<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Characterization of the Conus bullatus genome and its venom-duct transcriptome</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-60"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Hao Hu"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Characterization of the Conus bullatus genome
and its venom-duct transcriptome
Hu et al.

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60 (25 January 2011)

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Characterization of the Conus bullatus genome
and its venom-duct transcriptome
Hao Hu1, Pradip K Bandyopadhyay2, Baldomero M Olivera2, Mark Yandell1*

Abstract
Background: The venomous marine gastropods, cone snails (genus Conus), inject prey with a lethal cocktail of
conopeptides, small cysteine-rich peptides, each with a high affinity for its molecular target, generally an ion
channel, receptor or transporter. Over the last decade, conopeptides have proven indispensable reagents for the
study of vertebrate neurotransmission. Conus bullatus belongs to a clade of Conus species called Textilia, whose
pharmacology is still poorly characterized. Thus the genomics analyses presented here provide the first step toward
a better understanding the enigmatic Textilia clade.
Results: We have carried out a sequencing survey of the Conus bullatus genome and venom-duct transcriptome.
We find that conopeptides are highly expressed within the venom-duct, and describe an in silico pipeline for their
discovery and characterization using RNA-seq data. We have also carried out low-coverage shotgun sequencing of
the genome, and have used these data to determine its size, genome-wide base composition, simple repeat, and
mobile element densities.
Conclusions: Our results provide the first global view of venom-duct transcription in any cone snail. A notable
feature of Conus bullatus venoms is the breadth of A-superfamily peptides expressed in the venom duct, which are
unprecedented in their structural diversity. We also find SNP rates within conopeptides are higher compared to the
remainder of C. bullatus transcriptome, consistent with the hypothesis that conopeptides are under diversifying
selection.

Background
Next-generation sequencing techniques have opened up
new opportunities for genomics studies of new model
organisms [1]. Many of these organisms are not amenable to classical genetic techniques; thus their sequenced
and annotated genomes are the central resource for
experimental studies. The popularity of the Planarian
Schmidtea mediterranea, which can regenerate complete
animals from fragments of its body, with stem-cell
researchers is one example [2]. The Cone snail is
another.
The cone snails (genus Conus) belong to the superfamily Conoidea which probably includes over 10,000
venomous gastropods [3]. The venom from each of the
species of cone snails includes a mixture of small
cysteine-rich peptides, which are used to immobilize
* Correspondence: myandell@genetics.utah.edu
1
Eccles institute of Human Genetics, University of Utah, and School of
Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

their prey. These small peptides (~15 to 40 amino acids
in length) have exquisite specificity for different isoforms of ion channels, receptors and transporters [4].
Their disulfide scaffold restricts the conformational
space available to a peptide. However, the combination
of variable intervening amino acids and their posttranslational modifications enable a spectrum of specific
interactions with their target molecules. A typical conopeptide precursor is comprised of three regions: an
N-terminal signal peptide, a pro-region, and a mature
peptide region. The N-terminal sequence is usually
much more conserved than the mature peptide, possibly
due to the diversifying selection on the latter [5]. Conopeptides are classified into super-families, mainly based
on the conserved signal peptide and different cysteine
patterns observed within the mature peptide.
Conopeptides serve as specific neurobiological tools
for addressing specific receptors and channels, and are
also valuable lead compounds for therapeutic evaluation.
A conopeptide, ω-MVIIA (commercially known as

© 2011 Hu et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

Prialt, ziconotide) isolated from Conus magus, has been
approved by FDA for the treatment of chronic pain
[6,7]. In addition, other conopeptides are also being
evaluated for the treatment of pain and epilepsy [8-11].
It is estimated that the venom of a single species of
Conus may contain as many as 200 different venom
peptides [4,12]. This raises the possibility that the
500-700 species of cone snails may provide upwards of
100,000 compounds of potential pharmacological interest, perhaps more when all the members of superfamily
Conoidea are considered.
We have carried out a sequencing survey of the Conus
bullatus genome and venom-duct transcriptome. Conus
bullatus is a fish-hunting cone snail that together with
C. cervus and C. dusaveli are members of the subgenus
Textilia (Swainson, 1840). This is probably the least
understood group of fish-hunting Conus. All are from
the Indo-Pacific region (Pacific and Indian oceans from
Hawaii through South Africa). Conus bullatus is the
only accessible member of this clade of species; all
others are rare and from deep water. C. bullatus is
found from the intertidal zone to about 240 m, most
commonly from slightly subtidal to 50 m, C. cervus
between 180-400 m and C. dusaveli 50-288 m [13].
The pharmacology of the Textilia is thus still poorly
characterized, and the genomics analyses presented here
provide the first step toward a better understanding the
enigmatic Textilia clade. The biology of the Conus species that belong to the Textilia clade is mostly unknown,
but we recently documented the prey capture behavior
of Conus bullatus (Figure 1). The general strategy
appears to be analogous to that first established for
Conus purpurascens [14], with one group of venom peptides causing a rapid tetanic immobilization, and a second set eliciting a block of neuromuscular transmission.

Page 3 of 15

Multiple venom peptides that act coordinately to
achieve a particular physiological endpoint are referred
to as “conopeptides cabals” [15]. The fish-hunting cone
snails generally have both a “lightning-strike cabal” and
a “motor cabal” leading to the tetanic immobilization
and neuromuscular block, respectively. A video of
Conus bullatus has documented the most rapid tetanic
immobilization of prey observed for any fish-hunting
cone snail. (http://www.hhmi.org/biointeractive/biodiversity/2009_conus_bullatus.html).
Venom studies in Conus bullatus have already yielded
results of exceptional pharmacological interest. The
best characterized bullatus venom component, alphaconotoxin BuIA is a small peptide antagonist of nicotinic
receptors that has become the standard pharmacological
tool for differentiating between nicotinic receptors that
carry two closely related subunits, b2 and b4. These receptors are of considerable interest in Parkinson’s disease [16].
More recently, the μ-conotoxins, peptides with 3 disulfide
bonds that are antagonists of voltage-gated Na channels
have also been characterized from Conus bullatus [17].
These peptides appear to have novel subtype selectivity for
the different molecular isoforms of voltage-gated Na channels [17]. Thus, they provide a promising neuropharmacological lead to developing an entirely new pathway to
differentiate between different voltage-gated Na channel
subtypes. Clearly, better cone snail genomics resources
would aid these studies; however, few such resources exist
as yet for Conus studies, and none for C. bullatus.
The cone snails are being extensively investigated as a
source of peptidic pharmacological agents (ligands) with
exquisite specificity for different subtypes of receptors in
the central nervous system. In keeping with this main
goal it is not surprising that most of the available
nucleic acid sequences from Conus are a catalogue of

Figure 1 Conus bullatus and its feeding preference. a. Shell of Conus bullatus; b. Prey capture by Conus bullatus.

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

these compounds present in the venom. In addition,
partial sequences of a few mitochondrial (ribosomal
RNA and COI) and nuclear genes [18-23] have also
been determined to ascertain the phylogenetic relationship among cone snails.
Previous work has used traditional molecular biology
approaches to clone genes encoding members of specific
conopeptide super-families [20,24-26], and EST sequencing in another Conus snail has identified conopeptides
[27,28]. However, to date, no high-throughput sequencing approach on the whole mRNA reservoir of a Conus
venom-duct has been attempted.
We have used RNA-seq [29] to identify and profile the
expression of conopeptides and post-translational modification enzymes implicated in venom production. Our
results provide the first global view of venom-duct transcription. Our shotgun genomic survey complements
our RNA-seq data, and is also the first reported for a
cone snail. Knowledge of several marine gastropod genomes will provide a first step toward the molecular
understanding of numerous traits unique to these species. Accordingly, we have used these data to determine
the suitability of the genome for sequencing and assembly with 2nd generation technologies, determining genome-wide base composition, sequence heterozygosity,
simple repeat, and mobile element densities within the
C. bullatus genome.
As we show, our RNA-seq and genomic datasets can
be combined to enable analyses not possible with either
dataset alone. For example, the transcriptome assembly
has allowed us to explicitly test the hypothesis that conopeptides are under diversifying selection [5]. We have
also developed a novel method for estimating genome
size using RNA-seq and genomic shotgun sequences,
which we present here. The approach is accurate, and
should prove useful for any researcher seeking to determine the size of an emerging model organism [1] genome using 2nd generation sequencing data.

Results
Sequence datasets

We generated 96,379,716 Illumina paired 59-mers and
55,699,572 paired 60-mers for the genome. The average
insert size of the paired-end library is 200nt. We also
isolated venom-duct poly-A mRNA and sequenced it
using both Illumina and Roche technologies. On the
Illumina platform, we generated 102,278,116 paired 79mers with a median insert size of 340bp. The Roche 454
platform generated 848,394 reads with average read
length of 248bp. Many cDNA reads from the Illumina
platform have low-quality 3’ ends, which could be due
to either to the small amounts of mRNA used in our
experiments, or instrument error during sequencing or

Page 4 of 15

processing. We removed 3’end sequences from the reads
with phred quality values of 2.
Genome-wide GC content

We randomly selected 30 million genomic reads using
the process described in the Methods section (see section Simulated Read Sets) and determined their GC
content. This procedure gives an estimated GC content
for the C. bullatus genome of 42.88%. To validate this
method, we also simulated 1 million randomly sampled
60-mers from the D. melanogaster genome and performed the same experiment, which gives 41.87%, an
estimate in good agreement with the actual GC content
(41.74%.) of the D. melanogaster genome.
Genome-wide Repeat Content

We took three approaches to characterize the repeat
content of the C. bullatus genome. First, we ran RepeatMasker on 1 million randomly selected C. bullatus
genomic reads, comparing the results to a matched
human, Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and Aplysia californica (a mollusk) datasets of
simulated reads, as well as real human genome reads
[30] (see Methods for details); these datasets match the
Conus data precisely as regards number of reads, distance between pairs, read lengths, and (among the simulated sets) base quality (see Methods for details).
Comparisons of the simulated human reads to real
human reads (purple and grey columns in Figure 2),
indicates that the simulated human reads closely match
the real reads as regards repeat content for all repeat
classes except simple repeats. We speculate that this is
because many simple repeats (e.g., those near telomeres
and centromeres) are designated as “N” in the reference
human genome; hence, a random sampling of segments
of the human reference assembly under represents its
simple repeat content.
RepeatMasker [31] and RepBase [32] lack extensive
libraries of repeats for mollusks, which will compromise
the ability of RepeatMasker to identify interspersed
repeats in the two mollusk datasets. Although, this fact
does not complicate direct comparison of C. bullatus
and Aplysia californica, with regards to the relative
numbers of conserved interspersed repeats, it does complicate absolute measurements and comparisons to the
other genomes (Figure 2). The ability of RepeatMasker
to identify simple repeats, however, is less impacted by
the lack of well-characterized repeat libraries for mollusks. This fact together with comparison with J. Flatley’s genomic reads [30] (Figure 2) suggests that
C. bullatus is significantly enriched for simple repeats
relative to the other invertebrates, and slightly so (1.44
fold) compared to human.

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Comparison of Repetitive element counts in 1 million reads drawn from five different genomes. Repeats in 1 million randomly
sampled C. bullatus Illumina 80-bp reads were characterized using RepeatMasker and compared to matched datasets manufactured from
simulated reads from three other sequenced genomes and real reads from Flatley genome. X-axis: repeat-class. Y-axis: counts.

We also used RECON [33] to identify novel, highcopy genomic sequences that may be interspersed
repeats in the C. bullatus genome. For this analysis we
used our C. bullatus de novo genomic assembly (see
Methods). In total, we found 115 genomic contigs present in 10 or more copies, with an average length of
544bp. Among these genomic sequences, 5 are homologous with known LINE members that were not detected
by RepeatMasker in first repeat analysis. Of the remaining contigs, 9 have significant homology with G-protein
receptors; 2 have significant homology with lipoprotein
receptors; 1 has a leucine-rich repeat structure. These
are probably high-copy number genomic regions but are
not interspersed repeats. The remaining contigs have little homology with known interspersed repeats, however,
a significant fraction of them have either strong homology to nuclease proteins or weak homology with rRNA
and tRNA genes-both common motifs in LINE elements. Running RepClass [33] over these 115 genomic
contigs confirmed that 20 contigs have LINE-like structures or are significantly homologous to known LINEs.
Including this set would increase the percentage of the

C. bullatus genome with LINE homology from 0.24% to
0.56%.
Because novel forms of retro-transposons might not
have been identified in our RepeatMasker experiment,
or some unknown bias in the ABySS [34] assembler
might have caused us to underestimate the numbers of
novel repeats identified with RECON, we devised a third
experiment, that controls for both of these possibilities.
In this experiment, we took the same read-datasets used
in our RepeatMasker analysis (Figure 2), and performed
an all-against-all BLAST [35] search of the C. bullatus
reads against themselves, and repeated the same experiment for a matched set of simulated reads from
H. sapiens (see Methods for details). For reasons of
computational complexity we choose to limit this analysis to only one target genome: H. sapiens, because it is
the most repeat rich of any in our dataset and its genome is nearly the same size as the C. bullatus genome.
We then tallied the percentage of reads having one
BLAST hit, two hits and so on. For each read, its number of hits can be used to obtain an estimate of the
copy-number of its sequence within the genome (see

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

Methods). This allows us to estimate the proportion of
high-copy number genomic sequences within the Conus
genome and to make comparisons to the human genome (Figure 3). This experiment presumes no prior
knowledge of the repeat content of the genome. We
also used the ‘SEG’ option with WU-BLAST [36] to
exclude hits between reads consisting only of low complexity and/or simple sequence repeats. By using BLAST
with the SEG option any reads consisting entirely of low
complexity or simple sequence repeats will have no hits.
This analysis reveals much about the repeat content of
Conus compared to that of the Human genome. First,
the Conus genome has a larger proportion of high copynumber sequences (presumably interspersed repeats)
compared to human. This is shown by the fact that 23%
of Conus reads (compared to 16% in human) have numbers greater than 50. By looking into this group of
human reads, we confirmed that 91% of these are
homologous to known interspersed repeats. Second, the

Page 6 of 15

human dataset (and hence the human genome as compared to the Conus genome) has 3× as many genomic
sequences with a copy number above 10,000 compared
to Conus (6.9% versus 2.4%). These sequences are
mostly non-LTR elements that exists in extremely high
copy number; running Repeatmasker over these human
genome reads showed that 75% of these genomic
regions are SINEs and another 20% are LINEs, supporting this hypothesis. Taken together, our results show
that although the Conus genome is enriched for interspersed repeats compared to human, it has far fewer
non-LTR repetitive elements.
A partial genome assembly

A previous estimate based upon cytology, placed the
Conus bullatus genome at around 3 billion base pairs
[37]. If true, our 60 bp paired-end Illumina dataset
would provide 3× coverage. Although this is insufficient
to produce anything near a complete genome assembly,

Figure 3 Profile of proportion of the genomic sequences with each copy number. Generated from all-by-all blast analysis of one million C.
bullatus and H.sapiens reads each against themselves. The number of read partners is converted to copy-number of corresponding genomic
sequence. X-axis: each bin’s label gives the minimum and maximum copy numbers in the genome. Y-axis: fraction of reads falling into that bin.

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

a partial genome assembly is still desirable for some
analyses. We used ABySS to produce a partial assembly
201 million base pairs in length with an N50 value of
182 bp (See Methods for details). This accounts for ~7%
of the total length of the C. bullatus genome. To estimate the quality of our genome assembly, we simulated
8.7 million 60bp-long Illumina reads from the D. melanogaster genome (3× coverage), with the same base-calling accuracy distribution as in our Conus genomic
reads. To do so we used the procedure described in the
Methods section. This process gives 3× coverage over
the Drosophila genome with the same error rates as our
C. bullatus reads. Assembling these reads with ABySS
with the same parameters produced a Drosophila assembly with an N50 of 143 bp and total sequence length of
16 MB, which accounts for roughly 10% of the fly genome. Thus the two assemblies are of comparable quality.
Assembly of the venom-duct transcriptome

We assembled our Illumina RNA-seq reads from the
C. bullatus venom-duct with ABYSS (see methods for
details). This produced 525,537 contigs of 60bp or
greater in length and having a total length of 57 MB.
We chose 60bp as minimum contig size because conopeptides can be as short as 20 amino acids. The 454
reads were generated and assembled by Roche.
Annotation of transcriptome

To determine the percentage of the total C. bullatus
proteome sampled one or more times in our Illumina
and Roche transcriptome datasets, we took the core
eukaryotic protein set from CEGMA [38], which is comprised of 248 core proteins that generally lack paralogs
in the eukaryotes [38,39], and asked what percentage of
these proteins are found in the combined Illumina or
Roche assemblies. Using BLASTX, 211 out of 248 proteins (85%) are found (E < = 1e-7).
To annotate the transcriptome assembly we ran WUBLASTX on the ABySS Illumina assembly against UniProtKB database [40]. 7,691 unique UniProtKB proteins
have significant homology with one or more transcriptome contigs. We also mapped those contigs no shorter
than 200bp to GO [41] terms for biological process,
molecular function and cellular component. As a control,
we applied the same approach to the annotated C. elegans,
D. melanogaster and H. sapiens transcriptomes and compared the proportion of genes assigned to each GO term
in these organisms to our transcriptome assembly results
(Additional File 1). Note that is not a comparison of
expression levels, but rather a comparison using GO of
which genes were represented in our transcriptome
assembly. In other words, the relative proportions of all
GO gene categories associated with our C. bullatus contigs
was found to be similar to the relative proportions of

Page 7 of 15

genes assigned to the same GO categories for C. elegans,
D. melanogaster and H. sapiens transcriptomes. We found
that the resulting GO profiles are highly similar for all
four organisms. This finding, together with our observation that 85% of CEGMA proteins are represented in the
assembly, suggests that we have sampled a wide swath of
the C. bullatus transcriptome.
Identification of Conopeptides in RNA-seq data

We searched our combined Illumina and Roche transcriptome assemblies for significant homology to a set
of known conopeptides collected from ConoServer [42],
using the procedure described in the Methods section.
We find that, as might be expected, conopeptides are
transcribed at high levels in the venom duct; the depth
of coverage of the putative conopeptides is 102× versus
33× for the remainder of the transcriptome.
Whenever possible, we assigned each of our putative
conopeptide contigs to a conopeptide superfamily, by significant homology to signal sequences that are characteristic of each superfamily (see Methods for details). In
total, we were able to assign 543 contigs a unique conopeptide super-family. We find that, as in most Conus species examined so far, the O1, M, A and T superfamilies
were represented by the greatest number of distinct contigs. We also observed that mRNA abundance levels followed this same general pattern with respect to
superfamilies (Table 1). Besides these well represented
superfamilies, we also found small number of conopeptides belonging to the rarer in I2 and J conopeptide
super-families in Conus bullatus, which account for
~0.4% of total putative-conopeptide transcripts.
In total, we identified 2,410 putative conopeptide contigs. Most of these contigs are short (with the N50 of
69bp), and do not contain the full-length sequence of
the conopeptide precursor. Nevertheless, we were able
to identify a few complete conopeptides (mainly from
the Roche data), and a selection of 30 putative complete
and partial conopeptide sequences are presented in
Table 1 Superfamilies of C. bullatus conopeptides
identified by RNA-seq
Conopeptide Super
Family

C. bullatus RNAseq data

Conoserver reference
sequences

T

15%

13%

A

17%

19%

M

20%

9%

O2
O1

4%
44%

5%
40%

Other

< 1%

14%

Percentages for C. bullatus refer to percentage of venom-duct RNA-seq reads
belonging to a given superfamily. Globally the distribution parallels that for
reference conopeptide sequences by class available on Conserver, although
rare classes are under-sampled.

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

(Table 2). The conopeptides listed belong to the O, M,
A, J, contryphan and conkunitzin super-families with
O- being the most abundant. While conopeptides
belonging to the I2, T, con-ikot-ikot, and conantokin
super-families could be identified in the Blast analysis;
the contig lengths and frameshifts associated these hits
precluded the generation of a high confidence protein
sequence.
A notable feature of the Conus bullatus transcriptome
analysis is the breadth of A-superfamily peptides
expressed in the venom duct, which are unprecedented
in their structural diversity (Table 3). In most Conus
species, the predominant structural classes of A-peptides

Page 8 of 15

is the a4/7 subfamily; in fish-hunting cone snails, additional subclasses are the a3/5 subfamily and A conotoxins (in species of the Pionoconus clade) and the aA
conotoxins (in species of the Chelyconus clade). The
Conus bullatus transcriptome includes an mRNA encoding a A conotoxin (Bu27), which is unambiguous in its
identity. There is also a single member of the a4/7 subfamily (Bu19) of unknown function, which is strikingly
different in sequence from all other Conus venom peptides in this group. Although no member of the aA
family or the a3/5 subfamilies were found, 8 other A
superfamily peptides were identified. Together these
comprise a greater range of structural diversity in the

Table 2 Translated transcripts containing putative toxin sequences
O-superfamily: C-C-CC-C-C
1.

MKLTCVAIVAVLLLTACQLITAEDSRGTQLHRALRKTTKLSVSTRCKGPGAKCLKTMYDCCKYSCSRGRC

2.

MKLTCVLIIAVLFLTAITADDSRDKQVYRAVGLIDKMRRIRASEGCRKKGDRCGTHLCCPGLRCGSGRAGGACRPPYN

3.

MKLMCVLIVSVLVLTACQLSTADDTRDKQKDRLVRLFRKKRDSSDSGLLPRTCVMFGSMCDKEEHSICCYECDYKKGICV

4.
5.

MKLTCVVIVAVLLLTACQLIIAEDSRGTQLHRALRKATKLSVSTRTCVMFGSMCDKEEHSICCYECDYKKGICV
MKLTCVLIVAVLFLTACQLATAENSREEQGYSAVRSSDQIQDSDLKLTKSCTDDFEPCEAGFENCCSKSCFEFEDVYVC*GVSIDYYDSR

6.

MKLICVFIVAVLLLTACQLNAADDSRDTQKHRALRSTTKLSMSKKDSCVPDGDSCLFSRIPCCGTCSSRSKSCV*G

7.

MKLTCMMIVTVLFLTAWTFVTADDSTYGLKNLLPKARHEMMNPEAPKLNKKDECSAPGAFCLIRPGLCCSEFCFFACF [67]

8.

AEDSRGTQLHRALRKATKLSESTRCKRKGSSCRRTSYDCCTGSCRNGKC*G
AVLLLTACQLITAEDSRDTQKHRALRSDTKLSMLTLRCATYGKPCGIQNDCCNICDPARRTCT

9.
10.
11.

DSRGTQLHRALRKATILSVSARCKLSGYRCKRPKQCCNLSCGNYMC*G
ACQLITAEDSRGTQLHRALRSTSKVSKSTSCVEAGSYCRPNVKLCCGFCSPYSKICMNFPKN

12.
13.

TAEDSRGTQLHRALRKATKLPVSTRCITPGTRCKVPSQCCRGPCKNGRCTPSPSEW
AEDSRGTQLHRALRKTTKLSLSIRCKGPGASCIRIAYNCCKYSCRNGKCS

14.

AACQLGTAASFARDKQDYPAVRSDGRQDSKDSTLDRIAKRCSEGGDFCSKNSECCDKKCQDEGEGRGVCLIVPQNVILLH

M-superfamily: CC-C-C-CC
15.
16.
17.

MLKMGVLLFTFLVLFPLATLQLDADQPVERYADNKQDLNPDERMIFLFGGCCRMSSCQPPPVCNCCAKQDLNPDER
DQPADRPAERMQDDISSEQNPLLEKRVGERCCKNGKRGCGRWCRDHSRCC*GRR [17]
GLYCCQPKPNGQMMCNRWCEINSRCC*GRR

A-superfamily: CC-C-C; CC-C-C-C-C
18.
19.

MGMRMMFTVFLLIVLATTVVSFSTDDESDGSNEEPSADQTARSSMNRAPGCCNNPACVKHRC*G [68]
MGMRMVFTVFLLVVLATTVVSFTSDRASDGRNAAANDKASDLAALAVRGCCHDIFCKHNNPDIC*G

20.

MGMRMRMMFTVFLLVVLANTVVSFPSDRDSDGADAEASDEPVEFERDENGCCWNPSCPRPRCT*GRR [68]

21.

DGANAEATDNKPGVFERDEKKCCWNRACTRLVPCSK

22.
23.

SDRASDGRNAAANDRASDLVALTVRGCCTYPPCAVLSPLCD
MGMRMMVTVFLLGVLATTVVSLRSNRASDGRRGIVNKLNDLVPQYWTECCGRIGPHCSRCICPEVVCPKN*G

24.

MGMRMMVTVFLLVVLATTVVSLRSNRASDGRRGIVNKLNDLVPKYWTECCGRIGPHCSRCICPEVACPKN*G

25.

MGMRMMVTVFPLVVLATTVVSLRSNRASDGRRGIVNKLNDLVPKYWTECCGRIGPHCSRCICPGVVCPKR*G

26.
27.

LVVLATTVVSFRSNRASDGRKIAVNKRRRELVVPPGKLRECCGRVGPMCPKCMCPPRRC
ASDGRNAVVHERAPELVVTATTTCCGYDPMTICPPCMCTHSCPPKRKP*GRRND

J-superfamily
28.

MTSVQSATCCCLLWLVLCVQLVTPDSPATAQLSRHLTARVPVGPALAYACSVMCAKGYDTVVCTCTRRRG*VVSSSI

29.

MGKLTILVLVAAVLLSTQVMGQGDRDQPAARNAVPRDDNPGGASAKLMNLLHRSKCPWSPWC*G

Contryphan
Conkunitzin
30.

MEGRRFAAVLILPICMLAPGAVASKRWTRPSVCNLPAESGTGTQSLKRFYYNSDKMQCRTFIYKGNGGNDNNFPRTYDCQKKCLYRP*G

Cysteine motifs are shown next to the superfamilies. The underlined residues indicate presumed propeptide cleavage site ascertained by analogy to previously
isolated toxins; * indicate probable amidation at the C-terminal residue after cleavage of the following G residue. In the case of 23,24,25,26 where the propeptide
cleavage site is uncertain, we have indicated the cleavage site at the basic residues (K) proximal to the presumed toxin sequence. The peptides Bu 7, 16, 18 and
20 have been previously characterized.

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

Table 3 Sequence diversity and classification of
A-superfamily conopeptides from Conus bullatus
Subclasses of A-superfamily peptides (Mature toxin sequences)
a4/4
Bu18
Bu20

APGCCNNPACVKHRC*
DENGCCWNPSCPRPRCT*

Page 9 of 15

contigs). By contrast, the single nucleotide polymorphism rate within conotoxin contigs is 0.011 (1146 SNPs
in 105,259bp of high-coverage conotoxin contigs; this is
64% of all conotoxin contigs by length). The 3.1-fold
higher SNP rate within conopeptides contigs is consistent with the hypothesis that conopeptides are under
diversifying selection.
Candidate post-translational processing enzymes

a4/5
Bu21

CCWNRACTRLVPCSK

Bu22

GCCTYPPCAVLSPLCD

Bu19

GCCHDIFCKHNNPDIC*

Bu27

APELVVTATTTCCGYDPMTICPPCMCTHSCPPKRKP*

Bu23
Bu24

LNDLVPQYWTECCGRIGPHCSRCICPEVVCPKN*
YWTECCGRIGPHCSRCICPEVACPKN*

a4/6

a4/7

A

A-like

Bu25
Bu26

YWTECCGRIGPHCSRCICPGVVCPKR*
LRECCGRVGPMCPKCMCPPRRC

*C-terminal is amidated. We have assumed that the proteolytic cleavage site
is at the basic residue proximal to the presumed toxin sequence.

A-superfamily than has been found in any other venom.
Three subclasses of a-conotoxins represented two different a4/4 peptides (Bu18 and 20), one a4/5 peptide
(Bu21) and one a4/6 peptide (Bu22). Unique to
C. bullatus are the four A peptides with 3 disulfide
bonds (Bu 23, 24, 25 and 26) which are divergent from
both A and aA families. It is notable that although
these comprise a significant fraction of the total complement of A-superfamily peptides in C. bullatus, similar
peptides have not been reported from any other species
thus far. Thus, it appears that Conus bullatus, and
potentially the Textilia clade of Conus species, has
explored novel evolutionary pathways in generating their
complement of A-gene superfamily peptides.
SNP rates in conopeptides

We also compared the single nucleotide heterozygosity
level within the transcripts encoding conopeptides to
the rest of the transcriptome. To reduce false negative
rates, we restricted our analysis to transcriptome contigs
having coverage depths of 10× or more. Our rationale
being that SNPs within low-coverage contigs might be
missed, leading us to underestimate the actual SNP rate.
For the transcriptome as a whole, the SNP rate is
0.0035 (102,955 SNPs in 29.5 MB of high-coverage

Conopeptides contain post-translationally modified
amino acids. These modifications play an important role
in conferring target specificity. The most ubiquitous
modification is the formation of disulfides leading to
proper conotoxin folding; this mediated by disulfide isomerases, chaperones and enzymes involved in redox biochemistry. From an examination of transcriptome
sequences we have identified partial and complete
sequences of several chaperones and thiol-disulfide oxidoreductases that are likely to be involved in the redox
biochemistry of conotoxin folding (Additional File 2).
We identified some of the enzymes that are presumed
to catalyze correct disulfide connectivity within conopeptides [43-46]. These include members of the QSOX
family of sulfhydryl oxidases, Ero oxidases and protein
disulfide isomerases (PDIs). PDIs also have chaperonelike activity and prevent protein aggregation. We have
identified three isoforms of protein disulfide isomerase
(PDI) and four members belonging to different subfamilies of PDIs. Two of these are members of the P5 subfamily. We also identified a transcript related to human
PDIRs, which carry out oxidation-isomerization functions similar to PDI, but are less active. We also identified a transcript encoding a second redox inactive TRX
domain b’ belong to Ep72 and Ep57 subfamily. In addition, transcriptome contigs with homology to several
Chaperones, including 78kDa glucose regulated protein,
Hsp70, Hsp60, Hsp90, glucose regulated protein 94, different subunits of the T-complex protein 1, DNA J
(Hsp40), calnexin, calreticulin, chaperonin 10kDa subunit, prefoldin superfamily and activator of Hsp90
ATPase I were also identified.
The other enzymes we have identified include a proline hydroxylase related to the enzyme involved in collagen biosynthesis. (Unrelated to the posttranslational
modification of peptides, we have also identified the egl
nine homolog-also a prolyl hydroxylase). We have identified both FK506 binding protein type peptidyl prolyl
cis-trans isomerase and the cyclophilin peptidyl prolyl
cis-trans isomerase. The latter type has been shown to
enhance the rate of correct folding of conopeptides containing proline residues [47]. Other enzymes identified
include lysyl hydroxylase, vitamin K dependent g-glutamyl carboxylase [48,49], vitamin K epoxide reductase
and peptidyl glycine alpha amidating monooxygenase.

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

A large number of hormones and neuro-active peptides
require C-terminal amidation for full activity [50-52];
conopeptides are no exception. C-terminal amidation is a
two-step process. Peptidylglycine a-hydroxylating monooxygenase (PHM) catalyzes the hydroxylation of the
a-carbon of glycine and a second enzyme, peptidyla-hydroxy glycine a-amidating lyase (PAL) catalyzes the
formation of the amidated product and glyoxylate. In
Drosophila these two activities are carried out by separate
polypeptides, whereas in other organisms (C.elegans,
Xenopus laevis, human and rat) a single polypeptide carries out both activities. We discovered a single transcriptome contig encoding both PHM and PAL domains, thus
C-terminal amidation of conopeptides is likely carried
out by a single enzyme in C. bullatus.
A unique posttranslational modification first identified
in Conus was the presence of 6-Br tryptophan in conopeptides, e.g. bromocontryphan [53], bromosleeper [54]
and light sleeper [55]. Subsequently the modification
was also characterized in a peptide isolated from mammalian brain [55-57]. The enzyme responsible for this
modification has not been characterized. However, four
different classes of haloperoxidases are known [58],
which are enzymes that use heme iron/H 2 O 2 , vanadium/H2O2, FADH2/O2, and non-heme iron/O2/a-ketoglutarate. In the present analyses we have not identified
any of the above classes of enzymes.
Another posttranslational modification is the isomerization of L-amino acids in peptides to the D-conformation [59]. The enzyme has been isolated from the funnel
web spider venom [60]. At present we have not identified any transcript possibly encoding the isomerase.
A novel method for estimating genome size

We have developed a novel method for determining genome size, using 2nd generation genomic and RNA-Seq
reads (see Methods). For proof of principle, we first estimated the genome size of D. melanogaster. To do so,
we simulated 4,342,253 59bp genomic reads for the flygenome, and blasted the annotated fly transcriptome
against the simulated reads (red line in Figure 4). The
depth of coverage peak is at 1.50 (Figure 4). Thus, the estimated genome size for D. melanogaster is 4,342,253*59/
1.50 = 170.8 MB. Compared to the current size of fly genome (166.6 MB), the error is 2.5%. We also estimated the
genome size of C. elegans. This time we randomly sheared
the annotated transcriptome of C. elegans into short contigs with the same N50 as our C. bullatus transcriptome
assembly, and randomly selected a 57mb subset of these
contigs. We did this to simulate the fragmented nature of
our de novo transcriptome assembly. We also simulated
2,630,408 genomic C. elegans reads, and blasted them to
the subset of simulated C. elegans transcriptome. As
shown in Figure 4 (green line), the peak depth of coverage

Page 10 of 15

Figure 4 C. bullatus genome size estimated using Illumina
reads. Blue-line: C. bullatus; Red-line: D. melanogaster. Green line:
C. elegans. x-axis: depth of coverage of transciptome contigs by
aligned genomic reads. y-axis: frequency. In all cases the best
estimate for genome size is the product of the total length of
genomic reads and the mode of the frequency distribution.

for the transcriptome is 1.45×. We repeated this experiment three times; there was no variance in this value. This
gives us an estimate of genome size of 107.0MB, which is
6.7% higher than estimated genome size (100.3MB), again
a good fit to the published genome size. For Conus bullatus, the estimated coverage depth is 1.70× from 4.36GB of
sequence reads, thus the best estimate for the size of the
Conus bullatus genome is 2.56 GB.

Discussion
2 nd generation sequencing technologies now make it
possible to probe new and emerging model organism
genomes in a cost effective manner. This means that
genomes and transcriptomes can be rapidly trawled for
specific contents, and at the same time the organism
can be evaluated for suitability of whole-genome
de novo assembly. We have tried to accomplish both
these tasks in the work reported here.
Our transcriptome analyses provide the first global
view of gene expression within a Conus venom-duct.
Several lines of evidence suggest that our dataset provides a relatively comprehensive view of this pharmacologically important tissue. First, the relative proportion
of C. bullatus genes (as discovered by annotating out
transcriptome data) assigned to different GO terms
resemble those of other well annotated transcriptomes.
Second, 85% of CEGMA’s universally conserved eukaryotic genes are represented by one or more contigs,
providing an independent estimate of the degree of
completeness of the assembly. One caveat to this conclusion is that highly expressed basic house keeping

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

genes are over represented in the CEGMA set; thus a
more precise statement is that 85% of highly expressed
genes are present in the RNA-seq data.
Our RNA-seq data are highly enriched for reads with
conopeptide homology. The average read depth of contigs homologous to conopeptides is 102× as opposed to
33X for the remaining contigs. Interestingly, their superfamily frequency spectrum roughly approximates that of
the Conoserver reference collection in general [42],
although some rare classes are missing.
Overall, the distribution and frequencies of GO functions, processes and locations of annotated transcriptome data closely parallel those of various carefully
annotated model organism transcriptomes (Additional
File 1); this fact suggests that overall, the venom-duct
transcriptome is diverse, despite the highly specialized
nature of this tissue. Although, as our recovery of
numerous conopeptides and post-translational modification (PTM)-enzymes makes clear, its transcription is
also clearly geared toward venom production. Our success at characterizing the conopeptide and candidate
PTM-enzymes demonstrates the power of the RNA-Seq
approach for conopeptide discovery. The conopeptide
and PTM-enzymes we have discovered present new avenues for future research, as it is now possible to express
these proteins in heterologous cells in order to explore
interactions PTM-enzymes and their conopeptide targets [47,48,61,62].
Our genomic shotgun survey data have allowed us to
characterize the C. bullatus genome. Our analyses indicate that it is enriched for simple repeats relative to the
human genome. Characterization of its interspersed
repeat populations is complicated by the lack of an adequate repeat library for RepeatMasker. To circumvent
this obstacle, we developed a novel analysis method,
comparing the inter-read similarity frequency spectrum
of our C. bullatus genome reads to the inter-read similarity frequency spectrum of matched human dataset.
Based upon this analysis we conclude that C. bullatus
has higher repeat content, yet contains fewer extremely
high-copy repeat species. Because this method requires
no assembly or prior knowledge of a genome’s repeat
content, it should prove useful to others seeking to
characterize the repeat contents of new and emerging
model genomes.

Conclusions
We have carried out the first transcriptome and genomic
survey of a Textilian, Conus bullatus. Our RNA-seq analyses provide the first global view of transcription within
a Conus venom duct, and demonstrate the feasibility of
trawling these data for rapid discovery of new conopeptides and PTM-enzymes. We find that numerous
A-superfamily peptides are expressed in the venom duct.

Page 11 of 15

These conopeptides are unprecedented in their structural
diversity, suggesting that Conus bullatus, and potentially
the Textilia clade in general, has explored novel evolutionary pathways in generating its complement of A-gene
super-family peptides. Our data also provide support for
the long-standing hypothesis that conopeptides are under
diversifying selection. Our genomic analyses have
revealed that the C. bullatus genome has higher content
of interspersed repeats, yet fewer extremely highcopy-number repeats compared to human.

Methods
Preparation of RNA samples

Specimens of Conus bullatus were collected in the Phillippines. Each specimen was dissected to isolate the
venom duct and the duct was immediately suspended in
1.0 mL RNAlater solution (Ambion, Austin, TX) at
ambient temperatures, and then stored at -20 degrees
Centigrade until used. Total RNA was isolated using
mirVana® miRNA isolation kit (Ambion, Applied Biosystems CA USA) according to the manufacturer’s
recommendation Tissue homogenization was carried out
using a tissue tearor (Model 985370, Dremel, WI, USA).
Simulated read sets

To produce the matching sets of reads from other genomes with which to compare our C. bullatus reads, we
randomly sampled some number of read pairs from our
Conus dataset. Next we randomly selected substrings
from an assembled target genome (e.g. human, D. melanogaster, etc.) having the same length and pair distances
as our Conus reads. This matched dataset mimics the
Conus data precisely as regards number of reads, distance between pairs, read lengths, and importantly base
quality. This last feature is accomplished by mutating
the simulated reads from the target genome using the
base quality values of the selected Conus reads. These
matched datasets enable many useful analyses. For
example, a set of 1,000,000 randomly selected Conus
genomic reads can be passed through RepeatMasker
and the results directly compared to that produced from
its matched human counterpart.
Partial genome assembly

We generated a total of 152 million Illumina genomic
reads, with read lengths of either 59bp or 60bp depnding upon run. The reads are paired-end, and have a
average insertion size of 200bp. We used the ‘qualityTrimmer’ algorithm in the EULER-SR software package
[63] to remove bad reads and trim low-quality region
from reads. We then used ABySS 1.0.15 [34] for assembly, with the following parameters: c = 0, e = 2, n = 2.
The k-mer size is an important factor for the quality of
assembly, and in order to make an informed decision

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

about the k-mer size, we assembled the C. bullatus genome with k = 25, 30, 35, 40, 45 and 50. The k-mer size
of 25 generate an assembly with the best total length
(201MB) and N50 (182bp). The assembly was filtered so
that contigs/scaffolds with lengths less than 100 bp were
removed. When aligning the genomic reads back to the
de novo assembly, 3.6 million reads aligned.
Assembly of the transcriptome

102 million paired-ended RNA-seq reads were generated
using the Illumina sequencing platform. The read
lengths for these runs were 79bp, with an average insertion size of 340bp. These reads were first filtered with
EULER-SR’s ‘qualityTrimmer’ algorithm as above, then
assembled by ABySS 1.0.15 using the following parameters: c = 0, e = 2, E = 0. k-mer size of 25, 30, 35, 40,
45, 50 were tested, and the assembly at k = 35 were
chosen in consideration for the total assembly size as
well as N50. The assembly was filtered so that contigs/
scaffolds with lengths less than 60 bp were removed.
To assess the quality of the transcriptome assembly, we
aligned the RNA-seq reads back to the assembly with
Bowtie. Out of 102 million reads, 31million aligned to
the transcriptome under single-end alignment mode.
A much smaller portion (3.2 million) of reads were
aligned under paired-end mode. This is expected because
our library should be enriched for short conopeptide
sequences, thus many fragments should be shorter than
340bp, which will produce overlapping paired-reads that
won’t align under paired-end mode of Bowtie.
Characterization of repeat content in the genomic
assembly

We randomly selected 1 million Illumina reads for the
genome of Conus bullatus. As a control, we used the
reference genomes of Aplysia californica, Caenorhabditis
elegans, Drosophila melanogaster and Homo sapiens
from NCBI database. For each of the control genomes,
1 million Illumina reads with the same length and basecalling accuracy distribution were simulated. We also
used a second control consisting of 100,000 real Illumina genomic reads randomly sampled from the Flatley
genome [30]. We ran RepeatMasker with the ‘-species
all’ option in order to characterize all known families of
interspersed repeats. These data are shown in Figure 2.
Novel repeat families with Conus bullatus genome were
identified by running RECON over the longest genomic
contigs with a total length of 30MB (masked by RepeatMasker beforehand). We then perfromed an all-by-all
BLASTN of the contigs against themselves, using an
E-value threshold of 1e-8. The blastn reports were converted into MSP files and fed to RECON to identiy genomic sequences present in no less than 10 copies in the
30MB sample sequence. 115 high-copy-number sequences

Page 12 of 15

were identified, and any of them that have significant
homology (1e-5) with a UniprotKB or Repbase entry were
removed from the novel interspersed repeats collection.
Estimation of the proportion of repetitve regions

1 million genomic reads from the conus genome were randomly selected; 1 million human genomic reads were then
simulated with the same length and base-calling accuracy.
We aligned each set of reads to themselves with BLASTN
to look for significant similarity (M = 1 N = -3 Q = 3 R =
3 W = 15 WINK = 5 filter = seg lcmask V = 1000000 B =
1000000 E = 1e-5 Z = 3000000000). The percentage of
reads having each number of BLAST hit were then tallied.
To convert the number of BLAST hits to the copynumber of their corresponding genomic sequence, we
simulated a genome with the same size as the human
genome and the following features: 38% of this genome
are comprised of unique sequence; 20% are sequences
with 2 copies; 10% of the genome have 5 copies,
10 copies, 100 copies and 1000 copies each; 1% of the
genome have 10,000 and 100,000 copies each. Then we
simulated 1 million reads from this genome with the
same length and base-calling accuracy as the Conus
genomic reads and performed an all-to-all blast
approach as described above. For each read generated,
we tracked the copy number of the genomic region that
it is extracted from. Then we calculated the average
number of read partners for reads from different copynumber region. As Additional File 3 shows, the average
number of read partners is correlated extremely well
with the copy-number of the genomic region the read
was drawn from. The equation in Additional File 3
allows us to profile the proportion of genomic regions
with different copy-numbers, as shown in Figure 3.
SNP rates

To estimate SNP rates within our transcriptome assembly, Illumina reads were aligned to contigs no shorter
than 60bp in the transcriptome assembly, using Bowtie
[64] with default parameters. With the samtools package, the resulting Bowtie report was converted into
SAM files [65], then used to estimate the SNP ratio
with samtools. We used stringent criteria to call SNPs,
requiring that: 1) the SNP phred score was higher than
20; and 2) that each SNP variant was supported by at
least two reads. The SNP rates within conopeptides
were estimated using a same approach. We also calculated the proportion of triallelic SNPs, which is 15%,
indicative of the upper bound of the false-positive rate
due to mis-alignment.
BLAST searches for conopeptides

We ran BLASTX on our transcriptomal assembly
against the combined database of UniProtKB [40] and

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

conotoxins from ConoServer [42], using the following
parameters: W = 4 T = 20 filter = seg lcfilter. Contigs
that hit a conopeptide as its best hit were collected as
the low-stringency conopeptide set, and subsequently
translated into peptides according to the reading frame
identified by BLASTX. We then ran BLASTP on the
low-stringency conopeptides against the combined database, using the following parameters: hitdist = 40 wordmask = seg postsw matrix = BLOSUM80. The results
are filtered with E < = 3e-5.
Assignment of putative conotoxins to superfamilies

We first translated each putative conotoxin conteg into
peptide sequence, using the reading-frame predicted
from BLASTing the RNA-seq assembly to ConoServer’s
collection of conopeptides. Each translated putative-conopeptide was then aligned with BLASTP to conotoxin
signal peptides sequences, downloaded from ConoServer. We required all aligments to have Expect < = 1e-4,
and to have at least 7 identical amino acids aligned. The
best hit for each putative conopeptide is used to predict
its superfamily. Overall, we were able to assign 543
putative conopeptides to a superfamily. As a control, we
downloaded previously reported conopeptides from
ConoServer, and randomly sheared these sequences into
short oligos with the same N50 as our putative conopeptide contigs. We applied the same approach to assign
these to superfamiles. Out of 3274 oligos, we were able
to assign 449 to a superfamily, of which 443 (98.7%)
were correct. Thus, we believe our assignment method
is reasonably accurate.
Genome size estimation

We ran WU-BLASTN over all transcriptomal contigs
longer than 300bp against 73,898,732 59-mer genomic
reads, with the following parameters: M = 1 N = -3 Q =
3 R = 1 wordmask seg lcmask. The coverage depth for
each transcript was calculated from dividing total length
of reads mapped to this transcript by its transcript
length. Then the frequency distribution is shown in
Figure 4. The estimated coverage depth for the genome
is determined as the coverage depth with the highest
frequency, which is 1.70×. The estimated genome
size for Conus bullatus is thus 73,898,732*59/1.70 =
2.56×109 bp.
Significance of conopeptide BLAST hits

The short reads and base quality issues combine with
the short lengths of conopeptides to make identification
of conopeptides in RNA-seq data difficult. Because
many conopeptide transcript species are represented by
only one or a few reads, the base-quality of the resulting
contig is often low, especially as regards indels. All of
these facts combine to make the detection of even

Page 13 of 15

highly conserved conopeptides problematic, because
BLASTX is unable to take into account indel induced
frameshifts in the contigs when calculating the significance of a hit [35], thus many real hits are not detected.
Also problematic is the cysteine-rich nature of conopeptides, leading to spuriously significant hits against other
non-homologous but cysteine-rich proteins, and protein
domains. To control for these issues we performed a
simulation to help us determine the best E-value threshold for a conopeptide hits in RNA-seq data. We first
ran WU-BLASTP [36] on our transcriptome assembly
against the combined database of UniProtKB [40] and
conopeptides from ConoServer [42]. In total, 6,677 peptides were found to have a known conopeptide as its
best hit. We then plotted the E-value distribution of the
BLAST results for the best HSPs (Additional File 4).
Next, we randomly permuted the sequences of each of
our 6,677 C. bullatus contigs with conopeptide hits
using a Fisher-Yates shuffle [66]. We then ran BLASTP
using the permuted peptides against the combined UniProtKB and conotoxins database, and plotted the
E-value distribution for all hits. Presumably, the latter
plot should represent the background distribution of
insignificant BLAST hits. We found that only 5% of the
hits in the permuted peptide set have an E-value of lower
than 3e-5, while in the putative conopeptide set, the percentage is 48%. Thus we used E < = 3e-5 as the E-value
threshold for our BLASTP searches for conopeptides.
Data and software availability

The read-simulation tool and data (transcriptome
assembly, genomic assembly, putative conotoxin
sequences and post-translational modification enzymes)
can be downloaded at http://derringer.genetics.utah.edu/
conus/. The software is open source.

Additional material
Additional File 1: GO analyses. GO term abundance for molecular
function. In each organism (colored as in the legend), each transcript
was assigned applicable high-level generic GO slim terms. The
occurrence of each GO term was counted and converted into frequency
among all GO terms. Similar congruency between transcriptomes was
seen for GO process and location terms.
Additional File 2: Proteins involved in post-translational
modification. Annotated list of proteins that are presumed to participate
in conotoxin synthesis and posttranslational modification. Deduced from
conceptual translation of transcripts (ESTs) present in the venom duct.
Additional File 3: Correlation between Average read partner
number (from all-by-all BLAST) and actual copy number of
corresponding genomic sequence. A human-size genome is simulated
so that certain fractions of the sequence are present in 1 copy, 2 copies,
5 copies, 10 copies, 100 copies, 1000 copies, 10,000 copies and 100,000
copies. The average read partner count for reads simulated from each
group is calculated and used for the plot.
Additional File 4: Determining the appropriate BLAST E-value for
identification of conotopeptides. Red-line: E-value frequencies for all

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

contigs with conopeptide homology. Blue-line:E-value frequencies for the
same set of contigs after permutation. X-axis: frequency; y-axis E-value.
5% of the permuted contigs have an E-value of less than 3e-5, compared
to 45% of the native set. Thus, we choose 3e-5 as our cutoff threshold
for a 0.05 confidence level.

Acknowledgements
We thank Roche 454 sequencing for helping to make this work possible by
contributing transcriptome data to the project; especially C. Kodira for help
and support. We also acknowledge Cofactor Genomics for their help and
support in obtaining the Illumina RNA-seq and Genomic data. This work was
supported in part by NHGRI NIH grant 1R01HG004694 to MY, GM48677
(BMO, PB) and a University of Utah seed grant to MY and PB.
Author details
Eccles institute of Human Genetics, University of Utah, and School of
Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA. 2Department of Biology, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
HH, PB and MY wrote the paper. HH wrote software and carried out
experiments. PB annotated and analyzed results. MY, PB and BO conceived
of the project and oversaw the experiments. All Authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Received: 23 August 2010 Accepted: 25 January 2011
Published: 25 January 2011
References
1. Tools for genetic and genomic studies in emerging model organisms.
[http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-04-135.html].
2. Alvarado AS, Newmark PA, Robb SMC, Juste R: The Schmidtea
mediterranea database as a molecular resource for studying
platyhelminthes, stem cells and regeneration. Development 2002,
129(24):5659-5665.
3. Bouchet P, Rocroi JP: Malacologia: International Journal of Malacology,
Classification and Nomenclator of Gastropod Families. Conch Books;
200547.
4. Terlau H, Olivera BM: Conus venoms: a rich source of novel ion channeltargeted peptides. Physiological Reviews 2004, 84:41-68.
5. Conticello SG, Gilad Y, Avidan N, Ben-Asher E, Levy Z, Fainzilber M:
Mechanisms for evolving hypervariability: the case of conopeptides. Mol
Biol Evol 2001, 18(2):120-131.
6. Lynch SS, Cheng CM, Yee JL: Intrathecal ziconotide for regractory chronic
pain. Ann Pharmacother 2006, 40:1293-1300.
7. Miljanich GP: Ziconotide: neuronal calcium channel blocker for treating
severe chronic pain. Current Medicinal Chemistry 2004, 11:3029-3040.
8. Han TS, Teichert RW, Olivera BM, Bulaj G: Conus venoms - a rich source of
peptide-based therapeutics. Curr Pharm Des 2008, 14(24):2462-2479.
9. Lewis RJ, Garcia ML: Therapeutic Potential of Venom Peptides. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 2003, 2(10):790-802.
10. Olivera BM, Teichert RW: Diversity of the neurotoxic Conus peptides: a
model for concerted pharmacological discovery. Molecular Interventions
2007, 7(5):251-260.
11. Wang CZ, Chi CW: Conus Peptides - A rich Pharmaceutical Treasure. Acta
Biochimica et Biophysica Sinica 2004, 36(11):713-723.
12. Olivera BM: Conus peptides: biodiversity-based discovery and
exogenomics. Journal of Biological Chemistry 2006, 281(42):31173-31177.
13. Röckel D, Korn W, Kohn AJ: Manual of the living Conidae. Hackenheim,
Germany: Verlag Christa Hemmen; 1995.
14. Terlau H, Shon KJ, Grilley M, Stocker M, Stuhmer W, Olivera BM: Strategy
for rapid immobilization of prey by a fish-hunting marine snail. Nature
1996, 381(6578):148-151.
15. Olivera BM: Conus venom peptides, receptor and ion channel targets
and drug design: 50 million years of neuropharmacology (E.E. Just
Lecture, 1996). Mol Biol Cell 1997, 8:2101-2109.

Page 14 of 15

16. Azam L, Dowell C, Watkins M, Stitzel JA, Olivera BM, McIntosh JM: Alphaconotoxin BuIA, a novel peptide from Conus bullatus, distinguishes
among neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. J Biol Chem 2005,
280(1):80-87.
17. Holford M, Zhang MM, Gowd KH, Azam L, Green BR, Watkins M, Ownby JP,
Yoshikami D, Bulaj G, Olivera BM: Pruning nature: Biodiversity-derived
discovery of novel sodium channel blocking conotoxins from Conus
bullatus. Toxicon 2009, 53(1):90-98.
18. Bandyopadhyay P, Stevenson BJ, Ownby JP, Cady MT, Watkins M,
Olivera BM: The Mitochondrial Genome of Conus textile, coxI-coxII
Intergenic Sequences and Coinoidean Evolution. Molecular Phylogenetics
and Evolution 2007.
19. Bandyopadhyay PK, Stevenson BJ, Cady MT, Olivera BM, Wolstenholme DR:
Complete mitochondrial DNA sequence of a Conoidean gastropod,
Lophiotoma (Xenuroturris) cerithiformis: Gene order and gastropod
phylogeny. Toxicon 2006, 48:29-43.
20. Biggs JS, Olivera BM, Kantor YI: Alpha-conopeptides specifically expressed
in the salivary gland of Conus pulicarius. Toxicon 2008, 52(1):101-105.
21. Duda TF Jr, Palumbi SR: Evolutionary diversification of multigene families:
allelic selection of toxins in predatory cone snails. Mol Biol Evol 2000,
17:1286-1293.
22. Duda TF Jr, Kohn AJ: Species-level phylogeography and evolutionary
history of the hyperdiverse marine gastropod genus Conus. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2005, 34(2):257-272.
23. Espiritu DJD, Watkins M, Dia-Monje V, Cartier GE, Cruz LJ, Olivera BM:
Venomous cone snails: molecular phylogeny and the generation of
toxin diversity. Toxicon 2001, 39:1899-1916.
24. Santos AD, McIntosh JM, Hillyard DR, Cruz LJ, Olivera BM: The Asuperfamily of conotoxins: structural and functional divergence. Journal
of Biological Chemistry 2004, 279:17596-17606.
25. Twede VD, Teichert RW, Walker CS, Gruszczynski P, Kazmierkiewicz R,
Bulaj G, Olivera BM: Conantokin-Br from Conus brettinghami and
selectivity determinants for the NR2D subunit of the NMDA receptor.
Biochemistry 2009, 48(19):4063-4073.
26. Walker C, Steel D, Jacobsen RB, Lirazan MB, Cruz LJ, Hooper D, Shetty R,
DelaCruz RC, Nielsen JS, Zhou L, et al: The T-superfamily of conotoxins. J
Biol Chem 1999, 274:30664-30671.
27. Pi C, Liu J, Peng C, Liu Y, Jiang X, Zhao Y, Tang S, Wang L, Dong M, Chen S,
et al: Diversity and evolution of conotoxins based on gene expression
profiling of Conus litteratus. Genomics 2006, 88(6):809-819.
28. Pi C, Liu Y, Peng C, Jiang X, Liu J, Xu B, Yu X, Yu Y, Jiang X, Wang L, et al:
Analysis of expressed sequence tags from the venom ducts of Conus
striatus: focusing on the expression profile of conotoxins. Biochimie 2005,
88(2):131-140.
29. Morin R, Bainbridge M, Fejes A, Hirst M, Krzywinski M, Pugh T, McDonald H,
Varhol R, Jones S, Marra M: Profiling the HeLa S3 transcriptome using
randomly primed cDNA and massively parallel short-read sequencing.
Biotechniques 2008, 45(1):81-94.
30. [http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?
externalID=3357].
31. Smit A, Hubley R, Green P: RepeatMasker Open-3.0.1996-2004.
32. Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Pavlicek A, Klonowski P, Kohany O, Walichiewicz J:
Repbase Update, a database of eukaryotic repetitive elements. Cytogenet
Genome Res 2005, 110(1-4):462-467.
33. Bao Z, Eddy SR: Automated de novo identification of repeat sequence
families in sequenced genomes. Genome Res 2002, 12(8):1269-1276.
34. Simpson JT, Wong K, Jackman SD, Schein JE, Jones SJ, Birol I: ABySS: a
parallel assembler for short read sequence data. Genome Res 2009,
19(6):1117-1123.
35. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215(3):403-410.
36. [http://blast.wustl.edu/].
37. Hinegardner R: Cellular DNA content of the Mollusca. Comp Biochem
Physiol A Comp Physiol 1974, 47(2):447-460.
38. Parra G, Bradnam K, Korf I: CEGMA: a pipeline to accurately annotate core
genes in eukaryotic genomes. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(9):1061-1067.
39. Tatusov RL, Fedorova ND, Jackson JD, Jacobs AR, Kiryutin B, Koonin EV,
Krylov DM, Mazumder R, Mekhedov SL, Nikolskaya AN, et al: The COG database:
an updated version includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:41.
40. Apweiler R, Bairoch A, Wu CH: Protein sequence databases. Curr Opin
Chem Biol 2004, 8(1):76-80.

Hu et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:60
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/60

41. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al: Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25(1):25-29.
42. Kaas Q, Westermann JC, Halai R, Wang CK, Craik DJ: ConoServer, a
database for conopeptide sequences and structures. Bioinformatics 2008,
24(3):445-446.
43. Appenzeller-Herzog C, Ellgaard L: The human PDI family: Versatility
packed into a single fold. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 2007,
1783:535-548.
44. Hatahet F, Ruddock LW: Protein Disulfide Isomerase: A Critical Evaluation
of Its Function in Disulfide Bond Formation. Antioxidants & Redox
Signaling 2009, 11(11):2807-2839.
45. Thorpe C, Coppock DL: Generating Disulfides in Multicellular Organisms:
Emerging Roles for a New Flavoprotein Family. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 2007, 282(19):13929-13933.
46. van Anken E, Braakman I: Versatility of the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Protein Folding Factory. Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology 2005, 40:191-228.
47. Safavi-Hemami HBG, Olivera BM, Williamson NA, Purcell AW: Identification
of Conus peptidyl Prolyl cis-trans isomerases (PPIases) and assessment
of their role in the oxidative folding of conotoxins. J Biol Chem 2010.
48. Bandyopadhyay PK, Garrett JE, Shetty RP, Keate T, Walker CS, Olivera BM: γGlutamyl carboxylation: an extracellular post-translational modification
that antedates the divergence of molluscs, arthropods and chordates.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:1264-1269.
49. Czerwiec E, Begley GS, Bronstein M, Stenflo J, Taylor KL, Furie BC, Furie B:
Expression and characterization of recombinant vitamin K-dependent γglutamyl carboxylase from an intvertebrate, Conus textile. Eur J Biochem
2002, 269:6162-6172.
50. De M, Ciccotosto GD, Mains RE, Eipper BA: Trafficking of a Secretory
Granule Membrane Protein Is Sensitive to Copper. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 2007, 282(32):23362-23371.
51. Eipper BA, Milgram SL, Husten EJ, Yun HY, Mains RE: Peptidylglycine αamidating monooxygenase: a multifunctional protein with catalytic,
processing, and routing domains. Protein Sci 1993, 2:489-497.
52. Prigge ST, Mains RE, Eipper BA, Amzel LM: New insights into copper
monooxygenases an peptide amidation: structure, mechanism and
function. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 2000, 57:1236-1259.
53. Jimenez EC, Craig AG, Watkins M, Hillyard DR, Gray WR, Gulyas J, Rivier JE,
Cruz LJ, Olivera BM: Bromocontryphan: post-translational bromination of
tryptophan. Biochemistry 1997, 36:989-994.
54. Craig AG, Jimenez EC, Dykert J, Nielsen DB, Gulyas J, Abogadie FC, Porter J,
Rivier JE, Cruz LJ, Olivera BM, et al: A novel post-translational modification
involving bromination of tryptophan: identification of the residue, L-6bromotryptophan, in peptides from Conus imperialis and Conus radiatus
venom. J Biol Chem 1997, 272:4689-4698.
55. Jimenez EC, Watkins M, Olivera BM: Multiple 6-bromotryptophan residues
in a sleep-inducing peptide. Biochemistry 2004, 43:12343-12348.
56. Fujii R, Yoshida H, Fukusumi S, Habata Y, Hosoya M, Kawamata Y, Yano T,
Hinuma S, Kitada C, Asami T, et al: Identification of a neuropeptide
modified with bromine as an endogenous ligand for GPR7. J Biol Chem
2002, 277:34010-34016.
57. Tanaka H, Yoshida T, Miyamoto N, Motoike T, Kurosu H, Shibata K,
Yamanaka A, Williams SC, Richardson JA, Tsujino N, et al: Characterization
of a family of endogenous neuropeptide ligands for the G proteincoupled receptors GPR7 and GPR8. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:6251-6256.
58. Vaillancourt FH, Yeh E, Vosburg DA, Garneau-Tsodikova S, Walsh CT:
Nature’s Inventory of Halogenation Catalysts: Oxidative Strategies
Predominate. Chem Rev 2006, 106:3364-3378.
59. Jimenez EC, Olivera BM, Gray WR, Cruz LJ: Contryphan is a D-tryptophancontaining Conus peptide. J Biol Chem 1996, 281:28002-28005.
60. Shikata Y, Watanabe T, Teramoto T, Inoue A, Kawakami Y, Nishizawa Y,
Katayama K, Kuwada M: Isolation and characterization of a peptide
isomerase from funnel web spider venom. J Biol Chem 1995,
270:16719-16723.
61. Bulaj G, Buczek O, Goodsell I, Jimenez EC, Kranski J, Nielsen JS, Garrett JE,
Olivera BM: Efficient oxidative folding of conotoxins and the radiation of
venomous cone snails. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100(Supp
2):14562-14568.

Page 15 of 15

62. Zhi-Qiang W, Yu-Hong H, Xiao-Xia S, Cheng-Wu C, Zhan-Yu G: Molecular
cloning, expression and characterization of protein disulfide isomerase
from Conus marmoreus. FEBS J 2007, 274:4778-4787.
63. Chaisson MJ, Brinza D, Pevzner PA: De novo fragment assembly with
short mate-paired reads: Does the read length matter? Genome Res 2009,
19(2):336-346.
64. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL: Ultrafast and memoryefficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome.
Genome Biol 2009, 10(3):R25.
65. Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, Fennell T, Ruan J, Homer N, Marth G,
Abecasis G, Durbin R: The Sequence Alignment/Map format and
SAMtools. Bioinformatics 2009, 25(16):2078-2079.
66. Fisher RA, Yates F: Statistical Tables. London; 1938.
67. Bulaj G, DeLa Cruz R, Azimi-Zonooz A, West P, Watkins M, Yoshikami D,
Olivera BM: δ-Conotoxin structure/function through a cladistic analysis.
Biochemistry 2001, 40:13201-13208.
68. Puillandre N, Watkins M, Olivera BM: Evolution of Conus Peptide Genes:
Duplication and Positive Selection in the A-Superfamily. J Mol Evol 2010,
70:190-202.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-60
Cite this article as: Hu et al.: Characterization of the Conus bullatus
genome and its venom-duct transcriptome. BMC Genomics 2011 12:60.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
