<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Temporal diversification of Central American cichlids</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:279. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-279"/>
<meta name="Author" content="C Darrin Hulsey"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Temporal diversification of Central American
cichlids
C Darrin Hulsey*, Phillip R Hollingsworth Jr, James A Fordyce

Abstract
Background: Cichlid fishes are classic examples of adaptive radiation because of their putative tendency to
explosively diversify after invading novel environments. To examine whether ecological opportunity increased
diversification (speciation minus extinction) early in a species-rich cichlid radiation, we determined if Heroine
cichlids experienced a burst of diversification following their invasion of Central America.
Results: We first reconstructed the Heroine phylogeny and determined the basal node to use as the root of
Central American Heroine diversification. We then examined the influence of incomplete taxon sampling on this
group’s diversification patterns. First, we added missing species randomly to the phylogeny and assessed
deviations from a constant rate of lineage accumulation. Using a range of species numbers, we failed to recover
significant deviations from a pure-birth process and found little support for an early burst of diversification. Then,
we examined patterns of lineage accumulation as nodes were increasingly truncated. We assumed that as we
removed more recently diverged lineages that sampling would become more complete thereby increasing the
power to detect deviations from a pure-birth model. However, truncation of nodes provided even less support for
an early burst of diversification.
Conclusions: Contrary to expectations, our analyses suggest Heroine cichlids did not undergo a burst of
diversification when they invaded from South America. Throughout their history in Central America, Heroine
cichlids appear to have diversified at a constant rate.

Background
Patterns and rates of speciation vary tremendously
among clades. Vertebrate groups such as coelecanths or
bowfin fishes that were once species rich, underwent
bouts of extinction, and now are represented by few
extant species [1]. Alternatively, diversification (speciation minus extinction) in other clades such as cichlid
fishes can be explosive. In several instances, cichlids
have diversified incredibly rapidly resulting in species
assemblages that dominate many freshwater habitats
[2-4]. Both intrinsic and extrinsic forces could underlie
the tendency of cichlids to rapidly diversify. Intrinsic
factors such as innovations in jaw structure [5,6] and
reproductive phenotypes like mouth brooding [7] have
been suggested to drive rapid diversification in these
fishes. However, in the largest of the East African Rift
lakes, extrinsic factors such as the ecological release
* Correspondence: chulsey@utk.edu
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, TN, USA

these cichlids encountered upon colonizing Lakes Tanganyika, Victoria, and Malawi could have fueled their
bursts of unparalleled diversity [3,8]. The absence of
predators or competitors in these three massive, relatively old lakes could have been the key to the rapid filling of niches with the hundreds of endemic cichlid
species that now occur sympatrically in each lake. However, it is generally unclear how important the invasion
of novel habitats is to cichlid diversification [9] and if
cichlids presented with novel ecological circumstances
frequently experience a burst and subsequent slowdown in cladogenesis. To examine the hypothesis that
novel ecological opportunity facilitates an increase in
cichlid diversification rate, we determined whether
Heroine cichlids underwent a burst of diversification
following their invasion of Central America.
Central American (CA) Heroine cichlids are thought to
represent an adaptive radiation that like many other
cichlid radiations could have undergone a burst of diversification early in their history. Based on one taxonomic

© 2010 Hulsey et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

database [10] and recent species descriptions [11-13] there
are 122 named species in this clade with 114 of these inhabiting the region north of the Panamanian Isthmus. These
fishes are also extremely trophically diverse and exhibit an
incredible array of putatively adaptive jaw morphologies
[14-18]. The Heroines are nested phylogenetically within a
more evolutionarily disparate group of cichlids [19] that
has occupied South America since at least the Eocene, 4055 million years ago [20]. The diversity in CA Heroines
has been attributed in part to the paucity of Central American representatives of groups like catfish and characiform
fishes that dominate South American freshwater ecosystems [21,22]. Additionally, the few other cichlid lineages
that occur north of the Panamanian Isthmus, Geophagus
and Acarichthys, have only a few Central American species
and likely did not colonize Central America until the
emergence of the Isthmus of Panama, 3 million years ago
[23]. Because of the lack of competing fish lineages, Central America likely offered a huge opportunity for adaptive
divergence when Heroine cichlids invaded this region
from South America. However, it is unclear if the adaptive
diversity and species richness of the CA Heroines is largely
a result of an early burst of explosive speciation as is predicted under many scenarios of adaptive radiation [24,25].
There are several microevolutionary studies that suggest
that the diversification of CA Heroines continues to occur
rapidly. This radiation contains some of the best-documented cases of intraspecific trophic polymorphism in
vertebrates [26,27]. For example, species such as
Herichthys minckleyi and Amphilophus citrenellus exhibit
polymorphic jaw morphologies that allow individuals
within the same populations to exploit highly different
prey types [27,28]. Some of the most thoroughly examined
cases of sympatric speciation also occur in this radiation
[29-31]. These cases of on-going divergence in the Heroine cichlid radiation suggest that speciation in these fish
is strongly influenced by ecological opportunity. Also,
these instances of recent divergence could be used to
argue diversification in the CA Heroine radiation has not
slowed since the Heroine invasion of Central America.
Many large radiations like the CA Heroines exhibit
clear patterns of slowdown in diversification towards the
present [32,33]. Evaluating the patterns of diversification
during a clade’s history requires the ability to assess the
temporal patterns of cladogenesis. Recent advances in
the ability to estimate phylogenies and branch lengths
have made evaluating temporal patterns of speciation
feasible [34-38]. Lineage through time (LTT) studies
also depend on time-calibrated phylogenies [34] and a
determination of which ancestral node is relevant to
begin examining the effects of novel conditions on clade
diversification. Fortunately, an increasingly robust view
of the interrelationships of CA Heroine cichlids is coming to light. Also, because of the ability to reconstruct

Page 2 of 12

ancestral areas, such as inhabiting Central America or
not, and the relatively clear colonization of CA Heroines
from South America, determining which cichlid clades
to include in a LTT analysis should be feasible. If Heroine cichlids underwent an explosive phase of lineage
diversification when they colonized Central America,
this pattern should be detectable.
When evaluating the temporal variation in diversification rate of an adaptive radiation like the CA Heroines
it is critical to account for incomplete sampling of
lineages [35]. Species in a molecular phylogeny can be
incompletely sampled because of unavailability of DNA
sequences for known lineages and/or taxonomic inaccuracies in the delineation of species diversity. Simulations can be used to correct for an incomplete sampling
of lineages in a phylogeny via the creation of null distributions that generate random trees and subsequently
prune lineages from phylogenies [35,37]. Both underestimation of the number of “true” lineages [39] and overestimation of the number of species can also lead to
inaccurate estimation of species diversity [40,41]. This
taxonomic inaccuracy likely influences the evaluation of
recent LTT patterns most. To remedy this problem,
many LTT studies have somewhat arbitrarily truncated
the most recent 2 million years of the topology to
reduce the influence of taxonomic inaccuracy on the
estimation of recent diversification [42]. Pruning a range
of times or nodes from a topology to assess how taxonomic inaccuracies influence deviations from null
expectations would provide an even more robust
method to account for taxonomic inaccuracies. If Heroine cichlids underwent an explosive phase of lineage
diversification when they colonized Central America,
this pattern should be detectable with analyses that
account for uncertainty in the number of extant
lineages.
We combined phylogenetics, ancestral state reconstruction, and simulations to assess the temporal patterns of CA Heroine diversification. We first
reconstructed the phylogeny of CA Heroines and subsequently used likelihood reconstruction to determine the
basal node from which to estimate patterns of diversification. Then, we used simulations and the truncation of
nodes to examine Heroine deviations from a null distribution of diversification expected under a pure-birth,
constant rate model. We combined these analyses to
examine if patterns of Heroine diversification were consistent with rapid lineage accumulation coincident with
their invasion of Central America.

Results
Phylogeny Reconstruction

The phylogenetic relationships recovered with the 17
new cytochrome b sequences (Table 1) analyzed in a

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

Page 3 of 12

Table 1 Species sequenced for cytochrome b for this study.
Species

Genbank

Collection Locality

Archocentrus spinosissimus

[Genbank: HM193439]

commercial

Cichlasoma beani

[Genbank: HM193451]

Río Tepic, Nayarit, MX

Cryptoheros chetumalensis

[Genbank: HM193442]

Río Hondo, Quintana Roo, MX

Cryptoheros cutteri

[Genbank: HM193448]

Río Lancetilla, HN

Cryptoheros spilurus

[Genbank: HM193449]

Río Gracias a Dios, GT

Paraneetroplus gibbiceps

[Genbank: HM193450]

Arroyo Cristal, Tabasco, MX

Parachromis friedrichsthalii

[Genbank: HM193440]

Orange Walk, BZ

Parachromis managuensis
Parachromis motaguensis

[Genbank: HM193452]
[Genbank: HM193453]

Lago de Yojoa, HN
Río Choluteca, HN

Thorichthys affinis

[Genbank: HM193438]

Río Hondo, Quintana Roo, MX

Thorichthys aureus

[Genbank: HM193446]

Río Amatillo, GT

Thorichthys meeki

[Genbank: HM193445]

Lago de Illusiones, Tabasco, MX

Thorichthys pasionis

[Genbank: HM193447]

Lago de Illusiones, Tabasco, MX

Thorichthys socolofi

[Genbank: HM193443]

Río Macuspana, Tabasco, MX

Vieja bifasciata

[Genbank: HM193444]

Río Tzendales, Chiapas, MX

Vieja hartwegi
Vieja maculicauda

[Genbank: HM193441]
[Genbank: HM193454]

Río Tzendales, Chiapas, MX
Río Lancetilla, HN

Genbank accession numbers are followed by the collection localities that include commercial sources, Guatemala (GT), Honduras (HN), and Mexico (MX). For
geographic clarity, the states of collection sites in Mexico are provided.

Bayesian framework do not differ greatly from previous
analyses using the cytochrome b gene [43,44]. The clade
of three Greater Antillean Heroines and the South
American Australoheros, that in some phylogenetic analyses [45-47] have been recovered as nested within the
CA Heroines, fell phylogenetically just outside of the
CA Heroine clade here (Figure 1). These groups would
not be considered as primarily diversifying in Central
America so their phylogenetic position inferred here was
also convenient for our analyses. None of the previously
sequenced species that we re-sequenced here to better
estimate branch-lengths exhibited novel relationships.
For species that were not previously sequenced but fell
within the 90 included CA Heroine species, we recovered several interesting relationships. Thorichthys socolofi was found to be sister to T. aureus, and T. affinis
was recovered as sister to T. meeki. Interestingly, the
species Archocentrus spinosissimus was placed as sister
to Rocio octofasciata although the length of the branch
separating these two species suggests they are highly
divergent. Parachromis friedrichstahlii was recovered as
sister to the clade containing Parachromis motaguensis
and Parachromis loiselli. The two species Cryptoheros
cutteri and C. chetumalensis that were recently taxonomically split out of Cryptoheros spilurus [12] formed a
monophyletic group with C. cutteri being the most
phylogenetically distinct.
Chronogram

The root of the CA Heroine clade examined was estimated to be 16.2 million years before present (mybp),

but there are several CA Heroine clades that appear to
have diversified within a relatively recent timeframe
(< 3 mybp). The Amphilophus citrenellus + Am. labiatus
+ Am. hogaboomorum clade forms a polytomy that
likely includes a substantial number of species [31] that
diverged very recently. The newly erected species Cryptoheros chetumalensis is also highly genetically similar to
its sister C. spilurus. Thorichthys meeki and T. affinis as
well as Vieja melanura and V. synspila are not genetically very distinct. Likewise, Vieja hartwegi + V. bifasciata + V. breidohri show very little sequence
divergence. The sister clade to the polymorphic cichlid
Herichthys minckleyi that includes H. cyanoguttatus,
H. deppi, H. carpintis, and H. tamasopoensis also
diverged within the last 3 million years.
Ancestral Area Reconstruction

The likelihood reconstruction of ancestral areas indicates that there is greater than 95% probability that the
ancestral lineage leading to the basal node in Figure 1
began diversifying in Central America. The estimated
Mk1 rate parameter was 0.007 indicating a generally low
rate of transition between Central America and either
the Greater Antilles or South America. Because the
three species of Greater Antilles cichlids fell outside of
this clade it suggests they did not colonize this region
by first occupying Central America. Our ancestral
reconstruction also supports two instances of the CA
Heroines re-colonizing and experiencing limited diversification in South America. The Caquetaia clade of three
species as well as the clade composed of Cichlasoma

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

Page 4 of 12

Figure 1 Chronogram of CA Heroine diversification. Likelihood ancestral areas are reconstructed at nodes as either Central American (white)
or South American + Greater Antilles (black). The tips as well as many of the nodes in the phylogeny are only one color and therefore are
reconstructed with virtually 100% probability as one state. The pie diagrams that exhibit both colors represent ambiguous likelihood
reconstructions of the area at that node and are depicted at larger sizes. Posterior probabilities of nodes are shown on the branch preceding the
nodes and are indicated with an * if there is 100% Bayesian support for the node. Other numbers behind the nodes represent the percentage
that that node was recovered among topologies saved in the Bayesian analysis. Only support values above 50% are depicted. The node
calibrated with divergence of 7.5 million years before present (mybp) around the Punta del Morro is shown with an X. A temporal scale running
from 15.0 mybp to the recent is shown below the chronogram. An image of a typical Central American Heroine cichlid, Herichthys cyanoguttatus,
is shown nested within the phylogeny.

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

Page 5 of 12

The lineage-through-time (LTT) plot provides no
obvious excess of lineages early in the history of the
Heroine cichlid radiation (Figure 2). The simulation of
10000 lineages using a pure-birth model to create a 95%
CI for the expectation of diversification showed that
during their entire diversification the accumulation of
lineages in the CA Heroine clade fell within this null
expectation. The only component of the Heroine radiation that might be skewed towards faster than expected
diversification contains lineages originating within the
last five million years. The virtual linear accumulation of
species through time (Figure 2) is highly suggestive of a
pure birth process governing diversification in CA
Heroines.

Based on the values of g, the inference that there is a
burst of diversification early in the clade of Heroine
cichlids also depends upon how complete our taxon
sampling of lineages is (Figure 3). If our phylogeny contains all of the species in Central America and all unsampled lineages are merely synonyms of the 90 species
currently sampled, then the chronogram of CA Heroines
would exhibit a significant deviation from a pure-birth
process. If this were true, CA Heroines might exhibit a
slight burst of diversification early in the clade’s history.
However, this is unlikely, and if there are in fact 122
species of Heroine cichlids in this clade as current taxonomy suggests, this group does not show a burst of
diversification early during its radiation.
The truncation of nodes (Figure 4) indicates there is
little support for a burst of diversification especially as
one proceeds back into the CA Heroine phylogeny.
Sampling of lineages should become more complete as
one moves towards the root of the phylogeny, and
therefore, the results of this truncation should test how
robust our results are. If incomplete taxonomic sampling at the tips were skewing our inferences away from
detection of a burst of diversification, we would expect
that the g values would become, or remain, more significant as nodes were truncated. However, we recovered
the opposite. After nodes at an age of approximately
3.5 mybp were removed, the remaining g values were
clearly not above the critical threshold value of -1.645

Figure 2 The lineage-through-time (LTT) plot of CA Heroine
diversification. The black dots represent actual numbers of Heroine
lineages estimated at a given time frame from the reconstructed
phylogeny. The grey lines form an ellipse of simulated pure-birth
phylogenies of 90 species used to compare to the CA Heroines. The
dotted lines represent the 95% confidence interval of the number
of lineages expected from the simulated pure-birth phylogenies.
The CA Heroine LTT lies within the 95% null distribution expected
for a radiation diversifying via a pure-birth process.

Figure 3 Species number and g statistic. We used null
distributions to test if g exceeded the value of -1.645 (the critical
value for a = 0.05) with a range of “true” total numbers of CA
Heroine species in the clade. We examined g with 90 species, the
number of taxa sampled in the phylogeny, to 120 species.
Increasing the number of species resulted in lower and lower
probability of there being a burst early in the phylogeny. We
therefore could not reject the hypothesis that CA Heroine cichlids
exhibited a pure-birth model of constant lineage diversification if
there are 122 species as current taxonomy suggests.

festae + C. atromaculatum + C. umbrifera clade are
both reconstructed here as re-colonizing South America.
Retention of all of these species in the LTT analysis
should not be problematic because analyses that pruned
these species (results not shown) did not differ substantially from those we present. Also, these South American species represented relatively few species, their
speciation times did not seem skewed in any particular
direction, and there was some ambiguity (Figure 1)
about where (i.e. South America vs. Central America)
the speciation events at particular ancestral nodes took
place.
CA Heroine Lineages Through Time

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

Figure 4 Node truncation and stability of g. Nodes were
truncated from the present to the root of the CA Heroine
phylogeny in order to assess the stability of g using our empirically
estimated 90 species phylogeny. Because lineage sampling should
become more complete towards the root of the phylogeny,
truncation of nodes closer to the present should reduce the
influence of incomplete lineage sampling on inferences made from
g. Node removal and g recalculation is depicted temporally based
on the last removed node’s time-calibration from the CA Heroine
chronogram. Importantly, once nodes from the present to 3.5 mybp
are removed, g is clearly not significant in our empirical phylogeny.
Therefore, analyses of only the deeper nodes in the CA Heroine
phylogeny cannot reject a pattern of pure-birth lineage
diversification.

that statistically marks the 95% expectation of a constant
diversification rate. At 4.0 mybp and deeper in the
phylogeny, the fact that g did not exceed this critical
value indicates there was not an early burst of diversification in CA Heroines. As nodes were truncated from
our taxonomically incomplete chronogram, the g values
approached the expectation under a constant rate, purebirth model of diversification. Both our simulations
accounting for our incomplete phylogenetic sampling of
the named Heroine species in Central America and
pruning the topology back in time are concordant in
suggesting there was no early burst of diversification in
CA Heroine cichlids.
The expected rate of lineage accumulation under a
constant-rate model of diversification cannot be rejected
for the Heroine cichlids. Additionally, the model fitting
approach failed to favor any of the rate variable models
examined over a pure-birth model of lineage diversification. Regardless of the expected number of terminal
taxa (90-122) in the clade, a pure-birth model (no
extinction) could not be rejected for CA Heroine
cichlids.

Discussion and Conclusion
There was no dramatic burst of speciation as Heroine
cichlids colonized Central America. The phylogenetic
inclusion of several species further resolved the

Page 6 of 12

phylogeny of the entire clade, but did little to change
the overall topology of the tree recovered in previous
studies. The temporal estimates of the root node of Heroine cichlids as being close to 16 mybp is also consistent
with most other molecular clock estimates derived from
mitochondrial DNA markers for these fishes [44,48].
These studies, largely based on cytochrome b suggest an
age of between 15 and 22 mybp for Heroine diversification. However, several recent studies indicate that Heroines and other cichlids groups are much older than
previously thought [40,49,50]. These studies suggest that
the reciprocally monophyletic diversification in the Neotropics and Africa is generally consistent with a Gondwanan split and divergence time estimates for each
continental radiation of around 65-85 mybp. If this is
true, Heroine cichlids could have begun diversifying in
Central America almost 30 mybp [50]. Regardless, if our
dates are close to realistic, it suggests that there are several clades in the CA Heroines that have likely diverged
relatively recently (< 3 mybp). Nevertheless, our analyses
do not provide substantial support for an increased rate
of diversification at the base of the CA Heroine
phylogeny.
This phylogenetic analysis is the most thoroughly
sampled species-level analysis of Heroine cichlid relationships. However, it is unclear how incomplete the
taxonomic sampling of the phylogeny is currently.
Future studies of the alpha taxonomy of CA Heroines
could substantially increase the number of named species in this group. There remain regions of Central
America such as the flooded forests of the Moskitia in
Honduras and Nicaragua where the diversity of freshwater cichlids has not been extensively documented
[23]. Also, substantial numbers of CA Heroine lineages
could be described by taxonomically splitting currently
recognized species [12]. For instance, the species
‘Cichlasoma’ uropthalmus that is represented in our
phylogeny by a single lineage has 11 currently recognized species/subspecies [51]. If they form a recently
evolved monophyletic group as is likely, the addition of
these species to our phylogeny would further decrease
support for a burst of diversification at the base of the
CA Heroine radiation. The number of cichlid species in
the crater lakes of Lake Nicaragua is also debated but
the speciation times for these groups are clearly recent
as well [31]. A complete tally of CA Heroines will
undoubtedly recognize more lineages and generally
increase the number of recent nodes towards the tips of
the phylogeny rather than at the base of the radiation.
Additional Heroine species descriptions will not skew
diversification patterns toward detection of a burst of
diversification at the base of this clade.
If there are in fact 122 species of Heroine cichlids in
this clade, this group’s diversification does not show a

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

significant deviation from a pure-birth process (Figure 3).
However, the inference that there could have been a
burst of diversification in Heroine cichlids depends in
part on the completeness of our taxon sampling. If our
phylogeny contains all of the species in Central America
and all un-sampled lineages are merely synonyms of the
90 species currently sampled, then the phylogeny of
Central American cichlids would exhibit a significant
deviation from a pure-birth process. However, because
current taxonomy suggests there are 122 evolutionarily
independent lineages, Heroine cichlids probably did not
exhibit a burst of diversification concordant with their
invasion of Central America. There is also no empirical
support for a substantial amount of extinction (i.e. birthdeath model) or temporal change (rate variable model)
during the diversification of CA Heroine cichlids. The
comparison of the LTT plot to null distributions and
truncation of nodes provide little support for Heroine
diversification deviating significantly from a pure-birth
process. In fact, node truncation suggests that as one
proceeds back in time, the historical pattern of CA Heroine diversification becomes less and less compatible
with an early burst of diversification.
There remain a few caveats to this study. First, the use
of a mitochondrial marker like cytochrome b could
show saturation and thus underestimate the branch
lengths connecting deeper nodes in the tree [52]. However, this would only bias analyses towards detection of
a burst of speciation at the base of the radiation because
of underestimation of older branch lengths. Hybridization could also mislead the inferences we are making
with respect to CA Heroine phylogeny. However, hybridization is likely more important during the first few
million years of diversification within clades of cichlids
[53]. Therefore, the possibility of recent hybridization
should not obscure our inferences of a lack of rapid
lineage diversification in Heroine cichlid lineages that
diverged around 16 mybp or even earlier. Analyses of
more genes will undoubtedly provide an increasingly
robust view of the phylogenetic relationships among this
diverse clade. But, we have no reason to believe that the
marker used here provides an exceptionally biased view
of the diversification history of CA Heroines.
This study could call into question the general importance of ecological opportunity to cichlid diversification.
However, one way that hypotheses aimed at elucidating
the importance of ecological release to diversification
could be refined is to more explicitly incorporate the
history of these radiations into their particular environmental frameworks. There are several reasons the ecology of the African Great Lakes might better facilitate
obvious bursts of diversification compared to other
freshwater systems cichlids inhabit. Unlike rivers, the
African Great Lakes contain archipelagos of small rocky

Page 7 of 12

islands [3] that favor rapid isolation and divergence.
Additionally, the cichlid radiations in the African Great
Lakes diversified in an exceptionally sympatric context.
The radiation of CA Heroine cichlids likely involved a
much more allopatric mode of diversification in the
numerous river basins that dissect Central America.
Lake Tanganyika is also likely well over 10 million years
old [54] and could be as old as 20 million years [49].
Although Lake Victoria is less than a million years old
[54] and Lake Malawi is likely close to 3 million years
old [40,50], most of the lake and riverine habitats in
Central America are young and geologically dynamic
[55,56] as compared to the African Great Lakes. The
extensive bathymetry of the African Great Lakes also
create stratified light environments that appear to influence sexual selection and rapid reproductive isolation
among lineages [53]. The exceptional number of herbivores and planktivores in the African Great Lakes [3,8]
likewise could indicate there are ecological opportunities
available in these habitats that are largely absent from
other aquatic systems. Perhaps it is the particular types
of ecological conditions and their stability over time that
facilitated the explosive diversification of cichlid lineages
inhabiting the East African Rift Lakes [9].
Many models and empirical studies suggest that adaptive radiations should be characterized by a burst of
diversification early in their history [25]. We found no
evidence that the CA Heroine cichlids exhibit a burst
early in their history. However, we cannot exclude the
possibility that CA Heroines are indeed undergoing
rapid diversification and are still in the “early” stage of
their radiation where it is impossible to detect a slowdown in diversification at this time because it has not
yet occurred. If density dependence among members of
a clade governs the rate of diversification [57], CA Heroines could also simply be far from the carrying capacity
for the number of cichlid lineages that can co-exist.
Currently, the maximum number of CA Heroine species
that occur sympatrically is approximately 12 species [4].
This is far less than the 100 or more cichlid species that
can occur sympatrically in some habitats in Lake Malawi
[58]. The dynamic nature of the largely riverine and
geologically active Central American landscape relative
to the East African Great Lakes could have enforced a
relatively slow fuse on the explosive diversification rate
of CA Heroines.
Furthermore, although the rate of diversification in
some East African Rift Lakes is clearly high [54,59-64],
only diversification patterns in the oldest of the lakes,
Lake Tanganyika, has been tested extensively in a LTT
framework. Somewhat counter to what we find here for
CA Heroines, diversification rate does appear to have
slowed slightly towards the present in Lake Tanganyika.
However, this slowdown was not as marked as one

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

might expect and it is clear that the diversification rate
is not especially rapid for the cichlids inhabiting this
lake [64]. However, the diversification rates in Lake Victoria and Lake Malawi are unquestionably fairly rapid
[64]. If CA Heroines are in fact only 16 million years
old, diversification in this group of over 100 species has
been rapid compared to many fish radiations [65,66].
However, if this clade is as old as 30 million years as
some calibrations suggest [40,49,50], the diversification
rate is likely to be more in line with many other fish
groups. With multiple genes and multiple temporal calibrations, whether CA Heroines exhibit a relatively rapid
diversification rate per million years could be tested.
Additionally, ecological divergence in CA Heroines is
substantial [4,15,17] and the rate of adaptive phenotypic
and ecological divergence in this radiation could well be
extraordinary. General processes, both intrinsic and
extrinsic, that are responsible for generating diversity in
adaptively diverging clades should come to light as
radiations like the CA Heroine cichlids are examined in
more explicit evolutionary and ecological detail.

Methods
DNA Sequencing

Gene sequence for the cytochrome b gene (1137 bp) for
17 Heroine species (see Additional file 1) were combined with sequence for numerous species previously
analyzed [43,44]. All species sequenced in this study
were collected from the wild except for Archocentrus
spinossimus that was purchased commercially. Collection localities are available in Table 1. All new
sequences were submitted to Genbank [Genbank:
HM193438-HM193454]. Because we were interested in
efficiently resolving a bifurcating topology and estimating branch lengths only one complete sequence per currently named species was utilized in our analyses.
For sequencing, total genomic DNA was isolated from
axial muscle using Puregene© extraction. A 1 μl aliquot of
this solution was used to provide a DNA template for
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The entire cytochrome
b gene was PCR amplified using primers in Hulsey et al.
[43]. Amplifications were carried out using standardized
PCR protocols. The PCR volume was 25 ml (18 ml H2O,
2.75 ml MgCl2 PCR buffer, 1.25 ml MgCl2, 2.0 ml dNTPs
(10 mM), 1.25 ml of each primer (10 mM), 0.25 ml Taq
and 0.5 ml DNA; approx. 15-20 ng). Thermal cycling conditions consisted of an initial denaturation step of 94°C
(2.0 min), 54°C (1.0 min) and 72°C (1.5 min). A final incubation of 72°C for 4 min was added to ensure complete
extension of amplified products. Subsequently, the 1.4 kb
PCR products were separated from unincorporated
primers and dNTPs using electrophoresis in agarose gels
run in Tris-acetate buffer (pH 7.8). Ethidium bromide
(1.5 mg/ml) was added to the gels for visualization.

Page 8 of 12

Positively amplified DNA was then purified using an enzymatic combination of 1 μl of Exonuclease I and 1 μl
shrimp alkaline phosphatase per 10 μl of PCR product.
Complete gene sequences were assembled from individual
sequencing reactions using the program Sequencher
version 4.1 (Gene Codes, Ann Arbor, MI).
Phylogeny Reconstruction

A combined total of 111 species’ sequences were examined in the phylogenetic analysis (Additional file 1).
Prior to the analyses, it was unclear exactly which species should be included in the CA Heroine clade and
therefore a large number of potential outgroups were
included. The putative outgroups utilized that are all
from South America were Acarichthys heckelii, Aequidens coeruleopunctatus, Cichla monoculus, Cleithracara
maronii, Heros appendiculatus, Hoplarchus psittacus,
Hypselecara coryphaenoides, Mesonauta festivus, M.
insignis, Pterophyllum scalare, Symphysodon aequifasciata, and Uaru amphiacanthoides. Their Genbank
accession numbers are included (Additional file 1). For
the Bayesian analyses, sequences were aligned using
Clustal X [67] and codon positions were defined using
MacClade 4.0 [68]. ModelTest 3.06 [69] was used to
identify the best model of molecular evolution for each
codon site. A model of GTR + I + gamma was found to
be the best model for all three positions. The Bayesian
analyses were executed to find approximations of the
maximum likelihood tree using MrBayes 3.0 [70]. The
analyses treated the transition-transversion matrices,
number of invariant sites, and gamma shape parameters
as unlinked or independent for each codon site. Flat
prior probability distribution for all parameters were
assumed before analysis. We ran three separate Bayesian
analyses for 5,000,000 generations with four Markov
chains in each run. We sampled trees from the Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) search algorithm every
1000 generations. At the end of each analysis, the loglikelihood scores were plotted against generation time to
identify the point at which log likelihood values reached
a stable equilibrium. In all three, the equilibrium
appeared to be reached at approximately 100,000 generations, and therefore, sample points prior to generation 100,000 in each run were discarded as “burn-in”
samples. The remaining samples from all runs combined
were used to produce a majority rule consensus tree in
PAUP* 4.0b10 [71]. The percentage of trees that recovered a particular clade (the clade’s posterior probability)
was depicted on the single best likelihood tree topology
found during the Bayesian analyses.
Chronogram

To generate a time-calibrated chronogram of CA Heroine diversification, we utilized penalized-likelihood

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

implemented in the program r8s [72]. Optimal smoothing parameters that compensate for rate heterogeneity
were estimated using cross validation implemented in
r8s. Using the optimal rate smoothing parameter of
0.001 derived from the cross-validation, r8s generated a
time-calibrated ultrametric tree that was utilized in the
subsequent analyses.
Although it is not necessary to analyze LTT plots
using absolute rates of time, we chose to calibrate the
topology with what is likely a temporally realistic geologic calibration. To calibrate the topology we used the
formation of the Punta del Morro an extension of the
Mexican Neovolcanic Plateau to the Gulf of Mexico.
This boundary was thought to have formed between 5
and 10 million years ago [73]. We used the “set age”
command in r8s to fix the age of the divergence for the
two cichlid sister-clades that spanned the formation of
this boundary at 7.5 million years, the average of geologic estimates for the Punta del Morro formation. In the
Heroine cichlids, only the Herichthys species are located
north of this region [43]. We therefore used the node
separating a representative of these species, Herichthys
cyanoguttatus, and the species Vieja fenestrata, a member of the sister group to Herichthys, as the node calibrated by the formation of the Punta del Morro.
Ancestral Area Reconstruction

To determine the ancestral node in the Heroine phylogeny from which to measure patterns of speciation, we
reconstructed the ancestral areas of nodes on the CA
Heroine chronogram generated above. All species present in mainland Central America were coded as 1 and
all species that occur primarily in South America or in
the Greater Antilles were coded as 0. Using the program Mesquite [74], likelihood ancestral state reconstruction of presence in these two areas was estimated.
The Markov k-state 1 parameter model (Mk1) was
implemented to reconstruct the likelihood of ancestral
states at nodes [75]. This type of optimization assumes
equal probabilities of transitions and therefore estimates
a single parameter for transitions between Central
America and other regions. It is important to note that
our estimate of the Central American ancestral node is
likely biased towards reconstructing a relatively deep
node as mostly Central American as there are several
hundred South American cichlid outgroups not
included in our estimate of the ancestral area. However,
most of these outgroups are fairly distantly related to
the Central American Heroines, and therefore, they
should have limited influence on ancestral area estimation. Ancestral state reconstruction is always sensitive
to groups not included in the analysis due to processes
such as extinction and exclusion of species [75]. However, the likelihood that this ancestral area would be

Page 9 of 12

reconstructed as Central American would never be negligible as the three nodes closer to the present all subtend primarily Central American groups. Furthermore,
all phylogenetic studies to date have recovered this
group of CA Heroines as largely monophyletic [47]. We
depicted the likelihood of the ancestral states we estimated using pie diagrams showing the estimated probabilities that speciation at each reconstructed node on
the chronogram took place in either Central America or
outside of Central America.
CA Heroine Lineages Through Time

If CA Heroines underwent an explosive bout of diversification following their colonization of mainland Central
America, this pattern should be evidenced by deviations
from a constant rate pattern of cladogenesis. Several
approaches were used to explore diversification rate variation in the CA Heroine chronogram. First, we used
Pybus and Harvey’s [35] constant rate (CR) test, which
examines the accumulation of lineages through time
using the test statistic gamma (g). Under a pure-birth
model of diversification, g follows a standard normal distribution. Thus, values of g < -1.645 (the critical value
for a one tailed test at a = 0.05) indicate a deviation
from a pure-birth model where diversification decreases
towards the present as one would expect if CA Heroines
underwent a burst of diversification early in their
history.
However, the CR test assumes complete taxon sampling. Based on species names available in Fishbase [10]
and several recent taxonomic revision [11-13], we
included all but 32 of the currently 122 named species
in the CA Heroine radiation in our analysis (Additional
file 2). To compensate for this incomplete sampling, we
generated random topologies for the total number of
taxa thought to be extant in the clade and then pruned
them to the number of species empirically sampled. We
examined g over a range of expected terminal taxa (i.e.,
species richness). We used species richness values
between 90, which assumes our current tree contains all
species, to 122 species, the number current taxonomy
suggests is in the clade. This approach provided us with
a range of lineage values to examine the sensitivity of
our statistical inferences to taxonomy. Our null distributions of g were obtained using 10000 simulated purebirth trees with taxon sampling generated with the
program Phylogen [76].
When examining variation in diversification rate,
incomplete taxon sampling can also increase type I
error rates because it effectively results in nodes near
the tips of the tree being pruned [77]. Not including
the other 32 named species of CA Heroines in our
phylogeny could result in erroneously finding an
apparent high rate of diversification early in the clade’s

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

history. To help alleviate this problem, we also examined the values of the g statistic as our empirical tree
containing 90 species was truncated node by node serially back in time. As the tree was truncated, lineage
sampling should become increasingly more complete
thereby reducing error in inferences based on the
value of g. To examine the resulting changes in the g
statistic as nodes were truncated, we graphed g, recalculated for the number of lineages remaining in the
phylogeny, versus the time-calibrated estimate of the
most recent node removed. As one moved towards the
root of the CA Heroine phylogeny, g would be
expected to become more negative if an under-sampling of lineages was obfuscating an early burst of
diversification in CA Heroines.
Because there was some ambiguity in our ancestral
state reconstructions and relatively low support for
some of the deeper nodes in the topology, we also
re-examined all of the above analyses in the two major
subsections of the CA Heroine clade. This allowed us to
determine if our results were heavily contingent upon
inferences concerning the deepest nodes. Our results
from these analyses of subsets of the phylogeny were
consistent with those recovered for the entire topology
(results not shown).
If a pure-birth model was the best fit to the lineage
accumulation of CA Heroines through time, it would
suggest CA Heroines did not experience a burst of
diversification when they colonized Central America.
By comparing models that incorporate additional rate
parameters of lineage accumulation, we determined the
best model for the empirically observed pattern of CA
Heroine diversification rate variation through time. We
fit two candidate rate-constant models, pure-birth
(yule process) and birth-death (birth and extinction),
and three rate variable models (density dependent
exponential, density dependent logistic, and Yule tworate) to the vector of branching times obtained from
the CA Heroine chronogram. These models test several types of alternative patterns of speciation and
extinction through time [38]. We calculated the likelihood of each model given the data as implemented in
the R-package LASER (version 2.2) [37]. Subsequently,
we examined the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC)
to evaluate which was the best model given the data.
We chose the best model based on the distribution of
differences between the AIC scores of all of the rateconstant and rate-variable models using a critical difference in AIC scores of a = 0.05 [57]. These fits were
derived from comparisons to 10000 simulated purebirth trees with taxon sampling generated by the program Phylogen [76].

Page 10 of 12

Additional material
Additional file 1: Included cichlid species. Cichlid cytochrome b
sequences used to generate the Heroine chronogram. Generic names
that are repeated in the list are followed with shortened versions of the
genus using multiple letters to clarify the genus to which they are
currently assigned.
Additional file 2: Heroine species that were not included in this
study. Putative Heroine species that are extant [10,11,13,51] but are not
included in our phylogeny are listed.

Acknowledgements
We thank B. Fitzpatrick, M. Niemiller, G. Reynolds, J. Robinson, M. ToddThompson, and L. Wisner for comments on an earlier version of this
manuscript. Support for this project was provided through the University of
Tennessee and the National Science Foundation (NSF IOS-0919459).
Authors’ contributions
CDH and JAF conceived of the study. PRH performed most of the
sequencing and some of the phylogenetic analyses. CDH and JAH
performed and analyzed the LTT analyses. All three authors contributed to
the writing of the manuscript.
Received: 20 January 2010 Accepted: 14 September 2010
Published: 14 September 2010
References
1. Patterson C: Bony fishes. In Major Features of Vertebrate Evolution. Edited
by: D.R. Prothero S, R.M. Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee
Paleontological Society; 1994:57-84.
2. Greenwood PH: Explosive speciation in African lakes. Proceedings of the
Royal Institute of Great Britain 1964, 40:256-269.
3. Fryer G, Iles TD: The cichlid fishes of the Great Lakes of Africa. Edinburgh,
UK: Oliver and Boyd 1972.
4. Winemiller KO, Kelso-Winemiller LC, Brenkert AL: Ecomorphological
diversification and convergence in fluvial cichlid fishes. Environmental
Biology of Fishes 1995, 44:235-261.
5. Liem KF: Evolutionary strategies and morphological innovations - cichlid
pharyngeal jaws. Systematic Zoology 1973, 22:425-441.
6. Hulsey CD, García de León FJ, Rodiles-Hernandez R: Micro- and
macroevolutionary decoupling of cichlid jaws: A test of Liem’s key
innovation hypothesis. Evolution 2006, 60:2096-2109.
7. Salzburger W, Mack T, Verheyen E, Meyer A: Out of Tanganyika: Genesis,
explosive speciation, key-innovations and phylogeography of the
haplochromine cichlid fishes. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2005, 5(1):17.
8. Kornfield I, Smith PF: African cichlid fishes: Model systems for
evolutionary biology. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 2000,
31:163.
9. Seehausen O: Evolution and ecological theory - Chance, historical
contingency and ecological determinism jointly determine the rate of
adaptive radiation. Heredity 2007, 99:361-363.
10. FishBase. [http://www.fishbase.org].
11. Stauffer JR Jr, McKaye KR: Descriptions of three new species of cichlid
fishes (Teleostei: Cichlidae) from Lake Xiloá, Nicaragua. Managua,
Nicaragua: Dirección de Investigación de la Universidad Centroamericana
2002, 1-18.
12. Schmitter-Soto JJ: Phylogeny of species formerly assigned to the genus
Archocentrus (Perciformes: Cichlidae). Zootaxa 2007, 1-50.
13. Stauffer JR Jr, McCrary JK, Black KE: Three new species of cichlid fish
(Teleostei: Cichlidae) in Lake Apoyo, Nicaragua. Proceedings of the
Biological Society of Washington 2008, 121:117-129.
14. Eaton TH: An adaptive series of protractile jaws in cichlid fishes. Journal
of Morphology 1943, 72:183-190.
15. Hulsey CD, García de León FJ: Cichlid jaw mechanics: linking morphology
to feeding specialization. Functional Ecology 2005, 19:487-494.

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

16. Higham TE, Hulsey CD, Rican O, Carroll AM: Feeding with speed: prey
capture evolution in cichilds. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 2007, 20:70-78.
17. Hulsey CD, Roberts RJ, Lin ASP, Guldberg R, Streelman JT: Convergence in
a mechanically complex phenotype: Detecting structural adaptations for
crushing in cichlid fish. Evolution 2008, 62:1587-1599.
18. Hulsey CD, Hollingsworth PR, Holzman R: Co-evolution of the premaxilla
and jaw protrusion in cichlid fishes (Heroine: Cichlidae). Biological Journal
of the Linnean Society 2010, 100:619-629.
19. Farias IP, Orti G, Sampaio I, Schneider H, Meyer A: The cytochrome b gene
as a phylogenetic marker: The limits of resolution for analyzing
relationships among cichlid fishes. Journal of Molecular Evolution 2001,
53:89-103.
20. Malabarba MC, Zuleta O, Del Papa C: Proterocara argentina, a new fossil
cichlid from the Lumbrera Formation, Eocene of Argentina. Journal of
Vertebrate Paleontology 2006, 26:267-275.
21. Miller RR: Geographical distribution of Central American freshwater
fishes. Copeia 1966, 773-802.
22. Myers GS: Derivation of freshwater fish fauna of Central America. Copeia
1966, 766-773.
23. Hulsey CD, López-Fernández H: Historical biogeography of the fishes of
Nuclear Central America. In Neotropical Fish Biologeography. Edited by:
Alber J, Reis RE. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press; 2009:.
24. Schluter D: The ecology of adaptive radiation. New York, New York:
Oxford University Press 2000.
25. Gavrilets S, Losos JB: Adaptive Radiation: Contrasting Theory with Data.
Science 2009, 323:732-737.
26. Kornfield IL, Koehn RK: Genetic-variaion and speciation in New World
cichlids. Evolution 1975, 29:427-437.
27. Meyer A: Ecological and evolutionary consequences of the trophic
polymorphism in Cichlasoma citrinellum (Pisces, Cichlidae). Biological
Journal of the Linnean Society 1990, 39:279-299.
28. Hulsey CD, Hendrickson DA, García de León FJ: Trophic morphology,
feeding performance and prey use in the polymorphic fish Herichthys
minckleyi. Evolutionary Ecology Research 2005, 7:303-324.
29. Barluenga M, Stolting KN, Salzburger W, Muschick M, Meyer A: Sympatric
speciation in Nicaraguan crater lake cichlid fish. Nature 2006, 439:719-723.
30. Gavrilets S, Vose A, Barluenga M, Salzburger W, Meyer A: Case studies and
mathematical models of ecological speciation. 1. Cichlids in a crater
lake. Molecular Ecology 2007, 16:2893-2909.
31. Elmer KR, Kusche H, Lehtonen TK, Meyer A: Local variation and parallel
evolution: morphological and genetic diversity across a species complex
of neotropical crater lake cichlid fishes. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society Series B 2010, 365:1763-1782.
32. Kozak KH, Weisrock DW, Larson A: Rapid lineage accumulation in a nonadaptive radiation: phylogenetic analysis of diversification rates in
eastern North American woodland salamanders (Plethodontidae:
Plethodon). Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 2006,
273:539-546.
33. Weir JT: Divergent timing and patterns of species accumulation in
lowland and highland neotropical birds. Evolution 2006, 60:842-855.
34. Nee S: Inferring speciation rates from phylogenies. Evolution 2001,
55:661-668.
35. Pybus OG, Harvey PH: Testing macro-evolutionary models using
incomplete molecular phylogenies. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London Series B-Biological Sciences 2000, 267:2267-2272.
36. Nee S: Birth-death models in macroevolution. Annual Review of Ecology
Evolution and Systematics 2006, 37:1-17.
37. Rabosky DL: LASER: A Maximum Likelihood Toolkit for Detecting
Temporal Shifts in Diversification Rates From Molecular Phylogenies.
Evolutionary Bioinformatics 2006, 2:247-250.
38. Rabosky DL: Likelihood methods for detecting temporal shifts in
diversification rates. Evolution 2006, 60:1152-1164.
39. Avise JC, Walker D: Pleistocene phylogeographic effects on avian
populations and the speciation process. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London Series B-Biological Sciences 1988, 265:457-1463.
40. Genner MJ, Seehausen O, Lunt DH, Joyce DA, Shaw PW, Carvalho GR,
Turner GF: Age of cichlids: New dates for ancient lake fish radiations.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 2007, 24:1269-1282.
41. Isaac NJB, Mallet J, Mace GM: Taxonomic inflation: its influence on
macroecology and conservation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 2004,
19:464-469.

Page 11 of 12

42. Phillimore AB, Price TD: Density-dependent cladogenesis in birds. PLOS
Biology 2008, 6:483-489.
43. Hulsey CD, García de León FJ, Johnson YS, Hendrickson DA, Near TJ:
Temporal diversification of Mesoamerican cichlid fishes across a major
biogeographic boundary. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2004,
31:754-764.
44. Concheiro-Pérez GAC, Rican O, Orti G, Bermingham E, Doadrio I, Zardoya R:
Phylogeny and biogeography of 91 species of heroine cichlids
(Teleostei: Cichlidae) based on sequences of the cytochrome b gene.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2007, 43:91-110.
45. Chakrabarty P: Systematics and historical biogeography of Greater
Antillean Cichlidae. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2006, 39:619-627.
46. Rican O, Zardoya R, Doadrio I: Phylogenetic relationships of Middle
American cichlids (Cichlidae, Heroini) based on combined evidence from
nuclear genes, mtDNA, and morphology. Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 2008, 49:941-957.
47. López-Fernández H, Winemiller KO, Honeycutt RL: Multilocus phylogeny
and rapid radiations in Neotropical cichlid fishes (Perciformes: Cichlidae:
Cichlinae). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2010, 55:1070-1086.
48. Martin AP, Bermingham E: Systematics and evolution of lower Central
American cichlids inferred from analysis of cytochrome b gene
sequences. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 1998, 9:192-203.
49. Schwarzer J, Misof B, Tautz D, Schliewen UK: The root of the East African
cichlid radiations. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2009, 9:186.
50. Hulsey CD, Mims MC, Parnell NF, Streelman JT: Comparative rates of lower
jaw diversification in cichlid adaptive radiations. Journal of Evolutionary
Biology 2010, 23:1456-1467.
51. Hubbs CL: Fishes of the Yucatán Peninsula. Carnegie Institute of
Washington Publications 1936, 457:157-287.
52. Revell LJ, Harmon LJ, Glor RE: Underparameterized model of sequence
evolution leads to bias in the estimation of diversification rates from
molecular phylogenies. Systematic Biology 2005, 54:973-983.
53. Seehausen O, Terai Y, Magalhaes IS, Carleton KL, Mrosso HDJ, Miyagi R, van
der Sluijs I, Schneider MV, Maan ME, Tachida H, et al: Speciation through
sensory drive in cichlid fish. Nature 2008, 455:620-623.
54. Seehausen O: Patterns in fish radiation are compatible with Pleistocene
desiccation of Lake Victoria and 14,600 year history for its cichlid
species flock. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological
Sciences 2002, 269:491-497.
55. Rogers R, Karason H, van der Hilst R: Epirogenic uplift above a detached
slab in northern Central America. Geology 2002, 30:1031-1034.
56. Bethune DC, Ryan M, Losilla J, Krasn M: Hydrogeology. In Central America:
Geology, Resources, and Hazards. Edited by: Bundschuh J, Alvarado GE.
London: Taylor and Francis; 2007:665-686.
57. Rabosky DL, Lovette IJ: Density-dependent diversification in North
American wood warblers. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological
Sciences 2008, 275:2363-2371.
58. Danley PD, Kocher TD: Speciation in rapidly diverging systems: lessons
from Lake Malawi. Molecular Ecology 2001, 10:1075-1086.
59. Kornfield IL: Evidence for rapid speciation in African cichlid fishes.
Experientia 1978, 34:335-336.
60. Meyer A, Kocher TD, Basasibwaki P, Wilson AC: Monophyletic origin of
Lake Victoria cichlid fishes suggested by mitochondrial DNA sequences.
Nature 1990, 347:550-553.
61. Sturmbauer C, Hainz U, Baric S, Verheyen E, Salzburger W: Evolution of the
tribe Tropheini from Lake Tanganyika: synchronized explosive speciation
producing multiple evolutionary parallelism. Hydrobiologia 2003,
500:51-64.
62. Verheyen E, Salzburger W, Snoeks J, Meyer A: Origin of the superflock of
cichlid fishes from Lake Victoria, East Africa. Science 2003, 300:325-329.
63. Kocher TD: Adaptive evolution and explosive speciation: The cichlid fish
model. Nature Reviews Genetics 2004, 5:288-298.
64. Day JJ, Cotton JA, Barraclough TG: Tempo and mode of diversification of
Lake Tanganyika cichlid fishes. PLOS One 2008, 3:10.
65. McCune A: How fast is speciation? Molecular, geological, and
phylogenetic evidence from adaptive radiations of fishes. In Molecular
evolution and adaptive radiation. Edited by: Sytsma TJGKJ. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press; 1997:585-610.
66. Bolnick DI, Near TJ: Tempo of hybrid inviability in centrarchid fishes
(Teleostei: Centrarchidae). Evolution 2005, 59:1754-1767.

Hulsey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/279

Page 12 of 12

67. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Research 1997,
25:4876-4882.
68. Maddison DR, Maddison WP: MACCLADE 4.0. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates 2000.
69. Posada D, Crandall KA: MODELTEST: testing the model of DNA
substitution. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:817-818.
70. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
71. Swofford DL: PAUP*: phylogenetic analyses using parsimony (* and other
methods). beta version 4.0 edn Sunderland, MA: Sinauer 2002.
72. Sanderson MJ: r8s: inferring absolute rates of molecular evolution and
divergence times in the absence of a molecular clock. Bioinformatics
2003, 19:301-302.
73. Byerly GR: Igneous activity. In The Gulf of Mexico Basin: The Geology of
North America. Edited by: Salvador A. Boulder, CO: Geological Society of
America; 1991:91-108.
74. Maddison WP, Maddison DR: Mesquite: a modular system for
evolutionary analysis., 2.71 2009 [http://mesquiteproject.org].
75. Schluter D, Price T, Mooers AO, Ludwig D: Likelihood of ancestor states in
adaptive radiation. Evolution 1997, 51:1699-1711.
76. Rambaut AP: PhyloGen. Oxford: Department of Zoology, University of
Oxford; 2002, 1.0.
77. Nee S, Mooers AO, Harvey PH: Tempo and mode of evolution revealed
from molecular phylogenies. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 1992, 89:8322-8326.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-279
Cite this article as: Hulsey et al.: Temporal diversification of Central
American cichlids. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:279.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
