<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Differential regulation of the foraging gene associated with task behaviors in harvester ants</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19. doi:10.1186/1472-6785-11-19"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Krista K Ingram"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ingram et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/19

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Differential regulation of the foraging gene
associated with task behaviors in harvester ants
Krista K Ingram*, Lindsay Kleeman and Swetha Peteru

Abstract
Background: The division of labor in social insect colonies involves transitions by workers from one task to
another and is critical to the organization and ecological success of colonies. The differential regulation of genetic
pathways is likely to be a key mechanism involved in plasticity of social insect task behavior. One of the few
pathways implicated in social organization involves the cGMP-activated protein kinase gene, foraging, a gene
associated with foraging behavior in social insect species. The association of the foraging gene with behavior is
conserved across diverse species, but the observed expression patterns and proposed functions of this gene vary
across taxa. We compared the protein sequence of foraging across social insects and explored whether the
differential regulation of this gene is associated with task behaviors in the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex
occidentalis.
Results: Phylogenetic analysis of the coding region of the foraging gene reveals considerable conservation in
protein sequence across insects, particularly among hymenopteran species. The absence of amino acid variation in
key active and binding sites suggests that differences in behaviors associated with this gene among species may
be the result of changes in gene expression rather than gene divergence. Using real time qPCR analyses with a
harvester ant ortholog to foraging (Pofor), we found that the brains of harvester ant foragers have a daily
fluctuation in expression of foraging with mRNA levels peaking at midday. In contrast, young workers inside the
nest have low levels of Pofor mRNA with no evidence of daily fluctuations in expression. As a result, the association
of foraging expression with task behavior within a species changes depending on the time of day the individuals
are sampled.
Conclusions: The amino acid protein sequence of foraging is highly conserved across social insects. Differences in
foraging behaviors associated with this gene among social insect species are likely due to differences in gene
regulation rather than evolutionary changes in the encoded protein. The task-specific expression patterns of
foraging are consistent with the task-specific circadian rhythms observed in harvester ants. Whether the molecular
clock plays a role in regulating foraging gene expression (or vice versa) remains to be determined. Our results
represent the first time series analysis of foraging gene expression and underscore the importance of assaying
time-related expression differences in behavioral studies. Understanding how this gene is regulated within species
is critical to explaining the mechanism by which foraging influences behavior.

Background
Recent advances in sociogenomics allow for analyses of
the molecular mechanisms regulating behavioral flexibility [1-3]. In eusocial insects, one key aspect of their sociality, the division of labor, has received the most
attention [4,5]. Species exhibiting age-related polyethism, a derived form of division of labor in ants and bees
* Correspondence: kingram@colgate.edu
Department of Biology, 13 Oak Drive, Colgate University, Hamilton, NY
13346, USA

where colony tasks are allocated among distinct behavioral phenotypes of identical genotype, are ideal candidates for studying the molecular basis of behavioral
plasticity [4,5]. The colony organization of advanced
eusocial insects evolved independently in ants, bees, and
wasps but little is known about the genetic mechanisms
that mediate behavioral plasticity in these species.
The foraging gene, a cGMP-activated protein kinase
gene (PKG), has emerged as an important behavioral
gene in diverse taxa but the associations between the

© 2011 Ingram et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ingram et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/19

gene and behavior of particular species described to date
vary in both mechanism and proposed function [6,7]. In
mammals, PKG orthologs–cGKI and cGKII genes–play a
role in nociception responses, learning and memory,
and circadian rhythmicity [6,8]. The nematode ortholog,
egl-4, is involved in aggregation responses and foodrelated behaviors in C. elegans [9]. Furthermore, differential expression of egl-4 influences EDTA sensitivity
and chemotaxis in Pristionchus pacificus, a nematode
that parasitizes scarab beetles [10].
The foraging gene has been shown to have a direct
link to foraging behavior in several insect species
[7,11-16]. Indeed, the function of foraging was initially
described in the food-search behavior of Drosphilia melanogaster [15]. Differences in fruit fly foraging behavior
are linked to alternative alleles that result in changes in
abundance of foraging mRNA and protein kinase activity
[15]. Later studies in fruit flies provided evidence for the
influence of foraging on habituation and sucrose responsiveness, stress tolerance, olfactory and visual learning,
memory and sleep patterns [17-19].
In the social insects, the foraging gene is implicated in
the behavioral division of labor [11-13,16,20]. Honeybee
foragers (Apis mellifera) have higher levels of expression
of foraging than nurse bees and treatment with cGMP
causes precocious foraging in young bees [7]. A similar
result was found in bumblebees that have size-dependent task allocation; larger foragers had higher expression of foraging than smaller nurse bees [12]. However,
as larger forager bumblebees age, the expression of foraging decreases, suggesting age-dependent effects on
overall expression levels in this species. In previous
work, we showed that a harvester ant ortholog (Pbfor)
to foraging was associated with foraging behavior in
ants, but in contrast to honeybees, the expression was
lower in foragers than workers of other tasks, including
brood care (nurse) workers [11]. These patterns were
similar to those found for Vespula vulgaris wasps. Wasp
foragers had lower expression of foraging than nurse
wasps, although there was considerable variation in
expression levels [16]. A study on another ant species,
Pheidole pallidula, showed that expression of this gene
is high in soldier castes, which do not forage, and low in
minor workers which do engage in foraging [13].
It is not surprising that a conserved gene encoding for a
protein kinase has multiple behavioral roles across unrelated taxa, but the differential expression of this gene
within particular taxa suggests that foraging also plays a
role in behavioral plasticity. To better understand the role
of foraging in the plasticity of task behaviors important for
the division of labor in eusocial insects, we explored two
alternative hypotheses for why the association of the foraging gene and behavior varies across species. Sequence differences between species could alter binding site specificity

Page 2 of 9

or other properties of the encoded kinase and thus alter
the effect or function of the foraging gene in particular
taxa. An alternative, but not mutually exclusive, hypothesis
is that the foraging gene is differentially regulated across
species, thus resulting in diverse associations between
foraging gene expression and behavior. We examined the
evolution of the foraging gene in Hymenoptera and
explored whether the differential regulation of this gene is
associated with task behaviors in the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex occidentalis.
Red harvester ants in the genus Pogonomyrmex live in
large colonies of up to 10-12,000 workers in the southwestern deserts of the United States [21]. All workers in a colony are similar morphologically, but on a given day, some
individuals forage for seeds, while other individuals perform other colony tasks [21-23]. In ants, younger workers
tend to remain inside the nest while older workers perform tasks outside, such as foraging [24]. In harvester ants,
this progression of worker tasks, known as age-related
polyethism, occurs over the course of a year, the approximate lifespan of a worker [25,26]. In harvester ants, young
workers perform tasks related to brood care and never (or
rarely) leave the nest. Workers then progress to nest maintenance tasks, with brief trips out of the nest, then to
patrolling tasks, with short morning forays from the nest,
and finally to foraging tasks [21,23,27-29]. Foragers spend
the most time out of nest, leaving in early morning and
foraging until mid-afternoon.
The recent discovery of task-specific expression of circadian clock genes in harvester ants confirmed that foragers have a functional molecular clock and circadian
rhythm, but workers inside the nest do not show pronounced circadian rhythms in activity levels or expression of clock genes [30]. In conjunction with the large
differences in behavioral repertoire between tasks (with
forager behaviors tightly linked to time of day), these
results suggest that other behavioral genes may be differentially regulated via downstream interactions with
molecular clock pathways. Here, we show that the
expression pattern of the foraging gene changes during
the course of a day in harvester ant foragers. In addition, nest workers that stay inside the nest with no evidence of active circadian rhythm have low levels of
foraging mRNA and little fluctuation in mRNA levels
throughout the day. The fact that foraging mRNA levels
vary with time of day is of critical importance to studies
attempting to link the expression of the foraging gene
with behavioral function.

Results
Gene evolution in foraging

Comparative analysis of amino acid sequence from the
open reading frame of foraging shows considerable conservation of this gene among ants and maximum

Ingram et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/19

Page 3 of 9

likelihood phylogenetic analysis shows short branch
lengths between ant species and other eusocial insects
(Figure 1). For example, Harpegnathos saltator, the
Indian jumping ant, and Camponotus floridanus, a carpenter ant, group with Nasonia vitripennis, a non-social
wasp in an unresolved cluster of other hymenopteran
species (BP = 63). Within ants, amino acids sequences

have ClustalW similarity scores of 96.4, with an average of approximately 4% of the amino acid sites differing between pairs of sequences. In comparison, the
similarity score across other eusocial insect species is
87.5. Average similarity scores between ants and other
species reflect phylogenetic expectations (other eusocial insects: 90.4, Nasonia (non-social Hymenopteran):

Solenopsis invicta
Acromyrmex echinatior
Atta cephalotes
Pheidole pallidula
Linepithema humile
Pogonomyrmex barbatus
Pogonomyrmex occidentalis
Camponotus floridanus
Harpegnathos saltator
Nasonia vitripennis
Bombus ignitus
Bombus terrestris
Apis mellifera
Vespula vulgaris
Tribolium castaneum
Diabrotica virgifera virgifera
Locusta migratoria
Schistocerca gregaria
Anopheles gambiae
Mythimna separata
Drosophila melanogaster
Acyrthosiphon pisum
Caenorhabditis elegans
Schistosoma japonicum
Pristionchus pacificus
0.05
Figure 1 Maximum likelihood analysis of foraging amino acid sequence. Maximum likelihood analysis of amino acid sequences of foraging
from insect taxa with C. elegans, S. japonicum, and P. pacificus as outgroups. The tree shown represents the bootstrap consensus tree of 1000
replicates. Branch lengths represent the number of substitutions per site. All positions containing gaps and missing data were eliminated for a
total of 367 positions in the final dataset. The black bar denotes the hymenopteran species, the non-social species are shown in bold type, and
the ants (Formicidae) marked with an asterisk.

Ingram et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/19

89.7, non-Hymenopteran insects: 83.6, Nematodes/Trematodes: 52).
The foraging gene is a cGMP-dependent kinase
(cGPK) that contains four conserved domains; two tandem effector domains of the CAP family of transcription factors (CAP-ED), a catalytic domain of the
protein Serine/Threonine kinase, and a protein kinase
C terminal domain (Figure 2A). Within the Hymenoptera, there are 50 amino acid changes across the gene,
with 20 changes occurring within the conserved
domains (Additional File 1). There are only 4 amino
acid replacements unique to ants within the conserved
domains. No changes occurred at ligand-binding sites
or flexible hinges in the CAP-ED domains and no
changes occurred at the ATP binding sites or actives
sites of the PKG catalytic domain with the exception
of a single amino acid change in the activation loop
(A-loop). In most Hymenoptera, the final amino acid
in the A-loop chain is a histidine but some ants have
an asparagine (Figure 2B). Both amino acids have polar
side chains but the difference in side chain conformation may alter the activation efficiency or represent an
additional function of the enzyme. As this amino acid
change is not conserved across all ant species (Figure
2C), it is not a change that is likely to account for the

Page 4 of 9

alternative expression patterns of the foraging gene
across the Hymenoptera.
Differential expression of foraging between tasks

The results of the mixed model repeated measures
ANOVA show gene expression varies significantly
across time points (F = 5.33, p < 0.001). As predicted,
this change in gene expression across time was significantly different across tasks (Figure 3; F = 2.97, p <
0.05). The pattern of gene expression over time also varied with colony (F = 3.48, p < 0.001) and with a colony
× task interaction (F = 11.21, p < 0.001). Collapsing
across time, none of the between subjects factors or
their interactions were significant (Additional File 2).
Over all time points, the average expression level of
foraging is 2.4 times greater in foragers than nest workers, but due to variation across time points, this difference is not significant (t = 1.75; p = 0.08). The highest
mRNA levels for foragers are recorded at midday. At
this time, foragers have more than three times the level
of foraging mRNA than nest workers (t = 2.56, p =
0.05). During late evening and early morning hours,
when forager levels dip to the lowest level, nest workers
have marginally higher average levels of foraging mRNA
than foragers (t = 1.98, p = 0.06).

Figure 2 Annotation of the conserved domains of the foraging gene. A) Annotation of the cGMP-dependent protein kinase foraging
showing conserved domains. CAP-ED: effector domain of the CAP family of transcription factors, STKc_cGK_PKG: catalytic domain of the cGMPdependent protein kinase. B) Partial sequence alignment of catalytic domain in hymenoptera showing the single amino acid replacement in the
A-loop region (asparagine/histidine). The red line indicates the two A-loop regions and the red box encloses the amino acid replacement. C)
Partial sequence alignment of A-loop region in catalytic domain in known Formicidae. The red box encloses the asparagine/histidine
replacement site in eight ant species. The asparagine mutation is present in 6 out of 8 species.

Ingram et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/19

Page 5 of 9

play an important role in both influencing species-specific behavior and regulating behavioral plasticity within
species.
Conservation in foraging gene coding sequence

Figure 3 Relative expression of foraging mRNA in workers over
time. Relative expression of foraging mRNA in individual worker
brains from experimental colonies of P. occidentalis. Colonies were
entrained in controlled environmental chambers in a 12:12 hr LD
regime. Foragers (light bars, n = 4 colonies) and nest workers (dark
bars, n = 4 colonies) were collected at six time points. Bars
represent the averages of colony means with three nest workers
and three foragers sampled per colony (SE calculated across
colonies). The open stripe in the horizontal bar at base of the plot
represents the light phase and the solid stripe represents the dark
phase.

The pattern of expression of Pofor mRNA in forager
brains is significantly and strongly correlated with the
generalized sine function curve predicted from the daily
fluctuations in foraging behavior (t = 4.13, r = 0.92, p =
0.01). The expression pattern of nest workers is not correlated with the predicted sine curve function (t = 0.30,
r = 0.17, p = 0.39). Comparing the two tasks, foragers
show a significantly higher correlation to the predicted
daily fluctuation in expression levels of foraging than
nest workers (t = 2.72, r = 0.74, p = 0.03).

Discussion
Molecular mechanisms driving differences in social
insect behavior can involve gene evolution–mutations in
protein sequence of behavioral genes–or changes in
gene regulation–mutations in non-coding regions that
ultimately affect the impact of such genes on the behavior of organisms. Our results show that an important
behavioral gene, foraging, is highly conserved in the
Hymenoptera, with little evidence for functional evolution in amino acid sequence. Furthermore, our results
demonstrate that differential regulation of this gene in
P. occidentalis is associated with task-specific behaviors
that are integral to the division of labor in a social
insect. The regulation of foraging in harvester ants is
not limited to differences in levels of foraging mRNA
but involves daily fluctuations in gene expression in foragers that are not seen in workers inside the nest. Thus,
differential regulation of foraging gene expression may

Our results indicate that both the protein sequence of
foraging and the association of the foraging gene with
food-related behavior are conserved across hymenopteran species. Thus, the most likely mechanism by
which foraging influences behavior within species
appears to operate primarily via differential regulation of
gene expression. Changes in the pathways responsible
for the regulation of foraging, rather than foraging protein sequences, are also likely to be responsible for the
variability in the expression patterns of the this gene
across species. Although the link between the foraging
gene and foraging behavior is conserved across eusocial
insects, the directionality of the relationship may differ
between species due to independent mutations in the
regulatory pathways [2]. Thus, there are potentially two
levels at which the differential regulation of foraging
may influence flexibility in social insect division of
labor; age-related or task-specific plasticity in worker
behavior within species and species-dependent associations of foraging gene expression and worker behavior.
There is a growing body of evidence that additional
genetic pathways involved in nutrition and metabolism
also play a major role in worker-worker division of
labor (reviewed in [4]). Causal relationships between
gene regulation and transitions in worker task behaviors
have been documented for a few of these genes, including foraging [7,14]. The results from these studies highlight the complexity of relationships between conserved
genetic pathways and transitions to foraging in social
insects. For example, malvolio, a gene involved in manganese transfer and sucrose responsiveness, has a higher
expression level in pollen foragers than nurse honeybees
with nectar foragers intermediate [31]. Manganese treatment causes precocious foraging–but does not increase
pollen foraging in honeybee colonies. RNAi knockdown
of the storage protein gene, vitellogenin (Vg) also causes
precocious foraging in honeybees among other pleiotropic effects, demonstrating the co-option of a conserved
reproductive regulatory pathway for the organization of
behavior [32]. The insulin-signaling TOR pathway is an
important metabolic pathway linked to foraging behavior in honeybees and Polistes wasps [33,34]. IIS-gene
expression is up-regulated in forager bees which have
diminished nutrient reserves relative to nurse bees–a
pattern opposite to expectations from caste differentiation and associations of IIS with nutrient status in other
insect species [35]. Interesting parallels can be drawn
between the IIS pathway and the foraging pathway. In
both cases, differential regulation occurs within and

Ingram et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/19

between species, suggesting evolutionary changes in regulatory regions influencing these pathways. Understanding the diversity of mechanisms by which conserved
molecular pathways regulate behavioral plasticity in
workers is a central issue in social insect biology. The
foraging gene provides an important example of how
differential regulation of conserved genes influences the
behavioral division of labor within and between social
insect species.
Behavioral plasticity and foraging gene regulation

In harvester ants, the foraging gene is expressed in the
brains of both foragers and workers inside the nest,
but the pattern of expression differs between the two
tasks during the course of the day. Foragers have
higher expression levels of foraging during midday
when the foragers are outside the nest, actively foraging. In contrast, the expression levels of nest workers
do not vary with time of day, a pattern consistent with
the round-the-clock locomotor activity patterns of
these workers [30]. Nest workers generally show lower
levels of Pofor mRNA than foragers during the day and
similar, or higher, levels in late evening and early
morning hours.
A previous study on a related harvester ant, Pogonomyrmes barbatus, analyzed task-specific foraging expression in five different tasks, including young workers that
tended brood inside the nest and foragers from field
colonies [11]. The results from that study showed that
foragers had a lower expression of PbFor than brood
workers [11]. Interestingly, the sampled workers from
the P. barbatus field study were collected in the early
morning (between 6-8 am–a convention that allowed
researchers to identify and sample the workers of all
tasks in the field). The results from the P. barbatus
study support the findings from the current study, with
average levels of Pofor mRNA higher in nest workers
than foragers in the early morning. However, the conclusions from the 2005 study were limited to a single
time of the day. In order to clarify the role of foraging
in field colonies of harvester ants, it will be important to
test whether P. barbatus foragers show an increase in
expression of foraging throughout the day as seen in lab
colonies of P. occidentalis foragers. Alternatively, it is
possible that P. barbatus foragers in field colonies show
an age-related decrease in foraging expression similar to
the decrease documented in bumblebees [12]. In laboratory colonies, foragers may be newly transitioned from
nest work and may not show a decrease in foraging
expression due to age. The high level of Pofor mRNA in
P.occidentalis foragers in the laboratory may represent
the increase in foraging expression associated with new
external stimuli and the rapid learning associated with
foraging behavior [6]. Further data from field and

Page 6 of 9

laboratory studies in both species is needed to help disentangle these two hypotheses.
Our results also highlight the importance of considering the effect of time and circadian rhythms on gene
expression and, in particular, the expression of important behavioral genes. Despite the cost of designing
extensive qPCR studies, data we present indicate that it
may be necessary to use multiple time points when sampling behavioral gene expression differences within and
between species. At this point, we understand few of the
molecular pathways affected by circadian circuitry,
although a number of recent studies are attempting to
narrow this gap in our knowledge [6,36]. It is important
to note if task-related variation in foraging expression
levels across species is due to mutations in regulatory
mechanisms, then even closely related species may exhibit variation in foraging expression patterns. The
extreme flexibility in the regulation of foraging expression underscores the potential importance of this gene
in the development of behavioral plasticity in social
insect workers. Alternatively, our results also highlight
the possibility that some of the experimental differences
in patterns of foraging expression reported across studies
may not represent distinct associations of foraging gene
expression with species-specific behavior, but rather differences in the timing of sample collections and the
inadvertent capture of discrete snapshots of expression
levels across the daily fluctuations of the gene. A review
of the methods in previous social insect studies did not
provide enough detail on the timing of sampling to
determine whether this may be a factor affecting different patterns of expression across species.
The fact that we found significant levels of expression
of the foraging gene in nest workers suggests that this
gene has more than one function in harvester ant behavior. The possibility of multiple functions for foraging
within a species is not entirely surprising as the foraging
gene encodes for a protein kinase that is expected to
have numerous downstream targets [8]. There is already
evidence for numerous functions of the foraging gene in
behavior including phototaxis, chemotaxis, foraging,
learning and memory [6,8]. In harvester ants, task-specific behavioral associations with the foraging gene are
likely to be dependent on development due to the age
differences between task. The relatively stable expression
in young workers that remain inside the nests may indicate a specific, novel function for this gene that does
not involve phototaxis or foraging activities outside the
nest. We recognize that gene expression and the presence of foraging mRNA do not necessarily transfer to
protein activity differences in vivo. Important future studies could test for expression patterns in FOR protein in
specific brain regions in foragers versus nest workers to
elucidate whether the differential regulation of foraging

Ingram et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/19

is limited to particular brain areas in different tasks or
during different stages of development. A recent study
on another ant Pheidole pallidula showed the tremendous promise of research in this area [13].

Conclusions
The foraging gene is highly conserved across eusocial
species and has a robust association with task-specific
behaviors involved in the division of labor within colonies. Differences in how foraging influences task behaviors across social insects appear to be a product of
gene regulation, rather than protein evolution. In laboratory colonies of harvester ants, the regulation of the
foraging gene shows task-dependent daily fluctuations in
Pofor mRNA that correlate with patterns of foraging
behavior. The functions of foraging are not yet known
for ants but it is clear that the flexibility in the regulation of this gene is associated with the plasticity in
worker behavior within species and is likely to play an
important role in the evolution of behavioral differences
between species.

Page 7 of 9

samples. Exact ages of the foragers and nest workers
were not known, but workers within the nest are typically younger than foragers [27,29].
We collected multiple ants (6-10) at each time point
and sampled three individuals per time point per colony
for RNA extraction. All sampling during evening hours
was done using dim red light in dark conditions. Ants
were collected from each colony at six time points: 4:00,
8:00, 12:00, 16:00, 20:00, and 24:00 hours. Individual
ants were immediately immersed in liquid nitrogen and
stored at -70°C until dissection. Brain dissections were
performed in 50 μL 1 × PBS and 5 μL RNAlater® under
a dissecting microscope. RNA isolation of individual
brains was done using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen) with an
additional DNase treatment (Qiagen). Isolated RNA was
quantified using Nanodrop and stored at -70°C. In this
study, RNA was purified from 144 individual brain dissections, 432 cDNA reactions were amplified and 864
qPCR reactions were analyzed for the two genes.
Phylogenetic analysis of foraging

Methods
Ants and sampling

Laboratory colonies of harvester ants (Pogonomyrmex
occidentalis) were established by collecting field colonies
from Hurricane, Utah. Colonies were transferred to individual plexiglass nest boxes (15 cm wide × 30 cm long ×
10 cm high) connected to open-air foraging arenas (25
cm W × 60 cm L × 15 cm H) by short Tygon tubing (2
cm diameter × 10 cm long). Nest box floors had a 3 cm
layer of plaster with built-in irrigation system to keep
colonies moist. Nest boxes were covered in double
layers of red cellophane and had removable lids for ease
of observation and collection. Colonies were kept under
stable conditions of light, temperature and humidity in
controlled environmental chambers (lights on/off at 6
AM/6PM; ~70% relative humidity and a constant temperature of 19°C). Laboratory colonies (n = 4) were
composed of at least 400 workers and contained some
larvae, but no queens.
Foragers were identified as ants that were observed on
the food in the foraging arena and were labeled using a
dot of acrylic paint during the day. Marking was done at
least 3 days before any collection for all ants. Nests
were observed for at least a week before any marking
and nearly two weeks before any collections occurred.
The hours of observation varied across weeks, with
approximately 4 hours of observation per day occurring
across peak foraging times during the day. Nest workers
were identified as ants that remained in the covered
nest box with brood and were never observed in the
foraging arena. When possible, unmarked ants that were
physically tending brood were collected as ‘nest worker’

Degenerate primers were designed to amplify and
sequence the Pogonomyrmex occidentalis ortholog to
foraging from genomic DNA and cDNA (ABI Big-Dye
Sequencing technology on an ABI 377 instrument).
Amino acid sequences from the open reading frame,
including cGMP-binding and kinase domains and the 3’
end of Pofor, were aligned to orthologs found in Genbank and the ant genome database http://www.antgenomics.org/ant-genomics-resources using CLUSTALW
in MEGA 5.0 Additional Files 3 &4). A phylogeny was
constructed using maximum likelihood methods based
on the JTT matrix-based model in MEGA 5.0 with 367
informative sites. The robustness of the unrooted tree
was assessed using bootstraps (1000 replicates). A maximum parsimony tree was also constructed for comparison using TNT (Additional File 5). Amino acid
similarity of Pofor was calculated for each ortholog from
the sequence alignments. Sequence features were annotated manually using the honeybee sequence as a reference (NP_001011581.1).
Quantitative real-time PCR

Harvester ant-specific primers were designed from exoncoding regions to amplify a 130 bp region for qPCR
analyses (JN255751). cDNA was synthesized from
extracted total RNA preps using ABI TaqMan Gold
Reverse Transcriptase reagents and and random hexamers. The 10 μL reactions included 1.2 μL of RNA with 1
× TaqMan RT Buffer, 5.5 mM 25 mM MgCl2, 500 μM
of each of the deoxyNTPs, 2.5 μM of the Random Hexamer primers, 0.4 U/uL of RNase Inhibitor and 1.5 U/
uL of MultiScribe Reverse Transcriptase (50 U/uL).

Ingram et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/19

Reactions were performed in triplicate for each individual brain. All reactions were run at 25°C for 10 minutes, 48°C for 30 minutes, 95°C for 5 minutes, and then
stored at -20°C until quantitative PCR. For each cDNA
replicate, expression of Pofor was assayed on an ABI
7900 HT instrument using ABI Taqman Gold reagents
with the following primers: PbForB Forward:
TGGTGGTGACCCAATGAAGACGTA,
PbForB
Reverse: TAATCCCGCGGAACGTCTTG, PbForB
Probe: TCCATCACGCGTAACGCAATGGCT. The 25
uL qPCR reactions included 3 uL of template cDNA
with 1 × TaqMan Buffer A, 5.5 mM 25 mM MgCl2, 200
μM of 10 mM deoxyATP, 200 μM of 10 mM deoxyCTP, 200 μM of 10 mM deoxyGTP, 400 μM of 20 mM
deoxyUTP, 100 nM of probe, 200 nM of each primer,
0.01 U/uL of AmpErase UNG and 0.025 U/uL of AmpliTaq Gold DNA Polymerase (50 U/uL). To standardize
foraging expression, an ant homolog of the RNA polymerase II 512kD (PbRPII) subunit was used as a control
[37] for each cDNA replicate (JN255750). The following
primers were used for the control gene: PbRPII Forward:
GAGAACCAAGTGAACAGGAT, PbRPII Reverse:
TTATTGTATTCAGTCAGGGATTTC, PbRPII Probe:
CAGAGCCTCCAGTCTTGTCTCGA. Real-time PCR
reactions for Pofor and PbRPII were performed under
the following conditions: 2 min at 50°C for one cycle, 10
min at 95°C for one cycle, 15 sec at 95°C, 1 min at 58°
C, for 45 cycles. Data was analyzed using SDS 2.1 software and quantification of relative mRNA levels was calculated using the ΔΔCt method. Three individual brains
were averaged to calculate a colony value per time
point. Colony values were averaged at each time point
for comparisons across a 24 hr period.
Differences in individual brain expression levels across
time and task were tested with a mixed model repeated
measures ANOVA that included colony as a random
factor and time as the repeated measure. Expression differences between tasks at individual time points were
analyzed with standard t-tests in SPSS. Differences in
the pattern of relative Pofor expression over time were
analyzed for each task using repeated measures contrast
analyses [38]. Contrast analysis allows one to test specific, theoretically driven, a priori predictions about patterns in repeated measures data. In this case, we tested
the prediction that daily fluctuations in foraging gene
expression follow observed daily rhythms in foraging
behavior. The expression patterns of both foragers and
nest workers (non-foragers) were compared to a generalized sine curve function with a maximum expression
at midday. This sine curve approximates the daily locomotor activity rhythms of P. occidentalis foragers in
laboratory colonies [30]. Using the same method, one
can also test whether observed values from a particular

Page 8 of 9

task follow a predicted pattern better than another task
[38]. Differences in expression patterns between foragers
and nest workers were compared to test which task had
a better fit to the predicted sine curve.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Clustal alignment of foraging gene across
Hymenoptera. Alignment of foraging gene sequences using Clustal W.
The four amino acid sequences that differ across Hymenoptera are
boxed.
Additional file 2: Results from Mixed Model Repeated Measures
ANOVA. Table of complete results from mixed model repeated measures
ANOVA.
Additional file 3: Database accession numbers for foraging gene. A
list of the Genbank accession numbers for foraging gene sequences used
in phylogenetic analyses.
Additional file 4: Original foraging sequence alignment in ClustalW.
Alignment of foraging gene sequences using Clustal W with no gaps
removed. This alignment was used to measure similarity scores of amino
acid seqeuences between species.
Additional file 5: Maximum parsimony tree of foraging gene.
Maximum parsimony consensus tree of foraging gene. The tree shown
represents the bootstrap consensus tree of 250 replicates.

Acknowledgements
We thank J. Abrahams, S. Merrill, S. Dolan, M. LeRoux, S. Krummey and L.
Janson for assistance with the molecular and behavioral data, A. Filipowicz
for advice on statistical analyses, D. McHugh and three anonymous
reviewers for comments on the manuscript, and the US National Science
Foundation (NSF-MRI to KKI) and Colgate University for providing the funds
necessary to conduct this research.
Authors’ contributions
KKI designed the study, participated in molecular genetic work and statistical
analyses, and drafted the manuscript. LK and SP participated in the
molecular genetic work and statistical analyses. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 6 May 2011 Accepted: 10 August 2011
Published: 10 August 2011
References
1. Robinson GE, Grozinger CM, Whitfield CW: Sociogenomics: social life in
molecular terms. Nature Reviews Genetics 2005, 6(4):257-271.
2. Robinson GE, Ben-Shahar Y: Social behavior and comparative genomics:
new genes or new gene regulation? Genes Brain Behav 2002, 1(4):197-203.
3. Whitfield CW, Ben-Shahar Y, Brillet C, Leoncini I, Crauser D, Leconte Y,
Rodriguez-Zas S, Robinson GE: Genomic dissection of behavioral
maturation in the honey bee. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103(44):16068-16075.
4. Smith CR, Toth AL, Suarez AV, Robinson GE: Genetic and genomic
analyses of the division of labour in insect societies. Nat Rev Genet 2008,
9(10):735-748.
5. Toth AL, Robinson GE: Evo-devo and the evolution of social behavior.
Trends Genet 2007, 23(7):334-341.
6. Reaume CJ, Sokolowski MB: cGMP-dependent protein kinase as a
modifier of behaviour. Handb Exp Pharmacol 2009, 191(191):423-443.
7. Ben-Shahar Y, Robichon A, Sokolowski MB, Robinson GE: Influence of gene
action across different time scales on behavior. Science 2002,
296(5568):741-744.
8. Hofmann F, Feil R, Kleppisch T, Schlossmann J: Function of cGMPdependent protein kinases as revealed by gene deletion. Physiol Rev
2006, 86(1):1-23.

Ingram et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:19
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/19

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

Fujiwara M, Sengupta P, McIntire SL: Regulation of body size and
behavioral state of C. elegans by sensory perception and the EGL-4
cGMP-dependent protein kinase. Neuron 2002, 36(6):1091-1102.
Hong RL, Witte H, Sommer RJ: Natural variation in Pristionchus pacificus
insect pheromone attraction involves the protein kinase EGL-4. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(22):7779-7784.
Ingram KK, Oefner P, Gordon DM: Task-specific expression of the foraging
gene in harvester ants. Mol Ecol 2005, 14(3):813-818.
Tobback J, Mommaerts V, Vandersmissen HP, Smagghe G, Huybrechts R:
Age- and task-dependent foraging gene expression in the bumblebee
Bombus terrestris. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol 2011, 76(1):30-42.
Lucas C, Sokolowski MB: Molecular basis for changes in behavioral state
in ant social behaviors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(15):6351-6356.
Ben-Shahar Y, Leung HT, Pak WL, Sokolowski MB, Robinson GE: cGMPdependent changes in phototaxis: a possible role for the foraging gene
in honey bee division of labor. J Exp Biol 2003, 206(Pt 14):2507-2515.
Osborne KA, Robichon A, Burgess E, Butland S, Shaw RA, Coulthard A,
Pereira HS, Greenspan RJ, Sokolowski MB: Natural behavior polymorphism
due to a cGMP-dependent protein kinase of Drosophila. Science 1997,
277(5327):834-836.
Tobback J, Heylen K, Gobin B, Wenseleers T, Billen J, Arckens L,
Huybrechts R: Cloning and expression of PKG, a candidate foraging
regulating gene in Vespula vulgaris. Animal Biology September 2008,
58(11):341-351.
Belay AT, Scheiner R, So AK, Douglas SJ, Chakaborty-Chatterjee M,
Levine JD, Sokolowski MB: The foraging gene of Drosophila melanogaster:
spatial-expression analysis and sucrose responsiveness. J Comp Neurol
2007, 504(5):570-582.
Mery F, Belay AT, So AK, Sokolowski MB, Kawecki TJ: Natural polymorphism
affecting learning and memory in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104(32):13051-13055.
Kaun KR, Riedl CA, Chakaborty-Chatterjee M, Belay AT, Douglas SJ,
Gibbs AG, Sokolowski MB: Natural variation in food acquisition mediated
via a Drosophila cGMP-dependent protein kinase. J Exp Biol 2007, 210(Pt
20):3547-3558.
Ben-Shahar Y: The foraging gene, behavioral plasticity, and honeybee
division of labor. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol
2005, 191(11):987-994.
Gordon D: Ants at work: how an insect society is organized New York: Free
Press; 1999.
Gordon DM: The regulation of foraging activity in red harvester ant
colonies. Am Nat 2002, 159(5):509-518.
Gordon DM: The organization of work in social insect colonies. Nature
1996, 380(6570):121-124.
Wilson EO: The insect societies Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press; 1971.
Gordon DM, Holldobler B: Worker longevity in harvester ants
(Pogonomyrmex). Psyche 1987, 94:341-346.
Porter SD, Jorgensen CD: Longevity of harvester ant colonies in southern
Idaho. J Range Manage 1988, 41(2):104-107.
Gordon DM, Chu J, Lillie A, Tissot M, Pinter N: Variation in the transition
from inside to outside work in the red harvester ant Pogonomyrmex
barbatus. Insectes Soc 2005, 52(3):212-217.
Porter SD, Jorgensen CD: Foragers of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex
owyheei: a disposable caste? Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 1981,
9(4):247-256.
Gordon DM: The dynamics of the daily round of the harvester ant
colony (Pogonomyrmex barbatus ). Anim Behav 1986, 34(5):1402-1419.
Ingram KK, Krummey S, LeRoux M: Expression patterns of a circadian
clock gene are associated with age-related polyethism in harvester ants,
Pogonomyrmex occidentalis. BMC Ecol 2009, 9:7.
Ben-Shahar Y, Dudek NL, Robinson GE: Phenotypic deconstruction reveals
involvement of manganese transporter malvolio in honey bee division
of labor. J Exp Biol 2004, 207(Pt 19):3281-3288.
Nelson CM, Ihle KE, Fondrk MK, Page RE, Amdam GV: The gene
vitellogenin has multiple coordinating effects on social organization.
PLoS Biol 2007, 5(3):e62.
Ament SA, Corona M, Pollock HS, Robinson GE: Insulin signaling is
involved in the regulation of worker division of labor in honey bee
colonies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(11):4226-4231.

Page 9 of 9

34. Toth AL, Varala K, Newman TC, Miguez FE, Hutchison SK, Willoughby DA,
Simons JF, Egholm M, Hunt JH, Hudson ME, Robinson GE: Wasp gene
expression supports an evolutionary link between maternal behavior
and eusociality. Science 2007, 318(5849):441-444.
35. Ikeya T, Galic M, Belawat P, Nairz K, Hafen E: Nutrient-dependent
expression of insulin-like peptides from neuroendocrine cells in the CNS
contributes to growth regulation in Drosophila. Curr Biol 2002,
12(15):1293-1300.
36. Raizen DM, Zimmerman JE, Maycock MH, Ta UD, You Y, Sundaram MV,
Pack AI: Lethargus is a Caenorhabditis elegans sleep-like state. Nature
2008, 451(7178):569-572.
37. Radonic A, Thulke S, Mackay IM, Landt O, Siegert W, Nitsche A: Guideline
to reference gene selection for quantitative real-time PCR. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2004, 313(4):856-862.
38. Furr RM, Rosenthal R: Repeated-measures contrasts for “multiple-pattern”
hypotheses. Psychol Methods 2003, 8(3):275-293.
doi:10.1186/1472-6785-11-19
Cite this article as: Ingram et al.: Differential regulation of the foraging
gene associated with task behaviors in harvester ants. BMC Ecology 2011
11:19.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
