<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The metabolic advantage of tumor cells</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70. doi:10.1186/1476-4598-10-70"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Maurice Israël"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

REVIEW

Open Access

The metabolic advantage of tumor cells
Maurice Israël1* and Laurent Schwartz2

Abstract
1- Oncogenes express proteins of “Tyrosine kinase receptor pathways”, a receptor family including insulin or IGFGrowth Hormone receptors. Other oncogenes alter the PP2A phosphatase brake over these kinases.
2- Experiments on pancreatectomized animals; treated with pure insulin or total pancreatic extracts, showed that
choline in the extract, preserved them from hepatomas.
Since choline is a methyle donor, and since methylation regulates PP2A, the choline protection may result from
PP2A methylation, which then attenuates kinases.
3- Moreover, kinases activated by the boosted signaling pathway inactivate pyruvate kinase and pyruvate
dehydrogenase. In addition, demethylated PP2A would no longer dephosphorylate these enzymes. A “bottleneck”
between glycolysis and the oxidative-citrate cycle interrupts the glycolytic pyruvate supply now provided via
proteolysis and alanine transamination. This pyruvate forms lactate (Warburg effect) and NAD+ for glycolysis.
Lipolysis and fatty acids provide acetyl CoA; the citrate condensation increases, unusual oxaloacetate sources are
available. ATP citrate lyase follows, supporting aberrant transaminations with glutaminolysis and tumor lipogenesis.
Truncated urea cycles, increased polyamine synthesis, consume the methyl donor SAM favoring carcinogenesis.
4- The decrease of butyrate, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, elicits epigenic changes (PETEN, P53, IGFBP decrease;
hexokinase, fetal-genes-M2, increase)
5- IGFBP stops binding the IGF - IGFR complex, it is perhaps no longer inherited by a single mitotic daughter cell;
leading to two daughter cells with a mitotic capability.
6- An excess of IGF induces a decrease of the major histocompatibility complex MHC1, Natural killer lymphocytes
should eliminate such cells that start the tumor, unless the fever prostaglandin PGE2 or inflammation, inhibit them...
Introduction
The metabolic network of biochemical pathways forms a
system controlled by a few switches, changing the finality of this system. Specific substrates and hormones control such switches. If for example, glycemia is elevated,
the pancreas releases insulin, activating anabolism and
oxidative glycolysis, energy being required to form new
substance or refill stores. If starvation decreases glycemia, glucagon and epinephrine activate gluconeogenesis
and ketogenesis to form nutriments, mobilizing body
stores. The different finalities of the system are or
oriented by switches sensing the NADH/NAD+, the
ATP/AMP, the cAMP/AMP ratios or the O2 supply...
We will not describe here these metabolic finalities and
their controls found in biochemistry books.
Many of the switches depend of the phosphorylation
of key enzymes that are active or not. Evidently, there is
* Correspondence: mauisrael@wanadoo.fr
1
Av Aristide Briand 2, Bures sur Yvette 91440, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

some coordination closing or opening the different pathways. Take for example gluconeogenesis, the citrate condensation slows down, sparing OAA, which starts the
gluconeogenic pathway. In parallel, one also has to close
pyruvate kinase (PK); if not, phosphoenolpyruvate would
give back pyruvate, interrupting the pathway. Hence, the
properties of key enzymes acting like switches on the
pathway specify the finality of the system. Our aim is to
show that tumor cells invent a new specific finality, with
mixed glycolysis and gluconeogenesis features. This very
special metabolism gives to tumor cells a selective
advantage over normal cells, helping the tumor to
develop at the detriment of the rest of the body.

I Abnormal metabolism of tumors, a selective
advantage
The initial observation of Warburg 1956 on tumor glycolysis with lactate production is still a crucial observation [1]. Two fundamental findings complete the
metabolic picture: the discovery of the M2 pyruvate

© 2011 Israël and Schwartz; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

kinase (PK) typical of tumors [2] and the implication of
tyrosine kinase signals and subsequent phosphorylations
in the M2 PK blockade [3-5].
A typical feature of tumor cells is a glycolysis associated to an inhibition of apoptosis. Tumors overexpress the high affinity hexokinase 2, which strongly
interacts with the mitochondrial ANT-VDAC-PTP complex. In this position, close to the ATP/ADP exchanger
(ANT), the hexokinase receives efficiently its ATP substrate [6,7]. As long as hexokinase occupies this mitochondria site, glycolysis is efficient. However, this has
another consequence, hexokinase pushes away from the
mitochondria site the permeability transition pore
(PTP), which inhibits the release of cytochrome C, the
apoptotic trigger [8]. The site also contains a voltage
dependent anion channel (VDAC) and other proteins.
The repulsion of PTP by hexokinase would reduce the
pore size and the release of cytochrome C. Thus, the
apoptosome-caspase proteolytic structure does not
assemble in the cytoplasm. The liver hexokinase or glucokinase, is different it has less interaction with the site,
has a lower affinity for glucose; because of this difference, glucose goes preferentially to the brain.
Further, phosphofructokinase gives fructose 1-6 bis
phosphate; glycolysis is stimulated if an allosteric analogue, fructose 2-6 bis phosphate increases in response to
a decrease of cAMP. The activation of insulin receptors
in tumors has multiple effects, among them; a decrease
of cAMP, which will stimulate glycolysis.
Another control point is glyceraldehyde P dehydrogenase that requires NAD+ in the glycolytic direction. If
the oxygen supply is normal, the mitochondria malate/
aspartate (MAL/ASP) shuttle forms the required NAD+
in the cytosol and NADH in the mitochondria. In
hypoxic conditions, the NAD+ will essentially come via
lactate dehydrogenase converting pyruvate into lactate.
This reaction is prominent in tumor cells; it is the first
discovery of Warburg on cancer.
At the last step of glycolysis, pyruvate kinase (PK) converts phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) into pyruvate, which
enters in the mitochondria as acetyl CoA, starting the
citric acid cycle and oxidative metabolism. To explain the
PK situation in tumors we must recall that PK only
works in the glycolytic direction, from PEP to pyruvate,
which implies that gluconeogenesis uses other enzymes
for converting pyruvate into PEP. In starvation, when
cells need glucose, one switches from glycolysis to gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis; PK and pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) are off, in a phosphorylated form,
presumably following a cAMP-glucagon-adrenergic signal. In parallel, pyruvate carboxylase (Pcarb) becomes
active. Moreover, in starvation, much alanine comes
from muscle protein proteolysis, and is transaminated
into pyruvate. Pyruvate carboxylase first converts

Page 2 of 12

pyruvate to OAA and then, PEP carboxykinase converts
OAA to PEP etc..., until glucose. The inhibition of PK is
necessary, if not one would go back to pyruvate. Phosphorylation of PK, and alanine, inhibit the enzyme.
Well, tumors have a PK and a PDH inhibited by phosphorylation and alanine, like for gluconeogenesis, in
spite of an increased glycolysis! Moreover, in tumors,
one finds a particular PK, the M2 embryonic enzyme
[2,9,10] the dimeric, phosphorylated form is inactive,
leading to a “bottleneck “. The M2 PK has to be activated by fructose 1-6 bis P its allosteric activator,
whereas the M1 adult enzyme is a constitutive active
form. The M2 PK bottleneck between glycolysis and the
citric acid cycle is a typical feature of tumor cell
glycolysis.
We also know that starvation mobilizes lipid stores
from adipocyte to form ketone bodies, they are like glucose, nutriments for cells. Growth hormone, cAMP,
AMP, activate a lipase, which provides fatty acids; their
b oxidation cuts them into acetyl CoA in mitochondria
and in peroxisomes for very long fatty acids; forming
ketone bodies. Normally, citrate synthase slows down, to
spare acetyl CoA for the ketogenic route, and OAA for
the gluconeogenic pathway. Like for starvation, tumors
mobilize lipid stores. But here, citrate synthase activity
is elevated, condensing acetyl CoA and OAA [11-13];
citrate increases, ketone bodies decrease. Consequently,
ketone bodies will stop stimulating Pcarb. In tumors,
the OAA needed for citrate synthase will presumably
come from PEP, via reversible PEP carboxykinase or
other sources. The quiescent Pcarb will not process the
pyruvate produced by alanine transamination after proteolysis, leaving even more pyruvate to lactate dehydrogenase, increasing the lactate released by the tumor, and
the NAD+ required for glycolysis. Above the bottleneck,
the massive entry of glucose accumulates PEP, which
converts to OAA via mitochondria PEP carboxykinase,
an enzyme requiring biotine-CO2-GDP. This source of
OAA is abnormal, since Pcarb, another biotin-requiring
enzyme, should have provided OAA. Tumors may
indeed contain “morule inclusions” of biotin-enzyme
[14] suggesting an inhibition of Pcarb, presumably a
consequence of the maintained citrate synthase activity,
and decrease of ketone bodies that normally stimulate
Pcarb. The OAA coming via PEP carboxykinase and
OAA coming from aspartate transamination or via
malate dehydrogenase condenses with acetyl CoA, feeding the elevated tumoral citric acid condensation starting the Krebs cycle. Thus, tumors have to find large
amounts of acetyl CoA for their condensation reaction;
it comes essentially from lipolysis and b oxidation of
fatty acids, and enters in the mitochondria via the carnitine transporter. This is the major source of acetyl CoA;
since PDH that might have provided acetyl CoA remains

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

in tumors, like PK, in the inactive phosphorylated form.
The blockade of PDH [15] was recently reversed by
inhibiting its kinase [16,17]. The key question is then to
find out why NADH, a natural citrate synthase inhibitor
did not switch off the enzyme in tumor cells. Probably,
the synthesis of NADH by the dehydrogenases of the
Krebs cycle and malate/aspartate shuttle, was too low,
or the oxidation of NADH via the respiratory electron
transport chain and mitochondrial complex1 (NADH
dehydrogenase) was abnormally elevated. Another
important point concerns PDH and a ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase that are homologous enzymes, they
might be regulated in a concerted way; when PDH is
off, a ketoglutarate dehydrogenase might be also be slowed. Moreover, this could be associated to an upstream
inhibition of aconinase by NO, or more probably to a
blockade of isocitrate dehydrogenase, which favors in
tumor cells, the citrate efflux from mitochondria, and
the ATP citrate lyase route. Normally, an increase of
NADH inhibits the citrate condensation, favoring the
ketogenic route associated to gluconeogenesis, which
turns off glycolysis. Apparently, this regulation does not
occur in tumors, since citrate synthase remains active.
Moreover, in tumor cells, the a ketoglutarate not processed by a ketoglutarate dehydrogenase converts to
glutamate, via glutamate dehydrogenase, in this direction
the reaction forms NAD+, backing up the LDH production. Other sources of glutamate are glutaminolysis,
which increases in tumors [2].
The Figure 1 shows how tumors bypass the PK and
PDH bottlenecks and evidently, the increase of glucose
influx above the bottleneck, favors the supply of substrates to the pentose shunt, as pentose is needed for
synthesizing ribonucleotides, RNA and DNA. The Figure
1 represents the stop below the citrate condensation.
Hence, citrate quits the mitochondria to give via ATP
citrate lyase, acetyl CoA and OAA in the cytosol of
tumor cells. Acetyl CoA supports the synthesis of fatty
acids and the formation of triglycerides. The other product of the ATP citrate lyase reaction, OAA, drives the
transaminase cascade (ALAT and GOT transaminases)
in a direction that consumes GLU and glutamine and
converts in fine alanine into pyruvate and lactate plus
NAD+. This consumes protein body stores that provide
amino acids and much alanine (like in starvation). The
Figure 1 indicates that malate dehydrogenase is a source
of NAD+ converting OAA into malate, which backs-up
LDH. Part of the malate converts to pyruvate (malic
enzyme) and processed by LDH. Moreover, malate
enters in mitochondria via the shuttle and gives back
OAA to feed the citrate condensation. Glutamine will
also provide amino groups for the “de novo” synthesis
of purine and pyrimidine bases particularly needed by
tumor cells. The Figure 1 indicates that ASP shuttled

Page 3 of 12

out of the mitochondrial, joins the ASP formed by cytosolic transaminases, to feed the synthesis of pyrimidine
bases via ASP transcarbamylase, a process also enhanced
in tumor cells. In tumors, this silences the argininosuccinate synthetase step of the urea cycle [18-20]. This
blockade also limits the supply of fumarate to the Krebs
cycle. The latter, utilizes the a ketoglutarate provided by
the transaminase reaction, since a ketoglutarate coming
via aconitase slows down. Indeed, NO and peroxynitrite
increase in tumors and probably block aconitase. The
Figure 1 indicates the cleavage of arginine into urea and
ornithine. In tumors, the ornithine production increases,
following the polyamine pathway. Ornithine is decarboxylated into putrescine by ornithine decarboxylase,
then it captures the backbone of S adenosyl methionine
(SAM) to form polyamines spermine then spermidine,
the enzyme controlling the process is SAM decarboxylase. The other reaction product, 5-methlthioribose is
then decomposed into methylthioribose and adenine,
providing purine bases to the tumor. We shall analyze
below the role of SAM in the carcinogenic mechanism,
its destruction aggravates the process.
In summary, it is like if the mechanism switching
from gluconeogenesis to glycolysis was jammed in
tumors, PK and PDH are at rest, like for gluconeogenesis, but citrate synthase is on. Thus, citric acid condensation pulls the glucose flux in the glycolytic direction,
which needs NAD+; it will come from the pyruvate to
lactate conversion by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) no
longer in competition with a quiescent Pcarb. Since the
citrate condensation consumes acetyl CoA, ketone
bodies do not form; while citrate will support the synthesis of triglycerides via ATP citrate lyase and fatty acid
synthesis... The cytosolic OAA drives the transaminases
in a direction consuming amino acid. The result of
these metabolic changes is that tumors burn glucose
while consuming muscle protein and lipid stores of the
organism. In a normal physiological situation, one mobilizes stores for making glucose or ketone bodies, but not
while burning glucose! Tumor cell metabolism gives
them a selective advantage over normal cells. However,
one may attack some vulnerable points.

II Starters for cancer metabolic anomaly
1. Lessons from oncogenes

Following the discovery of Rous sarcoma virus transmitting cancer [21], we have to wait the work of Stehelin [22] to realize that this retrovirus only transmitted
a gene captured from a previous host. When one finds
that the transmitted gene encodes the Src tyrosine
kinase, we are back again to the tyrosine kinase signals,
similar to those activated by insulin or IGF, which
control carbohydrate metabolism, anabolism and
mitosis.

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

Page 4 of 12

Figure 1 Cancer metabolism. Glycolysis is elevated in tumors, but a pyruvate kinase (PK) “bottleneck” interrupts phosphoenol pyruvate (PEP) to
pyruvate conversion. Thus, alanine following muscle proteolysis transaminates to pyruvate, feeding lactate dehydrogenase, converting pyruvate
to lactate, (Warburg effect) and NAD+ required for glycolysis. Cytosolic malate dehydrogenase also provides NAD+ (in OAA to MAL direction).
Malate moves through the shuttle giving back OAA in the mitochondria. Below the PK-bottleneck, pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) is
phosphorylated (second bottleneck). However, citrate condensation increases: acetyl-CoA, will thus come from fatty acids b-oxydation and
lipolysis, while OAA sources are via PEP carboxy kinase, and malate dehydrogenase, (pyruvate carboxylase is inactive). Citrate quits the
mitochondria, (note interrupted Krebs cycle). In the cytosol, ATPcitrate lyase cleaves citrate into acetyl CoA and OAA. Acetyl CoA will make fatty
acids-triglycerides. Above all, OAA pushes transaminases in a direction usually associated to gluconeogenesis! This consumes protein stores,
providing alanine (ALA); like glutamine, it is essential for tumors. The transaminases output is aspartate (ASP) it joins with ASP from the shuttle
and feeds ASP transcarbamylase, starting pyrimidine synthesis. ASP in not processed by argininosuccinate synthetase, which is blocked,
interrupting the urea cycle. Arginine gives ornithine via arginase, ornithine is decarboxylated into putrescine by ornithine decarboxylase.
Putrescine and SAM form polyamines (spermine spermidine) via SAM decarboxylase. The other product 5-methylthioadenosine provides adenine.
Arginine deprivation should affect tumors. The SAM destruction impairs methylations, particularly of PP2A, removing the “signaling kinase brake”,
PP2A also fails to dephosphorylate PK and PDH, forming the “bottlenecks”. (Black arrows = interrupted pathways).

An up regulation of the gene product, now under viral
control causes tumors. However, the captured viral
oncogene (v-oncogene) derives from a normal host gene
the proto-oncogene. The virus only perturbs the expression of a cellular gene the proto-oncogene. It may modify its expression, or its regulation, or transmit a

mutated form of the proto-oncogene. Independently of
any viral infection, a similar tumorigenic process takes
place, if the proto-oncogene is translocated in another
chromosome; and transcribed under the control of
stronger promoters. In this case, the proto-oncogene
becomes an oncogene of cellular origin (c-oncogene).

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

The third mode for converting a prot-oncogene into an
oncogene occurs if a retrovirus simply inserts its strong
promoters in front of the proto-oncogene enhancing its
expression.
It is impressive to find that retroviral oncogenes and
cellular oncogenes disturb this major signaling pathway:
the MAP kinases mitogenic pathways. At the ligand
level we find tumors such Wilm’s kidney cancer, resulting from an increased expression of insulin like growth
factor; we have also the erbB or V-int-2 oncogenes
expressing respectively NGF and FGF growth factor
receptors. The receptors for these ligands activate tyrosine kinase signals, similarly to insulin receptors. The
Rous sarcoma virus transmits the src tyrosine kinase,
which activates these signals, leading to a chicken leukemia. Similarly, in murine leukemia, a virus captures and
retransmits the tyrosine kinase abl. Moreover, abl is also
stimulated if translocated and expressed with the bcr
gene of chromosome 22, as a fusion protein (Philadelphia chromosome). Further, ahead Ras exchanging protein for GTP/GDP, and then the Raf serine-threonine
kinases proto-oncogenes are known targets for oncogenes. Finally, at the level of transcription factors activated by MAP kinases, one finds cjun, cfos or cmyc. An
avian leucosis virus stimulates cmyc, by inserting its
strong viral promoter. The retroviral attacks boost the
mitogenic MAP kinases similarly to inflammatory cytokins, or to insulin signals, that control glucose transport
and gycolysis.
In addition to the MAP kinase mitogenic pathway, tyrosine kinase receptors activate PI3 kinase pathways;
PTEN phosphatase counteracts this effect, thus acting as
a tumor suppressor. Recall that a DNA virus, the
Epstein-Barr virus of infectious mononucleose, gives
also the Burkitt lymphoma; the effect of the virus is to
enhance PI3 kinase. Down stream, we find mTOR (the
target of rapamycine, an immune-suppressor) mTOR,
inhibits PP2A phosphatase, which is also a target for the
simian SV40 and Polyoma viruses. Schematically, one
may consider that the different steps of MAP kinase
pathways are targets for retroviruses, while the different
steps of PI3 kinase pathway are targets for DNA viruses.
The viral-driven enhanced function of these pathways
mimics the effects of their prolonged activation by their
usual triggers, such as insulin or IGF; one then expects
to find an associated increase of glycolysis. The insulin
or IGF actions boost the cellular influx of glucose and
glycolysis. However, if the signaling pathway gets out of
control, the tyrosine kinase phosphorylations may lead
to a parallel PK blockade [3-5] explaining the tumor
bottleneck at the end of glycolysis. Since an activation
of enyme kinases may indeed block essential enzymes
(PK, PDH and others); in principle, the inactivation of
phosphatases may also keep these enzymes in a

Page 5 of 12

phosphorylated form and lead to a similar bottleneck
and we do know that oncogenes bind and affect PP2A
phosphatase. In sum, a perturbed MAP kinase pathway,
elicits metabolic features that would give to tumor cells
their metabolic advantage.
2. The methylation hypothesis and the role of PP2A
phosphatase

In a remarkable comment, Newberne [23] highlights
interesting observations on the carcinogenicity of diethanolamine [24] showing that diethanolamine decreased
choline derivatives and methyl donors in the liver, like
does a choline deficient diet. Such conditions trigger
tumors in mice, particularly in the B6C3F1 strain.
Again, the historical perspective recalled by Newberne’s
comment brings us back to insulin. Indeed, after the
discovery of insulin in 1922, Banting and Best were able
to keep alive for several months depancreatized dogs,
treated with pure insulin. However, these dogs developed a fatty liver and died. Unlike pure insulin, the total
pancreatic extract contained a substance that prevented
fatty liver: a lipotropic substance identified later as being
choline [25]. Like other lipotropes, (methionine, folate,
B12) choline supports transmethylation reactions, of a
variety of substrates, that would change their cellular
fate, or action, after methylation. In the particular case
concerned here, the removal of triglycerides from the
liver, as very low-density lipoprotein particles (VLDL),
requires the synthesis of lecithin, which might decrease
if choline and S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) are missing. Hence, a choline deficient diet decreases the
removal of triglycerides from the liver; a fatty liver and
tumors may then form. In sum, we have seen that pathways exemplified by the insulin-tyrosine kinase signaling
pathway, which control anabolic processes, mitosis,
growth and cell death, are at each step targets for oncogenes; we now find that insulin may also provoke fatty
liver and cancer, when choline is not associated to insulin. We must now find how the lipotropic methyl donor
controls the signaling pathway. We know that after the
tyrosine kinase reaction, serine-threonine kinases take
over along the signaling route. It is thus highly probable
that serine-threonine phosphatases will counteract the
kinases and limit the intensity of the insulin or insulin
like signals. One of the phosphatases involved is PP2A,
itself the target of DNA viral oncogenes (Polyoma or
SV40 antigens react with PP2A subunits and cause
tumors). We found a possible link between the PP2A
phosphatase brake and choline in works on Alzheimer’s
disease [26]. Indeed, the catalytic C subunit of PP2A is
associated to a structural subunit A. When C receives a
methyle, the dimer recruits a regulatory subunit B. The
trimer then targets specific proteins that are dephosphorylated [27]. In Alzheimer’s disease, the poor

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

methylation of PP2A is associated to an increase of
homocysteine in the blood [26]. The result of the PP2A
methylation failure is a hyperphosphorylation of Tau
protein and the formation of tangles in the brain. Tau
protein is involved in tubulin polymerization, controlling
axonal flow but also the mitotic spindle. It is thus possible that choline, via SAM, methylates PP2A, which is
targeted toward the serine-threonine kinases that are
counteracted along the insulin-signaling pathway. The
choline dependent methylation of PP2A is the brake, the
“antidote”, which limits “the poison” resulting from an
excess of insulin signaling. Moreover, it seems that choline deficiency is involved in the L to M2 transition of
PK isoenzymes [28].
3. Cellular distribution of PP2A

In fact, the negative regulation of Ras/MAP kinase signals mediated by PP2A phosphatase seems to be complex. The serine-threonine phosphatase does more than
simply counteracting kinases; it binds to the intermediate Shc protein on the signaling cascade, which is inhibited [29]. The targeting of PP2A towards proteins of the
signaling pathway depends of the assembly of the different holoenzymes. The carboxyl methylation of C-terminal leucine 309 of the catalytic C unit, permits to a
dimeric form made of C and a structural unit A, to
recruit one of the many regulatory units B, giving a
great diversity of possible enzymes and effects. The different methylated ABC trimers would then find specific
targets. It is consequently essential to have more information on methyl transferases and methyl esterases that
control the assembly or disassembly of PP2A trimeric
forms.
A specific carboxyl methyltransferase for PP2A [30]
was purified and shown to be essential for normal progression through mitosis [31]. In addition, a specific
methylesterase that demethylates PP2A has been purified [32]. Is seems that the methyl esterase cancels the
action of PP2A, on signaling kinases that increase in
glioma [33]. Evidently, the cellular localization of the
methyl transferase (LCMT-1) and the phosphatase
methyl esterase (PME-1) are crucial for controlling
PP2A methylation and targeting. Apparently, LCMT-1
mainly localizes to the cytoplasm and not in the
nucleus, where PME-1 is present, and the latter harbors a nuclear localization signal [34]. From these
observations, one may suggest that PP2A gets its
methyles in the cytoplasm and regulates the tyrosine
kinase-signaling pathway, attenuating its effects. A
methylation deficit should then decrease the methylation of PP2A and boost the mitotic insulin signals as
discussed above for choline deficiency, steatosis and
hepatoma. At the nucleus, where PME-1 is present, it
will remove the methyl, from PP2A, favoring the

Page 6 of 12

formation of dimeric AC species that have different
targets, presumably proteins involved in the cell cycle.
It is interesting to quote here the structural mechanism associated to the demethylation of PP2A. The
crystal structures of PME-1 alone or in complex with
PP2A dimeric core was reported [35] PME-1 binds
directly to the active site of PP2A and this rearranges
the catalytic triad of PME-1 into an active conformation that should demethylate PP2A, but this also seems
to evict a manganese required for the phosphatase
activity. Hence, demethylation and inactivation would
take place in parallel, blocking mitotic actions. However, another player is here involved, the so-called
PTPA protein, which is a PP2A phosphatase activator.
Apparently, this activator is a new type of cis/trans of
prolyl isomerase, acting on Pro190 of the catalytic C
unit isomerized in presence of Mg-ATP [36], which
would then cancel the inactivation mediated by PME1. Following the PTPA action, the demethylated phosphatase would become active again in the nucleus, and
stimulate cell cycle proteins [37,38] inducing mitosis.
Unfortunately, the ligand of this new prolyl isomerase
is still unknown. Moreover, we have to consider that
other enzymes such as cytochrome P450 have also
demethylation properties.
In spite of deficient methylations and choline dehydrogenase pathway, tumor cells display an enhanced choline
kinase activity, associated to a parallel synthesis of
lecithin and triglycerides.
The hypothesis to consider is that triglycerides change
the fate of methylated PP2A, by targeting it to the
nucleus, there a methylesterase demethylates it; the
phosphatase attacks new targets such as cell cycle proteins, inducing mitosis. Moreover, the phosphatase
action on nuclear membrane proteins may render the
nuclear membrane permeable to SAM the general
methyl donor; promoters get methylated inducing epigenetic changes.
The relative decrease of methylated PP2A in the cytosol, not only cancels the brake over the signaling
kinases, but also favors the inactivation of PK and PDH,
which remain phosphorylated, contributing to the metabolic anomaly of tumor cells.
In order to prevent tumors, one should then favor the
methylation route rather than the phosphorylation route
for choline metabolism. This would decrease triglycerides, promote the methylation of PP2A and keep it in
the cytosol, reestablishing the brake over signaling
kinases. Moreover, PK, and PDH would become active
after the phosphatase action. One would also gain to
inhibit their kinases as recently done with dichloroacetate for PDH kinase [17]. The nuclear or cytosolic targeting of PP2A isoforms is a hypothesis also inspired by
several works [34,36-38].

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

Page 7 of 12

4. Hypoxia is an essential issue to discuss

that binds IGF with high affinity and controls its effects
[41]. In parallel, GH hormone induces in the liver, the
synthesis and release of insulin like growth factor (IGF).
The latter, activates like insulin, the IGF-tyrosine kinase
receptors (IGFR), triggering the MAP kinase-ERK mitogenic signal. The surface distribution of IGF-IGFR may
determine if a cell is sterile or endowed with a mitotic
potential. We propose that this distribution depends of
IGFBP; suppose that a cell starting mitosis secretes
IGFBP at one pole, and that IGFBP binds to the extracellular matrix, forming patches of IGFBP. The patch
may attract the IGF-IGFR complex by a capping process. The daughter cell that inherits the IGFR receptor
patch becomes a stem cell, while the cell poor in IGFR
will be sterile and follow the differentiation program.
This does not mean that the sterile daughter cell, at
rest in the Go phase, cannot exit and divide again; this
would require a reactivation of IGFR receptor genes in
order to build up again the membrane concentration of
IGFR.

We know that the transition from fetal to adult hemoglobin, with a lower oxygen affinity, would repeat the
phylogenic adaptation of “aquatic creatures” to breath in
air and live on land. Many adequate “adult proteins”
replace their fetal isoform: muscle proteins utrophine,
switches to dystrophine; enzymes such as embryonic M2
PK [39] is replaced by M1. Hypoxic conditions seem to
trigger back the expression of the fetal gene packet via
HIF1-Von-Hippel signals. The mechanism would
depend of a double switch since not all fetal genes
become active after hypoxia. First, the histones have to
be in an acetylated form, opening the way to transcription factors, this depends either of histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibition or of histone acetyltransferase
(HAT) activation, and represents the main switch. Second, a more specific switch must be open, indicating the
adult/fetal gene couple concerned, or more generally the
isoform of a given gene that is more adapted to the specific situation. When the adult gene mutates, an
unbound ligand may indeed indicate, directly or indirectly, the particular fetal copy gene to reactivate [40]. In
anoxia, lactate is more difficult to release against its
external gradient, leading to a cytosolic increase of upstream glycolytic products, 3P glycerate or others. These
products may then be a second signal controlling the
specific switch for triggering the expression of fetal
genes, such as fetal hemoglobin or the embryonic M2
PK; this takes place if histones (main switch) are in an
acetylated form. This is the case if HAT is active in
tumor cells, in spite of the decrease of butyrate a HDAC
inhibitor. In tumor cells, one finds hypermethylated
regions, in which HDAC activity silences a set of genes
and hypomethylated parts in which HAT activates other
genes.

III. Growth hormone-IGF actions, the control of
asymmetrical mitosis
When IGF - Growth hormone operate, the fatty acid
source of acetyl CoA takes over. Indeed, GH stimulates
a triglyceride lipase in adipocytes, increasing the release
of fatty acids and their b oxidation. In parallel, GH
would close the glycolytic source of acetyl CoA, perhaps
inhibiting the hexokinase interaction with the mitochondrial ANT site. This effect, which renders apoptosis possible, does not occur in tumor cells. GH mobilizes the
fatty acid source of acetyl CoA from adipocytes, which
should help the formation of ketone bodies, but since
citrate synthase activity is elevated in tumors, ketone
bodies do not form. Hence, butyrate cannot inhibit histone deacetylase (HDAC), the enzyme cuts acetylated
histone tails, this will silence several genes like PETEN,
P53, or methylase inhibitory genes. It is probable that
the IGFBP gene gets silent as well. IGFBP is a protein

IV. Compounds for correcting tumor metabolism
The figure 1 indicates interrupted and enhanced metabolic pathways in tumor cells.
In table 1, the numbered pathways represent possible
therapeutic targets; they cover several enzymes. When
the activity of the pathway is increased, one may give
inhibitors; when the activity of the pathway decreases,
we propose possible activators.
V. Cancer prevention, immune destruction of
tumor cells
1. A preventive cure

André Gernez [82-84] applied for the first time the stem
cell concept to cancer and neurological diseases. “He
compared tissues to colonies of bees in which, only the
queens renew the colony, while most bees are sterile
workers”. For preventing cancer, he imagined an annual
cure, which did not receive much attention. It consists
of three points: first a fasting period once a year, “this is
recommended by most religions”, second one should eat
more fruits, vegetables, less meat, consume products
rich in magnesium, vitamins C, E, selenium, this is now
currently accepted. The third point is more difficult to
apply, without testing it on animal models. It aims to
kill once a year eventual tumor cells, by giving for a few
days an anti-mitotic, colchicine for example. Gernez
mentions that chloral, anciently used for treating mental
patients, also protected them from cancer, because it
has anti-mitotic properties. The idea being to kill the
very first tumor cells that eventually appear, and if
missed the first year, one would catch them the next
year etc... How can we explain the possible prevention?
The first point is evident, fasting increases ketone bodies

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

Page 8 of 12

Table 1 Therapeutic targets
Targets Metabolic pathway

Activity

Drugs: inhibitors or activators

References

1

Proteolysis/alanine/transaminase/pyruvate

increased

aminooxacetic, 2PAM, D alanine,
b chloro-L-alanine

[42,43]

2

Lactate dehydrogenase/pyruvate/lactate/NAD+
Malate dehydrogenase/OAA/malate/NAD+
Malic enzyme/malate/pyruvate/lactate/NAD+

increased
increased
increased

Br pyruvate, gossypol
D malate, humic acid
D malate

[44-46]

3

Glycolysis

increased

mannoheptulose, lodinamineepalresta, citrate

[47-49]

4

PEP carboxykinase/PEP/OAA
Pyruvate carboxylase/pyruvate/OAA

increased Cl-PEP, b sulphopyruvate
decreased 3-hydroxybutyrate (ketone bodies will activate)

[50,51]
[52]

5

Pyruvate kinase (M2 bottleneck)/PEP/pyruvate
Pyruvate dehydrogenase/pyruvate/acetylCoA

decreased dihydroxyphenylethanol, polyethylene - glycol
decreased lipoic acid, kinase inhibitors (dichloroacetate,
2-chloropropionate) or PP2A agonists (xylulose5P, B12,
choline)

[53-55]
[16,17]

6

Lipolytic fatty acid source of acetyl CoA
Carnitine transporter

increased

niacine, Growth hormone inhibitors
Avoid oxfenicine or levofloxacin

[56,57]

7

Citrate synthase (OAA+ acetylCoA)/citrate

increased

Dserine, fluoroacetylCoA, carboxymethyl-CoA,
citrate (via product inhibition), capsaicine (via electron
transport inhibition and NADH increase)

[13]

8

ATPcitrate lyase citrate/OAA+acetylCoA
Triglycerides synthesis via acetyl CoA
Other OAA sources

increased
increased
increased

hydroxycitrate, fluorocitrate
xanthohumol (removes triglycerides)
D malate

[58]
[59]

9

Choline dehydrogenase/methylation/lipotropic
Choline kinase/phosphorylcholine/lecithin

decreased choline
increased miltefosin, farnesol

10

PP2A methylation (it counteracts signaling and
enzyme kinases)

decreased betaine, folate, B12, trimethylglycine (via SAM)

11

Histone deacetylase (gene silencing)

increased

butyrate, valproate, benzamide, trichostatin

[62]

12

Cytochrome P450 demethylase (hypomethylated
promoters)HAT/hexokinase expression
Histone acetylase

increased

ketonazole, bergamottin, quinine

[63-67]

increased

anacardic acid, garcinol, curcumine

[66,67]

13

Tyrosine kinase-signaling route (MAP kin, PI3 kin,
PLCg)

increased

imatinib mésilate (glivec chemotherapy)

14,15,
16

GH-IGF
IGFBP

increased octreotide, pegvisomant
decreased apigenin, casodex, omeprazol

[68-70]

17

Arginine dependency

increased

arginine deprivation diet,
pegylated arginine deiminase

[18-20]
[71-73]

18

Arginase/arginine/ornithine

increased

norvaline, N-omega-hydroxy-nor-arginine, boroargininre

[74-76]

19

Polyamine pathway:
Ornithine decarboxylase/putrescine
SAM decarboxylase

increased

DFMO (2-difluoromethylornithine),
MGBG methylglyoxal bis (guanylhydrazone),
4-amidinoindan-1one-2’-amidinhydrazone(alfafluoromethylhistidine)

[77-79]

20

Glutaminase/glutamate

increased

DON(6-diazo-5-oxo-l-norleucine),
riluzole, naftazone

[80].

21

Argininosuccinate synthetase

decreased troglitazone

such as butyrate, which is a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, this keeps histone tails acetylated, which cancels the silencing of several genes starting the tumor
process. The second part of the procedure takes advantage of the anti-inflammatory properties of flavonoids
found in fruits and vegetables. Flavonoids cancel the
effects of hypoxia on the expression of a set of genes:
cyclooxygenase (COX), VEGF, NOsynthase, glycolytic
enzymes, induction of fetal genes. Recall that fetal M2
PK expression is a typical feature of tumor cells. We
know the anti-tumor effect of avastin and anti VEGF
antibodies. The anti-cancer properties of ‘non-steroidal

[60,61]

[81]

anti-inflammatory drugs,’’ NSAIDS, results from the
inhibition of COX decreasing pro-inflammatory prostanoids. Moreover, magnesium may inhibit calcium
dependent phospholipases forming arachidonic acid, the
prostanoid precursor and diacylglycerol (DAG) with
mitogenic effects. In addition, vitamins C, E, and selenium, quench superoxides and peroxynitrite, formed by
a poor oxygen reduction during hypoxia. One may
strengthen this second line of protection with methyl
donors, folate, and vitamin B12. They would attenuate,
via methylated PP2A, the signaling kinases, activated by
insulin or IGF, and regulate the supply of glucose,

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

anabolism and mitosis. The third point deserves additional experiments. The hypothesis is that tumor cells
appear frequently, but the immune surveillance constantly eliminates them. If the immune surveillance fails,
an anti-mitotic would kill once a year, tumor cells
before they reach a critical mass. This third point of the
procedure would back-up the immune surveillance
when it fails, but deserves an evaluation.
2. The immune surveillance

Tumor cells or virus-invaded cells would display lower
MHC-1 levels, the major histocompatibility complex,
which is a self-recognition device. The consequence of
the MHC-1 decrease is to trigger the “Natural killer”
(NK) immune protection, because MHC-1 stops neutralizing receptors (KIR) on NK cells, which triggers the
release of perforines by NK cells. The perforines kill
cells poor in MHC-1. Well, an up-regulation of Insulin
or IGF signals decreases MHC-1, and may then trigger
the NK protection [85], if such a protection fails then
tumor cells may survive...
The NK protection is activated by leucotriene LTB4
formed by lipoxygenase, and inhibited by the fever prostaglandin PGE2 formed by cycloxygenase [86]. Hence,
inhibitors of PGE2 and cycloxygenase trigger the NK
protection; this is an effect of non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) aspirin, ibuprofen, or of some histone acetylase (HAT) inhibitors (curcumin, anacardic
acid garcinol etc...). It is also particularly interesting to
increase serotonin (5HT) that neutralizes the inhibition
of NK cells by PGE2. Echinacea extracts [87]; 5HT
uptake inhibitors (St John’s Wort tea, prozac, melatonine) [88] boost the release of 5HT from platelets, particularly if platelets are full of 5HT before reaching the
site. A substance P antagonist (aprepitan) [89] avoids
their premature degranulation). Finally 5HT can be preserved from its enzymatic conversion into quinolinic acid
by inhibiting indoleamine,2,3-dioxygenase with exiguamine or 1-methytryptophane [90,91]. Echinacea, melatonin, 5HT uptake inhibitors, substance P antagonists, and
HAT inhibitors [66,67,92,93] boost NK mediated protection against eventual tumor cell, or viral infections.

VI. A Possible sequential plural-therapy
As a complement to radiotherapies or chemotherapies,
we propose to try, after validating it on animal models a
sequential metabolic therapy. 1- Inhibit alanine transaminase, glutaminase, ornithine decarboxylase, arginase;
and decrease alanine, glutamine, arginine, supplies. 2Open PK and PDH bottlenecks (enzyme kinase inhibition and PP2A phosphatase activation by methylation
helpers) 3- Close citrate synthase, ATP citrate lyase,
increase the NADH mitochondrial potential. 4- Decrease
GH/IGF [94] and “tyrosine kinase receptor” signals. 5-

Page 9 of 12

Cancel epigenetic changes using HDAC inhibitors and
then HAT inhibition. 6- Boost immune NK protection.
In this review, we have collected observations on
tumor cell metabolism obtained by many laboratories
working on cancer for the past 80 years. When we find
that choline related methylations protect from liver cancer, that PP2A methylations controls the Tyrosine
kinase oncogenic signals, activated by IGF-GH it seemed
logic to establish a link between these observations even
if they were not obtained simultaneously. The impression is that the link we make is perhaps artificial. However, a reference for all the experimental observations is
given. The link between them is the interpretation we
propose. This model has inspired our recent works, and
convergent interpretations from other laboratories support some of the model predictions. See for example
reference [95] suggesting a therapeutic approach with
multiple drugs acting on glycolysis. Additional works
target with drugs this metabolic transformation of
tumor cells [96] and manipulate for example a ketoglutarate dehydrogenase [97] an enzyme similar to PDH,
which is less active in tumor cells as indicated in the
model. Other laboratories attack the increased glycolysis
with bromopyruvate as we also suggest [98]. As for the
spectacular effects of citrate and isocitrate [99,100] or
octreotide and capsaicine that the model predicts, they
may find a therapeutic application beneficial to patients
as shown by experiments on animals. Finally, the recent
discovery of a population of Dwarfs with no GH receptors, which do not develop cancers [101], illustrates the
GH/IGF prediction, establishing a link between ancient
and recent biochemical observations on tumors. By adding octreotide a somatostatin analogue, to the lipoic
acid isocitrate mixture, our recent results (in press)
seem to validate the presented model.

Conclusion: The origin of Cancers by means of
metabolic selection
The disruption of cells by internal or external compounds, releases substrates stimulating the tyrosine
kinase signals for anabolism proliferation and stem cell
repair, like for most oncogenes. If such signals are not
limited, there is a parallel blockade of key metabolic
enzymes by activated kinases or inhibited phosphatases.
The result is a metabolism typical of tumor cells, which
gives them a selective advantage; stabilized by epigenetic
changes. A proliferation process, in which the two
daughter cells divide, increases the tumor mass at the
detriment of the body. Inevitable mutations follow,
selecting the most robust tumor cells... We only hope
that a non-toxic mixture will bring back to normality
cells when they acquire the selective metabolic advantage, which leads them to cancer, this mixture may
back-up current cancer therapies.

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

Page 10 of 12

18.
Author details
1
Av Aristide Briand 2, Bures sur Yvette 91440, France. 2LIX: Ecole
Polytechnique Palaiseau 91128 and Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, 104 Bd
Raymond Poincaré Garches 92380m, France.

19.

Authors’ contributions
MI elaborated the biochemical model for cancer metabolism and drafted
the manuscript. LS tested model predictions for drugs affecting selectively
tumors. All authors read and approved the final manuscript

20.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

22.

Received: 7 March 2011 Accepted: 7 June 2011 Published: 7 June 2011

23.

References
1. Warburg O: On the origin of cancer cells. Science 1956, 123:309-314.
2. Mazurek S, Eigenbrodt E: The tumor metabolome. Anticancer Res 2003,
23(2A):1149-54.
3. Christofk HR, Vander Heiden MG, Wu N, Asara JM, Cantley LC: Pyruvate
kinase M2 is a phospho tyrosine-binding protein. Nature 2008,
452(7184):181-186.
4. Christofk HR, Vander Heiden MG, Hanis MH, Ramanathan A, Gerszten RE,
Wei R, Fleming MD, Schreiber SL, Cantley LC: The M2 splice isoform of
pyruvate kinase is important for cancer metabolism and tumor growth.
Nature 2008, 452(7184):230-233.
5. Hitosugi T, Kang S, Vander Heiden MG, Chung TW, Elf S, Lythgoe K, Dong S,
Lonial S, Wang X, Cheng GZ, Xie J, Gu TL, Polakiewicz RD, Roesel JL,
Boggon TJ, Khuri FR, Gilliland DG, Cantley LC, Kaufman J, Cheng J: Tyrosine
Phosphorylation inhibits PKM2 to promote the Warburg effect and
tumor growth. Sci Signal 2009, 2(97):l-8, ra73.
6. Hommes FA, Everts RS: Particulate and free hexokinase in fetal rat liver.
Biol Neonate 1978, 33(3-4):193-200.
7. Arora KK, Fanciulli M, Pedersen PL: Glucose phosphorylation in tumor
cells. Cloning, sequencing, and overexpression in active form of a fulllength cDNA encoding a mitochondrial bindable form of hexokinase. J
Biol Chem 1990, 265(11):6481-8.
8. Azoulay-Zohar H, Israelson A, Abu-Hamad S, Shoshan-Barmatz V: In selfdefence: hexokinase promotes voltage-dependent anion channel
closure and prevents mitochondria-mediated apoptotic cell death.
Biochem J 2004, 377(Pt.2):347-355.
9. Dombrauckas JD, Santarsiero BD, Mesecar AD: Structural basis for tumor
pyruvate kinase M2 allosteric regulation and catalysis. Biochemistry 2005,
44(27):9417-29.
10. Jurica MS, Mesecar A, Heath PJ, Shi W, Nowak T, Stoddard BL: The allosteric
regulation of pyruvate kinase by fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. Structure
1998, 6(2):195-210.
11. Costello LC, Franklin RB: Novel role of zinc in the regulation of prostate
citrate metabolism and its implications in prostate cancer. Prostate 1998,
35(4):285-296.
12. Schlichtholz B, Turyn J, Goyke E, Biernacki M, Jaskiewicz K, Sledzinski Z,
Swierczynski J: Enhanced citrate synthase activity in human pancreatic
cancer. Pancreas 2005, 30(2):99-l04.
13. Zanatta A, Schuck PF, Viegas CM, Knebel LA, Busanello EN, Moura AP, et al:
In vitro evidence that D-serine disturbs the citric acid cycle through
inhibition of citrate synthase activity in rat cerebral cortex. Brain Res
2009, 1298:186-193.
14. Kimura Y, Kashima K, Daa T, Kondo Y, Yada K, Sasaki A, et al: Biotin-rich
intranuclear inclusions in morule-lacking adenocarcinoma of the
gallbladder:a new category of “neoplastic/non-morular” lesions. Virchows
Arch 2005, 446(2):194-199.
15. Israël M, Schwartz L: Cancer a dysmethylation syndrome. Paris: John
Libbey Eurotext; 2005.
16. Clarke B, Wyatt KM, McCormack JG: Ranolazine increases active pyruvate
dehydrogenase in perfused normoxic rat hearts: evidence for an indirect
mechanism. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1996, 28(2):341-350.
17. Bonnet S, Archer SL, Allalunis-Turner J, Haromy A, Beaulieu C, Thompson R,
et al: A mitochondria-K+ channel axis is suppressed in cancer and its

21.

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

normalization promotes apoptosis and inhibits cancer growth. Cancer
Cell 2007, 11:37-51.
Wheatley DN, Campbell E: Arginine deprivation, growth inhibition and
tumor cell death: Deficient utilization of citrulline by malignant cells. Br J
Cancer 2003, 89(3):573-576.
Wheatley DN, Kilfeather , Stitt A, Campbell E: Integrity and stability of the
citrulline-arginine pathway in normal and tumor cell lines. Cancer Lett
2005, 227:141-152.
Feun L, You M, Wu CJ, Kuo MT, Wangpaichitr M, Spector S, Savaraj N:
Arginine deprivation as a targeted therapy for cancer. Curr Pharm Des
2008, 14(1):1049-57.
Rous P: A sarcoma of the fowl transmissible by an agent separable from
tumor cells. J Exp Med 13:397-411.
Stehelin D, Varmus HE, Bishop JM, Vogt PK: DNA related to the
transforming gene(s) of avian sarcoma viruses is present in normal avian
DNA. Nature 1976, 260(5547):170-173.
Newbeme PM: Choline deficiency associated with diethanolamine
carcinogenicity. (Toxicological highlights). Toxicological sciences 2002,
67:1-3.
Lehman-McKeeman LD, Gamsky EA, Hicks SM, Vassalo JD, Mar M-H,
Zeisel SH: Diethanolamine induces hepatic choline deficiency in mice.
Toxicological sciences 2002, 67:38-45.
Best CH, Huntsman ME: The effect of the components of lecithin upon
deposition of fat in the liver. J Physiol 1932, 75:405-412.
Vafai SB, Stock JB: Protein phosphatase 2A methylation: a link between
elevated plasma homocysteine and Alzheimer’s Disease. FEBS Lett 2002,
518(1-3):1-4.
Kong M, Fox CJ, Mu J, Solt L, Xu A, Cinalli RM, Birnbaum MJ, Lindsten T,
Thompson CB: The PP2A-associated protein a4 is an essential inhibitor of
apoptosis. Science 2004, 306:695-698.
Hacker HJ, Steinberg P, Bannasch P: Pyruvate kinase isoenzyme shift from
L-type to M2-type is a late event in hepatocarcinogenesis induced in
rats by a choline-deficient/Dl-ethionine supplemented diet.
Carcinogenesis 1998, 19(1):99-107.
Ugi S, Imamura T, Ricketts W, Olefsky JM: Protein phosphatase 2A forms a
molecular complex with Shc and regulates Shc tyrosine phosphorylation
anddownstream mitogenic signaling. Mol Cell Biol 2002, 22:2375-87.
De Baere I, Derua R, Janssens V, Van Hoof C, Waelkens E, Merlevede W,
Goris J: Purification of porcine brain protein phosphatase 2A
leucinecarboxyl methyltransferase and cloning of the human
homologue. Biochemistry 1999, 38:16539-47.
Lee JA, Pallas DC: Leucine carboxyl methyltransferase-l is necessary for
normal progression through mitosis in mammalian cells. J Biol Chem
2007, 282(42):30974-84, Epub 2007 Aug 27. [PMID: 17724024].
Lee J, Chen Y, Tolstykh T, Stock J: A specific protein carboxyl
methylesterase that demethylates phosphoprotein phosphatase 2A in
bovine brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93(12):6043-7.
Puustinen P, Junttila MR, Vanhatupa S, Sablina AA, Hector ME, Teittinen K,
Raheem O, Ketola K, Lin S, Kast J, Haapasalo H, Hahn WC, Westermarck J:
PME-I protects extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway activity
from protein phosphatase 2A-mediated inactivation in human
malignant glioma. Cancer Res 2009, 69(7):2870-7, Epub 2009 Mar 17. [PMID:
19293187].
Longin S, Zwaenepoel K, Martens E, Louis W, Rondelet E, Goris J,
Janssens V: Spatial control of protein phosphatase 2A (de)methylation.
Exp Cell Res 2008, 314(l):68-81, Epub2007 Aug 7. [PMID: 17803990].
Xing Y, Li Z, Chen Y, Stock JB, Jeffrey PD, Shi Y: Structural mechanism of
demethylation and inactivation of protein phosphatase 2A. Cell 2008,
133(1):154-63.
Jordens J, Janssens V, Longin S, Stevens I, Martens E, Bultynck G,
Engelborghs Y, Lescrinier E, Waelkens E, Goris J, Van Hoof C: The protein
phosphatase 2A Phosphatase activator is a novel peptidyl-prolyl cis/
transisomerase. Biol Chem 2008, 281(10):6349-57, Epub Dec 27. [PMID:
16380337].
Turowski P, Fernandez A, Favre B, Lamb NJ, Hemmings BA: Differential
methylation and altered conformation of cytoplasmic and nuclear forms
of protein phosphatase 2A during cell cycle progression.A5. The journal
of Cell Biology 1995, 129:397-410.
Yan Z, Fedorov SA, Mumby MC, Williams RS: PR48, a novel regulatory
subunit of protein phosphatase 2A, interacts with Cdc6 and modulates
DNA replication in human cells. Mol Cell Biol 2000, 20(3):1021-9.

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

39. Mazurek S, Zwerschke W, Jansen-Dûrr P, Eigenbrodt E: Effects of the
human papilloma virus [IPV-16 E7 oncoprotein on glycolysis and
glutaminolysis: role of pyruvate kinase type M2 and the glycolyticenzyme complex. Biochem J 2001, 356(Pt l):247-256.
40. Israël M: Four hidden metamorphoses: a remark on blood, muscle,
mental diseases and cancer. Paris: John Libbey Eurotext; 2004.
41. Walker GE, Wilson EM, Powell D, Oh Y: Butyrate, a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, activates the human IGF binding protein-3 promoter in breast
cancer cells/molecular mechanism involves an Spl/Sp3 multiprotein
complex. Endocrinology 2001, 142(9):3817-27.
42. Vedavathi M, Girish KS, Kumar MK: A novel low molecular weight alanine
aminotansferase from fasted rat liver. Biochemistry (Moscow) 2006,
7l(Suppll):S105-S112.
43. Morino Y, Kojima H, Tanase S: Affinity labeling of alanine
aminotransferase by 3-chloro-L-alanine. J Biol Chem 1979, 254(2):279-285.
44. Ko YH, Smith BL, Wang Y, Pomper MG, Rini DA, Torbenson MS, Hullihen J,
Pedersen PL: Advanced cancers: eradication in all cases using 3bromopyruvate therapy to deplete ATP. Biochemical Biophysical Res
Commun 2004, 324(1):269-275.
45. Tuszynski GP, Cossu G: Differential cytotoxic eflect of gossypol on human
melanoma colon carcinoma and other tissue culture cell lines. Cancer Res
1984, 44:768-77l.
46. Zhang M, Liu H, Guo R, Ling Y, Wu X, Li B, Zhu F, Ling Y, Griffith BN,
Wang S, Yang D: Molecular mechanism of gossypol-induced cell growth
inhibition and cell death of HT-29 human colon carcinoma cells. Biochem
Pharmacol 2003, 66:93-103.
47. Palanivel R, Velunthakal R, Kowluru A: Regulation by glucose and calcium
of the carboxylmethylation of the catalytic subunit of protein
phosphatase 2A in insulin secreting INS-1 cells. Am J Physiol Endocrinol
Metab 2004, 286:E1032-1041, [PMID: 14970A091].
48. Don AS, Hogg PJ: Mitochondria as cancer drug targets. Trends in
Molecular Medicine 2004, 10:372-378.
49. Hamada Y, Nakamura J, Naruse K, Komori T, Kato K, Kasuya Y, Nagai R,
Horiuchi S, Hotta N: Epalresta, an aldose reductase inhibitor, reduces the
levels of Nepsilon-(carboxymethyl) Lysine protein adducts and their
precursors in erythrocytesfromdiabetic patients. Diabetes Care 2000,
23:1539-44.
50. O’Leary , Diaz E: Phosphoenol-3-bromopyruvate: A mechanism-based
inhibitor of phospoenolpyruvate carboxylase from maize. J Bio Chem
1982, 257(24):4603-05.
51. Liu J, Peliska JA, O’Leary MH: Synthesis and study of (Z)-3chlorophosphoenolpyruvate. Arch Biochem Biophy 1990, 277(l):143-148.
52. Siess EA: Stimulation by 3-hydroxybutyrate of pyruvate carboxylation in
mitochondria from rat liver. Eur J Biochem 1985, 152(l):131-136.
53. Guichard C, Pedruzzi E, Fay M, Marie JC, Braut-Boucher F, Daniel F,
Grodet A, Gougerot-Pocidalo MA, Chastre E, Kotelevets L, Lizard G,
Vandewalle A, Driss F, Ogier-Denis E: Dihydroxyphenylethanol induces
apoptosis by activating serine/threonine protein phosphatase PP2A and
promotes the endoplasmic reticulum stress response in human
carcinoma. Carcinogenesis 2006, 27(9):l8l2-27.
54. Podesta FE, Plaxton WC: Activation of cytosolic pyruvate kinase by
polyethylene glycol. Plant Physiol 1993, 103:285-288.
55. Parnaud G, Tache S, Peiffer G, Corpet DE: Polyethylene-glycol suppresses
colon cancer and causes dose-dependent regression of azoxymethaneinduced aberrantcrypt foci in rats. Cancer Res 1999, 59(20):5143-7.
56. Friedrich LV, Dougherty R: Fatal hypoglycemia associated with
levofloxacin. Pharmacotherapy 2004, 24(12):1807-12.
57. Lionetti V, Linke A, Chandler MP, Young ME, Penn MS, Gupte S,
d’Agostino C, Hintze TH, Stanley WC, Recchia FA: Carnitine palmitoyl
transferase-l inhibition prevents ventricular remodeling and delays
decompensation in pacing-induced heart failure. Cardiovasc Res 2005,
66(33):423-461.
58. Saxty BA, Novelli R, Dolle RE, Kruse LI, Reid DG, Camilleri P, Wells TN:
Synthesis and evaluation of (+) and (-)-2,2-difluorocitrate as inhibitors of
rat-liver ATP-citrate lyase and porcine-heart aconitase. Eur J Biochem l99l,
202(3):889-896.
59. Casaschi A, Maiyoh GK, Rubio BK, Li RW, Adeli K, Theriault AG: The
chalcone xanthohumol inhibits triglyceride and apolipoprotein B
secretion in HepG2 cells. J Nutr 2004, 134:1340-1346.
60. Choubey V, Maity P, Guha M, Kumar S, Srivastava K, Puri SK,
Bandyopadhyay U: Inhibition of Plasmodium falciparum choline kinase

Page 11 of 12

61.

62.
63.

64.

65.

66.
67.
68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.
74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.
83.

by hexadecyltrimethylammoniumbromide: a possible antimalarial
mechanism. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2007, 5l(2):696-706.
Taylor MM, Macdonald K, Morris AJ, McMaster CR: Enhanced apoptosis
through farnesol inhibition of phospholipase D signal transduction. FEBS
J 2005, 272(19):5056-63.
Driever PH, Knupfer MM, Cinatl J, Wolff JE: Valproic acid for the treatment
of pediatric malignant glioma. Klin Padiatr 1999, 2ll:323-328.
Hijazi Y, Boulieu R: Contribution of CYP3A4, CYPZB6, and CYP2C9
isoforms to N-demethylation of ketamine in human liver microsomes.
Drug Metabolism and Disposition 2002, 30:853-858.
Lin HL, Kent UM, Hollenberg PF: The grapefruit juice effect is not limited
to cytochrome P450(P450) 3A4: evidence for bergamottin-dependent
inactivation, heme destruction, and covalent binding to protein in P450s
2B6 and 3A5. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2005, 313:154-164.
Goel A, Mathupala SP, Pedersen PL: Glucose metabolism in cancer.
Evidence that demethylation events play a role in activating type II
hexokinase gene expression. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:15333-40.
Eliseeva ED, Valkov V, Jung M, Jung MO: Characterization of novel
inhibitors of histone acetyltransferases. Mol Cancer Ther 2007, 6:2391-8.
Gellerman JL, Anderson WH, Schlenk H: Synthesis of anacardic acids in
seeds of Ginkgo Biloba. Biochim Biophys Acta 1976, 16-21.
Shukla S, Mishra A, Fu P, Maclenan GT, Resnick MI, Gupta S: Up-regulation
of insulin-like growth factor binding protein -3 by apigenin leads to
growth inhibition and apoptosis of 22Rv1 xenografts in athymic nude
mice. FASEB J 2005 14:2042-4.
Nickerson T, Pollak M: Bicalutamide (Casodex) - induced prostate
regression involves increased expression of genes encoding insulin-like
growth factor binding proteins. Urology 1999, 54(6):1120-5.
Murray IA, Perdew GH: Omeprazole stimulates the induction of human
insulin - like growth factor binding protein -1 through aryl hydrocarbon
receptor activation. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008, 324(3):1102-10.
Bowles TL, Kim R, Galante J, Parsons CM, Virudachalam S, Kung HJ, Bold RJ:
Pancreatic cancer cell lines deficient in argininosuccinate synthetase are
sensitive to arginine deprivation by arginine deiminase. Int J Cancer
2008, 123(8):1950-5.
Kim RH, Coates JM, Bowles TL, McNerney GP, Sutcliffe J, Jung IU, GandourEdwaeds R, Chuang FY, Bold RJ, Kung HJ: Arginine deiminase as a novel
therapy for prostate cancer induces autophary and caspaseindependent apoptosis. Cancer Res 2009, 69:700-708.
Feun L, Savaraj N: Pegylated argininedeiminase: a novel anticancer
enzyme agent. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2006, 15(7):815-822.
Thomasset N, Quash GA, Doré JF: The differential contribution of arginase
and transamidinase to ornithine biosynthesis in two achromic human
melanoma cell lines. FEBS Lett 1982, 148(1):63-66.
Chang CI, Liao JC, Kuo L: Macrophage arginase promotes tumor cell
growth and suppresses nitric oxide-mediated tumor cytotoxicity. Cancer
Res 2001, 61(3):1100-6.
Jung C, Gonon AT, Sjöquist PO, Lundberg TO, Pernow J: Arginase
inhibition mediates cardioprotection during ischaemia-reperfusion.
Cardiovasc Res 20l0, 5(1):147-154.
Casero RA, Marton LJ: Targeting polyamine metabolism and function in
cancer and other hyperproliferative diseases. Nat Rev, Drug disc 2007,
6:373-390.
Watanabe T, Yamatodani A, Maeyama K, Wada H: Pharmacology of
alphafluoro methylhistidine, a specific inhibitor of histidine
decarboxylase. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1990, 11(9):363-367.
Milovic V, Stein J, Piiper A, Gerhard R, Zeuzem S, Caspary WF:
Characterization of putrescine transport across the intestinal epithelium:
study using isolated brush border and basolateral membrane vesicles of
the enterocyte. Eur J Clin Invest 1995, 25(2):97-105.
Unterluggauer H, Mazurek S, Lener B, Hütter E, Eigenbrodt E, Zwerschke W,
Jansen-Dürr P: Premature senescence of human endothelial cells induced
by inhibition of glutaminase. Biogerontology 2008, 9(4):247-259.
Goodwin BL, Corbin KD, Pendleton LC, Levy MM, Solomonson LP,
Eichler DC: Trogliazone up-regulates vascular endothelial
argininosuccinate synthase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008,
370(2):254-258.
Gernez A: Le Cancer dynamique et eradication. Roubaix: printed by
Verschave; 196952.
Gernez A: Le Cancer, la carcinogénèse mécanisme et prévention. Editions
de La Vie Claire; 1974.

Israël and Schwartz Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:70
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/70

84. Gernez A: Néo-Postulats Biologiques et Pathogéniques. Editions de La Vie
Claire; 1975.
85. Giuliani C, Saji M, Bucci I, Fiore G, Liberatore M, Singer DS, Monaco F,
Kohn LD, Napolitano G: Transcriptional regulation of major
histocompatibility complex class 1 gene by insulin and IGF-1 in FRTL-5
thyroid cells. J Endocrinol 2006, 189(3):605-615.
86. Rossi P, Lindgren JA, Kullman C, Jondal M: Products of the lipoxygenase
pathway in human natural killer cell cytotoxicity. Cell Immunol 1985,
93(l):1-8.
87. Miller SC: Echinacea: a miracle herb against aging and cancer? Evidence
in vivo mice. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2005, 2(3):309-314.
88. Schulte-Löbbert S, Holoubek G, Müller WE, Schubert-Zsilavecz M,
Wurglics M: Comparison of the synaptosomal uptake of serotonin by St
John’s wort products. J Pharm Pharmacol 2004, 56(6):813-818.
89. Evans DL, Lynch KG, Benton T, Dubé B, Gettes DR, Tustin NB, Lai JP,
Metzger D, Douglas SD: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor and
substance P antagonist enhancement of natural killer cell innate
immunity in human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome. Biol Psychiatry 2008, 63:899-905.
90. Brastianos HC, Vottero E, Patrick BO, Van Soest R, Matainaho T, Mauk AG,
Andersen RJ: Exiguamine A, an indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO)
inhibitor isolated from the marine sponge Neopetrosia exigua. J Am
Chem Soc 2006, 128:16046-7.
91. Muller AJ, DuHadaway JB, Donover PS, Sutanto-Ward E, Prendergast GC:
Inhibition of indoleamine2,3-dioxygenase, an immunoregulatory target
of the cancer suppression gene Bin1, potentiates cancer chemotherapy.
Nature Medicine 2005, 11(3):312-319.
92. Liao CH, Sang S, Ho CT, Lin JK: Garcinol modulates tyrosine
phosphorylation of FAK and subsequently induces apoptosis through
down-regulation of Src, ERK, and Akt survival signaling in human colon
cancer cells. J Cell Biochem 2005, 96(1):155-169.
93. Marcu MG, Jung YJ, Lee S, Chung EJ, Lee MJ, Trepel J, Neckers L: Curcumin
is an inhibitor of p300 histone acetyltransferase. Med Chem 2006,
2(2):169-174.
94. Pollak M: Insulin and insulin-like growth factor signalling in neoplasia.
Nat Rev Cancer 2008, 8:915-928.
95. Sattler UG, Hirschhauser F, Mueller-Klieser WF: Manipulation of glycolysis in
malignant tumors: fantasy or therapy? Curr Med Chem 2010, 17(2):96-108.
96. Tennant DA, Duran RV, Gottlieb E: Targeting metabolic transformation for
cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2010, 10(4):267-277.
97. Tennant DA, Gottlieb E: HIF prolyl hydroxylase-3 mediates alphaketoglutarate-induced apoptosis and tumor suppression. J Mol Med 2010,
88(8):839-49.
98. Ko YH, Smith BL, Wang Y, Pomper MG, Rini DA, Torbenson MS, Hullihen J,
Pedersen PL: Advanced cancers: eradication in all cases using 3bromopyruvate therapy to deplete ATP. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2004, 324(1):269-275.
99. Zhang H, Varin E, Briand M, Allouche S, Heutte N, Schwartz L, Poulain L,
Icard P: Novel therapyfor malignant pleural mesothelioma based on antienergetic effect: an xperimental study using 3-Bromopyruvate on nude
mice. Anticancer Res 2009, 29(4):1443-8.
100. Schwartz L, Abolhassani M, Guais A, Sanders E, Steyaert JM, Campion F,
Israel M: A combination of alpha lipoic acid and calcium hydroxycitrate
is efficient against mouse cancer models: Preliminary results. Oncology
reports 2010, 23:1407-16.
101. Guevara-Aguirre J, Balasubramanian P, Guevara-Aguirre M, Wei M, Madia F,
Cheng CW, Hwang D, Martin-Montavalvo A, Ingles S, de Cabo R, Cohen P,
Longo VD: Growth hormone receptor deficiency is associated with a
major reduction in pro-aging signalling, cancer, and diabetes in humans.
Sci Transl Med 2011, 3:70ra13.
doi:10.1186/1476-4598-10-70
Cite this article as: Israël and Schwartz: The metabolic advantage of
tumor cells. Molecular Cancer 2011 10:70.

Page 12 of 12

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
