<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Characterization of pathogenic germline mutations in human Protein Kinases</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:S1. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-S4-S1"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jose MG Izarzugaza"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

RESEARCH

Open Access

Characterization of pathogenic germline
mutations in human Protein Kinases
Jose MG Izarzugaza1,2*, Lisa EM Hopcroft2, Anja Baresic2, Christine A Orengo2, Andrew CR Martin2*,
Alfonso Valencia1*
From ECCB 2010 Workshop: Annotation interpretation and management of mutations (AIMM)
Ghent, Belgium. 26 September 2010

Abstract
Background: Protein Kinases are a superfamily of proteins involved in crucial cellular processes such as cell cycle
regulation and signal transduction. Accordingly, they play an important role in cancer biology. To contribute to the
study of the relation between kinases and disease we compared pathogenic mutations to neutral mutations as an
extension to our previous analysis of cancer somatic mutations. First, we analyzed native and mutant proteins in
terms of amino acid composition. Secondly, mutations were characterized according to their potential structural
effects and finally, we assessed the location of the different classes of polymorphisms with respect to kinaserelevant positions in terms of subfamily specificity, conservation, accessibility and functional sites.
Results: Pathogenic Protein Kinase mutations perturb essential aspects of protein function, including disruption of
substrate binding and/or effector recognition at family-specific positions. Interestingly these mutations in Protein
Kinases display a tendency to avoid structurally relevant positions, what represents a significant difference with
respect to the average distribution of pathogenic mutations in other protein families.
Conclusions: Disease-associated mutations display sound differences with respect to neutral mutations: several
amino acids are specific of each mutation type, different structural properties characterize each class and the
distribution of pathogenic mutations within the consensus structure of the Protein Kinase domain is substantially
different to that for non-pathogenic mutations. This preferential distribution confirms previous observations about
the functional and structural distribution of the controversial cancer driver and passenger somatic mutations and
their use as a proxy for the study of the involvement of somatic mutations in cancer development.

Background
Point mutations of nucleotide bases are a mechanism of
crucial importance in the evolution of proteins, and
hence in the evolution of organisms. A biologically relevant class of point mutation, accounting for about 90%
of sequence polymorphisms [1] at an overall frequency
of about one per 1000 bases [2] is the single nucleotide
* Correspondence: jmgonzalez@cnio.es; andrew@bioinf.org.uk;
avalencia@cnio.es
1
Structural Biology and Biocomputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), C/Melchor Fernandez Almagro 3, E28029 Madrid,
Spain
2
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Division of Biosciences,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United
Kingdom
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

point mutation or PM. Traditionally, polymorphisms are
classified according to their genomic location into coding or non-coding. Coding PMs can be further classified
depending on whether the resulting protein product is
changed owing to the genomic polymorphism. Nonsynonymous PMs (nsPMs) are those that alter the
amino acid sequence of the protein product through
either amino acid substitution or the insertion of truncation mutations. We refer to those which generate a
single amino acid substitution as ‘single amino acid
polymorphisms’ or SAAPs. In contrast, synonymous
PMs (also referred as silent or sPM) are those that do
not alter the amino acid sequence of the protein product expressed. A particular case of PMs corresponds to
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs): those germline

© 2011 Izarzugaza et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

mutations frequently found (>1%) in normal individuals
and considered neutral. A major effort to catalogue and
annotate SNPs is dbSNP [3]. Although most amino acid
changes are tolerated in the native protein structure, not
all PMs are neutral. An increasing number of mutations
are prone to be associated with aberrant phenotypes and
disease. Disease-associated mutations occur at much
lower frequencies in the population and have a severe
effect on phenotype. Here, we use the term ‘pathogenic
deviation’ (PD hereafter) to refer to any single base
change reported to be correlated with disease. Although
both PDs and nsSNPs result in a change in the
expressed protein product, the former are reported to
have a severe effect on phenotype whereas nsSNPs are
expected to have a non-deleterious phenotypic effect.
About 1% of all human genes are known to contribute
to cancer as a result of acquired mutations. The family
of genes most frequently contributing to cancer is the
Protein Kinase gene family [4] which is implicated in a
huge number of tumorigenic functions including
immune evasion, proliferation, antiapoptotic activity,
metastasis and angiogenesis, possibly due to the simplicity of the mechanism of attaching an ATP-derived
phosphate to a substrate protein [5]. Protein Kinases are
one of the most ubiquitous families of signaling molecules in the human cell, accounting for approximately
2% of the proteins encoded by the human genome [6].
Protein Kinases show a wide-scale similarity both at
sequence and structure level, attributable to the fact that
all kinases transfer the terminal phosphate of ATP to a
serine, threonine or tyrosine residue in a target protein.
Empirical studies to date also suggest a common, with a
few exceptions, catalytic mechanism whereby ATP and
an active site divalent cation are bound in identical
manners and phospho-transfer is carried out by a shared
set of amino acids [7]. Studies [8,9] on yeast models
have shown that kinases can be very promiscuous, phosphorylating a huge number of different protein substrates albeit showing remarkable specificity. This
inconsistency suggests that kinases have a region committed to the general function of catalysis, with another
region (or regions) customizable to confirm substrate
specificity to the enzyme without any particular need to
alter fold, compromise ligand binding or modify the
subsequent reaction mechanism. Protein Kinases are a
thoroughly studied protein family and a plethora of
mutations have been previously reported in the literature [10]. These studies often include evidence of association with disease. Concomitantly, several efforts
[11,12] are devoted to the prediction of the pathogenicity of somatic kinase mutations in cancer samples.
These mutations are classified into two main categories:
those that are involved in cancer onset and development
–driver mutations– and those that are biologically

Page 2 of 10

neutral –passenger– mutations. For a detailed review,
see Baudot et al.,2009 [13]. Previous work [14] characterized the preferential distribution of cancer driver
kinase somatic mutations in regions of importance for
protein function, including disruption of substrate binding and/or effector recognition at family-specific positions, often avoiding structurally relevant positions.
The objectives of the work presented here are twofold. Firstly, we wanted to clarify whether the trends
detected for driver somatic kinase mutations can be
extended to other disease related mutations independently of the nature of the mutation. Secondly, we
wanted to provide additional information to the discussion on the interpretation of the role of kinase driver
somatic mutations in the onset of cancer.
Consequently, we carried out a detailed multi-level
comparative analysis of the differences between pathogenic and neutral (not pathogenic) germline mutations
within the framework of the human kinome: amino acid
composition of the polymorphisms was compared,
mutations were characterized according to their potential structural effects and finally, we assessed the location of the different classes of polymorphisms with
respect to kinase-relevant positions in terms of subfamily specificity, conservation, accessibility and functional
sites.

Results and discussion
Sequence features of deleterious kinase mutations

We mapped 130 pathogenic deviations and 200 neutral
SNPs to sequences within the Protein Kinase domain
(PDPKs and SNPPKs, respectively). The native residue in
the pathogenic (PD PK ) set was enriched in glycines
(p=0.01) and leucines (p=0.04) when the sequences were
compared using a two-sided Fisher exact test whereas it
was enriched in prolines (p=3x10–5) when the mutant
amino acids were considered. As expected, in the SNPPK
dataset none of the residue types were particularly
enriched, neither in the native sequences nor in the
mutated ones. Considering the native and mutant as a
residue pair, three mutations were found more often in
the PDPK dataset: leucine-proline (p=0), lysine-glutamate
(p=0.02) and arginine-proline (p=0.02). Again, in the
SNPPK dataset, no significant enrichment was found for
the the wildtype-mutated pairs. The complete set of
results can be found in Supplementary Table S2 in
Additional file 1.
Hypothesized structural effects of deleterious kinase
mutations

SAAPdb [15] provides a characterization of the structural consequences of mutations. When these features
were compared some differences between the groups
appeared. PD PK s were often observed at the interface

Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

Page 3 of 10

(p=0.03) including sites of inter-chain binding, as well as
ligand binding. By contrast, SNP PK s significantly
(p=0.04) more often than PDPKs tend to create empty
spaces in the protein as a consequence of the difference
in volume introduced by the side chain change, either in
the core of the protein or in partially buried regions.
Protein Kinase pathogenic mutations (PDPK) compared
to pathogenic mutations outside this domain (PDnPK ,
standing for ’non protein kinase’) produced striking
results: PDnPKs were more often explained by structural
analyses: the modified residues affected stability, affected
functional residues, introduced an empty region in the
interior of the protein, and affected interaction prone
positions (as annotated in MMDBBIND). By contrast,
PDPK mutations were not significantly related with any
of those categories. A complete description of these
results can be found in Supplementary Table S3 in
Additional file 1.
Proximity of deleterious kinase mutations to kinasespecific protein features

We present here the results of mapping the different
types of mutations, PDPK s and SNP PK s, onto a representative structural model from the Protein Kinase
superfamily. The mutations were analyzed in terms of
their distribution relative to evolutionary conserved
positions and known functional regions. We were able
to map 47 positions containing at least one of the 62
PDPK mutations and 27 positions with at least one of
the 36 SNP PK s to the consensus model (Figure 1)
described in the Methods section and in previous studies [14]. The results of these analyses are summarized
in Table 1.
Proximity of kinase mutations to known functional regions

a) Kinase mutations and the catalytic region The
active region of Protein Kinases includes the ATP binding site, the peptide-substrate binding sites and the catalytic loop implicated in the transference of the
phosphate group. We defined the kinase-binding site as
the set of residues extracted from the FireDB database
[16]. This definition includes 32 residues (Figure 1) that
directly contact the ATP in the binding pocket and that
contains the five highly conserved residues that play a
critical role in positioning ATP and stabilizing the active
conformation in the catalytic mechanism [7] (see Figure
1). The distance distribution histograms (Figure 2,
panels A and B) and the results in Table 1 (see also Figure S2 in Additional file 1, where the PD PK s, SNPPK s
and catalytic residues were represented), showed a very
strong tendency of PD PK s to locate if not in catalytic
residues, at least close to them. Indeed, 13 out of the 32
residues in the binding pocket were annotated as pathogenic whereas only three were annotated as neutral.
Moreover, 2 out of the 5 residues described as essential

Figure 1 Consensus model structure of summarizing the
human Protein Kinase family The model structure of human
Protein Kinase, based on MAP3K1, shows the basic two-lobe kinase
fold, with the N- and C-terminal (green and orange respectively)
lobes joined by a hinge region (magenta). Substrate recognition is
through interaction with the activation segment (blue), a region in
the C-terminal lobe. The substrate-binding groove is located
between the catalytic loop, the P+1 loop (activation segment), helix
D, helix F, helix G and helix H. ATP binds at a site between the two
lobes (yellow) that includes five conserved residues: (i) Lysine 74
that interacts with the alpha and beta phosphates of ATP and
thereby stabilizing it; (ii) a nearby glutamic acid (E96) forms a salt
bridge with lysine 74 increasing the stabilization network; (iii)
Aspartate 171 is the catalytic base that initiates phosphotransfer by
deprotonating the acceptor serine, threonine or tyrosine; (iv)
Asparagine 176 interacts with a secondary divalent cation, thereby
positioning the gamma-phosphate of ATP, and finally (v) Aspartate
190 which chelates the primary divalent cation, indirectly
positioning ATP at the same time.

Table 1 Results of the Xd analysis comparing PDPKs and
SNPPKs
Feature

PD (Å)

SNP (Å)

ΔXd

Conservation - Shannon

7.17

6.71

-0.13

Conservation - AL2CO
Structural Conservation

8.49
7.56

10.49
7.00

-0.52
2.10

Accessibility - Buried

2.94

3.63

-0.83

Catalytic - FireDB

8.69

12.66

-4.74

Catalytic - Knight

11.89

16.26

-2.33

TreeDeterminants

6.00

7.94

-1.98

Where PD (Å) and SNP (Å) stand for the average closest distances in
Angstroms from the feature residue and the PDs and SNPs respectively, and
ΔXd for the difference in Xd values. Negative values indicate that the PDs are
closer to the feature residues whereas positive values indicate that SNPs are
in the surroundings of feature residues.

Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

Page 4 of 10

tree-determinant residues as a proxy for functionally
important regions in Protein Kinases, particularly those
related with the specific functions of each one of the
subfamilies. Residues specific to the various subfamilies
of Protein Kinases were identified for each of the eight
subfamilies in which KinBase categorizes the human
kinome [6]. Our recent implementation of the
sequence-space approach, S3det [17] identified 32
unique positions in the model as containing information
relevant for differentiating between subfamilies; that is,
residues that tend to be conserved in the specific subfamilies and vary to different degrees in the others (Fig.
S3 in Additional file 1 depicts the distribution of the
mutations along with these tree-determinant residues).
Out of the 32 tree-determinants in the model, five were
annotated as pathogenic (residues 50, 173, 190, 217 and
233 in the generated structural model) whereas only two
were annotated as neutral. Pathogenic deviations, if not
exactly in positions that were disease-associated, clustered around tree-determinant residues in general. This
tendency was especially relevant for tree-determinants
in the ATP binding pocket, but also appreciable in the
other function specific tree-determinants. PDPKs were
closer to tree-determinant positions than neutral
SNPPKs (Fig. 2C) This was also clear in the difference of
Xd values (-1.98) indicating the existence of significant
differences between PDPKs and SNPPKs with respect to
proximity to positions characterized as important for
the function and subspecificity of the kinases.
Proximity of kinase mutations to the protein core

With the accessibility parameters defined in Methods,
99 residues were classified as buried in the kinase structural model; 20 of these buried residues are annotated
as PDPKs and 12 were annotated as SNPPKs (three residues – 58, 197 and 218 – are described in both datasets) (Fig. S4 in Additional file 1). The distribution of
distances (Fig. 2D) manifests a clear tendency of PDPKs
to be closer to buried residues. As a matter of fact, the
analysis of the mean distances of mutated positions to
buried residues (2.94Å and 3.63Å respectively) revealed
a tendency for the pathogenic deviations (PDPKs) to be
closer to buried residues than the neutral polymorphisms. This fact was supported by a Xd difference of
-0.83.
Figure 2 Histograms of the distribution of distances between
mutated resides and the analyzed features. (A) Catalytic residues
according to FireDB. (B) Catalytic Residues according to Knight et al
(2007). (C) Tree-Determinants (D) Buried residues.

for the correct functioning of the ATP binding pocket
[7] were annotated as PDPKs.
b) Kinase mutations and regions of functional subspecificity In this study we used the position of the

Examples of well-characterized disease-associated
mutations affecting kinase function

The statistically significant results provided after analyzing the sequence features of the single amino acid polymorphisms (see sequence features of deleterious kinase
mutations section) are supported by several examples in
the literature. Karkkainen et al., (2000) [18] associated
human hereditary lymphedema, a particular case of lymphatic obstruction, with mutations in the vascular

Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

endothelial growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR-3). The
endothelial cells lining blood and lymphatic vessels
depend on signal transduction mediated by specific
receptor tyrosine kinases for their differentiation into a
primary vascular plexus (vasculogenesis) and for the
sprouting and splitting of new capillaries from previously existing vessels (angiogenesis). Two mutations
were reported as the cause of the disease, due to the
loss of tyrosine kinase activity and hence impaired
downstream signaling, and a slower rate of internalization of the receptor. The suggested model highlights a
mutation in the second arginine in the highly conserved
HRDLAARN motif in the catalytic site to proline that
facilitates the hydrogen bond between aspartate and a
hydroxyl group from ATP at the binding pocket. This
aspartate is critical for protein function as it is believed
to act as the catalytic base in the phosphotransfer reaction. Moreover, their study revealed that a mutation
from leucine to proline disturbed protein function due
to both a disturbance in protein structural integrity and
an interference of ATP binding. Since the pathogenic
residue is located in the middle of a b-strand, introducing a restricted mobility residue such as proline disrupts the interaction with the surrounding b-strands,
destabilizing the protein fold in the region. In addition,
the sidechain of this leucine is part of the adenine-binding pocket, therefore alterations in such a relevant position modify the shape of the cleft and might interfere
with ATP binding. With respect to the significant
lysine-glutamate mutation, Mao et al., (2001) [19]
described the commonly cited mutation K430E
(amongst others) in Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK,
Q06187), speculating with regard to how it might cause
severe XLA (X-linked agammaglobulinemia), and providing a solved crystal structure. BTK is expressed on
the surface of B cells and its kinase activity is crucial in
proliferation and differentiation to mature B lymphocytes. According to their mechanism, upon the transphosphorylation of Y551, the highly conserved K430
facilitates a hydrogen bond with E445, causing a shift of
the aC helix. The K430E mutation disables the aC helix
repositioning, which is crucial for the catalytic activity
of BTK, hence impairing the creation of mature B cells.
Assessing the possible functional role of relevant kinase
mutations by their sequence-structure characteristics

Our general analysis of the distribution of mutations in
Protein Kinases not only provided an overview of their
relation with function and structure, but also provided
an insight into their specific biomedical implications. In
the work presented here, we summarized all the knowledge accumulated for the Protein Kinase domain in a
single framework structure (Fig. 1) under the assumption that regions important for the structure/function of

Page 5 of 10

the kinases are common to the whole family and hence
they can be used as a reference for the interpretation of
the mutations in any of the individual kinases. The
accumulation of information clearly increases the significance of the results provided and makes the distribution
of the polymorphisms more reliable and accurate. For
instance, mutations in the insulin receptor gene in
humans (INSR) have been reported as disease-associated
in the literature. Defects in INSR are the cause of insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus with acanthosis nigricans
type A (IRAN type A, MIM:610549), a syndrome characterized by the association of severe insulin resistance
manifested by marked hyperinsulinemia and a failure to
respond to exogenous insulin with the skin lesion
acanthosis nigricans and overian hyperandrogenism in
adolescent female patients. The relation of the disease
with mutations in kinases is thoroughly reported in
OMIM. Recent studies have further characterized the
relationship between insulin resistance and disease (for
example, [20]). Moreover, several studies have associated
acanthosis nigricans with mutations in other kinases,
such as the fibroblast growth factor receptors II and III
[21-23]. Here, we identified A1161T (residue 173 in the
model), a well-characterized mutation that introduces
an alanine-threonine shift in the ATP binding pocket of
INSR. This mutation has been defined in our analysis as
a pathogenic deviation (PD PK ). Concomitantly, it is a
catalytic residue in FireDB and is important for family
specificity. This perturbation of the ATP binding pocket
might explain the unpaired phosphorylation and therefore the reduced enzymatic activity leading to the aberrant phenotype.
Finally, we considered not only a single mutation but
a pair of consecutive mutations: T341P and C342F
(positions 233 and 234 in the structural model respectively), in the human fibroblast growth factor receptor
type 2 (FGFR2) to demonstrate that although only
T341P is reported to be a pathogenic deviation in our
dataset, the analysis can provide insights into complex
diseases caused by more than one mutation at the same
time. Several diseases caused by uncontrolled cell
growth have been associated to defects on FGFR2.
Among them, two related syndromes – Pfeiffer syndrome (PS) and Crouzon syndrome (CS) – have been
reported to be associated to the pair of mutations of
interest (T341P in PS and CS, C342F in CS). In our analysis, we described T341P as a mutation that introduces
a change from threonine to proline in a buried
sequence-conserved position. Other authors [15,24] have
shown that mutations to proline are very often associated with disease. Additionally, we have characterized
mutation C342F as a replacement of a buried residue. In
addition, we identified both mutations as tree-determinant residues, thus considered related to binding

Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

specificity and indicative of the importance of these two
positions for protein function.
Conclusions

We have analyzed point mutations in the structure of
Protein Kinases in order to characterize the structural
and functional singularities of pathogenic and neutral
mutations. Although the definition of the groups is by
no means stable and the groups are constantly being
redefined as new studies on the pathogenicity of mutations arise, this might be used as a proxy to deepen the
knowledge on the underlying mechanisms of disease.
The human kinome is particularly amenable for this
type of study since much is known about the structure
and function of this protein family and very relevant
cancer-associated mutations have been published for
these proteins [11,12,14].
To address this point, pathogenic deviations mapped
to the kinase domain (PDPK) and single nucleotide polymorphisms mapped to the kinase domain (SNPPK) were
compared on the basis of sequence, hypothesized structural effect and proximity to known kinase-specific features within the framework of a modeled consensus
structure, representative of the whole superfamily. At
the sequence level, several mutations were differentially
observed in the PDPK and SNPPK datasets: the leucineproline mutation emerged as an interesting feature of
the PDPK dataset: it was identified both when analyzing
the native and mutant residues separately, and when
analyzing the mutation pairs, and it has been identified
as being indicative of disease elsewhere, both specifically
in a kinase disease dataset [24] and in wider, non-disease-specific datasets [15,25,26]. In addition, replacing
an arginine with a proline was more often observed in
the PD PK dataset. Again, this mutation has been
described as being associated both with diseases predicted to be related to mutations in kinases [24] and
across all other diseases [15,26]. Finally, replacing the
positive charge of Lysine with the bulkier, negatively
charged glutamic acid sidechain is identified in the
PD PK dataset. Unlike the well-characterized previous
mutations, this is a novel observation. These finding
provide evidence about the existence of distinctive differences between the two types of mutations even at
such a coarse grain level as the amino acid composition.
In the second part of the analysis we focused on the
singularities of the mutations in structurally and functionally relevant regions. Thus, we characterized PDPK
mutations in terms of their structural consequences by
comparing them to SNPPK mutations. PDPK mutations
were more likely to occur at the interface with ligands
and other protein chains and SNP PK mutations were
more likely to introduce a cavity in the protein core.
This is coherent with the previous publications

Page 6 of 10

concluding that disease-associated mutations in kinases
often affect the site of ATP binding [16,18,19]. In addition, PDPK mutations were compared to other PD mutations (PDnPK) to comment on the mechanisms by which
mutations in kinases might lead to disease. In general, it
is easier to explain PD nPK s in structural terms. Most
noticeably, very few PDPK mutations resulted in a significant cavity, an empty space, or affected protein stability
at all. An increasing body of literature attributes the
pathogenic nature of PDs to their destabilizing effect on
native protein structure [15,27-30]. The results here,
specific to the mutations in the Protein Kinase domain,
contradict this trend, indicating that the pathogenicity
of PDPKs could not be simply attributed to a decreased
stability of the resulting proteins. This might be
explained by the fact that Protein Kinases are known to
be a highly structurally conserved superfamily, while
varying significantly with respect to sequence; as such,
the structures must be tolerant to sequence variation.
Hence, considerable flexibility must exist within the protein structure to be robust to sequence diversity. It is
noticeable the relatively small number of structures
available, we are aware that the results will benefit from
a dedicated modelling pipeline, especially for very divergent kinases differing from the canonical PK domain. By
contrast, a customized model for every single protein
would not only increment the complexity of the comparative analysis of distances but would also add some
uncertainties derived from the use of protein models.
In order to provide more detailed insight into the distinctive implication of pathogenic mutations in the disruption of protein function, we characterized the differences
between PDPKs and SNPPKs by their association to kinasespecific functional and structural features. There were significant differences between the two types of mutations in
terms of conservation, accessibility, distance to active/
binding site residues and distance to family specific binding sites. It is interesting to compare these results with the
ones previously obtained for driver/passenger mutations
in Protein Kinases [14] from the works by [11,12] that
constitute a subset of the many mutations stored in COSMIC [31]. Drivers are those mutations predicted to be
involved in cancer onset whereas passenger mutations are
those that are supposed to be accumulated during cancer
progression being neutral respect to the origin of the cancer. In the previous work, the main conclusion was that
driver mutations tended to be located near to important
residues such as sequence conserved positions, family specific regions and active/catalytic sites whereas passenger
mutations were located closer to structurally conserved
regions. The difference observed here for the set of PDPKs
and SNPPKs mimicked the one previously observed for driver and passenger mutations. Both datasets proved to be
non-redundant. Only 4 residues were common to both

Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

driver and pathogenic datasets, all of them in the human
B-raf proto-oncogene. The small overlap encountered is
consistent with the very different nature –germline and
somatic– of the mutations in each of the disease-prone
datasets. Thus, the new results presented here can be seen
as a confirmation of the functional/structural role of the
mutations that are more likely to be pathogenic (drivers
and PDs). Given that the definition of mutations as drivers
and passengers is somehow controversial (For a review,
see [13]), it is good to see that the current results could be
interpreted as an indirect support to the categorization of
mutations into drivers (disease-associated) and passengers
(disease-neutral) and their use as a proxy for the study of
the involvement of somatic mutations in cancer biology.
In summary, we have confirmed that the pathogenicity
of mutations within the Protein Kinase superfamily is
related to essential aspects of protein function, including
perturbation of substrate binding and recognition by
effectors at family-specific positions. As a matter of fact,
pathogenic deviations (PDPK) accumulate in key functional regions whereas they seem to be absent from
structurally relevant positions. These observations reinforce the idea that the pathogenicity of disease-associated mutations can be attributed to a disruption of
native protein function while avoiding drastic changes
prone to disrupt the protein globally. This tendency was
not observed for neutral polymorphisms, which are
apparently less disruptive of protein function and tend
to be tolerated. Consequently, they are more often
found in normal individuals. However, it is clear that
further classification of the mutations in more specific
subgroups will be necessary to provide a deeper knowledge on the mechanisms leading to disease. A typical
example would be the characterization of mutations into
a gain-of-function/loss-of-function on a large-scale.
The analysis presented here provides not only a characterization of the mutations, but also in some cases
additional insight into the specific biomedical implications of the mutations. This type of approach will be
particularly useful as part of the bioinformatics platform
developed for the International Cancer Genome Consortium and other cancer genome projects. The results discussed in this work are biologically sound not only
because they contribute to our understanding of the
role of mutations in disease, but also because they can
bee seen as a necessary step towards the development of
predictors of pathogenicity based on the combination of
the features analyzed here. Indeed, further development
of the idea presented here might naturally derive in a
classifier that making use of machine learning techniques would be able to predict the pathogenicity of any
novel kinase mutation.
Moreover, although out of the scope of this work, the
methodology used to analyze the distribution of the

Page 7 of 10

mutations in relation to a set of features can be applied to
other families. However, we see (as other authors in the
field [24]) advantages to the in-depth exploration of a
family with more information about sequence, structure
and mutations and for what it is feasible to obtain phylogenetic information to calculate subfamily specific sequence
features. It remains interesting to analyze other protein
families at a genome wide scale to corroborate to what
extend the results shown in this work can be generalized.

Methods
Protein Kinase domain sequences

The KinBase resource [6] is a repository of the currently
accepted classification of eukaryotic Protein Kinases. At
the moment of the analysis, KinBase contained 620
human protein sequences of which 516 were Protein
Kinases not defined as pseudogenes by the database
curators. Although it has been described that some
kinase pseudogenes are transcribed and even might have
a residual or scaffolding function [32] kinase pseudogenes were not considered in the analysis performed
here. KinBase does not map directly onto UniProtKB
[33]. The mapping was performed using a BlastP [34]
for each sequence against a custom database containing
all entries in UniProtKB annotated as Protein Kinase
domain for human. We were able to map 488 KinBase
identifiers to a valid UniProtKB entry, 474 of them
(97.13%) at sequence identity levels of at least 95%.
Classification of the mutations

SAAPdb [15] is a database of single amino acid polymorphisms (SAAPs) mapped to protein structure.
SAAPdb aims to provide likely structural effects of
mutations and identify differences in potential structural
consequences between neutral and pathogenic mutations. The disease dataset is derived mostly from OMIM
[35] whereas the neutral dataset comes from dbSNP.
For the Protein Kinase domain of the 488 kinases in
SAAPdb contains 130 pathogenic deviations (PD PK s)
and 200 neutral polymorphisms (SNPPKs). Of these 130
PDPKs, 62 were successfully mapped to a residue in the
solved PDB structure. Similarly, of the 200 SNP PK s
mapped to sequence, 36 were mapped to a PDB structure (See Supplementary Table S1 in Additional file 1).
In order to create control datasets 9263 non-kinase PDs
(PDnPK) were retrieved from SAAPdb, out of them 4652
mapped to a structure. All three datasets contain only
unique, non-synonymous (missense) mutations. We
excluded nonsense and synonymous mutations because
these have a known, truncating effect or no effect on
the protein structure. A unique mutation was defined by
the combination of four parameters: UniProtKB accession number and sequence position, native amino acid
and mutated amino acid.

Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

Comparing mutations with respect to the native and/or
mutant residues

To compare the mutations with respect to their
sequence features, the native and mutant residues were
extracted from SAAPdb, as described above. Two-sided
Fisher exact tests were carried out since they allow
robust comparison of datasets of disparate sizes and
evaluation of contingency tables with empty cells.

Page 8 of 10

alignment of the human kinome constructed using the
alignment package MUSCLE [36]. The selected
sequence was submitted to Modeller [37] assembling
the models created using all those closely related template PDBs structures returned from a BLAST search.
The predicted model has previously been used as a consensus of the Protein Kinase domain [14]. Finally, mutations were transferred from their own PDB coordinates
to the consensus model for comparison.

Structural effects of mutations

The SAAPdb hypothesized structural effects are fully
described elsewhere [15] and are summarised briefly
below. (a) Mutations affecting stability: mutations on the
surface of proteins that replace a hydrophilic residue
with a hydrophobic residue are identified as introducing
unfavourable hydrophobicity on the surface. Similarly,
mutations in the core that replace a hydrophobic residue
with a hydrophilic residue are identified as introducing
unfavourable hydrophobicity in the core. Buried mutations that create a charge shift are also identified. Using a
geometric analysis of PDB structures, SAAPdb identifies
mutations that affect potential disulphide bonds. Mutations that introduce large cavities in the protein core or
that break hydrogen bonds are identified as well. (b)
Mutations affecting folding: unfavourable (with respect
to torsion angles) mutations from cis-proline, from glycine and to proline are identified. Mutations that will
clash with existing residues are identified. (c) Mutations
to UniprotKB annotated residues: mutations at the site of
residues annotated by UniprotKB as functionally relevant.
(d) Mutations to binding residues: PDB structures are
analysed to identify residues binding to proteins, DNA or
small molecules. These data are augmented by data from
MMDBBIND. (e) Mutations disrupting the quaternary
structure (f) Mutations to sequence conserved residues.
In addition, we provide results for the summary analyses
categories of structurally explained (where at least one
structural explanation is true, i.e., any explanation apart
from the sequence conservation) and explained (where at
least one explanation is true). In order to compare the
mutations with respect to their structural effects, a binary
explanatory vector is calculated for each mutation and a
two-sided Fisher exact test was carried out.
Generation of a consensus model summarizing Protein
Kinase structures

A consensus model (Fig.1) of the basic structure of the
kinase domain was created. This consensus model
represents the average structure of a large number of
kinases widespread along the human kinome, and therefore it is useful to summarize global characteristics of
the structures. To build the model we first selected
MAP3K1 as a standard representative sequence of the
family from a manually curated multiple sequence

Calculation of important regions
Calculation of accessibility

NACCESS (Hubbard, unpublished) is a stand-alone program that calculates accessible areas by rolling a probe
with van der Waals radius over the surface of the molecule. A residue is defined as buried if 16% or less of the
residue’s surface is exposed to the probe. This is a common threshold [38] that ensures a reasonable number of
buried residues.
Definition of catalytic sites

The FireDB database [16] contains a comprehensive
curated set of substrate binding and catalytic residues,
extracted directly from the PDB [39] or from the Catalytic Site Atlas [40]. FireDB binding residues for the various kinases were mapped into the general model using
the corresponding multiple structure alignments.
Prediction of Tree Determinant positions

S3det [17] is an algorithm for the detection of groups of
proteins within a family with potential functional specificities and to identify the residues that are characteristic
of that group. S3det is based on the simultaneous quantitative analysis of sequences and residues within a multiple sequence alignment on related multidimensional
spaces. Those residues associated with specific sequence
subfamilies tend to be determinants of functional specificity and are located in functional regions of protein
families, including substrate binding sites, functional
sites and protein interaction sites.
Xd analysis

To assess the significance of the proximity of different
sets of mutations to areas of the protein (buried, functional, conserved, etc) we used the harmonic deviation,
Xd, measure introduced previously [41].
i =n

Xd =

∑
i =1

Pic − Pia
di ⋅ n

(1)

Where n is the number of distance bins in the distributions, di is the upper limit for each bin, Pic is the percentage of residues with distance between di and d i-1
and Pia is the same percentage for all residues in the
protein. Defined this way, positive values of Xd indicate

Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

that the population of residues is shifted to smaller distances with respect to the population of all residues. In
practice we used a difference of Xd values of 0.75 to
indicate distributions of residues that are significantly
different regarding their proximity to previously defined
areas of the protein. This threshold – albeit arbitrary –
is based on manual inspection of previous results and
has been proved valid in a similar context [14].

Additional material

Page 9 of 10

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

Additional File 1:

Acknowledgements
The authors want to thank D. Juan, A. Rausell, E. Leon, A. Carro, G. Lopez, O.
Redfern and M. L. Tress for their help, interesting discussion and ideas. This
work was supported by Grant BIO2007-66855 from the Spanish Ministerio de
Ciencia e Innovacion. This work was supported by Grant BIO2007-66855
from the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovacion, by grant COMBIOMED
(RD07/0067/0014) from the ISCIII and by the CONSOLIDER E-science grant
(CSD2007-00050).
This article has been published as part of BMC Bioinformatics Volume 12
Supplement 4, 2011: Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computational Biology (ECCB) 2010 Workshop: Annotation, interpretation
and management of mutation (AIMM). The full contents of the supplement
are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11?
issue=S4.
Author details
1
Structural Biology and Biocomputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), C/Melchor Fernandez Almagro 3, E28029 Madrid,
Spain. 2Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Division of Biosciences,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United
Kingdom.
Authors contributions
AV, CO and AM conceived the idea. All authors planned the analysis. JMGI,
LEMH and AB generated the datasets. JMGI and LEMH performed the
analysis. All authors discussed the results. JMGI, LEMH and AV wrote the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 5 July 2011
References
1. Collins FS, Brooks LD, Chakravarti A: A DNA polymorphism discovery
resource for research on human genetic variation. Genome Res 1998,
8(12):1229-31.
2. Taillon-Miller P, Gu Z, Li Q, Hillier L, Kwok PY: Overlapping genomic
sequences: a treasure trove of single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Genome
Res 1998, 8(7):748-54.
3. Sherry ST, Ward MH, Kholodov M, Baker J, Phan L, Smigielski EM, Sirotkin K:
dbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res 2001,
29:308-11.
4. Futreal PA, Coin L, Marshall M, Down T, Hubbard T, Wooster R, Rahman N,
Stratton MR: A census of human cancer genes. Nat Rev Cancer 2004,
4(3):177-83.
5. Garber K: The second wave in kinase cancer drugs. Nat Biotechnol 2006,
24(2):127-30.
6. Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S: The protein
kinase complement of the human genome. Science 2001,
298(5600):1912-1934.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

Knight JDR, Qian B, Baker D, Kothary R: Conservation, variability and the
modeling of active protein kinases. PLoS ONE 2007, 2(10):e982.
Ubersax JA, Woodbury EL, Quang PN, Paraz M, Blethrow JD, Shah K,
Shokat KM, Morgan DO: Targets of the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk1.
Nature 2003, 425(6960):859-64.
Ptacek J, Devgan G, Michaud G, Zhu H, Zhu X, Fasolo J, Guo H, Jona G,
Breitkreutz A, Sopko R, McCartney RR, Schmidt MC, Rachidi N, Lee SJ,
Mah AS, Meng L, Stark MJR, Stern DF, Virgilio CD, Tyers M, Andrews B,
Gerstein M, Schweitzer B, Predki PF, Snyder M: Global analysis of protein
phosphorylation in yeast. Nature 2005, 438(7068):679-84.
Krallinger M, Izarzugaza JMG, Rodriguez-Penagos C, Valencia A: Extraction
of human kinase mutations from literature, databases and genotyping
studies. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10(Suppl 8):S1.
Greenman C, Stephens P, Smith R, Dalgliesh GL, Hunter C, Bignell G,
Davies H, Teague J, Butler A, Stevens C, Edkins S, O’Meara S, Vastrik I,
Schmidt EE, Avis T, Barthorpe S, Bhamra G, Buck G, Choudhury B,
Clements J, Cole J, Dicks E, Forbes S, Gray K, Halliday K, Harrison R, Hills K,
Hinton J, Jenkinson A, Jones D, Menzies A, Mironenko T, Perry J, Raine K,
Richardson D, Shepherd R, Small A, Tofts C, Varian J, Webb T, West S,
Widaa S, Yates A, Cahill DP, Louis DN, Goldstraw P, Nicholson AG,
Brasseur F, Looijenga L, Weber BL, Chiew YE, DeFazio A, Greaves MF,
Green AR, Campbell P, Birney E, Easton DF, Chenevix-Trench G, Tan MH,
Khoo SK, Teh BT, Yuen ST, Leung SY, Wooster R, Futreal PA, Stratton MR:
Patterns of somatic mutation in human cancer genomes. Nature 2007,
446(7132):153-8.
Wood LD, Parsons DW, Jones S, Lin J, Sjöoblom T, Leary RJ, Shen D,
Boca SM, Barber TD, Ptak J, Silliman N, Szabo S, Dezso Z, Ustyanksky V,
Nikolskaya T, Nikolsky Y, Karchin R, Wilson PA, Kaminker JS, Zhang Z,
Croshaw R, Willis J, Dawson D, Shipitsin M, Willson JKV, Sukumar S, Polyak K,
Park BH, Pethiyagoda CL, Pant PVK, Ballinger DG, Sparks AB, Hartigan J,
Smith DR, Suh E, Papadopoulos N, Buckhaults P, Markowitz SD,
Parmigiani G, Kinzler KW, Velculescu VE, Vogelstein B: The genomic
landscapes of human breast and colorectal cancers. Science 2007,
318(5853):1108-13.
Baudot A, Real F, Izarzugaza J, Valencia A: From cancer genomes to cancer
models: bridging the gaps. EMBO Rep 2009, 10:359-366.
Izarzugaza J, Redfern O, Orengo C, Valencia A: Cancer-associated
mutations are preferentially distributed in protein kinase functional sites.
Proteins 2009, 77:892-903.
Hurst J, McMillan L, Porter C, Allen J, Fakorede A, Martin A: The SAAPdb
web resource: A large-scale structural analysis of mutant proteins. Hum
Mutat 2009, 30:616-624.
López G, Valencia A, Tress ML: FireDB–a database of functionally
important residues from proteins of known structure. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, 35(Database issue):D219-23.
Rausell A, Juan D, Pazos F, Valencia A: Protein interactions and ligand
binding: from protein subfamilies to functional specificity. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2010, 107(5):1995-2000.
Karkkainen MJ, Ferrell RE, Lawrence EC, Kimak MA, Levinson KL,
McTigue MA, Alitalo K, Finegold DN: Missense mutations interfere with
VEGFR-3 signalling in primary lymphoedema. Nat Genet 2000, 25(2):153-9.
Mao C, Zhou M, Uckun FM: Crystal structure of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase
domain suggests a novel pathway for activation and provides insights
into the molecular basis of X-linked agammaglobulinemia. J Biol Chem
2001, 276(44):41435-43.
Caceres M, Teran CG, Rodriguez S, Medina M: Prevalence of insulin
resistance and its association with metabolic syndrome criteria among
Bolivian children and adolescents with obesity. BMC Pediatr 2008, 8:31.
Leroy JG, Nuytinck L, Lambert J, Naeyaert JM, Mortier GR: Acanthosis
nigricans in a child with mild osteochondrodysplasia and K650Q
mutation in the FGFR3 gene. Am J Med Genet A 2007, 143A(24):3144-9.
Zankl A, Elakis G, Susman RD, Inglis G, Gardener G, Buckley MF, Roscioli T:
Prenatal and postnatal presentation of severe achondroplasia with
developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) due to the
FGFR3 Lys650Met mutation. Am J Med Genet A 2008, 146A(2):212-8.
Fonseca R, Costa-Lima MA, Cosentino V, Orioli IM: Second case of BeareStevenson syndrome with an FGFR2 Ser372Cys mutation. Am J Med
Genet A 2008, 146A(5):658-60.
Torkamani A, Schork NJ: Distribution analysis of nonsynonymous
polymorphisms within the human kinase gene family. Genomics 2007,
90:49-58.

Izarzugaza et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S4/S1

Page 10 of 10

25. Krishnan VG, Westhead DR: A comparative study of machine-learning
methods to predict the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms on
protein function. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(17):2199-209.
26. Vitkup D, Sander C, Church GM: The amino-acid mutational spectrum of
human genetic disease. Genome Biol 2003, 4(11):R72.
27. Wang Z, Moult J: SNPs, protein structure, and disease. Hum Mutat 2001,
17(4):263-70.
28. Ferrer-Costa C, Orozco M, de la Cruz X: Characterization of diseaseassociated single amino acid polymorphisms in terms of sequence and
structure properties. J Mol Biol 2002, 315(4):771-86.
29. Ferrer-Costa C, Orozco M, de la Cruz X: Sequence-based prediction of
pathological mutations. Proteins 2004, 57(4):811-9.
30. Yue P, Li Z, Moult J: Loss of protein structure stability as a major
causative factor in monogenic disease. J Mol Biol 2005, 353(2):459-73.
31. Forbes S, Clements J, Dawson E, Bamford S, Webb T, Dogan A, Flanagan A,
Teague J, Wooster R, Futreal PA, Stratton MR: COSMIC 2005. Br J Cancer
2006, 94(2):318-22.
32. Manning G, Plowman GD, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S: Evolution of protein
kinase signaling from yeast to man. Trends Biochem Sci 2002,
27(10):514-20.
33. Jain E, Bairoch A, Duvaud S, Phan I, Redaschi N, Suzek BE, Martin MJ,
McGarvey P, Gasteiger E: Infrastructure for the life sciences: design and
implementation of the UniProt website. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:136.
34. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-402.
35. Hamosh A, Scott AF, Amberger JS, Bocchini CA, McKusick VA: Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM), a knowledgebase of human
genes and genetic disorders. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(Database issue):
D514-7.
36. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced
time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
37. Fiser A, Sali A: Modeller: generation and refinement of homology-based
protein structure models. Meth Enzymol 2003, 374:461-91.
38. Ezkurdia I, Bartoli L, Fariselli P, Casadio R, Valencia A, Tress ML: Progress and
challenges in predicting protein-protein interaction sites. Brief
Bioinformatics 2009, 10(3):233-46.
39. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H,
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000,
28:235-42.
40. Porter CT, Bartlett GJ, Thornton JM: The Catalytic Site Atlas: a resource of
catalytic sites and residues identified in enzymes using structural data.
Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(Database issue):D129-33.
41. Pazos F, Helmer-Citterich M, Ausiello G, Valencia A: Correlated mutations
contain information about protein-protein interaction. J Mol Biol 1997,
271(4):511-23.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-S4-S1
Cite this article as: Izarzugaza et al.: Characterization of pathogenic
germline mutations in human Protein Kinases. BMC Bioinformatics 2011
12(Suppl 4):S1.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
