<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Mining the TRAF6/p62 interactome for a selective ubiquitination motif</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Proceedings 2011, 5:S4. doi:10.1186/1753-6561-5-S2-S4"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Trafina S Jadhav"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

PROCEEDINGS

Open Access

Mining the TRAF6/p62 interactome for a selective
ubiquitination motif
Trafina S Jadhav1, Marie W Wooten1,2, Michael C Wooten1*
From 6th International Symposium on Bioinformatics Research and Applications (ISBRA’10)
Storrs, CT, USA. 23-26 May 2010

Abstract
A new approach is described here to predict ubiquitinated substrates of the E3 ubiquitin ligase, TRAF6, which takes
into account its interaction with the scaffold protein SQSTM1/p62. A novel TRAF6 ubiquitination motif defined as
[–(hydrophobic)–k–(hydrophobic)–x–x–(hydrophobic)– (polar)–(hydrophobic)–(polar)–(hydrophobic)] was identified
and used to screen the TRAF6/p62 interactome composed of 155 proteins, that were either TRAF6 or p62
interactors, or a negative dataset, composed of 54 proteins with no known association to either TRAF6 or p62.
NRIF (K19), TrkA (K485), TrkB (K811), TrkC (K602 and K815), NTRK2 (K828), NTRK3 (K829) and MBP (K169) were found
to possess a perfect match for the amino acid consensus motif for TRAF6/p62 ubiquitination. Subsequent analyses
revealed that this motif was biased to the C-terminal regions of the protein (nearly 50% the sites), and had
preference for loops (~50%) and helices (~37%) over beta-strands (15% or less). In addition, the motif was observed
to be in regions that were highly solvent accessible (nearly 90%). Our findings suggest that specific Lysines may be
selected for ubiquitination based upon an embedded code defined by a specific amino acid motif with structural
determinants. Collectively, our results reveal an unappreciated role for the scaffold protein in targeting
ubiquitination. The findings described herein could be used to aid in identification of other E3/scaffold
ubiquitination sites.
Background
The process of signal transduction is dependent upon
specific protein-protein interactions, with a small number of proteins – called ‘hubs’ possessing the ability to
interact with many different partners to form multimeric
signaling complexes referred to as signalsomes. These
hubs mediate interactions by their modular protein
domains that confer specific binding activity to their
interacting partners. Protein p62 contains several structural motifs that allow it to function as a hub for protein-protein interactions. These motifs include an acidic
interaction domain (AID/ORCA/PC/PB1) that binds the
aPKC, a ZZ finger, a binding site for the RING finger
protein TRAF6, two PEST sequences, and the UBA
domain [1]. In this study, we focused on the mechanism
by which TRAF6, along with p62, targets specific
* Correspondence: wootemc@auburn.edu
1
Program in Cellular and Molecular Biosciences, Department of Biological
Sciences, 331 Funchess Hall, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Lysines for ubiquitination. The addition of ubiquitin, a
76 amino acid protein, occurs via a three step process
involving the concerted action of the E1 ubiquitin activating enzyme, E2 the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme
and E3 the ubiquitin ligase. Substrates are recognized by
different E3s or E2/E3 complexes. The incorporation of
a scaffold into the model, such as p62, would serve as a
crucial bridge between enzyme (E3 ligase, TRAF6) and
its substrate(s) and provide specificity for enzyme-substrate reactions [2]. Thus substrate recognition, site
selection and ultimately the ubiquitination reaction
result from the activation of the E3 once docked on the
scaffold. In support of this model, inhibition of TRAF6/
p62 interaction blocks the activity of TRAF6 along with
diminished K63-ubiquitination of its target substrate [3].
Two TRAF6/p62 substrates, tyrosine receptor kinase
A (TrkA) [3] and neurotrophin receptor interacting factor (NRIF) [4] (Figure 1A) were identified by us. Mutagenesis studies verified that both of these proteins are
K63- polyubiquitinated at specific Lysine residues, K485

© 2011 Jadhav et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

Page 2 of 15

Figure 1 Model illustrating the interaction between the ligase and scaffold in directing substrate ubiquitination. A: Schematic
representation of the means by which the E3 ligase, TRAF6, interacts with the scaffold, p62, and selects a specific Lysine for ubiquitination. B:
The sequence of the consensus motif identified in TRAF6/p62 substrates.

in TrkA and K19 in NRIF. The RING finger domain of
TRAF6 ligase is known to be responsible for its catalytic
E3 ligase activity [5] and also is responsible for binding
of the substrate [6], which then mediates polyubiquitination of target proteins. The modular scaffold protein p62
provides the platform for the transfer reaction to occur
[3]. Other studies have demonstrated TRAF6-mediated
polyubiquitination including TRAF6 auto-ubiquitination,
NEMO [5], TAB2 and TAB3 [7]. These reactions, however, have not been shown to require p62 to mediate
the modification. Moreover, like TRAF6, there are many
reported E3 Ub ligases whose potential pool of biological targets is unknown.
There are approximately one thousand reported E3
ubiquitin ligases in eukaryotes. The preferred substrates
for most of these ligases remain largely unknown. Moreover, it remains unclear how among the many Lysines
(K) found in an ubiquitinated protein only a few are
selected for post-translational modification. Like all signal transduction processes, ubiquitination is a result of
specific protein-protein interactions and biochemical
reactions occurring at the sub-cellular locales, mediated
by modular protein domains. Furthermore, E3 ligases
and scaffold proteins interact with numerous binding
partners through their multi-domain structures.

SQSTM1/p62 is one such scaffold that is known to be a
crucial for bridging the E3 ligase, TRAF6 and its substrates while at the same time providing specificity for
the enzyme-substrate reactions. We propose that the
scaffold plays an integral component in activation of the
E3 and may target the specificity of the ubiquitination
reaction [3,4]. Therefore, the scaffold TAB 2 and TAB3
which also interact with TRAF6 [7] would mediate ubiquitination of a different set of substrates, compared to
the interaction of TRAF6 with the scaffold p62. These
interactions would provide the needed specificity for formation of a signalsome in response to different receptors and external stimuli.
There are approximately 617 genes encoding putative
ubiquitin (Ub) E3s compared to the 518 genes reported
for protein kinases [8]. Preferred substrates for most of
these enzymes remain unknown. The biological importance of E3s requires understanding the site selection
process involved in substrate recognition during the ubiquitination reaction. Eukaryotic cells express a single
ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1) that activates free ubiquitin for subsequent transfer to one of approximately
50 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2) [9]. Ubiquitin E3
ligases recruit both substrate and activated ubiquitin to
mediate the transfer of the ubiquitin molecule to the

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

targeted protein either directly or with the help of E2
enzymes [10]. The substrate specificity of the ubiquitination process occurs at the level of the E3 ubiquitin
ligases. A large numbers of cellular proteins are known
to be ubiquitinated and correspondingly, there are large
numbers of E3 ligases with a diverse range of substrates.
With fewer than 1% of the cellular proteins being ubiquitinated at a given time on a select number of Lysine
residues, our understanding of the ubiquitination process is still in its infancy. A number of in vivo and in
vitro methods have been employed to identify ubiquitinated substrates and their sites, including proteomescale analyses of the substrates [11-13]. All these methods are time-consuming, labor-intensive, and expensive.
In addition, they are focused on characterizing the ‘ubiquitinated proteome’ rather than studying single enzyme
substrates. In contrast, computational approaches represent promising alternative methods for identification of
ubiquitination sites would be of great value to the field.
Until recently, no consensus amino acid motif had been
reported for a single ubiquitin ligase. The reported biological specificity seems to be associated with substrate
selection. This observation prompted us to hypothesize
that there exists an embedded code specified by a string
of amino acids that is read by E3 ligase in the target
substrate. Employing this hypothesis, we developed a
method to predict putative TRAF6/p62 ubiquitination
sites. To facilitate identification of the putative consensus motif(s) within a substrate protein, a brute-force
search algorithm was designed and implemented to
search for the site.
As the starting point, we examined protein sequences of
two known TRAF6/p62 substrates, TrkA and NRIF. This
initial analysis concentrated on target ubiquitination sites
selected to optimize our search for any potential consensus motif. Examination of flanking residues surrounding
the target Lysine revealed the presence of a likely consensus motif, which was then used to screen additional protein sequences derived from the Trk receptor family.
Ubiquitination sites in TrkB and TrkC proteins were first
identified in silico[14] and then confirmed through sitedirected mutagenesis and functional testing. The final analysis identified a 10-amino acid long sequence of [-hydrophobic – k – hydrophobic – x – x – hydrophobic - polar1
– hydrophobic - polar2 – hydrophobic -]. The hydrophobic amino acids included Alanine, Leucine, Valine,
Methionine, Glycine, Phenylalanine, or Isoleucine. The
polar1 amino acids included Glutamine, Tyrosine,
Cysteine, or Serine and polar2 included Histidine, Aspartic
Acid, or Threonine (Figure 1B).

Methods
The overall goal of this study was to test the hypothesis
that TRAF6 and p62- interacting proteins are putative

Page 3 of 15

E3 ubiquitin ligase substrates sharing a common target
ubiquitination motif. Because our putative motif was
pattern based and did not exhibit a fixed amino-acid
sequence, we organized our project in a step-wise fashion. First we asked if the putative motif was broadly present within TRAF6 and p62-interacting proteins. This
search included questions regarding the form and complexity of extant motifs, as well as, what subset of amino
acids served as the core components. Next we attempted
to evaluate the uniqueness of the motif forms identified.
This was accomplished by both screening for the occurrence of the motif pattern among unrelated proteins
and by estimating the probability of observing such
motifs within a randomly generated amino acid
sequence. In the final step, we further characterized our
target motifs relative to specific characteristics known to
be associated with protein function.
Database preparation

To permit testing of our motif pattern, a database containing 209 proteins was organized. Amino acid
sequences were obtained from the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) protein repository.
The proteins sequences were from a mixture of mammalian sources with human-derived proteins preferentially used when available. A full listing of proteins is
provided in Jadhav [15]. Proteins within the full database
were subdivided into two groups, an experimental dataset containing known or likely TRAF6 / p62 interactors
(n = 155) and a negative dataset containing randomly
selected proteins with no known association (n = 54).
The experimental dataset was further divided into five
groups depending on the protein’s likelihood of being a
TRAF6/p62 substrate. The subsets ranged from known
ubiquitinated substrates with mapped sites to either
TRAF6 or p62 interacting proteins. All known TRAF6/
p62 substrates with verified ubiquitination (Ub) sites
were placed in group I. Group II contained known and
tested substrates of the TRAF6 E3 ligase whose target
Lysine Ub site(s) were not mapped nor identified and
their interaction status with p62 was unknown. TRAF6or p62- interactors identified from various protein-protein interaction databases [HPRD [16], and BioGRID
[17] and EntrezGene [18] formed Groups III and IV,
respectively. Finally, Group V was comprised of proteins
from the insoluble Formic acid (FA) fraction of the
brain from p62 knockout mice. These proteins were
included because the trafficking and turnover of these
proteins are p62 dependent, and therefore, these proteins may also be either TRAF6 or p62 substrates. The
negative dataset contained 54 proteins with no known
evidence of interaction with either TRAF6 or p62 proteins. This dataset was used both for control comparisons and as a test group for the search algorithm.

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

Motif search protocol

Amino acid sequences of the 209 database proteins were
searched for matches to all possible combinations of the
putative motif using a brute-force approach. An exhaustive search approach was chosen over existing algorithms for two reasons: most existing motif programs
are either limited to searching for individual motif
sequences which is inconsistent with our variable pattern or programs that do include variation (e.g. SLiMSearch) are designed to only report perfect matches.
Because we were interested in evaluating the entire distribution of matches, particularly those found to be
near-perfect (7, 8 or 9 positions), we felt that a brute
force approach which identified all potential matches
would be most informative. To conduct this search, a
file containing all unique combinations of seven variable
positions in the 10 amino acid long target motif (hydrophobic – k – hydrophobic – x – x – hydrophobic –
polar1 – hydrophobic – polar2 – hydrophobic) was generated (Figure 1B). Ideally our search would have
included all possible combinations of amino acids
hypothesized to occur in each of the 10 motif positions.
Such an approach would, however, have required examining over 80 million character strings at each lysine
residue; certainly possible but not practical. As a compromise, we chose to search using only the seven well
defined positions and to conduct an a posterior analysis
of the two positions (x) that could contain any amino
acid. The results from this analysis yielded no consistent
amino acid pattern for these two sites (data not shown),
suggesting that our decision was appropriate. Excluding
the two x positions and the fixed Lysine, a total of
201,684 unique seven position motifs were possible.
Two computer-based search algorithms were employed
to facilitate screening for the presence of motifs. The
first program, MotifMaker, was a simple looping program that generated and stored all 201,684 potential
motifs combinations. The second program, MotifFinder,
implemented a brute-force search algorithm for all possible motif constructs. The analysis started by identifying
and counting each K(Lysine) within the target peptide.
Any Kwithin 8 residues from the carboxyl end was
excluded because it would be impossible for it to be a
full motif. The motif search then proceeded by temporarily storing the K-1, K+1, K+4…K+8amino acids for
each Kas a character string and comparing this string to
each of the 201,684 potential motif patterns. A step-up
procedure was used to determine the best fit among the
potential motifs. For each K, a counter would be initially
set at “zero” matches. The counter would be progressively updated as positive matches between the target
string and potential motifs were encountered. The
matching motif would then be stored in the computer
memory. By searching all possible motif combinations,

Page 4 of 15

this approach ensured that the maximum ‘best match’
motif was identified. In motifs that matched at all 7
variable positions, a perfect match was identified. In
motifs with less than perfect matches (6, 5, 4,…1), the
algorithm ensured that no motif with a greater number
of matching locations could be found. The procedure
was repeated at each Kwithin the target peptide until all
positions had been searched. Information on protein ID,
the location of each K, the “best match” motif pattern
for the amino acids surrounding each K, the corresponding motif pattern and the total count of positive
hits was stored as output for each protein. Both programs were developed and executed using MATLAB®
V6.5 (MathWorks Inc., Natick MA) and are freely available from the corresponding author (MCW).
To verify the accuracy of our search results both the
experimental and negative datasets were submitted to
SLiMSearch [http://www.southampton.ac.uk/~re1u06/
software/slimsearch/index.html]. This program searches
pre-defined SLiMs (Short Linear Motifs) in a protein
sequence database and allows individual residues to vary
as defined by the user. We utilized this program to
search for perfect (10 amino acid) matches which we
then compared to the results provided by our MotifFinder algorithm.
Statistical analysis

Results from the MotifFinder search of the 209 study
proteins were compiled as frequency distributions representing the number of positive motif “hits” ranked from
0 (no matches) to 7 (perfect match). Standard descriptive statistics (mean, mode, variance, skewness and kurtosis) were generated for each distribution. Of particular
interest were the estimates of kurtosis and skewness
[19] which were derived for each full empirical distribution and for distribution subsets (5, 6, 7 hits). Statistical
comparisons between the experimental and negative
datasets were made using Chi-squared analyses (with
Yates’ correction and one degree of freedom) or t-tests
[20]. Statistical calculations were generated using SAS
9.1 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary NC), Minitab 16 (Minitab
Inc., State College, PA) or by hand.
A randomization approach was used to further evaluate the uniqueness of the consensus motif and to provide a basis for initial estimates for the probability of
pattern occurrence. This procedure involved the creation and searching of 999 amino acid sequences which
were randomly generated using a parameter space
designed to reflect the information content found in the
original experimental dataset. The procedure was
initiated by identifying the frequency of occurrence for
each amino acid contained in the 155 proteins of the
experimental set. This empirical distribution was used
as the source for random draws of amino acids (with

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

replacement) that were used to construct 999 sequences.
Each of these sequences was 565 amino acids in length
which corresponded to the median size of actual proteins in the experimental dataset. The entire randomized
dataset was searched for motif matches using MotifFinder and the results compiled / analyzed as described
above.
Sequence logos

To aid in visual evaluation of putative motifs, sequence
logos [WebLogo; 21, 22] were created for the sets of 7
(perfect fit) and 6 (near fit) amino acid motifs identified.
This program generates a display of the amino acid distribution surrounding the core motif Lysine. The height
of each letter in a stack is proportional to its frequency
at that position in the motif set. Letters were further
sorted with the most frequent amino acid on top.
Secondary structure prediction

PSIPRED [23,24] was used to predict secondary structures. PSIPRED uses neural networking and searches for
homologous proteins with known structures to determine the most likely structure at each residue position.
Predictions of disorder regions at predicted ubiquitinated sites were made using the Metaserver of Disorder
(MeDor) [25]. MeDor collects disorder and secondary
structure predictions from servers available on the web
and generates a graphical output. The web-based database SMART [26] was used to predict signaling domains
within the protein sequences identified as containing
strong motif patterns. The SABLE server was used to
predict from sequence secondary structures and solvent
accessibilities, with the goal of identifying potential characteristics of predicted Ub sites in terms of structural
profiles [27].

Results
Results from motif search and statistical analyses of hit
distributions

The 155 proteins in the experimental dataset ranged in
length from 103 to 4,572 amino acids with a median
length of 565 amino acids (mean = 755.9 ± 609.5). A
total of 7,592 Lysine residues (range = 1 – 260 per
sequence) were found within the 155 sequences. This
produced a median count of 33 Lysines per protein with
one Lysine residues occurring on average every 19.7
residues (median = 17). The 54 protein negative dataset
contained fewer total Lysines (2,220) but median values
were similar between the two datasets. The negative
dataset proteins ranged from 147 to 2,115 amino acids
in length (median = 584; mean = 738.0 ± 496.7). Lysines
ranged from 4 to 151 per protein with a median count
of 29 and an average of one Lysine per 18.7 residues. Of
the 7,592 total Lysines in the experimental dataset,

Page 5 of 15

7,494 (98.7%) were located at positions within the
sequence that could allow for a full 10 amino acid
motif. In the negative dataset, 2,209 of 2,220 total
Lysines (99.5%) were similarly available.
As expected given the large number of motif combinations analyzed (201,684 variants), results from the motif
searches yielded a wide distribution of matches in the
regions surrounding individual Lysines (Figure 2). The
number of positive matches ranged from 1 to 7 in the
experimental proteins and 1 to 6 in the negative dataset.
A score of 7 “hits” represented a perfect match in that
an appropriate amino acid was found at each of the
variable residue locations surrounding the core Lysine.
The 7 position matches found using MotifFinder were
identical to those produced using SLiMSearch, thus verifying the accuracy of our programming. Both visual
inspection and statistical analysis indicated, not surprisingly, a strong similarity between the overall distributions of motif matches for the experimental and
negative datasets (Figure 2A). Based on KolmogorovSmirnov statistics the best-fitting model for both distributions, as well as the randomized dataset, was the discrete uniform distribution. Figure 3 illustrates the fit of
each distribution to its predicted values. The overall
similarity among the dataset match distributions was
driven by the domination of low accuracy hit (1, 2, 3 or
4) frequencies in both distributions (Figure 2B: 96.5% of
experimental dataset matches; 96.6% of negative). This
condition was reflected in skewness and kurtosis estimates for each distribution. Both datasets were positively skewed (estimate = 0.31 for both). Consistent with
their fit to a discrete uniform model, both distributions
were platykurtotic (-1.96 for experimental; -1.81 for
negative). Chi-squared goodness-of-fit tests were used to
examine how well the observed data from the negative
and experimental datasets agreed. Using multiple analyses we investigated whether the distribution of positive
hits in the negative dataset conformed to the positive
hits in the experimental dataset. These analyses included
comparisons of the full sets of positive matches (1-7)
and smaller subsets (4, 5, 6, 7 or 5, 6, 7). Because some
expected cell counts were below 5, probabilities were
estimated using resampling techniques. No comparisons
yielded Chi-squared estimates considered to be indicative of departure from expectations (P >0.3 for all tests).
Because low accuracy hits dominated all statistical
comparisons and potentially masked meaningful differences, we next evaluated a subset of the distributions
corresponding to match values > 4 (Figure 2B and
insert). Our assumption was that matches to the putative motif at 10, 9 or 8 positions might be biologically
meaningful while those below these values were likely
spurious. Proportions of 5 match hits were consistent
between the two datasets (experimental = 86.0; negative

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

Page 6 of 15

Figure 2 Motif match search results. A: Percentage distributions for positive matches at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the variable sites within the
10 amino acid long putative motif. The number of proteins in each dataset was: Experimental = 155, Negative = 54, Randomized = 999.
(insert). Percentages for a subset of positive hits (5, 6, 7) hypothesized to be biological meaningful. B: Actual counts of the number of matches
observed in each dataset for each level of positive match.

= 88.6), however, closer examination of the 6 and 7 hit
regions of the distributions revealed a strong dichotomy.
Perfect matches to all 7 variable residues of the putative
motif (Figure 2B) were only found among the experimental proteins. One protein, TrkC, contained two perfect match sequences. No perfect matches were
identified within the negative dataset. Twenty-six
matches at 6 variable sites were reported from the
experimental dataset and 8 from the negative. Because
differences between the dataset results were primarily at
the 6 (near perfect) and 7 (perfect) matches and little
consistency could be identified in the sequence patterns

among the level 5 motif matches, all further analyses
concentrated on 6 or 7 match results only.
While informative, direct comparisons between the
experimental and negative data sets did suffer from limitations. There existed an obvious bias within the experimental dataset because it was purposely assembled with
proteins known or suspected to contain some form of
our putative motif. This is not an unusual situation as
many motif discovery studies use as input, sets of
sequences hypothesized to contain a biologically important sequence pattern. These sequences are then
searched for patterns that are unlikely to occur by

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

Page 7 of 15

Figure 3 Probability – Probability (P/P) plots illustrating the relationships between values predicted under Discrete Uniform
Distribution models and empirical motif match results. A: P/P plot for the experimental dataset match distribution. B: P/P plot for the
negative dataset match distribution. C: P/P plot for the randomized dataset match distribution

chance. We attempted to estimate the probability of
encountering perfect or near perfect matches within our
datasets by chance using a randomized data approach.
For this the frequency of amino acids found in the

experimental dataset was used to randomly generate 999
test “proteins”. These 999 artificial proteins were then
screened using the MotifFinder program. Despite its
substantially larger size, all summary statistics for the

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

randomized data were consistent with both the experimental and negative results. As examples, skewness
(0.31) and kurtosis (-1.8) were effectively identical to the
empirical datasets. In addition, the overall match frequencies again exhibited a strong fit to a discrete uniform distribution model (Figure 3C) and the proportion
of low accuracy matches (1-4) was consistent (96.5%).
Overall, our randomization approach appeared to have
effectively modeled the data signal exhibited by the
experimental dataset proteins (Figure 2). A total of
34,567 Lysine residues were found in the randomized
dataset of which 34,955 were potential motif sites (away
from edges). Within the potential sites, 32,795 positive
hits (1-7) were recorded. Interestingly, despite the large
number of potential sites only one exact match was
found to occur by chance within the 999 “proteins” (Figure 2B). An additional 126 high probability sites (6
amino acid matches) were also identified.
Using the rate of occurrence of perfect matches (7
variable amino acids) in the randomized dataset as a
crude estimator, we made a first approximation of the
probability of encountering 8 motifs within 155 proteins.
Based an initial expectation of 1 match per 999 proteins,
the joint probability of finding 8 perfect motifs at random within 155 proteins was estimated to be extremely
small at ~ 4.0 x 10-7 . A similar pattern was found for
the near-perfect matches (6 variable amino acids) in the
experimental dataset where 26 matches were observed
compared to 19.8 predicted. As mentioned, it is obvious
that bias did exist within the experimental dataset relate
to protein selection, however even if the probability estimates are inflated by 1 or more orders of magnitude the
net conclusion remains; the total numbers of perfect
and near-perfect motif matches observed were well
beyond random expectations.
Collectively, the results provided by comparisons of
the experimental, negative and randomized datasets provided evidence in support of our hypothesis that a
Lysine-centered ubiquitination motif might exist among
TRAF6 / p62 interactors. The overall similarity between
the negative and experimental match distributions
argues that the selection of potential interacting proteins
for the experimental group did not unduly bias the
overall distribution pattern. Conversely, the presence of
probabilistically unlikely large numbers of perfect and
near perfect motif matches within the related experimental group proteins suggested that the motif is by
itself or in association with an amino acid sequence of
conserved biological importance.
Analysis of putative ubiquitination site selection

Next, we sought to identify amino acids that might play
a critical role in ubiquitination site selection and investigated whether there were preferences for certain amino

Page 8 of 15

acids near the target ubiquitinated Lysines. This analysis
focused on the well-defined proteins from Group I of
the experimental dataset. Notably, when we examined
the surrounding residues of the validated ubiquitinated
Lysine with amino acids conserved at 7 variable positions in our hypothesized motif (perfect hit), we
observed an enrichment of small residues (G/A) on the
either side of the target site and high frequency of
Valine at position 4, Leucine at position 6, and Aspartic
Acid at position 7 (Figure 4A). A closer look at all proteins from the experimental dataset (Groups I through
V) with amino acids conserved at 6 positions revealed a
similar distribution of amino acids, (Figure 4B). When
the distribution of positive matches at 6 positions in the
negative dataset was evaluated, the pattern of specific
amino acids surrounding the core Lysine residue was
less consistent (Figure 4C). However, in all datasets, the
target Lysine residue was predominantly surrounded by
hydrophobic residues (Glycine / Alanine / Valine / Leucine / Isoleucine).
Secondary structure prediction

Because post-translational modifications tend to be concentrated within specific structural regions of a protein,
we further investigated structural constraints of the predicted Lysines. Only predicted Lysines from highly positive (conserved at 6 or 7 variable sites) motif sites were
included in this analysis. These Lysines were classified
as a high probability group. There was a total of 30 proteins in this category, 25 from the experimental dataset
and 5 from the negative dataset. Eight of those 30 proteins had more than one predicted TRAF6/p62 ubiquitination site, such as one 7 match plus one 6 match
motif. NRIF (K19), TrkA (K485), TrkB (K811), TrkC
(K602 and K815), NTRK2 (K828), NTRK3 (K829) and
MBP (K169) were found to possess a perfect match for
the amino acid consensus motif for TRAF6/p62 ubiquitination (Table 1). Interestingly of the many Lysines in
each of these proteins, only a select Lysine was predicted and/or verified to be ubiquitinated [3,4]. GO
ontology analysis of these high probability proteins with
perfect match reveled that they were involved mainly in
membrane bound signaling events (Table 2).
We further sought to incorporate sequence information as well as information from sequence derived structural features of these proteins into the validation
process. To do so, four potential structural features of
the predicted high probability sites were evaluated: secondary structure, relative distribution within the protein,
solvent accessibility, and the intrinsic disorder within
the protein domain. Structural analysis was conducted
using secondary structure, protein domain, and disorder
prediction algorithms [25]. Our results indicated that
approximately one-half of the ubiquitination sites were

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

Page 9 of 15

Figure 4 Sequence logos illustrating the occurrence of amino acids at each site within the putative motif. A: Frequency distribution of
amino acids surrounding Lysines (K) with positive hits at seven variable positions in a ten amino acid long consensus motif in the experimental
dataset. B: The distribution at six variable positions in a ten amino acid long consensus motif in the experimental dataset. C: The distribution at
six variable positions in a ten amino acid long consensus motif in the negative dataset. K (red); AFGILMV (blue); CQSY (green); DHT (orange).

predicted to be in loops (Figure 5A) and disordered
regions (Figure 5B). Beta-sheets had the least representation of predicted ubiquitination sites (with 15% sites
in experimental and none from negative datasets). The

predicted ubiquitinated site was found at a significantly
greater rate in the loop regions than in the beta sheets
of the protein structure (P = 0.0001). The second most
common secondary structure was an alpha-helix (Figure

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

Page 10 of 15

Table 1 Lysines identified as TRAF6 ubiquitination sites and their structural characteristics.
Protein Name
TrkA

Target Lysine

Secondary Structure

Solvent Accessibility

Disorder Region

Domains Predicted

485

Loop

Exposed

470 - 490

None

TrkB

811

Loop

Exposed

810 – 820

None

TrkC*

602

B strand

Buried

0

Kinase_Tyr

815

Loop

Exposed

813 – 817

None

NTRK2

828

Loop

Exposed

827 – 834

None

NTRK3

829

Loop

Exposed

827 – 833

None

NRIF

19

Loop

Exposed

13 - 40

KRAB

MBP

169

Loop

Exposed

162 – 171

Myelin_MBP

* TrkC contained 2 perfect match motif sites

5A). Alpha helices and loops are usually found on the
surface of proteins and are tend to easily accessible for
post-translational modifications. The predicted sites
showed significantly high occurrence of sites in helices
and loops as compared to beta sheets (P = 0.0001). This
was in agreement with previously reported findings on
preferred in vivo ubiquitination sites in yeast proteins
[28]. As an example where surface accessibility has been
shown to define a ubiquitination site, position of Lysine
507 of Smad4 is ubiquitinated in the fully solvent-accessible L3 loop with its side chain protruding from the L3
loop surface to the neighboring space [29].
C-terminal Lysines

The highest possible resolution for investigating structure–function relationships is that of individual residues
and their corresponding microenvironments [30]. To
provide information on this aspect of hypothetical highprobability sites, the distribution of predicted Lysines
residues with regards to their relative position within
the protein sequence was evaluated (Figure 5C). Nearly

half (48%) of the core motif Lysines were located near
the C-termini of the proteins in the experimental dataset as compared to only 28% in the negative dataset.
The remaining predicted sites were evenly distributed
(25.8%) at the C-terminus or middle region of the proteins in the experimental dataset. On the contrary,
within the negative dataset most (42%) target Lysines
were located in the middle region of the protein (Figure
5C). This could be either because of false positive prediction of the sites or due to true positive (valid) sites
that are buried inside the protein and become exposed
when these proteins undergo conformational changes
induced by other post-translational modifications or
protein-protein interactions. This finding was consistent
with studies of the TRAF6 substrate, IRF7 that is ubiquitinated at multiple sites both in vitro and in vivo
with the three C-terminal Lysines (positions 444, 446,
and 452) essential for activation of IRF7 [31,32]. Similar
studies on SUMOylation sites of LEDGF/p75 have
shown that K75, K250, and K254 mapped on the Nterminal region located in evolutionarily conserved

Table 2 GO ontology analysis of sites in proteins with perfect match to the hypothesized motif for TRAF6/p62
ubiquitination.
Protein
name

GO: processes

GO: Term
for function

GO: function

GO: compotent

TrKA

small GTPase mediated signal transduction, transmembrane receptor protein
tyrosine kinase signaling pathway, nervous system development

GO:0005515

protein binding

Plasma membrane,
cytosol, endosome

TrkB

transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase signaling pathway, regulation GO:0005515
of dendrite development

protein binding

Plasma membrane,
cytosol, endosome

TrkC

transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase signaling pathway, nervous
system development

GO:0005515

protein binding

Plasma membrane,
cytosol, endosome

NTRK2

nervous system development, transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase GO:0043121,
signaling pathway, activation of adenylate cyclase activity
GO:0005515

NTRK3

nervous system

GO:0043121,

neurotrophin
binding protein
binding
neurotrophin
binding

Integral to plasma
membrane,
cytoplasm
Integral to plasma

development, transmembrane receptor protein tyrosine kinase signaling
pathway, activation of adenylate cyclase activity

GO:0005515

protein binding

membrane,
cytoplasm

regulation of transcription
synaptic transmission, central nervous system development, central nervous
system development

GO:0005520
GO:0019911

protein binding
structural
constituent of
myelin sheath

Nucleus
Plasma membrane

NRIF
MBP

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

Page 11 of 15

Figure 5 Structural context of predicted TRAF6/p62 ubiquitination sites within 30 proteins containing perfect motif matches. A:
Distribution of perfect match motif sites based on secondary structure for the experimental and negative datasets. B: Percentage distribution of
predicted sites in disordered protein regions and domain structures. C: Relative proportions of perfect match sites found in three protein
regions, N-terminus, Middle and C-terminus. D: Identification of perfect match Lysines as likely occupying exposed or buried protein regions as
determined by solvent accessibility predictions.

charge-rich regions, while C-terminal K364 was identified as solvent exposed [33]. There were 98 Lysines in
the N-terminal regions of the proteins in the experimental dataset that were not recognized by the program as
they lacked the required 8 amino acids towards the Nterminal end to fit the 10 amino acid long motif. Out of
these 98 Lysines, there were five instances of di-Lysines
and four tri-Lysines with one occurrence of a polyLysine chain of 9 Lysines. The negative dataset on the
other hand had 11 N-terminal Lysines, with only one
occurrence of a di-Lysine. No specific amino acid distribution pattern was observed surrounding the N-terminal
Lysines. The downstream Lysines in the di-Lysine
sequences have been reported to be preferentially ubiquitinated [28].

predictor. To examine this possibility for the data, solvent
accessibility of the high probability core Lysines for modification was examined. Solvent accessibility of an individual residue is often classified as “buried” or “exposed”
using geometric analysis (geometric similarity in the
arrangement of the water molecules around proteins) [35]
or predictive methods. Prediction of solvent accessibilities
revealed 84% of the highly positive sites in the experimental dataset and 100% of the negative dataset were exposed
on the surface of the protein, which in a cellular environment, would be easily accessible to the active TRAF6/p62
complex (Figure 5D). It has been reported that surface
accessibility of post-translational modifications is important for protein-protein interactivity [34].
Compartment specific ubiquitination motif

Surface accessibility

Recent studies of all post-translationally modified proteins
documented in Swiss-Prot have shown that most reversible modifications are found on protein surfaces [34]. Ubiquitinated Lysines are surface exposed but this
information is hidden in the primary sequence of the protein which can be detected by a surface accessibility

To study the subcellular distribution of the predicted
TRAF6/p62 substrates, compartmentalization of the proteins in both the datasets was examined (Table 2, Figure
6). Proteins were assigned to cellular compartments
based on the literature, curated information in protein
databases and GO ontology for protein subcellular localization [36].

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

Localization data of the high probability substrates
revealed that relatively few cytosolic proteins were predicted to be TRAF6/p62 substrates. However, when the
nuclear proteins in the experimental dataset were examined, the proportion predicted to function as TRAF6/
p62 substrates (29%) was slightly higher than the total
percentage of nuclear proteins (25%) found in the dataset (Figure 6). A substantial increase in prediction percentages was, however, observed for proteins that were
integral to membranes in both the experimental and
negative datasets. This finding suggests that either our
motif was biased in favor of a pattern that occurs more
commonly within membrane bound proteins, or potential that a meaningful cellular association was elucidated.
Since the consensus motif was based on plasma membrane bound TrkA and nuclear protein NRIF [3,4], we
hypothesize that a combination of both conclusions may
be correct. Further refinement of the motif as more substrates are experimentally verified from various subcellular localizations will be needed to clarify this
observation.
Sequence conservation

We sought to further validate the biological relevance of
our hypothetical ubiquitination motif by examining it in
an evolutionary context. For this analysis a high-confidence set of TRAF6/P62 substrates, those with perfect
matches to our putative motif, were selected for

Page 12 of 15

alignment. These proteins were TrkA, TrkB, TrkC,
NRIF, NTRK2, NTRK3 and MBP (Table 1). To check
for potential evidence of evolutionary pressure to conserve the site-specific ubiquitinated Lysines, conservation of our predicted sites in these eight proteins was
examined across multiple species [15]. Our results indicated that a predicted ubiquitination sites were conserved from among six mammalian species (data not
shown). This unusually high conservation suggests that
the ubiquitination of these sites may potentially be conserved across a wide spectrum of life forms, although
this remains untested. A high degree of conservation
among proteins that are ubiquitinated also suggests that
they may have arisen early in the course of evolution.
However, a significant number of ubiquitination sites
differ in the ubiquitome and the extent of homology is
not uniform because of the high diversity among the
proteins. Nevertheless, evidence of conservation does
suggest that ubiquitination is in each case indispensable
for protein function, which is in turn essential for regulating cellular function. These highly conserved essential
ubiquitination events may reflect how early forms of life
used protein ubiquitination in specific housekeeping cellular functions. Interestingly, our results indicated that
although the surrounding sequence regions may diverge,
the critical residues remain conserved. Similar whole
genome-scale studies have shown that 2,683 potential
SUMO substrates are conserved between human and

Figure 6 Sub-cellular localization of TRAF6/p62 substrates. Comparisons presented for each database showing the total proportion of
proteins in each category versus the proportion predicted among the perfect and near perfect motif match proteins.

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

mouse based on pattern recognition and phylogenetic
conservation [37]. In another study, linear pattern recognition in combination with phylogenetic conservation
was first used to discover transcription factor binding
sites [38]. This report was similar to recent studies on
phosphorylation sites which demonstrated similar conservation within protein families [39], thus pointing at
generic regulatory mechanisms which may be conserved
across species. The presence of evolutionary conservation is mechanistically important because the short
lengths and rarity within a complex proteome make linear motifs difficult to find computationally [40].

Discussion
Most proteins in cells undergo post-translational modifications giving them structural and functional diversity
for diverse roles in biological processes. Experimental
identification and validation of posttranslational modifications (PTMs) is labor-intensive task and can be
expensive in the absence of prior knowledge concerning
PTMs. Analyzing the ‘ubiquitome’ is one of the most
exciting and challenging tasks in current proteomics
research. A lack of curated datasets of ubiquitinated
proteins presents the ultimate limiting factor in studying
substrate selection mechanism in ubiquitination making
it difficult to evaluate, and compare target sites. As
more and more ligases are identified there exists an
urgent need to rapidly and precisely identify enzymespecific substrates to decode their selectivity and specificity [8]. Computational prediction of PTM sites has provided researchers with information on the high
probability PTM sites for further experimental characterizations like PHOSIDA and NetPhos for phosphorylation [41,42], SUMOsp for SUMOylation [43] and
NetAcet for prediction of N-acetyltransferase A substrates [44].
In this study, a computational tool was developed to
predict Lysine ubiquitination sites from sequences using
MATLAB programs and online prediction software. As
more validated ubiquitinated sites from experimental
data become available, and appropriate changes are
made based on the available site data, further predictions can be made. The inclusion of structural information to improve the prediction tools could be another
way to enhance the prediction performance as ubiquitination is an enzymatic process, and the interactions
between target sites and enzymes concerned should be
structurally satisfied. The model that we propose herein
could be applied to other E3 Ub ligases that are known
to employ scaffold proteins to aid in their substrate
selection process. One such example is DYRK2–EDVP
E3 ligase complex where DYRK2 not only is it serves as
adaptor for assembly of the active Ub ligase complex,
but it also phosphorylates its substrate and primes the

Page 13 of 15

substrate for degradation [45]. Thus, use of bioinformatics methods to predict site modification in silico
could yield more defined results. These prediction tools
should be closely integrated into the interpretation of
proteomic experiments.
Here we identified the interactome of the active
enzyme complex and studied the verified substrates for
characterization of target sites to predict substrates. As
proteomics methods identify additional in vivo ubiquitination sites, prediction algorithms can be fine tuned and
improved. A conserved motif that serves as a recognition determinant for TRAF6/p62 enzyme complex was
identified. Studies have shown some structural preferences for ubiquitination of targeted proteins such as
preferred choice of Lysines in loops and/or for easily
accessible Lysines within a–helical regions [46]. Our
findings indicate a bias towards a specific consensus
sequence motif for ubiquitination by TRAF6/p62. Moreover, it appears that the active complex targets an accessible surface residue providing the selection process with
a conformational recognition mechanism. We propose
that the scaffold, p62, plays an important role in recruiting substrates for TRAF6, thereby facilitating interaction
with an accessible Lysine residue in a loop or helical
structures on the surface of the substrate resulting in
K63-polyubiquitination at a specific Lysine, if the flanking residues fit the consensus motif. In this regard, it is
of interest to point out that the scaffold TAB2 and
TAB3, although ubiquitinated by TRAF6 (7), did not
possess the motif identified by our search algorithm.
This finding supports the notion that specific interaction
of the ligase with a given scaffold may facilitate substrate
ubiquitination in response to a given external stimulus.
A total of 42 high probability TRAF6/p62 ubiquitination sites in 30 proteins were identified by our prediction approach. Structural analysis of these predicted
TRAF6/P62 substrates showed that the predicted ubiquitination sites were biased towards the C-terminal
domain of the protein [31,32]. Secondary structure analysis of the predicted sites revealed overall preference
for loops and helices than beta-strands and solvent
accessibility analysis of predicted Lysines revealed most
of the predicted sites were exposed on the surface of the
protein rather than being buried. There was high structural and phylogenetic conservation of predicted sites.
Tertiary structure analyses of investigated proteins
revealed that most of the predicted sites are likely to be
exposed on the surface of the protein rather than being
buried. Although linear conservation of individual
amino acids within the consensus motif at the predicted
ubiquitinated sites is low, there is a high structural and
evolutionary conservation of predicted sites across mammalian species. The high accessibility of ubiquitination
sites suggests that they are localized in loops and

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

helices, since these structural elements are usually found
at the protein surface. It is well known that the loop
regions frequently participate in forming binding sites
and active sites of enzymes making them excellent substrates for regulation [40]. Beta sheets can be internal to
a protein (largely hydrophobic) or on the surface in
which case they are amphipathic, with every other
amino acid side chain alternating between hydrophobic
and hydrophilic nature. Because post-translational modification sites are predominantly located in rapidly evolving loop regions [40], relaxed evolutionary constraints
on loops allow them to evolve rapidly and rather independently from the protein core [41]. Formally, disordered regions are defined as regions within proteins that
lack a precise 3D structure and consist of an ensemble
of fluctuating, interconverting conformers. These
regions have been known to be associated frequently
with posttranslational modifications [48]. Disorder prediction of linear motifs and their flanking regions for
the experimentally characterized examples from the
Eukaryotic Linear Motif (ELM) database revealed that
short recognitions motifs are embedded in locally
unstructured regions [48]. Thus, structurally and evolutionarily, our high-confidence set of TRAF6/62 substrates and highly positive motif sites represent a
reasonable site for post-translational modification by
ubiquitin.
Findings from this study indicate that the ubiquitination
site prediction is closely correlated with the amino acid
property around the ubiquitination site. Our approach
makes it possible to find putative novel ubiquitination
sites that have not (yet) been experimentally identified.
Thus, in the absence of experimental data, the prediction
of novel ubiquitination sites can be taken as the first
method of an experimental design for uncovering functionality of any protein of interest and elucidating its involvement in certain signaling cascades. Methods for
computational prediction of peptide specificities and identification of substrates could be enhanced by combining
different approaches and integrating various types of information. In addition, the prediction approach taken here
combined with experimental verification will propel our
understanding of ubiquitination mechanisms. Thus, a
combination of both a computational and experimental
approach could propel our understanding of ubiquitination dynamics into a new phase.

Page 14 of 15

verified by mutagenesis along with verification of K63ubiquitin linked chains for sites observed in TrkA, B, C,
and NRIF [3,4]. NTRK2, NTRK3 and MBP are putative
TRAF6 substrates which have not been previously
reported to interact with p62 and thus define new signaling networks for integration of this E3/scaffold. Altogether these findings suggest that the approach we
describe could be applied to other E3 ligases for prediction of their substrates taking into account the specificity provided by the scaffold which aid in the formation
of the signalsome in response to external stimuli.

List of abbreviations
AID: Atypical PKC-interaction domain; aPKC: Atypical protein kinase C; ELM:
Eukaryotic linear motifs; FA: Formic acid; K: Lysine; KO: Knock-out; MBP:
Myelin basic protein; NEMO: NF-kappa-B essential modulator; NRIF:
Neurotrophin receptor interacting factor; NTRK2: Neurotrophic tyrosine
receptor kinase 2; NTRK3: Neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase 3; PB1: Phox
and Bem1; PEST: Proline Glutamate Serine Threonine; PTM: Post translational
modification; RING: Really Interesting New Gene; SUMO: Small ubiquitinrelated modifier; TAB2: TGF-beta activated kinase 1/MAP3K7 binding protein
2; TAB3: TGF-beta activated kinase 1/MAP3K7 binding protein 3; TRAF6:
Tumor necrosis factor receptor associated factor 6; TrkA: Tropomyosin
receptor kinase A; TrkB: Tropomyosin receptor kinase B; TrkC: Tropomyosin
receptor kinase C; Ub: Ubiquitin; UBA: Ubiquitin-associated domain; ZIP: Zeta
protein kinase C interacting protein; ZZ: ZZ-type Zinc finger domain
Acknowledgements
This study was supported in part by NIH –NINDS 33661 (MWW). We thank S.
Santos, J. Wower and N. Singh for reading draft version of this manuscript.
This article has been published as part of BMC Proceedings Volume 5
Supplement 2, 2011: Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on
Bioinformatics Research and Applications (ISBRA’10). The full contents of the
supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/17536561/5?issue=S2.
Author details
1
Program in Cellular and Molecular Biosciences, Department of Biological
Sciences, 331 Funchess Hall, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.
2
Deceased.
Authors’ contributions
TSJ identified the consensus motif, assembled the protein datasets, compiled
the search results, conducted the secondary structure analyses, conducted
the SLiMSearch analysis, generated the randomized protein dataset,
conducted parts of the statistical analyses and drafted the manuscript. MCW
developed and programmed the MotifMaker and MotifFinder algorithms,
conducted the motif searches using these programs, developed the
probability estimates and participated in drafting of the manuscript. MWW
conceived the study, led the project design, provided technical direction for
the research and participated in drafting of the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 28 April 2011

Conclusions
In conclusion, NRIF (K19), TrkA (K485), TrkB (K811),
TrkC (K602 and K815), NTRK2 (K828), NTRK3 (K829)
and MBP (K169) were found to possess a perfect match
for the amino acid consensus motif for TRAF6/p62 ubiquitination. The ability of a given Lysine residue to
serve as a bona fide in vivo ubiquitination site has been

References
1. Geetha T, Wooten MW: Structure and functional properties of the
ubiquitin binding protein p62. FEBS Lett 2002, 512:19-24.
2. Jadhav T, Wooten MW: Defining an embedded code for protein
ubiquitination. J Proteomics Bioinform 2009, 2:316-333.
3. Geetha T, Jiang J, Wooten MW: Lysine 63 polyubiquitination of the nerve
growth factor receptor TrkA directs internalization and signaling. Mol Cell
2005, 20:301-312.

Jadhav et al. BMC Proceedings 2011, 5(Suppl 2):S4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1753-6561/5/S2/S4

4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

Geetha T, Kenchappa RS, Wooten MW, Carter BD: TRAF6-mediated
ubiquitination regulates nuclear translocation of NRIF, the p75 receptor
interactor. EMBO J 2005, 24:3859-3868.
Lamothe B, Besse A, Campos AD, Webster WK, Wu H, Darnay BG: Sitespecific Lys-63-linked tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6
auto-ubiquitination is a critical determinant of IkappaB kinase activation.
J Biol Chem 2007, 282:4102-4112.
Deshaies R, Joazeiro C: RING Domain E3 Ubiquitin Ligases. Annu Rev
Biochem 2009, 78:399-434.
Ishitani T, Takaesu G, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Shibuya H, Gaynor RB, Matsumoto K:
Role of the TAB2-related protein TAB3 in IL-1 and TNF signaling. EMBO J
2003, 22:6277-6288.
Li W, Bengtson MH, Ulbrich A, Matsuda A, Reddy VA, Orth A, Chanda SK,
Batalov S, Joazeiro CA: Genome-wide and functional annotation of
human E3 ubiquitin ligases identifies MULAN, a mitochondrial E3 that
regulates the organelle’s dynamics and signaling. PLoS One 2008, 3:
e1487.
Willis MS, Schisler JC, Patterson C: Appetite for destruction: E3 ubiquitinligase protection in cardiac disease. Future Cardiol 2008, 4:65-75.
Liu YC: Ubiquitin ligases and the immune response. Annu Rev Immunol
2004, 22:81-127.
Peng J, Schwartz D, Elias JE, Thoreen CC, Cheng D, Marsischky G, Roelofs J,
Finley D, Gygi SP: A proteomics approach to understanding protein
ubiquitination. Nat Biotechnol 2003, 21:921-926.
Matsumoto M, Hatakeyama S, Oyamada K, Oda Y, Nishimura T,
Nakayama KI: Large-scale analysis of the human ubiquitin-related
proteome. Proteomics 2005, 5:4145-4151.
Jeon HB, Choi ES, Yoon JH, Hwang JH, Chang JW, Lee EK, Choi HW,
Park ZY, Yoo YJ: A proteomics approach to identify the ubiquitinated
proteins in mouse heart. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007, 357:731-736.
Jadhav T, Geetha T, Jiang J, Wooten MW: Identification of a consensus site
for TRAF6/p62 polyubiquitination. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008,
371:521-524.
Jadhav T: Mining the TRAF6/p62 interactome for preferred substrates
and target ubiquitination sites: developing a “code hypothesis”. Ph.D.
dissertation. Auburn University, Program in Cell and Molecular Biology,
Department of Biological Sciences; 2010.
Keshava Prasad TS, Goel R, Kandasamy K, Keerthikumar S, Kumar S,
Mathivanan S, Telikicherla D, Raju R, Shafreen B, Venugopal A, et al.: Human
Protein Reference Database–2009 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37(Database issue):D767-D772.
Breitkreutz BJ, Stark C, Reguly T, Boucher L, Breitkreutz A, Livstone M,
Oughtred R, Lackner DH, Bähler J, Wood V, et al: The BioGRID Interaction
Database: 2008 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , Database issue:
D637-D640.
Maglott D, Ostell J, Pruitt KD, Tatusova T: Entrez Gene: gene-centered
information at NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(Database issue):D54-D58.
Pearson ES, Hartley HD: ‘Biometrika’ tables for statisticians 1 London:
Cambridge University Press; 1972.
Sokal RR, Rohlf FJ: Biometry: The principles and practice of statistics in
biological research New York: W. H. Freeman and Company; 1995.
Schneider TD, Stephens RM: Sequence Logos: A new way to display
consensus sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18:6097-6100.
Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: A sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14:1188-1190.
Jones DT: Protein secondary structure prediction based on positionspecific scoring matrices. J Mol Biol 1999, 292:195-202.
Bryson K, McGuffin LJ, Marsden RL, Ward JJ, Sodhi JS, Jones DT: Protein
structure prediction servers at University College London. Nucleic Acids
Res 2005, 33:W36-W38.
Lieutaud P, Canard B, Longhi S: MeDor: a metaserver for predicting
protein disorder. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:S25.
Schultz J, Milpretz F, Bork O, Ponting CP: SMART, a simple modular
architecture research tool: Identification of signaling domains. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:5857-5864.
Adamczak R, Porollo A, Meller J: Accurate prediction of solvent
accessibility using neural networks-based regression. Proteins 2004,
56:753-767.
Catic A, Collins C, Church GM, Ploegh HL: Preferred in vivo ubiquitination
sites. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:3302-3307.

Page 15 of 15

29. Morén A, Hellman U, Inada Y, Imamura T, Heldin CH, Moustakas A:
Differential ubiquitination defines the functional status of the tumor
suppressor Smad4. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:33571-33582.
30. Wu S, Liu T, Altman RB: Identification of recurring protein structure
microenvironments and discovery of novel functional sites around CYS
residues. BMC Struct Biol 2010, 10:4-22.
31. Chew YC, Camporeale G, Kothapalli N, Sarath G, Zempleni J: Lysine
residues in N-terminal and C-terminal regions of human histone H2A
are targets for biotinylation by biotinidase. J Nutr Biochem 2006,
17:225-233.
32. Ning S, Campos AD, Darnay BG, Bentz GL, Pagano JS: TRAF6 and the three
C-terminal Lysine sites on IRF7 are required for its ubiquitinationmediated activation by the tumor necrosis factor receptor family
member latent membrane protein 1. Mol Cell Biol 2008, 28:6536-6546.
33. Bueno MT, Garcia-Rivera JA, Kugelman JR, Morales E, Rosas-Acosta G,
Llano M: SUMOylation of the lens-epithelium-derived growth factor/p75
attenuates its transcriptional activity on the heat shock protein 27
promoter. J Mol Biol 2010, 399:221-239.
34. Pang CN, Hayen A, Wilkins MR: Surface accessibility of protein posttranslational modifications. J Proteome Res 2007, 6:1833-1845.
35. Britton KL, Baker PJ, Fisher M, Ruzheinikov S, Gilmour DJ, Bonete MJ,
Ferrer J, Pire C, Esclapez J, Rice DW: Analysis of protein solvent
interactions in glucose dehydrogenase from the extreme halophile
Haloferax mediterranei. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:4846-4851.
36. Harris MA, Clark J, Ireland A, Lomax J, Ashburner M, Foulger R, Eilbeck K,
Lewis S, Marshall B, Mungall C, et al: The Gene Ontology (GO) database
and informatics resource. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D258-D261.
37. Zhou F, Xue Y, Lu H, Chen G, Yao X: A genome-wide analysis of
sumoylation-related biological processes and functions in human
nucleus. FEBS Lett 2005, 579:3369-3375.
38. Loots G, Ovcharenko I: ECRbase: database of evolutionary conserved
regions, promoters, and transcription factor binding sites in vertebrate
genomes. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:122-124.
39. Maathuis FJ: Conservation of protein phosphorylation sites within gene
families and across species. Plant Signal Behav 2008, 3:1011-1013.
40. Neduva V, Russell RB: Linear motifs: evolutionary interaction switches.
FEBS Lett 2005, 579:3342-3345.
41. Gnad F, Ren S, Cox J, Olsen JV, Macek B, Oroshi M, Mann M: PHOSIDA
(phosphorylation site database): management, structural and
evolutionary investigation, and prediction of phosphosites. Genome Biol
2007, 8:R250.
42. Blom N, Sicheritz-Ponten T, Gupta R, Gammeltoft S, Brunak S: Prediction of
post-translational glycosylation and phosphorylation of proteins from
the amino acid sequence. Proteomics 2004, 4:1633-1649.
43. Xue Y, Zhou F, Fu C, Xu Y, Yao X: SUMOsp: a web server for sumoylation
site prediction. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:W254-257.
44. Kiemer L, Bendtsen JD, Blom N: NetAcet: Prediction of N-terminal
acetylation sites. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:1269-1270.
45. Maddika S, Chen J: Protein kinase DYRK2 is a scaffold that facilitates
assembly of an E3 ligase. Nat Cell Biol 2009, 11:379-381.
46. Galluzzi L, Paiardini M, Lecomte MC, Magnani M: Identification of the main
ubiquitination site in human erythroid a-spectrin. FEBS Lett 2001,
489:254-258.
47. Lin YS, Hsu WL, Hwang JK, Li WH: Proportion of solvent-exposed amino
acids in a protein and rate of protein evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1005-1011.
48. Fuxreiter M, Tompa P, Simon I: Local structural disorder imparts plasticity
on linear motifs. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:950-956.
doi:10.1186/1753-6561-5-S2-S4
Cite this article as: Jadhav et al.: Mining the TRAF6/p62 interactome for
a selective ubiquitination motif. BMC Proceedings 2011 5(Suppl 2):S4.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
