<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary loss of 8-oxo-G repair components among eukaryotes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Integrity 2010 1:12. doi:10.1186/2041-9414-1-12"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kristina Jansson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

GENOME INTEGRITY

RESEARCH

Open Access

Evolutionary loss of 8-oxo-G repair components
among eukaryotes
Kristina Jansson, Anders Blomberg, Per Sunnerhagen, Magnus Alm Rosenblad*

Abstract
Background: We have examined the phylogenetic pattern among eukaryotes of homologues of the E. coli 7,8dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxo-G) repair enzymes MutY, MutM, and MutT.
Results: These DNA repair enzymes are present in all large phylogenetic groups, with MutM homologues being
the most universally conserved. All chordates and echinoderms were found to possess all three 8-oxo-G repair
components. Likewise, the red and green algae examined have all three repair enzymes, while all land-living plants
have MutY and MutM homologues, but lack MutT. However, for some phyla, e.g. protostomes, a more patchy
distribution was found. Nematodes provide a striking example, where Caenorhabditis is the only identified example
of an organism group having none of the three repair enzymes, while the genome of another nematode,
Trichinella spiralis, instead encodes all three. The most complex distribution exists in fungi, where many different
patterns of retention or loss of the three repair components are found. In addition, we found sequence insertions
near or within the catalytic sites of MutY, MutM, and MutT to be present in some subgroups of Ascomycetes.
Conclusion: The 8-oxo-G repair enzymes are ancient in origin, and loss of individual 8-oxo-G repair components at
several distinct points in evolution appears to be the most likely explanation for the phylogenetic pattern among
eukaryotes.

Background
To maintain structural integrity of DNA, organisms
have developed DNA repair mechanisms. These have
evolved both in complexity and specificity to ensure
genomic integrity against the constant threats from
damaging agents of endogenous and exogenous origins.
Damage to DNA bases resulting from alkylation, oxidation, deamination, and UV-induced crosslinking, is
mainly repaired by the base excision repair (BER) pathway, which is highly conserved throughout evolution
and ubiquitously present in bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes [1]. BER is the major pathway for repair of oxidative base damage, transcription-coupled repair (TCR)
and mismatch repair (MMR) being important backup
pathways. Moreover, several of the DNA glycosylases
that initiate BER of oxidative damage have overlapping
specificities and serve as alternative pathways for various
DNA lesions [2]. Oxidative damage in DNA, specifically
the 8-oxo-G lesion, is removed or prevented by the 8* Correspondence: Magnus.Almrosenblad@cmb.gu.se
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Lundberg Laboratory, University
of Gothenburg, P.O. Box 462, S-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden

oxo-G-specific BER enzymes MutY, MutM, and MutT
[3]. MutT is an 8-oxo-dGTPase that prevents incorporation of 8-oxo-G into DNA [4]. MutM excises 8-oxo-G
paired with C [5], while MutY is an adenine-DNA glycosylase that excises A paired with 8-oxo-G [6]. The
MutY and MutM glycosylases are both members of the
helix-hairpin-helix (HhH) superfamily. This gene subfamily is the most diverse of the DNA glycosylases, with
differing substrate specificities [7]. The MutT homologue belongs to the group of nudix hydrolases and is not
classified as a DNA glycosylase, despite being a component of the 8-oxo-G repair system [1].
The existence of an 8-oxo-G repair system in all main
organism groups; archaea, bacteria, fungi, animals, and
plants, underscores the importance of this system to
defend against deleterious 8-oxo-G mutagenesis. Despite
the widespread conservation and importance of this
repair system in maintaining genomic stability, limited
phylogenetic data is available about the highly diverse
and adaptable HhH gene family of DNA repair enzymes
among eukaryotes. The expanding number of entire
genome sequences from a wide range of eukaryotic

© 2010 Jansson et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

groups therefore encouraged an analysis of the phylogenetic distribution of the 8-oxo-G repair genes. As a
broad phylogenetic analysis of the HhH superfamily of
BER DNA glycosylases among prokaryotes has already
been presented [7], prokaryotes were omitted from this
study. Here, we have identified 8-oxo-G repair genes
from metazoans, fungi and plants, along with a sequence
analysis of the identified proteins.
We find that their phylogenetic distribution among
eukaryotes strongly argues for group-specific gene
losses. Thus, we reveal several cases of unexpected gene
distributions, despite the fact that our analysis includes
organisms where DNA repair has been extensively characterised both biochemically and genetically: yeast,
mammals, and higher plants.

Results

Page 2 of 10

Ascomycota, and is retained only in the “Candida”
group. All ascomycetous fungi were found to harbour
the MutM homolog, with the exception of Schizosaccharomyces, although in this clade the single species Sz.
japonicus seems to have the MutM protein as well. The
MutY homologue is absent not only from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and closely related species, but also
from other organisms of Saccharomycotina. Interestingly, the MutY component is found in Sordariomycetes
and Dothideomycetes (subgroups of Pezizomycotina),
but not in Eurotiomycetes, indicating it has been lost
several times during evolution of the ascomycotes.
MutY was present in all Schizosaccharomyces species,
which was expected as Sz. pombe has a well-characterised MutY homologue.
Overall, the MutM homologue emerges as the most
prevalent repair 8-oxo-G component among eukaryotes.

Phylogenetic distribution

The phylogenetic distribution and sequence analysis of
the 8-oxo-G repair components included a large number
of species across the domains of fungi, animals, and
plants. In general, homologues of all three types of 8oxo-G involved enzymes MutY, MutM, and MutT were
found in most surveyed subgroups of animals and plants
with a few exceptions (Figures 1, 2 and 3). All three 8oxo-G repair enzymes are found throughout the entire
group of chordates (8 species examined; Fig. 1). In red
and green algae, the distribution pattern is likewise uniform, with all three repair homologues found in all species examined. Notably, all eight species of land-living
plants examined lack a MutT homologue, but do possess MutY and MutM homologues (Fig. 2). However,
MutY homologues are apparently absent in insects and
annelids (Fig. 1). Notably, the Caenorhabditis nematodes
harbour none of the three 8-oxo-G repair genes of interest. Interestingly, all three enzymes are found in the
nematode Trichinella spiralis and MutM is found in
Brugia malayi, showing that nematodes have evolved
several different ways to deal with 8-oxo-G damage.
Each of the two nematodes C. elegans and C. briggsae
harbours one HhH superfamily homologue from the
Nth BER family [7], which may functionally overlap and
explain the lack of the 8-oxo-G repair system. Similarly,
the molluscs display a very scattered distribution, with
no single species harbouring all three 8-oxo-G repair
proteins. However, considering molluscs as a group, all
enzyme members of the 8-oxo-G repair system are
represented (Fig. 1). Incomplete genome sequencing
cannot be ruled out as a source of error, however.
The situation in fungi looks more diverse. Overall, all
three 8-oxo-G repair homologues are found in basidiomycetous fungi (Fig. 3). However, among ascomycotes,
the phylogenetic distribution pattern is clear but patchy.
Of the three proteins, MutT is the least prevalent in

Sequence divergence between orthologues

To see if sequence divergence of the three repair proteins correlates with phylogeny, or would be dependent
on the presence or absence of other 8-oxo-G repair
components within any given organism, multiple
sequence alignments were constructed (Figs 4 and 5).
Among the 8-oxo-G enzymes, only the sequence of
MutY is highly conserved between prokaryotes and
eukaryotes [8]. MutY has a catalytic domain containing
a signature helix-hairpin-helix element, followed by a
Gly/Pro-rich loop and a catalytically essential aspartate
residue, referred to as the HhH-GPD motif. MutY is distinct among the HhH-GPD superfamily in that it contains an additional carboxy-terminal domain that seems
to be responsible for 8-oxo-G recognition [9]. The two
MutY helical domains form a positively-charged groove
with the adenine specific pocket at their interface. Like
MutY, other base excision repair HhH superfamily glycosylases (MutM, EndoIII and AlkA) use similar twodomain molecular scaffolds, and their DNA-binding
HhH-GPD motifs is the most conserved superfamily
structural element [10]. In general, a strong conservation
of the defined protein domains of MutY, MutM, and
MutT was found. Identified residues, critical for DNA
binding and substrate interaction [11-13], are extremely
well conserved through all species examined. However,
the group of fungi shows some unique sequence features. The “Saccharomyces” subgroup within Saccharomycotina is found to harbour an insert in MutM,
approximately 15 amino acids long, about 10 residues
downstream from the HhH-PVD structural domain (Fig.
4). Furthermore, the Eurotiomycetes subgroup of Pezizomycotina harbours another MutM insert, located
immediately upstream of the HhH-PVD domain, and of
the same size (about 10 residues; Fig. 4). Conversely, the
Saccharomycotina group “Candida” and the

Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

Page 3 of 10

Figure 1 Phylogenetic distribution of MutY, MutM, and MutT homologues among metazoans. The table shows the presence (grey) or
absence (white) of 8-oxo-G repair gene homologues found in species included in the survey. Abbreviations: “Vertebr”, Vertebrata; “Ceph”,
Cephalochordata; “Uro”, Urochordata; “Cheli”, Chelicerata; “Crust”, Crustacea; “Lophotro”, Lophotrochozoa; “Mollu”, Mollusca; “Anne”, Annelida;
“Platyhelm”, Platyhelmintes; “Choanoflag”, Choanoflagellata.

Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2 Phylogenetic distribution of MutY, MutM, and MutT homologues in pants. The table shows the presence (grey) or absence
(white) of 8-oxo-G repair gene homologues found in species included in the survey. “Vascular”, Tracheophyta.

Pezizomycotina group Sordariomycetes, that do not harbour any of the two MutM insertions, instead were
found to have a small MutT sequence insertion and a
longer MutY insertion, respectively (Fig. 3). The MutY
insertion is located in the beginning of the specific “adenine recognition site”, the substrate binding domain of
the MutY protein (Fig. 5). While the longer, about 20
residues, MutY insertion is located in the important
substrate recognition site, the shorter MutT insertion is
located outside the highly conserved structural “nudix
motif” in the catalytic site of the protein (not shown).
Thus, all identified sequence insertions are found only
among ascomycetous species, largely paralleling the phylogenetic division into subgroups. Interestingly, no single
fungal species carries more than one out of the four
identified sequence insertions (two in MutM, one in
MutY, one in MutT). Construction of phylogenetic trees
from entire protein sequences, in trying to clarify any
mutually dependent evolutionary relationship between
the 8-oxo-G repair components and these sequence
insertions, did not provide any further information.

Discussion
Evolutionary loss of individual 8-oxo-G repair proteins
is the most likely event behind the observed distribution
pattern of the MutM, MutY, and MutT proteins among
eukaryotes. The existence of highly conserved full-length
protein sequences throughout the lineage of evolution
strongly argues for group-specific gene losses, and rules
out convergent evolution of independently evolved catalytic domains of repair genes among diverse subgroups
of eukaryotic species. However, it is not obvious why
individual 8-oxo-G repair homologues have been lost or

retained in an organism group. In fungi, the loss of specific 8-oxo-G repair genes in distinct phylogenetic
branches is very clear. Fungi within Pezizomycotina
have lost the MutT homolog, while Saccharomycotina
species seem to have lost the MutY homologue (Fig. 6).
The Eurotiomycetes branch of Pezizomycotina moreover
has lost the MutY protein, and harbours only the MutM
homolog. The “Saccharomyces” and “Yarrowia” subgroups of Saccharomycotina also show loss of the MutT
homolog, while it is still present in the “Candida”
branch of Saccharomycotina (Fig. 6).
The “Saccharomyces”, like the Eurotiomycetes subgroups, harbour only the MutM homolog. All subgroups
of Ascomycota clearly harbour the MutM repair
enzyme, except Schizosaccharomyces. Interestingly, in
this clade the single species Sz. japonicus harbours a
MutM homologue, with a sequence similar to other fungal homologues. By contrast, in Sz. pombe, MutT- and
MutM-like proteins have not been identified either by
sequence or experimental analysis [14]. Also, the nematode C. elegans deviates from the expected distribution
pattern of 8-oxo-G repair enzymes, in that it harbours
none of the 8-oxo-G repair components. However, C.
elegans does hold the Nth HhH superfamily homologue,
which may function in an alternative 8-oxo-G repair
pathway [7]. It is noteworthy that Caenorhabditis thus
only has one HhH superfamily member. By contrast, the
nematode Trichinella spiralis harbours all three of the
Mut proteins. This probably reflects the large evolutionary distance between nematode subgroups, with T. spiralis belonging to a basal lineage and evolutionary distant
to C. elegans. Another noteworthy example is Drosophila melanogaster, which only has a MutM homologue,

Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

Page 5 of 10

Figure 3 Phylogenetic distribution of MutY, MutM, and MutT homologues among fungi. The table shows the presence (grey) or absence
(white) of 8-oxo-G repair gene homologues found in species included in the survey (fungi and slime mold). Repair enzyme homologues with
any of the identified sequence inserts are marked with an asterisk, and where relevant their position indicated (C-term, N-term). “Sac”,
Saccharomyces; “Can”, Candida; “Sor”, Sordariomycetes; “Dot”, Dothideomycetes; “Eur”, Eurotiomycetes; “Taphri”, Taphrinomycotina; “Basidiomyc”,
Basidiomycetes; “Zygo”, Zygomycetes; “Chyt”, Chytridiomycetes; “Micro”, Microsporidia; “Dicty”, Dictyostelia.

Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

Page 6 of 10

Figure 4 Sequence alignment of fungal, metazoan, and plant MutMH. The alignment shows the HhH structural domain, and the two
identified MutMH sequence inserts (yellow shaded boxes) within the fungal groups Eurotiomycetes and “Saccharomyces” respectively. The
Eurotiomycetes MutMH insert is located immediately upstream of the HhH domain, while the “Saccharomyces” insert resides close to the
C-terminal end of the HhH domain.

whereas most arthropods have two to three 8-oxo-G
repair proteins. Therefore, the common picture of 8oxo-G repair gene distribution, predicted from a typical
“model organism”, is not always the most representative
view.
The widespread distribution of the MutM homologue
in eukaryotic genomes, and the lack of either the MutY
or the MutT homolog, or both, probably indicates 8oxo-G in non-replicated DNA as the most abundant
and important oxidative DNA damage to correct. The
post-replicative adenine DNA glycosylase MutY mainly
serves to excise adenines misincorporated opposite 8oxo-G by replication, in cooperation with the MMR system [15]. This likely provides redundancy in post-replicative mismatch repair by separate pathways. All three
8-oxo-G repair components, however, are highly specific
for their substrates [16], and possibly may have evolved
from more “promiscuous” BER repair enzymes with catalytic activity toward alternative substrates. The situation of combining “promiscuous” broad substrate

enzymes with highly specific ones may provide an
advantage in terms of specificity and redundancy within
and between separate DNA repair pathways [16]. The
organism thereby holds the capacity to deal with a larger variety of DNA damage in a new complex chemical
environment.
The identified sequence insertions in MutY, MutM,
and MutT, respectively, among subgroups of fungi, do
not obviously correlate with the presence or absence of
the other 8-oxo-G repair homologues. It is also not
possible to predict the functional importance of these
sequence insertions for specific enzymatic activities.
The sequence diversity among HhH glycosylases, and
to some extent observed among subgroups of fungi in
this study of the 8-oxo-G repair system, may reflect
the need of specific and highly adaptable systems to
process complex patterns of DNA damage, caused by
different environmental factors. Disparities in catalytic
mechanisms and in DNA repair pathways, by which an
organism processes DNA damage, probably is part of

Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

Page 7 of 10

Figure 5 Sequence alignment of fungal, metazoan, and plant MutYH. The alignment shows the C-terminal end of the important HhH
structural domain, and the identified MutYH sequence insert (yellow shaded box) within the fungal group Sordariomycetes. The insert is located
in the MutYH substrate binding site.

the explanation [7]. Even though there is an established functional redundancy between the MutY,
MutM, and MutT proteins [17], and between separate
repair pathways, in protecting against oxidative
damage, more experimental data in substrate specificity
and DNA repair pathway redundancy are clearly
needed.

Methods
Eukaryotic organisms were included in the study if the
entire genome sequence was available, with the aim of
covering as wide a selection of organism groups as possible. Published sequences of MutY, MutM and MutT
from Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, human, and Arabidopsis thaliana were used in
BLASTP searches (E-values < 1 × 10-20) to retrieve candidate homologues in the respective groups of fungi,
metazoans, and plants, plus the slime mold Dictyostelium and the choanoflagellate Monosiga (for summary
of data, see Additional file 1, 2, 3 and 4). Evaluation of

candidates was based on the identification of domains in
the NCBI Conserved Domains Database (CDD) that are
specific for the different proteins: Endo3c (cd00056) and
DNAglycosylase_C (cd03431) for MutY, OGG_N
(pfam07934, or in some cases cl06806) and Endo3c for
MutM, and MTH1 (cd03427) for MutT. The domains
were identified as part of the NCBI web-based BLAST
interface which includes an RPS-BLAST search vs. the
position-specific scoring matrices in CDD. While Evalues were different for the four domains, they were
always lower than 1 × 10-05 (cd03431). Only specific hits
to domains were considered and best hits to similar
domains (for instance Nth) were used as evidence to
reject a candidate. For MutY and MutM, both domains
had to be identified to score as positive. Found
sequences were also subjected to reciprocal BLASTP
searches, ensuring that they indeed were most similar to
proteins of the respective family. Most searches were
conducted using the non-redundant protein database at
NCBI of December 2009.

Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

Page 8 of 10

Figure 6 Evolutionary loss of individual 8-oxo-G repair proteins among fungi. Loss of a specific repair protein is indicated by the
homologue name in the outlined branches. The retention of MutM in Sz.japonicus marked as dashed box. The basidiomycetes are the only
subgroup harbouring all three 8-oxo-G repair components. The schematic tree is based on Fitzpatrick et al., 2006 [18].

Although the domain search made identifying proteins
with low similarity to the initial query sequences easier,
reliable candidates from the performed searches were
also used as queries to retrieve more sequences from
closely related groups, especially when a thorough evaluation was needed because the identified candidate had
a different length.
As most protein sequences are based on gene predictions, many sequences had truncated ends due to the
problems of identifying the exon-intron structure and
thus the true ends of the gene. In those cases, the candidate protein sequence was extended by matching full
sequences from closely related organisms to the genome
using TBLASTN and adding the found segments to the
protein sequence. For some organisms, also EST data
were used to validate a predicted sequence. Long gaps
or insertions within sequences that are not conserved in
related species, and thus are indications of erroneous

gene predictions, were left uncorrected as long as they
did not interfere with the identification of domains and
could be aligned properly to the other sequences.
To get a better representation of species in the different groups and conduct searches against unpublished
genomes and/or EST libraries, organism-specific databases were also used, many hosted by the Joint Genome
Institute (JGI; Table 1). In the summary of results (Figs
1, 2 and 3), some species in groups with many representatives are left out (e.g. Drosophila and Saccharomyces
species). In a few cases, species with only EST data
available were added to show that a specific protein was
indeed found within the group (e.g. the mollusc Crassostrea gigas).
Multiple alignments were constructed using clustalw
or t_coffee and visualised in JalView where also annotated features, such as the MutY “adenine recognition
site”, were included (Figs 1 and 2). The locations of

Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

Table 1 Organism-specific databases utilised in this
study.
Species

Organization URL

Apis mellifera

BeeBase

http://genomes.arc.georgetown.
edu/drupal/beebase/

Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis

Broad

http://www.broadinstitute.org/
annotation/genome/
batrachochytrium_dendrobatidis/

Capitella teleta

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Capca1/
Capca1.home.html

Chlorella NC64A

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/
ChlNC64A_1/ChlNC64A_1.home.
html

Chlorella vulgaris

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Chlvu1/
Chlvu1.home.html

Ciona intestinalis

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Cioin2/
Cioin2.home.html

Cyanidioschyzon
merolae

Univ. of
Tokyo

http://merolae.biol.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/

Daphnia pulex

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/
Dappu1/Dappu1.home.html

Daphnia pulex

wFleaBase

http://wfleabase.org/

Dictyostelium
discoideum

dictyBase

http://www.dictybase.org/

Helobdella robusta

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Helro1/
Helro1.home.html

Lottia gigantea

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Lotgi1/
Lotgi1.home.html

Monosiga brevicollis

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/
Monbr1/Monbr1.home.html

Parhyale hawaiensis

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/parha/
parha.home.html

Rhizopus oryzae

Broad

http://www.broadinstitute.org/
annotation/genome/
rhizopus_oryzae/

Schizosaccharomyces
octosporus

Broad

http://www.broadinstitute.org/
annotation/genome/
schizosaccharomyces_group/

Selaginella
moellendorffii

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Selmo1/
Selmo1.home.html

Stagonospora
(Phaeosphaeria)
nodorum

Broad

http://www.broadinstitute.org/
annotation/genome/
stagonospora_nodorum.2/

Trichoplax adhaerens

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Triad1/
Triad1.home.html

Xenopus (Silurana)
tropicalis

JGI

http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Xentr4/
Xentr4.home.html

found insertions were mapped to known 3D structures
of the proteins from the Protein Data Bank, accessed via
NCBI Structure database, using the program Cn3D.
Structures used in the analysis were: MutY from Geobacillus stearothermophilus, PDB:1RRQ; MutM from
Homo sapiens, PDB:2NOF; MutT from E. coli,
PDB:3A6S.

Page 9 of 10

Additional material
Additional file 1: Sequence Data. Excel file with information on all
sequences included in study and data from searches. Sheets for Fungi,
Metazoa and Plants plus overview for each group. Table contains
accession numbers for MutY/M/T orthologous sequences as well as
information on BLASTP hit values and domain hits. Bullets symbolize
reliable hits for a species to a certain query and may be found in two
columns for each Mut protein: “MutX” or “MutX additional refs” when
additional query sequences from closely related species have been used.
The initially used query sequences are listed in row 2. Comments, such
as truncated domains, are listed in “Note” column.
Additional file 2: MutY alignment. For MutY and MutM most
sequences from tables are included. For MutT only fungi and human
sequences are included. All sequences are named with a code that
identifies the organism group: ‘Me’ = metazoa; ‘Fu’ = fungi; ‘Pl’ = plants;
‘Ba’ = bacteria. Gaps in all sequences are the result of insertions in
sequences removed from alignment. Annotations from literature are
added. Secondary structure was taken from predictions using the “PHYRE
automatic fold recognition server” (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre/).
Regions that are judged as different in a group of organisms are marked
with boxes.
Additional file 3: MutM alignment. For MutY and MutM most
sequences from tables are included. For MutT only fungi and human
sequences are included. All sequences are named with a code that
identifies the organism group: ‘Me’ = metazoa; ‘Fu’ = fungi; ‘Pl’ = plants;
‘Ba’ = bacteria. Gaps in all sequences are the result of insertions in
sequences removed from alignment. Annotations from literature are
added. Secondary structure was taken from predictions using the “PHYRE
automatic fold recognition server” (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre/).
Regions that are judged as different in a group of organisms are marked
with boxes.
Additional file 4: MutT alignment. For MutY and MutM most
sequences from tables are included. For MutT only fungi and human
sequences are included. All sequences are named with a code that
identifies the organism group: ‘Me’ = metazoa; ‘Fu’ = fungi; ‘Pl’ = plants;
‘Ba’ = bacteria. Gaps in all sequences are the result of insertions in
sequences removed from alignment. Annotations from literature are
added. Secondary structure was taken from predictions using the “PHYRE
automatic fold recognition server” (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre/).
Regions that are judged as different in a group of organisms are marked
with boxes.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Swedish Research Council (2007-5460) and
the University of Gothenburg Science Faculty research platform in
Ecotoxicogenomics.
Authors’ contributions
PS conceived of the study and drafted the manuscript. MAR devised the
design of the study and carried out some of the searches and gene
predictions, as well as analyses of the results. KJ performed the majority of
the searches and sequence alignments, put together the results and helped
draft the manuscript. AB helped conceive the study and revised the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 14 June 2010 Accepted: 1 September 2010
Published: 1 September 2010
References
1. Baute J, Depicker A: Base excision repair and its role in maintaining
genome stability. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 2008, 43:239-276.

Jansson et al. Genome Integrity 2010, 1:12
http://www.genomeintegrity.com/content/1/1/12

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

Page 10 of 10

Slupphaug G, Kavli B, Krokan HE: The interacting pathways for prevention
and repair of oxidative DNA damage. Mutat Res 2003, 531:231-251.
Michaels ML, Tchou J, Grollman AP, Miller JH: A repair system for 8-oxo7,8-dihydrodeoxyguanine. Biochemistry 1992, 31:10964-10968.
Maki H, Sekiguchi M: MutT protein specifically hydrolyses a potent
mutagenic substrate for DNA synthesis. Nature 1992, 355:273-275.
Tchou J, Kasai H, Shibutani S, Chung MH, Laval J, Grollman AP, Nishimura S:
8-oxoguanine (8-hydroxyguanine) DNA glycosylase and its substrate
specificity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991, 88:4690-4694.
Michaels ML, Cruz C, Grollman AP, Miller JH: Evidence that MutY and
MutM combine to prevent mutations by an oxidatively damaged form
of guanine in DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:7022-7025.
Denver DR, Swenson SL, Lynch M: An evolutionary analysis of the helixhairpin-helix superfamily of DNA repair glycosylases. Mol Biol Evol 2003,
20:1603-1611.
Slupska MM, Baikalov C, Luther WM, Chiang JH, Wei YF, Miller JH: Cloning
and sequencing a human homolog (hMYH) of the Escherichia coli mutY
gene whose function is required for the repair of oxidative DNA
damage. J Bacteriol 1996, 178:3885-3892.
Noll DM, Gogos A, Granek JA, Clarke ND: The C-terminal domain of the
adenine-DNA glycosylase MutY confers specificity for 8-oxoguanine.
adenine mispairs and may have evolved from MutT, an 8-oxo-dGTPase.
Biochemistry 1999, 38:6374-6379.
Guan Y, Manuel RC, Arvai AS, Parikh SS, Mol CD, Miller JH, Lloyd S,
Tainer JA: MutY catalytic core, mutant and bound adenine structures
define specificity for DNA repair enzyme superfamily. Nat Struct Biol
1998, 5:1058-1064.
Bessman MJ, Frick DN, O’Handley SF: The MutT proteins or “Nudix”
hydrolases, a family of versatile, widely distributed, “housecleaning”
enzymes. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:25059-25062.
Parker AR, Eshleman JR: Human MutY: gene structure, protein functions
and interactions, and role in carcinogenesis. Cell Mol Life Sci 2003,
60:2064-2083.
Shinmura K, Yokota J: The OGG1 gene encodes a repair enzyme for
oxidatively damaged DNA and is involved in human carcinogenesis.
Antioxid Redox Signal 2001, 3:597-609.
Doi T, Yonekura S, Tano K, Yasuhira S, Yonei S, Zhang QM: The
Schizosaccharomyces pombe homolog (SpMYH) of the Escherichia coli
MutY is required for removal of guanine from 8-oxoguanine/guanine
mispairs to prevent G:C to C:G transversions. J Radiat Res (Tokyo) 2005,
46:205-214.
Gu Y, Parker A, Wilson TM, Bai H, Chang DY, Lu AL: Human MutY homolog,
a DNA glycosylase involved in base excision repair, physically and
functionally interacts with mismatch repair proteins human MutS
homolog 2/human MutS homolog 6. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:11135-11142.
O’Brien PJ: Catalytic promiscuity and the divergent evolution of DNA
repair enzymes. Chem Rev 2006, 106:720-752.
Tajiri T, Maki H, Sekiguchi M: Functional cooperation of MutT, MutM and
MutY proteins in preventing mutations caused by spontaneous
oxidation of guanine nucleotide in Escherichia coli. Mutat Res 1995,
336:257-267.
Fitzpatrick DA, Logue ME, Stajich JE, Butler G: A fungal phylogeny based
on 42 complete genomes derived from supertree and combined gene
analysis. BMC Evol Biol 2006, 6:99.

doi:10.1186/2041-9414-1-12
Cite this article as: Jansson et al.: Evolutionary loss of 8-oxo-G repair
components among eukaryotes. Genome Integrity 2010 1:12.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
