<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Expression of collier in the premandibular segment of myriapods: support for the traditional Atelocerata concept or a case of convergence?</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-50"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ralf Janssen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/50

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Expression of collier in the premandibular
segment of myriapods: support for the traditional
Atelocerata concept or a case of convergence?
Ralf Janssen1*, Wim GM Damen2, Graham E Budd1

Abstract
Background: A recent study on expression and function of the ortholog of the Drosophila collier (col) gene in
various arthropods including insects, crustaceans and chelicerates suggested a de novo function of col in the
development of the appendage-less intercalary segment of insects. However, this assumption was made on the
background of the now widely-accepted Pancrustacea hypothesis that hexapods represent an in-group of the
crustaceans. It was therefore assumed that the expression of col in myriapods would reflect the ancestral state like
in crustaceans and chelicerates, i.e. absence from the premandibular/intercalary segment and hence no function in
its formation.
Results: We find that col in myriapods is expressed at early developmental stages in the same anterior domain in
the head, the parasegment 0, as in insects. Comparable early expression of col is not present in the anterior head
of an onychophoran that serves as an out-group species closely related to the arthropods.
Conclusions: Our findings suggest either that i) the function of col in head development has been conserved
between insects and myriapods, and that these two classes of arthropods may be closely related supporting the
traditional Atelocerata (or Tracheata) hypothesis; or ii) alternatively col function could have been lost in early head
development in crustaceans, or may indeed have evolved convergently in insects and myriapods.

Background
The recent arthropods comprise four classes: the insects,
the crustaceans, the myriapods and the chelicerates. In
some phylogenies pycnogonids are suggested to comprise a fifth class of arthropods, in some other phylogenies they are closely grouped with the chelicerates [1].
The sister-group of the arthropods is represented by the
onychophorans that lack the most characteristic feature
of the arthropods - segmentation of the appendages
(arthropodization) (e.g. [2]). Body segmentation, tagmosis, and arthropodization are thought to be among the
main causes why the arthropods became the dominating
metazoan group in species number, number of individuals and morphological diversity, on our planet. A segmented body, often in combination with tagmosis,
probably allowed the arthropods to adapt to new
* Correspondence: ralf.janssen@geo.uu.se
1
Uppsala University, Department of Earth Sciences, Villavägen 16, 752 36
Uppsala, Sweden
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

environmental situations quickly by modification of single segments and their often-specialized appendages
without disturbing their general bodyplan [3].
Despite the biological importance of the arthropods
and the enormous number of published phylogenies, the
relationships of the arthropod classes remain controversial. In particular, the position of the myriapods has
changed often and dramatically during the last century
(reviewed in e.g. [4,5]). The myriapods were traditionally
thought to represent the sister-group of the hexapods
(Atelocerata or Tracheata theory) (e.g. [6,7]). This
hypothesis is exclusively based on morphological data
such as the presence of tracheae and Malpighian tubules
or the appendage-less tritocerebral segment (reviewed in
e.g. [8,9]). Myriapods were even placed with onychophorans and insects (Uniramia theory), suggesting that
arthropods are polyphyletic [10,11]. This latter theory
appears however to have lost its credibility (e.g. [12]).
Another current theory places myriapods and chelicerates as closely related sister-groups (Myriochelata or

© 2011 Janssen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/50

Parodoxopoda theory). This theory finds support in
morphological as well as in molecular studies (e.g.
[2,13-16]).
Nevertheless, most molecular and a number of morphological phylogenetic analyses argue strongly in favor
of a close relationship of crustaceans and insects (either
Tetraconata or Pancrustacea theory) (e.g. [17-23]). Note
that it is important to distinguish a true sister-group
relationship of insects and crustaceans (= Tetraconata)
and an in-group relationship of insects and crustaceans
(= Pancrustacea). Morphological features supporting the
Atelocerata are now often considered to have convergently evolved. Tracheae, Malpighian tubules and the
loss of the tritocerebral appendage for example are
thought to represent independent adaptations in insects
and myriapods necessary for a life on land [4,5,24-26].
A number of genes involved in the formation of the
head segments have been identified in Drosophila (e.g.
[27-30]) and subsequent studies suggested that these
factors may play widely conserved roles in insects (e.g.
[31-33]). One of the key players in anterior head development is the COE-family HLH transcription factor
collier (aka knot) [29]. Flies deficient for collier (col)
function lack ectodermal structures of the intercalary
segment, and the expression of segment defining genes
like engrailed and wingless is disturbed [34].
Very recently a study on function and expression of
the orthologs of col in insects, a crustacean and a chelicerate suggested that early col function in the development of the intercalary segment is only present in
insects [33]. In their paper Schaeper and colleagues conclude that the early function of col in head segmentation
is most probably an insect novelty. In accord with the
Pancrustacea hypothesis, the development of the limbless tritocerebral segment in myriapods is most likely
convergent and thus likely based on a different genetic
mechanism [33].
Our data on col expression in two myriapod species,
the millipede Glomeris marginata and the distantly
related centipede Lithobius forficatus now show that
the early expression of col is present in both the
insects and the myriapods. This finding may be seen as
support for the traditional Atelocerata hypothesis, and
thus arguing against a true in-group relationship of
insects and crustaceans in the sense of the widely
accepted Pancrustacea concept, or alternatively that
the early expression of col in the tritocerebral segment
of insects and myriapods may represent a case of
convergence in gene deployment.

Methods
Species husbandry and embryo treatment

The handling of Glomeris marginata, Lithobius forficatus and Euperipatoides kanangrensis specimens is

Page 2 of 9

described in [35], [36] and [2] respectively. After oviposition embryos of both myriapod species were allowed
to develop at room temperature. Staging was done after
[35] for Glomeris, after [37] for Lithobius and after [38]
for Euperipatoides. The developmental stage of all
embryos was determined by using the dye DAPI (4’-6Diamidino-2-phenylindole).
Gene cloning

A fragment of the collier gene was isolated from Glomeris, Euperipatoides and Lithobius each with degenerate primers from cDNA (SuperScript First Strand kit,
Invitrogen). The primers col_fw1 (GCN CAY TTY GAR
AAR CAR CC) and col_bw1 (TTR TTR TGN ACR
AAC ATR TTR TC) for the initial PCR and col_fw1 and
col_bw2 (GAT RTC NCK NGG RTT NCC NGC) for a
semi-nested PCR were used to isolate the Glomeris fragment. The Euperipatoides fragment was isolated using
primers col_fw1 and col_bw1 in a single PCR reaction.
The Lithobius fragment was isolated using primers
col_fw1 and col_bw1 in a first and col_fw2 (CAR GGC
CAR CCN GTN GAR ATH GAR) and col_bw1 in a
semi-nested PCR.
Sequences of the fragments were determined from
both strands by means of Big Dye chemistry on an
ABI3730XL analyser by a commercial sequencing service
(Macrogen, Korea). Sequences are available in GenBank
under the accession numbers AM279685 (Gm-col),
FN827160 (Lf-col), FN827161 (Ek-col).
In situ hybridization and nuclei staining

Whole mount in situ hybridization for all species was
performed as described for Glomeris in [39]. The inner
membrane of Lithobius embryos is (or becomes) very
fragile after fixation. As a consequence it is often hard
to remove the membrane completely. Unlike the case
for Glomeris, however, this membrane does not disturb
the in-situ hybridization procedure; it does not stain
unspecifically or inhibit detection of specific staining.
Embryos were analyzed under a Leica dissection microscope equipped with either an Axiocam (Zeiss) or a
Leica DC100 digital camera. Brightness, contrast, and
colour values were corrected in all images using the
image processing software Adobe Photoshop CS2 (Version 9.0.1 for Apple Macintosh).

Results
collier

cDNA fragments of the ortholog of the Drosophila gene
collier (col) have been amplified by RT-PCR from the
myriapods Glomeris marginata (millipede) and Lithobius
forficatus (centipede) and the onychophoran Euperipatoides kanangrensis. Orthology of the gene fragments
has been assessed by comparison with published collier

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/50

sequences from various metazoan species. There appears
to be no risk of mistaking the isolated fragments with
genes other than collier; no other similar sequences or
indeed paralog of col is present in the published genomes of any protostome species [40]. We therefore designate the corresponding genes as Gm-collier, Lf-collier
and Ek-collier respectively.
collier expression in Glomeris

Expression of Glomeris collier is already detectable at
the blastoderm stage (stage 0) as a broad closed ring
surrounding the egg perpendicularly to the anterior-posterior axis of the embryo. This ring is situated in the
anterior of the future head. Expression of the ring is
weaker but broader in the dorsal of the embryo (this
expression later disappears completely) (Additional file
1: Figure S1A, B, D-F). Expression of col is possibly
already present at earlier stages, but in situ hybridization
experiments for such stages are not workable. The dorsal extra-embryonic tissue does no longer express col
(Figure 1A, a). At stage 1 the stripe starts fading from
ventral tissue (Figure 1B), and at later stages up to stage
2 col is only visible as two separated shorter stripes
(Figure 1C, C’). Finally, at stage 3, this expression disappears
completely and at this point the embryos do not express col
at all. At late stage 4, expression appears de novo in form of
dots in the trunk lateral to the appendages. Soon after, at
stage 5, stripes of expression extend from there to a position anterior to the limb buds (Figure 1D, D’). At this point
expression in the central nervous system of the trunk also
appears (Figure 1D, D’). In stage 6 embryos this expression
intensifies; in addition the nervous system of the head segments also expresses col in a complex pattern (Figure 1E),
and two thin stripes of col appear at the anterior rim of the
head (Figure 1E).
The early stripe of col expression is situated in the anterior part of the mandibular (md) segment and the posterior part of the premandibular (pmd) segment
(intercalary segment in insects) (Figure 1A). This is
clear from the position of the col-stripe at later stages
when the intersegmental indentations form (Figure 1B).
We also provided a one-colour double staining using
the segmental marker engrailed (en) in a series of early
stage embryos (Figure 1F-H). Note that at this stage the
en-stripe of the pmd segment has not yet formed (cf.
[35]). Therefore it is clear that in the shown embryos
the stripe between the antennal and md en-stripes
represents expression of col. The area expressing early
col (Figure 1A) is homologous to parasegment 0 of Drosophila (e.g. [34]). At subsequent stages the anteriormost and posterior-most expression of col disappears, so
that as a consequence col expression does not abut en
expression in the md segment any longer (Figure 1F-H).
Instead, a clear gap is seen between the expression of en

Page 3 of 9

in these two segments and the expression of col covering the pmd/md boundary (Figure 1F-H).
collier expression in Lithobius

As in the millipede Glomeris, an early stripe of collier is
also detectable in the centipede Lithobius at the blastoderm
stage (Figures 2A, A’ and Additional file 1: Figure S1C,
G-I). In the embryo shown (Figure 2A), expression is
somewhat weaker in the ventral part of the future germband, similar to the situation in Glomeris (Figure 2A, A’).
We find that as in Glomeris this stripe forms a closed ring
at the early blastoderm stage and, similar as in Glomeris, is
weaker but broader in the future dorsal tissue (Additional
file 1: Figure S1J-L). Because of the limited number of
available young Lithobius embryos, we were not able to
trace this early expression to unambiguously determine in
which segment it lies. However, some aspects suggest that
the expression in Glomeris and Lithobius at early developmental stages is indeed in a homologous position. First, the
stripe/ring of expression lies in the anterior of the blastoderm stage embryo (Additional file 1: Figure S1). Second,
the expression is weaker in dorsal tissue (Additional file 1:
Figure S1). Third, the expression is broader in dorsal tissue
compared to ventral tissue (Additional file 1: Figure S1).
Fourth, the most ventral expression starts disappearing at
an early stage in both myriapod species. At later stages the
stripe of col expression disappears from the anterior of the
future head. In stage 1 embryos col is not expressed and in
stage 2 embryos expression is only seen faintly anterior to
the labrum. The latter expression differs from the situation
in Glomeris, where col is not expressed anterior to the
developing labrum (Figure 2B, B’). Later, with beginning of
blastokinesis and at least up to stage 6, expression appears
and persists in the developing brain, the central nervous
system and in segmental patches between the developing
limbs (Figure 2C, C’, D). Altogether the expression profile
of Lithobius col is very similar to that of Glomeris col with
the one exception of dominant expression anterior to the
labrum in Lithobius.
Collier expression in Euperipatoides

In contrast to col expression in myriapods, onychophoran
collier is not expressed at early blastoderm stages in form
of an anterior transversal stripe. However col is expressed
in a fuzzy domain around the blastopore in an early gastrulation embryo (Figure 3A, A’) (here referred to as stage
0 embryo; cf. e.g. [41] for early stages). The earliest expression in the head appears much later as two lateral domains
in the future brain anlage of the early stage II embryo
(Additional file 2: Figure S2). Soon after in late stage II
embryos this pattern transforms into a complex pattern in
the developing brain (Figure 3B). This expression profile is
similar to the expression in Glomeris and Lithobius at later
developmental stages (cf. Figures 1E and 2C). In early

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/50

Page 4 of 9

Figure 1 Expression of Glomeris marginata collier. Expression of collier (col) (A-E) and combined expression of col and engrailed (en) (F-H). All
embryos except the embryo shown in (a) are in ventral view. (A) Stage 0.2 embryo. col is expressed in a broad stripe in the anterior of the
developing embryo posterior to the ocular field (cf. A’ which shows a DAPI staining of the same embryo). (a) Same embryo as in A; lateral view.
(B) Stage 1 embryo. Expression of col fades from the ventral-most tissue (asterisk) (cf. B’, DAPI counterstaining). (C) Stage 2 embryo. Last
remnants of col-expression at the junction between mandibular and premandibular/intercalary segment. (D) Stage 5 embryo. Expression appears
in the trunk segments in dorso-lateral patches (asterisks) and thin stripes in the anterior of the segments (double-arrowhead). Weak expression
appears in the ventral nervous system (arrow) (cf. D’, DAPI counterstaining). (E) Stage 6 embryo. Expression in dorso-lateral patches and
segmental stripes in the trunk remains (asterisks and double-arrowhead). Expression in the ventral nervous systems enhances (filled circle).
Expression appears at the anterior rim of the head (arrowheads). (F) Stage 0.2 embryo. Expression of col virtually abuts expression of en in
mandibular segment. The distance to the en-stripe in the antennal segment is small (arrow). Arrowheads point to en expression in anntennal
and mandibular segments. (G) Stage 0.4 embryo. Expression of col does not abut the mandibular en stripe any longer; the distance to the
antennal en-stripe is increased (arrow). Arrowheads as in F. (H) Stage 0.4 embryo. col-stripe is further narrowing; distance to mandibular en-stripe
is increased. Arrow and arrowheads as in F. Note that at these early developmental stages en is not yet expressed in the premandibular/
intercalary segment. For details on en expression in young stages see [35]. Abbreviations: an, antennal segment; cu, cumulus; md, mandibular
segment; oc, ocular field; PS0, parasegment 0; saz, segment addition zone; T1, first trunk segment.

stage III embryos col is also expressed in the anterior of
the developing limbs (Additional file 2: Figure S2). In late
stage III embryos col is expressed in spots in the limb
buds and along the trunk ventral to the limbs (Additional
file 2: Figure S2). The latter expression may be associated

with the developing neuropil [42]. In early stage IV
embryos this expression profile persists, with exception of
the dots in the limbs that disappear again (Figure 3C). At
late stage IV the initially continuous expression along
the trunk disappears from the position of the limbs

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/50

Page 5 of 9

(Figure 3C, D). At this point expression in the head transforms into broad domains in the developing brain (Figure
3D).
Faint staining also appears at this stage in the tips of
the legs, the slime papillae, the jaws, and in the ventral
nervous system (or ventral organs; for a discussion on
the contribution of this tissue to the nervous system see
e.g. [42,43]) (Figure 1D). Note that this staining as well
as the staining in the antennae may be unspecific due to
the beginning of cuticle development.
Figure 2 Expression of Lithobius forficatus collier. (A) Blastoderm
stage (stage 0) embryo. Transversal stripe of col expression in the
anterior of the developing embryo. (A’) DAPI counterstaining of
embryo shown in A. (B) Stage 3.2 embryo. Expression anterior to
the outgrowing labrum (arrowhead). Expression has completely
disappeared from the intercalary segment (arrow). (B’) DAPI
counterstaining of the embryo shown in B. Arrow and arrowhead as
in B. (C) Stage 5 embryo (flat-mounted). Expression persists anterior
to the labrum. Expression extends from there towards the anterior
rim of the germ band (arrowhead). De novo expression in the
intercalary segment (ic) (large arrow). Note that the ic is now
situated ventral to the base of the antennae. Segmental expression
in the trunk at level of the developing legs (small arrow). Expression
in the central nervous system along the ventral midline (asterisk).
(C’) DAPI counterstaining of the embryo shown in C. (D) Stage 6
embryo. Expression as shown for a stage 5 embryo persists at later
developmental stages.

Discussion
Conserved and derived expression patterns of collier in
arthropods

Data on collier expression and function are now available from a wide range of metazoan animals. These data
suggest that the unifying theme, the ancestral function
of col, is associated with the development of the nervous
system [29,32,33,44-50].
Including this study, collier orthologs have been examined in representatives of all extant arthropod classes
[29,32,33]. Function of col in muscle differentiation and
wing patterning appears to be arthropod or even only
Drosophila specific [47,51]. In addition the function of
col in the patterning of the head segments was argued

Figure 3 Expression of Euperipatoides kanangrensis collier. (A) Stage 0 embryo. The blastopore begins to form (arrow). Expression of col is
around the blastopore. (B) Stage II embryo, lateral view. Diffuse expression (or possibly background) in the head and the posterior segment
addition zone (saz) (term introduced in [60]; also see [61]). Well-defined expression profile in the head forms two stripes at the anterior ridge of
the embryo (arrow). Two clear dots of expression anteriodorsal to the stripes (arrowheads). (C) Early stage IV embryo; ventral view. Expression
along the complete trunk is on the same level as the limbs. Note that this expression is discontinuous at the base of the limbs that do not
express col (asterisks). (D) Late stage IV embryo; ventral view; flatmounted. Complex strong expression in the brain (large arrow), with a dominant
spot-like domain in each hemisphere (small arrow) and faint dot-like expression at the anterior rim of the brain lobes (open arrowhead).
Expression between the bases of the limbs persists, but still no expression in the base of the limbs (asterisks). Faint expression appears in the
tips of all appendages and the two anterior-most lip bulges (filled circles). Expression begins in the central nervous system associated with the
anterior trunk segments (or ventral organs; discussed in [42] (closed arrowhead). Note that unspecific expression appears on the surface of the
antenna, possibly because of beginning cuticle formation. Abbreviations: bl, brain bulb; fap, frontal appendage; L1, first walking leg; L15, 15th
walking leg; sp, slime papilla; saz, segment addition zone.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/50

to be an insect-specific feature [33]. In order to gain
information on the ancestral expression patterns of col
in arthropods we examined its expression in the onychophoran Euperipatoides kanangrensis. The onychophorans represent the sister-group to the arthropods
and can therefore serve as outgroup to distinguish
ancestral from derived features in arthropods (e.g.
[2,16,21,52]). Most of the observed expression patterns
of col in the onychophoran Euperipatoides may be associated with the development of the nervous system. We
can however not totally exclude the possibility that
some of the col-expressing cells are involved in the
development of other tissues than the nervous system,
for example the mesoderm. Overall we find that most
aspects of col expression seem to be conserved among
arthropods and onychophorans, for example, expression
in: 1) the anterior rim of the head lobes; 2) the developing brain; 3) the central nervous system of the trunk
and 4) dorsolateral patches of the trunk. An obvious
exception is the prominent expression of col anterior to
the labrum in the centipede Lithobius. However the
observed expression patterns in arthropods + onychophorans suggest at least partially conserved functions of
col in this group.
The involvement of col in head segmentation in
insects and myriapods represents a novelty, since the
expression of col is absent from the crustacean, the chelicerate and the onychophoran. The question now is
how likely it is that such novelty would have evolved
independently in these two assumed rather distantly
related arthropod groups, i.e. is due to convergent evolution (discussed below).
Early expression of collier in insects and myriapods:
Support for the traditional Atelocerata concept?

It has long been known from manipulation studies in
the fly Drosophila melanogaster that collier plays a crucial role in anterior head patterning and that a loss of
col-function causes the loss of the head regions expressing col [29,34,53]. The recruitment of col expression in
patterning the anterior head and the coincident formation of the limb-less intercalary segment was recently
argued to represent a developmental novelty in insects
[33]. This idea was supported by the finding that col has
no early expression and consequently also no early function in head development in a chelicerate and a crustacean that both have retained their tritocerebral
appendage, the pedipalp and the second antenna respectively [33].
Our findings in two distantly related myriapods, the
millipede Glomeris and the centipede Lithobius (note
that the Lithobius data are less well worked-out than
the Glomeris data), contradict this assumption and
instead argue in favour of a conserved expression of col

Page 6 of 9

in head patterning in both, hexapods and myriapods.
Together with the data provided by [33] on a chelicerate
and a crustacean, our onychophoran data further support the idea that such early expression of col is not a
plesiomorphic character for arthropods but a derived
character.
Though the unique absence of the tritocerebral appendages in insects and myriapods is a long discussed common feature of these two arthropod classes, it was often
considered as a mere convergence and not as a synapomorphy (e.g. [13,24-26]). One of the strongest arguments
for this assumption was that the “simple” loss of an
appendage could easily be caused by any disturbance or
mutation of the underlying genetic network needed for
limb development [2,39]. That arthropods lose or modify
appendages is indeed frequent; in millipedes for example
- but not in centipedes - the second maxilla is also missing. Consequently the lack of the tritocerebral appendage
as possible synapomorphy for insects and myriapods was
often, and obviously with some justification, understated
in phylogenetic discussions (e.g. [54,55]).
Now however it appears that the col gene may be
involved in the development of the limb-less tritocerebral
segment in both insects and myriapods. The finding that
the same genetic factor(s)/mechanism(s) are possibly
involved in the formation of the tritocerebral segment
elevates this feature from a likely convergence to a possible synapomorphic character. This may therefore add a
molecular perspective to the body of hitherto exclusively
morphological data supporting the Atelocerata. In fact
the most parsimonious scenario in terms of requiring the
fewest number of evolutionary events affecting col would
be the single recruitment of col in the formation of the
tritocerebral segment (Figure 4). Since this would argue
against an insect-crustacean relationship in the sense of
the now widely accepted Pancrustacea concept, a case of
gene convergence must still be considered likely for the
expression of col in the tritocerebral segment of insects
and myriapods (Figure 4D).
The conserved expression of col in the tritocerebral
segments in insects may thus indeed represent an evolutionary novelty, but then the presence of col in the
homologous region in myriapods has to be considered
as another independently evolved evolutionary novelty
as well.
Contradictory data in arthropod phylogeny: A case of
homology versus convergence

The data presented here support the traditional Atelocerata theory, as do a number of morphological studies.
Other data support the Myriochelata hypothesis joining
chelicerates with myriapods. However the majority of
data available today, including some morphological studies and most nucleotide sequence analysis, clearly

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/50

Figure 4 Lack of the tritocerebral appendage and early colexpression plotted on current arthropod phylogenies. A The
Atelocerata concept: myriapods and insects are allied, crustaceans
are basally branching mandibulates; only one evolutionary event:
gain of early col-function (ecf). B The Tetraconata concept:
crustaceans and insects are allied sister-groups, myriapods are
basally branching mandibulates; two evolutionary events: 1) gain of
ecf in the stem-mandibulate and 2) loss of ecf in crustaceans. C The
Pancrustacea concept: crustaceans and insects are allied with insects
representing an in-group of the crustaceans; three evolutionary
events: 1) gain of ecf in stem mandibulate followed by 2) a loss in
the crustacean stem and finally 3) a re-gain in the insect lineage. D
Convergence. Ecf does not represent a synapomorphy of insects
and myriapods but evolved two times independently. Not shown:
The Myriochelata concept: chelicerates and myriapods are allied and
insects and crustaceans are allied; three evolutionary events in the
non-convergence scenario: 1) gain of ecf in arthropod stem
followed by 2) a loss in crustaceans and 3) chelicerates; Note that in
the case of convergence Myriochelata is as likely as Pancrustacea/
Tetraconata (shown in D).

support the close relationship of insects and crustaceans
(Tetraconata) or even consider the insects as an ingroup of the crustaceans (Pancrustacea). Consequently
some of the data supporting contradicting evolutionary
relationships must be considered to be either artificial,
incorrectly interpreted or the result of convergent evolution. Convergent evolution, or convergence, is a muchdiscussed possibility to explain the presence of morphological data contradicting the Tetraconata/Pancrustacea
hypothesis. It describes a scenario where similar
morphological structures evolved independently in not
(closely) related organisms as a response to similar
environmental conditions. But convergent evolution is
of course not restricted to morphological features only
but must also be reflected by the underlying genetic
levels controlling morphology. It is often argued that
single genes or even genetic networks, or part of it, may
be involved in the development of non-homologous
structures (e.g. [56,57]). In other words during evolution
a single gene may be recruited independently because of

Page 7 of 9

its given function. Likewise gene networks may be
recruited because of the conserved interaction of genes
(e.g. [3,58,59]).
For the given case described in this paper this would
mean that the collier gene could have been recruited
independently in the formation of the appendage-less tritocerebral segment in insects and myriapods (Figure 4D).
In that case the genetic network or at least part of it (the
action of the collier gene) would be conserved (homologous), but the resulting modification of the tritocerebral
segment, the lack of an appendage on this segment,
would not.
Further investigation of the function of collier, and the
genetic network within which it operates, may answer
this question in the future. If, as seems most likely, the
formation of the appendage-less tritocerebal segment is
convergent in myriapods and insects, the hint of the
same genetic mechanism behind this convergence offers
a rare and important insight into the genetic basis of
convergence. The degree to which the genetic patterning
mechanism matches the two cases may offer important
insights into how genes and their regulatory apparatus
are recruited during the origin of novelties.

Conclusions
One of the key players in the development of the limbless tritocerebral segment in insects (intercalary segment), the COE-family HLH transcription factor collier,
is also specifically expressed in the homologous limbless segment in myriapods. This finding contradicts the
suggestion that the role of col in the development of the
anterior head is an insect novelty [33].
Historically insects and myriapods have been united in
the Atelocerata (or Tracheata), and the morphology of the
tritocerebral segments was used as the main synapomorphy to support this group. Modern sequence-based phylogenetic analysis, however, now rather suggests a sister- or
even in-group relationship of insects to crustaceans (Tetraconata or Pancrustacea). The apparently synapomorphic
limb-less tritocerebral segment has been explained as an
example of convergent evolution, since it appeared likely
that a structure (like one of many appendages) could easily
be lost independently. Our data question this argumentation, because we show that it is not only the mere loss of
an appendage, but also the involvement of a specific gene
that may argue in favour of the Atelocerata.
This study shows that comprehensive data (and
taxon) sampling is often crucial to allow secure evolutionary statements. Although in line with the current
opinion, i.e. the Pancrustacea/Tetraconata hypothesis,
the data by [33] somewhat prematurely concluded that
the involvement of col in the formation of the tritocerebral segment in insects would represent an evolutionary novelty.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/50

Our data strengthen a possible synapomorphy (limbless tritocerebral segment) for the unlikely Atelocerata
concept, either challenging modern phylogenies, or presenting a complex case of parallel evolution. To find out
which of either is the case must be subject of future
investigation including an in-depth analysis of the
genetic network involved in the formation of the tritocerebral segment in arthropods.

Page 8 of 9

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1: Expression of Glomeris collier and
Lithobius collier at the blastoderm stage (stage 0). A/a Bright field (A)
and DAPI fluorescent (a) picture of the same Glomeris embryo showing
expression at blastoderm stage. The asterisk in the DAPI stained embryo
marks the cumulus. B/C Anterior expression in a closed ring in a
blastoderm stage embryo of Glomeris (B) and Lithobius (C) respectively.
D-F showing the same Glomeris embryo from different angles: ventral
view (D), lateral view (E) and dorsal view (F). G-I showing the same
Lithobius embryo from different angles: ventral view (G), lateral view (H)
and dorsal view (I). Note that in both species dorsal expression is weaker,
but in a broader domain. J-L Schematic drawing showing conserved
ring-morphology of col expression in Glomeris and Lithobius at the
blastoderm stage.
Additional file 2: Figure S2: Additional aspects of collier expression
in Euperipatoides. A Early stage II embryo with beginning expression in
the brain (black arrow). B Early stage III embryo. Arrowheads mark
expression in the anterior of the developing limbs. C Late stage III
embryo showing expression in a continuous anterior to posterior stripe
ventral to jaw, slime papilla and walking limbs. Dot-like expression is also
visible in the limbs.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank all reviewers involved in the publication of this paper.
Their comments were helpful and most appreciated. This work has been
supported by the Swedish Research Council (VR: grant to GEB), the
European Union via the Marie Curie Training network “ZOONET” (MRTN-CT2004-005624 (to GEB, WGMD and RJ)) and the DFG via SFB 572 of the
University of Cologne (to WGMD and RJ). The authors wish to thank Jean
Joss, Rolf Ericsson and especially Noel Tait for their help during
onychophoran collection.
Author details
1
Uppsala University, Department of Earth Sciences, Villavägen 16, 752 36
Uppsala, Sweden. 2Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Department of Genetics,
Philosophenweg 12, 07743 Jena, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
RJ designed the study, conducted the experiments and wrote the first draft
manuscript. WGMD and GEB were involved in data discussion and writing
the final version of the manuscript. All authors approved the final version of
the manuscript.

11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Received: 30 September 2010 Accepted: 24 February 2011
Published: 24 February 2011

26.

References
1. Dunlop JA, Arango CP: Pycnogonid affinities: a review. J Zool Syst Evol Res
2005, 43:8-21.
2. Janssen R, Eriksson BJ, Budd GE, Akam M, Prpic NM: Gene expression
patterns in an onychophoran reveal that regionalization predates limb
segmentation in pan-arthropods. Evol Dev 2010, 12:363-372.
3. Budd GE: Why are arthropods segmented? Evol Dev 2001, 5:332-342.
4. Shear WA, Edgecombe GD: The geological record and phylogeny of the
Myriapoda. Arthropod Struct Dev 2010, 39:174-190.

27.

28.

29.

Edgecombe DG: Arthropod phylogeny: an overview from the
perspectives of morphology, molecular data and the fossil record.
Arthropod Struct Dev 2010, 39:74-87.
Snodgrass RE: Evolution of the Annelida, Onychophora and Arthropoda.
Smithson Misc Collect 1938, 97:1-159.
Hennig W: Insect Phylogeny John Wiley, New York; 1981.
Bitsch C, Bitsch J: Phylogenetic relationships of basal hexapods among
the mandibulate arthropods: a cladistic analysis based on comparative
morphological characters. Zoologica Scripta 2004, 33:511-550.
Grimaldi DA: 400 million years on six legs: On the origin and early
evolution of Hexapoda. Arthropod Struct Dev 2009, 39:191-203.
Tiegs OW, Manton SM: The evolution of Arthropoda. Biol Rev 1958,
33:255-337.
Manton SM: Arthropod Phylogeny - Modern synthesis. J Zoology 1973,
171:111-130.
Shear WA: End of the ‘Uniramia’ taxon. Nature 1992, 359:477-478.
Friedrich M, Tautz D: Ribosomal DNA phylogeny of the major extant
arthropod classes and the evolution of myriapods. Nature 1995,
376:165-167.
Mallatt JM, Garey JR, Shultz JW: Ecdysozoan phylogeny and Bayesian
inference: first use of nearly complete 28S and 18S rRNA gene
sequences to classify the arthropods and their kin. Mol Phylogenet Evol
2004, 31:178-191.
Pisani D, Poling LL, Lyons-Weiler M, Hedges SB: The colonization of land
by animals: molecular phylogeny and divergence times among
arthropods. BMC Biol 2004, 2:1.
Mayer G, Whitington PM: Velvet worm development links myriapods with
chelicerates. Proc R Soc B 2009, 276:3571-3579.
Regier JC, Shultz JW, Kambic RE: Pancrustacean phylogeny: hexapods are
terrestrial crustaceans and maxillopods are not monophyletic. Proc R Soc
B 2005, 272:395-401.
Harzsch S: Neurophylogeny: architecture of the nervous system and
a fresh view on arthropod phylogeny. Integr Comp Biol 2006,
46:162-194.
Strausfeld NJ, Strausfeld MC, Stowe S, Rowell D, Loesel R: The organization
and evolutionary implications of neuropoils and their neurons in the
brain of the onychophorans Euperipatoides rowelli. Arthropod Struct Dev
2006, 135:169-196.
Ungerer P, Scholtz G: Filling the gap between identified neuroblasts and
neurons in crustaceans adds new support for Tetraconata. Proc R Soc B
2008, 275:369-376.
Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DO, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, Sörensen MV, Haddock SHD, SchmidtRhaesa A, Okusu A, Kristensen RM, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G:
Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution of the animal tree of
life. Nature 2008, 452:745-749.
Bourlat SJ, Nielsen C, Economou AD, Telford MJ: Testing the new animal
phylogeny: a phylum level molecular analysis of the animal kingdom.
Mol Phylogenet Evol 2008, 49:23-31.
Rota-Stabelli O, Kayal E, Gleeson D, Daub J, Boore JL, Telford MJ, Pisani D,
Blaxter M, Lavrov DV: Ecdysozoan mitogenomics: evidene for a common
origin of the legged invertebrates, the Panarthropoda. Genome Biol Evol
2010, 2:425-440.
Averof M, Akam M: Insect-crustacean relationships: insights from
comparative developmental and molecular studies. Phil Trans R Soc B
1995, 347:293-303.
Boore JL, Lavrov DV, Brown WM: Gene translocation links insects and
crustaceans. Nature 1998, 392:667-668.
Dohle W: Are the insects terrestrial crustaceans? A discussion of some
new facts and arguments and the proposal of the proper name
“Tetraconata” for the monophyletic unit Crustacea and Hexapoda. Ann
Soc Entomol Fr 2001, 37:85-103.
Mohler J, Mahaffey JW, Deutsch E, Vani K: Control of Drosophila head
segment identity by the bZIP homeotic gene cnc. Development 1995,
121:237-247.
Gallitano-Mendel A, Finkelstein R: Novel segment polarity gene
interactions during embryonic head development in Drosophila. Dev Biol
1997, 192:599-613.
Crozatier M, Valle D, Dubois L, Ibnsouda S, Vincent A: collier, a novel
regulator of Drosophila head development, is expressed in a single
mitotic domain. Curr Biol 1996, 6:707-718.

Janssen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/50

30. Finkelstein R, Perrimon N: The orthodenticle gene is regulated by bicoid
and torso and specifies Drosophila head development. Nature 1990,
346:485-488.
31. Lynch JA, Brent AE, Leaf DS, Pultz MA, Desplan C: Localized maternal
orthodenticle patterns anterior and posterior in the long germ wasp
Nasonia. Nature 2006, 439:728-732.
32. Economou AD, Telford MJ: Comparative gene expression in the heads of
Drosophila melanogaster and Tribolium castaneum and the segmental
affinity of the Drosophila hypopharyngeal lobes. Evol Dev 2009, 11:88-96.
33. Schaeper ND, Pechmann M, Damen WGM, Prpic NM, Wimmer EA:
Evolutionary plasticity of collier function in head development of diverse
arthropods. Dev Biol 2010, 344:363-376.
34. Crozatier M, Valle D, Dubois L, Ibnsouda S, Vincent A: Head versus trunk
patterning in the Drosophila embryo: collier requirement for formation
of the intercalary segment. Development 1999, 126:4385-4394.
35. Janssen R, Prpic NM, Damen WGM: Gene expression suggests decoupled
dorsal and ventral segmentation in the millipede Glomeris marginata
(Myriapoda: Diplopoda). Dev Biol 2004, 268:89-104.
36. Janssen R, Budd GE: Gene expression suggests conserved aspects of Hox
gene regulation in arthropods and provides additional support for
monophyletic Myriapoda. EvoDevo 2010, 1:4.
37. Kadner D, Stollewerk A: Neurogenesis in the chilopod Lithobius forficatus
suggests more similarities to chelicerates than to insects. Dev Genes Evol
2004, 214:367-379.
38. Walker MH, Tait NN: Studies of embryonic development and the
reproductive cycle in ovoviviparous Australian Onychophora
(Peripatopsidae). J Zool 2004, 264:333-354.
39. Prpic NM, Tautz D: The expression of the proximodistal axis patterning
genes Distal-less and dachshund in the appendages of Glomeris
marginata (Myriapoda: Diplopoda) suggests a special role of these
genes in patterning the head appendages. Dev Biol 2003, 260:97-112.
40. Jackson DJ, Meyer NP, Seaver E, Pang K, McDougall C, Moy VN, Gordon K,
Degnan BM, Martindale MQ, Burke RD, Peterson KJ: Developmental
expression of COE across the Metazoa supports a conserved role in
neuronal cell-type specification and mesodermal development. Dev
Genes Evol 2010, 220:221-234.
41. Eriksson BJ, Tait NN, Budd GE, Akam M: The involvement of engrailed and
wingless during segmentation in the onychophoran Euperiaptoides
kanangrensis (Peripatopsidae: Onychophora) (Reid 1996). Dev Genes Evol
2009, 219:249-264.
42. Mayer G, Whitington PM: Neural development in Onychophora (velvet
worms) suggests a step-wise evolution of segmentation in the nervous
system of Panarthropoda. Dev Biol 2009, 335:263-275.
43. Eriksson BJ, Tait NN, Budd GE: Head development in the onychophoran
Euperipatoides kanangrensis with particular reference to the central
nervous system. J Morphol 2003, 255:1-23.
44. Prasad BC, Ye B, Zackhary R, Schrader K, Seydoux G: unc-3, a gene required
for axonal guidance in Caenorhabditis elegans, encodes a member of
the O/E family of transcription factors. Development 1998, 125:1561-1568.
45. Dubois L, Enriquez J, Daburon V, Crozet F, Lebreton G, Crozatier M,
Vincent A: collier transcription in a single Drosophila muscle lineage: the
combinatorial control of muscle identity. Development 2007,
134:4347-4355.
46. Baumgardt M, Miguel-Aliaga I, Karlsson D, Ekman H, Thor S: Specification of
neuronal identities by feedforward combinatorial coding. PLoS Biol 2007,
5:e37.
47. Crozatier M, Vincent A: Requirement for the Drosophila COE transcription
factor Collier in formation of an embryonic muscle: transcriptional
response to Notch signalling. Development 1999, 126:1495-1504.
48. Crozatier M, Vincent A: Control of multidendritic neuron differentiation in
Drosophila: The role of Collier. Dev Biol 2008, 315:232-242.
49. Dubois L, Vincent A: The COE- Collier/Olf1/EBF- transcription factors:
structural conservation and diversity of developmental functions. Mech
Dev 2001, 108:3-12.
50. Pang K, Matus DQ, Martindale MQ: The ancestral role of COE genes may
have been in chemoreception: evidence from the development of the
sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis (Phylum Cnidaria; Class Anthozoa).
Dev Genes Evol 2004, 214:134-138.
51. Vervoort M, Crozatier M, Valle D, Vincent A: The COE transcription factor
Collier is a mediator of short-range hedgehog-induced patterning of the
Drosophila wing. Curr Biol 1999, 9:632-639.

Page 9 of 9

52. Regier JC, Shultz JW, Zwick A, Hussey A, Ball B, Wetzer R, Martin JW,
Cunningham CW: Arthropod relationships revealed by phylogenomic
analysis of nuclear protein-coding sequences. Nature 2010,
463:1079-1083.
53. Seecoomar M, Agarwal S, Vani K, Yang G, Mohler J: knot is required for the
hypopharyngeal lobe and its derivatives in the Drosophila embryo. Mech
Dev 2000, 91:209-215.
54. Klass KD, Kristensen NP: The ground plan and affinities of hexapods:
recent progress and open problems. In Ann Soc Entomol Fr. Volume 37.
Edited by: Deuve T. Origin of the Hexapoda; 2001:265-581.
55. Carapelli A, Lio P, Nardi F, van der Wath E, Frati F: Phylogenetic analysis of
mitochondrial protein coding genes confirms the reciprocal paraphyly
of Hexapoda and Crustacea. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:S8.
56. Couso JP: Segmentation, metamerism and the Cambrian explosion. Int J
Dev Biol 2009, 53:1305-1316.
57. Chipman AD: Parallel evolution of segmentation by co-option of
ancestral gene regulatory networks. BioEssays 2010, 32:60-70.
58. True JR, Carroll SB: Gene co-option in physiological and morphological
evolution. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2002, 18:53-80.
59. Saeko SV, Vrench V, Brakefield PM, Beldade P: Conserved developmental
processes and the formation of evolutionary novelties: examples from
butterfly wings. Phil Trans R Soc B 2008, 363:1549-1555.
60. Janssen R, Le Gouar M, Pechmann M, Poulin F, Bolognesi R, Schwager EE,
Hopfen C, Colbourne JK, Budd GE, Brown SJ, Prpic NM, Kosiol C,
Vervoort M, Damen WG, Balavoine G, McGregor AP: Conservation, loss,
and redeployment of Wnt ligands in protostomes: implications for
understanding the evolution of segment formation. BMC Evol Biol 2010,
10:374.
61. Mayer G, Kato C, Quast B, Chrisholm RH, Landman KA, Quinn LM: Growth
patterns in Onychophora (velvet worms): lack of a localized posterior
proliferation zone. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:339.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-50
Cite this article as: Janssen et al.: Expression of collier in the
premandibular segment of myriapods: support for the traditional
Atelocerata concept or a case of convergence? BMC Evolutionary Biology
2011 11:50.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
