<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The RST and PARP-like domain containing SRO protein family: analysis of protein structure, function and conservation in land plants</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:170. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-170"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Pinja Jaspers"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The RST and PARP-like domain containing SRO
protein family: analysis of protein structure,
function and conservation in land plants
Pinja Jaspers†, Kirk Overmyer†, Michael Wrzaczek†, Julia P Vainonen, Tiina Blomster, Jarkko Salojärvi,
Ramesha A Reddy, Jaakko Kangasjärvi*

Abstract
Background: The SROs (SIMILAR TO RCD-ONE) are a group of plant-specific proteins which have important
functions in stress adaptation and development. They contain the catalytic core of the poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) domain and a C-terminal RST (RCD-SRO-TAF4) domain. In addition to these domains, several,
but not all, SROs contain an N-terminal WWE domain.
Results: SROs are present in all analyzed land plants and sequence analysis differentiates between two structurally
distinct groups; cryptogams and monocots possess only group I SROs whereas eudicots also contain group II.
Group I SROs possess an N-terminal WWE domain (PS50918) but the WWE domain is lacking in group II SROs.
Group I domain structure is widely represented in organisms as distant as humans (for example, HsPARP11). We
propose a unified nomenclature for the SRO family. The SROs are able to interact with transcription factors through
the C-terminal RST domain but themselves are generally not regulated at the transcriptional level. The most
conserved feature of the SROs is the catalytic core of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PS51059) domain. However,
bioinformatic analysis of the SRO PARP domain fold-structure and biochemical assays of AtRCD1 suggested that
SROs do not possess ADP-ribosyl transferase activity.
Conclusions: The SROs are a highly conserved family of plant specific proteins. Sequence analysis of the RST
domain implicates a highly preserved protein structure in that region. This might have implications for functional
conservation. We suggest that, despite the presence of the catalytic core of the PARP domain, the SROs do not
possess ADP-ribosyl transferase activity. Nevertheless, the function of SROs is critical for plants and might be related
to transcription factor regulation and complex formation.

Background
The RCD1 (RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1) protein is an important regulator of plant stress and developmental responses [1,2]. In Arabidopsis thaliana it is a
member of a small protein family consisting of RCD1
and five SROs (SIMILAR-TO-RCD-ONE). RCD1 was
first identified as a plant gene able to complement the
oxidative stress sensitive phenotype of a yeast strain
deficient in the YAP1 transcription factor [3]. Since
then it has also been characterized as a major regulator
of plant ozone (O 3 ) tolerance [4]. A loss-of-function
* Correspondence: jaakko.kangasjarvi@helsinki.fi
† Contributed equally
Plant Biology Division, Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki,
Viikinkaari 1, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland

mutation in RCD1 results in highly pleiotropic phenotypes including increased sensitivity to extracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS), resistance to chloroplastic ROS formation by paraquat (methyl viologen) and
ultraviolet radiation, salt sensitivity, aberrant leaf and
rosette morphology, early flowering, altered nitric oxide
and hormone (jasmonic acid and ethylene) responses, as
well as defects in developmental processes, such as root
architecture and reproductive development [1,2,4-9].
While rcd1 displays a vast range of well-characterized
phenotypes, the function of its closest ortholog, SRO1, is
dispensable for normal plant development and stress
response [1]. Mutant sro1 plants exhibit only very subtle
phenotypes [2]. However, loss of a single SRO1 allele in
rcd1 background results in severe developmental defects

© 2010 Jaspers et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

with the rcd1 sro1 double mutant displaying even more
extreme phenotypes [1,2]. This demonstrates unequal
genetic redundancy between RCD1 and SRO1 in
A. thaliana [1,10]. In species other than A. thaliana,
several studies, mostly based on gene expression analysis, suggest roles for RCD1 and SRO1 orthologs in hormone signaling, plant development and response to
biotic and abiotic stresses [1,2,11-17]. However, the phylogenetic relationships of these proteins to the RCD1/
SRO gene family members in A. thaliana has so far not
been characterized.
Another member of the A. thaliana SRO family, SRO5
(At5g62520), is transcriptionally induced by ROS in
response to salt treatment and is required for the proper
response to oxidative stress [18]. It forms an antisense
overlapping gene pair with Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate
dehydrogenase (P5CHD). In the presence of both transcripts, a 24-nucleotide siRNA is formed, downregulating expression of P5CDH [18]. A salt stress responsive
SRO5 ortholog from tomato can functionally complement the A. thaliana sro5 mutant [19]. The other members of the SRO protein family, SRO2, SRO3 and SRO4,
have not been functionally analyzed.
The domain composition of the SROs is unique within
plants. While two A. thaliana SRO family members
contain an N-terminal WWE domain (PS50918 [20]), all
of them are characterized by the possession of the core
of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP; PS51059)
domain and a conserved C-terminal RCD1-SRO-TAF4
domain (RST domain; PF12174) [1]. The combination of
PARP and RST domain is specific to plants but the
WWE-PARP domain architecture is widely conserved in
organisms as distantly related as humans. The WWE
domain is involved in protein-protein interactions and
predicted to have a globular structure [20,21]. However,
in SROs the function of the WWE domain in dimerization and other protein-protein interactions remains to
be shown. The RST domain is a plant specific domain
found in plant WWE-PARPs and TAF4s (TBP-Associated Factor 4), a component of the TFIID general
transcription factor. The RST domain-bearing C-termini
of RCD1 and SRO1 are suggested to be critical for the
interaction with several, mostly plant specific transcription factors [1].
Protein ADP-ribosylation is a post-translational modification catalyzed by ADP-ribosyl transferases (ARTs)
that are present in all eukaryotes except yeast [22]. The
major classes of ARTs are the PARPs and mono(ADPribosyl) transferases (mARTs). PARPs attach single
ADP-ribose units to proteins and catalyze the elongation
and branching of long poly(ADP-ribose) chains. PARPs
have roles in many processes, including cell death, DNA
repair, telomere stability, chromatin remodeling, transcription, and memory [23]. A. thaliana has three

Page 2 of 20

PARPs which most closely resemble classical DNA
dependent PARPs http://www.arabidopsis.org/. The presence of the catalytic core of the PARP domain in
RCD1 and SROs suggests an ART or related activity.
The mARTs attach a single ADP-ribose unit to protein substrates. Humans possess both ectoenzymes and
intracellular endogenous mARTs [24,25]. To date, in
plants no mARTs have been isolated or predicted by
bioinformatics [26,27]. Most known human intracellular
mARTs resemble PARPs [26] and have until recently
been classified as PARPs [24]. There are 11 such human
PARPs with various domain structures. HsPARP7,
HsPARP12, HsPARP13 and HsPARP14 contain the
WWE and PARP domain together with other domains.
HsPARP11, with only WWE and PARP but no other
conserved domains, is the human protein most similar
in domain architecture to A. thaliana RCD1 and SRO1
and has currently no known function. Given the evolutionary distance between plants and humans it is not
clear which, if any, of these proteins are functionally
similar to the SROs.
The identification of RCD1 orthologs in several plant
species prompted us to investigate the SRO protein
family in a comparative manner. The availability of
sequenced and annotated genomes allows the analysis of
full gene families in silico. We compared the SRO family
in several species from evolutionarily divergent branches
of the plant kingdom showing a different composition
of the family in different plants. In addition, we suggest
a naming convention for the family members. We identified the RST domain as a protein-protein interaction
domain, analyzed the predicted function of the PARP
domain and studied the transcriptional regulation of the
gene family members in A. thaliana. Based on our findings we propose that, while SROs contain a highly conserved PARP domain, at least RCD1 does not possess
ADP-ribosyl transferase activity. Bioinformatic comparisons suggest this is likely to also apply to several other
SROs.

Results and Discussion
Based on their domain composition the A. thaliana
SROs could be divided into two structural types (Figure
1A). Type A SROs contain an N-terminal WWE domain
(PS50918) [20], the catalytic core of the poly(ADPribose) polymerase (PARP; PS51059) domain and a
C-terminal RCD1-SRO-TAF4 (RST; PF12174) [1]
domain. The type B SROs lack the WWE domain but
possess the PARP and RST domains.
The A. thaliana SRO protein family consists of six
members (Figure 1B), AtRCD1 and AtSRO1 to AtSRO5.
Based on a Neighbour-joining tree using full length protein sequences, they formed distinct groups: AtRCD1
and AtSRO1 belong to group I while the others form

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Page 3 of 20

Figure 1 Structural classes and evolutionary relationships of RCD1 and RCD1-like proteins. (A) Schematic diagram depicting the protein
structure of A. thaliana RCD1/SRO protein family members representing the two structural classes, type A (AtRCD1) and B (AtSRO2). RCD1 and
all SROs possess a poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) catalytic region (PS51059) and a C-terminal RST (RCD1-SRO-TAF4; PF12174) domain.
Additionally, the presence (type A) or absence (type B) of a WWE domain (PS50918) differentiates between the two structural classes. Human
HsPARP11 exhibits similar domain composition to the Arabidopsis SROs containing a WWE domain and the PARP domain. It is representative of
the five human WWE-PARPs although the remaining four have additional conserved domains. (B) A. thaliana and A. lyrata SROs clustered in
three groups in an unrooted Neighbour-joining tree. AtRCD1 and AtSRO1 and the A. lyrata orthologs AlSRO1a and AlSRO1b formed group I,
which structurally belongs to type A. AtSRO2 and AtSRO3 and the A. lyrata orthologs AlSRO2a and AlSRO2b formed group IIa. AtSRO4 and
AtSRO5 and the A. lyrata orthologs AlSRO2c and AlSRO2d form group IIb. All members of group II belong to structural type B. (C) Neighbourjoining tree of the A. thaliana and A. lyrata SROs rooted the A. thaliana PARPs (AtPARP1, 2 and 3). The SRO proteins clustered together and form
a monophyletic group while AtPARP1, 2 and 3 clustered together to form a single outgroup for the SRO protein family.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

group II, which is further divided into two subgroups.
AtSRO2 and AtSRO3 belong to group IIa and AtSRO4
and AtSRO5 to group IIb. AtRCD1 and AtSRO1 have
an identical protein domain structure and belong to
structural type A (Figure 1A). HsPARP11 (Figure 1A)
and a few other human PARPs possess similar domain
structure with an N-terminal WWE domain and a
PARP domain as the structural type A SROs, but lack
the C-terminal RST domain. Group II SROs (both subgroups) form the structural type B. The closest
sequenced relative of A. thaliana, Arabidopsis lyrata,
possesses the same complement of SRO proteins.
Orthologs from the two species clustered together in
the phylogenetic trees based on the full length protein
sequences (Figure 1B) and the PARP domain (Figure
1C).
Transcriptional regulation of the A. thaliana SROs

Three A. thaliana SROs, AtRCD1, AtSRO1 and AtSRO5
have previously been functionally characterized. Several
studies suggest that the expression of AtRCD1 and
AtSRO1 is developmentally regulated and only slightly
stress responsive [1,2,9], whereas AtSRO5 has previously
been indicated as common stress response gene [28]. To
probe transcriptional regulation of the AtSRO gene

Page 4 of 20

family, we mined publicly available Affymetrix microarray chip data (see Methods; AtSRO3 and AtSRO4 are
not represented on the Affymetrix arrays). These results
confirmed that AtSRO5 was the transcriptionally most
responsive member of the SRO family (Figure 2). In
order to verify and complement the microarray data,
quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qPCR) analyses indicated that AtRCD1 and AtSRO1 exhibited only subtle
regulation in response to stress treatments (Figures 2
and 3). Low variation in transcript abundance in
response to stress conditions suggests that these proteins are regulated primarily at the post-translational
level under our conditions. This is consistent with the
observed low and tightly controlled amounts of RCD1
protein [1]. In contrast to our results, Bechtold et al.
[16] reported a strong increase in AtRCD1 transcript
abundance in response to excess light stress. This difference is most likely due to the intensity and quality of
the light used. AtSRO2, AtSRO3 and AtSRO5 showed
changes in transcript levels in response to light stress,
salt treatment and exposure to O3 (Figure 3). AtSRO5
showed the clearest transcriptional responses to the
stress treatments also in the qPCR analysis. No reproducible results were obtained for AtSRO4 but its presence
in EST databases suggests that it is expressed in plants.

Figure 2 Transcript profile of SRO family genes. Bootstrapped Bayesian hierarchical clustering of the A. thaliana SRO family genes under
various stresses compared to normal growth conditions. The stress data sets were downloaded from public databases (see Methods for
complete description of the method and the data). Red and green indicate increased or decreased expression compared to untreated plants,
respectively. The intensity of the colors is proportional to the absolute value of the fold difference.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Page 5 of 20

Figure 3 qPCR analysis of SRO family genes. Steady state transcript levels of A. thaliana SRO family genes were investigated by qPCR. Relative
gene expression under light stress, salt stress, and exposure to O3 and in the rcd1-2 mutant is shown compared to Col-0 wildtype plants grown
under normal conditions. Red indicates elevated and green decreased expression. Black indicates unaltered transcript levels or in the case of
AtSRO4 not reproducible (NR). Numbers indicate relative fold-change ratios. All experiments were repeated three times, one representative
experiment is shown.

Expression of the SRO genes was analyzed by qPCR also
in the rcd1-2 mutant. SRO2, 3, and 5 exhibited higher
transcript accumulation in rcd1-2, suggesting that RCD1
acts as a negative regulator of these other gene family
members. The effect could be indirect and due to the
rcd1 mutant being primed for stress responses [1].
The AtSRO5 gene forms a natural siRNA pair with its
neighbouring gene P5CDH in A. thaliana where they
participate in a regulatory network during ROSmediated salt responses [18]. Interestingly, in A. lyrata,
grapevine, or poplar the P5CDH gene is not located
next to the orthologs of AtSRO5 ; none of the AtSRO5
orthologs overlap with their respective neighbouring
genes http://gbrowse.arabidopsis.org/cgi-bin/gbrowse_syn/arabidopsis/. This suggests that the system of
P5CDH transcript regulation by natural siRNA formation with SROs is specific to A. thaliana. In order to
address AtSRO5 gene function in transcriptional regulation, we performed microarray analysis of unstressed
sro5-2 plants. The sro5-2 allele (GABI-325B05) used in
our study carries a T-DNA insertion in the second exon
and expresses a truncated transcript [19]. Microarray
results revealed several genes with altered expression
according to the fold-change ratio (data not shown).
However, these differences were not supported as significant by statistical analysis. To verify the array results
with an independent method, we analyzed the expression of the genes with the clearest fold-changes by
qPCR (Figure 4). Similar to Babajani et al. [19], AtSRO5
itself had increased expression in the sro5-2 mutant
(Figure 4). Only one other gene, At3g30720, encoding
QUA-QUINE-STARCH [29], exhibited reproducible
changes of expression levels in the sro5-2 mutant. The
expression of P5CDH, the AtSRO5 cis-antisense gene
pair, was not altered according to our results and the
study by Babajani et al. [19], suggesting that natural
siRNA formation might not be the primary regulatory

Figure 4 Real-time quantitative PCR analysis of the sro5-2
mutant. The expression of 13 genes which were most differentially
expressed in non-stressed sro5-2 mutant plants according to
microarray results (data not shown) was re-examined by qPCR. Red
indicates elevated and black unaltered transcript levels compared to
Col-0 wildtype plants. Numbers indicate relative fold-change ratios.
All experiments were repeated three times, one representative
experiment is shown.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Page 6 of 20

mechanism in unstressed plants despite the elevated
AtSRO5 transcript.

used in this study have been named according to these
conventions (Figure 5).

SRO conservation and nomenclature in land plants

Representation of SRO groups and structural types in
land plants

To better understand the structure of the SRO protein
family in plants, the A. thaliana protein sequences were
used to identify and analyze the sequences of SROs in
several fully sequenced plant genomes (see Table 1 for
list of species names and abbreviations). No SRO protein orthologs were found in the sequenced genomes of
algae or photosynthetic bacteria (see Methods). Because
no sequence data or EST information is available for
any of the streptophyte algae, we cannot exclude the
possibility that SROs are present in this group. However,
the SRO family was present in all land plant genomes
analyzed and showed considerable variation in its composition between plant species (Figures 5 and 6).
The lack of clear one-on-one orthology outside the
Brassicaceae (see below) rendered naming conventions
based on A. thaliana impractical for most plant species.
Therefore, a new unified nomenclature system is proposed (Figure 5). The key features of this system are: i)
A. thaliana proteins retain their current names. ii) All
RCD1/SRO family members in other species are named
SROs and prefixed with a two letter abbreviation of the
species scientific name. iii) All SROs are assigned a
number designation; i.e. all SRO1s are in group I and
SRO2s in group II. iv) Multiple proteins within one
group are then assigned an arbitrary letter designation
in the order of their discovery to identify them individually. This nomenclature system allows the differentiation
between group I and II SROs and will facilitate the comparison of related SROs between species. All proteins

ScanProsite [30,31] and SMART [32,33] were used to
identify conserved domains in the SRO protein
sequences. The catalytic core of the PARP domain was
the most consistently conserved feature of all identified
SRO proteins. Therefore, the PARP domains were used
for the construction of a phylogenetic Neighbour-joining
tree (Figure 6). The tree was rooted using A. thaliana
classical PARP proteins (AtPARP1, 2 and 3) as an outgroup. AtRCD1/AlSRO1a and also AtSRO1/AlSRO1b
from both Arabidopsis species grouped tightly and,
along with SROs from grapevine, poplar, castor bean,
rice, and Brachypodium distachyon, formed the subgroup Ia. These proteins are of the structural type A
containing WWE, PARP, and RST domains (Figure 1A).
The second subgroup Ib contains only proteins from
the grasses rice and B. distachyon. This subgroup
includes only structural type A proteins (Figure 1A).
The orthologs from the moss Physcomitrella patens and
the representative of basal vascular plants Selaginella
moellendorffi, together with sequences from castor bean,
poplar, rice, and B. distachyon, formed the subgroup Ic.
These proteins retain the PARP and RST domains while
the WWE domain is only present in PtSRO1c, OsSRO1c, and BdSRO1c. Of the group Ic members in
which no WWE domain was detected, only PpSRO1c
appears to be a full-length sequence (Figure 5).
The group IIa (Figure 6) contains AtSRO2 and 3,
which grouped with their orthologs from A. lyrata

Table 1 Species of sequenced plant genomes used in this study
Genomes
Species

Abbr.

Common Name

Clade

Ref.

Data Source

Arabidopsis thaliana

At

Thale cress

Dicot/Eurosid II

[65]

TAIR

Arabidopsis lyrata

Al

Lyrate rock cress

Dicot/Eurosid II

-

TAIR

Brachypodium distachyon

Bd

Purple false-brome

Monocot/Poales

[66]

BDB

Oryza sativa ssp. japonica

Os

Rice

Monocot/Poales

[67]

RGADB

Physcomitrella patens

Pp

Club moss

Bryophyte

[68]

JGI

Populus trichocarpa

Pt

Poplar

Dicot/Eurosid I

[69]

JGI

Ricinus communis

Rc

Castor bean

Dicot/Eurosid I

-

CVI

Selaginella moellendorffi

Sm

Spikemoss

Lycophyte

-

JGI

Vitis vinifera

Vv

Grapevine

Dicot (basal Rosid)

[70]

VGC

List of the species used in this analysis including their abbreviation (abbr.), common name, phylogenetic classification (clade), and sources of data used. Analysis
of all species utilized resources of the NCBI: National Center for Bioinformatics http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. Additional web resources are listed below according
to the abbreviations: PZ, Phytozome http://www.phytozome.net/); TAIR, the Arabidopsis Information Resource http://www.arabidopsis.org/; JGI, Joint Genome
Initiative (Poplar: http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Poptr11/Poptr11.home.html; Physcomitrella: http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Phypa11/Phypa11.home.html; Selaginella: http://
genome.jgi-psf.org/Selmo1/Selmo1.home.html); CVI, Craig Venter Insititute http://castorbean.jcvi.org/; BDB, Brachypodium database http://www.brachypodium.org/;
RGADB, Rice Genome Annotation database http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/; VGC (Vitis Genome Consortium), The French-Italian Public Consortium for Grapevine
Genome Characterization http://www.cns.fr/spip/vitis-vinifera-e.html.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Page 7 of 20

Figure 5 SRO Orthologs in Sequenced Plant Genomes. All SRO sequences used for analyses are listed with names according to the proposed
nomenclature and their original identifiers. The length of the proteins in amino acids (AAs; size) and the presence (+) or absence (-) of potential
conserved domains (WWE PS50918, PARP PS51059, RST PF12174) are indicated. Proteins predicted to lack domains because they are not full
length are indicated (#). Domains present but with low statistical support are indicated with (‡). Data source: NCBI (National Center for
Bioinformatics, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Additional web resources are listed below: PZ, Phytozome http://www.phytozome.net/; TAIR, the
Arabidopsis Information Resource http://www.arabidopsis.org/; JGI, Joint Genome Initiative (Poplar: http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Poptr1_1/Poptr1_1.
home.html; Physcomitrella: http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Phypa1_1/Phypa1_1.home.html; Selaginella: http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Selmo1/Selmo1.home.
html); CVI, Craig Venter Insititute http://castorbean.jcvi.org/; BDB, Brachypodium database http://www.brachypodium.org/; RGADB, Rice Genome
Annotation database http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/. Two SROs from Brachypodium, Bradi2g10720.1 and Bradi1g01340.1, were only present as
very short and incomplete predictions, and thus could not be assigned to any group.

(AlSRO2a and b, respectively). The other members of
group II are VvSRO2a, RcSRO2a, and a group of 4 closely related orthologs from poplar (PtSRO2a, b, c and
d). The group IIb (Figure 6) contains AtSRO4 and 5,
which clustered together with AlSRO2c and d; as well
as VvSRO2b, RcSRO2b, and PtSRO2e and f. The group
II (IIa and b) contains only SRO members with domain
structure of type B (PARP and RST domain). Strikingly,
P. patens, S. moellendorffi, rice, and B. distachyon do
not contain proteins that cluster together with group II
(Figure 6) suggesting that this group is specific for
eudicots.
As described before, one to one orthology exists
between the SROs from Arabidopsis species A. thaliana
and A. lyrata, as evidenced by the tight clustering in cladograms, (Figure 1B and 1C; Figure 6). In Arabidopsis,
SROs were always present in pairs consistent with a previously proposed duplication event ([2,34], Plant Genome Duplication Database http://chibba.agtec.uga.edu/

duplication/index/home. Similar duplications are documented for several other gene families, e.g. the B3
DNA-binding superfamily [35]. SRO group I members
of other, more distantly related plant species lacked
such pairing and bore no greater similarity to either
AtRCD1 or AtSRO1 but rather formed a sister branch
within group I. This raises the question of when the
duplications occurred. An analysis of available expressed
sequence tags (ESTs) from Brassica rapa, Brassica oleracea and Brassica napus revealed the presence of distinguishable orthologs for AtRCD1 and AtSRO1 in
Brassica species (Additional file 1). This suggests that
the split between AtRCD1 and AtSRO1 might have
occurred during the diversification of the Brassicaceae,
while other plant species retained so-called “co-orthologs” to AtRCD1/AtSRO1 [36]. These refer to sister
groups related equally to both proteins, which are
derived from the expansion of paralogous genes in the
individual species. The situation was similar for group

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Page 8 of 20

Figure 6 Neighbour-joining tree of the PARP domains of the plant SRO protein family. The PARP domains of the SRO proteins from the
sequenced genomes of A. thaliana, A. lyrata, Vitis vinifera, Ricinus communis, Populus trichocarpa, Oryza sativa ssp. japonica, Brachypodium
distachyon, Physcomitrella patens and Selaginella moellendorffi were identified and aligned. Subsequently, a Neighbour-joining phylogenetic tree
was constructed using MEGA4. AtPARP1, 2 and 3 were used as outgroups. Plant SROs could be classified into two groups. Group I contained
SROs from all included plant species and could be further divided into three subgroups (Ia, Ib and Ic) according to the C-terminal RST domain.
Most SROs in group I belonged to structural type A. The members of group II (a and b) without exception belonged to structural type B.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

IIa; Brassica contained ESTs which can be assigned as
orthologous to either SRO2 or 3 (Additional file 1). In
contrast, while Brassica group IIb orthologs were found
for AtSRO5, no sequences similar to AtSRO4 were
found. However, it remains unclear if this indicates the
absence of an AtSRO4 ortholog from Brassica, or if this
gene was simply missing from the current EST collections due to low expression levels.
These results demonstrate the presence of group I
SROs with a conserved structure and domain architecture in all the genomes studied here and suggests their
presence in all extant plant species, while group II SROs
are unique to eudicot plants. Intriguingly, both monocot
species analyzed possess only group I SROs. The lack of
group II in members of the more basal plant groups
suggests that the origin of the SROs lies within group I,
and that group II represents a later development. It is
possible that the group II evolved within eudicots only
after the dicot-monocot split, or that at least some
monocots, represented in this study by two grasses, have
lost these groups after these plant lineages diverged
more than 120 million years ago [37]. Resolving this
question will require investigation of further genomes
especially species from the basal branches of angiosperms and gymnosperms, which are not currently available. Several informative plant species, including loblolly
pine (Pinus taeda, a coniferous gymnosperm) are currently being sequenced.
The conservation of the RST domain between
plant groups

A novel conserved domain in the C-terminus of plant
SROs was identified recently [1]. This RST domain is
also present in TAF4 (Figure 7A), which is a component
of several multimeric protein complexes including primarily the general transcription factor TFIID involved in
transcriptional initiation [38,39]. The RST domain is distinct from the conserved TAF4 superfamily-defining
domain (PF05236), which is required for the assembly of
the TFIID complex (Figure 7A; [1,38]). Here the analysis
of the RST domain has been expanded, demonstrating
that it is present in all known SRO family members
(Figure 5). In the few cases of SROs without an RST
domain, the gene annotation was questionable and
requires further verification through mRNA support for
the gene model (see Methods).
Alignments of the C-terminus of SRO family members
from different plant species, representing all groups and
subgroups, demonstrated that the RST domain is universally conserved (Figure 7B). The SRO group I was
subdivided into three subgroups (Ia, Ib and Ic) based on
the sequence of the PARP domain (Figure 6) and analysis of the RST domains resulted in the same grouping
(Figure 7B). Members of the groups Ia and Ib have an

Page 9 of 20

approximately 20 AA long extension in the N-terminus
of the RST domain compared to the members of the
groups Ic and II. Since the group Ib contains SROs
from P. patens together with SROs from grasses and the
eudicots castor bean and poplar, it might represent an
ancestral SRO group. A strong conservation of a large
number of aliphatic AAs in the N- and C- termini of
the RST domain, with a strictly conserved tyrosine in
the middle of the domain and two conserved positively
charged AAs in the second half of the domain, was
striking (Figure 7B). The strong conservation of aliphatic
AAs in the C-termini of the SRO proteins points to a
conserved alpha-helical structure. This sequence preservation implies strong functional constraints for the RST
domain during the diversification of the SRO protein
family, possibly ensuring that a critical structure of the
SRO C-terminus is retained in spite of sequence
divergence.
The functional domains of the A. thaliana SRO proteins
The RST domain mediates transcription factor interactions

AtRCD1 interacts with several transcription factors
(TFs) in the yeast 2-hybrid system (Y2H) and in vitro.
The WWE and PARP domains are dispensable for these
interactions [1,3]. Analysis of mutants lacking the RST
domain of AtRCD1 and AtSRO1 demonstrated the significance of this TF-interacting domain for plant development and stress responses. In contrast to AtRCD1,
AtSRO1 only interacts with a subset of these TFs [1].
The C-terminus of AtRCD1 is 18 AAs longer than that
of AtSRO1 and thus could account for its broader range
of TF interactions. To further characterize the RCD1-TF
interactions, we constructed C-terminal truncations of
AtRCD1 and tested them for interaction with DREB2A
and COL10 (Figure 8), two known AtRCD1 interacting
TFs [1]. Deletion of the 18 AA extension did not affect
the RCD1-TF interactions and also the next three AAs
(Q569-K517) were dispensable. However, deletion of
further nine or more AAs (N568-L559), which extend
into the conserved RST domain, disrupted interactions
supporting the proposed role for RST as a functional
protein interaction domain. AA D552 in AtSRO1 is
absent from AtRCD1 (and all other SROs), and was
thus another candidate for the observed differences in
the interactions. However, deletion of this residue did
not affect the AtSRO1-TF interactions (data not shown).
Thus, the determinants of interaction specificity must
lie in the other residues within the RST domain or elsewhere in the protein.
To address if the conserved SRO5-RST domain is also
a TF-interaction domain we screened the REGIA (TF)
collection [1,40] with AtSRO5, a group IIb SRO, which
has been shown to be involved in salt stress responses
[18]. AtSRO5 interacted with 13 TFs out of the more

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Page 10 of 20

Figure 7 The RST domain of the plant SRO protein family contains a strongly conserved amino acid pattern. (A) Domain structure of
AtRCD1 and TAF4s from multiple species (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Homo sapiens, Drosophila melanogaster). All
TAF4s have the conserved TAF4 superfamily domain (TAF4; PF05236). Yeast TAF4s lack an N-terminal extension while metazoan TAF4s have an
extension bearing an ETO domain (ETO/TAFH domain; PF07531), which is a known transcription factor-recruitment domain [43]. Plant TAF4s also
have an N-terminal extension that lacks the ETO domain but bears the structurally unrelated plant-specific RST (RCD1-SRO-TAF4; PF12174)
domain. TAF4 RST has not been tested for TF interaction, however, the RST domain from AtRCD1 is required for interaction with multiple TFs.
AtRCD1 also bears PARP-like (PS51059) and WWE (PS50918) domains. (B) The C-terminal RST domain of the different groups and subgroups (Ia,
Ib, Ic, IIa, IIb) of the plant SRO protein family were aligned using ClustalW and Boxshade. Consensus sequences for each group or subgroup are
depicted in bold characters and marked according to similarity: conserved (*), strong similarty (:), weak similarity (.) using Boxshade. Under the
sequence, alternatives for AAs are shown. AAs with similar chemical properties are indicated using colored bars. Green indicates polar, noncharged, non-aliphatic residues. Blue indicates the most hydrophobic AAs. Red indicates positively charged AAs. Magenta highlights acidic
residues. Orange shows glycine and brown indicates tyrosine.

Figure 8 The RST domain of AtRCD1 is required for the TF interactions. The C-terminus of AtRCD1 was truncated to determine the
minimum protein length capable of interacting with TFs. The dark gray horizontal bars above the AtRCD1 protein sequence denote the different
constructs. Green background indicates interaction and gray background the lack of it. Yeast spots from each interaction test are depicted in the
panel on the right. The ClustalW alignment of AtRCD1, AtSRO1 and AtSRO5 is included for comparison of the RST structure in different proteins.
Highlighted AAs in the protein sequences are as in figure 7.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

than 1300 present in the collection (Figure 9). Three
TFs belong to the AP2/ERF TF family and two to the
NAM/NAC and bHLH families each. Five of these TFs
interact also with AtRCD1, and DREB2A with both
AtRCD1 and AtSRO1 [1]. In addition, AtSRO5 interacted with 3 proteins that were not recovered with fulllength AtRCD1 but interacted with a truncated version,
which lacks the WWE domain (PCT), thus resembling
the AtSRO5 domain structure. Three TFs (AtMYB29,
WRKY46 and HSFA1E) were unique interaction partners for AtSRO5, although AtRCD1 interacted with
other members of the same TF families [1]. AtSRO5
was previously reported to localize to mitochondria [18].
However, bioinformatic prediction of its subcellular
localization rather suggested a different targeting of the
protein. This, together with the multiple TF interactions
of AtSRO5 prompted us to investigate the cellular distribution of the AtSRO5 protein.
Ectopic expression of AtSRO5-GFP in A. thaliana
seedlings showed that AtSRO5 localized to several dotlike structures in the nucleus (Figure 10, panels A-C).
The results were verified by transient expression of the
same construct in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves (data
not shown). The difference in the observed subcellular
localization could be due to the use of different expressions systems. Thus we cannot exclude that AtSRO5
localizes to mitochondria under certain conditions.
These results give possible biological relevance to the
interactions between AtSRO5 and TFs. Constant communication between the mitochondria and the nucleus
is required for normal cellular function [41]. AtSRO5
might participate in bidirectional interorganellar signaling and play a role in regulating nuclear gene expression
through the TF interactions. However, the implications

Page 11 of 20

of AtSRO5 localization to other cellular compartments
in addition to the mitochondria require further studies
to reveal its significance.
The high number of TF interactions in the Y2H
screen demonstrates functional conservation of the RST
domain and its importance for protein-protein interaction (this study, [1]). The RST domain is also present in
plant TAF4 proteins. Human and Drosophila TAF4s
have an N-terminal extension carrying the ETO-TAFH
domain (Figure 7A). This domain recruits various transcription factors to the TFIID initiation complex and
thereby participates in the regulation of transcription
[42,43]. The ETO-TAFH domain is missing from plant
TAF4 proteins; instead, the TAF4 N-terminus bears the
RST domain (Figure 7A). Its presence and position in
relation to other domains suggests that the RST domain
could be functionally equivalent to other, animal specific, TF-interaction domains. Strong conservation
between the RST domains from TAF4 and the SROs
could hint towards a common function of TF binding.
TF recruitment to TFIID by TAF4 RST is a paradigm
for transcriptional regulation. Competition for, or modification of, common TF interaction partners is a model
for the modulation of TAF4 dependent processes by the
SROs. The future challenge will be to resolve the structure of several highly similar RST domains including
AtRCD1, AtSRO1, AtSRO5 and also TAF4s. This
together with mutagenesis and deletion studies based on
the comparisons (Figures 8 and 9) will help to understand the basis of the specificity of the TF interactions.
In planta verification of the interactions and competition experiments between SROs, TFs, and TAF4s will be
required to determine the significance of the proteinprotein interactions.

Figure 9 AtSRO5 interacts with transcription factors. Transcription factors interacting with AtSRO5 in a pairwise interaction test against the
REGIA TF collection. FL: Full length AtRCD1. PCT: AtRCD1 construct lacking the WWE domain. + interaction observed, - interaction not observed.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Page 12 of 20

Figure 10 Subcellular localization of AtSRO5. The AtSRO5-GFP fusion protein localized to several dot-like structures in the nucleus in
A. thaliana seedlings (panels A-C). As comparison, the mitochondrial localization marker line mt-yk (panels D-F) and the nuclear and cytoplasmic
localization of YFP protein (panels G-I) are shown. Panels A, D and G display the fluorescent signal, panels B, E and H the light micrograph and
panels C, F and I the two overlaid. Scale bar 5 μm; arrows in B, C, H and I indicate the nucleus.

The conserved PARP domain in SRO-proteins: structural vs.
functional conservation

Based on the presence of a PARP catalytic domain, it
has been presumed that A. thaliana RCD1 and SRO
proteins could have ADP-ribosyl transferase activity
[1,2,6], which seems to be confirmed by the conserved
fold structure (Figure 11). The alignment of AtPARPs
and AtRCD1 with HsPARP1, for which the 3D structure
has been solved, allowed for identification of conserved
fold structures as landmarks in A. thaliana PARPs (Figure 11A). Generally, the fold structure is well conserved
and all of the folds that constitute the active site are
present (b sheets 1-6 and a helix 2, Figure 11A). Some
additional plant specific folds not present in the
HsPARP1 are predicted in AtPARP1 and 2, AtRCD1
and AtSROs (Figure 11A and 11B). These additional
predicted features, if present, apparently do not disrupt
the activity in AtPARP1, which was shown to exhibit
PARP activity (Table 2; [44]). The conserved active site
folds also mark the position of the catalytic triad, the
three AAs histidine (H), tyrosine (Y) and glutamic acid
(E), which is conserved in AtPARP1 and 2 but not
AtRCD1 or AtSROs (Figure 11A and 11B; Table 2). The
H333 to L and Y365 to H substitutions at the NAD
binding sites within the HYE catalytic triad of RCD1

(Table 2) suggest that it has lost the ability to bind
NAD.
To test the predictions of activity based on the fold
structure of the PARP domain, we expressed the A.
thaliana full length RCD1 protein and a truncated form
containing the PARP and RST domains (PCT; AAs 241589) as GST-tagged proteins in Escherichia coli. The
recombinant proteins were partially purified by affinity
chromatography with glutathione sepharose and used
for testing NAD binding. Pisum sativum short-chain
alcohol dehydrogenase-like protein A (SAD-A, [45]) was
used as positive control.
NAD binding was investigated by covalent cross-linking of bound NAD by ultraviolet irradiation [46,47].
After UV irradiation of sample mixtures containing
radioactive NAD and the proteins tested, the proteins
were separated by SDS-PAGE and labeling with [a-32PNAD] was monitored by autoradiography. To verify the
specificity of NAD binding, competition experiments
were performed with excess of unlabeled NAD.
The NAD binding of the positive control, SAD-A, was
visible as two bands in an autoradiogram (Figure 12A).
The major band at 30 kDa corresponds to monomeric
form of the enzyme, and the minor band at 60 kDa to
the dimer [45]. The presence of 1000-fold excess of

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Page 13 of 20

Figure 11 Conserved active site fold structure of the PARP domain. Fold-assisted AA alignments of the PARP catalytic core from (A) human
PARP1 (HsPARP1), A. thaliana PARP-1 and -2 (AtPARP1, AtPARP2) and RCD1 (AtRCD1) and (B) A. thaliana RCD1 and SROs (AtSRO1-5). Consensus
of conserved (*) and similar (: and .) AAs and conserved folds (a-helix or b-sheet) are indicated below the alignments. Additionally folds are
shaded in the alignment with grey (a-helix) or yellow (b-sheet) backgrounds. Conserved ADP-ribosyl transferase catalytic triad, composed of
three AAs at the C-terminus of b-sheet 1, middle of b-sheet 2 and N-terminal end of b-sheet 5, is indicated by turquoise background shading
and an (‡) above the alignment. Alignments were performed with T-Coffee at EMBL-EBI http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools and hand-adjusted according
to fold predictions performed with Psipred in the Phyre search [53]. AAs were color-coded according to their biochemical properties as in
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/t-coffee/help.html#color.

Table 2 Characteristics of the putative SRO active sites
Name

Identifier

WWE

Catalytic Core Motif

Loop length
(between b4 and b5)

NAD binding

Predicted Activity

Confirmed Activity

AtPARP1

At4g02390.1

No

H486 Y520 E614

38

yes

PARP

PARP [44]

AtPARP2

At2g31320.1

No

H833 Y867 E960

36

yes

PARP

ND

AtPARP3

At5g22470.1

No

C653 V687 E782

36

yes

PARP

ND

AtRCD1

At1g32230.1

Yes

L333 H365 N428

5

no *

inactive

inactive *

AtSRO1

At2g35510.1

Yes

V329 H361 N422

5

ND

inactive

ND

AtSRO2

At1g23550.1

Yes

Y118 H153 N216

5

ND

inactive

ND

AtSRO3

At1g70440.1

Yes

Y110 H145 K208

5

ND

inactive

ND

AtSRO4

At3g47720.1

Yes

C129 C150 K214

6

ND

inctive

ND

AtSRO5

At5g62520.1

Yes

C113 Y143 K207

5

ND

inactive

ND

HsPARP1

P09874

No

H862 Y896 E988 [24]

37

yes

PARP

PARP

HsPARP7

Q7Z3E1

Yes

H532 Y564 I631 [26]

6

ND

mART

ND

HsPARP10

Q53GL7

No

N886 Y919 I987 [26]

6

yes

mART

mART

HsPARP11

Q9NR21

Yes

H197 Y229 I313 [26]

6

ND

mART

ND
ND

HsPARP12

Q9H0J9

Yes

H564 Y596 I660 [26]

6

ND

mART

HsPARP13

Q7Z2W4

Yes

Y787 Y819 V876 [26]

6

ND

inactive

inactive

HsPARP14

NP_060024

Yes

H1682 Y1714 L1782 [26]

6

yes

mART

mART

Relationship between conserved AA motif of the ADP-ribosyl transferase catalytic triad, the loop length between b-sheets 4 and 5, and predicted or know
catalytic activity of selected A. thaliana and human PARPs and SRO family members. Presence or absence of the WWE domain (PS50918) and catalytic activities
are indicated. Results of this study are marked with an asterisk (*).

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Page 14 of 20

Figure 12 AtRCD1 does not bind NAD and does not have ADP-ribosylation activity. Biochemical analysis of NAD binding and ART activity
of AtRCD1. (A) NAD binding analysis: Autoradiography image of a SDS-PAGE gel showing proteins labeled with [32P-NAD] upon UV irradiation.
SAD-A, RCD1-GST, PCT-GST or GST were incubated with 0.6 μM of [32P-NAD] in absence or presence of 0.6 mM of unlabeled NAD under UV light
(see Methods). (B) Picture of the SDS-PAGE gel shown in (A) stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Positions of RCD1-GST and PCT-GST are
marked on panels (A) and (B) with arrows; asterisks mark the position of the DnaK protein. (C) ART activity analysis: Autoradiography image of
SDS-PAGE gel showing poly-ADP-ribosylation of proteins in presence of [32P-NAD]. HsPARP1, RCD1-GST or PCT-GST in concentration 200 nM
were incubated with 1.3 μM [32P-NAD] (see Methods) in absence or presence of 3 μg of histones. (D) Picture of the SDS-PAGE gel shown in (C)
stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The 70 kDa band represents BSA used as a carrier for protein precipitation. All panels: Unlabeled NAD was
used in the competition experiments. Molecular weight marker sizes (kDa) are indicated on the left side of each panel. The experiment was
repeated three times with similar results, one representative experiment is shown.

unlabeled NAD resulted in the disappearance of both
bands, indicating that the NAD binding was specific
(Figure 12A). In contrast, RCD1-GST, PCT-GST and
GST did not bind NAD (Figure 12A). The weak bands
visible on the autoradiogram at the molecular weights
corresponding to RCD1-GST or PCT-GST (indicated by
arrows in figures 12A and 12B) or GST alone, respectively, did not disappear in presence of unlabeled NAD,
indicating unspecific labeling of the proteins. The 70
kDa band visible in the autoradiogram (Figures 12A and
12B, asterisk) represented a contaminant in the purified

RCD1-GST and PCT-GST samples. It was identified by
mass spectrometry as DnaK molecular chaperone from
E. coli. DnaK protein contains a nucleotide-binding
domain explaining its ability to bind NAD.
These results demonstrated that AtRCD1 does not
bind NAD and thus should not have ART activity. To
verify this, we tested possible poly(ADP-ribosyl) transferase activity of RCD1-GST and PCT-GST directly in a
standard ART activity assay using recombinant
HsPARP1 as a positive control. HsPARP1 exhibited
automodification (Figure 12C, a smear at molecular

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

mass above 116 kDa) but no auto-poly(ADP-ribosyl)
transferase activity was detected for RCD1-GST or
PCT-GST (Figure 12C and 12D). Possible substrate
modification by RCD1-GST or PCT-GST was analyzed
by supplementing the reaction mixture with histones,
which are classical PARP targets. Neither RCD1-GST
nor PCT-GST exhibited detectable PARP or mART
activity (Figure 12C and 12D). Additionally, DREB2A,
the most prominent RCD1 interaction partner, could be
a possible substrate [1]. However, no PARP or mART
activity of RCD1-GST or PCT-GST towards DREB2AGST was detected (data not shown).
In light of these results, it is remarkable that the SROs
structurally resemble PARPs/ARTs so closely. It may be
possible that the PARP domain of AtRCD1 and the
SROs still has an activity related to ADP-ribosylation. A
novel mechanism has been described for HsPARP10,
which lacks the catalytic glutamic acid (E), the third
conserved AA of the catalytic triad (Table 2). HsPARP10
has still retained mART activity via a novel mechanism
in which the active E is provided by the substrate protein [24]. HsPARP10 has a shorter linker sequence
between folds b4 and b5 [24] which facilitates an open
active site configuration necessary for the substrate glutamic acid entry into the active site. AtPARPs
(AtPARP1, 2, and 3) retain a long b4-b5 linker but all
AtSROs have the shorter linker (Table 2) suggesting a
more open active site fold. The bioinformatic analysis
revealed the loss of both conserved NAD contacting H
and Y in the A. thaliana SRO PARP domains making
such a substrate-mediated mART activity unlikely
(AtSRO5 is an exception to this, it has lost the H but
retained the Y). This is supported by our biochemical
analysis which demonstrated that AtRCD1 is not able to
bind NAD, and, consequently, does not have mART or
PARP activity. Other similar changes in the catalytic
triad of the other AtSROs suggest they too may lack the
capacity for NAD binding and ART activity (Table 2).
Interestingly, this is also true for active sites in SROs
from other plant species (Additional file 2), with the
notable exception of P. patens SROs, which bear more
conserved and potentially active catalytic triads.

Page 15 of 20

SROs lies within subgroup Ib, which could be ancestral
to all other SROs. Alternatively, monocots and more
basal vascular plants might have experienced a secondary loss of group II SROs.
While the N-terminal WWE domain is only present in
group I SROs of the structural type A, virtually all SROs
analyzed contain a PARP-like domain and a C-terminal
RST domain (Figure 7B). The conservation of the C-terminus of the SROs suggests functional constraints and a
subsequent requirement for the conservation of a particular structure (Figure 7B). A possible function is the
interaction with transcription factors (Figure 8), which
has been demonstrated for several A. thaliana SROs,
including AtSRO5. For a protein localized to mitochondria [18], its ability to interact with several transcription
factors in Y2H analysis was unexpected. Our analysis of
subcellular localization for AtSRO5 showed that the
protein is localized to several dot-like structures in the
nucleus (Figure 10) which supports the significance of
the TF interactions. Nevertheless, it is possible that
AtSRO5 localizes to the mitochondria under certain
conditions linking TF interactions to retrograde signaling and mitochondrial metabolism [48].
The PARP-like domain is the most conserved feature
of the SROs. However, based on bioinformatic and biochemical evidence (Figures 11 and 12), we suggest that
the SROs do not possess PARP or mART activity.
Nevertheless, the fold structure of the PARP-like
domain is highly conserved (Figure 11). As a comparison, it is estimated, that 10% of the receptor-like protein
kinases encoded in the A. thaliana genome are inactive
but nevertheless expressed and translated and potentially function as co-receptors [49]. What other possible
function or activity might those PARP/ART-like
domains possess? The structural conservation of an
enzymatically inactive domain could facilitate complex
formation or stabilization and be an advantage for the
organism. Regardless of which activity is eventually discovered in the SROs, they have important functions in
plant stress responses and in development.

Methods
Sequence identification and phylogenetic analysis

Conclusions
The SROs are a protein family with a unique domain
architecture which is conserved in all land plants. The
SRO proteins can be subdivided into two groups representing two different structural types. Different plant
groups have experienced expansion of different SRO
groups during evolution. Interestingly, the basal plant
groups, P. patens, a moss, and S. moellendorffi, a lycopodiopsid, as well as monocots possess only group I SROs,
while eudicots additionally contain group II SROs. Our
analysis suggests that the evolutionary origin of the

Protein sequences for SROs of species used in this study
were obtained from the respective projects databases
(see Table 1 for reference) using HMMER and BLAST
searches. Additionally, the genomes of aquatic, photosynthetic, and plant associated microorganisms were
queried, including the green algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and Ostreococcus tauri; the yeasts, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe; the
plant pathogenic fungi, Magnaporthe grisea and Botrytis
cinerea; as well as the photosynthetic cyanobacteria Rhodobacter sphaeroides and Synechocystis sp. The genomes

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

of these microorganisms did not contain genes related
to SROs.
The assembly scaffold of the A. lyrata genome was a
kind donation of Prof. Detlef Weigel. A. lyrata RCD1SRO orthologs were identified by genomic blast with the
A. thaliana RCD1-SRO genomic sequences. The A. lyrata sequences were subsequently spliced according to
the A. thaliana gene models and converted to protein
sequences. Some genomes were excluded due to gene
models of SRO protein family members with significant
dissimilarity to A. thaliana gene models and lack of
cDNA support for these unique gene models.
The protein domains were identified using SMART
[32,33] and ScanProsite [30,31]. cDNA sequences and
ESTs were obtained via BLAST search through the
NCBI
webpage
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
Sequences were, if possible, verified for being full
length by comparison to existing ESTs from available
collections. Some gene models were included for completeness; however, their dissimilarity to A. thaliana
SROs and lack of cDNA support made them questionable: the gene models for OsSRO1d and OsSRO1e predicted long C-terminal extensions but ESTs suggested
that OsSRO1d ended in the PARP domain and OsSRO1e contained a RST domain of normal length.
PpSRO1a and PpSRO1b sequences were likely to be
incomplete as the PARP domain extended until the
end of the predicted protein. PpSRO1c contained a
long C-terminus but ESTs suggested a shorter protein
similar to other SROs. The C-terminal part of
SmSRO1a from S. moellendorffi showed only moderate
similarity to the C-terminus of other SROs. The annotation predicted a long C-terminal extension but EST
support suggested only a short C-terminal domain.
Due to the lack of other SRO sequences from organisms more closely related to S. moellendorffi, we were
unable to determine if the C-terminus of SmSRO1a
represented a unique development or a misannotation.
Two additional putative SROs from S. moellendorffi
were truncated and thus could not be assigned to any
group. These sequences from rice, P. patens, and S.
moellendorffi will require future verification.
Sequence alignments were performed using ClustalW2
[50] and colored using the Boxshade programme http://
www.ch.embnet.org/software/BOX_form.html. Subsequent phylogenetic analysis was performed using Phylip
and MEGA4 [51,52].
Active site alignments were preformed with T-Coffee
at EMBL-EBI http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools using only
sequences of PARP domains as defined above. Fold predictions utilized Psipred in the Phyre search http://www.
sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre[53]. Alignments were then hand
adjusted with the guidance of conserved fold structures.
Catalytic triad positions were determined as the

Page 16 of 20

positions within conserved folds corresponding to the
HYE triad from HsPARP1 and AtPARP1.
Yeast two-hybrid work

Yeast work was conducted as described in [1] using the
GAL4-based ProQuest Y2H system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). 10 mM 3-aminotriazole was used for
eliminating autoactivation in all experiments. The primers used for cloning are described in additional file 3.
Gene expression analysis

The sro5-2 allele was obtained from the GABI-Kat collection at the German Resource Center for Genome
Research (line 325B05) [54]. Microarray hybridizations
(4 biological repeats) and data analysis were performed
as previously described [1]. qPCR experiments for gene
expression analysis were done according to Wrzaczek et
al. [55]. The primers used for qPCR are described in
additional file 3.
Affymetrix raw data was downloaded from NASCArrays http://affymetrix.arabidopsis.info/narrays/experimentbrowse.pl (accession number NASCARRAYS-143,
paraquat; NASCARRAYS-353, ZAT12; NASCARRAYS176, ABA time course experiment 1; NASCARRAYS192, Ibuprofen), ArrayExpress http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
microarray-as/ae/ (accession numbers E-GEOD-12856,
Blumeria graminis sp. hordei; E-GEOD-5684, Botrytis
cinerea; E-GEOD-5743, 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid
(2,4-D); E-ATMX-13, Methyl Jasmonate; E-MEXP-550
polychromatic radiation with decreasing short-wave cutoff in the UV range (UV-B experiment); E-MEXP-739,
Syringolin A; E-MEXP-1797, Rotenone), Gene Expression Omnibus http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ (accession numbers GSE5615, Elicitors LPS, HrpZ, Flg22 and
NPP1; GSE5685, Virulent and avirulent Pseudomonas
syringae; GSE9955, BTH experiment 1; GDS417
E. cichoracearum; GSE5530, H2O2; GSE5621, Cold time
course experiment; GSE5622, Osmotic stress time
course experiment; GSE5623, Salt time course experiment; GSE5624, Drought time course experiment;
GSE5722, O 3 ; GSE12887, Norflurazon; GSE10732,
OPDA and Phytoprostane; GSE7112, ABA experiment
2) and The Integrated Microarray Database System
http://ausubellab.mgh.harvard.edu/imds (Experiment
name: BTH time course, BTH experiment 2).
The raw Affymetrix data was preprocessed with RMA
using probe set annotations (custom.cdf files) from
http://brainarray.mbni.med.umich.edu/, version 11.0.1.
Biological repeats of each experiment were combined by
computing a mean of the measured gene expression.
Gene expression was summarized by computing a log2
ratio of the treatment and control expressions (differential expression, DE). A visualization of the DE values is
shown in figure 2. Variation of differential expression in

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

an experiment e,  e , was estimated by summing the
ˆ2
variances of (logarithm of) treatment and control gene
expressions.
Parametric bootstrapping was implemented by generating 1000 samples for each experiment and each gene
from a Gaussian distribution with the estimated DE as
the mean and  e as the variance.
ˆ2
Bootstrap samples were discretized to down-regulated
(log2 DE<-1), no regulation (-1 ≥ log2 DE ≤ 1), and upregulated (log2 DE>1) genes. Bayesian agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm was then applied to the discretized bootstrap data [56]. The Bayesian hierarchical
clustering algorithm computes the best number of clusters
by Bayesian hypothesis testing. For each pair of genes (and
experiments, depending on the clustering direction), the
number of times they were assigned to the same cluster
was computed. These gene (or experiment) similarities
were then used as distances for computing the hierarchical
clustering (Ward method) shown in figure 2.
Protein localization

The localization of AtSRO5 was predicted using Predotar v. 1.03 http://urgi.versailles.inra.fr/predotar/predotar.
html, TargetP 1.1 [57], WoLF PSORT [58] and MitoProtII - v1.101 [59]. None of the programs predicted mitochondrial localization. For in planta study of the
localization, AtSRO5 was cloned into the pB7FWG2.0
[60] binary vector containing eGFP as C-terminal fusion
to the protein using the primers described in additional
file 3. YFP in pGREENII binary vector was used for
nuclear and cytoplasmic localization control [1]. Threeday old A. thaliana seedlings were used for transient
expression as described in [61]. The fluorescent proteins
were visualized using confocal laser scanning microscopy after 36 hours of co-cultivation. The mitochondrial localization control line mt-yk (N16264) was
obtained from Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre
and imaged at the same age as the transiently transformed plants.
Protein expression and purification

Full-length AtRCD1 and its truncated version, PCT, consisting of PARP and RST domains (AAs 241-589) were
cloned into pGEX4T-1 for N-terminal GST fusion using
the primers listed in additional file 3. After sequencing,
the constructs were transformed into the E. coli strain
BL21 (DE3) CodonPlus RIL for protein production.
LB medium containing ampicillin (100 μg ml -1 ) and
chloramphenicol (50 μg ml-1) was inoculated with 1/50
volumes of overnight bacterial culture and grown at 37°C
until OD600 reached 0.6-0.8. Expression of PCT-GST and
DREB2A-GST was induced by adding isopropyl-b-Dgalactoside (IPTG) to a final concentration of 0.5 mM,
and the culture was transferred to 28°C. After 4 hours,

Page 17 of 20

the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 g and
stored at -20°C.
For RCD1-GST expression, benzyl alcohol was added
to the cell culture with OD600 0.5-0.6 to a final concentration of 10 mM and the cells were grown for additional
30 min at 22°C [62]. Protein expression was induced by
0.1 mM of IPTG. After 16 hours at 22°C, the cells were
harvested by centrifugation at 5000 g at room temperature, resuspended in original volume of fresh LB medium
without IPTG and grown for additional 2-3 hours at 22°
C. Finally, the cells were harvested by centrifugation at
5000 g and stored at -20°C. The cell pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer (1/20 of initial culture volume)
consisting of 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5
mM DTT, protease inhibitors cocktail (Complete, Roche
Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). The cells
were lysed by addition of lysozyme (Roche) to a concentration of 0.2 mg ml-1 and incubation for 30 min at 4°C
with gentle shaking. Released DNA was then digested by
DNase I (Roche) at final concentration of 0.02 mg ml-1 in
presence of 5 mM MgCl2 and incubation for another 30
min at 4°C. The cell lysates was clarified by centrifugation
at 20000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The GST tagged proteins
were purified by affinity chromatography using 1-ml
GSTrap columns (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK)
according to manufacturer’s instructions. SAD-A-His
protein was expressed and purified as described [45].
Protein concentration was determined by Bradford
method using Protein Assay reagent (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA, USA).
UV photoaffinity labeling

Samples of total volume 30 μl containing 30 pmol of
protein in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 5
mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT and 0.6 μM of [a- 32 P NAD]
(0.8 mCi mmol-1) (NEN, PerkinElmer, Inc. Boston, MA,
USA) were incubated in a 96-well plate on an ice bath.
Unlabeled NAD in concentration 0.6 mM was added to
the mixtures in competition experiment. The UV irradiation was performed for 15 min as described in [46].
The proteins were then precipitated by addition of equal
volume of ice-cold 22% trichloroacetic acid and incubation on ice for at least 30 min. After centrifugation for
10 min at 16000 g the protein pellet was washed once
with cold acetone, air-dried, and resuspended in 10 μl of
SDS-PAGE sample buffer [63].
In vitro PARP activity assay

Samples corresponding to 200 nM of proteins were
incubated for 20 min at 22°C in assay buffer (50 μl) consisting of 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl,
5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 10 μg ml -1 activated DNA
(calf thymus nicked DNA, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, USA) and 1.3 μM [a-32P NAD] (0.8 mCi mmol-1).

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

Recombinant HsPARP1 (Sigma) was used as a positive
control. 3 μg of total histones (calf thymus histones,
Roche) or DREB2A-GST were added as acceptor proteins. 1 mM unlabeled NAD was added in competition
experiment. The reaction was stopped by addition of
ice-cold trichloroacetic acid as described above. 5 μg
BSA were added to the reaction mixture just before protein precipitation as a carrier.
SDS-PAGE and autoradiography

The proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE (12% or
4-15%) according to the protocol of [63]. After protein
visualization with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, the gels
were dried and subjected to autoradiography. The autoradiography images were analysed with Fuji BAS-1500
phosphoimager.
In-gel digestion and mass spectrometry

In-gel digestion and sample preparation for mass spectrometry was performed as described [64]. MALDI TOF
(matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionisation time-offlight) analysis was performed on reflector mode on a
Voyager DE-PRO mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
Additional file 1: Neighbour-joining phylogenetic tree of
Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica SROs. The gene duplication leading
to the AtRCD1/AtSRO1, AtSRO2/AtSRO3 and AtSRO4/AtSRO5 gene pairs in
Arabidopsis is also present in Brassica. Individual protein-coding ESTs from
Brassica can be assigned to AtRCD1 or AtSRO1, AtSRO2 or AtSRO3 or
AtSRO5. No EST was identified for AtSRO4. This indicates that the gene
duplication event leading to the gene pairs occurred early during the
evolution of the Brassicaceae family before the split between the
Arabidopsis and Brassica genera. Representative ESTs from Brassica napus,
Brassica rapa and Brassica oleracea coding for SRO proteins were
extracted via NCBI blast and the PARP domain was identified using
Prosite. The PARP domains of the Brassica SROs were aligned with the
PARP domains of the members of the A. thaliana and A. lyrata SRO
protein families an unrooted Neighbour-joining tree was constructed
using MEGA4.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11170-S1.PNG ]
Additional file 2: Active site alignments for all plant SROs.
Alignments of the region around the active site catalytic triad of all SROs
analyzed here. Alignments were hand-adjusted according to the
positions of conserved folds in AtRCD1, AtPARP1 and AtPARP2 as in
figure 10, only the regions immediately surrounding the predicted
catalytic amino acids (highlighted in red) are presented.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11170-S2.PDF ]
Additional file 3: Primers used for analysis. All primer sequences used
for qPCR anaylsis in the manuscript are listed in this file.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11170-S3.PDF ]

Acknowledgements
Tuomas Puukko and Marjukka Uuskallio are acknowledged for superb
technical assistance. We thank Dr. Mikael Brosché for his insight and

Page 18 of 20

comments on the manuscript and Prof. Åke Strid for providing the SAD-A-His
expression vector. The funding sources acknowledged for this work are:
Finnish Academy Centre of Excellence program (2006-2011) and research
grant to JK (# 121576), Postdoctoral grant to KO (# 115034) and Helsinki
University PostDoctoral Grant to MW. PJ and TB were supported by the Viikki
Graduate School in Biosciences. The REGIA TF ORF Library was generated as
part of the EU-funded project REGIA (http://cordis.europa.eu/;QLG-CT1199900876) and we acknowledge Dr. Franziska Turck for providing the collection
in the Y2H strains. Prof. Gerco Angenent and Dr. Richard Immink are gratefully
acknowledged for their collaboration in the Y2H work. We thank Dr. Saijaliisa
Kangasjärvi (University of Turku, Finland) for excess light treated plant material
and Dr. Sophia Mersmann (Max-Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research)
and Dr. Silke Robatzek (The Sainsbury Laboratories, UK) for plant material. Dr.
Jorma Vahala is acknowledged for help with the P. trichocarpa genome and
Mr. Korbinian Schneeberger and Prof. Detlef Weigel for the A. lyrata genome.
We thank Dr. Natalia Battchikova (University of Turku, Finland) for mass
spectrometric analysis of AtRCD1-copurifying protein and acknowledge the
national Finnish DNA Microarray Centre (Turku Centre for Biotechnology) for
the manufacturing of microarray slides.
Authors’ contributions
PJ, KO, MW, JPV and JK designed research. PJ, KO, MW, JPV, TB, RAR and JS
carried out research. PJ, KO, MW, JPV, TB, JS and JK analyzed the data. PJ,
KO, MW and JK wrote the paper. All authors have read and approved the
final manuscript.
Received: 6 November 2009 Accepted: 12 March 2010
Published: 12 March 2010
References
1. Jaspers P, Blomster T, Brosché M, Salojärvi J, Ahlfors R, Vainonen JP,
Reddy RA, Immink R, Angenent G, Turck F, Overmyer K, Kangasjärvi J:
Unequally redundant RCD1 and SRO1 mediate stress and
developmental responses and interact with transcription factors. Plant J
2009, 60(2):268-79.
2. Teotia S, Lamb RS: The paralogous genes RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH
1 and SIMILAR TO RCD ONE 1 have partially redundant functions during
Arabidopsis thaliana development. Plant Physiol 2009, 151(1):180-98.
3. Belles-Boix E, Babiychuk E, Van Montagu M, Inzé D, Kushnir S: CEO1, a new
protein from Arabidopsis thaliana, protects yeast against oxidative
damage. FEBS Lett 2000, 482(1-2):19-24.
4. Overmyer K, Tuominen H, Kettunen R, Betz C, Langebartels C,
Sandermann H, Kangasjärvi J: Ozone-sensitive Arabidopsis rcd1 mutant
reveals opposite roles for ethylene and jasmonate signaling pathways in
regulating superoxide-dependent cell death. Plant Cell 2000,
12(10):1849-62.
5. Ahlfors R, Lång S, Overmyer K, Jaspers P, Brosché M, Tauriainen A, Kollist H,
Tuominen H, Belles-Boix E, Piippo M, Inzé D, Palva ET, Kangasjärvi J:
Arabidopsis RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1 belongs to the WWE
protein-protein interaction domain protein family and modulates
abscisic acid, ethylene, and methyl jasmonate responses. Plant Cell 2004,
16(7):1925-37.
6. Ahlfors R, Macioszek V, Rudd J, Brosché M, Schlichting R, Scheel D,
Kangasjärvi J: Stress hormone-independent activation and nuclear
translocation of mitogen-activated protein kinases in Arabidopsis
thaliana during ozone exposure. Plant J 2004, 40(4):512-22.
7. Fujibe T, Saji H, Arakawa K, Yabe N, Takeuchi Y, Yamamoto KT: A methyl
viologen-resistant mutant of Arabidopsis, which is allelic to ozonesensitive rcd1, is tolerant to supplemental ultraviolet-B irradiation. Plant
Physiol 2004, 134(1):275-85.
8. Katiyar-Agarwal S, Zhu J, Kim K, Agarwal M, Fu X, Huang A, Zhu JK: The
plasma membrane Na+/H+ antiporter SOS1 interacts with RCD1 and
functions in oxidative stress tolerance in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2006, 103(49):18816-21.
9. Ahlfors R, Brosché M, Kollist H, Kangasjärvi J: Nitric oxide modulates
ozone-induced cell death, hormone biosynthesis and gene expression in
Arabidopsis. Plant J 2008, 58(1):1-12.
10. Briggs GC, Osmont KS, Shindo C, Sibout R, Hardtke CS: Unequal genetic
redundancies in Arabidopsis–a neglected phenomenon? Trends Plant Sci
2006, 11(10):492-8.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

11. Caruso A, Chefdor F, Carpin S, Depierreux C, Delmotte FM, Kahlem G,
Morabito D: Physiological characterization and identification of genes
differentially expressed in response to drought induced by PEG 6000 in
Populus canadensis leaves. J Plant Physiol 2008, 165(9):932-41.
12. da Cruz Gallo de Carvalho MC, Caldas DGG, Carneiro RT, Moon DH,
Salvatierra GR, Franceschini LM, de Andrade A, Celedon PAF, Oda S,
Labate CA: SAGE transcript profiling of the juvenile cambial region of
Eucalyptus grandis. Tree Physiol 2008, 28(6):905-19.
13. Quaggiotti S, Barcaccia G, Schiavon M, Nicolé S, Galla G, Rossignolo V,
Soattin M, Malagoli M: Phytoremediation of chromium using Salix
species: cloning ESTs and candidate genes involved in the Cr response.
Gene 2007, 402(1-2):68-80.
14. Walter S, Brennan JM, Arunachalam C, Ansari KI, Hu X, Khan MR, Trognitz F,
Trognitz B, Leonard G, Egan D, Doohan FM: Components of the gene
network associated with genotype-dependent response of wheat to the
Fusarium mycotoxin deoxynivalenol. Funct Integr Genomics 2008,
8(4):421-7.
15. Sanchez-Ballesta MT, Lluch Y, Gosalbes MJ, Zacarias L, Granell A,
Lafuente MT: A survey of genes differentially expressed during long-term
heat-induced chilling tolerance in citrus fruit. Planta 2003, 218(1):65-70.
16. Bechtold U, Richard O, Zamboni A, Gapper C, Geisler M, Pogson B,
Karpinski S, Mullineaux PM: Impact of chloroplastic- and extracellularsourced ROS on high light-responsive gene expression in Arabidopsis.
J Exp Bot 2008, 59(2):121-33.
17. Taylor NL, Heazlewood JL, Day DA, Millar AH: Differential impact of
environmental stresses on the pea mitochondrial proteome. Mol Cell
Proteomics 2005, 4(8):1122-33.
18. Borsani O, Zhu J, Verslues PE, Sunkar R, Zhu JK: Endogenous siRNAs
derived from a pair of natural cis-antisense transcripts regulate salt
tolerance in Arabidopsis. Cell 2005, 123(7):1279-91.
19. Babajani G, Effendya J, Plant AL: Sl-SROl1 increases salt tolerance and is a
member of the radical-induced cell death 1-similar to RCD1 gene family
of tomato. Plant Science 2009, 176(2):214-222.
20. Aravind L: The WWE domain: a common interaction module in protein
ubiquitination and ADP ribosylation. Trends Biochem Sci 2001, 26(5):273-5.
21. Zweifel ME, Leahy DJ, Barrick D: Structure and Notch receptor binding of
the tandem WWE domain of Deltex. Structure 2005, 13(11):1599-611.
22. Schreiber V, Dantzer F, Ame JC, de Murcia G: Poly(ADP-ribose): novel
functions for an old molecule. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006, 7(7):517-28.
23. Hakmé A, Huber A, Dollé P, Schreiber V: The macroPARP genes Parp-9
and Parp-14 are developmentally and differentially regulated in mouse
tissues. Dev Dyn 2008, 237(1):209-15.
24. Kleine H, Poreba E, Lesniewicz K, Hassa PO, Hottiger MO, Litchfield DW,
Shilton BH, Lüscher B: Substrate-assisted catalysis by PARP10 limits its
activity to mono-ADP-ribosylation. Mol Cell 2008, 32(1):57-69.
25. Hassa PO, Haenni SS, Elser M, Hottiger MO: Nuclear ADP-ribosylation
reactions in mammalian cells: where are we today and where are we
going? Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2006, 70(3):789-829.
26. Otto H, Reche PA, Bazan F, Dittmar K, Haag F, Koch-Nolte F: In silico
characterization of the family of PARP-like poly(ADP-ribosyl)transferases
(pARTs). BMC Genomics 2005, 6:139.
27. Corda D, Di Girolamo M: Functional aspects of protein mono-ADPribosylation. EMBO J 2003, 22(9):1953-8.
28. Ma S, Bohnert HJ: Integration of Arabidopsis thaliana stress-related
transcript profiles, promoter structures, and cell-specific expression.
Genome Biol 2007, 8(4):R49.
29. Li L, Foster CM, Gan Q, Nettleton D, James MG, Myers AM, Wurtele ES:
Identification of the novel protein QQS as a component of the starch
metabolic network in Arabidopsis leaves. Plant J 2009, 58(3):485-98.
30. de Castro E, Sigrist CJA, Gattiker A, Bulliard V, Langendijk-Genevaux PS,
Gasteiger E, Bairoch A, Hulo N: ScanProsite: detection of PROSITE
signature matches and ProRule-associated functional and structural
residues in proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34(Web Server):W362-5.
31. Hulo N, Bairoch A, Bulliard V, Cerutti L, De Castro E, LangendijkGenevaux PS, Pagni M, Sigrist CJA: The PROSITE database. Nucleic Acids Res
2006, 34(Database):D227-30.
32. Letunic I, Goodstadt L, Dickens NJ, Doerks T, Schultz J, Mott R, Ciccarelli F,
Copley RR, Ponting CP, Bork P: Recent improvements to the SMART
domain-based sequence annotation resource. Nucleic Acids Res 2002,
30(1):242-4.

Page 19 of 20

33. Letunic I, Doerks T, Bork P: SMART 6: recent updates and new
developments. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37(Database):D229-32.
34. Tang H, Bowers JE, Wang X, Ming R, Alam M, Paterson AH: Synteny and
collinearity in plant genomes. Science 2008, 320(5875):486-8.
35. Romanel EAC, Schrago CG, Couñago RM, Russo CAM, Alves-Ferreira M:
Evolution of the B3 DNA binding superfamily: new insights into REM
family gene diversification. PLoS One 2009, 4(6):e5791.
36. Sonnhammer ELL, Koonin EV: Orthology, paralogy and proposed
classification for paralog subtypes. Trends Genet 2002, 18(12):619-20.
37. Sanderson MJ, Thorne JL, Wikström N, Bremer K: Molecular evidence on
plant divergence times. American Journal of Botany 2004, 91:1656-1665.
38. Wright KJ, Marr MT, Tjian R: TAF4 nucleates a core subcomplex of TFIID
and mediates activated transcription from a TATA-less promoter. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(33):12347-52.
39. Lago C, Clerici E, Mizzi L, Colombo L, Kater MM: TBP-associated factors in
Arabidopsis. Gene 2004, 342(2):231-41.
40. Paz-Ares J, The Regia Consortium: REGIA, an EU project on functional
genomics of transcription factors from Arabidopsis thaliana. Comp Funct
Genomics 2002, 3(2):102-8.
41. Cannino G, Di Liegro CM, Rinaldi AM: Nuclear-mitochondrial interaction.
Mitochondrion 2007, 7(6):359-66.
42. Wei Y, Liu S, Lausen J, Woodrell C, Cho S, Biris N, Kobayashi N, Wei Y,
Yokoyama S, Werner MH: A TAF4-homology domain from the corepressor
ETO is a docking platform for positive and negative regulators of
transcription. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2007, 14(7):653-61.
43. Marr MT: TAF4 takes flight. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(5):1295-6.
44. Doucet-Chabeaud G, Godon C, Brutesco C, de Murcia G, Kazmaier M:
Ionising radiation induces the expression of PARP-1 and PARP-2 genes in
Arabidopsis. Mol Genet Genomics 2001, 265(6):954-63.
45. Scherbak N, Brosché M, Ala-Häivälä A, Strid H, Ohrfelt A, Nilsson F, Strid A:
Expression of Pisum sativum SAD polypeptides in production hosts and
in planta: tetrameric organization of the protein. Protein Expr Purif 2009,
63(1):18-25.
46. Carroll SF, Lory S, Collier RJ: Ligand interactions of diphtheria toxin. III.
Direct photochemical cross-linking of ATP and NAD to toxin. J Biol Chem
1980, 255(24):12020-4.
47. Ma Y, Ludden PW: Role of the dinitrogenase reductase arginine 101
residue in dinitrogenase reductase ADP-ribosyltransferase binding, NAD
binding, and cleavage. J Bacteriol 2001, 183(1):250-6.
48. McBride HM, Neuspiel M, Wasiak S: Mitochondria: more than just a
powerhouse. Curr Biol 2006, 16(14):R551-60.
49. Castells E, Casacuberta JM: Signalling through kinase-defective domains:
the prevalence of atypical receptor-like kinases in plants. J Exp Bot 2007,
58(13):3503-11.
50. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23(21):2947-8.
51. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP - Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2).
Cladistics 1989, 5:164-166.
52. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(8):1596-9.
53. Kelley LA, Sternberg MJE: Protein structure prediction on the Web: a case
study using the Phyre server. Nat Protoc 2009, 4(3):363-71.
54. Rosso MG, Li Y, Strizhov N, Reiss B, Dekker K, Weisshaar B: An Arabidopsis
thaliana T-DNA mutagenized population (GABI-Kat) for flanking
sequence tag-based reverse genetics. Plant Mol Biol 2003, 53(1-2):247-59.
55. Wrzaczek M, Brosché M, Kollist H, Kangasjärvi J: Arabidopsis GRI is involved
in the regulation of cell death induced by extracellular ROS. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(13):5412-7.
56. Savage RS, Heller K, Xu Y, Ghahramani Z, Truman WM, Grant M, Denby KJ,
Wild DL: R/BHC: fast Bayesian hierarchical clustering for microarray data.
BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:242.
57. Emanuelsson O, Nielsen H, Brunak S, von Heijne G: Predicting subcellular
localization of proteins based on their N-terminal amino acid sequence.
J Mol Biol 2000, 300:1005-16.
58. Horton P, Park KJ, Obayashi T, Fujita N, Harada H, Collier CA, Nakai K: WoLF
PSORT: protein localization predictor. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:
W585-W587.

Jaspers et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/170

59. Claros MG, Vincens P: Computational method to predict mitochondrially
imported proteins and their targeting sequences. Eur J Biochem 1996,
241(3):779-86.
60. Karimi M, Inzé D, Depicker A: Gateway vectors for Agrobacteriummediated plant transformation. Trends Plant Sci 2002, 5(5):193-5.
61. Li JF, Park E, von Arnim AG, Nebenführ A: The FAST technique: a
simplified Agrobacterium-based transformation method for transient
gene expression analysis in seedlings of Arabidopsis and other plant
species. Plant Methods 2009, 5:6.
62. de Marco A, Vigh L, Diamant S, Goloubinoff P: Native folding of
aggregation-prone recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli by
osmolytes, plasmid- or benzyl alcohol-overexpressed molecular
chaperones. Cell Stress Chaperones 2005, 10(4):329-39.
63. Laemmli UK: Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the
head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 1970, 227(5259):680-5.
64. Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mann M: Mass spectrometric sequencing
of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 1996,
68(5):850-8.
65. The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative: Analysis of the genome sequence of
the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 2000, 408(6814):796-815.
66. The International Brachypodium Initiative: Genome sequencing and
analysis of the model grass Brachypodium distachyon. Nature 2010,
463(7282):763-8.
67. Yu J, Hu S, Wang J, Wong GKS, Li S, Liu B, Deng Y, Dai L, Zhou Y, Zhang X,
Cao M, Liu J, Sun J, Tang J, Chen Y, Huang X, Lin W, Ye C, Tong W, Cong L,
Geng J, Han Y, Li L, Li W, Hu G, Huang X, Li W, Li J, Liu Z, Li L, Liu J, Qi Q,
Liu J, Li L, Li T, Wang X, Lu H, Wu T, Zhu M, Ni P, Han H, Dong W, Ren X,
Feng X, Cui P, Li X, Wang H, Xu X, Zhai W, Xu Z, Zhang J, He S, Zhang J,
Xu J, Zhang K, Zheng X, Dong J, Zeng W, Tao L, Ye J, Tan J, Ren X, Chen X,
He J, Liu D, Tian W, Tian C, Xia H, Bao Q, Li G, Gao H, Cao T, Wang J,
Zhao W, Li P, Chen W, Wang X, Zhang Y, Hu J, Wang J, Liu S, Yang J,
Zhang G, Xiong Y, Li Z, Mao L, Zhou C, Zhu Z, Chen R, Hao B, Zheng W,
Chen S, Guo W, Li G, Liu S, Tao M, Wang J, Zhu L, Yuan L, Yang H: A draft
sequence of the rice genome (Oryza sativa L. ssp. indica). Science 2002,
296(5565):79-92.
68. Rensing SA, Lang D, Zimmer AD, Terry A, Salamov A, Shapiro H,
Nishiyama T, Perroud PF, Lindquist EA, Kamisugi Y, Tanahashi T,
Sakakibara K, Fujita T, Oishi K, Shin-I T, Kuroki Y, Toyoda A, Suzuki Y,
Hashimoto SI, Yamaguchi K, Sugano S, Kohara Y, Fujiyama A, Anterola A,
Aoki S, Ashton N, Barbazuk WB, Barker E, Bennetzen JL, Blankenship R,
Cho SH, Dutcher SK, Estelle M, Fawcett JA, Gundlach H, Hanada K, Heyl A,
Hicks KA, Hughes J, Lohr M, Mayer K, Melkozernov A, Murata T, Nelson DR,
Pils B, Prigge M, Reiss B, Renner T, Rombauts S, Rushton PJ, Sanderfoot A,
Schween G, Shiu SH, Stueber K, Theodoulou FL, Tu H, Peer Van de Y,
Verrier PJ, Waters E, Wood A, Yang L, Cove D, Cuming AC, Hasebe M,
Lucas S, Mishler BD, Reski R, Grigoriev IV, Quatrano RS, Boore JL: The
Physcomitrella genome reveals evolutionary insights into the conquest
of land by plants. Science 2008, 319(5859):64-9.
69. Tuskan GA, Difazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U,
Putnam N, Ralph S, Rombauts S, Salamov A, Schein J, Sterck L, Aerts A,
Bhalerao RR, Bhalerao RP, Blaudez D, Boerjan W, Brun A, Brunner A, Busov V,
Campbell M, Carlson J, Chalot M, Chapman J, Chen GL, Cooper D,
Coutinho PM, Couturier J, Covert S, Cronk Q, Cunningham R, Davis J,
Degroeve S, Déjardin A, Depamphilis C, Detter J, Dirks B, Dubchak I,
Duplessis S, Ehlting J, Ellis B, Gendler K, Goodstein D, Gribskov M,
Grimwood J, Groover A, Gunter L, Hamberger B, Heinze B, Helariutta Y,
Henrissat B, Holligan D, Holt R, Huang W, Islam-Faridi N, Jones S, JonesRhoades M, Jorgensen R, Joshi C, Kangasjärvi J, Karlsson J, Kelleher C,
Kirkpatrick R, Kirst M, Kohler A, Kalluri U, Larimer F, Leebens-Mack J,
Leplé JC, Locascio P, Lou Y, Lucas S, Martin F, Montanini B, Napoli C,
Nelson DR, Nelson C, Nieminen K, Nilsson O, Pereda V, Peter G, Philippe R,
Pilate G, Poliakov A, Razumovskaya J, Richardson P, Rinaldi C, Ritland K,
Rouzé P, Ryaboy D, Schmutz J, Schrader J, Segerman B, Shin H, Siddiqui A,
Sterky F, Terry A, Tsai CJ, Uberbacher E, Unneberg P, Vahala J, Wall K,
Wessler S, Yang G, Yin T, Douglas C, Marra M, Sandberg G, Peer Van de Y,
Rokhsar D: The genome of black cottonwood, Populus trichocarpa (Torr.
& Gray). Science 2006, 313(5793):1596-604.
70. Velasco R, Zharkikh A, Troggio M, Cartwright DA, Cestaro A, Pruss D,
Pindo M, Fitzgerald LM, Vezzulli S, Reid J, Malacarne G, Iliev D, Coppola G,
Wardell B, Micheletti D, Macalma T, Facci M, Mitchell JT, Perazzolli M,
Eldredge G, Gatto P, Oyzerski R, Moretto M, Gutin N, Stefanini M, Chen Y,

Page 20 of 20

Segala C, Davenport C, Demattè L, Mraz A, Battilana J, Stormo K, Costa F,
Tao Q, Si-Ammour A, Harkins T, Lackey A, Perbost C, Taillon B, Stella A,
Solovyev V, Fawcett JA, Sterck L, Vandepoele K, Grando SM, Toppo S,
Moser C, Lanchbury J, Bogden R, Skolnick M, Sgaramella V, Bhatnagar SK,
Fontana P, Gutin A, Peer Van de Y, Salamini F, Viola R: A high quality draft
consensus sequence of the genome of a heterozygous grapevine
variety. PLoS One 2007, 2(12):e1326.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-170
Cite this article as: Jaspers et al.: The RST and PARP-like domain
containing SRO protein family: analysis of protein structure, function
and conservation in land plants. BMC Genomics 2010 11:170.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
