<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genome analysis and comparative genomics of a Giardia intestinalis assemblage E isolate</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:543. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-543"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jon Jerlström-Hultqvist"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Genome analysis and comparative genomics
of a Giardia intestinalis assemblage E isolate
Jon Jerlström-Hultqvist1, Oscar Franzén2,3, Johan Ankarklev1, Feifei Xu4, Eva Nohýnková5, Jan O Andersson4,
Staffan G Svärd1, Björn Andersson2,3*

Abstract
Background: Giardia intestinalis is a protozoan parasite that causes diarrhea in a wide range of mammalian
species. To further understand the genetic diversity between the Giardia intestinalis species, we have performed
genome sequencing and analysis of a wild-type Giardia intestinalis sample from the assemblage E group, isolated
from a pig.
Results: We identified 5012 protein coding genes, the majority of which are conserved compared to the
previously sequenced genomes of the WB and GS strains in terms of microsynteny and sequence identity. Despite
this, there is an unexpectedly large number of chromosomal rearrangements and several smaller structural changes
that are present in all chromosomes. Novel members of the VSP, NEK Kinase and HCMP gene families were
identified, which may reveal possible mechanisms for host specificity and new avenues for antigenic variation. We
used comparative genomics of the three diverse Giardia intestinalis isolates P15, GS and WB to define a core
proteome for this species complex and to identify lineage-specific genes. Extensive analyses of polymorphisms in
the core proteome of Giardia revealed differential rates of divergence among cellular processes.
Conclusions: Our results indicate that despite a well conserved core of genes there is significant genome variation
between Giardia isolates, both in terms of gene content, gene polymorphisms, structural chromosomal variations
and surface molecule repertoires. This study improves the annotation of the Giardia genomes and enables the
identification of functionally important variation.

Background
Giardia intestinalis (syn G. lamblia and G. duodenalis)
is a flagellated protozoan parasite that belongs to the
diplomonad group, which includes both parasitic and
free living species. During the course of evolution this
organism has adapted to a parasitic life-style, which
involves passing through an infectious cyst stage
and subsequently into the vegetative trophozoite stage.
G. intestinalis infects humans and a broad range of
other mammals including wild and domestic animals,
and causes diarrhea. The parasite spreads through
the fecal-oral route and constitutes a serious health problem in developing countries, where it contributes to
malnutrition and growth inhibition in children [1,2]. In
industrialized countries, waterborne outbreaks of G.
* Correspondence: bjorn.andersson@ki.se
2
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Box 285, SE171 77 Stockholm, Sweden
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

intestinalis continue to be a health concern in public
water supplies and recreational waters. Highly resistant
G. intestinalis cysts are able to survive from weeks to
months in cold water, and the infectious dose can be as
low as 10 cysts [3,4]. Many G. intestinalis infections do
not give rise to symptoms and chronic carriers of G.
intestinalis have been documented and these are sources
of new infective cysts [5,6]. In addition to being an
important mammalian pathogen G. intestinalis is an
interesting model organism since it has been suggested
to be a primitive, early-branching eukaryote. However,
recently a number of eukaryotic features have been
described in G. intestinalis [7]: a putative nucleolus has
been identified [8]; a vestigial mitochondrial organelle
called the mitosome has been confirmed [9]; and the
prokaryote-like metabolic pathways that have been identified are most probably a result of horizontal gene
transfer [10]. Even so, G. intestinalis is unusual by having two identical and transcriptionally active nuclei, no

© 2010 Jerlström-Hultqvist et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

peroxisomes as well as a lack of a recognizable stacked
Golgi-apparatus in vegetative cells [2]. The genome of G.
intestinalis is small (the haploid size is ~11.7 Mb) compared to most sequenced eukaryotic genomes and was
first described by Morrison et al [11]. Each nucleus of
the best studied G. intestinalis isolate WB contains a
diploid set of 5 major chromosomes that are inherited
individually [12,13]. Substantial karyotype variability has
been reported among G. intestinalis isolates, most likely
caused by the hypervariable subtelomeric regions [14].
Compared to some other unicellular species, eg. Trichomonas vaginalis, Trypanosoma cruzi, and even the diplomonad Spironucleus vortens, the G. intestinalis genome
has not undergone a massive repeat expansion, possibly
due to evolutionary constraints that act upon the genome
or because a large scale proliferation of mobile elements
has not occurred. The genome of G. intestinalis is compact in terms of intergenic space and non-coding regions.
Promoters and untranslated regions are minimal and
only four introns have been identified [11], which is consistent with the features of a compact genome.
G. intestinalis has previously been considered to be a
single species, mainly due to similarity in morphology
between different isolates. However, based on the
genetic variation between strains, G. intestinalis can be
considered to be a species complex [15,16]. Seven
assemblages (genotypes) have been confirmed as distinct
evolutionary lineages, by enzyme electrophoretic pattern
studies and phylogenetics [17,18]. Moreover, sequence
analysis has been used to stratify isolates into these
groups, mainly based on the genes glutamate dehydrogenase, beta-giardin, elongation factor-1 alpha, triose
phosphate isomerase and small subunit rRNA. Furthermore, a growing number of studies have shown
phenotypic differences regarding metabolism and biochemistry, growth rates (both in vivo and in vitro), drug
sensitivity, pH preference, infectivity, susceptibility to
the G. intestinalis dsRNA virus and clinical features
[19,18]. However, no genetic factors guiding host
specificity or adaptability have been identified so far,
possibly due to the limited genetic tools available for
G. intestinalis.
Assemblages A and B are the only assemblages known
to infect humans, C and D infect dogs, group E infects
hoofed animals, including cattle, sheep, goats, pigs,
water buffaloes and mufflons, F infects cats and G is
restricted to rodents. One recent study analyzed the
genetic variation from a large number of assemblage A
and B isolates [20]. It has been proposed that assemblages A and B are distinct species, with the species
names G. duodenalis for assemblage A and G. enterica
for assemblage B [16]. However, the degree of genetic
variation between other assemblages than A and B is
largely unknown.

Page 2 of 15

Whole genome data is important to establish phylogenetic relationships, to identify genotype specific markers
for epidemiological studies and offers a novel approach
to understand the genetic diversity on the subspecies
level. Furthermore, comparative genomics is a powerful
tool to reveal insights into the evolutionary history of
microbial pathogens and can provide information as to
how host specificity and virulence is determined. The
genome-wide genetic variation in the G. intestinalis species complex remains largely unexplored, so far only
two isolates from two assemblages have been subject to
whole genome sequencing. The first G. intestinalis genome to be sequenced was the WB isolate (assemblage
A). The WB genome was found to be 11.7 Mb in size
with 4889 annotated coding sequences, extremely low
levels of allelic sequence heterozygosity (<0.01%) and no
known identifiable virulence factors [11]. More than
50% of the annotated coding sequences showed no similarity to any protein sequence in public databases, but of
the genes with a functional annotation many are likely
to represent lateral transfers from bacteria or archaea
[21]. We previously reported genome sequencing and
analysis of the assemblage B isolate GS and comparative
genomics to the WB genome revealed a well conserved
core of genes, but also extensive genomic rearrangements [22]. The GS isolate was found to have an abundance of allelic sequence heterozygosity as detected by
high throughput sequencing. Moreover, a comparison of
three genetically divergent G. intestinalis isolates allows
improved annotation of protein coding genes and noncoding RNAs.
To further understand the biological differences
between human- and non-human infective isolates of G.
intestinalis we here present a draft genome sequence
and analysis of the assemblage E isolate P15, originally
isolated from a piglet in the Czech Republic. This is the
first whole genome analysis of a field isolate of G. intestinalis with minimal cultivation in the laboratory. We
therefore expect it to closely reflect a wild-type G. intestinalis isolate.

Results
Genome assembly and allelic sequence heterozygosity

Clustering of the shotgun reads (Table 1, Additional file
1) and manual finishing of the assembly resulted in 820
contiguous sequences (contigs) with an N50 of 71,261
bp and an average genome coverage of 47×. The
Table 1 Sequence data summary
FLX

Titanium

Read count

698 868

940 272

Data amount (Mbp)

143

474

Average read length (bp)

205

504

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

relatively large number of contigs is likely to be caused
by the presence of genomic repeats rather than areas of
insufficient sampling. The combined contig length was
11,522,052 bp. The haploid genome size is likely to be
somewhat larger, due to the collapse of certain repeat
regions.
The G + C content of the overall assembly is 47%,
which is identical to GS but differs slightly from WB
(49%). The lower G + C content in P15 and GS is most
likely explained by non-perfect assembly of G + C rich
repeat regions, such as VSPs or High Cysteine Membrane Proteins in the whole genome shotgun data sets.
To circumvent the problem of different degree of
assembly completion, we examined the G + C content
of conserved syntenic genes (1:1:1 orthologs) and found
the G + C content to be 46% (P15), 47% (GS) and 49%
(WB). Orthologs in P15 have the lowest average G + C
content while WB have the highest.
Only 255 positions of 10,704,988 analyzed positions
passed the criteria for allelic sequence heterozygosity.
Most heterozygous positions were located in short contigs and may therefore represent artifacts, for example
chimeric contigs, rather than a real heterozygosity. None
of the heterozygous positions were located in genes that
have previously been used for genotyping.
The assembly contains 61 frame shifted genes, 48 of
which were found to be interrupted by single base insertion or deletion errors which is consistent with the
homopolymer sequencing errors related to the 454 technology. Six genes were present in regions where the
assembly is of low quality. Five frame shifted genes
could not be attributed to homopolymer sequencing
errors or low coverage in the assembly and were designated as putative pseudogenes, these are described
further below (Additional file 2).
Genome annotation and prediction

The vast majority of the P15 annotations were assigned
using the information from the WB and GS genomes ([GenBank:AACB00000000] and [GenBank:
ACGJ00000000]). The P15 draft genome sequence was
found to contain 5012 annotated protein coding
sequences, of which 2470 were conserved hypothetical
genes. About 91% of the annotated genes had orthologs
in WB. Genes without assigned orthologs were located
in genomic regions without conserved synteny compared to the previously published Giardia genomes. The
average protein identity between P15 and WB was 90%
(sd. 7) and for the corresponding nucleotide sequences
the identity was 87% (sd. 4). Only 15% of the ortholog
pairs showed a nucleotide identity higher than 90%. The
average protein identity between P15 and GS was 81%
(sd. 10) and the nucleotide identity 77% (sd. 5). The
higher average protein identity confirmed earlier

Page 3 of 15

phylogenetic studies [23] that showed assemblage E to
be more closely related to assemblage A than assemblage B to A. Furthermore, 82% of the P15 genome
assembly was identified as coding. The divergence
between P15 and WB is close to what is observed
between Leishmania major and L. infantum and the
divergence between GS and WB is similar to that
observed between Theileria parva and T. annulata
(Figure 1).
The Giardia core proteome and polymorphisms

The Giardia gene content can be subdivided into a core
set of housekeeping genes and structural genes (approximately 91% of the Giardia genes), unique assemblagespecific genes and a more variable part of the genome
that contains members of large gene families (approximately 9% of the Giardia genes; Additional file 3). The
core genes contain conserved positional orthologs
between P15, WB and GS. The ratio of non-synonymous (dN) and synonymous (dS) nucleotide changes
was used to estimate the selective pressure on genes. In
two comparisons (GS-WB and P15-GS) synonymous
changes were found to be saturated and the ratio is not
reliable. P15 and WB orthologs (see Methods) were
used to calculate dN/dS in order to evaluate if certain
genes have a differential evolutionary rate in Giardia.
The distribution of dN/dS values displayed a left skew
with a peak around 0.15 (Table 2, Figure 2A), implying
that most genes are under purifying selection. Some 104
genes were found to be perfectly conserved in pairwise
comparisons between the three genomes when comparing on the amino acid level (Additional file 4). Among
the genes with the highest dN/dS appeared uncharacterized genes, possibly due to a relaxation of the selective
pressure or because of their importance in parasite
adaptability. Using a slimmed gene ontology we mapped
981 Giardia genes to 12 broad categories (Figure 2B),
which represent about 20% of the core gene content.
The dN/dS distributions were grouped according to biological process GO category and the categories were
found to be different from each other using a KruskalWallis test. Five GO categories were significantly different using a Mann-Whitney test when compared to all
other genes: protein metabolic process; nucleic acid
metabolic process; primary metabolic process; translation; transport.
Publicly available Serial Analysis of Gene Expression
(SAGE) data was used to group Giardia genes into 6
developmental categories and one category for constitutively expressed genes (Figure 2C). Hierarchical clustering of data from 10 SAGE libraries have been used to
construct the following developmental categories: excystation; differentiation; encystation; cyst/excystation; trophozoite/encystation; cyst/excystation genes that are

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 A multi-species comparison of Giardia to other protozoan pathogens. A comparison of the divergence between different species
of protozoan pathogens. The following pairs of species were compared: T. cruzi (non-Esmeraldo) - T. brucei; P. falciparum - P. knowlesi; G. intestinalis
WB - G. intestinalis GS; G. intestinalis GS - G. intestinalis P15; T. parva - T. annulata; G. intestinalis WB - G. intestinalis P15; L. major - L. infantum; C.
parvum - C. hominis. The vertical axis shows the cumulative frequency of the ortholog count and the horizontal axis shows the corresponding
amino acid identity. A steeper curve to the right indicate that the species pair is more closely related compared to a species pair to the left. In this
comparison, C. parvum and C. hominis are the closest related species, whereas T. cruzi and T. brucei are the most distantly related based on protein
similarity. G. intestinalis P15 and WB have a divergence close to what can be observed between L. major and L. infantum. G. intestinalis WB and GS
have a divergence close to what is observed between T. parva and T. annulata. The ortholog relationships were established using reciprocal BLASTP
and the protein identities were extracted from the BLAST outputs. Sequence data was downloaded from EuPathDB.

Table 2 Comparative genomics data
P15-WB

P15-GS

Orthologsa

4564

4180

4301

Protein identity

90% (sd. 7)

81% (sd. 10)

78% (sd. 14)

dNb

0.06 (sd. 0.06)

0.13 (sd. 0.09)

0.13 (sd. 0.08)

dSc

0.44 (sd. 1.48)

1.33 (sd. 2.18)

1.30 (sd. 2.15)

dN/dS

0.15 (sd. 0.12)

0.11 (sd. 0.09)

0.11 (sd. 0.09)

a

WB-GS

Orthologs refer to positional orthologs. Genes truncated in contig ends are
not included.
b
The rate of nonsynonymous and nucleotide variation. Calculated using the
program yn00.
c
The rate of synonymous and nucleotide variation. Calculated using the
program yn00.

downregulated; constitutively expressed genes [24]. The
distribution of dN/dS ratios was examined and the
groups were found to be different from each other using
a Kruskal-Wallis test. Four categories were found to be
significantly different when compared to all other
groups using a Mann-Whitney test: constitutively
expressed genes; trophozoite/encystation; cyst/excystation; differentiation. The differentiation group contain
the smallest number of genes (n = 3).
Small insertion-deletion (indel) events were found to
be abundant between orthologs. We produced threeway alignments of orthologous genes in GS, P15 and
WB in order to identify lineage specific adaptions.

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Evolutionary analyses of Giardia genes compared between assemblage A and E. The evolutionary rate of Giardia genes between
P15 and WB was examined using estimates of dN/dS. Genes were grouped into gene ontology (GO) categories. The boundaries of each box
plot represents the lower quartile (Q1 = 25%) and the upper quartile (Q3 = 75%) and the median value is displayed by the black line. The box
width is proportional to the number of genes in the group. Statistical outliers are represented by circles. (A) The distribution of dN/dS estimates
for genes with ortholog relationships between P15 and WB. The vertical axis shows fraction of the genes with a certain dN/dS ratio (horizontal
axis). The curve is highly left skewed, indicating that most genes are under purifying selection. (B) dN/dS estimates for genes grouped after GO
categories. The GO categories are: Transcription (TS); Translation (TR); Transport (TP); Signal transduction (ST); Regulation of biological process (RP);
Protein Transport (PT); Protein metabolic process (PP); Primary metabolic process (PM); Nucleic acid metabolic process (NM); Metabolic process
(MP); Carbohydrate metabolic process (CM); Biosynthetic process (BP). Five GO categories were significantly different using a Mann-Whitney test
when compared to all other genes: translation; protein metabolic process; nucleic acid metabolic process; primary metabolic process; transport.
(C) Distribution of dN/dS estimates in six Giardia developmental stages and one category for constitutively expressed genes. The category labels
represent: EX = Excystation; DI = Differentiation; EN = Encystation; CE = Cyst and excystation; TE = Tropohozoite and encystation; D = Genes
down-regulated during cyst and excystation; CS = Constitutively expressed genes. Four categories were found to be significantly different when
compared to all other groups using a Mann-Whitney test: constitutively expressed genes; trophozoite/encystation; cyst/excystation;
differentiation. The categorization is based upon publicly available SAGE data (GEO GSE8336).

Alignment gaps were interpreted as indel events along
the branches of the phylogenetic tree ((P15, WB), GS).
In order to find lineage specific indels, we defined an
indel event as an alignment gap in one lineage that did
not occur in the other two lineages, or correspondingly
that one lineage lacked an alignment gap but a gap of
the same length and start position was present in the
two other lineages. The requirement of the same gap
length and start position was implemented since gaps
of different lengths would be caused by more than one
indel event. Furthermore, a quality filter was implemented where 15 bp downstream and upstream of the
genes was examined for mismatches and if more than
7 mismatches were identified the indel was rejected.
Indels located in non-coding sequences were not considered because of the risk of inaccurate alignments.
Some 515 indels were found to be specific for the P15
lineage (196 insertions and 319 deletions). The median
deletion length was 3 bp and the median insertion
length 6 bp. The most common length of an indel was
3 bp and the longest indel was 75 bp. Some 738 indels
(303 insertions and 435 deletions) were found for the
WB lineage.

Differential distribution of genes

Comparisons between the three Giardia isolates
revealed the presence of genes specific for each isolate
(Figure 3, Additional file 2). In terms of specific genes,
the P15 isolate has a few more (38) than GS, while the
WB isolate has the smallest subset (5). The identified
genes are not members of the large Giardia gene
families and most of them have no sequence similarity
to known sequences and their functions are therefore
unknown. One P15 specific gene (GLP15_874) encodes
an acetyl transferase. BLAST searches indicated high
similarities to bacterial homologs of the gene. A phylogenetic analysis showed that this P15 gene clusters with
bacterial sequences, mostly from a low G+C gram positive group (Firmicutes) suggestive of a recent gene
acquisition (Additional file 5). The donor lineage cannot
be determined due to poor bootstrap support values and
likely frequent transfer of the gene among bacteria.
Nevertheless, many of the putative donor lineages (i.e.
Lactobacillus, Cloststridium, Anerotruncus and Enterococcus) are common inhabitants of the gastrointestinal
tract of mammals (Additional file 5). This is consistent
with a recent uptake of the gene from intestinal bacteria.

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

Page 6 of 15

in the GS-P15 and P15-WB genome comparisons,
respectively. The remaining 5 pseudogenes were identified in P15. Candidate pseudogenes in WB and P15
were confirmed to have disrupted coding sequences by
sequencing of PCR products (data not shown). SAGEtags were not detected for WB pseudogenes, but could
be detected for some WB orthologs to the confirmed
pseudogenes in P15 and putative pseudogenes in GS
(Additional file 2). One pseudogene in P15 involves a
lateral transfer candidate (Additional file 5). Intact
orthologs are present in the human associated G. intestinalis WB and GS stains, and only four bacterial strains
from three different groups. Thus, the gene has a very
patchy phylogenetic distribution in the tree of life. Some
of the bacteria that do encode the gene are associated
with mammals; Collinsella aerofaciens is part of the normal gut flora in humans, and Ruminooccus inhabit the
rumen of cattle.
Figure 3 A comparison of the shared and nonshared gene
content. The Venn diagram shows the shared and nonshared gene
content of the isolates WB (assemblage A), GS (assemblage B) and
P15 (assemblage E). The intersection displays the shared gene
content between 2 or 3 genomes. Orthologs were defined using
reciprocal BLAST and synteny information, as outlined in Methods.
Specific genes were identified using BLASTP and TBLASTN searches
with subsequent inspection of search results. Members of large
gene families were not included in this comparison. The core gene
content of Giardia consists of 4557 genes. Some 38 genes were
found to be specific for P15, 5 genes for WB and 31 genes for GS.
WB and P15 share 7 genes that are not present in GS, whereas GS
and P15 share 20 genes that are not present in WB. WB and GS
only share one gene which is not present in P15.

In this comparison, 31 GS specific genes were identified, and several conserved bacterial domains were identified in these genes as reported previously [22]. P15
and WB share only 7 genes that are not present in GS
(Figure 3). In comparison, WB and GS share only one
specific protein whereas P15 and GS share 20. Thirteen
of these genes are located in a 20 kb contig in P15.
Homologous genes were identified in GS on several
small contigs. Synteny analysis of this chromosomal
region in the WB genome indicates that a rearrangement has occurred when compared to P15. Preliminary
data indicates that this region may also be absent from
other Giardia assemblage A isolates. One of the genes
only present in P15 and GS (GLP15_2168) contains
domains similar to a prokaryotic DNA segregation protein and a second contains a possible nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase domain. However, the function of
these proteins remains unknown. We detected the presence of 16 candidate pseudogenes in the Giardia genomes, 5 that were detected in WB and 6 in GS
(Additional file 2). All of these are members of common
gene families and all but one have positional orthologs

Small RNAs and regulation of gene expression

The prediction of transfer RNAs (tRNA) was performed
using tRNAscan-SE [25]. The WB genome contains 63
tRNA genes, two of which were predicted to be pseudogenes [26]. In P15, 61 tRNA genes were predicted and 5
of them contained an intron. In contrast, 58 tRNAs
were identified in the GS genome and 7 of these contained an intron. The three genomes contain the same
complement of tRNA genes but the copy number of
each gene can be variable.
The same four introns were identified in the Giardia
WB and GS genomes [22] and introns were found in
the same positions in the P15 genome. Regular expressions constructed from consensus sequences of all
known Giardia introns failed to locate additional candidates. The encystation inducible promoters from P15
resemble those of WB. Binding sites for the transcription factor Myb2 can be identified in the equivalent
positions in the promoters of the cyst wall protein-1,
cyst wall protein-2 and Myb2 itself. P15 harbors Myb2
binding sites in the sugar synthesis genes glucosamine-6phosphate isomerase and UDP-glucose 4-epimerase as in
WB, a distinguishing feature that is missing in the GS
isolate.
Non-coding RNAs are generally well conserved, with
P15-WB pairs showing the greatest similarity (Additional file 6).
Variable Giardia gene families

Outside the core gene set, four highly variable gene
families, the Variant-specific Surface Proteins (VSP),
NEK Kinases, Protein 21.1 and High Cysteine Membrane Proteins (HCMP) predominate. The Giardia genomes analyzed so far contain approximately 200 each of
the VSP and NEK Kinase genes. VSPs are the main

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

parasite antigen in Giardia and these proteins have a
conserved membrane spanning domain with an invariant cytoplasmic tail and a cysteine rich variable domain
that is exposed to the extracellular environment. The
NEK Kinases belong to the NIMA-related (Never In
Mitosis Gene A) clade of serine/threonine kinases. Surprisingly, 76% of the NEK kinases in the Giardia WB
genome are predicted to be catalytically inert.
We identified 112 complete VSP genes in the P15
genome assembly. However, there is also a significant
number of VSP sequences that are present in small contigs in spite of the high coverage and relatively long
read lengths. The average identity of VSPs between P15
and GS is 61% ± 10 which is slightly higher than for
WB and GS. A search for the conserved terminal
CRGKA motif in all the reads gave 4757 hits. With an
average sequence coverage of 47× we estimated the
number of VSP genes to be approximately 100, which is
slightly lower than the number of annotated VSP genes.
The reason could be incorrectly annotated VSP genes in
shorter redundant contigs or possibly local variation in
sequence depth. When we corrected for this, the VSP
content is still lower in P15 compared to both WB and
GS. VSP genes are rarely located in syntenic position in
the genomes. This shows the plasticity of VSP genes
both from the sequence perspective and from genomic
location. The VSPs in P15 appear to be scattered
throughout the genome as in WB and GS. Regions
where VSPs and other dynamic protein families are
found are characterized by significant differences in
codon usage and higher G + C content. These regions
are also frequently associated with breaks in synteny
and rearrangements. The only regulatory motif that is
uniquely associated with VSP genes in WB and P15
is the extended polyadenylation signal. This motif is
remarkably well conserved over a stretch of 16 nucleotides (ACTTAGGTAGT[AG]AA[CT]GC) and is invariably located 0-15 bp downstream from the stop codon
of VSP genes. Subtle differences in the consensus
sequences can be distinguished between the isolates
(Additional file 7). This sequence is also found in the
small subset of VSP genes available from the GS isolate.
Motif searches conducted on sequences upstream of the
VSP genes revealed very few conserved sequences.
Phylogenetic analysis of VSP genes from P15 and WB
was conducted using protein sequence alignment and
maximum likelihood. The analysis indicated that VSP
genes are distributed in two major subgroups in this
tree which we designate as A and B, based on their distance in the phylogenetic tree (Additional file 7). The B
subgroup is considerably smaller than the A subgroup
but both subgroups contain both P15 and WB
sequences. Certain branches of each subgroup show
enrichment of either P15 or WB VSPs, which could

Page 7 of 15

reflect recent VSP duplication events. It is not clear
whether the enrichment of WB genes is due a possible
lack of assembled sequences for P15 or if this actually
represents lineage specific diversification.
Structural variation in Giardia genomes

Structural variation analyzed across the three Giardia
genomes revealed frequent loss of genome synteny. In
total, 141 cases of insertions, deletions and rearrangements could be detected. In most cases, the exact type
of rearrangement could not be determined due to the
termination of contigs in P15 and GS and occasionally
in WB. Only 28 synteny breaks were recorded between
WB and GS in contrast to 113 instances in the phylogenetically more related WB and P15. This discrepancy
can be explained by the more fragmented GS draft
assembly in which very few genes from repetitive gene
families could be assembled. The deep coverage and
overall quality of the P15 assembly increases the amount
of structural variants that can be detected. We investigated the quality of our assembly by PCR verification of
10 structural variants (Additional file 8). This set
included predicted intra- and inter-chromosomal rearrangements involving all chromosomes except chromosome 2. Seven out of 10 synteny breaks yielded the
expected PCR product, including potential inter-chromosomal rearrangements between chromosomes 1 and
5 as well as 3 and 5. Intra-chromosomal events were
verified on chromosomes 3, 4 and 5. The percentage of
verified synteny breaks is higher in the P15 assembly
(70%) than what was found experimentally in the GS
draft genome (59%) [22].
Genes found in non-syntenic regions of the genomes
were categorized according to annotation and the number of genes in each category were compared for WB
and P15 (Figure 4). Hypothetical proteins was the most
common category (WB: 86, P15: 82) followed by VSPs
(WB: 47, P15: 57). Protein 21.1, HCMPs, NEK Kinases
and putative transposable elements were also found to
be associated with synteny breaks in these Giardia genomes. Large fractions of genes belonging to these gene
families have diverged significantly, indicating that these
gene families evolve more rapidly than other genes.
Genes for GTP-binding protein and reverse transcriptase were more commonly associated with synteny
breaks in P15 whereas Kinases were found more often
in WB. Retro-transpososon associated sequences such as
reverse transcriptases or endonucleases are found 17
times in 13 distinct non-syntenic positions in P15 (10
instances/8 distinct loci) and WB (7 instances/5 distinct
loci).
Indications of the highly variable genome structure in
Giardia have been noted previously in several reports
[14,27-29]. Subtelomeric regions containing ribosomal

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

Page 8 of 15

Figure 4 Giardia genes in non-syntenic regions. Genes associated with non-syntenic genomic regions in P15 and WB were categorized
according to their annotation. The number of genes in each category is displayed on the vertical axis. The profiles of genes are strikingly similar
between isolates. Hypothetical genes and VSPs are the most common gene category found associated with non-syntenic genomic regions
followed by the large Giardia gene families High cysteine membrane proteins, Protein 21.1 and NEK Kinases. The number of Kinases in unique
regions is higher in WB whereas GTP-binding proteins are more frequent in P15.

DNA repeats are prone to rearrangements and copy
number variation whereas the central region of chromosomes appear to be comparatively stable. The Giardia
rearrangement rate of rDNA gene clusters has been estimated to be 1% per cell division in vitro [30]. Differences in chromosome number of individual Giardia
nuclei have been reported for in vitro cultivated isolates.
Five distinct chromosomal linkage groups have been
demonstrated in spite of the karyotype diversity seen in
Giardia. The karyotype heterogeneity could result from
recombination associated with the presence of mobile
elements. The WB genome contains three families of
retrotransposons, two of which are located at the telomeres and could still be active [31].
VSPs were frequently found in non-syntenic positions
in WB and P15. Genome rearrangements have been
identified as crucial components in the generation of
antigenic variation in other parasites. The mobile nature
of VSPs observed here is likely to be involved in generating VSP diversity through gene duplication and
recombination. The large-scale architecture of Giardia
chromosomes seem to consist of gene rich regions

displaying stable codon usage and conserved gene order
interspersed by chromosomal locations with atypical
codon usage (Figure 5). VSPs and HCMP genes contribute to create such chromosomal islands with higher
than average G + C content and atypical nucleotide
signatures.
Several smaller rearrangements were found in areas
with well-conserved genes. These include insertion or
deletion of individual or multiple genes, inversions and
translocations (Additional file 9).

Discussion
We have previously reported a draft genome sequence
and analysis of the Giardia assemblage B isolate GS
[22]. We here describe the first genome analysis of a
non-human Giardia isolate, that of assemblage E isolate
P15. We have chosen to use a high throughput strategy
to sequence the genome of P15, taking advantage of the
low cost of 454 sequencing and the rapid data generation. We have examined the genetic diversity of a mostly
uncharacterized assemblage of Giardia, and identified
intraspecific variation that can be used for population

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

Page 9 of 15

Figure 5 A circular overview of five Giardia P15 contigs. A circular overview of the five largest contigs in the P15 assembly which in total
represent 909 kb of the genome (about 8%). The most outer graph displays G + C content plotted in overlapping 1.5 kb windows along the
contigs. Areas where the G + C content is elevated (>50%) is displayed in red. The middle graph displays atypical nucleotide composition (as
defined in Methods), plotted in overlapping 1.5 kb windows. Radial lines represent genes, with different colors for different annotations (blue =
Hypothetical protein, red = Variant-specific surface protein (VSP), Reverse transcriptase (RT) or High cysteine membrane protein (HCMP), yellow =
NEK Kinase, purple = Protein 21.1, green = other). The most inner graph displays the level of sequence coverage. VSP, RT and HCMP genes are
characterized by a higher than average G+C content and atypical nucleotide signatures. These genes are dispersed and create chromosomal
islands with higher than average G + C.

studies or genotyping in a clinical setting. Comparative
genome analysis of the assemblage A isolate WB and
the B isolate GS previously revealed evidence of chromosomal shuffling, an abundance of allelic heterozygosity (ASH) and approximately 900 conserved open
reading frames that were left unannotated in the first
Giardia genome project.
We have estimated the core gene content of Giardia
to be approximately 91% of the total gene content, with
the remaining 9% involved in antigenic variation and
functions related to host specificity. A few members of
the VSP and HCMP families were found to be positionally conserved between all three genomes, but the function of these syntenic surface proteins is not known.
The Giardia genomes are relatively similar in terms of

core gene content, but tend to differ with respect to
synteny and in genes responsible for antigenicity. We
have identified several small scale genomic changes,
including insertions and deletions of coding and noncoding sequences. A small number of isolate specific
genes were identified and in most cases these are
located in nonsyntenic regions of the genome. As
expected, the Giardia isolates have diverged repertoires
of surface proteins (VSPs and HCMPs) primarily coded
in nonsyntenic regions of the genomes. A similar genomic arrangement is present in the trypanosomes where
syntenic regions are interspersed with large regions of
surface molecule genes, noncoding sequences and
repeats. The roles of such regions are unknown but
could constitute regions of increased genomic plasticity

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

and they could play a role in the generation of antigenic
variation through recombination events. A chromosome-wide analysis of gene order have been hindered in
our assembly by the lack of long range continuity, a
result of the sequencing read length. Future efforts to
characterize the Giardia spp. genomes would benefit
from using paired-end libraries or other strategies to
join repeated regions and to avoid the typical homopolymer errors associated with the 454 technology.
A very low level of allelic sequence heterozygosity was
detected in the P15 genome, which contradicts findings
in the GS genome, but is consistent with observations
from the WB genome. The striking differences in ASH
levels could imply different biology regarding sexual
reproduction, GS could be a recent mixture of two isolates, or the presence of active meiotic components in
either isolate. It has been suggested that the assemblage
A isolates may have a mechanism to maintain low levels
of ASH, and that such a mechanism could also be operating in some assemblage E isolates. However, low ASH
levels in P15 does conflict with genotyping data from
assemblage E isolates where double peaked chromatograms have been observed [32]. Low ASH may be a feature of this particular assemblage E isolate but the high
abundance of double peaks from other isolates could
also reflect the fact that mixed infections with different
assemblage E subgenotypes are more frequent in animals. Further studies of additional assemblage E isolates
are needed to resolve this issue. Several genes identified
as involved in DNA repair and meiosis in Giardia, were
previously shown to display larger than average
sequence divergence as well as insertions and deletions
in the GS isolate, compared to WB [22]. An analogous
comparison with the P15 isolate reveals substantial
divergence in the genes Rad50, Rad52 and Mre11, and
GS specific insertions in Smc5, Mlh1, Rad50 and deletions in Rad50, Msh6, Dmc1a and Smc1 that are specific
for the ASH-rich GS lineage. Only one insertion in
Rad50 was specific for the WB lineage whereas none
were detected in P15. However, it should also be noted
that genes displaying a high degree of divergence in the
GS lineage are also the most diverged when comparing
WB and P15. Future studies of these differences correlated to the level of ASH in disparate isolates could
reveal a mechanism for dealing with ASH accumulation.
These differences in gene synteny and ASH between
these three Giardia isolates suggest that there is ubiquitous inter-genotype genetic diversity.
Indels have previously been noted as a prominent feature of many Giardia proteins when compared to eukaryotic homologs. Small indels are an abundant feature in
pairwise comparisons between all three genomes and
they are dispersed over a major fraction of the genes. In
contrast to single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),

Page 10 of 15

indels always alter the primary amino acid sequence,
and are therefore more likely to impact protein function.
We found that a number of genes involved in core processes of the cell have indels, which could possibly alter
the functional specificity or efficiency of these proteins.
Indels have been described in other species and have
been attributed to DNA polymerase slippage [33].
Several groups encompassing metabolic genes were
found to have elevated dN/dS ratios (Figure 2B). Such
changes could cause substrate specificity to change in
enzymes or alter metabolic pathways. It is possible that
these enzymes allow variation in the amino acid
sequence without affecting protein function. Another
possibility is that these enzymes evolve more rapidly due
to adaptations to the intestinal microenvironment in the
host organism. A similar differential pattern of dN/dS
rate was observed for genes grouped according to developmental stage. We here observed that genes expressed
in certain developmental stages have slightly different
distributions of dN/dS values (Figure 2C). The reason
for this could be that certain stages need to be more
tightly regulated and cannot easily accommodate variation. Another possibility would be that some stages
expose proteins to the external environment, which
could cause selective constraints by the host immune
system.
We found evidence for a highly conserved set of core
genes in Giardia which we propose is essentially common to all Giardia intestinalis isolates. This set of genes
lies in genomic regions with mostly conserved synteny.
Despite this, polymorphisms in terms of synonymous
and nonsynonymous SNPs and indels are common in
this set of genes, which could change the function or
specificity of the expressed proteins. Also, cases of disrupted synteny do occur in these regions, which indicate
that chromosomal recombination takes place in Giardia
or in certain lineages of the species. Experimental evidence for recombination between assemblages is missing, but has been reported to occur between A2 isolates
[34].
A large fraction of genes in the diplomonad genome
have been proposed to have been acquired via horizontal gene transfer, due to their clustering with bacterial
sequences in phylogenetic trees [10,35,26]. Here we
found a number of genes only present in certain isolates
(Figure 3). Some of these genes could be involved in
shaping phenotypic differences, whereas others could be
non-functional remnants from recent horizontal gene
transfers, or represent recent losses in one or two of the
lineages. An example of a recently acquired gene is the
acetyl transferase gene with an apparent bacterial origin
which was identified in P15, but which is absent in WB
and GS (Additional file 5). However, it is presently
unknown if the gene is expressed and what the precise

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

function of its putative product might be. Our gene content comparison (Figure 3) showed that gene acquisition
and loss is much less frequent than in intestinal bacteria, such as Escherichia coli [36]. Nevertheless, it indicates that gene acquisition is an extant evolutionary
process also in a eukaryotic parasite, which likely contributes to diversification of Giardia isolates over evolutionary timescales.
The dynamics of the G. intestinalis genomes are
further exemplified by a putative pseudogene found in a
conserved core region of assemblage E. Evolutionary
analyses revealed that the gene most likely was recently
acquired from bacteria, probably of the mammalian gut
flora (Additional file 5). The gene then turned into a
pseudogene in P15, whereas it is under purifying selection in WB and GS. The presence of this gene exclusively in the human infecting isolates is intriguing; it is
tempting to speculate that it might be related to host
specificity.
We could not find any clear evidence for chromosomal duplications in our genome data, but we detected
the presence of a genomic region in P15 that harbors 13
genes that are absent in WB while it appears that they
are present in GS. A preliminary analysis suggests that
this region may be absent from other assemblage A isolates as well, and the protein products from these genes
could constitute good targets for the development of
assemblage discriminating antibodies for serological purposes. Host specificity or phenotypic variation could also
manifest at the level of expression. Differential expression of genes between isolates could provide means for
creating host specificity and phenotypic differences. The
regulation of gene expression is likely to be mostly posttranscriptional because of the short relaxed promoters
in Giardia, and it is possible that short RNAs could be
involved. Future efforts to characterize the Giardia transcriptome would benefit from using high throughput
sequencing to efficiently enhance the resolution and
confirm the expression of proposed gene models.
The repeat content of the Giardia genome is approximately 9% depending on which gene families are taken
into consideration. This can be compared to the 50%
repeat content of another protozoan parasite, T. cruzi
[37]. The relatively low complexity of the Giardia genome makes it ideal for rapid comparative genomics
using shotgun sequencing.
Repeated areas in the Giardia genome contain pseudogenes, retro-transposons and low complexity repeats
and they could constitute areas of increased genomic
plasticity or sites where recombination occurs, which is
indicated by their associations with discontinued synteny. Proteins that are encoded in these regions have no
positional orthologs in other genomes but tend to be
classified into one of the larger gene families in Giardia.

Page 11 of 15

In other genomes with short intergenic distances, gene
order has mostly been conserved. Also, the bidirectional
promoters of Giardia could act to prevent reshuffling by
inactivating genes upon rearrangement. Whether genomic rearrangements occur randomly, or in a controlled
manner by a certain mechanism or genomic location,
warrant further investigation. It is known that co-regulated genes act as a hindrance to genomic rearrangements. It could therefore be proposed that the lack of
gene regulation at the transcriptional level allows for larger genomic rearrangements in Giardia without affecting gene function. The presence of retro-transposon
derived sequences in non-syntenic genomic positions in
WB and P15 could indicate retro-transposons have contributed to shaping the Giardia genomes by increasing
the genomic plasticity.
The Giardia genomes contain a very large fraction of
hypothetical genes that code for proteins of unknown
function and with limited expression or proteomic data
to support their expression or function. Most of these
genes appear to be randomly distributed across the genome. The lack of significant hits to other protozoan genomes likely reflects the strong adaptation of the parasite
to its host environment in combination with the evolutionary divergence of these organisms. As the number of
sequences from diplomonads increases, due to a number
of ongoing diplomonad sequencing projects, several
Giardia proteins will likely be assigned orthologs, but
experimental efforts will be required to elucidate the
function of these proteins. The generation of the GS
and P15 draft genomes have provided information about
the strong conservation of these genes which indicates
that they have a functional role in Giardia biology.
It is clear that the genomic data alone cannot resolve
the question of host specificity and mechanisms of
pathogenicity, but the genome sequence data provide an
evolutionary insight into how parasite genomes have
been shaped over the course of evolution. Moreover, the
identification of lineage specific genes and gene variants
will provide candidates for future functional studies. We
hope that the draft genome sequence of this assemblage
E isolate will provide useful information for future studies of the differences between Giardia strains and the
diplomonads in general.

Conclusions
Our results indicate that there is extensive genetic variation between Giardia intestinalis lineages. This includes
chromosomal recombination, single nucleotide polymorphisms and insertion-deletion events. The assemblages contain diverged repertoires of Giardia surface
proteins and other gene families, including VSPs,
HCMPs, Protein 21.1 and NEK Kinases, including hundreds of distinct proteins for each of the three

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

Page 12 of 15

sequenced Giardia genomes. The analysis of orthologs
indicate a stable set of core genes, present in all of the
examined assemblages, and only a small number of isolate specific genes have been identified. Certain categories of genes were found to be under a differential
evolutionary rate. However, for a complete understanding of the genomic landscape of Giardia it would be
useful to combine data from more than one sequencing
platform to understand the chromosome-wide
differences.

sequence to be high and substitution errors extremely
rare, however, a few (< 100) indel errors were identified
due to their presence in open reading frames. The quality of the final assembly was assessed by evaluation of
the consensus quality scores, only 1.69% of all positions
in the assembly have quality scores less than 30.
According to Phred quality scores this equals a base
calling accuracy of 99.9% or 1 error in 1000 bases [41].
This would equal to 20,974 incorrectly called bases or
0.16% of the combined length.

Methods

The annotation and subsequent analysis of the contigs
have primarily been focused on the non-repetitive parts
of the genome. Gene prediction was performed using
GLIMMER 3 and CRITICA [42,43]. Open reading
frames (ORFs) with invalid start codons were removed
together with short, overlapping ORFs. An automatic
annotation was performed by pooling the ORFs from
WB and GS and using the best reciprocal BLAST hit as
a preliminary annotation. All annotations were manually
curated by aligning the contigs against the scaffolds of
WB and GS using TBLASTX.
Alignments of putative frame shifted genes (n = 61)
were manually inspected using the assembly viewer
Tablet (version 1.10.02.08) [44]. The open reading frame
of 48 genes could be restored by manual inspection of
the assembly alignments. Genes not fulfilling these criteria were either classified as being present in a problematic region (n = 6) or as being putative pseudogenes
(n = 5) (Additional file 2).
Orthologs were assigned to homologous genes in
syntenic position by using reciprocal BLAST searches
and manual curation of the results. Ortholog alignments were created using the transAlign program
which increases the accuracy of a nucleotide alignment
by using the corresponding amino acid alignment as a
template [45]. Whole genome alignments along with
genomic features were visualized using the Artemis
Comparison Tool (ACT) [46]. ORFs located in contig
breaks that span two or more contigs were annotated
as partial and designated herein as truncated. In order
to improve the Giardia genome annotation, all
hypothetical proteins were queried against the GenBank non-redundant protein database and the GenBank Conserved Domain Database (curated protein
families from Pfam and other sources). Statistics were
done using the R software platform (version 2.9.2). A
Kruskal-Wallis test and a Mann-Whitney test were
conducted to test significance of Gene Ontology categories. 5% was used as a significance level. SAGE data
was used as present in Gene Expression Omnibus and
Stekel et al.’s R-statistic was used to select differentially
expressed genes (R > 8) and clustered according to
expressional profile [24].

Reagents and cell culture

The P15 strain was originally isolated in the Czech
Republic from the upper jejunum of a necropsied piglet
that was naturally infected with Giardia [38]. Unless
otherwise indicated, the reagents used for cell culture
were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co, USA. Giardia
intestinalis strain P15 trophozoites were grown in standard conditions. Trophozoites from in vitro passage 10
were used for DNA extraction. Genomic DNA was
extracted using the Easy-DNA kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, US, Cat. no. K1800-01) followed by purification on
a G100 Genomic tip (Qiagen).
Sequencing, assembly and annotation

The genomic DNA was sequenced using a Genome
Sequencer FLX/Titanium instrument (454 Life
Sciences). Preparation and sequencing of the sample
was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Base-calling was performed using the bundled 454
software. Three runs with the Genome Sequencer (454
Life Science) generated 1,639,140 reads (Table 1, Additional file 1). Genome assembly was performed de novo
using the sequence assembly software MIRA V2.9.43
with the parameters -job = denovo,genome,normal,454
-SK:mnr = yes [39]. Manual inspection and editing of
the assembly was carried out using consed and custom
Perl scripts. The assembly process was complicated by
the presence of repeats, which were too long to be
spanned by the relatively short 454 reads.
A contamination screen was performed on the assembly using the megablast program [40] against GenBank
human and fungi genomic databases and a few suspicious short, low coverage contigs were removed. Possible mis-assemblies were identified using coverage
analysis and split at these points. Contigs less than 500
bp were removed from the assembly together with contigs with an average coverage less than 10.
The quality of our draft sequence is determined by
several factors: the read length; the frequency of sequencing errors; the repeat content; the presence of allelic
sequence heterozygosity. Given the high coverage (47×)
of the genome sequence, we expect the quality of the

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

Page 13 of 15

This Whole Genome Shotgun project has been deposited at DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank under the accession [GenBank:ACVC00000000]. The version described herein is
the first version, ACVC01000000. The data is also available in GiardiaDB [47].

Giardia genomes. We analyzed the upstream and downstream regions of VSP genes in P15 and WB for common motifs using the MEME program [52]. Non-coding
RNAs in P15 were identified by BLASTN searches using
gene models from WB.

Isolate specific genes and synteny

Confirmation of pseudogenes and synteny breaks

Isolate specific genes were identified by reciprocal
BLAST searches, using BLASTP and TBLASTN (cutoff
E = 1e-20). The final gene lists were compiled by manual curation of BLAST search results and investigation
of the associated genomic regions. While the current
assembly limited us from studying chromosome wide
synteny, we analyzed synteny blocks and microsynteny.
Genes associated with synteny breaks were recorded and
categorized according to available annotation.

Primers were designed manually according to recommendations in the Phusion HotStart II polymerase
instruction manual (Tm 60°C and 22-25 bp in length)
and synthesized by Sigma-Genosys. The targets were
amplified in a mixture containing 1 × Phusion HF buffer
with 1.5 mM MgCl2, 200 μM dNTPs, 0.5 μM of the forward and reverse primers, 40 ng template genomic DNA
(either P15 or WB) and 0.8 U Phusion HS II DNA polymerase (Finnzymes) in a total volume of 40 μl. The
reactions were incubated for 3 min at 98°C followed by
(98°C for 15 sec, 60°C for 15 sec, 72°C for 30 sec/1 kb
of expected amplicon) × 35 cycles and were subsequently held at 4°C. Amplicons were separated by 0.7%
1 × TAE agarose gel electrophoresis and visualized by
ethidium bromide staining. The PCR products were purified using the QIAquick PCR purification kit according
to the manufacturer’s recommendations and eluted in
30 μl Buffer AE. The purified PCR products were
sequenced with their respective forward and/or reverse
primers at the Uppsala Genome Center using the BigDye® Terminator v3.1 (Applied Biosystems) chemistry
followed by capillary electrophoresis on an ABI3730XL
sequencer (Applied Biosystems).

Evolutionary analysis and allelic sequence heterozygosity

Calculation of the dN/dS ratio was done using the yn00
program of the PAML package [48] (version 4.2b). The
trinucleotide composition was examined using c2 analysis of codon frequencies. This was performed by counting the frequencies of 3-mers in all 6 reading frames in
overlapping windows and using the genome wide 3mere frequencies as the expected value when calculating
the c2 statistics. By plotting the data using Circos [49],
distinct peaks appear in areas where the trinucleotide
(atypical) composition deviate from the average.
Phylogenetic trees were constructed from clustalw2
protein alignments and clustered using maximum likelihood, as implemented in the software RAxML (version
7.0.4) [50]. The gamma model of rate heterogeneity was
used together with the WAG substitution model for the
optimal tree. Bootstrap analyses were performed on 100
replicates using the same settings. The VSP tree was
rendered using the ape package for the R statistical platform [51].
We used strict criteria to define a single position as a
possible allelic sequence heterozygosity (ASH). Only positions with higher coverage than 20× were analyzed without gaps or ambiguous nucleotides (‘n’). Alternative
nucleotides located in reads with identical start positions
were ignored because of the likelihood of sequencing
errors. Further, alternative nucleotides would be required
to be present in at least 15% of the counted positions.
Introns, non coding sequences and motif discovery

Introns in the P15 genome were identified by alignment
of syntenic regions in the three Giardia genomes.
Introns and surrounding sequences from the three Giardia genomes were extracted and aligned using ClustalW.
The aligned sequences were manually edited and used
to build a regular expression capable of extracting all
known Giardia introns from the WB, GS and P15

Additional material
Additional file 1: Read length distribution and assembly coverage.
(A) Distribution of read lengths as generated by the 454 Genome
Sequencer FLX/Titanium. The read length in base pairs (bp) is on the
horizontal axis and the read count is on the vertical axis. The plot
displays a bimodal curve with one peak at 250 bp and another one at
500 bp, typical for each one of the two platform types used for
sequencing. (B) Shows the number of assembly positions on the vertical
axis with a certain level of coverage on the horizontal axis. The plot
shows that the average coverage is around 47 times.
Additional file 2: Specific genes, shared genes and disrupted open
reading frames. Contains lists of isolate specific genes, genes shared
between two isolates and putative pseudogenes. A list of artificially
disrupted open reading frames in the P15 data is also included.
Additional file 3: List of Giardia non-core and core genes. A list of
non-core genes in the P15 genome and Giardia core genes. A few genes
lack annotated orthologs due to an incomplete genome assembly.
Additional file 4: Conservation of meiosis, DNA repair and
ultraconserved proteins. Conservation of putative Meiosis and DNA
repair proteins in WB, GS and P15. Protein identities are recorded as
percent extracted from ClustalW alignments of orthologs in WB, GS and
P15. Several major deletions or insertions that are lineage specific were
recorded. Most of these were specific for the GS lineage. A list of
ultraconserved proteins in the genomes is included.
Additional file 5: Evolutionary analyses of a recently acquired
Giardia gene. Evolutionary analyses of a recently acquired Giardia gene.
(A) A maximum likelihood tree of an acetyl transferase gene

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

(GLP15_874). Only representatives of the homologs showing the highest
similarity to the Giardia sequences are included. The tree is based on 139
unambiguously aligned amino acid positions. (B) Alignment of conserved
hypothetical proteins from G. intestinalis GS (GL50581_4454) and WB
(GL50803_10192) to all detected bacterial homologs. A putative amino
acid sequence from a G. intestinalis P15 pseudogene is included and the
positions of frameshift and in-frame termination codons are indicated. (C)
A maximum likelihood tree based on 137 unambiguously aligned amino
acid positions in the alignment shown in (B). Accession numbers are
shown in parentheses. Only bootstrap values >50% are shown in the
trees. Unambiguously aligned regions were identified manually and
removed. Representative homologs with high sequence similarity to
these genes were selected using the BLAST-EXPLORER software.
Additional file 6: Non-coding RNA conservation. Conservation of noncoding RNAs across the three Giardia genomes. Non-coding RNAs are
generally well conserved, with P15-WB pairs showing the greatest
similarity. Examples of ultraconserved non-coding RNAs across all
genomes include GLsR2 and GLsR8.
Additional file 7: VSP extended polyadenylation signal and VSP
phylogenetic tree. (A) Comparative analysis of the extended
polyadenylation sequence of VSP genes. The conservation of the VSP
polyadenylation motif was investigated using the MEME software.
Downstream regions (200 bp) of VSP genes were extracted and queried
for the presence of conserved motifs. The VSP genes of all three Giardia
isolates carries a very similar conserved motif that extends over at least
16 bp and is strictly positioned 0-15 bp from the translational stop
codon. The P15 motif is more strictly conserved and carries a few more
semi-conserved positions for a longer motif than the corresponding
motifs in WB and GS. (B) A phylogenetic tree of VSP genes from P15 and
WB. The VSP phylogenetic tree is based on a clustalw2 protein alignment
of 156 VSP genes from WB and P15. VSP genes were selected for
alignment by all-against-all BLASTP, and only VSP genes that showed at
least 65% protein identity to the best-matching non-identical hit were
used for the alignment (n = 156). In order to improve the alignment,
sequences were trimmed (190 aa were removed from the 5’ part of all
sequences). Subsequent clustering was performed using maximum
likelihood as implemented in the software RAxML version 7.0.4 using
with the rapid bootstrap setting (-f a). The tree was rendered using the
ape package for R. Black dots represent nodes with > = 50% bootstrap
support. The gene id (genbank locus tag) is indicated at the tip of the
branch. Blue labels represent genes from WB while black labels represent
genes from P15. The tree revealed two primary groups (A and B), which
are distinguished based on their distance in the tree.
Additional file 8: Synteny breaks and PCR primers. Experimental
verification of 10 examples of structural variation discovered in the P15
genome.
Additional file 9: Structural variation in the Giardia genomes.
Genome structural variation detected during synteny analysis of the P15,
WB and GS genomes.

Abbreviations
(CDS): Coding Sequence; (ORF): Open Reading Frame; (ASH): Allelic
Sequence Heterozygosity; (SNP): Single Nucleotide Polymorphism; (INDEL):
Insertion or Deletion;
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Swedish National Research Agencies FORMAS
http://www.formas.se. EN was supported by Research Project MSM0021620806.
We thank the core facility at SMI for technical assistance and Louisa Messenger
and Tapan Bhattacharyya for carefully reading the manuscript.
Author details
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, BMC, Box 596, Uppsala
University, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden. 2Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Box 285, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
3
Science for Life Laboratory, KISP, Tomtebodavägen 23A, 171 65 Solna,
Sweden. 4Department of Evolution, Genomics and Systematics, EBC, Uppsala
1

Page 14 of 15

University, SE-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. 5Department of Tropical Medicine,
1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 128 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.
Authors’ contributions
JJH and OF carried out the bioinformatic analyses and wrote the manuscript.
JA participated in the genome annotation. JOA and FX participated in the
evolutionary analyses. BA, SGS, EN and JOA conceived the study, and
participated in its design and coordination. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Received: 7 April 2010 Accepted: 7 October 2010
Published: 7 October 2010
References
1. Goto R, Panter-Brick C, Northrop-Clewes CA, Manahdhar R, Tuladhar NR:
Poor Intestinal Permeability in Mildly Stunted Nepali Children:
Associations with Weaning Practices and Giardia Lamblia Infection.
British Journal of Nutrition 2002, 88:141-14910, 1079/BJN2002599.
2. Adam RD: Biology of Giardia lamblia. Clin Microbiol Rev 2001, 14:447-7510,
1128/CMR.14.3.447-475.2001.
3. LeChevallier MW, Norton WD, Lee RG: Occurrence of Giardia and
Cryptosporidium spp. in surface water supplies. Appl Environ Microbiol
1991, 57:2610-2616.
4. Craun GF, Calderon RL, Craun MF: Outbreaks associated with recreational
water in the United States. International Journal of Environmental Health
Research 2005, 15:24310, 1080/09603120500155716.
5. Wolfe MS: Giardiasis. Clin Microbiol Rev 1992, 5:93-100.
6. Hellard ME, Sinclair MI, Hogg GG, Fairley CK: Prevalence of enteric
pathogens among community based asymptomatic individuals. Journal
of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 2000, 15:290-29310, 1046/j.14401746.2000.02089.x.
7. Lloyd D, Harris JC: Giardia: highly evolved parasite or early branching
eukaryote? Trends in Microbiology 2002, 10:122-12710, 1016/S0966-842X(02)
02306-5.
8. Jiménez-García LF, Zavala G, Chávez-Munguía B, Ramos-Godínez MDP,
López-Velázquez G, Segura-Valdez MDL, Montañez C, Hehl AB, ArgüelloGarcía R, Ortega-Pierres G: Identification of nucleoli in the early branching
protist Giardia duodenalis. Int J Parasitol 2008, 38:1297-130410, 1016/j.
ijpara.2008.04.012.
9. Tovar J, Leon-Avila G, Sanchez LB, Sutak R, Tachezy J, van der Giezen M,
Hernandez M, Muller M, Lucocq JM: Mitochondrial remnant organelles of
Giardia function in iron-sulphur protein maturation. Nature 2003,
426:172-17610, 1038/nature01945.
10. Andersson JO: Gene transfer and diversification of microbial eukaryotes.
Annu Rev Microbiol 2009, 63:177-19310, 1146/annurev.micro.091208.073203.
11. Morrison HG, McArthur AG, Gillin FD, Aley SB, Adam RD, Olsen GJ, Best AA,
Cande WZ, Chen F, Cipriano MJ, Davids BJ, Dawson SC, Elmendorf HG,
Hehl AB, Holder ME, Huse SM, Kim UU, Lasek-Nesselquist E, Manning G,
Nigam A, Nixon JEJ, Palm D, Passamaneck NE, Prabhu A, Reich CI,
Reiner DS, Samuelson J, Svard SG, Sogin ML: Genomic minimalism in the
early diverging intestinal parasite Giardia lamblia. Science 2007,
317:1921-192610, 1126/science.1143837.
12. Bernander R, Palm JE, Svärd SG: Genome ploidy in different stages of the
Giardia lamblia life cycle. Cell Microbiol 2001, 3:55-62.
13. Adam RD: Biology of Giardia lamblia. Clin Microbiol Rev 2001,
14:447-47510, 1128/CMR.14.3.447-475.2001.
14. Le Blancq SM, Adam RD: Structural basis of karyotype heterogeneity in
Giardia lamblia. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1998, 97:199-208.
15. Andrews RH, Adams M, Boreham PF, Mayrhofer G, Meloni BP: Giardia
intestinalis: electrophoretic evidence for a species complex. Int J Parasitol
1989, 19:183-190.
16. Monis PT, Caccio SM, Thompson RCA: Variation in Giardia: towards a
taxonomic revision of the genus. Trends Parasitol 2009, 25:93-10010, 1016/
j.pt.2008.11.006.
17. Lalle M, Pozio E, Capelli G, Bruschi F, Crotti D, Cacciò SM: Genetic
heterogeneity at the beta-giardin locus among human and animal
isolates of Giardiaduodenalis and identification of potentially zoonotic
subgenotypes. Int J Parasitol 2005, 35:207-21310, 1016/j.ijpara.2004.10.022.
18. Thompson RCA, Monis PT: Variation in Giardia: implications for taxonomy
and epidemiology. Adv Parasitol 2004, 58:69-13710, 1016/S0065-308X(04)
58002-8.

Jerlström-Hultqvist et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:543
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/543

19. Cacciò SM, Thompson RCA, McLauchlin J, Smith HV: Unravelling
Cryptosporidium and Giardia epidemiology. Trends Parasitol 2005,
21:430-43710, 1016/j.pt.2005.06.013.
20. Sprong H, Cacciò SM, van der Giessen JWB, on behalf of the ZOOPNET
network and partners: Identification of Zoonotic Genotypes of Giardia
duodenalis. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2009, 3:e55810, 1371/journal.pntd.0000558.
21. Andersson JO, Sjögren AM, Davis LAM, Embley TM, Roger AJ: Phylogenetic
analyses of diplomonad genes reveal frequent lateral gene transfers
affecting eukaryotes. Curr Biol 2003, 13:94-104.
22. Franzén O, Jerlström-Hultqvist J, Castro E, Sherwood E, Ankarklev J,
Reiner DS, Palm D, Andersson JO, Andersson B, Svärd SG: Draft genome
sequencing of giardia intestinalis assemblage B isolate GS: is human
giardiasis caused by two different species? PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:
e100056010, 1371/journal.ppat.1000560.
23. Ey PL, Mansouri M, Kulda J, Nohýnková E, Monis PT, Andrews RH,
Mayrhofer G: Genetic analysis of Giardia from hoofed farm animals
reveals artiodactyl-specific and potentially zoonotic genotypes. J
Eukaryot Microbiol 1997, 44:626-635.
24. Birkeland SR, Preheim SP, Davids BJ, Cipriano MJ, Palm D, Reiner DS,
Svärd SG, Gillin FD, McArthur AG: Transcriptome analyses of the Giardia
lamblia life cycle. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2010, 10[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/20570699], 1016/j.molbiopara.2010.05.010Available: Accessed
29 June 2010.
25. Lowe TM, Eddy SR: tRNAscan-SE: a program for improved detection of
transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:955-964.
26. Morrison HG, McArthur AG, Gillin FD, Aley SB, Adam RD, Olsen GJ, Best AA,
Cande WZ, Chen F, Cipriano MJ, Davids BJ, Dawson SC, Elmendorf HG,
Hehl AB, Holder ME, Huse SM, Kim UU, Lasek-Nesselquist E, Manning G,
Nigam A, Nixon JEJ, Palm D, Passamaneck NE, Prabhu A, Reich CI,
Reiner DS, Samuelson J, Svard SG, Sogin ML: Genomic Minimalism in the
Early Diverging Intestinal Parasite Giardia lamblia. Science 2007,
317:1921-192610, 1126/science.1143837.
27. Le Blancq SM: Chromosome rearrangements in Giardia lamblia. Parasitol
Today (Regul Ed) 1994, 10:177-179.
28. Upcroft JA, Healey A, Upcroft P: Chromosomal duplication in Giardia
duodenalis. Int J Parasitol 1993, 23:609-616.
29. Tůmová P, Hofstetrová K, Nohýnková E, Hovorka O, Král J: Cytogenetic
evidence for diversity of two nuclei within a single diplomonad cell of
Giardia. Chromosoma 2007, 116:65-7810, 1007/s00412-006-0082-4.
30. Le Blancq SM, Korman SH, Van der Ploeg LH: Spontaneous chromosome
rearrangements in the protozoan Giardia lamblia: estimation of
mutation rates. Nucleic Acids Res 1992, 20:4539-4545.
31. Arkhipova IR, Morrison HG: Three retrotransposon families in the genome
of Giardia lamblia: two telomeric, one dead. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98:14497-1450210, 1073/pnas.231494798.
32. Lebbad M, Mattsson JG, Christensson B, Ljungström B, Backhans A,
Andersson JO, Svärd SG: From mouse to moose: Multilocus genotyping
of Giardia isolates from various animal species. Vet Parasitol 2010,
168:231-23910, 1016/j.vetpar.2009.11.003.
33. Viguera E, Canceill D, Ehrlich SD: Replication slippage involves DNA
polymerase pausing and dissociation. EMBO J 2001, 20:2587-259510,
1093/emboj/20.10.2587.
34. Cooper MA, Adam RD, Worobey M, Sterling CR: Population genetics
provides evidence for recombination in Giardia. Curr Biol 2007,
17:1984-198810, 1016/j.cub.2007.10.020.
35. Andersson JO, Sjögren AM, Davis LAM, Embley TM, Roger AJ: Phylogenetic
analyses of diplomonad genes reveal frequent lateral gene transfers
affecting eukaryotes. Curr Biol 2003, 13:94-104.
36. Welch RA, Burland V, Plunkett G, Redford P, Roesch P, Rasko D, Buckles EL,
Liou S, Boutin A, Hackett J, Stroud D, Mayhew GF, Rose DJ, Zhou S,
Schwartz DC, Perna NT, Mobley HLT, Donnenberg MS, Blattner FR:
Extensive mosaic structure revealed by the complete genome sequence
of uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99:17020-1702410, 1702410.1073/pnas.252529799.
37. El-Sayed NM, Myler PJ, Bartholomeu DC, Nilsson D, Aggarwal G, Tran A,
Ghedin E, Worthey EA, Delcher AL, Blandin G, Westenberger SJ, Caler E,
Cerqueira GC, Branche C, Haas B, Anupama A, Arner E, Aslund L, Attipoe P,
Bontempi E, Bringaud F, Burton P, Cadag E, Campbell DA, Carrington M,
Crabtree J, Darban H, da Silveira JF, de Jong P, Edwards K, et al: The

Page 15 of 15

38.

39.
40.

41.
42.
43.
44.

45.

46.

47.

48.
49.

50.

51.
52.

genome sequence of Trypanosoma cruzi, etiologic agent of Chagas
disease. Science 2005, 309:409-41510, 1126/science.1112631.
Koudela B, Nohýnková E, Vítovec J, Pakandl M, Kulda J: Giardia infection in
pigs: detection and in vitro isolation of trophozoites of the Giardia
intestinalis group. Parasitology 1991, 102(Pt 2):163-166.
Chevreux B: MIRA sequence assembler [http://sourceforge.net/apps/
mediawiki/mira-assembler/].
Zhang Z, Schwartz S, Wagner L, Miller W: A greedy algorithm for aligning
DNA sequences. J Comput Biol 2000, 7:203-21410, 1089/
10665270050081478.
Ewing B, Green P: Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using
phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res 1998, 8:186-194.
Delcher AL, Harmon D, Kasif S, White O, Salzberg SL: Improved microbial
gene identification with GLIMMER. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:4636-4641.
Badger JH, Olsen GJ: CRITICA: coding region identification tool invoking
comparative analysis. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:512-524.
Milne I, Bayer M, Cardle L, Shaw P, Stephen G, Wright F, Marshall D: Tablet–
next generation sequence assembly visualization. Bioinformatics 2010,
26:401-40210, 1093/bioinformatics/btp666.
Bininda-Emonds ORP: transAlign: using amino acids to facilitate the
multiple alignment of protein-coding DNA sequences. BMC Bioinformatics
2005, 6:15610, 1186/1471-2105-6-156.
Carver TJ, Rutherford KM, Berriman M, Rajandream M, Barrell BG, Parkhill J:
ACT: the Artemis Comparison Tool. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:3422-342310,
1093/bioinformatics/bti553.
Aurrecoechea C, Brestelli J, Brunk BP, Carlton JM, Dommer J, Fischer S,
Gajria B, Gao X, Gingle A, Grant G, Harb OS, Heiges M, Innamorato F,
Iodice J, Kissinger JC, Kraemer E, Li W, Miller JA, Morrison HG, Nayak V,
Pennington C, Pinney DF, Roos DS, Ross C, Stoeckert CJ, Sullivan S,
Treatman C, Wang H: GiardiaDB and TrichDB: integrated genomic
resources for the eukaryotic protist pathogens Giardia lamblia and
Trichomonas vaginalis. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D526-53010, 1093/nar/
gkn631.
Yang Z: PAML: a program package for phylogenetic analysis by
maximum likelihood. Comput Appl Biosci 1997, 13:555-556.
Krzywinski M, Schein J, Birol I, Connors J, Gascoyne R, Horsman D, Jones SJ,
Marra MA: Circos: an information aesthetic for comparative genomics.
Genome Res 2009, 19:1639-164510, 1101/gr.092759.109.
Stamatakis A, Ludwig T, Meier H: RAxML-III: a fast program for maximum
likelihood-based inference of large phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:456-46310, 1093/bioinformatics/bti191.
Paradis E, Claude J, Strimmer K: APE: Analyses of Phylogenetics and
Evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:289-290.
Bailey TL, Williams N, Misleh C, Li WW: MEME: discovering and analyzing
DNA and protein sequence motifs. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:W369-37310,
1093/nar/gkl198.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-543
Cite this article as: Jerlström-Hultqvist et al.: Genome analysis and
comparative genomics of a Giardia intestinalis assemblage E isolate.
BMC Genomics 2010 11:543.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
