<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>BIGSdb: Scalable analysis of bacterial genome variation at the population level</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-595"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Keith A Jolley"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

SOFTWARE

Open Access

BIGSdb: Scalable analysis of bacterial genome
variation at the population level
Keith A Jolley*, Martin CJ Maiden

Abstract
Background: The opportunities for bacterial population genomics that are being realised by the application of
parallel nucleotide sequencing require novel bioinformatics platforms. These must be capable of the storage,
retrieval, and analysis of linked phenotypic and genotypic information in an accessible, scalable and
computationally efficient manner.
Results: The Bacterial Isolate Genome Sequence Database (BIGSDB) is a scalable, open source, web-accessible
database system that meets these needs, enabling phenotype and sequence data, which can range from a single
sequence read to whole genome data, to be efficiently linked for a limitless number of bacterial specimens. The
system builds on the widely used mlstdbNet software, developed for the storage and distribution of multilocus
sequence typing (MLST) data, and incorporates the capacity to define and identify any number of loci and genetic
variants at those loci within the stored nucleotide sequences. These loci can be further organised into ‘schemes’
for isolate characterisation or for evolutionary or functional analyses. Isolates and loci can be indexed by multiple
names and any number of alternative schemes can be accommodated, enabling cross-referencing of different
studies and approaches. LIMS functionality of the software enables linkage to and organisation of laboratory
samples. The data are easily linked to external databases and fine-grained authentication of access permits multiple
users to participate in community annotation by setting up or contributing to different schemes within the
database. Some of the applications of BIGSDB are illustrated with the genera Neisseria and Streptococcus.
The BIGSDB source code and documentation are available at http://pubmlst.org/software/database/bigsdb/.
Conclusions: Genomic data can be used to characterise bacterial isolates in many different ways but it can also be
efficiently exploited for evolutionary or functional studies. BIGSDB represents a freely available resource that will
assist the broader community in the elucidation of the structure and function of bacteria by means of a
population genomics approach.

Background
Parallel sequencing technology, sometimes referred to as
‘next-generation’ sequencing, makes possible the rapid
determination of large numbers of complete bacterial
genome sequences at a low cost. This is leading increasingly to its use in population studies including epidemiological investigations, a trend that will accelerate with the
continual introduction of technical advances such as single molecule sequencing [1]. The possibility of comparing
any number of gene targets among multiple, disparate,
isolates, allows the assembled data resource to be used to
address a wide range of research questions concerning
* Correspondence: keith.jolley@zoo.ox.ac.uk
Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1
3PS, UK

bacterial evolution, ecology and pathogenicity. Harnessing this resource will enable a diversity of information to
be efficiently exploited in functional studies.
Investigations of bacterial population biology and epidemiology have utilised whole genome data but, until
now, its application has been limited to largely clonal
organisms or closely related isolates [2-8]. In order to
facilitate wider bacterial population genomic research,
there is a need to link whole genome data to the population sample data, including detailed provenance, clinical
information and phenotype as appropriate, allowing integrated studies irrespective of the diversity of the isolates.
One method that has been widely used to achieve this for
both population studies and especially epidemiological
investigation is multilocus sequence typing (MLST)

© 2010 Jolley and Maiden; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

[9,10]. MLST indexes the sequences of representative
housekeeping gene fragments, approximately 500 bp in
length usually from seven loci, with each unique allele
assigned an arbitrary integer identifier. Unique combinations of the alleles at each locus, allelic profiles, are identified by a sequence type (ST) number with definitions
stored in authoritative online databases overseen by a
curator for each species or group of species. Housekeeping gene profiles may be combined with sequence data
from more rapidly-evolving genes, such as those encoding surface antigens, where higher resolution is required
to address questions concerning antigenic variation or
antibiotic resistance [11,12]. The current generation of
sequence typing databases [13-15] have been highly successful at linking isolate provenance to sequence data,
contributing significantly to the widespread adoption of
MLST and antigen sequence typing. Indexing population
genomic data provided by parallel sequencing technologies, however, provides challenges requiring the development of new methodologies and informatics solutions.
We have extended the proven concept of MLST to
genome scale data, where particular combinations of
loci can be analysed depending on the question being
addressed. As with conventional MLST, each unique
sequence at each locus can be assigned an allele number, allowing the range of analyses developed for MLST,
or for other techniques utilizing numerical profiles such
as multiple locus VNTR analysis (MLVA) [16], to be
directly applied to whole genomes, while still providing
full access to the underlying sequence data when
required. This approach provides the isolate- or specimen-centric view required for epidemiology, ecology
and population analysis, with the isolate provenance and
phenotype linked to any quantity of sequence data, from
individual dye-terminator sequencing reads, through
partial genomes consisting of multiple unassembled contigs to complete genome sequences. It also enables routine typing applications for epidemiological studies to
use the same methodology as required for population
analysis, which has been one of the factors in the success and widespread adoption of MLST. While analogous to MLST, the application of the concept goes far
beyond typing, allowing detailed investigation of population diversity in bacterial systems. Here we describe a
software platform for population genomics that has
been designed and developed to exploit this concept.

Implementation
BIGSDB is written in Perl for installation on UNIX/
Linux systems. It utilizes the PostgreSQL database and
Apache web server software running under mod_perl
[17] to avoid the performance penalty of Perl interpreter
start-up times. Sequence handling routines are provided
by the BIOPERL library [18] and EMBOSS suite of

Page 2 of 11

programs [19]. Client-side Javascript makes use of the
JQUERY library [20]. Built-in authentication is based on
Perl/Javascript MD5 secure user authentication [21],
with Javascript MD5 code written by Paul Johnston [22].
Sequence homology matching uses BLAST [23] with a
default word size of 15 and identity of 70% for DNA
sequences (values are configurable by the user).
Configuration

Global configuration settings are stored in a text file.
Settings provide the locations of helper applications like
BLAST and EMBOSS and the names of the preference and
authentication databases. Logging utilizes the Log::Log4perl
module, enabling fine-grained control of error and status
logging by modifying a configuration file, setting the overall
log level for discrete components of the system.
Individual databases are configured with a XML file
that describes any isolate provenance fields including
default display properties (that can be over-ridden by
user preferences), sample table for use as a LIMS database, connection information, web paths, authentication
type in use and enabled plug-ins.
Sequence definition databases

As well as storing isolate information, BIGSDB is able to
host separate sequence definition databases so that new
allele sequences can be defined for any locus and made
available on the Internet. Users are able to paste in and
query sequences against all known alleles from a particular locus or against all loci. The nearest matches are
displayed along with nucleotide differences and the start
and end positions within the sequence are identified,
allowing exact polymorphisms to be identified and
checked rapidly and efficiently without the user having
to trim their sequence to match the defined allele.
Sequence definition databases can also define schemes
so can, for instance, make MLST profile data available.
User customization

Individual users are able to customize the query interface. The fields and loci that are returned within main
results tables following a query can be selected so that
only the results of interest are shown without leading to
the table width going beyond the confines of the page.
Drop-down list boxes that filter search results based on
particular provenance criteria or publications can be
added to the standard query interface. All settings are
stored in a separate preference database linked to a
unique identifier stored as a HTTP cookie so that these
are remembered between sessions.
Data export

Isolate data, along with all defined allele identifiers, can
be exported for a subset of the data returned from a

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

query or for the whole database. Isolate data are
exported in tab-delimited text format, suitable for
importing into spreadsheets or easy parsing by automated scripts. Concatenated sequences can be exported
for isolates in FASTA or extended-FASTA format suitable for use in third-party phylogenetic packages.
Plug-in architecture

The software employs a plug-in architecture, allowing
additional features and analysis packages to be added by
third-parties without modification of the core code. Various attributes are defined for each plug-in which specify
whether it works with isolate or sequence definition
databases, where in the interface it should be available,
e.g. main index page and/or following a query to utilise
a returned dataset, and a feature category, e.g. export,
breakdown, or analysis, allowing tools to be grouped by
function.
Most software functionality that can be considered
optional to the core requirements of the database form
part of plug-ins, easing maintenance of the main code
and allowing installations to be tailored to individual
requirements. Since plug-ins are self-contained units,
they can be distributed under different licenses to the
main software package.
Authentication and access control

There are three types of user in BIGSDB: i) ‘users’ can
view data but never modify it; ii) ‘curators’ can add and
modify data with specific permissions enabling particular
roles to be defined and controlled; and iii) ‘admins’ have
full control over the database structure, data and curator
permissions.
The software can be configured with either built-in
authentication or controlled by apache. Built-in authentication uses client-side Javascript to hash passwords
together with session identifiers so that passwords are
not transmitted in clear text over the network. Controlling authentication within the program also allows users
to change their own passwords from the web interface.
Using apache authentication allows any supported external authentication scheme to be employed.
Isolate databases can be configured to be public,
where either everybody on a public website or all
authenticated users can view all records. Alternatively,
controls can be configured allowing read and write
access of individual isolate records to specific users or
user groups. By default, new records are viewable by
everybody and writable by the curator who adds them,
but access can be controlled easily within the curator
interface in either a single isolate manner or batch
mode. Curation access to individual loci in sequence
definition databases can be set so that curators are
allowed to define allele sequences for certain loci only.

Page 3 of 11

This allows a single definitions database to be serviced
by a community of curators, expert in particular areas
of the organism’s biology.

Results
Design philosophy

The Bacterial Isolate Genome Sequence Database
(BIGSDB) is an informatics system that can hold provenance and phenotype information on an unlimited number of isolates, along with nucleotide sequence data
(Figure 1). These sequence data can be of any size scale
ranging from individual dye-terminator sequencing reads
through partial assemblies generated from parallel
sequencing technologies to complete assembled genomes. These are stored within a ‘sequence bin’ linked to
the isolate records. A reference sequence for each locus
can be defined, or alternatively they can be linked to
external databases that hold allele sequence definitions.
This enables the positions of loci within individual
sequences stored in the bin to be determined automatically using any algorithm, at present BLAST[23], and the
sequences extracted along with flanking regions if
required. If an external sequence definition database,
containing allele sequences and their identifiers, has been
defined it can automatically be queried to determine the
allele number for each locus (Figure 2). BIGSDB facilitates the construction of these definition databases. Provided the locus is fully encompassed within a single
contig, the length of individual sequences is unimportant
for extracting allele data, avoiding many of the problems
associated with assembly of short-read data.
Genetic loci can be grouped into schemes with membership defined by any criteria and with each unique
combination of alleles associated with a primary key (a
field that uniquely defines this combination) and any
number of other fields. One example of this is the standard seven locus MLST scheme where each allelic profile
is defined by a ST number, the primary key in this case.
Since the ST can also define membership of a clonal
complex, an epidemiologically related grouping of STs,
this can be included as an additional field in the scheme.
The flexibility of BIGSDB enables loci to belong to any
number of schemes, allowing multiple strain nomenclatures to be cross-referenced or for schemes based on specific aspects of the biology of the organism to be
employed, such as particular biochemical pathways, surface components coded by antigen genes, antibiotic resistance or members of macromolecular complexes.
Allele assignment and locus tagging

As well as automatic allele assignment using BLAST, allele
numbers can be assigned manually, enabling existing isolate datasets to be imported where these designations are
already determined. Competing allele designations,

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

Page 4 of 11

DNA

Figure 1 BIGSdb links bacterial isolate provenance, phenotypic and genotypic data. Sequences from multiple sources such as single dyeterminator reaction reads, contigs generated from parallel sequencing technologies or complete assembled genomes can be associated with an
isolate record. Following locus tagging, sequences can be readily extracted and exported in formats suitable for various analyses.

identified by different users or with different analysis
methods, can be handled with the first determined designation used for analysis, but the presence of conflicting
data highlighted within the user interface. Designations
can be promoted or demoted from the active or pending
state by the curator; with a fine-grained permission system

allowing specific curator roles (see access control in Methods). A full history of changes made to an isolate record is
logged, so that it is possible to track which curator made a
change and when.
Loci are usually defined by nucleotide sequences, but
BIGSDB will also handle loci that are defined by the

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

Identify loci, e.g. of
genes that encode
enzymes
belonging to
pathway

Upload example
sequence for each
locus

Create isolate
provenance record
which can include
detailed
phenotype

Page 5 of 11

Generate whole
genome contigs
by de novo
assembly

Link sequence
contigs to isolate
record by
uploading FASTA
file
Yes

Define sequence
as new allele

Scan genome for
existing alleles

Sequence
found?

Data export and analysis

No

Modify BLAST
parameters?

Yes
Yes

No
Is sequence a
new allele?

having multiple names having been stored in different
laboratories or collections. BIGSDB allows isolates to
have any number of names by storing aliases in a linked
table. These aliases are treated in the same manner as
the primary name, and will be found by searches against
the ‘isolate’ field. In a similar manner, loci can also have
aliases, all of which are accessible within the interface.
Loci that are members of schemes defined within external databases are not constrained to the names used in
those databases, ensuring that data organisation within
BIGSDB is not impacted by external naming constraints.

Tag isolate as
provisionally
missing locus

No
Tag allele
designation and
locus position in
isolate record

Analyse
relationship of
phenotype to
sequence

Figure 2 Iterative process of analysing loci. Since detailed
phenotypic information can be included with the isolate record, the
correlation between enzyme sequence diversity and phenotype can
be examined using the integrated analysis tools.

translated sequence peptide, commonly used, for example, to define variable regions of antigens important in
typing or vaccine development. Irrespective of the locus
type, the sequence definition database can be queried
using either nucleotide or peptide sequences, with the
query type recognized automatically and the appropriate
BLAST algorithm called. Alleles can be named using
either simple integers, or by a text string, with the format naming constrained by a regular expression defined
in the locus table if required. Coding sequence definitions from existing published annotations can be
retrieved automatically by entering a Genbank or EMBL
accession number, assisting the process of setting up
new loci for analysis.
Isolate and locus aliases

A common issue with population datasets is that of
alternative nomenclature of isolates, with many samples

Sequence and provenance data can be exported from
the database in multiple formats. Where genome data
are represented by single or a small number of large
contigs, export in EMBL format with the locus information included provides a method of consistent feature
annotation, allowing newly defined loci to be applied
rapidly to any number of existing genomes. Other formats include extended multi-FASTA where data for
each locus are grouped in aligned blocks, facilitating
whole genome phylogenetic analysis with applications
such as ClonalFrame [24].
Datasets can be further analysed by provenance or
allele content using various breakdown tools that determine value frequencies or that breakdown one field
against another, allowing analyses such as clonal complex against serogroup.
Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS)

BIGSDB can form the basis of a laboratory information
management system (LIMS). An optional samples table
can be defined containing any choice of fields which
can, for example, describe sample type and freezer location. Each isolate record can then be associated with
any number of samples which are displayed within the
detailed isolate information pages, where the records
can be updated by users with appropriate privileges.
Demonstration 1: PubMLST and reference gene-based
analysis of partially assembled genome data

We have installed BIGSDB on PubMLST.org and converted the Neisseria MLST databases [25] to use the system in place of the previously used MLSTDBNET[13]
software, the functionality of which is generically incorporated. The MLST databases for Neisseria are the largest of all such databases, containing provenance and
genetic data for over 17,000 isolates and over 8,000 STs,
providing a valid test of scalability and performance for
population level data. The isolate database has been
linked to existing antigen typing and antibiotic resistance gene databases [26], enabling automated allele
assignment and sequence tagging of typing antigens and

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

genes encoding candidate vaccine proteins. We have
further populated this database with publicly-available
Neisseria species genome data and performed automated
tagging and assignment of alleles for loci with existing
definition databases. Some of these are represented by
single contigs of approximately 2.2 Mbp, but there are
also samples with unfinished genomes consisting of multiple smaller contigs. Finally, we have deposited contigs
for isolate OX9932088, a ST-41/44 isolate collected during the UK meningococcal carriage study [27], generated
from Illumina Solexa reads, to demonstrate the ease of
analysis of such data using the gene reference approach
[Neisseria PubMLST:14923]. Velvet assembly [28] of the
Solexa runs yielded 295 contigs of >100 bp length, which
were uploaded to the PubMLST BIGSDB database. Automated sequence tagging determined the full strain
designation, B: P1.21,16: F1-5: ST-1415 (cc41/44), incorporating MLST and the PorA and FetA antigen types.
Additionally, the peptide sequence for Factor H binding
protein, a principal component of two meningococcal
recombinant protein vaccines undergoing clinical trials,
was identified as variant 19 [29]. Allele sequences for
penA [30] and rpoB (definitions incorporated into
PubMLST) were identified as penA-1 and rpoB-18 indicating the isolate has intermediate susceptibility to penicillin and high susceptibility to rifampicin respectively.
Isolate records for which genome data are available can
be readily extracted from the database by selecting ‘whole
genome’ in the project filter of the query interface.
Demonstration 2: Relationships within the genus
Streptococcus

Since BIGSDB can define multiple schemes for a dataset, it can be used to cross-reference typing methods.
A database containing 43 published streptococci genomes
was constructed [31] and had loci defined for all streptococcal MLST schemes (S. agalactiae [32], S. oralis [33], S.
pneumoniae [34], S. pyogenes [35], S. suis [36], S. uberis
[37] and S. zooepidemicus [38]). Sequences and ST definitions from these schemes were imported into a unified
definitions database, and the genomes tagged with all loci
found. In addition, unique alleles from the streptococcal
MLSA database [39], whose loci were chosen to be present
across the viridans streptococci, were imported and
assigned allele numbers. Genome isolates were then
tagged against these loci as well.
Further loci were defined based on a sample of the
coding sequences extracted from the annotated S. equi
genome [40]. The BIGSDB genome comparator tool was
used to identify loci found in all 43 genomes using
BLAST with a 70% identity cut-off and a word size of 8.
Because the search used nucleotide sequences it would

Page 6 of 11

be expected to only find the more conserved classes of
protein-coding genes [41]. Seventy-seven coding loci,
consisting largely of genes whose products are involved
in translation were identified. Sequences for the MLSA
scheme and the 77 trans-genus loci were then extracted
as two separate datasets from the database as aligned
sequences in multi-FASTA format using the BIGSDB
export functionality. ClonalFrame trees were generated
from these sequence data (Figure 3). The trees from the
MLSA loci and from the 77 loci identified without a
priori knowledge produced highly similar species clustering. The only major differences between the two trees
was that the branch points for the S. equi/S. zooepidemicus and the S. uberis branches were positioned nearer to
the S. pyogenes cluster in the MLSA tree.

Discussion
Flexible storage of population-scale bacterial
genome data

There is a dichotomy in the approach to data handling
and analysis between the researchers that have been
involved in generating complete annotated genome
sequences and those engaged in large scale bacterial
population studies. To date, the former have worked with
relatively few isolates as exemplars of their species, while
the latter have collected and analysed datasets that may
include hundreds or thousands of isolates with less complete genome sampling. Many of the genomes hosted in
online databases [42-44] have detailed and comprehensive annotation, but what these databases have in common is that for any particular species they contain very
few genomes (Figure 4) and the analysis is geared specifically to the attributes of the sequence itself rather than of
the isolate from which it was derived. For example, data
cannot be analysed based on host clinical outcome, geographical location or any number of attributes that are
important in evolutionary or epidemiological studies.
Conversely, population biologists and bacterial epidemiologists collect and analyse many more isolates, but
until now, have sampled the genome by sequencing relatively few genes. Methods of sampling a genome with
manageable units of data that are epidemiologically
meaningful will continue to be essential for characterisation of isolates and disease management and with the
decreasing costs of parallel sequencing it is likely, in the
near future, to be more efficient and cost-effective to
obtain MLST and antigen profiles by sequencing the
whole genome rather than by a gene-by-gene approach
using dideoxy chain termination methods. MLST and
antigen sequencing have proved sufficient for routine
typing, and they have been used successfully for association studies that link host, disease or sample site to

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

Page 7 of 11

A

B

S. agalactiae
S. equi
S. equisimilis
S. gordonii
S. mutans
S. pneumoniae
S. pyogenes
S. sanguinis
S. suis
S. thermophilus
S. uberis
S. zooepidemicus

Figure 3 The Genome Comparator plugin can identify loci shared among genomes. ClonalFrame trees were generated from
43 Streptococcal genome sequences using A) seven MLSA gene fragment loci and B) 77 complete genes found to be present throughout the
genus identified by BIGSDB. Aligned sequences were exported from the database and 50% consensus trees generated from six independent
runs with 50 k iterations, 50 k burn-in iterations, and a thinning interval of 100.

genetic type [45-49]. The information available from the
complete genome, however, will facilitate much higher
resolution association analyses. The BIGSDB platform
has been designed to store such population-scale bacterial genome datasets with no constraint on the number
of samples or loci that can be analysed.

Reference gene-based analysis of genome data

As the number of new genomes from individual species
or genera increases, a problem emerges as to how they
can be compared. Existing tools [50-52] do not scale
well to the challenge of handling multiple genomes
at the scale that will be required in the near future.

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

Page 8 of 11

Figure 4 The BIGSdb database platform is highly scalable. The system can be used to analyse a few isolates up to many thousands, each
with full genome data attached. This compares favourably with existing database and analysis resources.

When more than a handful of comparisons are to be
made, one method is to use single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to generate phylogenetic trees, identifying
informative SNP markers to differentiate particular nodes
[4,53-56]. Ongoing SNP discovery resulting in continual
tree generation makes this approach cumbersome for
large ongoing studies, and the effects of recombination
on population structure may make any resulting tree misleading. A recent study used short-read Solexa data to
investigate hospital transmission and intercontinental
spread of MRSA ST-239 [5]. This study identified thousands of high-quality SNPs, allowing a phylogeny to be
determined, but this approach depends on mapping the
sequences to a high-quality reference genome of a related
isolate. Such a method will not be generically applicable
to large scale population studies with diverse genotypes.
Adopting a reference gene-based, as opposed to a
reference genome-based, approach to analysis of whole
or partial genomes avoids many of the problems associated with determining how related strains are to each
other by existing genomic methods. As genes are generally the unit of selection, treating them as discrete units

of analysis is valid and analogous to MLST where each
unique allele at a locus is defined with an allele number.
Instead of a seven locus typing scheme the technique
can be applied to each of the coding sequences in the
genome. Identifying gene-length regions of DNA by
comparison to a database of reference sequences is conceptually straightforward, computationally simple, and
highly accurate. The method scales well, without the
need for reanalysis every time new variants are discovered or new isolates added to a dataset. This is a particular advantage for population datasets that can include
many thousands of isolates.
The method can utilize the array of analysis tools
developed or applicable for analysing MLST data
[24,57-60] with the loci chosen to provide the level of
discrimination required or to focus on particular aspects
of the biology of the organism. A further advantage is
that the method is additive to and fully compatible with
existing sequence typing schemes, so that new isolates
with genome data can easily be categorized and compared to the large isolate datasets that have been accumulated over many years and geographical locations.

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

Intra-genus analysis of species groups

With the exception of those defining rRNA variation, most
existing sequence typing and characterisation databases
host data for one or a few related microbiological species.
BIGSDB allows loci to belong to groups which could be
related to their level of diversity or by their presence in
specific organisms so it can be specified that, for example,
a N. meningitidis isolate should be scanned against Neisseria-specific loci and against more widely applicable loci
such as genes for DNA and RNA metabolism or protein
folding which are found widely throughout the bacterial
domain [61]. Such groupings allow a single database to
hold information for a disparate range of species, with
characterisation ranging from the genus to a finetype, as
appropriate, depending on their similarity and the research
question being addressed. The trans-genus Streptococcus
database demonstrates how multiple MLST schemes can
be accommodated within a single database, allowing such
schemes to be cross-referenced and sequences exported
for phylogenetic analysis. From the analysis of 43 Streptococcal genomes, 77 loci were found in all sequences using
a nucleotide BLAST search with the S. equi genome [40]
as a reference. The identification of these genes, without
prior knowledge, allowed a ClonalFrame tree to be constructed showing the individual species as distinct clusters,
very similar to the tree constructed from MLSA locus
data. Many more loci would be expected to be found
throughout the genus if the BLAST search for each locus
used an expanding database of all known alleles rather
than the single reference genome sequence, as used for
the MLSA scheme incorporated in the same database.
Alternatively, loci can be defined based on the translated
protein sequences, enabling protein BLAST searches to be
used. The relative insensitivity of nucleotide BLAST
searches compared to those for proteins [41], however, is
unlikely to be an issue for isolates belonging to the same
or closely related species.

Conclusions
Recent advances in sequencing technology have removed
the collection of these data as a limiting step in the study
of bacterial populations. It is now possible to undertake
whole genome studies on multiple isolates and such limits of cost and speed as remain are likely to be breached
in the very near future. The study of bacterial populations
now faces the challenge of exploiting this rich source of
inference, potentially from whole genomes of thousands
of isolates, and to do this it will be necessary to collect
structured representative samples of populations and to
link precise provenance and phenotype information with
the sequence data. The success of the MLST approach to
bacterial isolate characterisation was greatly facilitated by
the accessibility of the data via the Internet, which
enabled community participation in the collection and

Page 9 of 11

analysis of the data. MLST also provided a hierarchical
and structured approach to population analysis, as well
as linking the sequence type to relevant phenotype and
provenance information. BIGSDB replicates and extends
this paradigm by enabling whole genomes, or fragments
of them, to be archived and the data to be organised and
interpreted by any number of schemes, which can comprise any number of loci. Using BIGSDB, genomic data
can be used to characterise isolates in many different
ways but it can also be efficiently exploited for evolutionary or functional studies. Permitting indexing of loci on a
functional basis, by treating loci or groups of loci as independent units of analysis, opens the way for genome
annotation to become a community-based process
[62,63]. BIGSDB represents a freely available resource
that will assist the broader community in the elucidation
of the structure and function of the bacteria by means of
a population genomics approach.

Availability and requirements
Project name: BIGSDB
Project home page: http://pubmlst.org/software/database/bigsdb/
Operating systems: Linux/UNIX
Programming language: Perl, Javascript
Other requirements: Apache, PostgreSQL
License: GNU GPL
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: none
Abbreviations
LIMS: Laboratory Information Management System; MLST: Multi-Locus
Sequence Typing; MLVA: Multi-Locus VNTR Analysis; MRSA: MethicillinResistant Staphylococcus auerus; SNP: Single Nucleotide Polymorphism; ST:
Sequence Type; VNTR: Variable Number Tandem Repeats
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by The Wellcome Trust. MCJM is a Wellcome Trust
Senior Research Fellow. We are grateful to Holly Bratcher (University of
Oxford) and Stephen Bentley (Sanger Institute) for allowing us to deposit
Illumina Solexa contigs for isolate OX9932088 in the PubMLST database.
Authors’ contributions
MM and KJ conceived the design concept and wrote the manuscript. KJ
developed the software. Both authors read and approved the manuscript.
Received: 20 May 2010 Accepted: 10 December 2010
Published: 10 December 2010
References
1. Pettersson E, Lundeberg J, Ahmadian A: Generations of sequencing
technologies. Genomics 2009, 93(2):105-111.
2. Roumagnac P, Weill FX, Dolecek C, Baker S, Brisse S, Chinh NT, Le TA,
Acosta CJ, Farrar J, Dougan G, et al: Evolutionary history of Salmonella
typhi. Science 2006, 314(5803):1301-1304.
3. Baker S, Holt K, van de Vosse E, Roumagnac P, Whitehead S, King E,
Ewels P, Keniry A, Weill FX, Lightfoot D, et al: High-throughput genotyping
of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi allowing geographical assignment
of haplotypes and pathotypes within an urban District of Jakarta,
Indonesia. J Clin Microbiol 2008, 46(5):1741-1746.
4. Holt KE, Parkhill J, Mazzoni CJ, Roumagnac P, Weill FX, Goodhead I, Rance R,
Baker S, Maskell DJ, Wain J, et al: High-throughput sequencing provides

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27.

28.
29.
30.

31.

insights into genome variation and evolution in Salmonella Typhi. Nat
Genet 2008, 40(8):987-993.
Harris SR, Feil EJ, Holden MT, Quail MA, Nickerson EK, Chantratita N,
Gardete S, Tavares A, Day N, Lindsay JA, et al: Evolution of MRSA during
hospital transmission and intercontinental spread. Science 2010,
327(5964):469-474.
Lewis T, Loman NJ, Bingle L, Jumaa P, Weinstock GM, Mortiboy D,
Pallen MJ: High-throughput whole-genome sequencing to dissect the
epidemiology of Acinetobacter baumannii isolates from a hospital
outbreak. J Hosp Infect 2010, 75(1):37-41.
Gilmour MW, Graham M, Van Domselaar G, Tyler S, Kent H, Trout-Yakel KM,
Larios O, Allen V, Lee B, Nadon C: High-throughput genome sequencing
of two Listeria monocytogenes clinical isolates during a large foodborne
outbreak. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:120.
Beres SB, Carroll RK, Shea PR, Sitkiewicz I, Martinez-Gutierrez JC, Low DE,
McGeer A, Willey BM, Green K, Tyrrell GJ, et al: Molecular complexity of
successive bacterial epidemics deconvoluted by comparative
pathogenomics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107(9):4371-4376.
Maiden MCJ, Bygraves JA, Feil E, Morelli G, Russell JE, Urwin R, Zhang Q,
Zhou J, Zurth K, Caugant DA, et al: Multilocus sequence typing: a portable
approach to the identification of clones within populations of
pathogenic microorganisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95(6):3140-3145.
Maiden MC: Multilocus Sequence Typing of Bacteria. Annu Rev Microbiol
2006, 60:561-588.
Jolley KA, Brehony C, Maiden MC: Molecular typing of meningococci:
recommendations for target choice and nomenclature. FEMS Microbiol
Rev 2007, 31(1):89-96.
Dingle KE, McCarthy ND, Cody AJ, Peto TE, Maiden MC: Extended
sequence typing of Campylobacter spp., United Kingdom. Emerg Infect
Dis 2008, 14(10):1620-1622.
Jolley KA, Chan MS, Maiden MC: mlstdbNet - distributed multi-locus
sequence typing (MLST) databases. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5(1):86.
Jolley KA, Maiden MC: AgdbNet - antigen sequence database software
for bacterial typing. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:314.
Aanensen DM, Spratt BG: The multilocus sequence typing network: mlst.
net. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, , 33 Web Server: W728-733.
Keim P, Price LB, Klevytska AM, Smith KL, Schupp JM, Okinaka R, Jackson PJ,
Hugh-Jones ME: Multiple-locus variable-number tandem repeat analysis
reveals genetic relationships within Bacillus anthracis. J Bacteriol 2000,
182(10):2928-2936.
mod_perl home page. [http://perl.apache.org/].
Stajich JE, Block D, Boulez K, Brenner SE, Chervitz SA, Dagdigian C,
Fuellen G, Gilbert JG, Korf I, Lapp H, et al: The Bioperl toolkit: Perl modules
for the life sciences. Genome Res 2002, 12(10):1611-1618.
Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: the European Molecular Biology
Open Software Suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16(6):276-277.
jQuery home page. [http://jquery.com/].
Perl/Javascript MD5 secure user authentication home page.
[http://perl-md5-login.sourceforge.net/].
Paul Johnston’s home page. [http://pajhome.org.uk/].
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
Didelot X, Falush D: Inference of bacterial microevolution using
multilocus sequence data. Genetics 2007, 175(3):1251-1266.
Neisseria MLST website. [http://pubmlst.org/neisseria/].
Neisseria.org meningococcal typing website. [http://neisseria.org/nm/
typing/].
Maiden MC, Stuart JM, Group UMC: Carriage of serogroup C
meningococci 1 year after meningococcal C conjugate polysaccharide
vaccination. Lancet 2002, 359(9320):1829-1831.
Zerbino DR, Birney E: Velvet: algorithms for de novo short read assembly
using de Bruijn graphs. Genome Res 2008, 18(5):821-829.
Brehony C, Wilson DJ, Maiden MC: Variation of the factor H-binding
protein of Neisseria meningitidis. Microbiology 2009, 155:4155-4169.
Taha MK, Vazquez JA, Hong E, Bennett DE, Bertrand S, Bukovski S,
Cafferkey MT, Carion F, Christensen JJ, Diggle M, et al: Target gene
sequencing to characterize the penicillin G susceptibility of Neisseria
meningitidis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2007, 51(8):2784-2792.
Streptococci genomes demonstration website. [http://pubmlst.org/
streptococci/].

Page 10 of 11

32. Jones N, Bohnsack JF, Takahashi S, Oliver KA, Chan MS, Kunst F, Glaser P,
Rusniok C, Crook DW, Harding RM, et al: Multilocus Sequence Typing
System for Group B Streptococcus. J Clin Microbiol 2003, 41(6):2530-2536.
33. Do T, Jolley KA, Maiden MC, Gilbert SC, Clark D, Wade WG, Beighton D:
Population structure of Streptococcus oralis. Microbiology 2009, 155(Pt
8):2593-2602.
34. Enright MC, Spratt BG: A multilocus sequence typing scheme for
Streptococcus pneumoniae: identification of clones associated with
serious invasive disease. Microbiology 1998, 144(11):3049-3060.
35. Enright MC, Spratt BG, Kalia A, Cross JH, Bessen DE: Multilocus sequence
typing of Streptococcus pyogenes and the relationships between emm
type and clone. Infect Immun 2001, 69(4):2416-2427.
36. King SJ, Leigh JA, Heath PJ, Luque I, Tarradas C, Dowson CG,
Whatmore AM: Development of a multilocus sequence typing scheme
for the pig pathogen Streptococcus suis: identification of virulent clones
and potential capsular serotype exchange. J Clin Microbiol 2002,
40(10):3671-3680.
37. Coffey TJ, Pullinger GD, Urwin R, Jolley KA, Wilson SM, Maiden MC,
Leigh JA: First insights into the evolution of Streptococcus uberis: a
multilocus sequence typing scheme that enables investigation of its
population biology. Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72(2):1420-1428.
38. Webb K, Jolley KA, Mitchell Z, Robinson C, Newton JR, Maiden MC,
Waller A: Development of an unambiguous and discriminatory
multilocus sequence typing scheme for the Streptococcus zooepidemicus
group. Microbiology 2008, 154(Pt 10):3016-3024.
39. Bishop CJ, Aanensen DM, Jordan GE, Kilian M, Hanage WP, Spratt BG:
Assigning strains to bacterial species via the internet. BMC Biology 2009,
7:3.
40. Holden MT, Heather Z, Paillot R, Steward KF, Webb K, Ainslie F, Jourdan T,
Bason NC, Holroyd NE, Mungall K, et al: Genomic evidence for the
evolution of Streptococcus equi: host restriction, increased virulence, and
genetic exchange with human pathogens. PLoS Pathogens 2009, 5(3):
e1000346.
41. Pearson WR: Effective protein sequence comparison. Meth Enzymol 1996,
266:227-258.
42. Stalker J, Gibbins B, Meidl P, Smith J, Spooner W, Hotz HR, Cox AV: The
Ensembl Web site: mechanics of a genome browser. Genome Res 2004,
14(5):951-955.
43. Davidsen T, Beck E, Ganapathy A, Montgomery R, Zafar N, Yang Q,
Madupu R, Goetz P, Galinsky K, White O, et al: The comprehensive
microbial resource. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 38 Database: D340-345.
44. Liolios K, Chen IM, Mavromatis K, Tavernarakis N, Hugenholtz P,
Markowitz VM, Kyrpides NC: The Genomes On Line Database (GOLD) in
2009: status of genomic and metagenomic projects and their associated
metadata. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 38 Database: D346-354.
45. Nielsen LN, Sheppard SK, McCarthy ND, Maiden MC, Ingmer H, Krogfelt KA:
MLST clustering of Campylobacter jejuni isolates from patients with
gastroenteritis, reactive arthritis and Guillain-Barre syndrome. J Appl
Microbiol 2009.
46. Sheppard SK, Dallas JF, Strachan NJ, MacRae M, McCarthy ND, Wilson DJ,
Gormley FJ, Falush D, Ogden ID, Maiden MC, et al: Campylobacter
genotyping to determine the source of human infection. Clin Infect Dis
2009, 48(8):1072-1078.
47. Sheppard SK, Dallas JF, MacRae M, McCarthy ND, Sproston EL, Gormley FJ,
Strachan NJ, Ogden ID, Maiden MC, Forbes KJ: Campylobacter genotypes
from food animals, environmental sources and clinical disease in
Scotland 2005/6. Int J Food Microbiol 2009, 134(1-2):96-103.
48. Baldwin A, Loughlin M, Caubilla-Barron J, Kucerova E, Manning G,
Dowson C, Forsythe S: Multilocus sequence typing of Cronobacter
sakazakii and Cronobacter malonaticus reveals stable clonal structures
with clinical significance which do not correlate with biotypes. BMC
Microbiology 2009, 9:223.
49. Arvand M, Feil EJ, Giladi M, Boulouis HJ, Viezens J: Multi-locus sequence
typing of Bartonella henselae isolates from three continents reveals
hypervirulent and feline-associated clones. PLoS One 2007, 2(12):e1346.
50. Carver TJ, Rutherford KM, Berriman M, Rajandream MA, Barrell BG, Parkhill J:
ACT: the Artemis Comparison Tool. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(16):3422-3423.
51. Carver T, Berriman M, Tivey A, Patel C, Bohme U, Barrell BG, Parkhill J,
Rajandream MA: Artemis and ACT: Viewing, annotating and comparing
sequences stored in a relational database. Bioinformatics 2008,
24(23):2672-2676.

Jolley and Maiden BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:595
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/595

Page 11 of 11

52. Darling AC, Mau B, Blattner FR, Perna NT: Mauve: multiple alignment of
conserved genomic sequence with rearrangements. Genome Res 2004,
14(7):1394-1403.
53. Pandya GA, Holmes MH, Petersen JM, Pradhan S, Karamycheva SA,
Wolcott MJ, Molins C, Jones M, Schriefer ME, Fleischmann RD, et al: Whole
genome single nucleotide polymorphism based phylogeny of Francisella
tularensis and its application to the development of a strain typing
assay. BMC Microbiology 2009, 9:213.
54. Foster JT, Beckstrom-Sternberg SM, Pearson T, Beckstrom-Sternberg JS,
Chain PS, Roberto FF, Hnath J, Brettin T, Keim P: Whole-genome-based
phylogeny and divergence of the genus Brucella. J Bacteriol 2009,
191(8):2864-2870.
55. Pearson T, Okinaka RT, Foster JT, Keim P: Phylogenetic understanding of
clonal populations in an era of whole genome sequencing. Infect Genet
Evol 2009, 9(5):1010-1019.
56. Kennedy AD, Otto M, Braughton KR, Whitney AR, Chen L, Mathema B,
Mediavilla JR, Byrne KA, Parkins LD, Tenover FC, et al: Epidemic
community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: recent
clonal expansion and diversification. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105(4):1327-1332.
57. Jolley KA, Feil EJ, Chan MS, Maiden MC: Sequence type analysis and
recombinational tests (START). Bioinformatics 2001, 17(12):1230-1231.
58. Feil EJ, Li BC, Aanensen DM, Hanage WP, Spratt BG: eBURST: inferring
patterns of evolutionary descent among clusters of related bacterial
genotypes from multilocus sequence typing data. J Bacteriol 2004,
186(5):1518-1530.
59. Francisco AP, Bugalho M, Ramirez M, Carrico JA: Global optimal eBURST
analysis of multilocus typing data using a graphic matroid approach.
BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:152.
60. Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data. Genetics 2000, 155(2):945-959.
61. Gil R, Silva FJ, Pereto J, Moya A: Determination of the core of a minimal
bacterial gene set. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2004, 68(3):518-537.
62. Overbeek R, Begley T, Butler RM, Choudhuri JV, Chuang HY, Cohoon M, de
Crecy-Lagard V, Diaz N, Disz T, Edwards R, et al: The subsystems approach
to genome annotation and its use in the project to annotate 1000
genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(17):5691-5702.
63. Markowitz VM, Chen IM, Palaniappan K, Chu K, Szeto E, Grechkin Y,
Ratner A, Anderson I, Lykidis A, Mavromatis K, et al: The integrated
microbial genomes system: an expanding comparative analysis resource.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, , 38 Database: D382-390.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-595
Cite this article as: Jolley and Maiden: BIGSdb: Scalable analysis of
bacterial genome variation at the population level. BMC Bioinformatics
2010 11:595.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
