<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Comparative analysis of secreted protein evolution using expressed sequence tags from four poplar leaf rusts (Melampsora spp.)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:422. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-422"/>
<meta name="Author" content="David L Joly"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Comparative analysis of secreted protein
evolution using expressed sequence tags from
four poplar leaf rusts (Melampsora spp.)
David L Joly1, Nicolas Feau1,3, Philippe Tanguay1, Richard C Hamelin1,2*

Abstract
Background: Obligate biotrophs such as rust fungi are believed to establish long-term relationships by modulating
plant defenses through a plethora of effector proteins, whose most recognizable feature is the presence of a signal
peptide for secretion. Since the phenotypes of these effectors extend to host cells, their genes are expected to be
under accelerated evolution stimulated by host-pathogen coevolutionary arms races. Recently, whole genome
sequence data has allowed the prediction of secretomes, facilitating the identification of putative effectors.
Results: We generated cDNA libraries from four poplar leaf rust pathogens (Melampsora spp.) and used
computational approaches to identify and annotate putative secreted proteins with the aim of uncovering new
knowledge about the nature and evolution of the rust secretome. While more than half of the predicted
secretome members encoded lineage-specific proteins, similarities with experimentally characterized fungal
effectors were also identified. A SAGE analysis indicated a strong stage-specific regulation of transcripts encoding
secreted proteins. The average sequence identity of putative secreted proteins to their closest orthologs in the
wheat stem rust Puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici was dramatically reduced compared with non-secreted ones. A
comparative genomics approach based on homologous gene groups unravelled positive selection in putative
members of the secretome.
Conclusion: We uncovered robust evidence that different evolutionary constraints are acting on the rust
secretome when compared to the rest of the genome. These results are consistent with the view that these genes
are more likely to exhibit an effector activity and be involved in coevolutionary arms races with host factors.

Background
Rust fungi or Pucciniales (= Uredinales) represent the
largest group of fungal plant pathogens, including more
than 7000 species that possess the most complex life
cycles in the Kingdom Fungi [1]. Some of these obligate
biotrophs have been of long standing concern for agriculture and forestry while others have emerged in recent
epidemics. For instance, poplar leaf rusts belonging to
the genus Melampsora are considered as the world’s
most important disease of poplars [2]. Selection for durable resistance to these pathogens is thus an important
challenge for poplar breeders [3]. Although poplar
breeding programs have been in place for decades in
* Correspondence: richard.hamelin@ubc.ca
1
Natural Resources Canada, Canadian Forest Service, Laurentian Forestry
Centre, 1055 du PEPS, P.O. Box 10380, Stn. Sainte-Foy, Québec, QC, G1V 4C7,
Canada

Europe, clones selected for complete resistance against
rust have increasingly succumbed in time to new races of
Melampsora larici-populina [4]. Sustainability of newly
selected resistance clearly requires a better understanding
of the molecular mechanisms involved in PopulusMelampsora interactions.
Prokaryotic and eukaryotic plant pathogens have
evolved highly advanced strategies to engage their hosts
in intimate contacts and deliver suites of effector proteins to modulate plants’ innate immunity and enable
parasitic colonization [5-12]. Understanding the translocation mechanisms of bacterial pathogen effectors inside
host cells has been an outstanding breakthrough with
the characterization of the type III secretion system.
This export apparatus enables a bacterium to manipulate host cellular processes by injecting effector proteins
into the host cytoplasm [7]. Similarly, plant-parasitic

© 2010 Joly et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

Page 2 of 16

nematodes have developed diverse relationships to
obtain nutrients from their host plants. Perhaps their
most evolutionary sophisticated adaptations are effector
proteins encoded by parasitism genes expressed in oesophageal gland cells and secreted through a protrusible
feeding spear, called a stylet [5,6]. However, still little is
known about such translocation machineries in filamentous pathogens (mainly fungi and oomycetes), although
another specialized biotrophic infection cell called the
haustorium is thought to be involved [13-15]. The haustorium invaginates host cells and makes near-direct contact with the host plasma membrane, where it plays a
crucial role in nutrient acquisition. This structure is a
regulatory hub involved in the manipulation of host
metabolism and the suppression of host defenses, which
allows the establishment of a successful biotrophic relationship [16-19]. The concomitance of haustoria formation with the induction of a programmed cell death
response termed the hypersensitive response (HR) suggests a significant role for this structure in delivering
effector proteins into the infected host cell [14,20].
Key insights have emerged from the recent identification of filamentous pathogen effectors with avirulence
activity inducing plant defense responses and HR
[21-26]. Most of the avirulence genes identified encode
small proteins with N-terminal signal peptides that
direct them through the endoplasmic reticulum secretory pathway [14,27]. While effector genes reside in
pathogen genomes, their products essentially generate
phenotypes that extend to host cells and tissues, and are
hence likely to be the direct target of the never-ending
coevolutionary conflict between host and pathogen
[28,29,36]. In fact, avirulence proteins recognition by
plant resistance proteins imposes selection against effector function, and pathogen effector proteins probably
overcome resistance through diversification of the genes
encoding them [30]. For instance, several avirulence
genes or their plant counterparts display molecular hallmarks of positive selection [21,22,25,30-38]. Recently,
the availability of filamentous plant pathogen genome
sequences facilitated the cataloguing of whole secretomes using computational analyses, thus allowing the
identification of putative effectors [39-43]. Indeed, Tyler

et al. [41] provided evidence that secreted proteins have
been subject to accelerated evolution by contrasting the
genome sequences of Phytophthora ramorum and Phytophthora sojae.
Here we provide an overview of the expressed secretome of poplar leaf rusts belonging to the genus Melampsora. We constructed cDNA libraries for four
related poplar leaf rust pathogens with different host
specificities to test for the signature of selection in these
rust secretomes and used computational tools to annotate putative secreted proteins. A comparative genomics
approach based on homologous gene groups (HGGs)
was undertaken to evaluate the extent to which secretome members are under different evolutionary constraints. We describe adaptive evolution (positive
selection) in genes encoding secreted proteins of poplar
leaf rusts, in agreement with the idea that these genes
are expected to display an effector activity and be
involved in the escalating and reciprocal coevolutionary
arms race with host resistance factors.

Results and Discussion
Defining the poplar leaf rust secretome

We constructed cDNA libraries from ex planta material
of four different Melampsora taxa with different host
specificities: the Eurasian M. larici-populina, the North
American M. occidentalis, and two formae speciales of
the North American M. medusae, M. medusae f. sp. deltoidae and M. medusae f. sp. tremuloidae (Table 1; see
Methods). This allowed the comparison of expressed
sequence tags (ESTs) with their putative orthologues
and made it possible to incorporate evolutionary information into our analyses. In order to extend our dataset
with candidate effectors expressed in and secreted from
haustoria, we generated an additional haustoriumenriched library (biotrophic stage) of M. larici-populina.
In total, 14,904 clones were sequenced in this study,
which represented 6,044 unique sequences (unisequences, i.e. all contigs and singletons). Clone sequences
are available under GenBank accession numbers
GW672673 to GW687576. The identification of transcripts coding for secreted proteins was carried out
using an in silico analysis including a series of prediction

Table 1 Summary of Melampsora cDNA libraries characteristics
Species/Natural host

Material

Unisequences

Contigs

Singletons

Putative Sa (%)

Putative S+b (%)

M. larici-populina/Populus nigra

Haustoria

1148

427

721

54 (4.7)

72 (6.3)

M. larici-populina/P. nigra

Ex planta

787

266

521

51 (6.5)

92 (11.7)

M. medusae f. sp. deltoidae/P. deltoides

Ex planta

937

452

485

95 (10.1)

131 (14.0)

M. medusae f. sp. tremuloidae/P. tremuloides

Ex planta

1547

571

976

98 (6.3)

246 (15.9)

M. occidentalis/P. trichocarpa

Ex planta

1625

493

1132

107 (6.6)

148 (9.1)

a

S: Initial predicted set of unisequences encoding putative secreted proteins.
S+: Final set of unisequences encoding putative secreted proteins, following reassignments based on reciprocal BLAST.

b

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

Page 3 of 16

algorithms (SignalP, TargetP and TMHMM), yielding
405 sequences encoding putative proteins with predicted
secretory signal peptides (# Putative S, Table 1). A number of sources exist that lead to false prediction, i.e.
selecting individual proteins that should not be included
in the secretome. For example, mitochondrial localization sequences and N-terminal transmembrane anchors
are frequently interpreted as signal peptides [44]. Even
though no computational method seems fully accurate,
the prediction algorithms included in our approach
should have excluded such false positives. The assignment of a protein to the secretome is also totally dependent on having the full-length open reading frame
(ORF). An inaccurate ab initio gene prediction or an
incomplete ORF could lack an additional sequence
encoding a transmembrane domain or a signal peptide.
For this reason, we conducted reciprocal blast between
libraries to reduce the number of false assignments due
to partial or mispredicted ORFs. Most reassignments
were false negatives with truncated N termini, thus
increasing the number of putative secreted members to
689 (# Putative S+, Table 1).
Functional annotation of the poplar leaf rust secretome:
novel proteins and the identification of orthologues

This S+ dataset was used as search query in BLASTX
on the non-redundant UniProtKB database to find
sequences with significant matches. Furthermore, to
develop an understanding of how protein secretion by
poplar leaf rusts might be related to specialized functions or processes, we used the PFAM [45] and Gene
Ontology (GO) [46] databases to determine whether any
class of proteins was more likely to be found in the Melampsora secreted proteins. In addition, we used the
Gene Ontology methodology within a statistical
framework to determine whether any GO terms were
significantly enriched in S+ proteins when compared to

non-secreted proteins (NS). For 248 candidates, i.e. 36%
of the S+ dataset, significant similarity was found in the
UniProtKB database, mostly among putative effectors or
proteolytic and carbohydrate-degrading enzymes from
other fungal species (Table 2). Less than a quarter of
the unisequences had similarity to one or more PFAM
domain predictions or GO term assignments. The most
abundantly represented PFAM domains in the poplar
leaf rusts secretome are presented in Additional File 1,
and GO classifications are depicted in Figure 1.
Host infection by biotrophic fungi is believed to
involve the secretion of effectors that suppress plant
defenses and alter cellular metabolism to fulfill the
requirements of the invading pathogen [47]. Among the
candidates that had significant similarity to known
sequences, homologies with potential effectors previously identified in the haustoria of other rust species
were observed. Interestingly, 22 candidates had similarities with eight “haustorially expressed secreted proteins”
(HESPs) from Melampsora lini identified using a similar
bioinformatics approach. Some of these HESPs were
shown to co-segregate with known avirulence genes and
are proven HR elicitors in flax, such as the avirulence
protein AvrM [26]. The percentage of identity between
flax rust and poplar leaf rust HESPs differed greatly. For
instance, HESP-379 had close homologues in Melampsora spp. (identity: 93%), while AvrM appeared less conserved (identity: 26%). Other candidates had similarities
with Rust Transferred Protein (RTP1) from Uromyces
fabae, a small secreted protein that is specifically
expressed in broad bean rust haustoria and translocated
into host cells. This protein accumulates within the
cytoplasm of the infected host cell and in the host
nucleus, suggesting a role in influencing host gene
expression [13]. Homologies with other proteins thought
to contribute to pathogenesis were unravelled, with 19
unisequences having similarity to CFEM domain

Table 2 Similarity of Melampsora unisequences to sequences from UniProtKB, BasidiomycotaDB and PuccinialesDB
Library

% with homologues
in
UniProtKB

% with homologues in
BasidiomycotaDB

% with homologues in
PuccinialesDB

NSa

S+b

NS

S+

NS

S+

M. larici-populina haustoria

22.6

13.9

21.5

13.9

29.6

23.6

M. larici-populina ex planta material

54.0

54.3

54.1

50.0

62.4

56.5

M. medusae f. sp. deltoidae ex planta material

56.2

50.4

54.7

45.8

64.9

56.5

M. medusae f. sp. tremuloidae ex planta material
M. occidentalis ex planta material

36.7
47.4

23.6
43.9

38.3
49.3

23.2
37.2

47.4
59.6

35.4
54.7

BasidiomycotaDB included Basidiomycota (excluding Pucciniales) EST sequence 6-frame translations and protein sequences from the non-redundant database of
NCBI and gene models from Coprinus cinereus Okayama 7 (#130), Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii serotype A, strain H99, Laccaria bicolor S238N-H82,
Malassezia globosa CBS 7966, Phanerochaete chrysosporium RP78, Postia placenta MAD-698, Sporobolomyces roseus IAM 13481 and Ustilago maydis 521.
PuccinialesDB included Pucciniales EST sequence 6-frame translations and protein sequences from the non-redundant database of NCBI and gene models from P.
graminis f. sp. tritici CRL 75-36-700-3. BLASTX hits were considered significant when E-value ≤ 1e-4.
a
NS: Final set of unisequences not predicted to encode putative secreted proteins.
b
S+: Final set of unisequences encoding putative secreted proteins, following reassignments based on reciprocal BLAST.

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

proteins (CFEM = Common in Fungal Extracellular and
Membrane). This particular domain is an eight cysteinecontaining domain for which members are proposed to
have important roles in fungal pathogenesis [48], and it
was by far the most highly represented PFAM domain
in the S+ dataset. CFEM-containing proteins could function as cell-surface receptors, signal transducers, or
adhesion molecules in host-pathogen interactions [48].
Moreover, five unisequences had significant similarity to
gEgh16/gEgh16 H proteins from Blumeria graminis, a
large family potentially involved in host-pathogen interactions [49]. An appressorium-specific expression pattern was described for numerous gEgh16/gEgh16 H
homologues, including virulence genes GAS1 (MAS3)
and GAS2 (MAS1) from Magnaporthe grisea. GAS1 or
GAS2 deletion mutants had no defect in vegetative
growth, conidiation or appressoria formation, but were
reduced in appressorial penetration and lesion development [50].
The diverse ecological niches of fungal species are
mirrored in their secretome, which includes gene
families encoding various proteolytic and carbohydrate-

Page 4 of 16

degrading enzymes known to act on the linkages found
in plant cell walls and compatible with the array of
nutritional sources they can exploit [47]. Consistent
with the molecular function GO analysis (Figure 1),
36.56% and 47.88% of Melampsora secreted proteins
with a GO assignment were involved in binding
(GO:0005488) and catalytic activity (GO:0003824),
respectively. Note that there was a trend towards concentration of a distinct set of processes and functions in
the group of proteins making up the Melampsora secretome. Significantly higher proportions of secreted proteins, relative to the entire dataset, were assigned to the
following functions: carbohydrate and ion binding, and
hydrolase and oxidoreductase activity (GO:0030246 and
GO:0043167, and GO:0016787 and GO: 0016491).
There also appeared to be enrichment of proteins
involved in processes related to cell adhesion
(GO:0007155), response to stimulus (GO:0050896), regulation of molecular function (GO:0065009), carbohydrate and lipid transport (GO:0008643 and
GO:0006869), and primary metabolic process
(GO:0044238), including oxygen and reactive oxygen

Figure 1 Gene Ontology classification of the Melampsora unisequence dataset. For each main GO category (A: Biological process; B:
Molecular function; and C: Cellular component), percentages were based on the total number of ontologies found for unisequences encoding
putative secreted proteins (S+) or non-secreted proteins (NS) (see values in D). Note that individual GO categories can have multiple mappings
resulting in percentage values higher than 100%. Underlined GO categories are overrepresented in S+ compared with NS (***: significant at the
0.1% level; **: significant at the 1% level; *: significant at the 5% level).

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

species metabolic process (GO:0006800) and carbohydrate metabolic process (GO:0005975). Apart from putative effectors, members of the secretome had homology
to a battery of glycoside hydrolases and subtilisin-like
serine proteases that likely contribute to the penetration
of the plant cuticle and cell wall [47]. In fact, glycosyl
hydrolase 16 (PF00722) was the second most represented PFAM domain in the secretome, followed by
domains typically found in proteolytic enzymes (Peptidase_S8 [PF00082], Subtilisin_N [PF05922] and Asp
[PF00026]) (Additional File 1). A class of secreted proteins exhibiting the ability to neutralize reactive oxygen
species (ROS), and including Mn and Cu/Zn superoxide
dismutases, was also uncovered by this survey. This
finding was not surprising as it is known that rust fungi
prevent a variety of non-specific defense responses in
invaded cells, thus allowing the establishment of the
long-term biotrophic relationship between rust fungi
and living host cells [51]. Such host responses frequently
involve the production of ROS, whose detoxification is
essential for the establishment of the pathogen. A Mn
superoxide dismutase homologue had previously been
reported in the haustorial stage of Puccinia triticina [52]
and was differentially-expressed in Uromyces appendiculatus germlings during early appressorium development
[53]. Concordant with these observations, previous studies have demonstrated the upregulation of several host
genes encoding enzymes of the redox regulation pathways during Populus-Melampsora interactions [54,55].
Another group of interesting secreted proteins identified
here that may be critical for evading host recognition or
protecting fungal cell wall from hydrolysis by host
enzymes were chitin deacetylases, which have already
been described in libraries from Phakopsora pachyrhizi
[56] and P. triticina [52]. The conversion of chitin into
chitosan by de-N-acetylation not only protects fungal
infection structures from hydrolytic attack by chitinases
present in the host tissue, it also prevents the release of
chitin oligomers responsible for the triggering of resistance reactions [57].
This functional annotation established the secretome’s
ability to perform diverse roles in pathogenicity and
interactions with host cells. However, for the major part
of the secretome, no GO or PFAM domains could be
assigned. For 441 candidates, i.e. 64% of the S+ dataset,
no significant similarity was found to known proteins in
the UniProtKB database (E-value > 1e-4) (Table 2). To
ascertain that the large number of unmatched proteins
identified in this study was not due to the paucity of
Pucciniales (or even Basidiomycota) sequences in international databases [52], we constructed two specific
databases (BasidiomycotaDB and PuccinialesDB).
BLASTX searches of the complete dataset of Melampsora unisequences (S+ and NS) were performed against

Page 5 of 16

these databases. The percentage of unisequences with
homologues was similar between BasidiomycotaDB and
UniProtKB, indicating that the latter is not deficient in
Basidiomycota sequences (Table 2). As previously
observed with BLASTX searches, the percentage of S+
unisequences with homologues in both BasidiomycotaDB and PuccinialesDB was generally lower compared
to NS. These results are consistent with the view that
secreted effector proteins that subvert host-cell structure
and functions often show very limited phylogenetic distribution and no obvious conserved motifs, being less
evolutionarily conserved. Furthermore, the percentage of
homologues for the haustorium-enriched library was
surprisingly low considering that the whole gene set of
another rust, Puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici, was
included in the database. However, these results were
comparable to observations made on the haustorial
secretome of other rust fungi [26,58]. Most of the proteins secreted from the haustorium could be under
rapid evolution and strong diversification due to host
selective pressures and, therefore, be species-specific.
Taken together, these results strongly indicate that a
large portion of the secretome (and especially the haustorial secretome) of Melampsora may have virulence
functions or be involved in host-pathogen interactions.
Expression profiles of the poplar leaf rust secretome:
stage-specificity

Most abundantly represented members of the secretome
had no evident homologues in the UniProtKB database
(Additional File 2), or even in PuccinialesDB. However,
some highly expressed candidates showed similarities to
sequences suspected to be involved in pathogenicity or
host-pathogen interactions (HESPs and CFEM-containing proteins). To obtain an accurate overview regarding
the expression profiles of the secretome, we associated S
+ members to 15-bp tags from a serial analysis of gene
expression (SAGE). We analyzed expression patterns at
three time points during the infection process of M. larici-populina: twice during the pre-biotrophic stage (2
and 22 hours after inoculation), and once during the
biotrophic stage (5 days after inoculation) (Feau et al.,
unpublished). The last two time points were also investigated on both susceptible and resistant hosts, i.e. during
compatible and incompatible interactions. A quarter
(182 unisequences) of the S+ members was confidently
associated to a SAGE tag. An average linkage hierarchical clustering of SAGE patterns revealed strong stage
specificities of the secretome (Figure 2), similar to
observations made on U. fabae genes initially identified
using the yeast signal sequence trap [58]. Genes
expressed during pre-biotrophic growth were clearly
turned off at later biotrophic stages, while others were
induced only during the biotrophic stage. Global

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

Page 6 of 16

Figure 2 Serial analysis of gene expression: stage-specificity of putative secretome members of the Melampsora unisequence dataset.
Similarities in serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) patterns of 182 putative secretome members of the Melampsora unisequence dataset
were determined using an average linkage hierarchical clustering according to the Spearman Rank Correlation. Corresponding tags were
identified as described in the Methods section. Each row represents a tag, whereas each column corresponds to a SAGE library. 22H_C: 22 hours
after inoculation (compatible interaction); 22H_I: 22 hours after inoculation (incompatible interaction); 2H: 2 hours after inoculation (germinating
spores); 5D_C: 5 days after inoculation (compatible interaction); and 5D_I: 5 days after inoculation (incompatible interaction). Genes upregulated
during the biotrophic or pre-biotrophic stages are highlighted in blue and yellow, respectively. Medium blue = genes specific to the biotrophic
stage; Light blue = genes upregulated during the biotrophic stage; Dark yellow = genes upregulated in 22H_I; Medium yellow = genes
upregulated in 22H_C; and Light yellow = genes upregulated in 2 H. The relative abundance of the SAGE tag in the library correlates with the
intensity of the red color (black, not present; intense red, highly abundant). Brackets indicate clades containing homologues of haustorially
expressed secreted proteins (HESPs) 735, 417, and 379, respectively.

expression patterns were consistent with observations
made in our libraries, with 60% of the represented haustorium-enriched library unisequences being upregulated
during the biotrophic stage. Compatible and incompatible treatments were grouped together at each time
point, and the pre-biotrophic stage libraries were clustered together and separated from the biotrophic stage
libraries. Even though similar stage specificity has been
observed for the non-secreted counterpart (data not

shown), the abundance of tags pointed towards higher
expression levels for secreted proteins during the prebiotrophic stage when compared to the rest of the transcriptome. On the other hand, secretome members
found during the biotrophic stage had expression levels
similar to their non-secreted counterpart (Additional
File 3). The mean number of tags per unisequences correlated well with the abundance of clones per contig.
While the haustorium-enriched library shared a

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

Page 7 of 16

somewhat similar number of genes encoding putative
secreted proteins when compared to other libraries,
their level of expression, as reflected by the percentage
of identified sequences, was quite lower (Additional File
4). Secreted proteins accounted for 25% of ex planta
libraries (from 15.3 to 33.0%), while it was only 6.8% for
the haustorium-enriched library. Secretory activity
among obligate biotrophs thus appears limited and
strongly regulated. A strict control of the secretory
activity is required to form the interface layers that are
observed in biotrophic interactions [59] and this could
be a component of the pathogen’s strategy to evade
recognition by host factors [19].
Evolutionary constraints of the poplar leaf rust
secretome: adaptive evolution

None of the effectors described from various fungi are
known to have close homologues beyond species or
genus boundary [27]. In order to determine if the evolutionary model of poplar leaf rust S+ proteins was confined to the presence/absence pattern observed above,
we generated new BLASTP searches using 6033 (5349
NS/684 S+) predicted ORFs against the translated gene
models of P. graminis f. sp. tritici, and plotted the percentage of identity of each dataset to their closest
homologues (Figure 3). Around 40% of each dataset had
homologues in the P. graminis f. sp. tritici genome, a
proportion that could be explained by the relatively
short length of many ORFs, the presence of false ORFs
predicted from non-coding regions such as UTRs, and
the relative divergence expected between these genera
[60]. However, approximately half of NS-predicted ORFs
had high identity values (more than 70%) with their closest homologue from the P. graminis f. sp. tritici gene
models compared to only 7% of S+-predicted ORFs,
thus suggesting that the secretome is under different
evolutionary constraints. Again, fast evolution of coding
regions due to molecular arms races between pathogens
and hosts might explain the high divergence between
orthologues or the absence of close homologues in
related species.
We used reciprocal TBLASTX searches (E-value ≤ 1e30) among our taxonomic cDNA libraries to identify
orthologues and/or paralogues in different Melampsora
species libraries and to classify them into homologous
gene groups (HGGs). In order to increase the number
of HGGs, we included the gene models from P. graminis
f. sp. tritici. We found 369 HGGs consisting of at least
three different sequences with a minimum of two Melampsora unisequences retrieved. These HGGs included
1159 Melampsora unisequences and 437 P. graminis f.
sp. tritici gene models. HGGs were divided to 283 nonsecreted HGGs (76.7%) and 86 secreted HGGs (23.3%)
according to their predicted localization. Consistent

Figure 3 Accelerated sequence divergence of secreted proteins
between predicted ORFs from the Melampsora unisequence
dataset and the Puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici gene models. The
set of Melampsora predicted ORFs (2319 non-secreted ORFs,
represented by white circles; and 267 secreted ORFs, represented by
red circles) was compared with translated gene models of Puccinia
graminis f. sp. tritici. Each radius ranges from 0 (center) to 100 (outer
circle), representing BLASTP percent identity. A BLASTP hit was
considered significant when E-value ≤ 1e-4. Position of ORFs along
the circumference is random.

with the above similarity searches, approximately 45% of
secreted HGGs had no P. graminis f. sp. tritici homologues (at E-value ≤ 1e-30), compared with 12% for nonsecreted HGGs. Moreover, the proportion of secreted
HGGs (23.3%) was twice the proportion of S+ unisequences (11.4%), and the mean number of Melampsora
unisequences per HGG was slightly higher in secreted
HGGs (4.3 unisequences/HGG) compared with nonsecreted HGGs (2.9 unisequences/HGG). These results
could suggest that a larger proportion of allelic forms
and/or paralogue families exist among the rust secretome, which is consistent with an extensive sequence
diversification motivated by the coevolutionary arms
race [30].
In order to visualize the evolutionary relationships
between Melampsora and other fungi we used SimiTri
[61], which plots in two-dimensional space the relative
similarities of gene sequences between one group
(Melampsora) and three comparators. For each
sequence included in an HGG, a BLASTX was
performed against three other basidiomycetes for
which genome sequences were available: Puccinia
(Pucciniomycotina; Pucciniomycetes), the wheat stem
rust, which is phylogenetically close to Melampsora and
shares a similar biotrophic lifestyle; Sporobolomyces

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

(Pucciniomycotina; Microbotryomycetes), a free-living
saprobic yeast that is phylogenetically close to rusts but
differs in its saprophytic lifestyle; and Ustilago (Ustilaginomycotina; Ustilaginomycetes), the corn smut, which is
phylogenetically more distant from Melampsora but is
also a plant pathogen. In a few cases, sequences within
HGGs matched different paralogous sequences in one of
the comparators (usually Puccinia). Consensus
sequences were thus created from sequences having
identical BLASTX hits in the three comparators, allowing multiple consensus sequences for a single HGG.
SimiTri was used to plot 417 consensus sequences from
369 Melampsora HGGs against related species’ gene
models (Figure 4). For each HGG, most Melampsora
sequences grouped slightly towards Puccinia, its closest
relative (Figure 4). Again, the difference between nonsecreted and secreted HGGs was striking with 69.8% of
non-secreted HGGs exhibiting homologous sequences
in the three comparators, while only 33.0% of secreted
HGGs had such homologues. Even tough the percentage
of secreted HGGs with no hit in the three other species
(16.0%) was almost four times the percentage of unique
non-secreted HGGs (4.2%), this was not sufficient to
explain this difference. The percentage of HGGs unique
to Pucciniales was twice higher for secreted HGGs
(29.2% compared with 13.8%). Similar secreted/nonsecreted HGGs ratios were observed for the percentage
of secreted HGGs absent from Ustilago (11.3%

Page 8 of 16

compared with 5.1%) or from Sporobolomyces (9.4%
compared with 4.5%). While HGGs absent from Ustilago
but found in both Puccinia and Sporobolomyces could
have been eliminated following the Ustilaginomycotina/
Pucciniomycotina radiation, HGGs absent from the freeliving Sporobolomyces but found in the more distant
Ustilago could represent genes involved in host-pathogen interactions and/or biotrophic lifestyles. Similarly,
recent observations on the whole genome sequences of
Ustilago maydis and Laccaria bicolor suggested that the
inventory of certain enzymes underwent massive gene
loss as a result of its adaptation to a biotrophic (U. maydis) or symbiotic lifestyle (L. bicolor) [40,62].
Molecular genetic analysis of plant-pathogen interactions includes many layers of antagonistic coevolution.
Investigation of molecular evolution at these various
levels usually reveals diversifying selection and the selective maintenance of variation, resulting in positive selection at the genomic interfaces of escalating attack and
defense systems [63]. Following this idea, one of the
most reliable indicators of positive selection at the molecular level is a higher non-synonymous nucleotide substitution rate (d N ) than the synonymous nucleotide
substitution rate (dS) between two protein-coding DNA
sequences (ratio ω = dN/dS > 1) [64]. Based on this criterion, statistical methods, such as the approximate
(counting) and the maximum likelihood (ML) methods,
have been developed [65-67]. We calculated the dN and

Figure 4 Similarity of Melampsora homologous gene groups (HGGs) to the proteomes of other basidiomycetes. Similarity of Melampsora
A) non-secreted and B) secreted homologous gene groups (HGGs) to the proteomes of Puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici, Ustilago maydis and
Sporobolomyces roseus. For each of the 369 Melampsora HGGs, a BLASTX search was performed against the proteomes of the other three species
and SimiTri was used to plot the sequence similarity relationships between 417 consensus sequences derived from these HGGs and related
species. Each tile in the graphics represents a unique consensus sequence and its relative position is computed from the raw BLAST scores
derived above (with a cutoff of > 40). Hence, each tile’s position indicates its degree of sequence similarity to each of the three selected
databases. Sequences showing similarity to only one database are not shown. Sequences showing sequence similarity to only two databases
appear on the lines joining the two databases. The position of positively selected HGGs is indicated by arrows. Tiles are colored by their highest
BLASTX score for each of the databases: red ≥ 300; yellow ≥ 200; green ≥ 150; blue ≥ 100; and purple < 100.

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

dS rates across all possible pairwise sequence comparisons within each of the 369 HGGs using the ML
method. The distribution of omega ratios (ω) was
skewed towards extreme low values for non-secreted
HGGs, with almost 75% of highest pairwise estimates of
ω < 0.2 and only 5% > 0.8 (Figure 5). This distribution
was quite different for secreted HGGs, with proportions
around 40% and 20% of highest pairwise estimates of ω
< 0.2 and > 0.8, respectively. For 13 HGGs, the dN value
was significantly greater than dS (ω = dN/dS > 1.2) in at
least one pairwise comparison (Table 3). Ten of these
groups under positive selection were secreted HGGs
(corresponding to 12% of the total secreted HGGs).
Using a different approach based on Fixed-Effect Likelihood (FEL) statistics, Feau and colleagues detected positive selection in seven gene groups (including five
putative secretome members) from a similar dataset
[68]. Two of these seven gene groups corresponded to
secreted HGGs unravelled using the d N /d S approach
described here (92 and 6067, corresponding to MEL_49
and MEL_55, respectively, in [68]). Interestingly, eight
positively selected secreted HGGs were found to encode
cysteine-rich proteins with an even number of Cys residues that may be involved in disulfide bonds. An even
number of Cys residues is generally indicative of the

Page 9 of 16

presence of disulfide bonds, which are formed between
the thiol groups of cysteines. Disulfide bonds play an
important role in the folding and stability of some proteins, usually proteins secreted to the extracellular medium, and are typical features of a subset of fungal and
oomycete effectors, especially those acting in the plant
apoplast [11,27].
To identify additional HGGs under positive selection
and detect the amino acid residues that are under positive selection, we contrasted the M2A/M1A, M8/M7
and M8/M8A models with likelihood ratio tests (Additional Files 5 and 6; see Methods) [64,66]. Significant
evidence of positive selection was found in 4 (including
2 secreted HGGs) of the 369 HGGs. Selective pressures
had previously been identified for one of these secretome members using FEL statistics and a population
genetics approach [68,69]. This particular secreted HGG
has homology with HESP-417 from M. lini, a gene
known to be expressed in haustoria and encoding a
secreted protein with an even number of Cys residues
[26].
We assessed the position of positively selected HGGs
on above SimiTri plots (indicated by arrows, Figure 4):
only one non-secreted HGG (1278) had homologues in
the three databases, two secreted HGGs (747 and 6067)

Figure 5 Elevated dN/dS ratios among Melampsora homologous gene groups (HGGs) encoding secreted proteins. The rates of nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions per non-synonymous site (dN) and the rates of synonymous nucleotide substitutions per synonymous site
(dS) were calculated across all possible pairwise comparisons within each of the 369 HGGs using the maximum likelihood method implemented
in the codeml program (runmode = -2) in the PAML 4 software package. The distribution of highest calculated ω (dN/dS ratios) among all
pairwise comparisons within each HGG is shown. In cases where dN > 0 and dS = 0 (i.e. ω = ∞), the second higher ratio was selected.

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

Page 10 of 16

Table 3 Characteristics of the Melampsora homologous gene groups (HGGs) predicted to be under positive selection
(at least one pairwise ω = dN/dS > 1.2)
ωb

HGG

NS/Sa

205

NS

115

No hit

No hit

-

ND

2.68

254

NS

200-202

No hit

PGTT03363

1e-10

-

ND

2.59

1278

NS

173-175

XP_001211022 conserved hypothetical protein
[Aspergillus terreus]

3e-07

PGTT11073

1e-34

-

ND

1.88

Length

BLASTX
Fungi UniProtKB

E-value

No hit

BLASTX
Puccinia

E-value

No hit

PFAM

28

S

161

92

S

271-276c (227)d

AAS45284 proline-rich antigen
[Chrysosporium lucknowense]

4e-09

PGTT01207

2e-13

CFEM

0

1.38

6 (2)d

1.43

729

S

269

EAT81533 hypothetical protein
[Phaeosphaeria nodorum]

7e-11

PGTT12331

7e-61

-

8

1.32

747

S

163

XP_757360 hypothetical protein
[Ustilago maydis]

1e-04

PGTT02151

2e-14

-

4

1.95

4191

S

129

No hit

5606
5610

S
S

119-123e
98

No hit
No hit

No hit

-

4

1.57

No hit
No hit

-

6
6g

1.76
4.31

5617

S

168-169f

No hit

No hit

-

0g

5624

S

1.23

176

No hit

No hit

-

8

1.93

6067

S

285

XP_758577 hypothetical protein
[Ustilago maydis]

-

10g

1.27

6e-06

PGTT13234

-

Cys

5e-21

BLASTX and PFAM hits were considered significant when E-value ≤ 1e-4 and 1e-5, respectively.
a
NS: non-secreted; S: secreted.
b
Highest calculated dN/dS ratio among all pairwise comparisons within each HGG.
c
Length is 271 (M. medusae f. sp. deltoidae, M. medusae f. sp. tremuloidae and M. occidentalis), and 276 (M. larici-populina); an 86 amino acids insertion and a 5
amino acids minisatellite are also present in a M. medusae f. sp. deltoidae unisequence (length: 357) and a M. larici-populina unisequence (length: 281),
respectively.
d
A 44 amino acids deletion (including 4 Cys residues) is present in a M. medusae f. sp. deltoidae unisequence.
e
Length is 119 (M. medusae f. sp. tremuloidae) and 123 (M. occidentalis).
f
A 12 amino acids minisatellite is present in a M. occidentalis unisequence (length: 181).
g
Additional Cys residues are present before the signal peptide cleavage site.

were absent from Sporobolomyces, one secreted HGG
(92) was absent from Ustilago, one secreted HGG (729)
was present only in Puccinia, and the remaining HGGs
(6 secreted and 2 non-secreted HGGs) had no hit. Two
other groups of sequences identified using FEL statistics
[68] had corresponding HGGs plotted on the line
between Puccinia and Ustilago (absent from Sporobolomyces) (data not shown).

Conclusion
Database searches with sequences of small secreted proteins from fungi commonly do not yield homologues or
known protein domains, the only recognizable features
being the presence of a signal peptide for secretion and,
in many cases, an even number of cysteine residues.
Despite these commonalities, effectors appear to be evolutionarily diverse and highly variable in their distribution, showing very limited phylogenetic distributions
possibly due to accelerated evolution stimulated by
plant-pathogen arms races [27]. In a straightforward in
silico approach, we generated a first overview of the
secretome from poplar leaf rusts belonging to the genus
Melampsora, unravelling an unknown and diversifying

set of genes. The identification of positive selection in
putative secreted proteins reported here suggests that
these genes are likely to encode candidate effectors
implicated in host-pathogen interactions. Such information should be used to augment other selection criteria
(such as gene expression data) for prioritizing candidate
effector genes for functional studies. Two intriguing
properties of rust fungi are their host specificity and
their need for host alternation. Even though host specificity is probably controlled at several levels, examples
from the flax rust fungus suggest that the secretion of
effectors plays a prominent role [26]. Their intimate
interactions with host factors expose them to very
strong selective pressures resulting in their rapid evolutionary turnover. However, poplar leaf rust effectors not
only cope with the poplar defense machinery, they also
face another phylogenetically diverse host plant, which
differs between species, from other dicots to monocots
and even gymnosperms. Is this particularity responsible
for a greater sequence diversification? Or is it responsible for a broader arsenal of effectors in poplar leaf
rusts? The recent completion of the M. larici-populina
genome http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Mellp1/Mellp1.home.

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

html will reveal further information on the whole repertoire of secreted proteins in this pathogen. Comparative
genomics studies with other biotrophs should elucidate
molecular mechanisms underlying common strategies to
infect plants. The identification of host targets will provide further insight into the evolutionary forces that
shaped the rust secretome, a key step facilitated by the
availability of the poplar genome sequence [70] and
transcript profiling of poplar-rust interactions [55,71,72].
This pathosystem clearly represents an unprecedented
opportunity to understand the particularities of hostpathogen interactions.

Methods
Rust and plant material

cDNA libraries were constructed from ex planta material (resting and germinating urediniospores, germ
tubes, etc.) of four different Melampsora taxa. Fungal
materials from isolates of the North American subspecies M. medusae f. sp. deltoidae and the Eurasian species M. larici-populina were harvested from naturally
infected leaves of eastern cottonwood (Populus deltoides) and hybrid poplar (P. balsamifera × P. maximowiczii) clones, respectively. Melampsora medusae f. sp.
tremuloidae and M. occidentalis mono-uredinial cultures
were used to inoculate fresh leaves of P. tremuloides and
P. trichocarpa, respectively. Inoculated leaves were
maintained for 13 days in a growth chamber at 60%
humidity, 19°C and 16 h photoperiod. In addition, we
generated one additional haustorium-enriched library
(biotrophic stage) for the M. larici-populina species.
Haustoria were isolated by affinity chromatography as
described by Hahn and Mendgen [73]. A mixture of
plant leaf and fungal tissues was collected 6 days after
inoculation of a rust-susceptible P. × jackii clone 1014
with the rust strain Mlp Berth. 3729. A 100-μm pore
size nylon mesh was used to remove the bulk of the
plant cell material from the crude preparation, which
was then passed through an 11-μm pore size nylon
mesh to remove intact plant cells. An affinity column
was prepared by covalently attaching concanavalin A
(Pharmacia Biotech) to cyanogen bromide-activated
Sepharose 6 MB (Pharmacia Biotech) as described in the
manufacturer’s protocol. Samples of purified haustoria
colored using Calcofluor white (50 μM final concentration) were then examined using a fluorescence microscope under UV filters.
cDNA libraries and DNA sequencing

Haustoria samples were pelleted by centrifugation at
20,800 g, washed twice with sterile distilled water, and
maintained at -80°C until total RNA extraction. Fungal
material was directly frozen in liquid nitrogen and
ground using the Mixer Mill MM 300 with 2 mm

Page 11 of 16

tungsten carbide beads. All the following manipulations
were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA was extracted from ex planta material
and purified haustoria using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) and the Absolutely RNA® miniprep kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA), respectively.
PolyA RNA was purified using biotylinated oligo-dT/
streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Dynabeads® Oligo
(dT) 25 ; Dynal Biotech, Oslo, Norway). Haustoriumenriched M. larici-populina as well as M. medusae f. sp.
tremuloidae and M. occidentalis ex planta cDNA
libraries were generated using the SMART™ cDNA
library construction kit (Clontech, Mountain View, CA,
USA). Melampsora larici-populina and M. medusae f.
sp. deltoidae ex planta cDNA libraries were constructed
using the pBlueScript II XR cDNA library construction
kit (Stratagene) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Following the column sepharose chromatography
step included in the protocol, only size fractions above
500 bp were retained for ligation in the SfiI-digested,
dephosphorylated pDNR-LIB vector. Plasmid ligations
were transformed by electroporation into E. coli ElectroMAXTM DH10BTM Cells (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA). After library amplification and tittering, individual
colonies were transferred onto 384-well microtiter plates
containing LB medium with 30 μg/ml chloramphenicol
for PCR amplification and sequencing. cDNA inserts
were amplified according to the manufacturer’s PCR
protocol and then sequenced with the M13 forward primer (5′-GTAAAACGACGGCCAGT-3′) using the Big
Dye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit v1.1 on an ABI
3730xl sequencer (Applied Biosystems) at the CHUQ
Research Centre (CRCHUQ) Sequencing and Genotyping Platform, Quebec City, QC, Canada. Sequences were
deposited at NCBI under accession numbers GW672673
to GW687576.
cDNA assembly and ORF prediction

Raw sequences were trimmed and cleaned using the
Phred software [74], which resulted in the identification and removal of poor quality regions (quality cutoff of 20). Cross-match was then used to mask vector
sequence in each read (minimum match of 10, minimum score of 20). The extent of redundancy for each
library was ascertained using the Phrap software (Phil
Green, http://www.phrap.org), which was also used to
compile the unisequence set (minimum match of 50,
minimum score of 100). In order to identify and
remove plant sequences in the ESTs, unisequences
were used in BLAST comparisons against the Populus
trichocarpa genome and predicted gene models. Initial
ORF prediction for Melampsora spp. was generated
with the bestORF algorithm (Softberry) using Ustilago
parameters.

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

Sequence analysis

Similarity searches for full length sequences and conserved domains were performed using a combination of
standard bioinformatics programs and customized
Python scripts. Each assembled transcript was searched
against UniProtKB database (Release 15.5, TrEMBL and
Swiss-Prot at http://www.uniprot.org) resources [75]
using the BLASTX algorithm [76]. Using UniProt/Gene
Ontology (GO) crossed tables, candidate GO assignments were predicted on the basis of best transcripts
matches (E-value <10 -05 ) to the UniProt reference
sequences. Categories were assigned on the basis of the
biological, functional and molecular annotations available from GO http://www.geneontology.org[46].
Additionally, we constructed and searched (using the
BLASTX algorithm) two other fungal sequence databases. The BasidiomycotaDB database included Basidiomycota (excluding Pucciniales) protein sequences from
the non-redundant database of NCBI (124,751
sequences), a 6-frame translation of Basidiomycota
(excluding Pucciniales) EST sequences from NCBI
(287,259 sequences), and gene models from eight genome projects: Coprinus cinereus Okayama 7 (#130)
(Broad Institute); Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii
serotype A, strain H99 (Broad Institute); Laccaria bicolor S238N-H82 (JGI); Malassezia globosa CBS 7966
(Procter and Gamble Co.); Phanerochaete chrysosporium
RP78 (JGI); Postia placenta MAD-698 (JGI); Sporobolomyces roseus IAM 13481 (JGI); and Ustilago maydis 521
(Broad Institute) (a total of 85,025 gene models). The
PuccinialesDB database included Pucciniales protein
sequences from the non-redundant database of NCBI
(390 sequences), a 6-frame translation of Pucciniales
EST sequences from NCBI (84,006 sequences), and gene
models from P. graminis f. sp. tritici CRL 75-36-700-3
(20,567 gene models). The hmmpfam program (HMMer
software; http://hmmer.janelia.org[77] was used to
search the PFAM HMM profile database of protein
domains [45].
Signal peptide prediction

In silico predictions of secreted proteins were carried
out using a combination of SignalP 3.0, TargetP 1.1 and
TMHMM 2.0 [44,78,79]. The SignalP algorithms incorporate a cleavage site and signal peptide prediction
based on artificial neural networks (NN) and hidden
Markov models (HMM). In order to support the SignalP
results and exclude proteins with either mitochondrial
targeting peptides or transmembrane domains, protein
sequences were also entered into different prediction
servers. TargetP is a neural networks server that predicts
the subcellular localization of eukaryotic proteins based
on the presence of any of the N-terminal presequences,
either chloroplast transit peptide (for plant predictions),

Page 12 of 16

mitochondrial targeting peptide or secretory pathway
signal peptide, while TMHMM uses hidden Markov
models for the prediction of transmembrane helices.
Following predictions, the output files were manipulated
to select signal peptides containing sequences using the
following criteria: (1) positive SignalP-HMM Sprob
score, (2) positive SignalP-NN Smax and D scores, (3)
TargetP signal peptide prediction, and (4) no transmembrane domains. SignalP-HMM Sprob score was selected
because of its ability to discriminate between N-terminal
signal peptides and N-terminal signal anchors, while
SignalP-NN Smax and D scores are the most accurate
single scores [80]. Furthermore, because TMHMM may
not distinguish signal peptides from transmembrane
domains, deduced proteins with a single transmembrane
domain within 40 amino acids of the N-terminus were
also considered as potential secreted proteins.
SAGE analyses

The SAGE method was used as initially described in
Velculescu et al. [81,82] at the CHUQ Research Centre
(CRCHUQ) SAGE Platform, Quebec City, QC, Canada
http://www.crchuq.ulaval.ca/plateformes/gpb. Fungal
materials from M. larici-populina strain Mlp Berth.
3729 were harvested from both susceptible (P. × jackii)
and resistant (P. trichocarpa × P. deltoides ’Boelare’)
hosts at two different time points (22 hours and 5 days)
after inoculation. Additionally, germinating urediniospores and germ tubes were collected 2 hours after
inoculation on the susceptible cultivar by painting leaves
with 5% cellulose acetate (dissolved in acetone), letting
the acetone evaporate, and stripping the cellulose acetate film off the leaves. For each of the five treatments,
50 micrograms total RNA were extracted using the
RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) and poly
(A) RNA isolated with the mRNA Mini kit (Qiagen),
annealed with the biotin-50-T18-30 primer, and
converted into cDNA using the cDNA synthesis kit
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The resulting cDNA
were digested with NlaIII (anchoring enzyme), and the
3′ restriction fragments were isolated with streptavidincoated magnetic beads (Dynal Biotech, Oslo, Norway)
before being separated into two populations. Each
population was ligated to one of the two annealed linker
pairs and washed to remove unligated linkers. The tag
beside the most 3′ NIaIII restriction site (CATG) of
each transcript was released by digestion with BsmFI
(tagging enzyme). The blunting kit from Takara Co.
(Otsu, Japan) was used for the blunting and ligation of
the two tag populations. The resulting ligation products
containing the ditags were amplified by PCR with an
initial denaturation step of 1 min at 95°C, followed by
22 cycles of 20 sec at 94°C, 20 sec at 60°C and 20 sec at
72°C with 27 bp primers. The PCR products were then

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

digested with NlaIII and the band containing the ditags
was extracted from 12% acrylamide gel. The purified
ditags were self-ligated to form concatemers of 5001800 bp isolated by agarose gel. The resulting DNA
fragments were ligated into the SphI site of pUC19 and
cloned into UltraMAX DH5aFT E. coli cells (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). White colonies were screened by
PCR to select long inserts for automated sequencing as
previously described for cDNA libraries.
Sequence files were analyzed using the SAGEparser
program [83]. Tags corresponding to linker sequences
were discarded and duplicate concatemers were counted
only once. To identify the transcripts, the sequences of
15 bp SAGE tags (NlaIII site CATG plus adjacent 11 bp
tags) were matched with a collection of unassembled
poplar and M. larici-populina ESTs with polyA tail
using a customized Python script. To avoid the possibility of sequencing errors in the EST database, the
matches that were identified only once among the EST
database were not considered.
Positive selection analyses

Homologous gene groups (HGGs) were identified from
reciprocal TBLASTX searches (E-value < 1e-30) between
libraries and P. graminis f. sp. tritici gene models followed by graph clustering analysis using a TCL implementation of the Deep-First Search algorithm. Each
HGG included at least two sequences from Melampsora
unisequences and a minimum of three total sequences.
HGGs were either removed or divided when overlapping
regions where too short or when similarity was not found
throughout the majority of the unisequence coding
sequences. Furthermore, sequences with gaps across the
aligned coding sequences were removed in order to minimize the impact of the pitfalls of positive selection analyses, such as gap-induced misalignments and relaxed
selection in pseudogenes. The resulting 369 HGGs were
then submitted to positive selection analyses using a suite
of program grouped into a single Python script. The protein sequences in each HGG were first aligned with ClustalW [84] and the corresponding coding DNA sequences
were automatically extracted. A Neighbor-joining phenetic tree based on distance matrix between nucleotidic
sequences was then reconstructed for each HGG and
used as starting tree for Bayesian inference and Markov
Chain Monte Carlo simulations (B/MCMC) (only possible with HGG of 4 sequences and more; the Neighborjoining tree reconstructed with PAUP* was used for
HGG of 3 sequences). Prior to the B/MCMC, the models
for nucleotide substitutions were selected using the hierarchical likelihood ratio test (hLRT) implemented in the
Modeltest 3.7 program. Adaptive evolution was first estimated by pairwise calculation of the rates of nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions per nonsynonymous site

Page 13 of 16

(dN) and the rates of synonymous nucleotide substitutions per synonymous site (dS) between all members of
an HGG. Additionally, as adaptive evolution is likely to
act on a small subset of amino acid residues and hence
averages of substitution rates across the gene may not
strictly indicate positive selection, HGGs were scanned
for adaptive evolution using codon-based substitution
models that allow ω to vary among sites, with the parameters of the model estimated using maximum likelihood. These analyses were conducted using the codeml
application from the PAML package version 4 [67]. Bayesian inference of phylogeny aimed at estimating the posterior probabilities and branch length of phylogenetic
trees as starting values for codeml maximum likelihood
iteration under codon model M0 to get fixed branch
lengths. The resulting ω pairwise calculations are shown
in Table 3 for all HGGs with at least one pairwise calculation showing ω > 1.2. We also contrasted the codon
substitution models M1A (neutral), M2A (selection), M7
(beta), M8 (beta and ω) and M8A (beta and ω = 1; [85]).
The model M1A assumes two site classes in proportions
p0 and p1 = 1-p0 with 0 < ω 0 < 1 (conserved) and ω 1 =
1 (neutral). M2A adds an additional class of site with ω 2
as a free parameter, allowing for sites with ω 2 > 1 with
proportion p2. Model M7 uses a beta distribution of sites
within the interval 0 < ω < 1. M8 adds an extra class of
sites to the M7 model, allowing for positively selected
sites with ω > 1, while this extra d N /d S category is
restricted to one in model M8A [85]. From these models,
statistical significance was tested using likelihood ratio
tests by comparing the null models M1A, M7 and M8A
with the alternative M2A, M8 and M8 models, respectively. Models M2A and M8 are tests of positive selection
among codon sites and were implemented with at least
three different starting ω values (0.2, 1.0 and 2.0). Twice
the difference in log likelihood ratio between null and
alternative models was compared with a c2 distribution
with two degrees of freedom. The likelihood ratio tests
assess whether the alternative models fits the data better
than the null model and is known to be conservative in
simulation tests. For HGGs that tested positive using the
ML method, posterior Bayesian probabilities of site
classes were inferred for each amino acid site by using
the Bayes empirical Bayes method [86].

Additional material
Additional file 1: PFAM domains found in the putative secreted
members of the Melampsora unisequence dataset. Domains
represented in more than five unisequences are shown. PFAM hits were
considered significant when E-value ≤ 1e-5.
Additional file 2: Top five most abundantly represented secretome
members in each Melampsora library. BLASTX hits were considered
significant when E-value ≤ 1e-4.

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

Additional file 3: Mean number of SAGE tags associated with
Melampsora unisequences.
Additional file 4: Proportion of contigs and clones included in the
putative secretome of Melampsora.
Additional file 5: Characteristics of the Melampsora homologous
gene groups (HGGs) predicted to be under positive selection (sitebased analysis with codeml). BLASTX and PFAM hits were considered
significant when E-value ≤ 1e-4 and 1e-5, respectively.
Additional file 6: Significant likelihood ratio tests and sites under
positive selection as inferred under the site class models M1A,
M2A, M7, M8 and M8A of codeml applied to each of the
Melampsora homologous gene groups (HGGs).

Page 14 of 16

9.

10.

11.
12.
13.

14.
15.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Genomics Research Initiative of Natural
Resources Canada to RCH. The authors would like to thank the Broad
Institute and the DOE-JGI for releasing the data of the fungal genome
sequencing projects. Furthermore, the authors thank Brian Boyle for
technical assistance and Josyanne Lamarche, Sébastien Duplessis and Francis
Martin for helpful comments on the manuscript.

16.
17.
18.
19.

Author details
1
Natural Resources Canada, Canadian Forest Service, Laurentian Forestry
Centre, 1055 du PEPS, P.O. Box 10380, Stn. Sainte-Foy, Québec, QC, G1V 4C7,
Canada. 2Department of Forest Sciences, Faculty of Forestry, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada. 3Unité Mixte de
Recherche 1202, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique-Université
Bordeaux I, Biodiversité, Génes et Communautés (BioGeCo), INRA BordeauxAquitaine, 33612 Cestas Cedex, France.
Authors’ contributions
DLJ contributed to the conception and design of the project, conducted
laboratory experiments (EST libraries), designed bioinformatics scripts,
performed analysis and interpretation of the data and drafted the
manuscript. NF and RCH helped conceive the project and participated in its
coordination. NF conducted laboratory experiments (EST libraries and SAGE
analysis) and helped design bioinformatics scripts. NF, PT and RCH critically
revised the manuscript. All authors read, helped to edit, and approved the
final manuscript.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

Received: 15 January 2010 Accepted: 8 July 2010 Published: 8 July 2010
References
1. Cummins GB, Hiratsuka Y: Illustrated genera of the rust fungi St.Paul: APS
Press, 3 2003.
2. Steenackers J, Steenackers M, Steenackers V, Stevens M: Poplar diseases,
consequences on growth and wood quality. Biomass Bioenergy 1996,
10:267-274.
3. Dowkiw A, Bastien C: Characterization of two major genetic factors
controlling quantitative resistance to Melampsora larici-populina leaf rust
in hybrid poplars: strain specificity, field expression, combined effects,
and relationship with a defeated qualitative resistance gene.
Phytopathology 2004, 94:1358-1367.
4. Pinon J, Frey P: Interactions between poplar clones and Melampsora
populations and their implications for breeding for durable resistance.
Rust diseases of willow and poplar Wallingford: CAB InternationalPei MH,
McCracken AR 2005, 139-154.
5. Davis EL, Hussey RS, Baum TJ, Bakker J, Schots A, Rosso MN, Abad P:
Nematode parasitism genes. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2000, 38:365-396.
6. Davis EL, Hussey RS, Baum TJ: Getting to the roots of parasitism by
nematodes. Trends Parasitol 2004, 20:134-141.
7. Alfano JR, Collmer A: Type III secretion system effector proteins: double
agents in bacterial disease and plant defense. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2004,
42:385-414.
8. Birch PRJ, Rehmany AP, Pritchard L, Kamoun S, Beynon JL: Trafficking arms:
oomycete effectors enter host plant cells. Trends Microbiol 2006, 14:8-11.

25.

26.

27.
28.
29.
30.

31.

32.

Ellis J, Catanzariti AM, Dodds P: The problem of how fungal and
oomycete avirulence proteins enter plant cells. Trends Plant Sci 2006,
11:61-63.
Grant SR, Fisher EJ, Chang JH, Mole BM, Dangl JL: Subterfuge and
manipulation: type III effector proteins of phytopathogenic bacteria.
Annu Rev Microbiol 2006, 60:425-449.
Kamoun S: A catalogue of the effector secretome of plant pathogenic
oomycetes. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2006, 44:41-60.
Jones JDG, Dangl JL: The plant immune system. Nature 2006, 444:323-329.
Kemen E, Kemen AC, Rafiqi M, Hempel U, Mendgen K, Hahn M, Voegele RT:
Identification of a protein from rust fungi transferred from haustoria
into infected plant cells. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2005, 18:1130-1139.
Catanzariti A-M, Dodds PN, Ellis JG: Avirulence proteins from haustoriaforming pathogens. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2007, 269:181-188.
Whisson SC, Boevink PC, Moleleki L, Avrova AO, Morales JG, Gilroy EM,
Armstrong MR, Grouffaud S, van West P, Chapman S, Hein I, Toth IK,
Pritchard L, Birch PRJ: A translocation signal for delivery of oomycete
effector proteins into host plant cells. Nature 2007, 450:115-118.
Hahn M, Mendgen K: Signal and nutrient exchange at biotrophic plantfungus interfaces. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2001, 4:322-327.
Voegele RT, Mendgen K: Rust haustoria: nutrient uptake and beyond.
New Phytol 2003, 159:93-100.
Voegele RT: Uromyces fabae: development, metabolism, and interactions
with its host Vicia faba. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2006, 259:165-173.
Heath MC: Signalling between pathogenic rust fungi and resistant or
susceptible host plants. Ann Bot 1997, 80:713-720.
Dodds PN, Rafiqi M, Gan PHP, Hardham AR, Jones DA, Ellis JG: Effectors of
biotrophic fungi and oomycetes: pathogenicity factors and triggers of
host resistance. New Phytol 2009, 183:993-1000.
Allen RL, Bittner-Eddy PD, Grenville-Briggs LJ, Meitz JC, Rehmany AP,
Rose LE, Beynon JL: Host-parasite coevolutionary conflict between
Arabidopsis and downy mildew. Science 2004, 306:1957-1960.
Dodds PN, Lawrence GJ, Catanzariti A-M, Ayliffe MA, Ellis JG: The
Melampsora lini AvrL567 avirulence genes are expressed in haustoria and
their products are recognized inside plant cells. Plant Cell 2004,
16:755-768.
Shan W, Cao M, Leung D, Tyler BM: The Avr1b locus of Phytophthora sojae
encodes an elicitor and a regulator required for avirulence on soybean
plants carrying resistance gene Rps1b. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2004,
17:394-403.
Armstrong MR, Whisson SC, Pritchard L, Bos JIB, Venter E, Avrova AO,
Rehmany AP, Böhme U, Brooks K, Cherevach I, Hamlin N, White B, Fraser A,
Lord A, Quail MA, Churcher C, Hall N, Berriman M, Huang S, Kamoun S,
Beynon JL, Birch PRJ: An ancestral oomycete locus contains late blight
avirulence gene Avr3a, encoding a protein that is recognized in the host
cytoplasm. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:7766-7771.
Rehmany AP, Gordon A, Rose LE, Allen RL, Armstrong MR, Whisson SC,
Kamoun S, Tyler BM, Birch RJB, Beynon JL: Differential recognition of
highly divergent downy mildew avirulence gene alleles by RPP1
resistance genes from two Arabidopsis lines. Plant Cell 2005, 17:1839-1850.
Catanzariti A-M, Dodds PN, Lawrence GJ, Ayliffe MA, Ellis JG: Haustorially
expressed secreted proteins from flax rust are highly enriched for
avirulence elicitors. Plant Cell 2006, 18:243-256.
Rep M: Small proteins of plant-pathogenic fungi secreted during host
colonization. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2005, 253:19-27.
Dawkins R, Krebs JR: Arms races between and within species. Proc R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 1979, 205:489-511.
Dawkins R: The extended phenotype: the long reach of the gene Oxford:
Oxford University Press 1999.
Dodds PN, Lawrence GJ, Catanzariti A-M, Teh T, Wang CIA, Ayliffe MA,
Kobe B, Ellis JG: Direct protein interaction underlies gene-for-gene
specificity and coevolution of the flax resistance genes and flax rust
avirulence genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:8888-8893.
Rohmer L, Guttman DS, Dangl JL: Diverse evolutionary mechanisms shape
the type III effector virulence factor repertoire in the plant pathogen
Pseudomonas syringae. Genetics 2004, 167:1341-1360.
Schürch S, Linde CC, Knogge W, Jackson LF, McDonald BA: Molecular
population genetic analysis differentiates two virulence mechanisms of
the fungal avirulence gene NIP1. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2004,
17:1114-1125.

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

33. Liu Z, Bos JIB, Armstrong M, Whisson SC, da Cunha L, Torto-Alalibo T, Win J,
Avrova AO, Wright F, Birch PRJ, Kamoun S: Patterns of diversifying
selection in the phytotoxin-like scr74 gene family of Phytophthora
infestans. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:659-672.
34. Ma W, Dong FFT, Stavrinides J, Guttman DS: Type III effector
diversification via both pathoadaptation and horizontal transfer in
response to a coevolutionary arms race. PLoS Genet 2006, 2:e209.
35. Stergiopoulos I, De Kock MJD, Lindhout P, De Wit PJGM: Allelic variation in
the effector genes of the tomato pathogen Cladosporium fulvum reveals
different modes of adaptive evolution. Mol Plant Microb Interact 2007,
20:1271-1283.
36. Win J, Morgan W, Bos J, Krasileva KV, Cano LM, Chaparro-Garcia A,
Ammar R, Staskawicz BJ, Kamoun S: Adaptive evolution has targeted the
C-terminal domain of the RXLR effectors of plant pathogenic oomycetes.
Plant Cell 2007, 19:2349-2369.
37. Jiang RHY, Tripathy S, Govers F, Tyler BM: RXLR effector reservoir in two
Phytophthora species is dominated by a single rapidly evolving
superfamily with more than 700 members. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:4874-4879.
38. van der Merwe MM, Kinnear MW, Barrett LG, Dodds PN, Ericson L, Thrall PH,
Burdon JJ: Positive selection in AvrP4 avirulence gene homologues
across the genus Melampsora. Proc R Soc Lond Biol Sci 2009,
276:2913-2922.
39. Dean RA, Talbot NJ, Ebbole DJ, Farman ML, Mitchell TK, Orback MJ, Thon M,
Kulkarni R, Xu J-R, Pan H, Read ND, Lee Y-H, Carbone I, Brown D, Oh YY,
Donofrio N, Jeong JS, Soanes DM, Djonovic S, Kolomiets E, Rehmeyer C,
Li W, Harding M, Kim S, Lebrun M-H, Bohnert H, Coughlan S, Butler J,
Calvo S, Ma L-J, Nicol R, Purcell S, Nusbaum C, Galagan JE, Birren BW: The
genome sequence of the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe grisea. Nature
2005, 434:980-986.
40. Kämper J, Kahmann R, Bölker M, Ma L-J, Brefort T, Saville BJ, Banuett F,
Kronstad JW, Gold SE, Müller O, Perlin MH, Wösten HAB, de Vries R, RuizHerrera J, et al: Insights from the genome of the biotrophical fungal
plant pathogen Ustilago maydis. Nature 2006, 444:97-101.
41. Tyler BM, Tripathy S, Zhang X, Dehal P, Jiang RHY, Aerts A, Arredondo FD,
Baxter L, Bensasson D, Beynon JL, Chapman J, Damanesco CMB, et al:
Phytophthora genome sequences uncover evolutionary origins and
mechanisms of pathogenesis. Science 2006, 313:1261-1266.
42. Cuomo CA, Güldener U, Xu J-R, Trail F, Turgeon BG, Di Pietro A, Walton JD,
Ma L-J, Baker SE, Rep M, Adam G, Antoniw J, Baldwin T, Calvo S, Chang Y-L,
DeCaprio D, Gale LR, Gnerre S, Goswami RS, Hammond-Kosack K, Harris LJ,
Hilburn K, Kennell JC, Kroken S, Magnuson JK, Mannhaupt G, Mauceli E,
Mewes H-W, Mitterbauer R, Muelbauher G, Münsterkötter M, Nelson D,
O’Donnell K, Ouellet T, Qi W, Quesneville H, Roncero MIG, Seong K-S,
Tetko IV, Urban M, Waalwijk C, Ward TJ, Yao J, Birren BW, Kistler HC: The
Fusarium graminearum genome reveals a link between localized
polymorphism and pathogen specialization. Science 2007, 317:1400-1402.
43. Hane JK, Lowe RGT, Solomon PS, Tan K-C, Schoch CL, Spatafora JW,
Crous PW, Kodira C, Birren BW, Galagan JE, Torriani SFF, McDonald BA,
Oliver RP: Dothideomycete-plant interactions illuminated by genome
sequencing and EST analysis of the wheat pathogen Stagonospora
nodorum. Plant Cell 2007, 19:3347-3368.
44. Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, von Heijne G, Brunak S: Improved prediction of
signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J Mol Biol 2004, 340:783-795.
45. Bateman A, Coin L, Durbin R, Finn RD, Hollich V, Griffiths-Jones S, Khanna A,
Marshall M, Moxon S, Sonnhammer ELL, Studholme DJ, Yeats C, Eddy SR:
The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D138-D141.
46. The Gene Ontology Consortium: Gene Ontology: tool for the unification
of biology. Nature Genet 2000, 25:25-29.
47. Soanes DM, Richards TA, Talbot NJ: Insights from sequencing fungal and
oomycete genomes: What can we learn about plant disease and the
evolution of pathogenicity? Plant Cell 2007, 19:3318-3326.
48. Kulkarni RD, Kelkar HS, Dean RA: An eight-cysteine-containing CFEM
domain unique to a group of fungal membrane proteins. Trends Biochem
Sci 2003, 28:118-121.
49. Grell MN, Mouritzen P, Giese H: A Blumeria graminis gene family encoding
proteins with a C-terminal variable region with homologues in
pathogenic fungi. Gene 2003, 311:181-192.
50. Xue C, Park G, Choi W, Zheng L, Dean RA, Xu JR: Two novel fungal
virulence genes specifically expressed in appressoria of the rice blast
fungus. Plant Cell 2002, 14:2107-2119.

Page 15 of 16

51. Heath MC: Involvement of reactive oxygen species in the response of
resistant (hypersensitive) or susceptible cowpeas to the cowpea rust
fungus. New Phytol 1998, 138:251-263.
52. Hu G, Linning R, McCallum B, Banks T, Cloutier S, Butterfield Y, Liu J,
Kirkpatrick R, Stott J, Yang G, Smailus D, Jones S, Marra M, Schein J,
Bakkeren G: Generation of a wheat leaf rust, Puccinia triticina, EST
database from stage-specific cDNA libraries. Mol Plant Pathol 2007,
8:451-467.
53. Lamboy JS, Staples RC, Hoch HC: Superoxide dismutase: a differentiation
protein expressed in Uromyces germlings during early appressorium
development. Exp Mycol 1995, 19:284-296.
54. Rouhier N, Gelhaye E, Gualberto JM, Jordy M-N, De Fay E, Hirasawa M,
Duplessis S, Lemaire SD, Frey P, Martin F, Manieri W, Knaff DB, Jacquot J-P:
Poplar peroxiredoxin Q. A thioredoxin-linked chloroplast antioxidant
functional in pathogen defense. Plant Physiol 2004, 134:1027-1038.
55. Rinaldi C, Kohler A, Frey P, Duchaussoy F, Ningre N, Couloux A, Wincker P,
Le Thiec D, Fluch S, Martin F, Duplessis S: Transcript profiling of poplar
leaves upon infection with compatible and incompatible strains of the
foliar rust Melampsora larici-populina. Plant Physiol 2007, 144:347-366.
56. Posada-Buitrago ML, Frederick RD: Expressed sequence tag analysis of the
soybean rust pathogen Phakopsora pachyrhizi. Fungal Genet Biol 2005,
42:949-962.
57. El Gueddari NE, Rauchhaus U, Moerschbacher BM, Deising HB:
Developmentally regulated conversion of surface-exposed chitin to
chitosan in cell walls of plant pathogenic fungi. New Phytol 2002,
156:103-112.
58. Link TI, Voegele RT: Secreted proteins of Uromyces fabae: similarities and
stage specificity. Mol Plant Pathol 2008, 9:59-66.
59. Mendgen K, Hahn M: Plant infection and the establishment of fungal
biotrophy. Trends Plant Sci 2002, 7:352-356.
60. Maier W, Begerow D, Weiß M, Oberwinkler F: Phylogeny of the rust fungi:
an approach using nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA sequences. Can
J Bot 2003, 81:12-23.
61. Parkinson J, Blaxter M: SimiTri-visualizing similarity relationships for
groups of sequences. Bionformatics 2003, 19:390-395.
62. Martin F, Aerts A, Ahrén D, Brun A, Danchin EGJ, Duchaussoy F, Gibon J,
Kohler A, Lindquist E, Pereda V, Salamov A, Shapiro HJ, Wuyts J, Blaudez D,
Buée M, et al: The genome of Laccaria bicolor provides insights into
mycorrhizal symbiosis. Nature 2008, 452:88-92.
63. Stahl EA, Bishop JG: Plant-pathogen arms races at the molecular level.
Curr Opin Plant Biol 2000, 3:299-304.
64. Yang Z, Nielsen R, Goldman N, Krabbe Pedersen AM: Codon-substitution
models for heterogeneous selection pressure at amino acid sites.
Genetics 2000, 155:431-449.
65. Yang Z: PAML: A program package for phylogenetic analysis by
maximum likelihood. Comput Appl Biosci 1997, 13:555-556.
66. Nielsen R, Yang Z: Likelihood models for detecting positively selected
amino acid sites and applications to the HIV-1 envelope gene. Genetics
1998, 148:929-936.
67. Yang Z: PAML 4: Phylogenetic Analysis by Maximum Likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24:1586-1591.
68. Feau N, Joly DL, Hamelin RC: Poplar leaf rusts: model pathogens for a
model tree. Can J Bot 2007, 85:1127-1135.
69. Feau N, Bergeron M-J, Joly DL, Roussel F, Hamelin RC: Detection and
validation of EST-derived SNPs for poplar leaf rust Melampsora medusae
f. sp. deltoidae. Mol Ecol Notes 2007, 7:1222-1228.
70. Tuskan GA, DiFazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U,
Putnam N, Ralph S, Rombauts S, Salamov A, Schein J, Sterck L, Aerts A,
et al: The genome of black cottonwood, Populus trichocarpa (Torr. &
Gray). Science 2006, 313:1596-1604.
71. Miranda M, Ralph SG, Mellway R, White R, Heath MC, Bohlmann J,
Constabel CP: The transcriptional response of hybrid poplar (Populus
trichocarpa x P. deltoides) to infection by Melampsora medusae leaf rust
involves induction of flavonoid pathway genes leading to the
accumulation of proanthocyanidins. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2007,
20:816-831.
72. Azaiez A, Boyle B, Levée V, Séguin A: Transcriptome profiling in hybrid
poplar following interactions with Melampsora rust fungi. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 2009, 22:190-200.

Joly et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:422
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/422

Page 16 of 16

73. Hahn M, Mendgen K: Isolation by ConA binding of haustoria from
different rust fungi and comparison of their surface qualities.
Protoplasma 1992, 170:95-103.
74. Ewing B, Hillier L, Wendl MC, Green P: Base-calling of automated
sequencer traces using Phred. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res 1998,
8:175-185.
75. The UniProt Consortium: The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt). Nucleic
Acids Res 2008, 36:D190-D195.
76. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
77. Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:755-763.
78. Emanuelsson O, Nielsen H, Brunak S, von Heijne G: Predicting subcellular
localization of proteins based on their N-terminal amino acid sequence.
J Mol Biol 2000, 300:1005-1016.
79. Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonnhammer ELL: Predicting
transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model:
Application to complete genomes. J Mol Biol 2001, 305:567-580.
80. Klee EW, Ellis LBM: Evaluating eukaryotic secreted protein prediction. BMC
Bionformatics 2005, 6:256.
81. Velculescu VE, Zhang L, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW: Serial analysis of gene
expression. Science 1995, 270:484-487.
82. Velculescu VE, Zhang L, Zhou W, Vogelstein J, Basrai MA, Bassett DE Jr,
Hieter P, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW: Characterization of the yeast
transcriptome. Cell 1997, 88:243-251.
83. Dinel S, Bolduc C, Belleau P, Boivin A, Yoshioka M, Calvo E, Piedboeuf B,
Snyder EE, Labrie F, St-Amand J: Reproducibility, bioinformatic analysis
and power of the SAGE method to evaluate changes in transcriptome.
Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:e26.
84. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
85. Swanson WJ, Nielsen R, Yang Q: Pervasive adaptive evolution in
mammalian fertilization proteins. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20:18-20.
86. Yang Z, Wong WSW, Nielsen R: Bayes empirical Bayes inference of amino
acid sites under positive selection. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:1107-1118.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-422
Cite this article as: Joly et al.: Comparative analysis of secreted protein
evolution using expressed sequence tags from four poplar leaf rusts
(Melampsora spp.). BMC Genomics 2010 11:422.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
