<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>On the origin of Acochlidia and other enigmatic euthyneuran gastropods, with implications for the systematics of Heterobranchia</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-323"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Katharina M Jörger"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

On the origin of Acochlidia and other enigmatic
euthyneuran gastropods, with implications for
the systematics of Heterobranchia
Katharina M Jörger1*, Isabella Stöger1, Yasunori Kano2, Hiroshi Fukuda3, Thomas Knebelsberger1, Michael Schrödl1

Abstract
Background: A robust phylogenetic hypothesis of euthyneuran gastropods, as a basis to reconstructing their
evolutionary history, is still hindered by several groups of aberrant, more or less worm-like slugs with unclear
phylogenetic relationships. As a traditional “order” in the Opisthobranchia, the Acochlidia have a long history of
controversial placements, among others influenced by convergent adaptation to the mainly meiofaunal habitats.
The present study includes six out of seven acochlidian families in a comprehensive euthyneuran taxon sampling
with special focus on minute, aberrant slugs. Since there is no fossil record of tiny, shell-less gastropods, a
molecular clock was used to estimate divergence times within Euthyneura.
Results: Our multi-locus molecular study confirms Acochlidia in a pulmonate relationship, as sister to Eupulmonata.
Previous hypotheses of opisthobranch relations, or of a common origin with other meiofaunal Euthyneura, are
clearly rejected. The enigmatic amphibious and insectivorous Aitengidae incerta sedis clusters within Acochlidia, as
sister to meiofaunal and brackish Pseudunelidae and limnic Acochlidiidae. Euthyneura, Opisthobranchia and
Pulmonata as traditionally defined are non-monophyletic. A relaxed molecular clock approach indicates a late
Palaeozoic diversification of Euthyneura and a Mesozoic origin of the major euthyneuran diversity, including
Acochlidia.
Conclusions: The present study shows that the inclusion of small, enigmatic groups is necessary to solve deeplevel phylogenetic relationships, and underlines that “pulmonate” and “opisthobranch” phylogeny, respectively,
cannot be solved independently from each other. Our phylogenetic hypothesis requires reinvestigation of the
traditional classification of Euthyneura: morphological synapomorphies of the traditionally defined Pulmonata and
Opisthobranchia are evaluated in light of the presented phylogeny, and a redefinition of major groups is proposed.
It is demonstrated that the invasion of the meiofaunal habitat has occurred several times independently in various
euthyneuran taxa, leading to convergent adaptations previously misinterpreted as synapomorphies. The inclusion
of Acochlidia extends the structural and biological diversity in pulmonates, presenting a remarkable flexibility
concerning habitat choice.

Background
Since the introduction of the Heterobranchia concept by
Haszprunar [1,2], considerable advances have been
achieved, solving the phylogeny of certain heterobranch
groups (i.e. “families” or “orders”) on morphological (e.g.
Mikkelsen [3] on Cephalaspidea; Jensen [4] on Sacoglossa; Wägele and Willan [5] on Nudibranchia,
* Correspondence: Katharina.Joerger@zsm.mwn.de
1
Bavarian State Collection of Zoology, Münchhausenstr. 21, 81247 München,
Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Klussmann-Kolb [6] on Aplysiidae) and molecular levels
(e.g. Wollscheid-Lengeling et al. [7] on Nudibranchia;
Wade et al. [8] on Stylommatophora; Klussmann-Kolb
and Dinapoli [9] on Pteropoda). Members of the Euthyneura - the major heterobranch clade - have conquered
marine, limnic and terrestrial habitats from the deep sea
to the high mountains. As a result they form one of the
most successful and diverse groups within Gastropoda,
and even within Mollusca as regards species numbers
and ecological diversity. Quite some effort has been
dedicated to revealing relationships in the taxon, and to

© 2010 Jörger et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

supporting or rejecting the respective monophyly of traditional higher groupings such as Pulmonata and
Opisthobranchia. Nevertheless, the phylogeny of the
Euthyneura has remained partially unresolved and heavily
discussed [see e.g. [10-17]]. While morphological analyses
face the problem of convergent developments that might
mask the true phylogenetic signal, and depend on the
coding procedure for morphological characters [18], single-marker molecular analyses are challenged in choosing
a suitable marker, and multi-locus molecular studies
stand and fall with the available taxon sampling.
One major problem in molecular studies is that highly
aberrant or derived taxa of uncertain taxonomic relationships “jump around” in phylogenetic analyses and
weaken the phylogenetic signal for higher taxa. Members of such groups are often hard to obtain (especially
for molecular purposes); thus, the groups are frequently
either excluded from phylogenetic analyses or only
included with a low number of representatives, resulting
in poor overall taxon sampling. One attempt to support
future phylogenetic approaches on a higher taxonomic
level (i.e. Heterobranchia or Gastropoda) is to provide
data on small enigmatic groups and their phylogenetic
relationships step by step.
The Acochlidia, a traditional “order” of the Opisthobranchia since their establishment by Odhner [[19]; as
Acochlidiacea], form one of the unsolved mysteries
within Euthyneura [18]. Being a small group with only 28
valid species worldwide, these slugs are morphologically
and biologically highly aberrant and diverse, comprising a
series of unusual characters (e.g. secondary gonochorism,
lack of copulatory organs, asymmetric radulae) [see e.g.
[20-23]]. Most acochlidians live interstitially in marine
sands, while some have conquered limnic systems
(uniquely within opisthobranch gastropods). Their
monophyly is widely accepted [20,22,24,25] especially
since a proposed sister group relationship of the acochlidian family Ganitidae with Sacoglossa (based on the dagger-shaped radula teeth, see [26]) could be rejected based
on a comprehensive parsimony analysis of morphological
characters [22]. During the last years a series of studies
have redescribed key acochlidian taxa in great detail,
including 3D reconstructions [27-32], and added considerably to the morphological and biological knowledge of
this previously little understood group. A first comprehensive cladistic analysis of their phylogeny is now established [22], but the identity of their sister group remains
uncertain. Most recent morphological analyses suggested
a common origin with either the equally enigmatic Rhodopemorpha [10], the diaphanid cephalaspidean Toledonia [25], or with runcinid or philinoid cephalaspideans
[22,33]. However, morphology-based analyses by Schrödl
and Neusser [22], demonstrated that Acochlidia usually
group with other mesopsammic taxa, if any were

Page 2 of 20

included (i.e. with the sacoglossan Platyhedyle, the
rhodopemorph Rhodope or the cephalaspideans Philinoglossa or Philine exigua). Thus, it is likely that convergent
adaptations to the interstitial habitat mask the truly phylogenetic signals. Molecular markers independent from
direct ecological pressures suggested an unresolved basal
opisthobranch origin for Acochlidia ([34] based on
nuclear 18S rRNA and 28S rRNA). A first combined
multi-gene dataset led to the surprising result of Acochlidia clustering in a pulmonate relationship, united in a
clade with Pyramidelloidea, Amphiboloidea and Eupulmonata [17]. However, only three derived acochlids [see
[22]] were included, with partially missing data. Therefore this unexpected result requires re-examination based
on complete multi-locus data and a more focused taxon
sampling, including all previously suggested potential sister groups of Acochlidia. Most recently, another curiosity
with potential affinities to Acochlidia has been described:
the amphibious and insectivorous sea slug Aiteng ater
from mangrove mud in Thailand [35]. Due to its unusual
combination of morphological characters (prepharyngeal
nerve ring, presence of ascus, uniseriate radula) it was
placed in a new family, Aitengidae, with unclear phylogenetic relationships and affinities to Sacoglossa, Acochlidia
and Cephalaspidea. A similar but still undescribed species
was found in Japan, which was available for the present
study. Morphologically it clearly belongs to the Aitengidae, but shows differences to A. ater at genus or species
level (own unpublished data). Its affinity to A. ater is confirmed by comparison of the mitochondrial 16S rRNAsequences (K. Händeler, pers. comm.).
The present study aims to clarify the origins and phylogenetic relationships of Acochlidia and potentially
related enigmatic taxa such as Aitengidae, based on a
combined molecular dataset from nuclear and mitochondrial markers. For the first time, representatives of
six out of seven acochlidian families [22] are analysed in
the context of a broad taxon sampling that includes
other meiofaunal slugs (Philinoglossa praelongata, Philine exigua, Smeagol phillipensis) and most euthyneuran
sub-groups. Furthermore, the potentially related Gascoignella nukuli (as a representative of Platyhedylidae)
and an undescribed species of Aitengidae are included
in the present study. Since there is no fossil record of
Acochlidia or any other mesopsammic Euthyneura, we
apply a molecular clock approach to estimate divergence
times for these groups. On the basis of our phylogenetic
hypothesis we discuss evolutionary trends and potential
consequences for euthyneuran classification in general.

Results
Neighbournet analysis

The neighbournet graph created by SplitsTree 4 (see
Additional File 1) visualises a generally high conflict in

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

the data (shown by a netlike structure with edges of
similar length), and high substitution rates displayed by
long terminal branches in many taxa. There is no cladesupporting pattern for the monophyly of Opisthobranchia or of Pulmonata on the basis of our dataset. Of the
major traditional heterobranch taxa only Acteonoidea
and Nudipleura show a clear split support (visualised by
long parallel edges); some split support is present for
Pyramidelloidea, Cephalaspidea s.s., Anaspidea, Umbraculoidea, pteropod Gymnosomata and Thecosomata,
Amphiboloidea and Siphonarioidea. No pattern supporting any of the other opisthobranch or pulmonate groups
can be found, mainly due to affinities of individual species to neighbouring groups. No split pattern indicates a
relationship between the different meiofaunal heterobranchs such as Acochlidia, Smeagol phillipensis and
Philinoidea (Philinoglossa praelongata and Philine exigua) (see Additional File 1).
The monophyly of the Acochlidia receives no split
support. A very weak signal supports a grouping of Acochlidia together with some pulmonate taxa, but there is
no indication for affinities to other opisthobranch taxa.
The acochlidian subgroups Hedylopsacea and Microhedylacea receive no split support, due to some common
support for Hedylopsis (Hedylopsacea) and Asperspina
(Microhedylacea). The enigmatic Aitengidae sp. receives
split support grouped with acochlidian Pseudunelidae
and Acochlidiidae, and shows no affinity to Sacoglossa
or Cephalaspidea.
Phylogenetic analysis

Examination of differences in incongruence length
between the four genetic markers - 18S rRNA, 28S
rRNA, 16S rRNA and cytochrome c oxidase subunit I
(COI) - using the ILD-test implemented in PAUP* [36]
revealed that the phylogenetic signal is improved in the
combined data set (p-value of 0.01). Thus a concatenated dataset was used for phylogenetic analyses. The
likelihood values of the different partitions of the dataset
were compared via the Akaike Information Criterion
(AIC) and the separation into 5 partitions (one each for
18S, 28S and 16S; COI separated in the two partitions
1st and 2nd position and 3rd position) improved the likelihood significantly (see Additional File 2). The dataset
aligned with MAFFT, masked with Gblocks and analysed in 5 partitions led to the best likelihood value,
thus it is presented herein as the most probable phylogenetic hypothesis based on our data (see Figure 1). For
comparison of the different analytical approaches and
the resulting differences in tree topology and related
support values, see Table 1.
The Euthyneura form a monophyletic group without
significant bootstrap support (BS) in ML-analyses, or
posterior probability (PP) in Bayesian analyses. They do

Page 3 of 20

not include the Acteonoidea (sister to “lower heterobranch” Rissoelloidea) in most of our analyses, but
include the Pyramidelloidea and Glacidorboidea as sister
group to Amphiboloidea. Within the Euthyneura the
Opisthobranchia clearly result as non-monophyletic. At
the basis of the Euthyneura the Nudipleura split off,
with high internal support. The clade of the remaining
euthyneuran taxa receives good support (85 BS/1.0 PP).
First, an opisthobranch clade (no significant BS/1.0) is
composed of Umbraculoidea, Runcinacea, Cephalaspidea
s.s., Anaspidea and Pteropoda, with Umbraculoidea as
the most basal branch. The runcinid Runcina africana
forms the sister group to the Anaspidea and the well
backed (82/1.0) Pteropoda (Gymnosomata and Thecosomata), and the above combined are sister to the remaining Cephalaspidea s.s., with high support for monophyly
of Cephalaspidea s.s. (100/1.0). Internally the Cephalaspidea s.s. are poorly resolved, and their internal topology
differs between the RAxML and Bayesian analyses (see
Table 1). The mesopsammic Philine exigua and Philinoglossa praelongata do not form a clade: P. praelongata
clusters with Scaphander lignarius, whereas no clear sister group relationship could be identified for P. exigua.
The Pulmonata as traditionally defined result as nonmonophyletic due to the inclusion of the opisthobranch
groups Sacoglossa and Acochlidia and of the “lower”
heterobranch Pyramidelloidea and Glacidorboidea. The
pulmonate clade is significantly supported (75/1.0), but
internally characterised by an unstable topology, with no
or low support concerning the sister group relationships
between the major groups. Siphonarioidea and Sacoglossa form a clade (lacking significant support) sister to
the remaining taxa (see Figure 1). In the analyses of the
ALISCORE dataset Siphonarioidea form the most basal
group, followed by a split-off of the Sacoglossa (see
Table 1). The monophyletic Sacoglossa (98/1.0) combine
clades with shelled and shell-less representatives, with
Gascoignella nukuli (Platyhedylidae) as the most basal
offshoot of the latter. Siphonarioidea + Sacoglossa are
recovered as sister group to a clade composed of (Glacidorboidea + (Amphiboloidea + Pyramidelloidea)) +
(Hygrophila + (Eupulmonata + Acochlidia)). Apart from
Acochlidia, the monophyly of all higher taxa is well supported: Amphiboloidea (100/1.0), Pyramidelloidea (99/
1.0), Hygrophila (86/1.0) and Eupulmonata (93/1.0).
However, relations between these taxa are poorly
resolved, not supported, and vary within the different
analyses (see Table 1). In all our analyses Amphiboloidea cluster with Glacidorboidea and Pyramidelloidea.
Thus Thalassophila (= Siphonarioidea and Amphiboloidea) and Basommatophora (= Thalassophila and Hygrophila) are left as polyphyletic. The Eupulmonata
(Stylommatophora, Systellommatophora, Ellobioidea,
Trimusculoidea and Otinoidea) are recovered sister to

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

Page 4 of 20

Figure 1 Origin of Acochlidia within Heterobranchia. RAxML analysis based on the combined dataset (18S, 28S, 16S, COI), masked with
Gblocks. Bootstrap support and posterior probabilities given (only BS ≥ 50 and PP ≥ 0.95 are considered relevant and thus shown).

Table 1 Summary of the different analyses conducted
Sequence
alignment/
masking/
phylogenetic
analysis

Model of
sequence
evolution

Length of Monophyly of Acochlidia and sister group
alignment relationship

Changes within the tree topology compared
to Figure 1

MAFFT + Gblocks
+ RAxML

GTRCAT
GTR +
GAMMA

3641 bp

see Figure 1

see Figure 1

MAFFT +
ALISCORE +
RAxML

GTRCAT
GTR +
GAMMA

3926 bp

MAFFT + Gblocks
+ MrBayes

GTR + G
+I

3641 bp

Acochlidia monophyletic (no BS support)
Aitengidae basal within Hedylopsacea; Acochlidia
sister to (Hygrophila + (Glacidorboidea +
(Amphiboloidea + Pyramidelloidea))) (no BS
support)
Acochlidia monophyletic (no significant PP); sister
group to Eupulmonata (0.96 PP)

Anaspidea non-monophyletic; different internal
topology of Cephalaspidea s.s. (Philine exigua
basal to remaining taxa); Siphonarioidea and
Sacoglossa form no clade, but Siphonarioidea +
(Sacoglossa + remaining pulmonate taxa)
basal tritomy within Euthyneura: (Acteonoidea +
Rissoelloidea)/Nudipleura/remaining Euthyneura;
different internal topology of Cephalaspidea s.s.
(Philine exigua basal to remaining taxa),
((Glacidorboidea + Amphiboloidea) +
Pyramidelloidea)

MAFFT +
ALISCORE +
MrBayes

GTR + G
+I

3926 bp

Acochlidia monophyletic (no significant PP)
Aitengidae basal within Hedylopsacea; Acochlidia
sister to (Hygrophila + (Glacidorboidea +
Amphiboloidea + Pyramidelloidea)) (no significant
PP)

Anaspidea non-monophyletic; different internal
topology of Cephalaspidea s.s. (Philine exigua
basal to remaining taxa); Siphonarioidea and
Sacoglossa form no clade, but Siphonarioidea +
(Sacoglossa + remaining pulmonate taxa);
Nudipleura form a basal clade with (Acteonoidea
+ Rissoelloidea)

The table lists the different methods of masking the alignment, phylogenetic approaches and models of sequence evolution used for the different analyses, as
well as the resulting differences in tree topology (bootstrap support = BS; posterior probability = PP).

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

Acochlidia. Within Eupulmonata Stylommatophora (90/
1.0) form the basal group; Systellommatophora (no significant BS/1.0) is sister to a clade Ellobioidea + (Trimusculoidea + Otinoidea), the latter comprising
Smeagol phillippensis and Otina ovata.
Acochlidia are recovered as monophyletic but with no
significant support. The internal phylogeny of the Acochlidia is composed of the two monophyletic traditional
suborders Hedylopsacea (with Hedylopsidae, Pseudunelidae and Acochlidiidae) and Microhedylacea (with Asperspinidae and Microhedylidae including Ganitidae), and is
congruent with the morphology-based phylogeny of
Acochlidia proposed by Schrödl and Neusser [22]. Additionally the enigmatic Aitengidae sp. clusters within the
Hedylopsacea as sister group to Pseudunelidae and Acochlidiidae (see Figure 1) or basal within Hedylopsacea.
In analyses of Gblock datasets Acochlidia are sister to
Eupulmonata (see Figure 1), in ALISCORE based analyses they cluster sister to Hygrophila + (Glacidorboidea
+ Amphiboloidea + Pyramidelloidea) (see Table 1). To
assess the level of confidence of the “best” tree (i.e. pulmonate relationship of Acochlidia), we calculated the
p-values of an alternative topology (Acochlidia cluster
within Opisthobranchia) in combination with the “best”
tree topology. Based on the resulting p-values of the AU
test the alternative hypothesis is highly significantly
rejected (AU value = 0).
Molecular clock

The phylogenetic hypothesis obtained with the software
BEAST (see Figure 2) based on the concatenated fourmarker Gblocks dataset largely confirms the topology
obtained from RAxML and MrBayes (see Figure 1).
Based on the three fossil calibration points the Euthyneura originated already in the Palaeozoic, probably in
the Carboniferous or Permian. The diversification of
Euthyneura with the rise of many extant taxa started
approximately in the late Palaeozoic (Permian) and
major divergence events occurred in the Mesozoic. On
the basis of our analysis the pulmonate clade (also
including Sacoglossa, Acochlidia, Pyramidelloidea and
Glacidorboidea) first appeared in the late Palaeozoic to
early Mesozoic, approximately at the Permian/Triassic
transition. The split between Eupulmonata and Acochlidia took place in the Mesozoic, between the Triassic
and Jurassic periods. The diversification of Acochlidia is
estimated to have happened in the Jurassic with the split
between Hedylopsacea and Microhedylacea. Aitengidae
split off from Pseudunelidae and Acochlidiidae in the
Cretaceous. The transition to limnic habitats within
Acochlidiidae appears as a comparatively recent event
dating to the Palaeogene.
According to our data, major opisthobranch groups
originated also in the Mesozoic (e.g. Cephalaspidea s.s.

Page 5 of 20

estimated to the Jurassic, Sacoglossa approximately
Triassic/early Jurassic period, Pteropoda to the
Cretaceous).
For comparison and to evaluate the impact of removing ambiguous parts of the alignment on molecular
clock analyses, we repeated the analysis with the raw
(i.e. uncut) alignment of our data (again using the concatenated four-marker dataset in five partitions). Even
though the topology varied slightly from the one in the
previous analysis, the estimated divergence times stayed
surprisingly constant, supporting the rough estimate
given above.

Discussion
Implications for the phylogeny of Heterobranchia

Our results on the origin of Acochlidia - in congruence
with previous molecular studies on Euthyneura based on
the same molecular markers [14,17] - necessitate the
reconsideration of current classification concepts. Redefinitions below aim to observe continuity in traditional
nomenclature and cause the unavoidable minimum of
changes in terminology.
Euthyneura

The monophyly of Euthyneura (traditionally uniting
Opisthobranchia and Pulmonata) has been widely
accepted and well supported [13,18,37], even though
their eponymous apomorphy - the euthyneury - has
been revealed as convergent development [1,2]. Euthyneuran monophyly was recently questioned due to
inclusion of “lower Heterobranchia” Pyramidelloidea
unresolved within Pulmonata [13,15,16] or sister to
Amphiboloidea [14,17]. Some other morphological studies place Pyramidelloidea as sister to Euthyneura
[10,33]. Dinapoli and Klussmann-Kolb [14] argued to
include them within Euthyneura, which has also been
supported by morphological analysis [13]. Latest molecular data on Pyramidelloidea support an euthyneuran
origin and indicate a relationship with Glacidorboidea
and Amphiboloidea [38]. Our data again recovers Pyramidelloidea as sister to Amphiboloidea within pulmonates (see Figure 1), but with no significant support. In
addition to nucleotide sequences [[14,15,17], present
study], data from mitochondrial gene arrangements [16],
a “morpho-molecular” synapomorphy (20 bp deletion in
16S rRNA helix of Pyramidelloidea and Euthyneura, see
[11]) as well as morphology (presence of a euthyneurous
nervous system with giant nerve cells) all support the
inclusion of Pyramidelloidea within Euthyneura. When
first describing Glacidorboidea, Ponder [39] placed them
within Pulmonata and discussed a relationship to
Amphiboloidea. However, Haszprunar [2] moved them
to “lower Heterobranchia”. The first molecular data on
Glacidorboidea confirmed a pulmonate relationship [14].
This is again supported by our data.

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

Page 6 of 20

Figure 2 Chronogram of Heterobranchia. Showing estimated divergence times obtained from BEAST v1.5.3 under the uncorrelated lognormal
relaxed clock model. Numbers at nodes refer to node ages in this presented tree (maximum-clade-credibility-tree); bars express 95% highest
posterior density (HPD) (only presented for nodes with a PP > 0.5). Red circles indicate calibration points. Geological timescale is based on the
International Stratigraphic Chart by the International Commission on Stratigraphy (2009).

“Opisthobranchia”

While the monophyly of several opisthobranch subgroups
(e.g. Pteropoda, Cephalaspidea s.s., Nudipleura) receives
good support, the monophyly of the Opisthobranchia in a
traditional sense is rejected in all recent studies, regardless
of whether the latter are molecular or morphological [e.g.
[14,17,40]]. This is confirmed by our multi-locus molecular approach (see Figure 1) and supported by the results of
the AU test. Thus, “Opisthobranchia” as traditionally
defined should be considered as non-monophyletic.
As in previous studies we can clearly distinguish at
least two clades (i.e. basal Nudipleura and Umbraculoidea + Runcinacea + Anaspidea + Pteropoda + Cephalaspidea s.s.) within “Opisthobranchia” that lead towards
the pulmonate level of organisation.
Only one of our analyses indicates the Acteonoidea
sister to Nudipleura (see Table 1). This clade that had
resulted repeatedly in molecular studies with still limited
“lower heterobranch” taxon sampling, either in a derived
position [34,41] or as a basal offshoot within Euthyneura
[15,17]. A recent molecular phylogeny on Acteonoidea

suggest a common origin with lower heterobranch Rissoelloidea and a sister group relationship to Nudipleura
[42]. While the basal position of Acteonoidea was commonly accepted [33,40], some authors doubted the basal
position of Nudipleura, which was originally considered
as a highly derived taxon, and suspect rate heterogeneity
and deviant base composition as causing this unnatural
grouping [17,34]. Based on potential synapomorphies in
the reproductive system (presence of a ciliary stripe
within the ampulla, androdiaulic or triaulic pallial gonoduct), Ghiselin [43] already suggested a relationship
between Acteonoidea and Nudipleura. However, Acteonoidea form a well-supported “lower heterobranch”
clade with Rissoelloidea, (see Figure 1; Table 1), confirming results by Aktipis et al. [44] and Dinapoli and
Klussmann-Kolb [14]. The latter authors also recovered
Nudipleura as the first offshoot of Euthyneura, which is
confirmed by our study. Salvini-Plawen and Steiner [10]
grouped Umbraculoidea with Nudipleura, but none of
the recent molecular or morphological studies support
such a relationship [17,33,34].

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

A common clade including Umbraculoidea, Anaspidea, Cephalaspidea s.s. and Pteropoda was already well
supported in previous molecular analyses [9,14,17], and
monophyly of a clade Anaspidea + Pteropoda received
strong support in one previous study [12]. The present
results confirm Cephalaspidea s.s., including Diaphanidae, but excluding Runcinidae as suggested in a previous
analysis [45]. In our study Runcina africana groups with
Anaspidea and Pteropoda, as in the Bayesian analysis of
the concatenated 18S rRNA, 28S rRNA and COI dataset
of the more comprehensive cephalaspidean phylogeny
by Malaquias et al. [45]. The latter authors thus proposed to reinstate Runcinacea as a taxonomic category
equivalent to Cephalaspidea s.s.. However, different analyses of the same authors led to different placements of
Runcinacea, e.g. as sister to the remaining Cephalaspidea
s.s.; hence the group’s origin was left unresolved. Surprisingly our study indicates independent origins for the
mesopsammic Philine exigua (Philinidae) and Philinoglossa praelongata(Philinoglossidae). The internal topology of Cephalaspidea s.s. is weakly supported in our
study, but a more complete cephalaspidean sampling
also rendered Philinoidea paraphyletic (based on 18S
and 28S) [45].
Based on our results and in congruence with the
topology in previous studies [14,17], we suggest to
unite Umbraculoidea, Anaspidea, Runcinacea, Pteropoda and Cephalaspidea s.s. in the new clade Euopisthobranchia (see Figure 3), presenting a
monophyletic remainder of the “Opisthobranchia” as
traditionally defined. Previous studies [9,18] discussed
the gizzard (i.e. a muscular oesophageal crop lined
with cuticula) with gizzard plates as homologous apomorphic structures supporting a clade composed of
Cephalaspidea s.s., Pteropoda and Anaspidea. A gizzard
with gizzard plates probably originated in herbivorous
taxa in which it worked like a grinding mill, thus
might be secondarily reduced in carnivorous groups
within Cephalaspidea s.s. and Gymnosomata [9]. Klussmann-Kolb and Dinapoli [9] considered the gizzard in
Umbraculoidea as non-homologous with the one in
the previous groups, on account of the absence of gizzard plates or spines. This contradicted Salvini-Plawen
and Steiner [10], who had proposed the gizzard to be a
synapomorphy of the larger clade of Paratectibranchia
(Pteropoda, Cephalaspidea and Anaspidea) and
Eleutherobranchia, secondarily lost in Nudipleura but
still present in Umbraculoidea. As coded in Wägele
and Klussmann-Kolb [33], our phylogenetic hypothesis
supports homology of the gizzard in Umbraculoidea
with the gizzard with gizzard plates and spines in the
other euopisthobranchian taxa. Thus, the structure is
proposed as a synapomorphy of Euopisthobranchia.

Page 7 of 20

“Pulmonata”

The monophyly of Pulmonata as traditionally defined
has been well supported in morphological analyses (see
e.g. [10,13]) and molecular studies [8,46]. However,
doubts have arisen recently due to molecular studies
which recovered additional taxa (e.g. Pyramidelloidea,
Sacoglossa or Acochlidia) within “Pulmonata” [14,17], or
to novel studies based on mitochondrial gene arrangements [16] which rendered “Pulmonata” polyphyletic.
Based on our phylogenetic hypothesis (Figure 1) “Pulmonata” as traditionally defined is non-monophyletic
due to the inclusion of Pyramidelloidea, Glacidorboidea,
Sacoglossa and Acochlidia. On the premise of monophyletic Euthyneura, with basal Nudipleura and monophyletic Euopisthobranchia (see discussion above), the
remaining euthyneuran taxa necessarily form a clade, in
our study supported with maximum posterior probability (1.0) and significant bootstrap support (75%) (see
Figure 1). Even though the topology within this pulmonate clade is unstable and not well resolved (see
Table1), for practical reasons and due to the assumptions of monophyletic Euthyneura and Euopisthobranchia we suggest the new taxon Panpulmonata to unite
Siphonarioidea, Sacoglossa, Glacidorboidea, Pyramidelloidea, Amphiboloidea, Hygrophila, Acochlidia and
Eupulmonata (see Figure 3). The scientific meaning of
the name “Pulmonata” and the corresponding major feature of those animals being “air-breathers” surely are not
applicable to the novel panpulmonate groups Acochlidia, Sacoglossa and Pyramidelloidea, but also not for traditional pulmonate taxa such as Siphonarioidea or
Hygrophila, most members of which lack permanently
air-filled lungs. The term Panpulmonata is chosen for
continuity in terminology. While certain pulmonate
groups are well supported morphologically and molecularly (i.e. Eupulmonata and Hygrophila), unambiguous
synapomorphies for Panpulmonata are hard to find (see
discussion below).
Siphonarioidea and Sacoglossa form a clade sister to
the remaining Panpulmonata (see Figure 3). While Haller [47] classified Siphonarioidea as opisthobranchs (e.g.
on account of the presence of a gill), nowadays they are
usually considered as “primitive” pulmonates, either
grouped at the basis of the remaining Pulmonata [37,46]
or united with Amphiboloidea as basommatophoran
Thalassophila [48]. Molecular studies rendered Basommatophora and Thalassophila paraphyletic and indicated
a close relationship of Siphonarioidea to Sacoglossa,
either both within Opisthobranchia [16], at their basis
[15], or basal to the remaining Pulmonata [[14,17], present study] as sister groups or separate clades. However,
all studies show weak support at these nodes, and the
positions of siphonariids and sacoglossans as well as

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

Page 8 of 20

Figure 3 Proposed reclassification of Euthyneura, discussed groups shown. Nodes with significant support (i.e. > 75% bootstrap support
(BS) and > 0.95 posterior probability (PP)) marked by dots; nodes with > 0.95 PP but low BS marked by circles. (Note: “Lower Heterobranchia”
does not form a clade in the present study (see Figure 1), the branches are collapsed in the present Figure for illustration purposes.)

their relationship still need confirmation by other character sets and improved taxon sampling.
In the present study the monophyly of Sacoglossa is
well supported and also the split into shelled Oxynoacea
and Plakobranchacea is well backed (see Figure 1). Both
suborders are also well supported morphologically [4].
Platyhedylidae stand basally within the latter, as sister to
Limapontioidea plus the remaining Plakobranchoidea.
Jensen [4] placed Platyhedylidae at the basis of Plakobranchoidea but already pointed out their unclear
relationships.
Hygrophila, Amphiboloidea and Eupulmonata are all
well supported monophyletic groups in the present
study, but their sister group relationships are not well
resolved and receive little to no support.

Origin of Acochlidia

All groups previously discussed as having an affinity or
closer relationship to Acochlidia were included in the
present study to reveal their phylogenetic relationships.
Only the enigmatic Rhodopemorpha are lacking, but a
recent molecular phylogeny based on nuclear and mitochondrial markers shows no affinities between Acochlidia and Rhodopemorpha [49], and the morphological
characters common to both groups can be explained as
convergent developments (see discussion below and
[22]). A phylogenetic relationship of Acochlidia with the
diaphanid Toledonia, which was suggested based on
similar radula characteristics [25], is rejected by the present molecular data and also resulting from morphological analyses [22]. Morphological studies indicated a

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

common origin for small Runcinacea and Cephalaspidea
(i.e. mesopsammic Philinoglossa and Philine exigua)
with Acochlidia [22,33]. However, Schrödl and Neusser
[22] showed the liability of the topology to inclusion of
other interstitial taxa such as Rhodope and Platyhedyle,
which always resulted as direct sister groups to Acochlidia in various analyses. The authors thus concluded that
the convergent adaptations to the interstitial habitat (e.g.
worm-shaped body, development of spicules, loss of pigmentation) mask the true phylogenetic signal. This
interpretation is supported by our SplitsTree analysis
(see Additional File 1) and the present molecular results
(see Figure 1), which clearly signal independent evolutionary origins for all the different mesopsammic Heterobranchia included here.
Previous molecular analyses placed the Acochlidia
basally in an unresolved opisthobranch level [34] or surprisingly clustered them in an unresolved pulmonate
relationship [17]. While any opisthobranch affinities are
rejected based on split support (see Additional File 1),
based on the AU test and based on phylogenetic analysis, the pulmonate relationship of Acochlidia is confirmed in this study (see Figure 1), which presents a
much better acochlidian taxon sampling and highly
likely topology within Acochlidia (see discussion below).
Even though support for their direct sister group relationships are low and the topology varies between the
different analyses, all analyses performed in the present
study placed Acochlidia within pulmonates (see Table
1). This grouping based on molecular markers requires
a re-evaluation of morphological characters and earlier,
potentially biased homology assumptions, and a search
for potential synapomorphies uniting Acochlidia with
pulmonates. Three anatomical characters are generally
accepted as true synapomorphies of the “Pulmonata” as
traditionally defined: the pallial cavity opening by means
of a pneumostome, presence of a procerebrum (with
cerebral gland and double cerebro-connectives) and the
existence of medio-dorsal (cerebral) bodies [13,50].
1) Pallial cavity opening by means of a pneumostome

Although denied by some earlier authors, the pulmonary
cavity of “Pulmonata” is today generally considered as
homologous to the pallial cavity of non-pulmonate gastropods [51]. Whereas the loss of a gill and the presence
of a “lung” certainly is a matter of multiple convergence
paralleled in several prosobranch clades, the acquisition
of a pneumostome (i.e. a small respiratory opening) is
considered as synapomorphic for “Pulmonata”
[13,18,48]. Dayrat and Tillier [[13], see also references
therein] pointed out that the pneumostome of Siphonarioidea is not contractile, and their phylogenetic hypothesis [13] favoured homology with the pneumostome of
the remaining Pulmonata. On the other hand, at least
some siphonariids are reported to open and close their

Page 9 of 20

pneumostome [e.g. [52]]. A morphocline from a wide
open pallial cavity to a narrow, nearly closed one (i.e.
presence of pneumostome) is present in both “Opisthobranchia” and “Pulmonata"; thus the presence of a pneumostome in general cannot be considered as a
pulmonate synapomorphy [53]. Barker [53] also questioned the synapomorphic contractile pneumostome,
which might have evolved independently in different
pulmonate taxa, e.g. in Eupulmonata and some Siphonarioidea. The presence of a small opening seems to be
variable, indeed, and might depend on the habitat. For
example, the truly subtidal marine Williamia (Siphonarioidea) have a wide opening [54], while intertial
Siphonaria have a small one (i.e. a contractile or noncontractile pneumostome). The opening is wide also in
subtidal shell-bearing Sacoglossa [3], whereas the pallial
cavity is usually reduced in shell-less Sacoglossa. Pyramidelloidea also have a wide opening. In general within
“Pulmonata” the “lung” undergoes a series of reductions;
e.g., the tiny Smeagol climoi only has a small pallial cavity without respiratory function [51], as do larger Onchidiidae. A small, reduced pallial cavity can still be found
in the quite basal acochlidian Hedylopsis ballantinei [55]
(as Hedylopsis sp.), while all remaining Acochlidia studied so far entirely lack such a cavity [22,30]. All hedylopsacean nervous systems described in detail contain
an osphradial ganglion [25,29,31,32], which can be interpreted as a remainder of an osphradium that was
reduced in the course of the reduction of the pallial cavity. A group of derived, benthic and limnic acochlidians
have developed a sensory, osphradium-like organ [56]
like the one reported for the basal ellobiid Ovatella [57].
2) Presence of a procerebrum

The procerebrum of “Pulmonata” is defined as an accessory lobe linked to the cerebral ganglion via two connectives, associated to the optic, tentacular and
peritentacular nerves [58]. Its homology with the
opisthobranch rhinophoral ganglion has long been discussed [2,47,59]. The configuration of the cerebral
nerves and associated ganglia is complex in Acochlidia.
The labiotentacular nerve arises ventrally from the cerebral ganglion; the rhinophoral ganglion usually gives rise
to the rhinophoral nerve (with Hancock’s nerve branching off), and the optic ganglion to the optic nerve
([31,32,56] and own unpublished data). However, in
Pseudunela cornuta the optic nerve splits off from the
rhinophoral nerve, and no nerves arise from the optic
ganglion [29]. A similar arrangement occurs in Hedylopsis spiculifera and H. ballantinei, except that the optic
ganglion is lacking [25,60]. In the microhedylaceans
Pontohedyle and Microhedyle the rhinophoral nerve
emerges directly from the cerebral ganglion, and eyes
nestle directly on it ([27], own unpublished data); thus
the additional ganglion might refer to either the

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

rhinophoral or the optic ganglion. Tillier et al. [46] discussed a potential homology between the optic ganglion
in “Opisthobranchia” and the pulmonate procerebrum.
In Acochlidia double cerebral connectives could be
identified for the rhinophoral ganglion in Tantulum elegans [60], the optic (but not the rhinophoral) in Strubellia paradoxa [56], and for the unclear optic/rhinophoral
ganglion in Pontohedyle milaschewitchii and Microhedyle glandulifera ([27] as rhinophoral ganglion, own
unpublished data). The variable development of cerebral
features in Acochlidia makes homologisation difficult at
this time. Rhinophoral and optic ganglia are closely
related to and might develop from the cerebral ganglion,
and they share common features with the pulmonate
procerebrum. Based on our phylogenetic hypothesis, the
plesiomorphic state for Panpulmonata might be separate
rhinophoral and optic ganglia that have been fused various times independently. However, the presence of socalled “globineurons” - neurons with densely packed,
small, round nuclei - in Eupulmonata [58,61] appears to
be a synapomorphy for this clade.
Additionally, the presence of a cerebral gland - a
small, tube-like structure involved in the formation of
the procerebrum - is considered as characteristic for the
pulmonate nervous system [58,61]. This ectodermal
structure may form a tube-like process from the procerebrum towards the lateral head region, or it may be
reduced to a small epithelial cavity attached or enclosed
within the procerebrum [58,61]. No structure similar to
the cerebral gland has been described for Acochlidia,
but due to the small size of the cerebral gland and the
previously unknown pulmonate affinities of Acochlidia it
might have been overlooked in morphological studies;
hence, ultrastructural reinvestigations of acochlidian
nervous systems are needed in the future. The cerebral
gland is lacking also in other pulmonate taxa, e.g.
Amphiboloidea [58], which either raises doubts about
their pulmonate affinities [46] or suggests that the structure might have been lost secondarily. Moreover, Tardy
[62,63] described a similar invagination involved in the
formation of the rhinophoral ganglion in different nudibranchs. In light of the present phylogenetic hypothesis,
with Nudipleura as the most basal euthyneuran offshoot,
this might indicate that the formation of the rhinophoral
ganglion (and the homologous procerebrum) involving
an ectodermal invagination is plesiomorphic within
Euthyneura, and that there are remnants (or paedomorphotic reinstatements) of this structure in adults of
(some) pulmonate taxa.
3) Presence of medio-dorsal (= cerebral) bodies

(Medio-)dorsal bodies (also termed cerebral bodies) are
endocrine organs situated dorsally of the cerebral ganglia in “Pulmonata” [13], but considerable variation exists
within the main pulmonate groups as regards the

Page 10 of 20

structure and innervation of the dorsal bodies
[58,61,64]. Similar structures closely attached to the cerebral ganglia have been found in several Acochlidia:
First described as “dorsal bodies” [25], they were later
renamed “lateral bodies” by Neusser et al. [60], due to
their more lateral position to the central nervous system
and the unclear homology to pulmonate dorsal bodies.
Since dorsal bodies in Pulmonata play a role in female
reproduction [64], they might be fully developed in
female adults only, thus might have been overlooked in
some studies of gonochoristic acochlidian species or of
hermaphrodites with “sex change”. Further ultrastructural data on acochlidian “lateral bodies” and their
potentially neurosecretory function are needed to evaluate homology with pulmonate structures. Moreover, pulmonate dorsal bodies might be homologous to the
juxtaganglionar organs of some opisthobranchs [60], and
thus might represent a plesiomorphic character of
Panpulmonata and a potential synapomorphy of
Euthyneura.
In addition, the presence of an unpaired dorsal jaw,
which probably originated through the fusion of the
paired lateral jaws [65], has been discussed as a potential
synapomorphy of “Pulmonata” [18,48]. The presence of
a pair of dorso-lateral jaws is a plesiomorphic character
state for Euthyneura [13,65], but that condition has
been reduced various times independently in “Opisthobranchia” and “Pulmonata” [18]. A dorsal, unpaired jaw
might have evolved at the basis of Panpulmonata, and
then have been secondarily reduced various times independently (e.g. in Onchidiidae, Amphibola) [18]. In Acochlidia, jaw-like structures are reported only for the
derived microhedylacean family Ganitidae (as paired
jaws), and as unclear “cuticular elements” for Microhedyle glandulifera (see [22] for citations). According to
the derived position of Ganitidae in morphological [22]
and molecular analyses (present study), these structures
may represent either secondary developments (potentially related to the specialised dagger-shaped radula) or
paedomorphic structures; however, studies of Acochlidia
larvae are still overdue.
The only potential synapomorphy of “Opisthobranchia” is the presence of a rhinophoral nerve with a
thickened basis (i.e. rhinophoral ganglion) and of associated sensory structures such as Hancock’s organ [66].
Based on our phylogenetic hypothesis the presence of a
rhinophoral nerve has to be considered as a plesiomorphic character within Euthyneura, and thus for Panpulmonata. The rhinophoral ganglion, and potentially
the optic ganglion, is considered as homologous with
the pulmonate procerebrum. Rhinophoral nerve and
Hancock’s organ have been reduced various times independently, probably correlated with the reduction of the
rhinophores and/or habitat changes.

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

In summary, we are currently unable to find clear
morphological synapomorphies which support a placement of Acochlidia within pulmonate taxa, as sister to
Eupulmonata. In the light of our phylogenetic hypothesis, conventional pulmonate synapomorphies appear to
be plesiomorphies or convergences within pulmonate
taxa. On the other hand, no morphological characters
currently contradict that molecular phylogenetic hypothesis, nor do they favour any alternative relationships,
since morphological characters common to the mesopsammic heterobranchs are shown to be convergent
developments, and the potential synapomorphy of Acochlidia with “Opisthobranchia” has to be considered as
plesiomorphic.
The aberrant morphology of Acochlidia in relation to
its proposed sister groups remains problematic. In his
ontological studies on the nudibranch Aeolidiella alderi,
Tardy [62] reported an abnormal development in some
larvae that leads to a visceral hump separated from the
head-foot complex in juvenile stages, thereby closely
resembling external morphology in Acochlidia (see fig.
20 in [62]). According to Tardy [62] these abnormal
developmental forms are also known from pulmonate
Stylommatophora. Progenesis is discussed as a principle
in the evolution of meiofaunal taxa [67], and acochlidian
morphology might have evolved by retention of the
juvenile characters of an aberrant developmental form
of an early pulmonate.
Monophyly and phylogeny of Acochlidia

The monophyly of Acochlidia is well supported morphologically [20,22,24] and also backed by previous
molecular studies [17,34]. Our study, which includes all
valid acochlidian families except for the monotypic Tantulidae, also recovers Acochlidia as monophyletic but
with low posterior probability and bootstrap support.
The low bootstrap values for Acochlidia and some internal acochlidian taxa (e.g. Hedylopsacea) might be caused
by their relatively early (Mesozoic) divergence times (see
Figure 2): recent acochlidian taxa probably constitute
but a remnant of much larger diversity in evolutionary
history.
The acochlidian internal topology confirms the morphological analysis of Schrödl and Neusser [22], showing
the same family relationships, but with better resolution
within Microhedylacea: the genus Pontohedyle splits off
at the basis of the Microhedylidae s.l. (including Ganitidae) with the closely related genera Microhedyle and
Paraganitus. The hedylopsacean family Acochlidiidae
includes the genera Strubellia and Acochlidium as proposed by Arnaud et al. [68] and Schrödl and Neusser
[22]. Puzzling is the position of the enigmatic Aitengidae
within Acochlidia, either as sister to Pseudunelidae and
limnic Acochlidiidae (see Figure 1) or basal within

Page 11 of 20

Hedylopsacea (see Table 1). Aitengidae shows some of
the general, but not unique, features of Acochlidia, such
as the lack of a shell, reduction of mantle cavity, the
praepharyngeal (circumpharyngeal) nerve ring, and the
radula with a descending and ascending limb. This
taxon also shares some features with limnic Acochlidiidae: the radula with a strong rhachidian tooth specialised in egg feeding, as also reported for Strubellia sp.
[56]; the large, internal lateral eyes closely associated
with the cerebral ganglia; and the presence of a foot
groove and a branched digestive gland like reported for
the genera Acochlidium and Palliohedyle [69,70]. On the
other hand, Aitengidae lacks several acochlidian characteristics: the division of the body into head-foot complex
and visceral hump; presence of 1-2 head appendages
(with characteristic innervation of the rhinophores); and
the ability to retract the head-foot complex into the
visceral hump. However, in the absence of a separated
visceral hump A. ater is able to retract its head under
the notum. The presence of spicules is confirmed for
Aitengidae sp., and the “parasites” described for A. ater
might represent spicules instead (T. Neusser, pers.
comm.). Re-examination of the doubtful “ascus” in A.
ater is necessary; examination of Aitengidae sp. showed
no true (i.e. sacoglossan-like) ascus containing old teeth,
just a radula slightly bent at the end (own unpublished
data). The presence of an ascus is currently accepted as
a unique synapomorphy of Sacoglossa [4], and any sacoglossan relationship is clearly rejected by SplitsTree analysis (see Additional file 1) and phylogenetic analyses in
the present study.
At the present stage of knowledge, molecular data
suggests an inclusion of Aitengidae within Acochlidia, as
sister to Pseudunelidae and Acochlidiidae. Detailed
description by semithin serial sectioning and 3D reconstruction of the Aitengidae sp. used in the present
study, together with focused redescription of A. ater, are
needed as a basis to evaluating phylogenetic relationships of Acochlidia and Aitengidae in the future. This
should be supported by a comprehensive molecular phylogeny of Acochlidia, including the two known species
of Aitengidae.
Evolutionary traits in Euthyneura
Invasion of the interstitial habitat

Our study supports earlier assumptions that invasion of
the interstitial habitat has occurred various times independently within the Euthyneura [22,68,71], probably by
benthic, sand-dwelling or temporarily (i.e. juvenile)
mesopsammic ancestors of the nudibranch genera
Embletonia and Pseudovermis, the cephalaspidean Philinoglossa and Philine exigua, the sacoglossan Platyhedyle,
some members of the Rhodopemorpha incertae sedis
(Helminthope and some Rhodope), and the Acochlidia

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

[22,68]. The pulmonate genus Smeagol is found in
gravel or pebble beaches on the undersides of stones;
due to the relatively large body size in some species (e.g.
up to 14 mm in S. manneringi[72]), it cannot be generally assigned to the meiofauna.
Major convergent adaptations to this spatially limited
and unstable habitat are the worm-shaped body, loss of
shell, and reduction of head appendages and pigmentation [21]. The development of subepidermal, calcareous
spicules in Acochlidia, Rhodopemorpha and potentially
Platyhedyle can also be considered as an adaptation to
the interstitial habitat, probably serving to stabilise certain body parts during movements through the interstices [27], even though the occurrence of spicules is
not limited to the mesopsammon. As far as is known,
Acochlidia represent the most successful group of Heterobranchia in the mesopsammon concerning species
diversity and abundance [27]. Key features for their success probably are an initial heterochronic miniaturisation and two different evolutionary trends towards a
rapid, imprecise sperm transfer [23]. Additionally, adaptation to (temporarily) brackish waters with the development of a complex excretory system in Hedylopsacea
[22,29] allows colonisation of shallow sands with freshwater impact (by groundwater or rain), overcoming limitations to deeper, truly marine sands.
Colonisation of freshwater and terrestrial habitats

It is undisputed and again confirmed by the present
study that the “Pulmonata” have a marine origin [see e.
g. [17,18]]. The hygrophilian radiation in the freshwater
system is the most successful within “Pulmonata” [17],
in terms of diversity and abundance, but not a unique
event in pulmonate evolutionary history. Dinapoli and
Klussmann-Kolb [14] already showed that the invasion
of freshwater within pulmonate taxa took place at least
twice, in Hygrophila and in the enigmatic Glacidorbis.
According to our study, the colonisation of freshwater
in Panpulmonata has occurred at least one more time in
Acochlidia. Schrödl and Neusser [22] showed that
within Acochlidia the freshwater colonisation already
occurred twice independently, with a radiation of the
Indo-Pacific Acochlidiidae and the single Caribbean
Tantulum elegans (Tantulidae, not included in the present study). Thus, the development of a complex kidney
within Hedylopsacea [29] as an adaptation to (temporarily) brackish water can be considered as a precursor to
the invasion of limnic systems in Acochlidia. Acochlidian invasion of freshwater originated probably from a
mesopsammic ancestor with temporary freshwater tolerance [32], or via a semi-terrestrial habitat as reported
for Aitengidae [35]. Our study thus highlights the high
diversity and flexibility of pulmonate habitats ranging
from marine to temporarily brackish, permanently
brackish, limnic and terrestrial environments. The still

Page 12 of 20

enigmatic Aiteng ater (Aitengidae) lives “amphibiously”
and tolerates marine to brackish waters, but there are
no observations of these animals truly leaving the water
[35]. The species’ mangrove habitat is comparable to
that of representatives of, e.g., the pulmonate Onchidiidae, and is classified as marginal zones from which the
transition to terrestrial habitat probably originated [17].
Similar to the limnic habitat, terrestrial environments
have been colonised various times independently [53].
The present study indicates a least four independent
pathways to the terrestrial habitat: in Amphiboloidea,
Stylommatophora, Systellommatophora and Ellobioidea.
Molecular clock and estimation of divergence times in
Acochlidia

The use of molecular clocks to estimate divergence
times is controversially debated, due to conflicting
results from different studies and disparities with
paleontological or archaeological data [73-76]. Criticism
focuses on the major problems such as faulty calibration, impact of rate heterogeneity among lineages, and
“time dependency of molecular rates” [73,75-77]. Some
of the problems could be solved by the relaxed clock
approach [78], and despite all pitfalls and criticism,
molecular clock approaches have helped considerably to
reveal the evolutionary history of life, especially when it
comes to divergence times of groups with poor or no
fossil record [75,76,79]. Thus, we consider it a valuable
methodology to roughly estimate divergence times for
tiny, sluggish gastropods for which there is no fossil
record. Molecular clock dating stands and falls with the
accuracy with which genetic distances can be estimated
[80]; thus we consider the removal of ambiguous (i.e.
potentially non-homologous) sites from the alignment as
problematic. It seems common use to run the molecular
clock analyses with reduced datasets (e.g. [14,81-83]),
but the crucial question, how this will affect the molecular dating, has remained unaddressed. The exclusion of
highly saturated positions - e.g., in some cases the 3rd
codon position of the COI sequence (see e.g. [84]) - can
be justified by the biasing effect of saturation on the
molecular clock. It can be argued that ambiguous parts
of the alignment are often highly variable and might suffer from saturation, but on the other hand the exclusion
of a series of non-saturated sites might result in underestimated divergence times. However, our Beast analysis
of the raw, uncut dataset provided estimations of divergence times very similar to those from the Gblocks
dataset (not shown). Nevertheless, we recommend to
critically compare data from masked and raw alignments
for molecular clock analyses, and to stay mindful of the
potentially underestimating effect on divergence times.
The only molecular clock data on Heterobranchia [14]
available prior to the present study suffers from

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

unreliable calibration, which is considered as the most
sensible and critical part of divergence time estimations
[76]. There is no objective way to assign fossils to a certain point of a stem line in a recent phylogeny, thus the
age of the fossil has to be taken as the minimum age of
the split between the extant taxon it is assigned to and
its sister group [80]. In [14] the fossil ages were assigned
to the diversification of Heterobranchia, Acteonoidea
and Omalogyridae, respectively, rather than to the splits
from the corresponding sister groups, which led, e.g., to
the surprising Pre- to early Cambrian split between
Vetigastropoda and Apogastropoda. Our molecular
clock was calibrated to the split between Caenogastropoda and Heterobranchia; thus molecular dating of this
node is biased (i.e. depends directly on calibration features). However, fossil data shows two clearly different
lineages by the mid-Devonian, thus indicating a pre- or
early Devonian split of Apogastropoda [85,86]. According to our study euthyneuran gastropods already
emerged in the Palaeozoic Permian, diverting from the
“Lower Heterobranchia”, but all major radiations of
Euthyneura occurred in the early Mesozoic. According
to paleontological data the oldest opisthobranchs
appeared in the Triassic (about 220 Mya), the earliest
pulmonates in the Jurassic (about 190 Mya) [85,86].
Based on their phylogenetic hypothesis from morphological data and the fossil record of cephalaspidean outgroups, Schrödl and Neusser [22] suspected a Jurassic
time frame for the origin of Acochlidia. Their inferred sister group relationships are different from the present
study, but the early divergence time is supported by our
molecular clock approach, which places the origin of Acochlidia in the late Triassic to early Jurassic and their major
diversification in the Jurassic. In the present study the
Eupulmonata as sister group to Acochlidia show similar
origin and diversification times, and so do the Hygrophila.
Tillier et al. [46] inferred divergence times from branch
lengths in a molecular distance tree (based on partial 28S
sequences), indicating a similar Jurassic time frame for
Eupulmonata and slightly younger for Hygrophila. This
corresponds with fossil data, which reports a first occurrence in the late Jurassic (approx. 150 Mya) [46]. Based on
fossils, diversification times of eupulmonate groups such
as Stylommatophora can be dated to the late Cretaceous,
when most extant families appear [87].
According to our data most acochlidian families
appeared in the Jurassic or Cretaceous, only Ganitidae,
Pseudunelidae and Acochlidiidae have a Palaeogene origin. These old splits on the family and even genus levels
(see Hedylopsis, Figure 2, diverging in the Cretaceous)
might indicate either that the extant diversity of Acochlidia is only a small remnant of high diversity in former times, or that known acochlidian diversity is just
the tip of the iceberg still waiting to be discovered.

Page 13 of 20

Based on fossil data the major diversification of
“opisthobranch” taxa in a traditional sense took place
comparatively recently, at the beginning of the Cenozoic
(around 60 Mya), with the first records of Sacoglossa,
Anaspidea and Thecosomata [86]. However, due to
more or less reduced shells the fossilization probability
is low. Our study suggests that most extant “opisthobranch” taxa, e.g. Sacoglossa, Cephalaspidea s.s., Pteropoda, Umbraculoidea and Anaspidea, have a Mesozoic
origin. Ambiguous is the basal euthyneuran position of
the Nudipleura and the resulting estimates of an old age
(late Palaeozoic) and diversification (middle Mesozoic).
This contradicts previous molecular clock analyses on
Nudipleura, which indicated a Triassic origin and Jurassic diversification [82]. These discrepancies clearly result
from major differences in tree topology (basal vs.
derived position). Moreover, while our study includes
only three nudipleuran representatives (poor ingroup
taxon sampling), Göbbeler’s and Klussmann-Kolb’s [82]
analysis lacks comprehensive heterobranch outgroup
sampling. Future studies are needed to resolve the origin
of Nudipleura within the Heterobranchia.

Conclusions
Our multi-locus molecular study including six out of
seven acochlidian families and the recently established
Aitengidae confirms a pulmonate relationship of Acochlidia, which was traditionally placed within Opisthobranchia. The enigmatic Aitengidae cluster within
Acochlidia. Previously assumed morphological synapomorphies of Pulmonata (pallial cavity with pneumostome, procerebrum with cerebral gland, and presence of
medio-dorsal bodies) appear as either homoplastic or
plesiomorphic in light of the present phylogenetic
hypothesis, as does the potential opisthobranch synapomorphy (presence of rhinophoral nerve). At present,
morphological characters neither justify a placement of
Acochlidia within Pulmonata, nor do they favour any
opisthobranch relationships that would contradict the
molecular hypothesis. The aberrant acochlidian morphology might have resulted from ancestral progenesis
and paedomorphic retention of the morphology of an
abnormally developed juvenile.
The present study once more underlines the respective non-monophyly of Euthyneura, Opisthobranchia
and Pulmonata as defined traditionally. We demonstrate
the necessity for inclusion of small, enigmatic groups to
solve deep-level phylogenetic relationships, and highlight
that the “pulmonate” and “opisthobranch” phylogenies
cannot be solved independently from each other. Clarification of remaining enigmas such as Rhodopemorpha,
and of well supported taxa with unclear relationships
such as Pyramidelloidea or Sacoglossa, is needed for
future advances. The reclassification suggested herein

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

defines 1) Euthyneura as including Pyramidelloidea and
Glacidorboidea; 2) Euopisthobranchia as including
Umbraculoidea, Cephalaspidea s.s., Runcinacea, Anaspidea and Pteropoda, but excluding Acteonoidea and
Nudipleura, as well as Sacoglossa and Acochlidia; and 3)
Panpulmonata as composed of Siphonarioidea, Sacoglossa, Hygrophila, Amphiboloidea, Pyramidelloidea,
Glacidorboidea, Eupulmonata and Acochlidia. The present results based on standard molecular markers
require confirmation from other character sets (e.g. rare
genomic changes, mitochondrial gene arrangements,
additional molecular markers) and careful (re-)examination of morphological characters and homology assumptions in the light of the new phylogenetic hypothesis.
Our molecular clock analysis estimates a Mesozoic origin for all major panpulmonate taxa. The poorly supported topology within Panpulmonata might be
promoted by the old age of this group, which potentially
stands for a series of radiation and extinction events in
history, resulting in poor taxon representation in present
times.
The present study shows that the mesopsammon was
colonised various times independently within Euthyneura, resulting in a series of convergent adaptations to
the interstitial habitat. The inclusion of Acochlidia
within pulmonate taxa extends the structural and biological diversity of the pulmonate clade, which exhibits
remarkable flexibility in habitat choice, with various
transitions from marine to limnic and terrestrial
habitats.

Methods
Taxon sampling

A total of 78 gastropod taxa were investigated in the
present study. As new material, nine acochlidian taxa
and five additional enigmatic and hard-to-obtain euthyneuran taxa with potential acochlidian relationships
were included (see Table 2). Specimens were collected
by hand or extracted from sand samples following the
method described by Schrödl [88], usually anaesthetised
with MgCl2, and fixed in 96% ethanol. Reference specimens and DNA vouchers of sequences generated in this
study are deposited at the Bavarian State Collection for
Zoology (ZSM); sampling localities, reference material
and DNA Bank accession numbers (http://www.dnabank-network.org) of our own data are listed in Table 2.
Other sequences were retrieved from GenBank (for
accession numbers see Table 3). Outgroups were chosen
to include all major euthyneuran and several further
heterobranch taxa. Special focus was given to mesopsammic representatives and groups previously discussed
as potentially related to Acochlidia. Of these potential
relatives only Rhodopemorpha are missing in our study,

Page 14 of 20

but a Rhodopemorpha-Acochlidia relationship can be
clearly rejected based on molecular markers [49].
DNA extraction, PCR and sequencing

Genomic DNA was extracted from tissue samples of the
foot or from entire specimens using the DNeasy Blood
and Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden Germany). Four markers
were amplified: nuclear 18S rRNA (approx. 1800 bp),
28S rRNA (approx. 1020 bp), mitochondrial 16S rRNA
(approx. 300-400 bp), and cytochrome c oxidase subunit
I (COI - approx. 650 bp). For PCR protocols and primers used, see additional file 3. Successfully amplified
PCR products were purified using ExoSapIT (USB, Affymetrix, Inc.). Cycle sequencing and the sequencing reaction were performed by the sequencing service of the
Department of Biology Genomic Service Unit (GSU) of
the Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, using Big
Dye 3.1 kit and an ABI 3730 capillary sequencer. All
fragments were sequenced in both directions using the
PCR primers. All sequences have been deposited at
GenBank (see Table 3 for accession numbers). The
Gblock alignment and the resulting tree were deposited
in TreeBASE (http://www.treebase.org, accession number 10801).
Sequence editing and alignment

All sequences generated in this study were checked for
contaminations with BLAST searches [89] implemented
in the GenBank database on the NCBI webpage (http://
blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). Reconciliation of forward and reverse reads was carried out in BioEdit 7.0.5.
[90]. MAFFT v6 [91] was used to generate sequence
alignments for each gene region, using the default settings (automatically chosen models for 18S, 28S, COI:
FFT-NS-i; for 16S: L-INS-i). The alignment of the protein coding COI gene was corrected manually according
to the amino acids. The individual MAFFT alignments
were parsed 1) using Gblocks [92,93] with the default
settings for less stringent selection, 2) with ALISCORE
v1.0 [94] using the default parameters, or c) left
unmasked.
Phylogenetic analysis

For an a priori analysis of variation in the phylogenetic
signal a split-decomposition analysis was performed
using SplitsTree v4.6 [95].
The best-fit model of nucleotide substitution for each
gene was selected using Modeltest 3.7 [96] via the
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). The incongruence
length difference (ILD) test [97] was carried out in Paup
4.0b10 [36]. This test was conducted with heuristic
searches and 100 replicates to evaluate incongruence
between single markers.

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

Page 15 of 20

Table 2 Information on the material generated for the present study
Taxon

Family

Locality

Museums Nr.

DNA Bank voucher
Nr.

Hedylopsis spiculifera

Hedylopsidae

Istria Croatia/Corse France, Mediterranean
Sea

ZSM Mol 20080951/ZSM Mol
20080955

AB35081816
AB35081817

Hedylopsis ballantinei
Pseudunela sp.

Hedylopsidae
Pseudunelidae

Sinai, Egypt, Red Sea
Mounparap Island, Vanuatu, Pacific

ZSM Mol 20090244
ZSM Mol 20080393

AB34858170
AB35081809
AB34858174

Acochlidia

Strubellia paradoxa

Acochlidiidae

Ambon, Indonesia, Indo-Pacific

Berlin Moll 193944

Acochlidium fijiense

Acochlidiidae

Vitilevu, Fiji, Pacific

ZSM Mol 20080063

AB34404244

Asperspina sp.

Asperspinidae

Kamtschatka, Russia, North Pacific

ZSM Mol 20090171

AB35081833

Microhedyle glandulifera

Microhedylidae

Istria, Croatia, Mediterranean Sea

ZSM Mol 20081019

AB35081799

Pontohedyle
milaschewitchii

Microhedylidae

Istria. Croatia, Mediterranean Sea

ZSM Mol 20080054/ZSM Mol
20080925

AB34404241

Paraganitus ellynnae

Ganitidae

Guadalcanal, Solomons, Pacific

ZSM Mol 20080170

AB34404203

Gascoignella nukuli

Platyhedylidae

Pak Phanang Bay, Thailand, Gulf of
Thailand

ZSM Mol 20090182

AB344011928

Volvatella viridis
Aitengidae sp.

Volvatellidae
Aitengidae

Bonotsu, Kagoshima, Japan, Pacific
Hisamatsu, Miyako Island, Okinawa, Japan,
Pacific

-

-

Cephalaspidea
Philine exigua

Philinidae

Guadalcanal, Solomons, Pacific

Sacoglossa

ZSM Mol 20080752

Philinoglossa praelongata Philinoglossidae Istria, Croatia, Mediterranean Sea

AB34401927

ZSM Mol 20080917

AB34500041

The table lists the species names, collecting localities, reference numbers of museum vouchers (ZSM = Bavarian State Collection for Zoology; Berlin = Museum of
Natural History, Berlin) and DNA vouchers deposited in the DNA Bank of the ZSM.

Maximum likelihood analyses were performed using
RAxML 7.0.3 [98] adapting the program parameters to
the alignment as described in the manual (“hard & slow
way” - with 10 parsimony starting trees and 6 different
rate categories). Additionally 200 multiple inferences
were executed on the original alignment and 1000 bootstrap replicates were generated. Analyses were run
under the GTR Gamma model as recommended in the
manual [98] and the caenogastropod taxa Littorina littorea and Aperostoma palmeri were defined as outgroups. The alignment was analysed in different
partition sets: one partition, two partitions (18S + 28S +
16S combined; COI separate), three partitions (18S +
28S + 16S combined; COI with codons partitioned to
1st + 2nd separate from 3rd), four partitions (separated
by gene regions), and five partitions (18S, 28S, 16S, COI
1st + 2nd, COI 3rd). To test whether partitioning significantly improves the likelihood values of the dataset, we
compared the likelihood values of all partitions via the
Akaike Information Criterion.
Bayesian phylograms were generated from the Gblocks
and ALISCORE alignments with MrBayes 3.1.2 [99].
The general time-reversible model was used for both
datasets, with invariant site frequency and gamma-shape
parameter estimated from the data (GTR + I + G). The
‘shape’, ‘proportion of invariant sites’, ‘state frequency’
and ‘substitution rate’ parameters were estimated for
each gene separately. Each codon position in the amino-

acid coding COI was also allowed to have different parameters; hence the alignments had six partitions of parameters. Two parallel runs were made for 5 × 10 6
generations (with a sample frequency of 1000), using a
default value of four Markov chains. Quality and ESS
values (effective sampling size) of each run were
checked in Tracer 1.5.3. The first 2000 trees for each
run were discarded to ensure that the four chains
reached stationarity. The consensus tree and posterior
probabilities were computed from the remaining 6000
trees (3000 trees × 2 runs).
To evaluate support for our tree topology an alternative
topology (grouping Acochlidia with Opisthobranchia)
was tested in comparison to the “best” tree topology by
using the Approximately Unbiased Test [100]. The hypothetic topology was computed with RAxML [98] using
the -g option for the constraint ML tree. The p-values of
the sitewise log likelihoods combined with the “best”
topology were estimated using Treefinder [101].
Molecular clock

Approximate divergence times were calculated using the
relaxed molecular clock approach [78] implemented in
the software BEAST 1.5.3 [102]. For molecular clock
analysis the concatenated Gblock-dataset was analysed
in five partitions as for the phylogenetic analyses.
Calibration points were chosen for groups with
stable and well supported nodes in the phylogenetic

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

Page 16 of 20

Table 3 GenBank accession numbers of the sequences used in the present study
Taxon

Family

Species

18S

28S

16S

COI

Caenogastropoda

Cyclophoridae

Aperostoma palmeri

DQ093435

DQ279983

DQ093479

DQ093523

Littorinidae

Littorina littorea

X91970

AJ488672

DQ093481

AY345020

“Lower” Heterobranchia

Orbitestellidae

Orbitestella sp.

EF489352

EF489377

EF489333

EF489397

Valvatidae

Valvata piscinalis

FJ917223/FJ917222

FJ917224

FJ917248

FJ917267

Cimidae

Cima sp.

FJ917206.1

FJ917228.1

FJ917260.1

FJ917279.1

Rissoellidae

Rissoella rissoaformis

FJ917214.1

FJ917226.1

FJ917252.1

FJ917271.1

Pyramidellidae

Turbonilla sp.

EF489351

EF489376

EF489332

EF489396

Pyramidellidae
Pyramidellidae

Boonea seminuda
Eulimella ventricosa

AY145367
FJ917213.1

AY145395
FJ917235.1

AF355163
FJ917255.1

FJ917274.1

Pyramidellidae

Odostomia sp.

AY427526.1

AY427491.1

FJ917256.1

FJ917275.1

Glacidorbidae

Glacidorbis rusticus

FJ917211.1

FJ917227.1

FJ917264.1

FJ917284.1

Acteonidae

Pupa solidula

AY427516

AY427481

EF489319

DQ238006
GQ845174.1

Acteonoidea

Aplustridae

Umbraculoidea

AY427515

AY427480

EF489320

Rictaxis punctocaelatus

EF489346

EF489370

EF489318

EF489393

Bathydorididae

Bathydoris clavigera

AY165754

AY427444

AF249222

AF249808

Pleurobranchidae
Pleurobranchidae

Nudipleura

Hydatina physis

Acteonidae

Tomthompsonia antarctica
Pleurobranchus peroni

AY427492
AY427494

AY427452
AY427455

EF489330
EF489331

DQ237992
DQ237993
DQ256200

Umbraculidae

Umbraculum umbraculum

AY165753

AY427457

EF489322

Tylodinidae

Tylodina perversa

AY427496

AY427458

-

AF249809

Anaspidea

Akeridae

Akera bullata

AY427502

AY427466

AF156127

AF156143

Aplysiidae

Aplysia californica

AY039804

AY026366

AF192295

AF077759

Pteropoda

Pneumodermatidae

Pneumoderma cf. atlantica

DQ237970

DQ237989

-

DQ238003

Pneumodermatidae

Spongiobranchaea australis

DQ237969

DQ237988

-

DQ238002

Cavoliniidae
Cavoliniidae

Hyalocylis striata
Cavolinia uncinata

DQ237966
DQ237964

DQ237985
DQ237983

-

DQ237997

Runcinacea

Runcinidae

Runcina africana

DQ923473

DQ927240

-

DQ974680

Cephalaspidea s.s.

Bullidae

Bulla striata

DQ923472.1

DQ986694.1

DQ986632.1

DQ986567.1

Phillinoglossidae

Philinoglossa praelongata

AY427510

AY427475

HQ168411*

-

Scaphandridae

Scaphander lignarius

EF489348

EF489372

EF489324

-

Haminoeidae

Haminoea hydatis

AY427504

AY427468

EF489323

DQ238004

Philinidae

Philine exigua

HQ168425*

HQ168438*

HQ168412*

HQ168450*

Diaphanidae
Diaphanidae
Cylichnidae

Diaphana sp.
Toledonia globosa

EF489350

EF489373
EF489375

EF489325
EF489327

EF489394
EF489395

Cylichna gelida

EF489349

EF489374

EF489326

-

Volvatellidae

Volvatella viridis

HQ168426*

HQ168439*

HQ168413*

HQ168451*

Cylindrobullidae

Cylindrobulla beauii

EF489347

EF489371

EF489321

-

Platyhedylidae

Gascoignella nukuli

HQ168427*

HQ168440*

HQ168414*

HQ168452*

Caliphyllidae

Cyerce nigricans

AY427500

AY427463

EU140843

DQ237995

Plakobranchidae

Plakobranchus ocellatus

AY427497

AY427459

DQ480204

DQ237996

Elysiidae
Elysiidae

Thuridilla bayeri
Elysia viridis

AF249220
AY427499

AY427461
AY427462

DQ480206
AY223398

DQ471271
DQ237994

Sacoglossa (?)

Aitengidae

Aitengidae sp.

HQ168428*

HQ168441*

HQ168415*

HQ168453*

Acochlidia

Hedylopsidae

Hedylopsis ballantinei

HQ168429*

HQ168442*

HQ168416*

HQ168454*

Hedylopsidae

Hedylopsis spiculifera

HQ168430*

HQ168443*

HQ168417*

HQ168455*

Pseudunelidae

Pseudunela sp.

HQ168431*

HQ168444*

HQ168418*

HQ168456*

Acochlidiidae

Strubellia paradoxa

HQ168432*

HQ168445*

HQ168419*

HQ168457*

Acochlidiidae

Acochlidium fijiense

HQ168433*

HQ168446*

HQ168420*

HQ168458*

Asperspinidae
Microhedylidae

Asperspina sp.
Pontohedyle milaschewitchii

HQ168434*
HQ168435*

HQ168447*
AY427484

HQ168421*
HQ168422*

HQ168459*

Sacoglossa

Ganitidae

Paraganitus ellynnae

HQ168436*

HQ168448*

HQ168423*

HQ168460*

Microhedylidae

Microhedyle glandulifera

HQ168437*

HQ168449*

HQ168424*

HQ168461*

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

Page 17 of 20

Table 3 GenBank accession numbers of the sequences used in the present study (Continued)
Siphonarioidea

U86321

DQ279993

AY377627

AF120638

Siphonaria concinna

EF489334

EF489353

EF489300

EF489378

Amphibolidae

Amphibola crenata

EF489337

EF489356

EF489304

-

Amphibolidae
Amphibolidae
Hygrophila

Siphonaria pectinata

Siphonaridae
Amphiboloidea

Siphonaridae

Phallomedusa solida
Salinator cf. fragilis

DQ093440
-

DQ279991
EF489355

DQ093484
EF489303

DQ093528
EF489381

Latiidae

Latia neritoides

EF489339

EF489359

EF489307

EF489384

Chilinidae

Chilina sp.

EF489338

EF489357

EF489305

EF489382
AY282581

Acroloxidae

AY282592

EF489364

EF489311

Lymnaea stagnalis

EF489345

EF489367

EF489314

EF489390

Physidae

Physella acuta

AY282600

EF489368

AY651241

AY282589

Planorbidae
Stylommatophora

Acroloxus lacustris

Lymnaeidae

Ancylus fluviatilis

AY282593

EF489365

EF489312

AY282582

Arionidae
Helicidae

Arion silvaticus
Arianta arbustorum

AY145365
AY546383

AY145392
AY014136

AY947380
AY546343

AY987918
AY546263
AY546276

Enidae

Ena montana

AY546396

-

AY546356

Cerionidae

Cerion incanum

-

AY014060.1

-

-

Subulinidae

Rumina decollata

-

13794085:464-1292

AY345050

AY345050

Onchidiidae

Onchidium verruculatum (§)

AY427522

AY427487

EF489316

EF489391

Onchidiidae

Onchidella floridiana

AY427521

AY427486

EF489317

EF489392

Veronicellidae

Laevicaulis alte

X94270.1

AY014151.1

Veronicellidae
Rathouisiidae

Semperula wallacei
Atopos australis

-

DQ897671.1
AY014152.1

DQ897675.1
-

DQ897673.1
-

Trimusculoidea

Trimusculidae

Trimusculus afra

EF489343

-

EF489309

EF489388

Otinoidea

Otinidae

Otina ovata

EF489344

EF489363

EF489310

EF489389

Smeagolidae

Smeagol phillipensis

FJ917210

FJ917229

FJ917263

FJ917283

Ellobioidea

Carychiidae

Carychium minimum

EF489341

EF489361

EF489308

EF489386

Ellobiidae

Ophicardelus ornatus

DQ093442

DQ279994

DQ093486

DQ093486

Ellobiidae

Myosotella myosotis

EF489340

EF489360

AY345053

EF489385

Systellommatophora

Sequences generated within this study are marked with *; (§) in GenBank as “O. verrucosum”, which is not a valid name, thus treated as O. verruculatum. (“ - ”
indicates missing sequences).

hypothesis and decently documented fossil record with
clear identification to recent taxa. Minimum constraints for three nodes were chosen based on the fossil record: 1) split between Caenogastropoda and
Heterobranchia based on the oldest known fossil of
the Heterobranchia (Palaeocarboninia janke) recorded
from the Middle Devonian (390 Ma) [85]; 2) the split
between Acteonoidea and its sister group based on
acteonoid fossils with a minimum age of 240 Ma
([103], A Nützel pers. comm.) and 3) the split of Ellobioidea and their sister group based on ellobiid fossils
with a minimum age of 140 Ma ([86], A Nützel pers.
comm.). We calibrated using a hard minimum bound
(i.e. the divergence data cannot be younger than the
oldest known fossil); the probability that the divergence event occurred above the minimum date
declines according to a gamma distribution, such that
95% of the posterior density falls within the range [x x + 10%] [see [104]]. Calibration nodes were not fixed
as monophyletic.

The analyses were run with the relaxed uncorrelated
lognormal clock model under the Yule process using the
GTR+G+I substitution model (chosen from Modeltest
3.7 [96] via the Akaike Information Criterion) for all
markers. The MCMC was run ten times independently,
generating 10 6 generations each, and sampled every
1000 steps. The single runs were combined with LogCombiner 1.5.3, with the first 10 5 samples each discharged as burn-ins. The runs were checked for quality
and sufficient ESS (effective sample size) in Tracer 1.5.3.
All trees were combined to produce a consensus tree
using TreeAnnotator 1.5.3, with the first 1000 trees of
each dataset discharged as burn-in.
To evaluate the potential effect on molecular dating of
removing ambiguous sites from the alignment, the
BEAST runs were repeated with the raw alignments (i.e.
mainly uncut; only longer ends of some sequences
removed due to the use of different primers) alignments,
generating 10 × 10 6 generations and following the
method described above.

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

Additional material

Page 18 of 20

5.
6.

Additional file 1: Neighbournet graph on the origin of Acochlidia.
Generated with Splits Tree v4.6 from the concatenated, four marker
dataset masked with Gblocks, visualising highly conflicting signal at the
basis of the Acochlidia. Representatives of meiofaunal taxa highlighted in
boldface, showing the absence of a common phylogenetic signal.
Additional file 2: Likelihood values of different partitions
Additional file 3: PCR protocols and primers used [105-107].

7.

8.
9.

10.
Acknowledgements
Prof. Dr. Gerhard Haszprunar (ZSM/LMU Munich) and three referees are
kindly acknowledged for valuable discussion and for helpful comments on
the manuscript. Timea P. Neusser and Bastian Brenzinger (both ZSM)
contributed with their knowledge of acochlidian anatomy. Dr. Matthias
Glaubrecht (Museum für Naturkunde Berlin), Dr. Alexander Martynov
(Zoological Museum, Moscow State University) and Dr. Kees Swennen
(Prince of Songkla University) kindly provided material for molecular analysis.
Katharina Händeler (University of Bonn) is thanked for sharing mitochondrial
data on Aiteng ater (Aitengidae), and Dr. Alexander Nützel (University of
Munich) for critical evaluation of potential fossil calibration points. Special
thanks go to Dr. Dirk Metzler (University of Munich) for introduction to and
support in molecular clock analyses. Martin Spies (ZSM) kindly helped
improving our English. This study was financed by a PhD scholarship from
the Volkswagen foundation to KJ. Additional support for molecular analyses
was provided by the DNA Bank Network (DFG grant INST 17818/1-1). Field
work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG SCHR 667/4
to MS) and the GeoBioCenterLMU.
Author details
1
Bavarian State Collection of Zoology, Münchhausenstr. 21, 81247 München,
Germany. 2Department of Marine Ecosystems Dynamics, Atmosphere and
Ocean Research Institute, University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa,
Chiba 277-8564, Japan. 3Conservation of Aquatic Biodiversity, Faculty of
Agriculture, Okayama University, Tsushima-naka 1-1-1, Kita-ku, Okayama 7008530, Japan.
Authors’ contributions
KMJ, MS, YK and HF sampled the material. KMJ, IS, TK and YK generated the
molecular data. KMJ and YK conducted the phylogenetic and network
analysis. KMJ performed the molecular clock approach. KMJ wrote the initial
version of the manuscript; all authors contributed to the discussion of the
results and the preparation of the final manuscript. MS planned and
supervised the study. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they do not have competing interests.
Received: 26 April 2010 Accepted: 25 October 2010
Published: 25 October 2010
References
1. Haszprunar G: The Heterobranchia - a new concept of the phylogeny of
the higher Gastropoda. Z f zool Systematik u Evolutionsforschung 1985,
23:15-37.
2. Haszprunar G: On the origin and evolution of major gastropod groups,
with special reference to the Streptoneura. J Molluscan Stud 1988,
54:367-441.
3. Mikkelsen PM: The evolutionary relationships of Cephalaspidea s.l.
(Gastropoda: Opisthobranchia): a phylogenetic analysis. Malacologia
1996, 37:375-442.
4. Jensen KR: Phylogenetic systematics and classification of the Sacoglossa
(Mollusca, Gastropoda, Opisthobranchia). Philos Trans R Soc Lond, Ser B:
Biol Sci 1996, 351:91-122.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.
20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Wägele H, Willan RC: Phylogeny of the Nudibranchia. Zool J Linn Soc 2000,
130:83-181.
Klussmann-Kolb A: Phylogeny of the Aplysiidae (Gastropoda,
Opisthobranchia) with new aspects of the evolution of seahares. Zool Scr
2004, 33:439-462.
Wollscheid-Lengeling E, Boore J, Brown W, Wägele H: The phylogeny of
Nudibranchia (Opisthobranchia, Gastropoda, Mollusca) reconstructed by
three molecular markers. Org Divers Evol 2001, 1:241-256.
Wade CM, Mordan PB, Clarke B: A phylogeny of the land snails
(Gastropoda: Pulmonata). Proc Biol Sci 2001, 268:413-422.
Klussmann-Kolb A, Dinapoli A: Systematic position of the pelagic
Thecosomata and Gymnosomata within Opisthobranchia (Mollusca,
Gastropoda) - revival of the Pteropoda. JZS 2006, 44:118-129.
Salvini-Plawen Lv, Steiner G: Synapomorphies and plesiomorphies in
higher classification of Mollusca. In Origin and evolutionary radiation of the
Mollusca. Edited by: Taylor J. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1996:29-51.
Thollesson M: Phylogenetic analysis of Euthyneura (Gastropoda) by
means of the 16S rRNA gene: use of a ‘fast’ gene for ‘higher-level’
phylogenies. Proc R Soc Lond Ser B Biol Sci 1999, 266:75-83.
Dayrat B, Tillier A, Lecointre G, Tillier S: New clades of euthyneuran
gastropods (Mollusca) from 28S rRNA sequences. Mol Phylogen Evol 2001,
19:225-235.
Dayrat B, Tillier S: Evolutionary relationships of euthyneuran gastropods
(Mollusca): a cladistic re-evaluation of morphological characters. Zool J
Linn Soc 2002, 135:403-470.
Dinapoli A, Klussmann-Kolb A: The long way to diversity - Phylogeny and
evolution of the Heterobranchia (Mollusca: Gastropoda). Mol Phylogen
Evol 2010, 55:60-76.
Grande C, Templado J, Cervera JL, Zardoya R: Molecular phylogeny of the
Euthyneura (Mollusca: Gastropoda). Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:303-313.
Grande C, Templado J, Zardoya R: Evolution of gastropod mitochondrial
genome arrangements. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:61.
Klussmann-Kolb A, Dinapoli A, Kuhn K, Streit B, Albrecht C: From sea to
land and beyond–new insights into the evolution of euthyneuran
Gastropoda (Mollusca). BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:57.
Dayrat B, Tillier S: Goals and limits of phylogenetics. The euthyneuran
gastropods. In Molecular systematics and phylogeography of Mollusks. Edited
by: Lydeard C, Lindberg D. Washington, London: Smithonian Books;
2003:161-184.
Odhner N: Die Acochlidiaceen, eine eigentümliche OpisthobranchiatenGruppe. Basteria 1938, 3:5-11.
Wawra E: Zur Anatomie einiger Acochlidia (Gastropoda, Opisthobranchia)
mit einer vorläufigen Revision des Systems und einem Anhang über
Platyhedylidae (Opisthobranchia, Ascoglossa). PhD thesis Universität Wien;
1987.
Swedmark B: The biology of interstitial Mollusca. Symp Zool Soc Lond
1968, 22:135-149.
Schrödl M, Neusser TP: Towards a phylogeny and evolution of Acochlidia
(Mollusca: Gastropoda: Opisthobranchia). Zool J Linn Soc 2010,
158:124-154.
Jörger KM, Heb M, Neusser TP, Schrödl M: Sex in the beach:
spermatophores, dermal insemination and 3D sperm ultrastructure of
the aphallic mesopsammic Pontohedyle milaschewitchii (Acochlidia,
Opisthobranchia, Gastropoda). Mar Biol 2009, 156:1159-1170.
Rankin JJ: A freshwater shell-less Mollusc from the Caribbean: structure,
biotics and contribution to a new understanding of the Acochlidioidea.
R Ont Mus Life Sci Contrib 1979, 116:1-123.
Sommerfeldt N, Schrödl M: Microanatomy of Hedylopsis ballantinei, a new
interstitial acochlidian gastropod from the Red Sea, and its significance
for phylogeny. J Molluscan Stud 2005, 71:153-165.
Gosliner TM: Gastropoda: Opisthobranchia. In Microscopic Anatomy of
Invertebrates, Mollusca I. Volume 5. Edited by: Harrison FW, Kohn AJ. WileyLiss, Inc.; 1994:253-355.
Jörger KM, Neusser TP, Haszprunar G, Schrödl M: Undersized and
underestimated: 3D-visualization of the Mediterranean interstitial
acochlidian gastropod Pontohedyle milaschewitchii (Kowalevsky, 1901).
Org Divers Evol 2008, 8:194-214.
Neusser TP, Heb M, Haszprunar G, Schrödl M: Computer-based threedimensional reconstruction of the anatomy of Microhedyle remanei

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.
39.
40.

41.

42.

43.
44.

45.

46.

47.

48.
49.

50.

51.
52.

(Marcus, 1953), an interstitial acochlidian gastropod from Bermuda. J
Morphol 2006, 267:231-247.
Neusser TP, Heb M, Schrödl M: Tiny but complex - interactive 3D
visualization of the interstitial acochlidian gastropod Pseudunela cornuta
(Challis, 1970). Front Zool 2009, 6:20.
Neusser TP, Martynov AV, Schrödl M: Heartless and primitive? 3D
reconstruction of the polar acochlidian gastropod Asperspina
murmanica. Acta Zool (Stockh) 2009, 90:228-245.
Neusser TP, Schrödl M: Tantulum elegans reloaded: a computer-based 3Dvisualization of the anatomy of a Caribbean freshwater acochlidian
gastropod. Invertebr Biol 2007, 126:18-39.
Neusser TP, Schrödl M: Between Vanuatu tides: 3D anatomical
reconstruction of a new brackish water acochlidian gastropod from
Espiritu Santo. Zoosystema 2009, 31:453-469.
Wägele H, Klussmann-Kolb A: Opisthobranchia (Mollusca, Gastropoda) more than just slimy slugs. Shell reduction and its implications on
defence and foraging. Front Zool 2005, 2:1-18.
Vonnemann V, Schrödl M, Klussmann-Kolb A, Wägele H: Reconstruction of
the phylogeny of the Opisthobranchia (Mollusca: Gastropoda) by means
of 18S and 28S rRNA gene sequences. J Molluscan Stud 2005, 71:113-125.
Swennen CK, Buatip S: Aiteng ater, new genus, new species, an
amphibous and insectivorous sea slug that is difficult to classify
(Mollusca: Gastropoda: Opisthobranchia: Sacoglossa(?): Aitengidae, new
family). Raffles Bull Zool 2009, 57:495-500.
Swofford DL: PAUP* Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony (*and other
methods). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA; 2002.
Wade CM, Mordan PB: Evolution within the gastropod molluscs; using
the ribosomal RNA gene-cluster as an indicator of phylogenetic
relationships. J Molluscan Stud 2000, 66:565-570.
Dinapoli A, Zinssmeister C, Klussmann-Kolb A: New insights into the
phylogeny of the Pyramidellidae (Gastropoda). J Molluscan Stud 2010.
Ponder WF, Avern GJ: The Glacidorbidae (Mollusca: Gastropoda:
Heterobranchia) of Australia. Rec Aust Mus 2000, 52:307-353.
Wägele H, Klussmann-Kolb A, Vonnemann V, Medina M: Heterobranchia I:
The Opisthobranchia. In Phylogeny and Evolution of the Mollusca. Edited by:
Ponder WF, Lindberg D. Berkley, University of California Press; 2008:385-408.
Grande C, Templado J, Cervera JL, Zardoya R: Phylogenetic relationships
among Opisthobranchia (Mollusca: Gastropoda) based on mitochondrial
cox 1, trnV, and rrnL genes. Mol Phylogen Evol 2004, 33:378-388.
Göbbeler K, Klussmann-Kolb A: Phylogeny of the Acteonoidea
(Gastropoda): Molecular systematics and first detailed morphological
study of Rictaxis puctocaelatus (Carpenter, 1864). J Molluscan Stud 2010.
Ghiselin MT: Reproductive function and the phylogeny of opisthobranch
gastropods. Malacologia 1966, 3:327-378.
Aktipis SW, Giribet G, Lindberg D, Ponder WF: Gastropoda - an overview
and analysis. In Phylogeny and Evolution of the Mollusca. Edited by: Ponder
WF, Lindberg D. Berkley, University of California Press; 2008:201-237.
Malaquias MAE, Mackenzie-Dodds J, Bouchet P, Gosliner T, Reid DG: A
molecular phylogeny of the Cephalaspidea sensu lato (Gastropoda:
Euthyneura): Architectibranchia redefined and Runcinacea reinstated.
Zool Scr 2008, 38:23-41.
Tillier S, Masselot M, Tillier A: Phylogentic relationships of the pulmonate
gastropods from rRNA sequences, and tempo and age of the
stylommatophoran radiation. In Origin and evolutionary radiation of the
Mollusca. Edited by: Taylor J. Oxford, Oxford University Press; 1996:267-284.
Haller B: Die Anatomie von Siphonaria gigas Less., eines
opisthobranchiaten Gastropoden. Arb Zool Inst Univ Wien Zool Stat Triest
1892, 10:71-100.
Nordsieck H: Phylogeny and system of the Pulmonata (Gastropoda). Arch
Moll 1990, 121:31-52.
Wilson NG, Jörger KM, Schrödl M: Reducing an enigma: placing the
vermiform Rhodopemorpha (Gastropoda) in a phylogeny [abstract]. Trop
Nat Hist 2010, , Suppl 3: 37.
Mordan PB, Wade CM: Heterobranchia II: The Pulmonata. In Phylogeny and
evolution of the Mollusca. Edited by: Ponder WF, Lindberg DR. Berkley Los
Angeles London: University California Press; 2008:409-426.
Ruthensteiner B: Homology of the pallial and pulmonary cavity of
gastropods. J Molluscan Stud 1997, 63:353-367.
Marshall DJ, McQuaid CD: Relationship between heart rate and oxygen
consumption in the intertidal limpets Patella granularis and Siphonaria
occulus. Comp Biochem Physiol A 1992, 103:297-300.

Page 19 of 20

53. Barker GM: Gastropods on land: Phylogeny, diversity and adaptive
morphology. In The biology of terrestrial molluscs. Edited by: Barker GM.
Oxon, New York: CAB International; 2001:1-146.
54. Ruthensteiner B: Redescription and 3D morphology of Williamia gussonii
(Gastropoda : Siphonariidae). J Molluscan Stud 2006, 72:327-336.
55. Fahrner A, Haszprunar G: Microanatomy, ultrastructure, and systematic
significance of the excretory system and mantle cavity of an acochlidian
gastropod (Opisthobranchia). J Molluscan Stud 2002, 68:87-94.
56. Brenzinger B, Neusser TP, Glaubrecht M, Haszprunar G, Schrödl M:
Redescription and 3-dimensional reconstruction of the limnic
acochlidian gastropod Strubellia paradoxa (Strubell, 1892) from Ambon,
Indonesia. J Nat Hist .
57. Ruthensteiner B: Nervous system development of a primitive pulmonate
(Mollusca: Gastropoda) and its bearing on comparative embryology of
the gastropod nervous system. Boll Malacol 1998, 34:1-22.
58. Van Mol JJ: Étude morphologique et phylogénétique du ganglion
cérébroide des Gastéropodes Pulmonés (Mollusques). Mém Acad Roy Belg
Science 1967, 37:1-168.
59. Haszprunar G, Huber G: On the central nervous system of Smeagolidae
and Rhodopidae, two families questionably allied with the
Gymnomorpha (Gastropoda, Euthyneura). J Zool 1990, 220:185-199.
60. Neusser TP, Jörger KM, Schrödl M: Exploring cerebral features in
Acochlidia (Gastropoda: Opisthobranchia). Bonn Zool Beitr 2007,
55:301-310.
61. Van Mol JJ: Evolution phylogénetique du ganglion cérébroide chez les
gastéropodes pulmones. Haliotis 1974, 4:77-86.
62. Tardy J: Contribution a l’étude des métamorphoses chez les
nudibranches. Ann Sci Nat Zool 1970, 12:299-370.
63. Tardy J: Morphogenese du systéme nerveux chez les mollusques
nudibranches. Haliotis 1974, 4:61-75.
64. Saleuddin ASM, Ashton ML, Khan HR: An electron microscopic study of
the endocrine dorsal bodies in reproductively active and inactive
Siphonaria pectinata (Pulmonata: Mollusca). Tissue Cell 1997, 29:267-275.
65. Ponder WF, Lindberg DR: Towards a phylogeny of gastropod molluscs:
Analysis using morphological characters. Zool J Linn Soc 1997, 119:83-265.
66. Huber G: On the cerebral nervous system of marine Heterobranchia
(Gastropoda). J Molluscan Stud 1993, 59:381-420.
67. Westheide W: Progenesis as a principle in meiofauna evolution. J Nat Hist
1987, 21:843-854.
68. Arnaud PM, Poizat C, Salvini-Plawen Lv: Marine-interstitial Gastropoda
(including one freshwater interstitial species). In Stygofauna Mundi. Edited
by: Botosaneanu L. Leiden, Brill/Backhuys; 1986:153-161.
69. Haynes A, Kenchington W: Acochlidium fijiensis sp. nov. (Gastropoda:
Opisthobranchia: Acochlidiacea) from Fiji. Veliger 1991, 34:166-171.
70. Wawra E: Acochlidium sutteri nov. spec. (Gastropoda, Opisthobranchia,
Acochlidiacea) von Sumba, Indonesien. Ann Naturhist Mus Wien (B Bot
Zool) 1979, 82:595-604.
71. Swedmark B: The interstitial fauna of marine sand. Biol Rev 1964, 39:1-42.
72. Tillier S, Ponder WF: New species of Smeagol from Australia and New
Zealand, with a discussion of the affinities of the genus (Gastropoda,
Pulmonata). J Molluscan Stud 1992, 58:135-155.
73. Ho SYW, Larson G: Molecular clocks: when times are a-changin’. Trends
Genet 2006, 22:79-83.
74. Welch JJ, Bromham L: Molecular dating when rates vary. Trends Ecol Evol
2005, 20:320-327.
75. Arbogast BS, Edwards SV, Wakeley J, Beerli P, Slowinski JB: Estimating
divergence times from molecular data on phylogenetic and population
genetic timescales. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 2002, 33:707-740.
76. Wilke T, Schultheiss R, Albrecht C: As time goes by: A simple fool’s guide
to molecular clock approaches in invertebrates. Am Malacol Bull 2009,
27:25-45.
77. Graur D, Martin W: Reading the entrails of chickens: molecular timescales
of evolution and the illusion of precision. Trends Genet 2004, 20:80-86.
78. Drummond AJ, Ho SYW, Phillips MJ, Rambaut A: Relaxed phylogenetics
and dating with confidence. PLoS Biol 2006, 4:699-710.
79. Hedges SB, Kumar S: Precision of molecular time estimates. Trends Genet
2004, 20:242-247.
80. Renner SS: Relaxed molecular clocks for dating historical plant dispersal
events. Trends Plant Sci 2005, 10:550-558.

Jörger et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:323
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/323

81. Malaquias MAE, Reid DG: Tethyan vicariance, relictualism and speciation:
evidence from a global molecular phylogeny of the opisthobranch
genus Bulla. J Biogeogr 2009, 36:1760-1777.
82. Göbbeler K, Klussmann-Kolb A: Out of Antarctica? - New insights into the
phylogeny and biogeography of the Pleurobranchomorpha (Mollusca,
Gastropoda). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2010, 55:996-1007.
83. Frey MA, Vermeij GJ: Molecular phylogenies and historical biogeography
of a circumtropical group of gastropods (Genus: Nerita): Implications for
regional diversity patterns in the marine tropics. Mol Phylogen Evol 2008,
48:1067-1086.
84. Strugnell J, Jackson J, Drummond AJ, Cooper A: Divergence time
estimates for major cephalopod groups: evidence from multiple genes.
Cladistics 2006, 22:89-96.
85. Bandel K, Heidelberger D: A Devonian member of the subclass
Heterostropha (Gastropoda) with valvatoid shell shape. Neues Jahrb Geol
Palaontol-Monatsh 2002, 533-550.
86. Bandel K: Triassic Euthyneura (Gastropoda) from St. Cassian Formation
(Italian Alps) with a discussion on the evolution of the Heterostropha.
Freib Forsch H C 1994, 2:79-100.
87. Bandel K, Riedel F: The Late Cretaceous gastropod fauna from Ajka
(Bakony Mountains, Hungary): A revision. Ann Naturhist Mus Wien A 1994,
96:1-65.
88. Schrödl M: Techniques for collecting interstitial opisthobranchs.[http://
www.seaslugforum.net/factsheet.cfm?base=inteextr].
89. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
90. Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acids Symp Series 1999,
41:95-98.
91. Katoh K, Kuma K, Toh H, Miyata T: MAFFT version 5: improvement in
accuracy of multiple sequence alignment. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:511-518.
92. Talavera G, Castresana J: Improvement of phylogenies after removing
divergent and ambiguously aligned blocks from protein sequence
alignments. Syst Biol 2007, 56:564-577.
93. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:540-552.
94. Misof B, Misof K: A Monte Carlo approach successfully identifies
randomness in multiple sequence alignments: A more objective means
of data exclusion. Syst Biol 2009, 58:21-34.
95. Huson DH, Bryant D: Application of phylogenetic networks in
evolutionary studies. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:254-267.
96. Posada D, Crandall KA: MODELTEST: testing the model of DNA
substitution. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:817-818.
97. Farris JS, Källersjö M, Kluge AG, Bult C: Testing significance of
incongruence. Cladistics 1995, 10:315-319.
98. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
99. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
100. Shimodaira H: An approximately unbiased test of phylogenetic tree
selection. Syst Biol 2002, 51:492-508.
101. Jobb G, von Haeseler A, Strimmer K: TREEFINDER: a powerful graphical
analysis environment for molecular phylogenetics. BMC Evol Biol 2004,
4:18.
102. Drummond AJ, Rambaut A: BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary analysis by
sampling trees. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:214.
103. Tracey S, Todd JA, Erwin DH: Mollusca: Gastropoda. In The fossil record.
Edited by: Benton MJ. London, Chapman and Hall; 1993:131-167.
104. Hipsley CA, Himmelmann L, Metzler D, Muller J: Integration of Bayesian
molecular clock methods and fossil-based soft bounds reveals early
Cenozoic origin of African lacertid lizards. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:151.
105. Wollscheid E, Wägele H: Initial results on the molecular phylogeny of the
Nudibranchia (Gastropoda, Opisthobranchia) based on 18S rDNA data.
Mol Phylogen Evol 1999, 13:215-226.
106. Simon C, Frati F, Beckenbach A, Crespi B, Liu H, Flook P: Evolution,
weighting, and phylogenetic utility of mitochondrial gene sequences
and a compliation of conserved polymerase chain reaction primers. Ann
Entomol Soc Am 1994, 87:651-701.

Page 20 of 20

107. Folmer O, Black M, Hoeh W, Lutz R, Vrijenhoek R: DNA primers for
amplification of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I from
diverse metazoan invertebrates. Mol Mar Biol Biotechnol 1994, 3:294-299.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-323
Cite this article as: Jörger et al.: On the origin of Acochlidia and other
enigmatic euthyneuran gastropods, with implications for the
systematics of Heterobranchia. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:323.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
