<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The kinome of Phytophthora infestans reveals oomycete-specific innovations and links to other taxonomic groups</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-700"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Howard S Judelson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The kinome of Phytophthora infestans reveals
oomycete-specific innovations and links to other
taxonomic groups
Howard S Judelson*, Audrey MV Ah-Fong

Abstract
Background: Oomycetes are a large group of economically and ecologically important species. Its most notorious
member is Phytophthora infestans, the cause of the devastating potato late blight disease. The life cycle of P.
infestans involves hyphae which differentiate into spores used for dispersal and host infection. Protein
phosphorylation likely plays crucial roles in these stages, and to help understand this we present here a genomewide analysis of the protein kinases of P. infestans and several relatives. The study also provides new insight into
kinase evolution since oomycetes are taxonomically distant from organisms with well-characterized kinomes.
Results: Bioinformatic searches of the genomes of P. infestans, P. ramorum, and P. sojae reveal they have similar
kinomes, which for P. infestans contains 354 eukaryotic protein kinases (ePKs) and 18 atypical kinases (aPKs),
equaling 2% of total genes. After refining gene models, most were classifiable into families seen in other
eukaryotes. Some ePK families are nevertheless unusual, especially the tyrosine kinase-like (TKL) group which
includes large oomycete-specific subfamilies. Also identified were two tyrosine kinases, which are rare in nonmetazoans. Several ePKs bear accessory domains not identified previously on kinases, such as cyclin-dependent
kinases with integral cyclin domains. Most ePKs lack accessory domains, implying that many are regulated
transcriptionally. This was confirmed by mRNA expression-profiling studies that showed that two-thirds vary
significantly between hyphae, sporangia, and zoospores. Comparisons to neighboring taxa (apicomplexans, ciliates,
diatoms) revealed both clade-specific and conserved features, and multiple connections to plant kinases were
observed. The kinome of Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis, an oomycete with a simpler life cycle than P. infestans,
was found to be one-third smaller. Some differences may be attributable to gene clustering, which facilitates
subfamily expansion (or loss) through unequal crossing-over.
Conclusion: The large sizes of the Phytophthora kinomes imply that phosphorylation plays major roles in their life
cycles. Their kinomes also include many novel ePKs, some specific to oomycetes or shared with neighboring
groups. Little experimentation to date has addressed the biological functions of oomycete kinases, but this should
be stimulated by the structural, evolutionary, and expression data presented here. This may lead to targets for
disease control.

Background
Protein kinases regulate numerous cellular processes
including mitosis, communication, differentiation, metabolism, and transcription. They constitute the largest
protein family in most single-celled and multicellular
eukaryotes, underscoring the ubiquitousness of phosphorylation as a control mechanism. Nearly all protein
* Correspondence: howard.judelson@ucr.edu
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, University of California,
Riverside, California 92521 USA

kinases share a common ancestry, belonging to the
eukaryotic protein kinase (ePK) superfamily [1]. These
contain a core domain of about 250 amino acids which
catalyzes the phosphorylation of serine, threonine, or
tyrosine. Protein phosphorylation in eukaryotes is also
mediated by some proteins not related closely to ePKs,
including atypical protein kinases (aPKs) that act on serine or threonine and bacterial-like histidine kinases
[2,3].

© 2010 Judelson and Ah-Fong; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

ePKs are typically categorized into nine families
based on the sequences of their catalytic domains [1].
The AGC, CAMK, CMGC, CK, OTHER, RGC, STE,
and TKL families, which are described in more detail
in Results and Discussion, primarily phosphorylate serine and threonine, while the TK family acts mainly at
tyrosine, although some ePKs can modify all three residues [1,4]. The further classification of ePKs into subfamilies is possible using features of the catalytic
region as well as non-catalytic accessory domains [5].
The latter comprise regulatory modules, affect substrate binding, determine subcellular localization, or
allow the kinases to serve as scaffolds for multipeptide
complexes. The shuffling of non-catalytic domains is
likely a major feature behind the diversification of
eukaryotic species.
Interspecific comparisons have shown that while the
major ePK families predate the eukaryotic radiation, significant changes occurred during evolution. Examples
include the loss of TKL kinases from yeasts, the enlargement of receptor-like kinase subfamilies in plants, the
birth and death of subfamilies in metazoan lineages, and
the appearance of TKs as a mostly metazoan-specific
feature [6-8]. Having data from diverse eukaryotes is
important for understanding kinase evolution, and testing conclusions from early studies based on limited
kinomes. For example, the greater abundance of TKs in
humans than fruit flies and their absence from yeasts
and slime molds once led to the proposal that TKs are
linked to complex multicellular life, but then the singlecelled protist Monosiga brevicollis was found to have
more TKs than animals [9,10]. Similarly, the conclusion
that most organisms devote a similar fraction of their
transcriptome to ePKs, about 2%, had to be altered
when this value in the ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia
was found to be >3-fold higher [11]. Also, plant data
revealed new classes of calcium-dependent kinases that
do not follow the metazoan regulatory paradigm [6,12].
Stramenopiles (heterokonts) comprise a major eukaryotic kingdom that lacks close taxonomic affinity to
organisms with well-characterized kinomes, and thus
offer opportunities to learn more about the evolution of
these proteins. Stramenopiles include many important
pathogens and saprophytes in the oomycete (“water
mold”) group, as well as diatoms and brown algae, and
are part of a larger group called Chromalveolates
[13,14]. This paper focuses on the kinome of the oomycete Phytophthora infestans, the potato late blight agent
[15]. Its life stages include vegetative hyphae, sexual
structures, and asexual spores including flagellated zoospores [16]. Protein kinases have been shown to participate in the growth and differentiation of oomycetes [17].
Here we describe the P. infestans kinome, including its
content of kinases with novel domains and oomycete-

Page 2 of 20

specific subfamilies, its expression pattern, and evidence
of its diversification from the kinomes of related taxa.

Results and discussion
Discovery of P. infestans protein kinases

To identify genes encoding ePKs and aPKs the draft
genome [18] was explored for sequences encoding the
relevant Pfam domains and by BLAST using representative animal, fungal, and plant kinases. An iterative process of rechecking the database using diverse P.
infestans sequences helped raise the probability of
detecting kinases deviated from those of other eukaryotes, or having erroneous gene models. Particular care
was used to evaluate the structure of each gene model.
More plausible models were developed for about twothirds of genes based on matches to expressed sequence
tags, comparisons to sequences from P. ramorum and P.
sojae, and RT-PCR in the case of genes of particular
interest.
Genes encoding 354 ePKs and 18 aPKs (including 3
histidine kinases) were identified in P. infestans, and
their features are summarized in Additional File 1
Tables S1 and S2. Not included in the above tallies or
the later sections of this paper are four pseudogenes and
five genes that appeared to have been artificially duplicated in the assembly. None of the pseudogenes contain
A-rich sequences at their 3’ termini, suggesting that
they are not processed (retrotransposed) pseudogenes
despite the abundance of retroelement-like sequences in
the P. infestans genome [17].
The P. infestans kinome appears very similar to those
of two other Phytophthora spp. for which draft genome
sequences are available publicly, P. ramorum and P.
sojae [19]. A detailed comparison was not undertaken
due to the challenge of correcting gene models in the
latter two species, although it appears that the number
of kinases are similar. For example, using an E < 10-10
criterion for matches against a HMM for the ePK catalytic domain (pfam00069), and after eliminating presumptive artificially duplicated genes, P. ramorum and
P. sojae are estimated to contain 352 and 354 ePKs,
respectively.
Classification of P. infestans ePKs

The 354 P. infestans ePKs were grouped into the major
families defined by Hanks and Hunter [1]. This entailed
matching their catalytic domains against HMM models
of each family and using BLAST to compare them
against metazoan ePKs. Classifications were confirmed
and ambiguities resolved by phylogenetic analyses with
human, plant, and yeast ePKs. Of the eleven subdomains
(I to XI) shown to represent conserved features of the
kinase catalytic region [1], particular note was made of
the composition of subdomains VIb and VIII, which are

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Page 3 of 20

Figure 1 Phylogram of P. infestans ePKs. Illustrated is a maximum likelihood tree based on catalytic domains. The major groups are
highlighted by different colors (AGC, CAMK, CK1 CMGC, OTHER, STE, TKL). Significant subfamilies are noted using the traditional nomenclature,
except for the CAMKa-d groups which are specific to this study. Two putative TKs are included within the TKL group, and the catalytic domains
of dual-kinase proteins were analyzed separately (noted by A and B suffixes on gene names). Proteins with predicted inactive catalytic regions
are noted with a green dot next to the gene number. Blue dots mark proteins with clear orthologs in H. arabidopsidis. Red dots indicate
proteins with transmembrane domains.

believed to determine substrate specificity. These generally matched the established paradigms, with some
divergence especially in subdomains VIII of the CK1,
CAMK, and TKL families (Additional File 2 Fig. S1).
A phylogram of the 354 P. infestans ePKs that portrays their assignments to the major groups is presented

Figure 1 and that information is also summarized in
Table 1. The table also includes data from representative
plant, animal, yeast, apicomplexan, ciliate, and slime
mold kinomes along with data for two other stramenopiles, the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana and the
oomycete H. arabidopsidis, which is a downy mildew

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Page 4 of 20

Table 1 Content of ePKs in selected eukaryotes
Genes in subfamilya
AGC

CAMK

CK1

CMGC

RGC

STE

TK

TKL

OTHER

Total ePKs

% of genesb

P. infestans

47

70

3

46

0

15

2

137

34

354

2.0

H. arabidopsidis

36

46

3

30

0

6

0

58

27

207

1.3

T. pseudonana

29

52

4

25

0

5

0

14

23

152

1.3

P. falciparum

5

13

1

18

0

0

0

5

23

65

1.5

P. tetraurelia

635

970

165

322

1

118

2

21

380

2614

6.6

O. sativa

59

163

33

151

0

73

0

1387

31

1897

4.7

D. discoideum
S. cerevisiae

27
17

21
21

2
4

28
34

0
0

44
18

0
0

68
0

71
36

261
130

2.1
2.2

H. sapiens

63

74

12

63

5

47

90

43

81

478

1.4

Species

a

Classifications for P. infestans, H. arabidopsidis, and T. pseudonana are from this study. Assignments for the other species are from the literature [10,11,30,59].
Based on estimated gene contents of 17,997 for P. infestans (Broad Institute v. 2); 15,551 for H. arabidopsidis (Virgina Bioinformatics Institute v. 8.3); 11,390 for T.
pseudonana (Joint Genome Institute v. 3), 39,642 for P. tetraurelia (v. 1), 40,577 for O. sativa (MSU v. 6.1), 12,500 for D. discoideum (v. 2), 5,804 for S. cerevisiae; and
34,316 for H. sapiens (UCSC build 37.1).
b

pathogen. The latter two datasets were generated for
this study using the same mining scheme applied to P.
infestans, although gene models were not corrected. It
should be noted that our size estimate of the T. pseudonana kinome is smaller than in a previous report (152
versus 190; [20]). In total, ePKs account for 2.0% of total
P. infestans genes, which compares to 1.3 to 6.6% for the
other eukaryotes in Table 1. Details of each family in P.
infestans are presented in later sections, except for
receptor guanylyl cyclase (RGC) kinases which were not
detected and are believed to be metazoan-specific [10].
Three ePKs (gene models PITG_04344, PITG_05862,
and PITG_07317) contain two tandem ePK domains.
Such composite kinases have been reported previously
in animals and plants. The two ePK domains within
each of the P. infestans proteins belong to the same
family. Orthologs of these dual-kinase proteins exist in
P. ramorum and P. sojae, but not H. arabidopsidis.
Catalytically inactive kinases

A fraction of ePK-like proteins in most organisms are
predicted to be inactive since they lack one or more of
the amino acids that are required for catalytic activity.
These include an aspartate in the HRD motif of subdomain VIb of the catalytic domain that is the catalytic
residue, the aspartate in the DFG motif of subdomain
VII that binds the Mg2+ ion that coordinates ATP in the
ATP-binding cleft, and a lysine in the VAIK motif of
subdomain II (or in subdomain I) that also binds the
ATP. Rather than being useless, these proteins are postulated to act as scaffolds for signal complexes or have
other regulatory functions [21].
In P. infestans 32 ePKs or 9% of the total appear to be
incapable of phosphorylation, which is nearly the same
fraction seen in organisms as diverse as humans, slime
molds, and trypanosomes [10,21,22]. They include 2
AGC, 3 CAMK, 5 CMGC, 19 TKL, and 3 OTHER

kinases. These are marked by green dots in Figure 1 and
noted in Additional File 1 Table S1. P. ramorum orthologs of 25 of these are also predicted to be inactive, and
this conservation suggests that most have a cellular
function.
Accessory Domains in ePKs

Sixty-eight P. infestans ePKs or 19% of the total contain
domains other than the kinase catalytic region (Table 2;
Additional File 1 Table S1). This is substantially less
than in humans, where over 50% contain additional
domains, many of which have regulatory functions [7].
This suggests that a greater fraction of P. infestans ePKs
are controlled at the level of mRNA, and as described
later over two-thirds are transcriptionally regulated during the life cycle. The function of many of the domains
are discussed later in combination with descriptions of
specific ePK families.
It is notable that six domains were found that were not
associated previously with ePKs in other organisms,
based on searches of the Pfam database and Genbank.
Examples of proteins containing an ePK domain along
with novel accessory domains are shown in Figure 2. The
unusual domains include the Arb2, cyclin, PAS signal
sensor, and RhoGAP domains; a previous study also
reported a RhoGAP-containing ePK in P. sojae [23]. The
PAS-containing protein, PITG_01203, is particularly
interesting due to its potential role in environmental sensing, which is important in the life cycle of P. infestans.
The match to the PAS domain appears to be authentic
since it is followed by a PAC domain, which contributes
to PAS function. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that the
PAS domain in PITG_01203 is not derived from those
found in the histidine kinases of P. infestans, an aPK
group that is described later in this paper.
Transmembrane domains were predicted for 99 of the
P. infestans ePKs (Figure 1 red circles; Additional File 1

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Page 5 of 20

Table 2 Non-kinase domains in ePKs from P. infestans
No. of Proteinsa

Represented Families

Function

Ankyrin

3

AGC, TKL

higher order structure

Arb2

2

AGC

chromatin association

Armadillo

1

TKL

protein interaction

C2

1

AGC

Ca2+-dependent membrane targeting

cNMP binding

8

AGC, CAMK

cyclic nucleotide binding

cyclin N, C

4

CMGC

cell cycle control

DEP

5

AGC, TKL

protein targeting and interaction

EF hand
FYVE

3
2

CAMK, OTHER
AGC

calcium binding
zinc binding

HEAT

1

OTHER

protein interaction

KA1

4

CAMK

kinase associated, unknown

LRR

16

TKL

protein interaction

NAF

2

CAMK

unknown

PAS

1

CMGC

signal sensor

PDZ

1

TKL

protein interaction

PH
PhoD

9
1

AGC, CAMK, CMGC
STE

phosphatidylinositol binding
phosphatase

PP2C

4

AGC, CAMK, OTHER

protein phosphatase

PX

3

AGC

phosphoinositide binding

Response Reg

1

OTHER

two-component signaling

RhoGAP

1

STE

GTPase activating protein

RWD

2

OTHER

unknown

RyR

1

CAMK

unknown

SAM
SET

2
1

STE, TKL
CMGC

protein interaction
protein interaction

TPR

1

TKL

protein interaction

UBA/TS-N

1

CAMK

ubiquitin binding

WD40

1

OTHER

protein interaction

WW

1

CMGC

protein interaction

ZF-B

1

STE

zinc binding

Pfam Domain

a
b

Novel?b
✓

✓

✓

✓
✓

✓

If a protein contains more than one given domain it is counted only once in that category.
Indicates combination of kinase domain and accessory domain not reported previously outside of Phytophthora.

Table S1), ranging in number from one to nine per protein. Most of these proteins also contain recognizable
signal peptide or signal anchor domains. All are in the
TKL family, which as described later contains a novel
family of receptor-like kinases. In addition, four proteins
are predicted to contain signal peptides without transmembrane domains.
AGC family of P. infestans

P. infestans encodes 47 AGC kinases, a group named
after Protein Kinases A, G, and C. In other organisms,
this group includes cyclic nucleotide or phospholipidregulated kinases, G-protein coupled kinases, ribosomal
protein S6 kinases, and related proteins [24]. This represents 13% of the ePK kinome, which is the same fraction
as observed in humans based on the annotation of Manning et al. [7] and the number of genes in the current
build of that genome, but less than in T. pseudonana

(19%) and H. arabidopsidis (18%). Since P. infestans and
H. arabidopsidis are both oomycetes this difference is
notable, and a later section of this paper focuses on
other differences between their kinomes. The composition of each ePK subfamily in these two oomycetes is
also compared in Table 3. A detailed description of each
AGC kinase in P. infestans is presented in Additional
File 1 Table S1, along with the rest of the ePKs.
The most abundant AGC subfamily within P. infestans
is the AKT group, which has 20 members. In other
organisms these are commonly regulated by phosphoinositides, but only six of the P. infestans proteins contain recognizable N-terminal PH or PX domains that
typically bind such compounds. Next in abundance were
members of the cGMP and cAMP-regulated PKG and
PKA subfamilies, and the ribosomal protein S6 kinase
(RSK) subfamily. Although each Phytophthora spp. contains 24 or more G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR),

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Figure 2 Novel domain combinations in P. infestans ePKs.
Indicated are six proteins that contain accessory domains not
described previously for ePKs, drawn approximately to scale. The
novel domains are RhoGAP, a domain found on GTPase activating
proteins; the WW protein interaction domain, which was found on a
dual-kinase protein; the Arb2 domain which associates with
chromatin and may influence histone methylation and siRNA
formation; the N and C-terminal alpha fold domains of cyclins,
cyc_N and cyc_C, which may be cell cycle control or protein
interaction domains; the RyR ryanodine receptor domain, which are
found on some Ca2+ channels and other proteins but have
unknown functions; and the PAS signal sensor domain. The latter is
located just upstream of PAC, which is a structural domain that is
believed to contribute to the activity of the PAS fold. PITG_12903
also contains a predicted phosphatidylinositol-binding PH (Pleckstrin
Homology) domain, which is commonly found on ePKs, as is the
zinc and phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate-binding FYVE domain
shown on PITG_01365.

only one GPCR-regulated kinase (GRK) was detected,
PITG_16476. This low number of GRKs might be
explained by the observation that some P. infestans
GPCRs contain a phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase
domain which may be capable of protein phosphorylation [25]. Members of the MAST, NDR, RSK and SGK
subfamilies were also detected. While three AGC
kinases had catalytic domains that appeared nearly equidistant between PKA and PKC (PITG_03513,
PITG_16213, PITG_16461), none bore the C1 or C2
ligand-binding domains typical of PKC in other taxa.
PKC is also absent from Dictyostelium discoideum and
plants but in metazoans and yeast, which is consistent
with the suggestion that it arose late in evolution [10].
The detection of cGMP-regulated ePKs in P. infestans
is of particular interest. Their absence from plants, D.
discoideum, and yeast led to a prior suggestion that
PKG is metazoan-specific [10]. Since our identification
of the PKG proteins was based on the traditional
approach of studying the ePK catalytic domain where
differences between different AGC subfamilies are
subtle, the possibility of misclassification was considered.
However, all six predicted PKGs contain the expected
cyclic nucleotide binding domains. We can also detect
PKG in the sequenced genomes of ciliates such Paramecium tetraurelia, apicomplexans such as Toxoplasma

Page 6 of 20

gondii, and diatoms such as T. pseudonana. The shared
occurrence of PKG in these species is not surprising
since these groups and stramenopiles reside on the
same branch of the eukaryotic tree, with the ciliates and
apicomplexans closer to the root and the diatoms closer
to the tip [14,26]. Due to this taxonomic affinity, comparisons between oomycete, apicomplexan, and ciliate
kinomes will be highlighted in many of the following
sections of this paper.
Two of the predicted PKG proteins, PITG_08304 and
PITG_09375, did not cluster near the rest in Figure 1.
Both contain inactive kinase domains, as well as protein
phosphatase and cNMP-binding domains. Predicted proteins containing this curious combination of domains, in
the same orientation and including the inactive kinase,
can also be found in plants but not apicomplexans or
ciliates. While their functions are uncharacterized, it is
possible that the kinase-like domain helps bind substrates of the phosphatase. This connection between P.
infestans and plant ePKs is notable. While stramenopiles
do not have overall taxonomic affinity with plants, they
are thought to include genes transferred from a photosynthetic red algal endosymbiont which could be shared
with the plant lineage [14,19].
One AGC kinase, PITG_06776, is also unusual in that
it contains a predicted N-terminal Arb2 domain. No
other known ePK bears this domain, which is seen in
proteins that bind chromatin and are involved in siRNA
generation. The domain is also found in orthologs in P.
ramorum, P. sojae, and H. arabidopsidis but an ortholog
is not present in apicomplexans, ciliates, or diatoms.
CAMK family

Seventy P. infestans ePKs are within this category, making it the second largest (Additional File 1 Table S1).
The family was defined initially by mammalian kinases
that contain a catalytic domain that is activated
when the Ca 2+ -binding EF-hand protein calmodulin
binds to a downstream association domain. While the
family’s name is thus an abbreviation for Ca2+/calmodulinregulated kinases, not all members of the family in
eukaryotes have this traditional structure or function.
For example, plants, ciliates, and apicomplexans instead
contain proteins that seem to have evolved from a
fusion between CAMK and calmodulin genes, leading
to a gene product with both kinase and EF-hand
domains [12,27]. Widely distributed in eukaryotes is
another CAMK subfamily that lacks both calmodulinbinding or calmodulin-like domains, which is named
after the sucrose non-fermenting SNF1 kinase of yeast.
Due to the diversity within the CAMK group, some
researchers refer to it as the calcium-dependent protein
kinase (CDPK) or the CDPK-SNF1 related kinase
family (CDPK-SnRK).

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Page 7 of 20

Table 3 ePK subfamilies in P. infestans and H. arabidopsidis
Number of kinases
Family

Subfamily

P. infestans

H. arabidopsidis

AGC

AKT/PKB

20

20

GRK

1

0

MAST

1

1

NDR

1

1

PKA

7

PKG
RSK
SGK
unclassified

Number of kinases
Family

Subfamily

P. infestans

TK

H. arabidopsidis

-

2

0

TKL

MLK/LRRK

28

15

STRK/RIPK

2

2

4

IRAK

5

5

6

1

OS1

14

2

6
3

3
3

OS2
OS3

25
33

10
7

2

3

10

CAMK

OS4

21

other LRR

7

4

27

19

OS4

21

10

CAMK-a

18

14

unclassified

2

2

CAMK-b

8

2

CAMK-c

9

6

AURORA

4

3

CAMK-d
CMGC

CAMK1

6

6

NAK
NEK

4
7

1
3

OTHER

17

16

PEK

5

5

4

0

POLO

2

2

CK2

1

1

SCY1

1

1

CLK

1

1

ULK

2

2

DYRK

5

5

VSP15

1

1

GSK

1

1

WEE

2

2

MAPK
RCK

15
3

8
0

WNK
unclassified

1
5

1
3

SRPK
STE

CDK
CDKL

1

1

STE7

6

3

STE11

5

1

STE20

4

3

Assignments are based on phylogenetic analysis of oomycete proteins against human ePKs, with a few exceptions. For CAMK, the CAMK1 group clusters well
with that human subfamily, but others could not be unambigously assigned and are instead placed into four oomycete-specific clades (a to d). For the TKL
family, the MLK/LRRK subfamily combines MLK and LRRK-like kinases, since these were not clearly separated in phylogenetic analyses, and the same is true for
the RIPK/STRK subfamily.

The relative size of the CAMK family in P. infestans
(19% of ePKs) slightly exceeds that of metazoans, where
Ca2+ is known to play major roles in cellular regulation.
However, it is also demonstrated that Ca 2+ controls
many stages of oomycete development [17,28]. Nevertheless, less than 10% of P. infestans ePKs in the CAMK
family bear accessory domains consistent with regulation
by Ca2+. About half contain sizeable regions C-terminal
to the catalytic site, with a mean size of 110 aa, but
none resemble the calmodulin-association regions of
mammalian CAMKs.
Four P. infestans proteins contain kinase and C-terminal EF-hand domains in a single peptide, namely PITG_
00525, PITG_08008, PITG_12271, and PITG_13934.
Such proteins thus resemble the CDPK subfamily found
previously only in plants, ciliates, and apicomplexans
[29-31]. This supports the concept of genes being

passed to this eukaryote lineage from a red algal symbiont. The presence of only four CDPKs in P. infestans
is surprisingly small. By comparison, the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, the apicomplexan T. gondii, and the
ciliate P. tetraurelia contain about 42, 16, and 101 members of this class, respectively. The possibility was considered that additional kinases containing EF-hands
were not detected due to the evolutionary distance
between P. infestans and organisms used previously to
define the EF-hand domain. To test this, a comparison
was made of position-specific sequence matrices
(PSSMs) from 100 EF-hands from 42 P. infestans proteins and those in the SMART database. The two
PSSMs were very similar, suggesting that most EF-hands
were detected and P. infestans only has four ePKs
in this class. Three of these contain four EF-hand
domains. In the diatom T. pseudonana we detect only

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

one CDPK-like kinase, which contains two EF-hands.
Visinin-like CDPK kinases, which bear three EF-hands
and are found in plants, were not detected within P.
infestans or the diatom.
While classic CDPKs contain EF-hand domains Cterminal to the catalytic domain, PITG_08008 contains
N-terminal EF-hand domains which has not been
described for any ePK. A PH domain also resides
between the EF and catalytic domains, and the novel
structure of this gene was confirmed by RT-PCR.
PITG_08008 does not cluster with the plant-like CDPKs
of P. infestans (Figure 1). Its catalytic domain is instead
closest phylogenetically to PITG_06259, which also has
a PH domain. This suggests that PITG_08008 arose
from a PITG_06259-like ancestor that fused with EFhand domains. It should be noted that the EF domains
are a weak match to the eukaryotic consensus, and
when we performed binding assays between recombinant PITG_08008 and 45 Ca 2+ negative results were
obtained.
Two P. infestans kinases, PITG_01480 and
PITG_21395, resemble the SnRK3 subclass of plant
SNF1-related kinases that are regulated by Ca2+ through
calcineurin B-like (CBL) sensors. CBLs have been
described as a plant-specific lineage of Ca 2+ binding
proteins that resemble the regulatory B-subunit of calcineurin and the neuronal Ca 2+ sensor of animals, and
SnRK3 has also been described as being plant-specific
[12]. P. infestans nevertheless contains a CBL protein,
PITG_02011, in addition to the two SnRK3-like kinases.
The latter contain a N-terminal catalytic domain followed by a CBL-binding NAF domain, and a C-terminal
KA1 kinase associated domain. While one P. infestans
protein (PITG_21395) has a good match to the NAF
domain signature, the other (PITG_01480) is more
diverged and might be nonfunctional. Unlike the CDPK
subfamily described in the preceding paragraph that is
also in ciliates and apicomplexans, SnRK3 appears to
be plant and oomycete-specific, with no members in
T. gondii or P. tetraurelia. No SnRK3-like protein was
detected in the databases of the diatoms T. pseudonana
or Phaeodactylum tricornutum.
Plants contain two other SnRK subfamilies which are
not regulated by Ca 2+ [12,27]. Instead, SnRK1 and
SnRK2 are controlled by proteins interacting with Cterminal ubiquitin association (UBA/TS-N) or acidic
domains, respectively. These proteins also contain a
KA1 domain, like SnRK3. P. infestans lacks an obvious
SnRK2 but encodes an SnRK1 based on the presence of
UBA/TS-N and KA1 in PITG_14707. PITG_00858 is
related but lacks obvious UBA/TS-N, NAF, or acidic
domains.
A curious connection to Ca2+ signaling is observed in
PITG_12903, which contains two C-terminal RyR

Page 8 of 20

(ryanodine receptor) domains. These motifs have not
been reported previously in any ePK. Their function
is unknown but interestingly are a feature of many
Ca 2+ -activated ion channels [32]. Orthologs can also
be detected within P. ramorum and P. sojae, but not
H. arabidopsidis. This protein therefore appears to be
an innovation in Phytophthora, although alternatively
it could have been lost from the downy mildew. In
cases such as this when H. arabidopsidis is reported to
lack an ortholog of a P. infestans gene, this conclusion
is based on searches of gene models, predicted noncoding regions of assemblies, and unpaired reads since
not all gene models or assemblies may be correct.
Twenty-one CAMK kinases contain very short
domains C-terminal to the catalytic region (<10 aa) that
are unlikely to bind another protein. Six of these also
contain very short regions upstream of the catalytic
domain, with a typical example being PITG_15777
which extends 3 and 6 amino acids up- and downstream
of the catalytic domain. While this organization superficially resembles the plant PEP carboxylase kinase subfamily (PPCK; [27]), such P. infestans proteins do not
cluster with PPCKs in phylogenetic analysis. Nevertheless, like PPCKs these P. infestans proteins are likely
regulated at the transcriptional level.
CK1 family

In other organisms this represents a typically small
group of essential kinases that regulate repair, morphogenesis, and differentiation and are named after their
ability to phosphorylate casein. P. infestans encodes
three such proteins (Additional File 1 Table S1), which
is similar to the number in most lower eukaryotes. As
in other organisms, these kinases are unusual in that
they lack the APE motif of subdomain VIII that is seen
in other ePKs (Additional File 2 Fig. S1). Like other
CK1 proteins, the P. infestans members have no additional domains although one (PITG_15970) contains
extensive arginine, histidine, and serine-rich tracts in its
C-terminal half. Similar regions are predicted in the P.
ramorum ortholog of PITG_15970 and are present albeit
to a lesser extent in the P. sojae ortholog.
CMGC family

This group is named for cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK),
mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK), glycogen synthase
kinase (GSK) and Cdc2-like kinase (CLK), and also
includes related kinases. P. infestans is predicted to
encode 46 CMGC proteins (Additional File 1 Table S1).
These include 17 CDKs, five DYRKs, 15 MAPK, and a
small number related to each of the GSK, SRPK, RCK,
CK2, and CLK subfamilies. The CMGC family represents 13% of all ePKs, and a similar fraction was found
in other stramenopiles (Table 1).

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

CDKs were first identified as regulators of the cell
cycle, with their activity being modulated by cyclins
[33]. All sequenced eukaryotes express at least one CDK
that contains the cyclin-binding PSTAIRE motif in subdomain III of the catalytic domain; when this binds
cyclin, a conformational change is induced which
enhances the ability of the kinase to bind ATP. Six
of the 15 P. infestans CDKs (PITG_02446, PITG_06708,
PITG_17990, PITG_18073, PITG_19450, and PITG_
21617) contain PSTAIRE-like sequences and are defined
as members of the CDK2 class (CdkA using plant
nomenclature) which bind A- and B-type cyclins and
play key roles at G1/S and G2/M transitions. A seventh
kinase, PITG_20584, contains the PITSLRE motif
instead of PSTAIRE which places it in a class associated
with non-cell cycle roles such as RNA splicing [33].
For maximum activity CDKs must be phosphorylated
in their activation loop, which spans subdomains VII
and VIII of the catalytic domain. All 15 CDKs of P.
infestans contain the expected serine or threonine substrates for phosphorylation at that location. Phosphorylation of the loop is performed by a CDK subfamily
called CDK-activating kinases (CAK), which are also
named CDK7 after the mammalian CAK. CDK7 also
phosphorylates the carboxy-terminal domain of the
large subunit of RNA polymerase II, and is a component
of the general transcription factor TFIIH. Two P.
infestans proteins match CDK7, PITG_07995 and
PITG_21504. Another mechanism that regulates CDKs
in other taxa involves the cyclin-dependent kinase regulatory subunit CKS, and P. infestans encodes a single
CKS as PITG_12863.
Four P. infestans CDKs have the remarkable feature of
bearing C-terminal regions which match strongly the
Pfam domains for cyclins (Cyclin_N, Cyclin_C; Figure 2).
As the combination of kinase and cyclin domains has not
been described in any species, their structure was
confirmed by RT-PCR to exclude the possibility that the
gene-calling program had erroneously fused two adjacent
genes. One of these four proteins, PITG_21617, also
contains the cyclin-interacting PSTAIRE helix which
might suggest it is autoactivated. However, all four may
be enzymatically inactive due to the substitution of a
catalytic aspartate in subdomain VIb with asparagine.
A database search identified related genes in P. ramorum,
P. sojae, H. arabidopsidis, the ciliates P. aurelia and
Tetrahymena thermophila, and the apicomplexan Theileria annulata. These were not found in two other apicomplexans (P. falciparum, T. gondii) or the diatoms
T. pseudonana and P. tricornatum. Interestingly, each
gene contains the same aspartate to asparagine substitution in subdomain VIb, which suggests an important
function, and perhaps the cyclin domain serves to regulate the stability of this innovative protein.

Page 9 of 20

Another unusual CDK-like gene is PITG_14137. This
also contains substitutions in the catalytic region that
render it inactive, and cause it to cluster outside the
CMGC group (Figure 1). The protein appears to be a
fusion between an inactive kinase and an N-terminal
histone-lysine N-methyltransferase. Orthologs with this
usual structure exist in P. ramorum and P. sojae, but
not other species including H. arabidopsidis.
A final comment related to CDKs is that P. infestans
also encodes the expected cognate cyclins. These
include six that may participate in cell cycle control
such as three A-type, two B, and one H cyclins. Also
detected were seven other cyclins that belong to the C,
K, L, and M families, but these are not known to have
cell cycle roles in other taxa [34]. For example, cyclin C
binds the transcriptional regulator CDK8, which is
known as CDKE in plants and represented in P. infestans as PITG_19235.
P. infestans has five proteins that cluster with
the DYRK subfamily, which stands for dual specificity tyrosine-phosphorylated kinase. Three of these
(PITG_00178, 14626, 08572) contain the tyrosine in the
activation loop that is normally phosphorylated for full
activity. DYRKs are notable since many catalyze both
tyrosine- and serine/threonine-directed phosphorylation,
besides being subjected to tyrosine phosphorylation
themselves.
Another significant CMGC subfamily encodes mitogen
activated kinases (MAPK). These typically link extracellular signals to cellular systems that control growth,
development, and stress responses. MAPK proteins are
activated by phosphorylation cascades that are often
G-protein-stimulated and mediated by MAPK kinases
(MAP2K), MAPKK kinases (MAP3K), and MAPKKK
kinases (MAP4K). MAPK proteins in animals form
three major groups named extracellular receptor kinases
(ERK), c-Jun N-terminal and stress-activated protein
kinases (JNK/SAPK), and p38 kinases, with the JNK and
p38 pathways appearing metazoan-specific [10,35].
P. infestans is predicted to express 15 MAPK-like proteins, which are all ERK kinases. By comparison,
humans contain a total of six ERK, JUN/SAPK, and p38
MAPKs while A. thaliana and O. sativa have 20 and 15,
respectively, which are exclusively ERKs [36]. The diatom T. pseudonana has only five MAPKs, which are
ERKs. The absence of JNK/SAPK and p38 from stramenopiles is consistent with reports that these are not distributed widely. All 15 MAPK-like proteins from P.
infestans have the threonine that is the predicted
MAP2K target within their activation loop. However,
the TxY motif seen in other eukaryotes is only observed
in 12 of the P. infestans MAPK-like proteins (11
TEY and 1 TDY), being absent from PITG_00254,
PITG_01203, and PITG_15298. PITG_01203 and

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

PITG_15298 instead contain a TEH motif, which is a
conservative deviation from the consensus. PITG_00254
by contrast includes a dramatic change to TKH. The latter is also present in orthologs in P. sojae, P. ramorum,
H. arabidopsidis, T. pseudonana, and P. tricornatum but
not in apicomplexans or ciliates, making it a stramenopile-specific feature. Its maintenance even in the small
diatom MAPK subfamily suggests that it serves an
important role.
Another novel feature of a P. infestans MAPK is the
presence of a PAS domain, which is a signal sensing
fold present in archaea, eubacteria and eukaryotes. This
is found N-terminal to the kinase domain in
PITG_01203, and also in its P. ramorum, P. sojae, and
H. arabidopsidis orthologs (Figure 2). The presence of
PAS on an ePK has not been reported previously. It is
not on any diatom, alveolate, or ciliate MAPK. The only
other proteins in P. infestans that contain PAS domains
are its three histidine kinases.
STE kinases

These take their name from sterile-phenotype kinases of
yeast, and includes the STE7/MAP2K, STE11/MAP3K,
and STE20/MAP4K subfamilies which constitute much
of the signaling cascade for MAPK activation. P. infestans has 15 STE kinases which include six MAP2K, five
MAP3K, and four MAP4K proteins (Additional File 1
Table S1). This number is similar to that of yeast, but
less than humans and plants (Table 1). Other stramenopiles including H. arabidopsidis and T. pseudonana have
even fewer predicted STE kinases (five or six), and these
are absent from the apicomplexans P. falciparum and T.
gondii [37].
When considering how these STE kinases act in
MAPK signaling, it is prudent to note that non-STE
kinases may also participate in the cascade. In humans
and A. thaliana, some members of the RAF subfamily
of TKL kinases are MAP3Ks. However, no RAF kinases
appear to exist in P. infestans where, as in yeast,
MAP3K activity is likely limited to the STE11 subfamily.
In addition, not all P. infestans STE kinases may be part
of a MAPK cascade. Some organisms have two classes
of STE11 proteins, namely the MAP3K class called
MEKK and a non-MAP3K class called CDC [6]. While
MEKK is ubiquitous, some species lack CDC.
PITG_10045 belongs to the CDC class while the other
STE11 proteins of P. infestans are MEKK-like MAP3Ks.
The ratio between MAPK, MAP2K, MAP3K, and
MAP4K in P. infestans resembles that in A. thaliana,
where there is near-stoichiometry between MAP2K,
MAP3K, and MAP4K and a excess of MAPK. In contrast, in yeast each group has similar numbers while in
humans MAPK and MAP4K are in excess. The implication of these ratios in P. infestans is that each MAP2K

Page 10 of 20

activates multiple MAPKs. That the numbers of MAP3K
and MAP4K proteins are similar does not imply that the
former are always activated by the latter, since other
types of kinases can also activate MAP3Ks. Also, since
the four predicted MAP4Ks have very different C-terminal regions, some may have functions unrelated to the
MAPK cascade. This may resemble the case in plants,
where many MAP4K-like proteins do not phosphorylate
a MAP3K and instead act in other pathways [38].
One predicted MAP4K protein contains a C-terminal
RhoGAP domain, which has not been found in any previous study of a non-oomycete. The domain is seen in
both PITG_11253 and its orthologs from P. ramorum
and P. sojae, but not in H. arabidopsidis. RhoGAP
appears to be a protein interaction domain that is often
associated with GTPase-activating protein complexes.
TKL family

These kinases have sequence similarity to tyrosine
kinases, but act biochemically as serine/threonine
kinases. Such tyrosine kinase-like kinases (TKLs) exist in
most eukaryotes except fungi [6,10]. P. infestans contains 139 TKL proteins, making it the largest family at
39% of ePKs (Additional File 1 Table S1). This is much
more than other eukaryotes, except for plants (Table 1).
While P. infestans contains proteins resembling members of TKL subfamilies seen in other species (IRAK,
LISK, LRRK, RAF, RIPK, and STKR), most belong to
oomycete-specific groups.
TKLs are the only P. infestans ePKs that contain
transmembrane domains. Such proteins are marked by
red circles in Figure 1 and the topologies of representative transmembrane TKLs are shown in Figure 3. These
include proteins with very short predicted extracellular
domains such as PITG_07851, proteins with long extracellular portions such as PITG_20769, and proteins with
accessory domains in the extracellular or intracellular
regions such as PITG_00640 and PITG_02226.
Of the broadly distributed TKL subfamilies, the largest
in P. infestans is the mixed lineage kinase group (MLK)
with eight members (Figure 4). In animals MLK proteins
regulate apoptosis and stress signaling through p38/JNK;
as the latter is absent from P. infestans these eight proteins presumably play different roles. In analyses based
on either the catalytic region or whole protein, the eight
MLK-like proteins of P. infestans only cluster loosely
with human MLKs. The analysis does not indicate if the
P. infestans proteins are closest to any particular eukaryotic TKL subfamily such as HH498, ZAK, or DLK,
although none contain the leucine zippers and SAM
domains of ZAK kinases or the dual leucine zippers of
DLKs.
Possible members of other eukaryotic TKL subfamilies
in P. infestans include 18 proteins that cluster near

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Figure 3 Examples of transmembrane ePKs in P. infestans.
Illustrated are six proteins displaying the diversity within the group,
including proteins with single or multiple transmembrane domains,
dual kinase domains, extracellular leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domains,
or an intracellular DEP domain.

Page 11 of 20

human LISK, LRRK, RIPK, or STRK sequences (Figure 4).
However, most do not have the traditional structures of
such proteins. For example, the LRRK-like kinase,
PITG_10192, lacks the leucine-rich repeat domain that
gives this group its name. Similarly, the two P. infestans
proteins that cluster with LISK lack the N-terminal LIM
domains typical of that group. The P. infestans proteins
near metazoan STKR also lack the extracellular domains
typical of such proteins, and most instead contain Nterminal transmembrane domains. Two proteins that cluster near human STKR (PITG_2400 and PITG_02529) are
likely to function biochemically as tyrosine kinases, as will
be discussed later.
P. infestans has five genes classified as IRAK kinases,
which are named after interleukin-1 receptor-associated
kinase (PITG_03773, PITG_03775, PITG_04568,
PITG_7210, and PITG_22686). As shown in Figure 4
these form a coherent clade that is well-separated from
other TKL subfamilies. In plants and animals, most are

Figure 4 Maximum likelihood tree of P. infestans TKL proteins and selected human TKLs. Leaves with P. infestans proteins are unlabeled,
while human proteins start with the prefix Hs. In the upper corners, subtrees are shown to help illustrate relationships between the P. infestans
proteins and RAF kinases (upper right) or between the two putative TKs and human STKR and RIPK (upper left); numbers at nodes are aLRT
confidence numbers from PhyML. Human gene names are based on the nomenclature at http://kinase.com. Subfamily assignments of the P.
infestans proteins in the tree are in Additional File 1 Table S1.

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

involved in the innate immune response where they are
either membrane-spanning proteins that associate with
pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs) or part of the
receptors themselves. Of the five P. infestans IRAK proteins, all but PITG_22686 contain a transmembrane
domain N-terminal to the kinase region. Curiously, all
are predicted to be catalytically inactive. This partially
resembles the case in humans, where two of the four
IRAKs are predicted to be inactive yet still participate in
the immune response [39]. Either these interact with
signaling components independently of phosphorylation,
or bioinformatic assessments of kinase activity are inaccurate. As P. infestans is not known to have an innate
immune response, it will be interested to address the
function of its IRAK proteins. Interestingly, no IRAKlike proteins are detected in T. pseudonana, P. falciparum, or P. tetraurelia.
The most striking feature of the TKL family in P.
infestans is that 60% appear to be unique to oomycetes,
and fall into four major clades marked as Oomycete
Subfamilies in Figure 4. Relatives exist in P. ramorum,
P. sojae, and H. arabidopsidis but not diatoms, apicomplexans, or ciliates. These presumptive oomycete-specific
TKLs were also compared to nonmetazoan-specific TKL
subfamilies from D. discoideum and plants, but no affinity was observed (not shown).
Most of the 13 members of Oomycete Subfamily 1
contain protein interaction domains. These may be used
to regulate the kinase or contribute to signaling. For
example, PITG_06288 contains 15 ankyrin repeats
N-terminal to the kinase region, PITG_10645 contains 10
C-terminal Armadillo domains, PITG_11566 contains a
C-terminal PDZ domain, and PITG_16204 contains eight
C-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domains.
The remaining three oomycete-specific subfamilies
appear similar to receptor kinases due to the presence
of a signal peptide, transmembrane domains, and a cytoplasmic kinase domain. Twenty-two of the 25 proteins
in Oomycete Subfamily 2 have one to six predicted
transmembrane domains, with most also bearing signal
peptides. Representatives shown in Figure 3 include
PITG_06480, which lacks a sizable predicted extracellular domain, and PITG_20769 which contains a 364
amino acid extracellular domain. A similar situation
exists in Oomycete Subfamily 3 where 27 of 35 proteins
have membrane-spanning regions, and in Oomycete
Subfamily 4 for 23 of 26 members. Notably, 16 of the
transmembrane proteins in Oomycete Subfamily 4
group also contain extracellular leucine-rich repeats as
illustrated for PITG_00640 in Figure 3.
It should be stressed that these putative receptor
kinases are not related closely to animal receptor tyrosine kinases or plant receptor-like kinases, which form a
well-supported monophyletic family along with the RAF

Page 12 of 20

group of TKL kinases [40]. In fact, no oomycete TKL is
related to RAF as shown in the upper right portion of
Figure 4. As part of a study of the diatom T. pseudonana, Montsant et al. also reported finding transmembrane leucine-rich repeat kinases in P. ramorum and P.
sojae, as well as in T.pseudonana [20]. However, we find
that the diatom proteins do not cluster with those
oomycete-specific subfamilies. Bowler et al. also
reported that the leucine-rich repeat kinases of the diatom P. triconutum are unrelated to proteins in Phytophthora [41]. It therefore appears that receptor-like
kinases have appeared multiple times during evolution.
Tyrosine kinases (TK)

The wide existence throughout eukaryotes of tyrosine
phosphorylation has not been disputed, but whether this
results from tyrosine kinases as opposed to dual-specificity
kinases (such as DYLKs, which exist in P. infestans) has
been controversial. TKs are a major component of the
ePK superfamily in animals, and have been said to be a
metazoan-specific invention [42]. Most studies report the
absence of TKs from non-metazoans, but two papers suggested that primitive TKs exist in plants and green algae
based on matches to a TK HMM or phylogenetic analysis
[42,43].
P. infestans proteins PITG_02400 and PITG_02529
resemble TKs, with the latter also containing transmembrane domains near its N-terminus. In our initial analyses these clustered with TKL kinases (Figure 1). When
included in phylogenetic trees with P. infestans and
human TKLs, these two proteins had affinity to human
STKR albeit with only modest branch support (Figure 4
upper left corner). However, when the catalytic domains
of PITG_02400 and PITG_02529 were searched against
a database of metazoan kinases, the best hits were
against TKs with E-values of 10-23 and 10 -33 , respectively. When tested against the Kinomer HMMs [44],
the two P. infestans proteins best-matched the TK
model with E values of 10-15 and 10-45, respectively. In
phylogenies with metazoan TKs and the other P. infestans ePKs, PITG_02400 and PITG_02529 clustered with
the TKs with strong branch support (Figure 5A). P.
ramorum and P. sojae orthologs showed similar placement in the trees, while no orthologs were found in H.
arabidopsidis.
Closer examination of the catalytic regions of
PITG_02400 and PITG_02529 provided more evidence
for these being tyrosine kinases. Prior studies indicated
that subdomains VIB and VIII contribute to substrate
recognition, with most serine/threonine kinases having
HRD(I/L)KxxN in subdomain VIb and tyrosine kinase
having HRD(I/L)AARN. As shown in Figure 5B, the
two putative P. infestans TKs and orthologs from
P. ramorum and P. sojae contain the latter. PITG_02400

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Page 13 of 20

and PITG_02529 also match the TK signature in subdomain VIII, having proline in the second position instead
of threonine. These can be compared to the sequences
of these subdomains in other human and P. infestans
ePKs in more detail in Additional File 2 Fig. S1.
This data provides the strongest support yet for the
existence of TKs outside metazoans. The putative A.
thaliana TKs described previously [44] had E values
against the TK HMM of only 10-13 compared to 10-45
for PITG_02529. We observe that those kinases lack the
AARN at the end of subdomain VIb, and another genome-wide study in A. thaliana found that all of the
plant kinases contained the KxxN motif associated with
serine/threonine kinases [45]. Also, unlike the putative
A. thaliana TKs which are predicted to be catalytically
dead, the P. infestans TKs contain the lysine in subdomain II and aspartates in subdomains VIb and VII that
are considered required for phosphotransfer activity.
One previous study also suggested that P. infestans
might contain a TK based on the clustering of an ESTderived sequence with TKs, albeit with weak branch
support [42]. Our analysis of the full-length gene suggests it is a serine/threonine kinase, however.
It therefore appears that TKs predated the radiation of
eukaryotic life forms, although convergent evolution can
not be excluded. The extent of the importance of tyrosine phosphorylation in oomycetes remains to be elucidated. Only four proteins in P. infestans contain
plausible SH2 phosphotyrosine-binding domains and
none have PTB phosphotyrosine-binding domains.
Dual-specificity phosphatases have been detected, however, which are an indicator of phosphotyrosine signaling [46].
OTHER family

Figure 5 Features of putative tyrosine kinases of Phytophthora.
A, Maximum likelihood tree incorporating the TKs from P. infestans
(Pi prefix) and their orthologs from P. ramorum (Pr) and P. sojae (Ps).
Also included are three representatives of each of the P. infestans
TKL, AGC, STE, CAMK, CK1, and CMGC groups, which are shown in
collapsed branches to conserve space. The analysis also
incorporated 60 metazoan TKs; to ensure that diverse TKs were
analyzed, these included representatives of clades 1 to 20 as
defined in a previous study [1]. Numbers at nodes are aLRT values
from PhyML. B, Sequences of kinase subdomains VIb and VIII.
Shown are relative amino acid frequencies for the predicted
Phytophthora TKs (Phy; includes orthologs from P. infestans, P.
ramorum, P. sojae), along with human TKs. Also illustrated are the
amino acid frequencies within those domains in P. infestans and
human TKLs.

This comprises ePKs that do not fit well into the
above-described groups, but which nonetheless are
typically well-conserved in eukaryotes. P. infestans contains 35 OTHER kinases (Additional File 1 Table S1).
These include ePKs involved in cell division such as
four Aurora, six NEK, two POLO-like (PLK), and two
WEE kinases. Also detected were four NAK kinases
which in other species regulate the cytoskeleton, one
VPS15 kinase which participates in protein sorting, a
WNK kinase which regulates ion homeostasis, and five
PEK/GCN2 kinases which control translation initiation
and participate in the starvation response. Two ULK
kinases were also detected, which in yeast control
autophagy.
Some workers suggested that most of these kinases can
be placed in the main families. We have not chosen that

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Page 14 of 20

approach in this study since most group with each other
in phylogenetic analysis (Figure 1). The exceptions are
Aurora and POLO, which have affinity to the CAMK
family.
Expression pattern of ePKs

Microarray and qRT-PCR analysis was used to measure
mRNA levels in hyphae, asexual sporangia, and swimming zoospores to obtain more insight into the function
of the kinases. By mining data from our prior microarray study [47], reliable signals were obtained for 221
ePK genes in one or more of the three developmental
stages. The remainder were either not represented or
gave poor signals on those microarrays, and to obtain
data from these qRT-PCR was performed. In total,
expression could be measured reliably for 293 kinases in
the three developmental stages by combining both
approaches. Five genes were studied using both methods, which revealed similar patterns of expression.
A compilation of the data is presented graphically in
Figure 6 and in more detail in Additional File 1 Table S3.
Levels of mRNA for 194 genes, or 66% of measured
ePKs, exhibited >2-fold differences between hyphae,
sporangia, or zoospores at P < 0.05, based on two biological replicates. Six main patterns were detected. Ninetyeight genes showed little change between stages (Figure
6A), 27 were mostly hyphal-specific (Figure 6B), 55 were
upregulated in sporangia (Figure 6C), and 77 were
induced in zoospores (Figure 6D). Smaller numbers of
genes were down-regulated in zoospores or sporangia
(Figure 6E, F).
While many ePKs are subjected to strong transcriptional regulation during development, not all families
show the same patterns. This is illustrated on the right
side of Figure 6 which shows the proportion of each
expression pattern within each family. For example, the
CK1 family shows little change between stages, AGC
kinases lack hyphal-specific members, and most STE
kinases are induced in sporangia or zoospores. The latter observation implies that some MAPK pathway
branches may be important in spore development or
germination.
Another observation that may shed light on how lifestages are controlled in P. infestans involves two genes
encoding WEE kinases, which in other species block
entry into mitosis. PITG_00477 mRNA is upregulated
10-fold in sporangia and PITG_10062 is zoosporeinduced, which may explain why mitosis is dormant in
these spores. Also highly upregulated in zoospores is
PITG_18073, which is a cyclin-dependent kinase. It is
interesting to speculate whether this gene regulates
nuclear or cellular dynamics in zoospores or germinating zoospore cysts. One more story of note involves
the sporulation-specific kinase PITG_13567. This

Figure 6 Expression patterns of P. infestans ePKs. Data from
microarray and qRT-PCR experiments were pooled, per-gene
normalized, and subjected to hierarchical and K-means clustering.
Six main clusters (A-F) were identified based on mRNA levels in
hyphae, sporangia, and zoospores. Shown on the left are box-plots
of the expression levels in each tissue, with horizontal lines
matching the 0, 25, 50, 75, and 100th percentiles of the genes in
each group. Shown on the right are the percent of ePKs in each of
the major families that reside in clusters A to F.

encodes a NEK kinase, which in other species regulates
the formation and stability of the axonemal microtubules of flagella [48]. Perhaps this protein also plays
such a role in sporangia, which already contain all
proteins needed for zoosporogenesis [49]. Other
kinases with intriguing potential functions can be
extracted from the data but are too numerous to
describe here.
Besides suggesting how kinases regulate development,
the expression data can help indicate whether the ePK
gene models actually lead to a protein; in any genome
project, not all predicted proteins are necessarily
expressed. Based on data from the microarray and qRTPCR studies, and searches of databases of P. infestans
expressed sequence tags for matches to the gene models, it appears that at least 327 of the 354 P. infestans
ePK genes are transcribed. Evidence of expression was
also obtained for 27 of the 32 predicted catalytically
inactive kinases.

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Genomic organization of ePKs

P. infestans has a large and complex genome, in which
the total size is 240 Mb and 70% of sequences are repetitive [18]. Many gene families appear to have expanded
through mechanisms such as unequal crossing over.
This includes ePKs where 66 are organized in 23 clusters of 2 to 13 members; a cluster is defined as two or
more genes of similar sequence that reside within two
genes of each other on a genomic scaffold.
A comparison of P. infestans and P. ramorum indicate
that most ePK clusters predate speciation. Of ePKs
within the 23 clusters of P. infestans, orthologs of at least
17 also comprise clusters in P. ramorum (Figure 7).
The opposite analysis reveals that 22 clusters exist within
P. ramorum, with 17 conserved in P. infestans. These are
approximate values since both species have draft genomes with some short contigs.
While the number of clusters in each species are similar, many show dynamic changes. For example, cluster
a’ contains five ePKs in P. infestans but only two in P.
ramorum, while cluster g has four members in P.
ramorum and two in P. infestans.
These differences may be important for biological
diversification. Remarkably, these expansions and reductions are balanced such that kinome sizes are nearly
identical between P. infestans (354) and P. ramorum
(352). Orthologous pairs can also be identified for nearly
every kinase in these species, if one accounts for family
expansion. Their kinomes are also more similar in size
than their proteomes, as P. infestans is predicted to have
17,797 genes and P. ramorum 14,451. The most common clustered ePK gene encodes a TKL kinase. This
may explain why this family is the largest and why it
contains the most catalytically inactive members, since
mutations may be tolerated more in a gene copy after

Figure 7 Clusters of ePKs in the genomes of P. infestans and P.
ramorum. A survey of the distributions of ePKs along supercontigs
revealed 28 clusters in one or both species (a to z, a’ to b’). Shown
are the number of genes within orthologous clusters.

Page 15 of 20

duplication. This does not necessarily mean that most
catalytically inactive TKL proteins lack a function. Most
also contain transmembrane domains and therefore
resemble the receptor tyrosine kinases of metazoans,
where some pseudokinases act as regulatory partners.
For example, in humans the HER2 kinase assumes its
active conformation only after associating with the
HER3 pseudokinase [21].
Comparison of P. infestans and H. arabidopsis kinomes

The P. infestans and H. arabidopsidis kinomes were
comprehensively compared to more thoroughly study
how kinomes evolved over a broader evolutionary distance. H. arabidopsidis is in a different family of the
Class Oomycota (Peronosporaceae versus Pythiaceae),
although not very distant compared to other oomycetes
[50]. H. arabidiopsidis is distinguished from many
oomycetes including P. infestans in that the former has
lost the ability to produce zoospores and can not grow
on artificial media which may indicate a loss of metabolic or regulatory pathways [51]. The current genome
release of H. arabidopsidis, based on 9.5-fold Sanger
coverage, measures its gene content at about 90% of P.
ramorum and 75% of P. infestans. Much of the variation
in gene number has been attributed to differences in
families of effector proteins that modulate interactions
with plants [52]. Gene content does not correlate to
genome size, as the downy mildew genome is larger
than that of P. ramorum (77 versus 65 Mb).
The H. arabidopsidis ePK kinome comprises 207 proteins, which is 42% less than P. infestans and exceeds
the 25% difference in their total genes. Apparently, ePK
genes were lost from the downy mildew or families
expanded in P. infestans. The possibility that the small
appearance of the H. arabidopsidis kinome is an artifact
of poor gene calling or assembly was considered but
excluded. In multiple cases where an ortholog was
absent, we searched unsuccessfully for “missing” genes
in noncoding regions of the assembly and unplaced
reads. Also, as will be noted below, the absent kinases
are preferentially from certain subfamilies. It is possible
that the challenge of assembling diverged alleles in
diploids led to an overestimation of the P. infestans
kinome, but only four of its ePKs were on small contigs
or contig edges which might suggest this.
Additional insight into the evolution of the two
kinomes was revealed by comparing the number of
ePKs per family (Table 1) and subfamily (Table 3). The
P. infestans ePKs that contain orthologs in the downy
mildew are also marked with blue circles in Figure 1.
These data reveal that the loss of kinases in the downy
mildew is uneven. Only the CK1 family has the same
size in both species, with the rest being 20 to 60%
reduced in the downy mildew. Some differences are

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

remarkable and have significant biological implications.
For example, P. infestans is predicted to encode five
STE11 MAP3Ks compared to only one for the downy
mildew.
Notable differences that might be related to the
absence of zoospores from the downy mildew are seen
in the NAK and NEK families. Four and one NAKs are
detected in P. infestans and H. arabidopsidis, respectively. NAKs regulate cytoskeleton dynamics [53], which
is important during zoosporogenesis and zoospore cyst
germination. Moreover, two of the NAKs that are missing from the downy mildew are transcriptionally
induced in P. infestans sporangia, which is the stage that
forms zoospores. Regarding the NEK subfamily, P. infestans and H. arabidopsidis are predicted to encode six
and three such proteins, respectively. NEKs are known
to regulate flagella [48], and at least one gene missing
from the downy mildew is upregulated in P. infestans
sporangia. However, not all genes missing from the
downy mildew exhibited spore-specific expression in P.
infestans.
While many subfamilies exhibit large differences
between the species, others were present in equal numbers. For example, this was the case with POLO and
WEE. The TKL subfamily IRAK also had identical numbers. In contrast, other TKL subfamilies showed dramatic changes. For example, the OS1 subfamily is
reduced from 13 to 2 members in the downy mildew
compared to P. infestans, and OS3 is trimmed from 33
to 7. Since TLKs are the most likely ePKs to reside in
clusters, their expansion in P. infestans through unequal
mitotic crossing over might explain the differences.
Atypical protein kinases

Many species express so-called atypical protein kinases
(aPKs), which phosphorylate proteins but are not members of the ePK group [2,3]. Some have weak similarity
to ePKs, while others have unique evolutionary histories
and catalytic mechanisms. Humans encode a total of 20
aPKs while yeast makes nine. P. infestans, P. ramorum,
and H. arabidopsidis encode 18, 20, and 18 aPKs,
respectively (Additional File 1 Table S2).
RIO kinases have some similarity to the ePK catalytic
domain, but interact differently with ATP and lack the
standard peptide binding region. RIO is found in organisms ranging from archaea to eukaryotes, and participates in ribosome biogenesis and some cell cycle events.
P. infestans encodes four RIO proteins, which can be
classified as three RIO1 and one RIO2 based on diagnostic features in their N-termini [2]. P. ramorum also
has four RIO kinases, while H. arabiodopsidis has three.
An explanation for the “missing” gene in the downy mildew is that one gene duplicated early in the Phytophthora lineage, since two similar RIO genes reside

Page 16 of 20

near each other in P. infestans, P. ramorum, and P.
sojae. Retroelement-like sequences comprise much of
the intervening DNA which hints at the process underlying the duplication.
Alpha kinases are named based on their habit of phosphorylating alpha helices, and are known to regulate
transcription elongation and ion channels. They have
minor sequence similarity but stronger structural similarity to the ePK catalytic fold. A check of oomycetes
and neighboring taxa reveals a checkered pattern of distribution of these proteins. P. infestans, P. ramorum,
and H. arabidopsidis each encode three Alpha kinases,
which are unlinked in their genomes. The ortholog
group exemplified by PITG_06533 contains a weak
match (E = 10-4) to a N-terminal von Willebrand factor
type A (VWA) domain, which may be a metal iondependent protein adhesion site. Alpha kinases with the
VWA domain have been described previously in
humans and fungi. We found Alpha kinases in the moss
Physcomitrella patens, albeit without the VWA domain,
but not in higher plants. Diatoms also contain Alpha
kinases without VWA domains and the ciliate P. tetraurelia encodes several Alpha kinases including some
with VWA. None were found in the apicomplexans T.
gondii or P. falciparum.
Phosphoinositide 3’ kinase-related kinases (PIKK) have
some structural similarity to ePKs, but utilize a divergent catalytic mechanism and are more related to lipid
kinases. PIKKs only phosphorylate proteins and are
distinguished from lipid kinases by the presence of Nterminal FAT and C-terminal FATC domains. These
proteins are widely distributed in eukaryotes, and help
coordinate cellular responses to stress. P. infestans, P.
ramorum, and H. arabidopsidis each encode four PIKKs,
which are unlinked to each other in the genome. Two in
each species contain a rapamycin binding domain,
which defines them as relatives of the mammalian
mTOR protein. In addition, the species contain two proteins that appear PIKK-like, but lack either the FAT
(PITG_05423) or FATC domains (PITG_03571).
Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDHK) is a mitochondrial protein which regulates the activity of pyruvate
dehydrogenase. Unlike the kinases described previously,
it phosphorylates histidine. PDHKs can be identified by
the presence of histidine kinase-ATPase and mitochondrial branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase
kinase domains. P. infestans, P. ramorum and H. arabidopsidis each encode four PDHKs. While two of the
PDHKs are adjacent to each other in P. ramorum and
H. arabiodopsidis, this is not the case in P. infestans
which suggests a post-speciation genome rearrangement.
Histidine kinases (HK) are believed to have evolved in
bacteria and spread by horizontal transfer to eukaryotes
[3]. They are found in most eukaryotes except animals.

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Bacterial HK systems are generally composed of an
autophosphorylating histidine kinase and a separate
response regulator protein, but these are usually on the
same molecule in eukaryotes. The size of the HK family
exhibits some flexibility in oomycetes as three, five, and
four were found in P. infestans, P. ramorum, and H.
arabidopsidis, respectively. In each species the genes
reside in one or two clusters, which suggests a mechanism underlying the different numbers. Each protein contains both the kinase and response regulator domains
typical of eukaryotic HKs, but not the transmembrane
domain seen in some HKs. Each oomycete HK contains
a tandem array of N-terminal PAS folds, which is a
cofactor sensor domain. The three P. infestans proteins
contain 10, 15, and 21 PAS domains, P. ramorum proteins have up to 20, and H. arabidopsidis proteins have
up to 11. The size of these arrays are exceptional since
eukaryotic HKs with PAS folds typically contain one to
three, and the same is true for most bacterial HKs
although up to 11 are reported in Geobacter.
Several data raised the possibility that distinct horizontal transfer events provided HK to oomycete and
non-oomycete lineages. For example, the size of the
oomycete PAS arrays resemble those of bacteria. Also,
the HK of the diatom T. pseudonana has only one PAS
domain, plus a GAF (phytochrome) domain that is also
in plant HKs but not oomycetes. PAS domains are also
absent from HKs of the ciliates P. tetraurelia and T.
thermophila. Finally, the apicomplexans P. faliciparum
and T. gondii lack HKs, although Cryptosporidium parvum may contain one HK-like protein although
response regulator and PAS domains are absent. Phylogenetic analyses using whole protein sequences, or separate analyses of the histidine kinase phosphoacceptor,
histidine kinase ATPase, and response regulator
domains did not provide a clear resolution about
whether oomycetes acquired HKs independently,
however.
While aPKs are not the central focus of this paper,
they provide a useful control for comparing the kinomes
of Phytophthora and H. arabidopsidis. While major
changes in ePK numbers were observed, aPKs were
nearly identical. The small differences in aPKs appear to
be attributable to repeat expansion, which apparently
also influenced the evolution of the ePK families.

Conclusions
P. infestans contains a large kinome compared to that of
most other lower eukaryotes, including fungal plant
pathogens that occupy similar environmental niches but
typically express only about 100 ePKs and less than 10
aPKs [54]. The comparison of Phytophthora and Hyaloperonospora also revealed diversity within oomycetes,
which may underlie their biological differences. It was

Page 17 of 20

notable that TKs were detected only in Phytophthora,
which in itself is a striking discovery since there are few
examples of TKs outside metazoans. This underscores
the value of including diverse eukaryotes in studies of
kinase evolution besides the animal, fungal, and plant
models. Features shared between oomycete and plant
ePKs (and often alveolate ePKs as well) such as the
CDPK-like and calcineurin-regulated SnRK3 subfamilies
also help to solidify theories concerning the transfer of
genes from a common ancestor or endosymbiont.
Functional studies have been performed on only one
oomycete kinase [55], so this paper has minimized speculation about their cellular roles. Nevertheless the data
hint about which may be worth examining to learn
more about novel aspects of oomycete biology. For
example, studies of spore-specific kinases in subfamilies
with roles in cytoskeleton dynamics might help illuminate zoosporogenesis, and examination of the receptorlike kinases might reveal signaling mechanisms at the
plant-pathogen interface. These kinases and their associated signaling pathways might also be useful targets
for crop protection chemicals, or drugs against maladies
caused by the animal-pathogenic oomycetes. Kinases are
subjects of many drug discovery activities in medicine
[56].

Methods
Discovery of protein kinase genes and gene model
correction

P. infestans genomic sequences (assembly version 2) and
gene models were obtained from the Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard http://www.broadinstitute.org/
science/data. ePK candidates were identified by searching these with HMM profiles of kinase domains, using
TBLASTN to search the assemblies using catalytic
domains from selected kinases (from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Arabidopsis thaliana, humans, and oomycetes),
and checking for keywords within lists of BLAST hits
against GenBank. This resulted in a list of about 370
ePK candidates. Several ePKs appeared to be duplicates
resulting from incorrect assembly and were discarded;
these typically involved cases where the two genes had
identical sequences, with one based on a large contig
and the other on a very short contig. ePK pseudogenes
were predicted based on the presence of internal stop
codons, frameshift mutations within the catalytic
domain, or deletions in otherwise well-conserved
regions. aPKs were found using similar approaches.
Gene models were assessed by using expressed
sequence tag data, checking for questionable features,
and making comparisons to P. ramorum and P. sojae
gene models (v. 2.0) available at http://vmd.vbi.vt.edu/
toolkit/. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was also used to test models containing novel

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

domain combinations which might have resulted from
the artificial fusion of two genes. In total, more plausible
gene models were created for 60% of P. infestans genes.
Kinases were also obtained from the databases of H.
arabidopsidis (v. 8.3), P. ramorum, and P. sojae. This
entailed keyword searches and TBLASTN searches of
gene models, assemblies, and unassembled reads. Due to
the potential of errors in gene models, a low-stringency
threshold E value of 10-10 for matches against the Pfam
HMM for ePKs was used to identify the kinases. Data
from T. pseudodonana were obtained from the Joint
Genome Institute (v. 3; http://genome.jgi-psf.org/) and
classified. While a prior report identified 190 gene models tagged with the IPR000719 annotation for ePKs [20],
about 20% had very weak E values and stronger matches
in GenBank against non-ePKs, and were consequently
eliminated from our analysis. The proteomes of other
organisms were not analysed systematically, but were
searched at GenBank, EuPATHdb http://eupathdb.org,
or the Joint Genome Institute. Orthologs were identified
using a combination of reciprocal best BLAST and phylogenetics methods.
Classification of kinases

Kinases were categorized according to the taxonomy
established by Hanks and Hunter [1] using three methods in parallel. One involved comparing the sequences
against a database of metazoan kinases that had been
classified into families and subfamilies http://kinase.com.
A second matched the unknowns to HMM models for
different kinase families using Kinomer http://www.
compbio.dundee.ac.uk/kinomer. When contradictions
occurred, a final determination was made by phylogenetic analysis against representative kinases.

Page 18 of 20

bootstrap replicates for alignments of the total kinome,
or 500 replicates for individual groups of kinases. Trees
were visualized using the FigTree program.
Kinase expression

mRNA levels during development were calculated from
Affymetrix microarray data [47], which are deposited in
NCBI GEO as series GSE9623, or data generated for
this study by qRT-PCR. This employed DNAse-treated
RNA from nonsporulating vegetative hyphae grown on
rye-sucrose broth, freshly harvested and unchilled sporangia from 7-day cultures, and swimming zoospores
released from the sporangia prepared as described [47].
At least two biological replicates of each tissue were
used. Hot-start Taq polymerase (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, California USA) was used in amplifications
with primers targeted to the 3’ portions of genes (150225 nt amplicons; Additional File 1 Table S4), with the
intercalation of SYBR Green as a reporter. cDNA levels
were normalized based on primers for a constitutively
expressed gene encoding ribosomal protein S3a. Expression was determined by the ΔΔCT method from triplicate reactions. Relative expression data from
microarrays and qRT-PCR were pooled and analyzed
using GeneSpring (Agilent Technologies, Foster City,
California USA).
Calcium binding assays

Recombinant PITG_08008 was prepared using pMALC2x as a fusion with maltose binding protein. The
recombinant protein and maltose binding protein alone
were purified on amylose columns and tested for binding to 45Ca2+ using an overlay assay [58].

Additional material
Protein domain analysis

Proteins were searched for matches against the Pfam
and SMART databases http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk, http://
smart.embl-heidelberg.de using an E threshold of 10-5.
P. infestans gene models having weak matches to the
protein kinase domain (E > 10 -10 ) were rechecked to
help eliminate errors. Transmembrane domains were
identified using the TMHMM server at http://www.cbs.
dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/, and signal peptides using
PSORT at http://psort.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp/form.html.

Additional File 1: Table S1. Sequence, structure, and classification of
ePKs from P. infestans. Table S2. Sequence, structure, and classification of
aPKs from P. infestans. Table S3. Expression data for ePKs from P.
infestans. Table S4. Primers used for qRT-PCR.
Additional File 2: Fig. S1. Amino acid composition of catalytic region
subdomains VIb and VIII in the seven main groups of kinases from P.
infestans and humans.

Phylogenetic analysis

List of abbreviations
aPK: atypical protein kinase; ePK: eukaryotic protein kinase; HMM: hidden
Markov model; qRT-PCR: quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction.

Alignments of protein sequences were performed using
the SEAVIEW implementation of MUSCLE using
default parameters [57]. Maximum likelihood trees were
made from these alignments using PhyML, using the LG
substitution model and collecting SH-like aLRT data for
branch support. These were compared with neighborjoining trees constructed using BioNJ using 100

Acknowledgements
We thank Brian Haas and the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT for
providing access to the P. infestans genome data, Tom Hirshauser for
assistance in analyzing gene models, and Jason Stajich for helpful
discussions. We are also grateful to the Virginia Bioinformatics Institute for
providing access to the H. arabidopsidis database prior to publication, and to
the P. ramorum and P. sojae databases. This work was supported by an
award to H.S.J. from the National Science Foundation of the United States.

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Authors’ contributions
HSJ carried out the global analyses of protein kinases and performed
expression studies. AAF analysed subsets of kinases and other proteins,
tested gene models, and performed biochemical studies of kinases. All
authors participated in writing the manuscript and approved the manuscript.
Received: 18 May 2010 Accepted: 9 December 2010
Published: 9 December 2010

Page 19 of 20

20.

21.
22.

References
1. Hanks SK, Hunter T: The eukaryotic protein kinase superfamily: Kinase
(catalytic) domain structure and classification. FASEB J 1995, 9:576-596.
2. LaRonde-LeBlanc N, Wlodawer A: The RIO kinases: an atypical protein
kinase family required for ribosome biogenesis and cell cycle
progression. Biochim Biophys Acta 2005, 1754:14-24.
3. Wuichet K, Cantwell BJ, Zhulin IB: Evolution and phyletic distribution of
two-component signal transduction systems. Curr Opin Microbiol 2010,
13:219-225.
4. Becker W, Joost HG: Structural and functional characteristics of Dyrk, a
novel subfamily of protein kinases with dual specificity. Prog Nucleic Acid
Res Mol Biol 1999, 62:1-17.
5. Deshmukh K, Anamika K, Srinivasan N: Evolution of domain combinations
in protein kinases and its implications for functional diversity. Prog
Biophys Mol Biol 2010, 102:1-15.
6. Champion A, Kreis M, Mockaitis K, Picaud A, Henry Y: Arabidopsis kinome:
after the casting. Funct Integr Genomics 2004, 4:163-187.
7. Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S: The protein
kinase complement of the human genome. Science 2002, 298:1912-1934.
8. Manning G, Plowman GD, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S: Evolution of protein
kinase signaling from yeast to man. Trends Biochem Sci 2002, 27:514-520.
9. Manning G, Young SL, Miller WT, Zhai Y: The protist, Monosiga brevicollis,
has a tyrosine kinase signaling network more elaborate and diverse
than found in any known metazoan. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:9674-9679.
10. Goldberg JM, Manning G, Liu A, Fey P, Pilcher KE, Xu Y, Smith JL: The
Dictyostelium kinome–analysis of the protein kinases from a simple
model organism. PLoS Genet 2006, 2:e38.
11. Bemm F, Schwarz R, Forster F, Schultz J: A kinome of 2600 in the ciliate
Paramecium tetraurelia. FEBS Lett 2009, 583:3589-3592.
12. Hrabak EM, Chan CW, Gribskov M, Harper JF, Choi JH, Halford N, Kudla J,
Luan S, Nimmo HG, Sussman MR, Thomas M, Walker-Simmons K, Zhu JK,
Harmon AC: The Arabidopsis CDPK-SnRK superfamily of protein kinases.
Plant Physiol 2003, 132:666-680.
13. Adl SM, Simpson AG, Farmer MA, Andersen RA, Anderson OR, Barta JR,
Bowser SS, Brugerolle G, Fensome RA, Fredericq S, James TY, Karpov S,
Kugrens P, Krug J, Lane CE, Lewis LA, Lodge J, Lynn DH, Mann DG,
McCourt RM, Mendoza L, Moestrup O, Mozley-Standridge SE, Nerad TA,
Shearer CA, Smirnov AV, Spiegel FW, Taylor MF: The new higher level
classification of eukaryotes with emphasis on the taxonomy of protists. J
Eukaryot Microbiol 2005, 52:399-451.
14. Simpson AG, Roger AJ: The real ‘kingdoms’ of eukaryotes. Curr Biol 2004,
14:R693-696.
15. Fry W: Phytophthora infestans: the plant (and R gene) destroyer. Mol
Plant Pathol 2008, 9:385-402.
16. Judelson HS, Blanco FA: The spores of Phytophthora: weapons of the
plant destroyer. Nature Microbiol Rev 2005, 3:47-58.
17. Judelson HS, Roberts S: Novel protein kinase induced during sporangial
cleavage in the oomycete Phytophthora infestans. Eukaryot Cell 2002,
1:687-695.
18. Haas BJ, Kamoun S, Zody MC, Jiang RH, Handsaker RE, Cano LM,
Grabherr M, Kodira CD, Raffaele S, Torto-Alalibo T, Bozkurt TO, Ah-Fong AM,
Alvarado L, Anderson VL, Armstrong MR, Avrova A, Baxter L, Beynon J,
Boevink PC, Bollmann SR, Bos JI, Bulone V, Cai G, Cakir C, Carrington JC,
Chawner M, Conti L, Costanzo S, Ewan R, Fahlgren N, et al: Genome
sequence and analysis of the Irish potato famine pathogen
Phytophthora infestans. Nature 2009, 461:393-398.
19. Tyler BM, Tripathy S, Zhang X, Dehal P, Jiang RH, Aerts A, Arredondo FD,
Baxter L, Bensasson D, Beynon JL, Chapman J, Damasceno CM,
Dorrance AE, Dou D, Dickerman AW, Dubchak IL, Garbelotto M, Gijzen M,
Gordon SG, Govers F, Grunwald NJ, Huang W, Ivors KL, Jones RW,

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.
31.
32.
33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.
39.
40.

41.

42.
43.

Kamoun S, Krampis K, Lamour KH, Lee MK, McDonald WH, Medina M, et al:
Phytophthora genome sequences uncover evolutionary origins and
mechanisms of pathogenesis. Science 2006, 313:1261-1266.
Montsant A, et al: Identification and comparative genomic analysis of
signaling and regulatory components in the diatom Thalassiosira
pseudonana. J Phycol 2007, 43:585-604.
Boudeau J, Miranda-Saavedra D, Barton GJ, Alessi DR: Emerging roles of
pseudokinases. Trends Cell Biol 2006, 16:443-452.
Parsons M, Worthey EA, Ward PN, Mottram JC: Comparative analysis of the
kinomes of three pathogenic trypanosomatids: Leishmania major,
Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma cruzi. BMC Genomics 2005, 6:127.
Morris PF, Schlosser LR, Onasch KD, Wittenschlaeger T, Austin R, Provart N:
Multiple horizontal gene transfer events and domain fusions have
created novel regulatory and metabolic networks in the oomycete
genome. PLoS One 2009, 4:e6133.
Bogre L, Okresz L, Henriques R, Anthony RG: Growth signalling pathways
in Arabidopsis and the AGC protein kinases. Trends Plant Sci 2003,
8:424-431.
Meijer HJ, Govers F: Genomewide analysis of phospholipid signaling
genes in Phytophthora spp.: novelties and a missing link. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 2006, 19:1337-1347.
Baldauf SL, Roger AJ, Wenk-Siefert I, Doolittle WF: A kingdom-level
phylogeny of eukaryotes based on combined protein data. Science 2000,
290:972-977.
Harmon AC, Gribskov M, Gubrium E, Harper JF: The CDPK superfamily of
protein kinases. New Phytol 2001, 151:175-183.
Deacon JW, Donaldson SP: Molecular recognition in the homing
responses of zoosporic fungi, with special reference to Pythium and
Phytophthora. Mycol Res 1993, 97:1153-1171.
Cheng S-H, Willmann MR, Chen H-C, Sheen J: Calcium signaling through
protein kinases The Arabidopsis calcium-dependent protein kinase gene
family. Plant Physiol 2002, 129:469-485.
Srinivasan N, Krupa A: A genomic perspective of protein kinases in
Plasmodium falciparum. Proteins 2005, 58:180-189.
Harmon AC, Gribskov M, Harper JF: CDPKs: A kinase for every Ca2+ signal?
Trends Plant Sci 2000, 5:154-159.
Gaffin SL: Simplified calcium transport and storage pathways. J Thermal
Biol 1999, 24:251-264.
Malumbres M, Harlow E, Hunt T, Hunter T, Lahti JM, Manning G,
Morgan DO, Tsai LH, Wolgemuth DJ: Cyclin-dependent kinases: a family
portrait. Nat Cell Biol 2009, 11:1275-1276.
Wang G, Kong H, Sun Y, Zhang X, Zhang W, Altman N, DePamphilis CW,
Ma H: Genome-wide analysis of the cyclin family in Arabidopsis and
comparative phylogenetic analysis of plant cyclin-like proteins. Plant
Physiol 2004, 135:1084-1099.
Johnson GL, Lapadat R: Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways
mediated by ERK, JNK, and p38 protein kinases. Science 2002,
298:1911-1912.
Nakagami H, Pitzschke A, Hirt H: Emerging MAP kinase pathways in plant
stress signalling. Trends Plant Sci 2005, 10:339-346.
Ward P, Equinet L, Packer J, Doerig C: Protein kinases of the human
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum: the kinome of a divergent
eukaryote. BMC Genomics 2004, 5:79.
Champion A, Picaud A, Henry Y: Reassessing the MAP3K and MAP4K
relationships. Trends Plant Sci 2004, 9:123-129.
Meylan E, Tschopp J: IRAK2 takes its place in TLR signaling. Nat Immunol
2008, 9:581-582.
Shiu SH, Bleecker AB: Receptor-like kinases from Arabidopsis form a
monophyletic gene family related to animal receptor kinases. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:10763-10768.
Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP, Rayko E, Salamov A, Vandepoele K,
Beszteri B, Gruber A, Heijde M, Katinka M, Mock T, Valentin K, Verret F,
Berges JA, Brownlee C, Cadoret JP, Chiovitti A, Choi CJ, Coesel S, De
Martino A, Detter JC, Durkin C, Falciatore A, et al: The Phaeodactylum
genome reveals the evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature
2008, 456:239-244.
Shiu SH, Li WH: Origins, lineage-specific expansions, and multiple losses
of tyrosine kinases in eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:828-840.
Miranda-Saavedra D, Barton GJ: Classification and functional annotation of
eukaryotic protein kinases. Proteins 2007, 68:893-914.

Judelson and Ah-Fong BMC Genomics 2010, 11:700
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/700

Page 20 of 20

44. Martin DM, Miranda-Saavedra D, Barton GJ: Kinomer v. 1.0: a database of
systematically classified eukaryotic protein kinases. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37:D244-250.
45. Rudrabhatla P, Reddy MM, Rajasekharan R: Genome-wide analysis and
experimentation of plant serine/threonine/tyrosine-specific protein
kinases. Plant Mol Biol 2006, 60:293-319.
46. Ah Fong A, Judelson HS: Cell cycle regulator Cdc14 is expressed during
sporulation but not hyphal growth in the fungus-like oomycete
Phytophthora infestans. Molec Microbiol 2003, 50:487-494.
47. Judelson HS, Ah-Fong AM, Aux G, Avrova AO, Bruce C, Cakir C, da Cunha L,
Grenville-Briggs L, Latijnhouwers M, Ligterink W, Meijer HJ, Roberts S,
Thurber CS, Whisson SC, Birch PR, Govers F, Kamoun S, van West P,
Windass J: Gene expression profiling during asexual development of the
late blight pathogen Phytophthora infestans reveals a highly dynamic
transcriptome. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2008, 21:433-447.
48. Bradley BA, Quarmby LM: A NIMA-related kinase, Cnk2p, regulates both
flagellar length and cell size in Chlamydomonas. J Cell Sci 2005,
118:3317-3326.
49. Clark MC, Melanson DL, Page OT: Purine metabolism and differential
inhibition of spore germination in Phytophthora infestans. Can J Microbiol
1978, 24:1032-1038.
50. Riethmueller A, Voglmayr H, Goeker M, Weiss M, Oberwinkler F:
Phylogenetic relationships of the downy mildews (Peronosporales) and
related groups based on nuclear large subunit ribosomal DNA
sequences. Mycologia 2002, 94:834-849.
51. Slusarenko AJ, Schlaich NL: Downy mildew of Arabidopsis thaliana caused
by Hyaloperonospora parasitica (formerly Peronospora parasitica). Molec
Plant Pathol 2003, 4:159-170.
52. Win J, Morgan W, Bos J, Krasileva KV, Cano LM, Chaparro-Garcia A,
Ammar R, Staskawicz BJ, Kamoun S: Adaptive evolution has targeted the
C-terminal domain of the RXLR effectors of plant pathogenic oomycetes.
Plant Cell 2007, 19:2349-2369.
53. Smythe E, Ayscough KR: The Ark1/Prk1 family of protein kinases.
Regulators of endocytosis and the actin skeleton. EMBO Rep 2003,
4:246-251.
54. Alam I, Hubbard SJ, Oliver SG, Rattray M: A kingdom-specific protein
domain HMM library for improved annotation of fungal genomes. BMC
Genomics 2007, 8:97.
55. Blanco FA, Judelson HS: A bZIP transcription factor from Phytophthora
interacts with a protein kinase and is required for zoospore motility and
plant infection. Molec Microbiol 2005, 56:638-648.
56. Cohen P: Protein kinases-the major drug targets of the twenty-first
century? Nat Rev Drug Discov 2002, 1:309-315.
57. Gouy M, Guindon S, Gascuel O: SeaView version 4: a multiplatform
graphical user interface for sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree
building. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:221-224.
58. Garrigos M, Deschamps S, Viel A, Lund S, Champeil P, Moller JV, le Maire M:
Detection of Ca2+-binding proteins by electrophoretic migration in the
presence of Ca2+ combined with 45Ca2+ overlay of protein blots. Anal
Biochem 1991, 194:82-88.
59. Dardick C, Chen J, Richter T, Ouyang S, Ronald P: The rice kinase database.
A phylogenomic database for the rice kinome. Plant Physiol 2007,
143:579-586.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-700
Cite this article as: Judelson and Ah-Fong: The kinome of Phytophthora
infestans reveals oomycete-specific innovations and links to other
taxonomic groups. BMC Genomics 2010 11:700.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
