<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Bacteriophage T4 and its relatives</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2010, 7:293. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-293"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jim D Karam"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Karam and Miller Virology Journal 2010, 7:293
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/293

EDITORIAL

Open Access

Bacteriophage T4 and its relatives
Jim D Karam1*, Eric S Miller2

Bacteriophage T4 and its relatives (A series of
critical reviews)
Jim Karam & Eric Miller
In the coming months Virology Journal will publish a
number of authoritative reviews about the biochemistry,
structural biology and genomics of the bacteriophage T4
and the T4-related phages. Phage T4 is one of the most
extensively investigated viruses and has been the central
focus of several monographs and reviews over the last
25 years. Its popularity among experimental biologists is
related to the ease with which this phage and some of
its relatives can be propagated in widely available nonpathogenic laboratory strains of Escherichia coli and the
diversity of experimental approaches that can be used to
analyze its DNA genome and the RNA and protein products it encodes. The T4 biological system is amenable
to investigation by genetic, phylogenetic, biochemical,
biophysical, structural, computational and other tools.
Advances in T4 science have paralleled advances in
Molecular Biology since the birth of this interdisciplinary field around the middle of the 20th Century [1,2].
Such seminal discoveries as the chemical nature of the
gene, the existence of messenger RNA, how the genetic
code is read, how genes determine protein structure,
how DNA is replicated by multicomponent protein
machines and many other findings that have become
integral to our current understanding of basic molecular
mechanism in biology have typically involved important
contributions from the T4 and T4-related experimental
systems. The last monograph to comprehensively review
all aspects of the molecular biosciences of the T4 virus
was published in 1994 [3]. Since that time, the field of
Molecular Biology has undergone considerable transformation, particularly as a consequence of advancements
in the methods for sequencing microbial and eukaryotic
genomes and using DNA sequence data for novel
experimental designs that have yielded numerous
rewards in resolving biological mysteries and stimulating
* Correspondence: karamoff@tulane.edu
1
Department of Biochemistry, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, 1430
Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

the growth of biotechnology. The review series to be
published in Virology Journal will emphasize advances
and seminal discoveries in four major areas of T4
research: Genomics, Gene Expression, DNA Replication
and Phage Morphogenesis.

Genomics
Phages that share an evolutionary history with T4 are
highly abundant in nature and can be detected by simple plating techniques using a diversity of bacterial genera or species as hosts. Over the last several years,
advances in DNA sequencing technologies have made it
possible to analyze the genomes of a large number of
these phages, including both close and distant phylogenetics relatives of T4. The sequence database for these
T4-like phages is a rich source of insights into the
mechanisms of genome replication, expression, packaging and diversification in evolution. In many cases, the
experimental systems and genetic tools to test these
insights are available. In a review entitled Genomes of
the T4-related phages as windows on microbial evolution, V. Petrov, S. Ratnayaka, J. Nolan, E. Miller and
J. Karam summarize the genome sequence information
currently available in databases for more than 40 T4
relatives that represent a wide array of specificities to
bacterial hosts. Genomes have been sequenced from T4related phages that infect strains of Enterobacteria,
Aeromonas, Acinetobacter, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas,
Vibrio and marine Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus.
Comparisons between these genomes reveal a high
degree of genetic diversity around a conserved core of
genes that determine the replication, temporal expression and packaging (phage morphogenesis) of a specifically designed dsDNA viral chromosome. The review
draws parallels between the diversity of this large and
mosaically organized group of phage genomes and the
type and extent of diversity that is being observed within
groups of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes in general. The broad natural distribution of the T4-related
phages includes the largest ecosystem of our planet, the
marine environment. A review by M. Clokie, A. Millard
and N. Mann (T4-related phages of the marine

© 2010 Karam and Miller; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Karam and Miller Virology Journal 2010, 7:293
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/293

ecosystem) focuses on the comparative genomics and
other studies of T4 relatives that infect cyanobacteria,
particularly the genera Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus. The results of these studies have implications about
the possible roles of the T4-related cyanophages as traffickers of bacterial genes, including genes involved in
photosynthesis, and the potential impact of host-phage
interactions on control of the marine ecology.
A remarkable feature of T4-related genomes, irrespective of the host range or geographical origin, is the
abundance and diversity of mobile DNA elements that
have colonized this group of phages in evolution. Studies with phage T4 were among the first to show the
natural existence of mobile introns in the prokaryotic
world and to elucidate the mechanisms of intron mobility through the action of homing endonucleases [4].
Almost every category of homing endonuclease genes
has been detected in the group of T4-related genomes
sequenced so far. These genes can exist inside as well as
outside of introns and the homing enzymes they produce can mobilize a diversity of DNA sequences laterally
between genomes of the T4 family of phages[5]. In the
article entitled Mobile DNA elements of the T4-related
phages, D. Edgell, E. Gibb and M. Belfort review the
major progress that has been made over the last 15
years in our understanding of the structures, mechanisms of action and physiological roles of these mobile
elements and their potential impact on phage and
microbial evolution.

Gene expression
Temporal gene expression constitutes an important part
of the strategies used by all viruses to coordinate the
different biochemical processes involved in viral genome
replication, genome packaging and the release of new
generations of virus. In general, the control of gene
expression, which is highly permissive to diversification
in the evolution of organisms [6], contributes significantly to the adaptation of viruses to new physiological
conditions such as the encounter of these infectious
genetic entities with new potential hosts. The T4-related
phages exhibit many examples of such diversification. In
three reviews that deal with the control of T4 gene
expression, the authors discuss advances in research on
the structures and functions of the phage-encoded proteins that determine the temporal utilization of the
phage genome during the different stages of phage
development in the bacterial host. The review by D.
Hinton (Control of transcription in the prereplicative
phase of T4 development) discusses the current state of
knowledge about the structures and functions of the
protein factors and DNA sites that control phage genome transcription shortly after the entry of the phage
DNA into the bacterial host cell. The protein-DNA

Page 2 of 4

interactions during the early phase of the phage developmental program set the stage for diverting the host
RNA polymerase from transcription of the bacterial genome to transcription of the T4 genes required for phage
DNA replication, repair and the other replication-related
processes that ultimately ensure the coordination
between phage DNA metabolism and phage morphogenesis. Some of the phage-encoded proteins made during the prereplicative phase introduce modifications
onto subunits of the host RNA polymerase while others
associate with this enzyme and alter the specificity of
the transcription apparatus so that expression of the
phage genes that determine the structure and assembly
of infectious virions is maximized. The review by
E. P. Geiduscheck and G. A. Kassavetis (Transcriptional control during the late phase of T4 development) discusses recent progress in the analysis of the
structures and biochemical functions of the key proteins,
especially gp33, gp45 and gp55, involved in this transition in RNA polymerase specificity from early to late
transcription. These proteins play roles in coordinating
late transcription with genome replication during the
late phase of phage development. The third review,
Posttranscriptional control of T4 development by
M. Uzan and E. S. Miller discusses the several biochemical strategies used by phage T4 to control gene expression beyond the level of transcription. This phage
encodes a number of proteins that exert differential
effects on the utilization of the mRNA for specific
phage induced proteins. These strategies include controls over mRNA activation (RNA processing), inactivation (RNA decay and repression of translation) and host
ribosome function. All 3 reviews highlight the insights
gained from the sequence polymorphism that has been
observed among allelic proteins in the databases for T4
relatives.

DNA replication
T4 encodes all of the proteins required for replication of
the phage DNA genome, including the components of a
complete DNA replisome and several other proteins
that perform important auxiliary functions in the replication, repair and recombination of the genome. The
ease with which the T4 system replication system can
be analyzed by a wide range of experimental tools and
the many similarities this system exhibits to eukaryotic
DNA replication machines have made it a widely recognized model for investigators in the DNA replication
field. Genetic and biochemical studies of the multi-protein complexes that carry out T4 DNA replication have
brought to light the important role that genetic recombination plays in replication [7], elucidated several of
the enzyme mechanisms involved at DNA replication
forks and provided the generally accepted model for

Karam and Miller Virology Journal 2010, 7:293
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/293

coordination of DNA synthesis between the leading and
lagging strands (i.e., the trombone model; [8]). Three
reviews will highlight the recent advances in research on
the mechanisms of the initiation and DNA chain elongation stages of T4 DNA replication and the structures
of the proteins that carry out these processes. A review
by T.C. Mueser, J.M. Devos, J.M. Hinerman and K.J.
Williams (Structural analysis of T4 DNA replication)
discusses these structures with emphasis on the determinants of biochemical function and by drawing parallels
to available structural information about replication proteins from other biological systems. In a review entitled
Initiation of T4 DNA replication and replication fork
dynamics, K. N. Kreuzer and R. J. Brister describe
recent advances in understanding the interplay between
two modes of intiation of T4 DNA replication, one
based on the recognition of specific origins on the T4
dsDNA chromosome and one based on the use of the
enzymes of homologous recombination to create initiation sites through the invasion of the circularly permuted and terminally redundant phage dsDNA
chromosomes by the ends of homologous molecules.
Remarkably, like the linear dsDNA chromosomes of
eukaryotes, the T4 chromosome harbors multiple sites
for intiation (origins) of replication and the review discusses the evidence for differential use of these origins
and the take over by recombination-driven initiation
during the course of the phage developmental program.
Over the last 15 years, the structures of several of the
proteins of the T4 DNA replisome and/or homologous
proteins from the T4-related phage RB69 have been
analyzed at the atomic level by X-ray crystallography. A
review by J. Liu and S.W. Morrical (Assembly and
dynamics of the T4 homologous recombination
machinery) emphasizes advances in research on the
structures and biochemical mechanisms of the T4
encoded proteins that support genetic recombination
and the initiation of phage DNA replication. As an
integral part of the biochemical strategy for generating
hundreds of phage genomes per infected cell, the T4encoded proteins for genetic recombination have
evolved to be abundant and highly active and as a consequence, have been accessible for detailed biochemical
analysis. They are serving as models for evolutionarily
related counterparts in eukaryotes and bacteria.

Phage morphogenesis
Two reviews in this thematic series focus on the synthesis, structures and assembly of the two major components of the T4 virion, the capsid in which the phage
DNA is packaged (T4 heads) and the phage tail and
tail fibers, which make it possible for this bacterial
virus to recognize its bacterial host and deliver its
DNA into the cell. Far from being a hindrance to the

Page 3 of 4

experimental biologist, the complexity of the structure
of the T4 virion has proven to be a great asset in the
elucidation of many biochemical mechanisms that are
broadly represented in other systems of viral assembly
in cellular hosts. The structure of T4 phage particles,
or what is sometimes referred to as the “T4 morphotype”, exhibits several features that are conserved
among phylogenetic relatives of this phage and that
appear to be mimicked by a large number of viruses in
nature. A review entitled Morphogenesis of T4 heads
(by V. Rao and L. Black) discusses the new insights
that have been gained over the last few years about T4
head assembly from the direct structural analysis of a
protein (gp24) related to the major component of the
phage capsid (gp23), solid NMR analysis of T4 particles, other biophysical studies and refinements in in
vitro assays of DNA packaging. A second review (Morphogenesis of the T4 tails and tail fibers by P. G.
Leiman, F. Arisaka, M.J. Van Raiij, A. A. Aksyuk, V. A.
Kostychendo, S. Kanamaru and M. G. Rossmann
further underscores the impact of recent advances in
the structural sciences on understanding of the biochemical processes that underlie the assembly of
multi-component nucleoprotein biological structures.
The studies reviewed here have led to vivid images of
T4 phage particles and the dynamics of phage infection. This review discusses the application of a variety
of approaches that determined the structure of the
contractile tail of T4 and the broad implications of the
findings to the structural organization of other phages
with contractile tails.
Some of the reviews in this series will be supplemented by web-based information to be updated as new
developments in the field come to light. These supplements and updates will include summaries in the form
of PowerPoint charts (including simple animations),
Tables or videos that can be used by research scientists
and educators alike.
Virology Journal is taking a leading role in facilitating
the dissemination of new information in fast-growing
areas of phage biology and the series on T4 and its relatives constitutes a first example of the journal’s efforts
in this regard. We are grateful to Robert F. Garry, Ph.D.,
Editor in Chief of Virology Journal and Professor at
Tulane University for his guidance during the preparation of manuscripts for this thematic series.
Author details
1
Department of Biochemistry, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, 1430
Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA, USA. 2Department of Microbiology,
Campus Box 7615, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.
Received: 3 August 2010 Accepted: 28 October 2010
Published: 28 October 2010

Karam and Miller Virology Journal 2010, 7:293
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/293

Page 4 of 4

References
1. Cairns J, Stent GS, Watson JD, (eds.): Phage and the Origins of Molecular
Biology. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1992.
2. Holmes FL: Seymor Benzer and the definition of the gene. In The concept
of the gene in development and evolution: Historical and episemological
perspectives. Edited by: Beurton P, Falk R, Rheinberger H-J. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press; 2000:115-158.
3. Karam JD, (ed.), et al: Molecular Biology of Bacteriophage T4. Washington,
DC: American Society for Microbiology; 1994.
4. Belfort M: Scientific serendipity initiates an intron odyssey. J Biol Chem
2009, 284(44):29997-30003.
5. Belle A, Landthaler M, Shub DA: Intronless homing: site-specific
endonuclease SegF of bacteriophage T4 mediates localized marker
exclusion analogous to homing endonucleases of group I introns. Genes
Dev 2002, 16(3):351-362.
6. Barton NH, Briggs DEG, Eisen JA, Goldstein DB, Nipam HP: Evolution. New
York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2007.
7. Mosig G, Eiserling F: T4 and related phages: structure and development.
The Bacteriophages Oxford University Press; 2006, 225-267.
8. Alberts B: DNA replication and recombination. Nature 2003,
421(6921):431-435.
doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-293
Cite this article as: Karam and Miller: Bacteriophage T4 and its relatives.
Virology Journal 2010 7:293.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
