<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>To be at the right place at the right time</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68. doi:10.1186/1746-1596-6-68"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Klaus Kayser"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kayser et al. Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/6/1/68

HYPOTHESIS

Open Access

To be at the right place at the right time
Klaus Kayser1*, Stephan Borkenfeld2, Torsten Goldmann3 and Gian Kayser4

Abstract
Aim: To analyze the hypothesis of events or neighborhood interactions that is based upon recognizable structures
of systems which possess a surface in a four dimensional space - time constellation {x, y, z, t}. To include the
theory of hierarchic order of structures and aspects of thermodynamically open systems, especially entropy,
structural entropy and entropy flow.
Hypothesis: Any structure is a space - time constellation that occupies a unique space in its environment. The
environment can be a system too, and is assumed to be (nearly) constant. Structures can interact in their
environment and create a new structure at a higher order level. Interacting structures that create a surface are
called a system. Starting from the bottom, such a system is characterized by its inner structures, its surface
function, and its neighborhood. Interaction with a neighboring system is called an event. An event can alter a
system, create new systems or induce the decay of a system, dependent upon the surrounding lower level system
(background).
Results: The hypothesis results in a uniform theory about matter, life, diseases, or behavior. Concrete applications
permit the estimation of duration of life in man, for example the effect of solid cancer in man, or appearance of
protozoans in sexual or asexual reduplication. In addition, it can successfully describe the development of the
universe (small exceed of matter above antimatter at the big bang), or the increase of structures (and systems)
with increasing time (development of intelligent systems). The three dimensional space possesses the lowest
number of mandatory dimensions to implement such a system.
Keywords: Neighborhood interaction, order of structures, event, surface, entropy

Introduction
The interpretation of our environment and the search for
the “final cause” or destination of our individual life is
assumed to be a question of belief that is out of the range
of natural sciences [1-3] Never the less we are confronted
with convenient or displeasing events in our daily life,
which at least some of us would like to be explained
[1,3]. Why could I escape the imminent accident? Why
did I become agitated in this discussion despite I am personally not involved in any of the disagreed issues? Or,
more difficult, what are the reasons that I do or do not
understand some properties of my environment, for
example those that are described by Einstein’s general
theory of relativity? Why was Elvis Presley that successful
when he started his career? How can I reach the same
level of success?

* Correspondence: klaus.kayser@charite.de
1
Institute of Pathology, Charite, Chariteplatz 1, D-10118 Berlin, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Many of us would answer: You have to be at the right
place at the right time, or to avoid the wrong place at
the wrong time! Try not to understand what you cannot
understand either!
This article introduces a hypothesis on right time and
right place, which tries to generalize our daily experiences of right (or wrong) place and right (or wrong) time.

Theoretical considerations
Obviously, man belongs to a specific class of creatures
which all are characterized by certain features and have
to obey general laws of life. These include a very early
stage of the individual that starts with fertilization, followed by growth and maturation, and finally ends with
its death. In addition, specific functions develop such as
assurance of energy supply (nutrition), or information
exchange with the environment, with individuals of other
or the identical species, and, at the highest level, the
recognition of itself (awareness).

© 2011 Kayser et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kayser et al. Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/6/1/68

Basically, every individual can be distinguished from its
environment, i.e., has to possess a surface [4,5]. The surface is of a lower dimension and divides the individual’s
space - time constellation into two non-overlapping
spaces: the “enclosed” space which belongs to the individual, and the “outer one” which we usually call environment. The surface assures the energy supply to stay alive,
to exchange information and to communicate. It possesses different properties at different areas. Thus, from
the thermodynamic point of view, the system is “open”
[6,7].
We can distinguish between two different “classes” of
individuals, those that are free to move in the space time constellation (animals), and those that are not
(plants). Interestingly, plants possess a less “complicated”
surface compared to that of animals. Plants can live with
roots, boles, branches, leaves, and blossoms already. The
surface of animals includes skin, nails, intestines, air
spaces, ears, eyes, or hair, which are again constructed in
organ specific manner. For example, the air spaces are
differentiated into the nose, trachea - bronchi, terminal
bronchi and air exchange spaces (alveoli). They possess
different structures and different functions [8].
In addition to the described living systems there exist
other systems that also possess a “surface”, which, however, cannot reduplicate in general and seem to be
“stable”. These non-living systems (stones, metals, cars,
computers, etc.) can exchange energy and possess
nested internal structures and systems too and might
become close to those that we call life.
We can now formulate a “basic law” derived from our
experience:
All systems of interest are embedded in a metric
space. In our environment it is a four dimensional
space, that can be separated into three non-directed
coordinates (x, y, z), and into a directed one (time, t).
(x, y, z) and (t) have not to be necessarily independent
from each other, in fact, they are not [9].
Every structure and the related system exist in its own
space- time environment. In other words, systems do
not overlap. Either the space or the time has to differ
for each system.
From this observation we can derive a “constellation”
of systems, i.e. a neighborhood. Two different systems
can be neighbors, either in space, or in time, or in both.
How can we analyze the constellation?
The first question to be answered is: Are the systems
neighbors, or not? Secondly: What are the conditions to
be neighbors?
For practical reasons, and usually limited to analysis of
visual information, the most frequently applied neighborhood condition is based upon Voronoi’s or Dirichlet’s
tessellation [10]. The graph theory is the preferred

Page 2 of 9

mathematical approach to derive information from spatial constellations (structures) [11,12].
Using an appropriate neighborhood condition and formulations of graph theory (for example the minimum
spanning tree and derivatives) we can analyze conditions
and consecutives of interaction between neighboring
systems [13-15]. They can be derived from observations
in living systems, and hopefully can serve for theoretical
approach to describe the basic principle of the universe.
To start with: In our daily life, we all are involved or
observe numerous constellations, which we call “events”,
such as fall in love, good luck, accident, acute heart failure, etc. What about our universe? We explore explosions (novas), new stars, dying stars, etc. In addition, the
most frequently accepted theory of the universe’s origin
is the theory of the big bang [16]. Although not clearly
defined at this stage, we can call the observations and
the big bang an “event”. Do all these events have something in common, or is it just an “accidental” expression
of occurrences that differ “in principle"?
What is an event?

In our environment, we can define an event as the result
of at least two different time - space constellations of
(living) systems (structures of the space-time constellation) that fit together, and induce changes in either one
or both of them. Examples are fertilization of an egg by
a sperm, a lion kills a gazelle, two cars (drivers) crash, a
band plays in front of the auditorium, a politician reads
a news paper, etc.
If the constellations do not fit together (in other words,
if they do not interact or exchange information), nothing
happens (examples: an egg lies on a plate at breakfast, the
gazelle escapes the lion, the seed cannot sprout in the
earth due to lack of water, one driver can avoid the accident, the politician does not understand the newspaper,
etc.). The interaction can affect all involved systems, the
environment only, or only one of the systems. The interaction is usually triggered by spatial movement of one system (lion jumps on a gazelle), by inner changes of one (or
of both) structures, (examples: sperm enters an egg), interaction of additional systems (additional lions eat from the
flesh), or by changes of the environment (sprout of a seed
after rain). Thus, we have a constellation that includes a
minimum of two partners. One of them is a system that
can be described by its location in the space - time environment, its surface, its inner structures, and interactions
that have to involve the surface.
What are the descriptors of an event?

Every living system occupies a certain limited space for
a limited time. Its boundary is called surface. Its inner
space commonly includes additional limited spaces for

Kayser et al. Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/6/1/68

the same or a smaller time the system is alive. In other
words, the system itself possesses inner structures which
are often arranged in a hierarchical order, or nested. In
life, they are often arranged as a functional unit (organ,
vessel, nerve, cell, nucleus, etc.), which means they act
as systems that are embedded in the inner space of the
whole (higher order) system.
An example is: Heart beats in a running person, the cardiac vessels contain blood, this blood flows through the
heart vessels, erythrocytes are transported with the blood
stream. The runner is the “environment of the heart, the
heart the environment of the intra-cardiac vessels, the vessel the environment of the blood, and the blood that of
the erythrocytes. The inner space can be considered as an
“inner environment” that obviously can act in a similar
manner as the environment of the whole system itself.
Dependent upon the basic level that we are free to
choose, the result will be a hierarchical order of structures
and systems as described by Kayser et al. [17-19]. These
authors started from the light microscopic level (cells) and
could demonstrate the biological significance of system
surface and constellation parameters in solid cancers, i.e.
on the prognosis of the patients [4,14,18,20,21].
These considerations postulate a constant space - time
environment that we can use to describe structures. It
serves for the coordinate system which defines the
neighborhood condition and derived parameters such as
structural entropy [4].
In a first step we limit our considerations to stable
basic living systems, such as man, bird, snake, dog, etc.
Stability means, that at least one system of the involved
systems does not (significantly) change its inner systems,
structures or surface prior to the interaction with another
system or the environment.
According to our postulate and experiences the interaction requires that the involved systems are spatially
separated from each other. The interaction will only
take place if all involved partners fulfill a neighborhood
condition that triggers the interaction.
We can now take a look at the neighborhood conditions and postulate:
1. The occurrence of an interaction is called an
event.
2. Obviously events take place in the environment of
the involved systems.
3. An environment is a scalable space - time constellation with constant features (air, water, space, etc.)
{r, t, f(r, t)}. Its range is large in relation to the
expansion of the involved systems, as long as the
environment can be considered as a system too.
Thus, we can neglect the outer surfaces of the environment, and it is irrelevant whether they exist or
not.

Page 3 of 9

4. Systems occupy space and time {rs, ts, fs} of the
environment {r, t}, with rs c r, ts c t.
5. If systems dissolute, they are replaced by different
systems or by the environment.
6. The constellation of the systems within their
environment defines the neighborhood condition.
7. A spatial and time defined neighborhood is mandatory; however not sufficient for interaction.
8. The release of an interaction requires additional
constellations of the involved systems (hunger of the
lion, intelligence of the politician, properties of the
surfaces in egg - sperm interaction, etc.).
9. The environment and the structures obey the
same basic laws (physics, emotional, biological, etc.).

Derivatives
Structural entropy

A frequently used approach to analyze spatial distributed systems is the concept of entropy [22,23]. The concept of entropy can be interpreted as a measure of
“uncertainty” or as a measure of order in a macro-system with several microstates [4].
When we consider a constellation (environment) that
is composed of numerous distinct properties (systems) i
each being measured with a probability pi, the distance
from the constellation’s end stage can be computed to
S = k∗

pi ∗ In 1/pi

(K = constant, so-called Boltzmann constant), with the
condition ∑(pi )= 1.
The entropy S measures the “distance of the systems”
from “predictable end stage” as long as no interaction
occurs. In other words, if the probability pi is only
related to the total number N of observable systems or
(micro) states (for example 6 in case of a usual die),
then pi = Ni/N holds, and we will obtain the so - called
Boltzmann - Gibbs distribution of pi. The entropy S is
maximum if the pi do not differ, i.e., once the system
has reached its end stage.
We can now consider the systems that interact or
count “events”. The entropies can then be simply added
(which makes them unique), if we assume no dependencies (strong chaos or the so-called Boltzmann - Gibbs
distribution); however, it might become more complicated for dependent systems (weak chaos). In addition,
we might take into account regularities (symmetries)
that can frequently be noted in nature. Details and conditions of this entropy have been discussed by Tsallis
[22,23].
Examples with clinical applications have been reported
[4,18,22,24]. Starting from the level of individual cells,
any healthy tissue possesses regular, i.e. repeating

Kayser et al. Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/6/1/68

Page 4 of 9

structures that can be aggregated to new (higher order)
structures. Diseases (for example cancer) disturb these
symmetries by more or less spatially random growth.
Assuming additive entropies and features that are
derived from “normal field forces” we get the following
result:
S (MST) = −k∗

pk ∗ In pk

pk = 1/(N − 1)∗

k=

;
2

mik /mmik

mmk / mk

2

(N > 1)

= standardization constant;

Δmik = micro- stage differences between neighboring
cells (distance, mass, staining intensities, etc.);
mm k , Δm k = mean of micro- stages in the macrostage k.
The more general formula to calculate the “distance of
living systems” from the end stage is
S (MST) = −k∗

pIk ∗ In pIk

pIk = 1/(N − 1)∗

k=

ftk / fek

;

f eik /f tik
2

2

(N > 1)

= standardization constant;

Δfeik = micro- stage differences between an event and
those of non-involved systems (distance, hunger, sex,
age, velocity, mass,, etc.);
ftk, = mean of micro- stages in the system k out of the
neighborhood;
Δfek = difference of microstages between an event k
and the systems not involved.
Flow of entropy

Until now we have applied the concept of entropy to so
- called closed systems. Closed systems have a fixed and
impenetrable surface, and their development solely
depends upon their embedded macro- and microsystems, i.e., structures, events, classes, and the internal
relationships. These systems only crudely reflect to biology systems, which require an exchange of energy and
other features to stay alive. In addition they develop in a
fixed direction of time, and considerations derived from
the field of irreversible thermodynamics seem to be
more appropriate [6,7].
Prigigone analyzed the development of open thermodynamic systems and introduced a dynamic derivative of
the entropy, the so - called flow of entropy [25,26].
According to the theorem of Prigogine (1959) an open
thermodynamic system tries to minimize the creation of

new entropy and to become indistinguishable from its
environment in such a manner that d/dt(T*dS/dt) = >0
holds true for the final stationary stage (T = temperature) [6,7,26]. Eigen demonstrated in accordance to Prigigone’s theorem that major changes in any open
biological system can only occur in stages of large
“local” entropy differences in comparison to the individual environment [27].
In higher order biological systems the flow of entropy
can be calculated in circumscribed diseases such as cancer [24,28,29], or in “agglutinated” populations with
events. If we consider events (for example dividing cells)
as the main production of heat in a circumscribed system, and that the produced heat can be only transported
into the (healthy) environment via the internal and
outer boundaries, the corresponding formula of the
entropy flow EF [24,28] can be derived to:
EF = E(MST)∗ Sph/ (OS + IS) .

EF: entropy flow;
E(MST) : structural entropy;
Sph: numerical fraction of heat production (events,
proliferating (tumor) cells, etc.);
OS: outer surface;
IS: inner surface.
Development in biology

Living biological systems are characterized by (nearly)
constant structures and inner systems, and structure/
system - associated functions. Biological functions
include static and dynamic flows of energy, heat, molecules, and electromagnetic fields. They ensure either a
sufficient amount of free energy embedded in an appropriate environment, or an adequate information transfer.
Both procedures are essential to keep the system alive:
Obviously, systems exist that have lost their functions.
We call such systems a corpse. The opposite, a system
that has lost its structure and still possesses its functions
is known by children and called a ghost (and would not
be an appropriate object of natural sciences in general).
Thus, structures are essential to maintain a constant
and low entropy level within the living system, and have
to steer the flow of entropy [4,5,27]. They also require
free energy in order to compensate their own entropy
increase.
To further analyze the entropy in living organisms, the
following theorems are stated:
The functions of a living system are a mixture of
export and import of its own products and that of the
environment. The import/export machine is regulated
by specific recognition processes which are part of the
neighborhood condition. At cellular and subcellular
(molecular biology) receptors, domains, antigens, etc.
take this duty.

Kayser et al. Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/6/1/68

Assuming that a living system possesses defined
spaces (macro- stages) of lower entropy compared with
their environment a mechanism has to exist that ensures
the entropy difference between the system and its environment. The only way such a machine can work is to
use free energy to export the created heat of the living
system. In addition, all involved products (molecules,
energy, entropy) have to pass the system’s surface. If we
agree that this entropy diminishing machine obeys general biological laws, we have to take into account that it
will become less efficient with increasing age. Its efficiency has to be renewed after certain times in order to
become more efficient again (for example during embryogenesis or phylogenesis).
More in detail, nature might use two different techniques to lower the entropy in a living system: a) to
increase the efficiency of the machine itself, and b) to
increase the space the machine is responsible for. At the
cellular level both techniques can be observed, as illustrated in Figure 1 and 2, taken from [4]
These two examples demonstrate that living systems
can be considered as complicated arrangements of
nested structures and inner systems that form a surface
and obey basic physical laws. For a certain space and
time constellation they possess a constant arrangement.
They tend to multiply if a suitable neighborhood condition exists (right space and right time). In addition, they
derive from an environment, which is under this

Page 5 of 9

assumption another, lower level system. However, what
about the environment (lowest level structure) or the
universe, or what is assumed to exist below the “lowest
level"?
Space time considerations

From the early beginning man tried to develop ideas
about the origin of the universe, and to formulate a
unique formula that can serve for a general description
[1,2]. Additional aims are to explain the existence of
man, the obtained general natural laws, and future
development of our species [1,2].
In doing this, man has detected, observes and measures systems and structures in the universe, for example constellations of stars, galaxies, etc.
However, does an “environment” of the universe
exist? If yes, what is its relationship to the observed
structures and their history? How does our hypothesis
of right space and right time fit into such huge
dimensions?
There are increasing indicators that black matter
(energy) exists in the universe which we might consider as
the environment of the universe [16]. Is this indication a
chance that our hypothesis does not solely remain a
fiction?
Assuming that a general (at the lowest level) positioned environment of the universe exists (which we call
black matter), and that it possesses some similarities to

Figure 1 Scheme of cellular fusion from the viewpoint of the entropy concept: The highest efficiency of entropy transportation is
obtained, if the surface/volume fraction of the new generated cell becomes a maximum, which obviously requires VA >> VB. [4].

Kayser et al. Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/6/1/68

Page 6 of 9

Figure 2 Scheme of cell division from the viewpoint of the entropy concept: The more equal the daughter cells are, the greater is the
generated space of lower entropy; i.e., VA = maximum if VB = VC.[4].

the development of biological systems, we can try the
following theorems:
1. We are living in a four-dimensional space - time
constellation (x, y, z, t).
2. This constellation is the lowest level structure
derived from the black matter.
3. It is scalable, and contains several ordered and
nested structures, that finally form living systems
after passing thru numerous higher order systems
and structures.
We can then ask: What is the dimension of the black
matter?
According to our hypothesis the universe itself is a
structure. It might still contain black matter at those
“spaces” that do not contain additional, higher order
structures, however, our hypothesis predicts that the
black matter is not present at other higher order structures, which include “occupied” spaces (mass, stars,
radiation, etc).
The dimension of the black matter would be (r = 0, t =
0), as r > 0 and t > 0 are the boundaries of the derived
lowest structure, the universe. From the viewpoint of
entropy we could call this stage “condensed entropy”
with undefined macrostages and an unlimited number of
microstages. Once released, the microstages will organize
themselves in macrostages, i.e. will form structures (and

a surface). Their number as well as the temperature of
the system will decrease with increasing {r,t}.
In this case our hypothesis is “very close” to the inflation theory of the big bang, which distinguishes early
structures such as quarks, antiquarks, electrons, positrons, at later stages more complicated structures such
as mesons, neutrons (they have already an internal
structure), protons, finally atoms, molecules, etc. [30].
Dependent upon the structure and its neighboring
structures the following events can occur:
1. A new (higher order) structure is created (with a
new surface, interactions of quarks, electrons, etc).
2. The structure is dissolved (for example electron positron interaction) and a lower order structure
remains (string). If the dissolved structure is at the
“lowest level”, all structures are lost, i.e., the bottom
of the “environment” remains, which is the stage at
{r = 0, t = 0}.
3. Even if we assume an equal distribution between
matter and antimatter, the creation of new structures
is a statistical process and controlled by neighborhood conditions. Therefore, it is unlikely that structures of matter and of antimatter will appear in
exactly the same number. Once the constellation
(that of matter or that of antimatter) is able to create
slightly more structures N (Nmatter > Nantimatter),
immediately the effect will be gained and results in an

Kayser et al. Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/6/1/68

overwhelming predominance of those structures that
are only of little advantage in the beginning. Thus, we
can describe the existence of matter.
Our hypothesis that surfaces, i.e., boundaries between
different space - time constellations and events can
serve for description of the involved structures and systems seems not to be a simple fiction. In addition, it
possesses the following advantages:
1. We have only to describe the “differences” or
derived “flows” between the involved systems, and
have not to analyze the whole arrangement.
2. We can estimate the “age of the systems”.
Obviously those systems are “older” or “more differentiated” that possess more internal structures
(nested systems).
3. We can apply the hypothesis to different sciences
such as molecular biology, cellular societies, living
organisms, societies, or basic theories in physics
such as that of the big bang.
Our hypothesis requires that at least one of the space
- time parameters has to be directed (otherwise no systems and correspondingly no surfaces will be created).
It explains the increase of “intelligence in living systems with increasing time” because more complicated
systems (systems that contain more nested structures

Page 7 of 9

and inner systems) require more space and time to be
created and, therefore, are older than less complicated
ones. They have more interactions (information flows)
between the internal structures and between the systems
and their environments.
If (biological) systems multiply, stabilization (feedback)
mechanisms have to exist between their structures
(otherwise a hierarchy of structures could not be established). The nesting of inner systems and structures
ensures the stability of the whole living system.
The measure entropy and derived parameters such as
entropy flow can be specifically applied to forecast the
length of systems’ life [20,21,24,25]. Man’s life occurs in
a space of four dimensions. Could it exist in a space of
lower dimensions?
Dimension of space

Our basic environment which we call universe can be
described by a four dimensional space - time configuration [1,9]. The neighborhood condition postulated by our
hypothesis requires that all derived structures have to
occur in these four dimensions only, because they cannot
create a boundary outside of this space. In addition each
structure has to exceed a certain size because at least two
neighboring basic elements are mandatory.
Simple calculations can give us some impression about
the embedded structures and possible events of such
systems in relation to the postulated number of
dimensions:

Figure 3 Projection of a cell scheme (n={3,t} to a n={2,t} plane, and that of the n ={2,t} plane to a n={1,t} line. Only a three dimensional
space offers stable internal and external “open”, i.e., constantly porous boundaries.

Kayser et al. Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/6/1/68

If we assume (in addition to the time dimension) a
one dimensional space {1,t}, the maximum number of
configurations to create a structure or an event results
in two neighbors only. Two - not necessarily identical neighbors are mandatory and sufficient to form the first
event, followed by another four neighbors (two events)
at the corresponding start and end points. Internal
structures cannot be built because such a system does
not possess a boundary (or surface). The dimension of
the boundary would be {0,t}, as surfaces require one
dimension less compared to those of the original space
{1,t}, (see Figure 3).
If we assume a two dimensional space {2,t}, the maximum number Nmax to create a first event results in nine
neighbors, the minimum is two again. The more extensive the covered constellations are the higher is the
mandatory number according to the formula (Square
basic elements and neighborhood condition based upon
connecting edges and vertices are postulated)
Nmax = 2(Nc + 2) .

Nc = number of inner square elements.

Internal structures can be built according to the formula
Nintmax = 2Nc .

The boundary would be a one -dimensional line. Such
a boundary cannot serve for mandatory interactions
between systems or the system and its environment (for
example entropy exchange), because the mandatory
“breaks” cannot be stabilized (see Figure 3).
The next higher space, the three dimensional space {3,t}
is that of the lowest number of dimensions that fulfill the
conditions a) to possess a boundary (of the dimension {2,
t}), and b) to create and stabilize “channels for interaction
with the environment” (of the dimension {1,t}).
Thus, nature has chosen the lowest ever possible
number of space dimensions to create systems that
finally reach the level of living organisms including man,
and to permit us to be at the right place at the right
time.
Author details
1
Institute of Pathology, Charite, Chariteplatz 1, D-10118 Berlin, Germany.
2
International Academy of Telepathology, Heidelberg, Germany. 3Clinical and
Experimental Pathology, Research Center Borstel, Borstel, Germany. 4Institute
for Pathology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
NA, All authors read and approved the final manuscript
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 27 June 2011 Accepted: 22 July 2011 Published: 22 July 2011

Page 8 of 9

References
1. Einstein A, Albert Einstein: The human Side - New Glimpses from his
Archives. Princeton, New Yersey: Princeton University Press; 1979.
2. Heisenberg W: Wandlungen in den Grundlagen der Naturwissenschaft.
Stuttgart: S. Hirzel Verlag; 1959.
3. Kayser K, Stauch G: Zeitgedanken und Spiegeldenken. Baden - Baden:
Rendevous Verlag; 2000.
4. Kayser K, Kayser G, Metze K: The concept of structural entropy in tissuebased diagnosis. Anal Quant Cytol Histol 2007, 29(5):296-308.
5. Trintscher KS: Biologie und Information - Eine Diskussion über Probleme
der biologischen Thermodynamik. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner
Verlagsgesellschaft; 1967.
6. De Groot SR: Thermodynamik irreversibler Prozesse. Mannheim:
Bibliographisches Institut; 196018/18A.
7. De Groot SR, Mazur P: Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics. Amsterdam:
North-Holland Publishing Company; 1962.
8. Kayser K: Analytical Lung Pathology. Heidelberg, New York: Springer; 1992.
9. Einstein A: The Meaning of Relativity. Princeton, New Yersey: Princeton
University Press; 1956.
10. Voronoi G: Nouvelles applications des parametres continus a la theorie
des formes quadratiques, deuxieme memoire: recherches sur les
paralleloedres primitifs. J Reine Angew Math 1902, 134:188-287.
11. O’Callaghan JF: An alternative definition for neighborhood of a point.
IEEE Trans Comput 1875, 24:1121-1125.
12. Zahn CT: Graph-theoretical methods for detecting and describing Gestalt
clusters. IEEE Trans Comput 1971, C-20:68-86.
13. Kayser K, et al: Theory of sampling and its application in tissue based
diagnosis. Diagn Pathol 2009, 4:6.
14. Kayser K, et al: Neighborhood analysis of low magnification structures
(glands) in healthy, adenomatous, and carcinomatous colon mucosa.
Pathol Res Pract 1986, 181(2):153-8.
15. Ruelle D: Zufall und Chaos. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer; 1993.
16. Cheng TP: Relativity, Gravitation and Cosmology: a Basic Introduction.
Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press; 2005.
17. Kayser K: Application of structural pattern recognition in histopathology.
In Syntactic and structural pattern recognition. Edited by: T.P. G. Ferraté, A.
Sanfeliu, H. Bunke. Springer: Berlin Heidelberg New York; 1988:115-135.
18. Kayser K, et al: TNM stage, immunohistology, syntactic structure analysis
and survival in patients with small cell anaplastic carcinoma of the lung.
J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1987, 113(5):473-l80.
19. Kayser K, Hoeffgen H: Pattern recognition in histopathology by orders of
textures. Med Inform (Lond) 1984, 9(1):55-9.
20. Kayser K, et al: Combined morphometrical and syntactic structure
analysis as tools for histomorphological insight into human lung
carcinoma growth. Anal Cell Pathol 1990, 2(3):167-78.
21. Kayser K, et al: Primary colorectal carcinomas and their intrapulmonary
metastases: clinical, glyco-, immuno- and lectin histochemical, nuclear
and syntactic structure analysis with emphasis on correlation with
period of occurrence of metastases and survival. Apmis 2002,
110(6):435-46.
22. Gell-Mann M, Tsallis C, eds: Nonextensive Entropy: Interdisciplinary
Applications. Oxford University Press: Oxford; 2004.
23. Tsallis C: Introduction to Nonextensive Statistical Mechanics. Berlin:
Springer; 2010.
24. Kayser K, Gabius HJ: The application of thermodynamic principles to
histochemical and morphometric tissue research: principles and
practical outline with focus on the glycosciences. Cell Tissue Res 1999,
296(3):443-55.
25. Kayser K, Molnar B, Weinstein RS: Virtual microscopy - Fundamentals,
Applications, Perspectives of electronic tissue - based diagnosis. Berlin:
VSV Interdisciplinary Medical Publishing; 2007.
26. Prigogine I: Introduction to Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes.
New Yorck: John Wiley & Sons Inc; 2 1961.
27. Eigen M: Selforganization of matter and the evolution of biological
macromolecules. Naturwissenschaften 1971, 58:465-523.
28. Kayser K, Gabius HJ: Graph Theory and the Entropy Concept in
Histochemistry. In Progress in Histochemistry and Cytochemistry. Volume 32.
Edited by: W. Graumann. Stuttgart, Jena, Lübeck, Ulm: Gustav Fischer; 1997.
29. Kayser K, et al: Towards an automated virtual slide screening: theoretical
considerations and practical experiences of automated tissue-based

Kayser et al. Diagnostic Pathology 2011, 6:68
http://www.diagnosticpathology.org/content/6/1/68

Page 9 of 9

virtual diagnosis to be implemented in the Internet. Diagn Pathol 2006,
1(10).
30. Guth A: Eternal inflation and its implications. J Phys 2007, A40:6811-6826.
doi:10.1186/1746-1596-6-68
Cite this article as: Kayser et al.: To be at the right place at the right
time. Diagnostic Pathology 2011 6:68.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
