<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A Functional Henipavirus Envelope Glycoprotein Pseudotyped Lentivirus Assay System</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2010, 7:312. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-312"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Dimple Khetawat"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

RESEARCH

Open Access

A Functional Henipavirus Envelope Glycoprotein
Pseudotyped Lentivirus Assay System
Dimple Khetawat, Christopher C Broder*

Abstract
Background: Hendra virus (HeV) and Nipah virus (NiV) are newly emerged zoonotic paramyxoviruses discovered
during outbreaks in Queensland, Australia in 1994 and peninsular Malaysia in 1998/9 respectively and classified
within the new Henipavirus genus. Both viruses can infect a broad range of mammalian species causing severe and
often-lethal disease in humans and animals, and repeated outbreaks continue to occur. Extensive laboratory studies
on the host cell infection stage of HeV and NiV and the roles of their envelope glycoproteins have been hampered
by their highly pathogenic nature and restriction to biosafety level-4 (BSL-4) containment. To circumvent this
problem, we have developed a henipavirus envelope glycoprotein pseudotyped lentivirus assay system using
either a luciferase gene or green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene encoding human immunodeficiency virus type-1
(HIV-1) genome in conjunction with the HeV and NiV fusion (F) and attachment (G) glycoproteins.
Results: Functional retrovirus particles pseudotyped with henipavirus F and G glycoproteins displayed proper
target cell tropism and entry and infection was dependent on the presence of the HeV and NiV receptors ephrinB2
or B3 on target cells. The functional specificity of the assay was confirmed by the lack of reporter-gene signals
when particles bearing either only the F or only G glycoprotein were prepared and assayed. Virus entry could be
specifically blocked when infection was carried out in the presence of a fusion inhibiting C-terminal heptad (HR-2)
peptide, a well-characterized, cross-reactive, neutralizing human mAb specific for the henipavirus G glycoprotein,
and soluble ephrinB2 and B3 receptors. In addition, the utility of the assay was also demonstrated by an
examination of the influence of the cytoplasmic tail of F in its fusion activity and incorporation into pseudotyped
virus particles by generating and testing a panel of truncation mutants of NiV and HeV F.
Conclusions: Together, these results demonstrate that a specific henipavirus entry assay has been developed using
NiV or HeV F and G glycoprotein pseudotyped reporter-gene encoding retrovirus particles. This assay can be
conducted safely under BSL-2 conditions and will be a useful tool for measuring henipavirus entry and studying F
and G glycoprotein function in the context of virus entry, as well as in assaying and characterizing neutralizing
antibodies and virus entry inhibitors.

Background
Hendra virus (HeV) emerged in 1994 in two separate
outbreaks of severe respiratory disease in horses with
subsequent transmission to humans resulting from close
contact with infected horses. Nipah virus (NiV) was
later determined to be the causative agent of a major
outbreak of disease in pigs in 1998-99 along with cases
of febrile encephalitis among people in Malaysia and
Singapore who were in close contact exposure to
infected pigs (reviewed in [1,2]). Phylogenetic analysis
* Correspondence: cbroder@usuhs.mil
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services
University, Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA

revealed that HeV and NiV are distinct members of the
Paramyxoviridae [3,4] and are now the prototypic members of the new genus Henipavirus within the paramyxovirus family [4]. Pteropid fruit bats, commonly known
as flying foxes in the family Pteropodidae, are the principal natural reservoirs for both NiV and HeV (reviewed
in [2]) however recent evidence of henipavirus infection
in a wider range of both frugivorous and insectivorous
bats has been reported [5,6].
Since their identification, both HeV and NiV have
caused repeated spillover events. There have been 14
recognized occurrences of HeV in Australia since 1994
with at least one occurrence per year since 2006, the

© 2010 Khetawat and Broder; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

most recent in May 2010. Every outbreak of HeV has
involved horses as the initial infected host, causing lethal
respiratory disease and encephalitis, along with a total of
seven human cases arising from exposure to infected
horses, among which four have been fatal and the most
recent in 2009 (reviewed in [2]) [7-9]. By comparison
there have been more than a dozen occurrences of NiV
emergence since its initial recognition, most appearing
in Bangladesh and India (reviewed [2]) and the most
recent in March 2008 [10] and January 2010 [11].
Among these spillover events of NiV the human mortality rate has been higher (~75%) along with evidence of
person-to-person transmission [12,13] and direct transmission of virus from flying foxes to humans via contaminated food [14].
In contrast to other paramyxoviruses, NiV and HeV
exhibit an extremely broad host tropism and in addition
to bats, horses, pigs and humans, natural and/or experimental infections have also been reported in cats, dogs,
guinea pigs, hamsters (reviewed in [2]), ferrets [15] and
some nonhuman primates, the squirrel monkey [16] and
the African green monkey [17,18]. In those hosts susceptible to henipavirus-induced pathology, the disease is
characterized as a widespread multisystemic vasculitis,
with virus replication and associated pathology in highly
vascularized tissues including the lung, spleen and brain
[2,19]. Both the broad host and tissue tropisms exhibited
by NiV and HeV can for the most part be explained by
the highly conserved and broadly expressed nature of
the receptors the henipaviruses employ, the ephrinB2
and B3 ligands [20-23] which are members of a large
family of important signaling proteins involved in cellcell interactions (reviewed in [24,25]).
NiV and HeV possess two envelope glycoproteins
anchored within the viral membrane, a trimeric fusion
(F) and a tetrameric attachment (G) glycoprotein
(reviewed in [26]). The F glycoprotein is initially synthesized as a precursor F0 which is cleaved into the disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits by cathepsin L within the
host cell [27]. The G glycoprotein consists of a stalk
domain and globular head and G monomers form disulfide-linked dimers that associate in pairs forming tetramers [28]. The F and G oligomers associate within the
membrane and G is responsible for engaging receptors,
which in turn triggers F-mediated membrane fusion
(reviewed in [26]). The F and G glycoproteins of NiV
and HeV share ~88% and 83% amino acid identity and
both NiV and HeV can elicit cross-reactive anti-envelope glycoprotein antibody responses [29]. It has also
been demonstrated that F and G of NiV and HeV can
efficiently complement each other in a heterotypic manner in cell-fusion assays [30]. The henipavirus F and G
glycoproteins share many of the general structural features found in the envelope glycoproteins of other

Page 2 of 14

paramyxoviruses, and recently the structure of both
receptor-bound and unbound forms of the globular
head domain of NiV G have been reported [31,32].
Because of their highly pathogenic nature and lack of
approved vaccines or therapeutics, HeV and NiV are
classified as biological safety level-4 (BSL-4) select
agents by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and as priority pathogens by the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID),
having the potential to cause significant morbidity and
mortality in humans and major economic and public
health impacts (reviewed [1]). These restrictions have
somewhat limited detailed studies on virus entry and
their envelope glycoprotein functions in the context of a
viral particle. To circumvent these restrictions, virus
pseudotyping systems have been examined, where the
envelope glycoproteins from one virus are incorporated
into the progeny virions of another that lacks its own
envelope glycoprotein(s), effectively changing the host
range and tropism of the virus. For example, the F and
G envelope glycoproteins of NiV have been successfully
incorporated into recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV) lacking VSV G glycoprotein (VSV-ΔG) and
encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) [21,33]. Other
widely employed viral pseudotyping systems are those
based on retroviral vectors, and lentiviral vectors have
emerged as promising tools for a variety gene-delivery
studies and can efficiently transduce proliferating as well
as quiescent cells (reviewed in [34]).
Virus pseudotyping systems have been useful for the
study of otherwise highly pathogenic viral agents such
as Ebola and Marburg viruses, severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and influenza virus [35-37]. Here, building on the initial findings
of Kobayashi et al., [38], who first demonstrated that
simian immunodeficiency virus from African green
monkey (SIVagm) could be functionally pseudotyped
with the F and hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) glycoproteins of Sendai virus (SeV), we demonstrate for
the first time that the F and G envelope glycoproteins of
NiV and HeV, a cellular protein receptor using paramyxovirus, can also be functionally pseudotyped into
lentivirus particles using either a luciferase or GFP
reporter gene encoding HIV-1 genome. These HIV-1
based, henipavirus glycoprotein pseudotyped particles
exhibited the same cellular tropism characteristics as
authentic NiV and HeV, and virus entry was specifically
inhibited by antiviral agents that target the henipaviruses. The pseudotyped particles could be readily concentrated by ultracentrifugation without any loss of
infectivity, and using this system we also examined the
incorporation of F and G glycoproteins into virions, and
explored the infectivity and pseudotyping efficiency of
cytoplasmic tail truncated versions of F. This lentivirus-

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

Page 3 of 14

based henipavirus glycoprotein pseudotyped particle
infection assay can also be conducted safely under
BSL-2 conditions and will be a useful tool for measuring
henipavirus entry and for studying F and G glycoprotein
function in the context of virus particle entry, as well as
in assaying and characterizing neutralizing antibodies
and virus entry inhibitors.

Results
Henipavirus F and G envelope glycoprotein pseudotyped
lentivirus particles

It is often desirable to study the functions of viral envelope glycoproteins that are involved in attachment, membrane fusion and entry in the context of a viral particle.
For example, infectivity experiments using virus particles
can confirm observations made from cell-cell fusion
assays, studies on virus tropism, or during the characterization of antiviral agents targeting various stages in the
virus entry process [39]. However, work with infectious
henipaviruses is restricted to BSL-4 containment which
raises both cost and safety issues. To counter this limitation, we sought to develop a henipavirus envelope glycoprotein pseudotyping system using reporter geneencoding lentivirus vectors, which would provide a virus
entry assay based on the function of the F and G glycoproteins that could be safely and routinely carried out
under BSL-2 conditions.
To test this possibility, pseudotyped retrovirus particles
were produced by transfection using pNL4-3-Luc-E-R+, a
plasmid containing the HIV-1 proviral clone NL4-3 which
encodes luciferase and does not produce the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein [40] along with pCAGGs expression vectors encoding the NiV or HeV F and G glycoproteins. The
preparations of henipavirus glycoprotein pseudotyped
virus particles and control virus particles lacking the glycoproteins were normalized for p24 content by ELISA (see
Methods) and used to infect several human cell lines,
293T, U87, HOSX4T4 and TK-, long known to be permissive for henipavirus-mediated cell-cell fusion [30,41] and
the henipavirus receptor (ephrinB2 and B3) negative and
fusion and infection resistant cell line HeLa-USU [20].
Pseudotyped virus particles generated with the NiV F and
G glycoproteins were able to infect and produce luciferase
reporter gene activity at various levels on all permissive
receptor expressing cells (Figure 1A) while no signal was
observed with the receptor negative HeLa-USU or with
control virus particles generated by transfection with
empty vector (pCAGGs). Surprisingly however, virus particles produced using the pCAGGs expression plasmids
encoding the HeV F and G glycoproteins were consistently
non-functional as measured by luciferase activity (data not
shown). The expression vector pCAGGs is a mammalian
expression vector with the cytomegalovirus (CMV)
immediate early enhancer linked with the chicken b-actin

Figure 1 Henipavirus F and G bearing pseudotyped lentivirus
particles. (A) Infection assay with NiV F and G glycoprotein bearing
virus particles. Virus particles were prepared in 293T cells by cotransfecting the pNL4-3-Luc-E-R+ HIV-1 backbone along with the
NiV F and G encoding vectors, or with empty vector (pCAGGs).
Culture supernatants were collected 36 hr post-transfection and
filtered through a 0.45 μm filter and the pseudovirus preparations
were normalized by p24 ELISA. The pseudovirus preparations were
used to infect receptor positive and negative cells in triplicate wells
and at 48 hr post infection, cells were lysed and assayed for
luciferase reporter gene activity as described in the Methods. (B)
Diagram of the panel of splice site mutants of the HeV G gene
cloned into the pCAGGs vector. Putative splice donor sites are
presented as black triangles and the splice acceptor site as grey
squares. (C) Infection assay using pseudotyped virus particles
prepared with HeV F along with (left to right) HeV G (wild-type) or
each of the seven HeV G splice site mutants (SM1 - SM7); NiV G
(wild-type); or empty vector (pCAGGs). Error bars indicate the
standard error of the mean from triplicate wells.

promoter (CAG promoter) [42]. It has an intron with the
splice acceptor site from the rabbit b-globin gene, which
results in the splicing of the pre-mRNA, increasing the
stability of the expressed mRNA and enhancing the production of an encoded protein. Although these features
make pCAGGs an efficient vector for the expression of
genes in the nucleus, we found it problematic for the
expression of the HeV G glycoprotein, an RNA virus gene
normally expressed in the cytoplasm of an infected cell,
and expression levels of HeV G were significantly lower in
comparison to NiV G in the same system (data not
shown). Analysis of the HeV G gene cloned in pCAGGs
using splice site prediction software from EMBL-EBI
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/asd-srv/wb.cgi?method=7 revealed 3
possible splice sites within HeV G coding region (Figure
1B), while none were present in the NiV G glycoprotein
pCAGGs construct (Additional file 1: Fig. S1). Mutations
were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis to remove
the predicted splice sites singly or in different combinations, keeping the amino acid coding sequence unaltered,

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

and a panel of seven (SM1 - SM7) HeV G mutant clones
were generated (Figure 1B).
The HeV G splice mutant constructs were then tested
for expression by plasmid transfection which indicated
that the removal of these predicted splice sites improved
HeV G glycoprotein production, and removal of all three
sites was optimal, and mRNA expression and alternative
splicing patterns were confirmed by Northern blot analysis
(results not shown). A series of pseudotyped virus particles
were prepared using HeV F along with each of HeV G
splice mutants (SM1 - SM7). In addition, control virus
particles were also prepared using HeV F along with
empty vector (pCAGGs), wild-type HeV G, or wild-type
NiV G. This series of pseudotyped virus particles were
then used to infect 293T target cells, and as shown in
Figure 1C, the HeV G splice mutant SM7 (3 putative
splice sites removed) in combination with HeV F was able
to produce functional pseudotyped particles, as measured
by luciferase reporter gene activity, to signal levels comparable to NiV F and G bearing particles (Figure 1A). The
remainder of the HeV G splice mutants (SM1 - SM6) did
show low levels of reporter gene signal, whereas the wildtype HeV G did not. These results demonstrate that the
splice site removal by mutation in HeV G-SM7 restores
the ability of HeV G to be expressed in the context of
pCAGGs, thus allowing its incorporation into the lentivirus particles. In addition, functional particles were also
generated using HeV F in heterotypic combination with
NiV G, confirming the previous heterotypic cell-cell fusion
activities observed with the henipaviruses [30]. The heterotypic pseudotyped particles yielded reporter gene activity essentially equivalent to the HeV G-SM7 and HeV F
particles (Figure 1C) and similar to the signals obtained
with NiV F and G bearing particles (Figure 1A).
To confirm these findings and demonstrate an expanded
utility of the henipavirus envelope glycoprotein pseudotyping systems, NiV and HeV F and G glycoprotein bearing
lentivirus particles were prepared with the GFP reporter
gene encoding construct pNL4-3-GFP-E-R+ and used to
infect receptor positive 293T cells (Figure 2). Here, productively infected cells were visualized using a fluorescent
microscope 48 hrs post-infection and fluorescent cells
were observed only in those cells infected with pseudotyped virions prepared with either NiV F and NiV G or
HeV F and HeV G SM7 . No GFP expressing cells were
observed in those wells infected with virions prepared
with empty vector (pCAGGs) or virus particles prepared
with HeV F and wild-type HeV G.
Specificity of henipavirus envelope glycoprotein
pseudotyped lentivirus particles

To examine the cellular infection specificity of the HeV
and NiV F and G pseudotyped particles, several henipavirus specific reagents capable of blocking virus infection

Page 4 of 14

Figure 2 Henipavirus F and G bearing pseudovirus infection
assay with GFP-encoding lentivrus particles. 293T cells were cotransfected with the pNL4-3-GFP-E-R+ HIV-1 backbone plasmid
along with either empty pCAGGs vector, homologous combinations
of NiV F/G, HeV F/G, or HeV F with HeV GSM7. The supernatants
were collected 36 hr post-transfection and processed as detailed in
the methods. Receptor positive 293T cells were infected with
pseudovirions and scored for transduction efficiency by counting
the number of GFP positive green cells 48 hr post-infection using
Olympus IX81 fluorescent microscope.

were tested for their ability to inhibit the infection of
the henipavirus pseudotypes. Virus particles were prepared as before and then mixed with various inhibitors
(Figure 3). The henipavirus specific peptide fusion inhibitor NiV-FC2, a 36 amino acid peptide corresponding
to the henipavirus heptad repeat region 2 (HR-2) of the
F glycoprotein [39,41], completely blocked the entry of
the henipavirus pseudotypes as measured by luciferase
reporter gene activity. The NiV-FC2 peptide functions
in an analogous manner to the HIV-1 specific fusion
inhibitor enfuvirtide (Fuzeon™, formerly T-20) [43,44],
and specifically blocks the formation of the class 1
fusion glycoprotein structure known as the 6-helix bundle of the F glycoprotein preventing F-mediated membrane fusion and subsequent virion entry. A scrambled
version of the peptide (Sc NiV-FC2) was used as a negative control. Infection specificity was also examined by
inhibition with the cross-reactive anti-henipavirus G glycoprotein human monoclonal antibody (mAb) m102.4
[45,46]. The m102.4 mAb neutralizes henipaviruses by
specifically binding and blocking the ephrin-B2 and -B3
receptor-binding region on the henipavirus G glycoprotein. As shown in Figure 3, infection of either the HeV
or NiV pseudotypes was completely blocked by mAb
m102.4 confirming that their entry and resultant luciferase signal is specifically mediated by the attachment
and subsequent fusion triggering functions of their

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

Figure 3 Infection specificity of henipavirus F and G bearing
pseudovirions. The HeV and NiV envelope glycoprotein
pseudotyped virus particles were preincubated with 2 μg of NiVFC2, Sc-NiV-FC2, soluble, murine ephrin-B2, or soluble human
ephrin-B2, mAb m102.4 IgG, recombinant NiV sG, or nothing
(control), for 1 hr at 4°C and then receptor positive 293T cells were
infected (transduced) with the various treated pseudotyped virus
preparations in triplicate wells. After 1 hr incubation, complete
media was added and infections were continued for an additional
48 hrs. Cells were then lysed and assayed for luciferase reporter
gene activity as described in the Methods. Error bars indicate the
standard error of the mean from triplicate wells.

Page 5 of 14

stop codons into the coding sequence of the NiV and
HeV F gene (Figure 4). The FΔCt1 and FΔCt2 constructs of both the NiV and HeV F, differ by only one
additional deleted valine residue to better ensure complete removal of the cytoplasmic tail domain.
Because cytoplasmic tail truncations of membrane
anchored proteins could affect proper folding and transport, we first examined the levels of cell surface
expressed F and compared the series of truncated
mutant F constructs to each wild-type F, using a cell
surface biotinylation assay [50]. The series of NiV and
HeV F glycoprotein mutants and each wild-type F were
expressed by plasmid transfection in HeLa-USU cells,
both in the presence and absence of their homologous
G glycoprotein partner, and surface proteins were biotin
labeled, precipitated with Avidin-agarose, and analyzed
by Western blot assay using an F 1 specific antisera

henipavirus G glycoproteins. In addition, the binding
and infection of the henipavirus pseudotypes to target
cells could be blocked by recombinant, soluble ephrinB2 and -B3 receptors (Figure 3). HeV and NiV F and G
bearing particles pre-incubated with soluble ephrin-B2
or -B3 were unable to infect host cells as was previously
shown with infectious virus [20]. Also, in a reciprocal
manner, recombinant soluble NiV G (sG) could block
entry of either henipavirus pseudotype as was similar to
earlier observations made with HeV sG in infectious
virus entry. Together, these results demonstrate the specificity of the henipavirus F and G glycoprotein bearing
pseudotyped virus entry assay and its potential utility in
screening specific henipavirus entry inhibitors.
Influence of the henipavirus F glycoprotein cytoplasmic
tail on processing and function

Previous studies have demonstrated that efficient incorporation of heterologous envelope glycoproteins into
HIV-1 or murine leukemia virus (MLV) particles often
depended on the removal of part or all of the cytoplasmic tail domains from the pseudotyping glycoproteins
[38,47-49]. To explore whether a similar feature was
occurring in the henipavirus pseudotyping system here,
a series of seven cytoplasmic tail truncation mutations
in each henipavirus F glycoprotein were generated,
designated FΔCt1 to FΔCt7, by introducing translational

Figure 4 Schematic diagram of truncation mutants in the
fusion glycoprotein. (A) A schematic representation of the F
glycoprotein truncation mutants. The transmembrane and the
cytoplasmic tail regions are marked along with the disulfide bond
linking F1 and F2. The nomenclature for the constructs is shown on
the left and the position of stop codon on the right. (B) The amino
acid composition of truncation mutants near the truncation site
within the F glycoprotein of both HeV and NiV.

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

(Figure 5). The wild-type NiV F0 precursor was cleaved
and detected. FΔCt1, FΔCt2 appeared less efficiently
cleaved (levels of F1 versus F0) as compared to wild-type
NiV F. A significant amount of each of the NiV FΔCt3,
FΔCt4, FΔCt5, FΔCt6 and FΔCt7 constructs were
cleaved, with the FΔCt6 appearing highly processed
although its overall expression was lower in comparison
to others. The ratio of cleaved to uncleaved F (F1 to F0)
on the cell surface was approximately equal (1:1) when
the complete retention and endocytosis motif (YSRL)
[51,52] was retained, beginning with the FΔCt4 constructs. Notably, the coexpression of NiV G did not
appear to significantly alter the expression and cleavage
patterns of NiV F (Figure 5).
The retention of amino acid residues from the endocytosis motif YSRL to residues EDRRV in the cytoplasmic tail appeared to allow for more efficient F 0
processing, as evidenced by the greater levels of F 1
observed with these NiV constructs (NiV FΔCt4 to
FΔCt7) (Figure 4) in comparison to NiV FΔCt1, FΔCt2
and FΔCt3 which lack the YSRL motif. In addition, the
cell surface levels of F (primarily F0) observed with the
FΔCt1, FΔCt2 and FΔCt3 constructs appeared greater in
comparison to the FΔCt4, FΔCt5, FΔCt6 and FΔCt7
constructs, and this mostly likely reflects the reduced

Figure 5 Cell surface expression of truncation mutants of the
henipavirus F glycoprotein. The various F cytoplasmic tail
truncation mutants alone or together with their G glycoprotein
partner were transfected into HeLa-USU cells. At 24 hr post
transfection, cell surface proteins were biotinylated and precipitated
with Avidin agarose beads, and the precipitated proteins were
processed for Western blot analysis as detailed in the Methods and
probed using the anti F1 specific antisera. This experiment was
performed twice and representative experiment is shown in the
figure.

Page 6 of 14

ability of the F0 precursor to be endocytosed and processed by Cathepsin L [27,53]. Similar results were
obtained when the series of HeV F cytoplasmic tail
truncation mutants were examined in parallel, and the
HeV F constructs FΔCt1, FΔCt2 and FΔCt3 revealed
greater cell surface expression levels of F0 with less efficient processing as measured by the detection of F 1 ,
whereas the HeV F constructs, FΔCt4 through FΔCt7
revealed greater F0 precursor processing but perhaps an
overall lower level of expression (Figure 5). A variable
and doublet appearance of HeV F0 has been observed
previously [30,54,55]. As with the NiV F truncation
mutants the coexpression of the HeV F panel along
with their HeV G glycoprotein partner did not significantly alter the HeV F expression and cleavage patterns
observed in cell surface biotinylation assays.
Having characterized the expression and processing of
the cytoplasmic tail truncation mutants of both NiV and
HeV F glycoprotein, we next examined their biological
function in cell-cell membrane fusion assays. Membrane
fusion was assessed using the well-characterized vaccinia
virus-based, reporter-gene, cell-cell fusion assay [56].
This assay has also been used extensively in earlier
reports on the characterization of HeV and NiVmediated membrane fusion and tropism [30,41,57]. The
series of F glycoprotein truncation mutants for both
HeV and NiV were expressed, along with their respective partner G glycoprotein, in HeLa-USU cells (effector
cells) and cell-cell fusion reactions were carried out
using target cells of either receptor negative HeLa-USU
(control) or fusion permissive 293T cells, and results are
shown in Figure 6. For NiV F, the removal of most of
the cytoplasmic tail domain from F (FΔCt1 and FΔCt2),
which also reduced F0 processing, impaired their fusogenic potential as would be expected, whereas the fusogenic activity of NiV FΔCt3, FΔCt4, FΔCt5, FΔCt6 and
FΔCt7 were either equivalent or slightly elevated in
comparison to wild-type NiV F. The cell-cell fusion
assay with the series of HeV F truncation mutants generated slightly more variable results in contrast to NiV
F, though all possessed some fusogenic activity. In general there was only a slight reduction in fusion with
HeV F, FΔCt1 and FΔCt2, while FΔCt3, FΔCt5 and
FΔCt6 were essentially equivalent to wild-type HeV F,
while lower fusion signals were seen with HeV FΔCt4
and FΔCt7, which could be related to an overall lower
expression level as seen in Figure 5. A comparison of
the results in Figure 5 and Figure 6 suggests that NiV F
processing appears to correlate with cell-cell fusion signals; whereas cell-cell fusion activity was readily apparent in several HeV F truncation mutants possessing a
markedly lower level of F0 processing, however these are
independent experiments and a direct comparison may
be miss-leading.

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

Figure 6 Membrane fusion activity of the truncation mutants
of the F glycoprotein. The panels of F glycoprotein truncation
mutants were assayed for their ability to mediate cell-cell fusion
when co-expressed with their partner G glycoprotein in a
quantitative vaccinia virus-based cell-cell fusion assays. Each F
glycoprotein mutant was tested in triplicate wells in three
independent experiments. Shown are the results of a representative
cell-fusion assay with the F truncation mutants FΔCt1 through FΔCt7
along with wild-type NiV or HeV F as positive controls and vector
only (pCAGGs) or media only as negative controls. (A) NiV G along
with the panel of truncation mutants of NiV F. (B) HeV G along with
various truncation mutants of HeV F. Error bars indicate the
standard error of the mean from triplicate wells.

Incorporation and function of truncated F glycoproteins
into lentivirus particles

We next examined the efficiency of the various cytoplasmic tail truncation mutants of the NiV and HeV F glycoproteins to be incorporated into lentivirus-based
pseudotypes. Pseudotyped lentivirus particles were prepared as before using the series of cytoplasmic tail truncation mutants along with their partner G glycoprotein.
Three types of control virus particles were also prepared
using either empty vector (pCAGGs) or each species of
wild-type F glycoprotein alone or each species of G glycoprotein alone. Pseudotyped virus particle preparations
were filtered, purified by centrifugation through a
sucrose cushion, normalized for p24 content by ELISA
and used to infect 293T target cells. Following infection
and incubation for 48 h, cells were processed and

Page 7 of 14

luciferase activity was measured. As shown in Figure 7A
and 7B, pseudovirus particles prepared using the truncation mutants FΔCt1, FΔCt2, and FΔCt3 F glycoproteins
produced significantly greater levels of luciferase activity
as compared to virus particles made with wild-type F.
To evaluate whether the differences in infectivity, as
measured by luciferase reporter gene activity, by the various pseudovirus types correlated to the extent of incorporation of the mutant F glycoproteins into lentivirus
particles, equal amounts of virus particles based on
p24 content were lysed and analyzed by Western blot.
This analysis revealed that incorporation of F into either
the NiV or HeV pseudotyped virions was greater with
the FΔCt1, FΔCt2 and FΔCt3 constructs, and that F0
was the predominant species present in the virions
(Figure 7C). These results together with cell surface
expression pattern of the NiV and HeV wild-type and
truncation mutants demonstrate that, in general, the
amount of incorporation of the F glycoproteins in the
pseudotyped particles appears to correlate well with
the level of expression of these proteins on the surface
of the producer cells. This was also true in the amount
of wild-type NiV or HeV F alone bearing particles
which can be noted when comparing Figure 5 and
Figure 7C. Removal of the endocytosis motif from the
fusion protein prevents its transportation to the endosome and subsequent cleavage of F0 into F1 and F2 by
Cathepsin L, which explains the predominance of F0 in
the FΔCt1, FΔCt2 and FΔCt3 constructs which lack the
endocytosis motif YSRL. Interestingly, in both the NiV
and HeV F glycoprotein mutant series, the higher infectivity of the FΔCt1, FΔCt2 and FΔCt3 bearing pseudotypes in comparison to wild-type was notable, and
might be attributed to the greater levels of incorporation
of these F glycoproteins into the particles, except in the
case of wild-type NiV F and G bearing particles and the
reason for this later observation is unclear at present.
Alternatively however, and also of interest is that the
high infectivity signal and predominance of F 0 in the
pseudotypes prepared with FΔCt1, FΔCt2 and FΔCt3
could argue for a role of endocytosis followed by Cathepsin L processing of F 0 and subsequent productive
fusion and infection.

Discussion
In the present study we have detailed a new and readily
adaptable, reporter-gene containing, lentivirus-based
pseudotyping system which utilizes functional F and G
envelope glycoproteins of the henipaviruses; NiV and
HeV. Importantly, like other virus envelope glycoprotein
pseudotyping systems, this assay can be conducted safely
under BSL-2, a condition which is relevant considering
the otherwise highly pathogenic nature of infectious NiV
and HeV. We also demonstrate, by several measures, that

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

Page 8 of 14

Figure 7 Envelope glycoprotein incorporation efficiency and infectivity of henipavirus F and G bearing lentivirus particles. The panel of
expression plasmids encoding the NiV and HeV F glycoprotein cytoplasmic tail truncation mutants and/or their G glycoprotein partner together
with the HIV-1 backbone pNL4-3-Luc-E-R+ were transfected into 293T cells. The pseudovirus containing cell culture supernatants were collected
36 hr post-transfection, filtered with a 0.45 μm filter and purified through a 25% wt/vol sucrose cushion. The preparations of pseudovirions were
normalized by assaying p24 content and then used to infect permissive 293T target cells. (A) Infection assay with the various NiV F cytoplasmic
tail deletion mutants. (B) Infection assay with the various HeV F cytoplasmic tail deletion mutants. Error bars indicate the standard error of the
mean from triplicate wells. (C) Incorporation of the various NiV and HeV F glycoproteins into the lentivirus-based pseudovirions. Equal amounts
of particles, based on p24 content, were lysed and subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis to assess the levels of incorporation of the
F glycoproteins. Mock is processed supernatant prepared from cells not producing pseudovirions. This experiment was performed twice and
representative experiment is shown in the figure.

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

this henipavirus pseudotyping system faithfully recapitulated the natural NiV or HeV cell attachment and viral
glycoprotein-mediated membrane fusion stages of
infection.
The henipaviruses bind and infect their host cells by a
specific attachment step to the cell surface expressed
proteins ephrin-B2 and -B3 [20-23]. The current and
widely accepted model of paramyxovirus mediated
membrane fusion postulates that upon receptor binding
the viral attachment glycoprotein triggers conformational changes in the F glycoprotein, a class I viral
fusion glycoprotein. The receptor-induced triggering
event is presumed to involve direct contacts between an
attachment and fusion glycoprotein and this activation
process facilitates a series of conformational changes in
F and the glycoprotein transitions into its post-fusion,
six-helix-bundle conformation concomitant with the
merging of the viral membrane envelope and the host
cell plasma membrane [26,58]. However, all of the
details of the entire receptor binding and fusion activation process have yet to be defined. An important feature of many class I fusion glycoproteins is the two
a-helical regions referred to as heptad repeat (HR)
domains that are involved in the formation of the sixhelix-bundle structure [59,60]. HR-1 is located proximal
to the amino (N)-terminal fusion peptide and HR-2 precedes the transmembrane domain near the carboxyl (C)terminus. Peptide sequences from either HR domain of
the F glycoprotein of several paramyxoviruses, including
HeV and NiV, have been shown to be inhibitors of the
F-mediated membrane fusion step in both cell-cell
fusion and virus infection assays [30,39,41,57,61-66].
Here, as has been shown with infectious virus or cellcell fusion assays, the infection by NiV and HeV F and
G lentivirus pseudotypes was completely blocked by the
HR-2 based fusion inhibiting peptide (NiV-FC2) [39].
A number of other tests were also conducted to
demonstrate the specificity of the henipavirus pseudotyping system in addition to using the henipavirus peptide fusion inhibitors. In competition assays, the
infection of the pseudotypes could also be specifically
blocked using recombinant, soluble ephrin-B2 or
ephrin-B3 receptor proteins as was previously shown
with both henipavirus-mediated membrane fusion as
well as live virus infection assays[20]. In a similar fashion, recombinant, soluble henipavirus G glycoprotein
(sG) was also able to completely inhibit the infection of
either HeV or NiV pseudotypes by blocking receptor
binding, which had been demonstrated previously in
both henipavirus-mediated membrane fusion and live
virus infection assays [28]. Finally, the infection by the
NiV and HeV pseudotypes could also be completely
blocked using a well-characterized, cross-reactive human
mAb (m120.4) that is specific for the henipavirus G

Page 9 of 14

glycoprotein [15,46]. Thus, by a wide variety of wellknown and well-characterized approaches the functional
henipavirus envelope glycoprotein pseudotyped lentivirus assay system developed here, accurately recapitulates the receptor binding, membrane fusion and
infection stages of live HeV and NiV.
Because of both the highly pathogenic features of NiV
and HeV, which restricts the use of infectious virus to
BSL-4 containment, and the labor intensive nature and
challenges associated with a reverse genetics approach,
extensive and detailed structural and functional studies on
the henipavirus envelope glycoproteins in the context of a
viral particle has been limited. To demonstrate the utility
of the henipavirus pseudotyping system here, we generated
and tested an extensive panel of cytoplasmic tail domain
truncation mutants of the NiV and HeV F glycoprotein,
and examined the influence of this domain of F on its ability to be incorporated into this budding particles as well as
its fusion activity in the context of a viral particle.
Here, it was observed that the deletion of essentially
the entire F cytoplasmic tail domain, most notably with
the NiV F glycoprotein and to a lesser degree with that
of HeV F, impaired their fusogenic activity in the context of a cell-cell fusion assay. These findings were in
contrast with previous observations made on the envelope glycoproteins of certain lentiviruses. Studies with
human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) and
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) envelope (Env)
glycoproteins have shown that cytoplasmic domain truncation mutants exhibit significantly enhanced Env fusogenic activity as measured by syncytium formation
[67,68]. In addition, studies with murine leukemia virus
have demonstrated that naturally occurring late cleavage
of a small carboxy terminal sequence, designated as the
R peptide or p2E, in the cytoplasmic tail results in considerably enhanced cell-to-cell fusion activity [69,70].
Whereas for a paramyxovirus F glycoprotein, cytoplasmic tail deletions in simian virus 5 (SV5) [71], Newcastle disease virus [72], and human parainfluenza virus
(HPIV) type 3 (HPIV-3) revealed significantly reduced
syncytium formation, except in one example with HPIV2, where similar deletions did not affect membrane
fusion [73]. Overall, with the exception of the results
with HPIV-2, these studies also demonstrated that subsequent additions of parts of the deleted cytoplasmic tail
sequences restored the fusogenic potential of those F
glycoproteins. In the case of henipaviruses, one explanation to account for the reduced fusion activity of the
entire cytoplasmic tail deleted constructs is poor endocytosis and subsequent Cathepsin L processing of F 0
and the analysis of the surface expressed levels of NiV
F0 versus F1 in the cytoplasmic tail domain truncation
mutants support this conclusion, but to a lesser extent
with that of the HeV F truncation mutants.

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

However, although the cell-cell fusogenic results with
the truncation constructs of the henipavirus F glycoproteins reported here were similar to the majority of the
observations made with other paramyxoviruses, whether
as a result of F0 precursor processing or by some other
mechanism, the cytoplasmic tail deleted HeV and NiV F
glycoproteins in the context of the virus particle pseudotyping system, revealed an opposing result. In general,
the higher levels of pseudotyped particle infectivity signal correlated with an overall greater level of incorporated F glycoprotein. Interestingly however, the highest
luciferase signals in the virus infection assays also correlated with a greater level of unprocessed F0 in the particles, particularly with FΔCt1, FΔCt2 and FΔCt3 in
which most of the cytoplasmic tail was deleted. Potentially, the greater luciferase signals in these instances
(FΔCt1, FΔCt2 and FΔCt3) could be due to particle
endocytosis following receptor binding [74] and subsequent F0 processing by Cathepsin L [27]. The pseudotyping system described here offers one system, albeit
artificial, to explore the possibility of a productive early
endocytic route of henipavirus infection. Taken together,
this henipavirus pseudotyping system shown here offers
a useful tool for measuring not only henipavirus entry
and assaying and characterizing virus neutralizing antibodies and virus entry inhibitors, but also offers a highly
versatile platform for studying F and G glycoprotein
function in the context of a virus particle during infection, and one that can readily assay numerous variations
or mutants of either or both the F and G henipavirus
glycoproteins.

Conclusions
Functional henipavirus envelope glycoprotein pseudotyped, reporter gene encoding, lentivirus particles could
be readily produced, concentrated by ultracentrifugation
and stored frozen without loss of infectivity. These henipavirus pseudotyped particles maintained the same cellular tropism characteristics as authentic NiV and HeV,
and infection of host cells by these particles could be
specifically inhibited by various antiviral agents that target the henipaviruses. This henipavirus glycoprotein
pseudotyped virus infection assay can be conducted
safely under BSL-2 conditions and its utility in analyzing
the viral glycoprotein function, of otherwise BSL-4
restricted agents, in the context of a virus particle was
demonstrated in the characterization of cytoplasmic tail
truncated versions of the F glycoprotein. This new henipavirus pseudotyping system will be a useful tool for
measuring HeV and NiV entry and studying their F and
G glycoprotein function in the context of virus particle,
as well as in assaying and characterizing neutralizing
antibodies and virus entry inhibitors.

Page 10 of 14

Methods
Cells and culture conditions

U87 and HuTK-143B were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Recombinant human
osteosarcoma cells bearing CD4 and CXCR4 (HOST4X4)
were obtained from the NIH AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program [75]. The 293T cells were
obtained from Dr. G. Quinnan (Uniformed Services University). HeLa-USU cell line has been described previously [20]. HeLa-USU, U87, HOST4X4 and 293T cells
were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(Quality Biologicals, Gaithersburg, MD) supplemented
with 10% cosmic calf serum (CCS) (HyClone, Logan, UT)
and 2 mM L-glutamine (DMEM-10). All cell cultures
were maintained at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO 2
atmosphere.
Plasmids

The HeV and NiV F and G envelope glycoproteins were
transiently expressed using the mammalian expression
vector pCAGGs which contains the CAG promoter and
is composed of the cytomegalovirus immediate early
enhancer and the chicken b-actin promoter [42]. The
HIV-1 pNL4-3-Luc-E-R + or pNL4-3-GFP-E-R + backbone plasmids encoding the luciferase (Luc) [40] or
green fluorescence protein (GFP) reporter gene were
provided by Dr. R. Doms (University of Pennsylvania).
Antibodies, recombinant proteins and peptides

The henipavirus G and F glycoproteins were detected
with a cross-reactive polyclonal mouse antiserum raised
against recombinant, soluble HeV G [23,50] or a rabbit
polyclonal henipavirus F1-specific antiserum provided by
Dr. L-F. Wang (Australian Animal Health Laboratory,
Geelong, Australia) respectively. The human monoclonal
antibody (mAb) m102.4 IgG used for inhibition of virus
entry [15,45,46] was provided by Dr. D. Dimitrov
(National Cancer Institute-Frederick, National Institutes
of Health). The fusion inhibiting peptide NiV-FC2 corresponding to the HR2 region of NiV F and the nonfusion inhibiting scrambled control peptide Sc-NiV-FC2
have been previously described [39]. Recombinant, soluble ephrin-B2 and -B3 were from R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN. Recombinant, soluble NiV G (NiV sG)
has been previously described [76]
Fusion (F) glycoprotein constructs and mutagenesis

Full-length cDNA clones of the NiV and HeV F glycoprotein genes [30,41] each including the Kozak consensus sequence (CCACC) appended upstream of the initial
ATG [77] were subcloned into pCAGGs, generating the
NiV F-pCAGGs and HeV F-pCAGGs expression vectors. The cytoplasmic tail domain truncation mutants of

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

NiV and HeV F were generated by introducing stop
codons corresponding to amino acid positions 517, 518,
522, 528, 531, 533 and 541 of the full-length F glycoprotein by standard PCR techniques. The NiV F-pCAGGs
and HeV F-pCAGGs plasmids were used as templates,
and the 5’ primer included an external EcoRI site, the
Kozak consensus sequence (CCACC) and F-specific
sequence. The various 3’ primers included F specific
sequence, a stop codon at the desired location and an
external KpnI site. All PCR products were gel purified
and cloned into the TOPO vector (Invitrogen) and subsequently subcloned into pCAGGs, generating constructs NiV FΔCt1 through FΔCt7 and HeV FΔCt1
through FΔCt7 (Figure 4Aand 4B). All constructs were
sequenced confirmed.
Attachment (G) glycoprotein constructs and mutagenesis

Full-length cDNA clones of the NiV and HeV G glycoprotein genes [30,41] each including the Kozak consensus sequence (CCACC) appended upstream of the initial
ATG [77] were subcloned into pCAGGs, generating the
NiV G-pCAGGs and HeV G-pCAGGs expression vectors. The splice site mutations (Figure 1C) of the HeV
G gene were generated by site-directed mutagenesis
using the QuickChange II Site-directed Mutagenesis Kit
and QuickChange Multi Site-directed Mutagenesis Kit
(Stratagene, Cedar Creek, TX). The template for the
mutagenesis reactions was a HeV G clone in the TOPO
plasmid (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA). For the first
donor splice site D1 at nucleotide position 1749, the
TTG codon for leucine was changed to CTT. The other
redundant codons for leucine are CTG, CTA, CTC, and
TTA, but these were not effective in removing the predicted splice site. For the second donor splice site D2 at
nucleotide position 1858, the AGT codon for serine was
changed to TCG. For the third donor splice site D3 at
nucleotide position 2259, the GGG codon for glycine
was changed to GGT. All PCR products were gel purified and cloned into TOPO and subsequently subcloned
into pCAGGs. All mutation-containing constructs were
sequence verified.
Cell surface biotinylation

HeLa-USU cells grown in T25cm 2 flasks were transfected with the pCAGGs expression constructs of NiV
and HeV F alone or along with their partner G glycoprotein constructs with Fugene reagent (Roche Diagnostics Corp, IN) for 36 hrs. Following expression, cells
were rinsed three times with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and cell surface proteins were biotinylated using 0.25 mg/ml EZ-Link NHS-Biotin (Pierce,
Rockford, IL) in PBS for 30 min at 4°C [50]. The reaction was quenched by washing the cell monolayer three
times with ice-cold PBS before harvesting cells and

Page 11 of 14

preparation of cell lysates. Cells were lysed in 100 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 and
protease inhibitor at 4°C for 30 min and one-half of
each lysate was incubated with 100 μl of 20% vol/vol
solution of Agarose-Avidin D beads (Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA) in IP buffer (0.14 M NaCl,
0.1 M Tris, and 0.1% Triton) at 4°C and rotated overnight. Beads were washed twice with lysis buffer followed by one wash with DOC buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, and
0.1% SDS). Samples were boiled in SDS-PAGE sample
buffer with 2-mercaptoethanol, separated on a 4-20%
Tris-Glycine gradient gel (Invitrogen), transferred to
nitrocellulose, and probed with a cross-reactive polyclonal mouse antiserum to HeV G at a concentration of
1:25,000 or a rabbit polyclonal F1 specific antiserum at a
concentration of 1:25,000.
Cell fusion Assays

Henipavirus F and G mediated fusion activities were
measured using a previously described quantitative viral
glycoprotein-mediated cell-cell fusion assay [30,41,57].
Briefly, one cell population (effector cells) is infected
with a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing the T7
polymerase (vTF7.3) and the other cell population (target cells) is infected with a vaccinia virus encoding the
E. coli lacZ gene (b-Gal) gene under control of the T7
promoter (vCB21R). Cell-cell fusion between effector
and target cell results in b-Gal synthesis which can be
measured by specific synthetic substrate cleavage. Plasmids encoding NiV or HeV G along with their respective wild-type F glycoprotein partner or the various
truncation mutants of F were transfected into HeLaUSU cells and allowed to express overnight (effector cell
populations). Effector cell populations were also prepared using empty vector, pCAGGs, or NiV or HeV F
glycoprotein alone as additional negative controls. The
various effector cell populations were infected with
vTF7.3 and a fusion permissive 293T target cell population was prepared by infection with vCB21R. Vaccinia
virus infections were carried out with a multiplicity of
infection of 10, suspended in media and incubated at
31°C overnight as previously described[30,41,57]. Cell
fusion reactions were conducted with the various cell
mixtures in 96-well plates at 37°C with a ratio of envelope glycoprotein-expressing cells to target cells of 1:1
using 2 × 105 total cells per well in a total volume of 0.2
ml per well for 2.5 h. For quantitative analyses, Nonidet
P-40 was added (0.5% vol/vol) and aliquots of the cellcell fusion lysates were assayed for b-Gal at ambient
temperature with the substrate chlorophenol red-dgalactopyranoside (Roche Diagnostics Corp, IN, USA).
Assays were performed in triplicate, and fusion results
were calculated and expressed as rates of b-Gal activity

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

(change in optical density at 570 nm per minute ×
1,000) in an MRX microplate reader (Dynatech Laboratories, Chantilly, VA).
Preparation of henipavirus envelope glycoprotein
pseudotyped lentivirus particles

Pseudotyped, HIV-1 reporter gene encoding virus stocks
were prepared by transfecting 293T cells with the reporter gene-encoding backbone plasmids pNL4-3-Luc-E-R+
or pNL4-3-GFP-E-R+ along with the henipavirus envelope glycoprotein encoding pCAGGs vectors. 293T cells
(0.75 × 106) were seeded in a 6-well flat-bottom collagen
I-coated microplate (BD Biosciences, Durham, NC) and
transfected with the expression plasmids using the
Fugene reagent (Roche Diagnostics Corp, IN). The DNAs
of the pNL4-3-Luc-E-R + or pNL4-3-GFP-E-R + along
with the HeV or NiV F and G encoding pCAGGs plasmids were mixed in the ratio of 1:0.2:0.8, respectively,
and added to 500 μl of serum free DMEM and 9 μl
Fugene. The mixture was incubated at room temperature
for 30 min and then applied to the culture of 293T cells.
After 3 to 5 hr incubation at 37°C, transfected cells were
washed extensively with DMEM and incubated for additional 24-48 hr with 1 ml of DMEM-10, at 37°C in 5%
CO2. The supernatants from virus particle producing cultures were then collected and were clarified by centrifugation for 10 min at 1500 rpm, filtered through low
protein binding 0.45 μm syringe filter (Millipore, Bedford,
MA) and partially purified through 25% wt/vol sucrose in
Hepes-NaCl buffer by centrifugation at 36000 × g at 4°C
for 2.5 hr. The pellet was resuspended overnight at 4°C
in 10% sucrose in Hepes-NaCl buffer and used immediately or stored at -80°C.
Incorporation of henipavirus envelope glycoproteins in
the pseudotyped lentivirus particles

To measure the incorporation of the henipavirus F and
G glycoproteins into pseudotyped HIV-1 particles,
sucrose cushion purified particles were lysed in buffer
containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl,
2% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors at 4°C for 30
min. Samples were boiled in SDS-PAGE sample buffer
with 2-mercaptoethanol and separated on a 4-20% TrisGlycine gradient gels (Invitrogen), transferred to nitrocellulose, and probed with a cross-reactive polyclonal
mouse antiserum to HeV G at a concentration of
1:25,000 or a rabbit polyclonal F1 specific antiserum at a
concentration of 1:25,000.
Pseudotyped virus infection assays

Receptor positive cell lines, seeded into 48-well plates at
a concentration of 10 5 cells per well, were infected
(transduced) with pseudovirus, normalized for p24 antigen content using the HIV-1 p24 EIA Kit from

Page 12 of 14

Beckman-Coulter, and all infection experiments were
carried out in triplicate wells. No DEAE-Dextran or
polybrene was used to facilitate fusion/infection by the
pseudovirions. After infecting for 2.5-3 hr, the cells were
washed and incubated for additional 48-72 hr. For luciferase encoding particles, cells were lysed with 0.5%
Triton X-100 in PBS and a 50 μl aliquot of the lysate
was assayed for luciferase activity using luciferase substrate (Promega, Madison, WI) on a Mikrowin luminometer (Berthold Technologies Model: Centro LB 960).
For the GFP-encoding particles, the efficiency of infection was evaluated by counting the number of green
cells 48 h post-infection using Olympus IX81 fluorescent microscope.
For inhibition of pseudotyped virus infection assays,
pNL4-3-Luc-E-R + based virus particles pseudotyped
with full-length NiV or HeV F and G envelope glycoproteins were pre-incubated with 2 μg each of NiVsG,
mAb102.4 IgG, NiV-FC2 (fusion inhibiting) or Sc-NiVFC2 (scrambled control peptide), recombinant soluble
murine ephrin-B2 (rmEFN-B2/Fc) or recombinant soluble human ephrin-B3 (rhEFN-B3/Fc) at 4°C for 1 hr.
Receptor positive 293T cells, seeded into 48-well plates
(105 cells per well) were then infected with the various
pre-treated pseudotyped virus particles and processed as
above. All infection experiments were performed in
triplicate.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Splice site prediction in the pre-mRNA derived
from the HeV G gene as cloned in pCAGGs. EMBL-EBI Splice site
prediction software http://www.ebi.ac.uk/asd-srv/wb.cgi?method=7 was
used to check for the presence of splice donor sites in the G
glycoprotein constructs cloned in the pCAGGs vector. Splice acceptor
site present in the intron at position 1670-71 is shown on the left for all
the constructs. On the right is shown the predicted splice donor site.

Acknowledgements
The views expressed in the manuscript are solely those of the authors, and
they do not represent official views or opinions of the Department of
Defense or The Uniformed Services University of the Health Science. This
work was supported by NIH grant AI054715 to C.C.B. Portions of this work
were originally presented at the 2006 Keystone Symposia: Cell Biology of
Virus Entry, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Authors’ contributions
DK contributed to the development of the Henipavirus pseudovirus assay,
designed and constructed all the expression constructs and carried out the
experiments, identified the alternative splicing process in the original Hendra
virus G encoding pCAGGs plasmid clone, interpreted data, and wrote the
first drafts of the figures and manuscript. CCB conceived of and contributed
to the development of the Henipavirus pseudovirus assay provided overall
supervision and financial support and wrote and prepared the final versions
of the figures and manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

Received: 9 September 2010 Accepted: 12 November 2010
Published: 12 November 2010
References
1. Eaton BT, Broder CC, Middleton D, Wang LF: Hendra and Nipah viruses:
different and dangerous. Nat Rev Microbiol 2006, 4:23-35.
2. Bishop KA, Broder CC: Hendra and Nipah: Lethal Zoonotic
Paramyxoviruses. In Emerging Infections. Edited by: Scheld WM, Hammer
SM, Hughes JM. Washington, D.C.: American Society for Microbiology;
2008:155-187.
3. Wang L, Harcourt BH, Yu M, Tamin A, Rota PA, Bellini WJ, Eaton BT:
Molecular biology of Hendra and Nipah viruses. Microbes Infect 2001,
3:279-287.
4. Eaton BT, Mackenzie JS, Wang LF: Henipaviruses. In Fields Virology. Volume 2.
5 edition. Edited by: Knipe DM, Howley PM. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
2007:1587-1600.
5. Li Y, Wang J, Hickey AC, Zhang Y, Wu Y, Zhang H, Yuan J, Han Z,
McEachern J, Broder CC, et al: Antibodies to Nipah or Nipah-like viruses in
bats, China. Emerg Infect Dis 2008, 14:1974-1976.
6. Hayman DT, Suu-Ire R, Breed AC, McEachern JA, Wang L, Wood JL,
Cunningham AA: Evidence of henipavirus infection in West African fruit
bats. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e2739.
7. Anonymous: Hendra virus, human, equine - Australia (05): Queensland.
Pro-med International Society for Infectious Diseases; 2009 [http://www.
promedmail.org], September 10, archive no 20090910.3189.
8. Anonymous: Hendra virus, equine - Australia (03): (QL) human exp. ProMED International Society for Infectious Diseases; 2010 [http://www.
promedmail.org], May 22, archive no 20100522.1699.
9. Playford EG, McCall B, Smith G, Slinko V, Allen G, Smith I, Moore F, Taylor C,
Kung YH, Field H: Human Hendra virus encephalitis associated with
equine outbreak, Australia, 2008. Emerg Infect Dis 2010, 16:219-223.
10. Anonymous: Nipah Virus, Fatal - Bangladesh (Dhaka). Pro-Med
International Society for Infectious Diseases; 2008 [http://www.promedmail.
org], March 11, 2008, archive no 20080311.0979.
11. Anonymous: Nipah virus, fatal - Bangladesh: (Faridpur). Pro-MED
International Society for Infectious Diseases; 2010 [http://www.promedmail.
org], January 22, 2010, archive no 20100122.0250.
12. Gurley ES, Montgomery JM, Hossain MJ, Bell M, Azad AK, Islam MR,
Molla MA, Carroll DS, Ksiazek TG, Rota PA, et al: Person-to-person
transmission of Nipah virus in a Bangladeshi community. Emerg Infect Dis
2007, 13:1031-1037.
13. Harit AK, Ichhpujani RL, Gupta S, Gill KS, Lal S, Ganguly NK, Agarwal SP:
Nipah/Hendra virus outbreak in Siliguri, West Bengal, India in 2001.
Indian J Med Res 2006, 123:553-560.
14. Luby SP, Rahman M, Hossain MJ, Blum LS, Husain MM, Gurley E, Khan R,
Ahmed BN, Rahman S, Nahar N, et al: Foodborne transmission of Nipah
virus, Bangladesh. Emerg Infect Dis 2006, 12:1888-1894.
15. Bossart KN, Zhu Z, Middleton D, Klippel J, Crameri G, Bingham J,
McEachern JA, Green D, Hancock TJ, Chan YP, et al: A neutralizing human
monoclonal antibody protects against lethal disease in a new ferret
model of acute nipah virus infection. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000642.
16. Marianneau P, Guillaume V, Wong T, Badmanathan M, Looi RY, Murri S,
Loth P, Tordo N, Wild F, Horvat B, Contamin H: Experimental infection of
squirrel monkeys with nipah virus. Emerg Infect Dis 2010, 16:507-510.
17. Geisbert TW, Daddario-DiCaprio KM, Hickey AC, Smith MA, Chan YP,
Wang LF, Mattapallil JJ, Geisbert JB, Bossart KN, Broder CC: Development of
an acute and highly pathogenic nonhuman primate model of Nipah
virus infection. PLoS One 2010, 5:e10690.
18. Rockx B, Bossart KN, Feldmann F, Geisbert JB, Hickey AC, Brining D,
Callison J, Safronetz D, Marzi A, Kercher L, et al: A novel model of lethal
Hendra virus infection in African green monkeys and the effectiveness
of ribavirin treatment. J Virol 2010, 84:9831-9839.
19. Bossart KN, Broder CC: Developments towards effective treatments for
Nipah and Hendra virus infection. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2006, 4:43-55.
20. Bonaparte MI, Dimitrov AS, Bossart KN, Crameri G, Mungall BA, Bishop KA,
Choudhry V, Dimitrov DS, Wang LF, Eaton BT, Broder CC: Ephrin-B2 ligand
is a functional receptor for Hendra virus and Nipah virus. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2005, 102:10652-10657.
21. Negrete OA, Levroney EL, Aguilar HC, Bertolotti-Ciarlet A, Nazarian R,
Tajyar S, Lee B: EphrinB2 is the entry receptor for Nipah virus, an
emergent deadly paramyxovirus. Nature 2005, 436:401-405.

Page 13 of 14

22. Negrete OA, Wolf MC, Aguilar HC, Enterlein S, Wang W, Muhlberger E,
Su SV, Bertolotti-Ciarlet A, Flick R, Lee B: Two key residues in ephrinB3 are
critical for its use as an alternative receptor for Nipah virus. PLoS Pathog
2006, 2:e7.
23. Bishop KA, Stantchev TS, Hickey AC, Khetawat D, Bossart KN, Krasnoperov V,
Gill P, Feng YR, Wang L, Eaton BT, et al: Identification of hendra virus g
glycoprotein residues that are critical for receptor binding. J Virol 2007,
81:5893-5901.
24. Himanen JP, Saha N, Nikolov DB: Cell-cell signaling via Eph receptors and
ephrins. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2007, 19:534-542.
25. Pasquale EB: Eph receptor signalling casts a wide net on cell behaviour.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005, 6:462-475.
26. Bossart KN, Broder CC: Paramyxovirus Entry. In Viral Entry into Host Cells.
Edited by: Pöhlmann S, Simmons G. Austin, TX Landes Bioscience; 2009:.
27. Pager CT, Dutch RE: Cathepsin L is involved in proteolytic processing of
the hendra virus fusion protein. J Virol 2005, 79:12714-12720.
28. Bossart KN, Crameri G, Dimitrov AS, Mungall BA, Feng YR, Patch JR,
Choudhary A, Wang LF, Eaton BT, Broder CC: Receptor binding, fusion
inhibition, and induction of cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies by a
soluble g glycoprotein of hendra virus. J Virol 2005, 79:6690-6702.
29. Bossart KN, McEachern JA, Hickey AC, Choudhry V, Dimitrov DS, Eaton BT,
Wang LF: Neutralization assays for differential henipavirus serology using
Bio-Plex Protein Array Systems. J Virol Methods 2007, 142:29-40.
30. Bossart KN, Wang LF, Flora MN, Chua KB, Lam SK, Eaton BT, Broder CC:
Membrane fusion tropism and heterotypic functional activities of the
nipah virus and hendra virus envelope glycoproteins. J Virol 2002,
76:11186-11198.
31. Xu K, Rajashankar KR, Chan YP, Himanen JP, Broder CC, Nikolov DB: Host
cell recognition by the henipaviruses: crystal structures of the Nipah G
attachment glycoprotein and its complex with ephrin-B3. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2008, 105:9953-9958.
32. Bowden TA, Aricescu AR, Gilbert RJ, Grimes JM, Jones EY, Stuart DI:
Structural basis of Nipah and Hendra virus attachment to their cellsurface receptor ephrin-B2. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2008, 15:567-572.
33. Kaku Y, Noguchi A, Marsh GA, McEachern JA, Okutani A, Hotta K,
Bazartseren B, Fukushi S, Broder CC, Yamada A, et al: A neutralization test
for specific detection of Nipah virus antibodies using pseudotyped
vesicular stomatitis virus expressing green fluorescent protein. J Virol
Methods 2009, 160:7-13.
34. Baum C, Schambach A, Bohne J, Galla M: Retrovirus vectors: toward the
plentivirus? Mol Ther 2006, 13:1050-1063.
35. Han DP, Kim HG, Kim YB, Poon LL, Cho MW: Development of a safe
neutralization assay for SARS-CoV and characterization of S-glycoprotein.
Virology 2004, 326:140-149.
36. Chan SY, Speck RF, Ma MC, Goldsmith MA: Distinct mechanisms of entry
by envelope glycoproteins of Marburg and Ebola (Zaire) viruses. J Virol
2000, 74:4933-4937.
37. Wang W, Butler EN, Veguilla V, Vassell R, Thomas JT, Moos M Jr, Ye Z,
Hancock K, Weiss CD: Establishment of retroviral pseudotypes with
influenza hemagglutinins from H1, H3, and H5 subtypes for sensitive
and specific detection of neutralizing antibodies. J Virol Methods 2008,
153:111-119.
38. Kobayashi M, Iida A, Ueda Y, Hasegawa M: Pseudotyped Lentivirus Vectors
Derived from Simian Immunodeficiency Virus SIVagm with Envelope
Glycoproteins from Paramyxovirus. J Virol 2003, 77:2607-2614.
39. Bossart KN, Mungall BA, Crameri G, Wang LF, Eaton BT, Broder CC:
Inhibition of Henipavirus fusion and infection by heptad-derived
peptides of the Nipah virus fusion glycoprotein. Virol J 2005, 2:57.
40. Connor RI, Chen BK, Choe S, Landau NR: Vpr is required for efficient
replication of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 in mononuclear
phagocytes. Virology 1995, 206:935-944.
41. Bossart KN, Wang LF, Eaton BT, Broder CC: Functional expression and
membrane fusion tropism of the envelope glycoproteins of Hendra
virus. Virology 2001, 290:121-135.
42. Niwa H, Yamamura K, Miyazaki J: Efficient selection for high-expression
transfectants with a novel eukaryotic vector. Gene 1991, 108:193-199.
43. Kilby JM, Hopkins S, Venetta TM, DiMassimo B, Cloud GA, Lee JY,
Alldredge L, Hunter E, Lambert D, Bolognesi D, et al: Potent suppression of
HIV-1 replication in humans by T-20, a peptide inhibitor of gp41mediated virus entry. Nat Med 1998, 4:1302-1307.

Khetawat and Broder Virology Journal 2010, 7:312
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/312

44. Kilby JM, Lalezari JP, Eron JJ, Carlson M, Cohen C, Arduino RC,
Goodgame JC, Gallant JE, Volberding P, Murphy RL, et al: The safety,
plasma pharmacokinetics, and antiviral activity of subcutaneous
enfuvirtide (T-20), a peptide inhibitor of gp41-mediated virus fusion, in
HIV-infected adults.PG - 685-93. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2002,
18:685-693.
45. Zhu Z, Dimitrov AS, Bossart KN, Crameri G, Bishop KA, Choudhry V,
Mungall BA, Feng YR, Choudhary A, Zhang MY, et al: Potent neutralization
of Hendra and Nipah viruses by human monoclonal antibodies. J Virol
2006, 80:891-899.
46. Zhu Z, Bossart KN, Bishop KA, Crameri G, Dimitrov AS, McEachern JA,
Feng Y, Middleton D, Wang LF, Broder CC, Dimitrov DS: Exceptionally
potent cross-reactive neutralization of Nipah and Hendra viruses by a
human monoclonal antibody. J Infect Dis 2008, 197:846-853.
47. Hohne M, Thaler S, Dudda JC, Groner B, Schnierle BS: Truncation of the
human immunodeficiency virus-type-2 envelope glycoprotein allows
efficient pseudotyping of murine leukemia virus retroviral vector
particles. Virology 1999, 261:70-78.
48. Indraccolo S, Minuzzo S, Feroli F, Mammano F, Calderazzo F, ChiecoBianchi L, Amadori A: Pseudotyping of Moloney leukemia virus-based
retroviral vectors with simian immunodeficiency virus envelope leads to
targeted infection of human CD4+ lymphoid cells. Gene Ther 1998,
5:209-217.
49. Mammano F, Salvatori F, Indraccolo S, De Rossi A, Chieco-Bianchi L,
Gottlinger HG: Truncation of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1
envelope glycoprotein allows efficient pseudotyping of Moloney murine
leukemia virus particles and gene transfer into CD4+ cells. J Virol 1997,
71:3341-3345.
50. Bishop KA, Hickey AC, Khetawat D, Patch JR, Bossart KN, Zhu Z, Wang LF,
Dimitrov DS, Broder CC: Residues in the stalk domain of the hendra virus
g glycoprotein modulate conformational changes associated with
receptor binding. J Virol 2008, 82:11398-11409.
51. Bonifacino JS, Traub LM: Signals for sorting of transmembrane proteins to
endosomes and lysosomes. Annu Rev Biochem 2003, 72:395-447.
52. Weise C, Erbar S, Lamp B, Vogt C, Diederich S, Maisner A: Tyrosine residues
in the cytoplasmic domains affect sorting and fusion activity of the
Nipah virus glycoproteins in polarized epithelial cells. J Virol 2010,
84:7634-7641.
53. Meulendyke KA, Wurth MA, McCann RO, Dutch RE: Endocytosis plays a
critical role in proteolytic processing of the hendra virus fusion protein.
J Virol 2005, 79:12643-12649.
54. Gardner AE, Dutch RE: A conserved region in the F(2) subunit of
paramyxovirus fusion proteins is involved in fusion regulation. J Virol
2007, 81:8303-8314.
55. Gardner AE, Martin KL, Dutch RE: A conserved region between the heptad
repeats of paramyxovirus fusion proteins is critical for proper F protein
folding. Biochemistry 2007, 46:5094-5105.
56. Nussbaum O, Broder CC, Berger EA: Fusogenic mechanisms of envelopedvirus glycoproteins analyzed by a novel recombinant vaccinia virusbased assay quantitating cell fusion-dependent reporter gene activation.
J Virol 1994, 68:5411-5422.
57. Bossart KN, Broder CC: Viral glycoprotein-mediated cell fusion assays
using vaccinia virus vectors. Methods Mol Biol 2004, 269:309-332.
58. Lamb RA, Jardetzky TS: Structural basis of viral invasion: lessons from
paramyxovirus F. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2007, 17:427-436.
59. Hughson FM: Enveloped viruses: a common mode of membrane fusion?
Curr Biol 1997, 7:R565-569.
60. Singh M, Berger B, Kim PS: LearnCoil-VMF: computational evidence for
coiled-coil-like motifs in many viral membrane-fusion proteins. J Mol Biol
1999, 290:1031-1041.
61. Joshi SB, Dutch RE, Lamb RA: A core trimer of the paramyxovirus fusion
protein: parallels to influenza virus hemagglutinin and HIV-1 gp41.
Virology 1998, 248:20-34.
62. Lambert DM, Barney S, Lambert AL, Guthrie K, Medinas R, Davis DE, Bucy T,
Erickson J, Merutka G, Petteway SR Jr: Peptides from conserved regions of
paramyxovirus fusion (F) proteins are potent inhibitors of viral fusion.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:2186-2191.
63. Rapaport D, Ovadia M, Shai Y: A synthetic peptide corresponding to a
conserved heptad repeat domain is a potent inhibitor of Sendai viruscell fusion: an emerging similarity with functional domains of other
viruses. Embo J 1995, 14:5524-5531.

Page 14 of 14

64. Young JK, Li D, Abramowitz MC, Morrison TG: Interaction of peptides with
sequences from the Newcastle disease virus fusion protein heptad
repeat regions. J Virol 1999, 73:5945-5956.
65. Young JK, Hicks RP, Wright GE, Morrison TG: Analysis of a peptide
inhibitor of paramyxovirus (NDV) fusion using biological assays, NMR,
and molecular modeling. Virology 1997, 238:291-304.
66. Wild TF, Buckland R: Inhibition of measles virus infection and fusion with
peptides corresponding to the leucine zipper region of the fusion
protein. J Gen Virol 1997, 78(Pt 1):107-111.
67. Mulligan MJ, Yamshchikov GV, Ritter GD Jr, Gao F, Jin MJ, Nail CD, Spies CP,
Hahn BH, Compans RW: Cytoplasmic domain truncation enhances fusion
activity by the exterior glycoprotein complex of human
immunodeficiency virus type 2 in selected cell types. J Virol 1992,
66:3971-3975.
68. Ritter GD, Mulligan MJ, Lydy SL, Compans RW: Cell fusion activity of the
simian immunodeficiency virus envelope protein is modulated by the
intracytoplasmic domain. Virology 1993, 197:255-264.
69. Ragheb JA, Anderson WF: Uncoupled expression of Moloney murine
leukemia virus envelope polypeptides SU and TM: a functional analysis
of the role of TM domains in viral entry. J Virol 1994, 68:3207-3219.
70. Rein A, Mirro J, Haynes JG, Ernst SM, Nagashima K: Function of the
cytoplasmic domain of a retroviral transmembrane protein: p15E-p2E
cleavage activates the membrane fusion capability of the murine
leukemia virus Env protein. J Virol 1994, 68:1773-1781.
71. Dutch RE, Lamb RA: Deletion of the cytoplasmic tail of the fusion protein
of the paramyxovirus simian virus 5 affects fusion pore enlargement. J
Virol 2001, 75:5363-5369.
72. Sergel T, Morrison TG: Mutations in the cytoplasmic domain of the fusion
glycoprotein of Newcastle disease virus depress syncytia formation.
Virology 1995, 210:264-272.
73. Yao Q, Compans RW: Differences in the role of the cytoplasmic domain
of human parainfluenza virus fusion proteins. J Virol 1995, 69:7045-7053.
74. Pernet O, Pohl C, Ainouze M, Kweder H, Buckland R: Nipah virus entry can
occur by macropinocytosis. Virology 2009, 395:298-311.
75. Deng H, Liu R, Ellmeier W, Choe S, Unutmaz D, Burkhart M, Di Marzio P,
Marmon S, Sutton RE, Hill CM, et al: Identification of a major co-receptor
for primary isolates of HIV-1 [see comments]. Nature 1996, 381:661-666.
76. Mungall BA, Middleton D, Crameri G, Bingham J, Halpin K, Russell G,
Green D, McEachern J, Pritchard LI, Eaton BT, et al: Feline model of acute
nipah virus infection and protection with a soluble glycoprotein-based
subunit vaccine. J Virol 2006, 80:12293-12302.
77. Kozak M: An analysis of 5’-noncoding sequences from 699 vertebrate
messenger RNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 1987, 15:8125-8148.
doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-312
Cite this article as: Khetawat and Broder: A Functional Henipavirus
Envelope Glycoprotein Pseudotyped Lentivirus Assay System. Virology
Journal 2010 7:312.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
