<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genome scale prediction of substrate specificity for acyl adenylate superfamily of enzymes based on active site residue profiles</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:57. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-57"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Pankaj Khurana"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Genome scale prediction of substrate specificity
for acyl adenylate superfamily of enzymes based
on active site residue profiles
Pankaj Khurana1,2, Rajesh S Gokhale1, Debasisa Mohanty1*

Abstract
Background: Enzymes belonging to acyl:CoA synthetase (ACS) superfamily activate wide variety of substrates and
play major role in increasing the structural and functional diversity of various secondary metabolites in microbes
and plants. However, due to the large sequence divergence within the superfamily, it is difficult to predict their
substrate preference by annotation transfer from the closest homolog. Therefore, a large number of ACS sequences
present in public databases lack any functional annotation at the level of substrate specificity. Recently, several
examples have been reported where the enzymes showing high sequence similarity to luciferases or coumarate:
CoA ligases have been surprisingly found to activate fatty acyl substrates in experimental studies. In this work, we
have investigated the relationship between the substrate specificity of ACS and their sequence/structural features,
and developed a novel computational protocol for in silico assignment of substrate preference.
Results: We have used a knowledge-based approach which involves compilation of substrate specificity
information for various experimentally characterized ACS and derivation of profile HMMs for each subfamily. These
HMM profiles can accurately differentiate probable cognate substrates from non-cognate possibilities with high
specificity (Sp) and sensitivity (Sn) (Sn = 0.91-1.0, Sp = 0.96-1.0) values. Using homologous crystal structures, we
identified a limited number of contact residues crucial for substrate recognition i.e. specificity determining residues
(SDRs). Patterns of SDRs from different subfamilies have been used to derive predictive rules for correlating them
to substrate preference. The power of the SDR approach has been demonstrated by correct prediction of
substrates for enzymes which show apparently anomalous substrate preference. Furthermore, molecular modeling
of the substrates in the active site has been carried out to understand the structural basis of substrate selection. A
web based prediction tool http://www.nii.res.in/pred_acs_substr.html has been developed for automated functional
classification of ACS enzymes.
Conclusions: We have developed a novel computational protocol for predicting substrate preference for ACS
superfamily of enzymes using a limited number of SDRs. Using this approach substrate preference can be assigned
to a large number of ACS enzymes present in various genomes. It can potentially help in rational design of novel
proteins with altered substrate specificities.

Background
The acyl:CoA synthetases belong to the “AMP-forming
superfamily” or “acyl-adenylate/thioester-forming”
superfamily. ACS catalyze transfer of a wide variety of
acyl, aryl and aminoacyl moieties from their corresponding acids to the phosphopantetheine group of coenzyme
A (CoA) or other carrier proteins through formation of
* Correspondence: deb@nii.res.in
1
National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, India

a thioester bond. Based on the type of the carboxylate
substrate, enzymes of this superfamily have been functionally divided into several subfamilies, namely acetyl:
CoA synthetases (AcCS, EC 6.2.1.1), medium chain:CoA
synthetases (MCS, EC 6.2.1.2), long chain:CoA synthetases (LCS, EC 6.2.1.3), 4-coumarate:CoA ligases (4CL,
EC 6.2.1.12), luciferases (EC 1.13.12.7) and adenylation
domains of NRPSs (Non-Ribosomal Peptide Synthetases)
(Figure 1). AcCS activates C2-C4 fatty acids, MCS activates C 4 -C 12 and LCS activates C 10 -C 22 fatty acids.

© 2010 Khurana et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

Luciferases utilize luciferin as the substrate. 4CLs catalyzes the activation of various cinnamic acid derivatives
(cinnamate, coumarate, caffeate, sinapate, ferulate etc.)
[1]. The substrates for adenylation domains of NRPS
include various proteinogenic as well as non-proteinogenic amino acids. The enzymes carry out a two-step
reaction process which proceeds through the hydrolysis
of pyrophosphate (Additional file 1, Figure S1). In the
first step of the reaction, ATP in presence of Mg 2+
reacts with a carboxylate substrate to form an acyl-adenylate intermediate with the simultaneous release of
pyrophosphate. In the second step of the reaction, the
acyl-adenylate intermediate is esterified to CoA in case
of AcCS, LCS, MCS, 4CL subfamily while adenylation
domains of NRPS catalyze the transfer of the acyl adenylate to 4’-phosphopantheteine group of Peptidyl Carrier Protein (PCP). In case of luciferases the acyl
intermediate is oxidized by molecular oxygen. Since the
enzymes form thioester derivatives through an acyl-adenylate intermediate, this superfamily is also known as

Page 2 of 17

“acyl-adenylate/thioester-forming” superfamily. Apart
from FACL (Fatty Acyl CoA Ligases), which transfer the
acyl-adenylate intermediate to CoA, recently a new
family of enzymes called FAAL (Fatty Acyl AMP
Ligases) which transfer acyl adenylate to carrier protein
domains of adjacent NRPS/PKS clusters have been discovered in Mycobacterium tuberculosis [2,3].
Acyl:CoA synthetases have been characterized from
both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms and are
found in a wide variety of tissues and cell organelles.
Acyl:CoA derivatives are known to play important role
in cell signaling [4,5], post-translational protein modification [6,7], intracellular protein transport [8] and transcriptional control of genes involved in lipid metabolism
[9,10]. NRPSs catalyze the synthesis of a large number
of pharmacologically important peptides eg., vancomycin, cephalosporins, cyclosporins, penicillins [11]. 4-Coumarate:CoA ligases play central role in the biosynthesis
of phenylpropanoid-derived compounds like coumarins,
stilbenes, and lignin, which are important in plant

Figure 1 Schematic representation of the acyl-adenylate superfamily and its various subfamilies. The figure shows the chemical structure
of the substrates and products for the reactions catalyzed by members of each subfamily. The various subfamilies utilize different carboxylic acid
substrates and transfer acyl moiety to either CoA or enzyme bound phosphopantetheine arm. The luciferase catalyzes conversion of luciferin to
oxyluciferin. All the subfamilies are known to take up a similar 3-dimensional fold (depicted in centre) which has a large N-terminal domain and
a small C-terminal domain. The structure shown is the adenylation domain of gramicidin synthetase (PDB code: 1AMU). The cofactor AMP
(orange) and substrate Phenylalanine (red), shown in CPK, bind in the cleft separating the two domains. The substrate binding residues are
shown in cyan as ball and stick.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

growth and development [12]. Since the members of the
superfamily are involved in synthesis of siderophores
like mycobactin and yersiniabactin in M. tuberculosis
and Y. pestis, which are important for microbial virulence; several studies have implicated these enzymes as
important drug targets [13]. The enzymes of this superfamily have also been targets of interesting protein engineering studies. Eg. The acyl:CoA synthetases have been
used to incorporate unusual acyl groups into a variety of
secondary metabolites, e.g. antibiotics. This helps in the
synthesis of novel antibiotics with improved potency.
The adenylation domains of NRPSs can be engineered
to generate novel peptide antibiotics. Luciferase is extensively used for in-vivo luminescence monitoring [14] and
also as reporter of gene expression and regulation
[15,16]. The members of the superfamily are very
diverse in their primary sequence and the overall
sequence similarity ranges between 20-30%. However
there are reports of presence of highly conserved motifs
within the superfamily, especially the putative “AMPbinding domain signature motif” (PROSITE PS00455)
([LIVMFY] - {E} - {VES} - [STG] - [STAG] - G - [ST] [STEI] - [SG] - x - [PASLIVM] - [KR]). The presence of
this motif is used as the main criteria to group these
enzymes in one superfamily [17].
Crystal structures have been elucidated for several
members of the superfamily, some with and some without substrates [18-30]. Inspite of large differences in
their primary sequences (similarity ranging from 15%45%), the enzymes adopt a conserved structural fold
with large N-terminal and small C-terminal domain
with the active site lying between the interface of the
two domains (Figure 1). The three-dimensional structures in complex with substrates have allowed identification of the substrate binding pocket. The crystal
structure of adenylation domain of gramicidin synthetase (PheA) has helped in identification of 10 amino
acids forming the substrate (phenylalanine) binding
pocket (PDB code: 1AMU). The hypothesis that the
amino acids forming the substrate binding pocket can
potentially be the specificity determining residues was
established by the fact that the changes in these residues
have directly altered the substrate specificity of peptide
synthetases [31-33]. For adenylation domains of NRPSs,
it has been shown that prediction of substrate specificity
based on the active site pocket residues are more accurate than whole sequence comparisons [31,32,34]. Similarly, putative substrate binding pocket residues have
been identified for 4CLs and luciferases and their mutations have successfully altered the substrate specificity
profiles of these enzymes [1,35-41].
Recently there have been reports of enzymes which
show “anomalous” substrate specificity. CG6178 from
Drosophila melanogaster shows maximum sequence

Page 3 of 17

similarity to luciferase. However biochemical experiments show that it is a long chain fatty acyl:CoA synthetase and does not function as luciferase [42,43].
Similarly two proteins from Arabidopsis thaliana,
namely At4 g05160 and At5 g63380 are annotated as
4CL-like proteins in the databases. However biochemical
analysis revealed them to be utilizing long chain fatty
acids as the substrates [44]. Another example is At1
g62940 which shows similarity to 4CL but is experimentally found to be a medium chain CoA ligase and has
been shown to be involved in pollen development and
sporopollenin biosynthesis [45,46]. It is unclear how
these enzymes show high sequence similarity to one
subfamily but have substrate preference corresponding
to other subfamily. A large number of genes belonging
to acyl adenylate superfamily have been deposited in
public databases without any substrate preference being
assigned to them. Predicting the substrate preference of
these enzymes will help in unravelling their specific biological functions.
In this manuscript, we have attempted to develop a
novel computational approach which will be fast enough
for genome scale prediction of substrate specificity of this
biologically important enzyme family. We have used a
knowledge-based approach which combines substrate
specificity information from experimentally characterized
members of this superfamily with structural information
from available crystal structures to derive predictive rules
for correlating sequence to substrate specificity. Based on
detailed sequence and structural analysis we have identified residues which play a crucial role in dictating substrate preference of this enzyme superfamily. We also
demonstrate that, based on profiles of such specificity
determining residues it is not only possible to predict the
substrate specificities of various subfamilies accurately,
but also rationalize the observed substrate preferences of
enzymes which show anomalous substrate specificity. We
have also carried out detailed structural analysis and
ligand docking studies for each subfamily to understand
the structural basis of substrate selection.

Results And Discussion
Phylogenetic and HMM profile analysis

The sequences belonging to various different subfamilies
of acyl-adenylate superfamily were collected by keyword
search and repeated BLAST searches [47] against the
NR database of NCBI [48]. Only sequences with known
substrate preference were catalogued. The resulting
database comprised of 608 protein sequences with
known substrate specificity (120 AcCS, 130 LCS, 119
4CL, 25 luciferases and 29 MCS). Since the adenylation
domains are part of multidomain proteins, 190 adenylation domains with known substrates and correct
domain boundaries were extracted from NRPSDB, a

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

Page 4 of 17

comprehensive database on domain arrangement and
substrate specificity of NRPSs [34]. All-against-all pairwise sequence alignments were carried out for all 608
sequences to determine the similarity across the whole
superfamily. As can be seen from Table 1 the similarity
within the superfamily varies from 10-30%. Inter-subfamily similarity and intra-subfamily similarity values
were overlapping i.e. a LCS may show higher percentage
similarity to another LCS in the range of 10-30% and it
may show similarity in the same range with luciferase
also (Table 1). Hence for this superfamily of enzymes
the substrate preference for an uncharacterized
sequence cannot be assigned based on the closest
sequence homolog.
Figure 2 shows a dendrogram obtained from a set of
sixty representative sequences from various subfamilies.
As can be seen, the sequences utilizing similar substrates have clustered together in the phylogenetic tree.
This indicates that despite the large sequence divergence
within each subfamily, the sequences of a given subfamily have distinct features which distinguish them from
other subfamilies, such that they cluster in a subfamily
specific manner. Therefore profile based methods like
HMMs[49] can be used to devise a prediction protocol
for assigning the substrate specificity to an uncharacterized protein belonging to acyl adenylate superfamily. For
each subfamily, the sequences were randomly divided
into training set and test set. The training set was used
to derive subfamily specific HMM profiles and the test
set was used to benchmark the prediction accuracy. The
sequences of the training set were aligned by CLUSTALW and the resulting multiple sequence alignment
was given as input to the HMMER package[49] for
building HMM profiles for each subfamily. All the six
HMM profiles were compiled in the form of a HMM
library. Each sequence in the test set was matched with
all six profiles in this library of HMM’s using the program ‘hmmpfam’. The test sequence was scored against
each subfamily HMM and substrate preference was
assigned to the test sequence based on best scoring
HMM i.e. if the query sequence scores best with HMM
for 4-Coumarate:CoA ligases, then the specificity

assigned to the query would be Coumarate. By comparing predicted substrate specificity to the known substrate specificity, sensitivity (Sn) and specificity (Sp)
were calculated to determine the overall prediction
accuracy of the method. Table 2 summarizes the results
for HMM based substrate specificity predictions for the
acyl-adenylate superfamily. The sensitivity ranged from
0.91 for MCS to 1.0 for luciferases. The specificity was
0.96 for LCS, 0.99 for MCS and 1.0 for other subfamilies. Thus based on whole sequence HMM profiles it is
possible to correctly group acyl adenylate superfamily of
enzymes into various subfamilies as per their substrate
specificity. However, this whole sequence HMM failed
to predict correctly the substrate specificities for the
enzymes, CG6178, At4 g05160, At5 g63380 and At1
g62940 which show sequence homology to luciferase
and 4CLs, but utilize long chain or medium chain fatty
acyl substrates (Table 3). Rather than predicting them as
long chain or medium chain CoA synthetases, the
HMM profiles predicted them as luciferases and 4CLs
respectively.
Prediction of substrate specificity based on SDRs

It is possible that, the enzymes CG6178, At4 g05160,
At5 g63380 and At1 g62940 which show anomalous
substrate preference have acquired specificity for long
chain substrates as a result of specific mutations in the
active site pocket residues, while rest of the protein
shows similarity to luciferase or 4CLs. To test the
hypothesis, we attempted to develop a prediction protocol based on a limited set of binding pocket residues
responsible for substrate selection. In an earlier study
on adenylation domains of NRPS, Stachelhaus et al have
demonstrated that predictions based on binding-pocket
residues were significantly better than whole sequence
based approaches [32]. Based on the crystal structure of
adenylation domain of gramicidin synthetase (PDB
code:1AMU) in complex with the substrate phenylalanine, it had been proposed that the substrate selectivity
of NRPS adenylation domain is governed by the residues
forming the substrate binding pocket [32]. Since the
phenylalanine binding site on 1AMU is in close

Table 1 The range of pairwise sequence similarity between members of various subfamilies
Subfamily

LCS

LCS (129)

10-30

MCS

MCS (25)

10-20

20-50

4-CL

4-CL (115)

3-30

10-30

20-90

Luciferase (29)

10-30

10-30

10-35

50-90

AcCS

AcCS (120)

5-30

10-30

4-30

10-30

10-90

NRPS

NRPS (190)

2-30

10-30

10-30

10-30

10-30

30-50

Luciferase

All against all pairwise sequence comparisons were carried out by Needleman and Wunsch program of the EMBOSS package. The figures in the parenthesis
indicate the number of sequences included in our analysis for each subfamily.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

Page 5 of 17

Figure 2 A phylogenetic tree obtained from MSA of representative members of ACS superfamily. The six subfamilies are represented in
different colors. Each subfamily, namely AcCS (orange), 4CL (purple), MCS (pink), LCS (maroon), Luciferases (yellow), NRPS (green) cluster as
separate groups in the dendrogarm.

proximity of the conserved AMP binding site and the
catalysis by the superfamily of enzymes involve formation of covalent bond between AMP and acyl group, it
was reasonable to assume that other subfamilies will
have the acyl group binding site at a position structurally analogous to the Phe binding pocket of 1AMU.
Therefore in our work, all amino acids which fall within
6 Å distance from the Cb of the substrate phenylalanine
Table 2 Performance of the three prediction protocols
Subfamily

HMMER (Sn/Sp)

PSSM-15 (Sn/Sp)

PSSM-44 (Sn/Sp)

AcCS

0.96/1

0.95/1

0.96/1

4CL

0.98/1

0.92/1

0.92/1

LCS

0.98/0.96

0.93/0.96

0.98/0.95

Luciferase
MCS

1/1
0.91/0.99

1/0.99
0.83/0.97

1/1
0.91/0.99

NRPS

0.95/1

0.95/0.98

0.94/0.99

were identified as putative substrate specificity determining residues (SDRs) (Figure 3). By this method, 12
amino acids positions were identified. These include 7
out of the 10 residues which are identified in 1AMU as
the substrate binding pocket residues [18]. The remaining three, (position number 239, 278 and 299) were also
included in our analysis, even if they were at a distance
slightly larger than 6 Å. Hence, a total of 15 amino acid
positions were defined as the SDRs. The sequential
order of these 15 SDRs was defined as the active
site profile (ASP) for each enzyme in the training set

Sensitivity (Sn) and specificity (Sp) values for various different substrate
specificity prediction protocols. HMMER refers to the prediction based on
HMM profiles for the entire sequence while, PSSM-15 and PSSM-44 refer the
predictions based on the limited number of active site residues.

Table 3 Prediction of substrate preference by whole
sequence HMMs and PSSM-15 method for enzymes
having anomalous substrate specificity.
Protein

HMMER

PSSM-15

CG6178

Luciferase

Long chain:CoA ligase

At4 g05160 &
At5 g63380

Coumarate:CoA Ligase

Long chain:CoA ligase

At1 g62940

Coumarate:CoA ligase

Long chain:CoA ligase

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

(Figure 3). Multiple sequence alignments were obtained
for each subfamily by CLUSTALW and separate position specific scoring matrices PSSMs were built for each
subfamily as described in methods. The PSSM for the
ASPs for each subfamily were used to score the ASP of
a query sequence and the substrate preference was
assigned based on the highest scoring PSSM. The prediction accuracy of this protocol was also evaluated
using the above mentioned test and training set
approach. Table 2 also shows the results for prediction
of substrate specificity based on 15 active site pocket
residues. It was encouraging to note that for the acyl
adenylate superfamily, the substrate specificity can also
be predicted with high accuracy using a limited number
of residues which define the putative substrate binding
pocket. The 15 SDRs were able to correctly predict the
substrate preference for CG6178 to be long chain:CoA
ligase, rather than a luciferase. Similarly for At4 g05160

Page 6 of 17

and At5 g63380 the PSSM-15 based method correctly
identified the substrate preference as long chain fatty
acid (Table 3). Our SDR profiles indicates that, At1
g62940 is not a 4CL in agreement with experiments.
However, by our PSSM-15 based method this sequence
was predicted as long chain CoA ligase, rather than
medium chain CoA ligase (Table 3). The origin of this
discrepancy might be due to the ambiguity in literature
regarding definition of acyl chain length which distinguishes medium chain CoA ligase from long chain CoA
ligases. Thus, our analysis suggests that, for this superfamily of enzymes a limited number of residues lining
the substrate binding pocket are involved in substrate
selection. In some cases, the enzymes having whole
sequence homology to one subfamily, have evolved to
acquire specificity for completely different substrates by
mutating a limited number of active site residues. Prediction of substrate specificity based on limited number

Figure 3 Identification of Specificity Determining Residues (SDRs). (a)The crystal structure of adenylation domain of gramicidin synthetase
(PDB code: 1AMU). The C terminal domain is colored in ochre. The A and B subdomains of the N-terminal domain are shown in green and pink
respectively. The cofactor AMP (orange) and substrate phenylalanine (red) are depicted as CPK models. The 15 SDRs lining the substrate binding
pocket are shown in cyan. (b) Zoomed in version of the active site. The substrate phenylalanine and AMP are shown as stick in red and orange
respectively and the 15 SDRs as ball and stick. (c) The extraction of SDRs from a protein sequence. The query sequence is aligned with the
structural template and the amino acids of the query corresponding to the SDRs of the template are extracted. The residues highlighted in red
represent the SDRs.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

of specificity determining residues (SDR) has the additional advantage that, based on the identified residues
site directed mutagenesis experiments can be designed
to alter substrate specificity by protein engineering.
Even though PSSM-15 method could successfully predict for cases in which enzymes showed so called anomalous specificity, the overall prediction accuracy for the
PSSM-15 method was slightly lower compared to the
prediction by whole sequence HMMs. The prediction
accuracy fell from 0.98 to 0.93 for LCS, from 0.91 to
0.83 for MCS and from 0.98 to 0.92 for 4CLs. This
could be due to the fact that these 15 SDRs were identified based on a smaller substrate phenylalanine. For larger substrates like luciferases, long chain and medium
chain fatty acids the binding pocket could be larger and
they can comprise of more number of SDRs. To confirm
this hypothesis, SDRs were increased from 15 to 44 by
increasing the distance cut-off for defining putative
SDRs from 6 Å to 10 Å. The PSSM for each subfamily
were rebuilt for 44 positions and the prediction accuracy
recalculated. As can be seen, from Table 2 the prediction accuracy with larger binding site was comparable to

Page 7 of 17

that obtained by whole sequence based method
(HMMER).
Analysis of conservation pattern of SDRs

Since these 15 residues could successfully predict the
substrate preference, it was intriguing to see the amino
acid conservation pattern at these positions across the
different subfamilies. Figure 4 shows the conservation
pattern of the 15 SDR positions (consensus active site
profile). The conservation pattern was identified using
an approach is similar to that used in the evolutionary
trace method, which has been used in earlier studies to
identify functional sites on proteins [50]. As can be seen
in Figure 4, eight out of these 15 positions clearly
change in a subfamily specific manner. The binding
pocket of all subfamilies is majorly composed of hydrophobic amino acids. The consensus active site profile of
LCS, MCS and luciferases are very similar. This is also
reflected in the substrates of the enzymes. LCS and
MCS only differ in the chain length of the fatty acid
that they use as substrate. There are reports where luciferases have been known to catalyze formation of long

Figure 4 Consensus Active Site Profile for six subfamilies. The table lists the conservation pattern of 15 positions that constitute the SDRs
for various subfamilies. Number in the bracket refers to the percentage conservation of the amino acid in the alignment. The positions which
have conservation >80% or <50% are shown in red and green respectively. Those positions with conservation between 50% and 80% are
colored in pink. The positions which are highlighted have a subfamily specific conservation pattern and play a crucial role in controlling
substrate specificity. Position number 210 (highlighted in yellow) was identified by docking studies.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

chain fatty acyl:CoA [42,51]. Many biochemical and
mutagenesis experiments have been carried out to determine the residues governing substrate specificity in this
superfamily. These experiments also independently show
that, many of these 15 SDRs are indeed important for
substrate selection. The position 324 (numbering
according to 1AMU) has a conserved tryptophan in
AcCS (substrate C 2 ), whereas in all other subfamilies
which utilize larger substrate (>C2), this position has a
conserved glycine. Analysis of the substrate binding
pocket in the available crystal structures, it clearly
shows that bulkier tryptophan makes the substrate binding cavity smaller whereas a glycine will allow accommodating larger substrates (Additional file 1, Figure S2).
Various structural and mutagenic studies have confirmed the role of tryptophan in controlling the substrate preference of the enzyme [25,38,40,52]. Similarly,
position 234 has a conserved tryptophan in AcCS, a
conserved histidine in 4CL, LCS, MCS and luciferases
and a conserved phenylalanine in NRPSs. We hypothesize that this histidine may play a role in attracting the
carboxylic acid substrate into the deep seated binding
pocket. In NRPSs this role is played by negatively
charged aspartic acid (adjacent position i.e. 235) which
interacts with the NH3+ group of amino acids [18]. The
conserved tryptophan in AcCS might provide a suitable
chemical environment for the substrate acetate which
allows it to easily move in and out of the binding
pocket. Hence it is hypothesized that this histidine may
act as an attracting hook which pulls the larger substrates (like coumaric acid, fatty acid chains, luciferin)
into the active site; however for small substrates like
acetic acid only chance entrapment can catalyze the
reaction. Mutagenic experiments in different subfamilies
have shown the importance of this histidine [39,53-56].
Structural similarity between members of ACS
superfamily

It is known that, various members of ACS superfamily
adopt a highly conserved three dimensional fold despite
low sequence similarity. We analyzed the extent of
structural similarity between available crystal structures
of ACS superfamily of enzymes. Since, the orientation of
the C-terminal domain relative to the N-terminal
domain is known to change upon ligand binding [26],
the structures were aligned only over the N-terminal
domain and RMSD was calculated. Simultaneously, the
percentage similarity between the sequences is also calculated by Needleman-Wunsch program. The Table S1
in Additional file 2summarizes the results. It clearly
shows that luciferase (PDB code:1LCI) and acetyl:CoA
ligase (PDB code:1PG4) which show only 17% similarity
at sequence level, are found to have almost identical
folds with RMSD of 1.6 Å. Also luciferases from

Page 8 of 17

Photinus pyralis (PDB code: 1LCI) and Luciola cruciata
(PDB code: 2D1R), which show higher similarity (64%)
show RMSD in the comparable range (1.1 Å). During
the protein structure comparison studies it was noticed
that, the large N-terminal domain of the ACS fold, can
be further subdivided into two subdomains, namely subdomain A and B. The subdomain A stretches from
amino acid 67 to 203 and B subdomain from amino
acid 204 to 428 (numbering according to 1AMU). These
two domains are relatively independent and there are
very few contacts between the two (Figure 5). The B
subdomain contains all the substrate binding residues.
As seen from the multiple sequence alignment (Figure
5) most of the insertions and deletions are confined to
the subdomain A and the subdomain B is relatively
more conserved. This may be due to the functional constraint of the superfamily of catalyzing the same reaction
but with different substrates. During superimposition
the N-terminal domains of various structures of the
superfamily, it was found that there are relative movements between the subdomain A and B in different
structures. Thus our structural analysis helped in
explaining how enzymes of this superfamily can adopt a
highly conserved tertiary fold despite large divergence in
primary sequence. It is also interesting to note that, the
core of the conserved structural fold consists of the subdomain B of the N-terminus domain. Since substrate
binding pocket is primarily confined to subdomain B,
binding pockets of the various members of this superfamily can be modelled using the limited number of
available crystal structures as templates.
Effect of the choice of structural templates on SDRs

At the time when the work was carried out, crystal
structures were available for adenylation domain of
NRPS (PDB code:1AMU), luciferases (PDB code:1LCI)
and acetyl:CoA ligases (PDB code:1PG4). For long
chain:CoA ligases, medium chain CoA ligases and luciferases, ligand free luciferase structure 1LCI was used
as the template. However, the SDRs for all subfamilies
were identified based on superposition of the modeled
structure on 1AMU. With the availability of substrate
bound crystal structures for all the subfamilies, it is
important to understand whether SDR profiles for various subfamilies would change with the choice of structural template. Currently substrate bound structures
are available for five out of the six sub families of acyl
adenylate superfamily discussed in this work. They are
1PG3 (acetyl CoA ligase), 3EQ6 (medium chain CoA
ligase), 1V26 (long chain CoA ligase), 2D1R (luciferase)
and 1AMU (adenylation domain of NRPS). For the
enzymes 1PG3, 3EQ6, 1V26 and 2D1R, active site residues were identified by three different methods and
compared.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

Page 9 of 17

Figure 5 Structural subdomains of adenylation domain. The figure depicting the A- (green) and B- (pink) subdomains of the N-terminal
domain of 1AMU. The bound AMP and phenylalanine (stick representation) are also shown. The MSA of some of the representative members
from each subfamily shows that most of the insertions and deletions are confined to the A-subdomain. The 14 SDRs (highlighted red) belong to
the B-subdomain which is relatively conserved.

In method 1, the sequences were submitted as query
to our web server http://www.nii.res.in/pred_acs_substr.
html which models long chain:CoA ligases, medium
chain CoA ligases and luciferases using the ligand free
luciferase structure 1LCI as the template, but identifies
binding pocket residues based on superposition of the
modeled structure on 1AMU. In method 2, no structural modelling is carried out, instead the crystal structures 1PG3, 3EQ6 and 1V26 are used, but binding
pocket residues are identified based on superposition of
the crystal structures on 1AMU. In method 3, binding
pocket residues are identified from the ligand bound
crystal structures based on amino acids which are within
a distance of 6 Å from the ligand. This will correspond
to the true binding pocket as seen in experimentally
determined structure. The SDRs identified by these

three different methods for the four enzymes 3EQ6,
1PG3, 2D1R and 1V26 are listed in Additional file 2,
Tables S2-S5.
It is interesting to note that, for 3EQ6, the medium
chain CoA ligase 12 out of the 15 binding pocket residues were common in the three different methods for
binding pocket identification (Additional file 2, Table
S2). The binding pocket in the medium chain fatty acid
bound crystal structure had only four additional residues
which were not predicted by our web server. Similarly,
in case of 1PG3, the acetyl CoA ligase, which has a
smaller ligand compared to our reference structure phenylalanine bound 1AMU, 8 out of the 15 binding pocket
residues were found to be common in the three different methods and the true binding pocket in the acetyl
bound structure had only 2 extra residues (Additional

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

file 2, Table S3). In case of 2D1R, the luciferase, all the
15 amino acids identified by the web server were common to the three different methods, but because of the
larger size of luciferin 10 additional residues were identified in the actual luciferin bound crystal structure
(Additional file 2, Table S4). Similarly, in case of 1V26,
the long chain CoA ligase, 13 out of the 15 binding
pocket residues identified by our web server were present in the true binding pocket, but additional residues
lined the actual binding pocket in view of the larger
chain length of the bound ligand (Additional file 2,
Table S5). Thus the binding pocket residues identified
based on 1AMU agree very well with the true binding
pocket as seen in crystal structure and only in case of
enzymes having larger substrates additional residues
constitute the binding pocket. In view of the high degree
of structural conservation in the superfamily, modeled
structures (method 1) and actual crystal structures
(method 2) give almost identical binding pocket
residues.
Our analysis demonstrates that, in view of the high
degree of structural conservation in the acyl adenylate
superfamily, active site based substrate specificity can be
done using information from single structural template.
The identification of SDRs based on single structural
template has certain advantages for prediction of substrates for acyl adenylate superfamily without knowing a
priori the subfamily information. In absence of prior
information about subfamily, it will be difficult to
choose subfamily specific structural templates. This
becomes a major problem, specially in those cases
which show anomalous substrate specificities i.e.
sequences showing high homology to 4CL but utilizing
long chain acyl substrates. Secondly, use of different
structural templates from different subfamilies would
lead to different number of binding pocket residues and
this will make comparison of scores across subfamilies
for matches to active site profiles a difficult task. Therefore, in cases where subfamily information is not
known, a better approach for prediction of substrate
specificity would be would be to first identify the subfamily using single structural template and then align
the sequences with the respective templates for more
accurate identification of binding pocket residues.
Ligand docking

We next proceeded to carry out docking of substrates to
their respective proteins and understand how exactly the
identified SDRs stabilize the cognate substrates in their
respective binding sites. In view of the large sequence
divergence within each subfamily and availability of only
a limited number of crystal structures, structural features of various members of this superfamily can only
be obtained by homology modeling approach. We

Page 10 of 17

decided to carry out all the docking studies using
homology models based on PheA (PDB code:1AMU)
and compare the results to actual crystal structures
wherever available (Additional file 1, Figure S3). A
representative sequence from each subfamily was chosen. Acetyl:CoA ligase from Salmonella enterica (GenBank:31616027), long chain:CoA ligase from Thermus
thermophilus (GenBank:55980573), luciferase from Photinus pyralis (GenBank:126501), Coumarate:CoA ligase
from Arabidopsis thaliana (At4CL2) (GenBank:5702188)
and medium chain:CoA ligase from Pseudomonas oleovorans (GenBank:416605) were chosen for model building. The structure of adenylation domain of gramicidin
synthetase (PDB code:1AMU) was used as a template
and its alignments with the query sequence were
obtained from GenTHREADER [57]. Based on these
alignments MODELLER[58] package was used to build
the homology models. During docking simulations the
docking grid was defined based on cavities found adjacent to the AMP binding pockets. The cavities were
identified in the models, using the program ACSITE
[59]. For each model, a docking grid was built to
encompass the whole cavity (Figure 6). During docking
AMP was kept in the AMP binding site as a fixed
ligand.
For AcCS, MCS and LCS, C 2 (acetic acid), C 10
(decanoic acid) and C14 (myristic acid) fatty acids were
used as substrates respectively. At4CL2 has been shown
to utilize coumarate and caffeate efficiently [60] and
hence caffeate was chosen for docking on the model of
At4CL2 (Additional file 1, Figure S3). The conformations of the ligand generated after docking runs were
clustered at different RMSD cut off value. For AcCS,
this was set at 1 Å and for larger substrates; it was set
at 1.7 Å. The final orientation of the ligand which was
selected as the docked conformation was based on three
criteria; the energy rank, cluster rank and the distance
of the carbonyl carbon and the donor phosphate of
AMP. The energy rank is based on the docking energy
and the cluster rank is based on the number of conformations in the cluster. For the catalytic activity, the carbonyl group of the substrate should be close to the
donor oxygen of AMP. Hence, the conformation having
lower energy rank and cluster rank and minimum distance between the carbonyl carbon and phosphate of
AMP is selected as the docked complex.
Table 4 summarizes the results of docking for each
subfamily, while Figure S4 (A-E) in Additional file
1shows the final docked orientations for the cognate
substrates for each of the different subfamilies. As can
be seen from Table 4, except for 4CL, in all other cases
the final docked conformation has lower energy as well
as cluster rank. Since crystal structure [24] of myristic
acid in complex with long chain CoA synthetase was

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

Page 11 of 17

Figure 6 Docking of myristic acid onto model of long chain:CoA ligase. (a) The N-terminal domain of the homology model of long chain:
CoA liagse. The figure shows that AUTODOCK sampled many conformations (shown in yellow) within the docking grid. (b) Histogram showing
the various clusters obtained after docking. The cluster highlighted in red was chosen and the docked conformation was selected. (c)
Comparison of the conformation of the docked ligand (green) with the conformation of the same ligand as obtained from X-ray crystallography
(PDB code: 1V26) (orange).

available, we compared it with the docked conformation
for long chain fatty acid (C14) obtained by our docking
simulation. Interestingly, the ligands had a RMSD of 2.2
Å (Figure 6) and 80% of the binding pocket residues
identified by docking studies matched with those identified from actual crystal structure. Apart from long chain
CoA synthetase, similar comparisons of docked complexes with the available crystal structures of enzyme-

substrate complexes were also carried out for acetyl
CoA synthetases, luciferase and medium chain CoA
ligase. Figure 7 shows the superposition of the docked
complexes on to the crystal structures of the corresponding protein-ligand complexes. For acetyl CoA
ligase the comparison of the docked complex with the
acetyl group bound crystal structure 1PG3 showed that,
the ligand had an RMSD of 1.7 Å and 85% of the

Table 4 Results of docking of various substrates onto their cognate enzymes in each subfamily
Subfamily

% Iden with
1AMU

Number of docking
runs (GALS)

Cluster
RMSD
(Ǻ)

Docking
energy

Energy
Rank

Cluster
size

Population
rank

Distance
(Ǻ)

AcCS
4CL

18.5
19.8

250
250

1.0
1.7

-3.73
-7.74

4
8

168
59

1
2

3.6
5.4

MCS

16.3

250

1.7

-8.5

4

6

9

3.1

LCS

18.3

250

1.7

-11.42

3

31

1

4.2

Luciferase

17.7

250

1.7

-11.20

4

61

2

4.3

The table shows the energy and population rank for the cluster having the carboxyl group at interacting distance from the phosphate of AMP. The last column
depicts the distance between the carbonyl carbon and oxygen of the donor phosphate.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

Page 12 of 17

Figure 7 Comparison of the docking based substrate bound conformations for acetyl CoA synthetase, medium chain CoA ligase and
luciferase with the substrate bound structures obtained from X-ray crystallography. The structures obtained from docking are shown in
green, while the corresponding crystal structures are depicted in orange. (A) acetyl CoA ligase (B) medium chain CoA ligase (C) luciferase. The
RMSD values shown in the figures correspond to root mean squared deviations in ligand coordinates when the enzyme structures were
optimally superposed.

binding pocket residues in the crystal structure matched
with the docked complex (Figure 7A). Figure 7B shows
the superposition of the docked complex for medium
chain CoA ligase on the medium chain fatty acid bound
crystal structure 3EQ6. In our docking studies medium
chain CoA ligase from Pseudomonas oleovorans (GenBank:416605) was docked with decanoic acid. However,
the human medium chain CoA ligase crystal structure
(3EQ6) had the substrate butyric acid bound in the
active site. The ligands were compared over the first
four carbon atoms and the RMSD was 3.3 Å and 78% of
the binding pocket residues matched. For luciferase the
docked complex was compared with the luciferase from
Luciola cruciata (PDB code: 2D1R) which had the ligand
luciferin bound in the active site. The ligand RMSD was
2.3 Å and 75% of the binding pocket residues matched
(Figure 7C).
Hence for this enzyme superfamily, inspite of low
sequence similarity, one is able to build approximate
homology models, dock the ligand and identify the correct binding pocket. Therefore, the best docking

solution from each subfamily was analyzed to identify
additional functionally important residues apart from
the 15 SDRs. The residue at position number 210 was
found to be important for long and medium chain:CoA
ligases. The long chain:CoA ligases have a conserved
asparagines, whereas MCS have a conserved histidine
(Figure 4). This position could potentially be the one
controlling substrate chain length. In medium chain:
CoA ligases, the presence of a positively charged histidine in the fatty acid binding tunnel will disfavour binding of longer fatty acyl substrates. However, in long
chain:CoA ligases, the presence of partially hydrophobic
asparagine might favour binding of fatty acids having
longer chain length. Interestingly, in luciferases this
position has a conserved arginine which has been suggested in earlier studies to form the base of the cavity
for luciferin binding [39,40,61].
Thus the results from our docking studies as well as
conservation profile analysis of binding pocket residues
indicate that, in various subfamilies of acyl adenylate
superfamily, the amino acids in the binding pocket have

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

changed collectively to accommodate their respective
substrates. The amino acids forming the binding pocket
of acetyl:CoA ligases are larger in size than the ones
forming the binding pocket of other subfamilies, e.g.
position numbers 234, 278, 301, 322. (Figure 4). These
observations from our in silico analysis are also in agreement with experimental studies. In Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus ACS, the mutation of valine
(corresponding to position number 301) to smaller
amino acids (alanine) have shown to lengthen the binding pocket to accommodate longer substrates like propionate [52]. The glycine corresponding to position 301
in firefly luciferase (G315) has been found to be very
important for proper luciferin binding [40].
Identifying new members of acyl adenylate superfamily
from NR database

Since the benchmarking studies on the test set of ACS
sequences clearly demonstrated the power of SDR based
prediction of substrate specificity, we developed a user
friendly web based tool for genome scale prediction of
substrate preference for acyl CoA synthetase superfamily
of enzymes. Figure 8 shows the results of a typical analysis using this web server available at http://www.nii.res.in/
pred_acs_substr.html. This server permits classification of
acyl AMP superfamily of enzymes into various subfamilies using both whole sequence HMM profile as well as

Page 13 of 17

PSSM based on 15 SDRs. We used this novel tool to
identify new members of the AMP superfamily from NR
database. NR database was downloaded. HMMER profiles
built for each subfamily were used to pick up homologous sequences. Duplicated sequences and sequences
which were part of the training set were removed. This
way a total of 5480 sequences were fetched out.
Sequences with length ranging from 300-750 amino acids
were considered. Table 5 shows the number of proteins
which could be assigned to various substrate specific subfamilies. It is important to note that, using our computational protocol it is possible to assign specificity to a
large number of proteins which were originally annotated
as just AMP ligases or hypothetical/unknown proteins.
Interestingly apart from classifying various AMP ligases
as per their chain length specificity, our method has identified several coumarate:CoA ligases and NRPS adenylation domains. These sequences deserve special attention
for experimental studies as they do not show obvious
sequence homology to coumarate:CoA ligases or NRPS
adenylation domains, but might utilize coumaroyl moiety
or amino acids as substrates. Thus our analysis demonstrates that, using our computational method it is not
only possible to identify ACS superfamily of enzymes in
various genomes, but also get valuable clues about the
biosynthetic pathways they could possibly be involved
based on in silico assignment of their substrate specificity.

Figure 8 Typical use of the query interface of pred_acs_substr for analysis of substrate specificity of ACSs. The prediction of substrate
preference of the query sequence is based on two protocols, namely HMMER and PSSM-15. Each method provides the results in a tabular
format, which are sorted based on the score of the query sequence against each subfamily. The two results are shown in separate pop-up
windows. The last column in each table provides the link to the alignment of the query sequence with the template sequences of each
subfamily.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

Page 14 of 17

Table 5 Identification and annotation of new members of the acyl-adenylate superfamily.
Subfamily

AMP-ligases (1499)

Hypothetical proteins (235)

Unnamed proteins (64)

Putative proteins (473)

Unknown proteins (5)

AcCS

266

42

21

54

0

4CL
MCS

12
151

7
16

0
4

11
23

1
0

LCS

1065

162

39

341

4

Luciferase

0

0

0

0

0

NRPS

5

8

0

44

0

Total

2276

The numbers within parenthesis in the top row indicate total number of proteins in NR database which have been originally annotated as acyl-AMP ligases,
putative proteins or unknown proteins due to lack of suitable tools for assigning substrate preference. The various rows indicate the number of such proteins
which could be grouped into various subfamilies by our substrate specificity prediction methods.

Conclusions
In this work, we have used an in silico approach to
investigate the relationship between sequence and substrate specificity for acyl adenylate superfamily of
enzymes. We have demonstrated that, using profile
HMMs derived from experimentally characterized members of various subfamilies, it is possible to identify cognate substrates for each subfamily with high sensitivity
and specificity. However, to alter the substrate utilization profile of an enzyme it is important to identify key
residues which might be controlling the substrate preference. Using substrate bound homologous crystal
structures, we have identified a limited number of contact residues crucial for substrate recognition i.e. specificity determining residues (SDRs). Benchmarking on a
data set of known specificity indicated that, using the
SDR patterns the substrate preference can be predicted
for different subfamilies with high accuracy. The power
of the SDR approach was further demonstrated by correct prediction of substrate in the cases of enzymes
which exhibit apparently anomalous substrate preference. Since our substrate specificity prediction method
based on SDRs is fast enough for genome scale prediction of substrate preference, we analyzed the nr database
of NCBI using this prediction protocol and assigned
substrate preference to many uncharacterized sequences.
Molecular modeling of the substrate in the active site
of each subfamily was carried out for further understanding the structural basis of substrate preference.
Homology models were built for representative member
of each family using structural template from a single
subfamily and the cognate ligand was docked. The
results were compared to actual crystal structures wherever available. It was encouraging to note that despite
the low sequence homology, the modeled structures
could be superposed on the corresponding crystal structures with a Ca RMSD in the range of 2 to 3 Å. Similarly for the docked LCS-myristic acid complex, the
docked ligand could be superposed on the experimentally determined ligand position with an RMSD of 2.2 Å
and 80% of the SDRs identified by docking studies

matched with those identified from actual crystal structure. Comparison of docked enzyme-substrate complexes involving acetyl CoA liagse, medium chain CoA
ligase and luciferase with the corresponding crystal
structures showed that, predicted binding sites had reasonably good overlap with the experimentally identified
binding sites. In summary, our structural analysis helped
in explaining how enzymes of this superfamily can
adopt a highly conserved tertiary fold despite large
divergence in primary sequence. The core of the conserved structural fold consists of the subdomain B of
the N-terminus domain, while most insertions and deletions in primary sequence are confined to the subdomain A. Since substrate binding pocket is primarily
confined to subdomain B, binding pockets of the various
members of this superfamily can also be modelled using
the limited number of available crystal structures as
templates, despite high sequence divergence.

Methods
Compilation of the sequences

Since, sequences with experimentally confirmed specificities were crucial for our analysis the dataset had to be
curated carefully. All the sequences of adenylation
domain of NRPSs were extracted from NRPSDB http://
www.nii.res.in/nrps-pks.html[34] which contains manually curated substrate specificities for adenylation
domains based on experimentally characterized NRPS
gene clusters. Since adenylation domains often occur in
multiple copies on a single polypeptide chain of a multifunctional enzyme, it was easy to obtain confirmed specificities of a large number of NRPS adenylation
domains based on experimentally identified chemical
structure of the nonribosomal peptide product. However, for other families like 4CL, luciferase, acetyl CoA
ligase, medium chain CoA ligase and long chain CoA
ligase such large numbers of experimentally characterized sequences were not available. Based on extensive
literature survey we collected at least 20 biochemically
characterized sequences for AcCS, LCS, 4CL and at
least 10 characterized sequences for MCS and

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

luciferases. Since, such small numbers of sequences are
not adequate for HMM and PSSM analysis using a
training and test set approach, we had to include additional sequences in each group using the experimentally
characterized sequences as seed sequence. The additional members were selected based on the criteria of
low e-value, alignment over the whole length, and same
annotation as the seed sequence. Finally, a data set comprising of 608 protein sequences with known substrate
specificity (120 AcCS, 130 LCS, 119 4CL, 25 luciferases
and 29 MCS) were collected by keyword search and
repeated BLAST searches[47] against the NR database
of NCBI [48].
Sequence analysis

Pairwise sequence comparisons were carried out by
Needleman and Wunsch alignment program of the
EMBOSS package [62]. BLAST was used to perform
local alignment [63]. BLOSUM62 scoring matrix and
default values for gap penalties were used for sequence
alignments. Multiple alignments and phylogenetic dendrograms were also constructed for each of the domain
types using CLUSTALW program [64].
Building PSSM

For building the PSSM, for each subfamily columns corresponding to 15 active site positions were extracted
from the alignment. The score of amino acid ‘a’ at column/position ‘p’ is defined as:
Score (a , p)  log (freq (a , p) / number of sequences in the alignment * 0.05).

Freq(a, p) refers to the frequency of residue ‘a’ at position ‘p’ in the alignment. 0.05 represents the probability
of random occurrence of any amino acid.
If any amino acid occurs with frequency of ‘0’, then a
large fixed negative score of -3.00 is assigned to the
amino acid at that position. Hence for each subfamily a
15 × 21 position specific scoring matrix (PSSM) (corresponding to 15 positions and 20 amino acids + gap) was
calculated, which quantifies the occurrence of amino
acids at each position.

Page 15 of 17

Structure analysis

For model building, the alignments with the template
structure 1AMU were generated by program GenTHREADER [57]. The models of proteins were built by
MODELLER 6V2[58]. The model structures were optimized by conjugate gradient energy minimization and
molecular dynamics with simulated annealing provided
in the MODELLER program. The ligands for docking
were built using the builder module of InsightII. The
ligands were minimized before docking using the discover module of InsightII.
Protein ligand docking

Dockings were carried out by molecule docking evaluation program, AUTODOCK 3.0 [65]. Dockings were
done by Lamarckian genetic algorithm. Each docking
experiment consisted of a series of 100 simulations,
each producing a docking solution. The docking experiment was performed 250 times to give 250 possible
solutions. The solutions having an RMSD over all atoms
of < 1 Å (for small substrate) or <1.7 Å (for large substrate) were grouped together in a single cluster. Parameters for the docking used were: a population size of
50, a random starting position and conformation, a
maximal mutation of 2 Å in translation and 50° in rotations, an elitism of 1, a mutation rate of 0.02, a crossover rate of 0.8 and a local search rate of 0.06.
Simulations were performed with a maximum of 1.5
million energy evaluations and 27000 generations. The
center of the ligand was chosen as the root. The 60 ×
60 × 60 grid with grid points separated by 0.375 Å was
build centered on the ligand.
Additional file 1: Supplementary figures. Supplementary figures S1, S2,
S3, S4A-S4E.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1157-S1.DOC ]
Additional file 2: Supplementary tables. Supplementary tables S1, S2,
S3, S4, S5.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1157-S2.DOC ]

Calculation of prediction accuracy

For the data which are predicted as positive, the actual
positive ones are called true positives (TP), while the
others are called false positives (FP). For the data which
are predicted as negative, the actual positive ones are
called false negatives (FN), while the others are called
true negatives (TN). The sensitivity and specificity are
defined as:Sn  TP / ( TP  FN) and Sp  TN / ( TN  FP).

Acknowledgements
Authors thank Director, NII for encouragement and support. PK thanks CSIR,
India for award of senior research fellowship. RSG is a HHMI International
Research Scholar and is also recognized with Swarnajayanti Fellowship. The
work has been supported by grants to National Institute of Immunology
from Department of Biotechnology, Government of India, grants to DM
under BTIS project of DBT, India.
Author details
1
National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, India.
2
Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences, Delhi, India.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

Authors’ contributions
PK performed the computations, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript;
RSG and DM designed research, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. All
the authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 29 June 2009
Accepted: 27 January 2010 Published: 27 January 2010
References
1. Stuible HP, Kombrink E: Identification of the substrate specificityconferring amino acid residues of 4-coumarate:coenzyme A ligase
allows the rational design of mutant enzymes with new catalytic
properties. J Biol Chem 2001, 276(29):26893-26897.
2. Trivedi OA, Arora P, Sridharan V, Tickoo R, Mohanty D, Gokhale RS: Enzymic
activation and transfer of fatty acids as acyl-adenylates in mycobacteria.
Nature 2004, 428(6981):441-445.
3. Arora P, Goyal A, Natarajan VT, Rajakumara E, Verma P, Gupta R, Yousuf M,
Trivedi OA, Mohanty D, Tyagi A, et al: Mechanistic and functional insights
into fatty acid activation in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Nat Chem Biol
2009, 5(3):166-173.
4. Korchak HM, Kane LH, Rossi MW, Corkey BE: Long chain acyl coenzyme A
and signaling in neutrophils. An inhibitor of acyl coenzyme A
synthetase, triacsin C, inhibits superoxide anion generation and
degranulation by human neutrophils. J Biol Chem 1994,
269(48):30281-30287.
5. Murakami K, Ide T, Nakazawa T, Okazaki T, Mochizuki T, Kadowaki T: Fattyacyl-CoA thioesters inhibit recruitment of steroid receptor co-activator 1
to alpha and gamma isoforms of peroxisome-proliferator-activated
receptors by competing with agonists. Biochem J 2001, 353(Pt2):231-238.
6. Gordon JI, Duronio RJ, Rudnick DA, Adams SP, Gokel GW: Protein Nmyristoylation. J Biol Chem 1991, 266(14):8647-8650.
7. Li ZN, Hongo S, Sugawara K, Sugahara K, Tsuchiya E, Matsuzaki Y,
Nakamura K: The sites for fatty acylation, phosphorylation and
intermolecular disulphide bond formation of influenza C virus CM2
protein. J Gen Virol 2001, 82(Pt 5):1085-1093.
8. Rubenstein JL, Fine RE, Luskey BD, Rothman JE: Purification of coated
vesicles by agarose gel electrophoresis. J Cell Biol 1981, 89(2):357-361.
9. DiRusso CC, Metzger AK, Heimert TL: Regulation of transcription of genes
required for fatty acid transport and unsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis
in Escherichia coli by FadR. Mol Microbiol 1993, 7(2):311-322.
10. DiRusso CC, Heimert TL, Metzger AK: Characterization of FadR, a global
transcriptional regulator of fatty acid metabolism in Escherichia coli.
Interaction with the fadB promoter is prevented by long chain fatty acyl
coenzyme A. J Biol Chem 1992, 267(12):8685-8691.
11. Marahiel MA, Stachelhaus T, Mootz HD: Modular Peptide Synthetases
Involved in Nonribosomal Peptide Synthesis. Chem Rev 1997,
97(7):2651-2674.
12. Hahlbrock K, Scheel D: Physiology and molecular biology of
phenylpropanoid metabolism. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 1989,
40:347-369.
13. Ferreras JA, Ryu JS, Di Lello F, Tan DS, Quadri LE: Small-molecule inhibition
of siderophore biosynthesis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Yersinia
pestis. Nat Chem Biol 2005, 1(1):29-32.
14. Contag CH, Spilman SD, Contag PR, Oshiro M, Eames B, Dennery P,
Stevenson DK, Benaron DA: Visualizing gene expression in living
mammals using a bioluminescent reporter. Photochem Photobiol 1997,
66(4):523-531.
15. Kricka LJ: Chemiluminescence and bioluminescence. Anal Chem 1995,
67(12):499R-502R.
16. Kricka LJ: Application of bioluminescence and chemiluminescence in
biomedical sciences. Methods Enzymol 2000, 305:333-345.
17. Fulda M, Heinz E, Wolter FP: The fadD gene of Escherichia coli K12 is
located close to rnd at 39.6 min of the chromosomal map and is a new
member of the AMP-binding protein family. Mol Gen Genet 1994,
242(3):241-249.
18. Conti E, Stachelhaus T, Marahiel MA, Brick P: Structural basis for the
activation of phenylalanine in the non-ribosomal biosynthesis of
gramicidin S. Embo J 1997, 16(14):4174-4183.
19. May JJ, Kessler N, Marahiel MA, Stubbs MT: Crystal structure of DhbE, an
archetype for aryl acid activating domains of modular nonribosomal
peptide synthetases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(19):12120-12125.

Page 16 of 17

20. Conti E, Franks NP, Brick P: Crystal structure of firefly luciferase throws
light on a superfamily of adenylate-forming enzymes. Structure 1996,
4(3):287-298.
21. Franks NP, Jenkins A, Conti E, Lieb WR, Brick P: Structural basis for the
inhibition of firefly luciferase by a general anesthetic. Biophys J 1998,
75(5):2205-2211.
22. Gulick AM, Starai VJ, Horswill AR, Homick KM, Escalante-Semerena JC: The
1.75 A crystal structure of acetyl-CoA synthetase bound to adenosine-5’propylphosphate and coenzyme A. Biochemistry 2003, 42(10):2866-2873.
23. Jogl G, Tong L: Crystal structure of yeast acetyl-coenzyme A synthetase
in complex with AMP. Biochemistry 2004, 43(6):1425-1431.
24. Hisanaga Y, Ago H, Nakagawa N, Hamada K, Ida K, Yamamoto M, Hori T,
Arii Y, Sugahara M, Kuramitsu S: Structural basis of the substrate-specific
two-step catalysis of long chain fatty acyl-CoA synthetase dimer. J Biol
Chem 2004, 279(30):31717-31726.
25. Gulick AM, Lu X, Dunaway-Mariano D: Crystal structure of 4chlorobenzoate:CoA ligase/synthetase in the unliganded and aryl
substrate-bound states. Biochemistry 2004, 43(27):8670-8679.
26. Reger AS, Wu R, Dunaway-Mariano D, Gulick AM: Structural
characterization of a 140 degrees domain movement in the two-step
reaction catalyzed by 4-chlorobenzoate:CoA ligase. Biochemistry 2008,
47(31):8016-8025.
27. Nakatsu T, Ichiyama S, Hiratake J, Saldanha A, Kobashi N, Sakata K, Kato H:
Structural basis for the spectral difference in luciferase bioluminescence.
Nature 2006, 440(7082):372-376.
28. Tanovic A, Samel SA, Essen LO, Marahiel MA: Crystal structure of the
termination module of a nonribosomal peptide synthetase. Science 2008,
321(5889):659-663.
29. Du L, He Y, Luo Y: Crystal structure and enantiomer selection by D-alanyl
carrier protein ligase DltA from Bacillus cereus. Biochemistry 2008,
47(44):11473-11480.
30. Bains J, Boulanger MJ: Biochemical and structural characterization of the
paralogous benzoate CoA ligases from Burkholderia xenovorans LB400:
defining the entry point into the novel benzoate oxidation (box)
pathway. J Mol Biol 2007, 373(4):965-977.
31. Challis GL, Ravel J, Townsend CA: Predictive, structure-based model of
amino acid recognition by nonribosomal peptide synthetase
adenylation domains. Chem Biol 2000, 7(3):211-224.
32. Stachelhaus T, Mootz HD, Marahiel MA: The specificity-conferring code of
adenylation domains in nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Chem Biol
1999, 6(8):493-505.
33. von Dohren H, Dieckmann R, Pavela-Vrancic M: The nonribosomal code.
Chem Biol 1999, 6(10):R273-279.
34. Ansari MZ, Yadav G, Gokhale RS, Mohanty D: NRPS-PKS: a knowledgebased resource for analysis of NRPS/PKS megasynthases. Nucleic Acids
Res 2004, , 32 Web Server: W405-413.
35. Stuible H, Buttner D, Ehlting J, Hahlbrock K, Kombrink E: Mutational
analysis of 4-coumarate:CoA ligase identifies functionally important
amino acids and verifies its close relationship to other adenylateforming enzymes. FEBS Lett 2000, 467(1):117-122.
36. Ehlting J, Shin JJ, Douglas CJ: Identification of 4-coumarate:coenzyme A
ligase (4CL) substrate recognition domains. Plant J 2001, 27(5):455-465.
37. Schneider K, Hovel K, Witzel K, Hamberger B, Schomburg D, Kombrink E,
Stuible HP: The substrate specificity-determining amino acid code of 4coumarate:CoA ligase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100(14):8601-8606.
38. Lindermayr C, Fliegmann J, Ebel J: Deletion of a single amino acid residue
from different 4-coumarate:CoA ligases from soybean results in the
generation of new substrate specificities. J Biol Chem 2003,
278(5):2781-2786.
39. Branchini BR, Magyar RA, Murtiashaw MH, Anderson SM, Zimmer M: Sitedirected mutagenesis of histidine 245 in firefly luciferase: a proposed
model of the active site. Biochemistry 1998, 37(44):15311-15319.
40. Branchini BR, Southworth TL, Murtiashaw MH, Boije H, Fleet SE: A
mutagenesis study of the putative luciferin binding site residues of
firefly luciferase. Biochemistry 2003, 42(35):10429-10436.
41. Sandalova TP, Ugarova NN: Model of the active site of firefly luciferase.
Biochemistry (Mosc) 1999, 64(8):962-967.
42. Oba Y, Ojika M, Inouye S: Characterization of CG6178 gene product with
high sequence similarity to firefly luciferase in Drosophila melanogaster.
Gene 2004, 329:137-145.

Khurana et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:57
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/57

43. Oba Y, Sato M, Ojika M, Inouye S: Enzymatic and genetic characterization
of firefly luciferase and Drosophila CG6178 as a fatty acyl-CoA
synthetase. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 2005, 69(4):819-828.
44. Schneider K, Kienow L, Schmelzer E, Colby T, Bartsch M, Miersch O,
Wasternack C, Kombrink E, Stuible HP: A new type of peroxisomal acylcoenzyme A synthetase from Arabidopsis thaliana has the catalytic
capacity to activate biosynthetic precursors of jasmonic acid. J Biol Chem
2005, 280(14):13962-13972.
45. de Azevedo Souza C, Kim SS, Koch S, Kienow L, Schneider K, McKim SM,
Haughn GW, Kombrink E, Douglas CJ: A novel fatty Acyl-CoA Synthetase
is required for pollen development and sporopollenin biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2009, 21(2):507-525.
46. Souza Cde A, Barbazuk B, Ralph SG, Bohlmann J, Hamberger B, Douglas CJ:
Genome-wide analysis of a land plant-specific acyl:coenzyme A
synthetase (ACS) gene family in Arabidopsis, poplar, rice and
Physcomitrella. New Phytol 2008, 179(4):987-1003.
47. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
48. Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Wheeler DL: GenBank:
update. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, , 32 Database: D23-26.
49. Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998, 14(9):755-763.
50. Lichtarge O, Bourne HR, Cohen FE: An evolutionary trace method defines
binding surfaces common to protein families. J Mol Biol 1996,
257(2):342-358.
51. Oba Y, Ojika M, Inouye S: Firefly luciferase is a bifunctional enzyme: ATPdependent monooxygenase and a long chain fatty acyl-CoA synthetase.
FEBS Lett 2003, 540(1-3):251-254.
52. Ingram-Smith C, Woods BI, Smith KS: Characterization of the acyl
substrate binding pocket of acetyl-CoA synthetase. Biochemistry 2006,
45(38):11482-11490.
53. Branchini BR, Murtiashaw MH, Magyar RA, Anderson SM: The role of lysine
529, a conserved residue of the acyl-adenylate-forming enzyme
superfamily, in firefly luciferase. Biochemistry 2000, 39(18):5433-5440.
54. Branchini BR, Magyar RA, Murtiashaw MH, Anderson SM, Helgerson LC,
Zimmer M: Site-directed mutagenesis of firefly luciferase active site
amino acids: a proposed model for bioluminescence color. Biochemistry
1999, 38(40):13223-13230.
55. An JH, Lee GY, Jung JW, Lee W, Kim YS: Identification of residues essential
for a two-step |reaction by malonyl-CoA synthetase from Rhizobium
trifolii. Biochem J 1999, 344(Pt 1):159-166.
56. Jung JW, An JH, Na KB, Kim YS, Lee W: The active site and substrates
binding mode of malonyl-CoA synthetase determined by transferred
nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy, site-directed mutagenesis, and
comparative modeling studies. Protein Sci 2000, 9(7):1294-1303.
57. Jones DT: GenTHREADER: an efficient and reliable protein fold
recognition method for genomic sequences. J Mol Biol 1999,
287(4):797-815.
58. Sali A, Blundell TL: Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of
spatial restraints. J Mol Biol 1993, 234(3):779-815.
59. Choudhury D: Functional Implications of Macromolecular Recognition:
Assembly of Adhesive Pili and enzyme substrate interactions. Ph.D.
Thesis. Uppsala: Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala 2001.
60. Ehlting J, Buttner D, Wang Q, Douglas CJ, Somssich IE, Kombrink E: Three
4-coumarate:coenzyme A ligases in Arabidopsis thaliana represent two
evolutionarily divergent classes in angiosperms. Plant J 1999, 19(1):9-20.
61. Branchini BR, Magyar RA, Murtiashaw MH, Portier NC: The role of active
site residue arginine 218 in firefly luciferase bioluminescence.
Biochemistry 2001, 40(8):2410-2418.
62. Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: the European Molecular Biology
Open Software Suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16(6):276-277.
63. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215(3):403-410.
64. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: improving the sensitivity of
progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting,
position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids
Res 1994, 22(22):4673-4680.
65. Garrett M, Morris DSG, Halliday SRobert, Huey Ruth, Hart EWilliam,
Belew KRichard, Olson JArthur: Automated docking using a Lamarckian
genetic algorithm and an empirical binding free energy function. Journal
of Computational Chemistry 1998, 19(14):1639-1662.

Page 17 of 17

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-57
Cite this article as: Khurana et al.: Genome scale prediction of substrate
specificity for acyl adenylate superfamily of enzymes based on active
site residue profiles. BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:57.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
