<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Molecular characterization of hepatitis A virus isolates from environmental and clinical samples in Greece</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2010 7:235. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-235"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Petros Kokkinos"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kokkinos et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:235
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/235

SHORT REPORT

Open Access

Molecular characterization of hepatitis A virus
isolates from environmental and clinical
samples in Greece
Petros Kokkinos, Panos Ziros, Sevasti Filippidou, Ioannis Mpampounakis, Apostolos Vantarakis*

Abstract
Background: Hepatitis A virus (HAV) strains detected in environmental and clinical samples were analysed to
characterize the genotypes of HAV circulating in Greece. Fifty (50) sewage samples were collected from Patras
(South-Western Greece) and Alexandroupolis (North-Eastern Greece) from 2007 until 2009, accordingly. The clinical
samples derived from an HAV outbreak involved populations from three neighbouring prefectures of North-Eastern
Greece (Xanthi, Rodopi, and Evros). HAV particles were detected by nested RT-PCR, using a previously validated set
of primers to amplify a 290-bp fragment encompassing the 5’-NTR. Positive HAV samples were confirmed by
sequencing of the PCR product. To determine the relatedness between the different isolated sequences, a
phylogenetic tree was constructed.
Results: Results showed a 100% prevalence of genotype I, and particularly subgenotype IA. The analyzed HAV
strains were closely related between them with the percentage of nucleotide identity ranging between 96% and
100%.
Conclusions: The study revealed the major prevalence of circulating strains of IA genotype in Greece and
underlined the usefulness of molecular methods for the detection and typing of viruses in both environmental and
clinical samples. The present study is, to our knowledge, the first in Greece to depict the simultaneous molecular
characterization of HAV strains isolated from both clinical and environmental samples.

Background
The Hepatitis A virus (HAV) is responsible for around
half the cases of hepatitis diagnosed worldwide and is
recognized currently as one of the most important
human food-borne pathogens, as it is the cause of most
outbreaks reported in the Western world. It is not possible to distinguish HAV strains by serotyping, but seven
genotypes can be differentiated with molecular methods
[1]. HAV infection is present in a worldwide distribution, although its endemicity varies significantly at both
international and national levels [2]. Genotype I is the
most prevalent genotype, comprising at least 80.0% of
circulating human strains. The geographical origin of
the genotypes correlates with the virus isolates. Subgenotype IA has been defined as the major HAV in the
population in America. In Europe, a more heterogenous
* Correspondence: avantar@med.upatras.gr
Environmental Microbiology Unit, Department of Public Health, School of
Medicine, University of Patras, Greece

pattern is observed with co-circulation of genotypes IA
and IB [3]. The detection of HAV is important for diagnosis and epidemiological studies of hepatitis A. Because
of the slow and non-cytopathic replication of wild-type
(wt) HAV strains, detection of HAV normally utilizes
reverse transcription (RT) coupled to polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) [4].
An epidemiological shift, from high to low prevalence,
has been observed in recent decades in the countries of
Southern Europe, including Greece. Consequently, the
Mediterranean basin as a whole should no longer be considered as an endemic area [5,6]. Studies, conducted two
decades ago in Greece and referenced in more recent
reports, albeit with limited sample sizes, indicated a significant reduction in the incidence of hepatitis A probably due to the improvement in socioeconomic
conditions [2,7,8]. The last reported HAV outbreak in
Greece involved Roma populations in three Prefectures
located in the northeast of the country [9]. Current

© 2010 Kokkinos et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kokkinos et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:235
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/235

available national data regarding the disease burden of
hepatitis A in Greece are thin due to the very limited
recent seroepidemiological studies and to the significant
underreporting of infection rates. The latest national
cross-sectional seroprevalence survey indicated that
hepatitis A infection is prevalent in Greece. The National
Advisory Committee for Immunization concluded that
the hepatitis A vaccine should be included in the Greek
National Immunization Program (GNIP) as of January
2008 [8]. To our knowledge, only one of the very few studies performed in the last decade in Greece has compared clinical and environmental HAV strains [10].
The aim of the present study was to correlate HAV
isolates from clinical and environmental samples by
applying molecular methods in order to reveal the prevalence of genotypes of HAV in Greece. HAV strains
from environmental sewage samples, analysed over a 2year period (2007-2009), were collected from the cities
of Patras and Alexandroupolis. Clinical HAV strains
were collected during a major HAV outbreak among
patients with acute hepatitis, from the hospitals of the
cities of Alexandroupolis, Komotini and Xanthi.

Methods
Sewage samples

A total of one hundred (100) sewage samples were collected from the biological treatment plants of two large
Greek towns, Patras (SW Greece) and Alexandroupolis
(NE Greece), from 2007 until 2009. Samples were collected at the entry-point of the Patras’ biological treatment plant, which receives sewage from a population of
about 250,000 inhabitants. Sewage samples were also
collected from both the entry and exit-points of the
treatment plant of Alexandroupolis, a city of approximately 50,000 inhabitants. Sewage sampling, concentration and HAV detection were performed according to
previously described protocols [10,11].
Human serum samples

Serum samples from hospitalized HAV outbreak cases
were collected and analysed for HAV as previously
described [9]. A total of 124 cases were diagnosed with
hepatitis A on the basis of their positivity for the hepatitis
A IgM antibody (IgM anti-HAV) by hospital laboratories
between July and November 2007. HAV isolates were
sequenced from eight (8) sera samples from hospitalized
patients with acute hepatitis during the outbreak [9].
Nucleic acid extraction and enzymatic amplification

Viral nucleic acids were extracted using the QIAamp
Viral RNA mini-kit (Qiagen), in line with the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and nested PCR techniques
were used for the detection of HAV, according to

Page 2 of 5

previously published protocols [10]. A 290-bp fragment
encompassing the 5’-NTR part was amplified with the
same protocol from all samples (environmental and clinical) by employing previously validated primer sets [9].
Sequencing and analysis of viral genomes

All positive samples (environmental and clinical) were
confirmed by sequencing of the PCR product. The purified PCR products of the clinical HAV strains were
sequenced by Lark Technologies (Essex, UK), and the
environmental strains by VBC-Biotech (Austria). The
nucleotide sequences obtained were analyzed by BLAST
N program at the NIH website (NCBI, National Centre
for Technology Control, NIH, USA), and were compared with each other and with other published
sequences deposited in the GenBank database. Multiple
alignments were performed using Clustal W2 software
http://www.ebi.ac.uk. The neighbour-joining method
was applied for the phylogenetic tree analysis, the reliability of which was assessed by bootstrap resampling
(1,000 pseudoreplicates), using MEGA 4.0.2 software.
The HAV genotype was determined by comparing the
different sequences of the Greek strains included in the
phylogenetic analysis with the reference sequences of
different HAV genotypes.

Results
Presence of HAV in environmental and clinical samples

HAV was detected in four sewage samples (4/50, 8%)
collected from the inlet of the biological treatment plant
of Patras and in one sample (1/50, 2%) collected from
the entry-point of the treatment plant of Alexandroupolis. Sera from eight hospitalized patients with acute
hepatitis were collected and analyzed for the detection
of HAV genome [9].
Sequence analysis of HAV RNA genomes

Sequence analysis of the nested PCR products of 5’NTR
region, showed high degree of identity among environmental and clinical samples. Comparison of the nucleotide sequence of PAT73 (isolate from sewage of Patras
biological treatment plant) with the sequences of the
other sewage samples from Patras (PAT74, PAT76,
PAT87), the sewage sample from Alexandroupoli
(ALEef) and the clinical strains from the cities of Komotini (KOM94, KOM89, KOM64), Xanthi (XAN64,
XAN65) and Alexandroupoli (ALE 05, ALE10), showed
96%-100% similarity (Figure 1). This close relationship
was confirmed by the phylogenetic analysis, as shown in
the phylogenetic trees (Figures 1,2). Comparative analysis of environmental and clinical isolates in our study
with other reference isolates (GenBank accession numbers included in the tree) confirms the presence of HAV
strains belonging only to genotype IA.

Kokkinos et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:235
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/235

Page 3 of 5

Figure 1 Phylogenetic tree depicting the relationship between the clinical and the environmental HAV strains of the present study.
Numbers under branches are bootstrap percentage values, calculated from 1,000 bootstrap replicates. Abbreviations are: PAT74, PAT76, PAT87
(sewage samples from the Patras biological treatment plant), ALEef (sewage sample from the Alexandroupolis treatment plant), KOM94-KOM89KOM64, XAN64-XAN65 and ALE05- ALE10 (clinical strains from the cities of Komotini, Xanthi and Alexandroupolis, respectively). The % nucleotide
identity of the nucleotide sequence of PAT73 isolate with the sequences of the other HAV strains of the study is shown on the right.

Discussion
The hepatitis A virus still represents a major public
health problem. HAV is a significant cause of morbidity
and socioeconomic losses in many parts of the world,
while it can result in fulminant hepatitis and death,
albeit rarely [12]. HAV has been reported to have an
inherently more stable molecular structure than other
picornaviruses and thus is characterised by high resistance to the environment and is able to persist for
extended periods on environmental surfaces [2]. The
incidence of HAV infection varies considerably among
and within countries [1]. In the present study, HAV
subgenotype IA was detected in sewage samples collected from the biological treatment plants of two urban
cities (Patras and Alexandroupolis) in northern and
southern Greece. Different patterns of HAV endemicity
have been detected in the cities of Cairo and Barcelona,
while the circulating strains as characterized by the analysis of sewage samples were genotype IB [6]. A similar
study, performed in order to depict HAV strains in

Barcelona, from both environmental and clinical samples, revealed a 95% prevalence of genotype I, with
nearly 50% being either subgenotype IA or subgenotype
IB. Interestingly, in the year 2000, although the number
of cases of hepatitis A has been estimated to be less
than 15-30 per 100000 habitants, 80% of urban sewage
samples studied showed the presence of HAV. This was
attributed to the fact that faecal shedding of HAV can
last for months after the resolution of symptoms, and
patients could be a source of further virus spreading
within the community [11]. Analysis of the environmental and clinical isolates of our study showed the presence of HAV strains belonging to genotype IA. Subtype
IA appears to be responsible for the majority of hepatitis
A cases worldwide, whereas subtype IB viruses have
been found in the Mediterranean region [1]. A study of
molecular analysis of HAV isolates in Albania has
shown that the unique genotype present in Albania is
genotype IA [13]. In another study in Albania, only genotype IA was characterized in all the analysed samples

Kokkinos et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:235
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/235

Page 4 of 5

Figure 2 Phylogenetic tree depicting the relationship between the clinical and the environmental HAV strains of the present study in
relation to other isolates retrieved from the GenBank database. Numbers under branches are bootstrap percentage values, calculated from
1,000 bootstrap replicates. GenBank accession numbers of the reference sequences along with the corresponding genotypes or sub-genotypes
are included in the phylogram.

of sewage and sera of patients involved in an HAV outbreak [14]. A study from another Mediterranean country, Tunisia, showed that all Tunisian strains belonged
to genotype I with a greater presence of sub-genotype
IA (98%) and 2% of sub-genotype IB [15].
The hepatitis A vaccine is included in the Greek
National Immunization Program (GNIP) and universal
vaccination is recommended for all children over 12
months of age [8]. With regards to hepatitis viruses,
moving populations such as Roma and refugees constitute special target groups of any population coverage

program, as the underlying unfavourable living conditions could facilitate the spread of the infections [12].
Over the past two decades there has been a significant
increase in immigration from Eastern Europe and the
Balkan countries to Greece. As a result, immigrants of
these countries of origin currently comprise 10% of the
Greek population [8]. Moreover, due to recent large
immigration flows from North Africa and Asia, through
Turkey, to Greece, a new epidemiological pattern may
emerge in the near future. Data from the occurrence of
viruses in sewage may provide an overview of the

Kokkinos et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:235
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/235

epidemiology of viral infections circulating in the community, and at the same time reveal the occurrence of
asymptomatic infections in the population [6].

Page 5 of 5

9.

10.

Conclusions
In conclusion, this study - the first in Greece to depict
the simultaneous molecular characterization of HAV
strains isolated from both clinical and environmental
samples - revealed the major prevalence of circulating
strains of IA genotype in Greece. Further environmental
surveillance could be used in order to enrich the poor
existing clinical data from Greece and evaluate the prevalence of HAV in the environment as well as in the
community.
Environmental surveillance could prove to be a valuable strategy in the study of prevalence and of the incidence of various pathogens, especially when there is a
lack of sufficient clinical data. This lack is mainly due to
the fact that most infections develop asymptomatically
in children and to the problematic reporting of hepatitis
A cases through the surveillance system in Greece.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Vantarakis A, Nearxou A, Pagonidis D, Melegos F, Seretidis J, Kokkinos P,
Zarkadis I, Parasidis T, Alamanos Y: An outbreak of hepatitis A in Roma
populations living in three prefectures in Greece. Epidemiol Infect 2010,
138:1025-1031.
Kokkinos P, Filippidou S, Karlou K, Vantarakis A: Molecular Typing of
Enteroviruses, Adenoviruses, and Hepatitis A Viruses in Untreated and
Treated Sewage of a Biological Treatment Plant in Greece. Food Environ
Virol 2010, 2:89-96.
Pina S, Buti M, Jardí R, Clemente-Casares P, Jofre J, Girones R: Genetic
analysis of hepatitis A virus strains recovered from the environment and
from patients with acute hepatitis. J Gen Virol 2001, 82:2955-2963.
Michos A, Terzidis A, Kalampoki V, Pantelakis K, Spanos T, Petridou ET:
Seroprevalence and risk factors for hepatitis A, B, and C among Roma
and non-Roma children in a deprived area of Athens, Greece. J Med Virol
2008, 80:791-797.
Gabrieli R, Sanchez G, Macaluso A, Cenko F, Bino S, Palombi L, Buonomo E,
Pinto RM Bosch A, Divizia M: Hepatitis in Albanian children: Molecular
analysis of hepatitis A virus isolates. J Med Virol 2004, 72:533-537.
Divizia M, Gabrieli R, Macaluso A, Bagnato B, Palombi L, Buonomo E,
Cenko F, Leno L, Bino S, Basha A, Panà A: Nucleotide correlation between
HAV isolates from human patients and environmental samples. J Med
Virol 2005, 75:8-12.
Gharbi-Khelifi H, Sdiri K, Harrath R, Fki L, Hakim H, Berthomé M, Billaudel S,
Ferre V, Aouni M: Genetic analysis of HAV strains in Tunisia reveals two
new antigenic variants. Virus Genes 2007, 35(2):155-159.

doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-235
Cite this article as: Kokkinos et al.: Molecular characterization of
hepatitis A virus isolates from environmental and clinical samples in
Greece. Virology Journal 2010 7:235.

Authors’ contributions
PK carried out the sequence alignments, constructed the phylogenetic trees
and participated in the writing of the manuscript. PZ participated in the
molecular analyses and helped to draft the manuscript. SF and IM collected
the samples and participated in the viral concentration, nucleic acids
extraction and nested PCRs. AV was responsible for setting up and
coordinating the study, and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 4 August 2010 Accepted: 16 September 2010
Published: 16 September 2010
References
1. Sánchez G, Populaire S, Butot S, Putallaz T, Joosten H: Detection and
differentiation of human hepatitis A strains by commercial quantitative
real-time RT-PCR tests. J Virol Methods 2006, 132:160-165.
2. Dounias G, Rachiotis G: Prevalence of hepatitis A virus infection among
municipal solid-waste workers. Int J Clin Pract 2006, 60:1432-1436.
3. Rodrigues L, Pista A, Oliveira A, Agua-Doce I, Manita C, Paixão MT:
Molecular epidemiology of hepatitis A virus in a group of Portuguese
citizens living in Lisbon area. J Med Virol 2007, 79:483-487.
4. Kwon OS, Byun KS, Yeon JE, Park SH, Kim JS, Kim JH, Bak YT, Kim JH,
Lee CH: Detection of hepatitis A viral RNA in sera of patients with acute
hepatitis A. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2000, 15:1043-1047.
5. Arvanitidou M, Mamassi P, Vayona A: Epidemiological evidence for
vaccinating wastewater treatment plant workers against hepatitis A and
hepatitis B virus. Eur J Epidemiol 2004, 19:259-262.
6. Pintó RM, Alegre D, Domínguez A, El-Senousy WM, Sánchez G, Villena C,
Costafreda MI, Aragonès L, Bosch A: Hepatitis A virus in urban sewage
from two Mediterranean countries. Epidemiol Infect 2007, 135:270-273.
7. Mazokopakis E, Vlachonikolis J, Philalithis A, Lionis C: Seroprevalence of
hepatitis A, B and C markers in Greek warship personnel. Eur J Epidemiol
2000, 16:1069-1072.
8. Kyrka A, Tragiannidis A, Cassimos D, Pantelaki K, Tzoufi M, Mavrokosta M,
Pedeli X, Athanassiadou F, Hatzimichael A, Konstantopoulos A, Kafetzis D,
Papaevangelou V: Seroepidemiology of hepatitis A among Greek children
indicates that the virus is still prevalent: Implications for universal
vaccination. J Med Virol 2009, 81:582-587.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
