<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Stem cell proliferation during in vitro development of the model cestode Mesocestoides corti from larva to adult worm</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2010 7:22. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-7-22"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Uriel Koziol; María F Domínguez; Mónica Marín; Alejandra Kun; Estela Castillo"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

RESEARCH

Open Access

Stem cell proliferation during in vitro
development of the model cestode Mesocestoides
corti from larva to adult worm
Uriel Koziol1, María F Domínguez1, Mónica Marín1, Alejandra Kun2, Estela Castillo1*

Abstract
Background: In free-living flatworms somatic differentiated cells do not divide, and a separate population of stem
cells (called neoblasts) is responsible for cell proliferation and renewal. In cestodes, there is evidence that similar
mechanisms of cell renewal exist.
Results: In this work, we have characterized proliferative cells during the development of the model cestode
Mesocestoides corti from larva (tetrathyridium) to young segmented worm. This was done by two complementary
strategies with congruent results: characterizing cells in S phase and their progeny by incorporation of 5-bromo-2′deoxyuridine, and characterizing cells in M phase by arresting mitotic cells with colchicine and studying their
morphology and distribution. Proliferative cells are localized only in the inner parenchyma, particularly in close
proximity to the inner muscle layer, but not in the cortical parenchyma nor in the sub-tegumental tissue. After
proliferation some of these cells migrate to the outer regions were they differentiate. In the larvae, proliferative
cells are more abundant in the anterior regions (scolex and neck), and their number diminishes in an anteroposterior way. During the development of adult segments periodic accumulation of proliferative cells are observed,
including a central mass of cells that constitutes the genital primordium, which grows at least in part due to in situ
proliferation. In later segments, the inner cells of genital primordia cease to proliferate and adopt a compact
distribution, and proliferative cells are also found in the testes primordia.
Conclusions: Proliferative cells have a characteristic localization and morphology throughout development from
larva to adult of Mesocestoides corti, which is similar, and probably evolutionary conserved, to that described in
other model cestodes. The characteristics of proliferative cells suggest that these consist of undifferentiated stem
cells.

Background
In free-living platyhelminthes, the best studied model
being planarians, somatic differentiated cells do not
divide and a separate cellular population of stem cells,
called neoblasts, are responsible for cell proliferation
and renewal during growth, regeneration and maintenance [1-4]. Recently, the study of planarian cell proliferation has been revolutionized by new cellular and
molecular biology approaches which have allowed considerable insight into the mechanisms of neoblast maintenance and differentiation, and into the existence of
different sub-populations of neoblasts and their progeny
* Correspondence: estelacasti@gmail.com
1
Sección Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
de la República, Iguá 4225, CP 11400, Montevideo, Uruguay

[3,5-7]. In the parasitic clade Neodermata, which
includes the well known classes Cestoda, Monogenea
and Trematoda, there is evidence that similar mechanisms of cell renewal exist [2]. This has been studied
mostly in cestodes, in which the functional equivalents
of neoblasts are usually referred to as germinative cells.
Diphyllobothrium dendriticum (Pseudophyllidea) is
probably the cestode species in which the characterization of germinative cells has been most thorough, as
well as their differentiation into different cell types during histogenesis [8-12]. Germinative cells in the plerocercoid larva and adult of D. dendriticum and other
Diphyllobothrium species are absent in the outer regions
of the cortical parenchyma and sub-tegumental tissue,
and are localized mainly in the inner regions of cortical

© 2010 Koziol et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

parenchyma and in the medullary parenchyma. They are
especially abundant in close proximity to the inner muscle layer. These cells migrate from the inner parenchyma to the outer parenchyma and sub-tegumental tissue
for cell renewal and tissue growth. During strobilization,
they accumulate in the genital primordium in each segment. Localization and characterization of proliferative
cells has also been studied to different degrees in other
cestode models, with generally similar results, although
some differences were observed in larval stages of Taenia and Hymenolepis, were proliferative cells are not
restricted to the medullary parenchyma [13-22]. The
morphology of germinative cells is very characteristic,
since they are undifferentiated cells with round shape, a
large nucleus with little heterochromatin and a very prominent nucleolus, and a very basophilic cytoplasm due
to the abundance of RNA. Ultrastructural studies
demonstrate the abundance of free ribosomes and the
absence or paucity of endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi
apparatus [9,18].
Mesocestoides corti is a model for studying cestode
biology and development. It is particularly interesting
because of its intermediate larval stage (tetrathyridium),
composed of a scolex and an unsegmented body, which
is uniquely able to proliferate asexually by longitudinal
fission in the peritoneum and organs of mice and several other intermediate hosts. This allows the maintenance of large and constant populations of worms
through repeated serial intraperitoneal passage in mice
[23]. In vitro culture of tetrathyridia allows studying
either asexual reproduction or segmentation (formation
of successive segments in the body) and strobilar development (formation of serially arranged genital organs,
one in each segment), depending on the culture conditions used [24-27]. Strobilar development is very similar
in vitro and in vivo, making it an ideal model for studying this process [26] except that viable eggs have only
been sporadically documented.
The first studies on cellular proliferation in M. corti
were done in tetrathyridia by Hess [28-30]. Initially,
large basophilic cells were identified by histological
methods (methyl green/pyronin) on whole-mount material as possible germinative cells. In later electron microscopy studies, Hess proposed that at least two different
proliferative cell populations exist in tetrathyridia. One
is a population of germinative cells in the parenchyma
(which would be similar to the localization of germinative cells in other cestodes), for which he found evidence
of differentiation into parenchymal muscle cells, but not
into sub-tegumental muscle cells or tegumental cells
(also known as perinuclear cell bodies of the tegumental
syncytium). The other is a reticulated syncytium of cells
in connection with the tegument (and therefore part of
the tegumental syncytium), located between the suckers,

Page 2 of 12

where longitudinal fission begins, and termed by Hess
as the ‘apical massif’. In this tissue Hess observed mitotic figures and incorporation of tritiated thymidine. Proliferating tegumental cells were not observed in other
regions, and have not been described in any other cestode. He proposed that the apical massif is a major
source of differentiating cells during asexual reproduction. Furthermore, he proposed, based on ultrastructural
similarities, that cells from the apical massif detach from
it and migrate to the tegumental region where they are
incorporated for growth of the tegumental syncytium
during normal growth.
Smith and McKerr [31], in a mainly methodological
work, demonstrated the utility of the thymidine analog,
5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU), for labeling cells in S
phase in tetrathyridia. Using a 24 hours pulse, they
found labeled cells throughout the parenchyma, not
being especially abundant in the region between the
suckers. They also found labeled cells in the sub-tegumental region. However, the length of the pulse could
allow for cell migration in this case.
Finally, Espinoza and collaborators [32,33] performed
autoradiographic analysis of cells incorporating tritiated
thymidine in tetrathyridia and during segmentation.
Although the purpose of the autoradiographic analysis
was mainly for quantification of cell proliferation,
demonstrating important increases during early and late
segmentation, they also described an abundance of
labeled cells close to the region between internal and
external parenchyma, interpreting this as incorporation
of proliferative cells into the nerve cords. However, this
was also done with 24 hours pulses exclusively, and only
longitudinal sections were shown as a basis for this
interpretation. The localization of proliferative cells during the formation and development of genital primordia
was not described.
In this work, we have thoroughly characterized the
localization and abundance of proliferative cells during
the in vitro development of M. corti from tetrathyridium
to young segmented worm. This was done by two complementary strategies: characterizing cells in S phase and
their progeny by pulse and pulse-chase experiments with
BrdU (including short pulses of only 4 hours to prevent
cell migration), and characterizing cells in M phase by
arresting mitotic cells with colchicine and studying their
morphology and distribution.

Results
Description of early proglottid formation in M. corti

Strobilar development of M. corti has been described
both in vivo and in vitro [25,26,34], but the first stages
of development of the genital primordia have not been
characterized in detail. We therefore performed studies
on whole-mount specimens stained with TO-PRO-3, a

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

nuclear stain, focusing our attention in the early development of proglottids and genital primordia.
After induction with sodium taurocholate (ST), tetrathyridia elongate, and the neck region, which becomes
narrower than the scolex, shows a great density of cells.
In a first stage of development, several segment primordia (approximately 6), with their respective genital primordia, can be observed behind the neck (Figure 1A, B).
These genital primordia consist of small and loose accumulations of cells in the center of each segment. The
posterior-most region of tetrathyridia, where the excretory pore or pores are located (since one pore is formed
after each asexual reproduction cycle [35]), shows a
much lower cell density, a higher abundance of
calcareous corpuscles, and does not participate in the
segmentation process. In more developed specimens, an
antero-posterior gradient of development is observed,
since new segments are being formed continuously in
the neck region (Figure 1C), but even in these specimens the posterior-most region does not segment nor
elongate (Figure 1D). Initially, in proglottids next to the
neck region, the genital primordium is small and cells
are loosely packed (Figure 1E). In posterior segments, it
grows considerably, while at the same time the primordia of the testes appear to its sides. The genital primordium continues to grow, and becomes a very compact
and elongated mass of cells, which divides in an anterior
and a posterior region (Figure 1F), presumably the male
and female genital rudiments respectively. In some but
not all cases, a developed cirrus pouch and developing
uterus can already be observed around this stage
(Figure 1G).
Detection of BrdU incorporation as a marker for cells in
S phase

The distribution of cells in S phase was determined by
the detection of BrdU incorporation in whole-mount
specimens and sections of uninduced tetrathyirida, tetrathyridia after ST induction, and in segmented
worms. Two different pulse lengths were used: a 24
hour pulse and a 4 hour pulse. The 24 hour pulse
should label all actively proliferating cells (taking into
account the length of the cell cycle estimated in other
cestode species, 8.5 hours in 4 day old Hymenolepis
diminuta, and 19 hours in Diphyllobothrium dendriticum plerocercoids; [18,36]), and the results can be
directly compared to previous studies in tetrathyridia
[31]. However, it could be long enough to allow some
labeled cells to migrate and initiate differentiation. The
4 hour pulse, on the other hand, is shorter or similar
in length to the S phase in other cestodes [18,36], and
would only label a fraction of actively proliferating
cells, being short enough to prevent significant
migration.

Page 3 of 12

BrdU positive cells after a 24 hour BrdU pulse

BrdU positive (BrdU+) cells show a very similar distribution in tetrathyridia both before and after induction
with ST (Figure 2A-C, [see Additional File 1]). They
show an accumulation in the scolex and the entire anterior-most region, particularly next to and behind the
suckers. The region between the suckers (where the apical massif is located) shows a high number of BrdU+
cells, but not higher than in other regions next to the
suckers. BrdU+ cells can also be detected within the
suckers.
There is a clear antero-posterior gradient in the distribution of BrdU+ cells; there are few BrdU+ cells in the
posterior-most region, which does not participate in segmentation. BrdU+ cells after a 24 hour pulse are localized throughout the medullary parenchyma, particularly
in its periphery, next to the inner muscle layer, as determined by analysis of several focal planes. No evidence
was observed of preferential accumulation of BrdU+
cells in the region of the main nerve cords. Very few
BrdU+ cells can be observed in the cortical parenchyma
and sub-tegumental region (outside of the inner muscle
layer), both in the scolex as in the body. These few cells
probably acquired the label while in the medullary
region, and then migrated to the cortical and sub-tegumental regions (see below).
In very early segmenting specimens, periodic accumulations of BrdU+ cells can be observed, even in the
absence of external signs of segmentation (Figure 2D).
In segmented specimens, BrdU+ cells are also found in
the medullary region, with very few BrdU+ cells in the
cortical and sub-tegumental regions (Figure 2E-G). A
large number of BrdU+ cells are found in the scolex
and in the neck. In early proglottids, BrdU+ cells are
segmentally distributed and accumulated in the early
genital primordium. In more developed proglottids,
strongly labeled BrdU+ cells are found in the late genital
primordium and in the testes primordia.
BrdU detection in sections was performed in order to
study in greater detail the localization of proliferating
cells in segmenting worms (Figure 3). In transverse sections, it is readily apparent that BrdU+ cells are mainly
distributed in the medullary parenchyma, particularly in
positions next to the inner muscle layer, thus forming a
ring shape in cross-sections (Figure 3A-C). No accumulations were apparent in the region of the main nerve
cords [37-39]. Some BrdU+ cells are found in the base
of the cortical parenchyma, in direct contact with the
inner muscle layer. In the posterior-most region,
although the number of BrdU+ cells is smaller, their distribution is very similar (data not shown). Similar results
were observed in serial sagittal sections (Figure 3D); the
observation of several consecutive sections was important to confirm the presence of BrdU+ cells throughout

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

Figure 1 Morphology of segments and genital primordia of M.
corti during early segmentation. All specimens were stained with
TO-PRO-3. A. Tetrathyridium beginning segmentation. B. Close-up of
early cell accumulations in segment primordia (arrows) with central
genital primordia. C. Developed adult worm. D. Posterior region of
the same adult worm as in C; anterior is to the bottom; notice the
lack of segmentation of the posterior most region. E. Early segments
of adult worm, showing early genital primordia (arrows). F. Later
segment of adult worm showing late genital primordium (arrow)
and testis primordia (asterisks). G. Later segment of adult worm
showing cirrus pouch (arrowhead) and developing uterus (ut). H.
Schematic drawing of a transverse section of a segment with late
genital primordium. cp, cortical parenchyma; g, genital primordium;
iml, inner muscle layer; mp, medullary parenchyma; nc, main nerve
cords; st, sub-tegumental region with sub-tegumental muscle layer;
t, testes primordia; teg, tegument (which consists of a syncytium
that covers the body in a continuous sheet connected to perikarya
(tegumental cells) that lie below the sub-tegumental muscle layer
[43]). Bars represent 200 μm in A, 100 μm in B and F, 1000 μm in C
and D, and 50 μm in E and G.

the external region of the medullary parenchyma. In the
scolex, BrdU+ cells are also found mainly in the outer
regions of the medullary parenchyma, close to the inner
muscle layer and to muscle fibers attaching suckers to
each other (originally described by Terenina et al. [37];
Figure 3E). BrdU+ cells can also be observed within the
suckers. Only two BrdU+ cells were found in the cortical parenchyma and sub-tegumental regions in over 40
sections observed, confirming the results obtained with
whole-mount material.

Page 4 of 12

Figure 2 Whole-mount BrdU detection after a 24 hour pulse of
ST induced specimens. A. Full view of a tetrathyridium. B. Closeup of the scolex of the specimen shown in 2A. C. Close-up of the
border of the body wall of a tetrathyridium. The broken line
indicates the limit of the body wall. D. Initiation of segmentation;
arrowheads indicate periodic accumulations of BrdU+ cells. Anterior
is to the right. E. Early segments of adult worm. F. Later segment of
adult worm, with genital primordium (large arrow) and testis
primordia (asterisks). G. Scolex of adult worm. Small arrows in all
figures indicate rare BrdU+ cells in the cortical parenchyma. cp,
cortical parenchyma; mp, medullary parenchyma; s, sucker; st, subtegument. Note that the tegument was previously removed. Bars
represent 1000 μm in A, 200 μm in B, D and G, 50 μm in C and E,
and 100 μm in F.

The early genital primordium is formed by a loose
accumulation of BrdU+ cells that traverses dorsoventrally the medullary parenchyma, and which is continuous with thickenings of the ring of BrdU+ cells in
the periphery of the medullary parenchyma. In later proglottids, the size of the primordia increases, consisting of
an internal compact region and an external loose region
(Figure 3C′). Only cells in the external region are labeled
by BrdU. Strong BrdU labeling can also be detected in
some but not all primordia of testes. Within an individual testis primordium, labeling is similar among all
cells (data not shown). These results suggest synchronic
proliferation of the cells of the testes primordia.
BrdU positive cells after a 4 hour BrdU pulse

In experiments in which a 4 hour BrdU pulse was performed, no BrdU+ cells were found in the cortical or
sub-tegumental regions in any of the developmental
stages, confirming the absence of proliferation in these
regions (Figure 4). This strongly indicates that the BrdU

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

Figure 3 BrdU detection in sections of segmented worms after
a 24 hour pulse. A, A’, B, B’ and C, C’. Transverse sections of early
(A, B) and later (C) segments stained with anti-BrdU and DAPI.
Arrow indicates genital primordia, and asterisks testis primordia. D.
Sagittal section of early segmenting worm, showing last genital
primordium (arrow) and the posterior non segmenting region.
Anterior is to the right. E. Transverse section of the scolex. cp,
cortical parenchyma; mp, medullary parenchyma; s, sucker; st, subtegument; t, tegument. Bars represent 50 μm except in D, 100 μm.

+ cells found in these regions after 24 hour long BrdU
pulses originated in the medullary parenchyma and later
migrated to the outer regions.
Periodic accumulations of BrdU+ cells were observed
in segmenting worms before any external sign of segmentation was apparent, indicating that this accumulation occurs at least in part due to in situ proliferation
(Figure 4B). In more developed worms, abundant BrdU+
cells occur in the scolex and neck, followed by smaller
numbers in the region immediately posterior to the
neck, just before segments are evident (Figure 4E). This
is expected, since the neck region is known to be the
proliferating region generating the proglottids in other
cestodes [2]. Large amounts of BrdU+ cells were also
found in early and late genital primordia, and in the primordia of testes, confirming the existence of abundant
in situ proliferation in these regions (Figure 4C, D). In
late genital primordia, BrdU+ cells are found mainly in
their periphery, as observed in sections after 24 hour
long BrdU pulses (see above). This indicates that growth
occurs mainly by proliferation of cells in the periphery
of the primordium, although a contribution of immigrating parenchymal cells cannot be discarded.
BrdU positive cells after pulse-chase experiments

The absence of proliferating cells in the cortical parenchyma and sub-tegumental tissues strongly suggested

Page 5 of 12

Figure 4 BrdU detection after a 4 hour pulse. A. Sagittal section
of a tetrathyridium. The inset shows a general view of the same
specimen. B. Whole-mount of early segmenting specimen showing
periodic accumulations of BrdU+ cells (arrowheads). C. Early
segments of whole-mount adult worm (lateral view) with early
genital primordia (arrows). D. Later segment of whole-mount adult
worm, with late genital primordium (arrow) and testis primordia
(asterisks). E. Scolex and neck of adult worm; the broken line
indicates the limit of the body wall. cp, cortical parenchyma; iml,
inner muscle layer; mp, medullary parenchyma; s, sucker; st, subtegument; t, tegument. Note that the tegument was removed in
whole-mount specimens. Bars represent 20 μm in A (200 μm in the
inset), 50 μm in B, C and D, and 100 μm in E.

that cell renewal and growth in these regions occurs by
immigration of proliferating cells from the medullary
parenchyma, similar to what has been described in other
cestodes [8,19]. Furthermore, Hess [30] reported the
absence of mitoses in the sub-tegumental region. In
order to confirm this hypothesis, we performed labeling
experiments with either a 4 or 24 hour BrdU pulse, followed by a two to three day chase in BrdU-free media
(Figure 5). Indeed, in tetrathyiridia after the chase, BrdU
+ cells are distributed almost homogeneously, including
the cortical parenchyma and sub-tegumental tissues,
confirming this hypothesis, and indicating that between
24 and 72 hours are required for migration of most cells
to these regions (Figure 5A, B, E). In segmented specimens, many BrdU+ cells are found after the 48 hours
chase in the cortical parenchyma and sub-tegumental
tissues (Figure 5C), especially in the scolex and neck
(data not shown). However, the number is much lower
than in tetrathyridia (compare figures 5A and 5C), and
most BrdU+ cells in the proglottids are localized in the

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

Figure 5 BrdU detection in pulse and chase and in continuous
labeling experiments. A, B. Whole-mount detection of BrdU in a
tetrathyridium after a 24 hour pulse followed by a 48 hour chase. C.
Whole-mount detection of BrdU in early segments of an adult
worm after a 24 hour pulse followed by a 48 hour chase. D. Sagittal
section of tetrathyridium after a 4 hour pulse followed by a 68 hour
chase. E. Section of tetrathyridium with an amputated scolex after
72 hours of continuous labeling with BrdU. cp, cortical parenchyma;
iml, inner muscle layer; mp, medullary parenchyma; st, subtegument; t, tegument. Note that the tegument was removed in
whole-mount specimens. Bars represent 100 μm in A, 50 μm in B
and C, and 20 μm in D and E.

genital and testes primordia. This suggests that during
segmentation, cell renewal in the external regions is
diminished, and that the destiny of most proliferative
cells is the development of reproductive structures.
BrdU positive cells after continuous labeling in
tetrathyridia with an experimentally amputated scolex

Hess [30], based on ultrastructural studies, suggested
that cells integrating into the tegumental syncytium
were originated by proliferation in the apical massif,
from where they detach and migrate to the sub-tegumental region for fusion with the tegument. This mode
of sub-tegumental replacement was proposed to occur
during asexual reproduction and during normal growth.
The apical massif was also proposed as the source of
new sub-tegumentary muscle cells.
Furthermore, it was indicated that germinative cells
did not contribute to either tegumental cells or subtegumental muscle cells. However, our results with
short BrdU pulses and pulse chase experiments suggest
that cells integrating into the sub-tegumental region
could originate throughout the body, as suggested by
Smith and McKerr [31]. We tested this hypothesis by

Page 6 of 12

Figure 6 Histological detection of mitoses in colchicine treated
specimens stained with ethidium bromide (red) and/or DAPI
(blue). A. Sagittal section of the region directly behind the suckers.
Anterior is to the bottom. B. Sagittal section of early genital
primordium. The inset shows a general view of the same specimen.
C. Close-up of germinative cells in the body of a tetrathyridium. D,
E, F, G. Close-up of mitotic figures stained only with DAPI. Arrows in
all figures indicate mitotic cells. cp, cortical parenchyma; g,
germinative cells; gp, genital primordium; iml, inner muscle layer; m,
dorso-ventral muscle cell; mp, medullary parenchyma; p,
parenchymal cell; st, sub-tegument; t, tegument. Bars represent 10
μm.

experimentally amputating the scolex region in tetrathyridia (therefore removing the apical massif). These
fragments do not regenerate [40], but remain viable,
similarly to natural acephalic fragments [24,40]. After
two days of culture, these fragments were subject to
continuous labeling with BrdU during three days. Under
these conditions, although labeled cells were few (which
is not surprising, since proliferation in the posterior
region is always scarce), labeled nuclei were observed in
the sub-tegumental region, where only cells of the tegumental syncytium and sub-tegumentary muscle cells are
located [30] (Figure 5E). Therefore, cells proliferating in
the medullary parenchyma can be the source of cells
incorporating into the sub-tegumental region.
Identification of cells in M phase

As a parallel approach, we determined the localization
of cells in mitosis in tetrathyridia and in tetrathyridia
initiating the process of segmentation. To this end, specimens were cultured for 6 hours in medium with 0.05%
colchicine, which arrests mitotic cells in metaphase,
allowing the mitotic figures to accumulate. This method
has been very useful for the identification and localization of mitotic figures in other cestodes [9,18,20].

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

Although conventional haematoxylin staining did not
allow us to discern mitotic figures (not shown), probably
because of the very small size of the chromosomes and
the basophilic character of germinative cells in cestodes
[9], these were readily identifiable in sections stained
with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) dilactate
(Figure 6). Sections were co-stained with ethidium bromide, in order to identify cells with RNA rich cytoplasm. This allowed us to observe cell morphology and
is analogous to the basophilic staining of the cytoplasm
in RNA rich cells under conventional histological techniques, such as methyl green/pyronin [9,28]. Identification of cell types was based on the criteria and
descriptions of Douglas [16], Gustafsson [12], Loehr and
Mead [15], and Hess [28].
Cells similar to the germinative cells described in
other cestodes were observed (containing a large
nucleus with finely granular chromatin, large prominent
nucleolus, rounded undifferentiated shape and cytoplasm strongly stained with ethidium bromide). These
were located in the medullary parenchyma and accumulated in genital primordia (Figure 6, [see Additional File
2]). With the exception of mitotic cells found in the
suckers (see below), cells found in mitosis were of similar size to these putative germinative cells, and were
intensely stained with ethidium bromide. This suggests
that almost all proliferating cells are of the germinative
cell type.
The localization of cells in M phase is very similar to
the localization of cells in S phase as determined by
BrdU incorporation (Figure 7). Mitotic figures are more
abundant in the scolex and anterior regions of the body,
while very few exist in the posterior region which does
not segment. In the body, mitotic figures were found in
the medullary parenchyma, especially in close proximity
to the inner muscular layer, although many also occur
in the inner regions. Mitotic figures also occur in the
innermost region of the cortical parenchyma, in direct
contact with the inner muscular layer. The close proximity of mitotic figures and the inner muscle layer was
confirmed by double labeling with DAPI and Alexa-546
conjugated phalloidin which strongly stains the inner
and sub-tegumental muscle layers (Figure 8; [37]). Only
one mitotic figure was found close to the sub-tegumental region, as part of an accumulation of cells associated
to an accessory excretory pore.
In the scolex, mitotic figures are most abundant
between and directly behind the suckers, always in close
proximity to the inner muscular layer. Mitotic cells also
occur within the suckers, confirming the existence of
proliferating cells within these organs. However, these
cells show a differentiated morphology in many cases
[see Additional File 3], since the cytoplasm usually
shows extensions and is less stained with ethidium

Page 7 of 12

bromide. In the region anterior to the suckers, and
between the pairs of suckers, where the apical massif
was described [30], many mitoses exist, but most of
them are next to the inner muscle layer that continues
from the suckers as dorso-ventral muscles, previously
described by Terenina et al. [37] (Figure 7, Figure 8A,
[see Additional File 4]). It is possible that some of these
mitotic cells are part of the apical massif as described by
Hess [30], but most of them are distant from the subtegumental region.
In early genital primordia, germinative cells accumulate and mitotic figures are common (Figure 6C, Figure
7), even in the absence of colchicine incubation (not
shown), confirming the existence of in situ proliferation.
In larger genital primordia, cells have a more compact
distribution, more differentiated cells are observed, and
in some cases mitoses are not apparent in their interior
(data not shown).

Discussion
Localization of proliferative cells in M. corti

Proliferating cells in M. corti are localized in the medullary parenchyma, mainly in the periphery, close to the
inner muscle layer. Proliferative cells in the scolex show
a similar distribution, close to the muscle layers and in
the muscular suckers. Proliferating cells are absent from
the cortical parenchyma and sub-tegumental regions.
Cell renewal and growth in these regions is achieved by
immigration of cells from the medullary parenchyma.
Morphologically, cells with characteristics similar to the
germinative cells of other cestodes, and previously
described as “basophilic cells” by Hess [28], are present
in the medullary parenchyma and are the only cells
observed in mitosis, with the exception of the suckers.
In tetrathyridia, the abundance of proliferating cells is
greater in the anterior region (scolex and neck), while in
the posterior region, which is rich in calcareous corpuscles and does not participate of segmentation, proliferating cells are scarce. This is consistent with in vivo
studies, where this region has been shown to be shed by
tetrathyridia in the definitive host, and sometimes in the
intermediate host, not participating in either segmentation nor in asexual reproduction by longitudinal fission
[35,41]. It is also consistent with the absence of asexual
reproduction by budding from this region, as proposed
by Hart [38] and Novak [35], unlike the original interpretation by Specht and Voge [23]. In segmented specimens, proliferating cells are more abundant in the
scolex and neck than in early proglottids. In more developed proglottids, proliferating cells are abundant in the
genital primordia and testes primordia. At least some of
these cells must belong to the germ line, which is probably determined by epigenesis [42]. In late genital primordia, proliferating cells are restricted to the periphery.

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

Figure 7 Position of mitotic cells in serial sagittal sections of
M. corti at the beginning of segmentation. A. Schematic drawing
of one analyzed specimen, indicating the orientation and direction
of the successive planes of section. Numbers of planes correspond
to illustrations in part B. B. Scale drawings of some of the analyzed
sections from that specimen, indicating the position of mitotic
figures (red dots). The approximate distance between sections is
indicated to the right. In sections 2 and 3, the posterior-most region
(which, due to the curvature of the specimen, is not continuous in
these sections with the anterior-most region) has no mitotic figures
and is not illustrated. The only mitotic cell found in the cortical
region (in over 600 identified mitoses) is illustrated in section 4.
Notice the proximity of this cell to an accessory excretory pore. cp,
cortical parenchyma; ec, excretory ducts; ep, excretory pore; gp,
genital primordium; mp, medullary parenchyma. The bar represents
approximately 200 μm.

Comparison with previous studies in M. corti

The localization of cells in S and M phases determined
in this work is very similar to the localization of “basophilic cells” described by Hess [28] in tetrathyridia. Subsequently, in an ultrastructural study, Hess [29] divided
the pool of germinative cells in two subpopulations:
“dark” germinative cells, localized close to the inner
muscular layer and in which no mitoses were recorded,
and “light” germinative cells, localized throughout the
parenchyma, and in which mitoses were observed. Hess
proposed that dark cells were the progeny of light cells,
differentiating into parenchymal muscle cells. Although
in our work the germinative cells were not characterized
at the ultrastructural level, it is clear that the germinative cells localized close to the inner muscle layer proliferate actively.

Page 8 of 12

Figure 8 Close proximity of mitotic figures to the inner muscle
layer. Specimens were stained with DAPI (blue) and phalloidin
(orange) A Sagittal section of scolex of tetrathyridium showing the
dorso-ventral muscles anterior to the suckers (arrowhead). B, C, D.
Close-ups of mitotic cells next to the inner muscle layer. cp, cortical
parenchyma; iml, inner muscle layer; mp, medullary parenchyma; s,
sucker. Arrows in all figures indicate mitotic cells. Bars represent 20
μm in A, and 10 μm in B, C and D.

In a previous BrdU incorporation study in tetrathyridia [31], labeled cells were found in the sub-tegumentary regions. Here, we demonstrate that this was
probably due to the duration of the BrdU pulse
(24 hours) since no cells are labeled in this region after
4 hours, while some (few) are seen after a 24 hour
pulse. BrdU pulse and chase experiments further indicate that cell renewal in this region occurs by immigration of cells from the medullary parenchyma.
Espinoza et al. [32,33], based in autoradiographic analyses of tritiated thymidine incorporation in longitudinal
sections, proposed that during segmentation, proliferating cells are localized and/or incorporated preferentially
in the main nerve cords. Although their results with
longitudinal sections are very similar to our own, the
incorporation of different section planes, phalloidin
staining and whole-mount detection of BrdU incorporation in this work shows that the distribution of proliferative cells is not restricted to the main nerve cords
but is found throughout the periphery of the medullary
parenchyma, close to the inner muscle layer. The distribution of proliferative cells in the scolex, next to the
inner muscle layers, is congruent with this. Furthermore,
during segmentation and formation of the genital primordia, proliferative cells accumulate in the dorsal and
ventral regions of the medullary parenchyma, and not in
the lateral regions, where the main nerve cords are
located [37-39]. However, minor medial nerve cords are

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

present in these regions, and there is an intimate relationship between the nerve cords and the muscle layer
[37,38], so the ring of proliferative cells is actually close
to both the nerve cords and the inner muscle layer.
Our results show no support for the apical massif [30]
as a particularly proliferative region under our culture
conditions. Both BrdU+ cells after a short (4 hour)
pulse, and mitotic figures, are abundant throughout the
scolex, including the region of the apical massif, but
even in this region very few mitoses are found in close
proximity to the sub-tegumental tissue, while most are
close and inner to the dorso-ventral muscles that continue from the inner longitudinal muscle layer. It is possible that some of these mitotic cells belong to the
apical massif, and that the apical massif has a more
important role in cell proliferation during asexual reproduction of tetrathyridia, which was not studied in this
work, but was studied in detail by Hess [30].
Results with BrdU pulse and chase experiments also
suggest that during normal growth, and during development into segmented worms, cells in the sub-tegumental
region (tegumental cells and sub-tegumental muscle cells)
originate from germinative cells located throughout the
body, as suggested by Smith and McKerr [31], and not
from the apical massif. Experimental amputation of the
scolex and apical massif followed by BrdU labeling further
confirms this suggestion, since it demonstrates that proliferating cells from the medullary parenchyma of the body
can be the source of cells in the sub-tegumental region. If
the original source of these proliferating cells was the apical massif, then these cells would have to be able to
remain undifferentiated and proliferating outside of the
apical massif after two days of culture. However, no evidence was provided by Hess [30] for proliferation of the
proposed migratory cells from the apical massif; only cells
in the apical massif itself and germinative cells in the parenchyma were reported to incorporate tritiated thymidine.
Comparison with other model cestodes

Although variation exists in the distribution of proliferative
cells in larval forms [18,19], there appears to be a common
pattern in the distribution of proliferative cells in the neck
and proglottids of strobilizing cestodes. Proliferative cells
are found mainly or exclusively in the external region of the
medullary parenchyma, close to the inner muscle layer in
Diphyllobothrium dendriticum, Diphyllobothrium latum,
Cylindrotaenia dispar, Hymenolepis diminuta and Taenia
solium [9,12,16,18,20]. In Diphyllobothrium dendriticum
the distribution appears to be more disperse, with proliferative cells being present in the inner regions of the cortical
parenchyma, although in the related Diphyllobothrium
latum the distribution is more restricted [9]. We suggest
that this is a conserved developmental characteristic of
eucestodes. The renewal of the tegumental syncytium by

Page 9 of 12

mesenchymally originating stem cells has been proposed to
be homologous to epidermal replacement in free-living flatworms, and seems to be unique for platyhelminthes [43]
and the phylogenetically controversial Acoela [44]. On the
other hand, proliferation within the scolex has been much
less studied. In the case of Hymenolepis diminuta, no proliferative activity was detected in the scolex [18], in sharp
contrast with our results in M. corti.
The distribution of proliferative cells next to the inner
muscle layer, the development of the genital primordium
from dorso-ventral thickenings of the ring of germinative
cells (resulting in a genital primordium that traverses the
medullary parenchyma), and the later appearance of the
testes primordia laterally to the genital primordium are
very similar between M. corti and Cylindrotaenia dispar
(syn. Baerietta dispar [16,45]). These developmental similarities could be related to the fact that families Mesocestoididae and Nematotaeniidae have been proposed to be
phylogenetically close, forming a monophyletic group at
the base of the cyclophyllideans [46]. However, the phylogenetic position of Mesocestoididae is uncertain, and may
in fact be basal to all other cyclophyllideans [47]. On the
other hand, although the early genital primordium does
not transverse all the medullary parenchyma in D. dendriticum, the posterior development of it is similar with M.
corti, since in both cases the cells of the inner region
adopt a compact disposition and cease to proliferate [11].
Cell proliferation in genital primordia has not been
reported, to the best of our knowledge, in other eucestode
species, but this could be another conserved developmental characteristic of eucestodes.

Conclusions
In this work, we have thoroughly characterized proliferative cells during the in vitro development of M. corti
from tetrathyridium to young segmented worm by two
different methods with congruent results, which are
similar to those described in other model cestodes.
Throughout development, cell proliferation in the body
only occurs in the medullary parenchyma; cell renewal
in the cortical parenchyma and sub-tegument occurs by
migration and integration of cells from the medullary
parenchyma. In situ proliferation contributes to the formation and growth of segmental and genital primordia,
and diminishes during the differentiation of the latter.
We conclude that the localization and characteristics of
proliferative cells are evolutionary conserved between
Mesocestoides and other model cestodes, and are compatible with a stem cell nature of these cells.
Methods
Parasite culture

Mice infected with M. corti tetrathyridia were kindly
donated by Laura Dominguez and Jenny Saldaña

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

(Facultad de Química, Uruguay). Parasite removal and in
vitro culture was performed as described by Britos et al.
[48]. Briefly, approximately 500 μl of tetrathyridia were
cultured in 15 ml of modified RPMI 1640 with 10%
bovine fetal serum. (RPMI 1640 media, HEPES modified
(Sigma-Aldrich) with 4.3 g/l glucose, 4.8 g/l yeast extract
and 50 μg/ml gentamycin added) at 37°C under a 5%
CO 2 atmosphere. Two thirds of the medium was
replaced every 48 to 72 hours. For induction of strobilization, tetrathyridia were cultured for 48 hours and then
sodium taurocholate (ST; Sigma-Aldrich) was added to
a final concentration of 1 mg/ml, maintaining this concentration in successive media changes. Under these
conditions, strobilar development is apparent 5 to 7
days after the induction with ST.
Whole-mount staining with TO-PRO-3

Worms were fixed overnight at 4°C with 4% paraformaldehyde prepared in PBS (PFA-PBS). After exhaustive
washes in PBS, they were stained with TO-PRO-3 (Invitrogen; 0.2 μM in PBS) for one hour, washed five times
with PBS for ten minutes each and mounted in ProLong
Gold Antifade Reagent (Invitrogen).
Incorporation of 5-Bromo-2′-Deoxyuridine (BrdU)

Samples of cultures of M. corti were cultured in RPMI1640 modified media without yeast extract and with
10% bovine fetal serum, containing 5 mM BrdU (SigmaAldrich), for 4 hours or for 24 hours. Some individuals
were fixed immediately after the BrdU pulse, while the
rest were washed exhaustively with RPMI-1640 modified
medium without BrdU and cultured in the same medium until 72 hours had passed since the beginning of
BrdU incubation. Experiments were performed with uninduced tetrathyridia, tetrathyridia induced for 48 hours
with ST, and segmented worms after at least 6 days of
induction with ST.
For acephalic fragments, tetrathyridia were amputated
with a sterile blade under a dissecting microscope,
washed extensively with sterile PBS supplemented with
50 μg/ml gentamycin, 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml
streptomycin, and cultured for two days in BrdU-free
media supplemented with the same antibiotics. Then,
they were incubated for 3 days in RPMI-1640 modified
media without yeast extract and with 10% bovine fetal
serum, containing 250 μM BrdU.
Immunohistofluorescent and immunohistochemical
detection of BrdU

Detection was performed both in whole-mounts and in
serial sections. In the case of whole-mounts, the tegument was removed by incubating the live specimens in
distilled water for 5 hours as described by Gustafsson
[49] before fixing with PFA-PBS. Similarly to what was

Page 10 of 12

described by Gustafsson [49] for other cestode species,
worms elongated considerably in addition to loosing the
tegument. Staining with TO-PRO-3 confirmed that only
the tegument was lost while the nuclei in the sub-tegumental region remained and that the genital primordia
and testis primordia were well conserved and morphologically recognizable [see Additional File 5]. Specimens
were then fixed either overnight at 4°C or for 4 hours at
room temperature with PFA-PBS, dehydrated progressively to 100% ethanol and stored at -20°C until further
use. After rehydration, the following detection protocol
was performed: specimens were treated with protease K
(20 μg/ml) in PBS for 20 minutes at room temperature,
washed in PBS, and treated with HCl 2 N in PBS for 30
to 60 minutes at room temperature. After several
washes in PBS, specimens were incubated with PBS plus
0.1% Triton X-100 (two washes of 15 minutes each),
washed once in PBS for 1 minute, blocked with 1%
bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 5% sheep serum
(Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS plus 0.05% Tween-20 for one
hour, and incubated with anti-BrdU monoclonal antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, 1:100 dilution) in PBS with 1%
BSA and 0.05% Tween-20 for two hours at room temperature. Samples were then washed six times, 20 minutes each, with PBS plus 0.05% Tween-20 (PBS-Tw). For
immunohistofluorescent detection, samples were incubated with goat anti-mouse antibody conjugated to Cy5
(Chemicon), diluted 1:800 in PBS with 1% BSA and
0.05% Tween-20, for 1 hour at 37°C. Specimens were
finally washed six times, 20 minutes each, with PBS-Tw,
and mounted with ProLong Gold AntiFade Reagent
(Invitrogen). Negative controls of specimens not incubated in the presence of BrdU did not show any signal.
For immunohistochemical detection, samples were incubated with polyclonal goat anti-mouse antibody conjugated to horse radish peroxidase (Dako) diluted 1:100 in
PBS with 1% BSA, and detected with 3-Amino-9-ethylcarbazole (AEC, Sigma-Aldrich).
For serial sections, specimens were embedded in Paraplast (Oxford Labware) as described by the manufacturer and cut in 10 μm thick sections. The detection
protocol was similar to the protocol for whole-mount
specimens, except that protease K concentration was
reduced to 1 μg/μl and washes were reduced in length
by half.
TO-PRO-3 stained worms and immunohistofluorescent detection of BrdU were analyzed with an Olympus
FV300 confocal microscope.
Identification of mitoses in paraffin sections of specimens
treated with colchicine

M. corti specimens that had been cultured for 6 days
were incubated in RPMI-1640 modified media with
0.05% colchicine at 37°C for 6 hours. Fixation and

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

sectioning were performed as described above into sections of 6 or 10 μm. Sections were stained with 4′,6diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) dilactate (SigmaAldrich; 1 μg/ml in PBS) with or without ethidium
bromide (Sigma-Aldrich; 1 μg/ml in PBS) for 15 minutes, washed 4 times for 5 minutes each with PBS, and
mounted in ProLong Gold Antifade Reagent (Invitrogen). The slides were analyzed with a fluorescence
microscope (Olympus). Over 600 mitoses were identified from 35 longitudinal sections from six different
specimens.
Identification of mitoses in cryosections and phalloidin
staining

M. corti specimens were fixed for 90 minutes in PFAPBS at room temperature, washed extensively with PBS,
and incubated in 30% saccharose at 4°C for 48 hours.
Specimens were embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT compound, frozen with liquid nitrogen, and sections 10 μm
thick were obtained with a cryostat, and mounted on
SilanePrep slides (Sigma-Aldrich). Staining with Alexa546 conjugated phalloidin (Invitrogen) was performed as
instructed by the manufacturer. Co-staining with DAPI
was performed as described above.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary figure 1: Whole-mount BrdU
detection after a 24 hour pulse in un-induced tetrathyridia. A.
Anterior region of tetrathyridium. B. Medium and posterior region of
tetrathyridium. C. Scolex showing BrdU+ cells within suckers (broken
circles). Bars represent 100 μm in A, and 200 μm in B and C.
Additional file 2: Supplementary figure 2: Histological detection of
mitoses in colchicine treated specimens stained with ethidium
bromide (red) and/or DAPI (blue). A, B, C. Sagittal sections. Arrows in
all figures indicate mitotic cells. cp, cortical parenchyma; g, germinative
cells; gp, genital primordium; iml, inner muscle layer; m, dorso-ventral
muscle cell; mp, medullary parenchyma; st, sub-tegument; t, tegument.
Bars represent 10 μm.
Additional file 3: Supplementary figure 3: Histological detection of
mitoses within the suckers. Specimens were stained with ethidium
bromide (red) and DAPI (blue). Arrows indicate mitotic cells. s, sucker.
Insets show close-ups of mitotic cells. Bars represent 10 μm.
Additional file 4: Supplementary figure 4: Histological detection of
mitoses in the anterior-most regions of the scolex. Specimens were
stained with ethidium bromide (red) and DAPI (blue). A, B. Sagittal
sections. Anterior is to the bottom. Insets show general views of the
scolex stained with DAPI. Arrows indicate mitotic cells. s, sucker; exc,
excretory ducts. Bars represent approximately 10 μm.
Additional file 5: Supplementary figure 5: Morphology of M. corti
after tegument removal. Specimens were stained with TO-PRO-3. A.
Close-up of the border of the body wall; the broken line indicates the
position of the inner muscle layer. B. Segment showing the genital
primordium (arrow) and testes primordia (asterisks). Bars represent 50
μm.

Page 11 of 12

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Marcela Díaz, IIBCE, Uruguay, for her help with
confocal microscopy and Lucía Canclini, IIBCE, Uruguay, for her help during
immunohistofluorescence. Histological sections were done with the
equipment and assistance of Sección Biología Celular, Facultad de Ciencias,
Uruguay. This work was financially supported by CSIC, Uruguay and
PEDECIBA, Uruguay. UK was the recipient of a MSc fellowship from CSIC.
Author details
1
Sección Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
de la República, Iguá 4225, CP 11400, Montevideo, Uruguay. 2Departamento
de Proteínas y Ácidos Nucleicos, Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas
Clemente Estable, Avenida Italia 3318, CP11600, Montevideo, Uruguay.
Authors’ contributions
UK carried out or participated in all experiments. MFD performed parasite
cultures, and participated in BrdU labeling experiments and histology. UK
and EC designed the study and drafted the manuscript. MM and AK
participated in discussions and experimental design, and contributed with
essential reactives. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 11 May 2010 Accepted: 13 July 2010 Published: 13 July 2010
References
1. Peter R, Gschwentner R, Schürmann W, Rieger RM, Ladurner P: The
significance of stem cells in free-living flatworms: one common source
for all cells in the adult. Journal of Applied Biomedicine 2004, 2:21-35.
2. Reuter M, Kreshchenko N: Flatworm asexual multiplication implicates
stem cells and regeneration. Canadian Journal of Zoology 2004,
82:334-356.
3. Shibata N, Rouhana L, Agata K: Cellular and molecular dissection of
pluripotent adult somatic stem cells in planarians. Dev Growth Differ 2010,
52:27-41.
4. Ladurner P, Rieger R, Baguna J: Spatial distribution and differentiation
potential of stem cells in hatchlings and adults in the marine
platyhelminth Macrostomum sp.: a bromodeoxyuridine analysis. Dev Biol
2000, 226:231-241.
5. Newmark PA, Sanchez Alvarado A: Not your father’s planarian: a classic
model enters the era of functional genomics. Nat Rev Genet 2002,
3:210-219.
6. Eisenhoffer GT, Kang H, Sanchez Alvarado A: Molecular analysis of stem
cells and their descendants during cell turnover and regeneration in the
planarian Schmidtea mediterranea. Cell Stem Cell 2008, 3:327-339.
7. Rossi L, Salvetti A, Batistoni R, Deri P, Gremigni V: Planarians, a tale of stem
cells. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008, 65:16-23.
8. Wikgren B-JP, Knuts GM: Growth of subtegumental tissue in cestodes by
cell migration. Acta Acad Abo Ser B 1970, 30:1-6.
9. Wikgren BJ, Gustafsson MKS: Cell proliferation and histogenesis in
diphyllobothrid tapeworms (Cestoda). Acta Acad Abo Ser B 1971, 31:1-10.
10. Gustafsson MKS: The cells of a cestode. Diphyllobothrium dendriticum as a
model in cell biology. Acta Acad Abo Ser B 1990, 50:13-44.
11. Wikgren BJ, Gustafsson M, Knuts G: Primary Anlage Formation in
Diphyllobothriid Tapeworms. Z Parasitenkd 1971, 36:131-139.
12. Gustafsson MK: Studies on cytodifferentiation in the neck region of
Diphyllobothrium dendriticum Nitzsch, 1824 (Cestoda, Pseudophyllidea). Z
Parasitenkd 1976, 50:323-329.
13. Galindo M, Paredes R, Marchant C, Mino V, Galanti N: Regionalization of
DNA and protein synthesis in developing stages of the parasitic
platyhelminth Echinococcus granulosus. J Cell Biochem 2003, 90:294-303.
14. Loehr KA, Mead RW: Changes in embryonic cell frequencies in the
germinative and immature regions of Hymenolepis citelli during
development. J Parasitol 1980, 66:792-796.

Koziol et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/22

15. Loehr KA, Mead RW: A Maceration Technique for the Study of Cytological
Development in Hymenolepis citelli. J Parasitol 1979, 65:886-889.
16. Douglas LT: The development of organ systems in nematotaeniid
cestodes. I. Early histogenesis and formation of reproductive structures
in Baerietta diana (Helfer. 1948). J Parasitol 1961, 47:669-680.
17. Douglas LT: The development of organ systems in nematotaeniid
cestodes. II. The histogenesis of paruterine organs in Baerietta diana. J
Parasitol 1961, 47:681-685.
18. Bolla RI, Roberts LS: Developmental physiology of cestodes. IX.
Cytological characteristics of the germinative region of Hymenolepis
diminuta. J Parasitol 1971, 57:267-277.
19. Merchant MT, Corella C, Willms K: Autoradiographic analysis of the
germinative tissue in evaginated Taenia solium metacestodes. J Parasitol
1997, 83:363-367.
20. Willms K, Merchant MT, Gomez M, Robert L: Taenia solium: germinal cell
precursors in tapeworms grown in hamster intestine. Arch Med Res 2001,
32:1-7.
21. Sakamoto T, Sugimura M: Studies on echinococcosis XXIII. Electron
microscopical observations on histogenesis of larval Echinococcus
multilocularis. Jap J Vet Res 1970, 18:131-144.
22. Spiliotis M, Lechner S, Tappe D, Scheller C, Krohne G, Brehm K: Transient
transfection of Echinococcus multilocularis primary cells and complete in
vitro regeneration of metacestode vesicles. Int J Parasitol 2008,
38:1025-1039.
23. Specht D, Voge M: Asexual Multiplication of Mesocestoides Tetrathyridia
in Laboratory Animals. J Parasitol 1965, 51:268-272.
24. Markoski MM, Bizarro CV, Farias S, Espinoza I, Galanti N, Zaha A, Ferreira HB:
In vitro segmentation induction of Mesocestoides corti (Cestoda)
tetrathyridia. J Parasitol 2003, 89:27-34.
25. Barrett NJ, Smyth JD, Ong SJ: Spontaneous sexual differentiation of
Mesocestoides corti tetrathyridia in vitro. Int J Parasitol 1982, 12:315-322.
26. Thompson RC, Jue Sue LP, Buckley SJ: In vitro development of the
strobilar stage of Mesocestoides corti. Int J Parasitol 1982, 12:303-314.
27. Voge M, Coulombe LS: Growth and asexual multiplication in vitro of
Mesocestoides tetrathyridia. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1966, 15:902-907.
28. Hess E: Apropos of the asexual multiplication of the tetrathyridia larva of
Mesocestoides corti Hoeppli, 1925 (Cestoda: cyclophyllidea). (Prelimary
note). Acta Trop 1975, 32:290-295.
29. Hess E: Ultrastructural Study of the Tetrathyridium of Mesocestoides corti
Hoeppli, 1925 (Cestoda): Pool of Germinative Cells and Suckers. Rev
Suisse Zool 1981, 88:661-674.
30. Hess E: Ultrastructural study of the tetrathyridium of Mesocestoides corti
Hoeppli, 1925: tegument and parenchyma. Z Parasitenkd 1980,
61:135-159.
31. Smith AG, McKerr G: Tritiated thymidine ([3H]-TdR) and
immunocytochemical tracing of cellular fate within the asexually
dividing cestode Mesocestoides vogae (syn. M. corti). Parasitology 2000,
121(1):105-110.
32. Espinoza I, Gomez CR, Galindo M, Galanti N: Developmental expression
pattern of histone H4 gene associated to DNA synthesis in the
endoparasitic platyhelminth Mesocestoides corti. Gene 2007, 386:35-41.
33. Espinoza I, Galindo M, Bizarro CV, Ferreira HB, Zaha A, Galanti N: Early postlarval development of the endoparasitic platyhelminth Mesocestoides
corti: trypsin provokes reversible tegumental damage leading to seruminduced cell proliferation and growth. J Cell Physiol 2005, 205:211-217.
34. Cabrera G, Espinoza I, Kemmerling U, Galanti N: Mesocestoides corti:
Morphological features and glycogen mobilization during in vitro
differentiation from larva to adult worm. Parasitology 2009, 1-12.
35. Novak M: Quantitative studies on the growth and multiplication of
tetrathyridia of Mesocestoides corti Hoeppli, 1925 (Cestoda:
Cyclophyllidea) in rodents. Can J Zool 1972, 50:1189-1196.
36. Wikgren BJ, Gustafsson MK: Duration of the cell cycle of germinative cells
in plerocercoids of Diphyllobothrium dendriticum. Z Parasitenkd 1967,
29:275-281.
37. Terenina NB, Reuter M, Gustafsson MK: An experimental, NADPHdiaphorase histochemical and immunocytochemical study of
Mesocestoides vogae tetrathyridia. Int J Parasitol 1999, 29:787-793.
38. Hart JL: Studies on the nervous system of Tetrathyridia (Cestoda:
Mesocestoides). J Parasitol 1967, 53:1032-1039.
39. Hrckova G, Halton DW, Maule AG, Shaw C, Johnston CF: 5Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)-immunoreactivity in the nervous system

Page 12 of 12

40.
41.

42.

43.

44.

45.
46.

47.

48.

49.

of Mesocestoides corti tetrathyridia (Cestoda: Cyclophyllidea). J Parasitol
1994, 80:144-148.
Hart JL: Regeneration of tetrathyridia of Mesocestoides (Cestoda:
Cyclophyllidea) in vivo and in vitro. J Parasitol 1968, 54:950-956.
Kawamoto F, Fujioka H, Mizuno S, Kumada N, Voge M: Studies on the
post-larval development of cestodes of the genus Mesocestoides:
shedding and further development of M. lineatus and M. corti
tetrathyridia in vivo. Int J Parasitol 1986, 16:323-331.
Extavour CG, Akam M: Mechanisms of germ cell specification across the
metazoans: epigenesis and preformation. Development 2003,
130:5869-5884.
Tyler S, Hooge M: Comparative morphology of the body wall of
flatworms (Platyhelminthes). Canadian Journal of Zoology 2004,
82:194-210.
Egger B, Steinke D, Tarui H, De Mulder K, Arendt D, Borgonie G,
Funayama N, Gschwentner R, Hartenstein V, Hobmayer B, et al: To be or
not to be a flatworm: the acoel controversy. PLoS One 2009, 4:e5502.
Jones MK: A taxonomic revision of the Nematotaeniidae Luehe, 1910
(Cestoda: Cyclophyllidea). Syst Parasitol 1987, 10:165-245.
Hoberg EP, Jones A, Bray RA: Phylogenetic analysis among the families of
the Cyclophyllidea (Eucestoda) based on comparative morphology, with
new hypotheses for co-evolution in vertebrates. Syst Parasitol 1999,
42:51-73.
Olson PD, Littlewood DT, Bray RA, Mariaux J: Interrelationships and
evolution of the tapeworms (Platyhelminthes: Cestoda). Mol Phylogenet
Evol 2001, 19:443-467.
Britos L, Dominguez L, Ehrlich R, Marin M: Effect of praziquantel on the
strobilar development of Mesocestoides corti in vitro. J Helminthol 2000,
74:295-299.
Gustafsson MK: Skin the tapeworms before you stain their nervous
system! A new method for whole-mount immunocytochemistry. Parasitol
Res 1991, 77:509-516.

doi:10.1186/1742-9994-7-22
Cite this article as: Koziol et al.: Stem cell proliferation during in vitro
development of the model cestode Mesocestoides corti from larva to
adult worm. Frontiers in Zoology 2010 7:22.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
