<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The evolution of farnesoid X, vitamin D, and pregnane X receptors: insights from the green-spotted pufferfish (Tetraodon nigriviridis) and other non-mammalian species</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5. doi:10.1186/1471-2091-12-5"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Matthew D Krasowski"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The evolution of farnesoid X, vitamin D, and
pregnane X receptors: insights from the greenspotted pufferfish (Tetraodon nigriviridis) and
other non-mammalian species
Matthew D Krasowski1,2*, Ni Ai3, Lee R Hagey4, Erin M Kollitz5, Seth W Kullman5, Erica J Reschly2, Sean Ekins3,6,7

Abstract
Background: The farnesoid X receptor (FXR), pregnane X receptor (PXR), and vitamin D receptor (VDR) are three
closely related nuclear hormone receptors in the NR1H and 1I subfamilies that share the property of being
activated by bile salts. Bile salts vary significantly in structure across vertebrate species, suggesting that receptors
binding these molecules may show adaptive evolutionary changes in response. We have previously shown that
FXRs from the sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus) and zebrafish (Danio rerio) are activated by planar bile alcohols
found in these two species. In this report, we characterize FXR, PXR, and VDR from the green-spotted pufferfish
(Tetraodon nigriviridis), an actinopterygian fish that unlike the zebrafish has a bile salt profile similar to humans. We
utilize homology modelling, docking, and pharmacophore studies to understand the structural features of the
Tetraodon receptors.
Results: Tetraodon FXR has a ligand selectivity profile very similar to human FXR, with strong activation by the
synthetic ligand GW4064 and by the primary bile acid chenodeoxycholic acid. Homology modelling and docking
studies suggest a ligand-binding pocket architecture more similar to human and rat FXRs than to lamprey or
zebrafish FXRs. Tetraodon PXR was activated by a variety of bile acids and steroids, although not by the larger
synthetic ligands that activate human PXR such as rifampicin. Homology modelling predicts a larger ligand-binding
cavity than zebrafish PXR. We also demonstrate that VDRs from the pufferfish and Japanese medaka were activated
by small secondary bile acids such as lithocholic acid, whereas the African clawed frog VDR was not.
Conclusions: Our studies provide further evidence of the relationship between both FXR, PXR, and VDR ligand
selectivity and cross-species variation in bile salt profiles. Zebrafish and green-spotted pufferfish provide a clear
contrast in having markedly different primary bile salt profiles (planar bile alcohols for zebrafish and sterically bent
bile acids for the pufferfish) and receptor selectivity that matches these differences in endogenous ligands. Our
observations to date present an integrated picture of the co-evolution of bile salt structure and changes in the
binding pockets of three nuclear hormone receptors across the species studied.

Background
Nuclear hormone receptors (NHRs) are transcription factors that work in concert with co-activators and corepressors to regulate gene expression [1,2]. Most of
the NHRs in vertebrates are ligand-activated, although
some NHRs function in a ligand-independent manner.
* Correspondence: mkrasows@healthcare.uiowa.edu
1
Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa
City, IA, 52242, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Examples of ligands for NHRs include a range of endogenous compounds such as bile acids, retinoids, steroid
hormones, thyroid hormone, and vitamin D. A few
NHRs, such as the pair of xenobiotic sensors, pregnane X
receptor (PXR; NR1I2; also known as steroid and xenobiotic receptor or SXR) and constitutive androstane
receptor (CAR; NR1I3), are activated by structurally
diverse exogenous ligands. NHRs share a conserved
domain structure, which includes, from N-terminus to
C-terminus, a modulatory A/B domain, the DNA-binding

© 2011 Krasowski et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

domain (DBD; C domain), the ‘hinge’ D domain, the
ligand-binding domain (LBD; E domain), and a variable
C-terminal F domain that is absent in some NHRs [2,3].
NHRs show varying degrees of sequence conservation
across vertebrate species in the LBD that likely reflects,
at least in part, cross-species variation in the physiologically important ligands. The xenobiotic sensors PXR and
CAR show extensive cross-species amino acid sequence
divergence across vertebrate species [4,5] in addition to
evidence of positive (Darwinian) selection in the LBD
from phylogenetic analyses [6,7]. Cross-species differences in xenobiotic ligands are a possible driving force
for changes in the LBD sequence and structure. We and
others have also provided data consistent with the
hypothesis that the structure of the LBD of NHRs in the
NR1 H and NR1I subfamilies may have co-evolved with
the endogenous ligands in some species in evolution
[4,6-12].
Bile salts are one class of NHR ligands that show substantial cross-species differences in chemical structure
[13]. Bile salts are amphipathic, water-soluble end-metabolites of cholesterol that facilitate intestinal absorption
of lipids, enhance proteolytic cleavage of dietary proteins, and exert antimicrobial activity in the small intestine [14,15]. Bile salts exhibit significant structural
diversity across vertebrate species [13,16-18] and include
bile alcohols (which have a hydroxyl group on the terminal carbon atom of the side-chain) and bile acids
(which have a carboxylic acid group on the side-chain)
(Figure 1) [15]. Primary bile salts are defined as those
synthesized by the liver, which is accomplished by a
complicated biosynthetic pathway that starts with cholesterol [19,20].
Secondary bile salts result from modification of primary bile salts by host bacteria in the intestine [15].
Common alterations in bile acids catalyzed by enzymes
from anaerobic bacteria in the intestinal tract include
deconjugation and dehydroxylation, with one possible
end result being unconjugated and poorly water-soluble
bile acids such as lithocholic acid (3a-hydroxy-5b-cholan-24-oic acid; LCA), a compound known to be toxic
to mammalian species including humans [15,21]. There
have been few studies of intestinal bile salts in animals
that utilize bile alcohols, but one study of the Asiatic
carp (Cyprinus carpio) showed that the bile alcohol sulfates synthesized in the liver of this species did not
undergo hydrolysis in the intestinal tract and thus did
not generate potentially toxic unconjugated secondary
bile alcohols [22].
Variation in the stereochemistry of the junction
between rings A and B of the bile salt steroid nucleus
determines whether bile salts have a flat (planar) or a
‘bent’ orientation. Based on surveys of the bile salt composition in 1153 vertebrate species, we have proposed

Page 2 of 19

that 5a (planar) bile alcohols are the likely ancestral
ligands (the paleomorphic state) while 5b (bent) bile
acids are the derived (apomorphic) phenotype [13,23-25].
Common 5b-bile acids include chenodeoxycholic acid
(CDCA; 3a,7a-dihydroxy-5b-cholan-24-oic acid) and
cholic acid (CA; 3a,7a,12a-trihydroxy-5b-cholan-24-oic
acid), the two dominant primary bile acids in humans
and other mammals (Figure 1) [13,24].
PXRs are activated by a structurally diverse array of
endogenous and exogenous molecules that includes bile
salts, steroid hormones, prescription medications, herbal
drugs, and endocrine disruptors [26,27]. PXR regulates
the transcription of enzymes and transporters involved
in the metabolism and elimination of potentially harmful
compounds, including sulfation of toxic bile acids [28].
Previous studies have shown substantial cross-species
differences in PXR ligand specificity, including in the
selectivity for bile salts [4,7,8]. Mammalian PXRs are
activated by a broad range of bile salt structures (both
ancestral and evolutionarily derived), while chicken
(Gallus gallus) and zebrafish (Danio rerio) PXRs are
activated by a structurally narrow range of bile salts
[4,6,7,9,29]. We and others have proposed that the evolution of PXRs has been driven by at least two factors:
adaptation to evolutionary changes in bile salt (and perhaps other endogenous molecular) structure and function as a xenobiotic sensor [4,7,9,12]. Compared with
published X-ray crystallographic structures of human
PXR [30-35], a homology model of the zebrafish PXR is
predicted to have a smaller ligand-binding pocket (LBP)
than human PXR, with a flat ligand-binding surface
well-suited to binding the planar 5a-bile alcohols that
are the primary bile salts of zebrafish and other cypriniform fish [9].
FXR serves as the major transcriptional regulator of
bile salt synthesis, in part by controlling the expression
of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 7A1, the rate-limiting
enzyme in the synthetic pathway [36]. Mammalian FXRs
are activated best by primary bile acids CDCA and CA
[37-39]. FXR is typically expressed at high levels in the
liver, intestine, kidney, and adrenal glands. A second
FXR, termed FXRb (NR1H5), is found in some animal
species (although it is a pseudogene in the genome of
some mammals such as humans and other primates)
but does not appear to be involved with bile salt binding
or regulation [40]. Throughout this manuscript, FXR
refers to NR1H4, or what might be termed FXRa in
species possessing two FXRs.
The African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis) expresses an
unusual FXR (also termed FOR, FXR-like orphan receptor) that has a 33 amino acid insert, not found in mammalian FXRs, in helix 7 of the ligand-binding domain
(LBD) [41]. We have previously demonstrated that sea
lamprey (Petromyzon marinus), zebrafish, and African

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 3 of 19

Figure 1 Representative bile salts and their structures. All bile salts are derived from cholesterol (topmost structure), illustrated with the
carbon atoms numbered and the steroid rings labelled A, B, C, and D. Jawless fish, lobe-finned fish, and a limited number of actinopterygian
fish use 5a bile alcohols such as 5a-cyprinol-27-sulfate that have an overall planar and extended structure of the steroid rings (see
representation of A, B, and C rings on the right side). Most actinopterygian fish (including medaka and Tetraodon nigrivirdis) use 5b bile acids
that have an overall bent structure of the steroid rings. One of the two most common primary salts in mammals is chenodeoxycholic acid
(CDCA), the stem C24 bile acid that has the basic 3a,7a-dihydroxylation pattern. Lithocholic acid is one of the smallest naturally occurring bile
acids and results from bacterial enzyme-mediated deconjugation and dehydroxylation of primary bile acids. The sodium and calcium salts of
lithocholic acid have very low solubility at body temperature. Additionally, lithocholic acid is toxic in humans and other mammals.

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

clawed frog FXRs are activated by bile alcohols [9]. Sea
lamprey and zebrafish FXRs are selective for planar 5a
bile alcohols. The Xenopus FXR isoform 1 was activated
by 5a- and 5b-bile alcohols (paralleling the complex bile
salt profile of this amphibian [23]) but was poorly activated by bile acids [9,41].
The vitamin D receptor (VDR; NR1I1) is known to
mediate the action of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (calcitriol), a hormone whose ‘classic’ function is to regulate
calcium and phosphorus homeostasis. However, VDRs
are now known to be involved in a wide range of physiological processes including immune system modulation, skin development, and regulation of the
metabolism of toxic compounds [42-45]. Two VDR
genes have been found in the genome of many actinopterygian fish (a likely by-product of whole genome
duplication prior to actinopterygian fish radiation)
[46-48], with VDRa and VDRb both shown to be functional in the Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes) [49].
Mammalian VDRs are activated at low affinity by a narrow range of 5b-bile acids, particularly the toxic secondary bile acid LCA and its derivatives [7,50-52]. VDR
activation in the intestine has been shown to upregulate
the expression of enzymes (e.g., CYP3A) that can metabolize and reduce the toxicity of LCA [52-56]. We previously determined that the VDR from the sea lamprey
(Petromyzon marinus) was insensitive to activation by a
wide array of bile salts, including bile acids and bile
alcohols with a range of substituents. We proposed the
hypothesis that activation of VDRs by bile acids is a
‘derived’ trait, possibly as an adaptation to evolutionary
changes in bile salt pathways and vertebrate physiology
that allow for generation of toxic secondary bile acids
[6,7,9,10].
In this report, we characterize the ligand selectivity of
FXR, VDR, and PXR from the green-spotted pufferfish
(Tetraodon nigriviridis), an actinopterygian fish that
synthesizes mainly the 5b-bile acids CA and CDCA [23],
thereby having a bile salt profile similar to most mammals. We also cloned and characterized VDRs from
three additional non-mammalian species: medaka,
African clawed frog, and chicken (Gallus gallus). In
terms of primary bile salts, the medaka synthesizes a
mixture of 5b C24 and C27 bile acids [57,58]. The African clawed frog has a complicated mixture of C26 and
C27 bile alcohols, C24 bile acids, and C27 bile acids in its
bile [9,23]. The chicken synthesizes mainly CA and
CDCA as primary bile salts [25].
We generated homology models of Tetraodon FXR
(tnFXR) and PXR (tnPXR) using rat FXR [59] and
human PXR [32] crystallographic structures, respectively, as templates. We then performed computational
ligand docking experiments to these receptors. This

Page 4 of 19

allowed for comparison to the structures of the corresponding mammalian receptors, helping to formulate
hypotheses to rationalize the structural changes that
have occurred during receptor evolution. Additionally,
we build on our previous docking studies with bile acids
and human VDR (hVDR) and expand structure-activity
series of bile acids at this receptor. Combining information from docking experiments and cross-species
sequence comparisons, we generated site-directed mutations and chimeras to better understand the molecular
determinants of bile salt activation of VDRs.

Results
Bile salt profile of Tetraodon nigriviridis

We previously reported a survey of the biliary bile salts
of 213 fish species from 38 different orders [23].
Included in this survey were six species from Tetraodontiformes, an order of actinopterygian fish that
includes Tetraodon nigriviridis. The primary bile salts
from all six species of Tetraodontiformes examined
were the common 5b-bile acids CA and CDCA. This is
illustrated in Additional file 1 by high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) and electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (ESI/MS/MS) (Additional file 1: figures S1A-S1C). The primary bile salt
pool of Tetraodon is quite similar to that of many mammals (including humans) and birds [13,16,17,24,25].
Ligand selectivity of the Tetraodon FXR

Analysis of the draft genome of Tetraodon nigriviridis
revealed a single putative ortholog to human FXRa
(hFXR) and another single putative ortholog to human
PXR (hPXR). We did not find any evidence of an ortholog
to FXRb in the Tetraodon genome. The LBDs of tnFXR
and tnPXR were cloned and functionally expressed as
GAL4/LBD chimeras (concentration-response data in
Figure 2 and 3). tnFXR was activated most strongly by
GW4064 (Figure 2A), a synthetic ligand known to activate
mammalian FXRs with high efficacy [60], and activated
weakly by T-0901317 (Figure 2B), an agonist of mammalian liver X receptors (LXRs; NR1H2 and NR1H3), FXRs,
and PXRs [34,61,62]. Conjugated and unconjugated 5b
bile acids also activated tnFXR, including CDCA, tauroCDCA, 3-oxo-LCA, and LCA (Figure 2C,D; Additional file
2). The EC50 of bile acids for activation of tnFXR ranged
from 8.8 to 37.6 μM, with maximal effects varying from
15-61% of that produced by GW4064 (which served as the
reference compound for comparisons of maximal effect or
efficacy). The planar bile alcohol 5a-cyprinol sulfate (the
main bile salt of cypriniform fish but only a very minor
component of Tetraodon bile salts) weakly activated
tnFXR. A 76-compound library of known NHR ligands
was screened for additional activators of tnFXR. This

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 5 of 19

Figure 2 FXR concentration-response curves. Ligand activation of FXRs from different species. A) The synthetic mammalian FXR activator
GW4064 activates human FXR (hFXR) with high efficacy and submicromolar potency. GW4064 also activates Tetraodon FXR (tnFXR) and zebrafish
FXR (zfFXR) but not Xenopus laevis FXR(xlFXR). B) T-0901317 activates hFXR, zfFXR, and tnFXR (although with lower efficacy compared to
GW4064) but not xlFXR. C) The primary bile acid chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) activates hFXR and tnFXR but not zfFXR or xlFXR. D) The
secondary bile acid lithocholic acid (LCA) activates hFXR, tnFXR, and zfFXR, but not xlFXR. The ordinate indicates fold induction compared to
vehicle control in luciferase-based assay. Note that the scale of the ordinate is different in A) through D).

screening identified three activators of tnFXR in addition
to bile acids which included two farnesol derivatives (farnesol and S-farnesyl-L-cysteine methyl ester) and 6-formylindolo-[3,2-b]-carbazole.
Ligand selectivity of the Tetraodon PXR

With respect to bile salts, tnPXR had similar structureactivity relationships to tnFXR, namely activation by 5b-

bile acids with one or two hydroxyl groups on the
nuclear rings (Figure 3; Additional file 2). Unlike tnFXR,
tnPXR was not activated by GW4064 or farnesol compounds. tnPXR was also activated by a variety of androstane, estrane, and pregnane steroids, similar to PXRs
from mammals, chicken, and zebrafish (Figure 3C) [4].
tnPXR was not activated by several xenobiotics known
to be agonists of mammalian PXRs including hyperforin

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 6 of 19

Figure 3 PXR concentration-response curves. Ligand activation of PXRs from different species. A) T-0901317 activates human PXR (hPXR) and
chicken PXR (chPXR) but not Tetraodon PXR (tnPXR) or zebrafish PXR (zfPXR). B) The primary conjugated bile acid taurochenodeoxycholic acid
(TCDCA) activates hPXR and tnPXR but not chPXR or zfPXR. C) The steroid 5b-pregnane-3,20-dione (5b-pregnanedione) activates all four PXRs
shown. D) Nifedipine activates hPXR, chPXR, and zfPXR, but not tnPXR. The ordinate indicates fold induction compared to vehicle control in
luciferase-based assay. Note that the scale of the ordinate is different in A) through D).

(pharmacologically active component of the herbal antidepressant St. John’s wort), nifedipine (Figure 3D),
rifampicin, and SR12813, but was activated by n-butyl
4-amino benzoate, an agonist of Xenopus laevis PXRs
[4,63] (Additional file 2).
Structure-activity relationship of bile acids for activation
of human and mouse VDRs

Expanding on previous studies from our group [6,7,10]
and others [50,52], we determined the structure-activity
relationships of naturally occurring and synthetic bile

acids for transactivation of GAL4/LBD constructs of
hVDR and mouse VDR (mVDR). LCA and derivatives
(e.g., 3-oxo-LCA, LCA acetate) activated both hVDR
and mVDR (Figure 4; Additional file 3). Iso-LCA, with a
single 3b-hydroxy group on the steroid rings (as
opposed to 3a-hydroxy of LCA), weakly activated hVDR
and mVDR. In contrast, naturally occurring 5b-bile
acids with two or three hydroxyl groups on the nuclear
rings were inactive including CDCA (3a,7a-dihydroxy5b-cholan-24-oic acid), DCA (3a,12a-dihydroxy), and
CA (3a,7a,12a-trihydroxy). We also tested three 5b-bile

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 7 of 19

Figure 4 Structure-activity for human and mouse VDR. Structure-activity data for bile acid activation of human and mouse VDRs. The bile
acids that activate human and mouse VDRs are small, hydrophobic bile acids that are related to lithocholic acid (LCA) and have either a
hydroxyl or oxo group at C-3 (LCA, 3-oxo-LCA, LCA acetate, iso-LCA) or have unsubstituted steroid ring (5a-cholanic acid). Addition of a 7ahydroxy group to LCA (resulting in the bile acid CDCA) or even single steroid ring substitutions at C-7 or C-12 result in bile acids that do not
activate the VDRs. Nor-LCA, which has a shortened bile acid side-chain, is also inactive.

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 8 of 19

acids not known to occur naturally in bile that have a
single hydroxyl substituent on the steroid rings on a carbon other than C-3 (7a-hydroxy, 7b-hydroxy, and
12a-hydroxy-5b-cholan-24-oic acids), as well as unsubstituted 5b-cholanic acid (no hydroxyl groups on any of
the steroid rings). All four of these bile acids were inactive with respect to activation of hVDR and mVDR.
Thus, bile acids with hydroxyl groups at the C-7 or
C-12 position are unfavourable for activation of hVDR
(Figure 4). Unsubstituted 5a-cholanic acid, which would
have an overall planar orientation of the steroid rings,
weakly activated hVDR and mVDR. Two 5a-cholanic
acid derivatives (3b-hydroxy and 3-oxo) were inactive
(Additional file 3).
Activation of non-mammalian VDRs by bile salts

The African clawed frog VDR (Xenopus laevis VDR;
xlVDR) was not activated by any bile salts tested,
including bile alcohols. In contrast, chicken VDR
(chVDR), medaka VDRa (olVDRa), Tetraodon VDRa
(tnVDR), and zebrafish VDRa (zfVDRa) were each activated by LCA and/or its derivatives (3-keto-LCA and
LCA acetate) but not by bile acids with two or more
hydroxyl groups such as CDCA, DCA, or CA (Figure 5
and 6; Additional file 3). The efficacies of LCA,
3-oxo-LCA, and LCA acetate (in comparison to 1,25adihydroxyvitamin D3) for activation of chicken, medaka,
Tetraodon, zebafish VDRs were lower than for hVDR
and mVDR (Figure 6; Additional file 3).
Structure-directed mutagenesis experiments

We previously used molecular modelling computational
docking studies to understand the structural basis of
bile acid activation of hVDR and mVDR [9]. These studies predicted an electrostatic interaction between Arg274 (hVDR numbering) and the bile acid side-chain,
and a hydrogen bond between the 3a-hydroxyl group of
LCA and His-397 in helix 11 (note corresponding residue numbers are 5 lower for mVDR; e.g., Arg-269 in
mVDR is equivalent to Arg-274 in hVDR). This hydrogen bonding brings LCA close to the activation helix 12
where LCA forms hydrophobic contacts with Val-398
and Phe-422 that would stabilize the helix in the optimal orientation for coactivator binding. Site-directed
mutagenesis by Adachi et al. supported this conclusion
and indicated that alteration on this Arg residue of
hVDR (e.g., Arg274Leu) significantly disrupted the
receptor response to LCA [51]. Additional file 4 displays
the surface around the ligand binding pocket of hVDR,
showing that it is predominantly hydrophobic in the
middle with more polar features on its ends.
We next performed site-directed mutagenesis experiments to confirm the docking model of the bile acid to
VDR, and to try to rationalize the cross-species

Figure 5 Transactivation of full-length teleost VDRs. HepG2 cells
were transiently transfected with pRL-CMV, XREM-Luc and either
medaka VDRa-pSG5, zebrafish VDRa-pSG5, or Tetraodon VDRa-pSG5
as described in Methods. Cells were exposed to 100 μM of either
lithocholic acid (LCA), 3-keto-LCA, or LCA acetate for 24 hours. VDR
response was measured via dual-luciferase assays. Data is
represented as the mean fold induction normalized to control
(DMSO) ± SEM.

differences in activation of VDR by bile salts. These
mutations were performed in mVDR, which generally
has higher maximal activation by bile acids but shows a
similar selectivity for bile acids to hVDR. Three residues,
previously identified by the hVDR docking model as key
to bile acid activation - Arg-269 (R269; charge clamp to
carboxylic acid group on bile acid side-chain), His-392
(H392; hydrogen bond to 3a-hydroxy group of LCA),
Phe-417 (F417; stabilization of helix 12) - were mutated
individually to two other amino acid resides. This produced a total of six-directed mutants: R269A, R269E,
H392A, H392Y, F417A, and F417D.
We also made site-directed mutations at amino acid
positions that showed differences between VDRs that
are bile acid-sensitive (human, mouse, chicken, greenspotted pufferfish) and bile acid-insensitive (African
clawed frog, sea lamprey, zebrafish). These mVDR mutations changed the amino acid residue(s) in mVDR to the
corresponding residue(s) found in the bile-salt insensitive VDRs: Q286E (to corresponding residue found in
xlVDR), S293 D (xlVDR), S293G (sea lamprey VDR),

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 9 of 19

Figure 6 VDR concentration-response curves. Ligand activation of VDRs from different species, chimeric human-frog VDRs, and mouse VDR
site-directed mutants. A) The plot shows activation of human, chicken, Xenopus laevis, and Tetraodon VDRs by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Also
shown are activation data for a chimeric receptor that is mostly human VDR (hVDR) with the H1-H3 insert replaced by the corresponding
sequence from Xenopus laevis VDR (xlVDR) and the converse chimeric receptor that is mostly xlVDR with the H1-H3 insert replaced by the
corresponding sequence from hVDR. B) The plot shows activation of mouse VDR (mVDR) and six site-directed mutants of mVDR (R269A, R269E,
H392A, H392Y, F417A, and F417D) by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. C) Lithocholic acid (LCA) activates human, chicken, and Tetraodon VDRs, as well
as the chimeric receptor hVDR with xlVDR h1-H3 insert, but does not activate xlVDR and the chimeric receptor xlVDR with the hVDR H1-H3
insert. D) Lithocholic acid strongly activates mVDR, weakly activates the site-directed mutants F417A and F417D, and does not activate R269A,
R269E, H392A, and H392Y. The ordinate indicates fold induction compared to vehicle control in luciferase-based assay. Note that the scale of the
ordinate is different in A) through D).

N319 D (lamprey VDR), N319K (zfVDR), and RCR363365LCK (xlVDR), RCR363-365RIQ (zfVDR), RCR363365ACR (lamprey VDR) (see Additional file 5). Lastly,
we also tested the role of the H1-H3 ‘insertion’ domain
in mediating bile acid activation. Thus, we generated

hVDR that lacked amino acid residues 165-218 (hVDR/
Δins) and an hVDR construct where the insert domain
was replaced with the insertion domain from the bile
acid-insensitive xlVDR (hVDR/xlVDRins). The analogous constructs were also created for xlVDR: one

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 10 of 19

Figure 7 Pharmacophore models of Tetraodon VDR, PXR, and FXR. Pharmacophore models were developed for A) Tetraodon VDR (tnVDR),
B) Tetraodon PXR (tnPXR), and C) Tetraodon FXR (tnFXR) using the HipHop method in Catalyst™. The structure-activity data used to develop the
pharmacophore models are summarized in Additional File 6. A) The tnVDR pharmacophore contains 4 hydrophobes (cyan) and two hydrogen
bond acceptors (green). 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (calcitriol) was mapped to the pharmacophore. B) The tnPXR pharmacophore contains three
hydrophobes (cyan) and one hydrogen bond acceptor (green). Taurochenodeoxycholic acid was mapped to the pharmacophore. C) The tnFXR
pharmacophore contains four hydrophobes (cyan), one hydrogen bond acceptor (green), and one negative ionizable feature (blue). GW4064 was
mapped to the pharmacophore.

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 11 of 19

H3 insertion domain does not appear to play a major
role in selectivity for bile acids.
Pharmacophore models for Tetraodon VDR, PXR, and FXR

Figure 8 PXR-ligand interactions. Interaction map between the
secondary bile acid lithocholic acid and PXRs. Key residues involved
in binding are listed for human, Tetraodon (tn), and zebrafish (z)
PXRs (the residue number is for human). Conserved resides
throughout the three species are highlighted by black boxes. The
hydrogen bond is shown by a green dashed line, the electrostatic
charge interaction is presented as a blue dashed line, and the
hydrophobic interaction is depicted as an orange dashed line. The
ligand is shown as ball and stick presentation and colored
according to atom types (gray = carbon, red-oxygen).

lacking the insertion domain (xlVDR/Δins) and the
other with the insertion domain from hVDR (xlVDR/
hVDRins).
The two mutations at Arg269 (R269A and R269E)
reduced the apparent affinity of 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3 by over two orders of magnitude and abolished activation by LCA and 3-oxo-LCA. Similar effects were produced by the two mutations at His392 (H392A and
H392Y) which reduced the apparent affinity of 1a,25dihydroxyvitamin D 3 by approximately 10-fold and
100-fold, respectively, and abolished activation by LCA
and 3-oxo-LCA. The two mutations at Phe417 (F417A
and F417D) both reduced the apparent affinity of 1a,25dihydroxyvitamin D3 by approximately two orders of
magnitude while retaining activation by LCA and 3-oxoLCA but not LCA acetate. Interestingly, unsubstituted
5a-cholanic acid activated the R269A, R269E, H392A,
H392Y, F417A, and F417D mutants weakly.
In general, the mutations at Glu-286, Ser-293,
Asn-319, and Arg/Cys/Arg (363-365) had little effect on
activation by 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 or bile acids
compared to wild-type mVDR. Similarly, the four constructs that involved either deletion (hVDR/Δins and
xlVDR/Δins) or swapping of the H1-H3 insertion
domain (hVDR/xlVDRins and xlVDR/hVDRins) had little effect on activation by 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 or
bile acids compared to wild-type hVDR. Thus, the H1-

Using the structure-activity data for tnVDR, tnPXR, and
tnFXR (summarized in Additional File 6), we developed
common features pharmacophore models for these
three receptors (Figure 7). The tnVDR pharmacophore,
mapped onto 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 in Figure 7A,
has four hydrophobes and two hydrogen bond acceptors. The tnPXR pharmacophore, mapped onto taurochenodeoxycholic acid in Figure 7B, shows three
hydrophobes and one hydrogen bond acceptor, a smaller
pharmacophore than that determined for hPXR [64].
The tnFXR pharmacophore, mapped onto GW4064 in
Figure 7C, shows four hydrophobes, one hydrogen bond
acceptor, and one negative ionizable feature.
Homology modeling of Tetraodon PXR

Structural studies of the LBD of hPXR reveal a large
(~1,300 Å3), roughly spherical, hydrophobic LBP with the
flexibility to accommodate large molecules such as hyperforin and rifampicin [30,32-34]. We can also see this by surface analysis of the co-crystallized ligands that cover a
molecular weight range of 273-714 Da and a calculated
ALogP (measure of hydrophobicity) range of 3.54-10.11
[65]. The homology model we generated of the LBD of
tnPXR showed an LBP predicted to be slightly smaller
(1,230 Å3) compared to hPXR (Figure 8), but larger than
the estimated volumes of homology models of the LBPs of
zebrafish PXR (~1,000 Å3) and Xenopus laevis PXRa (~860
Å 3 ) that we reported previously [9,66]. The homology
model results for tnPXR are consistent with the pharmacophore model for this receptor described above (Figure 7B).
We performed molecular docking studies with two steroids (5b-pregnan-3,20-dione and 5a-androstan-3a-ol) and
one bile acid (CDCA) that activated tnPXR in the luciferase assays (Figure 9). Docking studies show that the two
steroids bind similar to the published crystallographic
structure of 17b-estradiol bound to hPXR [35]. The carbonyl group of pregnanedione or hydroxyl group of androstanol at the C-3 position has a hydrogen bond with Thr111, which corresponds to Ser-247 in hPXR. For pregnanedione, the carbonyl group at C-20 forms another hydrogen bond with Gln-305, as shown in Figure 6. Molecular
docking indicated that the electrostatic interactions
between CDCA and the conserved Arg-151 residue on
helix 5 are important for binding to tnPXR. The hydroxyl
group at the C-3 position forms a hydrogen bond with
Glu-149, which is different from tnFXR, for which a His
residue is involved in hydrogen bonding. For tnPXR, Tyr
is in the position of this His residue, and adopts a different
side-chain rotamer orientation to provide van der Waals
contacts with the hydrocarbon scaffold of CDCA.

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 12 of 19

Figure 9 Homology model of Tetraodon PXR. Plot of interactions of ligands with tnPXR: A) the steroid 5b-pregnan-3,20-dione
(pregnanedione) and B) the bile acid CDCA. The legend indicates the types of amino acid residues and amino acid-ligand interactions.

Homology modeling and docking studies of zebrafish
PXR [9] show an important amino acid sequence difference (Met-243 in human PXR versus Phe at the corresponding position in zebrafish PXR). This residue is
located at the bottom of the PXR LBP and has direct

van der Waals contacts with A-ring and B-ring of the
hydrocarbon scaffold of bile salts, specifically the methyl
group at the C-10 position. In zebrafish PXR, the bulky
and more rigid benzyl side-chain of the phenylalanine
significantly narrow this portion of the zebrafish PXR

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Page 13 of 19

LBP compared with human PXR which has the flexible
side-chain of methionine-243, which may lead to preference for planar bile alcohols by zebrafish PXR. tnPXR
has valine at the position corresponding to methionine243 in human PXR, which allows enough room for
either bent or planar formations of the A/B ring of bile
salts.
Homology modeling of Tetraodon FXR

For the homology model of tnFXR, molecular docking
studies show that GW4064 adopts a similar orientation
in the structural model as in the hFXR crystal structure
[60]. The carboxyl group of GW4064 forms a strong
electrostatic interaction with the conserved Arg residue
in helix 5 of tnFXR. In addition, extensive hydrophobic
contacts occur between the di-chloro-substituted benzyl
ring of GW4064 and residues in helices 5, 7, 11 and 12
of tnFXR, which would stabilize the active conformation
of receptor. CDCA also activated tnFXR in our experiments, but with weaker activity compared with its activity in hFXR. Sequence alignment indicated that most of
the ligand contact residues identified in the crystallographic structure of hFXR [60] are conserved between
tnFXR and hFXR. However, one important hydrogen
bond interaction between the C-3 hydroxyl group of
CDCA and hFXR is not present for tnFXR because Tyr358 (hFXR) in helix 7 is substituted for by Phe in
tnFXR.
There is an opening to solvent for the FXR LBP as
seen in crystallographic structures of human or rat
FXRs [59,60] and our homology models (Figure 10).
The width of this opening is mostly controlled by two
residues - Met-262 and Ile-332 in human FXR. For
tnFXR, the residue corresponding to hFXR Ile-332 is
alanine. Our model suggests that the LBP of tnFXR has
a wider opening to solvent than hFXR, which may
explain how tnFXR and not hFXR can accommodate
cyprinol 27-sulfate, a C 27 bile acid that has a longer
side-chain and more hydroxyl groups than CDCA. The
pharmacophore model for tnFXR summarized in Figure
7C is consistent with the homology modelling and docking results, in having multiple hydrophobic interactions,
a hydrogen bond acceptor, and negative ionizable features for the bound ligand.

Discussion
In this study, we characterize the FXR, VDR, and PXR of
the green-spotted pufferfish Tetraodon nigriviridis, an
actinopterygian fish that synthesizes mainly 5b-bile acids.
This bile salt profile is similar to humans and most mammals, as well as many other actinopterygian fish, some
reptiles, and some birds [13,23]. We find that the FXR
and PXR of Tetraodon (tnFXR and tnPXR) are activated
by common bent-shaped 5b-bile acids such as CDCA

Figure 10 FXR-ligand interactions. Interaction map between the
primary bile acid chenodeoxycholic acid and FXRs. Key residues
involved in binding are listed for human, mouse (m), Tetraodon (tn),
and sea lamprey (sl) FXRs (the residue number is for human).
Conserved resides throughout the four species are highlighted by
black boxes. Hydrogen bonds are shown by green dashed lines, the
electrostatic charge interaction is presented as a blue dashed line,
and the important cation-π interaction for FXR is depicted as a
brown dashed line. The ligand is shown as ball and stick
presentation and colored according to atom types (gray = carbon,
red-oxygen).

and less well by planar 5a bile alcohols, matching the
endogenous primary bile salt profile of this species.
Our experimental and molecular modelling studies of
tnFXR reveal a receptor that differs in multiple respects
from sea lamprey and zebrafish FXRs [9] but is instead
more similar to medaka FXRa [58] and mammalian
FXRs. Homology modelling of tnFXR predicts an LBP
with a wide opening to solvent (wider than crystallographic structure of hFXR [60]) and an overall architecture that differs markedly from homology models of sea
lamprey and zebrafish FXRs, which are both predicted
to have narrow LBPs that can accommodate planar bile
alcohols but cannot accommodate bent bile acids such
as CDCA. Docking studies of lamprey and zebrafish
FXRs predict good binding to planar 5a-bile alcohols
but not to bent 5b-bile acids, a prediction that is consistent with reporter assay experiments [9]. For tnFXR,
docking studies show that the FXR-selective agonist
GW4064 and bile acid CDCA adopt orientations in the
LBP similar to those observed in the crystallographic
structures of GW4064 bound to hFXR [60] and rat FXR
bound to an analog of CDCA, respectively [59], lending
further support to the conclusion that tnFXR has an
overall LBP structure more similar to human and rat
FXRs than to sea lamprey or zebrafish FXRs.
Tetraodon FXR has similar ligand selectivity to medaka
FXRa (to which it shares high sequence identity in the
LBD), including strong activation by GW4064 and the

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

primary bile acid CDCA (both unconjugated and taurineconjugated) [58]. Given that the activation of medaka
FXRa upregulates the transcription of genes important
in bile salt synthesis and transport, including the genes
for CYP7A1 and bile salt export protein as well as the
NHR repressor small heterodimer partner (SHP, NR0B2)
[67], Tetraodon FXR seems likely to also be involved in
regulation of bile salt biology. Tetraodon FXR and
medaka FXRa have a substantially different ligand selectivity from sea lamprey FXR, which is not activated by
GW4064, CDCA (or other 5b-bile acids), or T-0901317
[9]. This is not surprising because the primary bile salts
of the sea lamprey (planar 5a-bile alcohols) are quite different from those of Tetraodon (CDCA, CA) and medaka
(CDCA, CA, and C27 bile acids) [23,57,58]. The FXRs of
Tetraodon and medaka also differ significantly from an
FXR cloned and characterized from the little skate (Leucoraja erinacea, a cartilaginous fish), which was found to
be insensitive to bile salts, even the 5b-bile alcohols (e.g.,
5b-scymnol sulfate) produced by the little skate and
many other cartilaginous fish [68]. However, the skate
FXR showed significant differences in sequence from
other vertebrate FXRs, including novel insertions, and
there is the possibility that this receptor is actually orthologous to mammalian FXRb (NR1H5), which are activated not by bile salts but instead by other steroidal
compounds such as lanosterol [40].
Homology modelling of tnPXR predicts a receptor
with an LBP with a volume (1,230 Å3) significantly larger than the estimated volumes of the LBPs of zebrafish
PXR (~1,000 Å3) and Xenopus laevis PXRa (~860 Å3)
[9,66] but smaller than the LBP of hPXR in crystallographic structures [30,32-34]. The homology model and
docking studies of tnPXR are consistent with our studies
of recombinant tnPXR in luciferase reporter assays that
show activation by a wider range of ligands than can
activate either zebrafish or Xenopus PXRs. For example,
tnPXR is activated by a broad range of 5b- and 5a-bile
salts and steroids similar to hPXR. In contrast, studies
of recombinant zebrafish PXR show activation by a narrow range of planar 5a-bile alcohols [4,6,7]. The pharmacophore model for tnPXR is similar to models of
hPXR [64,69,70] which have four hydrophobic features
along with a hydrogen bond acceptor, although the
tnPXR pharmacophore had three hydrophobic features
and a hydrogen bond donor, consistent with a somewhat more restricted LBP limited to smaller ligands
than hPXR [29,64]. Like hPXR, tnPXR has a pharmacophore model markedly different from that of chicken
and zebrafish PXRs [29].
Overall, the ligand selectivity of tnFXR and tnPXR contrasts with that of sea lamprey FXR, zebrafish FXR, and
zebrafish PXR, which are activated better by 5a bile alcohols, which are the main bile salts of jawless fish

Page 14 of 19

(Agnatha, which includes extant lampreys and hagfish)
and Cypriniformes (which includes zebrafish) [9,23].
Unlike lampreys and zebrafish, Tetraodon nigriviridis has
a bile salt profile of mainly bent 5b-bile acids such as
CDCA, and would thus be predicted to have bile-saltregulating NHRs that can recognize Tetraodon endogenous bile acids and not the ‘ancestral’ bile alcohols that
comprise only a trace fraction of the Tetraodon bile salt
pool. These results lend further significant support to the
hypothesis that structural changes to the LBD of FXR
and PXR throughout evolution have paralleled crossspecies changes in bile salt profile [6,7,10,11,66]. In
Additional file 7 bile salt variation and NHR bile salt
sensitivity are overlaid on a fish phylogeny. So far, only a
limited number of fish species have been characterized
with respect to their FXRs, VDRs, and/or PXRs. As discussed in Additional file 7 a number of fish groups would
be of particular interest for future studies of NHRs,
including the Elasmobranchii (sharks, skates, rays), Chimaeriformes (chimaerae), Myxiniformes (hagfish), and
lobe-finned fish (lungfish and coelacanths).
Our present and previous studies [6,7,9,10] with VDRs
from various non-mammalian species have revealed
some VDRs that are insensitive to bile acids (sea lamprey, African clawed frog) and others that are activated
by secondary bile acids such as LCA (human, mouse,
chicken, medaka, Tetraodon). In humans and some
other mammals, enzymes from anaerobic bacteria in the
caecum deconjugate and dehydroxylate primary bile
acids such as CDCA, leading to secondary bile acids
such as LCA that can produce toxicity to the intestinal
and hepatobiliary tracts [15,21]. We and others have
speculated that the ability of VDRs to bind secondary
bile acids was acquired during vertebrate evolution as a
protective mechanism against the potential toxicity of
poorly water-soluble secondary bile acids such as LCA
[6,7,51,52]. One challenge to this hypothesis is that
there has been little study to date of the secondary bile
salts (and the anaerobic bacterial intestinal flora that
could generate such bile salts) of non-mammalian species. For example, it is not known whether Tetraodon or
other actinopterygian fish species have physiologically
important amounts of secondary bile acids in the intestinal tract. With these caveats in mind, we summarize
our studies of VDRs across different species.
The structure-activity and molecular modelling data
are both consistent with a tight, hydrophobic binding
pocket for bile acids in the human VDR LBP that can
bind bile acids with an oxo or single hydroxyl group at
the C-3 position but not bile acids with substituents at
the C-7 or C-12 positions (including unnatural bile
acids with a single hydroxyl group on C-7 or C-12 and
no substituent on C-3). Molecular modeling predicts an
hVDR bile acid binding pocket that is predominantly

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

hydrophobic but with polar features that permit hydrogen bond interaction with the 3a-hydroxy or 3-oxo
group on the A ring of the bile acid and electrostatic
interactions with the bile acid side-chain as described
above. Bile acids that have hydroxyl groups on steroid
rings B and/or C (CDCA, DCA, CA, 7a-hydroxy-5bcholanic acid, 7b-hydroxy-5b-cholanic acid, and 12ahydroxy-5b-cholanic acid) do not interact favourably
with the more hydrophobic and sterically constrained
portion of the hVDR bile acid binding pocket, consistent
with the lack of activity of these bile acids in transactivation assays. On the contrary, the unsubstituted and
hydrophobic B, C, and D rings of LCA complement well
the lipophilic portion of hVDR pocket and can form
numerous van der Waals interactions. We suggested
that the unique physicochemical arrangement of the
hVDR ligand binding cavity provides the structural basis
for selective activation by LCA and its derivatives [9].
It is less clear, even with our mutagenesis studies,
exactly what changes mediate the cross-species differences in VDR pharmacology. Our studies rule out the
helix 1 - helix 3 ‘insertion’ domain as playing a role in
the cross-species differences in activation by secondary
bile acids. This insert is disordered in human and
mouse VDRs and shows highly variable sequences and
lengths across species [71-74]. Our site-directed mutagenesis experiments do confirm the previous prediction
that Arg-274 and His-397 play a key role in interacting
with bile acids [50,51]. Interestingly, Arg-274 and His397 are conserved in the bile salt-insensitive xlVDR,
indicating that other determinants underlie the differences in bile salt pharmacology between xlVDR and
bile-salt responsive VDRs.

Conclusions
Our studies provide further important evidence of the
relationship between FXR, PXR, and VDR ligand selectivity and cross-species variation in bile salt profiles. Zebrafish and the green-spotted pufferfish Tetraodon nigriviridis
provide a clear contrast in having markedly different primary bile salt profiles (planar bile alcohols for zebrafish
and sterically bent bile acids for the pufferfish) and correspondingly contrasting receptor selectivity that matches
the differences in endogenous ligands. In contrast, Tetraodon has a bile salt profile and receptor ligand selectivity
similar to humans. Our observations present an integrated
picture of co-evolution of bile salt structure and the binding pockets of three nuclear hormone receptors.
Methods
Bile sample analysis

Bile salts from the green-spotted pufferfish were analyzed by HPLC and ESI/MS/MS using methods previously described [23,75].

Page 15 of 19

Chemicals

The sources of chemicals were as follows: GW4064
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA); T-0901317 (Axxora, San
Diego, CA, USA); 3a,7a,12a,24-tetrahydroxy-5a-cholan24-sulfate (5a-petromyzonol sulfate; Toronto Research
Chemical, Inc., North York, ON, Canada); 1a,25-(OH)2vitamin D3, Nuclear Receptor Ligand Library (76 compounds known as ligands of various NHRs; BIOMOL
International, Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA). All other
commercially purchased steroids and bile salts
were obtained from Steraloids (Newport, RI, USA).
Norlithocholic acid, 3b-hydroxy-5a-cholan-24-oic acid,
3b-hydroxy-5b-cholan-24-oic acid, 7a-hydroxy-5b-cholan-24-oic acid, 7b-hydroxy-5b-cholan-24-oic acid, and
12a-hydroxy-5b-cholan-24-oic acid were generously
donated by the laboratory of A.F. Hofmann (University of
California - San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA).
Cloning and expression of full-length VDRs

Full-length VDRa sequences from medaka (Oryzias
latipes), zebrafish, and green spotted pufferfish were
identified within each species genome by conducting a
generalized BLAST search using a query sequence
representing the P box domain of human VDR located
within the highly conserved DNA binding region for the
NHR superfamily. Full-length transcripts were subsequently determined by identifying transcriptional start
and stop codons for each gene. cDNAs containing a
complete open reading frame for each gene were produced by PCR using primer sets that spanned the entire
nucleic acid sequence for each gene including start and
stop codons. cDNAs were produced from extracts of
fish liver total RNA. Livers were homogenized with 1
mL RNA Bee (Tel-Test, Inc. Friendswood, TX, USA)
using a stainless steel Polytron homogenizer (Kinematica, Lucerne, Switzerland) followed by cleanup and oncolumn DNase treatment using an RNeasy Mini Kit
(Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA).
RNA was eluted with 30 μl RNase-free water. RNA
quantity and quality were verified using an Agilent 2100
Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA,
USA) and NanoDrop ® ND-1000 spectrophotometer
(ThermoScientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). First strand
cDNA was made from total RNA (1-3 μg) and diluted
with RNase-free water to a final volume of 10 μl, and 1 μl
oligo(dT)15 (500 μg/ml; Promega, Madison, WI, USA)
and 1 μl 10 mM dNTPs were mixed with diluted RNA to
yield a final volume of 20 μl. The mix was heated to 65°C
for 5 min and chilled on ice for 2 min. Following centrifugation, 4 μl 5X first-strand buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, USA), 2 μl of 0.1 M DDT, and 1 μl RNase OUT Inhibitor (40 U/μl; Invitrogen) were added to each reaction
and heated to 37°C. Following a 2 min incubation, 1 μl
Superscript Reverse Transcriptase (200 U/μl; Invitrogen)

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

was added to each reaction and mRNA reverse transcribed at 37°C for 1 h. All reverse transcription (RT) reactions were then inactivated by incubating at 70°C for 15
min. cDNAs were stored at -20°C until PCR. PCR primers
for teleost VDRa were designed using PrimerQuest (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, USA). PCR primers were flanked by restriction sites for incorporation
and transfer between appropriate cloning and expression
vectors. For each 25-μl PCR reaction, first-strand cDNAs
were amplified using 2 μl (100-300 ng) first-strand cDNA,
9 μl RNase-free water, 0.75 μl 10 μM forward primer (0.3
μM), 0.75 μl 10 μM reverse primer (0.3 μM), and 12.5 μl
2X Advantage Taq PCR Master Mix (Clontech, Mountain
View, CA, USA). PCR reaction conditions were: 95°C for
1.5 min followed by 35 cycles of 94°C for 15 s, 55°C for 30
s, and 72°C for 1 min. PCR products for each teleost
VDRa sequence were cloned into the TA cloning vector
pCR2.1 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) as per manufacturer’s
suggestions. VDR’s were subsequently excised from pCR
2.1 using EcoRI and BamHI and inserted unidirectionally
into the expression vector pSG5. Proper orientation of
VDRa’s within the vector was confirmed by PCR screening and sequencing in both directions.
HepG2 cells were cultured in T75 flasks with vented
caps (Corning, Corning, NY) using MEM containing
head-inactivated fetal bovine serum (10%), 1X sodium
pyruvate, 1X nonessential amino acids, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were maintained at 37°C with 5%
CO2 and split regularly at 70-80% confluency. For transient transfection, HepG2 cells were seeded at a density
of 1 × 105 cells per well in 24 well plates in antibioticfree MEM. Wells were transfected over night with either
empty pSG5 vector (control), medaka VDRa, zebrafish
VDRa, or Tetraodon VDRa. Each well contained 299 ng
pSG5-VDRa for either (medaka, zebrafish, or Tetraodon), 64 ng hCYP3A4-Luc reporter construct (XREM),
and 15 ng of the Renilla normalizing plasmid (pRLCMV). Luciferase reporter assay experiments were
performed as previously described [58].
Plasmids containing human organic anion transporting
polypeptide (Oatp1a1; Slco1a1), as well as the reporter
construct tk-UAS-Luc and the ‘empty’ vector PM2, were
generously provided by SA Kliewer, JT Moore, and LB
Moore (GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC,
USA). To permit comparison between species and to
avoid mismatching of non-mammalian receptors with
mammalian retinoid X receptor, co-factors, and chromatin remodeling factors, all receptors were studied as
LBD/GAL4 chimeras. For the GAL4/LBD expression
constructs, the reporter plasmid is tk-UAS-Luc, which
contains GAL4 DNA binding elements driving luciferase
expression. The cloning of LBDs from hFXR, hVDR,
mouse VDR (mVDR), and zebrafish VDR has been previously reported [6,7,9].

Page 16 of 19

The LBD of chicken VDR was cloned from RNA
extracted from the LMH cell line. The LBD of Xenopus
laevis VDR was cloned from RNA extracted from the
A6 cell line. The LBDs of tnFXR, tnVDR, and tnPXR
were cloned from total RNA extracted from Tetraodon
liver using sequence information from the draft Tetraodon nigriviridis genome [76]. The LBDs of chVDR
(amino acid residues 113-451), xlVDR (amino acid residues 91-422), tnFXR (amino acid residues 180-463),
tnVDR (amino acid residues 91-426), and tnPXR (amino
acid residues 202-483) were inserted into the pM2GAL4 vector to create GAL4/LBD chimeras.
Site-directed mutations of mVDR were performed using
the QuikChange II mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla,
CA, USA). All mutations were confirmed by sequencing of
both DNA strands. To explore the importance of the H1H3 insert in ligand selectivity, four constructs were created.
Thus, we generated hVDR/Δins that lacked amino acid
residues 165-218 (hVDR/Δins) and a hVDR construct
where the insert domain was replaced with the insertion
domain from bile acid-insensitive xlVDR (hVDR/xlVDRins;
hVDR residues 158-223 replaced by xlVDR residues 160218). The analogous constructs were also created for
xlVDR: one lacking the insertion domain (xlVDR/Δins;
missing amino acid residues 166-211) and the other
(xlVDR/hVDRins; xlVDR residues 160-218 replaced by
hVDR residues 158-223). The chimeras were generated by
synthesis of double-stranded DNA (Genscript, Piscataway,
NJ) which was inserted into the pM2-GAL4 vector.
Cell lines

The creation of a HepG2 (human liver) cell line stably
expressing the human Na+-taurocholate cotransporter
(NTCP; SLC10A1) has been previously reported [7].
HepG2-NTCP cells were grown in modified Eagle’s medium-a containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. The cells were grown at 37°C in 5%
CO2. The chicken LMH hepatoma cell line (ATCC, Manassus, VA, USA) was grown in Waymouth’s MB 752/1
medium (ATCC) with 10 fetal bovine serum. The Xenopus laevis A6 kidney cell line (ATCC) was grown in 75%
NCTC 109 medium, 15% distilled water, and 10% fetal
bovine serum at 26°C in 2% CO2. Except as noted above,
all media and media supplements for the HepG2 and A6
cell lines were obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA,
USA). Co-transfections and transactivations assays were
performed as previously described [77]. The maximal
activators and their concentrations were as follows:
chVDR, xlVDR, and tnVDR - 200 nM 1a,25-(OH) 2 vitamin D 3 ; tnFXR - 5 μM GW4064; tnPXR - 50 μM
5a-androstan-3a-ol. All comparisons to maximal activators were done within the same microplate. Luciferase
data were normalized to the internal b-galactosidase control and represent means ± SD of the assays.

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

Common features pharmacophore development and
database screening

Computational molecular modeling studies were carried
out using Catalyst™in Discovery Studio 2.5.5 (Accelrys,
San Diego, CA, USA) by methods previously described
[29]. Common features pharmacophores were developed
based on the compounds tested against tnFXR, tnPXR
and tnVDR using the HipHop method [78,79]. A HipHop
pharmacophore attempts to describe the arrangement of
key features that are important for biological activity.
Molecular modeling studies

A structural model of the LBDs of the tnFXR and
tnPXR were constructed using the Molecular Operating Environment (MOE; Chemical Computating
Group, Montreal, Canada) Homology Model module.
The modeling template used for FXR is the published
crystal structure of rat FXR in complex with 6a-ethylchenodeoxycholic acid (PDB ID = 1OSV) [59] (this
structure was chosen because it has bound bile acid
unlike available crystal structures of hFXR). The template for PXR is hPXR co-crystallized with SR12813
(PDB ID = 1nrl) [33]. Several energy minimizationbased refinement procedures were implemented on the
initial model, and the quality of the final model was
confirmed by the WHATIF-Check program. Estimation
of the volume of the LBP for the crystallographic
structures and homology models described above were
determined using CASTp http://sts.bioengr.uic.edu/
castp/calculation.php [80].
Molecular docking studies were performed by the
GOLD docking program [81]. In addition to the docking
studies with tnPXR and tnFXR, LCA was docked into
the crystal structure for human VDR (PDB accession
number 1DB1). During the docking process, the protein
was held fixed while full conformational flexibility was
allowed for ligands. For each ligand, 30 independent
docking runs were performed to achieve the consensus
orientation in the LBP.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Analyses of biliary bile salts from the greenspotted pufferfish.
Additional file 2: Activation data for Tetraodon FXR and PXR by bile
salts, steroids, and synthetic ligands.
Additional file 3: Activation data for VDRs, including the sitedirected mutants of mouse VDR.
Additional file 4: The ligand binding pocket of human VDR. Surface
representation of human VDR ligand binding pocket.
Additional file 5: Amino acid sequence alignment for VDRs
(including the four chimeric constructs involving the H1-H3
insertion domain) and human PXR.
Additional file 6: Data for pharmacophore modeling of Tetraodon
nuclear hormone receptors.

Page 17 of 19

Additional file 7: Fish phylogeny, bile salt variation, and nuclear
hormone receptor ligand specificity.

Acknowledgements
MDK is supported by K08-GM074238 from the National Institutes of Health.
SWK is supported by the National Science Foundation NSF0842510. SE kindly
acknowledges Accelrys for providing Discovery Studio for use in this work.
Author details
1
Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa
City, IA, 52242, USA. 2Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15261 USA. 3Department of Pharmacology, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. 4Department of Medicine, University of California
- San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093 USA. 5Department of Environmental and
Molecular Toxicology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695,
USA. 6Collaborations in Chemistry, Jenkintown, PA 19046, USA. 7Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201,
USA.
Authors’ contributions
NA and SE performed molecular modelling studies, including those that
provided the basis for the site-directed mutagenesis experiments. LRH
performed the analysis of bile salts of the green-spotted pufferfish. EMK and
SWK performed the cloning, expression, and analysis of full-length VDRs in
three actinopterygian fish species. EJR and MDK cloned Tetraodon FXR,
Tetraodon PXR, chicken VDR, Xenopus laevis VDR, and Tetraodon VDR, as well
as all site-directed mutants of mouse VDR. MDK performed the function
assays of all GAL4/LBD chimeric receptors and drafted the manuscript. All
authors contributed to, read, and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 20 September 2010 Accepted: 3 February 2011
Published: 3 February 2011
References
1. Huang P, Chandra V, Rastinejad F: Structural overview of the nuclear
receptor superfamily: insights into physiology and therapeutics. Annu
Rev Physiol 2010, 72:247-272.
2. McEwan IJ: Nuclear receptors: one big family. Methods Mol Biol 2009,
505:3-18.
3. Steinmetz ACU, Renaud J-P, Moras D: Binding of ligands and activation of
transcription by nuclear receptors. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2001,
30:329-359.
4. Moore LB, Maglich JM, McKee DD, Wisely B, Willson TM, Kliewer SA, Lambert MH,
Moore JT: Pregnane X receptor (PXR), constitutive androstane receptor (CAR),
and benzoate X receptor (BXR) define three pharmacologically distinct
classes of nuclear receptors. Mol Endocrinol 2002, 16:977-986.
5. Moore LB, Parks DJ, Jones SA, Bledsoe RK, Consler TG, Stimmel JB,
Goodwin B, Liddle C, Blanchard SG, Willson TM, et al: Orphan nuclear
receptors constitutive androstane receptor and pregnane X receptor
share xenobiotic and steroid ligands. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:15122-15127.
6. Krasowski MD, Yasuda K, Hagey LR, Schuetz EG: Evolutionary selection
across the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily with a focus on the
NR1I subfamily (vitamin D, pregnane X, and constitutive androstane
receptors). Nucl Recept 2005, 3:2.
7. Krasowski MD, Yasuda K, Hagey LR, Schuetz EG: Evolution of the pregnane
X receptor: adaptation to cross-species differences in biliary bile salts.
Mol Endocrinol 2005, 19:1720-1739.
8. Iyer M, Reschly EJ, Krasowski MD: Functional evolution of the pregnane X
receptor. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2006, 2:381-387.
9. Reschly EJ, Ai N, Ekins S, Welsh WJ, Hagey LR, Hofmann AF, Krasowski MD:
Evolution of the bile salt nuclear receptor FXR in vertebrates. J Lipid Res
2008, 49:1577-1587.
10. Reschly EJ, Bainy ACD, Mattos JJ, Hagey LR, Bahary N, Mada SR, Ou J,
Venkataramanan R, Krasowski MD: Functional evolution of the vitamin D
and pregnane X receptors. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:222.
11. Reschly EJ, Krasowski MD: Evolution and function of the NR1I nuclear
hormone receptor subfamily (VDR, PXR, and CAR) with respect to

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

12.

13.

14.
15.
16.
17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

metabolism of xenobiotics and endogenous compounds. Curr Drug
Metab 2006, 7:349-365.
Schuetz EG, Strom S, Yasuda K, Lecureur V, Assem M, Brimer C, Lamba J,
Kim RB, Ramachandran V, Komoroski BJ, et al: Disrupted bile acid
homeostasis reveals an unexpected interaction among nuclear hormone
receptors, transporters, and cytochrome P450. J Biol Chem 2001,
276:39411-39418.
Hofmann AF, Hagey LR, Krasowski MD: Bile salts of vertebrates: structural
variation and possible evolutionary significance. J Lipid Res 2010,
51:226-246.
Hofmann AF, Eckmann L: How bile acids confer gut mucosal protection
against bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:4333-4334.
Hofmann AF, Hagey LR: Bile acids: chemistry, pathochemistry, biology,
pathobiology, and therapeutics. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008, 65:2461-2483.
Haslewood GAD: Bile salt evolution. J Lipid Res 1967, 8:535-550.
Moschetta A, Xu F, Hagey LR, van Berge Henegouwen GP, van Erpecum KJ,
Brouwers JF, Cohen JC, Bierman M, Hobbs HH, Steinbach JH, et al: A
phylogenetic survey of biliary lipids in vertebrates. J Lipid Res 2005,
46:2221-2232.
Une M, Hoshita T: Natural occurrence and chemical synthesis of bile
alcohols, higher bile acids, and short side chain bile acids. Hiroshima J
Med Sci 1994, 43:37-67.
Norlin M, Wikvall K: Enzymes in the conversion of cholesterol into bile
acids. Curr Mol Med 2007, 7:199-218.
Russell DW: The enzymes, regulation, and genetics of bile acid synthesis.
Annu Rev Biochem 2003, 72:137-174.
Hofmann AF: Detoxification of lithocholic acid, a toxic bile acid:
relevance to drug hepatotoxicity. Drug Metab Rev 2004, 36:703-722.
Goto T, Holzinger F, Hagey LR, Cerrè C, Ton-Nu H-T, Schteingart CD,
Steinbach JH, Shneider BL, Hofmann AF: Physicochemical and
physiological properties of 5a-cyprinol sulfate, the toxic bile salt of
cyprinid fish. J Lipid Res 2003, 44:1643-1651.
Hagey LR, Møller PR, Hofmann AF, Krasowski MD: Diversity of bile salts in
fish and amphibians: evolution of a complex biochemical pathway.
Physiol Biochem Zool 2010, 83:308-321.
Hagey LR, Vidal N, Hofmann AF, Krasowski MD: Evolutionary diversity of
bile salts in reptiles and mammals, including analysis of ancient human
and extinct giant ground sloth coprolites. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:133.
Hagey LR, Vidal N, Hofmann AF, Krasowski MD: Complex evolution of bile
salts in birds. Auk 2010, 127:820-831.
Kliewer SA, Willson TM: Regulation of xenobiotic and bile acid metabolism
by the nuclear pregnane X receptor. J Lipid Res 2002, 43:359-364.
Orans J, Teotico DG, Redinbo MR: The nuclear xenobiotic receptor PXR:
recent insights and new challenges. Mol Endocrinol 2005, 19:2891-2900.
Sonoda J, Xie W, Rosenfeld JM, Barwick JL, Guzelian PS, Evans RM:
Regulation of a xenobiotics sulfonation cascade by nuclear pregnane X
receptor (PXR). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:13801-13806.
Ekins S, Reschly EJ, Hagey LR, Krasowski MD: Evolution of pharmacologic
specificity in the pregnane X receptor. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:103.
Chrencik JE, Orans J, Moore LB, Xue Y, Peng L, Collins JL, Wisely GB,
Lambert MH, Kliewer SA, Redinbo MR: Structural disorder in the complex
of human PXR and the macrolide antibiotic rifampicin. Mol Endocrinol
2005, 19:1125-1134.
Watkins RE, Davis-Searles PR, Lambert MH, Redinbo MR: Coactivator
binding promotes the specific interaction between ligand and the
pregnane X receptor. J Mol Biol 2003, 331:815-828.
Watkins RE, Maglich JM, Moore LB, Wisely GB, Noble SM, Davis-Searles PR,
Lambert MH, Kliewer SA, Redinbo MR: 2.1 Å crystal structure of human
PXR in complex with the St. John’s wort compound hyperforin.
Biochemistry 2003, 42:1430-1438.
Watkins RE, Wisely GB, Moore LB, Collins JL, Lambert MH, Williams SP, Willson TM,
Kliewer SA, Redinbo MR: The human nuclear xenobiotic receptor PXR: structural
determinants of directed promiscuity. Science 2001, 292:2329-2333.
Xue Y, Chao E, Zuercher WJ, Willson TM, Collins JL, Redinbo MR: Crystal
structure of PXR-T1317 complex provides a scaffold to examine the
potential for receptor antagonism. Bioorg Med Chem 2007, 15:2156-2166.
Xue Y, Moore LB, Orans J, Peng L, Bencharit S, Kliewer SA, Redinbo MR:
Crystal structure of PXR-estradiol complex provides insights into
endobiotic recognition. Mol Endocrinol 2007, 21:1028-1038.
Kalaany NY, Mangelsdorf DJ: LXRs and FXR: the Yin and Yang of
cholesterol and fat metabolism. Annu Rev Physiol 2006, 68:159-191.

Page 18 of 19

37. Makishima M, Okamato AY, Repa JJ, Tu H, Learned RM, Luk A, Hull MV,
Lustig KD, Mangelsdorf DJ, Shan B: Identification of a nuclear receptor for
bile acids. Science 1999, 284:1362-1365.
38. Parks DJ, Blanchard SG, Bledsoe RK, Chandra G, Consler TG, Kliewer SA,
Stimmel JB, Willson TM, Zavacki AM, Moore DD, et al: Bile acids: natural
ligands for an orphan nuclear receptor. Science 1999, 284:1365-1368.
39. Wang H, Chen J, Hollister K, Sowers LC, Forman BM: Endogenous bile
acids are ligands for the nuclear receptor FXR/BAR. Mol Cell 1999,
3:543-553.
40. Otte K, Kranz H, Kober I, Thompson P, Hoefer M, Haubold B, Remmel B,
Voss H, Kaiser C, Albers M, et al: Identification of farnesoid X receptor b as
a novel mammalian nuclear receptor sensing lanosterol. Mol Cell Biol
2003, 23:864-872.
41. Seo Y-W, Sanyal S, Kim H-J, Won DH, An J-Y, Amano T, Zavacki AM,
Kwon H-B, Shi Y-B, Kim W-S, et al: FOR, a novel orphan nuclear receptor
related to farnesoid X receptor. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:17836-17844.
42. Dusso AS, Brown AJ, Slatopolsky E: Vitamin D. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
2005, 289:F8-F28.
43. Holick MF: Evolution and function of vitamin D. Recent Results Cancer Res
2003, 164:3-28.
44. Kira M, Kobayashi T, Yoshikawa K: Vitamin D and the skin. J Dermatol 2003,
30:429-437.
45. Moro JR, Iwata M, von Andriano UH: Vitamin effects on the immune
system: vitamins A and D take centre stage. Nat Rev Immunol 2008,
8:685-698.
46. Bertrand S, Thisse B, Tavares R, Sachs L, Chaumot A, Bardet PL, Escriva H,
Duffraisse M, Marchand O, Safi R, et al: Unexpected novel relational links
uncovered by extensive developmental profiling of nuclear receptor
expression. PLoS Genet 2007, 3:e188.
47. Jaillon O, Aury J-M, Brunet F, Petit J-L, Strange-Thomann N, Mauceli E,
Bouneau L, Fischer C, Ozouf-Costaz C, Bernot A, et al: Genome duplication
in the telost fish Tetraodon nigroviridis reveals the early vertebrate
proto-karyotype. Nature 2004, 431:946-956.
48. Maglich JM, Caravella JA, Lambert MH, Willson TM, Moore JT,
Ramamurthy L: The first completed genome sequence from a teleost fish
(Fugu rubripes) adds significant diversity to the nuclear receptor
superfamily. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:4051-4058.
49. Howarth DL, Law SH, Barnes B, Hall JM, Hinton DE, Moore L, Maglich JM,
Moore JT, Kullman SW: Paralogous vitamin D receptors in teleosts:
transition of nuclear receptor function. Endocrinology 2008, 149:2411-2422.
50. Adachi R, Honma Y, Masuno H, Karana K, Shimomura I, Yamada S,
Makishima M: Selective activation of vitamin D receptor by lithocholic
acid acetate, a bile acid derivative. J Lipid Res 2005, 46:46-57.
51. Adachi R, Shulman AI, Yamamoto K, Shimomura I, Yamada S,
Mangelsdorf DJ, Makishima M: Structural determinants for vitamin D
responses to endocrine and xenobiotic signals. Mol Endocrinol 2004,
18:43-52.
52. Makishima M, Lu TT, Xie W, Whitfield GK, Domoto H, Evans RM,
Haussler MR, Mangelsdorf DJ: Vitamin D receptor as an intestinal bile acid
sensor. Science 2002, 296:1313-1316.
53. Chow EC, Maeng HJ, Liu S, Khan AA, Groothuis GM, Pang KS: 1alpha,25dihydroxyvitamin D(3) triggered vitamin D receptor and farnesoid X
receptor-like effects in rat intestine and liver in vivo. Biopharm Drug
Dispos 2009.
54. Matsubara T, Yoshinari K, Aoyama K, Sugawara M, Sekiya Y, Nagata K,
Yamazoe Y: Role of vitamin D receptor in the lithocholic acid-mediated
CYP3A induction in vitro and in vivo. Drug Metab Dispos 2008,
36:2058-2063.
55. Pavek P, Pospechova K, Svecova L, Syrova Z, Stejskalova L, Blazkova J, Dvorak Z,
Blahos J: Intestinal cell-specific vitamin D receptor (VDR)-mediated
transcriptional regulation of CYP3A4 gene. Biochem Pharmacol 2009.
56. Thummel KE, Brimer C, Yasuda K, Thottassery J, Senn T, Lin Y, Ishizuka H,
Kharasch E, Schuetz J, Schuetz E: Transcriptional control of intestinal
cytochrome P-4503A by 1a,25-dihydroxy vitamin D3. Mol Pharmacol 2001,
60:1399-1406.
57. Hagey LR, Iida T, Ogawa S, Kakiyama G, Asahina K, Mushiake K, Goto T,
Mano N, Goto J, Krasowski MD, et al: Major biliary bile acids of the
Medaka (Oryzias latipes): 25R- and 25S epimers of 3α,7α,12α-trihydroxy5β-cholestanoic acid. Zool Sci 2010, 27:565-573.
58. Howarth DL, Hagey LR, Law SHW, Ai N, Krasowski MD, Ekins S, Moore JT,
Kollitz EM, Hinton DE, Kullman SW: Two farnesoid X receptor a isoforms in

Krasowski et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/5

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.
65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.
71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.
77.

78.

79.

80.

Japanese medaka (Orzias latipes) are differentially activated in vitro.
Aquat Toxicol 2010, 98:245-255.
Mi L-Z, Devarakonda S, Harp JM, Han Q, Pellicciari R, Willson TM,
Khorasanizadeh S, Rastinejad F: Structural basis for bile acid binding and
activation of the nuclear receptor FXR. Mol Cell 2003, 11:1093-1100.
Downes M, Verdecia MA, Roecker AJ, Hughes R, Hogenesch JB, KastWoelbern HR, Bowman ME, Ferrer J-L, Anisfeld AM, Edwards PA, et al: A
chemical, genetic, and structural analysis of the nuclear bile acid
receptor FXR. Mol Cell 2003, 11:1079-1092.
Houck KA, Borchert KM, Hepler CD, Thomas JS, Bramlett KS, Michael LF,
Burris TP: T0901317 is a dual LXR/FXR agonist. Mol Genet Metab 2004,
83:184-187.
Mitro N, Vargas L, Romeo R, Koder A, Saez E: T0901317 is a potent PXR
ligand: implications for the biology ascribed to LXR. FEBS Lett 2007,
581:1721-1726.
Blumberg B, Kang H, Bolado J, Chen H, Craig AG, Moreno TA, Umesano K,
Perlmann T, De Robertis EM, Evans RM: BXR, an embryonic orphan nuclear
receptor activated by a novel class of endogenous benzoate
metabolites. Genes Dev 1998, 12:1269-1277.
Ekins S, Erickson JA: A pharmacophore for human pregnane X receptor
ligands. Drug Metab Dispos 2002, 30:96-99.
Ekins S, Kortagere S, Iyer M, Reschly EJ, Lill MA, Redinbo MR, Krasowski MD:
Challenges predicting ligand-receptor interactions of promiscuous
proteins: the nuclear receptor PXR. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000594.
Krasowski MD, Ni A, Hagey LR, Ekins S: Evolution of promiscuous nuclear
hormone receptors: LXR, FXR, VDR, PXR, and CAR. Mol Cell Endocrinol
2010.
Howarth DL, Law SH, Law JM, Mondon JA, Kullman SW, Hinton DE:
Exposure to the synthetic FXR agonist GW4064 causes alterations in
gene expression and sublethal hepatotoxicity in eleutheroembryo
medaka (Oryzias latipes). Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2010, 243:111-121.
Cai SY, Xiong L, Wray CG, Ballatori N, Boyer JL: The farnesoid X receptor,
FXRa/NR1H4, acquired ligand specificity for bile salts late in vertebrate
evolution. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2007, 293:R1400-R1409.
Bachmann K, Patel H, Batayneh Z, Slama J, White D, Posey J, Ekins S,
Gold D, Sambucetti L: PXR and the regulation of apoA1 and HDLcholesterol in rodents. Pharmacol Res 2004, 50:237-246.
Schuster D, Langer T: The identification of ligand features essential for
PXR activation. J Med Chem 2005, 45:431-439.
Ciesielski F, Rochel N, Mitschler A, Kouzmenko A, Moras D: Structural
investigation of the ligand binding domain of the zebrafish VDR in
complexes with 1alpha,25(OH)2D3 and Gemini: purification,
crystallization and preliminary X-ray diffraction analysis. J Steroid Biochem
Mol Biol 2004, 89-90:55-59.
Ciesielski F, Rochel N, Moras D: Adaptability of the Vitamin D nuclear
receptor to the synthetic ligand Gemini: remodelling the LBP with one
side chain rotation. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2007, 103:235-242.
Rochel N, Tocchini-Valentini G, Egea PF, Juntunen K, Garnier J-M, Vihko P,
Moras D: Functional and structural characterization of the insertion
region in the ligand binding domain of the vitamin D nuclear receptor.
Eur J Biochem 2001, 268:971-979.
Rochel N, Wurtz JM, Mitschler A, Klaholz B, Moras D: The crystal structure
of the nuclear receptor for vitamin D bound to its natural ligand. Mol
Cell 2000, 5:173-179.
Rossi SS, Converse JL, Hofmann AF: High pressure liquid chromatography
analysis of conjugated bile acids in human bile: simultaneous resolution
of sulfated and unsulfated lithocholyl amidates and the common
conjugated bile acids. J Lipid Res 1987, 28:589-595.
Ensembl genome browser. [http://www.ensembl.org].
Reschly EJ, Ai N, Welsh WJ, Ekins S, Hagey LR, Krasowski MD: Ligand
specificity and evolution of liver X receptors. Journal of Steroid
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 2008, 110:83-94.
Clement OO, Mehl AT: HipHop: pharmacophore based on multiple
common-feature alignments. In Pharmacophore perception, development,
and use in drug design. Edited by: Guner OF. San Diego: IUL; 2000:69-84.
Diao L, Ekins S, Polli JE: Novel inhibitors of human organic cation/
carnitine transporter (hOCTN2) via computational modeling and in vitro
testing. Pharm Res 2009, 26:1890-1900.
Liang J, Edelsbrunner H, Woodward C: Anatomy of protein pockets and
cavities: measurement of binding site geometry and implications for
ligand design. Protein Sci 1998, 7:1884-1897.

Page 19 of 19

81. Jones G, Willett P, Glen RC, Leach AR, Taylor R: Development and
validation of a genetic algorithm for flexible docking. J Mol Biol 1997,
267:727-748.
doi:10.1186/1471-2091-12-5
Cite this article as: Krasowski et al.: The evolution of farnesoid X, vitamin
D, and pregnane X receptors: insights from the green-spotted pufferfish
(Tetraodon nigriviridis) and other non-mammalian species. BMC
Biochemistry 2011 12:5.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
