<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Differential distribution of a SINE element in the Entamoeba histolytica and Entamoeba dispar genomes: Role of the LINE-encoded endonuclease</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-267"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Vandana Kumari"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Differential distribution of a SINE element in the
Entamoeba histolytica and Entamoeba dispar
genomes: Role of the LINE-encoded
endonuclease
Vandana Kumari1†, Rahul Sharma1†, Vijay P Yadav1, Abhishek K Gupta1, Alok Bhattacharya2 and
Sudha Bhattacharya1*

Abstract
Background: Entamoeba histolytica and Entamoeba dispar are closely related protistan parasites but while E.
histolytica can be invasive, E. dispar is completely non pathogenic. Transposable elements constitute a significant
portion of the genome in these species; there being three families of LINEs and SINEs. These elements can
profoundly influence the expression of neighboring genes. Thus their genomic location can have important
phenotypic consequences. A genome-wide comparison of the location of these elements in the E. histolytica and
E. dispar genomes has not been carried out. It is also not known whether the retrotransposition machinery works
similarly in both species. The present study was undertaken to address these issues.
Results: Here we extracted all genomic occurrences of full-length copies of EhSINE1 in the E. histolytica genome and
matched them with the homologous regions in E. dispar, and vice versa, wherever it was possible to establish synteny.
We found that only about 20% of syntenic sites were occupied by SINE1 in both species. We checked whether the
different genomic location in the two species was due to differences in the activity of the LINE-encoded endonuclease
which is required for nicking the target site. We found that the endonucleases of both species were essentially very
similar, both in their kinetic properties and in their substrate sequence specificity. Hence the differential distribution of
SINEs in these species is not likely to be influenced by the endonuclease. Further we found that the physical properties
of the DNA sequences adjoining the insertion sites were similar in both species.
Conclusions: Our data shows that the basic retrotransposition machinery is conserved in these sibling species.
SINEs may indeed have occupied all of the insertion sites in the genome of the common ancestor of E. histolytica
and E. dispar but these may have been subsequently lost from some locations. Alternatively, SINE expansion took
place after the divergence of the two species. The absence of SINE1 in 80% of syntenic loci could affect the
phenotype of the two species, including their pathogenic properties, which needs to be explored.

Background
Transposable elements are found in the genomes of
almost all organisms, and are of ancient origin. Their
ability to insert into new genomic locations makes them
potent agents of phenotypic change, including various
known pathologies [1-3]. Transposons are also found in
* Correspondence: sbjnu110@gmail.com
† Contributed equally
1
School of Environmental Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
110067, India
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

parasites, for example the human enteric pathogen,
Entamoeba histolytica, a unicellular eukaryote contains
three families of the autonomous non long terminal
repeat (LTR) retrotransposon called EhLINE and its
nonautonomous partner EhSINE [4-8]. The genome of
the morphologically indistinguishable sibling species
Entamoeba dispar, (which resides in the human colon
but is nonpathogenic), also contains three families of
EdLINEs and their partner EdSINEs [6,7,9]. It would be
of interest to know whether these retrotransposons have
any influence on pathogenesis-related gene expression.

© 2011 Kumari et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

Page 2 of 12

LINEs and SINEs are known to influence the expression of neighboring genes by a variety of mechanisms,
for example by providing alternative promoters, splicing
and polyadenylation sites and by heterochromatinization
[10-13]. For this reason it is important to investigate
whether these elements are located at syntenic positions
in the E. histolytica and E. dispar genomes. Earlier
investigations with a limited number of genomic loci
showed that the sites occupied by EhSINE1 in the E.
histolytica genome were empty at homologous regions
in E. dispar [14] and conversely the sites occupied by
EdSINE1 in the E. dispar genome were empty in E. histolytica [9]. Although an exhaustive genome-wide survey
of LINEs and SINEs in Entamoeba species has been
reported [6], a genome-wide comparison of the occupancy of these elements at syntenic loci in E. histolytica
and E. dispar has not been carried out. Here we present
results of a genome-wide comparison of EhSINE1 and
EdSINE1 in the two genomes. In addition we address
the question whether the differences in genomic locations of retrotransposons in these two organisms could
be due to inherent differences in the retrotransposition
machinery, particularly in the properties of the LINEencoded endonuclease. Target primed reverse transcription is the mechanism by which non-LTR retrotransposons insert in the genome [15]. Since retrotransposition
is initiated by the element-encoded endonuclease (EN)
making a nick at the bottom strand of the site of insertion, an important determinant of target site specificity
could be the preferred nucleotide sequences recognized
by the EN. We have earlier shown that the EhLINE1encoded EN (Eh EN) nicks preferentially at the consensus sequence 5’-GTATT-3’, between A-T and T-T. Here
we have investigated whether the endonuclease domain
encoded by EdLINE1 (Ed EN) has a different target site
specificity which could account for the lack of synteny
in the location of SINEs in the two genomes.

2008) was used. These were downloaded from NCBI
and the genes upstream and downstream of SINE1 elements in each of the species were located using perl
coding. Finally the orthologues of these genes were
searched in the other species using BLAST [16]. The
syntenic loci were checked to see whether SINE1 was
present there in both species. To check the homology at
Scaffold level we used GATA, a graphic alignment tool
for comparative sequence analysis [17]. Syntenic loci
were further examined to check for the presence of
SINE in both species.
DNA sequence features of the SINE1 insertion sites
were computed by extracting flanking 80 bp sequences
(40 bp upstream and downstream) from the respective
genomic sites in E. histolytica and E. dispar, using perl
scripting. “DNA SCANNER” was used as previously
described [18] to calculate the DNA parameters, which
include T rule, bendability, propeller twist, stacking
energy, duplex stability, DNA denaturation, proteininduced deformability, nucleosomal positioning and
bending energy [18].

Methods

Expression and purification of recombinant Ed EN

Comparative Analysis of E. histolytica and E. dispar with
respect to the occupancy of SINE1 elements

This was done essentially as described for Eh EN [19].
The pET-Ed-EN construct was transformed in Escherichia coli BL-21 (DE3). Cells were grown in 200 ml of
Luria Broth at 30°C to OD600 of 0.6. For induction of
hexa-His-tagged Ed EN, IPTG was used to a final concentration of 0.5 mM and the cells were further incubated for 2 hour. The protein was purified by Ni 2
+
-nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose (Qiagen) affinity chromatography and eluted with 250 mM of imidazole. The
eluted fractions were checked for the protein by resolving on a 12% SDS PAGE; these fractions were pooled,
dialyzed and stored at -20°C. The enzyme activity of Ed
EN was measured under the same conditions used for
Eh EN, i.e. pH 7.0, at 37°C, and at Mg2+ and NaCl concentrations of 10 and 100 mM respectively [20].

Since the Entamoeba genome has not yet been
assembled completely for any species, we have done all
of our comparative analysis on the basis of SINE1 elements located on the scaffolds. The genome sequence of
E. histolytica having 1529 scaffolds and E. dispar having
12258 scaffolds was downloaded [NCBI:AAFB00000000,
NCBI:AANV00000000]. A total of 393 EhSINE1 and
302 EdSINE1 elements having lengths greater than 450
bp were located. The EhSINE1 sequences were from
Huntley et al [4] and the EdSINE1 sequences were from
the feature table file of E. dispar (updated on Dec. 8,
2008). For genes flanking the EhSINE1 sequences the
feature table file of E. histolytica (updated on April 17,

Construction and Cloning of Ed EN

The consensus amino acid sequences of the E. dispar
and E. histolytica endonuclease domains, Ed EN and Eh
EN respectively were compared. A total of 23 amino
acid positions were different of which 12 amino acid
residues were changed in the Eh EN sequence [19] and
11 amino acid residues (synonymous) were left
unchanged to obtain the Ed EN sequence. The desired
mutations were introduced either by means of overlapping PCR (Additional file 1 Figure S1) or by site-directed mutagenesis. The primer pairs used are listed
(Additional file 2 Table S1). The Ed EN sequence thus
obtained (782 bp) was cloned into the EcoRI-NotI site of
pET30(b) vector (Novagen) to yield the pET-Ed-EN
construct.

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

Western blotting

The whole cell lysate of induced and uninduced BL-21
(DE3) cells was resolved on 12% SDS PAGE and transferred to PVDF membrane by semidry transfer method
according to manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad). The
membrane was blocked overnight with 5% skimmed
milk in PBS-T (Phosphate buffer saline with 0.1%
Tween 20) and subsequently incubated with anti-His
antibody or anti-Eh EN antibody for 1 hour followed by
three times washing with PBS-T. The membrane was
further incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody and again washed with PBS-T
thrice. The protein was detected by the Chemiluminescent HRP Substrate (Millipore).
Nicking assay of radiolabeled 176 bp substrate

The 176 bp DNA fragment was radiolabeled as
described earlier [19]. The labeled DNA was resolved on
6% native gel, the band was visualized by ethidium bromide staining, excised from the gel and eluted by crush
and soak method [21]. The nicking assay was carried
out as described for Eh EN and products were resolved
by denaturing electrophoresis on 6-8% polyacrylamide
gels containing 7 M Urea [19]. The gels were dried and
autoradiographed in the PhosphorImager (Fujifilm).
Nicking assay of pBS DNA

Supercoiled pBluescript (pBS) plasmid DNA was purified by plasmid purification kit (Qiagen). 2 nM of purified Ed EN was incubated with 2-75 nM of supercoiled
pBS DNA. The reaction was performed under the conditions employed for Eh EN [20], at 37°C for 8 minutes
and was stopped with 25 mM EDTA. Products were
separated on 0.8% agarose gel containing 0.5 μg of ethidium bromide/ml. Under this condition the supercoiled
DNA migrated fastest, followed by linear and open circular form. The intensity of supercoiled DNA band was
measured as a function of time, which gave the measure
of the disappearance of supercoiled DNA. Quantification
was done by densitometry; the kinetic constants Vmax,
K m and k cat were determined as described [22]. The
data obtained were the average of three independent
determinations.

Results and Discussion
Comparative analysis of EhSINE1-containing regions of E.
histolytica genome and syntenic regions of E. dispar

A total of 393 full-length SINE1 elements (length > 450
bp) were identified in E. histolytica by genome sequence
analysis. Syntenic regions corresponding to each of the
EhSINE1-containing loci were located in E. dispar. To
score for synteny entire scaffolds were matched in the
two species using the program GATA. In 88% of cases
where synteny was found, the syntenic regions matched

Page 3 of 12

throughout the scaffold, while in the rest synteny was
not visible in some patches. The presence or absence of
any of the EdSINEs (EdSINE1, 2, 3) was determined at
syntenic loci of E. dispar. The results are summarized in
Figure 1A. Of the 393 EhSINE1-containing loci of E.
histolytica, syntenic regions in E. dispar could be predicted with certainty for 180 loci. Only these loci were
included for further study - thus removing the contribution of differential sequence coverage in our comparative analysis. Loci not represented in both species due to
differences in genome coverage, or difficulty in alignment, have not been included. In addition, as stated
above, the synteny stretched for the entire length of the
scaffold. Of these 180 loci, SINEs were absent in E. dispar at 114 loci, were present at 24 loci and their presence or absence could not be determined at 42 loci.
Amongst the 114 loci where SINEs were absent, no
repeat element of any type was found at 96 loci (representative example shown in Additional file 3 Figure S2),
while LINE or EdRC4 sequences were found at 18 loci.
Amongst the 24 loci that contained a SINE, 18 had
EdSINE1 (one representative example is shown in Figure
2 and the rest in Additional file 4 Figure S3-S19), one
had a truncated copy of EdSINE1, and five had EdSINE2
and/or EdSINE3. Amongst the 42 loci where presence
or absence of SINE could not be established, in 23 cases
the scaffold ended within the locus in E. dispar, and in
19 cases the homology was restricted to genes on one
side of the SINE while there was no homology on the
other side (may be due to deletions/inversions/
rearrangements).
For 213 EhSINE1-containing loci of E. histolytica, syntenic
loci could not be found in E. dispar for the following reasons. In many of these cases the scaffolds containing these
loci were composed entirely of repeats (83 loci), tRNA
genes and repeats (7 loci) or pseudogenes and repeats (9
loci). In 114 cases synteny could not be determined either
because there were multiple copies of homologous genes,
or homologous genes were located on multiple scaffolds,
or there was a single gene in the scaffold.
Comparative analysis of EdSINE1-containing regions of E.
dispar genome and syntenic regions of E. histolytica

A total of 302 full-length SINE1 elements (length
greater than 450 bp) were identified in E. dispar by genome sequence analysis. Syntenic regions corresponding
to each of the EdSINE1-containing loci were located in
E. histolytica and the presence or absence of any of the
EhSINEs (EhSINE1, 2, 3) was determined as described
above. Of the 302 loci, syntenic regions could be predicted with certainty for 127 loci (Figure 1B). Of these,
SINEs were absent in E. histolytica at 73 loci, were present at 19 loci and their presence or absence could not
be determined at 35 loci. Amongst the 73 loci where

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

Page 4 of 12

Figure 1 Summary of the comparative analysis of genomic locations of SINE1 copies in E. histolytica and E. dispar. (A). Comparison of
EhSINE1-occupied regions in E. histolytica genome with syntenic regions of E. dispar. (B). Comparison of EdSINE1-occupied regions in E. dispar
genome with syntenic regions of E. histolytica.

SINEs were absent, no repeat element of any type was
found at 62 loci (Additional file 5 Figure S20), while
LINE sequences were found at 11 loci. Amongst the 19
loci that contained a SINE, 18 had EhSINE1 (as scored
above) while 1 had EhSINE2. Amongst the 35 loci

where presence or absence of SINE could not be established, in 23 cases the scaffold ended within the locus in
E. histolytica, and in 12 cases the homology was
restricted to genes on one side of the SINE while there
was no homology on the other side.

Figure 2 Graphical representation of a syntenic region where SINE1 is present in both E. histolytica and E. dispar. Top and bottom
green lines mark the genomes of E. histolytica and E. dispar respectively. The E. histolytica and E. dispar genes are marked by red arrows,
showing the gene orientation. Shaded black lines showing the identical region within E. histolytica and E. diapar. Darkness of the shade is
proportional to the % identity, with white being the least conserved. Blue arrows show the repeat elements (EhSINE1 and EdSINE1).

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

For 175 EdSINE1-containing loci, syntenic loci could
not be found in E. histolytica for the reasons mentioned
in the previous section. In 75 cases the E. dispar loci
were composed entirely of repeats while in 100 cases
synteny could not be determined either because there
were multiple copies of homologous genes, or homologous genes were located on multiple scaffolds, or there
was a single gene in the scaffold.

Page 5 of 12

Sequence alignment of syntenic loci

Figure 3 shows actual sequence alignments of a few
selected syntenic loci where SINE1 is found in E. histolytica but missing in E. dispar, and vice versa. As is evident, in each case the element is flanked by TSDs. Only
one copy of the TSD is found at the syntenic locus of
the species where the SINE is missing. The surrounding
sequences show the sequence similarity expected of

Figure 3 Sequence alignment of syntenic intergenic regions. (A) SINE1 is absent in one of the species; (B) SINE1 is present in both species.
The scaffold number and nucleotide positions are indicated. TSD, target site duplication.

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

intergenic regions of the two species (80-90%). One
example is shown of an intergenic region where SINE1
is present in both species. Although SINE1 is located in
the same intergenic region, the actual point of insertion
is not the same and consequently the TSD sequences
are different (Figure 3B). This was the typical pattern
seen in other loci of this type where SINEs were located
in the same intergenic regions in both species.
From the above data it is clear that only in about 20%
of cases where presence or absence of SINE1 could be
established at syntenic loci, are SINE elements located
in the same intergenic region (although at different
insertion points) in both species. In >80% of these loci
SINE1 was not found at the same location in both species. Since the elements in the two species have a common lineage and are closely related, what possible
factors might account for these differences? According
to the Target primed Reverse Transcription model, retrotransposition is initiated by the LINE-encoded Endonuclease (EN) nicking the bottom strand of the target
site [15]. Hence it is reasonable to believe that the
sequences preferentially nicked by the EN could be the
preferred insertion sites of the retrotransposon, and the
behavior of EN might influence the choice of target site
of a non LTR retrotransposon. Since the Eh EN and Ed

Page 6 of 12

EN differ from each other at many amino acid positions
(as shown below), it is possible that the two enzymes
may have evolved different recognition specificities. To
establish this we studied the properties of the EdLINE1encoded EN and compared it with EhLINE1-encoded
EN.
Cloning and expression of the EdLINE1 endonuclease (Ed
EN) polypeptide

To obtain the Ed EN coding sequence we used the Eh EN
sequence (already cloned in our lab) as a starting point.
Ed EN differs from Eh EN in 23 amino acid positions
(Figure 4). The Eh EN sequence was mutated in these
positions (as described in Methods) to obtain the Ed EN
coding sequence. This 782-bp EcoRI-Not1 fragment was
cloned in the E. coli expression vector pET30b. The
expressed protein contained His-tag, and together with
other vector sequences at the amino terminus, it was 307
amino acids long, with an expected molecular mass of
35.3 kDa (Figure 5A). It was purified by nickel-agarose
chromatography, and its identity was confirmed by using
an anti-His tag antibody and anti-Eh EN antibody (Figure
5B). The Ed EN protein could nick a nonspecific substrate, pBS. Like the previously reported activity of Eh
EN [19] supercoiled pBS DNA was efficiently nicked by

Figure 4 Amino acid sequence alignment of consensus Eh LINE1 EN and Ed LINE1 EN. The conserved motifs CCHC and PD (X) 10-14 D
(shown in bold) are present both in Eh EN and Ed EN. Amino acid residues which were mutated to construct Ed EN are shown in red and the
synonymous amino acid residues left unchanged are shown in blue.

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

Page 7 of 12

Figure 5 Purification of Ed EN and cleavage activity on pBS supercoiled DNA. (A) The Ed EN protein was expressed in the E. coli expression
vector pET30(b) by inducing with IPTG. Expression was checked by separating uninduced (U) and induced (I) whole cell lysate on 12%
denaturing polyacrylamide gel. The expected size (35.3 kDa) is marked. (B) Western blot analysis with anti-his tag and anti-Eh EN antibody was
performed using whole cell lysate from above figure. Eh EN was loaded for comparison in the ‘Eh’ lanes. (C) Ed EN was purified through Ni-NTA
affinity chromatography and checked by separating on 12% denaturing polyacrylamide gel. (D) The cleavage activity of Ed EN was checked by
incubating purified protein with pBS supercoiled DNA at 37°C under conditions earlier used for Eh EN. The figure shows agarose gel picture of
time course (0, 5, 10, 15, 30 and 60 min) of incubation with Eh EN and Ed EN. The position of 3.0 kb band corresponding with linear pBS DNA is
marked. OC, open circular; L, linear; SC, supercoiled.

the purified Ed EN protein to yield open circular and linear DNAs. The presence of discrete bands corresponding
to open circular and linear forms shows that the enzyme
makes predominantly single-strand nicks and not double-strand breaks (Figure 5D).
Kinetics of the Ed EN-catalyzed reaction with pBS
supercoiled DNA substrate under steady-state conditions

To determine the kinetics under steady-state conditions,
reactions were carried out with the enzyme at a concentration of 2 nM and with pBS DNA at a concentration
of 2-75 nM (Figure 6). The disappearance of supercoiled
DNA was determined by densitometric scanning as
described for Eh EN [20]. As mentioned in Methods, all
time-course results were the average of at least three
independent determinations. The variation observed at
each time point was <4.7% of the mean value (0.09-5.1).
Although the variation in values of each data point was
in the range of 4% in three replicates, the slopes for

each set showed lesser variation (up to 1.0%). Kinetic
parameters (Km and kcat) were calculated from a Lineweaver-Burk plot (Figure 6C). Km for pBS DNA was calculated to be 1.086 ± 0.009 × 10 -8 M. The catalytic
constant, kcat, (Vmax ⁄ [E]) was determined to be 5.67 ±
0.027 × 10-3 sec-1. These values were comparable to the
Km (2.6 ± 0.018 × 10-8 M) and kcat (1.6 ± 0.01 10-2 sec1
) of Eh EN [20] and the Km was comparable with the
low Km values (0.5-17 nM) of restriction endonucleases
determined with different DNA substrates under different conditions of buffer and temperature [22]. Furthermore, the turnover number (kcat) of the enzyme was in
the lower range of that reported for restriction endonucleases [(1.6-16.6) x10-2 sec-1] [22]. The low turnover
number of a retrotransposon-encoded endonuclease
may have a significant role in limiting the rate of retrotransposition events in the genome. From the above
data we infer that the kinetic parameters of Ed EN are
not significantly different from Eh EN.

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

Page 8 of 12

Figure 6 Kinetics of cleavage of supercoiled pBS DNA by Ed EN. (A) Steady-state kinetics. Assays were carried out at 37°C with 2 nM Ed EN
in a reaction mixture containing increasing concentrations (2-75 nM) of pBS DNA. Aliquots were withdrawn at different time-points (0-8 min)
during the reaction and assayed by electrophoresis through 0.8% agarose. The concentration of the supercoiled form of pBS DNA at each timepoint was quantified as described in the Materials and Methods. The disappearance of the supercoiled form of pBS DNA with time was plotted
for the indicated concentration of substrate (nM) and the slopes thus obtained were taken as initial velocity at corresponding substrate
concentrations. (B) and (C) DNA cleavage as a function of substrate concentration. Initial reaction velocities, obtained as described above, were
plotted as a function of substrate concentration. A Lineweaver-Burk plot (C) was used to calculate the kinetic parameters Km and kcat. The data
are expressed as the average of three independent determinations, as mentioned in the Results and Discussion, and the standard deviation is
indicated as error bars (± SD).

Nicking site sequence preference of Ed EN

We had earlier shown that Eh EN preferentially nicked a
176 bp fragment from E. histolytica precisely at the site
where a SINE1 element was known to insert in this
region of the genome [19]. To test whether Ed EN had a
similar sequence preference as Eh EN, the same 176 bp
fragment was incubated with Ed EN. The nicking pattern,
determined for the bottom strand, was exactly the same
as that obtained with Eh EN. Three nicking hot spots
were obtained, of which site #3 corresponded with the
exact site of insertion of Eh SINE1 in vivo (Figure 7A).
The sequences important for target site recognition, as
determined for Eh EN [18], were tested for Ed EN by
altering the sequences immediately surrounding the
nicked site #3. Transition mutations were introduced
using oligonucleotides with the appropriately altered

sequence to PCR amplify a 117 bp fragment from the
176 bp template (position 60 to 176). The DNA
sequences thus obtained contained a normal site #2 and
a mutated site #3. The activity of Ed EN on the mutated
site #3 was quantitated using site #2 as an internal control. The results showed that changing the GG nucleotides (on top strand, upstream of the nick) to TT
decreased the activity to 10% for Ed EN (compared with
2% for Eh EN) and changing the T nucleotide upstream
of the nick to C increased the activity to 183% for Ed EN
(compared with 133% for Eh EN) (Figure 7B). These
results show that both Ed EN and Eh EN are very similar
in their target site specificity. Since the endonuclease
domain of ORF2 was used in these studies, the possibility
of a complete ORF2 protein displaying a different specificity in vivo cannot, however, be entirely ruled out.

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

Page 9 of 12

Figure 7 Comparative nicking profile of Eh EN and Ed EN with 176 bp substrate containing an unoccupied insertion site of EhSINE1.
(A) End labeled 176 bp substrate was incubated with each enzyme for the indicated time. The reaction products were separated through 8%
polycarylamide gel containing 7 M urea as mentioned in Materials and Methods. The three major nicking sites seen with Eh EN are marked. (B)
Nicking activity of Eh EN and Ed EN on substrates mutated at site #3 (sequences flanking the nicking sites are shown in the box). Substrate I is
wild type and mutations in substrates II-IV are indicated. Arrows in sequence I indicate nicking sites. Lane C in each panel indicates 0 min.
incubation. Each substrate was incubated with enzyme for 60 min. The ratio of band intensity of sie#3/site#2 for each mutated substrate was
calculated and compared with control substrate to obtain the percentage activity.

DNA structural features of E. dispar and E. histolytica
SINE1 insertion sites

We have earlier shown that sequence-dependent DNA
structural features may play an important role in site
selection by SINE elements in E. histolytica [18]. Here
we have analyzed the same features in E. dispar to see if
the SINE insertion sites share these properties with E.
histolytica. The parameters checked are listed in ‘Methods’. In general majority of the features showed similar

pattern in both the species except for DNA denaturation
energy and free energy profile. Our previous study had
shown that the insertion sites in E. histolytica are Tenriched and the content profile showed a significant
peak at -22 bp relative to the insertion site. Similar profile was also observed for E. dispar with a peak at -22
bp (Figure 8). Statistical analysis by Mann-Whitney test
on the difference of the average T content of insertion
sites for E. histolytica and E. dispar suggested that there

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

Figure 8 T content profile. Profile shows the frequency of T
residues flanking the SINE1 insertion sites. Details are provided in
Materials and Methods. Both E. histolytica (red) and E. dispar (green)
show high T content at -22 position.

is no significant difference between the two. Similar
results were obtained when other DNA-based structural
parameters were determined. Thus the SINE1-occupied
sites in E. histolytica and E. dispar share the same structural features.
We checked whether the intergenic regions at loci
where SINEs were found in both genomes shared
greater sequence similarity compared with loci where
SINEs did not occur in both genomes. However this
was not found to be the case. Intergenic regions in both
sets of loci showed overall sequence similarity in the
range of 75-90%. E. histolytica and E. dispar are very
closely related sibling species [23] which were in fact
classified as a single species until they were re-described
as two separate species [24]. Their close relationship is
also evident from phylogeny based on LINE-derived RT
sequences. This analysis showed that all three families
of LINEs and SINEs already existed in the common
ancestor before E. histolytica and E. dispar separated
into two distinct species [6]. The great similarity
between the two ENs of E. histolytica and E. dispar, as
found in this study, again shows that the basic retrotransposition machinery is highly conserved in these sibling
species. It is therefore possible that SINEs may indeed
have occupied all of the potential insertion sites in the
genome of the common ancestor of E. histolytica and E.
dispar but many of the inserted elements may have
been preferentially lost in each genome as the two species diverged from each other. Indeed the differential

Page 10 of 12

loss of retrotransposons from specific loci might have
contributed to speciation [25,26]. On the other hand it
may be possible that SINE expansion took place after
the divergence of the two species, and only a sub set of
the potential insertion sites in the E. histolytica and E.
dispar genomes are currently occupied. In that case one
may expect that each of these extant genomes may possess a large number of ‘empty’ sites where SINEs could
potentially insert in future. A hallmark of retrotransposition is the appearance of target site duplication (TSD)
following the insertion of a new element. In syntenic
loci an unoccupied site is expected to have one copy of
the TSD which is duplicated in the occupied site. We
checked for TSD sequences in E. dispar unoccupied
sites corresponding to the syntenic E. histolytica occupied sites. We randomly picked 75 loci of E. histolytica,
where SINE1 is absent in E. dispar and looked for
matches with the TSD at each locus. At 19 loci we
found very good match with the TSD sequence
(matched length greater than 15 bp, and sequence identity greater than 85%). The occurrence of close matches
of TSD sequences in the syntenic loci of E. dispar suggests that potential empty sites may exist where future
retrotransposition events could take place.

Conclusions
Our data show that the LINE-encoded endonucleases,
Eh EN and Ed EN are essentially very similar, both in
their kinetic properties and in their substrate sequence
specificity. The DNA structural features of SINE-occupied sites in E. histolytica and E. dispar are also similar.
However the elements do not insert at the same sites in
the two species. Even in the 20% cases where the elements are located in the same intergenic regions in the
two genomes the exact point of insertion is not the
same. It is possible that, despite the Eh EN and Ed EN
being very similar, the complete retrotransposition
machinery consisting of the ribonucleoprotein assembly
of LINE-encoded ORF1, ORF2 and the SINE transcript
might function differently in the two species, thus leading to the observed differences. Since the elements are
very closely related, these differences are likely to be the
result of subtle changes that got established after the
divergence of the two species. An experimental test of
these functional changes requires the complete assembly
of ORF1 and ORF2 of EdLINE1. On the other hand the
possibility exists that the retrotransposition machineries
in the two species are in fact identical and the observed
differences are due to the stochastic nature of the insertion process. The number of potential insertion sites of
these elements is likely to be large since they do not
insert at specific sequences. The only known specificity
of the process is that the elements in both E. histolytica
and E. dispar insert only in intergenic regions and not

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

within genes. Within intergenic regions they insert near
T-rich stretches [18,19]. As discussed above, in this scenario one would expect to find a large number of
‘empty’ sites in each genome which could be targets of
future insertions. This needs to be experimentally tested.
A further possibility is that common insertions did
indeed occur in the two genomes, but these were subsequently lost in a differential manner due to selection
pressure. If the loss of SINE copies from specific locations conferred a growth advantage to either species,
these elements could well have shaped the physiological
evolution of the two species, including their virulence
properties.
Whatever may have been the mechanisms and processes that determined the positioning of SINEs, the
resultant effect is that SINEs occupy different intergenic
locations in the two genomes. It is well recognized that
LINEs and SINEs can modulate the expression of genes
in their vicinity by providing alternative promoters, splicing and polyadenylation sites and by heterochromatinization [10-13]. The absence of SINE1 in >80% of
syntenic loci in the extant genomes of E. histolytica and
E. dispar could result in differential expression of genes
at these loci. This could profoundly influence the phenotype of the two species, which needs to be explored.
Recently Lorenzi et al. [27] in their reannotation and
analysis of the E. histolytica genome have listed a large
number of protein families showing high association
with repetitive elements. Though the top three families
which are associated with TEs 100% of the time are
hypothetical proteins, important known protein families
are also listed. These include gal/gal Nac lectin, hsp70
BspA-like surface protein family and AIG family associated with resistance to bacteria. Further analysis of a
similar nature with E. dispar genome will give interesting information on the possible contribution of TEs in
regulating the expression of important genes that may
influence pathogenesis.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Schematic representation of overlapping
PCRs for construction of Ed EN. Sixteen sets of primers incorporating the
desired mutations were designed. PCR was done using pET-Eh-EN
construct as template. The 782 bp fragment containing Ed EN domain
was cloned in pET30(b) vector at the EcoRI-NotI site.
Additional file 2: Table S1. Primer sets used for the construction of Ed
EN.
Additional file 3: Figure S2. Graphical representation of the syntenic
region where SINE1 is present in E. histolytica but absent in E. dispar. For
color code and arrows refer to figure S1-S17
Additional file 4: Figure S3-S19. Graphical representation of the
syntenic region where SINE1 is present in both E. histolytica and E. dispar.
Top and bottom green lines are showing the genomes of E. histolytica
and E. dispar respectively. Red arrows show the Eh and Ed genes, and
the gene orientation. Shaded black or Red (connecting) lines show the

Page 11 of 12

identical region within E. histolytica and E. dispar. Darkness of the shade
is proportional to the % Identity. Blue arrows show the repeat elements.
SINE1 has been shown above the marked Yellow dot in both E. hitolytica
and E. dispar in the syntenic region.
Additional file 5: Figure S20. Graphical representation of syntenic
region where SINE1 is present in E. dispar but absent in E. histolytica. For
color code and arrows refer to figure S1-S17.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant to SB from Indian Council of Medical
Research and by fellowship from Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research, India to VK and AKG.
Author details
1
School of Environmental Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
110067, India. 2School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi 110067, India.
Authors’ contributions
SB proposed and designed the research, drafted the final version of the
manuscript, AB designed and analyzed the computational work. VK
performed the experiments regarding cloning, expression, purification and
assay of Ed EN. RS performed the computational work. VPY helped in
performing the enzyme kinetics of Ed EN, AKG helped in the cloning of Ed
EN. All authors have participated in preparing the manuscript. All authors
have read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 27 January 2011 Accepted: 25 May 2011
Published: 25 May 2011
References
1. Belancio VP, Hedges DJ, Deininger P: Mammalian non-LTR
retrotransposons: for better or worse, in sickness and in health. Genome
Res 2008, 18(3):343-58.
2. Ebihara M, Ohba H, Ohno SI, Yoshikawa T: Genomic organization and
promoter analysis of the human nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha6
subunit (CHNRA6) gene: Alu and other elements direct transcriptional
repression. Gene 2002, 298(1):101-8.
3. Moolhuijzen P, Kulski JK, Dunn DS, Schibeci D, Barrero R, Gojobori T,
Bellgard M: The transcript repeat element: the human Alu sequence as a
component of gene networks influencing cancer. Funct Integr Genomics.
4. Huntley DM, Pandis I, Butcher SA, Ackers JP: Bioinformatic analysis of
Entamoeba histolytica SINE1 elements. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:321.
5. Bakre AA, Rawal K, Ramaswamy R, Bhattacharya A, Bhattacharya S: The
LINEs and SINEs of Entamoeba histolytica: comparative analysis and
genomic distribution. Exp Parasitol 2005, 110(3):207-213.
6. Lorenzi H, Thiagarajan M, Haas B, Wortman J, Hall N, Caler E: Genome wide
survey, discovery and evolution of repetitive elements in three
Entamoeba species. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:595.
7. Sharma R, Bagchi A, Bhattacharya A, Bhattacharya S: Characterization of a
retrotransposon-like element in Entamoeba histolytica. Mol Biochem
Parasitol 2001, 116(1):45-53.
8. Van Dellen K, Field J, Wang Z, Loftus B, Samuelson J: LINEs and SINE-like
elements of the protist Entamoeba histolytica. Gene 2002,
297(1-2):229-239.
9. Shire AM, Ackers JP: SINE elements of Entamoeba dispar. Mol Biochem
Parasitol 2007, 152(1):47-52.
10. Faulkner GJ, Carninci P: Altruistic functions for selfish DNA. Cell Cycle 2009,
8(18):2895-900.
11. Chow JC, Ciaudo C, Fazzari MJ, Mise N, Servant N, Glass JL, Attreed M,
Avner P, Wutz A, Barillot E, Greally JM, Voinnet O, Heard E: LINE-1 activity
in facultative heterochromatin formation during X chromosome
inactivation. Cell 2010, 141(6):956-69.
12. Lev-Maor G, Sorek R, Shomron N, Ast G: The birth of an alternatively
spliced exon: 3’ splice-site selection in Alu exons. Science 2003,
300(5623):1288-91.
13. Ostertag EM, Kazazian HH Jr: Biology of mammalian L1 retrotransposons.
Annu Rev Genet 2001, 35:501-538.

Kumari et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/267

Page 12 of 12

14. Willhoeft U, Buss H, Tannich E: The abundant polyadenylated transcript 2
DNA sequence of the pathogenic protozoan parasite Entamoeba
histolytica represents a nonautonomous non-long-terminal-repeat
retrotransposon-like element which is absent in the closely related
nonpathogenic species Entamoeba dispar. Infect immun 2002,
70(12):6798-6804.
15. Luan DD, Korman MH, Jakubczak JL, Eickbush TH: Reverse transcription of
R2Bm RNA is primed by a nick at the chromosomal target site: a
mechanism for non-LTR retrotransposition. Cell 1993, 72(4):595-605.
16. McGinnis S, Madden TL: BLAST: at the core of a powerful and diverse set
of sequence analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32 Web Server: W20-25.
17. Nix DA, Eisen MB: GATA: a graphic alignment tool for comparative
sequence analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:9.
18. Mandal PK, Rawal K, Ramaswamy R, Bhattacharya A, Bhattacharya S:
Identification of insertion hot spots for non-LTR retrotransposon:
computational and biochemical application to Entamoeba histolytica.
Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34(20):5752-63.
19. Mandal PK, Bagchi A, Bhattacharya A, Bhattacharya S: An Entamoeba
histolytica LINE ⁄ SINE pair inserts at common target sites cleaved by the
restriction enzyme-like LINE encoded endonuclease. Eukaryot Cell 2004,
3(1):170-179.
20. Yadav VP, Mandal PK, Rao DN, Bhattacharya S: Characterization of the
restriction enzyme-like endonuclease encoded by the Entamoeba
histolytica non-long terminal repeat retrotransposon EhLINE1. FEBS J
2009, 276(23):7070-7082.
21. Sambrook J, Russell DW: Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. 3 edition.
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y; 2001.
22. Pingoud A, Alves J, Geiger R: Restriction enzymes. Methods Mol Biol 1993,
16:107-200.
23. Silberman JD, Clark CG, Diamond LS, Sogin ML: Phylogeny of the genera
Entamoeba and Endolimax as deduced from small-subunit ribosomal
RNA sequences. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16(12):1740-1751.
24. Diamond LS, Clark CG: A redescription of Entamoeba histolytica
Schaudinn, 1903 (Emended Walker, 1911) separating it from Entamoeba
dispar Brumpt, 1925. J Eukaryot Microbiol 1993, 40(3):340-344.
25. Böhne A, Brunet F, Galiana-Arnoux D, Schultheis C, Volff JN: Transposable
elements as drivers of genomic and biological diversity in vertebrates.
Chromosome Res 2008, 16(1):203-215.
26. Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kohany O, Jurka MV: Repetitive sequences in
complex genomes: structure and evolution. Annu Rev Genomics Hum
Genet 2007, 8:241-259.
27. Lorenzi HA, Puiu D, Miller JR, Brinkac LM, Amedeo P, Hall N, Caler EV: New
assembly, reannotation and analysis of the Entamoeba histolytica
genome reveal new genomic features and protein content information.
PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2010, 4(6):e716.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-267
Cite this article as: Kumari et al.: Differential distribution of a SINE
element in the Entamoeba histolytica and Entamoeba dispar genomes:
Role of the LINE-encoded endonuclease. BMC Genomics 2011 12:267.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
