<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Strabismus-mediated primary archenteron invagination is uncoupled from Wnt/β-catenin-dependent endoderm cell fate specification in Nematostella vectensis (Anthozoa, Cnidaria): Implications for the evolution of gastrulation</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2011, 2:2. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-2"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Shalika Kumburegama"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

RESEARCH

Open Access

Strabismus-mediated primary archenteron
invagination is uncoupled from Wnt/b-catenindependent endoderm cell fate specification in
Nematostella vectensis (Anthozoa, Cnidaria):
Implications for the evolution of gastrulation
Shalika Kumburegama1,2,3, Naveen Wijesena1,3, Ronghui Xu2, Athula H Wikramanayake1*

Abstract
Background: Gastrulation is a uniquely metazoan character, and its genesis was arguably the key step that
enabled the remarkable diversification within this clade. The process of gastrulation involves two tightly coupled
events during embryogenesis of most metazoans. Morphogenesis produces a distinct internal epithelial layer in the
embryo, and this epithelium becomes segregated as an endoderm/endomesodermal germ layer through the
activation of a specific gene regulatory program. The developmental mechanisms that induced archenteron
formation and led to the segregation of germ layers during metazoan evolution are unknown. But an increased
understanding of development in early diverging taxa at the base of the metazoan tree may provide insights into
the origins of these developmental mechanisms.
Results: In the anthozoan cnidarian Nematostella vectensis, initial archenteron formation begins with bottle cellinduced buckling of the blastula epithelium at the animal pole. Here, we show that bottle cell formation and initial
gut invagination in Nematostella requires NvStrabismus (NvStbm), a maternally-expressed core component of the
Wnt/Planar Cell Polarity (PCP) pathway. The NvStbm protein is localized to the animal pole of the zygote, remains
asymmetrically expressed through the cleavage stages, and becomes restricted to the apical side of invaginating
bottle cells at the blastopore. Antisense morpholino-mediated NvStbm-knockdown blocks bottle cell formation and
initial archenteron invagination, but it has no effect on Wnt/ß-catenin signaling-mediated endoderm cell fate
specification. Conversely, selectively blocking Wnt/ß-catenin signaling inhibits endoderm cell fate specification but
does not affect bottle cell formation and initial archenteron invagination.
Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that Wnt/PCP-mediated initial archenteron invagination can be uncoupled
from Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated endoderm cell fate specification in Nematostella, and provides evidence that these
two processes could have evolved independently during metazoan evolution. We propose a two-step model for
the evolution of an archenteron and the evolution of endodermal germ layer segregation. Asymmetric
accumulation and activation of Wnt/PCP components at the animal pole of the last common ancestor to the
eumetazoa may have induced the cell shape changes that led to the initial formation of an archenteron. Activation
of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling at the animal pole may have led to the activation of a gene regulatory network that
specified an endodermal cell fate in the archenteron.

* Correspondence: athula@miami.edu
1
Department of Biology, The University of Miami, 1301 Memorial Drive, Coral
Gables, FL 33146, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Kumburegama et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

Background
The origin of metazoans from a choanoflagellate-like
protist and the vast diversification of this clade is a
remarkable evolutionary chronology in the history of life
on Earth. From relatively simple origins, metazoans have
radiated to produce organisms with levels of physiological and morphological complexity unmatched in other
multicellular forms that have emerged in several clades
[1,2]. The unique character that enabled the evolution
of complex metazoans is generally believed to be the
process of gastrulation [3]. The evolution of gastrulation
produced a functionally distinct internal cell layer, and
the interaction between the different tissue layers most
likely led to the induction of new cell types, tissues, and
organs [3]. Beginning with the seminal observations of
Ernst Haeckel, a number of models have been proposed
to reconstruct the evolution of gastrulation [reviewed in
4]. Many of these models posit that activation of morphogenesis on one side of a hypothetical blastula-like
“urmetazoan” enabled cells on the outside to internalize
and form an archenteron [4]. Regardless of the details of
the individual models, it is likely that a crucial step in
the evolution of gastrulation was the co-option of a
localized molecular asymmetry that was present in
ancient embryos to effect the cell shape changes that led
to cell ingression and/or epithelial bending. However,
the nature of the primordial anisotropy that triggered
initial gastrulation movements is not known, and no
existing model provides a molecular explanation for the
initial evolution of a functional gut [3,5].
One ancient polarity that is present in most metazoan
eggs is the animal-vegetal (AV) or primary axis of the
egg [3,6]. The animal pole is defined by the site of polar
body release during meiosis, and the AV axis is polarized by asymmetric distribution of maternal factors in
the form of RNA, protein or organelles that can impart
differential developmental potentials to blastomeres
derived from the different poles of the egg [3,6,7]. In
most animals, the AV axis predicts the axial properties
of the embryo and adult. For example, in bilaterians, a
clade that includes most animal phyla, patterns of gastrulation morphogenesis vary but a majority of these
organisms develop their endomesoderm from vegetal
pole-derived blastomeres [3,7]. In Porifera and Placozoa,
two animal phyla generally believed to be two of the
earliest diverging clades [8,9], little is known about the
relationship between initial egg polarity and larval/adult
patterning [10,11]. Additionally, these animals lack a
functional endodermal germ layer. The Cnidaria and
Ctenophora are the two remaining extant basal, nonbilaterian metazoan phyla and recent phylogenomic analyses indicate that they diverged after the appearance of
the Porifera and the Placozoa [8]. In these two taxa that

Page 2 of 15

are clear outgroups to the bilaterians [8], and the only
non-bilaterians to undergo true gastrulation, endoderm
specification and archenteron formation are initiated at
the animal pole [3,7,12]. These observations have led to
the proposal that formation of an archenteron and segregation of an endodermal germ layer evolved at the
animal pole, and the mechanisms that regulate these
processes were moved to the vegetal pole sometime
after the divergence of the urbilaterian from the last
shared common ancestor with cnidarians and ctenophores [7,13]. This idea is supported at the molecular
level by the observation that the site of gastrulation in
several bilaterians and cnidarians is marked by nuclear
ß-catenin [3,13-18]. If archenteron formation and segregation of an endodermal germ layer evolved at the animal pole, then cnidarians and ctenophores are key taxa
for gaining insights into the developmental mechanisms
that led to the evolution of these processes.
The anthozoan cnidarian Nematostella vectensis has
emerged as an important model organism for comparative molecular studies of embryonic development.
Recent studies have identified several key cellular and
molecular processes involved in initial germ layer segregation and archenteron formation in this animal
[13,14,19-21]. Gastrulation is initiated in Nematostella
by primary archenteron invagination at the animal pole
of the embryo [20,21]. This primary invagination is
induced by an apical constriction of cells at the future
blastopore, leading to the formation of bottle cells and a
subsequent buckling of the blastula wall [20,21]. It is
well established that bottle cells play an important role
in initiating gastrulation in embryos of diverse taxa, and
components of the ß-catenin-independent Wnt/PCP
pathway appear to play a particularly important role in
regulating apical constriction of these cells during initial
archenteron formation [22-26]. There are several “core”
PCP genes that are conserved between vertebrates and
Drosophila [27], and we have initiated studies to determine the roles of these genes in regulating early polarity
events in Nematostella. Here, we focus on the core
Wnt/PCP gene NvStrabismus (NvStbm). We show that
NvStbm is maternally expressed, and the NvStbm protein becomes localized to the animal pole of the zygote,
and remains asymmetrically localized to the apical end
of blastomeres at one side of the embryo during the
early cleavage stages. At the initiation of primary invagination, NvStbm becomes restricted to the apical end of
cells at the blastopore. Knockdown of NvStbm using
antisense morpholinos blocks bottle cell formation and
archenteron invagination but has no effect on cell fate
specification. Strikingly, blocking the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway, which is required for endoderm specification
in Nematostella [13,14] has no effect on primary

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

archenteron invagination indicating that initial gastrulation morphogenesis can be uncoupled from endoderm
cell fate specification in this embryo. We propose a
novel model for the evolution of gastrulation in metazoans that is based on a deeply conserved organismic
polarity, and evolutionarily conserved signal transduction pathways.

Results
Cloning and phylogenetic analysis of an Stbm ortholog
from Nematostella

Known bilaterian Stbm sequences were used to search
an assembly of the Nematostella genome ([28] and Joint
Genome Institute) and this resulted in the identification
of several sequences coding for a putative Stbm. Predicted sequences were used to design PCR primers that
were used to amplify a full length Stbm sequence from
cDNA made from mRNA collected from mixed stage
Nematostella embryos. Phylogenetic analysis confirmed
that NvStbm is closely related to bilaterian, placozoan
and cnidarian Stbm homologs, and that it is most likely
a Nematostella ortholog of Strabismus (Figure 1A, B).
NvStbm shows between 31 and 48% identity to various
metazoan Stbm proteins and contains the four hydrophobic transmembrane domains and the highly conserved PDZ binding motif at the carboxy terminus
(Figure 1A). Further searches of Nematostella genome
sequences failed to reveal other related sequences. Using
the available databases we were unable to identify
homologs of this gene from sponges or ctenophores.
The phylogenetic position of placozoans and ctenophores with respect to sponges, cnidarians and bilaterians is controversial and remains poorly resolved
[8,9,29]. But our data indicate that a Stbm homolog was
present in the last common ancestor to placozoans, cnidarians and bilaterians, and if the coelenterate clade is
valid [8], then it is likely that ctenophores will also have
a Stbm homolog, unless there has been a loss of Stbm
in this taxon.

Page 3 of 15

subcellular localization of the NvStbm protein, we
generated affinity-purified anti-rabbit polyclonal antibodies to a peptide sequence corresponding to amino acids
308 to 322 of the NvStbm protein (Figure 1A). Western
blots of Nematostella egg and embryo extracts showed
that the antibodies recognized a band of 80 kD, which is
the predicted size of the NvStbm protein (Figure 2K).
The NvStbm protein is expressed maternally, and at relatively even levels during early embryogenesis and through
the planula stage (Figure 2K). The specificity of the antibodies was demonstrated by preadsorption of the antiserum with the immunizing peptide, which resulted in
the elimination of staining of the 80 kD band on Western
blots (Figure 2L). Immunostaining of Nematostella eggs
and early embryos using affinity-purified anti-NvStbm
polyclonal antibodies revealed that NvStbm protein
expression is congruent with transcript expression
(Figure 2F-J). Double immunostaining for NvStbm and
the female pronucleus in unfertilized eggs showed that
NvStbm is enriched at the animal pole cell membrane
(Figure 2F), and the protein remains asymmetrically localized at the apical cell surface of blastomeres on one side
of the embryo (Figure 2G-I). At the early gastrula stage
the NvStbm protein is clearly localized to the apical end
of bottle cells at the blastopore (Figure 2J). NvStbm localization closely corresponded to the spatial expression of
NvDishevelled (NvDsh)[13], a known partner of Stbm in
Wnt/PCP signaling [27]. The lack of morphological landmarks during the early cleavage stages and at the blastula
stage made it difficult to determine if NvStbm expression
is strictly restricted to the animal pole blastomeres prior
to gastrulation initiation. But the localization of NvStbm
to the animal pole at the zygote stage and the early
gastrula stage made it likely that the expression of the
protein is restricted to the apical end of animal pole blastomeres. In sum, these results showed that NvStbm is
maternally expressed and that the protein becomes localized to the apical end of the bottle cells at the blastopore,
suggesting a role for NvStbm in the regulation of apical
constriction of these cells.

Expression of NvStbm during Nematostella development

Expression analysis of core PCP components in Nematostella using whole mount in situ hybridization
(WMISH) revealed that the Nematostella Stbm ortholog
is expressed in an intriguing pattern corresponding to
the site of primary invagination and bottle cell formation (Figure 2). NvStbm mRNA is broadly expressed in
unfertilized eggs with a consistent slight asymmetry
towards one side (Figure 2A). After fertilization and
during early embryogenesis NvStbm transcripts show a
striking asymmetric expression pattern, and by the early
gastrula stage (12 to 14 hours post fertilization, hpf) the
transcripts accumulate around the blastopore, suggesting
a role in gastrulation (Figure 2B-E). To examine the

NvStbm knockdown blocks primary invagination

To test if NvStbm has a role in bottle cell formation and
gastrulation, we used a translation-blocking NvStbm
antisense morpholino (NvStbm-MO) to knockdown
NvStbm protein levels. The efficacy of the NvStbm-MO
in knocking down NvStbm protein expression was
tested using Western blots and scanning confocal
microscopy (Figure 3A-C). This analysis showed that by
the blastula stage, injection of NvStbm-MO at 650 μM
resulted in knockdown of NvStbm protein to approximately 20% of that of embryos injected with ControlMO (Figure 3A). We noted that on the Western blots,
there were uneven levels of ß-tubulin that we used as an

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 Phylogenetic analysis of Nematostella Strabismus. A) Alignment of NvStbm sequence with Stbm homologs from 10 metazoan taxa.
The alignment was generated using ClustalW. Accession numbers used to obtain sequences for the alignment: Strabismus protein from N.
vectensis (XP_001630420), Homo sapiens (NP_065068- 47% identity), Mus musculus (NP_808213- 48% identity), Xenopus laevis (NP_001083892- 47%
identity) Danio rerio (NP_991313- 45% identity), Branchiostoma floridae (XP_002613474- 48% identity), Caenorhabditis elegans (NP_508500- 31%
identity), Drosophila melanogaster (NP_477177- 41% identity), Hydra vulgaris XP_002160166 - 47% identity), Trichoplax adhaerens (XP_002107643 38% identity) and Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (41% identity). The percent identities of Stbm proteins from various taxa to NvStbm are
indicated. Conserved amino acid residues across all nine taxa are shown in red. The regions highlighted in grey indicate the transmembrane
regions and the region highlighted in yellow indicate the peptide sequence used to generate the anti NvStbm polyclonal antibody. B) Molecular
phylogeny of Strabismus proteins from various metazoan taxa. Phylogenetic analysis of the NvStbm protein was carried out to determine
orthology. Amino acid alignments including NvStbm and both vertebrate and invertebrate Stbm sequences were generated using MacClade
[49]. A Bayesian Phylogenetic analysis was carried out using MrBayes 3.1 [50] with a run of one million generations, sampled every 100
generations. The summary consensus tree was generated in MrBayes using the last 7,500 trees and the posterior probabilities were calculated for
this consensus tree. The posterior probability values for the consensus tree are shown.

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Expression of NvStbm in Nematostella eggs and embryos.(A-E) Whole mount RNA in situ hybridization for NvStbm. (A) Unfertilized
egg. (B) Zygote. (C) 8-cell stage. (D) Blastula stage. (E) Gastrula stage. (F-J) NvStbm immunofluorescence in eggs and embryos (red). (F)
Unfertilized egg. The female pronucleus at the animal pole (arrow) is labeled with anti-histone antibodies (green). (G) Zygote. (H) 8-cell. (I)
Blastula. (J) Gastrula. The blastula and gastrula stages are also stained with phalloidin (green). At the gastrula stage the NvStbm is highly localized
to the apical end of cells at the blastopore. The basal ends of these cells are deep inside the blastocoel at this time. (K) Western blot analysis of
NvStvbm during early embryogenesis. The anti-NvStbm antiserum recognizes a single band at the expected size of 80 kD. The NvStbm protein is
maternally expressed and is expressed at all the examined stages. Anti ß-tubulin was used as a loading control. (L) Preadsoption test of the
specificity of the affinity purified anti NvStbm antibodies. Preadsorption of the affinity-purified anti-NvStbm polyclonal antibodies with ten fold
molar excess of the NvStbm peptide used as the antigen results in elimination of staining of the 80 kD protein band observed in the control
lane incubated with the anti-NvStbm antibodies. Anti ß-tubulin was used as a loading control.

internal control for quantifying NvStbm knockdown following MO injections. The cause for this fluctuation
was uncertain. Hence, to confirm the efficacy of NvStbm
knockdown following NvStbm MO injection on a perembryo basis, we used scanning confocal microscopy to
carefully examine NvStbm immunostained Control- and
NvStbm-MO-injected embryos at the early gastrula
stage. This analysis showed that while Control-MO
(650 μM) injected embryos showed strong NvStbm protein expression at the apical end of invaginating cells at
the blastopore (Figure 3B), a majority of NvStbm-MO
(650 μM) injected embryos did not show NvStbm protein expression (Figure 3C). We also noted that the
NvStbm-MO injected embryos did not undergo initial
archenteron invagination (Figure 3C). To further examine this phenotype, fertilized eggs injected with NvStbmMO (650 μM) or Control-MO (650 μM) were collected
at early (12 to 14 hpf) or mid gastrula (16 to 18 hpf)
stages and analyzed using morphological and molecular
criteria. Extensive analysis using scanning confocal
microscopy showed that while Control-MO-injected

embryos gastrulated normally (Figure 4A), most NvStbm
morphants failed to gastrulate (Figure 4B), and did not
form bottle cells. The blastula epithelium of NvStbm morphants remained columnar, and no cells or cell processes
were seen extending into the blastocoel (Figure 4B).
NvStbm-morphants displayed no signs of inward buckling
of the blastula wall typical of primary invagination, and
the apically located nuclei failed to migrate to the basal
end of the cells as normally seen during bottle cell formation in Nematostella embryos (Figure 4B) [21]. This phenotype was highly reproducible and was evident in a
majority of the NvStbm-MO-injected embryos (Figure
4M). These results demonstrated that reduced NvStbm
protein levels disrupted bottle cell formation and completely blocked initial archenteron invagination.
NvStbm knockdown does not affect ß-catenin
nuclearization and endoderm specification

In bilaterians endoderm specification and morphogenesis are tightly coupled, and usually cell fate specification precedes morphogenesis [30-32]. Endoderm cell

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

Page 6 of 15

morphants compared to controls (Figure 4G-L).
These results indicated that failure of primary archenteron invagination in NvStbm morphant embryos was
most likely not due to disruption of ß-catenin-dependent endoderm specification.
Nematostella embryos undergo primary archenteron
invagination in the absence of endoderm cell fate
specification

Figure 3 Analysis of the efficacy of NvStbm knockdown using
antisense NvStbm morpholinos. (A) Western blot analysis was
used to determine the efficacy of the NvStbm-MO. Individual
protein band pixel intensities were measured using the Odyssey
software (LI-COR, Lincoln, NE, USA). These intensities were used to
calculate the ratios of NvStbm/ß-tubulin and normalized to
determine the fold difference of each NvStbm band. This analysis
showed that there is approximately a five-fold decrease of the
endogenous Stbm protein in NvStbm-MO-injected (650 μM)
embryos compared to embryos injected with the Control-MO
(650 μM). (B, C) Scanning confocal microscopical analysis of Controland NvStbm-MO injected embryos immunostained with affinitypurified NvStbm antibodies. (B) NvStbm antibody stained ControlMO-injected (650 μM) embryos showed strong NvStbm expression
at the apical end of invaginating cells at the blastopore while (C) a
majority of NvStbm-MO (650 μM) injected embryos did not show
NvStbm expression. Also, NvStbm-MO injected embryos did not
undergo initial archenteron invagination. The numbers in (B)
represent the number of cases with NvStbm staining, and the
numbers in (C) represent the number of cases without NvStbm
staining.

fate specification in Nematostella requires Wnt/ß-catenin signaling [13,14], and studies have shown that there
is crosstalk between the Wnt/ß-catenin and the Wnt/
PCP pathways [33]. This raised the possibility that
NvStbm knockdown may affect Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
and thereby block gastrulation by disrupting endoderm
specification. To examine this we first analyzed embryos
co-injected with Nvß-catenin::RFP mRNA (0.3 μg/μl)
and NvStbm-MO or Control-MO to determine if
NvStbm-knockdown affected the nuclearization of
ß-catenin in blastomeres at the animal pole [13,14].
Analysis of these embryos showed that there was no
difference in the Nvß-catenin::RFP expression pattern
between NvStbm morphants, and control embryos
(Figure 4C-F). Consistent with this observation, WMISH
using several endoderm- and ectoderm-specific markers
showed normal gene expression patterns in NvStbm

NvStbm is maternally expressed and hence its early
expression would be independent of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and endoderm specification. The maternal
expression of NvStbm raised the possibility that if signaling by this protein through the Wnt/PCP pathway
was independent of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, then selectively blocking this branch of Wnt signaling would have
no effect on bottle cell formation and initial archenteron
invagination. To test this possibility we examined
archenteron formation in embryos inhibited in Wnt/ßcatenin signaling. Previous studies blocking Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by overexpressing Cadherin or NvDsh-DIX,
a Dsh dominant-negative in the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway,
have produced somewhat different outcomes [13,14].
We have previously shown that Nematostella embryos
overexpressing Cadherin did not express endodermal
markers, and did not gastrulate [13,14]. Similarly,
embryos overexpressing NvDsh-DIX did not express
endodermal markers, but in contrast to Cadherin-overexpressing embryos, these embryos had a blastopore but
lacked a visible archenteron [13]. The presence of a
blastopore in NvDsh-DIX-overexpressing embryos was
unexpected, and hence we used confocal microscopy to
carefully analyze these embryos when control embryos
were at early, mid, and late gastrula stages to determine
the extent of archenteron formation in the absence of
nuclear ß-catenin signaling. We observed that similar to
uninjected and GFP RNA-injected control embryos,
NvDsh-DIX::GFP RNA-injected embryos at the early
gastrula stage were able to undergo normal initial archenteron invagination (Figure 5A-C). However, while
control embryos possessed a distinct endodermal
epithelium at mid to late gastrula (20 to 22 hpf) stages
(Figure 5G, H, M), NvDsh-DIX::GFP RNA-injected late
gastrula stage embryos lacked an endodermal epithelium, and displayed compacted coelentera (Figure 5I,
M). We used WMISH to examine the extent of endoderm specification in NvDsh-DIX mRNA-injected
embryos, and significantly, these embryos failed to
express NvSnail and NvFz10 endoderm markers at
early and mid gastrula stages compared to controls
(Figure 6A-L). The lack of endodermal marker expression was most likely not from a delay in gene expression
due to mRNA injections because GFP mRNA-injected
embryos had normal endodermal gene expression

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

Page 7 of 15

Figure 4 The effect of NvStbm knockdown on endoderm specification and primary invagination in Nematostella embryos. (A) ControlMO injected gastrula at 12 to 14 hpf. (B) NvStbm-MO injected embryo at 12-14 hpf. Embryos are stained with phalloidin (green) and propidium
iodide (red). (C, D, E, F) Embryos co-injected with Nvß-catenin::RFP RNA and with either Cont-MO or NvStbm-MO. (C) In embryos injected with
the Cont-MO, initially Nvß-catenin::RFP is expressed in all blastomeres as previously shown. (D) By the blastula stage Nvß-catenin::RFP is stabilized
in animal-half derived blastomeres and enters the nuclei in these cells. Similar expression dynamics are seen in NvStbm-MO and Nvß-catenin::RFP
RNA injected embryos at the early cleavage stage (E) and blastula stage (F), indicating that knockdown of NvStbm does not affect Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling. (G-L) Analysis of gene expression in Control- and NvStbm-MO injected embryos. Similar to Cont-MO injected embryos that express
NvSnail (G) and NvFz10 (I) in the endoderm, NvStbm-MO injected embryos also express NvSnail (H) and NvFz10 (J) but show no signs of
archenteron invagination. NvFz5 expression in Cont-MO (K) and NvStbm-MO (L) injected embryos. (M) Quantification of the gastrulation
phenotype in embryos using confocal microscopy shows that in contrast to Uninjected- (94.6%, n = 37) and Control-MO injected (96.8%, n = 31)
embryos which gastrulated normally, very few NvStbm-MO injected embryos displayed an archenteron (9%, n = 66).

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

Page 8 of 15

Figure 5 Nematostella embryos inhibited in ß-catenin signaling fail to specify endoderm, but undergo initial archenteron invagination.
(A-L) Morphological analysis of early (A-F) and late (G-L) gastrula stage embryos that are uninjected controls (A, G), or injected with GFP (B, H),
NvDsh-DIX::GFP (C, I), SpAxin (D, J), Xß-cat-Eng (E,K), or LvCadherin (F, L) mRNA. Nuclei are stained with propidium iodide (red), and F-actin with
phalloidin (green). Similar to controls (A, B), NvDsh-DIX (C), SpAxin (D) and Xß-cat-Eng (E) overexpressing embryos develop a primary
invagination unlike LvCadherin (F) overexpressing embryos. However, while controls develop a normal endodermal epithelium at the late
gastrula stage (G, H), NvDsh-DIX (I), SpAxin (J) and Xß-cat-Eng (K) overexpressing embryos have compacted coelenterons. Cadherin
overexpressing embryos do not show any primary invagination and never develop an endodermal epithelium (L). (M) Quantification of the
different phenotypes in mid and late gastrula stage embryos observed using confocal imaging clearly show that 91.1% (n = 45) of NvDsh-DIX
RNA-injected embryos, 88.4% (n = 43) of SpAxin RNA-injected embryos and 85.7% (n = 49) of ß-catEn RNA-injected embryos cannot maintain the
gut epithelium in contrast to 90.9% (n = 33) of uninjected and 83% (n = 59) of GFP RNA-injected embryos which show a normal endodermal
epithelium. None of the Lvcadherin RNA injected embryos gastrulated (n = 23).

(Figure 6B, E, H, K). Moreover, the NvFz5 ectodermal
marker was expressed in NvDsh-DIX mRNA-injected
embryos in a spatial expression pattern similar to controls (Figure 6M-O). Embryos injected with SpAxin::
GFP and Xß-catEn mRNA, two proven methods to
specifically downregulate Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
[34,35] showed a phenotype similar to embryos overexpressing NvDsh-DIX (Figure 5D,E,J,K,M) supporting
the idea that Nematostella embryos can undergo initial
archenteron invagination in the absence of nuclear ßcatenin and endodermal cell fate specification. In normal embryos, after initial archenteron invagination the
basal ends of the bottle cells at the edge of the blastopore develop processes that interact with the inside
wall of the embryo to extend the archenteron toward
the aboral pole of the embryo [21]. In embryos with

disrupted Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, the archenteron
does not extend most likely due to the absence of
endodermal cell fate specification. Moreover, in these
embryos the epithelium of the archenteron loses its
integrity, indicating that while Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
is not required for initial archenteron invagination, this
signaling pathway is still needed for maintenance of
the endodermal epithelium. We conclude that in
Nematostella, bottle cell formation and primary archenteron invagination can occur in the absence of prior
endoderm specification, but that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is required for maintenance of the integrity of the
endodermal epithelium.
We had previously reported that LvCadherin and XßcatEn mRNA-injected embryos failed to gastrulate based
on the lack of an archenteron [14]. In the experiments

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

Page 9 of 15

Figure 6 Expression of endodermal and ectodermal genes in control and ß-catenin signaling-disrupted Nematostella embryos. (A-O)
WMISH for endodermal and ectodermal markers in uninjected, GFP mRNA- and NvDsh-DIX::GFP mRNA-injected embryos. Control uninjected
(A, D, G, J) and GFP mRNA injected (B, E, H, K) embryos show expression of NvSnail and NvFz10 in the early A, B, G, H) and mid (D, E, J, K)
gastrula stages. In contrast, NvDsh-DIX::GFP mRNA-injected embryos do not express these markers at the early (C, I) or mid (F, L) gastrula
stages. Normal expression of the ectodermal marker NvFz5 is seen in uninjected (M), GFP mRNA injected (N), and NvDsh-DIX::GFP mRNA
(O) injected embryos.

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

where we blocked nuclear ß-catenin by overexpressing
cadherin, we consistently saw loss of endoderm gene
expression and a failure of gastrulation in Nematostella,
phenotypes we have reproduced in this study (Figure 5F, L).
However, if primary archenteron invagination is uncoupled
from endodermal cell fate specification, then LvCadherinoverexpressing embryos should produce bottle cells
and consequently undergo primary invagination, but
we have never observed this (Figure 5F, L, M). A possible explanation for this discrepancy comes from
recent work that has shown that certain cadherins can
affect the actin cytoskeleton [36]. Hence, it is possible
that the lack of bottle cells and primary invagination
in cadherin-overexpressing embryos is due to LvCadherin disrupting the cortical actin in bottle cells,
thereby blocking apical constriction of these cells.
Our observations in the current study that Xß-catEnoverexpressing embryos consistently form a primary
invagination contradict a result from our previous report
[14]. In the previous study we used light microscopy to
analyze the morphology of Nematostella embryos. These
embryos are relatively opaque. Hence it is possible that
the discrepancy between the results of the previous
study and the current study is because when we previously examined Xß-catEn-overexpressing embryos the
blastocoel appeared hollow because the invaginated
archenteron had lost its epithelial integrity, and this
unusual phenotype was undetectable using light microscopy. In the current study, examination of many XßcatEn mRNA-injected embryos using scanning confocal
microscopy clearly showed that these embryos formed a
primary invagination, but these archentera lost their
epithelial integrity by the late gastrula stage (Figure 5E,
K). By using the Dsh-DIX dominant-negative, Axin and
Xß-catEn to downregulate nuclear ß-catenin signaling,
and through careful analysis of these phenotypes using
scanning confocal microscopy and molecular markers,
we show here that endoderm specification is not
required for primary archenteron invagination in Nematostella, and moreover that the epithelium of this initial
archenteron loses its integrity in the absence of nuclear
ß-catenin.

Discussion
In this study, we have presented results that implicate
the core Wnt/PCP protein NvStbm in regulating primary archenteron invagination in Nematostella. We also
show that in this cnidarian, NvStbm-regulated primary
archenteron invagination is independent of Wnt/ßcatenin signaling-dependent endoderm cell fate specification, demonstrating an uncoupling of initial gut morphogenesis from endoderm cell fate specification. Our results
support a model for the evolution of an archenteron in
the last common ancestor to the eumetazoa where

Page 10 of 15

asymmetric localization and activation of Wnt/PCP signaling components at the animal pole induced the cell shape
changes that led to epithelial buckling and morphogenesis
of the first gut. Concomitant or subsequent activation of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in animal pole blastomeres may
have activated a gene regulatory network that specified
endodermal cell fates in the archenteron.
Strabismus and regulation of primary archenteron
invagination in Nematostella

Cnidarians display more diverse gastrulation mechanisms than any other metazoan phylum [12]. However, a
majority of examined anthozoan (and scyphozoan) species gastrulate by invagination, and it has been suggested
that this mechanism was the primitive mode of gastrulation in cnidarians [12]. Typical of other anthozoans,
archenteron formation in Nematostella is initiated by
primary invagination at the animal pole of the embryo.
Our results indicate that NvStbm plays a critical role in
regulating primary invagination, and moreover, that this
protein regulates this process by mediating the formation of bottle cells. NvStbm is expressed maternally and
the protein becomes highly restricted to the apical end
of bottle cells at the blastopore in Nematostella
embryos. Knockdown of NvStbm protein levels results
in the absence of apical constriction of cells at the animal pole, failure of bottle cell formation, and inhibition
of primary archenteron invagination. To the best of our
knowledge, Stbm has not been directly implicated in
bottle cell formation in other metazoans, but this protein plays a critical role in regulating cell polarity and
cell shape changes in many other cellular contexts
[37-40]. Of relevance to the current study is that Stbm
has been implicated in regulating the cell polarity mediating convergence and extension (CE) movements in
vertebrates [37,38,40]. The mechanism of cell polarity
regulation by Stbm during CE is not well understood,
but it is believed to involve proteins in the Wnt/PCP
pathway including Dsh, Prickle, RhoA, ROCK and Rac
[40]. In many developmental contexts, apical constriction of bottle cells is regulated by RhoA-mediated activation of myosin II at the apical cortex [25]. We
currently do not know how NvStbm regulates apical
constriction in Nematostella through the Wnt/PCP
pathway, but some observations suggest a role for
NvDsh in this process. Dsh has been shown to regulate
bottle cell formation in Xenopus embryos, and it is one
of a relatively small number of proteins known to
directly interact with Stbm [39,40]. NvDsh shows an
expression pattern that closely matches the expression
of NvStbm during early embryogenesis [13]. Moreover,
blocking Wnt/PCP signaling in Nematostella by overexpressing Dsh-DEP, a Dsh dominant-negative in the
Wnt/PCP pathway, also leads to failure of bottle cell

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

formation and inhibition of initial archenteron invagination without affecting the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway [41].
Collectively these results suggest that an NvStbm/Dsh
pathway may mediate myosin activation and regulate apical constriction and primary archenteron invagination in
Nematostella. However, these possibilities and the role for
other Wnt/PCP components in early gastrulation events
in this cnidarian need to be addressed in future studies.
Uncoupling of primary archenteron invagination and
endoderm specification in Nematostella

In bilaterian embryos, germ layer specification precedes
gastrulation movements and usually these two events
are very tightly linked [30-32]. Hence, the observation
that endoderm cell fate specification and initial archenteron invagination can be uncoupled in Nematostella is
striking and may provide insight into the evolutionary
ontogeny of a functional gut in metazoans. We used
three different reagents to inhibit the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway, but blocking endoderm cell fate specification
through these perturbations had no effect on the initial
invagination of the archenteron. The primary invagination in Nematostella is initiated by formation of bottle
cells at the animal pole. Our results, therefore, strongly
indicate that endoderm specification is not required for
the formation of bottle cells and for initial archenteron
formation by primary invagination. NvStbm is maternally expressed and becomes localized at the apical ends
of the bottle cells at the blastopore. Since the expression
of this protein would be independent of ß-catenin signaling and endoderm specification, we suggest that
NvStbm can activate apical constriction of bottle cells
and drive primary archenteron invagination without
antecedent endoderm specification (Figure 7A). The
mechanism through which Stbm regulates downstream
signaling is not fully understood in any system [40]. In
Nematostella it is likely that the expression of effectors
of apical constriction of bottle cells downstream of
Stbm are also uncoupled from endoderm specification,
and it will be of great interest to identify these components and determine how they interact with NvStbm to
regulate the formation of bottle cells.
Our observations in Nematostella raise the possibility
that during evolution of gastrulation, initial morphogenesis of the archenteron could have occurred without
prior segregation of an endodermal germ layer. The data
presented here suggest that a maternally expressed Wnt/
PCP pathway component localized to the animal pole in
Nematostella embryos regulates primary archenteron
invagination, while Wnt/ß-catenin signaling mediates
endoderm specification. An important question, however, is whether the mechanisms we observe in Nematostella are restricted to anthozoans, or if they are more
generally seen in the Cnidaria. There is no other

Page 11 of 15

anthozoan model system where mechanisms of endoderm specification and gastrulation are understood at
the molecular level. Similarly, to the best of our knowledge, functional molecular analysis of early embryonic
development has not been done in cubozoans, or in scyphozoans. The fourth cnidarian class comprises the
hydrozoans, and from this group Hydra has proved to
be an important cnidarian model for studying axial patterning in the adult. However, due to technical difficulties of obtaining eggs and embryos, Hydra is not easily
amenable to molecular manipulation during the
embryonic stages [12]. Over the past several years, the
hydrozoan Clytia hemisphaerica has emerged as an
important model system for studying hydrozoan embryogenesis [42]. Elegant work done in Clytia has established the importance of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in
endoderm specification in this organism [15,43]. In this
hydrozoan, oral/endoderm specification is regulated by
CheWnt3, which is localized to the animal pole of the
unfertilized egg. Blocking CheWnt3 using an antisense
morpholino eliminated nuclearization of ß-catenin and
the expression of endodermal markers. However, while
these embryos were delayed in gastrulation, by the planula stage they had what appeared to be a complete
endodermal epithelium [43]. Similar to what we
observed in Nematostella [13, this study], in Clytia, the
archentera of embryos lacking nuclear ß-catenin did not
express any markers of endoderm differentiation [43].
Interestingly, when the translation of CheFz1, a Frizzled
homolog localized to the animal pole of the unfertilized
Clytia egg, was blocked using an antisense morpholino,
these embryos did not nuclearize ß-catenin or express
markers for endoderm, and moreover, they did not
show any signs of gastrulation [15]. Based on the effect
of CheFz1 knockdown on the polarity of the embryo,
these authors suggested that this Frizzled receptor
was involved in endoderm specification through Wnt/ßcatenin signaling, as well as signaling through a Wnt/
PCP pathway. In sum, these results suggest that
morphogenesis of the gut and cell fate specification are
also uncoupled in Clytia, and in this case as well, the
activities are regulated by the two Wnt pathways. Gastrulation in Clytia and most hydrozoans involves ingression rather than invagination, but this process also
involves bottle cell formation by apical constriction of
cells at the blastopore [12,43]. It would be interesting to
determine if Clytia Stbm orthologs and other components of Wnt/PCP signaling affect the formation of bottle cells in this embryo as seen in Nematostella.
Localization of Wnt/PCP components to the animal pole,
and the evolution of gastrulation

Bottle cell formation is a common strategy that is used
to initiate epithelial bending in metazoan embryos [25].

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

Page 12 of 15

Figure 7 Wnt signaling and the evolution of a functional gut. (A) In Nematostella, initial archenteron invagination is regulated by bottle cell
induction by NvStbm, and this can occur independently of endoderm cell fate specification mediated by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Both Wnt
pathways are required for completion of gastrulation. It is possible that a single upstream ligand (X) or receptor (Fz) coordinates the activation of
both branches of Wnt signaling during embryogenesis. (B) Model indicating the co-option of a polarity found in the oocytes of the last
common ancestor to the eumetazoa to locally activate Wnt signaling at the animal pole. The centrosomes associated with the oocyte nucleus at
meiosis served as a scaffold to localize critical Wnt pathway components to the apical pole (a). These components would be inherited by
blastomeres at the animal pole (b), and their activation would drive apical constriction of these cells to form bottle cells (c), leading to the initial
invagination of an archenteron (d). Endoderm specification mediated by Wnt/ß-catenin could have been coordinated with primary archenteron
invagination by a single upstream ligand (A). Alternatively, endoderm specification could have occurred after the evolution of the primary
invagination by the localized activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway at the animal pole.

In particular, bottle cell formation via apical constriction
is widely used to initiate archenteron invagination in
diverse taxa [25]. This highly conserved mechanism for
initiating gastrulation has led to the suggestion that
localized induction of bottle cells could have led to the
initial formation of an archenteron [31]. However, a
molecular mechanism for how the coordinated and spatially localized apical constriction of a group of cells
could have occurred, that is based on deeply conserved
organismic underpinnings has heretofore been missing.
Recent studies have implicated Wnt/PCP pathway components in bottle cell formation during gastrulation
initiation in C. elegans, sea urchins and Xenopus [22-25].
In this study, our data implicate a core component of

the Wnt/PCP pathway in the formation of bottle cells in
embryos of a modern descendant of one of the earliest
diverging metazoan phyla, indicating a possible ancient
co-option of this pathway for mediating apical constriction at one end of the embryo. Other studies have
shown that there is an enrichment of Wnt pathway
components at the animal pole of cnidarian eggs [15,43]
raising an intriguing possibility for the initial evolution
of the archenteron. There is increasing evidence that
Wnt pathway components accumulate at centrosomes
and cilia found in many epithelial cell types [44-46].
The animal pole is defined by the site of polar body
release [6,7], hence oocytes of all metazoans should have
centrosomes localized at this pole during meiosis.

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

Interestingly, oocytes of some invertebrate deuterostomes have a flagellum at the animal pole, and it has
been shown that the AV axis in these animals corresponds to the apical-basal polarity of the germinal
epithelium, suggesting that the AV axis may be homologous to the apical basal polarity of epithelial cells
[47,48]. The prevalence of this character in other taxa is
unknown, but it is likely that cilia/flagella and the centrosomes associated with this organelle are homologous
to the flagellar apparatus in the unicellular protist ancestor of metazoans. Thus, we propose that the centrosomes and flagellum of the protist last common
ancestor of metazoans was the original polarity that was
co-opted during metazoan evolution to enrich components of the Wnt pathway to one end of the eumetazoan oocyte (Figure 7B). Cell autonomous activation
of Wnt/PCP signaling may have led to apical constriction-mediated cell shape change and initial archenteron
invagination. Nuclearization of ß-catenin at the animal
pole by these localized Wnt pathway components may
have activated the expression of gene products that led
to the segregation of a novel germ layer, and the evolution of a functional gut.

Materials and methods
Spawning and gamete handling

Spawning, gamete preparation and embryo culturing
was done as previously described [13].
DNA constructs

PCR was used to amplify full-length NvStbm and partial
fragments of NvFz10 and NvFz5 from cDNA prepared
from mixed-stage Nematostella embryo RNA (primer
sequences and accession numbers are listed in Table 1).
SpAxin::GFP was constructed by PCR-amplifying an
Axin fragment from cDNA prepared from blastula stage
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus embryos, and subcloning
this fragment into pCS2 + GFP. Nvß-catenin::RFP was
made by replacing the GFP sequence in Nvß-catenin::GFP
[13] with RFP. NvDsh-DIX, Lvcadherin and Xß-catEn
(Xenopus ß-catenin fused to the Drosophila Engrailed

Page 13 of 15

repressor domain) constructs have been described
previously [13,18,35]. Constructs used for WMISH were
cloned into pGEM-T. Additional details of construct
synthesis are available upon request.
mRNA synthesis, morpholinos and microinjection

Synthesis of mRNA was done as previously described
[13,14]. Anti-sense morpholino oligonucleotides for
NvStbm (NvStbm-MO; 5’ GCGCTAAACTTGTTACAATCACAGC 3’) and standard control morpholinos
(5’ CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTATA 3’) were
synthesized at Gene Tools (Philomath, OR, USA)
(Table 1). The NvStbm MO was a translation blocking
morpholino designed to bind to the 5’ UTR of the
NvStbm mRNA immediately upstream of the translation start site. Morpholinos and synthetic RNA were
diluted in 40% glycerol, and control RNAs were
injected at the same molar concentrations as the RNAs
coding for the experimental constructs. Injected
embryos were cultured at 25°C in 1/3X seawater.
Antibody production and Western blot analysis

Anti-NvStbm polyclonal rabbit antibodies were raised
against a selected sequence corresponding to amino acids
308 to 322 of NvStbm (NH2-TASSQGRRNPGRNDRCOOH), and affinity-purified using the immunizing peptide (Bethyl Labs, Montgomery, TX, USA). Western blots
were performed as previously described [13,14]. AntiNvStbm and anti-ß-Tubulin (DSHB, Iowa City, IA, USA)
antibodies were used at 1:750 and 1:1000 dilutions, respectively. Goat anti-Rabbit IRDye 680 (1:12,000) and Goat
anti-Mouse IRDye 800 (1:12,000) were used as secondary
antibodies (LI-COR, Lincoln, NE, USA). Stained Western
blots were analyzed using an Odyssey Infrared Imager and
the Odyssey software (LI-COR).
Immunochemistry, whole mount RNA in situ hybridization
and microscopy

Immunochemistry and WMISH was performed as previously described [13]. Anti-NvStbm and mouse antihistone antibodies (Millipore, MA, USA) were used at

Table 1 Primer sequences used to clone various cDNAs used in this study
Gene or Construct Accession No: Primers

Template

Vector

NvStbm (in situ
1526895:4
hybridization probe)

Forward 5’ CGACAAAGCGAACCAATGTTTACTCT 3’
Reverse 5’ CCGACATCATGTAAGGGTTATACTCA 3’

Mixed stage N.vectensis cDNA

pGEM

NvStbm (Full-length) 1526895:4

Forward 5’GCCGGAATTCATGCCGCAATATCGTACCAAAGAC 3’ Mixed stage N.vectensis cDNA
Reverse 5’ GCCTAGGCCTGACGGAGGTCTCCGAATTTAACTTG 3’

pCS2+GFP

NvFz10

XP_001630630 Forward 5’ AGTACGATCAGTGCGTCCCCCAATG 3’
Reverse 5’ CCGCCACGACTTGAATGTTTTTGTAG 3’

Mixed stage N.vectensis cDNA

pGEM

NvFz5

XP_001634995 Forward 5’ GCGAAGAGATCACCATTCCCATGTGC 3’
Reverse 5’ ACCCACCAAACAGAGGAAGCCATTC 3’

Mixed stage N.vectensis cDNA

pGEM

SpAxin

XP_781992

Forward 5’ GCCGGAATTCATGAGTCTAGAAGTGTATAGGTTC 3’ Blastula stage S. purpuratus cDNA pCS2+GFP
Reverse 5’ GCCGAGGCCTGTGATCATCGACAGATTCCACCTG 3’

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

1:100 and 1:250 dilutions, respectively. Immunostained
embryos were examined using a Leica TCS SP5 scanning confocal microscope.
Abbreviations
AV: Animal-vegetal; CE: Convergence and extension; Dsh: Dishevelled; Fz10:
Frizzled 10; Fz5: Frizzled 5; GFP: Green fluorescent protein; Hpf: Hours post
fertilization; Lv: Lytechinus variegatus; MO: Morpholino; Nv: Nematostella
vectensis; PCR: Polymerase chain reaction; RFP: Red fluorescent protein; Sp:
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus; Stbm: Strabismus; WMISH: Whole mount in situ
hybridization; Wnt/PCP pathway: Wnt/Planar Cell Polarity pathway; Xß-catEn:
Xenopus ß-catenin engrailed;
Acknowledgements
We thank Y. Marikawa and J. Baker for critical reading of the manuscript and
suggestions, and Joanna Kobayashi for technical assistance. We also thank
three anonymous reviewers whose suggestions substantially improved this
manuscript. This work was supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation (IOS 0720365) to AHW.
Author details
Department of Biology, The University of Miami, 1301 Memorial Drive, Coral
Gables, FL 33146, USA. 2Department of Zoology, 2538 McCarthy Mall, The
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA. 3These authors
contributed equally to the paper.
1

Authors’ contributions
SK, NW and AHW designed the research. SK, NW and RX performed the
research. SK, NW and AHW analyzed the data and wrote the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Received: 22 August 2010 Accepted: 21 January 2011
Published: 21 January 2011
References
1. King N: The unicellular ancestry of animal development. Dev Cell 2004,
7:313-325.
2. Rokas A: The origins of multicellularity and the history of the genetic
toolkit for animal development. Annual Rev Genet 2008, 42:235-251.
3. Martindale MQ: The evolution of metazoan axial properties. Nat Rev Genet
2005, 6:917-927.
4. Willmer P: Invertebrate Relationships. Patterns in Animal Evolution Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 1990.
5. Wolpert L: Gastrulation and the evolution of development. Development
1992, 7-13.
6. Goldstein B, Freeman G: Axis specification in animal development.
BioEssays 1997, 19:105-116.
7. Martindale MQ, Hejnol A: A developmental perspective: changes in the
position of the blastopore during bilaterian evolution. Dev Cell 2009,
17:162-174.
8. Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P, Pick K, Borchiellini C, Boury-Esnault N,
Vacelet J, Renard E, Houliston E, Quéinnec E, Da Silva C, Wincker P, Le
Guyader H, Leys S, Jackson DJ, Schreiber F, Erpenbeck D, Morgenstern B,
Wörheide G, Manuel M: Phylogenomics revives traditional views on deep
animal relationships. Curr Biol 2009, 19:706-712.
9. Srivastava M, Begovic E, Chapman J, Putnam NH, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Kuo A, Mitros T, Salamov A, Carpenter ML, Signorovitch AY, Moreno MA,
Kamm K, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Shapiro H, Grigoriev IV, Buss LW,
Schierwater B, Dellaporta SL, Rokhsar DS: The Trichoplax genome and the
nature of placozoans. Nature 2008, 454:955-960.
10. Ereskovsky AV: The Comparative Embryology of Sponges New York: Springer;
2010.
11. Schierwater B: My favorite animal, Trichoplax adhaerens. BioEssays 2005,
27:1294-1302.
12. Byrum CA, Martindale MQ: Gastrulation in the Cnidaria and Ctenophora.
In Gastrulation from cells to embryo. Edited by: Stern C. Cold Spring Harbor:
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2004:33-50.

Page 14 of 15

13. Lee P, Kumburegama S, Marlow HQ, Martindale MQ, Wikramanayake AH:
Asymmetric developmental potential along the animal-vegetal axis in
the anthozoan cnidarian, Nematostella vectensis, is mediated by
dishevelled. Dev Biol 2007, 310:169-186.
14. Wikramanayake AH, Hong M, Lee PN, Pang K, Byrum CA, Bince JM, Xu R,
Martindale MQ: An ancient role for nuclear ß-catenin in the evolution
of axial polarity and germ layer segregation. Nature 2003,
426:446-450.
15. Momose T, Houliston E: Two oppositely localised frizzled RNAs as axis
determinants in a cnidarian embryo. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e70.
16. Henry JQ, Perry KJ, Wever J, Seaver E, Martindale MQ: ß-catenin is required
for the establishment of vegetal embryonic fates in the nemertean,
Cerebratulus lacteus. Dev Biol 2008, 317:368-379.
17. Schneider S, Steinbeisser H, Warga RM, Hausen P: Beta-catenin
translocation into nuclei demarcates the dorsalizing centers in frog and
fish embryos. Mech Dev 1996, 57:191-198.
18. Logan CY, Miller JR, Ferkowicz MJ, McClay DR: Nuclear beta-catenin is
required to specify vegetal cell fates in the sea urchin embryo.
Development 1999, 126:345-357.
19. Martindale MQ, Pang K, Finnerty JR: Investigating the origins of
triploblasty: “Mesodermal” gene expression in a diploblastic animal, the
sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis (Phylum Cnidaria; Class Anthozoa).
Development 2004, 131:2463-2474.
20. Kraus Y, Technau U: Gastrulation in the sea anemone Nematostella
vectensis occurs by invagination and immigration: an ultrastructural
study. Dev Genes Evol 2006, 216:119-132.
21. Magie CR, Daly M, Martindale MQ: Gastrulation in the cnidarian
Nematostella vectensis occurs via invagination not ingression. Dev Biol
2007, 305:483-497.
22. Lee JY, Marston DJ, Walston T, Hardin J, Halberstadt A, Goldstein B: Wnt/
Frizzled signaling controls C. elegans gastrulation by activating
actomyosin contractility. Curr Biol 2006, 16:1986-1997.
23. Croce J, Duloquin L, Lhomond G, McClay DR, Gache C: Frizzled5/8 is
required in secondary mesenchyme cells to initiate archenteron
invagination during sea urchin development. Development 2006,
133:547-557.
24. Choi SC, Sokol SY: The involvement of lethal giant larvae and Wnt
signaling in bottle cell formation in Xenopus embryos. Dev Biol 2009,
336:68-75.
25. Sawyer JM, Harrell JR, Shemer G, Sullivan-Brown J, Roh-Johnson M,
Goldstein B: Apical constriction: A cell shape change that can drive
morphogenesis. Dev Biol 2010, 341:5-19.
26. Sherrard K, Robin F, Lemaire P, Munro E: Sequential activation of apical
and basolateral contractility drives ascidian endoderm invagination. Curr
Biol 2010, 20:1499-1510.
27. Simons M, Mlodzik M: Planar cell polarity signaling: from fly development
to human disease. Annu Rev Genet 2008, 42:517-540.
28. Sullivan JC, Ryan JF, Watson JA, Webb J, Mullikin JC, Rokhsar D, Finnerty JR:
StellaBase: the Nematostella vectensis Genomics Database. Nucleic Acids
Res 2006, 34(Database issue):D495-499.
29. Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, Sørensen MV, Haddock SH, SchmidtRhaesa A, Okusu A, Kristensen RM, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G:
Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution of the animal tree of
life. Nature 2008, 452:745-749.
30. Rodaway A, Patient R: Mesendoderm: An ancient germ layer? Cell 2001,
105:169-172.
31. Leptin M: Gastrulation movements: the logic and the nuts and bolts. Dev
Cell 2005, 8:305-320.
32. Heisenberg C, Solnica-Krezel L: Back and forth between cell fate
specification and movement during vertebrate gastrulation. Curr Opin
Gen Dev 2008, 18:311-316.
33. van Amerongen R, Nusse R: Towards an integrated view of Wnt signaling
in development. Development 2009, 136:3205-3214.
34. Sakanaka C, Weiss JB, Williams LT: Bridging of beta-catenin and glycogen
synthase kinase-3beta by axin and inhibition of beta-catenin-mediated
transcription. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:3020-3023.
35. Montross WT, Ji H, McCrea PD: A ß-catenin/engrailed chimera selectively
suppresses Wnt signaling. J Cell Sci 2000, 113:1759-1770.
36. Nandadasa S, Tao Q, Menon NR, Heasman J, Wylie C: N- and E-cadherins
in Xenopus are specifically required in the neural and non-neural

Kumburegama et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:2
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/2

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.
43.

44.
45.
46.

47.

48.

49.
50.

Page 15 of 15

ectoderm, respectively, for F-actin assembly and morphogenetic
movements. Development 2009, 136:1327-1338.
Goto T, Davidson L, Asashima M, Keller R: Planar cell polarity genes
regulate polarized extracellular matrix deposition during frog
gastrulation. Curr Biol 2005, 15:787-793.
Jessen JR, Topczewski J, Bingham S, Sepich DS, Marlow F, Chandrasekhar A,
Solnica-Krezel L: Zebrafish trilobite identifies new roles for strabismus in
gastrulation and neuronal movements. Nat Cell Biol 2002, 4:610-615.
Babstock R, Strutt H, Strutt D: Strabismus is asymmetrically localized and
binds to Prickle and Dishevelled during Drosophila planar polarity
patterning. Development 2003, 130:3007-3014.
Torban E, Kor C, Gros P: Van Gogh-like2 (Strabismus) and its role in planar
cell polarity and convergent extension in vertebrates. Trends Genet 2004,
20:570-577.
Kumburegama S: Evolution of germ layers: insight from Wnt signaling in
a cnidarian, Nematostella vectensis. Ph.D. thesis University of Hawaii at
Manoa, Zoology Department; 2009.
Houliston E, Momose T, Manuel M: Clytia hemisphaerica: a jellyfish cousin
joins the laboratory. Trends Genet 2010, 26:159-167.
Momose T, Derelle R, Houliston E: A maternally localized Wnt ligand
required for axial patterning in the cnidarian Clytia hemisphaerica.
Development 2008, 135:2105-2113.
Bisgrove B, Yost HJ: The roles of cilia in developmental disorders and
disease. Development 2006, 133:4131-4143.
Gerdes JM, Davis EE, Katsanis N: The vertebrate primary cilium in
development, homeostasis, and disease. Cell 2009, 137:32-45.
Koji K, Yohei N, Katsumi K, Akira K: Dishevelled, a Wnt signaling
component, is involved in mitotic progression in cooperation with Plk 1.
EMBO Journal 2010, 29:3470-3483.
Frick JE, Ruppert EE: Primordial germ cells of Synaptula hydriformis
(Holothuroidea; Echinodermata) are epithelial flagellated-collar cells:
their apical-basal polarity becomes primary egg polarity. Biol Bull 1996,
191:168-177.
Frick JE, Ruppert EE: Primordial germ cells and oocytes of Branchiostoma
virginiae (Cephalochordata, Acrania) are flagellated epithelial cells:
relationship between epithelial and primary egg polarity. Zygote 1997,
5:139-151.
Maddison WP, Maddison DR: MacClade: Analysis of Phylogeny and Character
Evolution Sunderland Mass: Sinauer; 1992.
Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.

doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-2
Cite this article as: Kumburegama et al.: Strabismus-mediated primary
archenteron invagination is uncoupled from Wnt/b-catenin-dependent
endoderm cell fate specification in Nematostella vectensis
(Anthozoa, Cnidaria): Implications for the evolution of gastrulation.
EvoDevo 2011 2:2.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
