<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Developing a community-based genetic nomenclature for anole lizards</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-554"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kenro Kusumi"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Developing a community-based genetic
nomenclature for anole lizards
Kusumi et al.

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554 (11 November 2011)

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

CORRESPONDENCE

Open Access

Developing a community-based genetic
nomenclature for anole lizards
Kenro Kusumi1*, Rob J Kulathinal2*, Arhat Abzhanov3, Stephane Boissinot4, Nicholas G Crawford5,
Brant C Faircloth6, Travis C Glenn7, Daniel E Janes3, Jonathan B Losos3,8, Douglas B Menke9, Steven Poe10,
Thomas J Sanger3,8, Christopher J Schneider5, Jessica Stapley11, Juli Wade12 and Jeanne Wilson-Rawls1

Abstract
Background: Comparative studies of amniotes have been hindered by a dearth of reptilian molecular sequences.
With the genomic assembly of the green anole, Anolis carolinensis available, non-avian reptilian genes can now be
compared to mammalian, avian, and amphibian homologs. Furthermore, with more than 350 extant species in the
genus Anolis, anoles are an unparalleled example of tetrapod genetic diversity and divergence. As an important
ecological, genetic and now genomic reference, it is imperative to develop a standardized Anolis gene
nomenclature alongside associated vocabularies and other useful metrics.
Results: Here we report the formation of the Anolis Gene Nomenclature Committee (AGNC) and propose a
standardized evolutionary characterization code that will help researchers to define gene orthology and paralogy
with tetrapod homologs, provide a system for naming novel genes in Anolis and other reptiles, furnish
abbreviations to facilitate comparative studies among the Anolis species and related iguanid squamates, and
classify the geographical origins of Anolis subpopulations.
Conclusions: This report has been generated in close consultation with members of the Anolis and genomic
research communities, and using public database resources including NCBI and Ensembl. Updates will continue to
be regularly posted to new research community websites such as lizardbase. We anticipate that this standardized
gene nomenclature will facilitate the accessibility of reptilian sequences for comparative studies among tetrapods
and will further serve as a template for other communities in their sequencing and annotation initiatives.

Background
As the rate of generating new sequence assemblies continues to accelerate, the final bottleneck that remains is
annotation. While automated pipelines have been developed, it is still up to community initiatives to pool, evaluate, integrate, and disseminate the necessary resources
required for functional and comparative annotations
that support research needs. The presence of multiple
tools and resources, and changing assemblies and annotations, presents “moving-target” challenges for those
attempting to assign function, orthology, nomenclature
and other common vocabulary to genetic loci. One
* Correspondence: kenro.kusumi@asu.edu; robkulathinal@temple.edu
1
School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, PO Box 874501, Tempe, AZ
85287-4501, USA
2
Department of Biology, Temple University, 1900 N. 12th Street, Philadelphia,
PA 19122, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

challenge is that many assemblies are, or will be, periodically updated due to resequencing efforts that aim to
fill in ever-present gaps, initiatives to provide a consensus reference sequence that takes into account the polymorphism present in a species, or a re-deployment of
different assembly algorithms. The second challenge is
that the generation of confidently assigned gene models
on a fixed assembly generally correlates with the
amount of effort that a community puts into annotating
their genome of interest. A third challenge relates to the
principle that orthologous (and by association, functional) assignments are interdependent on the quality
and quantity of annotations from closely related
genomes.
The recent publication of the genome sequence of
the green anole, Anolis carolinensis, offers a rich trove
of opportunities for biologists [1]. Comparing vertebrate genomes holds the promise to solve such

© 2011 Kusumi et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

questions as unmasking the genetic basis of human
disease in addition to understanding common evolutionary processes. Whole genome sequencing efforts in
vertebrates have been carried out for 39 species of
mammals (10 primates, 8 rodents, 12 laurasiatherians,
3 afrotherians, 2 xenarthrans, 3 marsupials, 1 monotreme), 3 birds (avian reptiles), 1 amphibian, and 5 teleost species [2,3]. Non-avian reptiles are missing from
this taxonomic survey of genomes, and the publication
of a whole genome assembly for the green anole helps
to fill this gap [1]. As a complement to this effort, a
growing number of online resources are available for
the Anolis community (Table 1).
Mammals, birds, and non-avian reptiles are grouped
as amniotes, due to shared features including a characteristic egg adapted to terrestrial reproduction. Within
the amniotes, mammals are estimated to have diverged
over 300 million years ago (mya) from the reptiles [4].
Within the Reptilia are three major lineages: the Archosauria, which contains crocodilians, dinosaurs and birds
and whose most recent common ancestor lived approximately 250 mya; the Lepidosauria, which contains the
Squamata (lizards and snakes) and the tuatara (a lizardlike reptile found only in New Zealand); and the Anapsida or turtles. For comparative genomic analysis, this
first non-avian reptile sequence will be invaluable as an
outgroup for comparative analyses of an increasing
number of amniote sequences.
For the past century, A. carolinensis, which is native to
the southeastern US, has been a lizard of choice for
comparative studies in ecology, evolutionary biology,
behavior, physiology and neuroscience. With genomic
and transcriptomic sequences available, A. carolinensis is
also emerging as an important model organism for cellular, molecular, developmental and regenerative studies.
Furthermore, A. carolinensis is only one of over 350

Page 2 of 13

described species of Anolis, making it a member of one
of the most species-rich clades of tetrapods [4].
Comparative genomic research at all taxonomic levels
would be facilitated by a consistent system of gene
nomenclature for A. carolinensis as the first sequenced
non-avian reptile. Towards this goal, members of the
Anolis research community have established the Anolis
Gene Nomenclature Committee (AGNC) to generate
and maintain standardized gene vocabularies. As a companion to the publication of the first non-avian reptile
genome, we present this report as the first step in an
evolving document.

Report and Discussion
Establishing evolutionary metrics to help evaluate
orthology between anoles and other vertebrates

As an approach in the annotation process, finding
orthologous relationships across species has become an
important tool to evaluate gene identity [5]. However,
determining gene orthology is not a trivial exercise. Vertebrate genomes have experienced a dynamic flux of
activity from countless deletions and duplications, a
constant stream of genomic rearrangements (including
at least two whole genome duplications), and divergence
in both gene expression and protein function. Fortunately, for many genes, orthologs can be reliably determined based on reciprocal protein similarity. For other
genes, divergence in sequence requires data from synteny (gene order) conservation and functional analysis
to also be considered. Below, we present the challenges
involved in maintaining an evolving and communityaccepted record of gene ancestry, and briefly review the
current state of assigning orthology using presently
available resources and tools. Proposed criteria for evaluating gene orthology and paralogy are offered below
with an aim to present a multi-metric summary for each

Table 1 Anolis online databases and resources
db Name

Resources/Tools Available

URL

Anole Annals

• Blog updated regularly and focused on the latest Anolis
research

http://www.anoleannals.wordpress.com

Anolis Genome
Anolis Genome
Project
Anolis Newsletter

• Anolis genomic and expression data
• Primary site for genome sequencing effort by the Broad
Institute
• Manuscripts and reports generated by the Anolis community

http://www.anolisgenome.org
http://www.broadinstitute.org/models/anole

Ensembl

• Anolis carolinensis portal, genome and annotations

http://www.ensembl.org/Anolis_carolinensis/Info/Index

lizardbase

• Anolis genome browser
• GIS data mapping
• Gene nomenclature resources
• Anolis educational materials

http://www.lizardbase.org

NCBI Unigene

• Anolis carolinensis transcripts

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/UniGene/UGOrg.cgi?
TAXID=28377

UCSC

• Anolis carolinensis portal
• Comparative genomic tracks

http://www.genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgGateway

http://anolis.oeb.harvard.edu

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

gene that offers a measure of the confidence with which
the investigator can assign orthology.
Resources and challenges for assigning orthology

Confidence in genome assembly High quality whole
genome assemblies are essential for confidence in
comparative analysis. The genome of A. carolinensis
(estimated to be 1.78 Gbp) was first assembled in
March 2007 via shotgun reads to a depth of 6.85X
(AnoCar1.0) [1]. The second iteration of genome
assembly (AnoCar2.0) was released in May 2010 and
included increased coverage (7.10X). The Anocar2.0
assembly incorporated 6,645 scaffolds comprised of
41,985 contigs with a supercontig N50 of 4.0 Mbp.
Scaffolds were anchored to chromosomes by FISH
mapping using 405 BACs. Increased genome coverage
from new sequencing efforts is anticipated in the
upcoming years. Improved assemblies will allow for
conserved syntenic blocks to be more easily recognized thereby greatly assisting in identifying orthologs
with confidence.
Confidence in gene models Our inference of gene
orthology depends on the quality of gene annotations
among the multiple species compared. Awaiting large
public genome databases such as EMBL-EBI/Sanger’s
Ensembl and NCBI’s UniGene to generate gene models
and clusters provides a trouble-free route to reliable
annotations; however, the lag time from assembly
release to initiating an annotation build currently
remains at least four months and can take over an
entire year to become publicly available. Presently,
Ensembl generates a fairly quick and reliable gene build
that is based on a combination of ab initio gene predictions, comparative genomics, and incorporation of
experimental (e.g., ESTs) resources (doi:10.1101/
gr.1858004). Ensembl GeneBuild58.1b dramatically
increased the number of genes annotated in A. carolinensis from a pre-genome list of 36 loci to a genomewide set (based on AnoCar1.0) of 11,932 loci. Of these
initial annotations, 4,793 new genes were discovered
along with 471 pseudogenes and 3,099 RNA genes comprising a total count of 20,885 transcripts. In contrast,
UniGene clusters ESTs and mRNAs: as a result UniGene Build version 2 described 26,575 transcript clusters. So, how do we compare the quality of each of
these annotation sets? An interesting feature used by
some model organism databases is the application of
confidence scores. In FlyBase [6] a single digit scoring
metric is assigned based on evaluating three different
classes of evidence: ab initio gene prediction algorithms,
aligned nucleotide sequences and overlapping regions of
protein similarity. FlyBase plans to refine their transcript
confidence to include support from comparative genomics, proteomic analyses, and to potentially provide
details on the magnitude and quality of each type of

Page 3 of 13

support. Comparable approaches are planned to be
developed for A. carolinensis (see below).
Confidence in aligned assemblies from nearby taxa
The paucity of amphibian and reptilian sequences compared with mammalian genomes presents a challenge
for comparative analysis. When entire vertebrate clades
depend on the annotations of a single genome, errors in
comparative analysis are likely. As more annotated
assemblies become available, we should be able to test
and refine current assignments of orthologous and paralogous relationships. Yet, not all annotations are created
equally, with model organisms such as chicken, mouse,
rat and zebrafish having more comprehensive annotations due to greater allocated resources and larger active
research communities. Therefore, the challenge is to
develop an annotation approach that keeps pace with
the rapidly expanding number of whole genome
sequences being produced.
Currently available orthology pipelines Ancestral relationships between loci from selected species can be
extracted via a variety of ready-built pipelines. The
major databanks provide orthology/paralogy relationships for completed genomes through the implementation of well-established data workflows. Ensembl’s
orthology and paralogy relationships are based on a
maximum likelihood tree-building algorithm, TreeBeST
[7]. NCBI’s Homologene uses a clustering approach
based on an initial blastp search [8]. The UCSC Genome
Browser also generates a comparative genomic table on
selected sequenced species [9,10]. A number of other
databases that specifically identify orthology/homology
include the Orthologs Matrix Project (OMA) [11,12],
InParanoid [13,14], TreeFam [15,16], Optic [17,18], and
Evola [19,20]. Interestingly, HUGO (Human Genome
Organization) has constructed a meta-comparison tool,
HCOP (Human Gene Nomenclature Committee Comparison of Orthology Predictions), that records whether
an orthology call has evidence in each of the beforementioned pipelines, hence, providing a valuable evaluative resource to assess overall confidence [21]. A major
challenge for bioinformatics research is to keep up with
an ever-changing landscape of software tools. Workflow
evaluations must be performed on a regular basis by
computer-savvy researchers but, most importantly, the
results must be validated by knowledgeable biologists.
Towards community-driven evaluations of orthology

With an accelerated increase in genomic sequence data,
even a well-organized mechanism to assign orthology
can be overwhelmed. A community-driven effort to
characterize a gene’s evolutionary history as well as our
confidence in summarizing it will be useful to the community and beyond. We propose that the Anolis
research community work together to initiate and ultimately complement these efforts to build a pipeline that

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

follows a common set of guidelines and relationships
with the large genomic databanks. Towards this end, the
AGNC has established working relationships with representatives from a network of relevant databases.
Developing a common set of guidelines is the major
focus of the AGNC in the upcoming year. Ultimately,
we aim to generate a weighted point system, considering
the different types of characteristics being compared. In
situations where there is still substantial ambiguity, the
AGNC plans to work with the researchers and database
community for preliminary assignments. In the interim,
we propose the following framework as a starting point:
Species/taxa for comparative analysis Multiple alignment programs such as ClustalW [22], MUSCLE [23]
and T-COFFEE [24] provide accessible tools to align
multiple species. The presence or absence of reliable
alignments can tell us which lineage this gene is limited
to. All comparative analyses should include a common
starting set of genomes to align to:
• Mammals: 2 eutherians, preferably mouse and
human, plus marsupial and monotreme genes if
available.
• Birds (avian reptiles): zebra finch and chicken
• Non-avian reptiles: Any additional gene sequences
as available, particularly for non-squamate species
(turtles or crocodilians)
• Amphibians: Xenopus tropicalis and additional
genomes as available
• Teleosts: Zebrafish and Fugu rubripes or Tetraodon
nigroviridis should be included. Additional teleosts
(stickleback, medaka) can also be analyzed.
• Non-vertebrate chordates: Either Ciona intestinalis
or savignyi can serve as a stem alternative to Drosophila melanogaster, if available.
Protein sequence analysis Sequence analysis programs
such as MEGA [25] and PAML [26] provide accessible
tools to analyze protein alignment across multiple species. Protein divergence will be estimated using dN
(amino acid divergence) and dS (silent site divergence)
using a codon-substitution matrix. There will be much
variation in divergence estimates across proteins; however, confidence in alignment can be evaluated by comparing these estimates to other proteins. In particular,
dS will serve as a neutral divergence marker among vertebrates while dN will provide a rough indicator of
sequence alignment quality across larger phylogenetic
distances.
Orthology/Paralogy relationships Using the alignments, it will be informative to extract copy number
information for each gene. A number of databases also
provide this information (e.g., Ensembl) in their orthology pipelines. Relationships such as 1:1, 1:n, n:n (where

Page 4 of 13

n is an integer) are instructive to users interested in
gene families and how they evolved between lizards and
a reference genome such as chicken.
Predicted transcript sequence analysis Building on an
approach used by FlyBase [6], each transcript receives a
score based on a single-digit octal notation and the sum
of the following categories (to an 8 point maximum):
• 1 point if one or more aligned EST sequences
aligns to the annotated transcript,
• 2 points if an annotated exon intersects a region of
aligned protein similarity (of course, similarity to self
is excluded),
• 4 points if there is any gene prediction that is fully
consistent with the annotated transcript, and
• 8 points if one or more aligned cDNAs are fully
consistent with the annotated transcript.
Experimentally defined transcript sequence and alternative splicing EST or full-length cDNA transcript
sequence is highly preferable to predicted annotations
and should be used at every opportunity. Suggested
parameters are currently as defined above. For alternative splicing, the identification of similar patterns of
alternative splicing in the species being compared
greatly increases confidence that there is an orthologous
relationship.
Synteny conservation Minimally, orthology could be
recognized by the presence of at least 2 orthologous
genes, from Gallus gallus, on either the 5’ or 3’ flanking
sequences and in sequential order. Confidence increases
with additional orthologous genes on one flank, or synteny conservation on both flanking regions.
Gene expression Following gene duplication events,
divergence of regulatory control regions can lead to differentiation in tissue specificity and timing of gene
expression in paralogous genes. These regulatory regions
are considered part of the gene being compared, but it
is not straightforward to assign a score to this divergence. Genes that appear to be orthologous by the measures above can still display strikingly different gene
expression, raising the question of whether the regulatory gene functionality has diverged in an opposing fashion to that of the protein coding sequence. This is one
of the most difficult comparisons to evaluate, and as
more comparative analyses are reported, the AGNC
aims to develop proposals regarding how genes should
be annotated when sequence and expression suggest
contradictory findings about the descent of gene
functionality.
Much of the above information can be collated into a
single colon-separated string that provides the AGNC
with a single metric to evaluate nomenclature, and the
user with an instant confidence metric. Since this

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

evolutionary character code (ECC) would change
depending on the input data, the metric would simply
be linked to the gene as a separate feature. As an example, a hypothetical “gene2” would be annotated with the
gene description, gene2:chordates:80,55:1-1:5:3,4:TS,
meaning that gene2 has orthology only within chordates
with, respectively, 80% and 55% overall protein and
nucleotide identity (alternatively, dN and dS can be
used), it doesn’t possess paralogs within and between
species (chicken), it has both gene prediction and EST
evidence (an octal score of 5), 3 genes upstream with
synteny conservation with the reference species and 4
genes downstream, and tissue-specific expression in a
cross-species comparison (e.g., with mouse).
With the adoption of a reliable set of orthologous
relationships, downstream functional and comparative
annotations and alignments that can be used by the
entire community could quickly be generated. As an
example, gene ontologies (GO) can be easily transferred
after orthologies are assigned. Since the chicken genome
is one of the twelve “reference” genomes that the Gene
Ontology database is carefully annotating with controlled ontological vocabulary [27], the A. carolinensis
genome is in an excellent position to be annotated reliably with associated GO terms.
These data must be quickly disseminated to the community via regularly updated databases. The Anolis community currently has a database that is preparing for the
next generation of data sets. lizardbase [28] is the primary community website and anole resource that
includes a mapping portal for both geographical and
genome-based data. It is critical that such communityserving databases coordinate the effort to provide consensus datasets.
Nomenclature for Anolis gene names and symbols

Analysis of the chicken and zebra finch genomes has
demonstrated that while a majority of genes can be
assigned clear orthologs, functional genes unique to the
avian lineage require additional analysis [29]. With the
A. carolinensis genome, the challenge is for gene
nomenclature to both clearly point out orthology with
other vertebrates and allow for identification of nonavian, reptile-specific genes. The AGNC has reviewed
guidelines issued by gene nomenclature organizations
from mammalian (Human Gene Nomenclature Committee, HUGO; International Committee on Standardized Gene Nomenclature for Mice), avian reptile
(Chicken Gene Nomenclature Committee) [30], amphibian (Xenbase) [31,32], and teleost (ZFIN, Zebrafish
Information Network) [33,34] communities.
A major consideration for gene nomenclature in A.
carolinensis is flexibility for comparisons with other
amniote genomes. Given that the most frequent

Page 5 of 13

comparisons of Anolis genes would likely be with
human, mouse, or chicken orthologs, the AGNC proposes using a gene symbol style that would allow the
reader to infer the species based on the symbol alone.
For a hypothetical gene named “gene2”, likely species
for cross-comparison are:
GENE2, human (Homo sapiens): all capitals,
italicized
Gene2, mouse (Mus musculus): first letter capitalized, italicized
GENE2, chicken (Gallus gallus): all capitals, italicized
gene2, Xenopus tropicalis: all lower case, italicized
gene2, zebrafish (Danio rerio): all lower case,
italicized
To make it easier to distinguish a reference to an Anolis gene in comparisons with human, mouse, and avian
orthologs, the AGNC proposes a gene symbol style similar to Xenopus tropicalis and zebrafish, i.e.,
gene2, Anolis carolinensis: all lower case, italicized
Further details of these guidelines are presented
below.
Gene symbols

• Gene symbols for all Anolis species should be written in lower case only and in italics, e.g., gene2.
• Whenever criteria for orthology have been met
(previous Section), the Anolis gene symbol should be
comparable to the human gene symbol, e.g., if the
human gene symbol is GENE2, then the Anolis gene
symbol would be gene2. In situations where the
human and mouse symbols differ, the AGNC
requests that the investigator contact the AGNC
through lizardbase to determine a suitable gene
symbol for Anolis.
• Orthologous genes in other Anolis species should
have the same gene symbol and name as A. carolinensis. A proposed abbreviation code system for
comparisons within the genus covering Anolis species is presented below (see section below; Table 1).
• Gene symbols should only contain ASCII characters (Latin alphabet, Arabic numerals)
• Punctuation (dashes, periods, slashes) should not
be used unless they are part of a human or mouse
gene symbol, e.g., if the human gene symbol is
NKX3-1, then the Anolis gene symbol should be
nkx3-1.
• Gene names: In other model systems, a unique
database of gene symbols is typically maintained by
a gene nomenclature committee, but there is more
variability for the full gene name. Whenever possible,
the human or mouse gene name should be used, but

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

omitting references to homology or disease descriptions, e.g., “delta-like 1”, not “delta-like 1 (Drosophila)”. Provisional human or mouse gene names, e.
g., KIAA# or C#orf, should not be used as the basis
for a gene name in Anolis species.
• Novel gene names and symbols: If an orthologous
gene cannot be identified in any currently sequenced
genome, a novel name may be selected by the investigators. The name should ideally be brief and convey information about the gene expression or
function but not include proper or commercial
names, e.g., yep1, yolk expressed protein 1. References to molecular weight should be avoided, i.e., do
not use p35, 35 kDal protein.
• Gene symbols should not start with an “A” or “Ac”
as an abbreviation for Anolis carolinensis, i.e., not
acgene2. Gene symbols may start with “a” or “ac” if
the human or mouse ortholog starts with these letters, e.g., actb for beta-actin.
• Using criteria for orthology described in the previous objective, duplication of the Anolis ortholog of
a mammalian gene will be indicated by an “a” or “b”
suffix, e.g., gene2a and gene2b. If the mammalian
gene symbol already contains a suffix letter, then
there would be a second letter added, e.g., gene4aa
and gene4ab.
Protein symbols

• Protein symbols should be the same as the gene
symbol except written in all upper case without italics, e.g., GENE2.

Nomenclature for Anolis non-coding sequences, including
transposons and repetitive elements

The classification and nomenclature of transposable elements presents a particular challenge because of the
large diversity of transposons in eukaryotic genomes.
Several classification and naming schemes have been
proposed but there is currently no consensus on how
transposons should be annotated [35,36]. An ideal classification system of transposable elements should reflect
the evolutionary relationships among elements [37].
However, as eukaryotic genomes are annotated independently from each other there has been a tendency to
name transposon families by numbering them in the
order they are discovered, without much consideration
of their evolutionary affinities across genomes [38].
Although scientists agree on the major categories of
transposable elements (DNA transposons, non-LTR retrotransposons and LTR retrotransposons), there is no
consensus on their classification at lower levels (families
and subfamilies) and on how to name newly discovered
transposons. Thus, the nomenclature of transposons can

Page 6 of 13

be considered a work in progress. An International
Committee on the Classification of Transposable Elements has been created and is aiming to build a classification that will reflect the structural and evolutionary
affinities among elements, yet that will also be relatively
easy to use. Until a consensus is reached within the
transposable element community, we propose some simple guidelines for the nomenclature of transposable elements in A. carolinensis.
The general principles of the nomenclature follow the
recommendations of Kapitonov and Jurka [37], with
some minor modifications. Kapitonov and Jurka proposed to name elements by the super-family in which
they belong, followed by a unique identifier (generally a
number), a structural identifier if necessary, and end
with a species identifier. For example, Helitron-1_Acar
would be the name of family 1 of autonomous Helitron
in A. carolinensis. If a non-autonomous family of helitron has been amplified by Helitron-1_Acar, its name
will be Helitron-1N1_Acar, the N indicating its nonautonomous nature. However, the diversity within some
super-families is relatively well known, at least in vertebrates, and we propose that the name of elements
should reflect their evolutionary affinities below the
super-family level. For instance, the hAT super-family
contains several well-defined monophyletic lineages (e.g.,
hobo, Charlie, restless). In those cases where the diversity of the super-family is well characterized, we propose
to name elements using the name of the clades. For
instance, we propose to use the name hobo-1_Acar
instead of hAT-1_Acar for a family that is unambiguously related to other hobo elements.
An additional difficulty in naming transposable elements results from the common occurrence of horizontal transfer. A consequence of horizontal transfer is that
identical or very similar elements might be found in distantly related organisms [39-42]. Novick et al. [41] proposed to use the letter HT to indicate the fact that an
element has been horizontally transferred from another
species, e.g. hAT-HT1_Acar. However, this solution is
not satisfactory as the same elements might carry different names in different organisms because genomes are
annotated independently. For instance, the anole hATHT2_Acar is different from the hAT2_ML of bats but is
identical to the hAT4 in Xenopus tropicalis. In those
cases, we believe it is better to not use a numbering
scheme but instead to choose a different name for those
families that are found in distantly related taxa. A name
that reflects at least partially the evolutionary affinities
of the elements is preferable. The solution adopted in
Thomas et al. [42] to name horizontally transferred helitrons seems satisfactory, e.g., Heligloria.
As mentioned earlier, the classification and nomenclature of transposons is a work in progress that will

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

require a better knowledge of transposable element evolution below the super-family level and across genomes.
It is the goal of the committee to regularly improve and
update the classification of A. carolinensis elements.

Page 7 of 13

Table 2 Anolis species and proposed abbreviations
Anolis species

Abbreviation

acutus

Aacu

aeneus

Aaen

aequatorialis

Aaeq

Abbreviations for Anolis species and population groups

agassizi

Aaga

Comparative and functional genomics is rapidly progressing from broad-scale comparisons among model systems to fine-scale analyses among populations and
closely related species [43-45]. Anolis is an ecologically,
physiologically, and morphologically diverse genus of
over 350 species that has a rich history of comparative
studies [4]. While the nomenclature described above
establishes guidelines for the model system, A. carolinensis, it is critical that the research community arrive
at a common vocabulary to reference data from other
Anolis species and among populations. The AGNC proposes the following guidelines with this aim:

agueroi

Aagu

ahli

Aahl

alayoni

Aala

alfaroi
aliniger

Aalf
Aali

allisoni

Aals

allogus

Aall

altae

Aalt

altavelensis

Aalv

altitudinalis

Aaln

alumina

Aalm

alutaceus
alvarezdeltoroi

Aalu
Aald

amplisquamosus

Aamp

anatoloros

Aana

anchicayae

Aanc

anfilioquioi

Aanf

angusticeps

Aang

anisolepis

Aani

annectens
antioquiae

Aann
Aano

antoni

Aant

apletophallus

Aapl

apollinaris

Aapo

aquaticus

Aaqu

argenteolus

Aarg

argillaceus

Aari

armouri
auratus

Aarm
Aaur

baccatus

Abac

bahorucoensis

Abah

baleatus

Abal

baracoae

Abao

barahonae

Aban

barbatus

Abab

barbouri
barkeri

Abar
Abak

bartschi

Abat

beckeri

Abec

bellipeniculus

Abel

bicaorum

Abic

bimaculatus

Abim

binotatus

Abin

biporcatus
birama

Abip
Abir

Abbreviations for conserved sequences

biscutiger

Abis

A subclass of sequences can be defined by their high
degree of conservation across taxonomic levels [47,48].

bitectus

Abit

blanquillanus

Abla

• All genus and species abbreviations for anoles will
begin with the capital letter, ‘A’, followed by three
lowercase italicized letters based approximately on
the first letters of the species name, e.g., Anolis
sagrei = Asag.
• In comparative analyses abbreviations will be
added as a suffix to the proper gene names, e.g.,
gene2-Asag.
• The three-letter species abbreviation suffix (in lowercase) is generated by the first two letters of the species
name and an identifying third letter unique to each
species. In cases of redundancy in all of the first three
letters of species names, precedence is given to the
date of first publication. For the remaining species, the
third letter will be replaced with the subsequent letter
of the species name that generates a unique code.
Examples: A. grahami = Agra since this species was
first reported in 1845 [46]; A. gracilipes = Agrc; A.
granuliceps = Agrn. A full listing of 378 abbreviations
based on our current view of the species content of
Anolis is found in Table 2 and posted to various anole
community sites listed at the end of this report.
• Once established, modifications to the four letter
abbreviations are strongly discouraged in order to
maintain clarity, even in cases of renaming or
reclassification.
• This system of nomenclature does not address subspecies designations or geographic ‘races.’ The
AGNC is currently accepting community proposals
for these designations.

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

Page 8 of 13

Table 2 Anolis species and proposed abbreviations
(Continued)

Table 2 Anolis species and proposed abbreviations
(Continued)

boettgeri

Aboe

deltae

Adel

bombiceps

Abom

desechensis

Ades

bonairensis

Abon

dissimilis

Adii

bouvieri

Abou

distichus

Adis

breedlovei

Abrd

dolichocephalus

Adoi

bremeri

Abrm

dollfusianus

Adol

brevirostris
brunneus

Abre
Abru

dominicanus
duellmani

Adom
Adue

calimae

Acal

dunni

Adun

campbelli

Acam

eewi

Aeew

capito

Acap

electrum

Aele

caquetae

Acaq

equestris

Aequ

carlostoddi

Acao

ernestwilliamsi

Aern

carolinensis

Acar

etheridgei

Aeth

carpenteri
casildae

Acae
Acas

eugenegrahami
eulaemus

Aeug
Aeul

caudalis

Acau

euskalerriari

Aeus

centralis

Acen

evermanni

Aeve

chamaeleonides

Acha

extremus

Aext

charlesmeyeri

Ache

fairchildi

Afai

chloris

Achi

fasciatus

Afas

chlorocyanus

Achl

ferreus

Afer

chocorum
christophei

Acho
Achs

festae
fitchi

Afes
Afit

chrysolepis

Achr

forbesi

Afor

clivicola

Acli

fortunensis

Afot

cobanensis

Acob

fowleri

Afow

coelestinus

Acoe

fraseri

Afra

compressicauda

Acom

frenatus

Afre

concolor

Acon

fugitivus

Afug

confusus
conspersus

Acof
Acos

fungosus
fuscoauratus

Afun
Afus

cooki

Acoo

gadovi

Agad

crassulus

Acra

garmani

Agar

cristatellus

Acri

garridoi

Agai

cristifer

Acrs

gemmosus

Ager

cryptolimifrons

Acry

gibbiceps

Agib

cumingi

Acum

gingivinus

Agin

cupeyalensis
cupreus

Acue
Acup

godmani
gorgonae

Agod
Agor

cuprinus

Acur

gracilipes

Agrc

cuscoensis

Acuc

grahami

Agra

cusuco

Acus

granuliceps

Agrn

cuvieri

Acuv

greyi

Agre

cyanopleurus

Acya

griseus

Agri

cybotes

Acyb

gruuo

Agru

cymbops
damulus

Acym
Adam

guafe
guamuhaya

Aguf
Agua

danieli

Adan

guazuma

Aguz

darlingtoni

Adar

gundlachi

Agun

datzorum

Adat

haetianus

Ahae

delafuentei

Adef

haguei

Ahag

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

Page 9 of 13

Table 2 Anolis species and proposed abbreviations
(Continued)

Table 2 Anolis species and proposed abbreviations
(Continued)

hendersoni

Ahen

macrini

Aman

heterodermus

Ahet

macrolepis

Amal

heteropholidotus

Ahee

macrophallus

Amap

hobartsmithi

Ahob

maculigula

Amau

homolechis

Ahom

maculiventris

Amac

huilae

Ahui

magnaphallus

Amag

humilis
ibague

Ahum
Aiba

marcanoi
mariarum

Amaa
Amar

ibanezi

Aibn

marmoratus

Amam

imias

Aimi

marron

Amao

impetigosus

Aimp

marsupialis

Amas

incredulus

Ainc

matudai

Amat

inderenae

Aind

maynardi

Amay

inexpectata

Aine

medemi

Amed

insignis
insolitus

Ains
Aino

megalopithecus
menta

Ameg
Amen

isolepis

Aiso

meridionalis

Amer

isthmicus

Aist

mestrei

Ames

jacare

Ajac

microlepidotus

Amip

johnmeyeri

Ajoh

microtus

Amic

juangundlachi

Ajua

milleri

Amil

jubar

Ajub

mirus

Amir

kemptoni
koopmani

Akem
Akoo

monensis
monteverde

Amoe
Amot

kreutzi

Akre

monticola

Amon

krugi

Akru

morazani

Amor

kunayalae

Akun

muralla

Amur

laevis

Alav

nasofrontalis

Anas

laeviventris

Alae

naufragus

Anau

lamari

Alam

neblininus

Anei

latifrons
leachi

Alat
Alea

nebuloides
nebulosus

Aneu
Aneb

lemniscatus

Alen

nelsoni

Anel

lemurinus

Alem

nicefori

Anic

limifrons

Alim

nitens

Anit

lineatopus

Alie

noblei

Anob

lineatus

Alin

notopholis

Anot

liogaster

Alig

nubilis

Anub

lionotus
litoralis

Alio
Alit

occultus
ocelloscapularis

Aocc
Aoce

lividus

Aliv

oculatus

Aocu

longiceps

Alon

olssoni

Aols

longitibialis

Alog

omiltemanus

Aomi

loveridgei

Alov

onca

Aonc

loysianus

Aloy

opalinus

Aopa

luciae

Alua

ophiolepis

Aoph

lucius
luteogularis

Aluc
Alus

oporinus
orcesi

Aopo
Aorc

luteosignifer

Alut

ortoni

Aort

lynchi

Alyn

otongae

Aoto

lyra

Alyr

pachypus

Apac

macilentus

Amai

paravertebralis

Apaa

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

Page 10 of 13

Table 2 Anolis species and proposed abbreviations
(Continued)

Table 2 Anolis species and proposed abbreviations
(Continued)

parilis

Apai

salvini

Asal

parvicirculatus

Apar

santamartae

Asan

paternus

Apat

schiedi

Asch

pentaprion

Apen

schmidti

Ascm

peraccae

Aper

schwartzi

Ascw

petersi

Apet

scriptus

Ascr

philopunctatus
phyllorhinus

Aphi
Aphy

scypheus
semilineatus

Ascy
Asem

pigmaequestris

Apig

sericeus

Aser

pijolense

Apij

serranoi

Asea

pinchoti

Apin

sheplani

Ashe

placidus

Apla

shrevei

Ashr

poecilopus

Apoe

simmonsi

Asim

pogus

Apog

singularis

Asin

polylepis
polyrhachis

Apol
Apoh

smallwoodi
smaragdinus

Asml
Asma

poncencis

Apon

sminthus

Asmi

porcatus

Apor

soinii

Asoi

porcus

Apoc

solitarius

Asol

princeps

Apri

spectrum

Aspe

proboscis

Apro

squamulatus

Asqu

propinquus

Aprp

strahmi

Asta

pseudokemptoni
pseudopachypus

Apsk
Apsp

stratulus
subocularis

Astr
Asub

pseudotigrinus

Apse

sulcifrons

Asul

pulchellus

Apul

tandai

Atan

pumilus

Apum

taylori

Atay

punctatus

Apun

terraealtae

Ater

purpurescens

Apur

terueli

Ateu

purpurgularis

Apug

tetarii

Atet

pygmaeus
quadriocellifer

Apyg
Aqud

tigrinus
toldo

Atig
Atod

quaggulus

Aqua

tolimensis

Atol

quercorum

Aque

townsendi

Atow

reconditus

Arec

trachyderma

Atrc

rejectus

Arej

transversalis

Atra

rhombifer

Arho

trinitatus

Atri

richardi

Arih

tropidogaster

Atro

ricordi
rimarum

Aric
Arim

tropidolepis
tropidonotus

Atrl
Atrp

rivalis

Ariv

umbrivagus

Aumb

roatanensis

Aroa

uniformis

Auni

rodriguezi

Arod

unilobatus

Aunl

roosevelti

Aroo

utilensis

Auti

roquet

Aroq

utowanae

Auto

rubribarbaris

Arua

valencienni

Aval

rubribarbus
ruibali

Arub
Arul

vanidicus
vanzolinii

Avan
Avaz

ruizi

Arui

vaupesianus

Avau

rupinae

Arup

ventrimaculatus

Aven

sabanus

Asab

vermiculatus

Aver

sagrei

Asag

vescus

Aves

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

Table 2 Anolis species and proposed abbreviations
(Continued)
vicarius

Avic

villai

Avil

vittigerus

Avit

wampuensis

Awam

wattsi

Awat

websteri

Aweb

wellbornae
wermuthi

Awel
Awer

whitemani

Awhi

williamsi

Awil

williamsmittermeierorum

Awim

woodi

Awoo

yoroensis

Ayor

zeus

Azeu

Nomenclature for these conserved sequences (CSs)
poses unique challenges because they lack defining
content, such as that comprising transposons and repetitive elements. Additionally, CSs are not always completely conserved and occasional duplicate CSs are
scattered throughout the genome. We propose to
describe CSs in the Anolis genome using a combination of species code, unique identification number,
length, percent conservation with other species, and
characterization of species with which they are shared
[49]. We recommend that:
• CS names begin with the species code, Acar, to
identify Anolis carolinensis as the species within
which these sequences are described.
• A unique, 1-indexed, arbitrarily assigned number
follow the species name.
• Abbreviated length class designations follow the
CS number. We define the length classes as follows:
(s) short ≤ 99 bp; (m) medium 100-499 bp; or (l)
long ≥500 bp).
• A numeral representing percent conservation to
the reference species ((1) 100-95%; (2) 94-90%; or
(3) 89-85%) follows the length class designation.
• CS names end with an abbreviated indicator of the
taxonomic span of conservation: (S) shared among
Sauropsida, (M) shared among Mammalia, (B)
shared among Batrachia, and (G) shared among
Gymnophiona.
Using this nomenclature, the 1,000th CS identified in
the A. carolinensis genome that is 600 bp long having
100% conservation between A. carolinensis and chicken
genomes would be named Acar1000l1SMB.

Page 11 of 13

Abbreviations for Anolis genetic markers including
microsatellite assays

The A. carolinensis genome contains many types of
repetitive elements including mononucleotide tracts,
microsatellites, minisatellites, and satellites. Many
researchers focus on simple tandem repeats (STRs, also
known as short tandem repeats, microsatellites or simple sequence repeats, SSRs). Some STRs have variable
numbers of repeats (i.e., variable number tandem
repeats, VNTRs). However, variation is often not
reported with the genomic sequence and may be inconsistent among populations and species, and knowledge
of variation can change through time as more individuals are sampled. Rather than subdividing and explicitly defining the different repeat types or using VNTR
status, we provide a simple, unique nomenclature that
can be applied to all STRs in any species of Anolis. This
nomenclature is linked to a more descriptive, locus-specific annotation available from lizardbase. Additional
detail regarding the challenges of explicitly defining various classes of STRs has been described [50].
We propose that Anolis STRs be assigned a name
consisting of three fields separated by underscores:
1) the species code described in Part 4 above derived
from the organism of origin,
2) the letters ‘str’ for simple tandem repeat, and
3) a unique, 1-indexed, identification number
Using this nomenclature, the 8th STR identified in the
A. carolinensis genome would be coded as Acar_str_8.
We will store additional, locus-specific information such
as repeat unit, genomic location, and number of repeats
in a separate database, linked to each STR using these
unique names. The submission of STR markers and
assignment of unique identification numbers will be
handled through lizardbase by the AGNC or designated
member.

Conclusions
Future objectives of the Anolis Gene Nomenclature
Committee

The recently published green anole (A. carolinensis)
genome [1] provides an example of how a community
of researchers with both common and distinct interests
can work together to build an enduring resource. This
genomics resource now provides an opportunity for the
community to advance a greater knowledge of gene
function and orthology. As work progresses on Anolis
species genomes, new and unforeseen nomenclature
issues will certainly arise. The goal of the AGNC is to
foster community-based discussion where these problems can be resolved. We have presented guidelines for

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

three immediate objectives for the AGNC but we foresee the need to rapidly address the following objectives:
• Nomenclature for populations and treatment of
geographic variation
• Creating a common nomenclature for genetic markers such as microsatellites and SNPs
• Creating a common nomenclature for transposable
elements
The AGNC welcomes feedback from the community
to raise overlooked issues and unforeseen conflicts. The
AGNC views these recommendations as an evolving
document, and current, archival, and proposed revisions
will be posted to the anole community web sites:
lizardbase [28]
Anolisgenome [51]
Anolis Newsletter [52]
Anole Annals Blog [53]
Correspondence to any member of the committee is
welcomed. We also would like to elicit comments and
suggestions from other research communities with
unannotated genomes. It would be helpful to be able to
develop and share such important resources and experiences together.
List of abbreviations used
AGNC: Anolis Gene Nomenclature Committee; BAC: bacterial artificial
chromosome; ECC: evolutionary character code; CS: conserved sequence;
GO: Gene Ontology; HCOP: Human Gene Nomenclature Committee
Comparison of Orthology Predictions; HUGO: Human Genome Organization;
mya: million years ago; OMA: Orthologs Matrix Project; UCSC: University of
California: Santa Cruz; STR: short tandem repeat; VNTR: variable number
tandem repeat; ZFIN: Zebrafish Information Network.
Acknowledgements
The committee would like to thank the following individuals for helpful
discussions: Janet Weber, Manfred Grabherr, Jessica Alföldi, Federica di
Palma, Sudhir Kumar, Fiona McCarthy, Tonia Hsieh, Alan Rawls, and Rebecca
Fisher. We thank Karla Moeller for permission to reproduce the image used
for the cover page. Anolis genome-related research is supported by the NSF
(IOS 0742833, JW; DEB-0844624, SP; DEB-1011544 and DEB-1119734, CJS),
NIH (RR031305, KK and JW-R) and Arizona Biomedical Research Commission
(KK). Postdoctoral support (DEJ) was provided by the National Science
Foundation (MCB-0817687).
Author details
1
School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, PO Box 874501, Tempe, AZ
85287-4501, USA. 2Department of Biology, Temple University, 1900 N. 12th
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. 3Department of Organismic and
Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity Ave., Cambridge, MA
02138, USA. 4Department of Biology, Queens College, The City University of
New York, 65-30 Kissena Boulevard, Flushing, NY 11367-1597; USA.
5
Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston,
MA 02215, USA. 6Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University
of California, 621 Charles E. Young Drive South, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
7
Department of Environmental Health Science, University of Georgia, 150
East Green Street, Athens, GA 30602, USA. 8Museum of Comparative
Zoology, Harvard University, 26 Oxford St., Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Page 12 of 13

9
Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, 120 East Green Street,
Athens, GA 30602-7223, USA. 10Department of Biology, University of New
Mexico, 167 Castetter Hall, MSC03 2020, 1 University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001, USA. 11Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute, Unit 9100 BOX 0948, DPO AA 34002-9998, USA. 12Departments of
Psychology and Zoology, Michigan State University, 212 Giltner Hall, East
Lansing, MI 48824-1101, USA.

Authors’ contributions
KK, RJK, AA, TCG, DBM, TJS, JW and JWR are members of the Anolis Gene
Nomenclature Committee and conceived of the report and participated in
the drafting of the manuscript. SB, NGC, BCF, DEJ, JL, SP, CJS, and JS have all
contributed sections to the report and have participated in the drafting of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 29 April 2011 Accepted: 11 November 2011
Published: 11 November 2011
References
1. Alföldi J, Di Palma F, Grabherr M, Williams C, Kong L, Mauceli E, Russell P,
Lowe CB, Glor R, Jaffe JD, Ray DA, Boissinot S, Botka C, Castoe T,
Colbourne JK, Fujita MK, Moreno GR, ten Hallers BF, Haussler D, Heger A,
Heiman D, Janes DE, Johnson J, de Jong PJ, Koriabine MY, Novick P,
Organ CL, Peach SE, Poe S, Pollack DD, de Queiroz K, Sanger TJ, Searle S,
Shedlock AM, Smith JD, Smith Z, Swofford R, Turner-Maier J, Wade J,
Young S, Zadissa A, Genome Sequencing Platform and Whole Genome
Assembly Team, Edwards SV, Glenn TD, Schneider CJ, Losos J, Lander ES,
Breen M, Ponting CP, Lindblad-Toh K: The genome of Anolis carolinensis,
the green anole lizard, and comparative analysis with birds and
mammals. Nature 2011, 477:587-591.
2. Flicek P, Aken BL, Ballester B, Beal K, Bragin E, Brent S, Chen Y, Clapham P,
Coates G, Fairley S, Fitzgerald S, Fernandez-Banet J, Gordon L, Gräf S,
Haider S, Hammond M, Howe K, Jenkinson A, Johnson N, Kähäri A, Keefe D,
Keenan S, Kinsella R, Kokocinski F, Koscielny G, Kulesha E, Lawson D,
Longden I, Massingham T, McLaren W, Megy K, Overduin B, Pritchard B,
Rios D, Ruffier M, Schuster M, Slater G, Smedley D, Spudich G, Tang YA,
Trevanion S, Vilella A, Vogel J, White S, Wilder SP, Zadissa A, Birney E,
Cunningham F, Dunham I, Durbin R, Fernández-Suarez XM, Herrero J,
Hubbard TJ, Parker A, Proctor G, Smith J, Searle SM: Ensembl’s 10th year.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D557-562.
3. Ensembl. [http://www.ensembl.org].
4. Losos JB: Lizards in an Evolutionary Tree: Ecology and Adaptive Radiation of
Anoles Berkeley: University of California Press; 2009.
5. Lin MF, Carlson JW, Crosby MA, Matthews BB, Yu C, Park S, Wan KH,
Schroeder AJ, Gramates LS, St Pierre SE, Roark M, Wiley KL, Kulathinal RJ,
Zhang P, Myrick KV, Antone JV, Celniker SE, Gelbart WM, Kellis M: Revisiting
the protein-coding gene catalog of Drosophila melanogaster using 12
fly genomes. Genome Res 2007, 17(12):1823-1836.
6. Tweedie S, Ashburner M, Falls K, Leyland P, McQuilton P, Marygold S,
Millburn G, Osumi-Sutherland D, Schroeder A, Seal R, Zhang H, FlyBase
Consortium: FlyBase: enhancing Drosophila Gene Ontology annotations.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D555-559.
7. Vilella AJ, Severin J, Ureta-Vidal A, Heng L, Durbin R, Birney E:
EnsemblCompara GeneTrees: Complete, duplication-aware phylogenetic
trees in vertebrates. Genome Res 2009, 19:327-335.
8. HomoloGene. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=homologene].
9. Rhead B, Karolchik D, Kuhn RM, Hinrichs AS, Zweig AS, Fujita P, Diekhans M,
Smith KE, Rosenbloom KR, Raney BJ, Pohl A, Pheasant M, Meyer L, Hsu F,
Hillman-Jackson J, Harte RA, Giardine B, Dreszer T, Clawson H, Barber GP,
Haussler D, Kent WJ: The UCSC Genome Browser database: update 2010.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D613-619.
10. UCSC Genome Bioinformatics. [http://www.genome.ucsc.edu].
11. Schneider A, Dessimoz C, Gonnet GH: OMA Browser–exploring
orthologous relations across 352 complete genomes. Bioinformatics 2007,
23(16):2180-2182.
12. OMA Browser. [http://www.omabrowser.org].

Kusumi et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:554
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/554

13. Berglund AC, Sjölund E, Ostlund G, Sonnhammer EL: InParanoid 6:
eukaryotic ortholog clusters with inparalogs. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:
D263-266.
14. Inparanoid. [http://inparanoid.sbc.su.se/].
15. Ruan J, Li H, Chen Z, Coghlan A, Coin LJ, Guo Y, Hériché JK, Hu Y,
Kristiansen K, Li R, Liu T, Moses A, Qin J, Vang S, Vilella AJ, Ureta-Vidal A,
Bolund L, Wang J, Durbin R: TreeFam: 2008 Update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:D735-740.
16. TreeFam. [http://www.treefam.org].
17. Heger A, Ponting CP: OPTIC: orthologous and paralogous transcripts in
clades. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D267-270.
18. Optic. [http://www.genserv.anat.ox.ac.uk/].
19. Matsuya A, Sakate R, Kawahara Y, Koyanagi KO, Sato Y, Fujii Y, Yamasaki C,
Habara T, Nakaoka H, Todokoro F, Yamaguchi K, Endo T, Oota S,
Makalowski W, Ikeo K, Suzuki Y, Hanada K, Hashimoto K, Hirai M, Iwama H,
Saitou N, Hiraki AT, Jin L, Kaneko Y, Kanno M, Murakami K, Noda AO,
Saichi N, Sanbonmatsu R, Suzuki M, Takeda J, Tanaka M, Gojobori T,
Imanishi T, Itoh T: Evola: Ortholog database of all human genes in HInvDB with manual curation of phylogenetic trees. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:D787-792.
20. Evola. [http://www.jbirc.jbic.or.jp/hinv/evola/index.jsp].
21. HGNC Comparison of Orthology Predictions. [http://www.genenames.org/
cgi-bin/hcop.pl].
22. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23(21):2947-2948.
23. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
24. Notredame C, Higgins DG, Heringa J: T-Coffee: A novel method for fast
and accurate multiple sequence alignment. J Mol Biol 2000,
302(1):205-217.
25. Tamura K, Peterson D, Peterson N, Stecher G, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA5:
Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis Using Maximum Likelihood,
Evolutionary Distance, and Maximum Parsimony Methods. Mol Biol Evol
2011, 28(10):2731-2739.
26. Yang Z: PAML: a program package for phylogenetic analysis by
maximum likelihood. Comput Appl Biosci 1997, 13(5):555-556.
27. The Gene Ontology Database. [http://www.geneontology.org/GO.
refgenome.shtml].
28. lizardbase. [http://www.lizardbase.org].
29. International Chicken Genome Sequencing Consortium: Sequence and
comparative analysis of the chicken genome provide unique
perspectives on vertebrate evolution. Nature 2004, 432(7018):695-716.
30. Burt DW, Carrë W, Fell M, Law AS, Antin PB, Maglott DR, Weber JA,
Schmidt CJ, Burgess SC, McCarthy FM: The Chicken Gene Nomenclature
Committee report. BMC Genomics 2009, 10(Suppl 2):S5.
31. Bowes JB, Snyder KA, Segerdell E, Jarabek CJ, Azam K, Zorn AM, Vize PD:
Xenbase: gene expression and improved integration. Nucleic Acids Res
2009.
32. Xenbase. [http://www.xenbase.org/gene/static/geneNomenclature.jsp].
33. Sprague J, Bayraktaroglu L, Bradford Y, Conlin T, Dunn N, Fashena D,
Frazer K, Haendel M, Howe DG, Knight J, Mani P, Moxon SA, Pich C,
Ramachandran S, Schaper K, Segerdell E, Shao X, Singer A, Song P,
Sprunger B, Van Slyke CE, Westerfield M: The Zebrafish Information
Network: the zebrafish model organism database provides expanded
support for genotypes and phenotypes. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:
D768-772.
34. ZFIN The Zebrafish Model Organism Database. [https://wiki.zfin.org/
display/general/ZFIN+Zebrafish+Nomenclature+Guidelines].
35. Wicker T, Sabot F, Hua-Van A, Bennetzen JL, Capy P, Chalhoub B, Flavell A,
Leroy P, Morgante M, Panaud O, Paux E, SanMiguel P, Schulman AH: A
unified classification system for eukaryotic transposable elements. Nature
Rev Genetics 2007, 8(12):973-982.
36. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: A universal classification of eukaryotic transposable
elements implemented in Repbase. Nature Rev Genetics 2008, 9(5):411-412.
37. Seberg O, Petersen G: A unified classification system for eukaryotic
transposable elements should reflect their phylogeny. Nature Rev Genetics
2009, 10(4):276.

Page 13 of 13

38. Rouault J-D, Casse N, Chénais B, Hua-Van A, Filée J, Capy P: Automatic
classification within families of transposable elements: application to the
mariner family. Gene 2009, 448:22732.
39. Pace JK, Gilbert C, Clark MS, Feschotte C: Repeated horizontal transfer of a
DNA transposon in mammals and other tetrapods. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008, 105(44):17023-17028.
40. Gilbert C, Schaack S, Pace JK, Brindley PJ, Feschotte C: A role for hostparasite interactions in the horizontal transfer of transposons across
phyla. Nature 2010, 464(7293):1347-1350.
41. Novick P, Smith J, Ray D, Boissinot S: Independent and parallel lateral
transfer of DNA transposons in tetrapod genomes. Gene 2010, 449(12):85-94.
42. Thomas J, Schaak S, Pritham EJ: Pervasive horizontal transfer of rollingcircle transposons among animals. Genome Biol Evol 2010, 2:656-664.
43. Jorde LB, Watkins WS, Bamshad MJ: Population genomics: a bridge from
evolutionary history to genetic medicine. Hum Mol Genet 2001,
10:2199-2207.
44. Stinchcombe JR, Hoekstra HE: Combining population genomics and
quantitative genetics: finding the genes underlying ecologically
important traits. Heredity 2008, 100:158-170.
45. Stapley J, Reger J, Feulner PGD, Smadja C, Galindo J, Ekblom R, Bennison C,
Ball AD, Beckerman AP, Slate J: Adaptation genomics: the next
generation. Trends Ecol Evol 2010, 25:705-712.
46. Gray JE: Catalogue of the specimens of lizards in the collection of the British
Museum London: Trustees of die British Museum/Edward Newman;1845.
47. Bejerano G, Pheasant M, Mukunin I, Stephen S, Kent WJ, Mattick JS,
Haussler D: Ultraconserved elements in the human genome. Science 2004,
304:1321-1325.
48. Dermitzakis ET, Reymond A, Antonarakis SE: Conserved non-genic
sequences–an unexpected feature of mammalian genomes. Nat Rev
Genet 2005, 6:151-157.
49. Janes DE, Chapus C, Gondo Y, Clayton DF, Sinha S, Blatti CA, Organ CL,
Fujita MK, Balakrishnan CN, Edwards SV: Reptiles and mammals have
differentially retained long conserved noncoding sequences from the
amniote ancestor. Genome Biol Evol 2011, 3:102-113.
50. Chambers GK, MacAvoy ES: Microsatellites: consensus and controversy.
Comp Biochem Physiol B, Biochem Mol Biol 2000, 126(4):455-476.
51. Anolisgenome. [http://www.anolisgenome.org].
52. Anolis Newsletter. [http://www.anolis.oeb.harvard.edu].
53. Anole Annals. [http://www.anoleannals.wordpress.com/].
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-554
Cite this article as: Kusumi et al.: Developing a community-based
genetic nomenclature for anole lizards. BMC Genomics 2011 12:554.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
