<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.3)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Lampert and Schartl BMC Biology 2010, 8:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/78

CO M M E N TA R Y 	

Open Access

A little bit is better than nothing: the incomplete
parthenogenesis of salamanders, frogs and fish
Kathrin P Lampert1 and Manfred Schartl2*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/238

Abstract
A re-examination of the mitochondrial genomes of
unisexual salamander lineages, published in BMC
Evolutionary Biology, shows them to be the oldest
unisexual vertebrates known, having been around
for 5 million years. This presents a challenge to the
prediction that lack of genetic recombination is a fast
track to extinction.

About 90 species of vertebrates have been discovered
that are strictly unisexual, and all of them are fish,
amphibians or reptiles [1]. Being all females, every
individual produces offspring, and thus the population
will grow much faster than any competing bisexual
species that has to generate males. In bisexual species,
males exist only for the purpose of donating 50% of the
freshly recombined genetic material and do not produce
offspring, and this burden has been termed the ‘twofold
cost of sex’ by John Maynard Smith [2,3]. Considering the
reproductive advantage for a unisexual species, one
would expect that many more unisexual vertebrate
species should exist. There are, however, also disadvan­
tages to the absence of genetic recombination. One major
problem is that without meiotic crossovers, deleterious
mutations cannot be purged and thus they accumulate in
the genome - a process known as Muller’s ratchet [4]. A
second problem is that the genetic uniformity of the
offspring leads to a much lower genetic diversity, which is
likely to make it much more difficult to adapt, for
example, to changing environments or to parasites;
consequently, asexual species should be slow to evolve
[3,5]. These two disadvantages are predicted to strongly
outweigh the reproductive advantage, with unisexual
*Correspondence: phch1@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de
2
Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland,
97074 Würzburg, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

lineages being predicted to go extinct within a short time
(104 to 105 generations [6]), explaining why they are so
rare.
Like all good theories, this explanation for the rarity of
unisexual vertebrate species can be tested. In a study
published recently in BMC Evolutionary Biology, Bi and
Bogart [7] set out to examine the evolutionary age of
species of salamanders of the genus Ambystoma. This
group is known as the ‘mole salamanders’ and contains
about 30 bisexual species distributed from the Central
Valley of Mexico to Alaska and Labrador, along with
several unisexual biotypes (a biotype is a group of
individuals with the same genotype), which are abundant
in the Great Lakes region of North America.
Astonishingly, the nuclear DNA content of the unisexual
biotypes ranges from diploid to pentaploid, and their
nuclear genomes are apparently combinations of haploid
genomes or multiples thereof from four bisexual species:
Ambystoma laterale, A. jeffersonianum, A.  texanum and
A. tigrinum. For instance, the triploid unisexual biotype
LLT has two copies of the A. laterale genome (L) and one
copy of the A. texanum genome (T). Of the more than 20
different unisexual biotypes identified so far, all have at
least one L genome, but everything else is variable. In
contrast, the mitochondrial genomes (mtDNA) of all
Ambystoma unisexuals are very similar to that of another
species, A. barbouri. This supports the hypothesis that,
like all other unisexual vertebrates, the unisexual sala­
man­ ers are of hybrid origin, and that A. barbouri was
d
the maternal species involved in the hybridization. The
Kentucky genotypes of A. barbouri seem to be most
closely related to the unisexual lineages.
Bi and Bogart have analyzed mtDNA sequences,
includ­ ng that for cytochrome b (cytb) and non-coding
i
control regions, from 46 individuals of 9 unisexual bio­
types and one A. laterale individual as an outgroup. They
also constructed a phylogeny from the complete mito­
chondrial genomes of one of the unisexual biotypes, two
A. barbouri individuals, one A. texanum individual
(sequenced in this study) and 13 other amphibians. Their

© 2010 Lampert and Schartl; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lampert and Schartl BMC Biology 2010, 8:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/78

data support a monophyletic and ancient origin of the
unisexuals in the Ambystoma complex. No mitochondrial
genotypes were shared between the unisexuals and
A.  barbouri; instead, the sequence divergence in cytb
between unisexuals and A. barbouri was 5.16%. From
this, the split between A. barbouri and the unisexual
lineages was estimated to have occurred approximately
5  million years ago, based on conservative estimates of
the mutation rate in mitochondrial sequences. Bi and
Bogart’s age estimate is in good agreement with earlier
studies, which suggested an age for the unisexuals of 2.4
to 3.9 million years [8]. This finding makes the unisexual
Ambystoma salamanders the oldest clonally reproducing
vertebrates known.
The unexpectedly old age of the unisexual salamanders
is intriguing - and they are not alone. Other unisexual
vertebrate species, although not reaching the antiquity of
Ambystoma, are also much older than would be predicted
on theoretical grounds. The Amazon Molly, Poecilia
formosa, is a small all-female live-bearing fish species
that occurs in fresh water in the northeastern lowlands of
Mexico up to the Rio Grande. Its age has been calculated
on the basis of mitochondrial and nuclear sequences to
be 280,000 years and approximately 800,000 generations
[9]. In the genus Poeciliopsis, which also belongs to the
same family of live-bearing fishes, several unisexual
biotypes exist in the rivers of northwest Mexico.
Calculations suggest that these biotypes are more than
60,000 years old, equivalent to up to 200,000 generations
[10]. Both fish are well above the predicted upper survival
limit of 105 generations and show no signs of decline.
They are successful colonizers and very abundant.

How do they do it?
The question then arises: are the hypotheses about the
consequences of the absence of recombination wrong, or
are the age estimates? Most probably, both are correct.
The solution to this paradox comes from the fact that
many unisexual vertebrates have specialized ways to
circumvent the lack of meiotic recombination in their
nuclear genome (see [1]).
Although all unisexual female reproduction is often
loosely called parthenogenesis (reproduction in the
absence of fertilization of the egg), true parthenogenesis
is much more restricted. Defined as the production of
offspring by virgin females in the total absence of males,
true parthenogenesis results in genetically identical
clonal populations. In this exclusivity, true partheno­
forms of vertebrates are only found in unisexual lizards
and the single unisexual snake species known to date.
The unisexual fish and amphibians, in contrast,
reproduce by variations of parthenogenesis, which are
incomplete and genetically leaky compared with true
parthenogenesis.

Page 2 of 3

One variation of parthenogenesis is gynogenesis, in
which meiotic reduction does not occur during
oogenesis, but sperm is needed to trigger the onset of
embryonic development. The sperm is provided by a
male of a related species, but the male genetic material is
usually excluded and does not contribute to the genotype
of the offspring. Very rarely the exclusion mechanism
fails, and either small bits of ‘paternal’ DNA are included
in the oocyte in the form of additional B chromosomes
(Figure 1, microchromosomes), or the oocyte is fertilized,
leading to an increase in ploidy in the offspring (Figure 1,
triploidy). An extension of gynogenesis is the reproduc­
tive strategy of kleptogenesis, in which part or even all of
a maternal genome is more or less frequently exchanged
for paternal genetic material [8]. This is the typical
reproductive mode of the unisexual Ambystoma. If, for
instance, a triploid female of genome type LLJ (laterale/
laterale/jeffersonianum) gets its trigger for kleptogenesis
from an A. texanum male, the resulting offspring could
consist of both LLJ individuals (no genetic exchange
occurs) and LTJ individuals (genetic exchange has
occurred). In the latter case, one L genome has been
replaced with a T genome derived from the ‘father’.
Kleptogenesis therefore allows the acquisition of highly
adapted genetic material by the otherwise nonrecombined unisexual genome.
A third form of leaky parthenogenesis found in some
vertebrates is hybridogenesis. In this mode of reproduc­
tion, haploid oocytes are produced without meiosis. The
oocytes are fertilized by sperm from a closely related
bisexual species but the male genetic material is only
present for a single generation; it is excluded during
oocyte production and consequently is not passed on to
the next generation, and so the oocytes always exclusively
contain a maternal genome.
These leaky forms of parthenogenesis very rarely, or
not so rarely, allow the inclusion of paternal genetic
material in the oocyte. The consequence is a constitutive
or occasional addition of ‘fresh’ genetic material that can
slow down the degeneration process of Muller’s ratchet
and increase genetic diversity.
This then raises the question: why are unisexual
vertebrate species so rare if they have found ways to
decrease the negative impact of having no meiosis but
simultaneously enjoy the advantage of enhanced popu­
lation growth? An attractive hypothesis is that unisexuals
are so rare not because they are under considerable
disadvantage compared to their bisexual competitors, but
because the genomic conditions under which they can
arise are extremely rare [11]. Evidence for this comes
from a study on the gynogenetic Amazon Molly, P. formo­
sana [12]. The diploid genome of the asexual biotype is
composed of one copy from its maternal ancestor,
P.  mexicana, and one copy from its paternal ancestor,

Lampert and Schartl BMC Biology 2010, 8:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/78

Page 3 of 3

(a) Forms of non-meiotic reproduction
AB

AB

B’B’

AB

MM

B

AB

B’

A

AB

AB

M

AB

AB’
B’

Hybridogenesis

Parthenogenesis

Gynogenesis

(b) Forms of paternal leakage in gynogenesis
AB

MM

AB

MM

ABB

MM

composition of the genome is not on its own sufficient to
initiate asexuality. Only certain combinations of
individual genomes from the genome pools of both
species, and possibly additional mutations in the hybrid,
can bring about the switch from bisexual to unisexual
reproduction.
The paper by Bi and Bogart [7] is a crucial cornerstone
to our understanding of the biology of unisexual verte­
brates and the evolution of asexuality versus sexuality in
general. The reproductive mode of kleptogenesis in the
mole salamanders and the other mechanisms of incom­
plete parthenogenesis in unisexual fish and other
amphibians have obviously ensured their long-term
survival, and tell us that ‘a little bit of sex’ gives these
organisms the best of both worlds - just enough genetic
variation in addition to the mutations that generate new
genotypes also in asexuals, plus the superior mode of
propagation in the absence of males.

M

M
AB

ABM

Author details
1
Animal Evolutionary Ecology and Biodiversity, University of Bochum,
Universitätsstrasse 150, 44780 Bochum, Germany. 2Physiological Chemistry I,
Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

ABB

ABµ

Acknowledgements
We thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for support.

B

M
AB

ABM

Addition of
microchromosome

Polyploidization

Exchange of
genetic material:
Kleptogenesis

Figure 1. Variations on parthenogenesis. (a) Schematic
representations of forms of non-meiotic reproduction. Starting
genomes in this illustration are shown as maternal diploid (AB) or
triploid (ABB) and paternal diploid (MM). True parthenogenesis does
not require any intervention by sperm; diploid oocytes develop
directly into diploid offspring of identical genotype to the mother.
Hybridogenesis and gynogenesis involve the intervention of sperm.
In hybridogenesis, a haploid oocyte is produced without meiosis
and is fertilized by a sperm, which contributes its genome (M) to
the offspring. However, the M genome is lost when oocytes are
produced in the next generation, so the oocyte always contains
an unchanged maternal genome. In gynogenesis, stimulation by
sperm is required for the oocyte to develop into an embryo, but
the sperm does not contribute any of its genetic material to the
offspring. (b) Ways in which ‘paternal’ DNA can leak into gynogens.
From left to right: small pieces of chromosomes from the sperm can
be retained in the oocyte as microchromosomes (μ); a full sperm M
haploid genome can be added, leading to polyploidization; all or
part of a maternal genome can be replaced by the sperm M genome
(kleptogenesis).

P. latipinna. Both these species still live together at some
places in northeast Mexico, and there has been ample
opportunity for hybridization. In the laboratory, hybrids
between these two species, carrying both genomes, are
easily produced, but they are not the expected gynogens
of the P. formosa type. P. formosa, like the mole sala­
manders, has been found to be monophyletic and of
rather ancient origin. All this shows that the hybrid

Published: 3 August 2010
References
1.	 Avise JC: Clonality: The Genetics, Ecology, and Evolution of Sexual Abstinence in
Vertebrates. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2008.
2.	 Maynard Smith J: The origin and maintenance of sex. In Group Selection.
Edited by Williams GC. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton; 1971: 163-175.
3.	 Maynard Smith J: The Evolution of Sex. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press; 1978.
4.	 Muller HJ: Some genetic aspects of sex. Am Nat 1932, 66:118-138.
5.	 Bell G: The Masterpiece of Nature: The Evolution and Genetics of Sexuality.
Berkeley: University of California Press; 1982.
6.	 Lynch M, Gabriel W: Mutation load and the survival of small populations.
Evolution 1990, 44:1725-1737.
7.	 Bi K, Bogart JP: Time and time again: unisexual salamanders (genus
Ambystoma) are the oldest unisexual vertebrates. BMC Evol Biol 2010,
10:238.
8.	 Bogart JP, Bi K, Fu J, Noble DW, Niedzwiecki J: Unisexual salamanders (genus
Ambystoma) present a new reproductive mode for eukaryotes. Genome
2007, 50:119-136.
9.	 Lampert KP, Schartl M: The origin and evolution of a unisexual hybrid:
Poecilia formosa. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008, 363:2901-2909.
10.	 Quattro JM, Avise JC, Vrijenhoek RC: An ancient clonal lineage in the fish
genus Poeciliopsis (Atheriniformes: Poeciliidae). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992,
89:348-352.
11.	 Vrijenhoek RC: Genetic and ecological constraints in the origins and
establishment of unisexueal vertebrates. In Evolution and Ecology of
Unisexual Vertebrates. Edited by Dowley RM, Bogart JB. Albany, NY: New York
State Museum; 1989: 24-31.
12.	 Stöck M, Lampert KP, Möller D, Schlupp I, Schartl M: Monophyletic origin of
multiple clonal lineages in an asexual fish (Poecilia formosa). Mol Ecol 2010:
in press.

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-78
Cite this article as: Lampert KP, Schartl M: A little bit is better than nothing:
the incomplete parthenogenesis of salamanders, frogs and fish. BMC
Biology 2010, 8:78.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
