<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genome fluctuations in cyanobacteria reflect evolutionary, developmental and adaptive traits</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-187"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="John Larsson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Genome fluctuations in cyanobacteria reflect
evolutionary, developmental and adaptive traits
John Larsson1*, Johan AA Nylander1,2 and Birgitta Bergman1

Abstract
Background: Cyanobacteria belong to an ancient group of photosynthetic prokaryotes with pronounced variations
in their cellular differentiation strategies, physiological capacities and choice of habitat. Sequencing efforts have
shown that genomes within this phylum are equally diverse in terms of size and protein-coding capacity. To
increase our understanding of genomic changes in the lineage, the genomes of 58 contemporary cyanobacteria
were analysed for shared and unique orthologs.
Results: A total of 404 protein families, present in all cyanobacterial genomes, were identified. Two of these are
unique to the phylum, corresponding to an AbrB family transcriptional regulator and a gene that escapes functional
annotation although its genomic neighbourhood is conserved among the organisms examined. The evolution of
cyanobacterial genome sizes involves a mix of gains and losses in the clade encompassing complex cyanobacteria,
while a single event of reduction is evident in a clade dominated by unicellular cyanobacteria. Genome sizes and
gene family copy numbers evolve at a higher rate in the former clade, and multi-copy genes were predominant in
large genomes. Orthologs unique to cyanobacteria exhibiting specific characteristics, such as filament formation,
heterocyst differentiation, diazotrophy and symbiotic competence, were also identified. An ancestral character
reconstruction suggests that the most recent common ancestor of cyanobacteria had a genome size of approx.
4.5 Mbp and 1678 to 3291 protein-coding genes, 4%-6% of which are unique to cyanobacteria today.
Conclusions: The different rates of genome-size evolution and multi-copy gene abundance suggest two routes of
genome development in the history of cyanobacteria. The expansion strategy is driven by gene-family enlargment
and generates a broad adaptive potential; while the genome streamlining strategy imposes adaptations to highly
specific niches, also reflected in their different functional capacities. A few genomes display extreme proliferation of
non-coding nucleotides which is likely to be the result of initial expansion of genomes/gene copy number to gain
adaptive potential, followed by a shift to a life-style in a highly specific niche (e.g. symbiosis). This transition results
in redundancy of genes and gene families, leading to an increase in junk DNA and eventually to gene loss. A few
orthologs can be correlated with specific phenotypes in cyanobacteria, such as filament formation and symbiotic
competence; these constitute exciting exploratory targets.

Background
Cyanobacteria have played an important role in the history
of life on Earth as the inventors of oxygenic photosynthesis, which gradually changed atmospheric chemistry to
allow the evolution of Eukarya [1]. Being at the base of
global carbon and nitrogen biogeochemical cycles, the latter due to the ability of many genera to fix atmospheric
nitrogen gas, has provided them with essential roles in the
evolutionary past and in modern ecosystems. The capacity
* Correspondence: john.larsson@botan.su.se
1
Department of Botany, Stockholm University, SE-106 09, Stockholm, Sweden
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

to form stable symbiotic interactions with eukaryotic hosts
is another remarkable feature of cyanobacteria, which led
to the plastid we today term chloroplasts, and eventually
to the plant dominated biosphere of the globe [2,3]. This
green plastid is able to capture and transform the lightenergy of the sun into biologically useful forms of energy
and thereby to fix the carbon that life is built upon.
The eukaryotic hosts in contemporary cyanobacterial
symbiosis range from the amoeboid Paulinella chromatophora, which harbours a unicellular endosymbiotic cyanobacterium [4,5], to a number of plant species spread
within the plant kingdom [6]. The latter all act as hosts to

© 2011 Larsson et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

the more complex cyanobacteria differentiating for
instance heterocysts, a specific cell type in which nitrogen
fixation takes place. The frequency of this nitrogen-fixing
cell type is often considerably enhanced in symbiosis to
support the plant with its total need of combined nitrogen
[7].
The flexibility in life styles of cyanobacteria is
underpinned by the highly diverse morphology of the
cyanobacterial phylum (filamentous/unicellular and
multi-cellularity), in their self-sufficiency in terms of
physiological capabilities (e.g. photosynthesis and
nitrogen fixation), which in turn allows their wide
habitat occupancy-range on a global scale (marine/
freshwater/soils), often including extreme environments (e.g. from cold arctic to hot springs and desert
regions). Cyanobacterial diversity is reflected also at
the genomic level. Sequencing efforts over recent
years have clearly shown that genomes within the cyanobacterial phylum vary considerably in aspects such
as size (~1.4-9.1 Mbp), G+C content (31-63%), number of protein coding genes (1214-8446) and coding
nucleotide proportion (52-94%) (see e.g. [8-13]).
We recently reported on the complete genome sequence
of the heterocystous cyanobacterial symbiont (cyanobiont),
‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708, in the small aquatic fern Azolla filiculoides and discovered features signifying a genome in a
state of erosion [8]. The Azolla symbiosis is a highly integrated mutualistic symbiosis between a pro- and a eukaryote, the heart of which is a nutritional dependence by the
plant on the perpetual source of combined nitrogen delivered by the nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium. This is
accomplished through a number of unique features of the
Azolla symbiosis, many of which suggest a long-lasting coadaptation between the partners. Firstly, the filamentous
cyanobacterium colonizes and is kept as a restricted population in the extracellular cavity that is formed in each
Azolla leaf [14]. Secondly, the host maintains the cyanobiont population between generations, accomplished
through an ingenious and complex vertical transfer
mechanism not found in any other plant symbiosis, built
on multiple cyanobacterial cell differentiation events [14].
In this process the Azolla reproductive organ, the sporocarp, acts as the transfer vehicle of the cyanobacterial
inoculum between plant generations. Thirdly, the cyanobiont seems to have lost (at least part of) its autonomy as
it can no longer grow outside the plant [15], making it an
obligate symbiont, again the only known among plant
symbioses.
Interestingly, our genomic analyses showed that the
genome of the Azolla cyanobiont contains numerous
pseudogenes spread over all functional categories. This
indicates a severe loss of function, which has forced the
cyanobiont to rely on its host for survival. One central
question in relation to the cyanobiont of Azolla is to

Page 2 of 21

what extent the unique obligate life-style of this cyanobacterium has influenced the eroding process of its
genome and, more importantly, whether this is a contemporary example of a nitrogen-fixing plant plastid in the
making. Recent reports show other interesting examples
of reduced genomes within the cyanobacterial phylum,
such as the smallest known genomes among the more
complex Section IV cyanobacteria (filamentous, heterocystous and plant symbionts), Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii CS-505 and Raphidiopsis brookii D9 [16] and
the streamlined genome of a marine nitrogen-fixing unicellular cyanobacterium (cyanobacterium UCYN-A;
[12]). These organisms all show signs of genome reduction, although they, in contrast to the Azolla cyanobiont,
are not known to form symbioses. C. raciborskii differentiates only terminal and R. brookii only incompletely
developed heterocysts, and the cyanobacterium UCYN-A
lacks some genes (among many other present in most
cyanobacteria) for photosystem II. Prompted by our findings about the genome of the Azolla cyanobiont and
these recent reports, combined with the increased wealth
of genomic information, we set out to elucidate in greater
detail the evolutionary history of the large fluctuations
apparent in genome size and content within the cyanobacterial phylum. In the past few years, studies on the
phylogeny of cyanobacteria, based upon varying numbers
of sequenced genomes and conserved proteins, have been
presented [17-19] and aided the identification of major
clades within the phylum. The growing number of available genome sequences, however, warrants an updated
and robust phylogeny and an analysis of the genomic
changes which have occurred within the cyanobacterial
lineage.
Based on phylogenetic analysis of 285 orthologous protein groups present in 58 sequenced genomes, we analysed
evolutionary patterns of genome composition in cyanobacteria and reconstructed the genome of the most recent
common cyanobacterial ancestor. We also assessed the
extent of genome reduction and expansion (the former an
indication of adaptation to a specific niche, and the latter
of a broadened phenotype and adaptation to varying environments) within the phylum and searched for genetic and
functional signatures related to morphology, cell development and symbiosis.

Results
Phylogenetic analysis and the cyanobacterial core

Sequences from 58 cyanobacterial genomes were included
in this study, representing a mix of unicellular, filamentous
and filamentous heterocystous phenotypes, including
known plant symbionts, as well as a few potential symbionts. A list of the organisms, organism abbreviations
used and general information on their genome is presented in additional file 1. In total, the dataset comprises

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

217,365 protein sequences, 191,646 (88%) of which were
clustered into 16,334 orthologous groups. The phylogenetic relationship of the 58 cyanobacteria was determined
based on a concatenated alignment of 285 singlecopy orthologs present in all genomes (Figure 1). In the
resulting tree, many taxonomic groups are found to be
non-monophyletic, for example, the paraphyletic Chroococcales and the polyphyletic Oscillatoriales. On the other
hand, the orders Nostocales and Prochlorales are monophyletic. Overall, the major clades are in large agreement
with previous studies based on fewer genomes and single

Page 3 of 21

genes, such as 16S rRNA or parts thereof [18-21]. The
phylogeny can be divided into two main clades, here
termed Clade 1 and Clade 2. Clade 1 consists of a wide
range and a mixture of phenotypes including both filamentous and unicellular cyanobacteria of the orders
Chroococcales (14 genomes), Oscillatoriales (5 genomes)
and Nostocales (7 genomes) as well as Acaryochloris marina MBIC11017, the latter a unicellular marine organism
without an assigned order. All cyanobacteria with known
or suspected symbiotic competence belong to Clade 1.
The most evolutionary complex representatives within this

Figure 1 Phylogeny of 58 cyanobacteria based on a concatenated alignment of core orthologs. Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree
based on a concatenated alignment of 285 single-copy orthologs present in all genomes. The cyanobacteria with fully developed heterocysts
with a regular intercalary pattern distribution are indicated by the dark green shaded box while those with terminal or undeveloped heterocysts
are indicated by the light green shaded box. Specific phenotypes are shown by the coloured boxes next to the organism names. Numbers at
nodes indicate bootstrap values (when < 100). Bar, 0.4 expected substitutions per site.

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

clade are those capable of cell differentiation, the Nostocales (highlighted in green in Figure 1). The taxonomy of
Clade 2 is considerably more uniform, containing only
small-celled often closely related marine unicellular cyanobacteria of the orders Chroococcales (15 genomes) and
Prochlorales (13 genomes) with small genomes, while the
Cyanobacteria bacterium Yellowstone A and B-Prime
(also known as Synechococcus sp. OS-type A strain JA-33Ab and Synechococcus sp. strain JA-2-3B’a(2-13), respectively), isolated from hot springs, are placed as a sistergroup to Clades 1 and 2. Eight orthologs were identified
in all finished genomes of Clade 1, to the exclusion of all
genomes in Clade 2. These orthologs correspond to a
techoic acids export protein, a cytoskeleton RodZ putative
homolog, a putative multidrug resistance efflux pump, a
protein with a membrane protease subunit and four orthologs with unknown function. Conversely, eight orthologs
were found in all finished genomes of Clade 2, to the
exclusion of all Clade 1 genomes. These correspond to a
nuclease, an aminotransferase, a GNAT-family acetyltransferase, a homoserine O-succinyltransferase, a chorismate
binding enzyme, the rpoD4 RNA polymerase sigma factor
and two orthologs with unknown function. We identified
a total of 404 orthologous genes present in all 58 genomes
(see additional file 2), a gene set defined here as the most
updated cyanobacterial “core”. The most abundant functional protein categories encoded by this strict core were
not unexpectedly those related to translation (80 orthologs), but categories such as coenzyme metabolism (39
orthologs), DNA replication, recombination and repair (35
orthologs), energy production (33 orthologs) and cell
membrane biogenesis (29 orthologs) were also highly
represented. Four genomes had lost functional gene copies
in five of the 404 core orthologous groups (discussed
further below). By defining a relaxed core gene set, based
on orthologs present in the 39 finished genomes (with
both presence and absence allowed in unfinished genomes), we identified 132 additional orthologs, of which
103 are single-copy genes (see additional file 2). This
relaxed core, termed RCF, contained 23 orthologs involved
in translation, 11 of which are ribosomal proteins and the
rest are tRNA synthetases, elongation and release factors
and one uncharacterised gene putatively involved in translation repression. Within RCF are also several DNA maintenance genes such as recA, recG and mutS, genes
involved in carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism such
as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and glutamine
synthetase as well as some subunits of the ATP synthase
and photosystem I. A further relaxation of the core,
obtained by allowing orthologs to be missing from one
(RCF1), two (RCF2) and three (RCF3) finished genomes,
resulted in an additional 268, 86 and 57 identified
gene families, respectively (see additional file 2). In all of
these relaxed cores, the highly reduced genome of

Page 4 of 21

cyanobacterium UCYN-A (Ucyn) consistently lacked the
highest proportion of orthologs with 179, 44 and 32 genes
missing from RCF1, RCF2 and RCF3, respectively. Several
orthologs were also missing from the deep branching
species Gloeobacter violaceus (Glov) and Cyanobacteria
Yellowstone A- and B-prime (YellA and YellB). Glov
lacked 36 orthologs in RCF1: e.g. the circadian clock
kinase gene kaiC, genes involved in transport of cobalt,
iron and copper as well as several genes of unknown function. YellA and YellB both lacked 11 orthologs in RCF2:
e.g. the gamma subunit of the NAD hydrogenase (hoxS),
an N-acetyltransferase involved in membrane biogenesis, a
putative hydrolase and several uncharacterised genes.
In total, 18 finished genomes were missing genes, or had
only pseudogenes, in one or more orthologous groups
where all other genomes were represented (see additional file 3). These missing orthologs are likely the
result of specific adaptations for each individual genome,
or of extensive divergence of proteins that may cause
them to escape identification. The marine unicellular
cyanobacterium UCYN A (Ucyn), misses 127 orthologs
present in all other genomes corresponding to genes
such as those coding for proteins of the PSII complex
(see additional file 3). Its minimal genome (~1.44 Mbp)
and lack of crucial genes suggest that Ucyn is in reality
an obligate symbiont, although no eukaryotic host has
been found [22]. In most other genomes only a few
(1-19, maximum in Glov) orthologs were missing or
non-functional.
‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708 (NoAz) is the only obligate plant
symbiont among the 58 cyanobacteria investigated; the
reason for its obligate dependence on its host is as yet
unknown. However, we identified two protein groups
present in all other genomes, which in NoAz were nonfunctional pseudogenes. These correspond to a geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase and uroporphyrinogen-III
synthase HemD. The former is involved in the synthesis of
carotenoids and chlorophyll, and the latter is generating
precursors of tetrapyrroles such as haem, chlorophyll and
bilins, all with important roles in photosynthesis and protection against photooxidative damage.
Of all the protein groups identified, 5127 (31%) are
unique to cyanobacteria. That is, they contain no
sequences with similarity to proteins in organisms outside
the cyanobacterial phylum (BLASTP e-value < 0.01, nr
database 24 June 2010). Only two of these unique protein
groups, which we term Cya1043 and Cya1555, are represented in all 58 genomes (corresponding to genes all2080
and all0476 in Nostoc sp. PCC 7120, respectively).
Cya1043 corresponds to a AbrB family transcriptional regulator, shown to be involved in triggering a number of
physiological processes in cyanobacteria, such as nitrogen
metabolism [23], toxin production [24], photosynthesis
[25] and oxidative stress [26]. Paralogs of this gene are

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

present in 13 genomes, with the highest total number of
gene copies in Acaryochloris marina (11 copies in total,
three of which are present on the main chromosome).
Although no known function could be ascribed to
Cya1555, its relative organization in the genomes was
highly conserved. In 53 of the 58 genomes the gene was
found directly upstream of murG, involved in cell wall and
membrane biogenesis. The genomes that represented
exceptions to this gene organization were those of the five
unicellular strains Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Scys6803),
Thermosynechococcus elongatus (Thee), Gloeobacter violaceus (Glov) and Cyanobacteria bacterium Yellowstone Aand B-prime (YellA and YellB). In YellA and YellB the
Cya1555 gene is situated between a rhodanese domain
protein and an isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase. In Thee, a
three-gene cluster composed of the ctaCDE cytochrome c
oxidase subunits is located upstream of the gene. Lowering
the cut-off on searches (at e-value 0.045, Uniprot database)
we found that Cya1555 is distantly related to a DNAdirected RNA polymerase of Mycoplasma penetrans.
Among the relaxed core sets, an additional seven orthologs are unique to cyanobacteria. One of these orthologs
contains a thioredoxin domain (the gene is missing from
the Prochlorochoccus NATL1A and NATL2A genomes)
while the other cyano-unique orthologs in the relaxed
core sets corresponded to proteins of unknown function.
Gene duplications

Of the total 16,334 orthologous protein groups identified,
5216 contained recent paralogs (in-paralogs) in one or
more genome, 1642 of which contain only in-paralogs
from a single species lineage, arising from duplication after
speciation or representing ancient duplications retained in
one lineage only. We made no attempt to discriminate
between the origin of paralogs (i.e. horizontal gene transfer
or intra-chromosomal duplication events). However, as the
clustering method used (OrthoMCL, see Methods) identifies genes within genomes that are more similar to each
other than to genes in other genomes our analysis of paralogs consequently refers to in-paralogs. The highest genecopy number for any single protein group was found for a
transposase sequence, with for instance 292 copies in Crocosphaera watsonii (Crow). We determined the proportion
of paralogs and the total number of paralogous gene
copies in each genome and classified these according to
COG functional categories (Figure 2). Figure 2 (left) clearly
shows that large genomes of Clade 1 dominate the proportion of paralogs as well as the total paralogous gene copy
number in our dataset. The genomes with the highest
number in both these categories is the unicellular Acaryochloris marina (Acam), in line with previous reports
[9,27], but high numbers are also encountered in Microcystis aeruginosa (Mica) and Crocosphaera watsonii
(Crow), the filamentous Microcoleus chthonoplastes (Micc)

Page 5 of 21

and the heterocystous Nostoc punctiforme (Nosp). It is
interesting to note that both Acam and Nosp represent
cyanobacteria with symbiotic competence (see Discussion
below). The average number of gene copies for paralogs is
highest in Crow (an average of five copies per paralog).
We found that most paralogs cannot be classified according to COG functional categories (not shown in Figure 2)
and that the majority of genomes in Clade 1 have a higher
distribution of paralogs in the Replication (L) and Signal
transduction (T) categories, compared to Clade 2 (Figure
2, right). The high abundance in the latter category indicates that Clade 1 cyanobacteria have focused protein
family expansions towards sensory functions, thus increasing their capacity to adapt to varying environmental conditions. The numerous paralogs in the replication category
are mostly linked to transposases which can be seen in
Figure 2 where the “t” column is a sub-set of the L category, representing 26 transposase COGs. Transposases are
genetic elements that may also increase adaptation in
bacteria [28-30]. Additionally, the poorly characterized
categories S and R are more abundant among paralogs in
Clade 1, indicating putative novel inventions in these
organisms. In contrast, paralogs in Clade 2 have a higher
distribution in the Posttranslational modification and chaperone (O) and the Cell membrane biogenesis (M) categories, suggesting an increased need for maintaining
correct protein folding and high membrane stability during rapid growth. Ucyn, which has the smallest genome
not only within Clade 1 but among all 58 cyanobacteria in
this study, also contained the lowest number of paralogs.
Therefore, the few examples of paralogs found within the
Ucyn genome are highly interesting. These show a high
distribution in the Replication (L), Post translational modification and chaperone functions (O), Inorganic ion metabolism (P), Cell membrane biogenesis (M), Translation (J),
Energy production (C) and Amino acid metabolism (E)
categories. The obligate plant symbiont ‘Nostoc azollae’
0708 (NoAz) is unusual in that it contains comparatively
few paralogs, most of which fall into the Replication (L)
category, and to some degree the Cell cycle control, cell
division and chromosome partitioning (D) functional
classes, and the uncharacterised S category. A most striking feature is that not less than 725 of the 1136 (64%)
paralogs are pseudogenes in NoAz as are 252 of the 1202
(21%) in Trichodesmium erythraeum (Trie).
Evolutionary history of genomes: size and composition

The genome size variation among the 58 cyanobacteria
examined, illustrated in Figure 3, is formidable, spanning
from 1.4 (Ucyn) to 9.3 Mbp (Nosp). Cyanobacteria with
a genome size of > 3.3 Mbp (Rapb and above) are more
variable in terms of cell size and include all filamentous
cyanobacteria, while all genomes < 3.3 Mbp in size
(YellB and below) represent unicellular cyanobacteria,

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

Page 6 of 21

Figure 2 Amount and functional distribution of paralogs in cyanobacterial genomes. To the left a plot of proportion of protein groups
containing paralogs (x-axis) and total number of paralogous gene copies (colour of circles). Numbers in the right margin of the plot show the
average number of gene copies for paralogs. Organisms are ordered according to their position in the phylogenetic tree. To the right a heat
map of the functional distribution of paralogs classified according to the Cluster of orthologous groups (COG) categories. Abbreviations for
functional categories are as follows: t, a subset of L containing 26 transposase categories; O, posttranslational modification, protein turnover and
chaperones; S, function unknown; L, replication, recombination and repair; P, inorganic ion transport and metabolism; T, signal transduction
mechanisms; M, cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis; R, general function prediction only; J, translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis;
V, defence mechanisms; U, intracellular trafficking, secretion and vesicular transport; G, carbohydrate transport and metabolism; K, transcription; C,
energy production and conversion; Q, secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism; E, amino acid transport and metabolism; N,
cell motility; H, coenzyme transport and metabolism; F, nucleotide transport and metabolism; D, cell cycle control, cell division and chromosome
partitioning; I, lipid transport and metabolism. Categories are ordered by maximum percentage.

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

Page 7 of 21

Figure 3 Genome sizes among 58 cyanobacteria. The bars denote the genome size in Mbp and the green, grey and red portions of the bars
represent nucleotides in coding, non-coding and pseudogene regions, respectively.

restricted to oceans or hot springs. Cyanobacteria with
larger genomes are also considerably more variable in
their habitat selection, occupying soils, limnic and marine environments as well as a range of eukaryotic symbiont hosts (see additional file 1). Within this group

there is also a large subclade of unicellular cyanobacteria
with larger genomes, represented by Crow, Mica and the
six genomes within the genus Cyanothece. It is also
obvious that cell differentiation is not related to genome
size as the heterocystous cyanobacteria represent the

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

largest (Nosp) and the smallest (Rapb) genomes within
the > 3 Mbp genome group. However, the two cyanobacteria with smallest genomes in the heterocystous
clade (Figure 1), Rapb, with ‘traces’ of heterocysts, and
Cylr, with terminal heterocysts only, may be on their
way to lose the cell differentiation machinery [16].
Indeed, gene loss is probably also the case for Ucyn
which, in spite of belonging to Clade 1 cyanobacteria
(Figure 1), has the smallest genome of all 58 analysed
here. While coding nucleotides (green parts of the bars
in Figure 3) occupy most of the cyanobacterial genomes,
those of Trie and NoAz differ considerably in having a
significant proportion of their genomes represented by
non-coding DNA and a high frequency of pseudogenes,
respectively (Figure 3). A Pearson’s chi-squared test
based on 2000 replicates show that non-coding nucleotides are unequally distributed in cyanobacterial genomes (p-value < 0.001) and that NoAz and Trie are
heavily biased in this respect (data not shown). Another
13 genomes show a positive bias in non-coding nucleotides, most of which are in the larger range of genome
sizes (Figure 3; Nosp-Anav, Cya7424-Syn7335, Mica and
Nods), while the majority of genomes < 3 Mbp are
biased towards coding nucleotides. The organisms Prochlorococcus MIT 9313 (Prom9313) and Ucyn harbour
the only genomes < 3 Mbp which display an over-representation of non-coding nucleotides.
To visualize the fluctuations of genome sizes within
the cyanobacterial lineage we applied a parsimony
reconstruction of genome size at the nodes of the phylogeny. As seen in Figure 4, expansions have primarily
occurred within Clade 1 cyanobacteria, and a few genomes within this clade appear to have undergone particularly significant genome expansions: Acam, Trie and
Micc. Among the seven heterocystous cyanobacteria, the
genome of Nosp has expanded to become the largest
known for cyanobacteria today, while the genomes of
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Cylr) and Raphidiopsis
brookii (Rapb) have undergone severe reductions. In the
subclade consisting of these two cyanobacteria and
NoAz, a decrease in genome size has occurred since the
branching from the Anabaena/Nostoc clade. However,
whereas NoAz has retained roughly the size of the
ancestor shared with Cylr and Rapb, the reductions in
these latter genomes have been more severe. Genome
sizes have decreased also in Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002
(Syn7002) and Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Scys6803),
while the other members of this subclade are dominated
by the more large-celled unicellular cyanobacteria of the
genus Cyanothece, in which no obvious size changes
appear to have occurred since their branching from
Micc. However, the most notable genome reductions
have occurred in Ucyn and Thermosynechococcus elongatus (Thee). In sharp contrast to the high levels of

Page 8 of 21

genome size fluctuations of Clade 1 cyanobacteria, a single event of genome reduction appears to have taken
place in Clade 2 cyanobacteria, from the original 4.11
Mbp to the less than 3 Mbp genome sizes (Figure 4).
The size of the genome at the branching point between
Clade 1 and Clade 2 cyanobacteria is in turn estimated
to be 4.91 Mbp.
Differences in genome sizes between Clade 1 and
Clade 2 were analysed using Felsenstein’s phylogenetically independent contrasts [31,32]. As seen in Figure
5A,B, Clade 1 cyanobacteria (filled symbols) show a
higher evolutionary rate of both genome size (Wilcoxon-test, p < 0.0001) and paralog copy-number (same
test, p < 0.0001). As the differences between the clades
make them unsuited for simultaneous regression analysis through the origin [33], subsequent analysis was
focused on the more heterogeneous cyanobacterial genomes of Clade 1. A phylogenetically correct regression
analysis of paralogous gene copy number (dependent
variable) and genome size (independent variable) within
Clade 1 shows a significant positive correlation between
genome size and number of duplicated genes (r = 0.691,
two-tailed p < 0.0001) (Figure 5C). This is in line with
previous reports [27,34,35]. We also noted a negative
correlation (r = -0.252) between genome size and coding
nucleotide proportion within Clade 1, although without
statistical support (two-tailed p = 0.205).
As seen in Figure 4, the inferred genome size of the
most recent common ancestor (MRCA) of cyanobacteria
is approximately 4.5 Mbp. Based on the presence/
absence of orthologs in the nodes of the tree, the genome of the MRCA is estimated to have contained
between 1678 and 3291 protein-coding genes (see additional file 4). Given the large number of paralogs in the
genomes at the tree nodes we also determined the gene
content of the MRCA based on the copy number of
genes in orthologous groups. However, this did not shift
the gene content to a large extent (1816-3570 proteincoding genes). The coding nucleotide proportion of the
MRCA, based on the lowest and highest predicted number of genes is 36 and 70%, respectively. This indicates
that the smaller size of the gene set is likely to be an
underestimate. Of the estimated MRCA gene set, 206 of
the maximum 3291 and 68 of the minimum 1678 orthologs are unique to cyanobacteria. In total, 90 of these
cyano-unique groups could be reliably annotated in one
or more of the databases used (see Methods). The
majority of cyano-unique orthologs in the MRCA gene
set to which a COG category could be assigned
belonged to the categories Function unknown or General function prediction only (12 orthologs), Transcription (4 orthologs), Replication, recombination and repair
(4 orthologs) and Posttranslational modification, protein
turnover, chaperones (4 orthologs). Furthermore, this

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

Page 9 of 21

Figure 4 Parsimony reconstruction of ancestral genome sizes. Genome sizes are indicated (in Mbp) at specific nodes and in the right
margin for the extant genomes. A single event of genome reduction appears to have occurred in the ancestor of the unicellular and mostly
marine cyanobacteria (Prochlorococcus/Synechococcus). In contrast, the history of Clade 1 cyanobacteria involves a mix of genome expansions
and reductions. The most notable expansion events are evident in the genome of Acaryochloris marina (Acam), Trichodesmium erythraeum (Trie),
Nostoc punctiforme PCC 73102 (Nosp) and Microcoleus chthonoplastes (Micc). Reductions in this clade include Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Cylr),
Raphidiopsis brookii (Rapb), Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 (Syn7002), Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Scys6803) and cyanobacterium UCYN-A (Ucyn).
Note that the genome size of the obligate symbiont ‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708 (NoAz) has not changed considerably since the ancestor shared with
Cylr and Rapb although the pseudogenization in NoAz is considerable (Figure 3).

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

Page 10 of 21

unique set of ancestral cyanobacterial proteins includes
an uncharacterised thylakoid-associated protein, a thylakoid membrane protein, the replication initiation and
membrane attachment protein (DnaB), four bacterial
conjugation TrbI-like proteins, a number of phycocyanin-associated proteins and the circadian clock protein
KaiA. Additionally, the MRCA gene set includes the
genes nifEHDKUB, involved in the nitrogen fixation
process, and the transcriptional regulator patB. However, the presence of these genes in the MRCA could
not be inferred unambiguously.
Phenotypic characteristics and functional distribution

Figure 5 Relationships between genome sizes and paralog
number. A and B) Diagnostic plots of absolute values of
standardized independent contrasts in genome size (A) and number
of paralogs (B) versus their standard deviations (square roots of
sums of branch lengths) for Clade 1 (closed circles) and Clade 2
(open circles) cyanobacteria. The plots shows that contrasts within
Clade 1 are, on average, larger in magnitude (Wilcoxon tests, twotailed p < 0.0001). This indicates that genome sizes and gene-copy
numbers have evolved at a higher rate in Clade 1 species. In A and
B, a plus sign denotes the contrast between Clade 1 and Clade 2,
which was excluded from the tests. C) Phylogenetically correct
regression analysis through the origin of contrasts in number of
paralogous gene copies vs. positivized contrasts in genome size for
Clade 1. The plots show a strong positive correlation between
genome size and number of duplicated genes (r = 0.691, two-tailed
p < 0.0001).

An overview of phenotypic characteristics represented
by the 58 cyanobacteria examined is given in additional
file 1: morphology (filamentous, unicellular and heterocyst differentiation), physiology (nitrogen-fixation), symbiotic competence, and typical habitat (marine,
freshwater, terrestrial and hot springs). To search for
any biased functional distribution, which may indicate
functions necessary for a specific phenotype/characteristic, COG functional categories were attributed to each
protein in the 58 genomes. The relative distribution of
COG categories is shown in Figure 6 in relation to their
phylogenetic position. The functional distribution of
genes in chloroplast genomes - an extreme case of cyanobacterial genome reduction and adaptation - and in
the predicted gene set of the cyanobacterial MRCA is
also given. Some conspicuous trends are apparent. For
instance, the category Replication, recombination and
repair (L) makes up 10%, or more, of the gene repertoire
in five genomes: Crow, NoAz, Mica, Artm and Trie.
Most of these genes are related to transposases in each
genome as can be seen in Figure 6 where orthologs present in 26 transposase COGs in the L category are displayed separately ("t” column). In the majority of other
genomes, the L category contributes 5% or less and
transposases are scarce in Clade 2 genomes. In NoAz,
most genes in the L category (including transposases)
are pseudogenes, but several functional transposases still
exist in the genome (Figure 6). The two other COG
categories with the highest proportion of genes in most
genomes are General function prediction only (R), dominating in all genomes including the MRCA, and Function unknown (S), indicating that a large part of the
proteins in cyanobacteria are as yet not classified. The
latter of these two categories was generally more abundant in genomes belonging to Clade 1 cyanobacteria.
The smaller cyanobacteria of Clade 2 more consistently
contain a higher proportion of genes related to amino
acid metabolism (E) but a lower proportion of genes
involved in signal transduction (T) and cell motility (N)
compared to most other cyanobacteria. Furthermore,
the minimal genome of Ucyn has 10.5% of its genes in

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

Page 11 of 21

Figure 6 Functional distribution of genes in the cyanobacterial genomes. The distribution of functions for the most recent common
ancestor (MRCA) of cyanobacteria is shown at the top. Clade 1 and Clade 2 cyanobacteria are shaded in green and blue in the phylogeny,
respectively. At the bottom of the plot is the distribution for chloroplasts (averaged over 189 genomes with a total of 17,216 genes). Note that
the chloroplast plot has its own colour key (bottom). COG categories are ordered according to maximum contribution in a single genome.
Some Clade 1 cyanobacteria appear to have a higher distribution of genes related to Replication (L), Signal transduction mechanisms (T) and
Cell motility (N), while functions related to Amino acid metabolism (E) and Posttranslational modification and chaperones (O) are more abundant
in Clade 2. Pseudogenes have been excluded from this analysis. COG abbreviations are as in Figure 2.

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

the translation (J) category, and its functional bias is
thereby similar to that in chloroplasts, but not to its closest relatives. The extremely reduced genomes of chloroplasts are also highly devoted to energy production and
conversion (C), while Ucyn has a low proportion of its
genes in this category. Rather this genome appears
biased towards cell membrane biogenesis (M) and coenzyme transport and metabolism (H). It should also be
noted that the functional distribution of the MRCA is
not particularly similar to that of chloroplasts, although
it may have been closely related to the chloroplast
progenitor.
The filamentous phenotype is exhibited by 12 organisms in our dataset and shows an ambiguous evolutionary
history as seen in Figure 7A. Parsimony reconstruction
cannot discriminate between the possibilities ranging
from two independent gains (in Micc, and the Anav-Trie
clade, respectively) to one common gain (in the large sister group to Thee/Cya7425/Acam) with a consecutive
loss of the trait (in the ancestor of Syn7002-Scys6803).
The result of this reconstruction is in line with previous
studies of cyanobacterial traits [36,37]. We found 25
orthologs (see additional file 5) present in all filamentous
cyanobacteria with genomes sequenced to completion,
but lacking in all unicellular cyanobacteria. Neither of
these orthologs were present in the predicted gene set of
the cyanobacterial MRCA but nine are unique to the cyanobacterial phylum. Notably, eight of the 25 orthologs
are pseudogenes in NoAz, which implies that they are
not directly involved in filament formation. Of the
remaining 17 orthologs, two are present in all 12 filamentous cyanobacteria and correspond to a thermonuclease
(Pfam ID PF00565) and a protein distantly related to a
bacterial regulator of the luxR family (Pfam ID PF00196
at e-value = 0.18). These two orthologs were identified
previously by Stucken and co-workers [16] in a set of
genes found only in filamentous cyanobacteria. However,
the former of the two was not included in their proposed
core set (present in all filamentous species) comprising
10 genes in total. Of the remaining 15 orthologs found
only in filamentous cyanobacteria, six were also identified
by Stucken and co-workers. Six of the additional nine
orthologs identified here show significant similarity to a
sucrose porin, a protein kinase, a putative anti-sigma factor antagonist (involved in sporulation in Bacillus subtilis
[38]), a peptidase-like protein, a protein with a xylose isomerase domain and a protein with a KGK domain (Pfam
ID PF08872). The two latter are unique to cyanobacteria.
Three of the nine orthologs show only slight similarity to
a histidine kinase, an outer membrane efflux protein and
a protein involved in fatty acid synthesis (Pfam IDs
PF00672, PF02321 and PF00550 at e-values 0.024, 0.066
and 2.000, respectively). We found no orthologs uniquely

Page 12 of 21

shared by unicellular cyanobacteria, which provides additional support to the hypothesis that the filamentous
phenotype is a derived trait [16].
Of the 58 cyanobacteria in the dataset, 21 fix atmospheric nitrogen (diazotrophs). The history of nitrogen
fixation, as explained by parsimony and our taxonomic
sample (Figure 7B), does not exclude the possibility that
the cyanobacterial MRCA was diazotrophic. A number of
gains and losses of this capacity have clearly occurred
throughout the evolution of the cyanobacterial lineage.
Nitrogen fixation is, as expected, present in all heterocystous cyanobacteria with the notable exception of Rapb, an
example of an organism in the process of losing capacity
to differentiate heterocysts and diazotrophy [16]. Another
example of loss is seen in the genus Arthrospira (earlier
Spirulina). Interestingly, diazotrophy is retained in a number of unicellular cyanobacteria outside Clade 2, including
Ucyn with its minimal genome, while it seems to have
been lost in the globally wide-spread Mica and in Syn7002
and Scys6803. Hence, there is a general positive correlation between diazotrophy and filamentation on one hand
and unicellular cyanobacteria with larger genomes on the
other, while the smaller Clade 2 cyanobacteria lack this
capacity. The hetR gene, encoding the master regulator for
heterocyst development [39], is also not unexpectedly
lacking in Clade 2. The presence of hetR shows a positive
correlation with diazotrophy (being present in 10 out of
the 21 diazotrophs). The correlation is even stronger
between hetR and the filamentous phenotype, whether
heterocystous or non-heterocystous, with hetR being present in all 12 filamentous phenotypes examined here. The
hetR gene is in addition found in two unicellular strains of
Synechococcus (7335 and 7002), being a diazotroph and a
non-diazotroph, respectively, where its function is
unknown.
Thirteen orthologs were found in all nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria with finished genomes, but lacking in all nondiazotrophs. Six of these are present in all nitrogen-fixing
species and correspond to five genes in the nitrogenase
(nif) gene cluster: nifBEHKS (the nifD gene is not included
in this ortholog set because its amino acid sequence was
missing from the NCBI protein fasta file of Nostoc punctiforme although the gene exists in this genome with a DNA
incision element). The remaining ortholog is the XRE
family transcriptional regulator patB, which is found in
the vicinity of the nif cluster in a few cyanobacteria, but is
distantly located in others. Rapb, which appears to have
lost the complete nif cluster [16], did not share any orthologs exclusively with all nitrogen-fixers or all nitrogen-fixers with finished genomes. Similarly to the flanking
regions of the nif cluster in Cylr, Rapb shows a high similarity to both sides of the patB gene in Cylr, suggesting a
location for patB in Rapb before being lost. The additional

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

Page 13 of 21

Figure 7 Parsimony reconstruction of ancestral states of the filamentous and nitrogen-fixing phenotypes. Equivocal inference are
indicated with bi-coloured branches. Genome sizes (in Mbp) is indicated at key nodes of loss/gain. Both characters show a homoplastic pattern
with a possible single common origin of the trait followed by one (A) or many (B) losses.

six orthologs found only in nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria
correspond to Ferredoxin-3 and the nifUWXZT gene
cluster.
Heterocysts are formed by seven organisms in our
dataset. We identified 96 orthologs present in all heterocystous cyanobacteria with finished genomes that were

absent from all non-heterocystous cyanobacteria (see
additional file 6). As for the filamentous phenotype,
neither of the heterocyst signature genes were present
in the predicted cyanobacterial MRCA. However, 41 of
the 96 heterocyst specific orthologs were unique to cyanobacteria. Among these, which mostly correspond to

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

hypothetical genes, are two genes involved in bacterial
conjugation (TrbI-like proteins), a gene with a domain
found in osmotic shock protection proteins (Pfam ID
PF04972) as well as a putative type IV pilus biogenesis
gene. Two of the cyanobacteria included in the study do
not exhibit a complete developmental mode. Cylr forms
only terminal heterocysts and Rapb only partially developed terminal heterocysts [16]. The response regulator
gene patA, known to be essential to proper heterocyst
pattern formation [40,41], is among the 96 heterocyst
specific orthologs. Rapb lacks this ortholog and a protein alignment of PatA shows that the conserved Nterminal PATAN domain [42] of the protein is missing
in Cylr, which may underpin the presence of exclusively
terminal heterocysts in this organism. Of the 96 heterocyst-specific orthologs, not less than 21 orthologs are
pseudogenes in NoAz, most of which are involved in
solute transport and cell membrane biogenesis. One of
the orthologs present in all heterocystous cyanobacteria
was found in 3 to 10 copies in all genomes except in
NoAz where it is a single-copy gene. No function could
be ascribed to this ortholog with the cut-off used. However, lowering the cut-off (at e-value 0.087 in the Pfam
database) we find that the ortholog is distantly related
to fimbrial proteins (Pfam ID PF00419), which enable
bacteria to colonize the epithelia of host organisms and
to promote virulence [43].
The only two proven plant symbionts examined in this
study, Nosp and NoAz, exclusively share 13 orthologs
(see additional file 7). Notably, NoAz has lost function in
seven of these, two belonging to the receptor/sensory
family of proteins, one glycosyl transferase involved in
cell membrane biogenesis, a threonine/homoserine efflux
transporter, a type I phosphodiesterase, a short-chain
dehydrogenase of unknown specificity and one ortholog
to which no function could be assigned. Of the remaining
six orthologs exclusive to the plant symbionts, functions
could be assigned to two orthologs: a signal transduction
histidine kinase and a glycosyl hydrolase (Pfam ID
PF01374) which catalyses the endohydrolysis between Nacetyl-D-glucosamine and D-glucosamine. No other genome in the dataset contained any proteins annotated
with this Pfam ID. Two orthologs were exclusive to
NoAz, Nosp and Acam, the latter obtained as a symbiont
in colonial ascidians [44], one of which corresponds to a
ADP-ribosylglycohydrolase while to the other no function could be ascribed. Additionally, three orthologs were
exclusive to NoAz, Nosp, Cylr and Rapb, which may be
forming associations. These correspond to a protein with
an S-layer homology domain (which coat the surface of
bacteria), a Tellurite-resistance protein and a protein
with unknown function.
In contrast to Nosp, which is a facultative symbiont,
NoAz spends its entire life cycle in a perpetual plant

Page 14 of 21

interaction and has suffered severe loss of function with
a massive number of pseudogenes mainly in the functional categories related to replication, secondary metabolite biosynthesis, and signal transduction [8]. We
reconstructed the ortholog content of the most recent
ancestor of NoAz and its closest relatives, Cylr and
Rapb. Assuming that NoAz entered into its obligate
symbiotic relationship (potentially 140 million years ago
[45]) after diverging from Cylr and Rapb, this represents
the last known free-living ancestor of NoAz. Thus, any
orthologs in this subset which are missing in the extant
NoAz genome should have been lost during its evolution within the plant environment, and possibly reflect
redundant functions in this evolutionary setting. We
found that NoAz is missing between 56 to 159 orthologs
that were present in this free-living ancestor. Most of
these belong to the functional classes Energy production
(10.4%), Inorganic ion transport and metabolism (9.4%),
Nucleotide transport and metabolism (9.3%) and Carbohydrate transport and metabolism (9.1%). Numerous
orthologs (28 in total) with similarity to ABC-transporters, permeases and secretory proteins were also missing
in NoAz, as was a cell division control protein with a
DNA helicase domain, known to resolve Holliday junctions that arise during recombination and repair. In contrast, the functional classes Transcription, Defence
mechanisms and Translation were the least represented
among the missing orthologs.

Discussion
Our comparative analyses of cyanobacterial genomes
revealed a core gene set of 404 orthologs, the majority of
which are involved in crucial house-keeping functions.
The 58 cyanobacterial genomes examined here provide a
dataset several-fold larger than the 15 [17] and 13 [18]
genomes analysed in two previous studies. By matching
our core orthologs to those identified in these studies, we
find that the 1054 cyanobacterial clusters of orthologous
groups (CyOGs) identified by Mulkidjanian and co-workers (2006) translate into 1435 of the orthologs in the 58
genomes examined here. The latter study identified a core
set of 682 single-copy genes [18], of which 356 are present
in our relaxed core (RCF) of 393 single-copy orthologs.
The differences noted obviously relate to the number of
genomes examined but also to the method used to cluster
orthologs and define the core. The method (OrthoMCL)
used here to define the core gene set in the 58 genomes
involves an all-against-all BLAST step, and additional
rules to identify recent paralogs (so called in-paralogs).
Mulkidjanian and co-workers (2006) used the cluster of
orthologous groups method [46,47] and defined the core
in their dataset as CyOGs that were missing in no more
than one genome. Of the 1435 orthologs in our dataset,
which correspond to the 1054 CyOGs identified by

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

Mulkidjanian and co-workers, 931 are likewise present in
our relaxed core gene set (i.e. in either the strict core, RCF
or RCF1). The 504 CyOGs missing from the relaxed cores
were mostly lacking in cyanobacterium UCYN-A, the two
Yellowstone species or in the Prochlorococcus clade and
belonged primarily to the General prediction only (R),
Energy production (C), Amino acid (E) and Inorganic ion
transport and metabolism (P) functional categories. Shi
and Falkowski [18], on the other hand, identified their 682
single-copy orthologs using reciprocal best BLAST hits
and divided these into 323 core and 329 shell genes (the
latter displaying divergent phylogenies). The orthologs
which are not present among the 393 single-copy genes in
our RCF gene set most often corresponded to genes
involved in coenzyme and amino acid transport and metbolism. The reason that these orthologs are missing from
the core in our dataset is due to their absence in one or
more finished genome as well as to the existence of multiple gene copies in one or more of the genomes analysed
here.
The phylogeny presented in Figure 1 shows two major
cyanobacterial clades and a sister group consisting of the
Yellowstone species and Gloeobacter violaceus, in agreement with Gupta and Mathews (2010) [19]. Cyanobacteria
with the largest genomes (Clade 1) contained the highest
number of paralogs. This result suggests that gene duplication is a strong driving force for broadening the phenotypes and subsequently the adaptive behaviour of the
cyanobacteria investigated, as proposed for other prokaryotes [27,48-50]. These duplications can originate from
either within the genome itself (paralogs) or can be introduced by horizontal gene transfer (HGT). Although we
did not attempt to discriminate between these two
mechanisms, we observed that approximately 10% of protein groups involved only a single genome (i.e. do not
show significant similarity to any protein in the other genomes). This indicates that several protein families within
cyanobacteria may be the result of HGT events or that
these sequences have diverged to the point where any significant similarity to homologs in other genomes is lost.
Additionally, gene transfers both within cyanobacteria and
from other phyla have been reported previously [51-53]
and may contribute substantially to the expansion of gene
families [54]. A striking example of gene family expansion
is obvious in the chlorophyll d-containing unicellular
Acaryochloris marina with the second largest genome
among the 58 genomes examined and by far the highest
number of paralogs (Figure 2). Indeed, this cyanobacterium is capable of adapting to a range of specialized environmental niches [9], including symbiosis with ascidians
[44] and marine macroalgae [55]. The other extreme is the
unicellular cyanobacterium UCYN-A with the smallest
genome and the lowest number of paralogs among the 58
cyanobacteria investigated. The paralogs identified in this

Page 15 of 21

genome appear biased towards posttranslational modifications and chaperone functions (Figure 2), events of importance in endosymbionts [56] and exhibiting a positive
selection bias in e.g. the insect endosymbiont Buchnera
[57]. The drastically diminished genomic features in Ucyn
therefore support an implied life-style dependence on
other organisms [12,22], potentially in a fully developed
endosymbiotic context.
According to our parsimony reconstructions (based on
genome sizes and the presence/absence of orthologs in
genomes), the genome size of the most recent common
ancestor (MRCA) of cyanobacteria was approximately 4.5
Mbp and contained 1678-3291 protein-coding genes.
The coding nucleotide proportion would then account
for 36-70% of the proposed genome size of the MRCA.
Including the number of genes within orthologous
groups in the reconstruction (i.e. gene copy number
within protein families) did not significantly alter the size
of the estimated gene set. The relatively low coding proportion may be due to the fact that estimates are based
on orthologs in genomes, thereby missing the genes that
could not be grouped by our gene clustering method. A
parsimony reconstruction of the total number of genes in
the MRCA puts the gene count at approximately 4300,
which represents a more plausible size of the ancestral
gene repertoire. Interestingly, the MRCA genome may
have included a set of nif genes, opening up the possibility that the cyanobacterial ancestor was a diazotroph
(shown also in Figure 7B).
It is apparent that the genomes of cyanobacteria, ranging
almost 10-fold in size from just above 1 Mbp to close to
10 Mbp, have been subjected to a range of niche-specific
environmental and competitive forces during the billion
years of evolution of the phylum, and thus each genome in
our dataset may uniquely reflect the characteristics it displays. Still, the cyanobacterial genome sizes show two general trends that reflect the two major clades identified
(Clade 1 and 2; Figure 1). The evolutionary history of genomes within Clade 1 involves a mix of expansions and
reductions while a single event of genome reduction
appears to have taken place at the branching of Clade 2,
dominated by the often closely related marine picocyanobacteria (Figure 4). It is also clear that both genome
sizes and number of in-paralogs evolve at a faster rate
(Figure 5A,B), and that there exists a strong correlation
between genome sizes and gene copy number, in genomes
of Clade 1 (Figure 5C). Thus, Clade 1 cyanobacteria
appear to employ a survival strategy anchored in genome
(and consequently gene family) expansion capacities, while
the unicellular and mostly marine cyanobacteria in Clade
2 rely on genome streamlining and the maintenance of a
minimal gene repertoire. The former strategy allows Clade
1 cyanobacteria to be highly flexible in terms of not only
developmental capacities (e.g. specialization via cell

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

differentiation: akinetes, heterocysts, diazocytes), but also
physiological performance (e.g. nitrogen fixation, symbiosis) and a wide habitat occupancy among prokaryotes. A
similar pattern has been shown previously within Clade2
cyanobacteria with significant streamlining having ocurred
in Prochlorococcus isolates since their divergence from
Synechococcus [58] (the latter considered to be better generalists than the former). In spite of the constraints
imposed by the genomic streamlining in Clade 2 cyanobacteria, this strategy has been ecologically highly successful, at least in specific niches, considering the abundance
of these cyanobacteria in nutrient-deficient warmer oceans
with few competitors, or as recently suggested, positive
interactions with other co-occurring bacteria [59,60].
The adaptive potential of the Clade 1 strategy may also
explain the successful entrapment in highly specialized
niches. A clear example is the obligate symbiont ‘Nostoc
azollae’ 0708, which has substituted a free-living life-style
with one restricted within a eukaryotic host. Still, this
symbiotic interaction is highly dependent on the complex
developmental modes of the cyanobacterium, involving
differentiation of several cell types, including those
required for the vertical transmission process [14]. Such
host-restricted conditions impose population size diminishments and relaxed constraints on protein-coding
genes, leading to fixation of deleterious mutations [61]
and pseudogenization followed by gene loss and genome
shrinkage [62]. The ‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708 is apparently at
an early stage of a host-adapted life-style, as its genome
size has been only slightly reduced since divergence from
its free-living ancestor (5.65 to 5.49 Mbp; Figure 4). This
is also reflected in the relatively low number of orthologs
(56-159), which we estimate to have been completely lost
during symbiosis and the still evident high proportion of
pseudogenes [8], which are likely targets for removal. If
these pseudogenes were to be lost, the genome size of
‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708 would approach that of its closest
relatives C. raciborskii and R. brookii (Figure 3). Whether
any of the lost genes have been targeted to the plant
nucleus (as in the case of chloroplasts) is unknown. Such
a transfer of genetic material from the cyanobiont to the
host might be mediated by the DNA-containing vesicles
seen during the vertical transmission of the cyanobiont
between Azolla generations [14].
Other cyanobacteria in Clade 1 that show signs of genome reduction include Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii
and Raphidiopsis brookii [16], the unicellular cyanobacterium UCYN-A [12] and Thermosynechococcus elongatus [63] which occupies hot-springs [64]. However in
these cases, the genome reduction has affected distinctly
different cellular processes. In Cylindrospermopsis and
Raphidiopsis, free-living aquatic cyanobacteria with the
smallest genomes (3-4 Mbp) among Section IV heterocystous cyanobacteria, the capacity to differentiate

Page 16 of 21

heterocysts has been negatively affected, while in the
marine nitrogen-fixing Ucyn, genes involved in photosynthesis (PSII) are lost. The reduction in genome size in
these cyanobacteria has been considerably more dramatic
than in ‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708, since divergence from their
last known ancestor (5.65 to < 4 Mbp in Cylr and Rapb;
5.15 to 1.44 Mbp in Ucyn). These genome reductions
suggest a symbiotic or other highly interactive life style
for these organisms. If this is the case, the former would
act as photosynthetic symbionts (e.g. in a heterotrophic
host) while Ucyn would act as a diazotrophic symbiont
delivering nitrogen to a potentially photosynthetic host
supplying carbohydrates. The genome of Trichodesmium
erythraeum provides another unexpected example in
this context as it displays the highest proportion of noncoding nucleotides (including also numerous pseudogenes) among all 58 genomes examined (Figure 3). This
implies a severe ongoing genome erosion (in coding
functions) in a globally wide-spread, free-living, and fully
photosynthetic and diazotrophic cyanobacterium, sharing
oligotrophic surface waters with cyanobacteria with the
smallest genomes known (e.g. Prochlorococcus marinus
MIT9313 and cyanobacterium UCYN-A). However, our
data also clearly show that the large genome of Trichodesmium erythraeum (7.75 Mbp) is not shrinking but
expanding in size (Figure 4). This result suggests that this
cyanobacterium employs yet another strategy to cover
large segments of our oceans. One hypothesis is that the
large Trichodesmium colonies, which are associated with
numerous other microorganisms [65], are highly flexible
and ‘open’ to gene gain via transfers from its cohabitants.
Considering the large number of genomes used in this
study, the finding of orthologs that are exclusively shared
by, or missing from, genomes with specific phenotypes
strongly implicates these orthologs in the underlying reason for the resulting phenotype. For instance, we identified 17 orthologs underpinning filament formation, 96
orthologs exclusive to heterocystous species, as well as 13
orthologs shared between the only two sequenced plant
symbionts. Since no orthologs were identified exclusively
in the unicellular cyanobacteria, the filamentous phenotype is most likely a derived trait. Our results suggest
that the cyanobacterial ancestor was unicellular and that
the filamentous morphology was introduced later within
the lineage (Figure 7A). This finding is in line with previous reports on cyanobacteria [36,37] and argues against
the irreversible end-state of the coccus morphology in
prokaryotes [66].
Not less than 21 of the 96 heterocyst-related orthologs
are pseudogenes in ‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708, suggesting that
they are not directly involved in heterocyst formation or
that heterocysts are in some way severely impaired in
NoAz. Among the heterocystous cyanobacteria, the

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

N-terminal PATAN domain of PatA [42] is lacking in
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii and the whole patA gene is
missing in Raphidiopsis brookii. The absence of a fulllength copy of this otherwise heterocyst-specific ortholog
is a likely reason for the exclusively terminal heterocysts
(which in Raphidiopsis are not fully developed) in these
strains.
As seven of the symbiont-specific genes are no longer
functional in the obligate ‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708, these
may in turn have key functions in the re-establishment of
plant-cyanobacterial associations. The inability of ‘Nostoc
azollae’ 0708 to survive outside the plant host has
puzzled researchers. The cyanobacterial symbiont of
Azolla could be kept alive for months under certain freeliving conditions, but was still unable to multiply and
exhibited photobleaching [15]. Our finding of pseudogenized orthologs in NoAz involved in pigment synthesis
and present in all other cyanobacterial genomes investigated, suggests that these genes are necessary for survival
under free-living conditions but dispensable in the Azolla
symbiosis where the chloroplast canopy of the plant
shields the symbiont from excess light. Moreover, the
discovery of a specific protein family related to carbohydrate metabolism in the two plant symbionts Nostoc
punctiforme and ‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708, makes the substrates of this enzyme, N-acetyl-D-glucosamine and
D-glucosamine, a likely candidate for the carbohydrate
supplied by cyanobacterial plant hosts. Interestingly,
D-glucosamine is a signalling factor for nodule development in Rhizobia symbioses [67]. These orthologs constitute exciting targets for further analyses.
Finally, we are aware that bacterial traits often require a
complex network of genetic interactions and gene
expression dosage, seldom explained by the presence or
absence of a single gene product. Furthermore, the comparative approach taken here is naturally limited by the
data (sequenced genomes) at hand. Importantly, the
organisms included should optimally be judiciously
sampled in order to reflect the underlying phylogenetic
diversity and genetic complexity. Such a representative
sample might be hard to achieve given the current availability of cyanobacterial genomes, but should definitely
be taken into account in further sequencing efforts.
Nevertheless, we hypothesize that linking protein families
to characteristics, and analysed from an evolutionary perspective, provides a valuable starting point for further
research on the metabolic and morphological phenotypes
of cyanobacteria.

Page 17 of 21

contains 536 orthologs, of which 393 are found in singlecopy versions. Due to the severe loss of genes in cyanobacterium UCYN-A neither of these core gene sets include
genes for the photosystem II complex (although these are
present among 268 additional orthologs allowed to be
missing from one finished genome). Two orthologs in the
stringent gene core are unique to all cyanobacteria, one
which corresponds to a transcriptional regulator and the
other to an unknown protein with a conserved genomic
neighbourhood in all species examined. Seven additional
orthologs were unique to the relaxed core gene sets of
the cyanobacterial phylum (allowed to be missing from 1-3
of the finished genomes) but are currently poorly
characterized.
Genome sizes and number of duplicated genes within
the major clade, which comprises species of varying complexity and choice of habitat (including marine and freshwater, unicellular and filamentous and heterocystous
species) evolve at a higher evolutionary rate than the
clade of marine picocyanobacteria. Variation in cyanobacterial genome sizes is the result of a mix of gains of
losses in the former clade and of one single reduction
event in the latter. It is also deduced that the common
ancestor of extant cyanobacteria had a genome size of
~4.5 Mbp and contained between 1678 and 3291 proteins, ~4-6% of which are unique to cyanobacteria today.
The largest genomes of cyanobacteria contain the highest
number of paralogs and there is a strong correlation
between genome and gene family expansions within the
more complex clade. The latter is likely to result in
increased adaptive potential but may also lead to a an
accumulation of non-coding genomic regions as the
organisms shift their habitat and/or life-style, rendering
duplicated genes redundant and subject to increased
mutation rates. A clear example of this phenomenon is
the obligate symbiont ‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708 in which 64%
of in-paralogs are pseudogenes.
A number of orthologous proteins underpin traits of
certain cyanobacterial groups. These include a set of signal transduction proteins and a glycosyl hydrolase specific to plant symbionts. Conversely, the lack of certain
conserved orthologs or domains in a few cyanobacteria
can be correlated with the phenotype they exhibit as seen
in Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii with terminal heterocysts only, and the loss of functional genes involved in
pigment biosynthesis in ‘Nostoc azollae’ 0708.

Methods
Dataset

Conclusions
With the dataset used, based on 58 cyanobacterial genomes, the stringent core genetic repertoire of cyanobacteria
now represents 404 orthologs. A relaxed core gene set,
based on 39 of these genomes sequenced to completion,

All available cyanobacterial genomes as of June 24th
2010 were downloaded from NCBIs genome database
FTP server. The dataset included 58 genomes in total,
39 of which were sequenced to completion. Sequences
for all protein coding open reading frames (ORFs) and

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

predicted pseudogenes, the latter acquired from the
IMG database [68], were included in the analysis.
Orthologous protein groups and annotations

All ORFs in the dataset were subjected to orthologous
protein grouping using OrthoMCL v.2.0.1 [69,70]. Protein
sequences for each group were aligned with MUSCLE
v.3.5.1 [71], and Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [72]
were built from the alignments using hmmbuild v.3.0 [73].
Pfam and Uniprot databases (26 August 2010) were
searched with the HMMs as queries using hmmsearch
v.3.0 [73] and annotations were assigned to orthologous
groups for hits with full and domain-specific e-values
< 0.01 and a bias/score ratio < 10. COG functional groups
were assigned to orthologous groups using RPS-BLAST
against the CDD database (23 August 2010) with all
sequences of a group as query. For each group, the most
predominant best hit among orthologous sequences (at
e-value cut-off 0.01) was assigned. In case the majority of
sequences within a group could not be assigned a COG
hit, the second most abundant COG (if available) was
assigned to the group. Proteins which were not clustered
by OrthoMCL were assigned the highest scoring COG at
e-value threshold < 0.01. Cyanobacteria-unique protein
groups were defined as those which contained proteins
with only cyanobacterial hits below an e-value threshold
of 0.01 in the nr database.

Page 18 of 21

assumption of a rate heterogeneity across sites modelled
as a discrete Gamma distribution.
Shortcomings of the models used in phylogenetics can
render tree inference of prokaryotic organisms problematic [79] (or even questionable [80]), and the presence
of phylogenetic incongruence in our data was assessed
using a SH-test [81,82] as implemented in RAxML. The
trees from the separate gene analyses were pooled
together with the tree from the concatenated supermatrix (τ285), and the SH test was run for each gene data.
The separate gene analyses yielded a large collection of
trees, thus suggesting extensive topological incongruence
(see additional file 9). We did not investigate whether
lateral gene transfer could be a source of incongruence
but made the assumption that we may estimate one
underlying tree structure for our data sample (cf. [80]).
Thus, we note that concatenating and analysing the set
of genes (N = 71) for which τ285 could not be rejected,
gave a tree (τ71) very similar to the tree resulting in analysing all 285 genes (τ285). The two trees differed only in
two, poorly supported nodes (bootstrap proportions
< 60%), and we chose to base our analysis on the 285gene tree. Trees were rooted on the Gloeobacter violaceus branch, following previous results as having
G. violaceus as the sister group to all extant cyanobacteria e.g., [19,37,83,84].
Genome composition

Phylogenetic analysis

A phylogenetic analysis was conducted on a set of 285
orthologous protein groups (see additional file 2) in the
output from OrthoMCL (see above) present in singlecopy number in all 58 genomes in the dataset. Proteins
in each orthologous group were aligned using MUSCLE
(with default settings) and concatenated in to one supermatrix of 128,769 amino acid positions (see additional
file 8). Amino acid substitution models for each individual group was selected by the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) obtained from ProtTest v.3.0 [74] which
uses PhyML v.3.0 [75] for likelihood calculations. The
amino acid substitution models implemented both in
PhyML and RaxML (see below) were used as candidate
models for the AIC ranking. The 285 groups were analysed separately and combined under maximum likelihood as implemented in RAxML v.7.2.6 [76] and clade
support was assessed using bootstrapping [77]. For the
separate analyses, the AIC-best models were used in
RAxML. To avoid overparameterisation [78] but still
allow for evolutionary heterogeneity, the concatenated
alignment were analysed using a mix-model approach
where each gene partition was lumped in a “substitution
model"-partition according to their AIC-best chosen
models. This yielded a five partition model ("LG”, “JTT”,
“CPREV”, “WAG”, “RTREV”) each combined with an

Characters of the cyanobacterial genomes, such as sizes
and presence of orthologous groups were analysed by
parsimony optimization (least squared for continuous
characters) over the phylogenetic tree using Mesquite
(version 2.74) [85]. Analysis of evolutionary rates of genome sizes and paralogs was performed using Felsenstein’s phylogenetically independent contrasts [31] as
implemented in the PDAP module [86] of Mesquite.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Overview of the 58 cyanobacteria which genomes
were examined in this study. Information on general genome features
and characteristics of species is provided.
Additional file 2: Orthologs in the cyanobacterial core. List of
orthologs present in all genomes examined. Gene locus tags and
functional annotations (for the Uniprot, Pfam and COG databases) are
provided
Additional file 3: Orthologs missing in finished genomes. List of
orthologs which are missing, or pseudogenized, in finished genomes
while present in all others genomes. Locus tags for pseudogenes and
functional annotations are provided.
Additional file 4: Orthologs present in the most recent common
cyanobacterial ancestor. List of orthologs predicted in the most recent
common ancestor of cyanobacteria. Functional annotations and gene
locus tags in each genome (when available) is provided.
Additional file 5: Orthologs specific to filamentous cyanobacteria.
List of orthologs present in all filamentous cyanobacteria with finished
genomes and missing from all unicellular cyanobacteria.

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

Additional file 6: Orthologs specific to heterocystous cyanobacteria.
As above.

Page 19 of 21

11.

Additional file 7: Orthologs specific to plant-symbiotic
cyanobacteria. As above.
Additional file 8: Individual and concatenated alignments for
protein groups. Compressed file containing all alignments of individual
groups (fasta format) and the concatenated alignment of 285 single-copy
genes (phylip format).
Additional file 9: Details on test of incongruence. Description of
statistical analyses carried out on phylogenetic trees from the 285 singlecopy orthologs and the concatenated alignment.

12.

13.

14.

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Dr. R. Haselkorn (Univ. Chicago) for providing
improvements. This study was financially supported by the Swedish Energy
Agency and the Swedish Research Council Formas.

15.

16.
Author details
1
Department of Botany, Stockholm University, SE-106 09, Stockholm,
Sweden. 2Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1172 Blindern,
NO-0318 Oslo, Norway.
17.
Authors’ contributions
JL and JAAN carried out the genomic analyses, participated in its design and
drafted the manuscript. BB coordinated the study, participated in its design
and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

18.
19.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

20.

Received: 24 February 2011 Accepted: 30 June 2011
Published: 30 June 2011

21.

References
1. Kopp RE, Kirschvink JL, Hilburn IA, Nash CZ: The Paleoproterozoic snowball
Earth: A climate disaster triggered by the evolution of oxygenic
photosynthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:11131-11136.
2. Reyes-Prieto A, Bhattacharya D: Phylogeny of Calvin cycle enzymes
supports Plantae monophyly. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007, 45:384-391.
3. Moreira D, Guyader HL, Philippe H: The origin of red algae and the
evolution of chloroplasts. Nature 2000, 405:69-72.
4. Marin B, Nowack ECM, Melkonian M: A plastid in the making: evidence for
a second primary endosymbiosis. Protist 2005, 156:425-432.
5. Reyes-Prieto A, Yoon HS, Moustafa A, Yang EC, Andersen RA, Boo SM,
Nakayama T, Ishida K-ichiro, Bhattacharya D: Differential gene retention in
plastids of common recent origin. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:1530-1537.
6. Usher KM, Bergman B, Raven JA: Exploring cyanobacterial mutualisms.
Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2007, 38:255-273.
7. Bergman B, Ran L, Adams DG: Cyanobacterial-plant Symbioses: signalling
and development. In The Cyanobacteria: Molecular Biology, Genomics and
Evolution. Edited by: Herrero A, Flores E. Sevilla: Caister Academic Press;
2008:447-473.
8. Ran L, Larsson J, Vigil-Stenman T, Nylander JAA, Ininbergs K, Zheng W-W,
Lapidus A, Lowry S, Haselkorn R, Bergman B: Genome erosion in a
nitrogen-fixing vertically transmitted endosymbiotic multicellular
cyanobacterium. PLoS One 2010, 5:e11486.
9. Swingley WD, Chen M, Cheung PC, Conrad AL, Dejesa LC, Hao J,
Honchak BM, Karbach LE, Kurdoglu A, Lahiri S, Mastrian SD, Miyashita H,
Page L, Ramakrishna P, Satoh S, Sattley WM, Shimada Y, Taylor HL, Tomo T,
Tsuchiya T, Wang ZT, Raymond J, Mimuro M, Blankenship RE,
Touchman JW: Niche adaptation and genome expansion in the
chlorophyll d-producing cyanobacterium Acaryochloris marina. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:2005-2010.
10. Kaneko T, Tanaka A, Sato S, Kotani H, Sazuka T, Miyajima N, Sugiura M,
Tabata S: Sequence analysis of the genome of the unicellular
cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. strain PCC6803. I. Sequence features

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

in the 1 Mb region from map positions 64% to 92% of the genome.
DNA Res 1995, 2:153-66, 191-8.
Welsh EA, Liberton M, Stöckel J, Loh T, Elvitigala T, Wang C, Wollam A,
Fulton RS, Clifton SW, Jacobs JM, Aurora R, Ghosh BK, Sherman LA,
Smith RD, Wilson RK, Pakrasi HB: The genome of Cyanothece 51142, a
unicellular diazotrophic cyanobacterium important in the marine
nitrogen cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:15094-15099.
Tripp HJ, Bench SR, Turk KA, Foster RA, Desany BA, Niazi F, Affourtit JP,
Zehr JP: Metabolic streamlining in an open-ocean nitrogen-fixing
cyanobacterium. Nature 2010, 464:90-94.
Meeks JC, Elhai J, Thiel T, Potts M, Larimer F, Lamerdin J, Predki P, Atlas R:
An overview of the genome of Nostoc punctiforme, a multicellular,
symbiotic cyanobacterium. Photosyn Res 2001, 70:85-106.
Zheng W, Bergman B, Chen B, Zheng S, Guan X, Rasmussen U: Cellular
responses in the cyanobacterial symbiont during its vertical transfer
between plant generations in the Azolla microphylla symbiosis. New
Phytol 2009, 181:53-61.
Tang LF, Watanabe I, Liu CC: Limited Multiplication of Symbiotic
Cyanobacteria of Azolla spp. on Artificial Media. Appl Environ Microbiol
1990, 56:3623-3626.
Stucken K, John U, Cembella A, Murillo AA, Soto-Liebe K, Fuentes-Valdés JJ,
Friedel M, Plominsky AA, Vásquez M, Glöckner G: The smallest known
genomes of multicellular and toxic cyanobacteria: comparison, minimal
gene sets for linked traits and the evolutionary implications. PloS ONE
2010, 5:e9235.
Mulkidjanian AY, Koonin EV, Makarova KS, Mekhedov SL, Sorokin A, Wolf YI,
Dufresne A, Partensky F, Burd H, Kaznadzey D, Haselkorn R, Galperin MY:
The cyanobacterial genome core and the origin of photosynthesis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:13126-13131.
Shi T, Falkowski PG: Genome evolution in cyanobacteria: the stable core
and the variable shell. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:2510-2515.
Gupta RS, Mathews DW: Signature proteins for the major clades of
Cyanobacteria. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:24.
Swingley WD, Blankenship RE, Raymond J: Integrating Markov clustering
and molecular phylogenetics to reconstruct the cyanobacterial species
tree from conserved protein families. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:643-654.
Gupta RS: Protein signatures (molecular synapomorphies) that are
distinctive characteristics of the major cyanobacterial clades. Int J Syst
Evol Microbiol 2009, 59:2510-2526.
Zehr JP, Bench SR, Carter BJ, Hewson I, Niazi F, Shi T, Tripp HJ, Affourtit JP:
Globally distributed uncultivated oceanic N2-fixing cyanobacteria lack
oxygenic photosystem II. Science 2008, 322:1110-1112.
Ishii A, Hihara Y: An AbrB-like transcriptional regulator, Sll0822, is
essential for the activation of nitrogen-regulated genes in Synechocystis
sp. PCC 6803. Plant Physiol 2008, 148:660-670.
Shalev-Malul G, Lieman-Hurwitz J, Viner-Mozzini Y, Sukenik A, Gaathon A,
Lebendiker M, Kaplan A: An AbrB-like protein might be involved in the
regulation of cylindrospermopsin production by Aphanizomenon
ovalisporum. Environ Microbiol 2008, 10:988-999.
Lieman-Hurwitz J, Haimovich M, Shalev-Malul G, Ishii A, Hihara Y,
Gaathon A, Lebendiker M, Kaplan A: A cyanobacterial AbrB-like protein
affects the apparent photosynthetic affinity for CO2 by modulating lowCO2-induced gene expression. Environ Microbiol 2009, 11:927-936.
Agervald A, Baebprasert W, Zhang X, Incharoensakdi A, Lindblad P,
Stensjö K: The CyAbrB transcription factor CalA regulates the iron
superoxide dismutase in Nostoc sp. strain PCC 7120. Environ Microbiol
2010, 12:2826-2837.
Bratlie MS, Johansen J, Sherman BT, Huang DW, Lempicki RA, Drabløs F:
Gene duplications in prokaryotes can be associated with environmental
adaptation. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:588.
Shapiro JA: Transposable elements as the key to a 21st century view of
evolution. Genetica 1999, 107:171-179.
Capy P, Gasperi G, Biémont C, Bazin C: Stress and transposable elements:
co-evolution or useful parasites? Heredity 2000, 85(Pt 2):101-106.
Touchon M, Rocha EPC: Causes of insertion sequences abundance in
prokaryotic genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:969-981.
Felsenstein J: Phylogenies and the Comparative Method. The American
Naturalist 1985, 125:1-15.
Garland T, Harvey PH, Ives AR: Procedures for the Analysis of Comparative
Data Using Phylogenetically Independent Contrasts. Systematic Biology
1992, 41:18-32.

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

33. Garland T, Janis CM: Does metatarsal/femur ratio predict maximal
running speed in cursorial mammals? Journal of Zoology 1993,
229:133-151.
34. Pushker R, Mira A, Rodríguez-Valera F: Comparative genomics of genefamily size in closely related bacteria. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R27.
35. Jordan IK, Makarova KS, Spouge JL, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Lineage-specific
gene expansions in bacterial and archaeal genomes. Genome Res 2001,
11:555-565.
36. Sanchez-Baracaldo P, Hayes PK, Blank CE: Morphological and habitat
evolution in the Cyanobacteria using a compartmentalization approach.
Geobiology 2005, 3:145-165.
37. Schirrmeister BE, Antonelli A, Bagheri HC: The origin of multicellularity in
cyanobacteria. BMC Evol Biol 2011, 11:45.
38. Kovacs H, Comfort D, Lord M, Campbell ID, Yudkin MD: Solution structure
of SpoIIAA, a phosphorylatable component of the system that regulates
transcription factor sigmaF of Bacillus subtilis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1998, 95:5067-5071.
39. Buikema WJ, Haselkorn R: Characterization of a gene controlling
heterocyst differentiation in the cyanobacterium Anabaena 7120. Genes
Dev 1991, 5:321-330.
40. Liang J, Scappino L, Haselkorn R: The patA gene product, which contains
a region similar to CheY of Escherichia coli, controls heterocyst pattern
formation in the cyanobacterium Anabaena 7120. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1992, 89:5655-5659.
41. Young-Robbins SS, Risser DD, Moran JR, Haselkorn R, Callahan SM:
Transcriptional regulation of the heterocyst patterning gene patA from
Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120. J Bacteriol 2010, 192:4732-4740.
42. Makarova KS, Koonin EV, Haselkorn R, Galperin MY: Cyanobacterial
response regulator PatA contains a conserved N-terminal domain
(PATAN) with an alpha-helical insertion. Bioinformatics 2006, 22:1297-1301.
43. Abraham SN, Jonsson AB, Normark S: Fimbriae-mediated host-pathogen
cross-talk. Curr Opin Microbiol 1998, 1:75-81.
44. Miyashita H, Ikemoto H, Kurano N, Adachi K, Chihara M, Miyachi S:
Chlorophyll d as a major pigment. Nature 1996, 383:402.
45. Hall JW: A New Genus of Salviniaceae and a New Species of Azolla from
the Late Cretaceous. American Fern Journal 1968, 58:77-88.
46. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 1997, 278:631-637.
47. Tatusov RL, Galperin MY, Natale DA, Koonin EV: The COG database: a tool
for genome-scale analysis of protein functions and evolution. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000, 28:33-36.
48. Alm E, Huang K, Arkin A: The evolution of two-component systems in
bacteria reveals different strategies for niche adaptation. PLoS Comput
Biol 2006, 2:e143.
49. Serres MH, Kerr ARW, McCormack TJ, Riley M: Evolution by leaps: gene
duplication in bacteria. Biol Direct 2009, 4:46.
50. Andersson DI, Hughes D: Gene amplification and adaptive evolution in
bacteria. Annu Rev Genet 2009, 43:167-195.
51. Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP, Charlebois RL, Doolittle WF, Papke RT:
Phylogenetic analyses of cyanobacterial genomes: quantification of
horizontal gene transfer events. Genome Res 2006, 16:1099-1108.
52. Yerrapragada S, Siefert JL, Fox GE: Horizontal gene transfer in
cyanobacterial signature genes. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 532:339-366.
53. Bolhuis H, Severin I, Confurius-Guns V, Wollenzien UIA, Stal LJ: Horizontal
transfer of the nitrogen fixation gene cluster in the cyanobacterium
Microcoleus chthonoplastes. ISME J 2010, 4:121-130.
54. Treangen TJ, Rocha EPC: Horizontal Transfer, Not Duplication, Drives the
Expansion of Protein Families in Prokaryotes. PLoS Genet 2011, 7:
e1001284.
55. Ohkubo S, Miyashita H, Murakami A, Takeyama H, Tsuchiya T, Mimuro M:
Molecular detection of epiphytic Acaryochloris spp. on marine
macroalgae. Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72:7912-7915.
56. Moran NA, Plague GR: Genomic changes following host restriction in
bacteria. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2004, 14:627-633.
57. Fares MA, Barrio E, Sabater-Muñoz B, Moya A: The evolution of the heatshock protein GroEL from Buchnera, the primary endosymbiont of
aphids, is governed by positive selection. Mol Biol Evol 2002,
19:1162-1170.
58. Kettler GC, Martiny AC, Huang K, Zucker J, Coleman ML, Rodrigue S, Chen F,
Lapidus A, Ferriera S, Johnson J, Steglich C, Church GM, Richardson P,

Page 20 of 21

59.
60.

61.
62.
63.

64.
65.

66.
67.

68.
69.
70.

71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

77.
78.
79.
80.

81.

82.
83.
84.

85.

Chisholm SW: Patterns and implications of gene gain and loss in the
evolution of Prochlorococcus. PLoS Genet 2007, 3:e231.
Partensky F, Garczarek L: Prochlorococcus: advantages and limits of
minimalism. Ann Rev Mar Sci 2010, 2:305-331.
Sher D, Thompson JW, Kashtan N, Croal L, Chisholm SW: Response of
Prochlorococcus ecotypes to co-culture with diverse marine bacteria.
ISME J 2011.
Toft C, Andersson SGE: Evolutionary microbial genomics: insights into
bacterial host adaptation. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11:465-475.
Lawrence JG, Hendrix RW, Casjens S: Where are the pseudogenes in
bacterial genomes? Trends Microbiol 2001, 9:535-540.
Nakamura Y, Kaneko T, Sato S, Ikeuchi M, Katoh H, Sasamoto S,
Watanabe A, Iriguchi M, Kawashima K, Kimura T, Kishida Y, Kiyokawa C,
Kohara M, Matsumoto M, Matsuno A, Nakazaki N, Shimpo S, Sugimoto M,
Takeuchi C, Yamada M, Tabata S: Complete genome structure of the
thermophilic cyanobacterium Thermosynechococcus elongatus BP-1.
DNA Res 2002, 9:123-130.
Yamaoka T, Satoh K, Katoh S: Photosynthetic activities of a thermophilic
blue-green alga. Plant and Cell Physiology 1978, 19:943-954.
Sheridan CC, Steinberg DK, Kling GW: The microbial and metazoan
community associated with colonies of Trichodesmium spp.: a
quantitative survey. Journal of Plankton Research 2002, 24:913-922.
Siefert JL, Fox GE: Phylogenetic mapping of bacterial morphology.
Microbiology 1998, 144(Pt 10):2803-2808.
Lerouge P, Roche P, Faucher C, Maillet F, Truchet G, Promé JC, Dénarié J:
Symbiotic host-specificity of Rhizobium meliloti is determined by a
sulphated and acylated glucosamine oligosaccharide signal. Nature 1990,
344:781-784.
The Integrated Microbial Genomes (IMG) system. [http://img.jgi.doe.gov/
cgi-bin/pub/main.cgi].
Li L, Stoeckert CJ, Roos DS: OrthoMCL: identification of ortholog groups
for eukaryotic genomes. Genome Res 2003, 13:2178-2189.
Chen F, Mackey AJ, Stoeckert CJ, Roos DS: OrthoMCL-DB: querying a
comprehensive multi-species collection of ortholog groups. Nucleic Acids
Res 2006, 34:D363-368.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
Durbin R: Biological sequence analysis: probabalistic models of proteins and
nucleic acids Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1998.
HMMER3: a new generation of sequence homology search software.
[http://hmmer.org/].
Darriba D, Taboada GL, Doallo R, Posada D: ProtTest 3: fast selection of
best-fit models of protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2011, 27:1164-1165.
Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont J: A rapid bootstrap algorithm for the
RAxML Web servers. Syst Biol 2008, 57:758-771.
Burnham KP, Anderson DR: Model selection and multimodel inference: a
practical information-theoretic approach. 2 edition. New York: Springer; 2002.
Rannala B, Yang Z: Phylogenetic inference using whole genomes. Annu
Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2008, 9:217-231.
Bapteste E, O Malley MA, Beiko RG, Ereshefsky M, Gogarten JP, FranklinHall L, Lapointe F-J, Dupré J, Dagan T, Boucher Y, Martin W: Prokaryotic
evolution and the tree of life are two different things. Biol Direct 2009,
4:34.
Shimodaira H, Hasegawa M: Multiple Comparisons of Log-Likelihoods
with Applications to Phylogenetic Inference. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 1999, 16:1114.
Shimodaira H: An approximately unbiased test of phylogenetic tree
selection. Syst Biol 2002, 51:492-508.
Battistuzzi FU, Hedges SB: A major clade of prokaryotes with ancient
adaptations to life on land. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:335-343.
Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.
Maddison W, Maddison D: Mesquite: a modular system for evolutionary
analysis. Version 2.74. 2010 [http://mesquiteproject.org].

Larsson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/187

Page 21 of 21

86. Midford PE, Garland T, Maddison W: PDAP Package of Mesquite. Version
1.15. 2010 [http://mesquiteproject.org/pdap_mesquite/].
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-187
Cite this article as: Larsson et al.: Genome fluctuations in cyanobacteria
reflect evolutionary, developmental and adaptive traits. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2011 11:187.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
