<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A family history of DUX4: phylogenetic analysis of DUXA, B, C and Duxbl reveals the ancestral DUX gene</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-364"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Andreas Leidenroth"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A family history of DUX4: phylogenetic analysis
of DUXA, B, C and Duxbl reveals the ancestral
DUX gene
Andreas Leidenroth, Jane E Hewitt*

Abstract
Background: DUX4 is causally involved in the molecular pathogenesis of the neuromuscular disorder
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD). It has previously been proposed to have arisen by retrotransposition
of DUXC, one of four known intron-containing DUX genes. Here, we investigate the evolutionary history of this multimember double-homeobox gene family in eutherian mammals.
Results: Our analysis of the DUX family shows the distribution of different homologues across the mammalian
class, including events of secondary loss. Phylogenetic comparison, analysis of gene structures and information
from syntenic regions confirm the paralogous relationship of Duxbl and DUXB and characterize their relationship
with DUXA and DUXC. We further identify Duxbl pseudogene orthologues in primates. A survey of non-mammalian
genomes identified a single-homeobox gene (sDUX) as a likely representative homologue of the mammalian DUX
ancestor before the homeobox duplication. Based on the gene structure maps, we suggest a possible mechanism
for the generation of the DUX gene structure.
Conclusions: Our study underlines how secondary loss of orthologues can obscure the true ancestry of individual
gene family members. Their relationships should be considered when interpreting the relevance of functional data
from DUX4 homologues such as Dux and Duxbl to FSHD.

Background
Double homeobox genes are exclusive to placental
mammals and characterized by two closely spaced
homeoboxes of the PRD class [1]. The homeoboxes
encode 60 amino acid homeodomains (HDs), an ancient,
well studied DNA binding motif found in animals,
plants and fungi in many transcription factors including
the developmentally important Hox genes [2]. Our particular interest in the DUX family stems from the involvement of one member (DUX4) in the molecular
pathogenesis of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy
(FSHD) [3]. In most cases of this genetic disorder,
patients have a contraction of the 3.3 kb D4Z4 tandem
repeat array on 4q35. When the genetic linkage between
D4Z4 and FSHD was discovered, an intronless open
reading frame (ORF) encoding a putative double-homeodomain protein was found to reside within each D4Z4
* Correspondence: jane.hewitt@nottingham.ac.uk
Centre for Genetics and Genomics, School of Biology, The University of
Nottingham, Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK

repeat unit [4] and named DUX4 [5]. The DUX4-containing D4Z4 elements are present at high and variable
copy number on 4q35 with 11 to >100 repeats in controls [6]. In FSHD, one allele is reduced in size to 1-10
repeats [6], which is accompanied by a change in chromatin packaging into a less repressive state [7-9]. A near
identical tandem array is also present on 10q26, but
contractions are not associated with FSHD.
D4Z4 contractions are only pathogenic if they occur
on a particular haplotype background (“4qA161”)
[10,11]. It has been shown that the DUX4 ORF is discontinuously transcribed, with the ORF of the final
repeat unit utilizing a polyadenylation signal in the
pLAM region immediately distal to the D4Z4 array [12].
Recently, a landmark paper showed that only chromosomes of disease-permissive haplotypes such as 4qA161
carry this functional polyadenylation signal [13]. This
study presents the strongest evidence yet for a DUX4transcription mediated pathology in FSHD.

© 2010 Leidenroth and Hewitt; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

Page 2 of 13

DUX4 related sequences are found in primates and
Afrotheria and we previously showed that they have
been conserved by selection [1]. In mouse, a related
ORF known as Dux has been identified, which is also
found in a tandem array organization [1]. The predicted
Dux protein encoded within this array shares both
homeodomains as well as a conserved C-terminal
domain with DUX4 [1]. In higher apes and humans,
many hundreds of D4Z4 related sequences are dispersed
throughout the genome, notably on the poorly
assembled regions of the acrocentric chromosomes as
well as the heterochromatic regions on 1q12 [4,14]. In
an interesting case study, the ongoing amplification of
intronless DUX sequences has recently been characterized for a DUX4 homologue residing on the Y chromosome (DUXY) [15].
Interrogation of publicly available genome databases
has resulted in the discovery of four intron-containing
DUX genes (A, B, C and Duxbl = BL). DUXA and
DUXB were originally identified in humans [16,17], but
orthologues have also been found in a range of other
mammals [1]. DUXC has been described only in armadillo, dog and cow [1]. Before the current study, Duxbl
(named after DUXB-like) had been found only in mouse
and rat genomes [1]. Independently, gene expression
profiling experiments identified Duxbl as one of the
genes upregulated in specific stages of mouse thymocyte
development [18]. Figure 1 shows gene structures and
conserved domains of the four intron-containing DUX
homologues as well as the intronless DUX4 and rodent
Dux sequences. The two homeoboxes in all four introncontaining genes are split across four exons, with splice
junctions within the homeoboxes at equivalent positions.
The in vivo biological function of human DUX4 is still
unknown, although a number of groups are addressing
this question using experimental approaches based on
exogenous expression of DUX genes [19-21]. Studies of

DUXA (6 exon)

800bp

DUXA (5 exon)

100bp

DUXB
Duxbl
DUXC
DUX4
Dux

Figure 1 DUX family overview. Representative structures of the
four intron-containing and two intronless DUX genes are shown.
Open reading frame in coloured boxes, homeobox sequences in
dark blue. Conserved C-terminal domain of unknown function in
yellow. Dotted boxes indicate UTR with uncertainty about
transcriptional start and end sites. Note that introns and exons are
drawn to different scales.

DUX homologues may therefore contribute to our
understanding of DUX4 function, but if such inferences
are to be made with confidence, it is important that we
understand how the genes and proteins studied relate to
one another. Here, we comprehensively survey the distribution of intron-containing DUX genes in the mammalian class, characterize their gene structures and
present data on their phylogenetic relationships. We
also identify the putative ancestor of the DUX family
and suggest a mutational mechanism that may have created the double homeobox gene structure.

Results
Cataloguing intact and inactive DUX homologues in
placental mammals

We systematically searched all mammalian species in
Figure 2 for each of the four known intron-containing
DUX genes by tBLASTn. Searches were conducted on
whole genome assemblies and separately on syntenic
regions. The latter approach allowed the identification
of decaying orthologues, whose degenerate amino acid
sequences make them hard to identify in whole genome
tBLASTn scans. Wherever possible, phylogenetic tree
analysis of homeodomains, synteny information and
gene structure data were combined to verify that an
identified sequence represented the orthologue in that
species. Figure 3 shows the relative locations of some of
the neighbouring anchor genes used to establish synteny
for DUXA, B and BL. For DUXC, no appropriate nearby
anchors could be identified. CJ057 encodes a short,
highly conserved protein that proved to be particularly
useful due to its high conservation and linkage to Duxbl
(Additional file 1). Figure 2 provides an overview of all
DUX genes catalogued in this study.
DUXA

DUXA orthologues can be found in most mammalian
groups. Rabbits have an intact version, but we could not
find any DUXA genes in other Glires. However, squirrel
has an intronless DUXA sequence with an ORF spanning both homeoboxes, indicating that DUXA may
either be present in an unsequenced region or have had
its function maintained by a retrogene (such cases are
not without precedent [22]).
DUXA was originally identified as a 6-exon gene in
humans [16]. However, our survey of DUXA gene structures shows that the final exon seems to be exclusive to
higher primates (Additional file 2). Mouse lemur, rabbit,
Laurasiatheria and elephant share a stop codon at the
equivalent position in exon 5, just before the location of
the splice junction in primates. In dog, exon 5 is
extended by 156bp and there is no GT splice donor signal at the position corresponding to that in primates
(Additional file 3). Instead, there is an extended ORF,

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

DUX: A

B

BL

C
Human
Chimp

Orang

Primates

Gorilla

Macaque
?

Baboon

?

Marmoset

?

Mouse lemur

?

Tree shrew
Mouse
Rat
Glires

Squirrel
Guinea pig
Rabbit
?

Horse

?

?

Dolphin

?

?

Cow

?

Megabat

Laurasiatheria

Dog

Hedgehog
Xenarthra

?

?

Afrotheria

Pseudogene

Armadillo
Elephant

Intact

Not found
?

chimpanzee, macaque and orangutan shows an average
across all pairs that is below 1 (0.27), indicating that the
newly gained sequence has been maintained by purifying
selection.
DUXA has spawned a large number of processed
pseudogenes in primates as well as other species, indicating germline expression. Booth and Holland recently
identified ten such pseudogenes in humans and reported
a high number of EST matches for these sequences
(DUXAP1-10) [23]. In a brief survey of human ESTs we
found that some of these expressed sequences have less
than 100% sequence identity with either DUXA or any
of its known ten pseudogenes (data not shown). This
indicates that yet more processed pseudogenes are likely
to be dispersed throughout the genome, perhaps residing on the arms of acrocentric chromosomes (which
have long been known to house intronless DUX
sequences [4,14]). The presence of an EST sequence for
DUXA in the databases has also been noted [16].
DUXC

Cat
?

Page 3 of 13

Synteny unclear

Unclear

Figure 2 Mammalian DUX distribution. Summary of our
mammalian DUX catalogue. Presumed functional genes (with intact
ORF across all four homeobox exons, first exon may be unidentified)
in green. DUX sequences with stop codons or deleted/missing
exons in well sequenced regions in red. Putative DUX homologues
with unclear functional status (mainly due to gaps in assembly) in
yellow. Unless marked with ?, synteny was confirmed with anchor
genes. Phylogenetic relationship between species according to
references [28,44].

and the additional amino acids encoded by this putative
exon share no similarity with the final primate exon. It
is unlikely that Glires, Laurasiatheria and elephant have
independently acquired a stop codon at the same position in exon 5. Instead, the ancestral DUXA probably
contained five exons, with subsequent gain of a sixth
exon in primates, effectively creating two DUXA subclasses. The dN/dS ratio of the DUXA C-terminal
domain (after HD2) in a pairwise comparison of human,

In addition to the previously reported copies of DUXC
in armadillo, cow and dog [1], we have identified closely
related homologues in horse, dolphin and megabat
(Additional file 4). Interestingly, in all these species
DUXC has undergone local duplications and is found in
a tandem array organization. The dolphin assembly contains a contig with two intact DUXC copies and one
pseudogene as well as the 5’ end of a fourth copy, all
arranged in tandem in the same orientation with a spacing of less than 5 kb between them. In megabat, one
intact and one defective copy (containing a stop codon
in HD2) are separated by a spacing of 25 kb. Trace
archive sequence data from cow, dolphin, horse and dog
also indicate a multi-copy, array-like organization (data
not shown).
The previously described conserved C-terminal
domain of DUXC [1] is also found in the predicted protein of these newly-identified orthologues. Figure 4
shows an amino acid alignment demonstrating the conservation of this CTD not only between DUXC orthologues but also with human DUX4 and the predicted
protein product of the rodent Dux arrays, evidence that
they may be functionally related [1]. Maximum Likelihood analysis also clusters the two homeodomains of
DUX4 with DUXC (Additional file 5 &6). Indeed,
tBLASTn searches using DUXC as query return DUX4
sequences as top hits in primates. Thus far, we have not
found any DUXC orthologues in primates and Glires, so
it is possible that this homologue was lost in the common ancestor of the Euarchontoglires after the split
from the Laurasiatheria. However, the lack of any suitable anchor genes for DUXC precludes analysis of

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

Page 4 of 13

Human 19q13.43
ZIM3

DUXA

AURKC

Duxbl

Cphx CJ057

Mouse 14A3
Plac9

Anxa11

PLAC9

ANXA11

Human 16q23.1
ADAT1

TERF2IP

DUXB

CPHX-like

Human 10q22.3
SFTPD

DUXBLP remnants

CPHX CJ057

Figure 3 Anchor genes. Main anchor genes used to identify syntenic regions across species. DUX genes coloured yellow, anchor genes in
black. Cphx as a marker of Duxbl/DUXB duplication shown in green. Gene sizes and intergenic spacing not drawn to scale. ENSEMBL access
information: Human Cphx 10q processed transcript (ENSG00000230091); Human Cphx-like 16q protein coding (ENSG00000232078); Mouse CJ057
(ENSG00000021867); Human CJ057 (ENSG00000133678).

homologous regions, and some orthologues may thus be
missed.
DUXB and Duxbl

Before this study the evolutionary relationship between
DUXB and Duxbl was unclear, but our previous phylogenetic analysis suggested that they are not orthologues
[1]. Duxbl had only been found in rodents [1,18], while
DUXB sequences had been found in all major mammalian lineages except rodents [1]. Because genome-wide
tBLASTn fails to detect decaying orthologues that have
been secondarily lost and searches with low stringency
pick up more distantly related homeobox genes instead

10

20

30

HumanDUX4
MouseDux
RatDux
Horse
Dog
Dolphin
Cow
Armadillo

L L L DE L L A S P E F L QQA QP L L E TE A P GE L E A S
L F L DQ L L TE V Q L E E QGP A P V NV E E - - - - TWE
L F L DQ L L ME V RV E T L S P GP V H L E G - - - - A V Q
S L L DE L L A V TE L QE K A QP F L NGHP - - - - P A E
S F L QE L FS A DE ME E DV HP - L WV G T - - - L QE D
S L L DE L L S DV D I L DK A GP F L NV D T - - - - E E E
S L L E E I L A A TA I QD TP WS S P GS P A - - - - GE E
S I L DE L L L I TE CQE TA P S - L N L DS - - - Y E QD

HumanDUX4
MouseDux
RatDux
Horse
Dog
Dolphin
Cow
Armadillo

E E A A S L E A P L S E E E Y RA L L E E L - - - - - - - QMD T TP D L P L TS E E Y Q T L L DML - - - - - - - QMDA TP E L P L S QE E Y E A L L D I L - - - - - - - E P P G T L E GP L S E E E FQA L L DML QS S P GP Q I
E P P GP L E A P L S E DD FHA L L E ML QDS L WP QA
E L A A T L E A P L S E E E FK A L L D I L - - - - - - - GV E A T L E TP L S E DE Y QA L L DML P GS P GP GA
S TP - - A E P P L S E E D FQ F L I MT L QNS L K A S L

40

50

Figure 4 Conserved C-terminal domain. Amino acid alignment of
conserved C-terminal domain found in DUXC, DUX4 and rodent
Dux. All residues up to the stop codon are shown. Shading intensity
indicates % of sequences that agree with consensus at that residue.
Dark grey = >80%, grey = >60%, light grey = >40%, white = 40% or
fewer. Figure produced with JalView 2.5.

(e.g. MIX), we used synteny information to identify
genomic regions that might contain remnants of DUXB
and Duxbl (Figure 3).
In mouse and rat, exons four and five of a DUXB-type
gene are found next to the TERF2IP anchor, and each
of these murine orthologues has a different stop codon
mutation in exon five. In guinea pig and cow, exon four
is absent but exons two, three and five are still present,
again with different stop codon mutations in each species (Additional file 7).
For Duxbl, using CJ057 as an anchor, we found the
final exon in guinea pig and decaying Duxbl pseudogenes containing various numbers of exons in primates
(Figure 5a). In orangutan, baboon and marmoset, all five
exons are present but have stop codons in positions
unique to each species.
A recent 10 kb deletion occurred in the ape lineage,
removing exons three, four and part of five in human,
chimpanzee and gorilla (Figure 5b). It cannot be
deduced whether Duxbl was still intact in these apes
when the deletion occurred, or whether it was already a
pseudogene, perhaps sharing the same stop codon as
orangutan. However, the presence of intact (and presumably functional) Duxbl genes in mouse and rat and
the relatively undisrupted structure of the primate pseudogenes in combination with independent inactivating
mutations indicates that Duxbl was lost only recently in
primates. The intact murine Duxbl also implies that the
losses in primates and Laurasiatheria were independent
events.
Overall, these findings indicate a pattern of reciprocal
loss and retention of DUXB and Duxbl in different
lineages, although guinea pig is an exception, having lost
both genes. The unrooted Maximum Likelihood tree in
Figure 6 shows that Duxbl and DUXB cluster together,
supporting a relatively recent divergence. We also noted
the presence of a protein coding sequence (Cphx, itself

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

a)

800bp

Human
100bp

Chimp
Gorilla
Deletion
Orangutan
Macaque
Baboon*
Marmoset*
Mouse
Rat
Guinea pig

b)
100%

Orang
50%

Human
Chimp

Figure 5 Duxbl genes and pseudogenes. a) Overview of Duxbl
pseudogenes and intact rodent Duxbl. Intact genes in colour,
pseudogenes in grey. Dotted lines contain small gaps/contig holes
in assembly. Asterisk next to species name indicates lack of synteny
information. Star above exon = stop codon. b) Mapping of partial
primate Duxbl deletion. Genomic nucleic acid alignment based on
LAGAN in mVISTA of orangutan, human and chimpanzee Duxbl
pseudogene loci. Conserved sequences shown as peaks, with Duxbl
exons marked by dark bars. Gorilla was not included due to
incomplete assembly.

encoding a homeodomain) adjacent to mouse Duxbl.
Cphx has homologues next to both human DUXB and
the human pseudogene orthologue of Duxbl (DUXBLP),
indicative of a segmental duplication (Figure 3). This,
taken together with the similar gene structure, high
homeodomain identity and phylogenetic analysis, indicates that DUXB and Duxbl are paralogues that are
probably more closely related to one another than either
is to DUXA or DUXC.
Duxbl is also the DUX gene with the strongest experimental evidence for in vivo expression. Duxbl mRNA
can readily be detected by RT-PCR in many mouse tissues including brain, liver, lung, kidney (unpublished
data and references [18,24]), while protein expression
has been shown in a subset of tissues [18,24].

Page 5 of 13

Identification of a single-homeobox gene linked to CJ057/
ANXA11

In order to search for DUX homologues in more distantly related non-mammalian species, we extended our
synteny-based analysis for DUXA, B, and BL to opossum, platypus and chicken. In these three species, the
DUXA syntenic region could not be indentified with
confidence, and we found no homeobox related
sequences in the DUXB region (as defined by ADAT1
and Terf2IP). However, next to CJ057 orthologues, we
found a putative Duxbl-related gene in both opossum
and chicken, comprising at least two exons that encode
a single homeodomain (Figure 7a). The position of the
intron within the homeobox is at the equivalent location
to that in UXA, DUXB, Duxbl and DUXC (Figure 7b).
The large open reading frame in the second exon
extends further than in DUXB and Duxbl. Close inspection of the local region did not identify any additional
exons that could produce a double-homeobox gene.
Using the predicted ORF of this single-homeobox
gene as a tBLASTn query, we also found homologues in
platypus and wallaby (although lacking synteny information in either case), as well as anole lizard. Opossum,
wallaby and lizard each have more than one copy of
these two-exon pairs, in different orientations (Figure
7b). In both the wallaby and lizard assemblies, we found
a retrotransposed copy containing both exons (joined at
the homeobox splice junction). These retrocopies indicate that in the germline of these species at least, this
sequence has been transcribed and spliced to encode a
full homeobox. We suggest naming this single-homeobox DUX-related gene sDUX (for “single” homeodomain). Figure 7c shows an amino acid alignment of all
sDUX homeodomains identified and includes rodent
Duxbl homeodomains for comparison.
Relationship of the intron-containing DUX genes

Despite extensive search efforts, no double-homeobox
DUX genes have been identified in non-placental mammals here or previously [1]. Considering the similarity
between the homeodomains of the four DUX homologues A, B, BL and C compared to other known homeodomain proteins [1] and their similar gene structures
with identical splice positions in both homeoboxes, it is
likely that the duplication of the DUX homeobox
occurred only once in a single progenitor gene that gave
rise to all four members of the DUX family. A Maximum Likelihood tree based not on concatenated but
individual homeodomains supports this hypothesis (Figure 6b). For example, the first homeodomains of DUXB,
Duxbl and DUXC all cluster together, while the second
homeodomains of the same proteins form a separate
cluster, suggesting that the two homeoboxes were
already duplicated and divergent in the common

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

Page 6 of 13

C.Dolphin

C.Dog

Duxbl

ega

C.Cow

C.M

a)

bat
Ho

ou
BL s e
.R
at

C.

Ar

m

ad

BL
.M

e

rs

C.

100

illo

E
B.

le

ph

an

t

88

DUXC

illo

ad

rm

B.A

66

DUXB
B.Ra

69

bbit

96
88
nt

B.Horse

40

mur

B2.Meg

Co
A.

C2

illo
ow at
ad
C2.C gab
rm
e
.A
.M

C2

in1
olph
C2.D
C2.Dog
C2.Horse

in

A2
.Do .Cow
lph
in

72

A2 A2
.H .D
or og
se
A2.R
abb
it
A2.H
um
A2.Orang an
A2.Macaque

HD2: A

ng que
ra
.O aca
B2 2.M
B

82

A2.Elepha

C1

.Ar

ma

dillo

at
gab
.Me
C1 .Horse
C1 ow
C
C1. C1.Dolphin1

nt

35

72

yp

us

67

hi
c

ke
n
Pl
at

B1.A

98
.D

og

)

A1

by

BL1.Mouse
BL1.Rat

illo

B
B1 1.M
. ac
B1Chim aqu
.H p e
um
an

B1

.Ele

pha

nt

.O

ra

A1.Elephant

A1.C

ow A1.D

ng

olp
h
A1.M in
Lem
ur
A1.Rabbit A1.Hor
se
A1.Macaque
an
A1.Hum g
ran
A1.O

rmad

bbit

B1

HD1: A

B1.R
a
at2
ga b
og se
g
.D or eho B1.Me
B1 B1.H edg
.H
B1

la

(2

HD1:
B, BL
&C

82

C

(4)
um
)
oss
um (2
Op
1)
Oposs m (5)
y(
su
)
s
ab
(1
Opo
all
m
W
su
os
Op

C1.Dog

89

72

al

og

HD2:
B, BL
&C

87

35

W

eh

58

A2.MLemur

sDUX

bat

dg

e

A2

s
ou
M
2. at
BL 2.R
BL

b)

B2
B2
.C
.H
B2 him
ed
.H p
ge
um
ho
g
an

B2.Elephant

A.M
a
A.H caqu
uma e
n
A.Orang

lph

w

Do

ega

He

ue
aq
ac ng
M ra
n
B. B.O.Huma
B
B.Chimp

A.

abat2
B2.DB2.Hors
e
og

32
90

A.Dog orse
A.H

B2.Armadillo

A.Rabbit

B.

B2

36

DUXA

B.M

it

usele

B.Dog

53
ha

bb

A.Mo

lep

.Ra

A.E

Figure 6 Maximum Likelihood trees. a) Tree based on concatenated homeodomain sequences (120 amino acids). b) Tree based on individual
homeodomains (60 amino acids). Bootstrap values shown at internal nodes. Number after DUX name denotes homeodomain 1 or 2. Number in
brackets indicates sDUX copy number.

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

a)

Page 7 of 13

Opossum (1)

800bp

Wallaby* (1)
100bp
Platypus*
Chicken
Lizard (1)

b)
1

2

3

4

5

Opossum
CJ057

Anxa11
1

2

Wallaby
20kb
1
Chicken
Anxa11

CJ057
1

Lizard

Anxa11

c)

CJ057
10

Opossum1
Opossum2
Opossum3
Opossum4
Opossum5
Wallaby1
Wallaby2
Platypus
Chicken
Lizard1
Lizard2
BL2Mouse
BL2Rat
BL1Mouse
BL1Rat

2

20

30

40

50

K RRK R TQ F TK E Q I S L L L CY FE RNP Y P G I GE RE E L S RMTN I E E S R I QV WFQNRRA RQGK GP
A RRK R T I FS K V Q L D T L I DY FQK NNY P G I K E RE Q L S K M I NV P E DR I QV WFQNRRA RK S L NP
E K E E N T I Y K R - - TNY S FNP FS K E P I S NRRK RS T FP E L I N I E E S R I QV WFQNK RA RQQK NE
A RRK R T I FS K A Q L N I L I NY FQK NNY P G I K E RE Q L S K MTNV P E S R I QV WFQNRRA RQGK GP
A RRK R T I FS K A QRN I L I DY FQK DNY P G I E E RE Q L S K M I NV P E DR I QV WFQNRRA RRS L NP
S RRK R TV F TK E Q L NV L I NY FA K NP Y P G I TE RE E L A E R L N TE E S R I QV WFQNRRA RQ - QQK
S RRK Q TV F TNE H L NV L TS Y FA K K S Y P G I I E RE E L A E R L N TE E S R I Q I WFQNRRA RHS TQK
A RRK R T T FNK TQ L E I L V K S FNK DP Y P G I GV RE H L A S L I Q I P E S R I QV WFQNRRA RQ L GQK
GRRK R TS FS K A Q L E L L V R T FE K QP Y P G I A L RE Q L S G L TD I P E S R I QV WFQNRRA RQ L NRK
RRRE R TQ FS V E QV K V L QA S FN L QRY P DY E RRK K L GE D I HV DE GRV A V WFQNRRA RH L N TG
RRRE R TQ FS V E QV K A L E A S FN L QRY P DY E RRK K L GE D I HV DE GRV A V WFQNRRA RH L N TG
A RRS R TH F TK FQ TD I L I E A FE K NR FP G I V TRE K L A QQ TG I P E S R I H I WFQNRRA RHP DP G
A GRS R TH F TK FQ I D I L I E A FE K NR FP G I V TRE K L A QE TG I P E S R I H I WFQNRRA RHP DP K
A RRRR I I L TQS QK D T L RV WFE K NP NP D L A TRGH L A K E L G I S E S Q I MTWFQK HRK I RK QA E
A RRRR I I L NQS QK D T L RV WFE K NP NP D L A TRGH L A K K L G I S E S Q I MTWFQK HRK I RK QV E

Figure 7 Single-homeobox sDUX. a) Schematics of identified sDUX exons. Asterisk denotes missing synteny information. Number in brackets
corresponds to copy number in diagram below. b) Map of sDUX genes relative to anchors. All locations, genes sizes and distances drawn to
scale. Red arrows = two sDUX exons including intron. Orientation of arrow indicates strand orientation. Distance between lizard Anxa11 and
CJ057 too large to show to scale. c) Amino acid alignment of homeodomain. Duxbl homeodomains 1 and 2 included for comparison. Arrow
marks splice junction. Conserved residues shaded as in Figure 4.

ancestor of DUXB and DUXC. An analogous observation to such protein domain evolution among different
homologues has been made on the level of gene evolution among different species [25]. When relationships
between gene homologues (or, in our case, protein
domains) are unclear and two homologues (I and II)
found in the same species cluster together in phylogenetic analysis relative to a homologue (III) in an outgroup species [(I, II)III], they are most likely paralogues
that arose after the speciation event [25]. Conversely, if
the homologues cluster as [(I, III)II], gene duplication

occurred before speciation. The latter situation can be
observed for the two homeoboxes found in the DUX
family, which were duplicated before the generation of
the different DUX paralogues.
Based on the high similarity in both gene structure
and predicted homeodomain sequence compared to
other homeobox genes, DUXA probably shares a recent
common ancestor with B, BL and C, rather than having
evolved the double-homeobox independently. Although
the tree clusters DUXA HD1 and HD2 separately from
the other homologues, this is most likely due to

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

artefactual long branch attraction [26] caused by the
generally higher divergence of DUXA from B, BL and C
(note the long branches in Figure 6a).
Assuming our hypothesis that all four DUX homologues are descendants of the same ancestral DUX gene is
correct, identifying a single-homeobox gene at the
homologous locus of one of these four is informative. If
the DUX homeobox duplication had occurred elsewhere
(at a locus unlinked to CJ057), the syntenic CJ057/
ANXA11 locus in non-placental mammals would be
expected to either contain no DUX-related gene at all,
or a double-homeobox gene that arrived as a paralogue
from the ancestral DUX. We therefore propose that the
single-homeobox genes in linkage with CJ057 and
ANXA11 in opossum, chicken and lizard are homologues of the ancestral sDUX in mammals. Although we
have no synteny information for wallaby and platypus
sDUX, we have included these genes in our phylogenetic
analysis due to their similar homeodomains and gene
structure.
Thus, in the common ancestor of placental mammals,
duplication of the homeobox in sDUX gave rise to the
ancestral DUX gene, from which all other DUX genes
are ultimately descended. Consistent with this, sDUX
homologues cluster together at an internal node of our
tree, rather than being nested within a particular branch
(Figure 6b, Additional file 6).
When human DUX homeodomains (DUX4, DUXA
and DUXB) are compared with sDUX and human PRD
class homeodomains, sDUX and all DUX proteins cluster together, further supporting their close relationship
(Figure 8). Pax3 and Pax7 have been proposed to represent potential competitors for the same DNA binding
sites as DUX, a hypothesis based on their similar homeodomain sequences [20,27]. However, as our tree
demonstrates, Pax3/7 are not the only candidates that
could be considered in this context, and indeed there
are other PRD class homeodomains (e.g. HESX1,
TPRX1) that could be just as or more closely related to
DUX.

Discussion
DUX distribution across the mammalian class and
divergence of homologues

The DUX family shows patterns of selective loss and
retention of different homologues in different lineages.
This stands in contrast to the distribution of another
recently characterized PRD class homeobox gene,
ARGFX, which has survived in humans but has been
secondarily lost from most other mammals [28]. One of
the most striking features of the DUX family is the loss
of Duxbl in all examined species except rodents, with
the reverse pattern for its paralogue DUXB.

Page 8 of 13

Aside from exon shuffling and retrotransposition, gene
duplication is one of the best understood mechanisms of
gene evolution [29]. Following duplication, two paralogues usually meet one of two fates. If the second copy
instantly confers a selective advantage (“immediate”
model) or can accumulate beneficial mutations before it
decays into a pseudogene (“waiting” model), it can be
maintained alongside the original gene for sub- or neofunctionalization [29]. Additionally, the different genomic environment of the newly arisen paralogue may
result in the use of new promoters with different expression levels or tissue specificity [30]. However, because
initial functional redundancy after duplication can relax
selection pressure on one of the paralogues, another
likely outcome is decay of one of them [29]. This is
probably what we observe in the case of DUXB and
Duxbl. Which one of the two paralogues was maintained in each mammalian lineage may have been an
arbitrary, stochastic decision.
Conversely, the maintenance of DUXA in addition to
DUXB/Duxbl in many species argues for functional
diversification between these gene lineages. The
observed differences in gene structure and the higher
homeodomain divergence in DUXA are consistent with
this model.
For DUXC and DUX4, the evolutionary history is less
clear. We cannot find any evidence for the presence of
DUXC orthologues in rodent and primate branches,
indicating that this gene may have been lost in the common ancestor of these lineages. In primates at least, the
role of DUXC may have been filled by the intronless
DUX4-like sequences that encode closely related homeodomains and CTD. Similarly, in the rodent lineage,
mouse and rat may have a functional equivalent in Dux.
The maintenance of intronless DUX genes alongside
DUXA and DUXB/Duxbl (which also lack the conserved
DUX4 CTD) supports separate roles for these genes.
Implications for studying DUX4 function in model
organisms

The lack of evidence for any double-homeobox DUX
genes in non-placental mammals raises questions about
some of the experimental approaches that have been
employed to investigate DUX4 function. In a recent
study, mouse Dux mRNA was injected into Xenopus laevis embryos and gastrulation defects were observed,
which was suggested of being supportive of a myopathic
role for D4Z4 [27]. A very similar experiment using
human DUX4 was performed by a different group [31].
In this study, observed developmental defects and
increased TUNEL staining in the embryos were interpreted as evidence that in Xenopus there is conservation
for a function of DUX4 to induce apoptosis [31].

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

PR

PRD.SEBOX

Page 9 of 13

D.
DP
RX

PR
D.
AR

PR

D.

HE

SX

1

DUX
DUXB

B2.H

1.Hum

uma

n

DU

X4

TX

EU

D.L

PR

X
PR
D

.M

IX

RX1

PR
D.
IS

1

PRD.RAX

RX

TX2
PRD.O TX1 CRX
.O RD.
PRD
P

TP

PRD.P
HOX2
PR
A
D.D
RG PRD.P
R
X

PR

D.

L1

FX
G

4

AX

.P

D
PR

X6

PA

D.

PR

C

.GS

PRD

OBOX

PRD.N

PRD.RHOXF1

2.H

an

um

PRD.ESX1

an

PR

DUX41.Human

D.

PR

DUXA2.Human

AR

X

D.

)

um
(1
)
2)
Wa
llab
y (1

Liza
r
Lizard d (1)
(2)

DUXA1.Human

ss

y(

ab

po

O

all

W

BX
1
DM TX
D. .PI
PR PRD
OP1
.PR
PRD

(4

X1

)

m
(5) ) ssu
sum (2 po
pos sum O
O
os
Op

AL

ken typus
Pla

AX7
PRD.P
PRD.PAX3

Chic
sDUX
Human DUX4,
DUXA & DUXB

P
PRD RD.SHO
X
.OT
P
PR
D.U
NC
X
PR
D.
VS
X1

Figure 8 Relationship of sDUX to known human PRD class homeodomains. Maximum Likelihood tree based on single homeodomains.
Apart from sDUX, all homeodomains are from the human orthologues (data extracted from HomeoDB[23]). Number in brackets indicates sDUX
copy number. sDUX homeodomains cluster with DUX.

The biological relevance of the effects of overexpressing a DUX homologue in an organism of a species lineage that split from the common ancestor of mammals
long before the evolution of the double-homeobox gene
family is unclear. One might expect that overexpression
of a transcription factor in the embryo of an organism
whose transcriptional networks cannot have evolved to
include double-homeodomain DUX proteins in their
regulation can induce cellular stress.
Linking intronless to intron-containing DUX genes

Our data presented here and previously [1] indicate that
DUX4 originated from retrotransposition of a processed
transcript, most probably DUXC. As such a random integration event results in the loss of linkage with genes
flanking the parental locus, there exists no syntenic relationship between intronless and intron-containing DUX

genes. It is intriguing that of the four intron-containing
DUX homologues, DUXC is the only one consistently
found in tandem arrays. Although there are three adjacent copies of Duxbl in mouse, they are part of a much
larger macroduplication that includes the neighbouring
genes Plac9 and Cphx [24]. Exactly why DUXC and
DUX4 (embedded in D4Z4) in particular should have
repeatedly undergone duplications and maintained these
copies is an unresolved question.
In rodents, the most promising candidate for a functional equivalent of DUX4 is Dux [1]. While there are
fewer clues for the origin of the rodent Dux array than
for that of DUX4, it probably arose from an independent
retrotransposition event of an intron-containing DUXC
homologue [1]. We base our opinion of a possible functional equivalence of Dux and DUX4 on their common,
conserved C-terminal domain, which they both share

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

with DUXC, and their shared organisation into highcopy number tandem arrays [1]. However, we note that
the conserved CTD could have originally been present
in all the paralogues and then lost. In that case, Dux
could have a parental origin in a different DUX paralogue. Based on our trees, the origins of DUX4 are more
likely to lie with DUXC, but a rapid divergence of Duxbl
or of DUXA could render the homeodomain clustering
of DUX4 with DUXC an artefact of our Maximum Likelihood analysis (Additional file 5 &6).
However, our data do not support the hypothesis of Wu
et al. that mouse Duxbl is the orthologue of human
DUX4, which they base on the relatively high amino acid
similarity between their respective homeodomains [24]. In
a separate study, either human DUXA or DUX4 were suggested as candidates for the human Duxbl orthologue,
again based on amino acid identities [18]. Because DUX4
is most likely to have lost its introns through retrotransposition, it cannot be the orthologue of an intron-containing
gene such as Duxbl [24]. Here, we have identified the
human orthologue of mouse Duxbl, and it is human
DUXBLP (a decaying pseudogene), located on 10q22.3. If
DUX4 had arisen as a direct descendant of Duxbl by a
duplication event that simultaneously resulted in the loss
of all introns (in other words, retrotransposition), it could
presumably be called a retrogene paralogue of Duxbl. It is
interesting to note that after retrotransposition, DUX4
acquired introns in the 3’ untranslated region [12,19,32].
This is rather unusual, as in most known cases of retrogenes that have acquired introns this has occurred in the
5’ UTR, probably because introns distal to the stop codon
usually destabilize the transcript via non-sense mediated
decay (NMD) and can be selected against [33]. One example of a retrogene with an intron within the 3’ UTR is
ENSG00000182814 [33]. This may represent an example
of evolved NMD repression of transcript levels [33], a
mechanism that should not be ruled out for DUX4
regulation.
Orthology and paralogy are entwined concepts defined
by two fundamentally distinct evolutionary processes that
give rise to the different homologues in a gene family,
with important implications for gene function [34].
Orthologues are separated only by speciation events and
represent the direct descendants of a gene in a common
ancestor, and therefore usually perform equivalent functions in different species. Conversely, paralogues arise by
gene duplication within a given species lineage, and it is
an intrinsic consequence of the (initial) redundancy
between the two copies that one paralogue can be
released from purifying selection pressure and evolve to
perform related or (crucially) novel functions [34]. So, if
DUX4 did indeed originate from DUXC, its relationship
to Duxbl can perhaps be described as it being a retrogene
paralogue of a paralogue (DUXC) of Duxbl, not an

Page 10 of 13

orthologue. These definitions and distinctions are important if the findings of functional studies of one gene
(Duxbl) are to be used to infer the putative functions of
another gene (DUX4), as suggested in the study cited
above [24]. Potential functional divergence between
different gene family members would increase the uncertainty of such inferences. Nevertheless, these studies
of rodent Duxbl [18,24] provide the first evidence of
in vivo functions of any DUX protein, and are valuable
contributions.
Birth of the double-homeodomain ancestor

With sDUX, we have identified a putative single-homeobox homologue of DUX genes in non-placental animals.
Based on the similarity between the sDUX and DUX
homeodomains and the good synteny information
(CJ057 and ANXA11), we deem it likely that in the common ancestor of the eutherian mammals a duplication
of homeoboxes occurred in sDUX. This created the
ancestral DUX, which ultimately gave rise to all introncontaining and intronless DUX genes. Our data therefore also imply that the origins of DUXA lie with sDUX
and the other DUX family members and not with CRX,
as suggested previously [16].
We noticed a consistent feature of our gene structure
maps (Figure 5 Additional file 2, 4, 7, 8). In almost all
homologues, the intron between the two sets of homeodomain encoding exons (intron 3) is comparatively
small. We believe this may be a result of the duplication
mechanism.
With sDUX present in multiple local copies in opossum, lizard and wallaby, it is easy to imagine that two
closely spaced copies with identical orientations may
arise. Two possible mechanisms for this are misaligned
homologous recombinational repair and unequal crossing-over, which can be facilitated by repetitive elements

Deletion

Intron gain

Intron drawn
to scale
800bp

Duxbl (Mouse)

100bp

Figure 9 Homeobox duplication in DUX genes. Hypothetical
scenario of homeobox duplication at the sDUX locus. As an
illustrative example, the two tandem wallaby sDUX copies are
shown with all sizes and distances to scale. A deletion could join
the two genes leaving a single intact DUX ancestral gene. New
intron redrawn at 1/8th size (intron scale). Subsequent splicing
changes could result in intron gain. Mouse Duxbl is shown for
comparison.

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

such as SINEs [35]. Such tandem duplication cis events
have played a major role in the evolution of other
homeobox genes, for example the duplications of the
NK-like and Hox/ParaHox genes [36].
A tandem sDUX scenario can indeed be observed at
the wallaby locus (Figure 7c, Figure 9). Given such an
arrangement, one local deletion could join the two
together with a one in three chance of maintaining the
reading frame. Provided the extra homeodomain at the
N-terminus does not interfere with the function of the
joined HD2 and its final exon, one can readily imagine
natural selection to allow such a change to occur. A
large open reading frame such as that in the final exon
of sDUX (mean size of the second exon in ten identified
sDUX copies = 989 base pairs) would allow for many
possible 5’ deletion breakpoints that could all result in
an open reading frame. Indeed, the 3’ position of the
deletion breakpoint may also be variable as long as both
the HD2 homeobox and no stop codon are included in
the fused exon. The overall mean size of intron 3 across
all DUXA, DUXB, Duxbl, and DUXC genes catalogued
in our study is only 634 base pairs. We speculate that
this may be the consequence of such a mutational
mechanism that joined the homeoboxes (Figure 9).
A recent quantitative study analysed 330 independent
events of protein domain gain and showed that gene
fusion is a major mechanism, preceded by gene duplication in four out of five cases [37]. In the study sample,
71% of events occurred at protein termini and included
more than one exon [37].
Our proposed model for DUX homeobox duplication
is a simple mechanism requiring only one deletion, the
size of which may be relatively variable and should
allow retention of the original splice signals. A similar
gene fusion by deletion has been described for the D.
melanogaster gene Sdic. A tandem duplication of Cdic
(cytoplasmic dynein intermediate chain) and AnnX
(annexin X) followed by three local deletions joined several exons of these two genes together to create the
novel gene Sdic [38].
Alternative molecular mechanisms for joining two
neighbouring genes include readthrough transcription,
which depends on mutation of the stop codon and the
transcriptional termination signal in the first copy [29],
and co-transcription by intergenic splicing [35]. In the
latter model, pre-existing splice donor and acceptor sites
from both neighbouring genes can be used to create a
novel fusion gene. In such a case, a gradual erosion of
the internal intron 3 could have yielded a DUX like
gene structure.

Conclusions
We have characterized the evolutionary history and relationships of the double-homeodomain encoding DUX

Page 11 of 13

gene family and identified a likely candidate for its common ancestor. Gene duplication followed by a fusion
event most likely created the double homeobox in the
last common ancestor of placental mammals as these
are the only species where DUX genes have been found.
Our study illustrates how the true underlying relationships of homologues in gene families can be obscured
by secondary loss of orthologues and thus misunderstood, especially as genomic tBLASTn searches are likely
to identify active genes maintained by selection, but
miss decaying pseudogenes that may represent the true
orthologues. Our data reinforce the view that the inference of relationships between genes should take into
consideration synteny information, phylogenetic analysis
of amino acid sequence evolution and consider that
orthologues may no longer be present in a species. This
is particularly important if, as for DUX4, different
homologues are studied as models, especially if these
studies extend to different organisms. With recently
published data clearly linking DUX4 to FSHD pathogenesis [13], the need to understand DUX4 protein function
has become more urgent. Future studies will benefit
from a consideration of the evolutionary history of
DUX4.

Methods
Data collection and DUX gene identification

Previously published data on the DUX gene family [1,17]
was complemented and expanded by systematic interrogation of more than 30 genome databases (ENSEMBL,
release May 2010, http://www.ensembl.org/Multi/blastview). Species searched included 25 placental mammals
as well as opossum, platypus, chicken, lizard, frog and
zebrafish (P. troglodytes, G. gorilla, P. pygmaeus, M.
mulatta, P. hamadryas, C. jacchus, M. murinus, T. belangeri, M. musculus, M. norvegicus, S. tridecemlineatus, C.
porcellus, O. cuniculus, E. caballus, F. catus, C. familiaris,
T. truncates, B. taurus, P. vampyrus, E. europaeus, D.
novemcinctus, L. africana, M. domestica, O. anatinus, G.
gallus, A. carolinensis, X. tropicalis &D. rerio). Databases
were surveyed for annotated DUX genes and searched for
DUXA, DUXB, Duxbl and DUXC related sequences by
whole-genome ENSEMBL tBLASTn (protein against
nucleic acid) using default parameters with a near-exact
matches search. For DUXA, DUXB and Duxbl, neighbouring anchor genes (see results section) were used to
identify syntenic regions, which were then exported and
searched locally for homeodomain-encoding sequences
using the NCBI tBLASTn alignment tool with default
parameters http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi. For
DUXC, no suitable anchor genes could be identified due
to incomplete sequence contigs flanking the DUXC loci
and a resulting lack of linked sequences. Genes were verified as probable orthologues by considering synteny

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

conservation, and intron-exon boundaries as well as clustering of homeodomain amino acid sequences with
already characterized DUX homologues in phylogenetic
trees (JalView 2.5 and PHYLIP, see below). For some
genes, predicted ORFs were used in nBLAT (Ensembl) to
identify any recent pseudogene retrotranspositions to aid
exon identification of the intron-containing gene. If no
intact orthologue (defined as an intact ORF spanning at
least both homeoboxes) was found, but fragments of a
decayed DUX gene could be identified in the same region
(e.g. with stop codons, frameshifts, or deletion of individual exons), the orthologue was deemed to be not present or secondarily lost in that species. Where a DUX
sequence was identified but the gene status (intact or
pseudogene) was impossible to determine, e.g. due to
local contig gaps, gene status was assigned as unclear.
Sequence alignments and phylogenetic analysis

Predicted amino acid sequences (homeodomains were
considered either concatenated or separate) were aligned
using ClustalW implemented in JalView 2.5 http://www.
jalview.org/ [39]. JalView Average Distance or Neighbour-Joining trees based on percent identity or on a
BLOSUM62 matrix were calculated initially to confirm
clustering of newly identified homologues with the same
class of DUX genes. After data collection was complete,
phylogenetic analysis was performed with the PHYLIP
package version 3.69 http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip.html [40]. Only homeodomain sequences
from intact (and presumably functional) DUX homologues were included in the analysis. Datasets were bootstrapped with Seqboot (100 replicates) and unrooted
Maximum Likelihood trees were calculated using Proml
(Jones-Taylor-Thornton model, input order jumble =
10, non-rough analysis). Consensus trees were calculated
using the majority rule option in Consense, with node
bootstrap values representing the percent agreement
between the 100 bootstrapped datasets. Proml analysis
was then repeated on the original, non-bootstrapped
dataset using the consensus tree as an input guide tree.
The resulting tree with Maximum Likelihood analysis
branch lengths was drawn using iTOL version 1.8.1
http://itol.embl.de/ [41], and consensus bootstrap values
were added manually.
Comparative sequence analysis

The deletion breakpoint in the human, chimpanzee and
orangutan Duxbl locus was mapped using LAGAN in
mVISTA http://genome.lbl.gov/vista/mvista/submit.
shtml with species specific repeat masking and default
parameters [42]. To calculate dN/dS ratios, nucleic acid
sequence was aligned based on translated amino acids
using MEGA4 http://www.megasoftware.net/ [43], and

Page 12 of 13

ratios were calculated using the MEGA4 implemented
Nei-Gojobori method with Jukes-Cantor correction.
Availability of sequences

All relevant sequences are included in the supplemental
data (Additional file 9). Genomic loci can readily be
found using the data we have provided as query
sequences in ENSEMBL tBLASTn searches. Further, all
human DUX sequences are summarized in the HomeoDB v2.0 http://homeodb.cbi.pku.edu.cn/ [23].

Additional material
Additional file 1: CJ057 alignment. Alignment of CJ057 predicted
protein.
Additional file 2: DUXA gene structures. All labels as in Figure 1 and
Figure 5.
Additional file 3: DUXA CTD. Additional amino acids of extra DUXA
exon in primates. Arrow = splice position.
Additional file 4: DUXC gene structures.
Additional file 5: Concatenated HD tree with DUX4 & mDux.
Maximum Likelihood tree based on 120 amino acid concatenated
homeodomains. Note the clustering of DUX4 with DUXC and the
isolation of the rodent Dux node.
Additional file 6: Individual HD tree with DUX4 & mDux. Tree based
on 60 amino acid individual homeodomains.
Additional file 7: DUXB gene structures.
Additional file 8: Duxbl gene structures.
Additional file 9: Homeodomain amino acid sequences. DUX
homologue and homeodomain number (1 or 2) before species. Numbers
in brackets after species name denote different copies.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by grants from the Muscular Dystrophy Association,
USA and a PhD studentship from the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign of
Great Britain to AL. We would like to thank John Armour and John
Brookfield (University of Nottingham) for helpful feedback and discussion.
Authors’ contributions
JEH conceived the study. AL performed database interrogation and
phylogenetic analysis and drafted the manuscript. Both authors edited and
approved the final version of the manuscript.
Received: 27 August 2010 Accepted: 26 November 2010
Published: 26 November 2010
References
1. Clapp J, Mitchell LM, Bolland DJ, Fantes J, Corcoran AE, Scotting PJ,
Armour JAL, Hewitt JE: Evolutionary conservation of a coding function for
D4Z4, the tandem DNA repeat mutated in facioscapulohumeral
muscular dystrophy. Am J Hum Genet 2007, 81:264-279.
2. Gehring WJ, Affolter M, Burglin T: Homeodomain proteins. Annu Rev
Biochem 1994, 63:487-526.
3. de Greef JC, Frants RR, van der Maarel SM: Epigenetic mechanisms of
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. Mutat Res-Fund Mol M Mutat
2008, 647:94-102.
4. Hewitt JE, Lyle R, Clark LN, Valleley EM, Wright TJ, Wijmenga C,
Vandeutekom JCT, Francis F, Sharpe PT, Hofker M, et al: Analysis of the
tandem repeat locus D4Z4 associated with facioscapulohumeral
muscular-dystrophy. Hum Mol Genet 1994, 3:1287-1295.

Leidenroth and Hewitt BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:364
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/364

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Gabriels J, Beckers MC, Ding H, De Vriese A, Plaisance S, van der Maarel SM,
Padberg GW, Frants RR, Hewitt JE, Collen D, Belayew A: Nucleotide
sequence of the partially deleted D4Z4 locus in a patient with FSHD
identifies a putative gene within each 3.3 kb element. Gene 1999,
236:25-32.
van der Maarel SM, Frants RR, Padberg GW: Facioscapulohumeral muscular
dystrophy. BBA-Mol Basis Dis 2007, 1772:186-194.
Zeng W, de Greef JC, Chen Y-Y, Chien R, Kong X, Gregson HC, Winokur ST,
Pyle A, Robertson KD, Schmiesing JA, et al: Specific loss of histone H3
lysine 9 trimethylation and HP1gamma/cohesin binding at D4Z4 repeats
is associated with facioscapulohumeral dystrophy (FSHD). PLoS Genet
2009, 5:e1000559.
Greef JCD, Lemmers RJLF, Engelen BGMV, Sacconi S, Venance SL, Frants RR,
Tawil R, Maarel SMVD: Common epigenetic changes of D4Z4 in
contraction-dependent and contraction-independent FSHD. Hum Mutat
2009, 30:1449-1459.
van Overveld PGM, Lemmers R, Sandkuijl LA, Enthoven L, Winokur ST,
Bakels F, Padberg GW, van Ommen GJB, Frants RR, van der Maarel SM:
Hypomethylation of D4Z4 in 4q-linked and non-4q-linked
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. Nat Genet 2003, 35:315-317.
Lemmers R, van der Vliet PJ, van der Gaag KJ, Zuniga S, Frants RR, de
Knijff P, van der Maarel SM: Worldwide population analysis of the 4q and
10q subtelomeres identifies only four discrete interchromosomal
sequence transfers in human evolution. Am J Hum Genet 2010,
86:364-377.
Lemmers R, Wohlgemuth M, van der Gaag KJ, van der Vliet PJ, van
Teijlingen CMM, de Knijff P, Padberg GW, Frants RR, van der Maarel SM:
Specific sequence variations within the 4q35 region are associated with
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. Am J Hum Genet 2007,
81:884-894.
Snider L, Asawachaicharn A, Tyler AE, Geng LN, Petek LM, Maves L,
Miller DG, Lemmers RJLF, Winokur ST, Tawil R, et al: RNA transcripts,
miRNA-sized fragments and proteins produced from D4Z4 units: New
candidates for the pathophysiology of facioscapulohumeral dystrophy.
Hum Mol Genet 2009, 18:2414-2430.
Lemmers R, van der Vliet PJ, Klooster R, Sacconi S, Camano P, Dauwerse JG,
Snider L, Straasheijm KR, van Ommen GJ, Padberg GW, et al: A nifying
genetic model for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. Science
2010, 329:1650-1653.
Lyle R, Wright TJ, Clark LN, Hewitt JE: FSHD-associated repeat, D4Z4, is a
member of a dispersed family of homeobox-containing repeats, subsets
of which are clustered on the short arms of the acrocentric
chromosomes. Genomics 1995, 28:389-397.
Schmidt J, Kirsch S, Rappold GA, Schempp W: Complex evolution of a ychromosomal double homeobox 4 (DUX4)-related gene family in
hominoids. PLoS ONE 2009, 4:13.
Booth HAF, Holland PWH: Annotation, nomenclature and evolution of
four novel homeobox genes expressed in the human germ line. Gene
2007, 387:7-14.
Holland PWH, Booth HAF, Bruford EA: Classification and nomenclature of
all human homeobox genes. BMC Biol 2007, 5.
Kawazu M, Yamamoto G, Yoshimi M, Yamamoto K, Asai T, Ichikawa M,
Seo S, Nakagawa M, Chiba S, Kurokawa M, Ogawa S: Expression profiling
of immature thymocytes revealed a novel homeobox gene that
regulates double-negative thymocyte development. J Immunol 2007,
179:5335-5345.
Dixit M, Ansseau E, Tassin A, Winokur S, Shi R, Qian H, Sauvage S,
Mattotti C, van Acker AM, Leo O, et al: DUX4, a candidate gene of
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, encodes a transcriptional
activator of PITX1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:18157-18162.
Bosnakovski D, Xu ZH, Gang EJ, Galindo CL, Liu MJ, Simsek T, Garner HR,
Agha-Mohammadi S, Tassin A, Coppee F, et al: An isogenetic myoblast
expression screen identifies DUX4-mediated FSHD-associated molecular
pathologies. EMBO J 2008, 27:2766-2779.
Kowaljow V, Marcowycz A, Ansseau E, Conde CB, Sauvage S, Mattotti C,
Arias C, Corona ED, Nufiez NG, Leo O, et al: The DUX4 gene at the FSHDIA
locus encodes a pro-apoptotic protein. Neuromuscul Disord 2007,
17:611-623.
Baertsch R, Diekhans M, Kent WJ, Haussler D, Brosius J: Retrocopy
contributions to the evolution of the human genome. BMC Genomics
2008, 9.

Page 13 of 13

23. Zhong YF, Butts T, Holland PWH: HomeoDB: A database of homeobox
gene diversity. Evo Dev 2008, 10:516-518.
24. Wu SL, Tsai MS, Wong SH, Hsieh-Li HM, Tsai TS, Chang WT, Huang SL,
Chiu CC, Wang SH: Characterization of genomic structures and
expression profiles of three tandem repeats of a mouse double
homeobox gene: Duxbl. Dev Dyn 2010, 239:927-940.
25. Langkjaer RB, Cliften PF, Johnston M, Piskur J: Yeast genome duplication
was followed by asynchronous differentiation of duplicated genes.
Nature 2003, 421:848-852.
26. Bergsten J: A review of long-branch attraction. Cladistics 2005, 21:163-193.
27. Bosnakovski D, Daughters RS, Xu Z, Slack JMW, Kyba M: Biphasic
myopathic phenotype of mouse DUX, an ORF within conserved FSHDrelated repeats. PLoS ONE 2009, 4:e7003.
28. Li G, Holland PWH: The origin and evolution of ARGFX homeobox loci in
mammalian radiation. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:182.
29. Long M, Betran E, Thornton K, Wang W: The origin of new genes:
Glimpses from the young and old. Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4:865-875.
30. Soskine M, Tawfik DS: Mutational effects and the evolution of new
protein functions. Nat Rev Genet 11:572-582.
31. Wuebbles RD, Long SW, Hanel ML, Jones PL: Testing the effects of FSHD
candidate gene expression in vertebrate muscle development. Int J Clin
Exp Pathol 2010, 3:386-400.
32. Snider L, Geng LN, Lemmers RJLF, Kyba M, Ware CB, Nelson AM, Tawil R,
Filippova GN, van der Maarel M Sr, Tapscott SJ, Miller DG:
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy: Incomplete suppression of a
retrotransposed gene. PLoS Genet 2010, 6:e1001181.
33. Fablet M, Bueno M, Potrzebowski L, Kaessmann H: Evolutionary origin and
functions of retrogene introns. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:2147-2156.
34. Koonin EV: Orthologs, paralogs, and evolutionary genomics. Annu Rev
Genet 2005, 39:309-338.
35. Babushok DV, Ostertag EM, Kazazian HH: Current topics in genome
evolution: Molecular mechanisms of new gene formation. Cell Mol Life Sci
2007, 64:542-554.
36. Holland PWH, Takahashi T: The evolution of homeobox genes:
Implications for the study of brain development. Brain Res Bull 2005,
66:484-490.
37. Buljan MFA, Bateman A: Quantifying the mechanisms of domain gain in
animal proteins. Genome Biol 2010, 11:R74.
38. Nurminsky DI, Nurminskaya MV, De Aguiar D, Hartl DL: Selective sweep of
a newly evolved sperm-specific gene in drosophila. Nature 1998,
396:572-575.
39. Waterhouse AM, Procter JB, Martin DMA, Clamp M, Barton GJ: Jalview
version 2-a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis workbench.
Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1189-1191.
40. Felsenstein J: Confidence-limits on phylogenies - an approach using the
bootstrap. Evolution 1985, 39:783-791.
41. Letunic I, Bork P: Interactive tree of life (iTOL): An online tool for
phylogenetic tree display and annotation. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:127-128.
42. Brudno M, Do CB, Cooper GM, Kim MF, Davydov E, Green ED, Sidow A,
Batzoglou S, Progra NCS: LAGAN and multi-LAGAN: Efficient tools for
large-scale multiple alignment of genomic DNA. Genome Res 2003,
13:721-731.
43. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular evolutionary
genetics analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
44. Hedges SB: The origin and evolution of model organisms. Nat Rev Genet
2002, 3:838-849.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-364
Cite this article as: Leidenroth and Hewitt: A family history of DUX4:
phylogenetic analysis of DUXA, B, C and Duxbl reveals the ancestral
DUX gene. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:364.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
