<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Salmo salar and Esox lucius full-length cDNA sequences reveal changes in evolutionary pressures on a post-tetraploidization genome</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-279"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jong S Leong, Stuart G Jantzen, Kristian R von Schalburg, Glenn A Cooper, Amber M Messmer, Nancy Y Liao, Sarah Munro, Richard Moore, Robert A Holt, Steven JM Jones, William S Davidson, Ben F Koop"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Salmo salar and Esox lucius full-length cDNA
sequences reveal changes in evolutionary
pressures on a post-tetraploidization genome
Research article

Jong S Leong†1, Stuart G Jantzen†1, Kristian R von Schalburg1, Glenn A Cooper1, Amber M Messmer1, Nancy Y Liao2,
Sarah Munro2, Richard Moore2, Robert A Holt2, Steven JM Jones2, William S Davidson3 and Ben F Koop*1

Abstract
Background: Salmonids are one of the most intensely studied fish, in part due to their economic and environmental
importance, and in part due to a recent whole genome duplication in the common ancestor of salmonids. This
duplication greatly impacts species diversification, functional specialization, and adaptation. Extensive new genomic
resources have recently become available for Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), but documentation of allelic versus
duplicate reference genes remains a major uncertainty in the complete characterization of its genome and its
evolution.
Results: From existing expressed sequence tag (EST) resources and three new full-length cDNA libraries, 9,057
reference quality full-length gene insert clones were identified for Atlantic salmon. A further 1,365 reference full-length
clones were annotated from 29,221 northern pike (Esox lucius) ESTs. Pairwise dN/dS comparisons within each of 408 sets
of duplicated salmon genes using northern pike as a diploid out-group show asymmetric relaxation of selection on
salmon duplicates.
Conclusions: 9,057 full-length reference genes were characterized in S. salar and can be used to identify alleles and
gene family members. Comparisons of duplicated genes show that while purifying selection is the predominant force
acting on both duplicates, consistent with retention of functionality in both copies, some relaxation of pressure on
gene duplicates can be identified. In addition, there is evidence that evolution has acted asymmetrically on paralogs,
allowing one of the pair to diverge at a faster rate.
Background
Salmonidae (including salmon, trout, charr, whitefish and
grayling) are of economic and environmental importance,
leading to a high level of interest in many different areas
of biology. Of the sixty-six species in this family [1],
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) has been used as a model
for studies in several areas including osmoregulation,
environmental toxicology, immunology, growth, physiology, and genomics [2-25]. Both S. salar and the closely
related rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) are commonly used as important sentinel species to monitor the
health of aquatic environments [26]. Conservation and
* Correspondence: bkoop@uvic.ca
1 Biology, Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Victoria, Victoria, British
Columbia, V8W 3N5 Canada
† Contributed equally

enhancement of wild stocks of these fish continues to be
the subject of very large internationally concerned groups
[27,28]. Basic biological knowledge of S. salar serves as a
foundation for improving fish health, conserving wild
stocks, and increasing the commercial sustainability of
aquaculture. Recent efforts in genomics have provided
new tools to address fundamental questions regarding
fish health, ecology, physiology, and genetics, as well as
allowing investigation of post-tetraploidization genome
remodelling [29-34]. Detailed efforts to annotate the
entire complement of S. salar genes will greatly facilitate
a better understanding of all aspects of salmonid biology.
The study of salmonid genomes is made more difficult
and biologically interesting because of a whole genome
duplication (WGD) that occurred through an autotetraploidization event in the common ancestor of salmonids

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Leong et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

between 25-100 million years ago [35]. Extant salmonids
are currently in a pseudotetraploid state and are in the
process of reverting to a stable diploid state [32]. Though
many of the gene duplicates from the WGD have been
lost through deletion events or by being converted into
pseudogenes, many sets of paralogs remain. As a result,
there are practical problems in distinguishing among
alleles, recent segmental duplications, gene family members, and duplications arising from the WGD. Experimentally, S. salar genes have proven challenging to
characterize because of the complexities resulting from
assembling large numbers of partial mRNA sequences
represented by expressed sequence tags (ESTs) obtained
from these duplicated and other closely related
sequences. In addition, interspersed repeat sequences
[36] can lead to the formation of incorrect assemblies of
genomic sequences and transcripts (contigs). To resolve
these potential errors, a gene containing coding sequence
(CDS) flanked by 5' and 3' untranslated regions (UTR)
coming from a single, completely characterized cDNA
clone provides an important reference sequence representing a single allele of a single gene. The expansion of
reference clone resources are particularly important not
only in identifying other potential alleles and gene duplicates that are so pervasive in the pseudotetraploid salmonids, but also in studying fundamental genetic rates and
modes of evolutionary change.
Relatively few organisms and lineages have been used
to examine the evolution of duplicated genes following a
WGD. Morin et al. [37] investigated the selective pressures acting on paralogs in Xenopus laevis, which resulted
from allotetraploidization, and found wide-spread purifying selection but with some relaxation of pressure relative
to orthologs in the diploid Xenopus tropicalis. Maere et
al. [38] studied substitution rates and found certain functional categories of genes that were selectively lost after
genome duplication events in Arabidopsis thaliana. In a
larger scale study, Conant and Wagner [39] researched
the genomes of a number of different organisms that have
undergone WGDs, testing for asymmetric divergence of
paralogs which they found in 20 - 30% of duplicates.
Looking at asymmetrically evolving paralogs in yeast,
Turunen et al. [40] recently presented evidence for relaxation of selective pressures. Furthermore, in another
examination of the WGD in S. cerevisiae, positive selection was detected in a substantial portion of paralogs
[41]. These studies examined the ratio of amino acid
changing substitutions to silent substitutions (dN/dS) to
measure evolutionary rates. The present study incorporates some of these approaches to identify evolutionary
patterns in the genome of S. salar. Since there is not a
large number of examples of post-tetraploidization evolution available for study, the WGD in salmonids becomes
an important area for research.

Page 2 of 17

Of the few organisms studied, some have been examined by a number of research groups. Since this is one of
the first studies examining the post-tetraploidization evolutionary patterns in the salmonid genome, it is our hope
that other groups in addition to our own will expand on
the work presented here, incorporating growing datasets
and using a wide variety of phylogenetic and evolutionary
methods.
Characterizing evolutionary changes in polyploid
genomes requires comparison to a pre-WGD out-group
species so that differences in substitution rates with
respect to an ancestral genomic state can be determined.
Ishiguro et al., Lopez et al., and Li et al. [42-44] report
that the Order Esociformes is the closest non-polyploid
sister group to the Salmoniformes. Karyotypic data
[45,46] and C-values of ~3.0 - 3.3 pg in salmonids and
~0.9 - 1.4 pg in esocids [47] are consistent with the occurrence of the WGD after the divergence of esocids and salmonids. In particular, studying northern pike (Esox
lucius) as a representative of the order would provide an
opportunity to continue building upon existing efforts.
As there were only 158 core nucleotide sequences, 83
protein sequences, and 3,612 EST sequences [33] available for northern pike prior to this study, it was necessary
to expand sequence information of this species before a
more thorough analysis of salmonid gene duplications
could be done.
The objectives of this study were to: 1) obtain a large
number of full-length reference cDNA clone sequences;
2) expand the transcriptomic resources (ESTs) of E.
lucius; and 3) identify evolutionary patterns of duplicated
genes in the autotetraploid S. salar species.

Results
Full-length cDNA library construction and analysis

The majority of existing EST data from S. salar came
from highly normalized cDNA libraries that were fulllength (FL) biased [31,33,48,49]. To specifically identify
more full-length transcripts, a protocol for enrichment of
5'-CAPed mRNA was employed which prevents truncated mRNA from being reverse-transcribed, followed by
transfer of intact double-stranded cDNAs directly into
the library vector using Invitrogen Gateway® recombination cloning [50]. Starting from S. salar brain, head kidney, and spleen tissues, three non-normalized, size
selected, full-length libraries were constructed. mRNAs
were size-selected for 600 to 1,100 bp (rgg), 1,100 to 2,000
bp (rgh) and >2,200 bp (rgf ). 7,680, 7,680, and 16,128
clones from rgg, rgh, and rgf, respectively, were bi-directionally sequenced. For the short insert library (rgg),
11,917 sequences were obtained and assembled into
1,833 transcripts (903 singletons and 930 contigs). This
library had the fewest novel transcripts and had the highest redundancy in terms of identified sequences. The

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

majority of transcripts in this library were identified as
hemoglobins, ribosomal protein genes or other genes
previously seen in our existing EST dataset [33]. For the
mid-sized insert library (rgh), 12,250 sequences were
obtained and assembled into 5,305 transcripts (3,088 singletons and 2,217 contigs). While the sequence diversity
of this library was higher, nearly all complete transcripts
had been previously identified [33]. For the large-sized
insert library (rgf ), 30,415 sequences were obtained and
assembled into 15,125 transcripts (11,190 singletons and
3,935 contigs). This library contained the highest number
of novel transcripts.
Identification of S. salar Full-Length cDNA contigs from
existing EST assemblies

Starting with a 434,384 S. salar EST assembly [33] (Figure
1 part 1), 81,398 contigs (Figure 1 part 2) were compared
to the SwissProt protein database [51] (Figure 1 part 3)
and 34,451 unique transcripts were identified. 14,021 of
these were potential FLcDNA contigs as determined by
similarity comparisons to known proteins (Figure 1 part
4). These assembled sequences represent potential fulllength transcripts with significant similarity to SwissProt
protein sequences. 10,026 (mean = 1,295 bp; range = 195
- 4,696 bp) of these contigs contained complete ORFs and
5,853 of these could be represented by a single completely
characterized, non-redundant clone. These clone
sequences are consistent with contig consensus
sequences representing two or more different clones and
were provisionally designated as reference FLcDNAs.
E. lucius ESTs

A full-length biased, normalized cDNA library from E.
lucius head kidney, spleen, heart and gill tissues was constructed and 15,360 clones were bi-directionally
sequenced. 29,221 sequences averaging 731 bp were
obtained and, with the previously available 3,612 EST
sequences [33], assembled into 11,662 contigs (2,791 singletons and 8,871 clusters; mean cluster = 2.2 reads, 1,384
bp; max cluster = 106 reads). BLASTX analysis [52]
revealed a total of 3,816 unique transcripts with strong
SwissProt protein similarity (e-value ≤ 10-5). Using the
same method outlined in Figure 1 part 4 for S. salar, 1,830
were identified as potential full-length transcripts. After
ORF analysis (Figure 1 part 5), 1,543 FLcDNA contigs
contained sequences corresponding to full-length proteins (mean = 1,044 bp; range = 312 - 2,984 bp) and 1,365
non-redundant reference clones were identified.
Reference Full-Length cDNA identification using individual
clone assembly

Paired 5' and 3' sequence reads from short and mid-sized
insert FLcDNA libraries from S. salar (rgg: 11,917 reads
and rgh: 12,250 reads) were assembled individually to

Page 3 of 17

yield 6,941 rgg and 8,470 rgh cDNA clone sequences.
These sequences were selected for further full-length,
ORF and non-redundancy analysis (Figure 2). The shortinsert library (rgg) yielded 274 new, full-length protein
reference clone sequences. The midrange insert library
(rgh) yielded 357 new FLcDNA reference clone
sequences. The low yields of novel reference clones likely
reflect similar clone insert sizes obtained from previous
cDNA library characterizations.
The assembled 15,125 transcripts from the large-insert
full-length cDNA library (rgf ) from S. salar were initially
examined for non-redundancy with existing full-length
reference genes and potential for representing a fulllength gene (5' and 3' non-overlapping clone sequences
were consistent with the 5' and 3' ends of a known complete protein). Based on partial reference FLcDNA characterization, 4,380 clones were chosen for complete
characterization using primer walking methods. Once
these clones were completely sequenced, 4,112 were
shown to have significant SwissProt similarity. Of those
clones, 2,573 represented novel non-redundant S. salar
transcripts with complete ORFs that corresponded to
known proteins. Clones whose inserts contained full 5'
annotation (Figure 2 part 3) and a proper ORF (Figure 2
part 4) were designated as reference FLcDNA clones. In
total, 3,204 non-redundant reference FLcDNAs (Figure 2
part 5) were characterized from the three FLcDNA libraries of rgf, rgg, and rgh.
Reference Full-Length cDNA assessment

The 5' UTRs, ORFs and 3' UTRs for the 9,057 reference
clones were characterized and the results are summarized in Figure 3. The mean reference FLcDNA length for
9,057 S. salar sequences (Figure 3a) is 1,450 +/- 794 bp
(mean +/- SD), and ranges from 267 to 4,730 bp. Of these
sequences the mean 5' UTR and 3' UTR is 142 +/- 171 bp
and 608 +/- 509 bp, respectively. The mean reference
ORF is 755 +/- 499 bp.
Similar analysis of E. lucius reference FLcDNAs (Figure
3b) shows a mean length of 1,003 +/- 286 bp, ranging
from 312 to 1,731 bp. Mean UTRs in the 5' and 3' regions
are 118 +/- 124 bp and 379 +/- 279 bp, respectively. The
mean reference ORF is 540 +/- 232 bp.
The UTR results are comparable with efforts from
groups which have compiled mRNA UTR databases. In
one such study of UTRs for a variety of species belonging
to the 'fish' category, these species were shown to have an
average 5' UTR of 107 bp, while 3' UTRs averaged 397 bp
[53]. These results indicate that the UTRs from this study
are consistent with full-length sequences. While similar
studies in this area are available for non-fish FLcDNAs,
comparisons among more closely related organisms are
lacking [54].

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

Page 4 of 17

Figure 1 Schematic of S. salar FLcDNA contig identification and reference FLcDNA identification. Two-stage assembly of 434,384 high-quality
5'- and 3'-end ESTs identified 81,398 contigs (1-2) for FL contig identification. A BLASTX was carried out resulting in 34,451 well-annotated contigs (3),
which were further reduced to 14,021 FL annotations by increasing the stringency of the local alignment length (4). In-frame annotation-flanking start
and stop codons were found from the reduced set, resulting in a set of 10,026 FL contigs (5). The FL contigs represent the complete set of FL unique
putative transcripts. A set of all reads and subsequently sequenced library rgf reads was mapped to the FL contigs (6). Those clones whose 5'- and 3'end reads map to the same contig were analyzed to determine sequence overlap (complete) or non-overlap (incomplete) (7). Only complete clones
are considered, and a single representative of a clone is taken for each transcript resulting in 5,953 complete reference FLcDNAs (8).

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

Page 5 of 17

Figure 2 Schematic of S. salar reference FLcDNA identification through individual clone assemblies. Three full-length 5'-CAP enriched libraries
were created. A 4,380 clone subset of library rgf was resequenced to completion. Libraries rgg and rgh were bi-directionally sequenced and individually assembled using PHRAP (1). A BLASTX was carried out resulting in a total of 14,384 well-annotated cDNAs (2), which were further reduced to
8,469 FL annotations by increasing the stringency of the local alignment length (3). In-frame annotation-flanking start and stop codons were found
from the reduced set, resulting in a set of 7,255 reference FLcDNA candidates (4). Intra-library sequence redundancy was minimized using an all versus
all pairwise BLASTN comparison (5), resulting in a total set of 3,204 non-redundant reference FLcDNAs.

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

Page 6 of 17

Figure 3 Distributions and means of ORF, 5' and 3' UTR sizes in reference FLcDNAs for (A) S. salar (B) E. lucius. Each reference FLcDNA, determined by in-house annotation methods, was examined for an ORF, 5' UTR, and 3' UTR. Means for each region were calculated (+/- standard deviation).
An ORF is characterized by a start (ATG) and an in-frame stop codon (TGA, TAG, TAA). The 5' UTR is calculated as the entire area upstream of the start
codon, while the 3' UTR is considered the entire area downstream of the stop codon. Any 3' polyA tails were masked and were not included in UTR
length calculations.

A contig confirmation and uniqueness study was performed on each reference FLcDNA sequence set and the
results are outlined in Table 1. A comparison was done on
each corresponding contig set in an attempt to demonstrate which reference FLcDNAs could be confirmed by

an existing contig. Reference FLcDNAs from S. salar fulllength libraries were not included in the contig assembly
and therefore possibly contain novel cDNA inserts. There
were 6,115 reference FLcDNAs that could be confirmed
by a contig sequence for S. salar. All E. lucius clones were

Table 1: Summary of confirmed and unique reference FLcDNAs in contig sets for S. salar and E. lucius
Contigs

Reference FLcDNAs

Confirmed in Contigs

Unique

S. salar

81398

9057

6115

2942

E. lucius

11662

1365

1365

0

Total

93060

10422

7480

2942

Reference FLcDNAs were confirmed, using BLASTN, against their corresponding contig set. The remainder of the reference FLcDNAs are
represented by clones that are similar to and consistent with SwissProt entries and are unique to the full-length libraries characterized in this
study.

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

included in its contig assembly. As a result, the entire
1,365 reference FLcDNA set could therefore be confirmed by a contig sequence.
S. salar and E. lucius alignments

FLcDNA transcripts from S. salar were used to identify
protein coding regions for an analysis of silent and amino
acid changing substitution rates in duplicated genes. The
coding sequences were translated and used as queries in a
TBLASTN comparison to the nucleotide database consisting of all S. salar and E. lucius EST assemblies. Contig
sequences corresponding to the TBLASTN hits were
organized into clusters, then translated, resulting in a
cluster of nucleotide sequences and a corresponding cluster of protein translations for each full-length gene. A
common region of alignment with respect to the translated ORF was found for the DNA sequences and the corresponding proteins based on length and quality of
alignment criteria. A final screening process was performed to prevent allelic or distant homolog comparisons. 408 clusters contained the necessary one sequence
from E. lucius and two sequences from S. salar. These
sequences and alignments are given in Additional file 1.
Non-synonymous (dN), synonymous (dS) and ω (dN/dS)
values were calculated for the 408 individual gene trees to
investigate patterns of evolution. A value for ω that is < 1
over the alignment is indicative of purifying selection (the
rate of amino acid changing substitutions is less than the
rate of incorporation of synonymous mutations). A value
for ω that is > 1 is indicative of diversifying or positive
selection [55].
Pairwise comparisons to determine dS and ω

For each gene cluster, the corrected number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site (dS) was determined by comparing the E. lucius gene to each of the
duplicate S. salar genes (gray and black lines) and the S.
salar duplicate genes to each other (green line; Figure 4a).
For each branch, the frequency of dS values is plotted in
Figure 4a. S. salar gene duplicate dS values (green lines)
have a median value of 0.192 and the E. lucius to S. salar
dS values (gray and black lines) have a median value of
0.434. This difference confirms that the salmonid genome
duplication occurred more recently than the separation
of E. lucius and S. salar lineages.
The ratios of non-synonymous to synonymous substitution rates, or ω values, were in a similar manner calculated for each gene set and the frequency of ω values
presented in Figure 4b. The median ω for E. lucius to each
of the duplicate S. salar genes (gray and black lines) is
0.109 and the median ω for the duplicate S. salar genes
(green line) is 0.142. The low ω values for all three sets of
pairwise comparisons indicates an average of 7-9 synonymous substitutions for every non-synonymous substitu-

Page 7 of 17

tion. This ratio confirms that purifying selection is the
predominant evolutionary force in these genes. In most
cases, both copies of these genes appear to have had their
original functions retained based on the relatively low
ratio of substitutions and high similarity between
sequences. It is worth noting however, that poorly aligning and therefore potentially more divergent regions are
trimmed from the overall alignments. Therefore, these
estimates may be on the conservative side.
The paralogous comparisons (green line) produced ω
values that were generally larger than the orthologous
comparisons (gray and black lines). Upon using a
Kruskal-Wallis test to compare distributions, both sets of
orthologous comparisons were found to be significantly
different from the paralogous comparisons (p-value =
1.671 × 10-5 and 2.359 × 10-5) while orthologous sets were
not significantly different with respect to each other (pvalue = 0.9188). Therefore, while there is a large variance
in the level of selection among the different genes, this
result supports a small but significant relaxation in the
level of selection pressure following gene duplication.
This result is consistent with a comparison of 445 gene
duplicates in the polyploid Xenopus laevis [37].
dS and ω for tree segments

To more closely examine the effects of evolutionary pressures before and after duplication of the salmonid
genome (represented by a diamond in the accompanying
tree diagram), the substitution rates and ratios were separated into three tree segments (shown in Figure 4c, 4d).
This subdivision was accomplished by using all three
pairwise comparisons to calculate dS values and ω values
from the occurrence of the genome duplication (point O)
to each extant gene (points A, B, and C).
This calculation provides an approximation for the
number of substitutions before and after the duplication
event. The post-duplication branches (in red and light
blue) yielded median dS values of 0.0926 and 0.0942 and
the pre-duplication branch yielded a median ds value of
0.3162. E. lucius sequences clearly diverge from the S.
salar paralogs to a much greater extent than the S. salar
paralogs diverge from each other. This again is consistent
with the WGD occurring in salmonids but not in ecosids.
The few values that are less than zero are presumably a
result of the variation in the divergence of the three
sequences with respect to one another and chance convergent substitutions.
To pursue the observation in Figure 4b showing a relaxation of selection following gene duplication (green line)
and operating under the assumption that one duplicate
could be retained and preserve its original function, freeing the other to diverge [56], the two post-duplicate
branches were separated into two groups; one member of

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

Page 8 of 17

Figure 4 Frequencies of dS and ω values for comparisons within S. salar and E. lucius gene trios. (A) Distributions of dS values from pairwise comparisons within gene trios: between S. salar paralogs (green) and between each of the two S. salar paralogs and its corresponding E. lucius ortholog
(gray and black). (B) Distributions of dN/dS ratios (ω) from pairwise comparisons within gene trios: between S. salar paralogs (green) and between each
of the two S. salar paralogs and its corresponding E. lucius ortholog (gray and black). (C) Distributions of dS values separated into individual tree branches based on gene trios. Values from pairwise comparisons were used to calculate silent substitution rates for periods before and after the salmonid
tetraploidization event. The light blue curve represents frequencies of dS values from the duplication event to one S. salar paralog, the red curve from
the duplication event to the other paralog, and the black curve prior to the genome duplication to the E. lucius ortholog. (D) Distributions of dN/dS
ratios separated into branches where one S. salar paralog, that which has the lower ω value, is considered to be a slow branch (light blue curve) and
the other paralog (red curve) is considered to be more quickly diverging (fast branch for the purposes of labelling). The black curve displays frequencies of ω values between the E. lucius ortholog and the genome duplication.

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

each pair represented the slow branch (i.e. the branch
with the lower ω, indicating more purifying selection)
and the other member represented the fast branch (i.e.
with the higher ω, indicating possibly relaxed selection).
While this method of sorting duplicate genes is somewhat arbitrary, the results can be reviewed with respect
to an ancestral branch leading to E. lucius. Selection values (ω) for the fast and slow duplicates along with the
ancestral branch were calculated for each gene set and
the frequency of ω values plotted in Figure 4d. In the slow
S. salar branch (light blue) the median ω was 0.0760 and
in the ancestral branch (black) the median ω was 0.0896.
While the slow branch and pre-duplication branch do differ significantly from each other in terms of the means of
the ranks of the data (Kruskal-Wallis test, P = 0.00623),
the slow branch has a very similar median ω to the preduplication condition. The fast branch, on the other
hand, has a much higher average ω (red curve, median =
0.2063) than both of the other branches. These results are
consistent with the view that after the WGD there was little change in the evolutionary rate for one member of the
pair; though in many cases, the rate of incorporation of
non-synonymous changes increased dramatically for the
other member. Despite a high level of variation, these
data suggest that there is some asymmetry in evolutionary pressures on paralogs.
Gene Ontology analysis

In order to determine if there were ontological categories
that were enriched for gene pairs that were subjected to
more asymmetrical rates of evolution than others, Gene
Ontology terms [57] were found for two groups of gene
sets: those that had high fold differences (> 3x; n = 67) in
the ω values found for the two S. salar branches and those
that had low or no fold differences (<1.75x; n = 61). The
results are shown in Table 2. For the most part, the two
groups are populated by categories with similar proportions. A few notable exceptions include a larger proportion of genes involved in nucleic acid metabolic processes
(GO:0006139) in the high fold-change group relative to
the low. Likewise, the low fold-change group has a higher
proportion of "other" metabolic processes (various IDs)
such as lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. However, the
relatively low number of genes in most categories limits
the possibilities in this study of correlating ontological
terms with specific patterns of evolution.

Discussion
The objectives of this study were to: 1) characterize a
large unambiguous set of reference gene sequences to
compare with alleles and duplicates in S. salar, genes in
other salmonid species, and genes in more distantly
related fish species; 2) expand genomic resources for a
representative member of the closest non-tetraploidized

Page 9 of 17

fish group (Esociformes: E. lucius) to provide a reference
for the study of WGD in salmonids; and 3) identify patterns of change in the evolution of duplicated genes in the
autotetraploid S. salar.
Genome duplications have a profound impact on the
physiology, reproductive biology, ecology and evolution
of a species. Salmonids (11 genera and 66 species) [1] are
one of the most economically important and most studied groups of fish. A purported WGD in their common
ancestor between 25-100 million years ago [35], after the
separation from esocids, plays a prominent role in understanding the biology of this group. The different salmonid
species are currently in the process of reverting to a stable
diploid state through deletions and rearrangements
[17,32-34]. In the absence of a completed genome, there
is a significant problem in distinguishing among numerous duplicates, alleles and other very similar sequences.
The integrity of genes resulting from assembling large
numbers of partial mRNA sequences (ESTs) remains
open to question. To resolve this problem, a collection of
reference genes containing CDS and flanking UTRs coming from single, completely characterized cDNA clones
provides an essential resource in gene identification,
future genome annotation, and the study of evolutionary
patterns.
An analysis of existing EST data from S. salar led to
estimates of 10,026 FLcDNA contig consensus sequences.
However, these contigs may represent an amalgamation
of many unique transcript products with high similarity,
rather than a single unique allele. 9,057 S. salar reference
FLcDNA clones were determined in this study to resolve
this issue. These FLcDNA sequences represent a significant community resource, adding to the current knowledge base on salmonid biology. These sequences can also
serve as scaffolding with which to aid in genomic
sequencing and creation of physical maps in other salmonids. The increasing popularity of microarrays in gene
expression experiments has allowed for more precise
control of probe design and information on full-length
sequences enables probes to be optimally designed with
higher specificity. An increase in probe-binding specificity reduces unwanted cross-species interactions. Salmonid research benefits from a fuller characterization of S.
salar genes.
To expand evolutionary studies of salmonids, 29,221 E.
lucius ESTs were obtained and when combined with the
existing 3,612 EST sequences (32,833 total), 11,662 contigs and 1,365 FLcDNA reference sequences were identified. This resource not only provides an important initial
genetic foundation for the study of pike throughout
North America, Europe and Asia, but also provides
essential information on a diploid reference species for
the study of WGD in salmonids.

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

Page 10 of 17

Table 2: Proportions of genes in GO categories
Categories

ID

localization (transport, cell motion)

GO:0051179

11

16.4%

10

16.4%

nucleic acid metabolism

GO:0006139

10

14.9%

3

4.9%

protein metabolism

GO:0019538

6

9.0%

6

9.8%

other metabolic process

Multiple IDs

8

11.9%

16

26.2%

development

GO:0032502

6

9.0%

5

8.2%

translation

GO:0006142

6

9.0%

4

6.6%

transcription

GO:0006350

5

7.5%

3

4.9%

apoptosis

GO:0006915

3

4.5%

5

8.2%

response to stimulus

GO:0050896

4

6.0%

2

3.3%

cell proliferation

GO:0008283

3

4.5%

2

3.3%

cell cycle

GO:0007049

3

4.5%

2

3.3%

signal transduction

GO:0007165

2

3.0%

3

4.9%

67

100%

61

100%

Total

High fold-changes

Low fold-changes

Gene Ontology terms are given for gene trios in which there is a high fold-change in ω between paralogs (asymmetrically evolving duplicates)
or a low fold-change in ω (symmetrically evolving duplicates). The proportions of genes contained within Gene Ontology categories are
compared between the two groups. Nucleic acid metabolism (GO:0006139) is more highly represented in asymmetrically evolving gene
duplicates.

In this study, the FLcDNA sequences from S. salar
along with homologous data from E. lucius were used to
analyze evolutionary trends in some of the genes in the
pseudotetraploid genome of S. salar. While the salmon
genome may still be in the process of returning to a stable
diploid state, it is evident that many gene duplicates have
been retained. The peak in Figure 4c indicates a collection of genes that arose from a duplication event after the
separation of esocids from a salmonid ancestor. These
genes are likely to be still active because the data for this
study are based on mRNA, EST-derived sequences.
It is interesting to note that both Morin et al. [37] and
the present study started with approximately 10,000 fulllength transcripts. By selecting a subset of sequence clusters that fulfil alignment and homology criteria, both
studies ended up with only 400-450 gene sets. This ~4%
yield is due in part to the strict criteria for usable
sequences as well as the more limited E. lucius dataset

from which to draw sequences. Further investigation
should be undertaken to determine if both X. laevis and
S. salar have retained similar proportions of gene duplicates, which would be of great interest in understanding
responses to tetraploidization events. The numerous
other species in the salmonid family provide an opportunity to facilitate finer analysis of the genome duplication,
once additional data have been gathered for them. Moreover, the additional gene sets that contained more than
two S. salar sequences in addition to the E. lucius
ortholog (approximately 300 sets) could be studied to
gain an understanding of some of the smaller scale duplication events or potentially more ancestral WGDs.
Over the last century, many individuals and groups
have developed ideas about gene duplication in evolution
and its importance in expanding on existing biological
functions [58]. A central model that has been strongly
supported by Ohno [56] states that a duplicate gene can

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

accumulate mutations and become non-functional (nonfunctionalization) or diverge to a novel function (neofunctionalization) while the other duplicate keeps its
original function. Other models have been proposed
including sub-functionalization [59,60], where both
duplicates accumulate mutations resulting in complementary expression, leaving each copy with its own subfunction. It is of interest to look for signatures of different
types of selection in order to better understand models
that may be directing the fates of one or both paralogs.
Based on the observation that the genes under investigation are in fact being transcribed to some degree in S.
salar, it would be expected that purifying selection would
be acting on both duplicates. The vast majority of ω values that are presented (Figure 4) are much less than one.
It is apparent that negative selection is the predominant
force in this evolutionary process as was also found in the
similar analysis done by Morin et al. [37]. However, relative to the state of the genes before the duplication, there
is significant relaxation of selective pressure on at least
some of the paralogs, suggesting reduced constraints.
This relaxation is consistent with the idea that having
redundancy in the genome will result in increased freedom for divergence [56,58]. These trends could facilitate
neo-functionalization or modification of existing functionality taking place in some of the paralogs.
Data in this study provide evidence that selection constraints are not acting on both gene duplicates to the
same extent. In a number of the 408 gene sets examined,
one paralog may be relaxed, while it appears that the
other is maintained to roughly the same degree as the
pre-duplication single-copy gene. This asymmetrical pattern of evolution has recently been observed in specific
Hox clusters in S. salar [61] as well as in earlier genomewide studies in other organisms such as Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans [39].
The question that results from this observation centers
around the fate of these duplicate genes that are operating under relaxed selection. The paralogs that were studied are still being transcribed and are presumably
functional (with the possible exception of some rarely
transcribed pseudogenes) and have not been subject to
non-functionalization. Duplicates that were deleted since
the WGD would not be observed and neither would the
presumably large number of duplicates that have become
pseudogenes. Conclusive evidence for a general trend of
positive selection was not found for the set of genes, since
nearly all ω values were much less than one, though there
were a few higher post-duplication values that suggested
some duplicates may have been influenced by directional
selection. The few genes that did have an ω value greater
than one showed no enrichment for an ontological category (data not shown). Turunen et al. [40] looked at
asymmetrically evolving gene duplicates in yeast and

Page 11 of 17

found evidence for relaxation of selective pressure, subfunctionalization, and even neo-functionalization,
though the average ω was significantly less than one.
Therefore, it is not surprising that a strong signature of
diversifying selection was not detected. Positive selection
that may have occurred over a small region or short
period of time could be masked by a larger overall pattern
of negative selection. For example, once a neo-functionalization event has occurred, purifying selection would act
to maintain that new function in the long term. Indeed,
Hughes et al. [62] reported 30-50 million years of divergence to be the upper limit of detection of positive selection in eukaryotes using dN/dS analysis. Looking at a
variety of salmonid species in a comparative fashion
could enable a higher resolution study of changes in evolutionary pressures and may provide more clues as to the
events that took place in the duplicated genes soon after
the tetraploidization. In addition, other groups [63,64]
have studied polyploidization in Xenopus species using
some alternative methods that may be applicable to S.
salar in future efforts. One example was using transversion rates at four-fold synonymous codon positions (4
DTv) to measure evolutionary divergence, though saturation of mutations at synonymous sites was not a problem
for the present study.
Functional gene groups defined by Gene Ontology
terms were found for S. salar gene duplicates that displayed either substantial or very small to no differences in
selection constraints (i.e. evolving asymmetrically or
symmetrically, respectively). The proportions of genes
falling into the defined categories were generally quite
similar (Table 2). However, one interesting result was the
higher percentage of genes involved in nucleic acid metabolic processes (GO:0006139) (e.g. RNA processing and
DNA metabolism) in the group of gene sets in which a
large difference in selection constraints was identified. In
this case, the conclusion that nucleic acid metabolism
genes were more often present in the asymmetrical group
than the symmetrical group would be consistent with
earlier studies, which found that nucleic acid processing
and nucleoside metabolism functional groups were selectively lost after whole genome duplications in X. laevis
and A. thaliana. This suggests that nucleic acid processing and nucleoside metabolism functional groups of
genes may have a greater chance of conferring dosage
sensitivity [37,38].

Conclusions
During the rediploidization after a WGD in the common
ancestor of the salmonids, many gene duplicates were
retained. There is strong evidence that purifying selection
is the predominant force acting on these gene duplicates.
However, there is also evidence that this selection has
been relaxed significantly in genes after the duplication.

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

Furthermore, the relaxation of selection occurred in an
asymmetrical manner, preferentially allowing the divergence of one duplicate over the other. Though more
research is needed to gain a higher resolution picture of
the fates of the retained duplicates, these results add to
the body of knowledge surrounding models of evolution
following genome duplications and shed more light on
the complex salmonid genome.

Methods
The sequence data from this study have been submitted
to GenBank's dbEST [65] and core nucleotide databases
under search terms 'salmo salar [orgn] AND leong' and
'esox lucius [orgn] AND leong' for S. salar and E. lucius,
respectively. The corresponding author may also be contacted for GenBank accession numbers.
Tissues, RNA, and Sampling

Adult S. salar tissues (brain, kidney, spleen) were
obtained from Robert Devlin at the Department of Fisheries and Oceans (WestVan Lab, West Vancouver, British
Columbia). Adult E. lucius tissues (head kidney, spleen,
heart, gill) were obtained from Frank Koop at Charlie
Lake (Fort St. John, British Columbia). Tissues were rapidly dissected, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen or dry ice,
and stored at -80°C until RNA extraction.
cDNA Libraries

Three full-length, non-normalized cDNA libraries were
constructed using a full-length cDNA library protocol
(Research Genetics Inc.). This protocol employed an
enrichment of 5'-CAPed mRNA which prevents truncated mRNA from being reverse-transcribed, followed by
transfer of intact double-stranded cDNAs directly into
the library vector using Gateway® recombination cloning.
An estimated 65-85% of the clones were full-length [50].
Different mRNA size fractions were used in the construction of the three libraries. The libraries were created
using transcripts between 0.6 to 1.1 kb (rgg), 1.1 to 2.0 kb
(rgh) and > 2.2 kb (rgf ). The cDNA libraries were directionally constructed (5' M13 Forward, 3' M13 Reverse) in
pENTR222 vector (Research Genetics Inc.).
The E. lucius library (evq) was made from head kidney,
spleen, heart and gill cDNAs that were normalized and
directionally cloned (5' M13 Forward, 3' SP6) in pAL17.3
vector (Evrogen Co.). Sequences from a previously characterized E. lucius brain, kidney, and spleen library [33]
were also utilized.
Sequencing, Sequence Analysis, and Contig Assembly

Clone libraries were plated and robotically arrayed in
384-well plates as detailed previously [33]. Plasmid DNAs
were extracted and BigDye Terminator (ABI) cycle
sequenced on ABI 3730 sequencers using conventional

Page 12 of 17

procedures and the following primers: 5'-T18-3', M13
forward
(5'-GTAAAACGACGGCCAGT-3'),
M13
reverse (5'-AACAGCTATGACCAT-3' or 5'-CAGGAAACAGCTATGAC-3'), and SP6WAN (5'-ATTTAGGTGACACTATAG-3') for 3' end sequencing of Evrogen
libraries. Base-calling was performed using PHRED
[66,67] on chromatogram traces. Vector, polyA tails, and
low quality regions were trimmed from EST sequences.
Short (100 bp) low quality sequences were discarded.
Assembly of S. salar ESTs into contigs employed twostage processing using PHRAP (Figure 1 parts 1-2) [33].
CAP3 [68], using default parameters, was employed for a
single assembly of E. lucius ESTs in place of the PHRAP
two-stage approach, the purpose of which is to handle
WGD transcriptomes.
FLcDNA contig identification

The analysis of full-length transcripts began with all EST
contig sequences. Since each contig represents a potential
transcript, it must be determined if a transcript is complete or incomplete. A complete or full-length transcript
contains an entire CDS for a gene product, along with the
flanking 5' and 3' UTR. Incomplete transcripts are mRNA
that have not been fully reverse-transcribed during
cDNA library creation, and therefore may not contain the
complete CDS or the 5' UTR. Because of the selection for
polyA tails during cDNA library creation, both incomplete and complete transcripts contain a polyA tail.
Inherent experimental errors in the reverse transcription
step during cloning result in 5' incomplete cDNA inserts.
Using an e-value filter of e ≤ 10-5, the top ten SwissProt
high-scoring segment pairs (HSPs) from BLASTX for
each contig were analyzed in succession to identify the
correct open reading frame (Figure 1 part 3). Full database protein matches must be contained within a fulllength transcript sequence. HSPs often do not match a
homologous protein in its entirety. This situation exists
for the following reasons: i) a transcript is incomplete; ii)
a transcript represents a pseudogene; iii) a transcript represents a novel gene product, but contains a domain common to an existing non-homologous protein. In cases
where the match region between a transcript query and a
subject protein sequence does not fully encompass the
length of the subject protein, the two complete sequences
are checked to determine whether the 5' end of the transcript extends beyond the 5' end of the known database
reference protein sequence. In situations where the transcript is not long enough to accommodate the full database protein length, transcripts are disregarded from
further FLcDNA consideration (Figure 1 part 4). In cases
where the transcript is long enough to contain the known
database reference protein, the transcript is kept for further analysis.

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

An ORF is a single continuous region on a processed
transcript sequence that encodes a complete protein.
These regions are defined by a start codon (ATG) and end
with an in-frame (non-coding) stop codon (TAG, TAA,
or TGA). When a potential start codon is identified, a
corresponding in-frame stop codon is verified to complete an ORF. Stop codons found upstream of the start
are useful but not essential in defining the proper coding
region. Start codon positions are determined by examination of ATG motifs present upstream, in-frame or within
30 bp downstream of the beginning of the aligned reference protein. Coding regions often contain multiple
methionine codons, which may obscure prediction of a
start codon. If a methionine codon is not found between
the first upstream stop codon and the predicted start
codon, it is assumed that the start codon is correct. If a
methionine is found upstream of the predicted start
codon and still is in-frame with the downstream stop
codon, this new ATG motif position is assigned as the
correct start codon. Once a start codon is identified, a
corresponding in-frame stop codon is verified to form the
completed ORF (Figure 1 part 5).
Reference FLcDNA identification

Complete transcripts whose coding regions can be fully
represented by a single cDNA clone sequence are considered reference FLcDNAs. These FLcDNAs contain 5' and
3' UTRs flanking an ORF that matches or is consistent
with a known protein identified by a BLASTX similarity
search.
Subsequent to the initial clustering and annotation of
434,384 ESTs to establish the putative transcript set,
three full-length cap-trapped libraries (rgg, rgh, rgf ) were
created and bi-directionally sequenced. Of these libraries,
rgf ESTs were assembled, using PHRAP, to produce transcripts to be compared to the established set of 81,398
putative transcripts [33]. The clone reads from the original libraries that were used to produce the putative transcript set were mapped back, via local alignment, to this
putative set to determine which clones contained a reference FLcDNA insert. Library rgf was also mapped back to
the putative transcript set. Reads from identical clones
that map against the same putative transcript and contain
sequence overlap are considered to be from a reference
clone. If the forward and reverse reads from the same
clone both overlap an identical region of the transcript,
that clone is classified as being complete. There are cases
where clones have forward and reverse reads that do not
overlap when mapped to the same transcript. In this scenario, a gap exists between the reads when mapped to the
cluster, suggesting an area for which primers can be
designed for further sequencing. These clones are known
as incomplete clones, and formed a subset of 4,380 rgf
clones that were later resequenced to completion. Librar-

Page 13 of 17

ies rgg and rgh were not included in any of these comparisons but were analyzed on an individual clone basis
(discussed below).
The 81,398 putative transcripts were established using
a two-stage EST clustering process [33]. As a result, the
second-stage assembly begins with sequences from the
first-stage assembly. Prior to assembly, gaps from the
sequence set need to be removed. As a result of a twostage assembly, not only does one lose gaps that initially
may have been introduced, but EST read names are also
lost. The modification of gaps in assembled sequences
affects the positions in the reads the assemblies are composed of. To recalculate read positions and reference
FLcDNA clones, a local alignment of all reads from all
libraries (except rgg, rgh) was performed against the
putative second-stage transcript set of 81,398 sequences.
Reads from identical clones that map against the same
transcript set corresponding to FLcDNA contigs, regardless of sequence overlap, are determined (Figure 1 part 6).
All 6,081 complete (overlapping reads) clones (Figure 1
part 7) that flanked the entire predicted ORF region, in
the set of 10,026 FLcDNAs, are selected and form the reference FLcDNA clone set. In this set, more than one
complete reference clone may map to a single transcript.
Therefore, to produce a non-redundant set of complete
FLcDNA reference clones, only the longest complete reference clone that maps to a specific transcript is selected.
In the case where clones are of equal length, the clones
are simply chosen according to alphabetical order, resulting in 5,853 non-redundant reference clones that are
unique to a single transcript (Figure 1 part 8).
Reference FLcDNA identification using individual clone
assembly

In addition to analyzing reference FLcDNA clones via
transcript mapping, two full-length libraries (rgg, rgh)
and a single fully sequenced full-length library subset
(incomplete clones from rgf ) were examined. Each of
these three S. salar libraries was analyzed independently.
Clones were assembled individually so that reads that
were already known to be from the same clone could be
explicitly allowed to join, while erroneous additions of
other sequences could be minimized. Using this method,
libraries rgg, rgh, and a portion of rgf clones that were
selected to be resequenced were analyzed independently
from each other. For all sequence reads from rgg and rgh
libraries, individual clone PHRAP assemblies [69] (minscore 8, repeat stringency 99%) were performed (Figure 2
part 1).
The subset of 4,380 selected rgf library clones were fully
resequenced (minimum PHRED 20 for entire sequence)
[66,67]. Those clones that contained a gap or the end
sequences were of poor quality were rearrayed to a 384well plate for further finishing via primer-walking. All

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

sequences from this fully-sequenced group could therefore be directly selected for further full-length analysis.
Redundancy was minimized by performing an all versus all pairwise BLASTN comparison per library. Transcripts that showed greater or equal to 98% similarity
over 200 bp were considered redundant. For sets of
redundant transcripts, the longest sequence was taken as
the non-redundant representative (Figure 2 part 5).
Reference FLcDNA assessment

To properly assess reference FLcDNAs, sequences were
checked for polyA tails. A polyA tail is defined as a 3'
region of 15 or more consecutive "A" resides. If such a
polyA tail was detected, those sequences were deleted as
well as all subsequent downstream sequence.
For S. salar and E. lucius, reference FLcDNAs that
could be confirmed by a contig sequence were identified.
Using BLASTN to determine matches, each reference
FLcDNA set was compared to its contig assembly. Reference FLcDNAs that showed 100% similarity over ≥ 95% of
its sequence were considered to be identical. Those that
did not possess confirmed identity were categorized as
unique reference FLcDNAs.
Selection of homologous genes

The 10,026 full-length S. salar cDNA contigs were used
to identify homologous sequences and construct sets
containing two paralogs from S. salar and one ortholog
from E. lucius for determination of synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution rates. It was necessary to start
with known full-length contigs in order to be certain of
the translation frame and ORF in the E. lucius and S.
salar ESTs. Full-length sequences with the same accession number as another were removed from the query set
resulting in a set of 5,219 unique contigs. This was
because sequences with the same annotation would be
likely to return the same cluster of ESTs when used to
identify homologous sequences. The full-length
sequences were translated to protein using ORF information. A TBLASTN was performed using these amino acid
sequences as queries against a translated nucleotide database consisting of all of the S. salar and E. lucius EST contig assemblies, 93,060 in total. An e-value of 10-10 or less
was required for a match and 100 matches for each query
were considered. The contigs corresponding to the
BLAST matches were gathered into clusters, one cluster
for each query sequence. As a preliminary screening
function, the BLAST alignment was checked for percent
coverage of the length of the amino acid query sequence.
If the alignment covered 50% or greater, it was put into
the cluster; otherwise, the alignment was discarded.
BLAST information (hit region, frame of translation, and
percent positive and identical matches) for each hit was
retained. Each group of contigs was then translated using

Page 14 of 17

the frame information from the TBLASTN results and
the resulting amino acid sequences were put into another
cluster. Thus two corresponding sets of clusters were created, one protein and one nucleotide.
Determination of alignment regions

The DNA sequences in each individual cluster were
trimmed to a common region of alignment with respect
to the query protein sequence. The sequence that had the
longest local alignment was compared with the sequence
with the next longest alignment, and the common aligned
region was retained, potentially trimming one or both
ends of either sequence. This was repeated with
sequences having shorter and shorter alignments until a
common region was found for that cluster. The minimum
length of the alignment was 300 bp; if a sequence's alignment would cause the common region to drop below 300
bp, that contig was removed entirely. In addition, the
original TBLASTN alignment was required to have at
least 75% positive amino acid matches. This same process
was done on the protein sequences to get the same alignment regions using 100 residues as the minimum length.
Sequence alignment

The trimmed protein sequences were aligned using
ClustalW with default parameters [70]. Using the ClustalW alignments and the nucleotide clusters, RevTrans
was used to create codon-aware DNA alignments [71].
The alignments were further screened for the presence of
alleles and very similar sequences as well as odd
sequences that did not closely match the cluster. This filtering was done by aligning each sequence in the cluster
with every other sequence. If an alignment showed
greater than 98% identity or less than 60% identity or the
alignment was shorter than 90% of the length of the longer sequence, the sequence was dropped from the cluster.
dN/dS estimation

Only the final alignments containing one sequence from
E. lucius and two sequences from S. salar were used in
the analysis, 408 in total. The 408 clusters with the
required three sequences were then converted from
FASTA format to a sequential alignment form that the
PAML package could use as input. The YN00 program in
the PAML package was used with default parameters on
each gene trio to determine dN and dS rates [72]. In addition, ω (dN/dS) values for the individual branches of the
tree were estimated based on the formulae
d S ( AO) = (d S ( AC) + d S ( AB) − d S (BC)) / 2

(1)

d N ( AO) = (d N ( AC) + d N ( AB) − d N (BC)) / 2 (2)

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

w = dN / dS

Page 15 of 17

(3)

where A and B are the extant paralogs, C is the extant
ortholog, and O is the point of gene duplication [73].

7.

8.

9.

Gene Ontology analysis

Gene Ontology terms were found for the sequences that
had the highest fold-change in ω between the post-duplication branches (> 3x; n = 67) as well as the lowest foldchanges (<1.75x; n = 61). BLASTX searches [74] were
performed on sequences against the SwissProt database
[51]. Gene Ontology terms were taken from Entrez Gene
[75] for the top hit using e ≤ 10-10.

10.

11.

12.

Additional material
13.
Additional file 1 Sequence data for gene trios. Sequence data for all
gene trios used in the analysis are provided in FASTA format as a text file
named gene_trio_seqs.txt. Each gene trio contains three nucleotide
sequences from E. lucius and S. salar with a header containing species identifier and a unique contig number (e.g. >eluc_5216861). Sequences are
aligned and can be directly translated.
Authors' contributions
JSL and SGJ carried out the in silico analyses and drafted the manuscript. KRvS,
GAC, and AMM coordinated design, preparation and sequencing of libraries.
NYL, SM, RM, SJMJ, and RAH performed large-scale sequencing. BFK and WSD
conceived of the study, participated in its design and coordination, and helped
to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This project was funded by Genome Canada and Genome BC. Special thanks
to Niko Rebenich for additional statistical analysis, to Robert Devlin and Frank
Koop for tissue samples, and John Taylor for his contributions to the manuscript.
Author Details
1Biology, Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Victoria, Victoria, British
Columbia, V8W 3N5 Canada, 2Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 4E6 Canada and 3Molecular Biology and
Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6
Canada
Received: 22 December 2009 Accepted: 30 April 2010
Published: 30 April 2010

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

© 2010 Leong et al; licensee http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279
This is an Open2010, 11:279 BioMed Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC article is available from: distributed under the
Genomics Access article

References
1. Nelson JS: Fishes of the world. 4th edition. John Wiley & Sons, New York;
2006.
2. Handeland SO, Berge Å, Björnsson BTh, Stefansson SO: Effects of
temperature and salinity on osmoregulation and growth of Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar L.) smolts in seawater. Aquaculture 1998,
168:289-302.
3. Hutchings JA, Jones MEB: Life history variation and growth rate
thresholds for maturity in Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar. Can J Fish Aquat
Sci 1998, 55(Suppl 1):22-47.
4. Boeuf G, Le Bail PY: Does light have an influence on fish growth?
Aquaculture 1999, 177(1-4):129-152.
5. Mommsen TP, Vijayan MM Moon TW: Cortisol in teleosts: dynamics,
mechanisms of action, and metabolic regulation. Rev Fish Biol Fisher
1999, 9(3):211-268.
6. Norris AT, Bradley DG, Cunningham EP: Microsatellite genetic variation
between and within farmed and wild Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar)
populations. Aquaculture 1999, 180(3-4):247-264.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Garant D, Dodson JJ, Bernatchez L: Ecological determinants and
temporal stability of the within-river population structure in Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar L.). Mol Ecol 2000, 9(5):615-628.
Sutton SG, Bult TP, Haedrich RL: Relationships among fat weight, body
weight, water weight, and condition factors in wild Atlantic salmon
parr. T Am Fish Soc 2000, 129(2):527-538.
Bell JG, McEvoy J, Tocher DR, McGhee F, Campbell PJ, Sargent JR:
Replacement of fish oil with rapeseed oil in diets of Atlantic salmon
(Salmo salar) affects tissue lipid compositions and hepatocyte fatty
acid metabolism. J Nutr 2001, 131(5):1535-1543.
King TL, Kalinowski ST, Schill WB, Spidle AP, Lubinski BA: Population
structure of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.): a range-wide perspective
from microsatellite DNA variation. Mol Ecol 2001, 10(4):807-821.
Landry C, Garant D, Duchesne P, Bernatchez L: 'Good genes as
heterozygosity': the major histocompatibility complex and mate
choice in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). P Roy Soc B-Biol Sci 2001,
268(1473):1279-1285.
Jacobs MN, Covaci A, Schepens P: Investigation of selected persistent
organic pollutants in farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), salmon
aquaculture feed, and fish oil components of the feed. Environ Sci
Technol 2002, 36(13):2797-2805.
Bernatchez L, Landry C: MHC studies in nonmodel vertebrates: what
have we learned about natural selection in 15 years? J Evolutionary Biol
2003, 16(3):363-377.
Grimholt U, Larsen S, Nordmo R, Midtlyng P, Kjoeglum S, Storset A, Saebo
S, Stet RJM: MHC polymorphism and disease resistance in Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar); facing pathogens with single expressed major
histocompatibility class I and class II loci. Immunogenetics 2003,
55(4):210-219.
Moore A, Scott AP, Lower N, Katsiadaki I, Greenwood L: The effects of 4nonylphenol and atrazine on Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L) smolts.
Aquaculture 2003, 222:253-263.
Krogdahl A, Hemre GI, Mommsen TP: Carbohydrates in fish nutrition:
digestion and absorption in postlarval stages. Aquacult Nutr 2006,
11(2):103-122.
Ng SHS, Artieri CG, Bosdet IE, Chiu R, Danzmann RG, Davidson WS,
Ferguson MM, Fjell CD, Høyheim B, Jones SJM, de Jong PJ, Koop BF,
Krzywinski MI, Lubieniecki K, Marra MA, Mitchell LA, Mathewson C,
Osoegawa K, Parisotto SE, Phillips RB, Rise ML, von Schalburg KR, Schein JE,
Shin H, Siddiqui A, Thorsen J, Wye N, Yang G, Zhu B: A physical map of the
genome of Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar. Genomics 2005, 86:396-404.
Zheng XZ, Torstensen BE, Tocher DR, Dick JR, Henderson RJ, Bell JG:
Environmental and dietary influences on highly unsaturated fatty acid
biosynthesis and expression of fatty acyl desaturase and elongase
genes in liver of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta-molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids 2005, 1734(1):13-24.
Derome N, Duchesne P, Bernatchez L: Parallelism in gene transcription
among sympatric lake whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis Mitchill)
ecotypes. Mol Ecol 2006, 15(5):1239-1249.
Jorgensen SM, Lyng-Syvertsen B, Lukacs M, Grimholt U, Gjoen T:
Expression of MHC class I pathway genes in response to infectious
salmon anaemia virus in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) cells. Fish
Shellfish Immun 2006, 21(5):548-560.
Lukacs MF, Harstad H, Grimholt U, Beetz-Sargent M, Cooper GA, Reid L,
Bakke HG, Phillips RB, Miller KM, Davidson WS, Koop BF: Genomic
organization of duplicated major histocompatibility complex class I
regions in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). BMC Genomics 2007, 8:251.
Harstad H, Lukacs MF, Bakke HG, Grimholt U: Multiple expressed MHC
class II loci in salmonids; details of one non-classical region in Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar). BMC Genomics 2008, 9:193.
von Schalburg KR, Yazawa R, de Boer J, Lubieniecki KP, Goh B, Straub CA,
Beetz-Sargent MR, Robb A, Davidson WS, Devlin RH, Koop BF: Isolation,
characterization and comparison of Atlantic and Chinook salmon
growth hormone 1 and 2. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:522.
Yazawa R, Cooper GA, Beetz-Sargent M, Robb A, McKinnel L, Davidson WS,
Koop BF: Functional adaptive diversity of the Atlantic salmon T-cell
receptor gamma locus. Mol Immunol 2008, 45(8):2150-2157.
Andreassen R, Lunner S, Høyheim B: Characterization of full-length
sequenced cDNA inserts (FLIcs) from Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar).
BMC Genomics 2009, 10:502.

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

26. Mos L, Cooper GA, Serben K, Cameron M, Koop BF: Effects of diesel on
survival, growth, and gene expression in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) fry. Environ Sci Technol 2008, 42:2656-2662.
27. Klemetsen A, Amundsen PA, Dempson JB, Jonsson B, Jonsson N, Connell
MF, Mortensen E: Atlantic salmon Salmo salar L., brown trout Salmo
trutta L. and Arctic charr Salvelinus alpinus (L.): a review of aspects of
their life histories. Ecol Freshw Fish 2003, 12(1):1-59.
28. McGinnity P, Prodohl P, Ferguson K, Hynes R, O'Maoileidigh N, Baker N,
Cotter D, O'Hea B, Cooke D, Rogan G, Taggart J, Cross T: Fitness reduction
and potential extinction of wild populations of Atlantic salmon, Salmo
salar, as a result of interactions with escaped farm salmon. P Roy Soc BBiol Sci 2003, 270(1532):2443-2450.
29. Rexroad CE, Lee Y, Keele JW, Karamycheva S, Brown G, Koop B, Gahr SA,
Palti Y, Quackenbush J: Sequence analysis of a rainbow trout cDNA
library and creation of a gene index. Cytogenet Genome Res 2003, 102(14):347-354.
30. Govoroun M, Le Gac F, Guiguen Y: Generation of a large scale repertoire
of Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) from normalised rainbow trout
cDNA libraries. BMC Genomics 2006, 7:196.
31. Adzhubei AA, Vlasov AV, Hagen-Larsen H, Ruden TA, Laerdahl JK, Høyheim
B: Annotated Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) from pre-smolt Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar) in a searchable data resource. BMC Genomics
2007, 8:209.
32. Danzmann RG, Davidson EA, Ferguson MM, Gharbi K, Koop BF, Høyheim
B, Lien S, Lubieniecki KP, Moghadam HK, Park J, Phillips RB, Davidson WS:
Distribution of ancestral proto-Actinopterygian chromosome arms
within the genomes of 4R-derivative salmonid fishes (Rainbow trout
and Atlantic salmon). BMC Genomics 2008, 9:557.
33. Koop BF, von Schalburg KR, Leong J, Walker N, Lieph R, Cooper GA, Robb
A, Beetz-Sargent M, Holt RA, Moore R, Brahmbhatt S, Rosner J, Rexroad CE,
McGowan CR, Davidson WS: A salmonid EST genomic study: genes,
duplications, phylogeny and microarrays. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:545.
34. Phillips RB, Keatley KA, Morasch MR, Ventura AB, Lubieniecki KP, Koop BF,
Danzmann RG, Davidson WS: Assignment of Atlantic salmon (Salmo
salar) linkage groups to specific chromosomes: Conservation of large
syntenic blocks corresponding to whole chromosome arms in rainbow
trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). BMC Genet 2009, 10:46.
35. Allendorf FW, Thorgaard GH: Tetraploidy and the evolution of salmonid
fishes. In Evolutionary Genetics of Fishes Edited by: Turner BJ. New York:
Plenum Press; 1984:1-53.
36. de Boer JG, Yazawa R, Davidson WS, Koop BF: Bursts and horizontal
evolution of DNA transposons in the speciation of pseudotetraploid
salmonids. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:422.
37. Morin RD, Chang E, Petrescu A, Liao N, Griffith M, Kirkpatrick R, Butterfield
YS, Young AC, Stott J, Barber S, Babakaiff R, Dickson MC, Matsuo C, Wong
D, Yang GS, Smailus DE, Wetherby KD, Kwong PN, Grimwood J, Brinkley
CP, Brown-John M, Reddix-Dugue ND, Mayo M, Schmutz J, Beland J, Park
M, Gibson S, Olson T, Bouffard GG, Tsai M, Featherstone R, Chand S,
Siddiqui AS, Jang W, Lee E, Klein SL, Blakesley RW, Zeeberg BR,
Narasimhan S, Weinstein JN, Pennacchio CP, Myers RM, Green ED, Wagner
L, Gerhard DS, Marra MA, Jones SJM, Holt RA: Sequencing and analysis of
10,967 full-length cDNA clones from Xenopus laevis and Xenopus
tropicalis reveals post-tetraploidization transcriptome remodeling.
Genome Res 2006, 16:796-803.
38. Maere S, De Bodt S, Raes J, Casneuf T, Van Montagu M, Kuiper M, Peer Y
Van de: Modeling gene and genome duplications in eukaryotes. P Natl
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(15):5454-5459.
39. Conant GC, Wagner A: Asymmetric sequence divergence of duplicate
genes. Genome Res 2003, 13:2052-2058.
40. Turunen O, Seelke R, Macosko J: In silico evidence for functional
specialization after genome duplication in yeast. FEMS Yeast Res 2009,
9:16-31.
41. Fares MA, Byrne KP, Wolfe KH: Rate asymmetry after genome
duplication causes substantial long-branch attraction artifacts in the
phylogeny of Saccharomyces species. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(2):245-253.
42. Ishiguro NB, Miya M, Nishida M: Basal euteleostean relationships: a
mitogenomic perspective on the phylogenetic reality of the
"Protacanthopterygii". Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 27:476-488.
43. López JA, Chen W, Ortí G: Esociform phylogeny. Copeia 2004, 3:449-464.
44. Li C, Lu G, Ortí G: Optimal Data Partitioning and a Test Case for RayFinned Fishes (Actinopterygii) Based on Ten Nuclear Loci. Syst Biol
2008, 57(4):519-539.

Page 16 of 17

45. Phillips R, Ráb P: Chromosome evolution in the Salmonidae (Pisces): an
update. Biol Res 2001, 76:1-25.
46. Mank JE, Avise JC: Phylogenetic conservation of chromosome numbers
in Actinopterygiian fishes. Genetica 2006, 127:321-327.
47. Gregory TR: Animal Genome Size Database. [http://
www.genomesize.com].
48. Rise ML, von Schalburg KR, Brown GD, Mawer MA, Devlin RH, Kuipers N,
Busby M, Beetz-Sargent M, Alberto R, Gibbs AR, Hunt P, Shukin R, Zeznik
JA, Nelson C, Jones SRM, Smailus DE, Jones SJM, Schein JE, Marra MA,
Butterfield YSN, Stott JM, Ng SHS, Davidson WS, Koop BF: Development
and application of a salmonid EST database and cDNA microarray:
Data mining and interspecific hybridization characteristics. Genome
Res 2004, 14(3):478-490.
49. von Schalburg KR, Rise ML, Cooper GA, Brown GD, Nelson CC, Davidson
WS, Koop BF: Fish and chips: Various methodologies demonstrate
utility of a 16,006-gene salmonid microarray. BMC Genomics 2005,
6:126.
50. Invitrogen Full-Length cDNA Library Construction [http://
www.invitrogen.com/site/us/en/home/Products-and-Services/Services/
Molecular-Biology-Services/Library-Construction/Full-Length.html]
51. Bairoch A, Apweiler R: The SWISS-PROT protein sequence data bank and
its supplement TrEMBL in 1998. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26(1):38-42.
52. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman
DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
53. Pesole G, Grillo G, Liuni S: Databases of mRNA untranslated regions for
metazoa. Computers Chem 1996, 20(1):141-144.
54. Mignone F, Gissi C, Liuni S, Pesole G: Untranslated regions of mRNAs.
Genome Biol 2002, 3(3):1-10.
55. Zhang L, Vision TJ, Gaut BS: Patterns of nucleotide substitution among
simultaneously duplicated gene pairs in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol Biol
Evol 2002, 19(9):1464-1473.
56. Ohno S: Evolution by gene duplication New York: Springer-Verlag; 1970.
57. The Gene Ontology Consortium: Gene ontology: tool for the unification
of biology. Nat Genet 2000, 25(1):25-29.
58. Taylor JS, Raes J: Duplication and divergence: The evolution of new
genes and old ideas. Annu Rev Genet 2004, 38:615-643.
59. Hughes AL: The evolution of functionally novel proteins after gene
duplication. P Roy Soc B-Biol Sci 1994, 256:119-124.
60. Force A, Lynch M, Pickett FB, Amores A, Yan Y, Postlethwait J: Preservation
of duplicate genes by complementary, degenerative mutations.
Genetics 1999, 151:1531-1545.
61. Mungpakdee S, Seo H, Angotzi AR, Dong X, Akalin A, Chourrout D:
Differential evolution of the 13 Atlantic salmon Hox clusters. Mol Biol
Evol 2008, 25(7):1333-1343.
62. Hughes AL, Green JA, Garbayo JM, Roberts RM: Adaptive diversification
within a large family of recently duplicated, placentally expressed
genes. P Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97(7):3319-3323.
63. Hellsten U, Khokha MF, Grammer TC, Harland RM, Richardson P, Rokhsar
DS: Accelerated gene evolution and subfunctionalization in the
pseudotetraploid frog Xenopus laevis. BMC Biol 2007, 5:31.
64. Chain FJJ, Ilieva D, Evans BJ: Duplicate gene evolution and expression in
the wake of vertebrate allopolyploidization. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:43.
65. Boguski MS, Lowe TMJ, Tolstoshev CM: dbEST - database for "expressed
sequence tags". Nat Genet 1993, 4:332-333.
66. Ewing B, Green P: Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using
PHRED. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res 1998, 8(3):186-194.
67. Ewing B, Hillier L, Wendl MC, Green P: Base-calling of automated
sequencer traces using PHRED. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res
1998, 8(3):175-185.
68. Huang X, Madan A: CAP3: A DNA sequence assembly program. Genome
Res 1999, 9:868-877.
69. Green P: Documentation for PHRAP. [http://
bozeman.mbt.washington.edu].
70. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight
matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22(22):4673-4680.
71. Wernersson R, Pedersen AG: RevTrans: multiple alignment of coding
DNA from aligned amino acid sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2003,
31(13):3537-3539.

Leong et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/279

72. Yang Z, Nielsen R: Estimating synonymous and nonsynonymous
substitution rates under realistic evolutionary models. Mol Biol Evol
2000, 17(1):32-43.
73. Miyata T, Yasunaga T: Molecular evolution of mRNA: A method for
estimating evolutionary rates of synonymous and amino acid
substitutions from homologous nucleotide sequences and its
application. J Mol Evol 1980, 16:23-36.
74. NCBI Blast [http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov]
75. NCBI Entrez Gene database [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez]
doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-279
Cite this article as: Leong et al., Salmo salar and Esox lucius full-length cDNA
sequences reveal changes in evolutionary pressures on a post-tetraploidization genome BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279

Page 17 of 17

</pre>
</body>
</html>
