<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.6)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Liang M, Nielsen R BMC Biology 2011, 9:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/20

QUESTION & ANSWER	

Open Access

Q&A: Who is H. sapiens really, and how do we know?
Mason Liang* and Rasmus Nielsen*

Is it true that modern humans have Neanderthals
and other archaic species in their direct ancestry?
According to two recently published papers by Green
et al. and Reich et al., the answer to this question is yes.
Human genomes are in part composed of DNA from
other archaic hominin species that traditionally have not
been counted among our ancestors, although the
proportion of archaic DNA in the genome depends on
your ethnicity. On the basis of analyses of ancient DNA,
Green et al. report that, on average, 1 to 5% of the
genomes of non-African individuals are descended from
a Neanderthal, and Reich et al. report that 4 to 6% of the
genomes of Melanesians are derived from a newly
discovered archaic hominin population dubbed the
Denisovans. Denisovans and Neanderthals are the only
archaic species investigated so far, but future
investigations may reveal contributions of DNA from
other species, perhaps even from species that have never
been characterized well morphologically.
What is an archaic hominin, exactly?
Hominins are humans and their closely related extinct
ancestors. Denisovans and Neanderthals were hominins
that last lived approximately 30,000 years ago.
Neanderthal fossils were first found in 1856, in the
Neander Valley, which lends its name to the species.
Since then, specimens have been found in a wide
geographical range, including the Middle East, Central
Asia, and Western and Central Europe. To date, the only
discovered Denisovan remains are the finger bone and
two teeth discovered in Denisova Cave in Siberia. On the
basis of genetic analysis of the finger bone, Reich et al.
conclude that Denisovans represent a deeply diverged
population distinct from other Neanderthals. Whether
Neanderthals and Denisovans comprise separate species
is probably mainly an issue of semantics and, in any case,
cannot be answered without additional Denisovan
samples.

How does this fit with current theories of human
origins?
The question of human origins has intrigued scientists
ever since Darwin first proposed the theory of evolution.
Historically, most of the debate has focused on two
competing hypotheses: the out of Africa (OOA) theory
(Figure 1a) and the multi-regional theory (Figure 1b). The
OOA hypothesis posits that anatomically modern
humans first evolved in Africa 200,000 to 150,000 years
ago and then migrated out of Africa 100,000 to 60,000
years ago, displacing other archaic hominins, and giving
rise to all current human populations. The multi-regional
theory suggests that archaic hominins spread out of
Africa much earlier, and that humans then evolved from
this Eurasia-wide population, with some degree of
interbreeding, and thus gene flow, among individuals
from different populations being responsible for the
degree of genetic differentiation between populations we
currently observe. Mitochondrial (mt) DNA data first
reported in 1987 and subsequent analyses of autosomal
DNA seemed to support the OOA hypothesis.
However, even before the publication of the
Neanderthal genome, analyses of modern human DNA
from different geographic sources by Jeffrey Wall and
others had suggested that, contrary to the earlier
consensus, anatomically modern humans evolved in
Africa recently, but admixed with endemic archaic
hominids – Neanderthals, Denisovans, or even Homo
erectus – as they spread throughout the world (Figure 1c),
and that ancestral admixture may be much more
common than previously thought.
Wall et al. based their analysis on the pattern of
haplotype lengths. After controlling for other
confounding factors, such as demographic history and
recombination rate variation, they concluded that the
observed lengths of these regions could only be
accounted for by archaic admixture on the order of 5%.
The evidence of admixture from Neanderthal and
Denisovan nuclear DNA lends credence to these claims.

*Correspondence: wmliang@berkeley.edu; rasmus_nielsen@berkeley.edu
Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2011 Liang M, Nielsen R; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Modern Humans

Melanasian

Asian

European

African

Denisovan

Neanderthal

Other Archaic Hominin

Melanasian

Asian

European

African

Page 2 of 4

Melanasian

Asian

European

African

Liang M, Nielsen R BMC Biology 2011, 9:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/20

?
?
?

Archaic Humans

a

b

c

Figure 1. Human origins. Each panel shows a hypothesis for the evolutionary history of humans. The colored bars show the phylogenetic
relationships between species, with each color representing a species and blue representing the ancestral hominin species. Arrows represent gene
flow, or admixture, with question marks to indicate possible admixture from as yet undiscovered hominins. (a) The Out of Africa (OOA) hypothesis;
(b) the multiregional hypothesis; (c) a modification of the OOA hypothesis to include the archaic admixture inferred from recent work.

Isn’t it extremely difficult to get authentic
undamaged DNA from individuals dead for over
30,000 years?
Yes. It was necessary to locate samples that had been
buried in cool and dry conditions, under which DNA is
degraded relatively slowly. Even so, for the Neanderthal
samples, most DNA fragments were very short, and
approximately 95 to 99% of the DNA in the samples
belonged to bacteria. To reduce the amount of
sequencing needed, the relative proportion of hominin
DNA was increased by treating the DNA extract with a
concoction of restriction enzymes that were chosen to
cut bacterial DNA preferentially. This increased the
relative proportion of Neanderthal DNA to over 10%.
This enriched extract was analyzed using new-generation
sequencing machines, which produced a draft sequence
with approximately 1.3X coverage – that is, on average,

each base pair in the genome was sequenced 1.3 times.
Because of the random nature of next-generation
sequencing, this means that certain parts of the genome
will not have been sequenced at all, while other parts will
have been sequenced many more times.
The genetic material from the Denisovan individual
was extracted from a finger bone. Because of the cooler
climate in Siberia, there was less environmental
degradation of the DNA. However, the small volume of
the finger bone yielded only enough DNA to sequence
the Denisovan genome to 1.9X coverage.

We must have a lot of DNA in common with archaic
hominins because of our shared ancestry – How
can we infer interbreeding?
If we have two human populations, one of which has
undergone more archaic admixture than the other, then
we expect the more admixed human population to be

Liang M, Nielsen R BMC Biology 2011, 9:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/20

more genetically similar to the archaic hominin than the
other human population. This intuition is formalized by
the ABBA-BABA test. In this statistical test, DNA
representing the same sites in a chimpanzee sequence, an
archaic hominin sequence, and sequences from a pair of
modern human populations, such as Han and Yoruban or
Japanese and French, designated H1 and H2, are
compared. Only sites with two alleles, A and B, are
considered. The chimpanzee is assumed to carry A, the
ancestral allele. Two numbers are then computed, nABBA,
the number of sites where the chimpanzee and one of the
pair of modern humans (H2) have allele A and the archaic
hominin and the other modern human (H1) have allele B
(ABBA) and nBABA, the number of sites where chimpanzee
and H1 have allele A and the archaic hominin and H2
have allele B (BABA). Finally, nABBA and nBABA are added
up over all pairings of H1/H2 samples from the two
human populations being analyzed. If there had been no
archaic admixture, then the difference of these sums is
expected to be 0. If the difference is significantly different
from 0, then the null hypothesis of no admixture is
rejected. Using population genetic models, the admixture
fraction can also be estimated from the magnitude of this
difference. The ABBA-BABA test can then be used for
each pair of human populations to determine the
differences in admixture rates between them.
The results of the ABBA-BABA test showed that
human non-African populations are more closely related
to Neanderthals than African populations. When applied
to the Denisovan genome, Reich et al. found that only
Melanesians showed evidence of admixture.

This seems quite a subtle test – Might these results
be explained by human contamination?
Probably not. Contamination is a serious problem in any
sequencing project. A recent paper by Longo et al.
reports significant human contamination in non-primate
genome databases, and previous analyses of Neanderthal
genetic material have also been plagued by human DNA
contamination.
In the light of this earlier experience, researchers took
several precautions to guard against contamination. The
initial sample preparation and DNA extraction were done
in a clean room, using several procedures to reduce the
chances of modern human DNA contamination. As an
additional step in the sample preparation, special primers
were ligated onto both ends of each fragment, identifying
the fragments. During the sequencing, only reads with
this clean room tag were used to assemble the draft
genome, minimizing the effect of post-clean room
contamination.
The efficacy of these methods was validated using three
different procedures: by looking at mtDNA; by looking
for Y chromosome sequences; and by using statistical

Page 3 of 4

analyses of autosomes. mtDNA is much easier to
sequence because it occurs in much higher concentration
than nuclear DNA. As a result, the Neanderthal mtDNA
sequence can be very accurately determined, and several
fixed differences between humans and Neanderthals have
been identified. These differences can be used to estimate
the ratio of human mtDNA to Neanderthal mtDNA in
the sample. Likewise, because all the samples were
female, the amount of Y chromosomal DNA can be used
to estimate the level of contamination from human
males. Finally, researchers used human heterozygosity
and allele frequency data to directly estimate
contamination in the autosomal DNA. All three methods
estimated the human contamination to be 1% or less.
This is consistent with the results of a blind test in
which Green et al. examined present-day human genetic
variation without knowledge of the Neanderthal
sequence, and were able to locate regions of the human
genome that appeared admixed. Comparison of their
predictions with the Neanderthal data showed that these
candidate regions matched the Neanderthal sequence at
a higher frequency than could be explained by any level
of contamination.

What about DNA damage?
The main problem in dealing with ancient DNA is the
dearth of genetic material. The Neanderthal and Denisovan
genomes could not be sequenced to a higher coverage
not because of a lack of money or time, but because of a
lack of DNA extract; the three bones from Vindija Cave
and the one from Denisova Cave have been completely
hollowed out to produce the genomes reported.
Ancient DNA sequencing typically shows a much high
error rate than observed in modern DNA. Errors in the
reported genome can be caused by degradation of the
DNA from the environment or by sequencing error. In
ancient DNA samples, deamination of cytosine residues
causes C to have the chemical properties of T, and G to
have the chemical properties of A. As a result, the
Neanderthal draft genome shows an abnormally large
number of C→T and G→A substitutions, the vast
majority of which are errors. In sequencing the
Denisovan samples, this deamination was chemically
reversed, allowing the C and G residues to be sequenced
correctly. This, together with the drier and cooler climate
at Denisova Cave, resulted in DNA samples that were
about ten times less damaged.
Sequencing error can also be a problem, as the error
rate of new-generation sequencing is only slightly lower
than the divergence between humans and Neanderthals.
However, this problem will hopefully disappear as newgeneration sequencing technology becomes more
accurate and the discovery of new samples allows for
deeper coverage.

Liang M, Nielsen R BMC Biology 2011, 9:20
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/20

That sounds serious – How confident can we be of
any interpretation if the sequencing error rate and
the divergence are that close?
The statistical analysis of the Neanderthal and Denisovan
genomes was designed with the limitations of the data in
mind. A paper by Durand et al. argues that the ABBABABBA test for admixture is not sensitive to confounding
factors, such as human or Neanderthal demographic
history, sequencing error or damage to the DNA, as long
as the H1 and H2 samples were processed in the same
way. However, one source of concern is the possibility of
a shared error structure caused by DNA sequencing
methods. Current sequencing technology is highly
temperamental, and the frequency and type of sequenc­
ing errors in the final data depend on many factors, such
as sample preparation, the type of sequencing machine,
contamination from local conditions and reagents, and
sequencing coverage. If the error structures of the archaic
DNA and one of the modern human DNA samples are
similar to each other for one of many reasons, the ABBABABA test could report admixture when it did not in fact
occur. Even a very small proportion of shared errors
could cause a strong effect on the ABBA-BABA statistic.
For example, small effects that we typically tend to
ignore, such as shared contamination of reagents
between the samples, could cause artifactual evidence of
admixture. Green et al. and Reich et al. made great efforts
to control for these effects, and appear to have succeeded.
However, the issues of errors in next-generation
sequencing data, particularly for ancient DNA, and their
consequences for current and future inference of low
levels of admixture remain a critical issue that is likely to
be the focus of much future research.
Assuming that we can be confident of the
conclusions of these studies, how much of our
genomes comes from other hominins?
These two papers only investigated the possibility of
admixture from Neanderthals and Denisovans into

Page 4 of 4

humans. It is possible that other archaic hominins,
perhaps as yet undiscovered, also contributed to the
human genome. In fact, Plagnol and Wall report that
there is evidence for significant admixture into African
populations as well, although no candidate species has
been proposed.
On the basis of the data and analyses presented by
Green et al. and Reich et al., it appears that a simple out
of Africa hypothesis with no admixture does not give the
full picture of human origins. As sequencing technology
improves and additional archaeological discoveries are
made, we should be able to gain a more detailed
understanding of what now seems to be the mosaic
ancestry of the human genome.

Where can I find out more?
References
1.	 Green RE, Krause J, Briggs AW, Maricic T, Stenzel U, Kircher M, Patterson N, Li
H, Zhai W, Fritz MH, Hansen NF, Durand EY, Malaspinas AS, Jensen JD,
Marques-Bonet T, Alkan C, Prüfer K, Meyer M, Burbano HA, Good JM, Schultz
R, Aximu-Petri A, Butthof A, Höber B, Höffner B, Siegemund M, Weihmann A,
Nusbaum C, Lander ES, Russ C, et al.: A draft sequence of the Neandertal
genome. Science 2010, 328:710-722.
2.	 Reich D, Green RE, Kircher M, Krause J, Patterson N, Durand EY, Viola B, Briggs
AW, Stenzel U, Johnson PL, Maricic T, Good JM, Marques-Bonet T, Alkan C, Fu
Q, Mallick S, Li H, Meyer M, Eichler EE, Stoneking M, Richards M, Talamo S,
Shunkov MV, Derevianko AP, Hublin JJ, Kelso J, Slatkin M, Pääbo S: Genetic
history of an archaic hominin group from Denisova Cave in Siberia. Nature
2010, 468:1053-1060.
3.	 Durand E, Patterson N, Reich D, Slatkin M: Testing for ancient admixture
between closely related species. Genetics 2011, in press.
4.	 Wall J, Hammer M: Archaic admixture in the human genome. Curr Opinin
Genet Dev 2006, 16:606-610.
5.	 Plagnol V, Wall J: Possible ancestral structure in human populations. PLoS
Genet 2006, 2:972-979.
Published: 31 March 2011

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-20
Cite this article as: Liang M, Nielsen R: Q&A: Who is H. sapiens really, and
how do we know? BMC Biology 2010, 9:20.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
