<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary history of mammalian sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:292. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-292"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jessica E Light"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolutionary history of mammalian sucking lice
(Phthiraptera: Anoplura)
Jessica E Light1,2*, Vincent S Smith3, Julie M Allen2,4, Lance A Durden5, David L Reed2

Abstract
Background: Sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura) are obligate, permanent ectoparasites of eutherian mammals,
parasitizing members of 12 of the 29 recognized mammalian orders and approximately 20% of all mammalian
species. These host specific, blood-sucking insects are morphologically adapted for life on mammals: they are
wingless, dorso-ventrally flattened, possess tibio-tarsal claws for clinging to host hair, and have piercing mouthparts
for feeding. Although there are more than 540 described species of Anoplura and despite the potential
economical and medical implications of sucking louse infestations, this study represents the first attempt to
examine higher-level anopluran relationships using molecular data. In this study, we use molecular data to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of 65 sucking louse taxa with phylogenetic analyses and compare the results
to findings based on morphological data. We also estimate divergence times among anopluran taxa and compare
our results to host (mammal) relationships.
Results: This study represents the first phylogenetic hypothesis of sucking louse relationships using molecular data
and we find significant conflict between phylogenies constructed using molecular and morphological data. We
also find that multiple families and genera of sucking lice are not monophyletic and that extensive taxonomic
revision will be necessary for this group. Based on our divergence dating analyses, sucking lice diversified in the
late Cretaceous, approximately 77 Ma, and soon after the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary (ca. 65 Ma) these lice
proliferated rapidly to parasitize multiple mammalian orders and families.
Conclusions: The diversification time of sucking lice approximately 77 Ma is in agreement with mammalian
evolutionary history: all modern mammal orders are hypothesized to have diverged by 75 Ma thus providing
suitable habitat for the colonization and radiation of sucking lice. Despite the concordant timing of diversification
events early in the association between anoplurans and mammals, there is substantial conflict between the host
and parasite phylogenies. This conflict is likely the result of a complex history of host switching and extinction
events that occurred throughout the evolutionary association between sucking lice and their mammalian hosts.
It is unlikely that there are any ectoparasite groups (including lice) that tracked the early and rapid radiation of
eutherian mammals.

Background
Lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera) are obligate, permanent
ectoparasites of birds and mammals, entirely dependent
upon their vertebrate hosts for survival. Four phthirapteran suborders are recognized: the chewing louse suborders Amblycera, Ischnocera, and Rhynchophthirina,
and the sucking louse suborder Anoplura [1]. As a
group, chewing lice parasitize birds and mammals, and
* Correspondence: jlight2@tamu.edu
1
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

all have chewing mouthparts that they use to feed upon
the skin (feathers, fur, and dander) and sometimes the
blood of their hosts [2]. Sucking lice, in contrast, parasitize only eutherian mammals and they are morphologically adapted for life on their mammal hosts: they are
wingless, dorso-ventrally flattened, possess adaptive
tibio-tarsal claws that are used to cling to host hair, and
have modified piercing mouthparts for feeding. These
ectoparasitic insects are one of only a handful of haematophagous arthropod groups that use their highly
derived mouthparts to feed directly from host blood
vessels [3].

© 2010 Light et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

The blood-feeding habits of sucking lice and the close
association they have with their mammalian hosts are
hypothesized to have evolved via a particular sequence of
events [4-6]. Early in their evolutionary history, sucking
louse ancestors had simple chewing mouthparts and
were free-living associates of the nests and burrows of
vertebrates. These nests and burrows served as protective
habitats as well as a source of unlimited food supplies
such as fungi, dung, and organic debris, specifically
sloughed skin, fur, and feathers [5-7]. Over time, some of
these nest associates became more directly dependent on
their hosts and transitioned from opportunistic associates
to obligate parasites. These parasitic species fed directly
from their hosts, ingesting more nutritious and easier to
digest blood (compared to organic debris such as
sloughed skin and feathers) and subsequently developed
specialized mouthparts modified to obtain blood meals
[2,7]. This succession of events from free-living nest
associates to obligate parasites can be seen by examining
the closest living relatives of the Anoplura, members of
other phthirapteran suborders, and the bark and book
lice (order Psocoptera). The Psocoptera are closely
related to the Phthiraptera (together they form the superorder Psocodea), and these non-parasitic insects often
interact with vertebrate taxa, living in the nests, burrows,
or among the fur and feathers of mammals and birds and
use their chewing mouthparts to feed on fungi or organic
matter [7-10]. Within the Phthiraptera, phylogenetic studies have shown sucking lice to be monophyletic and
derived, nested within the chewing lice and sister to the
Rhynchophthirina, a small suborder of chewing lice
(3 known species) parasitic on warthogs, bush pigs, and
elephants [1,11-13]. Rhynchophthirina species have modified chewing mouthparts attached to the end of a long
proboscis that are used to break through the skin of their
hosts allowing pools of blood to form. These chewing
lice then use their mouthparts to feed on the blood
collected in these pools. Thus, it is likely that sucking lice
evolved from a blood-feeding Rhynchophthirina-like
ancestor with the highly modified anopluran mouthparts
derived from the ancestral chewing mouthparts found in
all other lice [14-16].
When sucking lice began their associations with mammals is uncertain because fossil evidence within the
Phthiraptera is generally lacking [10,17,18]. Psocopteran
groups are hypothesized to have originated in the Mesozoic Era [5,10,18,19], with dates ranging from the Cretaceous (65 Million Years Ago; Ma) as far back to the
Permian (260 Ma) for the origin of the Phthiraptera
[2,4,5,10,18,19]. However, the recent discovery of two
important fossils has shed light on the age of lice. The
first is an exceptionally preserved 44 Ma bird louse fossil
[17], and the second is a 100 Ma fossil of the book-louse
family Liposcelididae [18], which is the closest free-living

Page 2 of 15

relative of parasitic lice [13]. These two fossils imply a
rather ancient origin of lice and therefore it is reasonable
to assume that given their restricted host associations,
parasitic lice originated on their vertebrate hosts [5].
Most placental mammalian orders had originated by the
end of the Cretaceous, 85-100 Ma [20], thus providing
suitable habitats for sucking lice to colonize. Since their
origination, sucking lice have successfully diversified and
there now are more than 540 described species of
Anoplura worldwide that can be assigned to 50 genera in
15 families [21-24]. Sucking lice parasitize members of
12 of the 29 recognized mammalian orders, and are
generally host-specific with families, genera, and species
of lice parasitizing closely related hosts (Figure 1 and
Table 1). Of the non-parasitized potential host taxa, 11
mammalian orders are not known to be parasitized by
any louse species, whereas representatives of the remaining six orders (Dasyuromorphia, Didelphimorphia,
Diprotodontia, Paucituberculata, Proboscidea, and Pilosa)
are parasitized only by chewing lice. Although cospeciation is perceived to be common between parasitic organisms and their hosts, given the current host associations
of sucking lice (Figure 1 and Table 1) it is unlikely that
parallel evolution has been the dominant process shaping
the radiation of this assemblage. Rather, it is probable
that the associations between sucking lice and their
eutherian hosts involves a complex history of multiple
colonization events and small bouts of cospeciation, colonization failures, extinction events, and host switches
across eutherian lineages [6,22,25].
To date, there have been only two studies that have
attempted to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships
among anopluran families [21,22]. Kim and Ludwig [21]
studied 15 taxa based on 22 morphological characters
whereas Kim [22] examined 47 taxa with 39 morphological characters. Both studies were based on small morphological datasets with few characters, the phylogenetic
utility of which has been questioned [10]. While there
have been multiple studies examining anopluran relationships within genera and among apparently closely
related genera and families [26-29], a higher-level phylogeny of sucking lice is lacking. This study is the first to
use molecular data and estimates of divergence times to
elucidate the evolutionary history of this unique haematophagous group in relation to their mammalian hosts.

Results
Taxon Sampling, Data Collection, and Phylogenetic
Analyses

Lice were obtained from 8 of the 15 sucking louse
families (Additional File 1). Unfortunately, louse data
from the remaining 7 families could not be obtained
due to specimen rarity (some anopluran families have
extremely narrow host ranges and some are monotypic,

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Hypothesized relationships among Anoplura families (and their host associations) redrawn from Kim [22].

making collection almost impossible) or failure to
amplify specimens in the laboratory. Because of PCR
failure as well as availability of data from GenBank,
some molecular data could not be collected. The genes
18S, EF-1a, and COI were not collected from 11, 7, and
2 specimens, respectively, and, except for one sample of
Pedicinus pictus (Pedicinus pictus 2), none of the specimens analyzed were missing data from more than one
molecular marker (Additional File 1).
For each gene examined, phylogenetic analyses (MP,
ML, and Bayesian) yielded similar topologies, although
nodal support and placement of outgroup taxa varied
depending on the gene (See Additional Files 2, 3, and
4). Previous studies have noted that the third codon
positions of the mitochondrial COI gene tend to be
saturated and homoplasious [13]. Saturation plots supported slight saturation of third positions in the COI
data analyzed herein; however, phylogenetic analyses
including and excluding third codon positions did not
result in significant differences to tree topologies or
branch lengths with the exception of placement of some
of the outgroup taxa (data available upon request). The
three genes used in this study were phylogenetically
informative at different areas of the phylogeny, similar
to previous findings [28]. With 58, 126, and 220 parsimony informative sites for 18S, EF-1a, and COI, respectively, the nuclear genes (18S and EF-1a) provided
slightly more resolution basally whereas the mitochondrial marker, COI, provided more resolution at terminal
nodes (See Additional Files 2, 3, and 4). Although basal

resolution was generally lacking and there were overall
differences in resolution for each gene, topologies resulting from phylogenetic analyses of individual genes were
not in strong conflict.
Analysis of the 3-gene data set using MP, ML, or Bayesian approaches (including BEST and BEAST) resulted in
similar topologies, nodal support, and branch lengths
(Bayesian phylogram shown in Figure 2). Analyses of the
3-gene data sets seemed to merge different levels of
phylogenetic information from each gene resulting in a
more resolved phylogeny overall. Bayes factors indicated
that partitioning by gene and by codon within each protein coding gene was preferred over a more simple or
non-partitioned scheme. Although highly partitioned
data sets tend to be preferred according to Bayes factors
[30], partitioned and non-partitioned analyses yielded
similar topologies and support values. The species tree
constructed with BEST lacked resolution but did not
conflict with individual gene trees or trees resulting from
concatenated and partitioned phylogenetic analyses.
Although there were some topological differences
depending on the analysis and partitioning scheme, these
differences always involved clades that were not strongly
supported. One topological difference that appeared
in some phylogenetic analyses was the placement of
the mouse louse Polyplax serrata. Depending on the data
set examined (individual genes, 3-gene data set, etc.) and
phylogenetic method, topological placement of P. serrata
varied from being closely related to primate lice (Figure 2)
to located near the base of the tree (See Additional Files 3

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

Page 4 of 15

Table 1 Generalized Anoplura host associations*
Louse Family

Louse Genus
(Number of Species)

Common Names of Major Host Groups
(Host Orders)

Echinophthiriidae

Antarctophthirus (6)

Seals, Walrus (Carnivora)

Echinophthirius (1)
Latagophthirus (1)

Earless Seals (Carnivora)
Otters (Carnivora)

Lepidophthirus (2)

Sea Lions (Carnivora)

Atopophthirus (2)

Giant Flying Squirrels (Rodentia)

Enderleinellus (45)

Enderleinellidae

Earless Seals (Carnivora)

Proechinophthirus (2)

Squirrels (Rodentia)

Microphthirus (1)

Flying Squirrels (Rodentia)

Phthirunculus (1)
Werneckia (5)

Giant Flying Squirrels (Rodentia)
Squirrels (Rodentia)

Haematopinidae

Haematopinus (21)

Artiodactyls, Equids (Artiodactyla, Perissodactyla)

Hamophthiriidae

Hamophthirius (1)

Colugos (Dermoptera)

Hoplopleuridae

Ancistroplax (5)

Shrews (Soricomorpha)

Haematopinoides (1)

Moles (Soricomorpha)

Hoplopleura (141)

Rodents, Pikas (Rodentia, Lagomorpha)

Paradoxophthirus (1)

Asian Rock Squirrel (Rodentia)

Pterophthirus (5)
Schizophthirus (9)

Spiny Rats (Rodentia)
Dormice (Rodentia)

Hybophthiridae

Hybophthirus (1)

Aardvarks (Tubulidentata)

Linognathidae

Linognathus (52)

Artiodactyls (Artiodactyla), Canids (Carnivora)

Prolinognathus (8)

Hyraxes (Hyracoidea)

Solenopotes (9)

Bovids, Cervids (Artiodactyla)

Microthoraciidae

Microthoracius (4)

Camels, Lamas (Artiodactyla)

Neolinognathidae

Neolinognathus (2)

Elephant Shrews (Macroscelidea)

Pecaroecidae

Pecaroecus (1)

Peccaries (Artiodactyla)

Pedicinidae

Pedicinus (14)

New World Primates (Primates)

Pediculidae

Pediculus (3)

Old World Primates (Primates)

Polyplacidae

Abrocomaphthirus (2)

Chinchilla Rats (Rodentia)

Ctenophthirus (1)

Spiny Rats (Rodentia)

Cuyana (1)

Chinchillas (Rodentia)

Docophthirus (1)
Eulinognathus (27)

Tree Shrews (Scandentia)
Rodents (Rodentia)

Fahrenholzia (12)

Heteromyid Rodents (Rodentia)

Galeophthirus (1)

Cavies (Rodentia)

Haemodipsus (7)

Rabbits and Hares (Lagomorpha)

Johnsonpthirus (5)

Squirrels (Rodentia)

Lagidophthirus (1)

Chinchillas (Rodentia)

Lemurpediculus (2)

Dwarf Lemurs (Primates)

Lemurphthirus (3)
Linognathoides (11)

Bush Babies (Primates)
Squirrels (Rodentia)

Mirophthirus (1)

Pygmy Dormice (Rodentia)

Neohaematopinus (31)

Squirrels, Murids (Rodentia)

Phthirpediculus (3)

Lemurs (Primates)

Polyplax (78)

Rodents, Shrews (Rodentia, Soricomorpha)

Proenderleinellus (1)

Pouched Rats (Rodentia)

Sathrax (1)

Tree Shrews (Scandentia)

Scipio (3)
Typhlomyophthirus (1)

Cane, Dassie Rats (Rodentia)
Pygmy Dormice (Rodentia)

Pthiridae

Pthirus (2)

Old World Primates (Primates)

Ratemiidae

Ratemia (3)

Equids (Perissodactyla)

*Host associations and number of louse species are based on Durden and Musser [23,24] and recent publications.

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Bayesian phylogram of the Anoplura based on molecular data. This Bayesian phylogram is the result from the analysis of the
combined 3-gene data set partitioning the data by gene and by codon for the protein coding genes COI and EF-1a. Bayesian posterior
probability greater than 0.95 and likelihood support values greater than 75 are indicated by the heavy branches. Taxon names correspond to
Additional File 1 and taxon colors correspond to louse family. Louse family and host associations are indicated to the right of each clade. A
monophyletic Anoplura is indicated by the arrow.

and 4). However, the phylogenetic position of P. serrata
never received substantial support, and exclusion of this
taxon from phylogenetic analyses resulted in topologies
that were not in conflict with the phylogeny shown in
Figure 2.
All phylogenetic trees reconstructed in our analyses
support a monophyletic Anoplura, sister to the chewing
louse suborder Rhychophthirina (Figure 2). Several anopluran families (Hoplopleuridae and Polyplacidae), genera (Hoplopleura and Pterophthirus), and species
(H.ferrisi) were not monophyletic. Phylogenetic constraints forcing the families and genera to be monophyletic were significantly worse than the best tree (ML
Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests and examination of Bayesian

suboptimal trees; P < 0.05). The remaining louse families
were all monophyletic, although it is important to note
that taxon sampling for many of these groups was low
(Figure 2 and Additional Files 2, 3, and 4). Notably,
primate lice (excluding the polyplacid louse Lemurpediculus verruculosus) belonging to the anopluran families
Pedicinidae, Pediculidae, and Pthiridae formed a highly
supported monophyletic group (Figure 2).
For the most part, lice did not form monophyletic
groups according to host associations. There are two
clades of lice parasitizing artiodactyl mammals (Linognathus and Haematopinus, belonging to the families
Linognathidae and Haematopinidae, respectively), probably resulting from two independent colonization events

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

of the hosts (Figure 2). Lice parasitizing rodents were far
from monophyletic, and instead were scattered throughout the phylogeny in five distinct clades (Figure 2). One
rodent-louse clade containing the polyplacid genus
Neohaematopinus also included the lice Haemodipsus
and Sathrax. These two louse genera do not parasitize
rodents and instead are associated with rabbits and
hares, and tree shrews, respectively. Within Rodentia,
lice parasitizing the families Cricetidae, Muridae, and
Sciuridae also were not monophyletic (Figure 2). Sciurid
lice (Hoplopleura, Linognathoides, and Neohaematopinus) are distributed among three clades and cricetid
(Hoplopleura and Neohaematopinus) and murid (Polyplax and Hoplopleura) lice are each distributed across
two clades. Some host lineages, however, were parasitized by monophyletic lineages of lice. These host
groups include heteromyid rodents (parasitized by the
louse genus Fahrenholzia), carnivores (although the
sample size of lice parasitizing carnivores was extremely
small), and primates (except Cheirogaleidae; Figure 2).
Estimates of Divergence Times

The molecular clock was rejected in the combined
3-gene data set; thus, the most appropriate divergence
dating techniques are those that relax a molecular clock
[31]. Similar to phylogenetic analyses, Bayes factors indicated that partitioned data sets are the preferred partitioning scheme, although analyses of partitioned and
non-partitioned data sets produced similar results. Partitioned analyses (with model parameters unlinked across
partitions) using all three calibrations resulted in a late
Cretaceous origin of the Anoplura, and a time of basal
diversification approximately 77 Ma (95% HPD 5896 Ma; Figure 3 and Additional File 5). Upon initially
parasitizing their eutherian hosts, the Anoplura segregated into two clades and then diversified rapidly soon
after the Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) boundary approximately 65 Ma (Figure 3). In one clade (the top clade in
Figure 2), sucking lice radiated to parasitize carnivores,
artiodactyls, rodents, rabbits, and tree shrews, and in the
other clade (the bottom clade in Figure 2), anoplurans
diverged to colonize artiodactyls, shrews, rodents, and
primates. There appears to be no evidence for parallel
cladogenesis between sucking lice and their hosts early in
their evolutionary history. Rather, it seems that these
parasitic insects independently colonized diverse mammal groups possibly as these host lineages were radiating.

Discussion
Anoplura Phylogeny

This study represents the first phylogenetic hypothesis
of sucking louse relationships using molecular data. The
genes selected for use in this study (18S, EF-1a, and
COI) have proven phylogenetically informative for lice

Page 6 of 15

in other studies [1,11-13,27,28,32]. However, even when
used in combination, these genes fail to completely
resolve relationships at a higher level across Anoplura,
which is not unexpected given the relatively small number of species sampled in this study. There is good support for many of the louse lineages, but it is unclear
how these major lineages are related because some
branches are short and lack support (Figure 2). Future
studies will need to increase taxon sampling as well as
include additional molecular markers to better resolve
phylogenetic relationships among sucking louse species.
The mitochondrial gene COI has been a staple in
louse phylogenetic work (see references above); however,
rapid rates of evolution and data saturation in this marker are a concern especially for higher-level studies
[13,26]. Sequence divergence within a louse morphospecies can be rather high, upwards to 15% uncorrected
p-distances [27,32,33], and we found similar results in
this study. For example, the two Ancistroplax crocidurae
specimens were 13.5% divergent, the Lemurpediculus
verruculosus specimens were 14.7% divergent, and the
Linognathoides marmotae specimens were 12.5% divergent (all uncorrected p-distances). While these divergences may be indicative of cryptic species, it is more
likely that these high numbers for the COI gene are
typical for louse lineages because sequences for the
nuclear markers were identical. While COI saturation
was not an obvious problem in the current study, the
phylogenetic placement of Polyplax serrata appears to
be the result of elevated rates of evolution in this mitochondrial marker (See Figure 2 and Additional Files 3
and 4). Future studies may encounter similar problems;
therefore, inclusion of other data would be helpful when
attempting to resolve higher-level relationships among
lice. These additional data could be molecular or morphological (see below); however, finding appropriate
molecular markers for use within Phthiraptera has often
been difficult [28] and it is likely that novel approaches
will be necessary to resolve phylogenetic relationships in
this insect group.
Unfortunately, not all anopluran families could be
included in this study, resulting in an incomplete picture
of phylogenetic relationships in this louse lineage. To
better elucidate the evolutionary history of sucking lice,
it is imperative that future studies increase the diversity
of taxon sampling (in addition to utilizing additional
data; see above). Even with incomplete taxonomic sampling, a few aspects of anopluran systematics are apparent, specifically the lack of monophyly of the families
Hoplopleuridae and Polyplacidae (Figure 2). This lack of
monophyly is not surprising; Hoplopleuridae and Polyplacidae are the two largest sucking louse families, with
162 and 193 described species, respectively (Table 1).
Representing such a large number of species, it is likely

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

Page 7 of 15

Figure 3 Chronogram for the Anoplura. Shown is the Bayesian topology resulting from analysis of the 3-gene data set (partitioning the data
by gene and by codon for the protein coding genes COI and EF-1a) in BEAST [36], which differs only slightly from the topology shown in
Figure 2 (there is weak support for these differences; see text). Divergence times were estimated using three calibrations (94-101 Ma for the spilt
between Rhynchophthirina and Anoplura, 20-25 Ma for the split between Old World Monkey lice and hominoid lice, and 5-7 Ma for the split
between human and chimpanzee-associated Pediculus lice), indicated by filled circles at nodes. Taxon colors correspond to louse family indicated
in Figure 2 and host associations are indicated to the right of each clade. The Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) boundary is indicated at 65 Ma by
the dark gray vertical bar. Upper and lower bounds of the 95% highest posterior density interval (95% HPD) for each node are available in
Additional File 5.

that these two louse families are taxonomic hodgepodges in need of additional examination and substantial revision. Revision of these two families (as well as
genera within both families) will not be possible without
more complete taxon sampling. At a lower taxonomic
level, the results presented in the current study are in
agreement with previous research that focused on smaller anopluran groups [27-29,34].
Currently, the morphology-based classification of Anoplura detailed by Kim and Ludwig [21] and with modifications by Durden and Musser [23] is followed by most
researchers studying sucking lice. The molecular phylogeny reported here (Figure 2) agrees with aspects of this
morphology-based classification such as the distinct

familial lineages of Anoplura associated with pinnipeds
(anopluran family Echinophthiriidae), bovids (Linognathidae), bovids and suids (Haematopinidae), hominids (Pediculidae and Pthiridae) and cercopithecids (Pedicinidae).
The differences between the two phylogenies (compare
Figures 1 and 2) are intriguing; however, it is possible that
morphological features may support some of the molecular-based relationships proposed here. For example, the
molecular phylogeny places the hoplopleurid genus Pterophthirus within the genus Hoplopleura (Figure 2). Morphologically, the only difference between these two genera
is the extension, to varying degrees, of the second pair of
paratergal plates on the abdomen. Perhaps the varying
extensions of the second pair or paratergal plates evolved

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

more than once within Hoplopleura and, as such, it may
not warrant the recognition of Pterophthirus as a distinct
genus [35]. The wide separation between hoplopleurid
genera Hoplopleura (including Pterophthirus) and Ancistroplax in the molecular phylogeny (Figure 2) also has
morphological ramifications. Kim and Ludwig [21] recognized two subfamilies within the Hoplopleuridae, the only
anopluran family for which they recognized subfamilies.
Members of the subfamily Hoplopleurinae (genera Hoplopleura, Pterophthirus, and Paradoxophthirus) have a large
continuous sternite on abdomonal segment 2 that physically connects with the corresponding paratergal plates,
situated laterally. However, in members of the subfamily
Haematopinoidinae (genera Ancistroplax, Haematopinoides, and Schizophthirus), the abdominal segment two
sternite is clearly divided medially resulting in two separate plates. It is feasible that this morphological difference
actually defines two distinct families rather than subfamilies as supported by the large separation between the two
clades in Figure 2. As such, it would be beneficial for
future researchers to include other relevant hoplopleurid
genera in their molecular phylogenetic reconstructions of
Anoplura evolutionary history to determine if the two
Hoplopleura subfamilies remain genetically distinct.
The most obvious differences between the morphological (Figure 1) and molecular (Figure 2) anopluran phylogenies involve the family Polyplacidae, which is
monophyletic based on morphological data but paraphyletic based on molecular data. Interestingly, the
morphological definition of the Polyplacidae is quite
variable. Notwithstanding the features they share with
all other anopluran families, the only morphological
characters that are common to all members of the Polyplacidae, as currently recognized, are the presence of 5
antennal segments, 6 pairs of spiracles on the abdomen,
small forelegs, and the absence of a notal pit on the
thorax [21]. However, none of these characters are
synapomorphies for Polyplacidae. Statements reflecting
the morphological variability of Polyplacidae in current
descriptions include: “antennae...usually sexually
dimorphic,” “thorax with mesothoracic phragma usually
present,” “abdomen with paratergites usually highly
developed...and occasionally represented by small sclerites or completely lacking,” “tergal and sternal plates
usually highly developed and at times reduced or lacking,” “male...with variously shaped basal apodeme, parameres and pseudopenis,” and “female with...spermatheca
usually indistinct” [21]. This extreme morphological
variability within the Polyplacidae may actually encompass more than one family as suggested by the separate
polyplacid lineages shown in Figure 2. The molecular
data suggest that rigorous taxonomic reassessment of
what is currently treated as Polyplacidae is warranted.
In fact, all five of the separate polyplacid lineages shown

Page 8 of 15

in Figure 2 correspond with distinct morphological
characters that could be used to define separate families
and other suprageneric taxa if future taxonomic reevaluation supports such action.
Without complete taxonomic sampling at the family
level, it is difficult to compare Kim’s [22] morphological
hypothesis of anopluran relationships (Figure 1) to the
molecular phylogeny (Figure 2). A few additional differences, however, are apparent. For one, morphological data
support a sister relationships between Pedicinidae and
Pthiridae, and these two louse families are closely related
to Pecaroecidae, Haematopinidae, and Hybophthiridae, all
to the exclusion of Pediculidae [22]. Molecular data, however, support monophyly of all non-polyplacid primate lice
(families Pedicinidae, Pediculidae, and Pthiridae) with a
relatively distant relationship to the Haematopinidae
(Figure 2). Monophyly of these three primate louse
families has been found in previous molecular studies
[28,29]; however, molecular data from the families
Hybophthiridae, and Pecaroecidae will be needed for a
more rigorous comparison to the morphological study of
Kim [22]. Interestingly, Kim [22] noted a relatively close
relationship among the families Hoplopleuridae, Linognathidae, and Polyplacidae (Figure 1). The molecular data
presented herein also support a close relationship among
these three families (or at least specific clades within
Hoplopleuridae and Polyplacidae; Figure 2) and it will be
interesting to see if these relationships hold with additional
investigations. Although a more comprehensive morphological study is currently underway (Smith and Light,
unpubl. data), additional molecular data and better taxon
sampling will be necessary to properly compare morphology and molecules and it is likely that these data will both
agree that substantial taxonomic revision of Anoplura will
be necessary.
Host Associations and the Origin of Anoplura

Using a Bayesian approach implemented in the program
BEAST v1.5.3 [31,36], we estimated a late Cretaceous
diversification of sucking lice (approximately 77 Ma;
Figure 3 and Additional File 5). In this analysis, we utilized the 3-gene data set and three calibration points,
and we allowed substitution and clock models to be
unlinked. Divergence time estimates varied, however, if
clock models or clock and substitution models were
linked across the three data partitions, and when calibration points were not used concurrently or used as
hard bounds. When clock models or clock and substitution models were linked across the three data partitions,
estimates of divergence times tended to be much more
recent, with an Eocene or Paleocene origin of the
Anoplura, approximately 55 Ma. However, linking substitution or clock models across partitioned data sets is
the equivalent of performing analyses on concatenated

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

data sets (i.e., not applying different models of evolution
to each partition). Since Bayes Factors comparisons performed herein support partitioned analyses, we concentrate our discussion below on the estimates obtained
with unlinked model parameters.
Of our three calibration points, one was located
basally whereas the other two were located more terminally on the louse phylogeny (Figure 3). Previous
studies have found that the use of single calibration
points, especially when placed either basally or terminally, can result in erroneous estimations of divergence
times [28,37-39]. Similarly, our analyses using only the
basal calibration resulted in overestimates of ages at
terminal nodes and analyses using only the terminal primate-louse calibrations resulted in underestimates of the
ages at basal nodes. In fact, these over- and underestimates were extreme, 63 Ma for the split between Old
World and hominoid-associated lice, and 33 Ma for the
age of Anoplura, respectively. Other studies have found
that use of hard bounds is often ill-advised (especially
when there is a lack of confidence of the exact ages of
the calibration) and that fossils provide poor hard maximum bounds [38,40,41]. Analyses using only upper
bounds also resulted in underestimates for the age of
Anoplura, thus providing additional support for the
simultaneous use of the three calibration points. Further
analyses incorporating increased taxon sampling and
additional calibrations (if available) will be necessary to
test the hypotheses presented here.
Because the fossil record for lice is so poor
[10,17,18,42], our calibrations were based on welldocumented cospeciation events between these parasites and their mammalian hosts. The primate-louse
calibrations have been used in several previous studies
[28,29] and have generally proven useful to better
understand louse evolutionary history. For a basal
calibration representing the split between Rhynchophthirina and Anoplura, we chose the time of basal
diversification in placental mammals from BinindaEmonds et al. [20] because we believed it reasonable
that sucking lice could not have diversified until they
had appropriate hosts (i.e., placental mammals) to
colonize [5,20]. Additionally, the recent discovery of
two louse fossils at 44 Ma [17] and 100 Ma [18] adds
further weight to support an ancient origin of lice, as
does results of a recent study examining diversification
times across all suborders of lice utilizing these fossils.
This study found that sucking lice diversified approximately 75 Ma [Smith VS, Ford T, Johnson KP, Johnson
PCD, Yoshizawa K, Light JE: Multiple lineages of lice
pass through the K-Pg boundary, Submitted]. This
result is similar to our own findings, further supporting use of a basal calibration point of 94-109 Ma. It is
important to note that because some of the outgroup

Page 9 of 15

taxa used in this study (e.g., Bovicola, Felicola, and
Neotrichodectes) also parasitize eutherian mammals,
the Bininda-Emonds et al. [20] calibration could have
been placed at the root of the phylogeny. However,
these chewing lice are recently derived lineages within
Ischnocera and likely radiated as a result of a recent
host switch to eutherian mammals [43].
Soon after colonizing their hosts, sucking lice appear to
have diversified rapidly, parasitizing multiple mammalian
orders and families soon after the Cretaceous-Paleogene
(K-Pg) boundary, approximately 65 Ma (Figure 3). Two
major louse clades formed relatively early in anopluran
evolutionary history, and these two clades parasitize
members of a diverse assortment of mammal orders: one
louse clade parasitizes Artiodactyla, Carnivora, Lagomorpha, Rodentia, and Scandentia, whereas the other clade
parasitizes Artiodactyla, Primates, Rodentia, and Soricomorpha (Figure 3). These host groups are often distantly
related, and thus the louse phylogeny bears little similarity to the host tree (Figure 4). Furthermore, several mammal groups, specifically artiodactyls, rodents, and
primates, are parasitized by multiple, distantly related
louse lineages (Figures 3 and 4). In fact, the majority of
Anoplura parasitize these host groups (approximately
90%; Table 1). Thus, it is likely that the associations
between sucking lice and eutherian mammals are the
result of a complex history of host switching and extinction events both early and late during their evolutionary
history. Host switching has been documented in the literature for sucking lice [44] as well as other ectoparasites
[45-47]. In this study, clear instances of recent host
switching include Lemurpediculus parasitizing mouse
lemurs and Ancistroplax parasitizing shrews. These two
louse genera originated 5-10 Ma and their hosts, in contrast, diverged 35 Ma (Cheirogaleidae) and 50 Ma [20],
respectively. Cospeciation, however, also has played a significant role in shaping associations between sucking lice
and their mammalian hosts, especially at lower taxonomic levels. Examples include squirrels and their lice
[22,25], primates and lice belonging to the families Pedicinidae, Pediculidae, and Pthirdae [29], and heteromyid
rodents and Fahrenholzia lice [20,26,48]. Interestingly,
this study finds that Fahrenholzia lice diverged approximately 31.6 Ma (95% HPD 49-16.6 Ma; Figure 3), a range
that encompasses the divergence of their heteromyid
hosts [48], further supporting cospeciation in this
rodent-louse assemblage [26]. It is likely that additional
instances of cospeciation will be revealed as more anopluran groups are examined. Given the lack of concordance between host and parasite trees (Figure 4), it is
possible that anoplurans may have colonized their hosts
and diversified after the initial radiation of eutherian
mammals. Additional data and analyses will be necessary
to test this possibility as all current data [this study and

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

Page 10 of 15

Figure 4 Comparison of host and parasite chronograms. The parasite chronogram is redrawn from Figure 3 and the host chronogram (with
dates of major mammalian divergences) is redrawn from Bininda-Emonds et al. [20]. Lines drawn between taxa indicate host-parasite
associations. On the host chronogram, lineages with red and yellow boxes are parasitized by sucking lice and chewing lice, respectively.
Mammalian lineages without shaded boxes are not known to be parasitized by any louse group. The Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) boundary
indicated at 65 Ma by the dark gray vertical bar.

Smith VS, Ford T, Johnson KP, Johnson PCD, Yoshizawa
K, Light JE: Multiple lineages of lice pass through the
K-Pg boundary, Submitted] indicate a relatively old diversification of sucking lice.

Conclusions
Anoplurans are one of only a handful of haematophagous arthropod groups, and as a result of their bloodfeeding habits these ectoparastic insects can have severe
effects on their hosts. Heavy infestations of sucking lice
can cause host anemia, weight loss, damage to hides and
fur (due to itching, scratching, and stains from louse
feces), and general irritability, costing some livestock
industries millions of dollars each year [7,49-51]. Sucking lice can also serve as vectors of pathogenic organisms, transmitting the causative agents for wildlife and
livestock diseases such as swine pox, anaplasmosis,

dermatomycosis, Lebombo virus, and seal heartworm
[24]. Some anopluran species play important roles in
their associations with humans. Head, body, and pubic
lice (genera Pediculus and Pthirus, respectively) parasitize millions of people each year and Pediculus species
are important in human epidemiology, serving as vectors
of the causative agents of epidemic diseases such as
trench fever (Bartonella quintana), relapsing fever (Borrelia recurrentis), and louse-borne typhus (Rickettsia
prowazekii; [49]). Despite the potential economical and
medical implications of sucking louse infestations, this
study represents the first attempt to examine higherlevel anopluran relationships using molecular data.
Although this study produces novel findings regarding
anopluran relationships, future studies with more extensive taxon sampling will be necessary to provide a better
view of the evolutionary history of sucking lice.

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

Our analyses indicate that sucking lice diversified in
the late Cretaceous, approximately 77 Ma, and soon
after the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary approximately
65 Ma, these lice proliferated rapidly to parasitize multiple mammalian orders and families (Figure 3). These
dates are in agreement with mammalian evolutionary
history: all modern mammal orders are hypothesized to
have diverged by 75 Ma [20] thus providing suitable
habitat for the colonization and radiation of sucking
lice. Despite the concordant timing of diversification
events early in the association between anoplurans and
mammals, there is substantial conflict between the host
and parasite phylogenies (Figure 4). This conflict may be
because the free-living psocopteran ancestors of lice
colonized and began feeding on the blood of their vertebrate hosts several times as host orders were diverging
before the K-Pg boundary [20,52]. Additionally, host
and parasite topological differences may be the result of
a complex history of host switching and extinction
events that occurred throughout the evolutionary association between sucking lice and their mammalian hosts.
For example, multiple mammal lineages that radiated
during the Early Tertiary (60-65 Ma) are now extinct as
are their ectoparasitic lice (if present; although some of
these lice may have successfully switched to an extant
host). Furthermore, many of the modern mammal
families did not diversify until recently, during the late
Eocene to the Miocene (approximately 10-40 Ma), thus
providing ample new habitats for lice to colonize.
It is unlikely that there are any ectoparasite groups
(including lice) that tracked the early and rapid radiation
of eutherian mammals (red and yellow boxes in Figure 4).
This is in some ways unfortunate because ectoparasites
could potentially be used as independent data points to
infer host evolutionary history, something that could have
been valuable to help elucidate remaining questions
regarding the mammal phylogenetic tree [53,54]. Given
the multiple host radiations and host extinction events
[20], a combination of historical events such as extinction,
host switching, and cospeciation likely dominated the evolutionary association between ectoparasites and their
mammalian hosts. The sucking louse data presented
herein support this scenario, and we expect that additional
data from this group as well as other parasite lineages to
further elucidate the complicated evolutionary history
shared between parasites and their mammalian hosts.

Methods
Taxon Sampling and Data Collection

Data from 65 anopluran taxa (including 22 representatives from GenBank) representing 8 families and 48 species were included in the molecular analysis (Additional
File 1). Seven outgroup taxa, representing the chewing
louse suborders Rhynchophthirina and Ischnocera, also

Page 11 of 15

were included in the analysis. DNA was isolated
from louse specimens using the DNAeasy Tissue Kit
(QIAGEN Inc., Valencia, California) using louse specific
protocols [11,55]. After DNA extraction, lice were
mounted on slides and retained as vouchers. Voucher
specimens are deposited in the Texas A&M University
Insect Collection, voucher number 684.
Due to the large number of taxa obtained from
previous studies, we focused our laboratory work on
three genes that are well represented in GenBank. Portions of the nuclear 18S rRNA (18S; 460 or 508 base
pairs [bp] depending on alignment methodology, see
below) and elongation factor 1 alpha (EF-1a; 345 bp)
genes and the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (COI; 381 bp) gene were amplified and sequenced
using primers NS1 and NS2a [12], EF1For3 and Cho10
[56], and L6625 and H7005 [57], respectively. Doublestranded PCR amplifications, PCR purification, and
sequencing of these genes were undertaken following
protocols detailed in Light and Reed [28]. Sequences
were edited using Sequencher v. 4.2.2 (Gene Codes
Corporation, Ann Arbor, Michigan) and primer
sequences were removed and sequences trimmed in
reference to the translated protein sequence using
Se-AL v2.01a11 [58] and MacClade 4.0 [59]. The protein
coding genes EF-1a and COI were aligned by eye using
Se-Al v2.0a11 [58] and louse 18S rRNA sequences were
aligned using CLUSTAL W [60] and MUSCLE [61].
Phylogenetic analyses of CLUSTAL W and MUSCLE
alignments of 18S yielded similar topologies and branch
lengths. Results presented herein rely solely on the
MUSCLE 18S alignment (results based on CLUSTAL
alignments are available upon request). Longer
sequences obtained from GenBank were pruned for
maximum overlap with sequences generated herein. All
sequences are available in GenBank (Additional File 1)
and alignments are available on TreeBase (http://purl.
org/phylo/treebase/phylows/study/TB2:S10679; Submission ID 10669).
Phylogenetic Analysis

Phylogenetic analyses of individual and combined genes
were performed using maximum parsimony (MP), maximum likelihood (ML) and Bayesian approaches. Equally
weighted MP searches were performed with 10 random
addition replicates and tree bisection-reconnection
branch swapping using PAUP*4.0b10 [62]. To assess
nodal support, nonparametric bootstrap analyses were
performed [200 pseudoreplicates and 10 random
sequence additions; [63]]. To generate the best ML and
Bayesian trees, Modeltest [64] and MrModelTest [65]
were used to examine models of nucleotide substitution
(56 and 24, respectively) and to choose a best-fit model
of sequence evolution [66]. Models of evolution

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

providing the best approximation of the data using the
fewest parameters were chosen for subsequent analyses
according to the Akaike Information Criterion [67,68].
The general time reversible (GTR) model, including
among-site rate variation (G) and invariable sites [I;
[69,70]] was chosen as the best model of evolution in
both ModelTest and MrModelTest for the 18S rRNA,
EF-1a (three codon positions combined and the third
codon position), COI (three codon positions combined
and the first and second codon positions), and the combined 3-gene data set. The GTR+G, SYM, and HKY+G
models were chosen as the best model of evolution for
the first EF-1a codon position, second EF-1a codon
position, and third COI codon position, respectively.
Full heuristic ML searches were conducted using the
best-fit model in PAUP* 4.0b10 [62] and GARLI [71],
and full heuristic ML bootstrap (100 pseudoreplicates)
searches were conducted using the best-fit model in
GARLI [71].
Bayesian phylogenetic analyses were performed in
MrBayes 3.12 [72]. Model parameters were treated as
unknown variables with uniform priors and were estimated as part of the analysis. Bayesian analyses were
initiated from random starting trees, run for 10 million
generations with 4 incrementally heated chains [72], and
sampled at intervals of 1000 generations. Two independent Bayesian analyses were run to avoid entrapment on
local optima, and log-likelihood scores were compared
for convergence so that burn-in generations (the first
3000 trees) could be discarded. Tracer v1.4 [73] was
used to evaluate stability of all parameter estimates following removal of burn-in generations.
The 3-gene data set also was examined with partitioned Bayesian phylogenetic analyses. Individual genes
and codon positions were defined as partitions a priori,
and each partition was assigned its own substitution
model according to MrModelTest (see above). Partitioning schemes included non-partitioned, partitioned by
gene, and partitioned by gene and by codon position of
the protein coding genes COI and EF-1a. Partitioned
Bayesian analyses were performed as described above.
Bayesian partitioning schemes were compared using
Bayes factors [74], which were computed using the harmonic means of the likelihoods calculated from the
sump command within MrBayes. A difference of 2ln
Bayes factor > 10 was used as the minimum value to
discriminate between analysis schemes [30,75].
Bayesian Estimation of Species Trees [BEST; [76,77]]
was used to simultaneously estimate gene and species
trees while allowing for independent evolutionary processes for each locus. This type of approach is useful
when multiple molecular markers are being used to
infer a species tree and, if there are short branch lengths
in the species tree, gene trees may not match the species

Page 12 of 15

tree resulting in incorrect inferences of species relationships [76,78]. Because missing data in individual gene
trees can result in analytical complications [79], all taxa
that were missing data from an entire gene region were
removed prior to BEST analyses. To aid with computational time and to focus on the ingroup taxa, all outgroup taxa except for Haematomyzus elephantis were
removed from the data set resulting in a total of 47 individuals analyzed. BEST analyses were initiated from random starting trees, run for 60 million generations and
sampled at intervals of 1000 generations. The gene
mutation prior and the prior distribution for the effective population size parameter were set at (0.5, 1.5) and
0.05, respectively. The posterior distribution of species
trees (post burn-in) was summarized with a 50% majority-rule consensus tree to obtain posterior probability
values for species relationships.
Alternative phylogenetic hypotheses were compared
statistically using the Shimodaira-Hasegawa tests as
implemented in PAUP*4.0b10 [80-82]. Additionally, suboptimal trees from the Bayesian non-partitioned and
partitioned analyses were examined to assess alternative
phylogenetic hypotheses. The frequency of the Markov
chain Monte Carlo trees in agreement with an alternative hypothesis equals the probability of that alternative
hypothesis being correct [83]. The probability of trees
agreeing with alternative subfamily hypotheses was calculated by applying constraint-based filter trees implemented in PAUP*4.0b10 [83].
Estimates of Divergence Times

Divergence times of the sucking louse 3-gene data set
were estimated using the Bayesian approach implemented in BEAST v1.5.3 [31,36]. BEAST uses a Bayesian
relaxed molecular clock while incorporating tree uncertainty in the MCMC process to infer divergence times.
Before estimating divergence times, a likelihood ratio test
was performed on the louse 3-gene data set using PAUP*
4.0b10 [62] to determine if the sequence data departed
significantly from clocklike behavior. In BEAST, a Yule
process speciation prior and an uncorrelated lognormal
model of rate variation were implemented in each analysis [31]. Posterior probability distributions of node ages
were obtained for the 3-gene alignment with analyses
performed in a concatenated and partitioned framework
(all model parameters were unlinked across partitions).
Best-fit models of nucleotide substitution for each data
set were the same as those identified above as part of the
phylogenetic analyses using MrModelTest [65]. Two
separate MCMC analyses were run for 30,000,000 generations (burnin 10%) with parameters sampled every
1000 steps. Independent runs were combined using
LogCombiner v.1.5.3 [36]. Tracer v1.5 [73] was used to
measure the effective sample size of each parameter

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

(all resulting effective sample sizes exceeded 100) and
calculate the mean and upper and lower bounds of the
95% highest posterior density interval (95% HPD) for
divergence times. Tree topologies were assessed using
TreeAnnotator v.1.5.3 [36] and FigTree v.1.3.1 [84].
Bayes factors of non-partitioned and partitioned 3-gene
data sets were assessed using Tracer v1.5 [73].
Unfortunately, fossil calibrations for lice are lacking
[10,17,18]. But, given their parasitic nature and the potential ancient origin of lice considering the recently
described 100 Ma book louse fossil [Liposcelididae; [18]],
it is reasonable to assume that sucking lice originated on
their mammalian hosts by the end of the Cretaceous, 85100 Ma [5,20]. Bininda-Emonds et al. [20] determined that
time of basal diversification in placental mammals was 94109 Ma; therefore, a calibration with a mean of 101 (and
standard deviation of 3.5) was used to represent the basal
split between the Rhychophthirina and Anoplura. Additionally, some studies have documented cospeciation (i.e.,
roughly contemporaneous speciation events) between
sucking lice and their hosts, specifically primates and primate lice [29]. The sucking louse tree can therefore be
calibrated by placing host fossil dates on the corresponding node of the louse tree. Corresponding to the split
between Old World monkeys and apes [85], a calibration
of 20-25 Ma was used to represent the split between Old
World monkey lice (Pedicinus spp.) and hominoid-associated lice [29]. Furthermore, a calibration of 5-7 Ma
(corresponding to the split between chimpanzees and
humans) was used to represent the split between human
Pediculus lice (Pediculus humanus) and the chimpanzee
louse (Pediculus schaeffi; [86]). These three calibration
points were used in combination, as well as individually, to
cross-check the other calibration points, in the divergence
dating analyses. Node constraints were assigned a normal
prior distribution, with the standard deviations encompassing the minimum and maximum age of each calibration. Utilizing a normal distribution allows for uncertainty
in the calibration estimates [87], which is important for
our data because calibrations were taken from the host
fossil record rather than from louse fossils.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Louse taxa used in this study (arranged by family),
host associations, and GenBank accession numbers.
Additional file 2: Bayesian phylogram of the Anoplura based on the
18S rRNA gene. Bayesian posterior probability greater than 0.95 are
indicated above the nodes. Taxon names correspond to Additional File 1
and taxon colors correspond to louse family.
Additional file 3: Bayesian phylogram of the Anoplura based on the
nuclear EF-1a gene. Bayesian posterior probability greater than 0.95 are
indicated above the nodes. Taxon names correspond to Additional File 1
and taxon colors correspond to louse family. This Bayesian phylogram is
the result from a partitioned analysis with each codon position
representing a distinct partition.

Page 13 of 15

Additional file 4: Bayesian phylogram of the Anoplura based on the
mitochondrial COI gene. Bayesian posterior probability greater than
0.95 are indicated above the nodes. Taxon names correspond to
Additional File 1 and taxon colors correspond to louse family. This
Bayesian phylogram is the result from a partitioned analysis with each
codon position representing a distinct partition.
Additional file 5: Chronogram for the Anoplura with the 95%
highest posterior density interval indicated for each node. Bayesian
chronogram resulting from analysis of the 3-gene partitioned data set in
BEAST. This figure is identical to Figure 3 with the exception of including
the upper and lower bounds of the 95% highest posterior density
interval (95% HPD) for each node.

Acknowledgements
We thank A. Abramov, L. Barrow, M. Branham, S. Bush, J. Cook, J. Demboski,
T. Manning, P. Myers, R. Ream, J. Skinner, N. Whiteman, and S. Zohdy for
providing samples of lice to use in this study. Many of the samples used in
this study were collected as part of JEL’s dissertation research (supported by
an NSF Dissertation Improvement Grant; DEB 0308878). M. Branham and J.
Zaspel provided microscopical assistance. S. Jansa offered helpful feedback,
and members of the Light and G. Voelker labs at Texas A&M University
made valuable comments on earlier drafts of the manuscript. We thank M.
Gitzendanner and the Florida Museum of Natural History Phyloinformatics
Cluster for High Performance Computing in the Life Sciences and the
University of Florida Genetics Institute’s Fisher Bioinformatics Cluster for
analytical support. Four anonymous reviewers offered helpful comments and
suggestions that greatly improved the manuscript. This is publication
number 184 of the Center for Biosystematics and Biodiversity, Texas A&M
University. This work was supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation (DEB 0717165) to JEL, VSS, LAD, and DLR.
Author details
1
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843, USA. 2Florida Museum of Natural History,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611, USA. 3Entomology
Department, Natural History Museum, London SW7 5BD, UK. 4Department of
Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611, USA. 5Department of
Biology, Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, Georgia 30460, USA.
Authors’ contributions
JEL conceived the study, carried out molecular studies and analyses, and
wrote the manuscript. VSS and JMA collected molecular data and helped to
draft the manuscript. LAD contributed samples to the study and helped to
draft the manuscript. DLR participated in conceiving the study and drafting
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 17 May 2010 Accepted: 22 September 2010
Published: 22 September 2010
References
1. Johnson KP, Yoshizawa K, Smith VS: Multiple origins of parasitism in lice.
Proc R Soc Lond Ser B-Biol Sci 2004, 271:1771-1776.
2. Marshall AG: The Ecology of Ectoparasitic Insects. London: Academic Press
1981.
3. Snodgrass RE: The feeding apperatus of biting and sucking insects
affecting man and animals. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 1944,
104:1-113.
4. Hopkins GHE: The host-associations of the lice of mammals. P Zool Soc
Lond 1949, 119:387-581.
5. Lyal CHC: Phylogeny and classification of the Psocodea, wtih particular
reference to the lice (Psocodea, Phthiraptera). Syst Entomol 1985,
10:145-165.
6. Kim KC: Evolution and host associations of Anoplura. In Coevolution of
Parasitic Arthropods and Mammals. Edited by: Kim KC. New York: John Wiley
and Sons; 1985:197-231.
7. Lehane MJ: The Biology of the Blood Sucking Insects. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2 2005.

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.
34.

Pearlman JV: Some African Psocoptera found on rats. Entomologist 1960,
92:246-250.
Mockford EL: Some Psocoptera from plumage of birds. Proc Entomol Soc
Wash 1967, 69:307-309.
Grimaldi D, Engel MS: The Evolution of the Insects. New York: Cambridge
University Press 2005.
Cruickshank RH, Johnson KP, Smith VS, Adams RJ, Clayton DH, Page RDM:
Phylogenetic analysis of partial sequences of elongation factor 1 alpha
identifies major groups of lice (Insecta : Phthiraptera). Mol Phylogenet
Evol 2001, 19:202-215.
Barker SC, Whiting M, Johnson KP, Murrell A: Phylogeny of the lice
(Insecta, Phthiraptera) inferred from small subunit rRNA. Zool Scr 2003,
32:407-414.
Yoshizawa K, Johnson KP: How stable is the “polyphyly of lice” hypothesis
(Insecta: Psocodea)?: A comparison of phylogenetic signal in multiple
genes. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2010, 55:939-951.
Cummings BF: Note on the mouthparts of a species of Polyplax
(Anoplura) and on the relationship between Anoplura and Mallophaga.
Ann Mag Nat Hist (8) 1915, 15:256-259.
Stojanovich CJ: The head and mouthparts of the sucking lice (Insecta:
Anoplura). Microentomol 1945, 10:1-46.
Symmons S: Comparative anatomy of the Mallophagan head. Trans Zool
Soc Lond 1952, 27:349-436.
Wappler T, Smith VS, Dalgleish RC: Scratching an ancient itch: an Eocene
bird louse fossil. Proc R Soc Lond Ser B-Biol Sci 2004, 271:S255-S258.
Grimaldi D, Engel MS: Fossil Liposcelididae and the lice ages (Insecta :
Psocodea). Proc R Soc Lond Ser B-Biol Sci 2006, 273:625-633.
Kim KC, Ludwig HW: Parallel evolution, cladistics, and classification of
parasitic Psocodea. Ann Entomol Soc Am 1982, 75:537-548.
Bininda-Emonds ORP, Cardillo M, Jones KE, MacPhee RDE, Beck RMD,
Grenyer R, Price SA, Vos RA, Gittleman JL, Purvis A: The delayed rise of
present-day mammals. Nature 2007, 446:507-512.
Kim KC, Ludwig HW: The family classification of the Anoplura. Syst
Entomol 1978, 3:249-284.
Kim KC: Evolutionary parallelism in Anoplura and eutherian mammals. In
Biosystematics of Haematophagous Insects. Edited by: Service MW. Oxford:
Claredon Press; 1988:37:91-114.
Durden LA, Musser GG: The sucking lice (Insecta, Anoplura) of the world a taxonomic checklist with records of mammalian hosts and
geographical distributions. Bull Amer Mus Nat Hist 1994, 218:1-90.
Durden LA, Musser GG: The mammalian hosts of the sucking lice
(Anoplura) of the world: a host-parasite list. Bull Soc Vector Ecol 1994,
19:130-168.
Kim KC: Blood-sucking lice (Anoplura) of small mammals: True parasites.
In Micromammals and macroparasites: from evolutionary ecology to
management. Edited by: Morand S, Krasnov BR, Poulin R. Tokyo: Springer;
2006:141-160.
Light JE, Hafner MS: Codivergence in heteromyid rodents (Rodentia :
Heteromyidae) and their sucking lice of the genus Fahrenholzia
(Phthiraptera : Anoplura). Syst Biol 2008, 57:449-465.
Light JE, Hafner MS: Phylogenetics and host associations of Fahrenholzia
sucking lice (Phthiraptera : Anoplura). Syst Entomol 2007, 32:359-370.
Light JE, Reed DL: Multigene analysis of phylogenetic relationships and
divergence times of primate sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura). Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2009, 50:376-390.
Reed DL, Light JE, Allen JM, Kirchman JJ: Pair of lice lost or parasites
regained: the evolutionary history of anthropoid primate lice. BMC Biol
2007, 7(5):7.
Brandley MC, Schmitz A, Reeder TW: Partitioned Bayesian analyses,
partition choice, and the phylogenetic relationships of scincid lizards.
Syst Biol 2005, 54:373-390.
Drummond AJ, Ho SYW, Phillips MJ, Rambaut A: Relaxed phylogenetics
and dating with confidence. PLoS Biol 2006, 4:699-710.
Johnson KP, Reed DL, Parker SLH, Kim D, Clayton DH: Phylogenetic
analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial genes supports species groups for
Columbicola (Insecta: Phthiraptera). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007, 45:506-518.
Malenke JR, Johnson KP, Clayton DH: Host specialization differentiates
cryptic species of feather-feeding lice. Evolution 2009, 63:1427-1438.
Smith VS, Light JE, Durden LA: Rodent louse diversity, phylogeny, and
cospeciation in the Manu Biosphere Reserve, Peru. Biol J Linnean Soc
2008, 95:598-610.

Page 14 of 15

35. Johnson PT: Sucking lice of Venezuelan rodents, with remarks on related
species (Anoplura). Brigham Young Univ Sci Bull, Biol Ser 1972, 17:1-62.
36. Drummond AJ, Rambaut A: BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary analysis by
sampling trees. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:214.
37. Rutschmann F, Eriksson T, Salim KA, Conti E: Assessing calibration
uncertainty in molecular dating: the assignment of fossils to alternative
calibration points. Syst Biol 2007, 56:591-608.
38. Yang ZH, Rannala B: Bayesian estimation of species divergence times
under a molecular clock using multiple fossil calibrations with soft
bounds. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:212-226.
39. Yang ZH, Yoder AD: Comparison of likelihood and Bayesian methods for
estimating divergence times using multiple loci and calibration points,
with application to a radiation of cute-looking mouse lemur species. Syst
Biol 2003, 52:705-716.
40. Rannala B, Yang ZH: Inferring speciation times under an episodic
molecular clock. Syst Biol 2007, 56:453-466.
41. Ho SYW, Phillips MJ: Accounting for calibration uncertainty in
phylogenetic estimation of evolutionary divergence times. Syst Biol 2009,
58:367-380.
42. Dalgleish RC, Palma RL, Price RD, Smith VS: Fossil lice (Insecta:
Phthiraptera) reconsidered. Syst Entomol 2006, 31:648-651.
43. Taylor J, Purvis A: Have mammals and their chewing lice diversified in
parallel? In Tangled Trees: phylogeny, cospeciation, and coevolution. Edited
by: Page RDM. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 2002:240-261.
44. Musser GG, Durden LA, Holden ME, Light JE: Systematic review of
endemic Sulawesi squirrels (Rodentia, Sciuridae), with descriptions of
new species of associated sucking lice (Insecta, Anoplura), and
phylogenetic and zoogeographic assessments of sciurid lice. Bull Amer
Mus Nat Hist 2010, 2010:1-260.
45. Lyal CHC: Coevolution of trichodectid lice (Insecta, Phthiraptera) and
their mammalian hosts. J Nat Hist 1987, 21:1-28.
46. Hafner MS, Nadler SA: Phylogenetic trees support the coevolution of
parasites and their hosts. Nature 1988, 322:258-259.
47. Klompen JSH, Keirans JE, Durden LA: Three new species of ticks (Ixodida:
Argasidae: Carios) from fruit bats (Chiroptera: Pteropodidae) in the
Australasian region with notes on host associations. Acarologia 1994,
36:25-40.
48. Hafner JC, Light JE, Hafner DJ, Hafner MS, Reddington E, Rogers DS,
Riddle BR: Basal clades and molecular systematics of heteromyid
rodents. J Mamm 2007, 88:1129-1145.
49. Buxton PA: The Louse. An account of the lice which infest man, their
medical importance and control. London: Edward-Arnold and Co, 2 1947.
50. Clifford CM, Yunker CE, Corwin MD: Control of louse Polyplax serrata with
systemic insecticides administered in silastic rubber implants. J Econ
Entomol 1967, 60:1210-1212.
51. Sosna CB, Medleau L: External parasites - life-cycles, transmission, and
the pathogenesis of disease. Vet Med 1992, 87:538.
52. Brown JW, Payne RB, Mindell DP: Nuclear DNA does not reconcile ‘rocks’
and ‘clocks’ in Neoaves: a comment on Ericson et al. Biol Lett 2007,
3:257-260.
53. Whiteman NK, Parker PG: Using parasites to infer host popuation history:
a new rationale for parasite conservation. Anim Conserv 2005, 8:175-181.
54. Nieberding C, Morand S, Libois R, Michaux JR: A parasite reveals cryptic
phylogeographic history of its host. Proc R Soc Lond Ser B-Biol Sci 2004,
271:2559-2568.
55. Johnson KP, Clayton DH: Coevolutionary history of ecological replicates:
comparing phylogenies of wing and body lice to Columbiform hosts. In
Tangled Trees: phylogeny, cospeciation and coevolution. Edited by: Page RDM.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 2002:262-286.
56. Danforth BN, Ji S: Elongation factor-1a occurs as two copies in bees:
implications for phylogenetic analysis of EF-1a sequences in insects. Mol
Biol Evol 1998, 15:225-235.
57. Hafner MS, Sudman PD, Villablanca FX, Spradling TA, Demastes JW,
Nadler SA: Disparate rates of molecular evolution in cospeciating hosts
and parasites. Science 1994, 265:1087-1090.
58. Rambaut A: Se-AL: Sequence Alignment Editor. [http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/
software/seal/.].
59. Maddison DR, Maddison WP: MacClade. Sunderland, MA, USA: Sinauer
Associates, 4.06.OSX 2003.
60. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: Clustal-W-improving the sensitivity
of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence

Light et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:292
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/292

61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.

69.

70.

71.

72.
73.
74.
75.

76.
77.

78.
79.

80.

81.
82.
83.

84.
85.

86.

87.

weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice.
Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
Swofford DL: PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other
Methods). Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates, 4 2002.
Felsenstein J: Confidence-limits on phylogenies - an approach using the
bootstrap. Evolution 1985, 39:783-791.
Posada D, Crandall KA: MODELTEST: testing the model of DNA
substitution. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:817-818.
Nylander JAA: MrModeltest v2. Program distributed by the author.
Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala University, 2 2004.
Posada D: jModelTest: Phylogenetic model averaging. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25:1253-1256.
Huelsenbeck JP, Rannala B: Phylogenetic methods come of age: Testing
hypotheses in an evolutionary context. Science 1997, 276:227-232.
Posada D, Buckley TR: Model selection and model averaging in
phylogenetics: Advantages of akaike information criterion and Bayesian
approaches over likelihood ratio tests. Syst Biol 2004, 53:793-808.
Gu X, Fu YX, Li WH: Maximum-likelihood-estimation of the heterogeneity
of substitution rate among nucleotide sites. Mol Biol Evol 1995,
12:546-557.
Yang ZH: Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic estimation from DNAsequences with variable rates over sites-approximate methods. J Mol
Evol 1994, 39:306-314.
Zwickl DJ: Genetic algorithm approaches for the phylogenetic analysis of
large biological sequence data sets under the maximum likelihood
criterion. Ph.D. dissertation. The University of Texas at Austin 2006.
Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
Rambaut A, Drummond AJ: TRACER. Oxford: University of Oxford 2004.
Nylander JAA, Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP, Nieves-Aldrey JL: Bayesian
phylogenetic analysis of combined data. Syst Biol 2004, 53:47-67.
Brown JM, Lemmon AR: The importance of data partitioning and the
utility of bayes factors in Bayesian phylogenetics. Syst Biol 2007,
56:643-655.
Edwards SV, Liu L, Pearl DK: High-resolution species trees without
concatenation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:5936-5941.
Liu L, Pearl DK: Species trees from gene trees: Reconstructing Bayesian
posterior distributions of a species phylogeny using estimated gene tree
distributions. Syst Biol 2007, 56:504-514.
Degnan JH, Rosenberg NA: Discordance of species trees with their most
likely gene trees. PLoS Genet 2006, 2:762-768.
Leaché AD: Species tree discordance traces to phylogeographic clade
boundaries in North American fence lizards (Sceloporus). Syst Biol 2009,
58:547-559.
Kishino H, Hasegawa M: Evaluation of the maximum-likelihood estimate
of the evolutionary tree topologies from DNA-sequence data, and the
branching order in Hominoidea. J Mol Evol 1989, 29:170-179.
Goldman N, Anderson JP, Rodrigo AG: Likelihood-based tests of
topologies in phylogenetics. Syst Biol 2000, 49:652-670.
Shimodaira H: An approximately unbiased test for phylogenetic tree
selection. Syst Biol 2002, 51:492-508.
Ihlen PG, Ekman S: Outline of phylogeny and character evolution in
Rhizocarpon (Rhizocarpaceae, lichenized Ascomycoa) based on nuclear
ITS and mitochondrial SSU ribosomal DNA sequences. Biol J Linnean Soc
2002, 77:535-546.
Rambaut A: FigTree. [http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/].
Kumar S, Filipski A, Swarna V, Walker A, Hedges SB: Placing confidence
limits on the molecular age of the human-chimpanzee divergence. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:18842-18847.
Stauffer RL, Walker A, Ryder OA, Lyons-Weiler M, Hedges SB: Human and
ape molecular clocks and constraints on paleontological hypotheses.
J Hered 2001, 92:469-474.
Ho SYW: Calibrating molecular estimates of substitution rates and
divergence times in birds. J Avian Biol 2007, 38:409-414.

doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-292
Cite this article as: Light et al.: Evolutionary history of mammalian
sucking lice (Phthiraptera: Anoplura). BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010
10:292.

Page 15 of 15

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
