<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Predicting phenotypic traits of prokaryotes from protein domain frequencies</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:481. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-481"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Thomas Lingner"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Predicting phenotypic traits of prokaryotes from
protein domain frequencies
Thomas Lingner1,2*, Stefanie Mühlhausen1, Toni Gabaldón2, Cedric Notredame2, Peter Meinicke1*

Abstract
Background: Establishing the relationship between an organism’s genome sequence and its phenotype is a
fundamental challenge that remains largely unsolved. Accurately predicting microbial phenotypes solely based on
genomic features will allow us to infer relevant phenotypic characteristics when the availability of a genome
sequence precedes experimental characterization, a scenario that is favored by the advent of novel highthroughput and single cell sequencing techniques.
Results: We present a novel approach to predict the phenotype of prokaryotes directly from their protein domain
frequencies. Our discriminative machine learning approach provides high prediction accuracy of relevant
phenotypes such as motility, oxygen requirement or spore formation. Moreover, the set of discriminative domains
provides biological insight into the underlying phenotype-genotype relationship and enables deriving hypotheses
on the possible functions of uncharacterized domains.
Conclusions: Fast and accurate prediction of microbial phenotypes based on genomic protein domain content is
feasible and has the potential to provide novel biological insights. First results of a systematic check for annotation
errors indicate that our approach may also be applied to semi-automatic correction and completion of the existing
phenotype annotation.

Background
Despite initial expectations that the elucidation of the
complete genome of an organism would enable understanding its biology, the establishment of specific links
between genotype and phenotype remains one of the
major challenges that biology faces today. In particular,
this applies to complex phenotypes that depend on the
effect of many genes. The identification of phenotypespecific genes or other genomic features opens the way
to (1) formulate testable hypotheses on how the action
of these genes may explain the occurrence of that
phenotype and (2) predict the occurrence of that phenotype from the analysis of genomic sequences. Especially,
the inference of microbial phenotypes on the basis of
genomic features is highly relevant within the context of
a growing number of (meta)genomic projects. Despite
the progress that has been achieved for the investigation
of phenotype-specific groups of genes, no practical
* Correspondence: thomas@gobics.de; pmeinic@gwdg.de
1
Department of Bioinformatics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics,
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

solution exists for the genome-based prediction of phenotypical properties of prokaryotes.
The association of phenotypic and genotypic traits has
been intensively investigated in the field of comparative
genomics, mostly by exploiting the fact that organisms
that share a particular phenotype are expected to share
the set of genes responsible for that trait. In particular,
phylogenetic profiles - presence/absence patterns of a
given gene in a set of genomes - have been used to
identify the function of uncharacterized proteins based
on their co-occurrence with known proteins (e.g. [1], for
an overview see [2]). On the other hand, the use of gene
co-occurrence patterns is highly affected by missing data
resulting from genome misannotation or erroneous
assignment of orthology [2]. Since the orthology assignment step is a pivotal element of most phylogenomics
approaches, the results of such gene-based methods can
easily be deteriorated by simple genomic rearrangements
such as gene fusion/fission events or domain shuffling
[3]. Rather than correlating gene occurrence patterns
only, several alternative approaches explicitly analyze
genotype-phenotype associations by linking genes to a

© 2010 Lingner et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

particular phenotype, e.g. Gram stain, oxygen requirement, endospore formation or motility [4-8]. In order to
circumvent the orthology search step and the problem
of incomplete presence/absence patterns, most of these
approaches map genes and proteins to a more generic
level such as clusters of orthologous genes [4,7], protein
domains [5] and metabolic pathways [5,8].
A natural extension to these approaches is the de novo
prediction of an organism’s phenotype from the information contained in the genome. Such a predictive
approach is likely to be increasingly useful in the context of rapid generation of genomic sequences from a
growing number of microorganisms. For instance, current sequencing techniques allow the determination of
genomic sequences of unculturable organisms as well as
the rapid generation of sequences from recently isolated
strains and even from single cells [9,10]. In particular,
the rapidly growing number and sequencing depth of
metagenomes from different natural environments and
human body sites will allow the analysis of the genetic
potential of the most dominant species without isolation
of these organisms [11,12]. In many of the abovementioned cases, the availability of the genomic sequence
will precede the standard phenotypic characterization by
means of experimental tests.
To our knowledge, the possibility of directly predicting
phenotypic properties from genome content has only
been investigated in the context of assessing the predictive power of phenotype-associated genotypic features.
For instance, in Kastenmüller et al. [8] genome-specific
metabolic pathways have been evaluated for phenotype
prediction using an intermediate mapping of proteins to
pathways via EC categories together with multi-variate
machine learning techniques. However, as the authors
point out, the pathway inference method has several
limitations arising from incomplete EC annotations for
proteins and the limited metabolic knowledge represented in pathway databases. Furthermore, the approach
is limited to pathways that have been detected and
described in culturable species.
Here we present an approach for the prediction of
microbial phenotypes that is entirely based on discriminative learning from protein domain frequencies as
obtained from a large number of prokaryotic genomes.
This approach does not require the identification of
orthologous genes and fully operates on local genome
features, i.e. the presence or absence of certain Pfam
[13] domain families. The latter property in particular
allows to make predictions in very early stages of a genome project, just after a sufficient sequencing coverage
has been obtained. Provided the sequencing reads are
long enough, e.g. like in recent versions of 454 technology and upcoming Solexa paired-end modules, this status can already be achieved before assembly of the reads

Page 2 of 11

into longer contigs. Thanks to the availability of
HMMER3 (http://hmmer.janelia.org/), which achieves
the speed of RPS-BLAST [14], and with the availability
of the UFO web server [15], which is 100 times faster
than RPS-BLAST, the detection of protein domains at
genomic scale is no longer a computationally expensive
task.

Results
Our approach for phenotype prediction is based on the
complete genomic sequences and the NCBI phenotype
annotation of more than 1000 prokaryotic organisms
from 21 different phylogenetic groups available at the
NCBI web site http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. The
predictions were performed by applying a discriminative
machine learning technique to the organisms’ protein
domain profiles, i.e. frequencies of Pfam [13] domain
families in their genomes, and the organisms’ phenotype
annotations (see section “Methods”). As we will describe
below, our approach has two important outcomes: (1)
the accurate prediction of microbial phenotypes from
organism-specific protein domain profiles and (2) the
identification of discriminative, i.e. phenotype-specific,
Pfam domain families.
First, we compared our approach to a method that can
be used for microbial phenotype prediction and which is
based on inferred metabolic pathways [8] (for details see
section “Methods”). Table 1 shows the results of our
evaluation in terms of the average values of the product
of sensitivity and specificity and the area under ROC
curve (aucROC, [16]) over 100 repetitions of a crossvalidation procedure. The performance values for our
domain-based approach are consistently higher than
that of the pathway-based method: for both phenotype
categories our approach achieves a 6 percentage point
improvement in terms of the product of sensitivity and
specificity.
Afterwards, we extended our evaluation to the whole
set of organisms from the NCBI web site (for details see
section “Methods”). Column 2 of table 2 shows the phenotype prediction performance of our domain-based
approach in terms of the harmonic mean of sensitivity
and specificity, which is also known as F1-measure. The
average accuracy over all phenotype categories is high
(0.954), indicating that the high-dimensional protein
domain profile space provides a sufficient separability of
examples by the linear classification model.
Among the sequenced genomes available at the
moment, several entries represent closely related organisms from the same genus or merely different strains
from the same species (see also additional file 1). To
estimate the prediction accuracy in case of the absence
of those close relatives, we also evaluated our method
on a genus-partitioned data set, i.e. organisms belonging

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

Page 3 of 11

Table 1 Performance comparison with pathway-based
prediction
best pathwaybased

Phenotype

sensitivity specificity

domain-based

harmonic aucROC aucPRC
mean

Endospores

sens ×
spec

aucROC
(avg/std)

sens × spec
(avg/std)

Gram stain

0.93

0.90

0.97/0.01

0.96/0.01

Oxygen
Requirement

0.93

0.88

0.95/0.02

0.94/0.02

Prediction performance comparison between a pathway-based method [8]
and the protein domain profile-based approach. The first column indicates the
phenotype category. The second and fourth column represent the phenotype
prediction performance in terms of the area under ROC curve (aucROC), the
third and fifth column denote the prediction performance in terms of the
product of sensitivity (sens) and specificity (spec). For the domain-based
method the values denote average (avg) and standard deviation (std) over
100 repetitions of a ten-fold cross-validation with random partitioning.
Performance values for the pathway-based methods have been taken from
the supplemental material associated with the original work.

to genera that have been used for training were not used
for performance assessment. In the evaluation setup at
hand this can also be seen as a rather rigorous redundancy reduction on a particular phylogenetic level.
Column 3 of table 2 shows the performance values after
genus partitioning. The average performance decline
(shown in column 4 of table 2) is ≈ 7 percentage points,
ranging from ≈ 2 percentage points for the phenotype
category “Oxygen Requirement” to ≈ 13 percentage
points for the “Endospores” category.
To estimate the generalization capability of our
approach, we measured the prediction performance on
an independent test set of 443 proteomes from organisms that have not been used in the validation procedure (see also section “Methods”). Table 3 shows the
generalization performance in terms of the harmonic
mean and other performance indices and figure 1 shows
the associated ROC curves.
In principle, our discriminative approach can be used
with full genes as genomic features instead of (or in
addition to) protein domains. To evaluate this, we also
Table 2 Validation performance
Phenotype

no genus
partition

with genus difference
partition

Endospores

0.946

0.821

-0.125

Gram stain

0.966

0.905

-0.061

Motility

0.932

0.870

0.973

0.949

-0.024

average

0.954

0.875

0.894

0.984

0.959

0.993
0.942

0.907
0.874

0.948
0.906

0.986
0.927

0.968
0.944

Oxygen
Requirement

0.992

0.963

0.977

0.993

0.987

0.960

0.904

0.931

0.972

0.965

Generalization performance using an independent test data set (for details
see section “Methods”). The first column indicates the phenotype category,
the remaining columns represent the prediction accuracy in terms of different
performance measures. Here, “aucROC” and “aucPRC” correspond to “area
under ROC curve” and “area under PRC curve”, respectively.

used clusters of orthologous genes (COGs, [17]) to construct organism-specific gene frequency profiles (see
section “Methods”). On average, the validation performance is marginally lower as compared with the protein
domain profiles (-0.003 without genus partition, -0.011
with genus partition). The same can be stated for the
average generalization performance (-0.002), although
here the sensitivity is slightly higher (+0.009).
So far, we limited our evaluation to binary cases of
phenotypic traits, but in general, phenotype characteristics can have multiple values and may even be continuous. In contrast to other discriminative machine
learning techniques, the method we used provides the
possibility of multi-class learning (and classification by
regression) as a standard feature (see also section
“Methods”). Thus, we extended our evaluation to
three phenotypes with multiple values: “Salinity” (with
the traits “Extreme halophilic”, “Mesophilic”, “Moderate
1

0.9

0.8
Endospores

-0.062

Oxygen
Requirement

0.913

Gram stain
Motility

average

aucROC

true positives ratio

phenotype

Table 3 Generalization performance

0.886

-0.068

Comparison of phenotype prediction performance for different validation sets
according to phylogenetic proximity of organisms (see also section
“Methods”). The first column indicates the phenotype category, the second
and third column represent the prediction performance in terms of the
harmonic mean of sensitivity and specificity for the validation set without and
with using the genus partition, respectively. Values in the fourth column
correspond to the difference of prediction performance when the genuspartitioned data set is used.

0.7

Gram stain
Motility

0.6

0.5

Oxygen Requirement

0

0.1

0.2
0.3
false positive ratio

0.4

0.5

Figure 1 ROC curves for generalization performance. Receiveroperator characteristics (ROC) curves representing the phenotype
prediction performance on the independent test set. Each
phenotype-specific curve is assigned a unique color according to
the legend within the figure. Axes are limited to minimum 50% true
positive ratio and maximum 50% false positive ratio. The associated
area under ROC curve (aucROC) values are given in table 3.

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

halophilic’ and “Non-halophilic”), “Temperature range”
(“Thermophilic”, Hyperthermophilic” and “Mesophilic”)
and “Oxygen Requirement” including facultative organisms. Since the above mentioned performance indices
are not defined for multi-class problems, we measured
the generalization performance in terms of the average
classification error. Here, the categories “Oxygen
Requirement” and “Temperature range” show a good
performance with average errors of ≈ 2% and ≈ 11%,
respectively. In contrast, the phenotype category
“Salinity” yields a classification error of ≈ 33%.
A potential application of the approach that we present
here is the prediction of phenotypical traits for organisms
that cannot be cultivated but whose genomes can be
sequenced using single cell sequencing techniques or
may be assembled from metagenomic sequence data
because of the organism’s abundance. As a pilot study,
we analyzed two microbial genomes obtained from a
single cell sequencing approach [12]. Our prediction for
the two flavobacteria (MS024-2A and MS024-3C) indicate that both organisms do not form endospores, are
gram negative, do not show evidence for motility and a
weak evidence for an aerobic lifestyle. These results are
in good agreement with what would be expected from
flavobacteria in a marine environment.

Discussion
As we showed in the previous section, our discriminative
protein domain-based approach to microbial phenotype
prediction provides a good validation and generalization
performance and outperforms a method based on metabolic pathways [8]. The latter finding can possibly be
explained by the fact that the pathway-based method was
not intended for the purpose of phenotype prediction,
but for the identification of phenotype-associated pathways. In contrast to our approach, which is designed to
identify discriminative features from a large set of protein
domains, the restriction to a few detectable metabolic
pathways is likely to dismiss many of such discriminative
features. Furthermore, the EC-based mapping of proteins
to metabolic pathways as described in [8] complicates the
practical application for de novo prediction of newly
sequenced organisms. In contrast, our simpler approach
only requires the phenotype-specific discriminative
weight vectors and the organism’s protein domain
profile as obtained from a fast domain detection such as
UFO [15].
Since protein domain sequences are often substantially
shorter than the corresponding genes, domain detection
can even be performed on short sequence fragments
which do not contain full genes. This also qualifies our
approach for phenotype prediction on sequence read
data as obtained from high-throughput sequencing,
providing a sufficient number of reads can be assigned

Page 4 of 11

to a particular species. However, if the complete protein
sequences of an organism are available, our results indicate that clusters of orthologous genes (COGs) can be
used as well to provide genomic features within our
discriminative framework. This suggests that the choice
between full genes and protein domains should depend
on the kind of discriminative features one would like to
obtain for further analysis (see below). In principle, our
approach could also be used to study the importance of
protein domain architecture for microbial genotypephenotype association, e.g. by considering particular
domain architectures as single features. However, this
requires to deal with several rearrangements such as
gene fusion, gene fission and domain shuffling, which
lead to a high-dimensional and sparsely occupied feature
space that complicates learning. Our results indicate a
good generalization performance and thus a real world
suitability of our approach. However, compared to the
values obtained during validation, a decreased performance for all phenotype categories except “Oxygen
Requirement” can be observed. We assume that this
results from a combination of sequencing status and
annotation quality of the organisms, which we used for
the test set: the mostly unfinished genome sequences
(337 out of 443) may lead to wrongly estimated domain
profiles and the sometimes unverified phenotype annotation of these newly sequenced organisms may have
been derived merely on the basis of phylogenetic proximity to well-studied organisms.
Our genus partition experiment simulated the absence
of close species across the training and validation sets
and showed that the prediction accuracy decreases
differently across the phenotype categories. These results
suggest that certain phenotypic traits can be predicted
reliably without the presence of closely related species
in the training data, while other phenotype categories
lack a representative phylogenetic diversity in current
databases and may thus depend on the presence of
closely related organisms for accurate prediction. Similarly,
our pre-study regarding multi-class phenotypes showed
divergent accuracy results for the three tested phenotypes. In particular, the “Salinity” prediction performed
poorly, with every third example being wrongly
assigned. This may be explained by the low number of
training examples for particular traits (“Extreme halophilic”/“Moderate halophilic”: 8/18 examples) and the
difficulty to unambiguously assign one of these phenotype characteristics to an organism.
Investigation of discriminative domain families

In order to assess the biological relevance of the discriminative protein domain features, we investigate the 50
most discriminative phenotype-specific domain families
within a biological context. For brevity, we restrict the

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

Page 5 of 11

analysis to the two phenotype categories “Endospores”
(spore formation) and “Motility”. However, the investigation can be performed in a similar fashion for the
“Gram stain” and “Oxygen Requirement” phenotypes
using the ranked lists of discriminative domain families
provided in additional file 2. The features are based on
the discriminative model that has been learned from all
training organisms using the parameter associated with
the best validation performance. We also discuss the
results from the phylogenetic clustering of these
families, which may be used to identify functional modules of domains (for details see section “Methods”). The
clustering dendrograms associated with all phenotypes
can be found in additional file 3.
Endospores

Endospores are dormant resistance forms produced by
some gram-positive bacteria by the formation of a thick
internal wall that encloses the DNA and a part of the
cytoplasm. For reasons of brevity, table 4 only shows the
10 most discriminative domain families associated with
the phenotype category “Endospores”, a list with the 50
most discriminative domains can be found in additional
file 2. Of the top 10 (50) domains, 4 (12) have the terms
“spore” or “sporulation” in their description line. Additional domains are directly involved in sporulation,
e.g. the Cell wall hydrolase, the Coat F domain, the Germination protease, or the YabG peptidase U57 domain,
which is present in a sporulation-specific protease of
several spore coat proteins [18]. Other domains such as
YabP have been associated with the sporulation process
through mutagenesis analyses. Thus, the discriminative
domain set for prokaryotes associated with the term
“Endospore formation” is enriched in domains involved
in the sporulation process.

Figure 2 shows the dendrogram resulting from phylogenetic clustering of the 50 most discriminative domain
families. In the upper part, a cluster of Pfam domains
associated with sporulation can easily be identified
(colored green). Interestingly, also three domains of
unknown function (“DUFs”) are localized in that cluster
(DUF1659, DUF1540, DUF1429). This indicates that the
proteins associated with these families may directly be
involved in the sporulation process or act together with
sporulation proteins in the same pathway. In fact, the
domain family DUF1429 (PF07241) located at the lower
part of the cluster is considered a “dead” family in the
current version (24.0) of the Pfam database and has
been merged into the family YabP (PF07873), which is
associated with sporulation.
Motility

Of the top 10 (50) domains associated with the phenotype
“Motility” (see table 5 and additional file 2), 6 (24) are
known components of the flagellar machinery, the macromolecular complex responsible for bacterial motility,
including SPOA and SAF domains. Other groups of
domains associated with this phenotype are related to the
secretory pathway specifically devoted to export components of the flagellum, these include FHIPEP, FlhB, FliF,
FliP, and Bacterial export families 1 and 3. Additional
three domains are associated to the process of translation
and it could be postulated that they are specific factors for
transcribing genes related to the domain families mentioned above. For instance, sigma-54 has recently been
found to be involved in the flagellum in E. coli [19].
Another group of domains that is highly represented in
this set is the one related to chemotaxis, the mechanism
by which cells can direct their movement in response to
certain stimuli. These include MCP, CheW and CheC

Table 4 Discriminative domain families for phenotype category “Endospores”
rank

weight

# groups

Pfam-ID

Pfam description

1

0.008

3

PF03419

Sporulation factor SpoIIGA

2

0.007

5

PF07486

Cell Wall Hydrolase

3

0.007

1

PF06686

Stage III sporulation protein AC (SpoIIIAC)

4

0.007

2

PF00269

Small, acid-soluble spore proteins, alpha/beta type

5

0.007

1

PF07873

YabP family

6

0.007

1

PF09555

Stage III sporulation protein AD (spore_III_AD)

7

0.007

3

PF00407

Pathogenesis-related protein Bet v I family

8

0.007

4

PF00876

Innexin

9

0.007

6

PF04672

Protein of unknown function (DUF574)

10

0.006

1

PF04647

Accessory gene regulator B

List of the 10 most (positive) discriminative domain families associated with the RLSC model for the phenotype category “Endospores” (see also section
“Methods”). The first column indicates the rank, the second column shows the discriminative model weight. The third column denotes the phylogenetic width of
a particular domain family, i.e. the number of taxonomic groups at phylum level in which the family occurs. The fourth and fifth column correspond to the Pfam
ID and family description associated with a particular domain family. The table with the 50 most positively and negatively discriminative domain families can be
found in additional file 2.

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

Page 6 of 11

Tubulin−tyrosine ligase family
Pathogenesis−related protein Bet v I family
Protein of unknown function (DUF760)
WW domain
YKOF−related Family
Predicted secreted protein (DUF2300)
Protein of unknown function (DUF1659)
Manganese containing catalase
Bacillus/Clostridium GerA spore germination protein
Inhibitor of sigma−G Gin
Domain of Unknown Function (DUF1540)
Coat F domain
Cell Wall Hydrolase
YabG peptidase U57
YabP family
Spore cortex protein YabQ (Spore_YabQ)
SigmaK−factor processing regulatory protein BofA
Small, acid−soluble spore proteins, alpha/beta type
SpoVA protein
Stage V sporulation protein AD (SpoVAD)
Putative stage IV sporulation protein YqfD
Sporulation factor SpoIIGA
Germination protease
Stage II sporulation protein R (spore_II_R)
Stage IV sporulation protein A (spore_IV_A)
Stage III sporulation protein AD (spore_III_AD)
Stage III sporulation protein AE (spore_III_AE)
Stage III sporulation protein AC (SpoIIIAC)
Protein of unknown function (DUF1429)
Accessory gene regulator B
Putative redox−active protein (C_GCAxxG_C_C)
Glycosyl hydrolases family 18
Innexin
Uncharacterized conserved protein (DUF2267)
Uncharacterized conserved protein (DUF2048)
Small hydrophilic plant seed protein
5’ nucleotidase family
Stigma−specific protein, Stig1
Protein of unknown function (DUF2398)
Subtilisin inhibitor−like
Protein of unknown function (DUF574)
Domain of unknown function (DUF397)
Protein of unknown function (DUF742)
FAD−binding domain
Cellulose binding domain
Pseudomonas avirulence D protein (AvrD)
MAM domain
Hepatitis C virus non−structural protein NS4b
Protein of unknown function (DUF1645)
Neocarzinostatin family
30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Figure 2 Clustering dendrogram for phenotype category “Endospores”. Phylogenetic clustering dendrogram of the 50 most discriminative
positive domains associated with the phenotype category “Endospores” (see also section “Methods”). Clusters with a maximum linkage branch
length of 70% (Matlab® ‘dendrogram’ default threshold) are assigned unique colors. In the dendrogram a cluster of protein families associated
with sporulation can directly be identified (colored green). This cluster also contains several uncharacterized domain families (“DUFs”).

domains, the Cache and P2 response regulator domains,
the signal transducing histidine kinase and its related
HAMP domain. It is obvious that all bacteria able of chemotaxis do need a motility system and thus this association is to be expected.

The clustering dendrogram associated with the motility phenotype (see additional file 3) is dominated by a
cluster that groups together the domain families known
to be involved in the flagellar structure and protein
families associated with chemotaxis (colored green).

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

Page 7 of 11

Table 5 Discriminative domain families for phenotype category “Motility”
rank

weight

# groups

Pfam-ID

Pfam description

1

0.008

18

PF00015

Methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein (MCP) signaling domain

2

0.007

20

PF00672

HAMP domain

3

0.007

14

PF00460

Flagella basal body rod protein

4

0.006

12

PF08345

Flagellar M-ring protein C-terminal

5

0.006

15

PF06429

Domain of unknown function (DUF1078)

6

0.006

14

PF00700

Bacterial flagellin C-terminus

7

0.006

16

PF01312

FlhB HrpN YscU SpaS Family

8

0.006

11

PF02120

Flagellar hook-length control protein

9

0.006

14

PF02049

Flagellar hook-basal body complex protein FliE

10

0.006

14

PF00669

Bacterial flagellin N-terminus

List of the 10 most (positive) discriminative domain families associated with the RLSC model for the phenotype category “Motility” (see also section “Methods”).
The first column indicates the rank, the second column shows the discriminative model weight. The third column denotes the phylogenetic width of a particular
domain family. The fourth and fifth column correspond to the Pfam ID and family description associated with a particular domain family. The table with the 50
most positively and negatively discriminative domain families can be found in additional file 2.

This cluster also includes a domain of unknown function (DUF1078, PF06429), indicating that this DUF is
highly correlated to flagellar basal-body rod and flagellar
hook proteins. Indeed, the Pfam annotation of DUF1078
suggests a relation to these families and contains the gene
ontology (GO) cellular component category “flagellum”.
The DUF1078 domain family has also been identified to
be correlated with motility by Liu et al. [5].
Detecting annotation errors

A possible use of phenotype prediction approaches is
the completion and correction of existing annotation. In
order to identify erroneous NCBI annotation associated
with the organisms, we compared our prediction results
with the phenotype annotation and verified the candidates via literature search. We found several cases of
possible annotation errors for different categories by
verifying putatively false predictions on the test set that
do not agree with the existing annotation. For instance,
for the “Motility” category we identified two organisms
(Burkholderia glumae BGR1, Bacillus cereus 03BB102)
with negative annotation but evidence for being motile
[20,21]. Similarly, for the category “Gram stain” we
found another two possible erroneous annotations
(Eubacterium eligens ATCC 27750, Geodermatophilus
obscurus DSM 43160) with phenotype annotation in the
literature differing from that of the NCBI [22,23].
Finally, we identified two organisms that most likely
have been assigned to the wrong respiratory subcategory
(Dethiosulfovibrio peptidovorans DSM 11002, Acidimicrobium ferrooxidans DSM 10331 [24,25]). In order to
encourage the systematic correction of erroneous existing annotation, we provide phenotype-specific lists with
prediction results from our approach for organisms in
the independent test in additional file 4.

Robustness and speed

Our validation (test) data set consists of 795 (106) finished and 237 (337) unfinished genomes, respectively.
The total number of examples used for model training
and validation is substantially higher as compared to
related work of e.g. Slonim et al. [6] (59 genomes) or
Kastenmüller et al. [8] (266 genomes). We think that
the robustness of models, which is indicated by the
good generalization performance, can partly be attributed to the unprecedented size of the data set. Furthermore, the high prediction accurracy on the test set,
which contains many yet unfinished genomes, suggests
that even in early stages of genome projects reliable
statements about an organism’s phenotype can be
derived from the predicted domain profile.
In contrast to the approach presented in [8], our
method does not involve an intermediate mapping of
proteins to pathways. Instead, the phenotype prediction
is directly performed on the basis of estimated Pfam
domain profiles. The computation time that is necessary
for inference of the domain profiles depends on the
domain detection method and the size of an organism’s
proteome and ranges from a few seconds to several
hours [15]. The actual phenotype prediction can be efficiently performed by means of the dot product of the
precomputed domain profile and the discriminative
weight vector in domain profile space. This only
requires storage of the 10797-dimensional discriminant
and ≈ 0.05 milliseconds for calculation of the prediction
score.

Conclusions
In this work we presented a discriminative machine
learning approach that allows to accurately predict the
phenotype of a prokaryotic organism directly from its

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

protein domain frequencies. Our results indicate that
the domain-based method achieves a better prediction
accuracy than the pathway-based approach of Kastenmüller et al. [8], while being simpler to implement.
Furthermore, we showed that the learned models can be
interpreted within a biologically meaningful context in
terms of discriminative protein domain families associated with a particular phenotype. By means of a cluster analysis of these families we also identified
phenotype-specific functional modules that contain yet
uncharacterized protein domain families (“DUFs”) and
thus may be used to generate hypotheses about the
functions of these domains. As an alternative to protein
domains, we showed that clusters of orthologous genes
(COGs, [17]) may also be used as genomic features for
discriminative learning. Similar to our analysis of discriminative protein domains, this might be valuable for
interpretation of the resulting phenotype-specific genes.
The incorporation of gene context features such as protein domain architecture is possible with our approach
and shall be investigated in the future.
In combination with a fast domain detection method,
our approach can be used to rapidly predict the phenotype of an organism solely based on its genomic data.
As we showed in this work, this can be achieved in very
early stages even before genome assembly. In principle,
our method can also be used to verify and complete the
phenotype annotation in public databases, e.g. within
the NCBI prokaryotic genome project. Future work will
include the estimation of the reliability of the existing
annotation based on differences between phenotype predictions and literature information. By this means, we
hope to gradually improve the data underlying our
method and thus the accurracy of the resulting models.
Furthermore, the framework shall be extended to deal
with more detailed and diverse phenotype description,
e.g. as provided by the expected growth of metadata
associated with sequenced genomes.

Page 8 of 11

procedure (see below), we downloaded additional 443
proteomes and the associated annotation from the
abovementioned websites on October 10, 2009. The
complete list of organisms and their phenotype annotation can be found in additional file 1.
Construction of Pfam domain and COG profiles

In this work, the Pfam domain profile associated with a
particular organism is a d = 10797 dimensional domain
occurrence vector according to the maximum family
index of PF10797 in version 23.0, section “A” of the
Pfam database [13]. This vector has nonzero entries
only for dimensions associated with the Pfam domains
that occur in the organism’s genome. To calculate the
occurrences, we applied a Pfam domain detection to
each protein in each genome using the UFO method [15].
The resulting vector x of absolute domain occurrence
counts is normalized to relative domain frequencies such
that x f ∈ [0, 1]d , ∑ d x i = 1
i =1
Furthermore, each dimension of the domain feature
space with a standard deviation different from zero is
normalized to unit standard deviation. The data matrices
with UFO counts for all organisms of the validation and
test set along with the organism names and relevant
NCBI phenotype annotation in comma separated value
(CSV) format can be found in additional file 5.
For comparison, we also calculated organism-specific
profiles of full gene frequencies in terms of clusters of
orthologous genes (COGs, [17]) detected in the organisms’ protein sequences. For COG detection, we
downloaded the COG database in RPS-BLAST (Reverse
PSI-BLAST, [26]) format from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/
pub/mmdb/cdd/little_endian/Cog_LE.tar.gz and evaluated the organisms’ proteomes against this database
using the default e-value threshold of 0.01. The 5665
COG clusters give rise to 5665-dimensional organismspecific feature vectors, which we normalized as
described above.

Methods
Dataset

Phenotype prediction on domain profiles

We downloaded all prokaryotic proteomes from the
integr8 FTP site ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/
integr8/fasta/proteomes/ on May 12, 2009 and selected
all NCBI annotated organisms which could be uniquely
associated with an integr8 proteome file via the integr8
proteome report ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/
integr8/proteome_report.txt. The annotation of these
1032 organisms for the phenotypes “Endospores”,
“Gram stain”, “Motility” and “Oxygen Requirement” was
extracted from the respective columns of the table on
the NCBI prokaryotic genome project web site ftp://ftp.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/genomeprj/lproks_0.txt.
While these proteomes were used for the validation

To predict microbial phenotypes from organism-specific
domain profiles, we use a supervised classification
approach. For this purpose, we divide the task of predicting four phenotype categories into four binary classification problems according to the discrimination of
different phenotype realizations. Here, organisms that
are annotated as “yes” ("Endospores”), “+” (“Gram
stain”), “motile” (“Motility”) or “aerobic” (“Oxygen
Requirement”) are considered as positive examples and
organisms that are annotated “no”/“-”/“non-motile”/
“anaerobic” are used as negative examples of the respective two-class problem. Domain profiles of organisms
that do not have any annotation for a particular

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

Page 9 of 11

phenotype realization are not considered for evaluation.
Furthermore, organisms with an identical UFO Pfam
domain profile were reduced to a single representative
organism. Thus, the total number of examples as well as
the number of positive and negative examples vary
across the different phenotype categories. An overview
of the number of examples associated with each phenotype and the phylogenetic distributions of all phenotypes
in terms of histograms can be found in additional file 6.
For learning of discriminative phenotype prediction
models we use so-called regularized least-squares classifiers (RLSC, [27]). RLS classifiers are closely related to
widely-used Support Vector Machines (SVM) and have
been shown to provide similar classification performance, while being simpler to implement [28]. Furthermore, the RLSC method is computationally efficient and
the learned discriminative weight vector can be interpreted in terms of underlying features. To take into
account the imbalanced number of positive and negative
examples in each category, we apply a “balanced” implementation of RLSC [29]. The balanced RLSC error function for N examples and a regularization parameter l
can be written as
N

E(w) =

∑b

i

yi − w t x i

2

+ w

2

,

(1)

i =1

where w is the discriminative weight vector and yi Î
{-1, 1} is the class label of the i-th example. The vector
b contains the example-specific balancing factors,
whereby we use the inverse size of the class a particular
example belongs to. For reasons of computational efficiency, we apply the RLSC method in a kernel-based
manner using a linear kernel, whereby the kernel matrix
K of all examples is computed by K = XtX. The matrix
X corresponds to the matrix of all N organism-specific
domain profiles X = [x 1 ,..., x N ]. The abovementioned
error function can now be minimized by
w = (K +  B) −1 y ,

(2)

where B is a matrix that contains the inverse elements
of the vector b as diagonal elements. In case of multiclass learning problems with M classes, the label vector
y has to be replaced by a matrix Y = [z1,..., zM], zi, j Î
{0, 1}, where zi is a class-specific vector with non-zero
values for examples belonging to class i. The minimization then yields a matrix W = [w1 ,..., wM] of M classspecific discriminative weight vectors.
To evaluate the influence of the regularization parameter l, we randomly divided the data set into 20 partitions with 70% training and 30% validation examples,
respectively. Using these partitions, we computed the

average area under curve with respect to the precisionrecall characteristics (PRC, [16]) over all partitions to
determine the best parameter l = {10m|m = -5, -4,..., 5}.
Finally, we tested the prediction performance of our
method in terms of the harmonic mean (also known as
2* sens* spec

F1-measure) harm = sens + spec , which combines sensitivity ( sens = TPTPFN ) and specificity ( spec = TPTPFP ) .
+
+
To estimate the generalization performance of our
approach on the set of 443 test genomes, we evaluated
the discriminative model associated with the highest
validation performance.
The kernel-based RLSC model associated with a phenotype classification problem is represented by a vector
of N organism-specific weights. For fast prediction of
phenotypes, the discriminant in the original feature
space of Pfam protein domain profiles can be calculated
by a linear combination of the learned organism-specific
weights and the domain profiles in X. The phenotype
prediction for a newly sequenced organism then only
requires the construction of the organism’s Pfam
domain profile and the computation of the dot product
of the feature space discriminant and the domain
profile.
The feature space discriminant also allows to inspect
the learned discriminative features in terms of phenotype-specific Pfam domain families. For each phenotype
prediction problem, we assemble two ranked lists of
domain families that are associated with the 50 largest
positive and negative weights in the profile space discriminant, respectively. This allows to identify indicative
and counter-indicative domain families directly.
For further interpretation of the abovementioned lists
and for identification of functional modules, we also calculate clustering dendrograms for the 50 most discriminative domain families based on their phylogenetic
profile, i.e. the absence/presence pattern of a particular
domain across all organisms. To calculate the dendrograms, we apply the Matlab® function ‘dendrogram’ to
the domain phylogenetic profiles using average linkage
(UPGMA) and the profile correlation as a distance measure. Dendrogram branch colors are calculated by the
‘dendrogram’ function using the default color threshold
at 70% linkage branch length.
Comparison with pathway-based prediction

For comparison to a method that can in principle be
used for microbial phenotype prediction, we evaluate
our approach using the dataset presented in [8].
Because of the different set of phenotypic traits used in
the two works, only the two phenotypes “Gram stain”
and “Oxygen Requirement” can be directly compared.

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

As in [8], we selected the organisms associated with the
phenotypical traits “aerobic”/“anaerobic” and “gram
positive”/“gram negative” as the respective positive and
negative examples of the phenotype category. In Kastenmüller et al. [8] the commercial Pedant database [30] has
been used for collection of genome features and phenotype annotation. As a consequence, not all organisms
present in the Pedant database can be found in the NCBI
prokaryote genome project. For our evaluation, we used
the data of all organisms whose taxonomy ID could be
mapped to a NCBI taxonomy ID. In total, we used 166/
92 out of 201/113 possible organisms for the phenotype
categories “Gram stain”/“Oxygen Requirement”, respectively. However, our inspection of the list of all organisms
revealed that most of the missing organisms have identical species names when compared with the present
organisms, thus the performance values we obtain here
can be expected to provide lower bounds.
For direct comparison of the results, we measure the
prediction performance in terms of the area under ROC
curve [16] and the product of sensitivity and specificity
as in [8]. In the original work, a ten-fold cross validation
procedure has been performed. To get a reliable estimate of the prediction performance, we repeated the
cross validation 100 times using random partitions.
Furthermore, we compared our approach to the best of
the four classification methods used in [8] as indicated
by the classification quality diagrams in additional file 2
of the original work.

Additional material
Additional file 1: List of organisms for validation and test. The file
“organisms.pdf” contains the names of all 1032 (443) organisms that have
been used for validation (test) of the classification methods. The table
also shows the sequencing status and the phenotype annotation
associated with the organisms.
Additional file 2: Lists of phenotype-specific discriminative domain
families. The archive “discDomains.zip” contains lists of the 50 most
discriminative (indicative and counterindicative) Pfam domain families
associated with the four phenotype categories “Endospores”,“Gram stain”,
“Motility” and “Oxygen Requirement” in HTML format.
Additional file 3: Clustering dendrograms of discriminative domain
families. The file “Dendrograms.pdf” contains the phenotype-specific
phylogenetic clustering dendrograms for the 50 most discriminative
domain families. For the phenotype categories “Gram stain” and “Oxygen
Requirement” dendrograms for positive and negative discriminative
domains are shown, for the “Endospores” and “Motility” phenotype
categories only the dendrogram associated with positive discriminative
domains is shown.
Additional file 4: Comparison of predicted phenotypes to NCBI
annotation. The file “DeviationNCBI.pdf” contains the prediction results
of the domain-based approach for the set of 443 test organisms
separated according to NCBI phenotype categories for the four
phenotypes used in this study. The lists contain the predicted labels as
well as the original label according to the NCBI annotation; label
differences are highlighted using a red cell background. Furthermore,
organisms that have been identified as possibly containing a wrong NCBI

Page 10 of 11

phenoype annotation in section “Quality of annotation” are highlighted
using a bold face type.
Additional file 5: Protein domain profile data. The file “EvaluationData.
zip” consists of two comma separated value (CSV) files containing the
data matrices with UFO counts associated with all organisms of the
validation and test set, respectively. Here, each column corresponds to
one organism and each row corresponds to one of the 10797 Pfam-A
(version 23.0) families PF00001,..., PF10797. In addition, two CSV files
contain the list of organism names and the associated NCBI phenotype
annotation for the categories used in this study.
Additional file 6: Histograms of phenotype-specific phylogenetic
distribution of example organisms. The file “histoGroups.pdf” contains
phylum-level histogram plots of the phenotype-specific number of
positive and negative examples.

Acknowledgements
We thank Pier Luigi Buttigieg and Renzo Kottmann from the Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology in Bremen and Baldo Oliva from the UPF
Barcelona for fruitful discussion. Furthermore, we would like to thank
Christian Opitz for COG profiling and two anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments. TL was supported by a fellowship within the PostDoc
Programme of the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD).
Author details
1
Department of Bioinformatics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics,
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Germany. 2Bioinformatics Program,
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), UPF, Barcelona, Spain.
Authors’ contributions
TL carried out experiments and wrote the manuscript. SM carried out
experiments and performed annotation check. TG performed biological
interpretation of the results and wrote the manuscript. CN contributed
conceptually and wrote the manuscript. PM designed the experiments,
collected the data and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Received: 18 June 2010 Accepted: 24 September 2010
Published: 24 September 2010
References
1. Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: protein
phylogenetic profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:4285-4288.
2. Kensche PR, van Noort V, Dutilh BE, Huynen MA: Practical and theoretical
advances in predicting the function of a protein by its phylogenetic
distribution. J R Soc Interface 2008, 5:151-170.
3. Gabaldón T, Dessimoz C, Huxley-Jones J, Vilella AJ, Sonnhammer EL,
Lewis S: Joining forces in the quest for orthologs. Genome Biol 2009,
10:403.
4. Jim K, Parmar K, Singh M, Tavazoie S: A cross-genomic approach for
systematic mapping of phenotypic traits to genes. Genome Res 2004,
14:109-115.
5. Liu Y, Li J, Sam L, Goh CS, Gerstein M, Lussier YA: An integrative genomic
approach to uncover molecular mechanisms of prokaryotic traits. PLoS
Comput Biol 2006, 2:e159.
6. Slonim N, Elemento O, Tavazoie S: Ab initio genotype-phenotype
association reveals intrinsic modularity in genetic networks. Mol Syst Biol
2006, 2:2006.0005.
7. Tamura M, D’haeseleer P: Microbial genotype-phenotype mapping by
class association rule mining. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:1523-1529.
8. Kastenmüller G, Schenk ME, Gasteiger J, Mewes HW: Uncovering metabolic
pathways relevant to phenotypic traits of microbial genomes. Genome
Biol 2009, 10:R28.
9. Lasken RS: Single-cell genomic sequencing using Multiple Displacement
Amplification. Curr Opin Microbiol 2007, 10:510-516.

Lingner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:481
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/481

10. Ishoey T, Woyke T, Stepanauskas R, Novotny M, Lasken RS: Genomic
sequencing of single microbial cells from environmental samples. Curr
Opin Microbiol 2008, 11:198-204.
11. Kunin V, Copeland A, Lapidus A, Mavromatis K, Hugenholtz P: A
bioinformatician’s guide to metagenomics. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2008,
72:557-578.
12. Woyke T, Xie G, Copeland A, Gonzalez JM, Han C, Kiss H, Saw JH, Senin P,
Yang C, Chatterji S, Cheng JF, Eisen JA, Sieracki ME, Stepanauskas R:
Assembling the marine metagenome, one cell at a time. PLoS ONE 2009,
4:e5299.
13. Sammut S, Finn R, Bateman A: Pfam 10 years on: 10,000 families and still
growing. Brief Bioinformatics 2008, 9:210-219.
14. Marchler-Bauer A, Panchenko AR, Shoemaker BA, Thiessen PA, Geer LY,
Bryant SH: CDD: a database of conserved domain alignments with links
to domain three-dimensional structure. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:281-283.
15. Meinicke P: UFO: a web server for ultra-fast functional profiling of whole
genome protein sequences. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:409.
16. Davis J, Goadrich M: The relationship between Precision-Recall and ROC
curves. ICML ‘06: Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine
learning New York, NY, USA: ACM 2006, 233-240.
17. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 1997, 278:631-637.
18. Takamatsu H, Imamura A, Kodama T, Asai K, Ogasawara N, Watabe K: The
yabG gene of Bacillus subtilis encodes a sporulation specific protease
which is involved in the processing of several spore coat proteins. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 2000, 192:33-38.
19. Zhao K, Liu M, Burgess RR: Promoter and regulon analysis of nitrogen
assimilation factor, sigma54, reveal alternative strategy for E. coli
MG1655 flagellar biosynthesis. Nucleic Acids Res 2009.
20. Kim J, Kang Y, Choi O, Jeong Y, Jeong JE, Lim JY, Kim M, Moon JS, Suga H,
Hwang I: Regulation of polar flagellum genes is mediated by quorum
sensing and FlhDC in Burkholderia glumae. Mol Microbiol 2007,
64:165-179.
21. Homaster AR, Hill KK, Gee JE, Marston CK, De BK, Popovic T, Sue D,
Wilkins PP, Avashia SB, Drumgoole R, Helma CH, Ticknor LO, Okinaka RT,
Jackson PJ: Characterization of Bacillus cereus isolates associated with
fatal pneumonias: strains are closely related to Bacillus anthracis and
harbor B. anthracis virulence genes. J Clin Microbiol 2006, 44:3352-3360.
22. Holdeman LV, Moore WEC: New Genus, Coprococcus, Twelve New
Species, and Emended Descriptions of Four Previously Described
Species of Bacteria from Human Feces. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1974,
24(2):260-277.
23. Mevs U, Stackebrandt E, Schumann P, Gallikowski C, Hirsch P:
Modestobacter multiseptatus gen. nov., sp. nov., a budding
actinomycete from soils of the Asgard Range (Transantarctic Mountains).
Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2000, 50:337-346.
24. Magot M, Ravot G, Campaignolle X, Ollivier B, Patel BKC, Fardeau ML,
Thomas P, Crolet JL, Garcia JL: Dethiosulfovibrio peptidovorans gen. nov.,
sp. nov., a New Anaerobic, Slightly Halophilic, Thiosulfate-Reducing
Bacterium from Corroding Offshore Oil Wells. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1997,
47(3):818-824.
25. Clum A, Nolan M, Lang E, Rio TGD, Tice H, Copeland A, Cheng JF, Lucas S,
Chen F, Bruce D, Goodwin L, Pitluck S, Ivanova N, Mavromatis K,
Mikhailova N, Pati A, Chen A, Palaniappan K, Göker M, Spring S, Land M,
Hauser L, Chang YJ, Jeffries C, Chain P, Bristow J, Eisen J, Markowitz V,
Hugenholtz P, Kyrpides N, Klenk HP, Lapidus A: Complete genome
sequence of Acidimicrobium ferrooxidans type strain (ICPT). Standards in
Genomic Sciences 2009, 1.
26. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
27. Rifkin R, Yeo G, Poggio T: Regularized Least Squares Classification.
Advances in Learning Theory: Methods, Model and Applications NATO Science
Series III: Computer and Systems Sciences Amsterdam: IOS Press 2003,
190:131-153.
28. Zhang P, Peng J: SVM vs Regularized Least Squares Classification. Pattern
Recognition, International Conference on 2004, 1:176-179.
29. Lingner T, Meinicke P: Fast Target Set Reduction for Large-scale Protein
Function Prediction: a Multi-class Multi-label Machine Learning
Approach. 8th Workshop on Algorithms in Bioinformatics (WABI) 2008.

Page 11 of 11

30. Walter MC, Rattei T, Arnold R, Güldener U, Münsterkötter M, Nenova K,
Kastenmüller G, Tischler P, Wölling A, Volz A, Pongratz N, Jost R,
Mewes HW, Frishman D: PEDANT covers all complete RefSeq genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D408-411.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-481
Cite this article as: Lingner et al.: Predicting phenotypic traits of
prokaryotes from protein domain frequencies. BMC Bioinformatics 2010
11:481.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
