<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Transcriptome analysis of the Cryptocaryon irritans tomont stage identifies potential genes for the detection and control of cryptocaryonosis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:76. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-76"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Yogeswaran Lokanathan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Transcriptome analysis of the Cryptocaryon
irritans tomont stage identifies potential genes
for the detection and control of cryptocaryonosis
Yogeswaran Lokanathan1,2, Adura Mohd-Adnan1,2*, Kiew-Lian Wan1,2, Sheila Nathan1,2

Abstract
Background: Cryptocaryon irritans is a parasitic ciliate that causes cryptocaryonosis (white spot disease) in marine
fish. Diagnosis of cryptocaryonosis often depends on the appearance of white spots on the surface of the fish,
which are usually visible only during later stages of the disease. Identifying suitable biomarkers of this parasite
would aid the development of diagnostic tools and control strategies for C. irritans. The C. irritans genome is
virtually unexplored; therefore, we generated and analyzed expressed sequence tags (ESTs) of the parasite to
identify genes that encode for surface proteins, excretory/secretory proteins and repeat-containing proteins.
Results: ESTs were generated from a cDNA library of C. irritans tomonts isolated from infected Asian sea bass, Lates
calcarifer. Clustering of the 5356 ESTs produced 2659 unique transcripts (UTs) containing 1989 singletons and 670
consensi. BLAST analysis showed that 74% of the UTs had significant similarity (E-value < 10-5) to sequences that
are currently available in the GenBank database, with more than 15% of the significant hits showing unknown
function. Forty percent of the UTs had significant similarity to ciliates from the genera Tetrahymena and
Paramecium. Comparative gene family analysis with related taxa showed that many protein families are conserved
among the protozoans. Based on gene ontology annotation, functional groups were successfully assigned to 790
UTs. Genes encoding excretory/secretory proteins and membrane and membrane-associated proteins were
identified because these proteins often function as antigens and are good antibody targets. A total of 481 UTs
were classified as encoding membrane proteins, 54 were classified as encoding for membrane-bound proteins, and
155 were found to contain excretory/secretory protein-coding sequences. Amino acid repeat-containing proteins
and GPI-anchored proteins were also identified as potential candidates for the development of diagnostic and
control strategies for C. irritans.
Conclusions: We successfully discovered and examined a large portion of the previously unexplored C. irritans
transcriptome and identified potential genes for the development and validation of diagnostic and control
strategies for cryptocaryonosis.

Background
The ciliate protozoan Cryptocaryon irritans (Family:
Cryptocaryonidae) [1] is an obligate ectoparasite that
causes cryptocaryonosis, also known as white spot disease, in marine fish [2]. Although C. irritans is commonly found in tropical, subtropical and warm
temperate waters at low infection intensity [3], infection by this parasite has emerged as a major problem
in confined surroundings such as in mariculture and
* Correspondence: adura.adnan@gmail.com
1
School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and
Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia

aquariums [4,5] due to the buildup of the parasite and
high population density of fish in these systems [6].
C. irritans penetrates the skin, gills and eyes of the
fish and impairs the functioning of these organs. The
key signs of cryptocaryonosis are the formation of pinhead-sized whitish nodules, mucus hyperproduction,
skin discoloration, anorexia and respiratory difficulties
[2]. C. irritans has low host specificity and can infect a
taxonomically broad host range, including both temperate marine fish and saltwater-adapted fresh-water fish
that do not encounter the disease naturally [7,8].

© 2010 Lokanathan et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

The C. irritans life cycle involves four stages that
require a mean time of 1-2 weeks for completion independent of an intermediate host [2]. The parasitic stage
trophont burrows itself within the host epithelium and
feeds on both tissue debris and body fluids. During this
period, the whitish nodules are observed on the body
and fins, depending on the severity of the infection. The
mature trophonts leave the host as protomonts after 3-7
days. The protomonts sink and adhere to the substratum following which they encyst and enter the reproductive stage. These newly formed tomonts undergo a
sequence of asymmetric binary fissions to become
daughter tomites inside the cyst wall. Between days 372, cyst rupture leads to the asynchronous release of differentiated tomites into the environment as theronts. A
tomont produces approximately 200 theronts, and this
infective stage parasite swims freely to find a host and
rapidly penetrates the host epidermal layer. The infectivity of theronts decreases 6-8 h post-excystment [2,5].
To date, no commercial vaccines, drugs or diagnostic
kits have been developed for white spot disease. Control
of this parasite is hindered by factors such as the
embedment of the parasite in the host epithelium,
which renders many chemicals ineffective; asynchrony in
theront release and trophont exit; and ineffectiveness of
chemical treatment in large-volume systems [2]. In addition, lack of parasite genomic data has hampered the
use of molecular tools in developing control strategies
for C. irritans.
Many parasites are phylogenetically distant organisms,
and the application of genetic tools to solve important
parasite-related biological problems has been slow due
to the limitations in gene identification by heterologous
probing and lack of genomic studies [9]. Expressed
sequence tag (EST) analysis of parasites can provide a
vast amount of genomic data that can serve as an
important resource for transcriptome exploration
including gene discovery, gene structure identification,
genome annotation and identification of potential molecules for drug and vaccine development [10,11]. EST
analysis is also an efficient method of identifying differentially expressed genes at different developmental
stages. Currently 33 C. irritans nucleotide sequences are
known, but no EST records are available for these in the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
database.
In this study, we constructed a cDNA library of C.
irritans tomonts to generate ESTs. The Asian sea bass
(Lates calcarifer) was selected as the host because this
species is important in commercial aquaculture and fisheries in the Asia-Pacific region, and is exposed to cryptocaryonosis. By analyzing the ESTs generated, we could
predict transmembrane regions, glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor signals, signal peptides, and amino

Page 2 of 15

acid repeats, and this helped in identifying proteins that
could be useful in developing disease control strategies.
These data provide a foundation for further studies on
both the C. irritans genome and proteome that would
lead to a better understanding of the pathogenicity of
this organism.

Methods
Parasite Isolation

C. irritans tomonts were collected from infected adult L.
calcarifer (340-440 g) obtained from a sea cage culture
facility at Bukit Tambun, Penang, Malaysia. The fishes
were reared in 150 L aquariums filled with 100 L of seawater at a salinity of 30 ppt. The disease was induced by
placing ice bags inside the aquariums twice a day, which
lowered the water temperature from 28°C to 19°C. Glass
Petri dishes were placed at the bottom of the aquarium
once the white spots were visible to the naked eye. The
following day, the Petri dishes were collected and
replaced with new ones. The adhering tomonts were
gently scrapped from the Petri dishes into a cavity
block. All tomonts were cleaned with autoclaved seawater, transferred to microcentrifuge tubes, snap-frozen
in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further used.
RNA isolation

Total RNA was isolated from tomonts using TRI
Reagent® (Molecular Research Center, Inc., USA). TRI
Reagent® was added to the frozen tomonts, and the mixture was then mashed with a plastic mini-pestle until
the material was completely homogenized. The subsequent steps were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The total RNA was resuspended in TE
buffer (pH 7.4) and the quantity and quality of the RNA
aliquots were checked on a bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). mRNA was isolated from good quality total
RNA using the Illustra™ mRNA Purification Kit (GE
Healthcare, UK).
cDNA library construction

A cDNA library of C. irritans tomonts was constructed
using the ZAP-cDNA Library Construction Kit (Stratagene, USA). Briefly, mRNA was reverse transcribed into
cDNA and size-fractionated cDNA was inserted into the
Uni-Zap l vector in a sense orientation. The recombinant l vector was subsequently packaged into lambda
particles, transfected into XL1-Blue MRF’ cells, and plated on agar with X-gal and isopropyl-1-thio-b-D-galactopyranoside (IPTG). The primary library was amplified
to obtain a stable secondary library with a higher titer.
Plasmid extraction and sequencing

Aliquots of the secondary library were subjected to in
vivo mass excision, and the excised plasmids from randomly selected clones were extracted using the Montage™ Plasmid Miniprep 96 Kit (Millipore, USA). The
inserts were sequenced from the 5’ end using the SK

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

primer and the BigDye® Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems Inc., USA). The ABI
PRISM 3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems Inc.,
USA) was used for sequencing.
Sequence Analysis

Sequences were subjected to Phred [12,13] analysis with
a cut-off quality value (QV) of 20. Vector sequences
were trimmed using Cross_match [14] and StackPACK
version 2.2 [15] was used to cluster the EST data. The
resulting unique transcripts (UTs) were compared with
the nonredundant (nr) Genbank nucleotide and protein
databases at the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) site using TBLASTX and BLASTX
[16], respectively.
The ESTs of Ichthyophthirius multifiliis were downloaded from dbEST at NCBI, and BLASTN analysis was
performed to compare I. multifiliis ESTs with the UTs
obtained in this study. The C. irritans ESTs were further
translated using the Ciliate, Dasycladacean and Hexamita Nuclear Code, and BLASTX was used to compare
these to protein sequences of Tetrahymena thermophila
obtained from the nr protein database (NCBI) andthose
of Plasmodium falciparum obtained from PlasmoDB 5.5
[17]. The cut-off E-value was set to <10-5 in all BLAST
analyses.
Further comparisons were made to conserved protein
families by comparing the Pfam [18] protein family and
SUPERFAMILY [19] protein superfamily assignments of
C. irritans, T. thermophila, and P. falciparum. The protein domain assignments for C. irritans were derived
from the InterProScan results using BLAST2GO [20,21].
The Pfam protein families for P. falciparum 3D7 and T.
thermophila were obtained from the P. falciparum 3D7
directory at the Plasmodium falciparum Genome Project FTP server [22] and Tetrahymena Genome Database FTP server [23], respectively. The SUPERFAMILY
domain assignments for T. thermophila and P. falciparum were obtained from SUPERFAMILY Assignments for Genomes and Sequence Collections [24].
Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) in the nucleotide
sequences were identified using the MIcroSAtellite identification tool (MISA) [25]. The poly-A and poly-T
sequences at the terminal regions of the UTs were
removed before SSR identification.
The translation codes of ciliates differ from the standard translation codes; therefore, all nucleotide
sequences were translated to peptide sequences prior to
further analysis. Virtual Ribosome [26] was used to
translate the nucleotide sequence to peptide sequences
taking ciliate translation codes into consideration. The
parameters were set such that all sequences were treated
as partial sequences, and the presence of a start codon
was not essential for starting a coding sequence (CDS);
this aided the recognition of partial CDSs.

Page 3 of 15

Gene ontology (GO) annotations were performed
using Blast2GO [20]. The peptide sequence was loaded
into the Blast2GO program, and BLASTP with a minimum E-value of < 10-5 was performed by the program
prior to mapping and annotation into GO terms. In
addition, the UTs were annotated according to the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
[27] orthology (KO) by the KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) [28] and pathways of the annotated
UTs KO terms were identified using the KO Based
Annotation System (KOBAS) server [29]. The peptide
sequences of translated UTs were used as the query
sequence, and the bi-directional best hit (BBH) method
was employed to obtain the KO terms for the query
sequences. The KO list was then loaded into the pathway identification tool at the KOBAS web-server to
identify statistically augmented pathways in the data
set [29]. The entire T. thermophila gene set was used
for background distribution. Significantly enriched
pathways were considered to be those with P < 0.05
from binomial tests performed on the KOBAS server
[29,30].
Putative membrane proteins were identified by SignalP
3.0 [31], Localizome [32], ProtCOMP 6.1 [33],
TMHMM 2.0 [34] or Sosui 1.1 [35]. Putative GPIanchored proteins were predicted using GPI-SOM [36],
Big-π [37] and FragAnchor [38]. GPI-SOM predicts
both the N-terminal signal peptide and C-terminal GPIanchor signal whereas Big-π and FragAnchor only predict the C-terminal GPI-anchor signal. The repeats in
the UTs were identified using Reptile [39] and RepSeq
[40].

Results
Sample collection and cDNA library construction

White spots were observed on the fish body 3 days after
the arrival from the sea cage culture. The fishes harbored low levels of C. irritans infection when brought in
from the sea cage and became stressed due to the frequent and drastic temperature fluctuations. This lowered their immunity and resulted in the outbreak of
white spot disease [41]. Total RNA was prepared from
the harvested tomonts, and Bioanalyzer analysis confirmed that the RNA integrity was within the acceptable
range (5.9 to 6.3). mRNA was isolated from the total
RNA and used as the template for cDNA synthesis. The
cDNA was size-fractionated to select for cDNA strands
longer than 400 bp prior to construction of the cDNA
library. The constructed primary library of tomont
cDNA had a titer of 1.28 × 106 pfu. X-Gal/IPTG screening indicated a recombination efficiency of 93% while
PCR amplification of 96 random clones showed that the
insert sizes ranged from 1-4 kb with an average size of
1.3 kb.

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

EST sequencing and analysis

A total of 5760 clones were selected for plasmid extraction and subsequent single-pass sequencing from the 5’
end. After eliminating low-quality, vector-contaminated
and very low complexity sequences as well as those of
length less than 50 bp, 5356 (93%) good-quality
sequences were obtained for further analysis. The
sequences were loaded into a command line version of
StackPACK V2.2. Subsequently, clustering with d2_cluster, alignment using PHRAP, and assembly analysis
using stack_Analyze and CRAW were performed [42].
This resulted in the identification of 2659 UTs consisting of 670 consensi from 3367 sequences and 1989 singletons (Table 1).
Seventy five percent (1989/2659) of the UTs were singletons, which precluded the need to normalize or subtract the library generated in this study for data mining
and transcriptome survey. The genes expressed at the
tomont stage of development were mined and the gene
discovery rate (percentage of unique sequences over
total sequences analyzed) was 50%, which is acceptable
for a non-normalized library. The assembled ESTs
showed that some genes were expressed at very high
levels, as much as 2.5% of all the expressed transcripts
at the tomont stage. The 20 most abundant genes at the
tomont stage are listed in Table 2. The BLASTX results
revealed that the sequences of cn48 and cn10, two
highly expressed UTs, were similar to sequences from
bacteria. These UTs could be derived from new genes
that have not yet been identified in other lower eukaryotes and could have possible functions that are not
related to the BLASTX feedback. These UTs demonstrated no hits in InterProScan as well in the BLASTN
analyses with both the dbEST and nr nucleotide collection databases in Genbank; therefore, the functions of
these highly expressed unique proteins should be determined experimentally. Most of the other highly
expressed UTs had corresponding homologs in other
ciliates and protozoa, and several UTs were highly similar to other protozoan genes (Table 2).
The BLASTX similarity search showed that 72%
(1909) of the UTs had significant matches with
sequences in the NCBI nr protein database (Additional
Table 1 Summary of C. irritans EST analysis
Number (percentage)
Total number of clones sequenced

5760

Number of high quality sequences

5356 (93)

Number of consensi

670

Singletons

1989

Unique transcripts (UTs)

2659

Number of known genes

1966 (74)

Number of unknown genes

692 (26)

Page 4 of 15

File 1). Among the 1909 matches, 298 matches were to
genes of unknown function. Most of these matches were
to hypothetical proteins of T. thermophila SB210 and
Paramecium tetraurelia strain d4-2. Subsequent comparison by TBLASTX showed that another 57 of the
750 UTs with no matches from the BLASTX analysis
exhibited significant matches to sequences in the NCBI
nr nucleotide database. A plot of the UTs length versus
the number of BLAST hits (Figure 1) showed that more
than 96% (668/693) of the UTs without hits had a
length of more than 200 bp. Therefore, we presume that
the reason why most UTs do not have significant hits is
not because these are short but because these are novel
sequences that are specific to the C. irritans transcriptome. Exceptions could possible arise from possible
genomic DNA contamination and the presence of very
long untranslated regions and noncoding RNAs. However, there is also the possibility that some of these
novel genes may exist in other previously sequenced
organisms but have never been expressed or captured
for sequencing.
Organism distribution based on the BLASTX analysis
results is shown in Figure 2. A total of 57% of the
matches were to other ciliate species, mainly to T. thermophila SB210 and P. tetraurelia strain d4-2. Consistent
with this, the phylogenetic analysis of b-tubulin
sequences supported previously described taxonomic
relationships associating C. irritans with other ciliates
such as I. multifiliis, T. thermophila and P. tetraurelia
in a distinct cluster and more distantly than other nonciliate protozoa such as Plasmodium sp.(Figure 3)
[1,43,44]. Another 15% of the matches were with fish
sequences, which might be due to host contamination
in the parasite sample because the sample was collected
after in vivo propagation.
Comparative analysis with I. multifiliis

I. multifiliis is the fresh-water counterpart of C. irritans
that causes white spot disease in fresh-water fishes.
Although both C. irritans and I. multifiliis share many
external features and a parallel life cycle, ultrastructural
and taxonomic studies have concluded that these parasites are distantly related and that their striking similarities are a result of convergent evolution [1,45]. A
BLASTN search against 33 516 redundant I. multifiliis
ESTs showed that 260 UTs of C. irritans have significant similarities with I. multifiliis ESTs. Among the 260
hits, 2 UTs had matches with I. multifiliis ESTs with
low E values (10-7 and 10-9 respectively) and another 27
hits had an alignment percentages of more than 50%.
Almost all of the 258 C. irritans UTs that had matches
with the I. multifiliis ESTs also had matches with the
sequences of other organisms with a higher E-value
especially with T. thermophila and P. tetraurelia
sequences. These EST matches can be assumed to

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

Page 5 of 15

Table 2 The 20 most abundantly encountered genes at the tomont stage
UT ID

Putative Identity

Organism

% Identity

E Value

cn48

No. ESTs
136

Outer membrane adhesin like protein

Prosthecochloris vibrioformis

30.95

4E-09

cn52
cn10

98
79

28S ribosomal RNA
RTX toxins and related Ca2+-binding proteins

Ichthyophthirius multifiliis
Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum

84.00
34.78

0
3E-09
1E-118

cn42

68

Agglutination/immobilization antigen isoform 1

Cryptocaryon irritans

71.82

cn24

59

Insect antifreeze protein

Tetrahymena thermophila

22.67

1E-38

cn1

54

Granule tip protein 2

Tetrahymena thermophila

23.24

7E-08

cn21

50

No significant hit

cn57

48

Agglutination/immobilization antigen isoform 1

Cryptocaryon irritans

41.04

7E-58

cn107

40

Polyubiquitin

Plasmodium falciparum

97.21

0

cn123
cn41

37
35

Hypothetical 18K mitochondrion protein
Agglutination/immobilization antigen isoform 1

Carassius auratus
Cryptocaryon irritans

49.05
66.87

3E-15
1E-119
5E-20

cn14

34

Beta-glucanase/Beta-glucan synthetase

Hahella chejuensis

37.95

cn25

32

MCM2/3/5 family protein

Tetrahymena thermophila

51.06

0

cn11

29

Tubulin beta chain

Tetrahymena thermophila

95.11

0

cn174

28

ER-type hsp70

Paramecium tetraurelia

74.88

0

cn81

23

Chitinase

Kurthia zopfii

32.03

3E-47

cn66

22

Insect antifreeze protein

Tetrahymena thermophila

23.49

2E-24

cn110
cn56

22
20

Calpain-like protein
Agglutination/immobilization antigen isoform 4

Sterkiella histriomuscorum
Cryptocaryon irritans

32.95
42.67

8E-29
4E-65

cn80

20

Tubulin/FtsZ family, GTPase domain containing protein

Tetrahymena thermophila

93.63

present ESTs-encoding genes that are conserved in ciliates and are not exclusively present in these two parasitic ciliates. It is noteworthy that cn52, which was the
second most abundant encountered consensus sequence,
showed a high similarity to the highly abundant transcripts detected by I. multifiliis EST sequencing. Further
BLASTN analysis showed that cn52 is highly similar to
the I. multifiliis 28S ribosomal RNA gene (GenBank
accession number: EU185635.1) and to ribosomal RNA
of other organisms (Table 2). Polyadenylation of C. irritans rRNA remains to be confirmed because it was

0

recently discovered that the 28S rRNA of I. multifiliis
was not only polyadenylated at the 3’ end of the rRNA
but also contained three extra internal polyadenylation
sites [46].
Comparative BLASTX analysis with T. thermophila and
Plasmodium falciparum

The T. thermophila genome and transcriptome
sequences are publicly available, whilst P. falciparum is
a protozoan parasite for which abundant biological
information is readily available. BLASTX analysis of C.
irritans UTs against T. thermophila and P. falciparum

Figure 1 Length of unique transcripts versus BLAST hit. The relationship between the length of the unique transcripts (UTs) and the number
of UTs with BLAST hits.

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

Page 6 of 15

Figure 2 Distribution of best BLASTX matches according to organisms. A diagrammatic representation of organism distribution according
to UTs with the best match to the NCBI non-redundant protein database.

proteins was performed to identify homologous proteins
in these organisms. The results are summarized in Additional File 2 and presented in Figure 4. A total of 1578
(59%) C. irritans UTs had significant similarity to T.
thermophila proteins including 1156 UTs that had
matches with annotated proteins of T. thermophila. In
addition, 941 (35%) UTs showed significant similarity to
P. falciparum proteins, including 748 UTs with matches
to annotated proteins of P. falciparum. We identified 53
proteins that are similar to P. falciparum proteins but
did not obtain significant hits with any T. thermophila
proteins. In total, 888 (33%) UTs showed similarity to
both T. thermophila and P. falciparum proteins.

Comparative gene family analysis

The gene families of C. irritans were compared to those
of T. thermophila and P. falciparum to characterize the
conserved and unique proteins in these protozoans. The
SUPERFAMILY domains are classified based on structural similarity whereas the Pfam domains were classified based on sequence similarity. The comparison
statistics of the protein family and superfamily assignments of the three protozoans are presented in Table 3,
and the complete table with the protein family and
superfamily assignments according to the SUPERFAMILY and Pfam domains is shown in Additional File 3.
The analysis showed that there is a large difference

Figure 3 Phylogenetic analysis of C. irritans. A maximum parsimony tree inferred from the complete b-tubulin amino acid sequence of C.
irritans and other alveolates, with Mus musculus as an outgroup. The I. multifiliis b-tubulin amino acid sequence was inferred from the EST
dataset. The numbers below branches are the bootstrap values of 1000 iterations of the data file.

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

Figure 4 Proteins shared among C. irritans, T. thermophila and
P. falciparum. Venn diagram summary of C. irritans translated UTs
comparison with T. thermophila and P. falciparum peptide
sequences. The numbers at the overlapping area represent
matching peptides (BLASTX of E < 10-5) in the relevant organism
with the query 2659 translated UTs of C. irritans.

between C. irritans and the two other organisms in
terms of the number of SUPERFAMILY and Pfam
domains found. A total of 250 SUPERFAMILY domains
and 345 Pfam domains were found to be present in all
the three protozoan’s, indicating that 77% of the C. irritans SUPERFAMILY domains and 57% of the Pfam
domains are conserved in these organisms. In addition,
87% of C. irritans protein families are well conserved in
T. thermophila. Interestingly, 28 SUPERFAMILY
domains and 66 Pfam domains were found to be present
exclusively in C. irritans. These included various
domains of metabolic enzymes such as serine-threonine
phosphatase, polysaccharide deacetylase, and oxidoreductase and domains of structural proteins such as axonemal dynein light chain, proteasome subunit A,
conserved membrane protein, and ligand-binding
domain of a nuclear hormone receptor. Further characterization of these unique C. irritans proteins could lead
to the identification of potential markers for C. irritans
detection. Thus, the comparative genomics analysis performed in this study provided an overview of conserved
gene families in protozoans.
SSR motif analysis

Mining of the EST data for SSRs identified a total of 317
UTs containing 375 nonredundant SSRs. Motifs containing 10, 6, and 5 repeat units of mononucleotides,
dinucleotides and higher-order repeats, respectively,
were considered to be major microsatellites. A total of

Page 7 of 15

30 UTs contained more than one SSR. The nonredundant EST-derived SSRs were composed of mono-, di-,
tri- and tetranucleotide repeat motifs only although
motifs containing repeated units of 1-6 nucleotides in
length were considered SSRs and were searched by
MISA. The frequency of the SSR motifs identified in the
317 UTs is summarized in Additional File 4. The distribution of SSR motifs revealed the presence of A/T
homopolymers in up to 76% of the total SSRs. This
might be due to the A/T-rich content of the ciliate genome and transcriptome [47]. The AC/GT and AT/AT
dinucleotide SSR motifs were present in equal numbers
and accounted for 9% of the SSRs identified. AAT/ATT
was the most widespread trinucleotide among the nine
trinucleotide SSR motifs present in the UTs. Only the
AAAC/GTTT, AAAT/ATTT and AACT/ATTG tetranucleotide SSR motifs were present in the UTs and each
occurred only once. C. irritans shows intraspecific variation; therefore, these SSRs within ESTs could serve as
microsatellite markers for variant discrimination, geographical differentiation, mixed infection identification
and also for lineage and population studies of this parasite [48]. Microsatellites have also been used for the
detection of drug-resistant variants of parasites [49].
Screening of ESTs is known to be a cost-effective and
efficient method for detecting utilizable microsatellite
markers [49].
Functional annotation
Gene Ontology annotation

As in the case of other ciliates, C. irritans also uses
TAA and TAG as glutamine codons instead of termination codons [50]. The UTs were translated into peptide
sequences using the Ciliate, Dasycladacean and Hexamita Nuclear Code, and the longest CDSs were obtained
by using options set to begin a CDS without a start
codon. The peptide sequence translated from the longest CDS was loaded into Blast2GO and the BLASTP
function was run against the GenBank nr protein database. Subsequently, Blast2GO was used to map and
annotate GO terms based on the BLASTP results. A
total of 790 UTs consisting of 248 consensi and 542 singletons were annotated with 1782 GO terms. The GO
terms were distributed into the 3 main GO categories of
biological process (601), molecular function (661) and
cellular component (520). The remaining UTs were not
annotated due to any one of the following reasons: they
did not result in a BLASTP hit, were not successfully
mapped, or were not annotated after mapping because
the UTs failed to fulfill the annotation criteria. The GO
distribution charts by 2nd level GO terms are shown in
Figure 5, and the complete GO annotation findings are
provided in Additional File 1. Cellular process (27%)
and metabolic process (24%) were the main subcategories of biological process. This was expected because

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

Page 8 of 15

Table 3 The summary of SUPERFAMILY and Pfam domains of C . irritan s, T. thermophila and P. falciparum
C. irritans

T. thermophila

Total peptide sequences

2 659

24 725

P. falciparum
5460

Sequences with SUPERFAMILY domain assignments
Total SUPERFAMILY hits

1 025(39%)
1 163

11268(46%)
17379

2468(45%)
3553

Unique SUPERFAMILY domains

323

715

1101

Sequences with Pfam domain assignments

1 043(39%)

13 896 (56%)

2492 (45%)

Total Pfam hits

1 203

39507

5542

Unique Pfam domains

608

4 168

1 101

the tomont is the dividing stage, which involves the cell
cycle as well as the generation and use of energy. GO
annotation under biological process showed the presence of many classes of proteins important for pathogenesis and continuous generation of the parasite such
as those involved in cell adhesion, stress response, circadian rhythm, dormancy process, death, cell communication and secretion. The molecular function category was
mainly comprised of proteins involved in binding (45%)
and catalytic activities (34%).
Subcategorization of this category also led to the identification of various groups of proteins that can be
exploited to control this parasite, mainly by using inhibitors of the proteins involved in cytoskeletal protein
binding, proteins with hydrolase activity, and proteins
with transferase activity. The cellular compartment consists of the following subcomponents: cell parts (27%),
cell (26%), and organelles (18%). Proteins that were
annotated as the external encapsulating structure, cell
projection proteins, and proteinaceous extracellular
matrix under the GO category cellular component were
those with potential as serodiagnostic markers of the
tomont stage parasites. An InterProScan was performed
via Blast2GO returned hits on 1273 UTs, which
included 77 UTs with no previous significant hits and
77 UTs that were similar to hypothetical proteins in the
nr protein database of NCBI (Additional File 1).
KEGG pathway assignment

KAAS annotated a total of 746 UTs with KO terms, and
these were further classified into 40 pathways containing
382 UTs by using the pathway identification tool in
KOBAS. The top 10 pathways are summarized in Table
4. Ribosomal proteins (47 UTs) accounted for the highest number of proteins mapped to the KEGG pathways.
Other KEGG pathways with a high number of UTs were
those for chaperones and folding catalysts, cell cycle
events, and oxidative phosphorylation with 28, 26 and
22 UTs, respectively. We also found three UTs that
mapped to the Jak-STAT signaling pathway, whereas T.
thermophila genes that are involved in this pathway are
yet to be identified or do not exist. Various genes that
are involved in the cell cycle and apoptosis pathways
were also identified, and these can be further studied for

future therapeutic strategies and control applications for
C. irritans.
Prediction of potential proteins that have potential use as
diagnostic markers and vaccine candidates
Membrane protein prediction

Membrane proteins were predicted by identifying the
transmembrane region and signal peptide. Most of the
methods used for predicting membrane proteins do not
discriminate well between signal peptides and membrane-spanning regions [51]; therefore, all peptides with
a single transmembrane region that overlapped a signal
peptide were not regarded as transmembrane proteins.
All sequences predicted to contain more than one transmembrane region or contain single transmembrane
regions that do not overlap with a signal peptide or signal anchor region were predicted to be membrane protein coding genes. Peptides with only a signal anchor or
a signal anchor that overlaps with a sole transmembrane
region were considered to be membrane-bound proteins. A total of 481 membrane proteins and 54 membrane bound proteins were predicted (Additional File 1).
Among the 481 predicted membrane proteins, 309 were
predicted to contain more than one transmembrane
region. In addition, in the GPI-anchor prediction analysis showed only two peptides that were identified as
GPI-anchored proteins by all three prediction tools. It is
noteworthy that GPI-SOM, which classifies GPIanchored proteins by detecting both the N-terminal signal peptide and C-terminal GPI-anchor signal, identified
39 peptides as GPI-anchored proteins. A total of 73 peptide sequences were found to contain a GPI-anchor signal by at least one of the three tools (Additional File 1).
Excretory/Secretory protein prediction

Excretory/secretory proteins (ESPs) of parasites enable
these organisms to invade and parasitize the host cell.
The ESPs can be used as immunodiagnostic, drug and
vaccine candidates because several studies have shown
that antibodies against ESPs protect or reduce parasite
infection [52,53]. Peptide sequences that were predicted by SignalP [31] to contain a signal peptide but
not contain any transmembrane regions (as predicted
by Localizome [32], ProtCOMP 6.1 [33] and TMHMM
2.0 [34]), were classified as ESPs. A total of 155 UTs

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

Page 9 of 15

Figure 5 GO annotation. GO annotation was done with the Blast2GO tool. The level 2 GO terms which are (a) biological process, (b) molecular
function, and (c) cellular component are shown.

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

Page 10 of 15

Table 4 Top 30 metabolic pathways in C. irritans mapped by KEGG
No.

KEGG pathway

No. UTs

Background genes distributiona

1

Ribosome

47

69

2
3

Chaperones and folding catalysts
Cell cycle

28
26

57
24

4

Oxidative phosphorylation

22

49

5

Translation factors

19

41

6

Pyruvate metabolism

18

36

7

Transcription factors

15

3

8

Cell cycle - yeast

14

24

9

14

27

Proteasome
Apoptosis

13
12

27
10

12

Wnt signaling pathway

11

14

13

Focal adhesion

10

5

14

Prostate cancer

10

9

15

Regulation of actin cytoskeleton

10

13

16

Beta-alanine metabolism

9

12

17

Epithelial cell signaling in Helicobacter pylori infection

9

14

18
19

Receptors and channels
Long-term potentiation

8
8

2
8

20

Tight junction

8

9

21

Melanogenesis

7

5

22

p53 signaling pathway

7

10

23

Huntington’s disease

6

4

24

TGF-beta signaling pathway

6

8

25

Notch signaling pathway

5

2

26
27

Adherence junction
Thyroid cancer

5
4

4
2

28

Renal cell carcinoma

4

3

29

Jak-STAT signaling pathway

3

0

30
a

Insulin signaling pathway

10
11

Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction

3

1

Number of genes present for the particular pathway in whole gene data set of Tetrahymena thermophila.

were predicted to be ESPs. Of these, 64 (41.3%) UTs
had no significant similarity to any of the protein
sequences publicly available, and another 10 UTs had
matches with hypothetical proteins or proteins of
unknown function. A total of 43 (27.7%) ESPs were
homologs of ciliate proteins (Additional File 1). One
group of ESPs that was found to be highly expressed
(8% of ESPs) contained members of the cysteine protease family such as calpain, papain, and cathepsin.
These proteolytic enzymes are known to be involved in
host cell invasion, encystation, excystation, catabolism
of host proteins, differentiation, cell cycle progression,
cytoadherence, and evasion of host immune responses
[54]. Cysteine proteases, which are strongly immunogenic, are potential as vaccine candidates, therapeutic
targets, and also serodiagnostic markers of parasites
[55,56]. Therefore, these highly expressed cysteine proteases can be exploited for the detection of C. irritans
in water and can also serve as therapeutic targets of

selective protease inhibitors [55]. Another interesting
finding was the identification of leishmanolysin
domain-containing proteases, which were identified as
ESPs. Leishmanolysin is a GPI-anchored surface protein originally identified as a virulence factor of Leishmania major. However, later, it was also found in
ciliates such as T. thermophila [57]. The prediction of
leishmanolysin as an ESP in this data sets may be due
to the partial sequencing of the UTs that might have
hindered the identification of the C-terminal GPIanchor. Another highly expressed ESP in C. irritans
was the disulfide-isomerase domain-containing protein;
it is required for catalyzing disulfide bond formation
and is also a target for inhibitors [58]. BNR/Asp-box
repeat family proteins are also major secreted ESPs in
the C. irritans tomont stage. The functions of these
proteins remain to be determined, although BNR/Asp
box repeats are mainly found in glycosyl hydrolases
such as sialidases and in other secreted proteins [59].

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

Peptide repeats analysis

Repeats are widely found in disease-causing parasites
such as P. falciparum, Trypanosoma brucei, and L.
major [40]. We used the RepSeq and Reptile tools to
identify repeats in the translated UTs. Although RepSeq
functions with any given proteome, it is designed for
repeat analysis in lower eukaryotic pathogens [40] and is
therefore well-suited for repeat analysis in C. irritans.
Motifs containing 10, 3, and 2 repeat units of a single
amino acid, tandem repeats (di-amino acid), and
sequence repeat regions (SSRs, 6-amino acid), respectively, were considered to be major peptide repeats. The
type and number of UTs containing these repeats are
presented in Additional File 4. Reptile was also used to
predict these repeats because the RepSeq tool only
searches for single, double and 6-amino acid repetitions
and misses all other repetitions. Reptile found a total of
373 UTs consisting of 101 consensi and 276 singletons
that contained repeats. Most of the repeats were repetitions of single or double amino acid motifs. The proteins that were found to contain repetitive motifs were
further studied to determine their localization and putative functions. The results are summarized in Table 5.
These proteins should be further studied as potential
diagnostic markers for C. irritans infection in mariculture systems and as vaccine candidates based on their
localization and the presence of repetitive motifs [39].
However, these proteins were identified from the noninfective stage, and their presence in the infective stage
of the parasite needs to be confirmed prior to further
studies on their use in vaccines.

Discussion
Tomonts represent an important stage in the life cycle
of C. irritans because they ensure the continuity of the
parasite by releasing asynchronous theronts from day 3
to day 35 post-encystment, even though they are incubated under similar conditions [2]. This is a serious
obstacle in total eradication of the parasite because
tomonts are resistant to most of the chemotherapeutics
tested so far when these are administered at a dose that
is nontoxic to the fish [2]. In addition, at present, there
is no reliable in vitro culture method available for continuously propagating C. irritans in a host-free system
[60]. Selection of the tomont stage, which is external to
the host and sediments at the bottom of the aquarium,
facilitated the collection of sufficient amounts of sample
for this study. Using the tomont stage C. irritans samples, we successfully constructed a high-quality cDNA
library with a recombination efficiency rate of 93% and
titer of 1.28 × 10 6 pfu. The assembly of 5356 EST
sequences aided the identification of 2659 UTs. These
data provide a useful functional genomics resource for
this economically important fish parasite. The

Page 11 of 15

transcriptomic data of the C. irritans tomont stage have
led to gene discovery and provided an insight into the
genomics of the parasite. Future studies on the expression profile of C. irritans at other stages of the life cycle
will facilitate the identification and differentiation of
genes involved in all stages of the life cycle versus those
involved only in certain stages of the life cycle. Moreover, this could provide an insight into the stage-specific
functions of C. irritans and the genes involved in the
pathogenesis of this parasite.
Phylogenetic comparison of the C. irritans b-tubulin
amino acid sequence supported earlier findings that the
parasitic ciliate C. irritans is taxonomically distinct from
the fresh-water parasitic ciliate I. multifiliis. This justified the classification of C. irritans under a different
class within the phylum Ciliophora (Class: Prostomatea)
despite the striking common features and parallel life
cycles of the two parasites [1,43]. The distinction
between C. irritans and I. multifiliis further supports the
failure to detect any genes unique to C. irritans and I.
multifiliis based on comparison of their currently available EST datasets. The absence of solely shared genes
between these parasites and their distant phylogenetic
relationship showed that the mechanism and molecules
involved in their life cycle and pathogenicity differed
considerably. These transcriptomic and taxonomic data
also demonstrate that their parasitic lifestyles have
evolved independently, confirming previous reports that
the common features of these two parasites are due to
adaptive convergence rather than evolutionary relatedness [1,45].
The ESTs of ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins,
which are normally removed during normalization or
preprocessing of ESTs, were not removed in this study.
A survey of existing literature shows that the levels of
ribosomal protein gene expression differ at different
stages of the life cycle. In addition to protein biosynthesis, ribosomal proteins play various roles, termed extraribosomal functions, which include transcription, signal
recognition, apoptosis, and nuclear transport protein
synthesis [61,62]. Therefore, the UTs encoding ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins should complement
ESTs from the other stages of the parasite life cycle as
this would help in obtaining a better understanding of
their stage-specific functions.
Many of the potential genes identified at the tomont
stage in this study for the diagnosis and control of C.
irritans are also expected to be expressed at other
stages of the C. irritans life cycle. These proteins
should facilitate the design of non-stage-specific control and diagnostic methods to overcome the difficulties in eradicating C. irritans due to asynchronous
theront release from tomonts and asynchronous trophont exit from the host. Development of a vaccine,

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

Page 12 of 15

Table 5 Repetitive motifs containing transmembrane and extracellular proteins
ID

BLASTX

Pfam/Interpro

L

Repeat

ESTs

cn349

Multicystatin

No significant hit

EC

2X

DKIPKSVLEFGINKLELSNVFAHKDFSKIENAQMKVVSGY
IYKFTLVYQFSEQEHKFEIQVWSKADQTLELISMKEIT

7

cn66

Unknown protein

EGF-like domain

EC

4X

YVNNGSCSSNSTLFNFTSKNCEKSCG

22

cn65
cn131

Insect antifreeze protein
Protein disulfide-isomerase
domain containing protein

EGF-like domain
Protein disulphide isomerase
family

EC
EC

5X
3X

LFNFTSKNCEKSCGESGY
EEKEEK

10
9

cn85

Predicted protein

Ricin-type beta-trefoil lectin
domain

EC

4X

VLDVYG

8

cn81

Chitinase

Glycoside hydrolase, family 18
domain, chitinase active site

EC

2X

YARGYELCKTPGDKLDKIFYAFLNPTTG

CiTo
53E07

Membrane associated protein

No significant hit

TM

9X

FSFLLFFFFFSFWS

1

CiTo
12F11

No significant hit

EGF-like domain, Metridin-like
ShK toxin

EC

3X

AETGST

1

CiTo
13H10

Tenascin

EGF domain

TM

3X

PNNCSG

CiTo
26C11

No significant hit

No significant hit

TM

3X

EKCRCL

1

CiTo
2H11

No significant hit

No significant hit

EC

3X

AKTAAE

1

CiTo
6G09

Cation diffusion facilitator family
transporter

Cation efflux protein
family

TM

3X

GHGHSH

1

L, Localization; TM, transmembrane domain; EC, extracellular

however, requires additional studies to ensure that the
selected antigen is present in the theront stage. This
would increase the probability of the antigen conferring immunity to the host against the infective stage of
C. irritans.
One protein that has been much studied in C. irritans
is the agglutination/immobilization antigen [50,63]. This
protein is regarded as the C. irritans immobilization
antigen (i-antigen) [50]. The i-antigens in other ciliates
such as T. thermophila, Paramecium aurelia, and I.
multifiliis and the protective immunity provided by
antibodies produced against i-antigens have been
reported previously [64]. It is also known that this protein is expressed in various isoforms and serotype variants in C. irritans (GenBank AB262047–AB262051;
[50,63]). Agglutination/immobilization antigen isoform 1
was reported to be present in both the theront and trophont stages of C. irritans and this antigen is predicted
to be expressed in the cilia of the parasite [50].
Although the function of the protein is unknown, it is
abundantly expressed in the tomont stage of C. irritans.
A total of six UTs (including cn41, cn42, and cn57
(Table 2)) were similar to agglutination/immobilization
antigen isoform 1, while three other UTs were similar
to agglutination/immobilization antigen isoform 4.
However, at the protein level, there is only 41%-71%
similarity between the UTs in this study and previously
reported agglutination/immobilization antigen isoforms.
Use of ClustalW 2.0 for multiple sequence alignment of
the translated nucleotide query of all nine UTs with all

i-antigens sequences available in the GenBank nr protein database showed that the 12 cysteine residues are
conserved in all but one of the sequences. Thus, it is
presumed that UTs with agglutination/immobilization
antigen features have similar structures. Variants of
these transcripts with possibly similar functions might
have arisen as a result of the presence of various C. irritans serotypes within the environment or due to a gene
duplication event in which the parasite might have
expanded the members of the gene family as a response
to environmental changes or as a survival strategy
[63,65,66]. Most probably, alternative splicing did not
lead to the creation of the these variants because alternative splicing is uncommon in ciliates [67]. Its occurrence was also not supported by the multiple sequence
alignment data (data not shown). The agglutination/
immobilization antigen is a potential vaccine candidate
for white spot disease because it is expressed at both
the theront and tomont stages [[38]; this study]. However, the serotype-specific protection conferred upon
the fish by agglutination/immobilization antigens as
shown by Hatanaka (2008) [63] and the existence of
various isoforms are some obstacles that need to be
overcome before this protein can be developed and
used as a vaccine against C. irritans. In addition to the
agglutination/immobilization antigen, several other
genes encoding potential vaccine candidates and targets
for detection and therapeutic applications were identified in this EST study. Among these were the genes
encoding predicted surface proteins, GPI-anchored

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

proteins, ESPs, and proteins with repetitive amino acids.
Various studies have been undertaken on apicomplexan
parasites such as Plasmodium vivax, Toxoplasma gondii,
and Trypanosoma brucei to identify surface proteins,
examine their role in pathogenicity, and determine their
potential as vaccine candidates [68,69]. Many putative
membrane proteins identified in this study have significant similarity to transporter proteins that are integral
membrane proteins involved in the transport of molecules across biological membranes. Transporter proteins
are also found to confer protection against bacterial
infections and have also been extensively studied in
drug-resistant parasitic protozoa [70]. GPI-anchored
proteins have also been widely studied as vaccine candidates in parasitic protozoa including C. irritans[63]
because these proteins are common on the surface of
protozoan parasites and are involved in stimulating or
inhibiting various host immunological responses [71].
ESPs are involved in molecular interactions with host
cells and are exposed to the host immune system; therefore, these could also act as protective antigens and
represent potential vaccine candidates as well as serodiagnostic molecules [52,53]. Moreover, inhibition of
essential ESPs could prevent invasion and growth of the
parasite [55]. The C. irritans proteases identified in this
study could be good targets for further studies on protease inhibition by various inhibitors [55].
Proteins with repeated amino acid motifs are implicated in antigenic diversity and recognition, host-cell
receptor binding and stimulation of the host immune
response [40]. Repeat-containing proteins such as the P.
falciparum histidine-rich protein-2 (Pf HRP2) are also
being studied as potential diagnostic markers [72]. However, antigenic polymorphisms facilitate the evasion of
host immune responses elicited by past exposure to the
same antigen, which leads to difficulties in the development of repeat-containing antigens as vaccines [73].
Another group of ESTs that were identified in this
study and could be useful are the enzymes and proteins
involved in cyst wall synthesis and differentiation. Since
the ESTs were generated from the cyst stage, enzymes
and other proteins involved in cyst wall synthesis and
differentiation, such as the chitin synthase family proteins, UDP-glucose 4-epimerase family proteins, and
UDP-glucose/GDP-mannose dehydrogenase family proteins, were identified in the EST data set. Disruption of
cyst wall synthesis, differentiation and integrity by using
chemotherapeutic agents may prevent encystment into
tomonts.
Previous studies with C. irritans showed that codons
that encode stop signals in standard translation systems
are used to encode glutamine in this organism. This is
also the case in other ciliates [50,74]. This was further
confirmed in this study in which the TAA and TAG

Page 13 of 15

codons appeared in most of the ESTs. Moreover, use of
the ciliate translation code in the Virtual Ribosome tool
resulted in longer CDSs, whereas use of the standard
translation code resulted in unreasonably short CDSs.
Thus, the nonstandard translation system of ciliates
requires additional research before any protein of interest is expressed because the expression of ciliate proteins in common expression systems using Escherichia
coli or yeast will result in premature polypeptide chain
termination. This has been a major complication in conducting various studies that require the expression of
the targeted protein. Although expression in E. coli with
suppressor tRNA-encoding expression vectors or sitedirected mutagenesis is possible, such procedures are
laborious and costly. Moreover, they may not be applicable to all proteins and generally meet with limited success [75]. The expression of the I. multifiliis surface
protein in T. thermophila is promising [76], but the
unavailability of a commercial ciliate expression vector
and transformation host as well as the special transformation method required (DNA bombardment) may hinder routine ciliate expression studies. However,
synthetic genes offer an alternative for heterologous protein expression in common expression systems [77].
This technology in combination with the availability of
potential genes for the control of C. irritans identified
in this EST study should allow the expression of C. irritans proteins for drug screening, vaccine trials, and
diagnostic tests.

Conclusions
In this study, we report the first ever C. irritans transcriptome data set of 5356 high-quality ESTs consisting
of 2659 UTs. The results provide new insights into the
genomics of this aquaculture parasite. Approximately
26% (693) of the UTs were identified to be novel
sequences, while 57% were found to be similar to ciliate
sequences. We also identified UTs that encode various
potential C. irritans diagnostic and therapeutic candidates. These should be useful in developing C. irritans
diagnostic and control strategies via molecular
techniques.
Additional file 1: BLASTX result, GO annotation, InterProScan result
and prediction of potential genes for usage in C. irritans diagnostic
and control strategy. The BLASTX results against the non-redundant
protein database of NCBI, the GO annotations of the UTs and
InterProScan results as performed by the Blast2Go tool, transmembrane
regions, GPI-anchor signal and signal peptide prediction.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1176-S1.XLS ]
Additional file 2: Comparison of BLASTX results against the nonredundant protein database of NCBI, T. thermophila and P.
falciparum. The BLASTX results against the non-redundant protein
database of NCBI, Tetrahymena thermophila and Plasmodium falciparum.

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1176-S2.XLS ]
Additional file 3: SUPERFAMILY and Pfam domains of C. irritans, T.
thermophila and P. falciparum. Number of protein domain assignments
of C. irritans, T. thermophila and P. falciparum according to SUPERFAMILY
and Pfam classifications.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1176-S3.XLS ]
Additional file 4: Nucleotide and protein repeats summary. The The
frequency of SSR motifs in the C. irritans UTs and number of amino acid
repeats identified in the translated UTs by RepSeq tool.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1176-S4.XLS ]

Page 14 of 15

10.

11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. Beng-Chu Kua, National Fish Health Research
Laboratory, Fisheries Research Institute, Penang, Malaysia for her assistance
with the sample collection. This project was funded by the Ministry of
Science, Technology and Innovation of Malaysia under the R&D Initiatives
Grant Program awarded to SN. The granting agency played no role in the
activities pertaining to the execution of the project and submission of the
manuscript.
Author details
School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and
Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia. 2Malaysia
Genome Institute, UKM-MTDC Technology Centre, Selangor, Malaysia.

1

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

Authors’ contributions
YL collected the samples, constructed the library, sequenced the clones,
analyzed and interpreted the data, and drafted the manuscript. SN and AMA
conceived and designed the study and interpreted the data. They also
participated in drafting the manuscript. K-LW participated in revising the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

23.

Received: 1 July 2009
Accepted: 29 January 2010 Published: 29 January 2010

26.

References
1. Wright A-DG, Colorni A: Taxonomic re-assignment of Cryptocaryon
irritans, a marine fish parasite. Eur J Protistol 2002, 37(4):375-378.
2. Colorni A, Burgess P: Cryptocaryon irritans Brown 1951, the cause of
‘white spot disease’ in marine fish: an update. Aquar Sci Conserv 1997,
1(4):217-238.
3. Diggles BK, Lester RJG: Infections of Cryptocaryon irritans on wild fish
from southeast Queensland, Australia. Dis Aquat Organ 1996,
25(3):159-167.
4. Diamant A, Issar G, Colorni A, Paperna I: A pathogenic Cryptocaryon-like
ciliate from the Mediterranean Sea. Bull Eur Assoc Fish Pathol 1991,
11(3):122-124.
5. Colorni A: Aspects of the biology of Cryptocaryon irritans, and
hyposalinity as a control measure in gilt-head sea bream Sparus aurata.
Dis Aquat Organ 1985, 1:19-22.
6. Bunkley-Williams L, Williams EH: Diseases caused by Trichodina spheroidesi
and Cryptocaryon irritans (Ciliophora) in wild coral reef fishes. J Aquat
Anim Health 1994, 6(4):360-361.
7. Yoshinaga T, Dickerson HW: Laboratory propagation of Cryptocaryon
irritans on a saltwater-adapted Poecilia hybrid, the black molly. J Aquat
Anim Health 1994, 6(3):197-201.
8. Burgess PJ, Matthews RA: Fish host range of seven isolates of
Cryptocaryon irritans (Ciliophora). J Fish Biol 1995, 46(4):727-729.
9. Ajioka JW, Boothroyd JC, Brunk BP, Hehl A, Hillier L, Manger ID, Marra M,
Overton GC, Roos DS, Wan KL: Gene discovery by EST sequencing in

27.

24.
25.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.
34.

35.
36.

Toxoplasma gondii reveals sequences restricted to the Apicomplexa.
Genome Res 1998, 8(1):18-28.
Ranganathan S, Menon R, Gasser RB: Advanced in silico analysis of
expressed sequence tag (EST) data for parasitic nematodes of major
socio-economic importance-Fundamental insights toward
biotechnological outcomes. Biotechnol Adv 2009, 27(4):439-448.
Nagaraj SH, Gasser RB, Ranganathan S: A hitchhiker’s guide to expressed
sequence tag (EST) analysis. Brief Bioinform 2007, 8(1):6-21.
Ewing B, Hillier L, Wendl MC, Green P: Base-calling of automated
sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res 1998,
8(3):175-185.
Ewing B, Green P: Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using
phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res 1998, 8(3):186-194.
Documentation for Phrap and cross_match. http://www.phrap.org/
phredphrap/phrap.html.
Reed G: StackPACK clustering system. Brief Bioinform 2001, 2:388-404.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 25(17):3389-3402.
Aurrecoechea C, Brestelli J, Brunk BP, Dommer J, Fischer S, Gajria B, Gao X,
Gingle A, Grant G, Harb OS: PlasmoDB: a functional genomic database for
malaria parasites. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37 Database: D539-543.
Finn RD, Mistry J, Schuster-Bockler B, Griffiths-Jones S, Hollich V,
Lassmann T, Moxon S, Marshall M, Khanna A, Durbin R: Pfam: clans, web
tools and services. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34 Database: D247-251.
Wilson D, Madera M, Vogel C, Chothia C, Gough J: The SUPERFAMILY
database in 2007: families and functions. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 35
Database: D308-313.
Conesa A, Gotz S, Garcia-Gomez JM, Terol J, Talon M, Robles M: Blast2GO: a
universal tool for annotation, visualization and analysis in functional
genomics research. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(21):3674-3676.
Mulder N, Apweiler R: InterPro and InterProScan: tools for protein
sequence classification and comparison. Methods Mol Biol 2007, 396:59-70.
FTP download P. falciparum 3D7 directory. ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/
pathogens/Plasmodium/falciparum/3D7.
Tetrahymena Genome Database. ftp://ftp.tigr.org/pub/data/
Eukaryotic_Projects/t_thermophila/annotation_dbs/final_release_oct2008.
SUPERFAMILY Assignments for Genomes and Sequence Collections.
http://supfam.cs.bris.ac.uk/SUPERFAMILY/cgi-bin/taxonomic_gen_list.cgi.
Thiel T, Michalek W, Varshney R, Graner A: Exploiting EST databases for
the development and characterization of gene-derived SSR-markers in
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). Theor Appl Genet 2003, 106(3):411-422.
Wernersson R: Virtual Ribosome-a comprehensive DNA translation tool
with support for integration of sequence feature annotation. Nucleic
Acids Res 2006, 34(Suppl 2):W385-388.
Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M: KEGG: Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 27(1):29-34.
Moriya Y, Itoh M, Okuda S, Yoshizawa AC, Kanehisa M: KAAS: an automatic
genome annotation and pathway reconstruction server. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, , 35 Web Server: W182-W185.
Wu J, Mao X, Cai T, Luo J, Wei L: KOBAS server: a web-based platform for
automated annotation and pathway identification. Nucleic Acids Res 2006,
, 34 Web Server: W720-W724.
Mao X, Cai T, Olyarchuk JG, Wei L: Automated genome annotation and
pathway identification using the KEGG Orthology (KO) as a controlled
vocabulary. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(19):3787-3793.
Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, von Heijne G, Brunak S: Improved prediction of
signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J Mol Biol 2004, 340(4):783-795.
Lee S, Lee B, Jang I, Kim S, Bhak J: Localizome: a server for identifying
transmembrane topologies and TM helices of eukaryotic proteins
utilizing domain information. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34 Web Server:
W99-W103.
Softberry ProtComp 6.0. http://www.softberry.com/berry.phtml?
topic=protcompan&group=help&subgroup=proloc.
Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonnhammer ELL: Predicting
transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model:
application to complete genomes. J Mol Biol 2001, 305(3):567-580.
Hirokawa T: SOSUI: classification and secondary structure prediction
system for membrane proteins. Bioinformatics 1998, 14(4):378-379.
Fankhauser N, Maser P: Identification of GPI anchor attachment signals by
a Kohonen self-organizing map. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(9):1846-1852.

Lokanathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:76
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/76

37. Eisenhaber B, Bork P, Eisenhaber F: Prediction of potential GPImodification sites in proprotein sequences. J Mol Biol 1999,
292(3):741-758.
38. Poisson G, Chauve C, Chen X, Bergeron A: FragAnchor: a large-scale
predictor of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchors in eukaryote protein
sequences by qualitative scoring. Genomics Proteomics & Bioinformatics
2007, 5(2):121-130.
39. Fankhauser N, Nguyen-Ha T-M, Adler J, Maser P: Surface antigens and
potential virulence factors from parasites detected by comparative
genomics of perfect amino acid repeats. Proteome Sci 2007, 5(1):20.
40. Depledge D, Lower R, Smith D: RepSeq - A database of amino acid
repeats present in lower eukaryotic pathogens. BMC Bioinformatics 2007,
8:122.
41. Seng LT, Tan Z, Enright WJ: Important parasitic diseases in cultured
marine fish in the Asia-Pacific region. AQUA Culture Asia Pacific Magazine
2006, 2:14-16.
42. Christoffels A, van Gelder A, Greyling G, Miller R, Hide T, Hide W: STACK:
Sequence Tag Alignment and Consensus Knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids
Res 2001, 29(1):234-238.
43. Diggles BK, Adlard RD: Taxonomic affinities of Cryptocaryon irritans and
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis inferred from ribosomal RNA sequence data.
Dis Aquat Organ 1995, 22(1):39-43.
44. Leander BS, Keeling PJ: Early evolutionary history of dinoflagellates and
apicomplexans (Alveolata) as inferred from hsp90 and actin
phylogenies. J Phycol 2004, 40(2):341-350.
45. Colorni A, Diamant A: Ultrastructural features of Cryptocaryon irritans, a
ciliate parasite of marine fish. Eur J Protistol 1993, 29(4):425-434.
46. Abernathy JW, Xu DH, Li P, Klesius P, Kucuktas H, Liu Z: Transcriptomic
profiling of Ichthyophthirius multifiliis reveals polyadenylation of the
large subunit ribosomal RNA. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics
Proteomics 2009, 4(3):179-186.
47. Abernathy JW, Xu P, Li P, Xu DH, Kucuktas H, Klesius P, Arias C, Liu Z:
Generation and analysis of expressed sequence tags from the ciliate
protozoan parasite Ichthyophthirius multifiliis. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:176.
48. Anderson TJC, Haubold B, Williams JT, Estrada-Francos JG, Richardson L,
Mollinedo R, Bockarie M, Mokili J, Mharakurwa S, French N: Microsatellite
markers reveal a spectrum of population structures in the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17(10):1467-1482.
49. Grillo V, Jackson F, Gilleard JS: Characterisation of Teladorsagia
circumcincta microsatellites and their development as population
genetic markers. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2006, 148(2):181-189.
50. Hatanaka A, Umeda N, Yamashita S, Hirazawa N: Identification and
characterization of a putative agglutination/immobilization antigen on
the surface of Cryptocaryon irritans. Parasitology 2007, 134(9):1163-1174.
51. Lao DM, Arai M, Ikeda M, Shimizu T: The presence of signal peptide
significantly affects transmembrane topology prediction. Bioinformatics
2002, 18(12):1562-1566.
52. Ghosh K, Hotez PJ: Antibody-dependent reductions in mouse hookworm
burden after vaccination with Ancylostoma caninum secreted protein 1. J
Infect Dis 1999, 180(5):1674-1681.
53. El Amir A: Evaluation of Schistosoma haematobium 27-29 kDa antigen for
immunodiagnosis of S chistosomiasis haematobium. J Egypt Soc Parasitol
2008, 38(2):435-451.
54. Klemba M, Goldberg DE: Biological roles of proteases in parasitic
protozoa. Annu Rev Biochem 2002, 71:275-305.
55. Sajid M, McKerrow JH: Cysteine proteases of parasitic organisms. Mol
Biochem Parasitol 2002, 120(1):1-21.
56. Chung JY, Bae YA, Na BK, Kong Y: Cysteine protease inhibitors as
potential antiparasitic agents. Expert Opin Ther Patents 2005,
15(8):995-1007.
57. Joshi PB, Kelly BL, Kamhawi S, Sacks DL, McMaster WR: Targeted gene
deletion in Leishmania major identifies leishmanolysin (GP63) as a
virulence factor. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2002, 120(1):33-40.
58. Mahajan B, Noiva R, Yadava A, Zheng H, Majam V, Mohan KVK, Moch JK,
Haynes JD, Nakhasi H, Kumar S: Protein disulfide isomerase assisted
protein folding in malaria parasites. Int J Parasitol 2006, 36(9):1037-1048.
59. Copley RR, Russell RB, Ponting CP: Sialidase-like Asp-boxes: sequencesimilar structures within different protein folds. Protein Sci 2001,
10(2):285-292.

Page 15 of 15

60. Yoshinaga T, Akiyama K, Nishida S, Nakane M, Ogawa K, Hirose H: In vitro
culture technique for Cryptocaryon irritans, a parasitic ciliate of marine
teleosts. Dis Aquat Organ 2007, 78(2):155-160.
61. Brodersen DE, Nissen P: The social life of ribosomal proteins. FEBS J 2005,
272(9):2098-2108.
62. Lindström MS: Emerging functions of ribosomal proteins in gene-specific
transcription and translation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2009,
379(2):167-170.
63. Hatanaka A, Umeda N, Hirazawa N: Molecular cloning of a putative
agglutination/immobilization antigen located on the surface of a novel
agglutination/immobilization serotype of Cryptocaryon irritans.
Parasitology 2008, 135(9):1043-1052.
64. Wang X, Dickerson HW: Surface immobilization antigen of the parasitic
ciliate Ichthyophthirius multifiliis elicits protective immunity in channel
catfish ( Ictalurus punctatus). Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 2002, 9(1):176-181.
65. Eisen JA, Coyne RS, Wu M, Wu D, Thiagarajan M: Macronuclear genome
sequence of the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila, a model eukaryote.
PLoS Biol 2006, 4(9):e286.
66. Aury JM, Jaillon O, Duret L, Noel B, Jubin C, Porcel BM, Ségurens B,
Daubin V, Anthouard V, Aiach N: Global trends of whole-genome
duplications revealed by the ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia. Nature 2006,
444(7116):171-178.
67. Coyne RS, Thiagarajan M, Jones KM, Wortman JR, Tallon LJ, Haas BJ,
Cassidy-Hanley DM, Wiley EA, Smith JJ, Collins K: Refined annotation and
assembly of the Tetrahymena thermophila genome sequence through
EST analysis, comparative genomic hybridization, and targeted gap
closure. BMC Genomics 2008, 9(1):562.
68. Angel DI, Mongui A, Ardila J, Vanegas M, Patarroyo MA: The Plasmodium
vivax Pv41 surface protein: Identification and characterization. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2008, 377(4):1113-1117.
69. Pays E, Nolan DP: Expression and function of surface proteins in
Trypanosoma brucei. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1998, 91(1):3-36.
70. Klokouzas A, Shahi S, Hladky SB, Barrand MA, van Veen HW: ABC
transporters and drug resistance in parasitic protozoa. Int J Antimicrob
Agents 2003, 22(3):301-317.
71. Ropert C, Gazzinelli RT: Signaling of immune system cells by
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor and related structures derived
from parasitic protozoa. Curr Opin Microbiol 2000, 3(4):395-403.
72. Beadle C, Long GW, Weiss WR, McElroy PD, Maret SM, Oloo AJ, Hoffman SL:
Diagnosis of malaria by detection of Plasmodium falciparum HRP-2
antigen with a rapid dipstick antigen-capture assay. Lancet 1994,
343:564-568.
73. Ferreira MU, da Silva Nunes M, Wunderlich G: Antigenic diversity and
immune evasion by malaria parasites. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2004,
11(6):987-995.
74. Prescott DM: The DNA of ciliated protozoa. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1994,
58(2):233-267.
75. Lin Y, Cheng G, Wang X, Clark TG: The use of synthetic genes for the
expression of ciliate proteins in heterologous systems. Gene 2002, 288(12):85-94.
76. Gaertig J, Gao Y, Tishgarten T, Clark TG, Dickerson HW: Surface display of a
parasite antigen in the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila. Nat Biotechnol
1999, 17(5):462-465.
77. Gustafsson C, Govindarajan S, Minshull J: Codon bias and heterologous
protein expression. Trends Biotechnol 2004, 22(7):346-353.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-76
Cite this article as: Lokanathan et al.: Transcriptome analysis of the
Cryptocaryon irritans tomont stage identifies potential genes for the
detection and control of cryptocaryonosis. BMC Genomics 2010 11:76.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
