<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Citrobacter freundii infection after acute necrotizing pancreatitis in a patient with a pancreatic pseudocyst: a case report</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:51. doi:10.1186/1752-1947-5-51"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Antonio Lozano-Leon"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Lozano-Leon et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:51
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/51

CASE REPORT

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL

CASE REPORTS
Open Access

Citrobacter freundii infection after acute
necrotizing pancreatitis in a patient with a
pancreatic pseudocyst: a case report
Antonio Lozano-Leon*, Jose Iglesias-Canle, Julio Iglesias-Garcia, Jose Larino-Noia, Enrique Dominguez-Muñoz

Abstract
Introduction: Infections are the most frequent and severe complications of acute necrotizing pancreatitis with a
mortality rate of up to 80 percent. Although experimental and clinical studies suggest that the microbiologic
source of pancreatic infection could be enteric, information in this regard is controversial.
Case presentation: We describe a Citrobacter freundii isolation by endoscopy ultrasound fine needle aspiration in a
80-year-old Caucasian man with pancreatic pseudocyst after acute necrotizing pancreatitis.
Conclusion: Our case report confirms that this organism can be recovered in patients with a pancreatic
pseudocyst. On-site cytology feedback was crucial to the successful outcome of this case as immediate
interpretation of the fine needle aspiration sample directed the appropriate cultures and, ultimately, the curative
therapy. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of isolated pancreatic C. freundii diagnosed by
endoscopy ultrasound fine needle aspiration.

Introduction
The infection of pancreatic and peripancreatic tissue in
the course of severe acute pancreatitis (AP) occurs most
frequently in patients with extensive pancreatic necrosis.
Pancreatic pseudocysts are fluid collections that do not
resolve, often communicative with the pancreatic ductal
system, and slowly develop a circumferential capsule.
They should be differentiated from the early extravasated fluid collections, having a dissimilar clinical significance and requiring a different therapeutic approach [1].
The species of pathogens isolated from an infected pancreas suggest an enteric origin in both pancreatic cyst
and infected pancreatic necrosis. Nevertheless, the origin
and route of the bacteria leading to infection of the
pancreatic gland in AP are still unclear. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain how these enteric
bacteria reach the pancreas: translocation of bacteria
from the gut, infection from the biliary tree or duodenum, as well as hematogenous or lymphatic spread from
other sites. The most commonly isolated

microorganisms in pancreatic infections are E. coli,
Enterococcus spp., Klebsiella pneumonidae and, Enterobacter spp.; less frequent are Staphylococcus spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus spp., and Bacteroides
[2].
Members of genus Citrobacter are Gram-negative,
non-spore-forming rods belonging to the family Enterobacteriaceae and, as the name suggests, usually utilize
citrate as a sole carbon source. These facultative anaerobes typically are motile by means of peritrichous flagella. They ferment glucose and other carbohydrates
with the productions of acid and gas. They are oxidase
negative, catalase and methyl red positive, VogesProskauer negative, and do not decarboxylate lysine.
They are differentiated by their ability to convert tryptophan to indole. Of the dozen species, C. freundii,
C. diversus, and C. amalonaticus are linked to human
disease [3]. Acute necrotizing pancreatitis associated
with Citrobacter infections is rare, and up to now, few
cases have been reported in the literature.

* Correspondence: antoniolozan@gmail.com
Department of Gastroenterology and Foundation for Research in Digestive
Diseases, University Hospital Santiago de Compostela, Spain, A Choupana s/
n, 15706. Santiago de Compostela, Spain

Case presentation
A 80-year-old Caucasian man presented to our hospital
with acute right lower quadrant and periumbilical

© 2011 Lozano-Leon et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lozano-Leon et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:51
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/51

Page 2 of 4

abdominal pain. He had no history of previous alcohol
abuse, cholelithiasis, abdominal trauma or surgery, nor
ingestion of raw food or medications. On admission,
hematological tests revealed normal hematocrit and platelet counts, and an increased white blood cell count of
23,800 mm -3 (reference range: 4,000 to 10,000 mm-3)
with 37.8% lymphocytes. The biochemical test results
were within the reference range: ALT: 11 U/L (0 to 35),
AST: 12 (0 to 35), glucose: 123, urea: 49, and creatinine:
1,1, Na: 142, K: 4.9, and serum amylase: 3157 UI/L (10
to 110). A computed tomographic (CT) abdominal scan
was performed revealing necrosis over 30% of the pancreas and the presence of liquid in the peripancreatic
cavity (Figure 1). With this finding, it was decided to
perform an endoscopic ultrasound. The pancreatic parenchyma showed a slightly abnormally structured and
irregular mass-like aspect on the head, compatible with
an inflammatory process. The pancreatic body reflected
a homogeneous pattern with an irregular and slightly
dilated main pancreatic duct. In the neck of the pancreas, a cystic lesion with a dense aspect of 42.2 × 35.1
mm was revealed, probably related to a pseudocystic
versus postnecrotic cavity. A gallbladder with hyperechogenic foci without an acoustic shadow floating
inside, which is compatible with microlithiasis, was
described. Endoscopy ultrasound fine needle aspiration
(EUS-FNA; by using lineal equipment and a 22G needle
puncture) was performed over the injury in the pancreatic head (Figure 2). Samples obtained were submitted
for cytohistological and microbiological evaluation.
Pathology results showed small fragments of pancreatic
parenchyma without evidence of malignancy surrounded
by areas of necrosis and inflammation. Microbiological
analysis reveals a monoculture isolating Citrobacter
freundii by biochemical testing with an API 20E system
(API Biomerieux SA, Marcy I’Etoile, France yielded the
numerical code 1604572 for the isolate. According to
the API 20E database, this represented a “very good

identification” for C. freundii. An analysis using
16SrRNA gene by PCR-Sequencing method was performed to confirm the pathogen identity. 16SrRNA gene
of strain and Citrobacter freundii (FN997639) has the
nearest kinship and are located in the same phylogenetic
tree.
Experiments with this bacterium in cell lines (cytopathic effect) and rats (i.p. injection) were performed
and showed vacuolization of the cells as well as development of acute pancreatitis in the rats, demonstrating
high levels of virulence of the strain. Susceptibility testing showed intermediate susceptibility to cefuroxim,
although it was completely susceptible to ciprofloxacin.
Oral ciprofloxacine (500 mg × 2) was administrated
over six weeks. During treatment our patient progressed
satisfactorily. A week after starting the treatment, he felt
well and the abdominal pain gradually decreased. With
the diagnosis of an acute necrotizing pancreatitis complicated with a pseudocystic percutaneous, he was discharged and referred to our Pancreatobiliary Unit. An
abdominal ultrasound (Figure 3) performed six months
later revealed a complete resolution of the previous
inflammatory process.

Figure 1 Computed tomographic abdominal scan (CT) showing
necrosis and presence of liquid in peripancreatic cavity.

Figure 3 Abdominal ultrasound showing the normal pancreas
six months after the episode.

Figure 2 Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration
of the pancreatic mass.

Lozano-Leon et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:51
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/51

Discussion
In this study, Citrobacter freundii was detected in a
sample obtained by EUS-FNA of a patient with pancreatic pseudocyst after an acute necrotizing pancreatitis.
EUS-FNA has emerged as an excellent tool to both
image and sample pancreatic lesions [1]. It is considered
the most sensitive and specific method of identifying
pancreatic masses. The American Joint Commission on
Cancer recommends EUS-FNA as the preferred diagnostic modality for pancreatic masses [2]. The presence of
an on-site cytologist for immediate interpretation is a
common practice in most high volume EUS centers [3].
On-site cytologic evaluation has been shown to increase
the diagnostic yield by 10 to 15% [4-6] and can decrease
procedure time and potential complications through
avoidance of unnecessary needle passes once diagnostic
tissue is obtained.
Most pathogens in pancreatic infection are gastrointestinal Gram negative bacteria; the colon seems to be
the main source of pancreatitis related infections. Therefore, it is possible that bacterial translocation (BT) is the
most important mechanism for contamination of
pancreatic necrosis.
Pancreatic pseudocysts are more frequently polymicrobial (57%) than monomicrobial (43%). This fact contrasts with infected necrosis, where monomicrobial
infections are usually found. Up to now anaerobes and
fungi have rarely been reported; however, the bacterial
spectrum may change in the near future due to the use
of specific antibiotics leading to an increase in different
microorganisms, especially fungi [2].
The diagnosis of pancreatic pseudocyst is based on
clinical suspicion, imaging techniques, and demonstration of infection. Since clinical presentation may be very
variable, pancreatic infection should be suspected in any
patient with fever or suggestive signs or symptoms of
sepsis within the context of AP. Once pancreatic pseudocysts have been diagnosed the treatment is complete
drainage. Pancreatic pseudocysts do not resolve spontaneously and, if untreated, the prognosis for a patient is
almost invariably death. Currently, two different
approaches can be considered for primary drainage of a
pancreatic pseudocyst: surgical and percutaneous.
Appropriate antibiotic therapy depends on the identification of the causative microorganisms and sensitivity
testing. Meanwhile, several options have been recommended: a combination of ceftazidime and clindamycin;
a combination of ciprofloxacin and metronidazole; or
carbapenems as a single agent due to its extremely
broad spectrum of activity [2].
Several trials have assessed the frequency of bacterial
infection of necrotic areas in the natural course of
severe AP without antibiotic intervention [7]. Results

Page 3 of 4

indicated an overall contamination rate of 24% within
the first week of the onset of AP, increasing to 46 and
71%, respectively, in the second and third week.
Escherichia fergusonii was isolated from pancreatic
carcinoma and cholangiosepsis [8] in a patient with a
history of weight loss, jaundice, and acholic stools. After
one day, E. fergusonii was grown as a single organism
from the gallbladder fluid as well as from blood culture.
Many other bacteria have been involved in AP [9].
A case of AP associated with brucellosis was reported in
a 56-year-old patient with a seven-day history of fever,
generalized myalgia and arthralgia, lower back pain,
anorexia, and sweating. He experienced a sudden onset
of abdominal pain accompanied by nausea and vomiting.
He lived in an area of northwestern Greece where brucellosis is endemic. The CT scan revealed the presence
of mild swelling of the pancreas without additional
abnormality. The Brucella agglutinins were present in a
titer and the blood culture grew B. maletiensis after
eight days of incubation.
Also, Mycobacterium tuberculosis was isolated from a
woman with a pancreatic mass. She was subsequently
diagnosed with pancreatic tuberculosis via EUSFNA. Intraprocedural immediate cytologic evaluation
prompted samples to be sent for appropriate microbiological culture [10].
Studies evaluating the presence of bactDNA in biological fluids of patients with AP and other pathologies
have rarely been reported in the literature. Madaria,
et al. [11] reported the presence of Citrobacter freundii
DNA and other pathogens (Pseudomona aeruginosa and
E. coli) in four blood samples from patients with
pancreatitis in Spain. There is no information in the literature regarding the pathogenic role of C. freundii in
the development of infections in patients with AP; this
bacterium has been shown to translocate in different
experimental and clinical situations and is related to
both biliary and intra-abdominal infections [12-14].
Enteric bacterial pathogens including Vibrio cholerae
and enterotoxigenic Escheriachia coli often produce
ADP-ribosylating enterotoxins that are mainly responsible for diarrheal diseases. Two well-characterized enterotoxins, cholera toxins produced by toxigenic strains of
Vibrio cholerae and the heat-labile toxin (LT) produced
by enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) strains, have been
detected to be virulence-like factors in Citrobacter freundii using immunological methods and PCR [15-17]. This
suggests a possible gene transfer between C. freundii and
this species [18].
One of the virulence factors attributed to Citrobacter
spp. is the activation of transcription factors, kappa beta
(NFb), concretely in C. rodentium (previously C. freundii
biotype 4280). The NFb is a nuclear transcription which

Lozano-Leon et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011, 5:51
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/5/1/51

regulates the expression of a large number of genes that
are critical for the regulation of apoptosis, viral replication,
tumorigenesis, inflammation, and various autoimmune
diseases. The NFb can be activated via different pathways. The most common, called the classical pathway, is
triggered in response to microbial or pro-inflammatory
cytokine injury, leading to a recruitment and activation of
the Ib-kinase (IK) complex which includes the scaffold
protein NFb essential modulator, NEMO, also named,
IKg [19-21].
It is possible that in pancreatic infections, NFb may
have an additional role to perform, for example, in the
expression and production of pro-inflammatory cytoquines during C. freundii infection and possibly in bacterial clearance.

Page 4 of 4

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Conclusion
The patient’s progress has been favorable. Final diagnosis isolated C. freundii based on a positive culture of an
EUS-FNA sample. On-site cytology feedback was crucial
to the successful outcome of this case as immediate
interpretation of the FNA sample directed us to the
appropriate cultures and, ultimately, the curative therapy. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of
isolated pancreatic C. freundii diagnosed by EUS-FNA.
Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Abbreviations
AP: acute pancreatitis; BT: bacterial translocation; CT: computed tomography;
ETEC: enterotoxigenic E. coli; EUS-FNA: endoscopy ultrasound fine needle
aspiration; LT: labile toxin.
Authors’ contributions
ALL performed the tissue sample processing and microbiological analysis
and was a major contributor in writing the manuscript. JLN, JIC, JIG and
EDM performed the endoscopy and prescribed treatment, and followed the
patient’s progress during hospitalization. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 10 June 2010 Accepted: 7 February 2011
Published: 7 February 2011
References
1. Balthazar EJ, Krinsky G: Role imaging methods in acute pancreatitis:
diagnosis, staging, and detections of complications. Clinical
Gastroenterology 2007, 56-80.
2. Sabater-Orti L, Calvete-Chornet J, Lledó-Matoses S: Therapeutic approach
to pancreatic abscess. Clinical Gastroenterology 2007, 149-155.
3. Samonis G, Karageorgopoulus DE, Kofteridis DP, Matthaiou DK,
Sidiropoulou V, Maraki S, Falagas ME: Citrobacter infections in a general
hospital: characteristics and outcomes. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2009,
28:61-68.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

Gress FG, Hawes RH, Savides TJ, Ikenberry SO, Lehman GA: Endoscopic
ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy using linear array and
radial scanning endosonography. Gastrointest Endosc 1997, 45:243-250.
Exocrine pancreas, AJCC Cancer Staging Handbook. Edited by: Greene FL,
Page DL, Fleming ID, Fritz AG, Balch CM. New York: Springer-Verlag; , 6
2002:179-188.
Faigel DO, Ginsberg GG, Bentz JS, Gupta PK, Smith DB, Kochman ML:
Endoscopic ultrasound-guide real-time fine needle aspiration biopsy of
the pancreas in cancer patients with pancreatic lesions. J Clin Oncol
1997, 15:1439-1443.
Chang KJ, Nguyeng P, Erickson RA, Durbin TE, Katz KD: The clinical utility
of endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration in the diagnosis
and staging of pancreatic carcinoma. Gastrointest Endosc 1997, 45:387-393.
Klapman JB, Logrono R, Dye CE, Waxman I: Clinical impact of on-site
cytopathology interpretation on endoscopic ultrasound-guided fineneedle aspiration. Am J Gastroenterol 2003, 98:1289-1294.
Wiersema MJ, Vilmann P, Giovannini M, Chang KJ, Wiersema LM:
Endosonography-guide fine-needle aspiration biopsy: diagnostic
accuracy and complication assessment. Gastroenterology 1997,
112:1087-1095.
Beger HG, Bittner R, Block S: Bacterial contamination of pancreatic
necrosis. A prospective clinical study. Gastroenterology 1986, 91:433-438.
Funke G, Hany A, Altwegg M: Isolation of Escherichia fergusonii from four
different sites in a patient with pancreatic carcinoma and
cholangiosepsis. J Clin Microbiol 1993, 31:2201-2203.
Papaioannides D, Korantzopoulus P, Sinapidis D, Charalabopoulos K,
Akritidis N: Acute pancreatitis associated with brucellosis. J Pancreas 2006,
7:62-65, (Online) (The volume number should be bold.).
Kaushik N, Schoedel K, McGrath K: Isolated pancreatic tuberculosis
diagnosed by endoscopic ultrasound-guide fine needle aspiration: A
case report. J Pancreas 2006, 7:205-210, (Online) (The volume # should be
bold.).
de Madaira E, Martinez J, Lozano B, Sempere L, Benlloch S, Such J, Uceda F,
Francés R, Pérez-Mateo M: Detection and identification of bacterial DNA
in serum from patients with acute pancreatitis. Gut 2005, 54:1293-1297.
Shoda R, Mahalanabis D, Wahed MA: Bacterial translocation in the rat
model of lectin induced diarrhea. Gut 1995, 36:379-381.
Koyluoglu G, Bakici MZ, Elagoz S: The effect of pentoxifylline treatment
on bacterial translocation after hemorrhagic shock in rats. Clin Exp Med
2001, 1:61-66.
Karasawa T, Hideaki I, Tsukamoto T, Yamasaki S, Kurazono H, Faruque SM,
Balakish Nair G, Nishibuchi M, Takeda Y: Cloning and characterization of
genes encoding homologues of the B subunit of cholera toxin and the
Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin from clinical isolates of Citrobacter
freundii and E. coli. Infect Immun 2002, 70:7153-7155.
Frances R, Benlloch S, Zapater P: A sequential study of serum bacterial
DNA in patients with advanced cirrhosis and ascites. Hepatology 2004,
39:484-491.
Bondarenko VM, Timofeeva IT, Kolesnikov SA, Stepanova MV, Vertiev IV:
Ability of Citrobacter freundii strains isolated in acute intestinal infections
to produce LT-enterotoxin. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol 1986, 12-15.
Jolivet-Gougeon A, Tamanai-Shacoori T, Sauvager F, Cormier M: Production
of Escherichia coli group I-like heat-labile enterotoxin by
Enterobacteriaceae isolated from environmental water. Microbios 1997,
90:209-218.
Yu W, Guang-Sheng X, Kourouma F, Umar S: Citrobacter rodentium
induced NFkB activation in hyperproliferating colonic epithelia: role of
p65 (Ser536) phosphorylation. Br J Pharmacol 2006, 148:814-824.

doi:10.1186/1752-1947-5-51
Cite this article as: Lozano-Leon et al.: Citrobacter freundii infection after
acute necrotizing pancreatitis in a patient with a pancreatic pseudocyst:
a case report. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2011 5:51.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
