<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Ribonucleotide reduction - horizontal transfer of a required function spans all three domains</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-383"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Daniel Lundin"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Ribonucleotide reduction - horizontal transfer of
a required function spans all three domains
Daniel Lundin1, Simonetta Gribaldo2, Eduard Torrents1,3, Britt-Marie Sjöberg1*, Anthony M Poole1,4*

Abstract
Background: Ribonucleotide reduction is the only de novo pathway for synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides, the
building blocks of DNA. The reaction is catalysed by ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs), an ancient enzyme family
comprised of three classes. Each class has distinct operational constraints, and are broadly distributed across
organisms from all three domains, though few class I RNRs have been identified in archaeal genomes, and classes
II and III likewise appear rare across eukaryotes. In this study, we examine whether this distribution is best
explained by presence of all three classes in the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA), or by horizontal gene
transfer (HGT) of RNR genes. We also examine to what extent environmental factors may have impacted the
distribution of RNR classes.
Results: Our phylogenies show that the Last Eukaryotic Common Ancestor (LECA) possessed a class I RNR, but that
the eukaryotic class I enzymes are not directly descended from class I RNRs in Archaea. Instead, our results indicate
that archaeal class I RNR genes have been independently transferred from bacteria on two occasions. While LECA
possessed a class I RNR, our trees indicate that this is ultimately bacterial in origin. We also find convincing
evidence that eukaryotic class I RNR has been transferred to the Bacteroidetes, providing a stunning example of
HGT from eukaryotes back to Bacteria. Based on our phylogenies and available genetic and genomic evidence,
class II and III RNRs in eukaryotes also appear to have been transferred from Bacteria, with subsequent withindomain transfer between distantly-related eukaryotes. Under the three-domains hypothesis the RNR present in the
last common ancestor of Archaea and eukaryotes appears, through a process of elimination, to have been a
dimeric class II RNR, though limited sampling of eukaryotes precludes a firm conclusion as the data may be equally
well accounted for by HGT.
Conclusions: Horizontal gene transfer has clearly played an important role in the evolution of the RNR repertoire
of organisms from all three domains of life. Our results clearly show that class I RNRs have spread to Archaea and
eukaryotes via transfers from the bacterial domain, indicating that class I likely evolved in the Bacteria. However,
against the backdrop of ongoing transfers, it is harder to establish whether class II or III RNRs were present in the
LUCA, despite the fact that ribonucleotide reduction is an essential cellular reaction and was pivotal to the
transition from RNA to DNA genomes. Instead, a general pattern of ongoing horizontal transmission emerges
wherein environmental and enzyme operational constraints, especially the presence or absence of oxygen, are
likely to be major determinants of the RNR repertoire of genomes.

Background
Deoxyribonucleotides, the building blocks of DNA, are
synthesised from their RNA counterparts, ribonucleotides, by reduction of the 2’ hydroxyl group in a radical* Correspondence: britt-marie.sjoberg@molbio.su.se; anthony.
poole@canterbury.ac.nz
1
Department of Molecular Biology and Functional Genomics, Stockholm
University, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

based reaction catalysed by ribonucleotide reductases
(RNRs). The reaction is the sole de novo pathway for
synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides, and was likely pivotal
to the transition from RNA- to DNA-based genomes
[1-5]. RNR is thus essential for cellular life, as evident
from the observation that all studied organisms code for
at least one RNR (with the exception of a few intracellular pathogens that rely on deoxyribonucleotide salvage
from their hosts) [6]. All extant RNRs are evolutionarily

© 2010 Lundin et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 2 of 19

related, as evidenced by structural conservation of the
catalytic core [7-10].
RNRs have been grouped into three broad classes
based on the mechanism of radical generation, which is
essential for the reaction. Class I RNRs generate a tyrosyl radical in a separate subunit (NrdB or NrdF in subclasses Ia and Ib respectively), from where it is
transferred to the catalytic subunit (NrdA/NrdE) with
each catalytic turnover. In the radical-generating subunit, the radical originates at an iron-oxygen centre,
meaning class I RNRs are operational only under aerobic conditions. Class III RNRs also carry a stable radical,
generated by an activase (NrdG), using S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) as cofactor. Radical generation
requires cofactor cleavage whereupon the radical is
transferred to the catalytic subunit (NrdD), and stored
as a stable glycyl radical. Exposure to oxygen cleaves the
enzyme at the glycyl radical; class III RNRs are hence
operational under strictly anaerobic conditions [11,12].
Class II RNRs can be either monomers or dimers of
NrdJ. Radical generation is via cleavage of deoxyadenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl, vitamin B12 coenzyme). No stable
protein-based radical is formed, so radical generation
and transfer to the active site occurs with each turnover.
Class II RNRs operate independent of oxygen presence
or absence, but the requirement for AdoCbl means they
are cobalt-dependent. See table 1 for a comparison of
RNR classes and [13-15] for reviews of RNR biochemistry, genetics and protein structure.
Genome analyses indicate that all three RNR classes
are found across all three domains of life, but only a
small minority of genomes carry genes for all three
classes [6]. While all three RNR classes are widespread
among bacteria, available genome data from archaea and
eukaryotes reveal a patchy distribution. Class I RNRs are
rare among archaea, but are present in all sequenced
eukaryotic genomes (except two intracellular parasites).
Classes II and III on the other hand, are common across
archaeal genomes, with only a handful identified in
eukaryote genomes. Furthermore, organisms encoding

more than one class as well as more than one set of
genes for a single class, are common [6]. While some
cases of within-class RNR specialisation in DNA repair
have been well studied [16], and a class I RNR subunit
in mammals is under DNA damage control [17], the
reaction biochemistries also dictate the existence of
clear operational constraints between the classes.
Given the clear antiquity of ribonucleotide reduction,
and the broad distribution of the three classes of ribonucleotide reductase, we sought to address whether this
distribution is the result of ancient paralogy - possibly
predating the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA)
- followed by differential loss among lineages, or
whether the current distribution is instead the result of
horizontal gene transfer (HGT). Under the latter model,
receipt of additional RNR classes may extend the
environmental conditions under which the recipient
organism can sustain DNA replication (and hence
reproduction).
To test these two hypotheses, we constructed phylogenetic trees using protein sequences from 73 archaea,
1297 bacteria, 162 eukaryotes and 188 viruses from all
three classes of RNR. The resulting phylogenies are not
exempt from the many problems that complicate phylogenetic estimation from ancient sequences (e.g. mutational saturation, varying rates of sequence change
across the tree and long-branch attraction [18]), but,
when combined with additional genetic evidence, nevertheless recover sufficient information to distinguish
between the two hypotheses.

Results
Assessing RNR phylogenies for vertical versus horizontal
transmission

To examine whether the evolutionary history of RNR
genes reflects ancient paralogy with vertical descent or
HGT, we performed phylogenetic analyses class by class
(sequence divergence precluded analyses across classes).
Figure 1 shows preliminary BioNJ trees for the class I
catalytic (NrdA/E) and radical-generating (NrdB/F)

Table 1 The RNR classes
Class I*

Class II

Class III

Operation

Aerobic

O2 independent,
B12 dependent

Anaerobic
SAM dependent

Structure

a2b2

a or a2

a2, activated by b2

Component names

a:NrdA or NrdE
b: NrdB or NrdF

NrdJ

Enzyme proper: NrdD
Activase: NrdG

Radical generating
metal site

Fe-O-Fe

Co (in AdoCbl)

b: 4Fe-4S and AdoMet

Distribution

Common in bacteria universal in
eukaryotes, rare in archaea

Common in bacteria and archaea, rare in
eukaryotes

Common in bacteria and archaea, rare in
eukaryotes

*Class I is traditionally subdivided into Ia (NrdA and NrdB) and Ib (NrdE and NrdF) respectively. Class Ib lacks activity regulation, and Ib operons contain two Ibspecific genes, a flavodoxin (NrdI) and a reductant (NrdH).

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 3 of 19

Figure 1 Overview RNR phylogenies. Unrooted BioNJ phylogenies from alignments of protein sequences of a) the catalytic subunit of class I
RNR (NrdA and NrdE for subclass Ia and Ib respectively), b) the radical generating subunit of class I RNR (NrdB and NrdF for subclass Ia and Ib
respectively), c) class II RNR (NrdJ) and d) the catalytic subunit of class III RNR (NrdD). Sequences were selected to cover the known sequence
diversity. See inset colour legend for colours of the largest organismal groups. For black branches, see individual trees in additional file 1. Dashed
branches are viruses; if the host range was known to us, viral sequences have the same colour as the host organism. Small arrows in a) and b)
indicate the location of archaeal sequences. The marked parts of each tree were subjected to full maximum likelihood analyses, as indicated. All
maximum likelihood trees are available in additional file 1; the trees from the marked areas of radical generating subunit of class I (NrdB, 1b) are
only available in additional file 1.

subunits (figures 1a and 1b), the class II (NrdJ - figure 1c)
and class III catalytic subunits (NrdD - figure 1d) respectively. The evolutionary distances spanned by known
RNR distribution patterns are great, and we therefore
expected to see poor resolution for the large number of
sequences included in each tree. For ancient paralogy to
apply, the three domains (Archaea, Bacteria and Eukarya)
should be phylogenetically distinct - failure to see this
pattern might either indicate insufficient phylogenetic
signal across a given dataset, or that the data are better
accounted for by horizontal transmission.
BioNJ trees of RNR subunits (figure 1) do not appear
consistent with ancient paralogy under any plausible
evolutionary model of the relationships between the
three domains. A general pattern likely to be consistent
with HGT is that major bacterial groups are divided
across several disparate parts of the trees. For the pattern we observe to be the result of ancient paralogy

followed by differential losses, a high number of RNRs
would have had to have been present in the common
ancestor of the various bacterial phyla. Further circumstantial evidence for the mobility of RNR genes is that
RNRs are frequently encoded by HGT vectors such as
plasmids, viruses, phage, and prophage (see RNRdb [6]
and table 2).
In order to investigate whether the distribution of
RNRs across the three domains can be explained by
HGT, we performed detailed investigations of a number
of potential cases of interdomain HGT apparent from
these preliminary analyses.
Evidence for HGT of class I RNR from bacteria to archaea

From our preliminary analysis of class I catalytic and
radical-generating subunits (figures 1a and 1b) it was
evident that the archaeal class I sequences form two wellseparated groups (orange, indicated with arrows)

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 4 of 19

Table 2 Examples of plasmid and prophage encoded RNR proteins
Domain

Organism

RNR proteins

Plasmid/prophage

Archaea

Natronomonas pharaonis DSM 2160

NrdA, NrdB, NrdR

PL131 (NC_007427)

Bacteria

Acaryochloris marina MBIC11017

NrdA, NrdB

pREB6 (NC_009931)

Bacteria

Lactobacillus plantarum L137

NrdD

pLTK13 (NC_011101)

Bacteria

Lactococcus lactis

NrdE, NrdF, NrdI

pGdh442 (NC_009435)

Bacteria

Ralstonia eutropha H16

NrdD, NrdG

pHG1 (NC_005241)

Bacteria

Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhi str. CT18

NrdA2, NrdB2

pHCM2 (NC_003385)

Bacteria

Thermus thermophilus HB8/HB27

NrdA, NrdB

pTT27 (NC_006462/NC_005838)

Bacteria

Yersinia pestis biovar Microtus str. 91001*

NrdA2, NrdB2

pMT1 (NC_005815)

Bacteria

Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168

NrdE2, NrdF2

prophage SPb (NC_000964)

*There are several other examples of plasmid encoded class I RNR operons in Yersinia spp.

interspersed within bacterial homologues (figures 1a
and 1b). This is surprising given that all eight archaeal
class I RNRs in RNRdb are from the Halobacteriaceae
(Table 3). This pattern may therefore be indicative of one
or more HGT events. To investigate this further, we generated maximum likelihood trees from the two clusters
encompassing these archaeal sequences (indicated in
orange in figure 1a). The resultant trees from both subunits (figure 2; see additional file 1 for NrdB/F trees),
pseudorooted using the global topologies in figure 1 (see
figure 2 legend), confirm this initial result, suggesting
that at least one set of class I RNR genes were horizontally transferred after the diversification of the Halobacteriaceae. Additional evidence supporting transfer comes
from an examination of the order of NrdA and NrdB
genes in class I RNR operons: gene order is opposite in
the two groups of archaeal sequences. The specific gene
order is in both cases shared with bacterial nearest neighbours as identified from the trees in figure 2 (table 3). We
also note that the small, radical-generating subunit
(NrdB) in the group including Halobacterium sp. carries
a substitution of the radical-bearing tyrosine to a phenylalanine (table 3 and figure 3). This variant is functional,
as recently demonstrated for the class I RNR from Chlamydia trachomatis [18,19].
Several additional lines of evidence support two independent HGT events from bacteria to Halobacteriales.
The group containing sequences from Halomicrobium
mukohataei, Halorubrum lacusprofundi and Natronomonas pharaonis clusters with Halophage AAJ-2005 and the
halophilic bacterium Salinibacter ruber 13855 [20], with
strong support in trees from both subunits (figure 2a and
additional file 1). In addition to S. ruber, the nearest
neighbours include other halophilic bacteria (Psychromonas sp. CNPT3 [21] and Leeuwenhoekiella blandensis
MED217 [22]) but also the vertebrate pathogen Dichelobacter nodosus VCS1703a [23], the thermophilic Thermus aquaticus and T. thermophilus (both isolated from
hot springs [24]) and the marine bacterium Polaribacter

irgensii [25]. Phylogenetic proximity to halophilic bacteria
adds credibility to transfer from bacteria to archaea since
these species can plausibly come into contact in a hypersaline environment.
Closer examination of the data indicates several
sequences are associated with vectors that could have
facilitated transfer. In addition to Halophage AAJ-2005
(an archaeal virus), the class I RNR genes in N. pharaonis and in T. thermophilus are both encoded on plasmids [26] (table 2), likewise providing a possible vector
for HGT. Interestingly, the class I genes in Halorubrum
lacusprofundi are encoded on the second, smaller chromosome, whereas the class II RNR genes are encoded
on the large chromosome (table 3). We can thus overall
conclude that the group of archaeal class I RNR
sequences from Halorubrum lacusprofundi, N. pharaonis and Halomicrobium mukohataei are likely the result
of HGT from bacteria, most probably in a shared hypersaline environment.
The other group of halophilic archaeal class I RNRs
(figure 2b, orange) - containing sequences from Halobacterium sp., Halogeometricum borinquense, Halorhabdus utahensis and Natrialba magadi - shows weaker
positional support, but the combination of phylogenetic
position, operon architecture (table 3) and a variant
phenylalanine in the small subunit (NrdB) (figure 3)
nevertheless indicates clear support for this group being
distinct. While no vectors can be implicated as agents of
transfer, and no sequences deriving from halophilic bacteria are immediate phylogenetic neighbours, to attribute the pattern we observe to vertical inheritance
would require massive loss of class I RNR genes across
archaea. This, and the fact that the NrdB genes carry an
atypical substitution of the radical harbouring tyrosine
to a non-radical harbouring phenylalanine, shared with
Chlamydiae spp. and other bacteria that are relatively
close to this group of archaeal sequences in our trees
(figure 2b), suggests a second independent transfer of
class I RNR genes from bacteria to archaea. These

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 5 of 19

Table 3 Archaea and archaeal virus class I RNRs and nearest bacterial/phage neighbours*
Organism
1

NCBI acc. nos

operon organisation

Halomicrobium mukohataei DSM 12286

NrdA: ZP_03875490

5’-nrdR-nrdB-nrdA-3’

Comment

NrdB: ZP_03875489
NrdJ: ZP_03874310
NrdR: ZP_03875488
2

Halorubrum lacusprofundi ATCC 49239

NrdA: YP_002564381

5’-nrdR-nrdB-nrdA-3’

Class I on chromosome 2
(NC_012028, 0.5 Mb), class II on
chromosome 1 (NC_012029, 2.7 Mb)

5’-nrdR-nrdB-nrdA-3’

Class I on plasmid (NC_007427),
class II on main chromosome
(NC_007426)

NrdB: YP_002564382
NrdJ: YP_002567020
NrdR: YP_002564383
3

Natronomonas pharaonis DSM 2160

NrdA: YP_327711

NrdB: YP_327710
NrdJ: YP_327319
NrdR: YP_327708
4

Halophage AAJ-2005

NrdA: ABB77922
NrdB: ABB77921

5

Salinibacter ruber DSM 13855

NrdA: YP_444285

5’-nrdB-nrdA-3’

NrdJ: ABB77927
5’-nrdB-nrdA-3’

The NrdA gene contains a group I
intron

5’-nrdA-nrdB-3’

Radical Y to F substitution

5’-nrdA-nrdB-3’

Radical Y to F substitution
Both subunits identical to
Halobacterium sp. NRC-1

5’-nrdR-nrdA-nrdB-3’

Radical Y to F substitution

5’-nrdR-nrdA-nrdB-3’

Radical Y to F substitution

5’-nrdR-nrdA-nrdB-3

Radical Y to F substitution

5’-nrdR-nrdA-nrdB-3

Radical Y to F substitution

NrdB: YP_444284
NrdJ: YP_444446
6

Halobacterium sp. NRC-1

NrdA: NP_280998
NrdB: NP_280997
NrdJ: NP_280419

7

Halobacterium salinarum R1

NrdA: YP_001690130

NrdB: YP_001690129
NrdJ: YP_001689532
8

Halogeometricum borinquense DSM 11551

NrdA: ZP_04000564
NrdB: ZP_04000565
NrdJ: ZP_03999548
NrdR: ZP_04000563

9

Halorhabdus utahensis DSM 12940

NrdA: YP_003131237
NrdB: YP_003131236
NrdD: YP_003130508
NrdG: YP_003130507
NrdJ: YP_003130199
NrdR: YP_003131238

10

Natrialba magadii ATCC 43099

NrdA: ZP_03692957
NrdB: ZP_03692956
NrdJ: ZP_03694849
NrdR: ZP_03692958

11

Chlamydia trachomatis D/UW-3/CX

NrdA: NP_220348
NrdB: NP_220349
NrdR: NP_219916

*Rows 1-3: archaeal class I RNRs transferred from halophilic bacteria, together with class I RNRs from the salt-tolerant bacterium Salinibacter ruber and a
halophage (bold font, rows 4 & 5). Rows 6-10: archaeal class I RNRs that are similar to the sequences from the bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis (bold, row 11).

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 6 of 19

Figure 2 Phylogenies of class I RNR catalytic subunits show independent transfers from bacteria to archaea. PhyML UL3 phylogenies
showing a) a probable bacterial origin of NrdA subunits from the archaea Halomicrobium mukohataei DSM 1228, Halorubrum lacusprofundi ATCC
49239 and Natronomonas pharaonis DSM 2160, and b) a probable bacterial origin of NrdA subunits from the archaea Halobacterium sp. NRC-1,
Halobacterium salinarum R1, Halogeometricum borinquense DSM 11551, Halorhabdus utahensis DSM 12940 and Natrialba magadii ATCC 43099.
Arrows point to the position of the archaeal sequences. Large top-level groups from the NCBI taxonomy have been colour-coded, see inset
legend, and smaller groups are in black. Viruses are in italics. The tree is not formally rooted; the pseudoroot is placed so as to be consistent
with the global phylogeny in Figure 1a.

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 7 of 19

Figure 3 Alignment of the radical generating subunit of subclass Ic RNR. The proposed subclass Ic [77] (uppermost 10 sequences, in blue
box) contains an unusual tyrosine to phenylalanine substitution (column in blue box). Subclass Ic hence does not harbour a stable protein
radical [18,19]. Archaea are in a pale yellow box. From the alignment, it is apparent that a group of archaea (Halobacterium sp., H. salinarium, H.
borinquense, H. utahensis and N. magadii) contains subclass Ic radical generating subunits, while another (H. lacusprofundi, H. mukohataei, N.
pharaonis and Halophage AAJ2005) carry a normal tyrosyl radical-containing enzyme.

results are also consistent with other observations indicating extensive gene transfer events from bacteria into
halophilic archaea [20,27,28]. In conclusion, the ancestor
of extant archaea did not possess a class I RNR, and this
class cannot be traced back to LUCA. Instead, it seems
most likely that class I RNR evolved in bacteria.
The LECA possessed a class I RNR of bacterial origin

Given the relatively recent bacterial origins established
for archaeal class I RNRs, class I presence in eukaryotes
cannot be explained by vertical inheritance from the
common ancestor of eukaryotes and archaea. We have
found class I RNRs in all completely sequenced eukaryote genomes we have knowledge of (August 2010) [6],
which currently span five eukaryote supergroups. This
suggests that the last eukaryotic common ancestor
(LECA) may have possessed a class I RNR. In support
of this, in trees derived from both class I subunits
eukaryotic sequences form a clan, consistent with a single origin (figures 1 and 4; see additional file 1 for radical-generating (NrdB/F) subunit trees). Furthermore,
phylogenies from both subunits (NrdA/E and NrdB/F)
are broadly consistent across eukaryotes, and trees are
likewise broadly congruent with expectations from single
gene trees spanning eukaryotes. While there are unexpected positions for some groups, especially in the small
subunit NrdB tree (see additional file 1), these largely
relate to the relationships between eukaryotic supergroups; lack of resolution of the deepest branches of

eukaryotes in our trees is hardly surprising given current
difficulties in establishing a definitive eukaryote phylogeny from much larger datasets [29,30]. However, we do
not observe any topologies that would strongly indicate
horizontal gene transfer among eukaryotes, and we
therefore tentatively conclude that LECA encoded a
class I RNR.
It has previously been suggested that eukaryotic class I
RNRs may have been transferred from mitochondria [3],
and class I trees (figures 1 and 4) are consistent with a
bacterial origin for eukaryotic class I RNR genes. A
plausible sister group to eukaryotes, consisting mainly of
actinobacterial sequences, can be identified in trees
from both subunits (figure 4 and additional file 1). However, our trees do not provide sufficient resolution to
establish a specific bacterial donor group. Moreover,
there is no evidence that eukaryote class I RNRs are of
alphaproteobacterial origin, which would be expected if
the genes were a result of HGT from the protomitochondrial genome [31]. It thus seems likely that class I
RNR entered the eukaryote lineage via HGT from a bacterium other than the protomitochondrion. However,
with ongoing transfer of ribonucleotide reductases
clearly occurring among bacteria, it is equally possible
that any signal relating to the ultimate bacterial source
has been erased by subsequent transfers; reliable detection of the originating lineage supposes that descendants
of the donor have not themselves been subject to homologous gene displacement events.

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 8 of 19

Figure 4 Phylogeny of class I RNR catalytic subunit sequences shows a bacterial origin of eukaryote NrdA plus transfer from
eukaryotes to bacteroidetes. A PhyML UL3 phylogeny from an alignment of protein sequences of the catalytic subunit of class I RNR from
eukaryote genomes, and a selection of closely related bacterial homologues. Large top-level groups from the NCBI taxonomy have been colourcoded, see inset legend with a bar indicating eukaryotic groups. Smaller groups are black and viruses are in italics. The bacterial sequences
(mainly Bacteroidetes) we suggest were horizontally transferred from eukaryotes have been indicated with a bar and label. The tree is not
formally rooted; the pseudoroot is placed so as to be consistent with the global phylogeny in Figure 1a.

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

HGT of class I RNR from eukaryotes back into bacteria

Both NrdA and NrdB trees (figure 4 and additional file 1)
also provide clear evidence for HGT of class I RNR in the
opposite direction, from eukaryotes to bacteria. In both
cases, there is strong phylogenetic support for the genes
of the recipient bacterial group, predominantly composed
of marine Bacteroidetes spp., being derived from within
eukaryotes (figure 4 and additional file 1). While it is not
possible to identify the exact partners associated with
transfer, the known biology of members of the recipient
group and their nearest eukaryote neighbours indicate a
mechanistically and ecologically plausible scenario for
association and transfer. Several species in the recipient
group have a documented association with eukaryotes.
For instance, Algoriphagus sp. is known to form colonies
with the choanoflagellate Proterospongia sp. (for which
no RNR sequence is available), Psychroflexus torquis was
isolated from a sea-ice algal assemblage [32] and Tenacibaculum MED152 is a nitrogen-fixing bacterium associated with diatoms [33,34]. Flavobacterium johnsoniae
UW101 is of particular interest since it encodes two class
I operons; as seen in the NrdA trees, one is placed near
the archaeal sequences in the tree (figure 2a), while the
other groups with eukaryotes (figure 4). The nearest
eukaryote neighbours in both NrdA and NrdB trees
(figures 1 and 4; additional file 1) include oomycetes
(Phytophthora sojae and Aureococcus anophagefferens)
and Naegleria gruberi (an Excavate). Based on these characteristics, phagotrophy could plausibly have facilitated
transfer, but would require prey bacteria to be resistant
to digestion. While our analysis is unable to identify the
specific eukaryote host-bacterium interaction responsible
for the pattern we observe in the data, the observation
that Flavobacterium spp. and Amoebophilus asiactus
(both members of the Bacteroidetes) are digestionresistant following engulfment by Acanthamoeba [35] is
consistent with transfer by this route. It will therefore be
interesting to establish whether gene transfer from host
to resident bacteria - the opposite of the ‘you are what
you eat’ ratchet [36] - is a significant pathway for gene
acquisition.
Eukaryotic class III RNRs and their activases are probably
fused and have been transferred from bacteria

Class III RNRs are common among both bacteria and
archaea [6]. Our overview tree in figure 1d (see also full
tree in additional file 1), shows that archaeal and bacterial sequences are not intermixed, possibly indicating
presence of class III RNR in the LUCA.
To date, only eight class III RNRs have been identified in eukaryote genomes [6], spanning fungi (Schizosaccharomyces japonicus, Fusarium oxysporum,
Gibberella moniliformis, Gibberella zeae, Nectria

Page 9 of 19

haematococca), and stramenopiles (Phytophtora
ramorum, P. sojae and P. capsisi). This might be due
to limited sequencing of eukaryote genomes, or an
indicator of HGT from either bacteria or archaea. Phylogenetic trees generated from NrdD sequences reveal
that the eukaryote sequences form a well-supported
clan (0.999 SH-like support - see methods), falling well
within the bacteria, suggesting a single transfer into
eukaryotes from a bacterial source (figures 1d and 5).
For class III RNR to have been present in the LUCA
would require, under the three domains scenario, that
class III was present in the ancestor of archaea and
eukaryotes and subsequently replaced in the lineage
leading to LECA by HGT from a bacterial source.
Further supporting a bacterial origin for eukaryotic
class III RNRs, we note that the handful of archaeal
sequences in the subtree shown in figure 5 are best
accounted for by independent HGT events from bacteria, not vertical descent from the archaeal-eukaryote
common ancestor.
Remarkably, closer inspection of the eukaryote class III
operons reveals that, at the sequence level, NrdD and
NrdG subunits are coded by a single open reading frame
in all cases except in S. japonicus where there are two
nrdD genes, one fused as per all other eukaryotes, and
one singleton nrdD. HGT of fused proteins has been
reported previously [37,38], and the putative NrdDG
fusion raises the possibility that subunit fusion facilitates
successful fixation of transferred prokaryotic operons in
eukaryotes by permitting expression of distal genes in
operons for which eukaryotic promoter sequences and
translation initiation sites will be unavailable.
The existence of a eukaryotic NrdDG clan also suggests a single bacterial to eukaryote transfer with subsequent spread among eukaryotes. This is supported by
the distribution of eukaryote NrdDG in two ways. First,
this gene fusion is only sporadically present among
fungi, being restricted to two genera. Notably, within
the Schizosaccharomyces genus, only S. japonicus carries
an NrdDG homologue - neither S. pombe nor S. octosporus genomes carry detectable homologues. Second,
the only identifiable homologues outside fungi are in
oomycetes (P. ramorum and P. sojae). This is of particular interest in that oomycetes have a fungal-like lifestyle,
but are constituents of the supergroup Chromalveolata,
so are evolutionarily distant from fungi (which are
members of the Opisthokonta). Phylogenomic evidence
suggests that the fungal-like lifestyle may in part be the
result of extensive transfer of genes to oomycetes from
fungi [39]. Taken together, these observations suggest
that class III RNRs have been transferred from a bacterial donor to eukaryotes, with subsequent transfer
between fungi and oomycetes.

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 10 of 19

Figure 5 Phylogeny of class III RNR from eukaryotes together with their most similar bacterial sequences. A PhyML UL3 phylogeny from
an alignment of NrdD protein sequences of the class III RNR enzyme from eukaryotic genomes and similar NrdD sequences from complete
bacterial genomes. Only the NrdD part of the fused eukaryotic NrdDG proteins was used. The arrow indicates eukaryotic sequences. Large toplevel groups from the NCBI taxonomy have been colour-coded, see inset legend, smaller groups are black. Viruses are in italics. The tree is not
formally rooted; the pseudoroot is placed so as to be consistent with the global phylogeny in Figure 1d.

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

HGT of class II RNR from bacteria to eukaryotes, and
intradomain HGT among eukaryotes

The archaeal class II RNR sequences are all in the same
part of our phylogenies (figures 1c and 6) although with
several interspersed bacterial sequences. The topology is
thus consistent with presence of a class II RNR in
LUCA followed by a few HGT events between archaea
and bacteria. However, certain bacterial groups - firmicutes (violet) and alphaproteobacteria (olive) in particular - are dispersed across the tree in a way that is hard
to reconcile with a solely vertical pattern of descent.
Similar to class III, class II RNRs are only sparsely distributed across sequenced eukaryotic genomes, though
this distribution spans four eukaryote supergroups:
Amoebozoa (Dictyostelium discoideum), Excavata
(Euglena gracilis and Trichomonas vaginalis), Opisthokonta (Monosiga brevicollis) and Chromalveolata (Phytophthora ramorum, P. infestans and P. sojae). Such a
broad distribution could indicate a deep eukaryotic
ancestry for class II RNR. Notably, the class II RNR in
Euglena gracilis has previously been suggested as a possible ancestral eukaryotic RNR [40]. If correct, this
would suggest that a class II RNR was present in the
LECA. If this was inherited vertically from the ancestor
of archaea and eukaryotes, then the archaeal class II
proteins should be closely related to the eukaryotic class
II proteins. Alternatively, the sparse presence of class II
RNRs among eukaryotes sequenced to date may be the
result of HGT from bacteria. To test between these two
possibilities, we generated phylogenies from NrdJ
sequences (figures 1c, 6 and 7). Figure 1c shows, with
strong support, that the eukaryotic class II RNRs can be
divided into two phylogenetically distinct groups, consistent with at least one HGT event. One group (all species
except T. vaginalis) is clearly derived from bacteria via
HGT - all sequences in this group, except M. brevicollis,
form a clan (0.997 SH-like support) - together with the
epsilonproteobacterium Nitratiruptor sp. (isolated from
a deep sea hydrothermal field [41]) - this clan is sister
to a group containing the class II RNR from Lactobacillus leichmannii (figure 7). The structure of L. leichmannii class II RNR reveals it is a monomer [9], in contrast
to the catalytic components of all other characterised
RNRs, where the catalytic component forms a dimer
[8,14]. At the dimer interface, effectors controlling the
substrate specificity of the enzyme bind [7,8,10], but the
monomeric L. leichmannii class II RNR instead contains
a domain that mimics the dimer interface [9]. Our phylogeny is in broad agreement with previous studies
where monomeric and dimeric sequences form separate
groups [6,40]. An alignment of eukaryotic NrdJ
sequences together with the sequences for the two
structurally solved NrdJs (monomeric L. leichmannii
and dimeric T. maritima respectively), and a handful of

Page 11 of 19

other putatively monomeric and dimeric NrdJ
sequences, indicates that all eukaryotic NrdJ sequences,
bar that from T. vaginalis, have the insert particular to
monomeric NrdJs (figure 8).
The class II RNR from M. brevicollis also appears
monomeric (figure 8), but does not belong to the same
clan as the other monomeric eukaryotic sequences, suggesting this sequence may be the result of a second
independent transfer. Branch lengths in the monomeric
part of the tree are long however and the M. brevicollis
sequence is extensively diverged from its nearest neighbours (Figure 7). This can lead to artefacts in phylogenetic reconstruction, especially long-branch attraction
[42,43]. We performed successive removal of groups of
sequences to analyse effects on topology, but failed to
detect any artefact (data not shown). We therefore conclude that the presence of monomeric class II RNRs in
eukaryotes is due to HGT from bacteria on at least one
occasion. Establishing whether monomeric class II RNRs
in eukaryotes originate from two independent transfer
events must await the identification of additional eukaryote class II sequences.
While the monomeric class II RNRs in eukaryotes
have entered this domain via HGT, what can be said of
the evolutionary history of the T. vaginalis class II RNR?
As all archaeal proteins are dimeric and group within a
distinct clade (figure 1c), one possibility is that the
T. vaginalis sequence has been inherited vertically from
the archaeal/eukaryal ancestor. The tree indicates
T. vaginalis is close to archaeal sequences (figure 6), but
two complicating factors are evident. First, the branch
leading to T. vaginalis is extremely long, and, second,
the clan to which T. vaginalis is basal consists of
archaea interspersed with bacteria (indicative of interdomain transfers), so there is no direct relationship with
archaea as predicted under vertical inheritance. The
extensive sequence divergence between T. vaginalis and
archaeal class II sequences, plus the fact that no other
dimeric class II sequences are known from eukaryotes,
makes it difficult to conclude on current data whether
the T. vaginalis class II sequence in our tree (figure 6)
has a horizontal or vertical evolutionary history.
Evaluating phylogenetic evidence for RNR gene mobility

A phylogenetic approach to identification of HGT can
effectively identify transfer events between distantly
related organisms since species incongruence is readily
recognisable. We have identified a number of interdomain transfers on this basis, but establishing a direct
donor-recipient relationship is often difficult because of
limited sequence sampling, and conclusions can only be
drawn from the resulting phylogenies. Following an
interdomain transfer, spread of a gene via subsequent
intradomain transfer is most readily identified when the

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 12 of 19

Figure 6 Phylogeny of dimeric class II RNR. A PhyML UL3 phylogeny from an alignment of protein sequences of dimeric class II RNR enzyme
containing the eukaryote T. vaginalis (arrow). Large top-level groups from the NCBI taxonomy have been colour-coded see inset legend, smaller
groups are black. Viruses are in italics. The tree is not formally rooted; the pseudoroot is placed so as to be consistent with the global phylogeny
in Figure 1c.

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 13 of 19

Figure 7 Phylogeny of monomeric class II RNR from eukaryotes together with their most similar bacterial sequences. A PhyML UL3
phylogeny from an alignment of protein sequences of monomeric class II RNR enzyme from eukaryotic genomes and genomes containing
similar sequences. The arrows indicate eukaryotic sequences. Top level groups from the NCBI taxonomy have been colour-coded; viruses are in
italics. The tree is not formally rooted; the pseudoroot is placed so as to be consistent with the global phylogeny in Figure 1c.

later transfers are between distantly related species.
However, phylogenetic signal may not in itself be sufficient to establish a transfer event since artefacts may
also give a misleading signal (e.g. [44]). It has also been
pointed out that the identification of putative transfer
events is greatly strengthened by ecological plausibility
[45,46], which in simple terms means that the candidate
organisms should at least have overlapping environmental ranges, thus enabling interaction. In the preceding
sections, we attempted to address ecological plausibility
despite uncertainty regarding identification of donor and

recipient. To address RNR mobility in more general
terms, we therefore sought independent evidence for
ongoing RNR gene mobility.
RNRdb contains a large number of RNR genes
encoded in viral genomes [6], and, using the database,
we identified several cases of plasmid and prophage
encoded RNRs among bacteria (table 2). These constitute evidence for association of RNR genes with mobile
vectors, and integrated plasmid and phage provide direct
evidence for transfer, thus contributing to the view that
RNR genes are horizontally mobile. This type of genetic

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

Page 14 of 19

Figure 8 Alignment of eukaryotic class II RNRs plus a few representative monomeric and dimeric prokaryotic class II RNRs. The portion
of the alignment shown here illustrates presence of the dimer interface-mimicking domain in monomeric enzymes and absence from dimeric
class II RNR enzymes (top five sequences). The domain mimics the dimer interface, where the substrate specificity effector binds [9]. All
eukaryotic proteins (P. ramorum, P. sojae, D. discoideum, E. gracilis and M. brevicollis) except the T. vaginalis sequence carry the insert, indicating
they are monomeric. In support of this, the P. ramorum structure could not be modelled with the dimeric T. maritima structure using Swiss
Model [78]. Nor could we model the T. vaginalis sequence with the L. lactobacillus structure, whereas the opposite combinations (P. ramorum
with L. lactobacillus and T. vaginalis with T. maritima) successfully produce structure models (data not shown).

signature readily identifies recipients, and demonstrates
transfer events, but in most cases it is not possible to
identify donors. One interesting case where a probable
donor-recipient relationship emerges is for the class I
RNR genes among a group of aquatic vertebrate viruses
(including Frog virus 3 and Grouper iridovirus). These
are not closely related to eukaryote class I RNR
sequences. In both NrdA and B subunit trees (see figure
2 and additional file 1) these viral sequences are nearest
neighbours to Francisella tularensis, a bacterial species
that includes both mammalian and fish pathogens [47].
Further evidence consistent with a direct relationship is
that both the Francisella and the viral sequences share
unusual features: in all these sequences, the predicted
NrdA lacks the N-terminal ATP-cone and the NrdB
appears to be a translational fusion with glutaredoxin as
it carries a glutaredoxin-like CxxC sequence in its
N-terminal region. However, while the nrdAB genes
form an operon in Francisella, they are separated in the
viral genomes. The latter pattern suggests either independent transfers of each gene, or subsequent viral genome rearrangement. Our interpretation of these data is
that these aquatic vertebrate viruses likely picked up
class I RNR genes from Francisella, possibly during a
double viral/bacterial infection in an aquatic vertebrate.

Discussion
Ribonucleotide reductases and the nature of LUCA
and of LECA

Ribonucleotide reduction is the sole pathway for de novo
deoxyribonucleotide synthesis, and evolution of this
reaction is thought to have played a crucial role in the
transition from RNA to DNA as genetic material [1-5].
Given such antiquity, it is perhaps unexpected that
there are three major classes of RNR, each with distinct
mechanisms for radical generation [4]. It is now clear
that the catalytic core of the three classes shares a common ancestry [7-10], illustrating that ribonucleotide

reduction evolved only once. The work we present here
illustrates that phylogenies cannot be reliably used to
settle the debate concerning the relationship of these
three contemporary classes to the ancestral RNR
[3,5,48,49], because the emerging pattern is one of
extensive interdomain transfer. It is significant that
there are numerous bacterial lineages which carry all
three classes, and this is likewise true for two eukaryotes
and one archaeon. The results presented here demonstrate that this pattern cannot be attributed to vertical
descent from some totipotent LUCA, and instead illustrate that the patterns we see can be attributed to the
disconnect between the evolutionary history of reproduction and gene mobility. Current data do not
obviously favour a class I RNR encoded by LUCA. This
interpretation is consistent with speculation that this
class evolved from class II (classes I and II exhibit some
sequence similarity though too low for reliable phylogenetic analyses), following the rise of atmospheric oxygen
[3,48]. While we favour this interpretation, we note that
cryptic ancient losses can never be ruled out (and are
not inconceivable given the RNR gene mobility documented here), and an early origin of class I is in fact
plausible under the ‘respiration early’ hypothesis [50-52],
and given plausibility of abiotic oxygen generation in
the early oceans [53]. Having said that, both class II and
class III phylogenies are arguably more readily reconciled with presence in LUCA, though the general
pattern of frequent intradomain and occasional interdomain horizontal transfers is such that, on these data, it
is not possible to definitively establish whether LUCA
was DNA-based [54].
While caution is warranted in speculating on the deep
antiquity of ribonucleotide reductases, there is perhaps
cause for cautious optimism with regards to establishing
the ancestral state for ribonucleotide reduction in LECA
however. Our results suggest that LECA probably possessed a class I RNR, but, having said that, there is also

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

evidence that this is ultimately bacterial in origin, deriving
from an ancient HGT event pre-dating LECA. Current
data precludes the presence of class I RNRs in the common ancestor of eukaryotes and archaea on account of
there being good evidence that those instances of class I
RNRs in archaea are independent transfers from bacteria.
Extrapolating from the operational constraints of class I
enzymes, the implication is that LECA was at minimum
aerotolerant and could divide in the presence of intracellular oxygen, consistent with the placement of sterol biosynthesis (which is oxygen-dependent) in LECA [55].
That known eukaryote class III genes have clearly entered
this domain via HGT from bacteria rules out a strictly
anaerobic RNR in the eukaryote ancestor. Having said
that, our analysis of class II enzymes cannot formally
exclude the possibility that LECA possessed a class II
enzyme. However, the data in support of this possibility
are restricted to the dimeric class II RNR from Trichomonas vaginalis. No eukaryotes are known to synthesise
AdoCbl, and B12-utilisation across eukaryotes appears
limited [56]. On the basis of these observations, support
for a class II RNR ancestral to LECA is currently weak.
This creates an interesting dilemma: all cellular lineages
require at least one RNR (barring a small number of
intracellular pathogens which can garner deoxyribonucleotides via salvage from their host); the class I RNRs
may be traceable to LECA, but are ultimately bacterial in
origin, and the dimeric class II RNR in T. vaginalis may
yet turn out to be the result of a transfer event. If true,
this would indicate that any evidence for the nature of
ribonucleotide reduction in the eukaryote stem lineage
(i.e. pre-LECA) has been erased by HGT.
More generally, our results are compatible with a bacterial origin of eukaryotic aerobic respiration, but the
class I phylogeny does not enable us to establish that
the source is mitochondrial, as previously suggested [3].
While it is tempting to try and establish the specific
donor, the mobility of RNR genes may well have long
since erased any trace of a mitochondrial origin since
detection of such a signal is reliant on there being no
HGT of alphaproteobacterial class I RNRs subsequent
to this event. Two processes are expected to contribute
to erasure of a signal for the direct donor for ancient
transfer events. The first is transfer of the gene of a
closest bacterial relative to the ancestor into another
lineage. The second is displacement of the original
sequence via loss or gene displacement in the direct
ancestor. While it is still formally possible that the class
I RNR entered eukaryotes via the mitochondrion, the
fact that we see numerous transfer events into eukaryotes suggests a more complex picture, such as that proposed by Lester et al. [57], where genes of bacterial
origin in the eukaryote lineage have been transferred
from multiple bacterial sources.

Page 15 of 19

An ecological view of RNR gene transfer

With evidence for a vertical trace being limited in the
case of RNRs, it seems highly likely that transfer of this
essential function is facilitated by the varying operational
constraints of each class. One might rather trivially
account for ongoing transfer by alluding to the distinct
operational constraints, and it likewise seems possible
that cases where all three classes are present in the
same genome may be indicative of lineages capable of
undergoing reproduction in diverse environmental conditions. However, in contrast to some cases of one-off
ancient gene transfer (where an ancient transfer event is
evident, but where subsequent transfers are either not
observed, or apparently infrequent), the data we present
hints at an ongoing process of transfer and loss. In particular, RNRdb reveals numerous instances of paralogy
as well as cases where only a single subunit is apparently
present in a genome. This makes sense in that, under
conditions wherein one RNR gene set is expressed,
another may not contribute to deoxyribonucleotide
synthesis. For instance, under environmental conditions
where class I RNR is required, expression of class III
may well be superfluous (indeed, the reaction biochemistries indicate the enzymes have mutually exclusive
operational conditions). Consequently, under environmental conditions where one is essential the other may
be lost through mutation, leading to a corresponding
reduction in environmental range. Our prediction is
therefore that horizontally transferred RNRs have a
facultative symbiotic relationship with the verticallyinherited genetic cohort; at least one RNR is essential,
but individual sets of RNR genes risk being lost. Rather
than viewing gene transfer solely in terms of receipt of
beneficial genes by the recipient, it would therefore
seem reasonable to consider the ecology of RNR genes
also. There is no benefit to gene loss for the individual
gene, and as a consequence, those RNRs carried by vectors have the greatest chance of persisting and spreading
under the threat of continual loss. Such a view may also
help explain apparent redundancy across genomes (i.e.
where more than one set of genes for a given class is
present in a cellular genome). Under ongoing transfer,
such redundancy may simply indicate the lag between
integration and loss of one set of homologues. An examination of RNRdb reveals that this is relatively common.
In some cases there may well be a functional rationale
for such redundancy (it is common to find genes for
both class Ia and Ib in bacterial genomes), but in the
absence of direct evidence for subfunctionalisation and
selection on subclass paralogues, the null hypothesis
should be that this represents functional redundancy.
The best indication that all three classes may be under
selection in some lineages comes from Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, which encodes all three RNR classes [58-60].

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

All three classes are expressed in P. aeruginosa, though
at very different levels, and there are indications for different roles of class I and class II during different cell
cycle phases. During aerobic exponential growth, the
level of class I transcripts greatly exceeds that of class II
RNR. When entering stationary phase this pattern is
reversed as class I transcription decreases and class II
transcription increases [59]. A possible explanation for
this is that the oxygen independence of class II could be
an advantage during fluctuating or diminishing oxygen
levels, a circumstance that is arguably more likely during
stationary phase than during the rapid growth experienced when available nutrients allow exponential
growth. The high expression levels of class I RNR during exponential growth suggest that class I RNR is more
effective than class II in the presence of oxygen. Such
an interpretation is in line with expectations of lower
requirements for deoxyribonucleotides for repair purposes during stationary phase. Another possibility, suggested by Torrents et al. [59], is that P. aeruginosa
experiences a reduced oxygen transfer rate during stationary phase, and this could reduce cellular oxygen
concentrations to a level suboptimal for class I RNR
function. In summary, although the precise biology is
not yet known, the presence of all three RNR classes in
P. aeruginosa, Phytophthora (a eukaryote), the archaeon
Halorhabdus utahensis, and diverse bacteria [6] hints at
a possible selective advantage for organisms that encode
a range of RNRs. Equally, these observations could be
an artefact of genome sequences as snapshots - we note
that, in contrast to other Phytophthora genomes, the
recently published genome of Phytophthora infestans
[61] does not carry genes for class III RNRs. We therefore caution against extrapolating lifestyle effects or possible selective explanations from RNR gene repertoire
alone.
Gene duplication, followed by specialisation via subfunctionalisation is considered an important evolutionary route to genetic novelty [62,63]. However HGT also
creates a situation similar to paralogy by the presence of
multiple copies. While a paralogous pair of genes created by gene duplication are initially identical, this is
not necessarily so for xenologues created by HGT. HGT
may therefore play an important role in organismal or
lineage survival since it is a means by which ‘ecoparalogues’ [64] may be acquired by an organism.

Conclusions
While ribonucleotide reduction is clearly an ancient process, pivotal to the origin of DNA, we find no definitive
phylogenetic support for class II and class III RNRs
being present in LUCA. Our data indicate class I originated in the bacteria, having spread to eukaryotes and
archaea via horizontal gene transfer. The timing of the

Page 16 of 19

origin of ribonucleotide reduction therefore remains
uncertain. We have however found evidence of both
intra- and interdomain transfer of RNR genes and conclude that ribonucleotide reduction, the essential function encoded by these genes, is a mobile trait owing to
the differing operational constraints that enzymes from
the three classes display. We predict that organismal
range will to some extent be dependent upon which
classes are present in the genome of the organism, and
that these are maintained through ongoing gene
transfer.

Methods
Sequence selection

RNR protein sequences were downloaded from the ribonucleotide reductase database (RNRdb) [6], in which all
non-environmental (i.e. metagenomic) RNR protein
sequences in public databases have been collated and
annotated. Because the number of sequences in RNRdb
far exceeds the number of informative sites in complete
multiple sequence alignments, the analyses presented
here are based on representative selections of sequences.
To select sequences, BioNJ [65] trees covering the full
diversity of RNR components were generated as an aid
to detecting potentially interesting patterns in the data
(figure 1). Some divergent sequences - mainly viral were excluded where these were uninformative for
hypothesis testing as such sequences reduced the number of well aligned sites that could be used for phylogenetic analyses. Maximum likelihood (ML) analyses of
subsets of the sequence diversity of each RNR component were subsequently performed (see marked clans in
figure 1). In the trees from class I components (NrdA
and NrdB), virtually all known sequences from the
respective clans in the BioNJ trees were included in ML
analyses, barring a few highly divergent sequences. For
the class II and III ML trees, highly similar sequences
from closely related species were eliminated. Both sets
of trees (full BioNJ and subset ML) were compared, and
different subsets were reanalysed where necessary in
order to check that patterns detected in ML trees were
robust and not an artefact of sequence exclusion. In
additional file 2 we have listed NCBI accession numbers
for each analysis.
Sequences for each subunit from each class were analysed separately. This was necessary for two reasons.
First, while catalytic subunits of the three RNR classes
are homologous (as evidenced by structural similarities
[7-10]), performing a joint phylogenetic analysis from
sequence alignment data of all three RNR classes is not
possible since, in contrast to structure, sequence similarities between the catalytic subunits from the three
classes are insufficient for generating global phylogenies.
Indeed, some sequences have essentially no sequence

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

level similarities except for a few strictly conserved residues like the catalytically active cysteine. Secondly, in
the case of classes I and III, concatenating RNR subunit
sequences from the same class was not practical. The
activase of class III is far too short to be informative,
and is in some cases non-trivial to distinguish from
other members of the radical SAM family. Furthermore,
complex patterns of paralogy, especially for class I protein-coding genes, will cause the components to contain
divergent evolutionary signals.
Sequence analyses

Alignments of protein sequences were performed using
Probcons 1.12 [66] and Promals3D [67]. Well-aligned sites
were chosen manually prior to phylogenetic estimation.
Phylogenetic trees were estimated using RAxML 7.2.6
[68-70] and a version of PhyML 3.0 that implements
recently developed mixture models [71,72]. All PhyML
analyses used the UL3 amino acid substitution model
[73] and gamma substitution rate correction with eight
categories. In additional file 2 we have listed parameters
and number of positions used for each analysis. All trees
presented in this paper and in associated supplementary
material are unrooted.
In addition to the BioNJ trees and ML trees presented
here, we also generated trees using maximum parsimony, Bayesian and network methods, as implemented
in SplitsTree [74]. These alternative methods did not
yield trees inconsistent with the results presented here
(data not shown).
Branch support in PhyML analyses was inferred using the
SH-like likelihood ratio test [75]. Phylogenetic tree figures
were prepared using Dendroscope [76] and Inkscape.

Additional material
Additional file 1: All PhyML trees in Dendroscope format. This file is
a gzipped tar archive containing all maximum likelihood trees presented
here plus three additional trees from the class I radical-generating
subunit (NrdB/F), in Dendroscope format. Individual files can be opened
and read using dendroscope [76], which is available for download from:
http://www.dendroscope.org/. Files have long informative names in
which individual parts are separated by periods. First comes the name of
the protein, second the name of the sequence selection, third the name
of the alignment program (probcons in all cases), fourth the name of the
site selection (wa00 in all cases) and fifth the PhyML parameters. See
additional file 2 for descriptions of trees.
Additional file 2: Analysis details and translation tables. This is an
OpenOffice spreadsheet containing details regarding all analyses. The first
sheet contains number of sequences and positions, plus PhyML
parameters for each tree. Sheets T01-T13 contain full names and NCBI
accession numbers for names used in our trees.

Abbreviations
RNR: Ribonucleotide reductase; LECA: Last Eukaryotic Common Ancestor;
LUCA: Last Universal Common Ancestor; HGT: Horizontal Gene Transfer

Page 17 of 19

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council to
BMS and AMP, and the Carl Tryggers Foundation to AMP. AMP is a Royal
Swedish Academy of Sciences Research Fellow supported by a grant from
the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. ET was supported by grants
from the Fondo de Investigación Sanitaria (PI081062) and ConsoliderINTERMODS (CSD2008-00013) from the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e
Innovación and the ERA-NET PathoGenoMics.
Author details
1
Department of Molecular Biology and Functional Genomics, Stockholm
University, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden. 2Unite Biologie Moléculaire du
Gène chez les Extremophiles (BMGE), Departement de Microbiologie, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France. 3Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC),
Scientific Park of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 4School of Biological Sciences,
University of Canterbury, Christchurch 8140, New Zealand.
Authors’ contributions
DL, AMP, ET & BMS designed research; DL performed research; DL, SG, BMS
& AMP analysed data; DL, BMS & AMP wrote the manuscript, with input
from all authors. All authors read and approved the final version.
Received: 27 September 2010 Accepted: 10 December 2010
Published: 10 December 2010
References
1. Freeland SJ, Knight RD, Landweber LF: Do proteins predate DNA? Science
1999, 286(5440):690-692.
2. Poole A, Penny D, Sjöberg B-M: Methyl-RNA: an evolutionary bridge
between RNA and DNA? Chem Biol 2000, 7(12):R207-216.
3. Poole AM, Logan DT, Sjöberg BM: The evolution of the ribonucleotide
reductases: much ado about oxygen. J Mol Evol 2002, 55(2):180-196.
4. Reichard P: From RNA to DNA, why so many ribonucleotide reductases?
Science 1993, 260(5115):1773-1777.
5. Torrents E, Aloy P, Gibert I, Rodriguez-Trelles F: Ribonucleotide reductases:
divergent evolution of an ancient enzyme. J Mol Evol 2002, 55(2):138-152.
6. Lundin D, Torrents E, Poole AM, Sjöberg BM: RNRdb, a curated database
of the universal enzyme family ribonucleotide reductase, reveals a high
level of misannotation in sequences deposited to Genbank. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10:589.
7. Larsson KM, Andersson J, Sjöberg BM, Nordlund P, Logan DT: Structural
basis for allosteric substrate specificity regulation in anaerobic
ribonucleotide reductases. Structure 2001, 9(8):739-750.
8. Larsson KM, Jordan A, Eliasson R, Reichard P, Logan DT, Nordlund P:
Structural mechanism of allosteric substrate specificity regulation in a
ribonucleotide reductase. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2004, 11(11):1142-1149.
9. Sintchak MD, Arjara G, Kellogg BA, Stubbe J, Drennan CL: The crystal
structure of class II ribonucleotide reductase reveals how an
allosterically regulated monomer mimics a dimer. Nat Struct Biol 2002,
9(4):293-300.
10. Uhlin U, Eklund H: Structure of ribonucleotide reductase protein R1.
Nature 1994, 370(6490):533-539.
11. King DS, Reichard P: Mass spectrometric determination of the radical
scission site in the anaerobic ribonucleotide reductase of Escherichia
coli. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1995, 206(2):731-735.
12. Young P, Andersson J, Sahlin M, Sjöberg BM: Bacteriophage T4 anaerobic
ribonucleotide reductase contains a stable glycyl radical at position 580.
J Biol Chem 1996, 271(34):20770-20775.
13. Jordan A, Reichard P: Ribonucleotide reductases. Annu Rev Biochem 1998,
67:71-98.
14. Nordlund P, Reichard P: Ribonucleotide reductases. Annu Rev Biochem
2006, 75:681-706.
15. Torrents E, Sahlin M, Sjöberg B-M: The ribonucleotide reductase family Genetics and genomics. In Ribonucleotide Reductase. Edited by: Andersson
KK. New York: Nova Science Publishers; 2008:17-77.
16. Elledge SJ, Davis RW: Two genes differentially regulated in the cell cycle
and by DNA-damaging agents encode alternative regulatory subunits of
ribonucleotide reductase. Genes Dev 1990, 4(5):740-751.
17. Tanaka H, Arakawa H, Yamaguchi T, Shiraishi K, Fukuda S, Matsui K, Takei Y,
Nakamura Y: A ribonucleotide reductase gene involved in a p53-

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

dependent cell-cycle checkpoint for DNA damage. Nature 2000,
404(6773):42-49.
Jiang W, Yun D, Saleh L, Barr EW, Xing G, Hoffart LM, Maslak MA, Krebs C,
Bollinger JM Jr: A manganese(IV)/iron(III) cofactor in Chlamydia
trachomatis ribonucleotide reductase. Science 2007, 316(5828):1188-1191.
Voevodskaya N, Lendzian F, Ehrenberg A, Graslund A: High catalytic
activity achieved with a mixed manganese-iron site in protein R2 of
Chlamydia ribonucleotide reductase. FEBS Lett 2007, 581(18):3351-3355.
Mongodin EF, Nelson KE, Daugherty S, Deboy RT, Wister J, Khouri H,
Weidman J, Walsh DA, Papke RT, Sanchez Perez G, et al: The genome of
Salinibacter ruber: convergence and gene exchange among
hyperhalophilic bacteria and archaea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102(50):18147-18152.
Mountfort DO, Rainey FA, Burghardt J, Kaspar HF, Stackebrandt E:
Psychromonas antarcticus gen. nov., sp. nov., A new aerotolerant
anaerobic, halophilic psychrophile isolated from pond sediment of the
McMurdo ice shelf, antarctica. Arch Microbiol 1998, 169(3):231-238.
Pinhassi J, Bowman JP, Nedashkovskaya OI, Lekunberri I, GomezConsarnau L, Pedros-Alio C: Leeuwenhoekiella blandensis sp. nov., a
genome-sequenced marine member of the family Flavobacteriaceae. Int
J Syst Evol Microbiol 2006, 56(Pt 7):1489-1493.
Myers GS, Parker D, Al-Hasani K, Kennan RM, Seemann T, Ren Q, Badger JH,
Selengut JD, Deboy RT, Tettelin H, et al: Genome sequence and
identification of candidate vaccine antigens from the animal pathogen
Dichelobacter nodosus. Nat Biotechnol 2007, 25(5):569-575.
Henne A, Bruggemann H, Raasch C, Wiezer A, Hartsch T, Liesegang H,
Johann A, Lienard T, Gohl O, Martinez-Arias R, et al: The genome sequence
of the extreme thermophile Thermus thermophilus. Nat Biotechnol 2004,
22(5):547-553.
Gosink JJ, Woese CR, Staley JT: Polaribacter gen. nov., with three new
species, P. irgensii sp. nov., P. franzmannii sp. nov. and P. filamentus sp.
nov., gas vacuolate polar marine bacteria of the CytophagaFlavobacterium-Bacteroides group and reclassification of ‘Flectobacillus
glomeratus’ as Polaribacter glomeratus comb. nov. Int J Syst Bacteriol
1998, 48(Pt 1):223-235.
Falb M, Pfeiffer F, Palm P, Rodewald K, Hickmann V, Tittor J, Oesterhelt D:
Living with two extremes: conclusions from the genome sequence of
Natronomonas pharaonis. Genome Res 2005, 15(10):1336-1343.
Cortez D, Forterre P, Gribaldo S: A hidden reservoir of integrative
elements is the major source of recently acquired foreign genes and
ORFans in archaeal and bacterial genomes. Genome Biol 2009, 10(6):R65.
Doolittle WF, Nesbø CL, Bapteste E, Zhaxybayeva O: Lateral Gene Transfer.
In Evolutionary Genomics and Proteomics. Edited by: Pagel M, Pomiankowski
A. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates; 2007:45-79.
Hampl V, Hug L, Leigh JW, Dacks JB, Lang BF, Simpson AG, Roger AJ:
Phylogenomic analyses support the monophyly of Excavata and resolve
relationships among eukaryotic “supergroups”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106(10):3859-3864.
Roger AJ, Simpson AG: Evolution: revisiting the root of the eukaryote
tree. Curr Biol 2009, 19(4):R165-167.
Timmis JN, Ayliffe MA, Huang CY, Martin W: Endosymbiotic gene transfer:
organelle genomes forge eukaryotic chromosomes. Nat Rev Genet 2004,
5(2):123-135.
Bowman JP, McCammon SA, Lewis T, Skerratt JH, Brown JL, Nichols DS,
McMeekin TA: Psychroflexus torquis gen. nov., sp. nov., a psychrophilic
species from Antarctic sea ice, and reclassification of Flavobacterium
gondwanense (Dobson et al. 1993) as Psychroflexus gondwanense gen.
nov., comb. nov. Microbiology 1998, 144(Pt 6):1601-1609.
Gonzalez JM, Fernandez-Gomez B, Fernandez-Guerra A, GomezConsarnau L, Sanchez O, Coll-Llado M, Del Campo J, Escudero L, RodriguezMartinez R, Alonso-Saez L, et al: Genome analysis of the proteorhodopsincontaining marine bacterium Polaribacter sp. MED152 (Flavobacteria).
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(25):8724-8729.
Riemann L, Steward GF, Azam F: Dynamics of bacterial community
composition and activity during a mesocosm diatom bloom. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2000, 66(2):578-587.
Greub G, Raoult D: Microorganisms resistant to free-living amoebae. Clin
Microbiol Rev 2004, 17(2):413-433.
Doolittle WF: You are what you eat: a gene transfer ratchet could
account for bacterial genes in eukaryotic nuclear genomes. Trends Genet
1998, 14(8):307-311.

Page 18 of 19

37. Andersson JO, Roger AJ: Evolutionary analyses of the small subunit of
glutamate synthase: gene order conservation, gene fusions, and
prokaryote-to-eukaryote lateral gene transfers. Eukaryot Cell 2002,
1(2):304-310.
38. Richards TA, Dacks JB, Campbell SA, Blanchard JL, Foster PG, McLeod R,
Roberts CW: Evolutionary origins of the eukaryotic shikimate pathway:
gene fusions, horizontal gene transfer, and endosymbiotic replacements.
Eukaryot Cell 2006, 5(9):1517-1531.
39. Richards TA, Dacks JB, Jenkinson JM, Thornton CR, Talbot NJ: Evolution of
filamentous plant pathogens: gene exchange across eukaryotic
kingdoms. Curr Biol 2006, 16(18):1857-1864.
40. Torrents E, Trevisiol C, Rotte C, Hellman U, Martin W, Reichard P: Euglena
gracilis ribonucleotide reductase: the eukaryote class II enzyme and the
possible antiquity of eukaryote B12 dependence. J Biol Chem 2006,
281(9):5604-5611.
41. Nakagawa S, Takai K, Inagaki F, Horikoshi K, Sako Y: Nitratiruptor tergarcus
gen. nov., sp. nov. and Nitratifractor salsuginis gen. nov., sp. nov.,
nitrate-reducing chemolithoautotrophs of the {varepsilon}-Proteobacteria
isolated from a deep-sea hydrothermal system in the Mid-Okinawa
Trough. Int J SystEvolMicrobiol 2005, 55:925-933.
42. Felsenstein J: Cases in which Parsimony or Compatibility Methods will be
Positively Misleading. Syst Biol 1978, 27:401-410.
43. Gribaldo S, Philippe H: Ancient phylogenetic relationships. Theor Popul Biol
2002, 61(4):391-408.
44. Logsdon JM, Faguy DM: Thermotoga heats up lateral gene transfer. Curr
Biol 1999, 9(19):R747-751.
45. Andersson JO: Lateral gene transfer in eukaryotes. Cell Mol Life Sci 2005,
62(11):1182-1197.
46. Andersson JO: Gene transfer and diversification of microbial eukaryotes.
Annu Rev Microbiol 2009, 63:177-193.
47. Ottem KF, Nylund A, Karlsbakk E, Friis-Moller A, Kamaishi T: Elevation of
Francisella philomiragia subsp. noatunensis Mikalsen et al. (2007) to
Francisella noatunensis comb. nov. [syn. Francisella piscicida Ottem et
al. (2008) syn. nov.] and characterization of Francisella noatunensis
subsp. orientalis subsp. nov., two important fish pathogens. J Appl
Microbiol 2009, 106(4):1231-1243.
48. Reichard P: The evolution of ribonucleotide reduction. Trends Biochem Sci
1997, 22(3):81-85.
49. Reichard P: Ribonucleotide reductases: the evolution of allosteric
regulation. Arch Biochem Biophys 2002, 397(2):149-155.
50. Castresana J, Moreira D: Respiratory chains in the last common ancestor
of living organisms. J Mol Evol 1999, 49(4):453-460.
51. Castresana J, Saraste M: Evolution of energetic metabolism: the
respiration-early hypothesis. Trends Biochem Sci 1995, 20(11):443-448.
52. Brochier-Armanet C, Talla E, Gribaldo S: The multiple evolutionary histories
of dioxygen reductases: Implications for the origin and evolution of
aerobic respiration. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26(2):285-297.
53. Kasting JF: Earth’s early atmosphere. Science 1993, 259(5097):920-926.
54. Poole AM, Logan DT: Modern mRNA proofreading and repair: clues that
the last universal common ancestor possessed an RNA genome? Mol Biol
Evol 2005, 22(6):1444-1455.
55. Desmond E, Gribaldo S: Phylogenomics of sterol synthesis: insights into
the origin, evolution, and diversity of a key eukaryotic feature. Genome
Biol Evol 2009, 1:364-381.
56. Zhang Y, Gladyshev VN: General trends in trace element utilization
revealed by comparative genomic analyses of Co, Cu, Mo, Ni, and Se. J
Biol Chem 2010, 285(5):3393-3405.
57. Lester L, Meade A, Pagel M: The slow road to the eukaryotic genome.
BioEssays 2006, 28(1):57-64.
58. Jordan A, Torrents E, Sala I, Hellman U, Gibert I, Reichard P: Ribonucleotide
reduction in Pseudomonas species: simultaneous presence of active
enzymes from different classes. J Bacteriol 1999, 181(13):3974-3980.
59. Torrents E, Poplawski A, Sjöberg BM: Two proteins mediate class II
ribonucleotide reductase activity in Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
expression and transcriptional analysis of the aerobic enzymes. J Biol
Chem 2005, 280(17):16571-16578.
60. Torrents E, Westman M, Sahlin M, Sjöberg BM: Ribonucleotide reductase
modularity: Atypical duplication of the ATP-cone domain in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J Biol Chem 2006, 281(35):25287-25296.
61. Haas BJ, Kamoun S, Zody MC, Jiang RH, Handsaker RE, Cano LM,
Grabherr M, Kodira CD, Raffaele S, Torto-Alalibo T, et al: Genome sequence

Lundin et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:383
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/383

62.

63.
64.

65.
66.

67.

68.

69.

70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

77.

78.

Page 19 of 19

and analysis of the Irish potato famine pathogen Phytophthora
infestans. Nature 2009, 461(7262):393-398.
Force A, Lynch M, Pickett FB, Amores A, Yan YL, Postlethwait J:
Preservation of duplicate genes by complementary, degenerative
mutations. Genetics 1999, 151(4):1531-1545.
Ohno S: Evolution by gene duplication. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1970.
Sanchez-Perez G, Mira A, Nyiro G, Pasic L, Rodriguez-Valera F: Adapting to
environmental changes using specialized paralogs. Trends Genet 2008,
24(4):154-158.
Gascuel O: BIONJ: an improved version of the NJ algorithm based on a
simple model of sequence data. Mol Biol Evol 1997, 14(7):685-695.
Do CB, Mahabhashyam MS, Brudno M, Batzoglou S: ProbCons: Probabilistic
consistency-based multiple sequence alignment. Genome Res 2005,
15(2):330-340.
Pei J, Kim BH, Grishin NV: PROMALS3D: a tool for multiple protein
sequence and structure alignments. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36(7):2295-2300.
Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(21):2688-2690.
Stamatakis A: Phylogenetic Models of Rate Heterogeneity: A High
Performance Computing Perspective. Proceedings of 20th IEEE/ACM
International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS2006), High
Performance Computational Biology Workshop: 2006 Rhodos, Greece; 2006.
Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont J: A rapid bootstrap algorithm for the
RAxML Web servers. Syst Biol 2008, 57(5):758-771.
Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52(5):696-704.
Le SQ, Lartillot N, Gascuel O: Phylogenetic mixture models for proteins.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008, 363(1512):3965-3976.
Le SQ, Gascuel O: An improved general amino acid replacement matrix.
Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(7):1307-1320.
Huson DH, Bryant D: Application of phylogenetic networks in
evolutionary studies. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(2):254-267.
Anisimova M, Gascuel O: Approximate likelihood-ratio test for branches:
A fast, accurate, and powerful alternative. Syst Biol 2006, 55(4):539-552.
Huson DH, Richter DC, Rausch C, Dezulian T, Franz M, Rupp R:
Dendroscope: An interactive viewer for large phylogenetic trees. BMC
Bioinformatics 2007, 8:460.
Högbom M, Stenmark P, Voevodskaya N, McClarty G, Gräslund A,
Nordlund P: The radical site in chlamydial ribonucleotide reductase
defines a new R2 subclass. Science 2004, 305(5681):245-248.
Schwede T, Kopp J, Guex N, Peitsch MC: SWISS-MODEL: An automated
protein homology-modeling server. Nucleic Acids Res 2003,
31(13):3381-3385.

doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-383
Cite this article as: Lundin et al.: Ribonucleotide reduction - horizontal
transfer of a required function spans all three domains. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2010 10:383.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
