<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Digital expression profiling of novel diatom transcripts provides insight into their biological functions</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010 11:R85. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-8-r85"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Uma Maheswari"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

RESEARCH

Open Access

Digital expression profiling of novel diatom
transcripts provides insight into their biological
functions
Uma Maheswari1,2, Kamel Jabbari1,3, Jean-Louis Petit3, Betina M Porcel3, Andrew E Allen1,4†, Jean-Paul Cadoret5†,
Alessandra De Martino1†, Marc Heijde1†, Raymond Kaas5†, Julie La Roche6†, Pascal J Lopez1†,
Véronique Martin-Jézéquel7†, Agnès Meichenin1†, Thomas Mock8,9†, Micaela Schnitzler Parker8†, Assaf Vardi1,10†,
E Virginia Armbrust8, Jean Weissenbach3, Michaël Katinka3, Chris Bowler1*

Abstract
Background: Diatoms represent the predominant group of eukaryotic phytoplankton in the oceans and are
responsible for around 20% of global photosynthesis. Two whole genome sequences are now available.
Notwithstanding, our knowledge of diatom biology remains limited because only around half of their genes can
be ascribed a function based onhomology-based methods. High throughput tools are needed, therefore, to
associate functions with diatom-specific genes.
Results: We have performed a systematic analysis of 130,000 ESTs derived from Phaeodactylum tricornutum cells
grown in 16 different conditions. These include different sources of nitrogen, different concentrations of carbon
dioxide, silicate and iron, and abiotic stresses such as low temperature and low salinity. Based on unbiased
statistical methods, we have catalogued transcripts with similar expression profiles and identified transcripts
differentially expressed in response to specific treatments. Functional annotation of these transcripts provides
insights into expression patterns of genes involved in various metabolic and regulatory pathways and into the
roles of novel genes with unknown functions. Specific growth conditions could be associated with enhanced gene
diversity, known gene product functions, and over-representation of novel transcripts. Comparative analysis of data
from the other sequenced diatom, Thalassiosira pseudonana, helped identify several unique diatom genes that are
specifically regulated under particular conditions, thus facilitating studies of gene function, genome annotation and
the molecular basis of species diversity.
Conclusions: The digital gene expression database represents a new resource for identifying candidate diatomspecific genes involved in processes of major ecological relevance.

Background
In the current catalogue of eight major groups of eukaryotic taxa [1], the majority of well explored model
organisms belong to the plant (Archaeplastida) and the
animal (Opisthokonta) groups, which both evolved from
primary endosymbiotic events that generated chloroplasts and mitochondria. The heterokonts, on the other
hand, probably evolved from serial secondary
* Correspondence: cbowler@biologie.ens.fr
† Contributed equally
1
Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS UMR 8197 INSERM
U1024, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d’Ulm, 75005 Paris, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

endosymbiosis events in which a heterotrophic eukaryote engulfed both autotrophic red and green eukaryotic
algae [2-4]. As a consequence, these organisms derive
from the combination of three distinct nuclear genomes.
The group includes highly diverse, ecologically important photosynthetic groups, such as diatoms, as well as
non-photosynthetic members, such as oomycetes (for
example, Phytophthora infestans, the causative agent of
potato late blight).
Diatoms typically constitute a major component of
phytoplankton in freshwater and marine environments.
They are involved in various biogeochemical cycles,

© 2010 Maheswari et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

most notably those involving carbon, nitrogen and silicon, and contribute 30 to 40% of marine primary productivity [5,6]. Consequently, they are responsible for
approximately one-fifth of the oxygen that is generated
through photosynthesis on our planet. Morphologically,
they exhibit different shapes and symmetries, the centric
diatoms being radially symmetric and the pennates displaying bilateral symmetry. In spite of their tremendous
ecological importance, the molecular mechanisms that
enable them to succeed in a range of diverse environments remain largely unexplored.
Results from the first diatom genome projects from
Thalassiosira pseudonana and Phaeodactylum tricornutum showed the presence of various genes needed for
efficient management of carbon and nitrogen - for
example, encoding urea cycle components [7,8].
However, these studies could only predict the functions
of around 55% of diatom genes. The comparative study
of the two diatom genomes [8] revealed that only 57%
of genes are shared between the two diatoms, and that
horizontal gene transfer from prokaryotes is pervasive in
diatoms. Thus, the necessity for functional genomics
and reverse genetics approaches to further explore diatom gene repertories is clear.
P. tricornutum is a pennate diatom that has been
extensively studied physiologically and phylogenetically.
In addition, it does not have an obligate requirement for
silicic acid like other diatoms, and can undergo morphological transitions between three possible morphotypes
[9]. The organism harbors a small genome (27.4 Mb)
[8], it can be routinely transformed with efficiencies
superior to those reported for other diatoms [10-13],
and gene silencing is now possible using RNA interference [14]. For these reasons P. tricornutum is emerging
as a model species for dissecting diatom molecular and
cellular biology [15-20].
In a pilot study of the P. tricornutum genome using
1,000 cDNAs, only 23.7% of sequences could be functionally defined using homology-based methods [21].
This study was later expanded to 12,136 cDNAs [22],
which facilitated comparative genomic studies of P. tricornutum with available genomes from the green alga
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii [23], the red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae [24], and the centric diatom T. pseudonana [7]. A number of interesting observations were
made from such analyses about the evolutionary origins
of individual genes [25]. This encouraged us to expand
the EST repository by generating cDNA libraries from
cells grown under different conditions of ecological relevance to increase the probability of obtaining unique
gene expression profiles and to study the conditions in
which they are induced. We describe herein statistical
methods as well as comparative and functional studies
to identify genes that are differentially expressed in 16

Page 2 of 19

different conditions based on 132,547 cDNAs cloned
and sequenced from P. tricornutum. These resources
permit a systematic understanding of the molecular
mechanisms underlying acclimation of this diatom to
different nutrient conditions and its responses to various
biotic and abiotic stresses, and should aid our understanding of the function of diatom-specific genes.

Results
Gene expression diversity across different cDNA libraries

To add to the previous 12,136 ESTs generated from
cells grown in standard growth conditions (here denoted
the ‘OS library’ for original standard [22], 15 non-normalized cDNA libraries were generated to explore the
responses of P. tricornutum to a range of growth conditions, including different nutrient regimes of Si, N, Fe,
and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), stress (hyposalinity and low temperature), and blue light. We also generated libraries from each of the three P. tricornutum
morphotypes, and from cells exposed to the programmed cell death-inducing aldehyde decadienal [20].
The libraries were generated from three different ecotypes whose phylogenetic relationships and general characteristics have been previously described [26].
Furthermore, three different culturing regimes were
used - batch, semi-continuous, and chemostats depending on the treatment being performed. A
comprehensive description of culturing conditions is
provided in Materials and methods and Additional file
1, and is summarized in Table 1. To facilitate comparisons, all cells were harvested in mid-late exponential
phase, and the libraries were made using the same RNA
extraction and cDNA library construction methodologies (see Materials and methods).
The number of sequenced cDNAs per library varied
from 3,541 to 12,566, with an average of 8,284 cDNAs
per library for a total of 120,411 sequences. In general,
the percentage of redundant sequences in the different
libraries was around 50 to 60% (Table 1), although the
triradiate morphotype (TM) library presented the highest level of redundancy (70%), whereas the lowest
redundancy (39%) was observed in the nitrate replete
(NR) library. Because the library size varied, we calculated rarefaction curves to check whether we had
exceeded the optimal library size (that is, over sampling), which might have led to the redundancy variation
[27]. All libraries were below saturation (Figure 1a),
implying that further increases in library size would lead
to the capture of new cDNAs. The differences in redundancy are not therefore due to over sequencing of some
libraries. Consequently, the differences seen in the rarefaction curves along with the differences in redundancy
rates of different libraries are likely to reflect differential
gene expression in response to each culture condition.

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 3 of 19

Table 1 List of different libraries and culture conditions together with library statistics
Library

Short
name

Strains

Original standardc

OS

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

Silica plus

SP

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

Silica minus

SM

Oval morphotype
Nitrate replete

Condition/mediuma

cDNAs Contigs Singletons TUs

%Rb

12,136

3,274

1,165

4,439 67.31

350 uM metasilicate in ASW

7,508

3,077

384

3,461 57.21

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

No metasilicate addition

6,968

2,838

459

3,297 54.63

OM

Pt3 (CCAP1052/1B)

Low salinity (10% ASW)

4,544

2,202

214

2,416 48.78

NR

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

1.12 mM in chemostat

3,632

2,028

242

2,270 39.01

Nitrate starved

NS

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

50 μM for 3 days in chemostat

9,122

3,271

512

3,783 60.79

Ammonium
adapted

AA

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

75 μM

9,031

3,329

567

3,896 60.20

Urea adapted

UA

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

50 μM

8,552

3,157

464

3,621 59.82

Tropical accession

TA

Pt9 (CCMP633)

Grown at 15°C

4,821

2,015

160

2,175 56.95

Low decadienal

LD

Pt1clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

0.5 μg/m 2E,4E-decadienal for 6 h

9,227

3,322

537

3,859 61.65

High decadienal

HD

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

5 μg/m 2E,4E-decadienal for 6 h

3,541

1,734

323

2,057 44.95

Iron limited

FL

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

5 nM

8,264

3,064

487

3,551 59.19

Triradiate
morphotype

TM

Pt8 (CCAP1055)

12,566

3,055

520

3,575 70.49

Blue light

BL

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

48 h dark adapted cells exposed to 1 h
blue light

12,045

4,253

607

4,860 59.61

CO2 high 4 days

C4

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

3.2 mM DIC for 4 days in chemostat

10,283

3,564

160

3,724 63.78

CO2 high 1 day

C1

Pt1 clone 8.6
(CCAP1055/1)

3.2 mM DIC for 1 day in chemostat

10,307

3,598

165

3,763 63.49

a
All cells grown in artificial seawater media, except chemostat cultures, which were grown in Walne medium [54]. bPercent redundancy of sequences in each
library. cThe original P. tricornutum cDNA library described previously [21,22] is herein referred to as OS. Although incorporated into the comparative expression
analyses, it was not examined extensively because it was generated using a different cDNA library protocol. ASW (artificial sea water),; TU, transcriptional unit.

To determine whether the abundance of transcripts
was evenly distributed, that is, to check if the libraries
have fewer sets of more abundant cDNAs (lower diversity) or several sets of evenly abundant cDNAs (higher
diversity), we calculated the Simpson’s reciprocal diversity index [28], which takes into account both the richness and evenness of transcripts in the libraries (the
higher the index the higher the library diversity). Across
the libraries we found the diversity index to vary from
1,218 to 268 (Figure 1b), with the nitrate replete (NR),
ammonium adapted (AA), urea adapted (UA) and high
decadienal (HD) libraries showing the highest diversity,
and the nitrate starved (NS) and high CO 2 (C1, C4)
libraries showing the least diversity along with the most
redundant triradiate morphotype (TM) library.
Clustering of libraries and genes based on expression

We obtained a set of non-redundant transcriptional
units (TUs) by aligning the 132,547 cDNAs with the
10,402 P. tricornutum predicted gene models using the

BLAST program. A total of 11,513 sequences lacked
predicted gene models and were clustered instead using
CAP3 [29]. These represented a further 1,968 TUs in
addition to the 8,944 TUs that aligned to the gene models [8]. In total, we obtained 9,145 transcripts present
more than once across different libraries and 3,225 single copy transcripts, thereby comprising 12,370 TUs.
The top 20 most abundant transcripts are represented
by cDNAs varying from 2,079 to 316 copies in all the
16 libraries (Table 2). The most abundant transcript
(G49202), with 2,079 copies, belongs to a P. tricornutum-specific gene family (family ID 4628) with 9 members [8]. All nine encoded proteins contain predicted
signal peptides and transcripts for them were detected
in one or more cDNA libraries. They do not show any
homology with known proteins (e-value cutoff = 10-5)
with the exception of G49297, which shows some similarity to a bacterial protein containing a carbohydrate
binding domain. When the above nine transcripts were
subjected to PSI-Blast, we found a few transcripts

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 4 of 19

Figure 1 Transcript diversity across libraries. (a) Rarefaction curves of cDNAs sequenced from 16 different cDNA libraries. (b) Plot showing
the Simpson’s diversity index across the 16 libraries. For two-letter library codes, see Table 1.

showing low homology (e-value cutoff = 10-3, iterations
= 3) to murine-like glycoprotein most typically associated with animal viruses. Eight of the genes belonging
to the above gene family are localized on chromosome
21. The absence of this gene family in T. pseudonana
and its high level of expression across various cDNA
libraries may indicate that it represents a P. tricornutum-specific expanded glycoprotein gene family.
By comparing all of these highly expressed transcripts
with those in 14 other eukaryotic genomes (see Materials and methods), we found that many are either present
only in the two available diatom genomes or only in
P. tricornutum (Table 2). Expression studies therefore
represent a valuable resource for gene annotation in diatom and related genomes. Within the top 20 most
abundant transcripts, some also encode highly conserved
proteins such as glutamate dehydrogenase and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, as well as others
found in higher plants but not in animals (for example,
ammonium transporter, light harvesting protein and
alternative oxidase) (Table 2).

A range of different clustering and functional annotation methods was used to identify the libraries with
similar gene expression patterns and to assess functional
significance. We first made a hierarchical clustering [30]
of the 9,145 transcripts expressed more than once, after
normalizing transcript abundance in each individual
library to library size. By this method we were able to
identify libraries that share similar patterns of expression with reference to the presence or absence of a transcript and its relative abundance. Figure 2 shows the
results visualized using ‘Java Treeview’ [31]. For example, from this analysis we see that libraries made from
cells grown in chemostat cultures cluster together (NS,
NR, C1 and C4). The oval morphotype (OM) and tropical accession (TA) libraries, which were derived from
oval morphotypes grown at low salinity and low temperature, respectively, were also seen to cluster together.
We classified transcripts into three categories: core
transcripts (represented across all 16 eukaryotic genomes), diatom-specific transcripts (expanded in the two
available diatom genomes), and P. tricornutum-specific

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 5 of 19

Table 2 Top 20 most highly expressed cDNAs across all the libraries, and their presence in different genomes
Contig

Cluster sizea

Gb

BLASTX description

InterPro description

G49202

2,079

P

-

-

G55010

856

P

-

Pyridoxal phosphate-dependent decarboxylase

G47667

833

O

Solute carrier family 34

Na+/Pi cotransporter

G27877

658

O

Ammonium transporter

Rh-like protein/ammonium transporter

G13951

630

C

Glutamate dehydrogenase

Glutamate dehydrogenase

G51797

613

D

Alpha 3 frustulin

-

G52619

605

O

Uric acid-xanthine permease

Xanthine/uracil/vitamin C permease

G44694
G20424

586
561

D
O

M6 family
Urea active isoform

Aldehyde dehydrogenase
Na+/solute symporter

G48027

545

P

-

-

G48315

479

V

Choline carnitine betaine transporter

BCCT transporter

G176.1

463

O

Alternative oxidase

Alternative oxidase

G29456

379

C

Glyceraldehyde-3- phosphate dehydrogenase

Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase

G49064

358

H

-

Na+/H+ antiporter NhaC

G49151

353

D

Nucleoside diphosphate epimerase

NmrA-like

G49211
C358

346
344

P
V

Periplasmic l-amino acid catalytic subunit

-

G30648

342

V

Light harvesting protein

Chlorophyll A-B binding protein

G23629

333

C

Calcium transporting ATPase

E1-E2 ATPase-associated region

G45835

316

V

-

Sterol-sensing 5TM box

a

Cluster size of contig. bConserved in different representatives from eukaryotic genomes (e-value cutoff 10-5; more than 30% identity and 50% coverage): C, core
(plant/animal/diatom); D, diatom (P. tricornutum and T. pseudonana); O, animal (opisthokonts); P, Phaeodactylum tricornutum; V, plant (Viridiplantae).

transcripts. Overall expression patterns of each class are
similar (Additional file 2A), supporting the hypothesis
that the diatom-specific genes do indeed represent bona
fide genes. Furthermore, when expression patterns in
individual libraries were explored, expression of these
three classes of genes was seen to vary greatly (Additional file 2B). As an example, the aldehyde treated
libraries (LD, HD) share a common pattern of expressed
transcripts representing diatom-specific gene families
(Additional files 2A and 3). A recurrent signature within
this class of transcripts are stress-related protein
domains associated with cell wall and membrane components, as well as proteases, lipases, glucanase, and elicitin. Expression analysis can therefore be used as a
basis to explore the function of diatom-specific genes by
comparing expression of the two diatom-specific classes
of genes with the expression patterns of core genes.
This comparison also demonstrates that the expression
of core genes is generally higher when compared to the
P. tricornutum-specific genes.
While hierarchical clustering reveals the correlations
and differences in patterns of gene expression across
libraries, to identify transcripts that are differentially
expressed, we used a statistical method based on loglikelihood [32]. For each TU we computed the log-likelihood ratio (R) and compared it with a randomly generated set (Additional file 4). Based on this comparison
we considered TUs with R-values greater than 12 to be

differentially expressed (see Materials and methods). On
average, we detected between 200 and 450 differentially
expressed transcripts per library (8 to 12%), the variation of which was mostly due to differences in library
size (Additional file 5). Figure 3 shows examples of
transcripts that are expressed across all 16 conditions
and that have different R-values. An ammonium transporter encoding gene with an R-value of 502 was catalogued as being differentially expressed in the nitrate
starved (NS) library, an alpha-3-frustulin encoding gene
was catalogued as differentially expressed in the oval
morphotype (OM) and blue light (BL) libraries, and a
citrate synthase encoding gene was upregulated in the
high decadienal (HD) and ammonium adapted (AA)
libraries. By contrast, a gene encoding an epsilon-frustulin was not catalogued as being differentially expressed
(R-value below 12). Seventy-one transcripts were
expressed at least once across all the libraries (Additional file 6) and most of them were classified as being
differentially expressed. Fifty-two of them also contained
a known domain, and the majority fell into our category
of core transcripts (30 sequences, against 15 diatomspecific transcripts, and 13 P. tricornutum-specific
transcipts). These genes encode putative transporters
(for bicarbonate and ammonium), some transcription
factors, transposable elements, and the mitochondrial
alternative oxidase, which has been proposed to be a
central actor in diatom metabolism [33].

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 6 of 19

Figure 2 Hierarchical clustering showing the expression pattern of transcripts expressed more than once in any of the 16 different
growth conditions. The blowup shows some of the genes differentially expressed in the high CO2 libraries (C1 and C4). Expression levels are
shown in an increasing scale from grey to dark blue, and are based on frequencies of ESTs in each library (see Materials and methods). NA, no
annotation information available. For two-letter library codes, see Table 1.

Based on our R-value criteria, only 7 genes could be
defined as being constitutively expressed across all
16 libraries and these included frustulins and genes
involved in cell division. This set of transcripts represents a valuable resource for promoter analysis, especially to identify constitutive promoters for reverse
genetics studies.
Gene Ontology term enrichment analysis

To further explore the functional significance of the
library clusters and the differentially expressed genes in
each library, functional annotation was performed using
sequence and domain conservation analysis. For the
transcripts showing sequence level similarity to ‘known’
proteins (Blastp, e-value <10 -5), Gene Ontology (GO)

term enrichment analysis was performed using blast2GO
[34]. The GO terms of all the expressed transcripts were
compared to the genes that are differentially expressed
in each library. Additional file 7 shows the list of GO
terms that are over-represented in each library (P <
0.001). In Additional file 7 we also show over-represented GO terms shared between libraries. The urea
adapted (UA) and ammonium adapted (AA) libraries
show over-representation of genes involved in nitrogen,
amino acid, nucleotide and organic acid metabolism
(Additional file 7), which is consistent with our knowledge of nitrogen metabolism. The blue light (BL) library
contains the highest number of over-represented GO
terms, and shares several categories related to photosynthesis and pigment biosynthesis with the iron limited

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 7 of 19

Figure 3 Individual examples of expression patterns of transcripts that are expressed in all 16 conditions but with different
log-likelihood ratios (R-values). For two-letter library codes, see Table 1.

(FL) library, such as porphyrin and tetrapyrrole biosynthesis. The significance of these shared terms with
respect to metabolic management in iron starved cells
has been discussed previously [33]. Additionally, the
blue light library also has some unique GO terms,
related to sugar and isoprenoid metabolism, transcription and translation, that likely reflect a general activation of metabolism stimulated by light exposure of darkadapted cultures. These terms are not shared with other
libraries.
The high decadienal (HD) library displays GO terms
related to steroid metabolism as well as uncharacterized
proteins involved in responses to biotic stimuli. These
transcripts might provide insight into mechanisms of
programmed cell death in diatoms because decadienal
has been implicated in regulating the process [20,35].
The nitrate libraries (NR, NS) share a group of transporters and the nitrate replete (NR) library shows overrepresentation of nucleoside phosphate metabolic processes, specifically purine nucleoside triphosphate metabolism. The oval morphotype (OM) library, which is a
salt stress library, shows over-representation of lipid
metabolism classes whereas the triradiate morphotype
(TM) library is over-represented in genes encoding
active transport processes. In the high CO2 after 1 day
(C1) library, COPI-vesicle-coat-related GO terms are
over-represented, and in the high CO2 after 4 days (C4)
library, inorganic anion transporters are over-represented. Perhaps surprisingly, in spite of clustering
together in the hierarchical clustering analysis (Figure
2), the two high CO2 libraries (C1, C4) do not share any

particular pathway terms. The over-representation of
novel genes may be the reason for not finding any
known GO terms between these two libraries, which
illustrates our present ignorance of diatom biology, in
spite of studying responses to a stimulus of significant
ecological relevance.
InterPro domain analysis

As an additional approach to examine the functional
significance of differentially expressed transcripts, we
explored domain content using InterPro [36]. We first
classified putative proteins into two groups, those containing InterPro domains were denoted ‘proteins with
defined functions’ (PDFs), and those with no recognizable domains were denoted ‘proteins with obscure functions’ (POFs) [37,38]. Comparisons with other
organisms showed that most PDFs have orthologs in
other heterokonts, particularly T. pseudonana, and that
a significant number are also found in Viridiplantae and
Opisthokonta (Additional file 8). Notwithstanding, a significant number of PDFs (1,011 out of 3,693) were not
found in these 14 organismal groups compared, indicative of the highly chimeric nature of diatom genomes.
In a previous whole genome study of 10 different
model eukaryotes, it was shown that POFs represent
between 18 and 38% of a typical eukaryotic proteome
[37]. In the putative proteome of P. tricornutum we
found 44% of POFs, considerably more than usual,
which likely reflects the fast evolving diatom genomes
and the largely unexplored nature of diatom gene
repertoires [8]. Table 3 shows the average protein

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 8 of 19

Table 3 Average properties of encoded POF and PDF
proteins in P. tricornutum
Protein property

POF

PDF

Length

440.6

477.4

Residue weight

110.9

110.8

Charge
Isoelectric point

11.4
7

10.8
6.9

48,852.8

52,840.5

1.424

1.487

Molecular weight
Transmembrane domains

composition statistics of the POFs and PDFs present in
the P. tricornutum genome. We do not see higher variation in the length, amino acid composition and percentage of putative proteins with trans-membrane domains,
indicating that the higher percentage of POFs is not
likely to reflect pseudo-genes or transcripts that are not
translated. We therefore propose that the majority
encode bona fide genes.
Most of the differentially expressed transcripts encode
PDFs; in particular, the blue light (BL) library contained
more than 75% of proteins with defined domains, consistent with the fact that the BL library has the highest
number of over represented GO terms (Additional file
5). This is possibly because we can infer a lot more
about photosynthesis in diatoms by extrapolation of
knowledge from plants and other algae than we can
about other processes such as diatom responses to
nutrients, which may therefore be rather novel. As a
case in point, the most highly represented IPR domains
in the blue light (BL) library included domains for bicarbonate transport, carbon fixation, light harvesting, and
photosynthetic electron transport (Additional file 9), all
of which are known to be key processes of
photosynthesis.
As an example of using domain analysis to obtain
functional information, the top 15 InterPro domains
found in the high CO2 libraries (C1 and C4) are shown
in Figures 4a,b. As a reference, Figure 4c shows the 30
most highly represented domains in the P. tricornutum
genome, corresponding to gene families expanded in
diatoms, such as protein kinases and heat shock transcription factors [8]. In the CO2 libraries we detected
domains involved in pH maintenance and nitrogen
metabolism, as well as a decarboxylase domain, found in
just one gene. The function of this gene in diatom
responses to high CO2 will be well worth exploring. The
enlarged region in Figure 2 shows some of the other
transcripts that are shared in the high CO2 conditions,
including genes encoding nitrogen metabolism components. Genes involved in phosphate metabolism are also
evident, suggesting that P. tricornutum responds to
higher CO2 levels by up-regulating primary metabolic
pathways.

The top 20 IPR domains in each of the other libraries
are shown in Additional file 9. The data both confirm
the validity of the culture conditions used for library
generation (for example, the nitrogen libraries are overrepresented in IPR domains related to nitrogen metabolism) and provide a new resource for exploring
unanticipated aspects of diatom responses to specific stimuli. For example, the observed over-representation of
IPR domains from heat shock transcription factors in
these same libraries infers the importance of this class of
transcription factors in regulating nitrogen metabolism.
Correlations between libraries

Correspondence analysis (CA) was conducted with the
9,145 transcripts to identify correlated growth conditions. In this method, the frequencies of possibly correlated expression patterns are split into smaller
components of un-correlated variables, and these components can be represented in multidimensional space
using an axis for each transformed component. The first
two components (axis) showing the maximum variance
(least correlated) in expression are plotted in Figure 5.
We found that the high decadienal (HD), original standard (OS) and high CO2 (C1, C4) libraries showed the
maximum variance from the rest of the libraries. The
dissimilarity of the OS library was not unexpected
because it was created using different protocols compared to the other 15 libraries. It was therefore not considered further in this analysis. Comparative and
functional analysis of the 100 genes showing maximum
variance in expression in the other three conditions
indicated that these transcripts mainly represent novel
transcripts expressed in specific conditions and not predicted by conventional gene prediction programs or by
other homology-based methods (data not shown). An
example is shown in Figure 5, in which transcript C322
is unique to the high decadienal (HD) library and
resembles a diatom-specific retrotransposon [39]. Conversely, transcript C301 is highly expressed uniquely in
high CO2 conditions (C4 library), but does not have a
predicted gene model. It does not show clear homology
to any known sequence in other organisms, but its best
BLAST hit is to a proteophoshphoglycan from Leishmania (data not shown). Interestingly, recent analyses have
shown that this gene is also heavily methylated, unlike
the majority of P. tricornutum genes (unpublished information Florian Maumus, Leila Tirichine and CB).
Methylation of DNA is currently receiving attention as a
mechanism controlling gene expression [40], so gene
C301 is likely to be of great interest for future studies.
To further examine the contribution of known and
unknown genes in each library, we repeated the correspondence analysis after classifying the transcripts based
on the presence and absence of domains. Figure 6a

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 9 of 19

Figure 4 InterPro domain representation of transcripts expressed in the high CO2 conditions. (a) High CO2 after 1 day (C1); (b) high CO2
after 4 days (C4). (c) The 30 most highly represented InterPro domains across all the predicted gene models in the P. tricornutum genome
shown for comparison.

shows that among the four libraries with maximum variation in expression, the high decadienal (HD) library
displayed considerably more transcripts without a
defined domain (POFs). The high CO2 (C1, C4) libraries
have a roughly equal number of PDF and POF

transcripts. Similar trends were seen when the analysis
was repeated for diatom-specific transcripts (present in
at least one of the two diatoms under study; e-value cutoff 10 -5 ) or core transcripts also present in 14 other
eukaryotic genomes (described in Materials and methods) (Figure 6b). We observed that the largest number
of diatom-specific transcripts was found in the high decadienal (HD) library, followed by the high CO2 (C1, C4)
libraries. These differences may imply that proteins with
no recognizable homologs or domains may exhibit preferential involvement in species-specific regulatory and
signaling networks [37]. As a case in point, the high
decadienal treatment is known to induce programmed
cell death and may be involved in regulating diatom
population sizes [20,35].
Expression analysis of diatom orthologous genes

Figure 5 Principle component analysis of all the libraries based
on frequencies of expression across all 16 different conditions.
The plot shows the axes with maximum variation. For two-letter
library codes, see Table 1.

The above described cDNA libraries from P. tricornutum are accessible through the diatom EST database,
together with seven libraries from T. pseudonana [41].
Because two of the conditions were examined in both
species (iron limitation (FL) and nitrogen starvation
(NS) [42]), we could make a comparative analysis of the
response of each diatom. A total of 346 and 278 transcripts were found to be differentially expressed in
P. tricornutum under iron limitation (FL) and nitrogen
starvation (NS) conditions, respectively. Among these
transcripts, around 50% (174 in FL and 163 in NS) have

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 10 of 19

Figure 6 Expression of POFs and of diatom-specific genes in all 16 libraries. (a) Plot showing the axis 1 and axis 2 obtained from
correspondence analysis of the expression of transcripts with known domains (PDFs) and without any predictable domain (POFs). (b) Plot
showing the axis 1 and axis 2 obtained from correspondence analysis of the expression of transcripts that are conserved across 16 eukaryotic
genomes (Core) and transcripts that are present only in diatom genomes (Diatom).

orthologs in T. pseudonana (e-value cutoff 10-5 ) and a
significant number of these are also responsive to the
same treatment in this second diatom. Figure 7 shows
hierarchical clustering of the 346 P. tricornutum FL
transcripts together with 71 T. pseudonana putative
orthologs that are also expressed under iron limitation
(FL). Within this set we can find diatom-specific POFs
as well as transcripts with recognizable domains such as
transcription factors (Figure 7). We can also find genes
encoding photosynthetic components and putative cell
wall proteins (fasciclin, gelsolin, annexin), implying that
the global reprogramming of cellular metabolism
observed in P. tricornutum [33] may be common to
other diatoms as well. In a similar analysis performed
with the 163 T. pseudonana orthologs of the nitrate
starvation responsive P. tricornutum genes, 46 were
found to be differentially expressed in the same condition in T. pseudonana (Additional file 10). These
include genes encoding components of nitrogen metabolism, regulatory pathways, and a range of POFs. Only
one of the genes expressed in response to nitrate starvation in both diatoms is diatom-specific, whereas nine of
the iron responsive genes were classified as being diatom-specific (compare Figure 7 and Additional file 10).
This could suggest that diatom responses to iron have
evolved specifically in diatoms, whereas nitrate starvation responses may constitute a more general organismal response.
Whole-genome expression profiling using a tiled array
in T. pseudonana led to the identification of previously

un-annotated TUs [42]. Among these 3,470 TUs, 1,458
were also found in the P. tricornutum genome (e-value
cutoff 10-5), and of these, 1,086 were expressed under
various conditions in P. tricornutum. Additional file 11
shows the expression patterns of these genes and it is
apparent that many of these TUs are highly expressed
in the high decadienal (HD) cDNA library. This result is
consistent with the previous observations revealing the
unique expression patterns of diatom-specific gene
families and ‘unknown’ genes in the HD library (for
example, Figure 6).
Expression patterns of bacterial genes

It was previously reported that horizontal gene transfer
from bacteria is one factor affecting diatom genome
diversity, with at least 587 genes of proposed bacterial
origin were identified in the P. tricornutum genome [8].
The expression of these genes was analyzed to study the
functional significance of these acquired genes. A total
of 446 bacterial genes were expressed under various
growth conditions, and 50% of them were expressed in
the blue light (BL) library (Additional file 12A). The
most highly expressed bacterial genes encode a putative
Na+/H+ antiporter, hybrid cluster protein, and nitrite
reductase (Additional file 13). The latter two have been
discussed previously in the context of their importance
for nitrogen metabolism in diatoms [43]. In spite of having fewer numbers of expressed bacterial genes, higher
frequencies of certain cDNAs were found in the oval
morphotype (OM) and tropical accession (TA) libraries.

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 11 of 19

Figure 7 Hierarchical clustering of transcripts defined as being differentially expressed under iron limitation (FL) in P. tricornutum,
along with the hierarchical clustering of corresponding orthologs expressed under iron limitation (FL) in T. pseudonana. Expression
levels are shown in an increasing scale from grey to dark blue, and are based on frequencies of ESTs in each library (see Materials and methods).
For two-letter library codes for P. tricornutum, see Table 1. T. pseudonana library codes are TL, temperature limited; FL, iron limited; CL, carbon
dioxide limited; SL, silicate limited; NL, nitrate limited; OL, old library; NP, nitrate plus [42]. The red letter ‘D’ in the T. pseudonana cluster denotes
the diatom-specific transcripts.

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

The functional significance of these bacterial genes was
explored with reference to their orthologs in other bacterial genomes using the COG database of bacterial
orthologous gene clusters [44]. The set of bacterial
genes identified in P. tricornutum were found to represent 19 different COG classes (Additional file 10), with
genes belonging to ‘energy production and conversion’
being the most highly expressed. By contrast, genes
belonging to the categories of intracellular trafficking,
secretion, cell motility, and chromatin structure were
under-expressed.
Gene composition and expression

In a pilot analysis with the 12,136 cDNAs from the OS
library, it was shown that transcripts that are represented by higher numbers of ESTs show higher levels of
guanine and cytosine nucleotides at the third codon
position (GC3) [25]. To examine the significance of correlation between expression level and codon usage bias,
we derived a codon usage table using the predicted gene
models for P. tricornutum, which is available at [45].
We applied correspondence analysis to study the relative
synonymous codon usage [46] in the highly expressed
genes across all the libraries. Codon Adaptation Index
values were then calculated using CodonW [47]. Correspondence analysis allowed the identification of the first
four axes (components) that explain the majority of the
variance (30.6%) in codon usage among P. tricornutum
putative coding sequences (CDSs). The principal axis
(F1) contributes 15.5% to the total variance, while the
second axis (F2) explains only 6%. Consequently, we can
conclude that F1 is the main factor driving codon usage
heterogeneity in P. tricornutum. We therefore chose the
projection of points (the 59 codons) along F1 and used
these coordinates as an estimator of the relative usage
of degenerate codons within each CDS (Figure 8). The
preferred codons are generally C-ending, in agreement
with previous reports [25]. Therefore, C-ending codons
are likely to be translationally optimal. An additional
interesting feature of P. tricornutum CDSs is the relative
lack of G3 ending codons among quartets.

Discussion
The P. tricornutum cDNAs described in this report were
obtained from cells grown in 16 different conditions of
ecological relevance, and are publicly available in a digital gene expression database [48]. In total, they correspond to 86% of the predicted genes in the genome, and
are therefore a useful basis for exploring gene expression patterns. As demonstrated here they can also be
used to probe the function of genes that do not show
significant homology to transcripts in other sequenced
genomes. How many of the remaining 14% of P. tricornutum gene models that lack EST support actually

Page 12 of 19

represent bona fide genes is unknown [8]. The fact that
we could detect an additional 1,968 TUs that lack gene
models shows the limitations of current gene prediction
programs to detect diatom genes, and sets an upper
limit of 12,370 genes in P. tricornutum, in the same
range as the upper count of 14,862 genes predicted by
expression analysis in T. pseudonana [42]. The number
of diatom genes that encode small RNAs rather than
proteins is also unclear at this time, although the
expressed P. tricornutum genes that lack homology to
known sequences do appear in general to encode proteins with the typical biochemical characteristics of
P. tricornutum proteins (Table 3).
Due to the phylogenetic distance of diatoms from
most of the eukaryotes for which whole genome
sequences are available, comprehensive cDNA collections also provide an important resource to improve
gene prediction. For example, in P. tricornutum only
28% of the gene models could be predicted by homology-based methods; the others were predicted using the
cDNAs reported here as a training set for ab initio
methods [8]. This data set will also be of importance for
the growing number of diatom genome projects, for
example, from Pseudo-nitzschia multiseries and Fragilariopsis cylindrus, as well as for other heterokont sequencing projects.
An important aspect of the current study is that 15 of
the libraries were generated from non-nomalized mRNA
populations and using the same methodologies (the original library (OS) described previously in [21] was generated using a different method). The gene expression
patterns in each culture condition can therefore be compared and contrasted with the other conditions. To
facilitate this, we converted EST counts to frequencies
in each library, examined redundancy by rarefaction,
and diversity using Simpson’s index. Although all
libraries were clearly under-saturated, there was wide
variation in redundancy and diversity (Figure 1). Some
libraries were characterized by having several sets of
evenly abundant cDNAs - for example, the nitrate
replete (NR) library - while others had fewer sets of
highly abundant cDNAs - for example, the nitrate
starved (NS) library. These results therefore provide
information about how P. tricornutum responds to the
different conditions examined.
Although the 15 cDNA libraries were generated and
sequenced using the same protocol, a potential caveat of
our approach is that the culturing conditions under
which the libraries were generated were not identical
(Additional file 1) because they were generated in different laboratories worldwide. To reduce unnecessary
heterogeneity, all cells were nonetheless harvested at
mid- or late exponential phase. Furthermore, in our
opinion the results from our statistical analyses

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 13 of 19

Figure 8 Radar plot showing the preference of C ending codons, obtained from Codon Adaptation Index analysis done on highly
expressed transcripts only. Codons shown in red correspond to the most commonly used codons.

demonstrate clearly the biological significance of the
measured transciptional outputs - for example, the
nitrogen limited libraries show clear effects in genes
involved in nitrogen metabolism.
Our analyses are especially valuable for the exploration of diatom genes with undefined functions because
expression profiling can shed light on their functional
significance [49]. Many of these genes encode proteins
that lack recognizable InterPro domains, and have been
classified as encoding POFs. Diatom genomes encode
higher numbers of POFs than have been observed in
other genomes (see Results). In rice and Arabidopsis,
such genes are thought to contribute to ecological

differences and species diversity [37,38]. The predicted
biochemical characteristics of these putative P. tricornutum proteins suggest that they represent functional
proteins. Approximately half of them are also found in
T. pseudonana, and interestingly can be seen in many
cases to be specifically induced by high decadienal treatment (Figure 6; Additional file 11). This aldehyde is of
interest because it has been implicated in regulating diatom population densities [20,50], so these genes deserve
attention as being of potential importance in the control
of population density and programmed cell death.
The different statistical methods employed in this
study provide support for several recent hypotheses

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

proposed on the basis of experimental observations; for
example, the commonalities of nitrate, ammonium and
urea assimilation [7,43] can be seen in the similar
expression profiles of the NS, AA, and UA libraries, and
the reprogramming of diatom photosynthesis in
response to iron limitation [33] is reflected in the common gene expression profiles between the FL library
and the blue light (BL) library (Figure 2). Conversely,
the two abiotic stress libraries - low temperature (TA)
and low salinity (OM) - display similar expression profiles (Figure 2), in agreement with the known overlap in
the response to these stresses in other organisms [8].
These expected results are satisfying, but more importantly they increase confidence that the methodologies
used can help resolve other less well understood processes involved in each individual response. For example, when hierarchical clustering is done using only the
small set of 177 expressed transcription factors in P. tricornutum, the relationships observed between the different libraries are essentially the same as can be seen
when using all 9,145 TUs [17] (Figure 2). Hence, the
methodologies reported here can help identify transcription factors associated with differential expression in the
different growth conditions. Conversely, genes of
unknown function can be recruited to a specific
response, for example, those induced in response to
high decadienal. Such correlations provide a reasonable
basis to explore the function of such genes.
Finally, our studies have helped to understand better
the roles in diatoms of genes of probable bacterial origin. These acquired bacterial genes have undergone
modifications, such as gene fusions and novel domain
reorganizations [8]. The observed diversity of their phylogenetic origins, derived from a wide range of different
bacterial groups, is reflected in their functional diversity
in that they belong to 19 different COG categories.
Many are expressed in different conditions (Additional
file 12), which may reflect the functional adaptation of
acquired bacterial genes to important metabolic and
regulatory processes. In other cases, they are not
strongly expressed - for example, genes in the intracellular trafficking, cell motility, secretion, and chromatin
structure categories - which may indicate that genes
derived from the secondary endosymbiotic parents have
been retained for these functions.
Although there can be no substitute for laboratorybased exploration of gene function, the sheer numbers
of diatom-specific genes of unknown function necessitates the availability of high throughput in silico
approaches that can allow diatom researchers to identify
interesting candidate genes that likely play key functions. We believe that the resources described here
represent a significant step forward for characterizing
diatom genes, as highlighted by PtTU G49202, a

Page 14 of 19

P. tricornutum gene of unknown function that is extremely highly expressed (Table 2), and PtTU G55010, a
carboxylase of unknown function that we have linked to
the diatom response to high CO 2 . Reverse genetics
approaches such as RNA interference [14] can now be
directed towards genes such as these in order to define
their precise functions experimentally and to help
understand the specific innovations that have led to the
dominance of diatoms in contemporary ecosystems.

Conclusions
The unbiased statistical methods used in the current
study to analyze diatom gene expression profiles in different conditions can provide insights of biological relevance for understanding how diatoms respond to their
environment, and in particular can pinpoint genes with
unassigned functions for targeted studies. The digital
gene expression database that we have established [48]
represents a new resource for identifying candidate diatom-specific genes involved in processes of major ecological relevance.
Materials and methods
Library conditions

A total of 15 cDNA libraries were constructed to
explore the molecular responses of P. tricornutum to a
range of conditions, in addition to the previously
reported library [21]. The different libraries are summarized in Table 1 and Additional file 1, and the rationale
for choosing each condition is summarized below. All
libraries are derived from cells in mid-late exponential
phase.
Geographically widely distributed strains of P. tricornutum show interesting intra-species genetic and phenotypic diversity [26] and undergo morphological
transitions between three possible morphotypes [9]. To
explore the functional adaptations of different morphotypes, we made libraries from each of them. The triradiate morphotype (TM) library was constructed from
mRNAs extracted from cells grown by repeated subculturing of the Pt8 accession under gentle agitation (80
rpm) in order to obtain a culture with 70% of triradiate
cells. The oval morphotype (OM) library was made
using the Pt3 accession grown at low salinity, and the
tropical accession (TA) library was obtained from Pt9
cells grown at low temperature (15°C), treatments that
both induce the formation of oval cells [26]. Cells were
obtained from cultures either following a shift to hyposalinity 10% in Brown’s artificial sea water (ASW) [26]
for Pt3 or after a shift from 28°C to 15°C for Pt9.
The Pt1 8.6 accession also produces oval morphotype
cells when treated with decadienal, a programmed cell
death-inducing aldehyde [35]. Chemical signaling
induced by this diatom-derived aldehyde has been

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

shown to trigger stress responses and may control
bloom dynamics in phytoplankton populations [20].
Two libraries, low decadienal (LD) and high decadienal
(HD), were constructed to explore the genes expressed
in response to sublethal (0.5 μg/ml) and lethal (5 μg/ml)
concentrations of decadienal after 6 h treatment,
respectively.
All other libraries were derived from cultures of the
Pt1 8.6 accession grown under different nutrient
regimes that contained predominantly the fusiform morphotype. Iron bioavailability is a major factor limiting
photosynthetic biomass in the ocean [51] and Fe fertilization experiments have shown that diatoms show
greater sensitivity to iron compared to other phytoplankton [52]. The iron limited (FL) library was
designed to study genes expressed at low concentrations
of iron [33].
Diatoms also play a major role in nitrogen-based biogeochemical cycles, and the diatom genome has been
shown to encode various nitrate and ammonium transporters as well as the full complement of urea cycle
enzymes [7,43]. cDNA libraries were therefore constructed from cells grown under various nitrogen
regimes to help understand the complexities of nitrogen
metabolism in diatoms. We constructed four such
libraries from nitrate-starved (NS) cells grown in 50 μM
of nitrate for 3 days, nitrate-replete (NR) cells grown in
1.12 mM nitrate, and from ammonium adapted (AA)
and urea adapted (UA) cultures. The NS and NR cultures were grown under continuous light (120 μmol.m-2.
s-1). Walne medium [53] was used for the NR condition
and NO3- concentration was reduced to 50 μM for the
NS condition. Cultures were sampled at both steady
state (NR and NS) as well as during the N-depletion
period.
Additionally, cDNAs obtained from cells grown in the
presence and absence of silicic acid (SP and SM, respectively), formed a useful data set for studies of the silicification process [54].
To examine light-responsive gene expression, a cDNA
library was generated from cultures grown in 12 h lightdark cycles to a concentration of 0.5 × 10 6 cells per
milliliter, subsequently dark adapted for 60 hours, and
then exposed to blue light. Cells were harvested after
1 h induction by centrifugation for 15 minutes at 3,000 g
and conserved at -80°C until RNA extraction.
Diatoms are responsible for about 20% of global carbon fixation and many studies are underway to explore
how diatoms may be affected by climate change. We
therefore constructed cDNA libraries from cells grown
under high carbon dioxide concentrations for one (C1)
and 4 days (C4). The study of adaptation to such conditions is of particular interest in the light of increasing
CO 2 levels in the Earth’s atmosphere. For these

Page 15 of 19

experiments cells were initially grown at 2.8 mM DIC
with a dilution rate of 0.5 d-1 (temperature and pH were
kept constant at 20°C and 8.0, respectively), and high
CO2 conditions were obtained by increasing DIC to 3.2
mM by bubbling carbon dioxide into the cultures until
the pH reached 7.0.
Moreover, we used three different culture methods;
the NS, NR, C1 and C4 libraries were all grown in chemostat cultures, whereas the OM, AA, UA, TA, FL, and
other libraries were from batch cultures. For the carbon
dioxide chemostat experiments the cells were grown at
20°C under continuous light (120 μmol.m-2.s-1) with an
operating speed of 100 rpm. The cultures were run at
20% dilution rates and sampled at steady state at pH 8.0
and pH 7.0 as well as during the adjusting period
between these two levels, that is, within 24 h after pH
modification.
The above libraries can therefore be used to study
growth conditions and gene expression in response to
different stimuli of ecological relevance. Although the
cDNA library that we originally characterized [21] was
also incorporated into the current analyses, certain comparisons with the other libraries should be viewed with
caution because this cDNA library was constructed
using different methodologies.
Library construction

The non-normalized cDNA libraries were constructed
from poly(A)+ RNA purified from total extracted diatom
RNA using the CloneMiner cDNA library construction
kit (Invitrogen, Cergy-Pontoise, France) following the
supplier’s instructions with minor modifications. Fifteen
different conditions (Table 1) were used to maximize
the detection of genes expressed with specific conditionenriched profiles. Sequencing was performed mostly
from the 5′ end of the insert but for some of the
libraries an attempt was made to sequence each clone at
both the 5′ and the 3′ ends. When both EST reads overlapped, the two sequences were fused into a consensus
sequence using PHRAP [55].
Sequence analysis

The complete set of cDNAs was subject to a preliminary
analysis as previously described in [22], with a variation
in obtaining the non-redundant data set. The cDNAs
were first aligned to the predicted gene models available
at the Joint Genome Institute (JGI) [56] using the
BLAST program [57] and the cDNAs that did not have
a predicted gene model were subjected to CAP3
assembly [29]. This two step procedure to derive the
non-redundant set avoided the over-estimation of nonredundant transcripts (TUs) led by short transcripts.
The cluster size (that is, the number of redundant
cDNAs for each TU) was obtained and the number of

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

transcripts contributed by each individual library to
cluster size was also counted for all the TUs. An initial
functional annotation of the non-redundant transcripts
was done using blast2GO [34]. A more advanced annotation, such as the assignment of InterPro domains and
KEGG pathways, was obtained from the P. tricornutum
genome annotation performed at the JGI.
The P. tricornutum and T. pseudonana sequences
were also compared by BLASTX to those in 14 other
eukaryotic genomes, specifically Phytophthora ramorum,
Phytophthora sojae, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Ostreococcus lucimarinus, Ostreococcus tauri, Cyanidioschyzon
merolae, Monosiga brevicollis, Dictyostelium discoideum,
Ciona intestinalis, Caenorhabditis elegans, Aspergillus
niger, Pichia stipitis, Arabidopsis thaliana and Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Library richness and diversity

The richness and diversity of cDNAs sampled from
each cDNA library was estimated by statistical methods.
Richness was estimated by rarefaction using the Analytic Rarefaction 1.3 program [58] to plot the rarefaction
curve. Diversity was estimated using Simpson’s Reciprocal Index and was calculated using the formula (1/D),
where D is Simpson’s index calculated using the formula [28]:
D=

∑ n( n − 1 )
N( N − 1 )

where n is the cluster size (the number of cDNAs of
each TU in each library) and N is the library size (the
total number of cDNAs sequenced in each library).
Data normalization and clustering

The count of cDNAs in each library and for each cluster
(TU) was normalized to the library size by calculating
the frequency (the EST count divided by the library
size). This normalized data facilitated the comparisons
of expression across different libraries in spite of the differences in library sizes. The frequency distribution of
9,145 TUs that are expressed more than once across
one or more libraries were used for principal component analysis. Principal component analysis was done
using R version 2.5.0 [59]. The same data set was used
to identify genes and libraries with similar expression
patterns using two-way hierarchical clustering. The hierarchical clustering was done using the program cluster
2.11 [30] and was visualized using ‘Java Treeview’ [31].
Differential gene expression

To study the distribution of transcripts across different
libraries and to identify clusters that were significantly
over-represented in certain growth conditions, we

Page 16 of 19

examined the expression patterns of the 9,145 clusters.
To eliminate differences in distribution caused by the
differences in library size, the counts were normalized
by converting them to frequency. To determine whether
the differences in frequency distribution were due to
statistically significant differential gene expression or to
a random distribution, we calculated the log likelihood
ratio, R-value [32], for each cluster. To define a cutoff
R-value, we calculated the R-value for 9,145 random
clusters generated from a Poisson distribution whose
parameter is equal to the expected cluster size for that
library 1,000 times. Additional file 4 shows the R-values
of the actual 9,145 clusters and in the randomized data
set. The probability of having an R-value above 23 was
zero in all randomized clusters. We considered an Rvalue cutoff of 12, corresponding to 0.96 probability
(that is, with 96% chance that it is not a random event),
providing a useful basis to define genes displaying differential mRNA levels in our cDNA libraries. The 8,402
transcripts with R-values above 12 were analyzed and
catalogued as differentially expressed in the libraries
having the top two highest frequencies. Transcripts
represented by three or fewer cDNAs were removed.
Gene Ontology and COG annotation

The expressed TUs were subjected to GO annotation
[60] and GO term enrichment analysis was done using
the Blast2GO program [34]. COG annotation was done
by RPS-BLAST [61] with the TUs as query using the
Conserved Domain Database (CDD) [62]. COG identities were assigned to any TU with a BLAST e-value
below 10-3.
Codon usage analysis

The codon usage table for P. tricornutum was obtained
using the CDSs from JGI and using the EMBOSS program [63]. Codon Adaptation Index values were calculated using CodonW [47]. This analysis was performed
using all the CDSs starting with ATG, and the maximum number or the sum of cDNAs across all the
libraries was taken as an expression level index. Genes
represented by more than 30 cDNAs were used as a
reference set for highly expressed genes to study codon
usage bias and its relation to expression level.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary Table S1. A comprehensive
description of culturing conditions of the libraries.
Additional file 2: Supplementary Figure S1. Expression patterns of
diatom-specific genes. (A) Hierarchical clustering to show the expression
pattern of transcripts belonging to the gene families conserved across
different taxonomical groups (Core), diatom-specific (Diatom) and P.
tricornutum-specific (Pt) [8]. (B) Plot showing the average frequency of
the above set of transcripts across the 16 different conditions. In (A),

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

expression levels are shown in an increasing scale from grey to dark
blue, and are based on frequencies of ESTs in each library (see Materials
and methods). For two-letter library codes, see Table 1.
Additional file 3: Supplementary Table S2. Diatom-specific genes
expressed in both high and low decadienal libraries (HD and LD).
Additional file 4: Supplementary Table S3. R-values of the actual 9,145
clusters and that of the randomized data set.
Additional file 5: Supplementary Figure S2. Percentage of
differentially expressed transcripts in primary y-axis, normalized to
number of non-redundant transcripts (TUs) across the EST libraries and
the percentage of transcripts with defined InterPro domains (PDFs) in the
differentially expressed transcripts in the secondary y-axis. The arrow in
the secondary y-axis at 56% corresponds to the percentage of PDFs
found in all the putative proteins predicted in the P. tricornutum genome
(5,825 out of 10,402 protein models). For two-letter library codes, see
Table 1.
Additional file 6: Supplementary Table S4. The 71 transcripts that
were expressed at least once across all the libraries.
Additional file 7: Supplementary Table S5. GO terms that are overrepresented in each library (P < 0.001). In this table we also show overrepresented GO terms shared between libraries.
Additional file 8: Supplementary Figure S3. Distribution of P.
tricornutum PDFs in other organismal groups. Numbers in parentheses
indicate the number of genes with defined protein domains (PDF) and
the number outside the parentheses represent the total number of
genes in each organismal group.
Additional file 9: Supplementary Table S6. The top 20 IPR domains
expressed across all the libraries and the number of ESTs for each
domain.
Additional file 10: Supplementary Figure S4. Hierarchical clustering of
transcripts defined as being differentially expressed under the nitrate
starved condition (NS) in P. tricornutum along with the hierarchical
clustering of corresponding orthologs expressed in the nitrate limited
condition (NL) in T. pseudonana. Expression levels are shown in an
increasing scale from grey to dark blue, and are based on frequencies of
ESTs in each library (see Materials and methods). For two-letter library
codes, see Table 1 and the Figure 7 legend.
Additional file 11: Supplementary Figure S5. Hierarchical clustering
showing the expression patterns of P. tricornutum orthologs of the novel
genes identified by tiling array in T. pseudonana [42]. Expression levels
are shown in an increasing scale from grey to dark blue, and are based
on frequencies of ESTs in each library (see Materials and methods). For
two-letter library codes, see Table 1.
Additional file 12: Supplementary Figure S6. Expression of bacterial
orthologous genes in P. tricornutum. (A) Plot showing the number of
transcripts of bacterial origin expressed across the 16 different growth
conditions. The primary y-axis shows the number of transcripts and the
secondary y-axis shows the average frequency of these expressed
transcripts. (B) Expression profiling of the genes of putative bacterial
origin along with their COG categories. The gradient of blue shows the
level of expression, with the darker colors being the highly expressed
genes. The red color shows the lack of expressed transcripts. For twoletter library codes, see Table 1.
Additional file 13: Supplementary Table S7. Bacterial genes and their
expression across different libraries along with the domain and genomic
location.

Abbreviations
AA: ammonium adapted; ASW: artifical sea water; BL: blue light; C1: high
CO2 1 day; C4: high CO2 4 days; CDS: coding sequence; DIC: dissolved
inorganic carbon; EST: expressed sequence tag; FL: iron limited; GO: Gene
Ontology; HD: high decadienal; JGI: Joint Genome Institute; LD: low
decadienal; NR: nitrate replete; NS: nitrate starved; OM: oval morphotype; OS:
original standard; PDF: protein with defined function; POF: protein with

Page 17 of 19

obscure function; SM: silicate minus; SP: silicate plus; TA: tropical accession;
TM: triradiate morphotype; TU: transcriptional unit; UA: urea adapted.
Acknowledgements
Funding for the Diatom Digital Gene Expression Database was from the
European Union-funded Diatomics project and the Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (France). cDNA construction and DNA sequencing was funded by
Genoscope (France). We are grateful to Pierre Vincens, Jean-Pierre Roux and
Edouard Bray for managing the server and the software and for their help in
web interface creation, Ikhlak Ahmed for his help with statistical analysis
using R statistical language, as well as Igor Grigoriev and Alan Kuo from JGI.
We would also like to thank Patrick Wincker, Julie Poulain and the technical
staff of Genoscope for their essential contribution to the experimental part
of the work, as well as Franck Anière and the entire system network team at
Genoscope. The database is freely available on the web at [48]. The P.
tricornutum cDNAs have been submitted to the NCBI dbEST (GenBank
accession numbers [GenBank:CD374840] to [GenBank:CD384835] and
[GenBank:BI306757] to [GenBank:BI307753]).
Author details
1
Institut de Biologie de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS UMR 8197 INSERM
U1024, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d’Ulm, 75005 Paris, France. 2Current
address: EMBL - European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome
Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK. 3CEA - Institut de Génomique,
Genoscope and CNRS UMR 8030, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux CP5706, 91057
Evry, France. 4Current address: J Craig Venter Institute, 11149 N. Torrey Pines
Rd, Suite 220, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. 5Physiologie et Biotechnologie des
Algues, IFREMER, BP 21105, 44311 Nantes, France. 6Marine Biogeochemistry,
IFM-GEOMAR Leibniz-Institut für Meereswissenschaften, Düsternbrooker Weg
20, D-24105 Kiel, Germany. 7Université de Nantes, EA 2160, Laboratoire ‘Mer,
Molécule, Santé’, Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, 2 rue de la Houssinière,
44322, BP 92208, 44322 Nantes Cedex 3, France. 8School of Oceanography,
University of Washington, 616 NE Northlake Place, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.
9
University of East Anglia, School of Environmental Sciences, Norwich
Research Park, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK. 10Department of Plant Sciences,
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel .
Authors’ contributions
UM performed the bioinformatics analyses and prepared the manuscript, KJ
performed codon usage analysis and provided advice on data interpretation,
JLP, BMP, JW, and MK perfected RNA extraction and library construction, and
performed DNA sequencing, assembly and annotation, AEA, JPC, ADM, MH,
RK, JLR, PJL, VMJ, AM, TM, MSP and AV prepared cultures and provided
critical advice on analysis outputs, EVA helped in data interpretation, CB
coordinated the work and finalized the manuscript. All authors have read
and approved the manuscript.
Received: 23 October 2009 Revised: 11 May 2010
Accepted: 25 August 2010 Published: 25 August 2010
References
1. Baldauf S: An overview of the phylogeny and diversity of eukaryotes. J
Systematics Evol 2008, 46:263-273.
2. Yoon HS, Hackett JD, Ciniglia C, Pinto G, Bhattacharya D: A molecular
timeline for the origin of photosynthetic eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21:809-818.
3. Patron NJ, Rogers MB, Keeling PJ: Gene replacement of fructose-1,6bisphosphate aldolase supports the hypothesis of a single
photosynthetic ancestor of chromalveolates. Eukaryot Cell 2004,
3:1169-1175.
4. Moustafa A, Beszteri B, Maier UG, Bowler C, Valentin K, Bhattacharya D:
Genomic footprints of a cryptic plastid endosymbiosis in diatoms.
Science 2009, 324:1724-1726.
5. Nelson DM, Treguer P, Brzezinski MA, Leynaert A, Queguiner B: Production
and dissolution of biogenic silica in the ocean - Revised global
estimates, comparison with regional data and relationship to biogenic
sedimentation. Global Biogeochem Cycles 1995, 9:359-372.
6. Raven JA, Waite AM: The evolution of silicification in diatoms:
inescapable sinking and sinking as escape? New Phytologist 2004,
162:45-61.

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

Armbrust EV, Berges JB, Bowler C, Green BR, Martinez D, Putnam NH,
Zhou S, Allen AE, Apt KE, Bechner M, Brzezinski MA, Chaal BK, Chiovitti A,
Davis AK, Demarest MS, Detter JC, Glavina T, Goodstein D, Hadi MZ,
Hellsten U, Hildebrand M, Jenkins BD, Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kröger N,
Lau VVY, Lane TW, Larimer FW, Lippmeier JC, Lucas S, et al: The genome of
the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana: Ecology, evolution, and
metabolism. Science 2004, 306:79-86.
Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP, Rayko E, Salamov A, Vandepoele K,
Beszteri B, Gruber A, Heijde M, Katinka M, Mock T, Valentin K, Verret F,
Berges JA, Brownlee C, Cadoret JP, Chiovitti A, Choi CJ, Coesel S, De
Martino A, Detter JC, Durkin C, Falciatore A, et al: The Phaeodactylum
genome reveals the evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature
2008, 456:239-244.
Borowitzka MA, Volcani BE: Polymorphic diatom Phaeodactylum
tricornutum - ultrastructure of its morphotypes. J Phycol 1978, 14:10-21.
Apt KE, KrothPancic PG, Grossman AR: Stable nuclear transformation of
the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Mol Gen Genet 1996, 252:572-579.
Dunahay TG, Jarvis EE, Roessler PG: Genetic transformation of the diatoms
Cyclotella cryptica and Navicula saprophila. J Phycol 1995, 31:1004-1012.
Falciatore A, Casotti R, Leblanc C, Abrescia C, Bowler C: Transformation of
nonselectable reporter genes in marine diatoms. Mar Biotechnol (NY)
1999, 1:239-251.
Poulsen N, Chesley PM, Kroger N: Molecular genetic manipulation of the
diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana (Bacillariophyceae). J Phycol 2006,
42:1059-1065.
De Riso V, Raniello R, Maumus F, Rogato A, Bowler C, Falciatore A: Gene
silencing in the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Nucleic Acids
Res 2009, 37:e96.
Harada H, Nakajima K, Sakaue K, Matsuda Y: CO2 sensing at ocean surface
mediated by cAMP in a marine diatom. Plant Physiol 2006, 142:1318-1328.
Kilian O, Kroth PG: Identification and characterization of a new conserved
motif within the presequence of proteins targeted into complex diatom
plastids. Plant J 2005, 41:175-183.
Falciatore A, d’Alcala MR, Croot P, Bowler C: Perception of environmental
signals by a marine diatom. Science 2000, 288:2363-2366.
Siaut M, Heijde M, Mangogna M, Montsant A, Coesel S, Allen A,
Manfredonia A, Falciatore A, Bowler C: Molecular toolbox for studying
diatom biology in Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Gene 2007, 406:23-35.
Tanaka Y, Nakatsuma D, Harada H, Ishida M, Matsuda Y: Localization of
soluble beta-carbonic anhydrase in the marine diatom Phaeodactylum
tricornutum. Sorting to the chloroplast and cluster formation on the
girdle lamellae. Plant Physiol 2005, 138:207-217.
Vardi A, Formiggini F, Casotti R, De Martino A, Ribalet F, Miralto A, Bowler C:
A stress surveillance system based on calcium and nitric oxide in marine
diatoms. PLoS Biol 2006, 4:e60.
Scala S, Carels N, Falciatore A, Chiusano ML, Bowler C: Genome properties
of the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Plant Physiol 2002,
129:993-1002.
Maheswari U, Montsant A, Goll J, Krishnaswamy S, Rajyashri KR, Patell VM,
Bowler C: The Diatom EST Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:D344-347.
Merchant SS, Prochnik SE, Vallon O, Harris EH, Karpowicz SJ, Witman GB,
Terry A, Salamov A, Fritz-Laylin LK, Marechal-Drouard L, Marshall WF, Qu LH,
Nelson DR, Sanderfoot AA, Spalding MH, Kapitonov VV, Ren QH, Ferris P,
Lindquist E, Shapiro H, Lucas SM, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Cardol P,
Cerutti H, Chanfreau G, Chen CL, Cognat V, Croft MT, Dent R, et al: The
Chlamydomonas genome reveals the evolution of key animal and plant
functions. Science 2007, 318:245-251.
Matsuzaki M, Misumi O, Shin-I T, Maruyama S, Takahara M, Miyagishima SY,
Mori T, Nishida K, Yagisawa F, Yoshida Y, Nishimura Y, Nakao S, Kobayashi T,
Momoyama Y, Higashiyama T, Minoda A, Sano M, Nomoto H, Oishi K,
Hayashi H, Ohta F, Nishizaka S, Haga S, Miura S, Morishita T, Kabeya Y,
Terasawa K, Suzuki Y, Ishii Y, Asakawa S, et al: Genome sequence of the
ultrasmall unicellular red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae 10 D. Nature
2004, 428:653-657.
Montsant A, Jabbari K, Maheswari U, Bowler C: Comparative genomics of
the pennate diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Plant Physiol 2005,
137:500-513.
De Martino A, Meichenin A, Shi J, Pan K, Bowler C: Genetic and
phenotypic characterization of Phaeodactylum tricornutum
(Bacillariophyceae) accessions. J Phycol 2007, 43:992-1009.

Page 18 of 19

27. Chao A: Estimating the population-size for capture recapture data with
unequal catchability. Biometrics 1987, 43:783-791.
28. Simpson EH: Measurement of diversity. Nature 1949, 163:688-688.
29. Huang X, Madan A: CAP3: A DNA sequence assembly program. Genome
Res 1999, 9:868-877.
30. Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D: Cluster analysis and display
of genome-wide expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:14863-14868.
31. Saldanha AJ: Java Treeview - extensible visualization of microarray data.
Bioinformatics 2004, 20:3246-3248.
32. Stekel DJ, Git Y, Falciani F: The comparison of gene expression from
multiple cDNA libraries. Genome Res 2000, 10:2055-2061.
33. Allen AE, Laroche J, Maheswari U, Lommer M, Schauer N, Lopez PJ,
Finazzi G, Fernie AR, Bowler C: Whole-cell response of the pennate
diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum to iron starvation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2008, 105:10438-10443.
34. Conesa A, Gotz S, Garcia-Gomez JM, Terol J, Talon M, Robles M: Blast2GO: a
universal tool for annotation, visualization and analysis in functional
genomics research. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:3674-3676.
35. Vardi A, Bidie KD, Kwityn C, Hirsh DJ, Thompson SM, Callow JA, Falkowski P,
Bowler C: A diatom gene regulating nitric-oxide signaling and
susceptibility to diatom-derived aldehydes. Curr Biol 2008, 18:895-899.
36. Mulder NJ, Apweiler R, Attwood TK, Bairoch A, Bateman A, Binns D, Bork P,
Buillard V, Cerutti L, Copley R, Courcelle E, Das U, Daugherty L, Dibley M,
Finn R, Fleischmann W, Gough J, Haft D, Hulo N, Hunter S, Kahn D,
Kanapin A, Kejariwal A, Labarga A, Langendijk-Genevaux PS, Lonsdale D,
Lopez R, Letunic I, Madera M, Maslen J, et al: New developments in the
InterPro database. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D224-D228.
37. Gollery M, Harper J, Cushman J, Mittler T, Girke T, Zhu JK, Bailey-Serres J,
Mittler R: What makes species unique? The contribution of proteins with
obscure features. Genome Biol 2006, 7:R57.
38. Gollery M, Harper J, Cushman J, Mittler T, Mittler R: POFs: what we don’t
know can hurt us. Trends Plant Sci 2007, 12:492-496.
39. Maumus F, Allen AE, Mhiri C, Hu H, Jabbari K, Vardi A, Grandbastien MA,
Bowler C: Potential impact of stress activated retrotransposons on
genome evolution in a marine diatom. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:624.
40. Roudier F, Teixeira FK, Colot V: Chromatin indexing in Arabidopsis: an
epigenomic tale of tails and more. Trends Genet 2009, 25:511-517.
41. Maheswari U, Mock T, Armbrust EV, Bowler C: Update of the Diatom EST
Database: a new tool for digital transcriptomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37:D1001-1005.
42. Mock T, Samanta MP, Iverson V, Berthiaume C, Robison M, Holtermann K,
Durkin C, BonDurant SS, Richmond K, Rodesch M, Kallas T, Huttlin EL,
Cerrina F, Sussmann MR, Armbrust EV: Whole-genome expression profiling
of the marine diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana identifies genes involved
in silicon bioprocesses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:1579-1584.
43. Allen AE, Vardi A, Bowler C: An ecological and evolutionary context for
integrated nitrogen metabolism and related signaling pathways in
marine diatoms. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2006, 9:264-273.
44. Tatusov RL, Fedorova ND, Jackson JD, Jacobs AR, Kiryutin B, Koonin EV,
Krylov DM, Mazumder R, Mekhedov SL, Nikolskaya AN, Rao BS, Smirnov S,
Sverdlov AV, Vasudevan S, Wolf YI, Yin JJ, Natale DA: The COG database:
an updated version includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:41.
45. The Phaeodactylum tricornutum Digital GeneExpression Database. [http://
www.diatomics.biologie.ens.fr/EST/Pt-GM.cod].
46. Sharp PM, Li WH: The Codon Adaptation Index - a measure of directional
synonymous codon usage bias, and its potential applications. Nucleic
Acids Res 1987, 15:1281-1295.
47. CBRG, Oxford University. [http://www.molbiol.ox.ac.uk/CBRG_home.shtml].
48. The Phaeodactylum tricornutum Digital GeneExpression Database..
[http://www.diatomics.biologie.ens.fr/EST3/].
49. Horan K, Jang C, Bailey-Serres J, Mittler R, Shelton C, Harper JF, Zhu JK,
Cushman JC, Gollery M, Girke T: Annotating genes of known and
unknown function by large-scale coexpression analysis. Plant Physiol
2008, 147:41-57.
50. Ianora A, Miralto A, Poulet SA, Carotenuto Y, Buttino I, Romano G, Casotti R,
Pohnert G, Wichard T, Colucci-D’Amato L, Terrazzano G, Smetacek V:
Aldehyde suppression of copepod recruitment in blooms of a
ubiquitous planktonic diatom. Nature 2004, 429:403-407.

Maheswari et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R85
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R85

Page 19 of 19

51. Behrenfeld MJ, Bale AJ, Kolber ZS, Aiken J, Falkowski PG: Confirmation of
iron limitation of phytoplankton photosynthesis in the equatorial Pacific
Ocean. Nature 1996, 383:508-511.
52. Tsuda A, Takeda S, Saito H, Nishioka J, Nojiri Y, Kudo I, Kiyosawa H,
Shiomoto A, Imai K, Ono T, Shimamoto A, Tsumune D, Yoshimura T,
Aono T, Hinuma A, Kinugasa M, Suzuki K, Sohrin Y, Noiri Y, Tani H,
Deguchi Y, Tsurushima N, Ogawa H, Fukami K, Kuma K, Saino T: A
mesoscale iron enrichment in the western Subarctic Pacific induces a
large centric diatom bloom. Science 2003, 300:958-961.
53. Walne PL: The effects of colchicine on cellular organization in
Chlamydomonas. I. Light microscopy and cytochemistry. Am J Bot 1966,
53:908-916.
54. Vartanian M, Descles J, Quinet M, Douady S, Lopez PJ: Plasticity and
robustness of pattern formation in the model diatom Phaeodactylum
tricornutum. New Phytol 2009, 182:429-442.
55. Documentation for Phrap and cross_match.. [http://bozeman.mbt.
washington.edu/phredphrap/phrap.html].
56. JGI Genome Portal. [http://genome.jgi-psf.org/phatr2/phatr2home.html].
57. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang JH, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
58. Analytic Rarefaction 1.3. [http://www.uga.edu/strata/software].
59. The R Project for Statistical Computing.. [http://www.R-project.org].
60. Harris MA, Clark J, Ireland A, Lomax J, Ashburner M, Foulger R, Eilbeck K,
Lewis S, Marshall B, Mungall C, Richter J, Rubin GM, Blake JA, Bult C,
Dolan M, Drabkin H, Eppig JT, Hill DP, Ni L, Ringwald M, Balakrishnan R,
Cherry JM, Christie KR, Costanzo MC, Dwight SS, Engel S, Fisk DG,
Hirschman JE, Hong EL, Nash RS, et al: The Gene Ontology (GO) database
and informatics resource. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D258-D261.
61. Altschul S, Madden T, Schaffer A, Zhang JH, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman D:
Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A new generation of protein database
search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
62. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Cherukuri PF, DeWweese-Scott C, Geer LY,
Gwadz M, He SQ, Hurwitz DI, Jackson JD, Ke ZX, Lanczycki CJ, Liebert CA,
Liu CL, Lu F, Marchler GH, Mullokandov M, Shoemaker BA, Simonyan V,
Song JS, Thiessen PA, Yamashita RA, Yin JJ, Zhang DC, Bryant SH: CDD: a
conserved domain database for protein classification. Nucleic Acids Res
2005, 33:D192-D196.
63. Peers G, Price NM: Copper-containing plastocyanin used for electron
transport by an oceanic diatom. Nature 2006, 441:341-344.
doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-8-r85
Cite this article as: Maheswari et al.: Digital expression profiling of novel
diatom transcripts provides insight into their biological functions.
Genome Biology 2010 11:R85.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
