<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>"Glucose and ethanol-dependent transcriptional regulation of the astaxanthin biosynthesis pathway in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous"</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-190"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Andrés Marcoleta"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

“Glucose and ethanol-dependent transcriptional
regulation of the astaxanthin biosynthesis
pathway in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous“
Andrés Marcoleta, Mauricio Niklitschek, Aniela Wozniak, Carla Lozano, Jennifer Alcaíno, Marcelo Baeza and
Víctor Cifuentes*

Abstract
Background: The yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous is one of the most promising and economically attractive
natural sources of astaxanthin. The biosynthesis of this valuable carotenoid is a complex process for which the
regulatory mechanisms remain mostly unknown. Several studies have shown a strong correlation between the
carbon source present in the medium and the amount of pigments synthesized. Carotenoid production is
especially low when high glucose concentrations are used in the medium, while a significant increase is observed
with non-fermentable carbon sources. However, the molecular basis of this phenomenon has not been established.
Results: In this work, we showed that glucose caused transcriptional repression of the three genes involved in the
synthesis of astaxanthin from geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate in X. dendrorhous, which correlates with a complete
inhibition of pigment synthesis. Strikingly, this regulatory response was completely altered in mutant strains that
are incapable of synthesizing astaxanthin. However, we found that addition of ethanol caused the induction of
crtYB and crtS gene expression and promoted de novo synthesis of carotenoids. The induction of carotenogenesis
was noticeable as early as 24 h after ethanol addition.
Conclusion: For the first time, we demonstrated that carbon source-dependent regulation of astaxanthin
biosynthesis in X. dendrorhous involves changes at the transcriptional level. Such regulatory mechanism provides an
explanation for the strong and early inhibitory effect of glucose on the biosynthesis of this carotenoid.

Background
Astaxanthin (3,3’-dihydroxy-b,b-carotene-4,4’-dione) is a
red-orange carotenoid pigment of high commercial interest, mainly because of its use as a dietary additive in the
aquaculture industry [1,2] and its many benefits to human
health [3]. As further properties of this carotenoid have
been discovered, demand has increased significantly, thus
motivating the identification of new sources of the pigment as an alternative to its chemical synthesis. One of
the most promising natural sources of astaxanthin is the
basidiomycete yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. This
yeast normally produces the pigment in its natural environment, probably to protect itself from other chemical
compounds. Carotenoids are potent antioxidants, and the
* Correspondence: vcifuentes@uchile.cl
Departamento de Ciencias Ecológicas y Centro de Biotecnología, Facultad
de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Las Palmeras 3425, Ñuñoa, Santiago,
7800024, Chile

main function of astaxanthin in X. dendrorhous has been
proposed to be protection against reactive oxygen species
and accompanying cellular damage. This hypothesis is
supported by the observations that X. dendrorhous is particularly susceptible to some activated oxygen species, has
low levels of catalase activity and possesses Mn-superoxide
dismutase but not other classes of superoxide dismutases
that are present in many other yeasts [4].
The biosynthesis of astaxanthin from the isoprenoid precursor geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP) in
X. dendrorhous requires at least four enzymatic activities,
which are catalyzed by enzymes encoded by the genes crtI,
crtYB and crtS. During the first phase of biosynthesis, the
phytoene synthase activity of the bifunctional enzyme phytoene-b-carotene synthase (PBS, product of crtYB) catalyzes the condensation of two GGPP molecules to produce
one molecule of phytoene, the first carotenoid of the pathway [5]. After four desaturation reactions catalyzed by the

© 2011 Marcoleta et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

enzyme phytoene desaturase (product of crtI), phytoene is
transformed into a lycopene [6]. Subsequently, the lycopene is cyclized to form b-carotene via the b-carotene
synthase activity of PBS [5]. Finally, the b-carotene is oxidized at both ends in a process that requires cytochrome
p450 astaxanthin synthase (product of crtS) [7,8]. This
reaction requires the accessory activity of a cytochrome
p450 reductase enzyme as an electron donor [9].
Although the structural genes needed for the synthesis
of astaxanthin in this yeast have been characterized, the
regulatory mechanisms that control this process are largely
unknown. Importantly, alternative processing of crtYB and
crtI have been reported to occur [10], although the implications of this phenomenon have not been established. In
addition, alternative transcripts of both genes have several
premature stop codons in all three reading frames, and
they likely encode non-functional proteins [10].
X. dendrorhous can develop two metabolic modes
depending on the type of carbon source present in the
medium. Glucose or other fermentable sugars are
assimilated through the glycolytic pathway followed by
alcoholic fermentation to produce ethanol, even in the
presence of oxygen [11]. However, non-fermentable carbon sources, such as ethanol or succinate, are transformed to acetyl-CoA and are processed through the
citric acid cycle. Thus, energy is produced mainly
through oxidative phosphorylation.
There is a strong correlation between the carbon source
used and the level of pigment synthesized; high glucose
concentrations as the carbon source yield minimal pigment synthesis [12,13], ethanol as the carbon source yields
greater pigment synthesis [14]. In addition, when X. dendrorhous is grown on glucose as the only carbon source,
the induction of carotenogenesis coincides with sugar
depletion and the beginning of ethanol consumption (produced by fermentation of the carbohydrate) [15]. Finally,
previous studies have reported the presence of putative
MIG1 binding sites in the promoter regions of the crtYB,
crtI and crtS genes [7]. MIG1 was originally described in S.
cerevisiae and is a well-known transcription factor that
mediates glucose-driven transcriptional repression processes in various yeasts [16-19].
Taken together, this information suggests that glucose
and ethanol may modulate carotenoid biosynthesis by
regulating the expression of the carotenogenesis genes.
In this study, we characterized the effect of glucose and
ethanol on the expression of crtYB, crtI and crtS and on
the early stages of carotenoid production.

Results
Effect of glucose on the expression of carotenoid
biosynthesis genes

Several observations support the hypothesis that glucose
has an inhibitory effect on carotenoid production in

Page 2 of 11

X. dendrorhous. Among other findings, the discovery of
potential MIG1-binding sites in the promoter regions of
several carotenogenic genes suggests that transcriptional
regulation mechanisms may be involved in this inhibition. To determine whether glucose affects the expression of the carotenogenic genes, X. dendrorhous cells
were grown in YM liquid medium without glucose to
prevent the production of ethanol, which can influence
the phenomenon under investigation. Once the culture
reached stationary phase (optical density between 3.5
and 4), it was divided in two Erlenmeyer flasks, one of
which had glucose added to a final concentration of 20
g/l (the concentration normally used in most media),
while the other flask was left untreated (control). Both
aliquots were incubated at 22°C with constant swirling,
and cell samples were taken 0, 2, 4, 6 and 24 h after the
addition of glucose. From these samples, total RNA was
extracted and the expression of several genes was determined relative to control using quantitative RT-PCR.
To validate our experimental approach, we first measured the effect of glucose on the expression of genes normally regulated by glucose in related yeasts. As a glucose
repression control, we used a genomic sequence from
X. dendrorhous called glucose repressible gene 2 (grg2)
[GenBank: JN043364]. This gene is highly repressed by
glucose in N. crassa and in many other yeasts [20,21]. As a
glucose induction control, we used the pyruvate decarboxylase gene PDC, which is induced by glucose in several
fungi and yeasts [22-25]. For this experiment, genomic
PDC and its cDNA were sequenced, its intron-exon structure was determined and its sequence was deposited in
the database [GenBank: HQ694557 and HQ694558].
By evaluating the expression of the genes mentioned
above, we found that the addition of glucose caused an
approximately 130-fold decrease in the mRNA levels of
the grg2 gene and an approximately 28-fold increase in the
mRNA levels of the PDC gene (Figure 1a). Both effects
reached their maximums 4 h after the addition of the carbohydrate and were not detectable after 24 h.
After validating the experimental approach, we characterized the effect of glucose on the expression of the crtYB,
crtI and crtS genes. The mRNA levels of the three carotenogenic genes decreased considerably upon the addition of
glucose. In the case of the crtYB gene (Figure 1b), both the
mature and the alternative transcripts reached minimum
levels 4 h after the addition of glucose and returned to
basal levels within 24 h. Curiously, the effect of glucose
was significantly greater on the alternative messenger
(~18-fold decrease) than on the mature messenger (~6fold decrease). This result is striking, considering that both
messengers are transcribed from the same promoter. A
similar effect occurred with the crtI gene (Figure 1c); glucose decreased the levels of the alternative mRNA (~35fold decrease) to a greater extent than the mature mRNA

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

Page 3 of 11

Expression (-fold change compared to control)

grg2/PDC

crtYB

1

b

a

crtI

crtS

1

1

c

d

Time after glucose addition (h)
Figure 1 Effect of glucose on expression of the carotenoid biosynthesis genes in X. dendrorhous. The gene expression kinetics in the
wild-type strain after adding glucose (20 g/l final concentration) was determined with respect to the control (black circle) for the
carotenogenesis genes and for the grg2 and PDC genes. a: grg2 (white inverted triangle) and PDC (black square); b: mmcrtYB (white circle) and
amcrtYB (black inverted triangle); c: mmcrtI (white circle) and amcrtI (black inverted triangle); d: crtS (white circle). The error bars correspond to
the standard deviation (n = 3). The negative values on the y-axis denote decreases relative to the control. mm: mature transcript, am: alternative
transcript.

(~6-fold decrease). The repression effect disappeared
quickly for both transcripts and was not detectable 24 h
after the addition of glucose. In the case of the crtS gene
(Figure 1d), glucose had a smaller effect, with an approximately 5-fold decrease in the mRNA levels at 2 h after
treatment. Interestingly, 24 h after adding the sugar,
expression of the crtS gene was increased 10-fold.
Depletion of the glucose added to the medium and the
subsequent decrease of the repression effect caused by
glucose may be responsible for the quick return of the
mRNAs to their basal levels. To evaluate this possibility,
we determined the amount of glucose remaining
throughout the 24-h-period during which the expression
response was observed (Figure 2a). The results indicated
that the kinetics of glucose consumption were much
slower than the return of the mRNAs to their basal levels.
For most of the genes studied, the glucose response (20
g/l final concentration) occurred mainly during the first 6

h after treatment. However, during that time frame, only
20% of the glucose was consumed, with approximately 16
g/l remaining in the medium. Given this observation, we
next determined whether lower concentrations of glucose
were capable of generating a repression response. We
determined the relative expression of the carotenogenesis
genes after adding glucose to final concentrations of 10, 5
and 1 g/l. For all of the genes assayed (Figure 2b, only
data for crtS is shown as an example), we observed that
the maximum repression effect increased as the glucose
concentration was increased. However, the response
kinetics was practically identical for all of the glucose
concentrations analyzed. The repressive effects on the
carotenogenic genes were not detectable when using a
glucose concentration of 1 g/l, suggesting that the
response threshold is more than 1 g/l. The return of the
carotenogenic gene expression to basal levels appeared to
be independent of the amount of glucose remaining in

Page 4 of 11

Extracellular glucose (g/l)

a

Time after glucose addition (h)

Expression (-fold change compared to control)

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

b

Time after glucose addition (h)

Figure 2 Dose-response effect of glucose-mediated transcriptional repression of the crtS gene. Cultures of UCD 67-385 were grown until
reaching stationary phase and were divided into five aliquots. Glucose was added to each aliquot to a final concentration of 20 (black square),
10 (white triangle), 5 (black inverted triangle) or 1 g/l (white circle); no glucose was added to the control culture (black circle). Subsequently, the
amount of glucose remaining in the media was determined (a), along with the relative expression of the crtS gene (b) at 2, 4, 6 and 24 h posttreatment. The error bars correspond to standard deviation (n = 3). The negative values on the y-axis denote decreases relative to the control.

the culture medium, as the kinetics of the transcriptional
response did not vary upon changing the initial concentration of glucose added. To further analyze this observation, the concentration of extracellular glucose was
determined at different times for all of the initial sugar
concentrations studied (Figure 2a). We observed that
greater than 50% of the initial glucose remained in all
cases 6 h after the addition of glucose. Thus, once the
glucose had caused a decrease in the mRNA levels, recovery to the original expression levels was not completely
dependent on the amount of glucose remaining in the
culture medium.
Effect of ethanol on the expression of carotenogenesis
genes

Previous reports indicated that adding ethanol to
X. dendrorhous cultures increased the amount of pigments produced after five days [14,26]. In addition,
when the yeast was grown with glucose as the only carbon source, the induction of carotenogenesis coincided
temporally with the depletion of the glucose and the
maximum concentration of ethanol (~2 g/l) produced
by fermentation of the sugar [15]. Ethanol may upregulate the expression of the carotenogenic genes, thus
inducing carotenoid production. To test this possibility,
we used an experimental design similar to that of the
glucose experiments, but we added ethanol instead of
glucose to a final concentration of 2 g/l. The results
indicated that upon the addition of ethanol, there was
an approximately 4.5-fold increase in the levels of the
mature messenger of crtYB, but there was no significant

effect on expression of its alternative version (Figure 3a).
Ethanol did not have a significant effect on the expression of the mature messenger of the crtI gene, but it
caused up to a 4.5-fold decrease in the expression of the
alternative transcript, which returned to basal levels
after 24 h (Figure 3b). Finally, the addition of ethanol
caused up to a 4-fold increase in the mRNA levels of
the crtS gene, which reached its maximum induction
level 4 h after treatment (Figure 3c). These results indicate that the addition of ethanol (2 g/l) caused a significant increase in the expression of two of the three genes
required for the synthesis of astaxanthin from GGPP in
X. dendrorhous. This phenomenon could explain, at
least in part, the induction of carotenoid production
upon ethanol addition.
Effect of glucose and ethanol on synthesis of pigments

To address the biological significance of the changes in the
mRNA levels of the carotenogenesis genes upon glucose
and ethanol addition, we tested the effect of these compounds on early pigment production. For this experiment,
we measured carotenoid production during a short time
after the carbon source addition, thus allowing a more
direct correlation between both phenomena. For this purpose, X. dendrorhous cells were grown in YM medium
without glucose for up to 24 h after the stationary phase
had been reached, at which point the cultures were
divided into three aliquots. Glucose was added to one of
the aliquots to a final concentration of 20 g/l. Ethanol was
added to another aliquot to a final concentration of 2 g/l
and the remaining aliquot was left untreated (control).

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

Page 5 of 11

crtYB

Expression (-fold change compared to control)

a

a

crtI
b

crtS

c

Time after ethanol addition (h)
Figure 3 Effect of ethanol on expression of the
carotenogenesis genes. The expression kinetics after adding
ethanol (2 g/l final concentration) was determined relative to
control (black circle) for the crtYB mature mRNA (mm, white circle)
and the alternative mRNA (am, black inverted triangle) (a); mmcrtI
and amcrtI (b); and crtS(c). The error bars correspond to standard
deviation (n = 3). The negative values on the y-axis denote
decreases relative to control.

Subsequently, aliquots from these cultures were collected
2, 4, 6 and 24 h after treatment, and the biomass production as well as the amount and composition of carotenoids
present in each sample were determined. We found that
the addition of glucose caused an increase in biomass that
was notably higher than that observed 24 h after the addition of ethanol (Figure 4a). However, analysis of the total

amount of carotenoids per ml of culture (Figure 4b)
revealed that no pigments were produced even 24 h after
adding the carbon source in the glucose-treated aliquot.
By contrast, upon addition of ethanol, there was an almost
1.8-fold increase in the amount of carotenoids present
24 h after treatment as compared with control (Figure 4b).
In this case, although there was also an increase in biomass, the increase was coupled with pigment production.
By analyzing the specific amount of carotenoids, we found
that glucose addition caused a progressive decrease in the
amount of pigments produced per dry biomass unit (ppm)
(Figure 4c). This decrease became noticeable just 2 h after
the addition of the sugar, reaching a level that was threefold less than in the control after 24 h, and was mainly
due to the increase in biomass and lack of pigment synthesis. However, upon the addition of ethanol, the amount
of carotenoids per unit of biomass remained relatively
constant, reaching a level slightly lower than the control
24 h after the carbon source was added.
Previous studies performed in our laboratory indicated
that as X. dendrorhous cultures age, the proportion of carotenoid intermediates relative to astaxanthin decreases.
This phenomenon is accompanied by an increase in the
relative amount of astaxanthin, which was explained by
the termination of the de novo synthesis of pigments and
the conversion of all of the intermediates to the final product of the pathway. Therefore, de novo synthesis of pigments can be evaluated by determining the proportion of
intermediates relative to the amount of the final product
(astaxanthin) over the course of the experiment. Accordingly, an analysis of the composition of the carotenoids
present in the previously analyzed samples was conducted
using reverse phase liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC).
We measured the relative content of astaxanthin with
respect to the total amount of pigments detected in each
sample (i.e., astaxanthin, phoenicoxanthin, canthaxanthin,
3-OH-ketotorulene, echinenone, 3-OH-echinenone, neurosporene and b-carotene) (Figure 4d). In the control condition, the amount of astaxanthin remained constant at
approximately 75% over the 24-h period studied, indicating that there were no intermediates generated. A very
similar situation was observed when glucose was added;
the proportion of astaxanthin remained the same as in the
control at each of the times analyzed. A completely different phenomenon was observed when ethanol was added
to the medium. In this case, 24 h after the addition of the
carbon source, a significant decrease in the relative
amount of astaxanthin was observed. This observation can
be explained by the generation of carotenoid intermediates
as a result of the induction of pigment biosynthesis. These
results indicate that the addition of ethanol caused an
increase in the amount of total carotenoids by promoting
the de novo synthesis of pigments. In contrast, when glucose was added to the medium, there was an inhibition of

Page 6 of 11

a

Total carotenoids (mg/ml culture)

Cell growth (O.D. at 600 nm)

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

c

Time after carbon source addition (h)

Time after carbon source addition (h)
Relative astaxanthin content (%)

Specific carotenoids (mg/g dry yeast)

Time after carbon source addition (h)

b

d

Time after carbon source addition (h)

Figure 4 Effect of glucose and ethanol on cell growth and early production of pigments in X. dendrorhous. Cell growth (a), total amount
of carotenoids produced by culture volume (b) and carotenoids produced by biomass (c) were determined for the control (untreated, black
circle) and cultures treated with glucose (20 g/l final, white inverted triangle) or ethanol (2 g/l final, black square). In addition, the relative
content of astaxanthin with respect to the total amount of carotenoids detected in each sample was determined (d). The error bars correspond
to standard deviation (n = 3).

pigment synthesis that was maintained over the entire
analyzed time period. Importantly, both effects were
detectable as early as 24 h after the addition of the carbon
source and the effects correlated temporally with changes
in the mRNA levels of the carotenogenesis genes.
Effect of glucose on the expression of carotenogenesis
genes in mutant strains incapable of synthesizing
astaxanthin

The results described above demonstrate that the inhibition of de novo synthesis of pigments caused by high glucose concentrations parallels the decrease in the
expression levels of all of the genes involved in carotenogenesis. However, previous reports have indicated that
carotenogenesis may be regulated by some type of feedback mechanism, by which the relative proportion of
astaxanthin regulates the total amount of carotenoids
synthesized [27]. Given our observations, the feedback
mechanism mediated by astaxanthin in the carotenoid
biosynthesis pathway may involve regulatory mechanisms

at the transcriptional level, and the presence and composition of pigments may affect the transcriptional response
triggered by the addition of glucose to the medium. To
test this hypothesis, we performed glucose addition
experiments using homozygous mutant strains that are
incapable of synthesizing astaxanthin. The strains used
were T-YBHH2 (crtYB-), T-I21H1H (crtI-) and T-SHH2
(crtS - ), as described in a previous work [28]. First, we
determined that the response of grg2 and PDC expression
to glucose was similar in all of the strains studied and did
not depend on the synthesis of pigments (data not
shown). In contrast, different results were observed for
the mutants of the carotenogenesis pathway genes. For
the crtYB gene, the 6-fold repression of mature messenger observed in the wild-type strain in response to glucose completely disappeared and was replaced by a slight
induction in both, the mutant that accumulates phytoene
(crtI-) and the mutant that accumulates b-carotene (crtS-)
(Figure 5a). However, the levels of alternative transcripts
in both mutant strains exhibited a glucose-mediated

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

Page 7 of 11

amcrtYB

Expression (-fold change compared to control)

mmcrtYB

mmcrtI

1
1
1

a

b

amcrtI

c

crtS

1

1

d

e

Time after glucose addition (h)
Figure 5 Effect of glucose on the expression of carotenogenesis genes in mutant strains incapable of synthesizing astaxanthin. Strains:
T-YBHH2 (crtYB-/-, white inverted triangle), T-I21H1H (crtI-/-, black square) and T-SHH2 (crtS-/-, white diamond). Levels of mRNA for mature crtYB
(a), alternative crtYB (b), mature crtI (c), alternative crtI (d) and crtS (e) in glucose-treated cultures (20 g/l) were determined for each strain relative
to the control. The values from wild-type strain UCD-67 385 (wt, black circle) were taken from Figure 1 and are included here as a reference. The
dotted line corresponds to the expression value in the control condition. The error bars correspond to standard deviation (n = 3). The negative
values on the y-axis denote decreases relative to the control.

decrease that was less than the one observed in the wildtype strain (Figure 5b). A similar phenomenon was
observed for the crtI gene; both, the mutant incapable of
synthesizing carotenoids (crtYB - ) and the mutant that
accumulates b-carotene (crtS-) showed a complete lack of
glucose repression of the mature transcript (Figure 5c)
and a very diminished response of the alternative transcript levels (Figure 5d). Finally, in the case of the crtS
gene, the slight repression by glucose observed in the
wild-type strain was replaced by a slight induction in the
crtYB- and crtI-mutants (Figure 5e). These results indicate that the expression of the crtYB, crtI and crtS genes
in response to the addition of glucose depends, at least in
part, on the normal synthesis of astaxanthin or on the
presence of this compound in the cell.

Discussion
Carotenogenesis in X. dendrorhous is a complex process
with regulatory mechanisms that have not been fully elucidated. Several studies have reported that the amount
and composition of carotenoids may be greatly modified
depending on the carbon source used [12-14,29,30]. A
common observation is that the synthesis of pigments is
particularly low at glucose concentrations greater than 15
g/l [12,13,31]. However, until this study, there was no

available data on how glucose exerts its repressive effect
on carotenogenesis.
The results obtained in this work show that glucose has
a regulatory effect on the expression of several genes in
X. dendrorhous, as has been shown in other yeasts. The
mRNA levels of the grg2 gene decreased dramatically
when glucose was added to the culture. Moreover, the
PDC gene was induced by glucose, as it is in the majority
of phylogenetically related organisms [22-25]. In addition,
we found that adding glucose to the media caused a
decrease in the mRNA levels of all of the carotenogenesis
genes involved in the synthesis of astaxanthin from
GGPP. In the majority of these experiments, the effect of
glucose reached its maximum between 2 and 4 h after
addition. By 24 h after glucose addition, mRNA levels
returned to baseline. No data were collected between 6
and 24 h after the addition of the sugar, but in most
cases the recovery was estimated to occur completely
within the first 8 h after the addition of glucose. Furthermore, the remaining glucose determinations showed that
the kinetics of sugar consumption was slower than the
return to basal gene expression levels. This finding suggests some type of adaptation mechanism, which over
time diminishes the transcriptional response to the presence of glucose.

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

The global effect of glucose on the carotenogenesis
pathway may be related to the presence of binding sites
for the MIG1 general catabolic repressor in the promoter regions of the crtS [7], crtYB and crtI genes [32].
Such sites are also present in the promoter region of the
grg2 gene (unpublished data), suggesting that a homolog
of the MIG1 regulator may mediate the glucose repression of these genes. However, further studies are needed
to demonstrate the functionality and importance of
these elements.
Interestingly, the repressive effect of glucose on crtYB
and crtI is manifested in different ways on the alternative
and mature transcripts of these genes. Considering that
both transcripts of each gene come from a single transcriptional unit, their different expressions suggest the
involvement of post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. Thus, the differential effect may be due to modification of the factors that control the alternative processing
of these genes. This differential effect is in addition to
previous observations that the amounts of the mature
and alternative mRNAs for both genes vary during yeast
growth, depending on the carbon source used, the age of
the culture and the carotenoid content [10]. The functions of the crtYB and crtI alternative transcripts are
unclear [10,15,32], although it has been established that
they are generated from anomalous splicing of the
respective non-processed messenger. The alternative
mRNA of the crtI gene conserves 80 bp of the first
intron, while the alternative mRNA of the crtYB gene
conserves 55 bp of the first intron and lacks 111 bp of
the second exon. In both cases, the alternate splice
results in mRNAs with several premature stop codons in
their sequences [10], suggesting that the alternative transcripts may not encode functional proteins. Studies performed in our laboratory indicate that mutant strains
that only express the alternative mRNA of the crtI gene
are unable to synthesize astaxanthin and they accumulate
phytoene [33], indicating that this mRNA does not
encode a functional phytoene desaturase protein. Considering these observations, the biological significance of the
glucose-mediated repression of the alternative crtYB and
crtI mRNAs is not clear.
An important observation is that the glucose-mediated
repression of the crtYB, crtI and crtS genes was seriously
compromised in mutant strains incapable of synthesizing
astaxanthin. This observation is consistent with previous
reports that showed that a decrease in astaxanthin content
causes an increase in the total amount of carotenoids, suggesting that astaxanthin may have a negative feedback
effect on pigment synthesis [27]. The results reported here
indicate that an inability to synthesize astaxanthin would
cause deregulation of a significant number of genes
involved in the late stages of the pathway, thereby releasing it from repression by glucose and even increasing the

Page 8 of 11

availability of the messengers necessary for pigment
synthesis.
By studying the effects of glucose on cell growth and
early pigment production, we found that glucose promoted a high biomass production after 24 h, but completely inhibited carotenoid biosynthesis. Similar results
were observed when other glucose-derived carbon
sources were used, such as maltose and galactose (data
not shown).
The early glucose-mediated inhibition of carotenoid
synthesis can be explained, at least partially, by the
decrease in the mRNA levels of the carotenogenesis
genes. A previous study showed that overexpression of
crtYB causes an increase in the amount of pigments produced and that overexpression of crtYB and crtI cause a
change in the relative composition of the carotenoids
synthesized [31]. These results indicate that changes in
the mRNA levels of the carotenogenesis genes have a
direct effect on pigment biosynthesis, supporting the
importance of gene expression in the regulation of the
pathway. However, it was not possible to establish a
priori whether the inhibition of pigment synthesis caused
by the addition of glucose was due only to a decrease in
the expression of the carotenogenesis genes. Previous
work has shown that high glucose concentrations
(between 20 and 80 g/l) cause a reduction in the X. dendrorhous growth rate; the low carotenoid production may
be associated with that inhibition [34]. However, our
results indicate that, at least under the conditions tested,
glucose can induce an important increase in biomass.
Thus, the inhibition of carotenoid biosynthesis reported
here cannot be explained by a reduction in growth rate.
Another possibility is that the inhibition of pigment production is a consequence of the cell growth promoted by
glucose, in contrast with the lack of growth observed in
the control culture. However, the experiments were
designed to evaluate the effect of glucose and ethanol
over a short period of time after the addition of the carbon source (only during the first six hours). In most
cases, the maximum effect on carotenogenic gene expression was observed between 2 and 4 h after the treatment;
during this time, biomass variations were very low. In
addition, X. dendrorhous exhibited very poor growth in
other carbon sources, such as galactose, sorbose and succinate, registering a growth level equivalent to the control
condition (data not shown), preventing these carbon
sources from being used as a “growing” control.
It is well known that glucose has a global effect on cell
metabolism, causing induction of genes related to glycolysis and fermentative metabolism and thereby repressing
many of the genes involved in secondary metabolism and
the use of alternative carbon sources [35]. The induction
of the PDC gene and repression of the invertase-coding
gene INV (data not shown) in response to glucose addition

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

suggests that this phenomenon may also occur in X. dendrorhous. Therefore, the inhibition of pigment synthesis in
response to glucose may also be a consequence of inhibition of the components of respiratory metabolism, which
control the availability of substrates for the carotenogenesis pathway.
However, in contrast to glucose, non-fermentable carbon sources generally cause an increase in the synthesis
of pigments in X. dendrorhous [12,13]. Accordingly, our
results indicate that the addition of ethanol causes an
increase in the total amount of carotenoids 24 h after
treatment. Strikingly, even when there was an increase
in the biomass, ethanol induced de novo synthesis of
pigments, as evidenced by an increase in the relative
amounts of intermediate carotenoids in the pathway.
These results agree with a previous report by Gu and
coworkers, in which the addition of ethanol at different
stages of growth caused an increase in the total amount
of carotenoids [14]. The authors proposed two mechanisms by which ethanol induced the biosynthesis of pigments. Initially, ethanol and its subsequent conversion
into acetate by the aldehyde oxidase enzyme may have
generated superoxide radicals, resulting in the induction
of carotenoid synthesis. This outcome is consistent with
previous work examining the induction effects of some
reactive oxygen species on carotenogenesis [27,36,37].
Alternatively, acetate may have continued along its
metabolic pathway towards the generation of acetyl
coenzyme A, with the latter becoming the substrate for
the synthesis of isoprenoids by the mevalonate pathway.
This outcome is in agreement with previous reports
demonstrating that the addition of mevalonate [38] and
several other non-fermentable carbon sources [12,29]
causes an increase in pigmentation production in X.
dendrorhous, probably because of their direct conversion
into isoprenoid precursors. Our results suggest that
there is a possible third mechanism underlying increased
pigmentation production, which is mediated by the
increase in expression of the crtYB and crtS genes
caused by the addition of alcohol. The increase in pigment synthesis mediated by ethanol is likely due to a
combination of these proposed mechanisms as well as
other factors not yet elucidated.

Conclusion
The carbon source regulation of carotenoid biosynthesis
in X. dendrorhous involves changes at the mRNA level
of several genes. In the presence of glucose, the three
genes involved in the synthesis of astaxanthin from
GGPP were down-regulated, while de novo synthesis of
pigments was inhibited. In contrast, ethanol caused early
induction of carotenoid biosynthesis, which was correlated with induction of crtYB and crtS gene expression.
Importantly, these results provide the first molecular

Page 9 of 11

explanation for the strong repression of carotenoid production observed when this yeast is grown in the presence of glucose.

Methods
Strains and culture conditions

The wild-type X. dendrorhous strain UCD67-385 was
used for all experiments. Unless otherwise specified, the
yeast cells were grown at 22°C with constant swirling
(180 rpm/min) in YM liquid medium (0.3% yeast
extract, 0.3% malt extract, 0.5% peptone) with or without glucose. The non-astaxanthin-producing strains
used were the homozygous mutants T-YBHH2 (crtYB-),
T-I21H1H (crtI - ) and T-SHH2 (crtS - ), described in a
previous work [28]. These strains accumulate the carotenoid intermediates GGPP, phytoene and b-carotene,
respectively. Yeast cell growth was assessed by measuring the optical density at 600 nm. For the determination
of specific carotenoids, biomass was assessed by measuring the dry weight from 10-ml culture samples on an
analytical balance (Shimadzu).
RNA extraction and single strand DNA synthesis

To measure relative gene expression at different times
and under different conditions, 40-ml culture aliquots
were collected and centrifuged at 4000 × g, and the
supernatants were discarded. The cell pellets were frozen
in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Total
RNA was extracted from the pellets by mechanical rupture of the cells, followed by addition of Tri-Reagent
(Ambion) and shaking in a vortex apparatus with 0.5 mm
glass beads (BioSpec) for 10 min. The lysates were then
incubated for 10 min at room temperature, after which
150 μl of chloroform was added per ml of Tri-Reagent
used. The mixtures were then centrifuged for 5 min at
4000 × g. For each sample, the aqueous phase was recovered and transferred to a clean RNase-free test tube.
After two consecutive extraction cycles with acidic phenol:chloroform (1:1) and centrifugation at 4°C for 5 min,
the RNA was precipitated by adding two volumes of isopropanol and incubating at room temperature for
10 min. Once precipitated, the RNA was washed with
75% ethanol, suspended in RNase-free H2O and quantified by determination of the absorbance at 260 nm in a
double beam Shimadzu UV-150-20 spectrophotometer.
The synthesis of cDNA was performed using 5 μg of
total RNA, 1.25 μM oligo-dT18 primer, 0.5 μM dNTPs
and 200 units of M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) in a final volume of 20 μl, according to the enzyme
manufacturer’s recommended protocol.
Quantitative RT-PCR

Relative mRNA expression levels were determined in a
Mx3000P quantitative PCR system (Stratagene) using

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

Page 10 of 11

1 μl of the reverse transcription reaction, 0.25 μM of
each primer and 10 μl of the SensiMix SYBR Green I
(Quantace) kit in a final volume of 20 μl. The primers
used to determine the relative levels of expression are
detailed in Table 1. All of the primer pairs used to
amplify each gene had efficiencies greater than 95%, as
determined by standard curves, with correlation coefficients (R2) ≥ 0.996.
The Ct values obtained for each reaction were normalized to the respective value for the b-actin gene and
were later expressed as functions of the control conditions using the ΔΔCt algorithm [39].

absorbance at 465 nm was determined. The pigment concentrations were quantified using the average of the
molar extinction coefficients of astaxanthin and b-carotene (2346 cm-1/M).
The pigment composition was determined by RPHPLC using a LiChrospher RP18 125-4 (Merck) column
and an acetonitrile:methanol:isopropanol (85:10:5)
mobile phase with a 1 ml/min flow rate under isocratic
conditions. Each pigment was identified by comparison
with specific standards (Sigma) based on their retention
time and absorption spectra [40] using a Shimadzu
SPD-M10A diode array detector.

Extraction and analysis of pigments

Quantification of glucose in the extracellular medium

For the extraction of pigments, aliquots of cell cultures
were collected under the different conditions tested. The
aliquots were centrifuged at 4000 × g, and the supernatants were subsequently discarded. Each cell pellet was
suspended in 2 ml of an acetone:water mixture (1:1), and
500 μl of 0.5-mm glass beads were then added. After
10 min of vortex shaking, the mixture was centrifuged at
4000 × g for 3 min. Next, the supernatant was transferred
to a clean test tube, and 2 ml of acetone was added to the
pellet. The tube containing the pellet was then vortex
stirred for 3 min and centrifuged at 4000 × g for 3 min,
after which the supernatant was collected and mixed
with the supernatant that had been previously set aside.
These steps were repeated until the recovered supernatant was completely colorless. The collected supernatants
were then treated with 0.25 volumes of water and 0.25
volumes of petroleum ether; this mixture was mixed and
centrifuged for 3 min at 4000 × g. Subsequently, the petroleum ether (top) phase was recovered, and its

The glucose present in the extracellular medium was
quantified by determining the increase in absorbance at
340 nm due to the production of NADPH as a product
of the oxidation of the glucose present, using the DGlucose/D-fructose kit (Megazyme).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Fondecyt 1100324, Deutscher Akademischer
Austanschdienst (DAAD) through a graduate scholarship to AW, Fundación
María Ghilardi Venegas through graduate scholarships to CL and AM and
MECESUP UCH0106 through graduate scholarships to MN and JA.
Authors’ contributions
AM and MN participated in the design of the study, conducted the
transcriptional repression analysis of the genes involved in the synthesis of
astaxanthin and cloned the grg2 and PDC genes. AW and CL conducted the
pigment analysis. JA participated in the construction of mutant strains. MB
participated in the study design. VC conceived this work and participated in its
design and coordination. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 11 March 2011 Accepted: 23 August 2011
Published: 23 August 2011

Table 1 Primers used in this work
Primer

Gene

Direction

Sequence (5’ to 3’)

Location

mactF-RT

act

F

CCGCCCTCGTGATTGATAAC

Spanning exons 2 & 3

mactR-RT

act

R

TCACCAACGTAGGAGTCCTT

Spanning exons 4 & 5

mmcrtYBF2-RT

crtYB(mm)

F

TCGCATATTACCAGATCCATCTGA

Spanning exons 1 & 2

mmcrtYBR2-RT

crtYB(mm)

R

GGATATGTCCATGCGCCATT

Exon 2

amcrtYBF-RT

crtYB(am)

F

GTGTGCATATGTGTTGCAACCA

Spanning exon 1 & intron 2

amcrtYBR-RT
mmcrtIF-RT

crtYB(am)
crtI(mm)

R
F

AGAAGGTGCCTAGTTGCCAAGA
CATCGTGGGATGTGGTATCG

Exon 3
Spanning exons 1 & 2

mmcrtIR-RT

crtI(mm)

R

GGCCCCTGATCGAATCGATAA

Spanning exons 3, 4, 5

amcrtIF-RT

crtI(am)

F

CGTGGTTTAATCCGTATCAGC

Spanning exon 1 & intron 1

amcrtIR2-RT

crtI(am)

R

TCTCGAACACCGTGACCT

Exon 2

crtS

F

ATGGCTCTTGCAGGGTTTGA

Spanning exons 6 & 7

mcrtSR-RT

crtS

R

TGCTCCATAAGCTCGATCCCAA

Spanning exons 8 & 9

grg2real FW1

grg2

F

CATCAAGACCTCTGTCACCAAC

Spanning exons 1 & 2

grg2real RV1
pdcreal FW1

grg2
PDC

R
F

TTGGCGTCAGACGAGGACT
TCAACACTGAGCTGCCCACT

Exon 3
Spanning exons 5 & 6

pdcreal RV1

PDC

R

ATTCCGAATCGGGAAGCACA

Exon 6

mcrtSF-RT

F: Forward, R: Reverse; (mm): mature transcript, (am): alternatively spliced transcript.

Marcoleta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:190
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/190

References
1. Baker RTM, Pfeiffer AM, Schöner F-J, Smith-Lemmon L: Pigmenting efficacy
of astaxanthin and canthaxanthin in fresh-water reared Atlantic salmon,
Salmo salar. Animal Feed Science and Technology 2002, 99:97-106.
2. Bjerkeng B, Peisker M, Von Schwartzenberg K, Ytrestøyl T, Åsgård T:
Digestibility and muscle retention of astaxanthin in Atlantic salmon,
Salmo salar, fed diets with the red yeast Phaffia rhodozyma in
comparison with synthetic formulated astaxanthin. Aquaculture 2007,
269:476-489.
3. Hussein G, Sankawa U, Goto H, Matsumoto K, Watanabe H: Astaxanthin, a
carotenoid with potential in human health and nutrition. J Nat Prod
2006, 69:443-449.
4. Schroeder WA, Johnson EA: Antioxidant role of carotenoids in Phaffia
rhodozyma. J Gen Microbiol 1993, 139:907-912.
5. Verdoes JC, Krubasik KP, Sandmann G, van Ooyen AJ: Isolation and
functional characterisation of a novel type of carotenoid biosynthetic
gene from Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Mol Gen Genet 1999,
262:453-461.
6. Verdoes JC, Misawa N, van Ooyen AJ: Cloning and characterization of the
astaxanthin biosynthetic gene encoding phytoene desaturase of
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Biotechnol Bioeng 1999, 63:750-755.
7. Alvarez V, Rodriguez-Saiz M, de la Fuente JL, Gudina EJ, Godio RP, Martin JF,
Barredo JL: The crtS gene of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous encodes a
novel cytochrome-P450 hydroxylase involved in the conversion of betacarotene into astaxanthin and other xanthophylls. Fungal Genet Biol 2006,
43:261-272.
8. Ojima K, Breitenbach J, Visser H, Setoguchi Y, Tabata K, Hoshino T, van den
Berg J, Sandmann G: Cloning of the astaxanthin synthase gene from
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous (Phaffia rhodozyma) and its assignment
as a beta-carotene 3-hydroxylase/4-ketolase. Mol Genet Genomics 2006,
275:148-158.
9. Alcaino J, Barahona S, Carmona M, Lozano C, Marcoleta A, Niklitschek M,
Sepulveda D, Baeza M, Cifuentes V: Cloning of the cytochrome p450
reductase (crtR) gene and its involvement in the astaxanthin
biosynthesis of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. BMC Microbiol 2008,
8:169.
10. Lodato P, Alcaino J, Barahona S, Retamales P, Cifuentes V: Alternative
splicing of transcripts from crtI and crtYB genes of Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous. Appl Environ Microbiol 2003, 69:4676-4682.
11. Reynders MB, Rawlings DE, Harrison STL: Demonstration of the Crabtree
effect in Phaffia rhodozyma during continuous and fed-batch cultivation.
Biotechnol Lett 1997, 19:549-552.
12. Johnson EA, Lewis MJ: Astaxanthin formation by the yeast Phaffia
rhodozyma. Journal of General Microbiology 1979, 115:173-183.
13. Vazquez M, Santos V, Parajo JC: Effect of the carbon source on the
carotenoid profiles of Phaffia rhodozyma strains. J Ind Microbiol Biot 1997,
19:263-268.
14. Gu WL, An GH, Johnson EA: Ethanol increases carotenoid production in
Phaffia rhodozyma. J Ind Microbiol Biot 1997, 19:114-117.
15. Lodato P, Alcaino J, Barahona S, Niklitschek M, Carmona M, Wozniak A,
Baeza M, Jimenez A, Cifuentes V: Expression of the carotenoid
biosynthesis genes in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Biol Res 2007,
40:73-84.
16. Klein CJ, Olsson L, Nielsen J: Glucose control in Saccharomyces cerevisiae:
the role of Mig1 in metabolic functions. Microbiology 1998, 144(Pt
1):13-24.
17. Carmona TA, Barrado P, Jimenez A, Fernandez Lobato M: Molecular and
functional analysis of a MIG1 homologue from the yeast
Schwanniomyces occidentalis. Yeast 2002, 19:459-465.
18. Kuchin S, Carlson M: Analysis of transcriptional repression by Mig1 in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae using a reporter assay. Methods Enzymol 2003,
371:602-614.
19. Zaragoza O, Rodriguez C, Gancedo C: Isolation of the MIG1 gene from
Candida albicans and effects of its disruption on catabolite repression. J
Bacteriol 2000, 182:320-326.
20. McNally MT, Free SJ: Isolation and characterization of a Neurospora
glucoserepressible gene. Curr Genet 1988, 14:545-551.
21. Kimpel E, Osiewacz HD: PaGrg1, a glucose-repressible gene of Podospora
anserina that is differentially expressed during lifespan. Curr Genet 1999,
35:557-563.

Page 11 of 11

22. Fredlund E, Beerlage C, Melin P, Schnurer J, Passoth V: Oxygen and carbon
sourceregulated expression of PDC and ADH genes in the respiratory
yeast Pichia anomala. Yeast 2006, 23:1137-1149.
23. Skory CD: Induction of Rhizopus oryzae pyruvate decarboxylase genes.
Curr Microbiol 2003, 47:59-64.
24. Kellermann E, Hollenberg CP: The glucose-and ethanol-dependent
regulation of PDC1 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae are controlled by two
distinct promoter regions. Curr Genet 1988, 14:337-344.
25. Pronk JT, Yde Steensma H, Van Dijken JP: Pyruvate metabolism in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 1996, 12:1607-1633.
26. Wozniak A: Influencia del metabolismo aerobio en la expresión de los
genes de carotenogénesis y la biosíntesis de pigmentos en
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. PhD Thesis Universidad de Chile, Facultad
de Ciencias; 2008.
27. Schroeder WA, Johnson EA: Singlet oxygen and peroxyl radicals regulate
carotenoid biosynthesis in Phaffia rhodozyma. J Biol Chem 1995,
270:18374-18379.
28. Niklitschek M, Alcaino J, Barahona S, Sepulveda D, Lozano C, Carmona M,
Marcoleta A, Martinez C, Lodato P, Baeza M, Cifuentes V: Genomic
organization of the structural genes controlling the astaxanthin
biosynthesis pathway of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Biol Res 2008,
41:93-108.
29. Flores-Cotera LB, Martin R, Sanchez S: Citrate, a possible precursor of
astaxanthin in Phaffia rhodozyma: influence of varying levels of
ammonium, phosphate and citrate in a chemically defined medium.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2001, 55:341-347.
30. Johnson EA: Phaffia rhodozyma: colorful odyssey. Int Microbiol 2003,
6:169-174.
31. Visser H, van Ooyen AJ, Verdoes JC: Metabolic engineering of the
astaxanthinbiosynthetic pathway of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.
FEMS Yeast Res 2003, 4:221-231.
32. Wozniak A, Lozano C, Barahona S, Niklitschek M, Marcoleta A, Alcaino J,
Sepulveda D, Baeza M, Cifuentes V: Differential carotenoid production and
gene expression in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous grown in a nonfermentable carbon source. FEMS Yeast Res 2011.
33. Niklitschek M: Regulación de la expresión de los genes de
carotenogénesis de Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. PhD Thesis
Universidad de Chile, Facultad de Ciencias; 2010.
34. Yamane Y, Higashida K, Nakashimada Y, Kakizono T, Nishio N: Influence of
Oxygen and Glucose on Primary Metabolism and Astaxanthin
Production by Phaffia rhodozyma in Batch and Fed-Batch Cultures:
Kinetic and Stoichiometric Analysis. Appl Environ Microbiol 1997,
63:4471-4478.
35. Gancedo JM: Yeast carbon catabolite repression. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev
1998, 62:334-361.
36. Schroeder WA, Johnson EA: Antioxidant role of carotenoids in Phaffia
Rhodozyma. J Gen Microbiol 1993, 139:907-912.
37. Liu YS, Wu JY: Hydrogen peroxide-induced astaxanthin biosynthesis and
catalase activity in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 2006, 73:663-668.
38. Calo P, De Miguel T, Velázquez JB, Villa TG: Mevalonic acid increases
transastaxanthin and carotenoid biosynthesis in Phaffia rhodozyma.
Biotechnol Lett 1995, 17:575-578.
39. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD: Analysis of relative gene expression data using
real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods
2001, 25:402-408.
40. Britton G, Pfander H, Liaaen-Jensen S: Carotenoids Handbook. Birkhäuser
Verlag; 2004.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-190
Cite this article as: Marcoleta et al.: “Glucose and ethanol-dependent
transcriptional regulation of the astaxanthin biosynthesis pathway in
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous“. BMC Microbiology 2011 11:190.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
