<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Functional analysis of archaeal MBF1 by complementation studies in yeast</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:18. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-18"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jeannette Marrero Coto"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

RESEARCH

Open Access

Functional analysis of archaeal MBF1 by
complementation studies in yeast
Jeannette Marrero Coto1,3, Ann E Ehrenhofer-Murray2, Tirso Pons3, Bettina Siebers1*

Abstract
Background: Multiprotein-bridging factor 1 (MBF1) is a transcriptional co-activator that bridges a sequence-specific
activator (basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) like proteins (e.g. Gcn4 in yeast) or steroid/nuclear-hormone receptor family (e.
g. FTZ-F1 in insect)) and the TATA-box binding protein (TBP) in Eukaryotes. MBF1 is absent in Bacteria, but is wellconserved in Eukaryotes and Archaea and harbors a C-terminal Cro-like Helix Turn Helix (HTH) domain, which is the
only highly conserved, classical HTH domain that is vertically inherited in all Eukaryotes and Archaea. The main
structural difference between archaeal MBF1 (aMBF1) and eukaryotic MBF1 is the presence of a Zn ribbon motif in
aMBF1. In addition MBF1 interacting activators are absent in the archaeal domain. To study the function and
therefore the evolutionary conservation of MBF1 and its single domains complementation studies in yeast (mbf1Δ)
as well as domain swap experiments between aMBF1 and yMbf1 were performed.
Results: In contrast to previous reports for eukaryotic MBF1 (i.e. Arabidopsis thaliana, insect and human) the two
archaeal MBF1 orthologs, TMBF1 from the hyperthermophile Thermoproteus tenax and MMBF1 from the mesophile
Methanosarcina mazei were not functional for complementation of an Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutant lacking
Mbf1 (mbf1Δ). Of twelve chimeric proteins representing different combinations of the N-terminal, core domain, and
the C-terminal extension from yeast and aMBF1, only the chimeric MBF1 comprising the yeast N-terminal and core
domain fused to the archaeal C-terminal part was able to restore full wild-type activity of MBF1.
However, as reported previously for Bombyx mori, the C-terminal part of yeast Mbf1 was shown to be not essential
for function. In addition phylogenetic analyses revealed a common distribution of MBF1 in all Archaea with
available genome sequence, except of two of the three Thaumarchaeota; Cenarchaeum symbiosum A and
Nitrosopumilus maritimus SCM1.
Conclusions: The absence of MBF1-interacting activators in the archaeal domain, the presence of a Zn ribbon
motif in the divergent N-terminal domain of aMBF1 and the complementation experiments using archaeal- yeast
chimeric proteins presented here suggests that archaeal MBF1 is not able to functionally interact with the
transcription machinery and/or Gcn4 of S. cerevisiae. Based on modeling and structural prediction it is tempting to
speculate that aMBF1 might act as a single regulator or non-essential transcription factor, which directly interacts
with DNA via the positive charged linker or the basal transcription machinery via its Zn ribbon motif and the HTH
domain. However, also alternative functions in ribosome biosynthesis and/or functionality have been discussed and
therefore further experiments are required to unravel the function of MBF1 in Archaea.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by William Martin, Patrick Forterre, John van der Oost and Fabian Blombach
(nominated by Eugene V Koonin (United States)). For the full reviews, please go to the Reviewer’s Reports section.

* Correspondence: bettina.siebers@uni-due.de
1
Faculty of Chemistry, Biofilm Centre, Molecular Enzyme Technology and
Biochemistry, Biofilm Centre, Faculty of Chemistry, University of DuisburgEssen, Universitätsstr. 5, (S05 V03 F41), 45141 Essen, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Marrero Coto et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

Background
Although the Archaea, the third domain of life, are prokaryotes, the processes involved in genetic information
processing, including transcription, are more similar to
their eukaryotic counterparts. The minimal archaeal
transcription machinery consists of a multi-subunit
RNA-polymerase (RNAP) resembling the eukaryotic
RNA polymerase II, a TATA-box binding protein (TBP)
that is also similar to its eukaryotic counterpart, and
transcription factor B (TFB), which is homologous to
eukaryotic (RNAP) TFIIB [1]. Multiple forms of the general transcription factors (GTFs), TBPs and TFBs, are
commonly found in Archaea, and it has been proposed
that they might function similar to bacterial sigmafactors, which regulate transcription in response to
environmental changes [2]. However, relatively little is
known about transcriptional regulation in Archaea and
how it helps to confer fitness across a broad range of
environments, including hostile ones.
Given the eukaryotic like- nature of the basal transcription machinery in Archaea, it is striking that most
transcriptional regulators are bacterial-type regulators,
modulating a eukaryotic-type core transcription apparatus. Only few eukaryotic-type transcriptional regulators
were reported so far [3,4]. Multiprotein-bridging factor
1 (MBF1), known as transcriptional co-activator in
Eukaryotes, has been identified in Archaea and therefore
seems to be present in all organisms, which harbor TBP
as GTF, Archaea and Eukaryotes [3], raising questions
about its possible function in Archaea.
MBF1 was first purified from posterior silk gland
extracts of the silkworm, Bombyx mori and was subsequently found in organisms as distant as mammals,
Arabidopsis and yeast [5-24]. In insects in vitro transcription studies revealed that MBF1 activates transcription of the fushi tarazu (ftz) gene by bridging the
activator FTZ-F1 (nuclear hormone receptor) and TBP
in B. mori and Drosophila melanogaster [5-7]. The ftz
gene of D. melanogaster is expressed during embryogenesis and metamorphosis and is connected with body
segmentation [18]. In general, MBF1 mediates transcriptional activation by bridging between TBP and either
steroid/nuclear hormone receptors (e.g. FTZ-F1 in
insects [5-7], Ad4BP/SF-1 in human [8]) or leucine zipper (bZIP)-type transcriptional activators such as Gcn4
in yeast [9] and ATF1, c-Jun, and c-Fos in human
[8,17]). Therefore MBF1-dependent activators are
responsible for the regulation of numerous different
processes in these organisms [5 - 24, for recent review
see [25]]. A unique structural feature of MBF1 interacting activators is that they contain a conserved basic
region in their DNA-binding domains. It has been previously suggested that the co-activator MBF1 mediates
transcriptional activation by interaction with the

Page 2 of 17

conserved basic region, which stimulates the binding of
the co-activator-activator complex to the target DNA
sequences, in a similar manner as the human T-cell leukaemia virus transactivator Tax does [25-27].
In yeast, Mbf1 interacts with Gcn4 and Tbp directly
and is involved in histidine synthesis, by mediating the
Gcn4-dependent transcriptional activation of the HIS3
gene, which encodes imidazole-3-phosphate dehydratase
[7]. Yeast mutants lacking either MBF1 or GCN4 are
viable, but are defective in HIS3 activation, and they
therefore exhibit sensitivity to 3-aminotriazole (3-AT),
an inhibitor of the HIS3 gene product [7,28].
Apart from the well-documented role of eukaryotic
MBF1 in transcription, it has been speculated that yMbf1
might be involved in translation fidelity [ [29], see reference 25 for review]. It was found that yeast strains with a
deletion of MBF1 (mbf1Δ) exhibit an increased rate of
ribosomal +1 frameshifting for several different reporter
gene constructs harboring frameshift mutations [29]. It
has been suggested that the interaction between the truncated product of Mbf1 and Tbp is impaired, thus affecting the RNAP III dependent transcription of tRNA
genes. The resulting reduced levels of tRNAs are supposed to induce increased rates of frameshift misreading,
leading to suppression [29]. Alternatively, Koning and
co-workers (2009) suggested that MBF1 might also be
involved in the biogenesis of ribosomes or tRNA, possibly
indirectly by transcription regulation of factors contributing to these pathways [25]. However, up to now, no
experimental data support the connection of MBF1 with
RNAP III transcription initiation or translation.
Previous studies revealed that expression of each of
the three paralogues of MBF1 from the plant Arabidopsis thaliana was able to restore Mbf1 function in the
yeast deletion strain (mbf1Δ) [21]. Moreover, the defect
of mbf1Δ was also rescued by expression of silkworm or
human MBF1 (Takemaru and Hirose, unpublished
observation [7]) suggesting a common phylogenetic conserved function of MBF1 within Eukaryotes. On the
basis of a combined bioinformatic and experimental
approach, a co-evolution of MBF1 and TBP has been
suggested and relevant residues for TBP and MBF1
interaction were predicted for Archaea, protists, plants,
fungi and animals [30]. However, so far no experimental
data are available for the biological function of MBF1 in
Archaea.
In the present study, it was tested whether aMBF1
from Thermoproteus tenax (TMBF1) and Methanosarcina mazei (MMBF1) as well as constructed archaealyeast chimeric proteins were able to complement the
function of yeast MBF1 as an attempt to elucidate the
possible function of MBF1 in Archaea and to study the
evolutionary conservation of MBF1 and of MBF1
domains.

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

Results and Discussion
Eukaryotic and archaeal MBF1: a comparison

Database searches (BLASTX) revealed sequences with
apparent MBF1 similarity in almost all available 64
archaeal genomes (Status: 15.12.2010). Only in two of
the three members of the recently proposed phylum
Thaumarchaeota, Cenarchaeum symbiosum A and
Nitrosopumilus maritimus SCM1, MBF1 is absent [25],
whereas Candidatus Nitrososphaera gargensis possesses
a single MBF1 homolog. All genomes harboring MBF1
contain a single MBF1 homolog with the only exception
of Halobacteriales, which harbor two paralogues [25].
In general MBF1 comprises an N-terminal domain that
is connected by a flexible linker to the C-terminal part,
which is composed of a HTH domain and a short
C-terminal stretch (Additional File 1). Whereas the HTH
domain of MBF1 is well-conserved in Archaea and
Eukaryotes and comprises four a-helices, the N-terminal
domain as well as the C-terminus is more divergent
[3,25]. The N-terminal domains of aMBF1 and eukaryotic
MBF1 reveal no obvious similarity and thus are nonorthologous. In the N-terminal part all aMBF1 s possess
a well-conserved Zn ribbon motif, predicted on the basis
of two pairs of cysteine residues, which is absent in
eukaryotic counterparts (Additional File 1). Due to the
presence of the Zn ribbon motif a possible direct binding
of aMBF1 to DNA has been suggested previously [3,25].
The predicted Zn ribbon motif in archaeal MBF1 is similar to the reported non-classical zinc finger-like domain,
which is also present in other transcription-related proteins from Archaea and Eukaryotes, including Pyrococcus
furiosus transcription factor B (PfuTFB), human and
yeast transcription factor IIS (TFIIS), Thermococcus celer
RNAP II subunit M (TcRPOM) and human TFIIB
[31-35]. The presence of the non-classical zinc finger-like
domain in aMBF1 therefore suggests a possible direct
interaction with the RNAP rather than DNA binding.
The HTH domain in the C-terminal part of MBF1 is
highly conserved in Archaea (Additional File 1) and it
has been predicted as the only highly conserved croHTH domain vertically inherited from Archaea to Eukaryotes [3]. The linker (residues 35-62 in BmMBF1 and
residues 41-68 in yMbf1) exhibits less prominent conservation and in B. mori a functional role rather than an
architectural was predicted due to its flexible structure
[7]. In Archaea this essential region encompasses a high
level of basic residues (arginine or lysine) (Additional
File 1). For the C-terminal stretch, as shown in Additional File 1, all aMBF1, except Thermoplasmatales,
the Thaumarchaeon C. N. gargensis and halobacterial
MBF1b paralogues (NP2072A, VNG1483C, rrnAC0872,
HQ2874A), comprise a C-terminal extension with a wellconserved four amino acid motif “[TS]-[LIVMF]-G[DENI]”.

Page 3 of 17

The regions of MBF1 required for protein-protein
interaction with TBP and the sequence specific activator
have been identified in insects and in yeast [7,9]. Deletion analyses of B. mori MBF1 and yMbf1 demonstrated
that the core domain of MBF1 comprising the flexible
linker and HTH domain (residues 35-113 and residues
41-119, respectively) is essential for the binding of TBP
and the transcriptional activators, FTZ-F1 in B. mori
[7] and Gcn4 in yeast [9]. Further analysis revealed that
mainly the conserved HTH domain in BmMBF1 (residues 65-132) and yMbf1 (residues 71-138) contribute to
these interactions. A deletion of the N-terminal part
(residues 1-66) as well as of the C-terminal part (residue
114-146) in BmMBF1 still retains significant activity.
NMR studies (hMBF1, BmMBF1 [36,37]) revealed the
presence of four amphipathic helices in the highly conserved HTH region (residues 63-132) in BmMBF1, that
are bundled into a compact form [36] and a function in
maintaining domain stability has been proposed. Binding
of TBP in hMBF1 occurs via the amphipathic helices in
the HTH domain [37] and in yeast an aspartate residue
at position 112 (Asp 112), located in helix three, was
identified as important binding site for Tbp [9]. The
N-terminal domain of MBF1 from BmMBF1, yMbf1 and
hMBF1 is not required for binding TBP. In insects and
yeast, binding of TBP to a truncated version of MBF1
lacking its N-terminal amino acids (residues 1-34 in
BmMBF1 [7] and residues 1-40 in yMbf1 [9]) remained
unaffected but the binding of the activator, Gcn4 or
FTZ-F1, was slightly reduced. Therefore both, the
N-terminal region and the core domain are indispensable for binding the activator, whereas the HTH domain
is essential for binding TBP. The observation that the
N-terminal domain of MBF1 is not required for binding
TBP in human, yeast and insects [6,7,9] suggests that at
least aMBF1 and yTbp interaction is possible, despite
the divergent N-terminal region with a conserved Zn
ribbon motif.
A phylogenetic tree (distance-based neighbour-joining)
was constructed based on the multiple alignment of
the MBF1 sequences lacking the non-orthologous
N-terminal domain of Eukaryotes and Archaea (residues
1-37 of T. tenax MBF1) (Additional File 1). Bootstrap
data supported two distinct branches: (I) MBF1 homologues of Eukaryotes and (II) MBF1 homologues of all
Archaea (Figure 1). The archaeal branch II is subdivided
into three clusters, the first one (IIa) includes MBF1
homologues from Crenarchaeota, Nanoarchaeota and
part of the Euryarchaeota (i.e. Thermococcales, Thermoplasmatales and Methanobacteriales). The second
archaeal branch (IIb) comprises MBF1 homologues of
the Korarchaeon C. K. crytophilum, the Thaumarchaeon
C. N. gargensis and all the residual Euryarchaeota. The
third archaeal branch (IIc) harbours the halobacterial

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

Page 4 of 17

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Yarrowia lipolytica
Trichoderma reesei
Arabidopsis thaliana (c)
100
93
Arabidopsis thaliana (a)
Arabidopsis thaliana (b)
79
Solanum lycopernicum (a)
Eukaryotes (I)
83
100
Solanum lycopernicum (b)
98
Solanum lycopernicum (c)
69
Zea mays
55
100
Homo sapiens (a)
Homo sapiens (b)
Bombyx mori
99
Drosophila melanogaster
100
90
Thermococcus onnurineus NA1
99
Thermococcus gammatolerans EJ3
69
Thermococcus kodakarensis KOD1
100
Thermococcales (T)(E)
Thermococcus sibiricus MM 739
Pyrococcus furiosus DSM 3638
Pyrococcus horikoshii OT3
99
Pyrococcus abyssi GE5
99
Metallosphaera sedula DSM 5348
90
Sulfolobus tokodaii str. 7
99
Sulfolobales (T)(C)
Sulfolobus acidocaldarius DSM 639
Sulfolobus solfataricus P2
99
Sulfolobus islandicus M.16.4
100
Ignicoccus hospitalis KIN4/I
3
27
Aeropyrum pernix K1
Desulfurococcales (T)(C)
Hyperthermus butylicus DSM 5456
47
Staphylothermus marinus F1
48
Desulfurococcus kamchatkensis 1221n
(IIa)
65
59
Pyrobaculum islandicum DSM 4184
7
26
Thermoproteus neutrophilus V24Sta
99
Pyrobaculum calidifontis JCM 11548
Pyrobaculum arsenaticum DSM 13514
40
Thermoproteales (T)(C)
4
Pyrobaculum aerophilum str. IM2
34
40
Thermoproteus tenax Kra1
8
Caldivirga maquilingensis IC-167
39
Thermofilum pendens Hrk 5
Thermoproteales (T)(C)
Methanopyrus kandleri AV19
Methanobacteriales (T)(E)
Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus
21
Methanobrevibacter smithii DSM 2375
Methanobacteriales (E)
Methanosphaera stadtmanae DSM 3091
17
Nanoarchaeota (T)
Nanoarchaeum equitans Kin4-M
Picrophilus torridus DSM 9790
28
49
Thermoplasmatales (T)(E)
Thermoplasma acidophilum DSM 1728
92
Thermoplasma volcanium GSS1
100
Korarchaeota (T)
Candidatus Korarchaeum cryptofilum OPF8
Archaeoglobales (T)(E)
Archaeoglobus fulgidus DSM 4304
26
Methanosarcinales (T)(E)
Methanosaeta thermophila PT
47
Methanosarcina acetivorans C2A
100
Methanosarcina barkeri str. Fusaro
48
Methanosarcinales (E)
Methanosarcina mazei Go1
97
Methanococcoides burtonii DSM 6242
58
Methanoculleus marisnigri JR1
8
43
Methanosphaerula palustris E1-9c
66
Methanomicrobiales (E)
Methanospirillum hungatei JF-1
10
98
Candidatus Methanoregula boonei 6A8
Methanocorpusculum labreanum Z
83
Halogeometricum borinquense DSM 11551
Haloquadratum walsbyi DSM 16790
Halorubrum lacusprofundi ATCC 49239
(IIb)
100
Halobacterium salinarum R1
Halobacteriales (E)
45
63
Haloarcula marismortui ATCC 43049
47
Halomicrobium mukohataei DSM 12286
7
Halorhabdus utahensis DSM 12940
72
Natronomonas pharaonis DSM 2160
56
Methanococcus maripaludis S2
85
100
Methanococcus maripaludis C7
99
Methanococcales (E)
Methanococcus maripaludis C5
91
Methanococcus vannielii SB
98
Methanococcus aeolicus Nankai-3
Methanocaldococcus vulcanius M7
Methanocaldococcales (T)(E)
Methanocaldococcus jannaschii DSM 2661
100
26
Methanocaldococcus fervens AG86
99
Thaumarchaeota
Candidatus Nitrososphaera gargensis
Haloquadratum walsbyi DSM 16790 (b)
Halomicrobium mukohataei DSM 12286 (b)
78
71
Haloarcula marismortui ATCC 43049 (b)
Halobacteriales (IIc)
100 66
Halobacterium salinarum R1 (b)
Natromonas pharaonis DSM 2160 (b)
66
Halorubrum lacusprofundi ATCC 49239 (b)
55
97

Archaea (II)

0.1

Figure 1 Phylogenic tree of archaeal and eukaryotic MBF1s. The phylogenetic tree was constructed based on the multiple alignment of the
MBF1 sequences lacking the non-orthologous N-terminal domain of Archaea and Eukaryotes (residues 1-37 of TtxMBF1, Additional file 1). The
tree was constructed based on pairwise distance estimates of the expected number of amino acid replacements per site using MEGA4 software
[69]. Bar = 0.20 amino acid replacement per site. The bootstrap values are indicated to the left of the branches. Branch length indicates the
relative evolutionary distances. T: Thermophile, C: Crenarchaeota, E: Euryarchaeota.

MBF1b paralogues. Within the Halobacteriales there are
two distinct lineages of MBF1, indicating that gene
duplication occurred at an early stage of halobacterial
evolution and that the MBF1 paralog (branch IIc) might
have acquired new functions.
Noteworthy most of the archaeal (hyper)thermophiles,
are grouped in branch IIa and only few (hyper)

thermophiles (Methanosaeta thermophila, Archaeaglobus fulgidus, C. K. crytophilum and the three Methanocaldococcales) are found in branch IIb (Figure 1).
Therefore, it is tempting to speculate that adaptation of
MBF1 to high temperature might have been an important selection factor in branch IIa. Although no general
rule could be proposed for protein stabilization at high

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

temperature, several recurrent themes and general tendencies were observed in a large-scale comparative analysis of proteins from closely related mesophilic and
thermophilic Methanococcus species [ [38], for review
[39]]. In addition it has recently been suggested that
protein misfolding plays a key role in determining evolutionary rates [40-44]. Many proteins require the assistance of molecular chaperones for correct folding and it
has been proposed that -GroEL-dependent folding
increases evolutionary rates by buffering the harmful
effects of misfolding-related mutations [44]. The protein
folding apparatus of Archaea contains both eukaryotic
and bacterial components [45], however, so far no information of the evolutionary effects of chaperones on protein evolution in Archaea is available.
As reported previously the genomic context of mbf1 is
well conserved in Crenarchaeota and comprises genes,
which encode proteins with predicted function in informational processing such as transcription or translation.
The mbf1 gene is in close neighborhood to the genes pan
(proteasome-activating nucleotidase), hflX (G-protein of
the HflX family) [46], tgt (tRNA guanine transglycosylase), tfb and tfe (coding for archaeal homologues of transcription factor II B and the N-terminal half of alpha subunit of transcription factor II E, respectively) and
rpoG (hypothetical RNA-polymerase subunit G) [25]. In
Euryarchaeota, the genomic context of mbf1 is less conserved; however, proximity to pan is also observed. In
Thaumarcheaota, N. maritimus SCM1 and C. symbiosum
A, mbf1 is replaced by a gene encoding a putative phosphate-uptake regulator and the genomic context in
the close neighborhood is similar to Crenarchaeota
[25]. Unfortunately, so far the complete genome of
C. N. gargensis is not available for comparison.

Page 5 of 17

expression in a mesophilic host (e.g. incorrect folding,
missing activity).
In yeast, Mbf1 is involved in the co-activation of the
transcription of the HIS3 gene, encoding the third
enzyme of histidine biosynthesis, by bridging between
Tbp and the bZIP type activator, Gcn4 [9]. Deletions
either of MBF1 or GCN4 in yeast are viable, but sensitive to 3-AT. Therefore complementation by eukaryotic
MBF1 could be easily monitored by growth in the presence of 3-AT, as demonstrated previously for the three
A. thaliana MBF1 s [21].
First experiments were performed with the expression
vector, pHR98/3, under the control of a constitutive and
high-level expression promoter. The expression plasmids
encoding full-length TMBF1 and MMBF1 were introduced into the mbf1Δ strain and the AT sensitivity was
compared to that of the wild-type and the mbf1Δ strain
expressing either yeast Mbf1 (pHRyMBF1, positive control) or an empty vector (pHR98/3, negative control)
(data not shown). As expected, growth of the mbf1Δ
strain was sensitive to 3-AT, and 3-AT resistance was
restored by re-introducing yeast Mbf1 on a plasmid
(pHRyMBF1, positive control). However, the growth of
the mbf1Δ strain in presence of 3-AT was not restored
by introducing the expression plasmid comprising fulllength aMBF1 from M. mazei or T. tenax, respectively.
In order to exclude deleterious effects caused by overexpression of aMBF1 in yeast, the experiments were
repeated using the vector pRS316. The three genes,
yMBF1, TMBF1 and MMBF1, were introduced under
the control of the endogenous yeast MBF1 regulatory
region (pyMBF1, pTMBF1 and pMMBF1, respectively).
However, as shown in Figure 2A also under control of
the ‘natural’ MBF1 promoter no complementation by
aMBF1 as well as by the empty vector (pRS316, negative

Complementation of yeast mbf1 Δ by archaeal MBF1

Transcription regulation in Archaea is not well understood. Although the archaeal transcription apparatus is
similar to the eukaryotic one; most archaeal transcription regulators are of the bacterial-type [4,47,48]. MBF1
is highly conserved in Eukaryotes and Archaea and a
co-evolution with TBP has been proposed previously
[24]. However, the function of co-activators from
Archaea has not been studied so far and the biological
role of aMBF1 as multiprotein bridging factor has not
been documented. Therefore a key question concerning
aMBF1 is its in vivo function. To address this issue,
complementation studies in yeast were performed and it
was tested whether aMBF1 s from the hyperthermophile
Thermoproteus tenax and the mesophile Methanosarcina mazei are functional for complementation in yeast
lacking Mbf1 (mbf1Δ). The mesophilic M. mazei MBF1
was included in this study in order to exclude temperature-dependent effects, which might be caused by

(A)

- AT

+ AT

(B)
wt
+
TTT
MMM

Figure 2 Functional complementation of yeast mbf1Δ by
archaeal MBF1 from T. tenax (T) and M. mazei (M). (A) AT
sensitivity of yeast wild type (WT), the mbf1Δ strain carrying pyMBF1
(+), empty vector (-), pTMBF1 (TTT) and pMMBF1 (MMM) using the
vector pRS316 under control of the natural yeast MBF1 regulatory
region. Serial dilutions of the respective strains were placed on
minimal medium either in the presence (+AT) or absence (-AT) of
3 mM aminotriazole. The plates were incubated at 30°C for 3 days.
(B) Expression of TMBF1 protein (pHRTMBF1) in the ymbf1Δ strain
was detected by immuno blotting using a polyclonal antibody
against TMBF1.

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

control) was observed, whereas yeast Mbf1 restored 3AT sensitivity of the mbf1Δ strain.
Western blot analysis of yeast cell extracts, using polyclonal antibodies generated against TMBF1, confirmed
that TMBF1 (pHRTMBF1) was successfully expressed in
the mbf1Δ strain (Figure 2B). Thus, the lack of complementation appears to be not due to the absence of
MBF1 expression using the high level expression vector.
For the vector pTMBF1, TMBF1 expression was only
hardly detectable with the antibody (data not shown).
The antibody showed no cross-reactivity with recombinant MMBF1 or yeast Mbf1. The addition of tags (i.e.
positively charged His-tag) for protein detection was
consciously avoided, since they might interfere with protein-protein interaction of MBF1 with Tbp and Gcn4,
required for functional complementation in yeast.
In general, many different recombinant archaeal proteins of (hyper)thermophilic origin have been successfully and functional expressed in mesophilic hosts, such
as, Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and yeast [49].
More recently TFB1, TFB3 and all the subunits of
RNAP from Sulfolobus solfataricus P2 were efficiently
expressed in yeast and used for yeast-two-hybrid experiments [50,51]. Furthermore, of great interest for this
study, i) the RNAP subunit P from the hyperthermophilic Euryarchaeon Pyrococcus furiosus functionally
replaced the eukaryotic polymerase subunit Rbp12 in
the respective yeast mutant [52] and ii) yeast, human,
and archaeal TBP are functionally interchangeable in
vitro in a Methanococcus-derived cell-free transcription
system [53].
Therefore, these results indicate that aMBF1, in contrast to eukaryotic MBF1 from human, insects [7] or
plants [21], is not able to complement and to restore
eukaryotic MBF1 wild-type function (3-AT resistance)
in yeast by substituting for eukaryotic MBF1 during
Gcn4-mediated transcription activation.
Based on a bioinformatic and mutational approach in
yeast Liu and co-workers [30] suggested the co-evolution of Mbf1 with Tbp in Eukaryotes and Archaea.
Aspartic acid (position 112) in yMbf1 and glutamine
(position 68) in yTbp were identified as important residues required for Mbf1:Tbp interaction during Gcn4dependent transcriptional activation [9,30]. In aMBF1,
they identified lysine, arginine, serine, or asparagine as
interacting residues that correspond to yMbf1 D112
based on the multiple alignment of 21 full-length Mbf1
protein sequences [30]. An in vivo mutational approach
for yMbf1 revealed that combinations that occur naturally (e.g. the mutant yMbf1-D112R (WT-Tbp-68Q);
Archaea) showed no effect, whereas combinations not
normally found, like yMbf1-D112K (WT-Tbp-68Q),
were sensitive to 3-AT, indicating that the interactions
between yMbf1 and yTbp were disrupted in the latter

Page 6 of 17

mutants [30]. The amino acids corresponding to position 112 in TMBF1 and MMBF1, are arginine (position
102) and lysine (position 108), respectively (Additional
File 1), suggesting that TMBF1 but not MMBF1 might
be able to interact with yTbp. However, as shown above
TMBF1 was not able to complement the yeast mbf1Δ
strain in spite of the presence of the appropriate amino
acid for the interaction with yTbp.
In order to further analyze MBF1 and TBP interaction
sites in Archaea a multiple sequence alignment of 14
eukaryotic and all available 68 archaeal MBF1 and TBP
sequences was performed (CLUSTAL_X, [54]) focusing
on the determined interaction sites of yeast (Mbf1D112, Tbp-Q68) [30]. A summary of compensatory
amino acid changes in the MBF1:TBP interaction sites is
shown in Additional File 2 and 3. Based on more
archaeal genomes available the comparative analysis suggests that other additional TBP:MBF1 interacting residues than previously reported [30] are present in
Archaea and thus the diversity of archaeal residues is
much higher than previously predicted. However, the
proposed co-evolution of MBF1:TBP, the importance of
the well-conserved HTH-domain of MBF1 for TBP
interaction and the fact that archaeal TBP and eukaryotic Tbp are functionally interchangeable (in vitro transcription system [53]) suggests that the interaction
between MBF1 and TBP might be also conserved in
Archaea.
Beside aMBF1-yTbp interaction also the binding of
aMBF1 to the activator Gcn4, which depends on both the
N-terminal and HTH- domain is important. In yeast the
binding of Gcn4 to Mbf1 was not altered by a D112A
mutation (Tbp binding), but it was slightly reduced by
the N-terminal deletion of yMbf1 (MBF1ΔNT). Both
mutants (D112A and MBF1ΔNT) are sensitive to 3-AT
as shown by Takemaru and co-workers [9]. It has been
reported previously that Archaea lack bZIP-proteins like
the transcriptional activator Gcn4 [25]. In accordance
with previous analysis PSI-BLAST searches with yGcn4
(281 amino acids) and BmFTZ-F1 (534 amino acids) in
all available archaeal genomes revealed no homologues to
the activators which interact with MBF1. Therefore, it is
questionable if the respective sites for Gcn4 interactions
are present in aMBF1 either in the divergent N-terminal
domain or in the conserved HTH domain. In summary,
these data suggest that the interaction of aMBF1 with
yGcn4 could be impaired rather than with yTbp and in
the light of the above, chimeric proteins of Archaea and
yeast were constructed and tested for 3-AT sensitivity.
Chimeric yeast - archaeal MBF1 variants

Studying protein function by interchanging protein
domains is a powerful approach that exploits the natural
variability of protein structure. Mbf1 from yeast exhibits

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

high structural similarity with T. tenax and M. mazei
MBF1, despite their difference in amino acid sequence;
TMBF1 and MMBF1 share 39% and 36% amino acid
identity with their yeast counterpart, respectively.
The observed missing complementation of aMBF1 in
yeast might be caused by the presence of the Zn ribbon
motif in the N-terminus of aMBF1 or as discussed
above by changes of important amino acid necessary for
Tbp and Gcn4 interaction. To test this possibility and to
study the evolutionary conservation of MBF1 domains
in Eukaryotes and Archaea, in total 12 chimeric interspecies MBF1 variants were constructed. Each chimeric
protein was composed of different combinations of the
N-terminal domain, the core domain (including the flexible linker and HTH-domain) and the C-terminal extension from either the hyperthermophile T. tenax or the
mesophile M. mazei, and yeast (Figure 3A). The hybrid
proteins were constructed using the recombination/gap
repair cloning technique in yeast and 3-AT sensitivity in
the mbf1Δ background was examined (Figure 3B). No
complementation was observed for any of the aforementioned chimeric MBF1 variants targeting the N-terminal
domain or the core domain (i.e. Tyy and Myy; yTy and
yMy; TTy and MMy, yTT and yMM; TyT and MyM),
indicating that neither the archaeal N-terminal nor the
core domain, harboring the conserved HTH domain,
was sufficient to allow for functional Mbf1 in yeast.
Next it was studied whether the well conserved,
archaeal C-terminal extension has an influence on
yMbf1 function. The mbf1Δ expressing the chimeric
proteins, yyT- and yyM-MBF1, showed similar 3-AT
resistance as the wild-type and the positive control
(pyMBF1, Figure 3B). However, also the yMBF1 mutant
(yyΔCt -MBF1 (residues 1 - 137), control) lacking the
yeast C-terminal part (residues 138 - 151) restored WT
activity, i.e. 3-AT resistance (Figure 3B). This observation clearly indicates that the archaeal C-terminal
stretch comprising the well conserved archaeal motif
does not interfere with domain stability of yMbf1
(Figure 3B) and moreover that the C-terminal part of
yeast MBF1 is not required for function as shown previously for the BmMBF1 mutant Δ114-146 [7]. The
TMBF1 antibody showed no cross-reactivity with the
hybrid proteins, however, the functional complementation by yyT and yyM nicely demonstrates functional
expression.
In summary, complementation studies with chimeric
archaeal/yeast proteins indicate that neither the N-terminal, nor the core domain of archaeal MBF1 is able to
substitute for the respective eukaryotic domains. Only
the archaeal and yeast C-terminal extension, which was
shown here to be dispensable for yMbf1 function, can
be successfully swapped. Therefore, due to the fact that
the N-terminal and core domain of yeast are required

Page 7 of 17

for Gcn4 interaction [9], MBF1 interacting activators are
absent in archaeal genomes and conserved MBF1:TBP
interaction has been suggested [30], it is tempting to
speculate that archaeal MBF1 is not able to bind to the
yeast activator Gcn4 rather than yTbp.
Computational analysis
Structure prediction of MBF1

Since no 3 D structure of MBF1 is available, the
previously described solution structure of T. reesei
C-terminal HTH domain [55] was used for modeling of
T. tenax MBF1 via METASERVER, a consensus foldrecognition method [56], PHYRE [57], I-TASSER [58]
fold-recognition and ab initio methods. These three
methods suggested different HTH domains as the best
template for T. tenax MBF1 with both, transcriptional
regulator from Vibrio cholerae (PDB ID: 1y9q) and
C.BclI a control element of the BclI restriction-modification system in Bacillus caldolyticus (PDB ID: 2b5a) as
best hits, which score significantly above the threshold.
The human MBF1 (endothelial differentiation-related
factor 1 protein, EDF-1; PDB ID: 1x57) and the regulator of cytolysin operon in Enterococcus faecalis (PDB ID:
1utx) were identified simultaneously by at least two
methods. Only I-TASSER [58] provided a 3 D model for
the complete MBF1 sequence. The structural models
were analyzed by different structure validation programs
including PROCHECK [59] for the evaluation of the
Ramachandran plot quality, WHATCHECK [60] for the
calculation of packing quality Z-score, and VERIFY-3 D
[61] for the evaluation of sequence-structure compatibility (Table 1). In general, quality values obtained for the
3 D models are similar to those observed in the template structures indicating a high quality of the MBF1
low-resolution model presented in this work (Figure 4).
Analysis of the three-dimensional model of TMBF1
suggests two residues in the N-terminal Zn ribbon motif
that establish van der Waals interactions with residues
in the HTH domain: (i) The isoleucine residue at position 11 (Zn ribbon) interacts with lysine at position 120
(helix-IV) (Figure 4). TMBF1-I11 is highly conserved in
archaeal sequences and TMBF1-K120 is well conserved
in both, Archaea and Eukaryotes (see Additional File 1).
In yeast Mbf1, lacking the Zn ribbon motif, TMBF1-I11
is substituted by alanine. (ii) The valine at position 27
(Zn ribbon motif) which is well conserved in Archaea
interacts with the not so well conserved E113 (helix-IV)
of TMBF1 (Figure 4). These predicted interactions
between the Zn ribbon motif and the HTH domain
would be favorable for the folding stability of T. tenax
MBF1.
Prediction of functional residues of archaeal MBF1

Comparison of the HTH domain from the 3 D model of
TMBF1 with the C-terminal domain of Trichoderma

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

Page 8 of 17

A)
yMy
MMy

Myy

yMM

yyM

MyM

M. mazei/yeast
MBF1 chimera

M. mazei, MMM

(36 – 134)

(135 – 161)

(1 – 40)

yeast, +

(1 – 35)

(41 – 137)

(138 – 151)

N – terminal domain

T. tenax, TTT

(1 – 37)

T. tenax/yeast
MBF1 chimera

C – terminal part

linker plus HTH domain
(38 – 128)

Tyy

(129 – 157)

yTy
yTT

TTy

yyT

TyT

B)

- AT

- AT

+ AT

+ AT

wt
+
Tyy
yTy
TTy

wt
+
TTT
yTT
TyT

wt
+
Myy
yMy
MMy

wt
+
MMM
yMM
MyM

wt
+
yyT
yyM
yy Ct
Figure 3 Schematic overview of the MBF1 from yeast, T. tenax and M. mazei, and constructed chimeric Archaea/yeast MBF1 proteins.
(A) Chimeric proteins were generated by the use of recombination/gap repair cloning technique and the vector pRS316 under control of the
natural yeast MBF1 regulatory region. (B) Functional complementation of yeast deletion mutant by yeast Mbf1 (y), aMBF1 (T. tenax (T) and
M. mazei (M)), and chimeric MBF1 variants. Only mbf1Δ expressing MBF1 comprising the C-terminal extension of T. tenax (yyT) or M. mazei (yyM)
MBF1 restored WT activity, i.e. AT resistance. The yyΔCt yMBF1 mutant lacking the C-terminal part (residues 138-151) was used as control. The
assay was performed as described above (see Figure 2).

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

Page 9 of 17

Table 1 Evaluation of the constructed three-dimensional model of archaeal MBF1 from Thermoproteus tenax (TMBF1)
Criteria

Characteristic

MBF1
(M1-E157)

MBF1
(R64-N141)

2b5a
(A)

1y9q
(A)

1x57
(A)

1utx
(A)

PROCHECK

Most favored regions

60.0%

94.1%

97.1%

93.1%

84.7%

93.3%

Additional allowed

24.4%

5.9%

2.9%

6.3%

11.1%

6.7%

Generally Allowed

8.9%

0%

0.0%

0.6%

2.8%

0.0%

Disallowed regions

6.7%

0%

0.0%

0.0%

1.4%

0.0%

WHATCHECK (Z-scores)

2nd generation packing quality

-4.061

-0.752

-0.1

-0.9

-1.758

-0.7

VERIFY-3D

3D-1 D score (≥0.2)

72.15%

64.56%

84.62%

98.28%

96.74%

100%

PDB ID: 2b5a, C.BCLI, control element of the BCLI restriction modification system (Bacillus caldolyticus); PDB ID: 1y9q, HTH_3 family transcriptional regulator (Vibrio
cholerae); PBD ID: 1x57, EDF-1, human multiprotein bridging factor 1 a; PDB ID: 1utx, CYLR2, Transcriptional repressor of cytolysin operon (Enterococcus faecalis).

reesei MBF1 (PDB ID: 2jvl, [55]) revealed that helix-II is
the most highly conserved region (Figure 5). The
C-terminal domain of T. reesei MBF1 [55] has been
reported previously to be structurally similar to the
DNA-binding domain (residues 1 to 69) of the phage
434 repressor (F434rep) (PDB ID: 1pra). For F434rep
the residues involved in DNA binding were identified;
F434rep-Q17 in helix-II participates in the anchoring to
the DNA and F434rep-R43 in helix-IV inserts in the
DNA minor groove [62]. In TMBF1, TMBF1-R86 at the
first position of helix-II corresponds to F434rep-Q17
and TMBF1-E113 in helix-IV to F434rep-R43. These
characteristics would be unfavorable for DNA binding,
and concurs with previous studies that BmMBF1 does
not bind directly to DNA, but instead stabilizes FTZ-F1-

DNA interactions [6]. In BmMBF1 Q90 and I117 are at
the respective positions (Additional File 1). DNA phosphate interaction with positive charged residues has
been previously described for F434rep [62]; arginine
and lysine residues positioned in the loop II connecting
helices III and IV of F434rep establish important contacts with DNA phosphates [62]. However, the respective positive charged residues are absent in the HTH
domain of B. mori, T. reesei and T. tenax MBF1 suggesting no binding to DNA via the core domain. Therefore,
the HTH domain in archaeal MBF1 might be important
for protein-protein interaction, possibly with TBP which
is well conserved also in Archaea.
It has been suggested previously [7] that the flexible
linker in eukaryotic MBF1 could have a functional role

Figure 4 Three dimensional model of T. tenax MBF1. The figure was generated using the CHIMERA program [71]. The residues predicted to
contribute to domain stability by van der Waals interactions are I11:K120, V27:E113 and the Zn ribbon motif (C4, C7, C28, C31) are indicated.

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

TMBF1
2jvl
1x57
1pra
1y9q
1utx
2b5a

Page 10 of 17

helix-I
helix-II
helix-III
helix-IV
70EYAEVIKRARESL--GLSREALASYIGVKESVLKRIESGQLMPDIELARKLEKALGVKLL127
82EVGKAIEQGRQKFEPTMTQAELGKEIGETAATVASYERGTATPDQNILSKMER--VLNVK139
13EVGKVIQQGRQSK--GLTQKDLATKINEKPQVIADYESGRAIPNNQVLGKIERAIGLKLR70
1SISSRVKSKRIQL--GLNQAELAQKVGTTQQSIEQLENGKTKRP-RFLPELASALGVSVD57
11QIANQLKNLRKSR--GLSLDATAQLTGVSKAMLGQIERGESSPTIATLWKIASGLEASFS68
1MIINNLKLIREKK--KISQSELAALLEVSRQTINGIEKNKYNPSLQLALKIAYYLNTPLE58
10KFGRTLKKIRTQK--GVSQEELADLAGLHRTYISEVERGDRNISLINIHKICAALDIPAS67

RMSd

%ID

4.2A
3.8A
2.7A
2.7A
2.5A
1.6A

16.9%
30.3%
22.1%
22.1%
24.6%
19.7%

Figure 5 Structural superimposition of the conserved helix-turn-helix (HTH) domains. The structural superimposition was performed using
the CE method [72]. Alpha helical structural elements are highlighted by grey shading according to DSSP [73]. The PDB IDs are: 2jvl, C-terminal
domain of MBF1 (Trichoderma reesei); PBD ID: 1x57, EDF-1 (human Multiprotein bridging factor 1 a); PDB ID: 1pra, DNA-biding domain (residues
1 to 69) of the bacteriophage 434 repressor; PDB ID: 1y9q, HTH_3 family transcriptional regulator (Vibrio cholerae); PDB ID: 1utx, CYLR2,
Transcriptional repressor of cytolysin operon (Enterococcus faecalis); PDB ID: 2b5a, C.BCLI, control element of the BCLI restriction modification
system (Bacillus caldolyticus).

rather than an architectural. In all aMBF1 a well- conserved lysine-arginine-rich region is present between the
Zn ribbon motif and the HTH domain, which would be
favorable for the interaction with the DNA phosphate
backbone (Additional File 1). In eukaryotic MBF1 lacking
the Zn ribbon motif, this lysine-arginine-rich region is
absent (Additional File 1). Taken together, based on predictions derived from modeling as well as structural analyses, and the performed complementation studies, it is
tempting to speculate that aMBF1 might act as a single
regulator or non-essential transcription factor, which
directly interacts with DNA via the positive charged linker or to the basal transcription machinery via its Zn ribbon motif (i.e. RNAP) and the HTH domain (i.e. TBP).
Origin of archaeal and eukaryotic MBF1: trends in evolution

As previously indicated [3], there is an extensively diversity of HTH domains in Archaea as well as in Bacteria.
Most of the predicted archaeal HTH-containing proteins
show significantly higher similarity to bacterial than to
eukaryotic HTH-containing transcription factors, with
the only exception of the core transcription machinery
comprising eukaryotic-like transcription factors such as,
TFIIE-a, TFIIB/TFB and MBF1 [3]. It has been proposed that beyond the core machinery, the bacterial-like
HTH- containing archaeal proteins might have been
established and maintained through multiple horizontal
gene transfer events from Bacteria to Archaea in the
course of evolution. Moreover, most of the archaeal
HTH domains appear to have undergone at least some
evolution within the archaeal superkingdom [3]. MBF1
is the only highly conserved HTH-domain in Archaea
and Eukaryotes. Eukaryotic MBF1 is not a general transcription factor since the disruptants are viable and able
to grow under different growth conditions [9]. The
situation in Archaea appears to be similar, because
MBF1 is well distributed but lost in two of the three
members of the Thaumarchaeota, C. symbiosum A and
N. maritimus SCM1. The absence of MBF1 homologs in
Bacteria suggests that MBF1 was originally present in
the last common ancestor of Archaea and Eukaryotes.

Eukaryotic MBF1 lacks the Zn ribbon motif and
MBF1-dependent gene regulation requires the function
of specific activators belonging to bZIP-like protein or
steroid/nuclear-hormone receptor family, which bind
directly DNA. In contrast, archaeal MBF1 exhibits a Zn
ribbon motif and homologs of eukaryotic MBF1-specific
activators are absent in Archaea, suggesting a different
mode of action of MBF1. Further on, the conserved
genomic context of mbf1 in the archaeal domain with
proximity to genes involved in information processing
proposes a basal function of aMBF1 in transcription or
translation [25].
Two evolutionary scenarios can be discussed which
might have evoked the present-day image. One possibility is that the common ancestor possessed an ancient
Zn ribbon containing MBF1 version which interacts
directly with DNA and/or RNAP and no specific interacting activators were required. This MBF1 version was
maintained in Archaea but further evolved in Eukaryotes. Probably the Zn ribbon motif was lost due to the
emergence of specific MBF1-interacting activators (bZIP
like proteins or FTZ-F1 related proteins), which allowed
for improved fine tuning of gene regulation in a more
complex cellular network; for instance, gen HIS3, which
possesses a constitutive “TATA-less control element” as
well as a regulatory region ("TATA-containing control
element”) and the latter is regulated by the Gcn4-Mbf1
complex in yeast under starvation conditions [63]. An
alternative possibility is that the last common ancestor
harbored both an eukaryotic-like MBF1 and homologs
of MBF1-interacting regulators. The specific interacting
activators were lost in the archaeal lineage and provoked
the evolution of the Zn ribbon containing archaeal specific MBF1, which acquired new functions.
The fact that MBF1 is involved in many different fundamental processes in Eukaryotes (e.g. histidine synthesis, development, immune and antioxidant defense,
steroid/hormone synthesis, lipid metabolism) and interacts with different activators in a very sophisticated and
complex manner seems to favor the first scenario.

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

However, since the function of archaeal MBF1 is still
unclear future studies have to be awaited, which will
provide key insights into the evolution and mechanism
of basic processes in both domains, Archaea and
Eukaryotes.

Conclusions
Previous studies with eukaryotic MBF1 revealed that the
defect of a yeast MBF1 deletion was rescued by the
expression of silkworm and human MBF1 [Takemaru
and Hirose, unpublished observation, 7] or plant MBF1
(three A. thaliana paralogues [21]) indicating that MBF1
s from divergent eukaryotic sources are able to substitute
yMbf1 in Gcn4-dependent transcriptional activation. In
contrast the present study revealed that archaeal MBF1,
neither from hyperthermophilic (Crenarchaeota) nor
from mesophilic (Euryarchaeota) origin, was capable of
functionally complementing the mbf1Δ in yeast. Furthermore, domain swap experiments suggest that the divergent archaeal N-terminal domain and the core domain of
MBF1, harboring the conserved HTH domain, are not
functional in yeast. This was surprising since the HTH
domain of MBF1 is a cro-HTH type domain and has
been identified previously as the only highly conserved,
classical HTH domain that is vertically inherited in all
Archaea and Eukaryotes. Further results obtained in this
study indicated that the archaeal C-terminal extension
containing the well conserved archaeal motif “[TS][LIVMF]-G-[DEN]” did not interfere with yMbf1 function and revealed that the C-terminal extension of yeast
Mbf1 is not required for Mbf1 function (yyΔCt-MBF1).
The conservation of MBF1 among all organisms in
which TBP is used as a general transcription factor suggests that MBF1 has a fundamentally important function
also in Archaea. However, the absence of bZIP-like
proteins in the archaeal domain, the presence of a nonclassical type Zn ribbon motif, the positive- charged linker in aMBF1 and the complementation experiments
using archaeal- yeast chimeric protein presented here
suggest a different mode of action of MBF1 -may be as
non-essential transcription factor or transcriptional
regulator, which contacts DNA and/or the basal transcription apparatus probably via RNAP and/or TBP.
Alternatively a role of MBF1 in translation either
directly in ribosome biogenesis [25] or indirectly in
translation fidelity [29] has been proposed. Thus, further
studies (e.g. protein-protein interaction studies, mutational approaches) are required in order to elucidate the
specific function of MBF1 in Archaea.
Methods
Yeast strains

Growth and manipulation of yeast was performed
according to standard procedures. AEY3087 (MATa

Page 11 of 17

his3Δ1 leu2Δ0, met15Δ0, ura3Δ0) and an mbf1Δ::
kanMX derivative thereof (Yeast Deletion Collection,
ResGen/Invitrogen) were used to determine AT sensitivity. For this purpose, the strains were rendered His3+ by
transformation to histidine prototrophy with a HIS3
fragment.
Cloning of MBF1 gene from yeast, T. tenax and M. mazei

To construct the overexpression vectors, pHRyMBF1
(YOR298C-A), pHRTMBF1 (TTX_1938, FR823290) and
pHRMMBF1 (MM_1005) encompassing the coding
region of yMbf1 and aMBF1 genes, the three DNA fragments corresponding to yMBF1, TMBF1 and MMBF1
open reading frame were amplified by PCR and then,
the resulting DNA fragments were cloned into BamHI
and SalI sites of pHR98/3 (2 μm, URA3) vector containing a constitutive and high-level expression promoter.
The pairs of primers and the restriction enzymes used
for cloning are indicated in Additional File 4.
To construct pyMBF1, the 1,667-Kb EcoRI/NotI genomic fragment encompassing the entire MBF1 regulatory
and coding region was cloned into pRS316 (2 μm,
URA3) vector using the primer set yMBF1-yprom-r and
yMBF1-yprom-f (Additional File 4). Plasmids encompassing the MBF1 gene from T. tenax (pTMBF1) and
M. mazei (pMMBF1) were generated by recombination/
gap repair cloning technique in yeast using pyMBF1 as
the starting vector (Addtional File 4). In these constructs, the yeast MBF1 open reading frame was
replaced by the MBF1 gene from T. tenax and M. mazei
to construct plasmids pTMBF1 and pMMBF1, respectively. Therefore, pTMBF1 and pMMBF1 encompass the
yeast S. cerevisiae MBF1 promoter and the MBF1 coding
region from T. tenax or M. mazei, respectively. After
gap repair, plasmids were isolated from yeast by amplification in E. coli and verified by sequence analysis.
Generation of chimeric MBF1s

Chimeric variants of yeast-archaeal MBF1 were constructed by gap repair in yeast as described above. They
were named using a three letters code with y, T or M,
corresponding to the origin from yeast (y), T. tenax (T)
or M. mazei (M) and the order indicates the position,
i.e. N- terminal domain, central region (flexible linker
and helix-turn-helix- domain) or C- terminal extension
(e.g. yTT). The chimeric variants were generated using
PCR sewing (Additional File 5). For this purpose, two
primer sets (external and internal) were designed to
amplify the respective fragment of MBF1 with addition
of sequences for gap repair. The external primers were
designed encompassing the 50-bp target fragment in
both outer arms. The gene- specific parts of the internal
primers were designed to ensure that their 5’-termini
matched 23-bp of the target sequence (Additional

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

File 4). Gap repair and construct verification was performed as above.
Generation of antibodies

Polyclonal antibodies against T. tenax MBF1 (antiTMBF1) were generated against the His-tagged version
of T. tenax MBF1 protein expressed in Escherichia coli
(EUROGENTEC, Seraing, Belgium). SDS-PAGE and
immuno blotting procedures were performed according
to standard protocols. The TMBF1 antibody was used in
a 1:500 dilution.
Complementation test: Sensitivity to Aminotriazole

Yeast colonies of the wild-type (WT) and the mbf1Δ
yeast strain transformed with plasmid expressing
aMBF1, chimeric protein variants, yMBF1 or empty vector were grown in the appropriate minimal medium. For
the serial dilutions, a suspension with an optical density
(OD600 nm) of 0.3 was generated, and 5-fold serial dilutions thereof were made in a microtiter dish. The cells
were transferred onto supplemented minimal medium
with or without 3 mM aminotriazole using a 6 × 8
pronged replica plater. The plates were incubated for
3 days at 30°C.
Computational analysis

All databases and software used in the present study are
publicly available. Sequences of MBF1 and TBP from
Archaea and Eukaryotes were retrieved from publicly
available databases including Swiss-Prot (sp), GenBank
(gb), EMBL (emb), and DDBJ (dbj). A list of Archaea with
available complete genome sequence was retrieved from
the Genomes On Line Database (GOLD) [64]. Nucleotide
sequences were translated into protein sequences using
the TRANSLATE web-server [65]. Position-Specific Iterated BLAST (PSI-BLAST) searches were performed
against the non-redundant (nr) database at the National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov [66] and were used to identify MBF1,
TBP and Gcn4 related sequences. Sequence alignments
with E-value less than 10-3 and with bit score greater than
100 were considered significant.
The analysis for functional domains was performed
using Pfam protein family database http://pfam.sanger.
ac.uk/ [67]. Furthermore, CLUSTAL_X [54] with default
settings was used to compare MBF1 and TBP sequences.
The aligned sequences were inspected and adjusted
manually to minimize the number of gaps and insertions. These manual adjustments were based on the
sequence similarities, secondary structure prediction,
and finally, fold recognition results.
The phylogenetic tree was constructed according to
the Neighbor-Joining method [68] and visualized by

Page 12 of 17

MEGA program version 4.0 [69]. Distance analyses
including 1500 bootstrap replicates were performed.
Structurally related proteins were identified by
searches against known structures in the Protein Data
Bank (PDB) [70], and for sequence-to-structure alignment of the deduced aMBF1 METASERVER was used
[56]. METASERVER predictions were complemented
with those obtained by PHYRE [57] and I-TASSER [58]
for a successful fold recognition approach. The predicted 3 D structure of MBF1 was subjected to a series
of tests for evaluating its internal consistency and reliability. Backbone conformation was evaluated by the
inspection of the Psi/Phi Ramachandran plot obtained
from PROCHECK analysis [59]. Packing quality of the
3 D model was investigated by the calculation of
WHATCHECK Z-score value [60]. Finally, sequencestructure compatibility was evaluated by VERIFY-3 D
[61]. All these programs were executed from the structure analysis and verification servers’ web-site at UCLA
http://www.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/.

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewers’ report 1: Bill Martin, Institut für Botanik III,
Düsseldorf University, Germany

This is a very straightforward and worthwhile manuscript
investigating the ability of the archaeal bZIP protein
MBF1 to complement yeast MBF deletion mutants and
in domain swapping regimens. Although the complementation studies showed that only a small portion of the
archaeal MBF1 (the C-terminal region) can substitute for
the yeast protein in complementation studies. It would
have been more exciting perhaps if the functionally more
important core and N-terminal regions of the archaeal
proteins from crenarchaeotes and euryarchaeotes had
been functional, but they did thorough work to show that
under these conditions that does not work, so that is
important information for the community to know.
Overall the paper was very well-prepared and is well
worth publishing, basically in present form in my opinion. The only point that I stumbled upon was the six
occurrences of “interestingly”, which is a word that can
almost always be deleted and that best occur once per
paper, lest one gain the impression that everything else in
the paper is not interesting (which in this case is not
true). While reading I began to wonder whether the
expression of archaeal specific chaperonins might help,
Bogumil & Dagan (GBE 2010) have found some extensive
evolutionary effects of chaperonins on protein evolution
in bacteria, my hunch is that much the same exists in
archaea but that it has not yet been reported. That aspect
might be worth mentioning in a sentence. Otherwise this
is a fine and interesting paper that will attract the interest
of many microbiologists and transcription cogniscenti.

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

Authors’ response: We appreciate these constructive
comments. We included the possible function of chaperonins in protein evolution in the manuscript. Although
chaperonins are reported in Archaea to our knowledge
their role in evolution has not been studied so far. However, it is tempting to speculate that they might be of
special significance for proper protein folding at high
temperature.
“Interestingly” has been removed from the text.
Reviewers’ report 2: Patrick Forterre, Institut Pasteur,
France

It is often claimed that Archaea use bacterial-like proteins to regulate an eukaryotic-like transcription
machinery. At the cross-road between regulators and
basal transcription factors, the protein MBF1, present in
Archaea and Eukarya, but not in Bacteria, is an interesting model for mechanistic and evolutionary studies. In
their paper, Bettina Siebers and co-workers have first
used literature data and in silico analyses to compare
the archaeal and eukaryal MBF1. In addition, they have
used a MBF1 mutant from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to check various constructions of chimeric
archaeal/eukaryal MBF1 proteins. In Eukarya, MBF1
proteins interact with TBP and regulatory proteins of
the FTZ-F1 family. Whereas TBP is conserved between
Archaea and Eukarya, FTZ-F1 regulators have no homologues in Archaea.
The experimental work by Siebers and co-workers
shows that the archaeal MBF1 cannot complement the
eukaryotic one. Chimeric proteins only work when the
C-terminal domain of the eukaryal one is replaced by
the archaeal one, but this domain is precisely the
domain of MBF1 which is dispensable for in vivo
function.
Since the central domain of MBF1 that probably interacts with TBP is conserved between Archaea and
Eukarya, the lack of complementation probably came
from the differences between the N-terminal domains of
the Archaeal and Eukaryal MBF1 and discrete differences in the central domain. The determinants for interaction between MBF1 and FTZ-F1 are probably missing
in the archaeal protein. The archaeal proteins apparently
exhibit specific features that allow them to interact
directly with DNA and RNA polymerase without the
requirement for an additional FTZ-F1-like protein. In
particular, a Zn ribbon motif present in the N-terminal
part of the archaeal protein and a set of basic residues
conserved in the archaeal protein could be essential for
the interaction of the archaeal protein with TBP, RNA
polymerase and DNA.
I think that publication of such paper in Biology
Direct should be the opportunity for the authors to discuss more about the evolutionary and/or physiological

Page 13 of 17

aspects of their work. It seems that MBF1 in Archaea
can be considered as a kind of additional basal transcription factor (dispensable since lacking in some
Thaumarchaeota). What can be its role (using information from the genomic context)? How the system
evolved from Archaea to eukarya or vice versa?
It would be nice if the authors could compare two
scenarios, either the loss of FTZ-F1-like proteins in the
archaeal lineage or their gain in the eukaryal lineage.
They could possibly even suggest experiments to evolve
the archaeal MBF1 protein into an archaeal-like one or
vice versa.
Authors’ response: Considering the valuable remarks a
new subsection “Origin of archaeal and eukaryotic
MBF1: trends in evolution” has been included in the
Results and Discussion section. We agree it would be
interesting to design experiments focused on the evolution
of the archaeal MBF1 protein into the archaeal like one
or vice versa. Actually this was somehow the intention
when we tried to work with chimeric proteins; however, it
seems to be quite difficult, probably due to the acquired
different functions in the course of evolution. May be
directed evolution would be an alternative tool for
further studies.
A MBF1 protein is present in the recently available
genome of the thaumarchaeon Nitrososphaera gargensis.
Considering the possible position of Thaumarchaeota at
the base of the archaeal tree, it should be interesting to
add this protein in the phylogenetic analysis.
Authors’ response: MBF1 from C. N. gargensis was
included in the analysis as recommended. Unfortunately,
the genomic context of mbf1 in C. N. gargensis could not
be analyzed, because the whole genome sequence is not
available.
Reviewers’ report 3: John van der Oost and Fabian
Blombach, Wageningen University, The Netherlands

Marrero Coto and colleagues report on an interesting
protein that is conserved in most Archaea and in all
Eukaryotes, the Multi-protein Bridging Factor (MBF1).
In order to gain insight in a function of the archaeal
enzyme, complementation studies have been performed
of the yeast MBF1, in which the entire yeast protein or
fragments (domain swap) were substituted by its
archaeal counterpart. In addition, a bioinformatics analysis has been performed. Overall the experiments have
been well performed, and are well described. MBF1-TBP
interaction - An extensive series of well-designed complementation experiments has been performed. Unfortunately, the outcome of the described experimental work
is rather disappointing. It is concluded that the MBF1
proteins from neither Thermoproteus nor Methanosarcina are capable of functionally complementing Gcn4dependent transcription of a yeast MBF1-mutant. In

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

addition, it is concluded that the C-terminal extension
of yeast MBF1 appears not to have an important role in
the function of MBF1 as transcriptional coactivator.
Obviously, more experiments are required to draw firm
conclusions on the evolutionary conservation of the
MBF1/TBP interaction. Based on the presented data it is
impossible to conclude at what stage the complementation fails: is it because an imperfect interaction between
MBF1 and TBP, between MBF1 and the bZIP regulators,
or both?
Author’s response: We appreciate these constructive
comments and recommendations. We think that the
outcome of these experiments is not disappointing, but
rather indicates the necessity to complement bioinformatic predictions by biological experiments. In 1999 a
possible function of MBF1 in Archaea as transcription
factor related to the core machinery was predicted due
to the presence of the well-conserved HTH domain in
Archaea and Eukaryotes and the additional Zn ribbon
motif present in Archaea [3,30]. Liu and co-workers
proposed a co-evolution of MBF1 and TBP in Eukaryotes and Archaea using bioinformatic as well as mutational analyses, suggesting the possibility of a similar
role of eukaryotic and archaeal MBF1 [30]. Importantly it has been previously shown that archaeal TBP
can be replaced by human and yeast TBP in a Methanococcus-derived cell-free transcription system [53]
highlighting the common origin of the core transcriptional machinery. To the best of our knowledge no biological data are available that test and clarify the
function of archaeal MBF1 and therefore it was a reasonable approach to test for archaeal MBF1 function in
a yeast MBF1 deletion strain, especially since functional complementation by plant, human and insect
MBF1 has been demonstrated [7,21].
The performed experiments revealed that archaeal
MBF1 as well as all of the constructed chimeric proteins
(except the C-terminal domain swap) are not able to
complement for MBF1 function in yeast.
We agree that we can only speculate about the reasons
why the complementation fails, but due to the presence
of the well-conserved HTH domain, the absence of bZIP
regulators in Archaea and the fact that eukaryotic and
archaeal TBP are interchangeable in an archaeal in
vitro transcription system, an impaired interaction of
MBF1 with Gcn4 rather than with TBP is favourable. In
the revised version of the manuscript we extended the
respective discussion and are more specific about the
possible explanations. In addition further experiments to
analyze for yGcn4, y/aTBP, y/aMBF1 (WT and chimeric
proteins) and aRNAP(subunit) interactions by yeast two
hybrid studies are currently on the way in order to
address this important point.

Page 14 of 17

Importantly, it is not known if all hybrid constructs
are expressed in a soluble form (only shown for
T. tenax MBF1). Although quite labor-intensive, tagbased immuno-detection and co-immuno- precipitation
experiments would have been informative. The presented data do not disprove an interaction between TBP
and MBF1. The failure of the archaeal HTH domains to
replace the HTH of yeast MBF1 can have several
reasons.
Author’s response: Beside T. tenax MBF1 the functional complementation of yyM and yyT confirms expression in soluble form. We agree that this is an important
point and therefore we added more detailed information
in the manuscript, why we choose the current approach.
The aim of this study was to investigate functional complementation in yeast, which is based on the interaction
of MBF1 with Tbp and Gcn4 in yeast. Therefore we
avoided any tags for protein detection, which might
interfere with protein-protein interaction or might influence protein-DNA interaction (e.g. by introducing a positively charged His tags).
After initial negative results for aMBF1 complementation using the yeast overexpression vector (pHR98/3) we
decided to express aMBF1, yMBF1 (control) as well as
chimeric MBF1 s under the control of the natural yeast
MBF1 promoter in order to avoid deleterious effects due
to overexpression. Unfortunately the expression under
control of the natural promoter and thus the low protein
amounts hampered the detection of the chimeric TMBF1
proteins by the polyclonal TMBF1 antibody, although at
least for yyT and yyM soluble expression was demonstrated by functional complementation.
Being able to functionally replace yeast MBF1 by plant
(Arabidopsis), insect (Bombyx mori) or human MBF1
does not mean that the same should be possible with
archaeal MBF1, especially regarding the far greater phylogenetic distance.
Author’s response: We agree but a similar function of
aMBF1 has been predicted previously by bioinformatic
and mutational analyses [3,30]. A great number of publications describe different archaeal proteins that can be
successfully expressed in yeast (e.g. TFBs [50,51]and subunits of RNAP [52]) and more important that are able
to replace the function of eukaryotic proteins and vice
versa (e.g. phophoglycerate kinase in yeast is functionally
replaced by the Sulfolobus solfataricus enzyme [see Piper
et al, 1996, Curr Genet]; TBP (see below) [53]). As mentioned above it has been shown that eukaryotic TBP is
able to functionally replace archaeal TBP in a cell-free
transcription assay [53]. Therefore the conserved function seems to be important rather than the phylogenetic
distance of organisms and in our opinion it is difficult to
predict a failure or success in functional replacement.

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

In silico analysis of MBF1 - No conclusions are drawn
from the phylogenetic analysis, and (apart from showing
the conservation of the C-terminal HTH domain in the
eukaryal and archaeal proteins) it does not add much to
the manuscript.
Author’s response: We agree, the manuscript has been
changed accordingly and the phylogeny is discussed in
more detail now (see also reviewer 1 and 2).
As the N-terminal domains of archaeal and eukaryotic
MBF1 are non-orthologous, it may be appropriate to
omit them from the alignment, or at least make a clear
statement on this in text and figure legend.
Authors’ response: A clear statement on the non-orthologous N-terminal domain was made in the text and in
the Figure legend for clarity. Furthermore the phylogenetic tree was re-constructed based on the multiple
alignment of the MBF1 sequences lacking the fragment
corresponding to the Zn ribbon since the archaeal and
eukaryotic N-terminal domains are non-orthologous.
In addition, in the description of the structural
model, the conservation is described of residues of the
N-terminal domains of archaeal and eukaryotic MBF1
(positions 11 and 27 in T. tenax MBF1); this does not
make sense as they are non-homologous domains.
Some of the descriptions in the description of the
structural models (e.g ProCheck) rather belong in the
M&M section.
Author’s response: This is a misunderstanding. We
modified the text for clarity. It has been mentioned in
the paper that the N-terminal domain of MBF1 from
Archaea has a Zn ribbon motif that is absent in the
eukaryotic counterparts. The analysis of the 3D-model of
T. tenax MBF1 was performed to analyze for putative
van der Waals interactions between residues of the
N-terminal domain and the C-terminal HTH-domain,
which might contribute to fold stability of the T. tenax
MBF1.
The description of the programs used to analyze MBF1
structural models (PROCHECK, WHATCHECK and
VERIFY-3D) are declared in both Sections: in Methods
and in Results and Discussion. We considered the following two sentences appropriate also for the Results and
Discussion section. The exact citation, as appeared in the
manuscript, is: “The structural models were analyzed by
different structure validation programs including PROCHECK [59]for the evaluation of the Ramachandran
plot quality, WHATCHECK [60]for the calculation of
packing quality Z-score, and VERIFY-3 D [61]for the
evaluation of sequence-structure compatibility (Table 1).
In general, quality values obtained for the 3 D models
are similar to those observed in the template structures
indicating a high quality of the MBF1 low-resolution
model presented in this work (Figure 4)”.

Page 15 of 17

The Endothelial Differentiation related factor 1 used
here as template is in fact a human MBF1 ortholog; this
should be mentioned in the text.
Author’s response: Modified in the text for clarity.
Conclusions - It is proposed that, on the basis of the
presented data, MBF1 most likely functions in Archaea
as a specific transcriptional regulator. This is a hypothesis that could be tested experimentally, by proteinprotein interaction studies (TBP, TFB, RNAP), by
DNA-binding analysis, or by gene disruption.
Author’s response: We appreciate the recommendations. Moreover, the experimental investigations of the
MBF1/TFB/RNAP and Gcn4 interaction (yeast-twohybrid experiments, see above) are currently underway
in the laboratory of BS at the University of DuisburgEssen.
In their conclusion the authors should also mention
alternative functions, including on the recently suggested role of the archaeal MBF1 in ribosome biosynthesis and/or functionality.
Author’s response: The proposed role of MBF1 in ribosome biogenesis has been discussed in the manuscript for
clarity; this suggested alternative function of MBF1 is
now also included in the conclusions.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Multiple sequence alignment of archaeal and
eukaryotic MBF1s. The N-terminal domains of archaeal and eukaryotic
MBF1 s are non-orthologous. The Zn ribbon motif is absent in the
eukaryotic N-terminal domain. The two pairs of cysteine residues present
in the N-terminal domain of archaeal MBF1 s (aMBF1) are highlighted by
grey shading. Dashes indicate gaps in the amino acid sequence
introduced to optimize the alignment. D112 of yMbf1, required for TBP
binding in yeast, and the respective residues in eukaryotic MBF1 and
aMBF1 are indicated by asterisk. The conserved motif, T(S, I)-L(V, M, F, I)G-D(E, N, I), in the C- terminal extension of aMBF1 is indicated in bold.
For the construction of the phylogenetic tree (Figure 1) the nonorthologous N-terminal domain (residues 1-37 TtxMBF1) was omitted.
Additional file 2: Multiple sequence alignment of partial sequences
of eukaryotic and archaeal MBF1 s and TBPs. Multiple sequence
alignment of partial sequences of eukaryotic and archaeal MBF1 and TBP
proteins comprising analogous residues to aspartic acid at position 112
(D112, red shadow) of yMbf1 and asparagine at position 68 (Q68, blue
shadow) of yTbp. A summary of compensatory amino acid changes of
the interaction site of MBF1:TBP in Archaea is given in Additional File 3.
Additional file 3: Summary of compensatory amino acid changes of
the interaction site of MBF1:TBP in Archaea. Summary of
compensatory amino acid changes of the interaction site of MBF1:TBP in
Archaea based on the multiple sequence alignment shown in Additional
File 2.
Additional file 4: List of primer sets used in this work. List of primer
sets used in this work for cloning yMBF1, TMBF1, MMBF1 and chimeric
genes to be expressed in yeast. Underlined sequences indicate the
corresponding cut-end sequence of the cloning vector used in the
recombination/gap repair cloning technique.
Additional file 5: Plasmids generated by using the recombination/
gap repair cloning technique. Plasmids generated by using the
recombination/gap repair cloning technique in order to express yMbf1,
TMBF1, MMBF1 and chimera in yeast. a Plasmids generated by the use of

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

recombination/gap repair cloning technique.
to linearize the cloning vector.

b

Restriction enzyme used

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschung Gemeinshaft (DFG)
as part of the Research Training Group “Transcription, Chromatin Structure
and DNA Repair in Development and Differentiation”, GK 1431. The authors
acknowledge Kira S. Makarova (NCBI, National Library of Medicine, National
Institute of Health, Bethesda) for critically reading the manuscript and very
helpful discussion.
Author details
1
Faculty of Chemistry, Biofilm Centre, Molecular Enzyme Technology and
Biochemistry, Biofilm Centre, Faculty of Chemistry, University of DuisburgEssen, Universitätsstr. 5, (S05 V03 F41), 45141 Essen, Germany. 2Department
for Genetics, University Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsstr. 5, 45117 Essen,
Germany. 3Faculty of Biology, University of Havana, Havana 10400, Cuba.
Authors’ contributions
JMC participated in the phylogenetic and sequence analysis, carried out the
molecular genetic studies and wrote the original draft of the manuscript; TP
contributed to the computational analysis and 3 D modeling; AE
participated in the design of the study and contributed to interpretation of
the results; BS conceived the study, participated in its design and
coordination and helped to draft the manuscript; all authors read, edited,
and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 28 February 2011 Accepted: 10 March 2011
Published: 10 March 2011
References
1. Reeve JN, Sandman K, Daniels CJ: Archaeal histones, nucleosomes, and
transcription initiation. Cell 1997, 89(7):999-1002.
2. Lagrange T, Kapanidis AN, Tang H, Reinberg D, Ebright RH: New core
promoter element in RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription:
Sequence specific DNA binding by transcription factor IIB. Genes & Dev
1998, 12:34-44.
3. Aravind L, Koonin EV: DNA-binding proteins and evolution of
transcription regulation in the archaea. Nucleic Acids Res 1999,
27(23):4658-4670.
4. Bell SD, Jackson SP: Mechanism and regulation of transcription in
archaea. Curr Opin Microbiol 2001, 4:208-213.
5. Ueda H, Sun GC, Murata T, Hirose S: A novel DNA-binding motif abuts the
zinc finger domain of insect nuclear hormone receptor FTZ-F1 and
mouse embryonal long terminal repeat-binding protein. Mol Cell Biol
1992, 12:5667-5672.
6. Li FQ, Ueda H, Hirose S: Mediators of activation of fushi tarazu gene
transcription by BmFTZ-F1. Mol Cell Biol 1994, 14:3013-3021.
7. Takemaru KI, Ueda H, Hirose S: Multiprotein bridging factor 1 (MBF1) is an
evolutionary conserved transcriptional coactivator that connects a
regulatory factor and TATA element-binding protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1997, 94:7251-7256.
8. Kabe Y, Goto M, Shima D, Imai T, Wada T, Morohashi KI, Shirakawa M,
Hirose S, Handa H: The role of human MBF1 as a transcriptional
coactivator. J Biol Chem 1999, 274(48):34196-34202.
9. Takemaru KI, Harashima S, Ueda H, Hirose S: Yeast Coactivator MBF1
mediates GCN4-dependent transcriptional activation. Mol Cell Biol 1998,
18(9):4971-4976.
10. Mariotti M, Consalez GG, Soria MR, Maier JA: EDF-1, a novel gene product
down-regulated in human endothelial cell differentiation. J Biol Chem
1998, 273:31119-31124.
11. Smith ML, Johanson RA, Rogers KE, Coleman PD, Slemmon JR:
Identification of a neuronal calmodulin-binding peptide, CAP-19,
containing an IQ motif. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1998, 62:12-24.

Page 16 of 17

12. Finkelstein RR, Lynch TJ: The Arabidopsis abscisic acid response gene
ABI5 encodes a basic leucine zipper transcription factor. Plant Cell 2000,
12:599-609.
13. Mariotti M, De benedictis L, Avon E, Maier JA: Interaction between
endothelial differentiation-related factor-1 and calmodulin in vitro and
in vivo. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:24047-24051.
14. Godoy AV, Zanetti ME, San Segundo B, Casalongue C: Identification of a
putative Solanum tuberosum transcriptional coactivator up-regulated in
potato tubers by Fusarium solani f. sp. eumartii infection and wounding.
Physiologia Plantarum 2001, 112:217-222.
15. Brendel C, Gelman L, Auwerx J: Multiprotein bridging factor-1 (MBF-1) is a
cofactor for nuclear receptors that regulate lipid metabolism. Mol
Endocrinol 2002, 16:1367-1377.
16. Matsushita Y, Miyakawa O, Deguchi M, Nishiguchi M, Nyunoya H: Cloning
of a tobacco cDNA coding for a putative transcriptional coactivator
MBF1 that interacts with the tomato mosaic virus movement protein. J
Exp Botany 2002, 53:1531-1532.
17. Busk PK, Wulf-Andersen L, Strøm CC, Enevoldsen M, Thirstrup K, Haunsø S,
Sheikh SP: Multiprotein bridging factor 1 cooperates with c-Jun and is
necessary for cardiac hypertrophy in vitro. Exp Cell Res 2003, 286:102-114.
18. Liu Q, Jindra M, Ueda H, Hiromi Y, Hirose S: Drosophila MBF1 is a coactivator for tracheae defective and contributes to the formation of
tracheal and nervous systems. Development 2003, 130:719-728.
19. Zanetti ME, Blanco FA, Daleo GR, Casalongué CA: Phosphorylation of a
member of the MBF1 transcriptional co-activator family, StMBF1, is
stimulated in potato cell suspensions upon fungal elicitor challenge. J
Exp Botany 2003, 54(383):623-632.
20. Jindra M, Gaziova I, Uhlirova M, Okabe M, Hiromi Y, Hirose S: Coactivator
MBF1 preserves the redox-dependent AP-1 activity during oxidative
stress in Drosophila. EMBO J 2004, 23:3538-3547.
21. Tsuda K, Tsuji T, Hirose S, Yamazaki KI: Three Arabidopsis MBF1 homologs
with distinct expression profiles play roles as transcriptional coactivators. Plant Cell Physiol 2004, 45(2):225-231.
22. Arce DP, Tonón C, Zanetti ME, Godoy AV, Hirose S, Casalongué CA: The
potato transcriptional co-activator StMBF1 is up-regulated in response
to oxidative stress and interacts with the TATA-box binding protein. J
Biochem Mol Biol 2006, 39:355-360.
23. Miotto B, Struhl K: Differential gene regulation by selective association of
transcriptional coactivators and bZIP DNA-binding domains. Mol Cell Biol
2006, 26(16):5969-5982.
24. Suzuki N, Bajad S, Shuman J, Shulaev V, Mittler R: The transcriptional coactivator MBF1c is a key regulator of thermotolerance in Arabidopsis
thaliana. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:9269-9275.
25. Koning B, Blombach F, Wu H, Brouns SJJ, van der Oost J: Role of
multiprotein bridging factor 1 in the archaea: bridging the domains?
Bioch Soc Trans 2009, 37(part 1):52-57.
26. Baranger AM, Palmer CR, Hamm MK, Giebler HA, Brauweiler A, Nyborg JK,
Schepartz A: Mechanism of DNA-binding enhancement by the human Tcell leukaemia virus transactivator Tax. Nature 1995, 376:606-608.
27. Perini G, Wagner S, Green MR: Recognition of bZIP proteins by the
human T-cell leukaemia virus transactivator Tax. Nature 1995,
376:602-605.
28. Hope I, Struhl K: Functional Dissection of a eukaryotic transcriptional
activator protein, GCN4 of yeast. Cell 1986, 46:885-894.
29. Hendrick JL, Wilson PG, Edelman II, Sandbaken MG, Ursic D, Culbertson MR:
Yeast frameshift suppressor mutations in the genes coding for
transcription factor MBF1p and ribosomal protein S3: evidence for
autoregulation of S3 synthesis. Genetics 2001, 157:1141-1158.
30. Liu Q, Nakashima-Kamimura N, Ikeo K, Hirose S, Gojobori T: Compensatory
change of interacting amino acids in the coevolution of transcriptional
coactivator MBF1 and TATA-box binding protein TBP. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1458-1463.
31. Pinto I, Ware DE, Hampsey M: The yeast SUA7 gene encodes a homolog
of human transcription factor TFIIB and is required for normal start site
selection in vivo. Cell 1992, 68:977-988.
32. Zhu W, Zeng Q, Colangelo CM, Lewis LM, Summers MF, Scott RA: The Nterminal domain of TFIIB from Pyrococcus furiosus forms a zinc ribbon.
Nat Struct Biol 1996, 3:122-124.
33. Qian X, Gozani SN, Yoon H, Jeon C, Agarwal K, Weiss MA: Novel zinc finger
motif in the basal transcription machinery: Three-dimensional NMR

Marrero Coto et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:18
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/18

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.
40.

41.

42.

43.

44.
45.
46.

47.
48.
49.
50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

studies of the nucleic acid binding domain of transcription elongation
factor TFIIS. Biochemistry 1993, 32:9944-9959.
Wang B, Jones DN, Kaine BP, Weiss MA: High-resolution structure of an
archaeal zinc ribbon defines a general architectural motif in eukaryotic
RNA polymerases. Structure 1998, 6:555-569.
Chen HT, Legault P, Glushka J, Omichinski JG, Scott RA: Structure of a
(Cys3His) zinc ribbon, a ubiquitous motif in archaeal and eucaryal
transcription. Protein Science 2000, 9:1743-1752.
Ozaki J, Takemaru K, Ikegami T, Mishima M, Ueda H, Hirose S, Kabe Y,
Handa H, Shirakawa M: Identification of the core domain and the
secondary structure of the transcriptional coactivator MBF1. Genes Cells
1999, 4:415-424.
Mishima M, Ozaki J, Ikegami T, Kabe Y, Goto M, Ueda H, Hirose S, Handa H,
Shirakawa M: Resonance assignments, secondary structure and 15N
relaxation data of the human transcriptional coactivator hMBF1 (57-148).
J Biomol NMR 1999, 14:373-376.
Haney PJ, Badger JH, Buldak GL, Reich CI, Woese CR, Olsen GJ: Thermal
adaptation analyzed by comparison of protein sequences from
mesophilic and extremely thermophilic Methanococcus species. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:3578-3583.
Charlier D, Droogmans L: Microbial Life at high temperature, the
challenges, the strategies. Cell Mol Life Sci 2005, 62:2974-2984.
Drummond DA, Bloom JD, Adami C, Wilke CO, Arnold FH: Why highly
expressed proteins evolve slowly. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:14338-14343.
Drummond DA, Wilke CO: Mistranslation-induced protein misfolding as a
dominant constraint on coding-sequence evolution. Cell 2008,
134:341-352.
Lobkovsky AE, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Universal distribution of protein
evolution rates as a consequence of protein folding physics. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:2983-2988.
Warnecke T, Hurst LD: GroEL dependency affects codon usage - support
for a critical role of misfolding in gene evolution. Mol Syst Biol 2010,
6(340).
Bogumil D, Dagan T: Chaperonin-Dependent Accelerated Substitution
Rates in Prokaryotes. Gen Biol Evol Adv 2010.
Macario AJL, Conway de Macario E: The archaeal molecular chaperone
machine: peculiarities and paradoxes. Genetics 1999, 152:1277-1283.
Wu H, Sun L, Blombach F, Brouns SJJ, Snijders PL, Lorenzen K, van den
Heuvel RHH, Heck AJR, Fu S, Li X, Zhang XC, Rao Z, van der Oost J:
Structure of the ribosome associating GTPase HflX. Proteins 2010,
78:705-713.
Ouhammouch M, Geiduschek EP: An expanding family of archaeal
transcriptional activators. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:15423-15428.
Kyrpides NC, Ouzounis ChA: Transcription in Archaea. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1999, 96:8545-8550.
Ciaramella M, Cannio R, Moracci M, Pisani FM, Rossi M: Molecular biology
of extremophiles. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 1995, 11:71-84.
Paytubi S, White M: The crenarchaeal DNA damage-inducible
transcription factor B paralogue TFB3 is a general activator of
transcription. Mol Microbiol 2009.
Magill CP, Jackson SP, Bell SD: Identification of a conserved archaeal RNA
polymerase subunit contacted by the basal transcription factor TFB. J
Biol Chem 2001, 276:46693-46696.
Reich Ch, Zeller M, Milkereit P, Hausner W, Cramer P, Tschochner H,
Thomm M: The archaeal RNA polymerase subunit P and the eukaryotic
polymerase subunit Rpb12 are interchangeable in vivo and in vitro. Mol
Microbiol 2009, 71(4):989-1002.
Wettach J, Gohl HP, Tschochner H, Thomm M: Functional interaction of
yeast and human TATA-binding proteins with an archaeal RNA
polymerase and promoter. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:472-476.
Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:4876-4882.
Salinas RK, Camilo CM, Tomaselli S, Valencia EY, Farah Ch, El-Dorry H,
Chambergo FS: Solution structure of the C-terminal domain of
multiprotein bridging factor 1 (MBF1) of Trichoderma reesei. Proteins
2009, 518-523.

Page 17 of 17

56. Ginalski K, Elofsson A, Fischer D, Rychlewski L: 3D-Jury: a simple approach
to improve protein structure predictions. Bioinformatics 2003,
19:1015-1018.
57. Kelley LA, Sternberg MJ: Protein structure prediction on the Web: a case
study using the Phyre server. Nat Protoc 2009, 4:363-371.
58. Zhang Y: I-TASSER: fully automated protein structure prediction in
CASP8. Proteins 2009, 77:100-113.
59. Laskowski RA, MacArthur MW, Moss DS, Thornton JM: PROCHECK: a
program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J
Appl Cryst 1993, 26:283-291.
60. Hooft RWW, Vriend G, Sander C, Abola EE: Errors in protein structures.
Nature 1996, 381:272-272.
61. Lüthy R, Bowie JU, Eisenberg D: Assessment of protein models with
three-dimensional profiles. Nature 1992, 5, 356(6364):83-85.
62. Anderson JE, Ptashne M, Harrison SC: Structure of the repressor-operator
complex of bacteriophage 434. Nature 1987, 326:846-852.
63. Chen W, Struhl K: Saturation mutagenesis of a yeast his3 “TATA
element": Genetic evidence for a specific TATA-binding protein. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1988, 85:2691-2685.
64. Liolios K, Chen IM, Mavromatis K, Tavernarakis N, Hugenholtz P,
Markowitz VM, Kyrpides NC: The Genomes On Line Database (GOLD) in
2009: status of genomic and metagenomic projects and their associated
metadata. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D346-D554.
65. Gasteiger E, Gattiker A, Hoogland C, Ivanyi I, Appel RD, Bairoch A: ExPASy:
the proteomics server for in-depth protein knowledge and analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:3784-3788.
66. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
67. Bateman A, Coin L, Durbin R, Finn RD: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D138-D141.
68. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406-425.
69. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
70. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H,
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000,
28(1):235-242.
71. Pettersen EF, Goddard TD, Huang CC, Couch GS, Greenblatt DM, Meng EC,
Ferrin TE: UCSF Chimera - A Visualization System for Exploratory
Research and Analysis. J Comput Chem 2004, 25:1605-1612.
72. Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: Protein structure alignment by incremental
combinatorial extension (CE) of the optimal path. Protein Engineering
1998, 11(9):739-747.
73. Kabsch W, Sander C: Dictionary of protein secondary structure: Pattern
recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features. Biopolymers
1983, 22:2577-2637.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-18
Cite this article as: Marrero Coto et al.: Functional analysis of archaeal
MBF1 by complementation studies in yeast. Biology Direct 2011 6:18.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
