<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A survey of the transmission of infectious diseases/infections between wild and domestic ungulates in Europe</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70. doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-70"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Claire Martin"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

VETERINARY RESEARCH

REVIEW

Open Access

A survey of the transmission of infectious
diseases/infections between wild and domestic
ungulates in Europe
Claire Martin1,4, Paul-Pierre Pastoret2, Bernard Brochier3, Marie-France Humblet1 and Claude Saegerman1*

Abstract
The domestic animals/wildlife interface is becoming a global issue of growing interest. However, despite studies on
wildlife diseases being in expansion, the epidemiological role of wild animals in the transmission of infectious
diseases remains unclear most of the time. Multiple diseases affecting livestock have already been identified in
wildlife, especially in wild ungulates. The first objective of this paper was to establish a list of infections already
reported in European wild ungulates. For each disease/infection, three additional materials develop examples
already published, specifying the epidemiological role of the species as assigned by the authors. Furthermore, risk
factors associated with interactions between wild and domestic animals and regarding emerging infectious
diseases are summarized. Finally, the wildlife surveillance measures implemented in different European countries
are presented. New research areas are proposed in order to provide efficient tools to prevent the transmission of
diseases between wild ungulates and livestock.
Table of contents
1. Introduction
1.1. General Introduction
1.2. Methodology of bibliographic research
2. Current status of European wild ungulates
2.1. Species and countries of concern
2.2. Definitions of important concepts
2.2.1. Definition of an infectious disease/infection
2.2.2. Definitions of epidemiological roles
2.3. Review of some infectious diseases already
reported in European wild ungulates
3. Risks factors associated with the transmission of
diseases
3.1. Global level (national or European level)
* Correspondence: claude.saegerman@ulg.ac.be
1
Research Unit in Epidemiology and Risk Analysis Applied to Veterinary
Sciences (UREAR), Department of Infectious and Parasitic diseases, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Boulevard de Colonster, 20, B42, B4000 Liège, Belgium
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

3.1.1. Environmental changes
3.1.1.1. Distribution of gerographical spaces
3.1.1.2. Chemical pollution
3.1.2. Global agricultural practices
3.1.3. Microbial evolution and adaptation
3.1.4. Climate change
3.1.5. Global increased mobility and trade
3.2. Local level (regional or district)
3.2.1. Natural dynamics of wildlife populations
3.2.2. Human behaviours
3.2.2.1. Farmers
3.2.2.2. Hunters
3.2.2.3. Public
3.2.2.4. Scientists
4. Measures implemented
4.1. At European level
4.1.1. Wildlife-livestock-human continuum
4.1.2. Biodiversity and wild heritage
4.1.2.1. Wild animals
4.1.2.2. Domestic species
4.1.2.3. Role of biodiversity in disease ecology
4.1.3. OIE working group on wildlife diseases
4.1.4. Prioritisation of wildlife diseases

© 2011 Martin et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

4.2. At country level
4.2.1. Surveillance programs
4.2.2. Vaccination programs
4.2.3. Sentinel animals
4.3. At local level
4.3.1. Adaptation of livestock farming
4.3.2. Specific hunting measures
5. Perspectives
6. Conclusion
7. Competing interests
8. Author’s contributions
9. Acknowledgements
10. References

1. Introduction
1.1. General introduction

The transmission of infectious diseases between wild
and domestic animals is becoming an issue of major
interest [1]. Scientists still lack of knowledge concerning
the means and ways a large majority of infectious agents
are transmitted. Wildlife can be exposed to domestic
animal diseases resulting in severe consequences on
their populations. On the other hand, numerous emerging infectious diseases (EIDs), including zoonoses, were
shown to originate from wildlife [2,3]. Multiple publications dealing with wildlife diseases focus on zoonoses,
while the present review targets the wild ungulates present in Europe (focussing on suinae and ruminants [4]),
considering their close ecological and phylogenic relationship with livestock. The main objectives of this
review are (i) for the first time, to establish a list as
complete as possible of infectious agents already
reported in European wild ungulates, (ii) to evaluate the
possible role of both wild and domestic ungulates in the
transmission of infectious diseases and (iii) to emphasize
the importance of considering wildlife when studying
the epidemiology of infectious diseases. Indeed, wild
species may be infected by livestock pathogens and, at
the same time, be a risk for the re-infection of livestock
[5]. Thus, their importance in global animal health and
in farming economy must be taken into account. This
review is the first to list so exhaustively infectious diseases/infections already reported in European wild
ungulates and, above all, to address their potential epidemiological role (e.g. reservoir, spillover, dead-end host
and asymptomatic excretory animal). Bacterial, viral and
prion, parasitic diseases are listed in three additional
files (additional file 1, additional file 2 and additional file
3). In order to better understand the epidemiology of
diseases/infections at the domestic animals/wildlife
interface, global risk factors associated with the transmission of infectious diseases are reviewed. Finally, the
different measures implemented by European countries

Page 2 of 16

regarding wildlife diseases/infections are summarized
and new areas of research are suggested.
1.2. Methodology of bibliographic research

A list of bacterial, viral and parasitic diseases known to
affect wild ungulates or livestock in Europe was established. The starting point was the list of diseases reportable to the World Organization for Animal Health
(OIE). A bibliographical research was performed, combining the [name of pathogens] or the [name of the disease associated] with [ungulate] or [wildlife] or [wild
ungulate] on web medical servers and databases (Medline, PubMed, CAB abstracts and ISI Web of Knowledge). Researches on prevalence or seroprevalence
studies were mostly carried out from October 2008 to
March 2009. No time limits of publication were
imposed. For each pathogen, the most recent publications covering a maximum of European countries were
selected. Furthermore, for each risk factor or perspective
considered, a bibliographic review was launched in both
Pubmed and ISI Web of Knowledge databases to identify the most suitable publications (fitting with keywords
introduced, and illustrating problematic of concerns).

2. Current situation/status of European wild
ungulates
2.1. Species and countries of concerns

This review targets wild ungulates present in the European continent (not only the European Union). They
are listed in Table 1 according to their phylogenic relationship. Data about the origin of populations (natural
vs. introduced) as well as their geographical distribution
are adapted from a recently edited book [6].
2.2. Definition of important concepts
2.2.1. Definition of an infectious disease/infection

The definition of an infectious disease/infection is the
first step towards understanding the mechanisms
involved in the transmission of a pathogen between animals. The first definition was given by Koch in four postulates at the end of the 19th century. However, they are
stated in a “one disease-one agent” model and are
almost exclusively based on laboratory considerations.
Several characteristics such as carrier state, opportunistic agents or predisposing factors are not taken into
account with this definition. A disease may be currently
defined as “any perturbation, not balanced, of one or
more body function(s)” [7], which includes responses to
infectious as well as non infectious agents [8]. In wild
animals, characterized by feeding, reproduction and
movements mostly independent from human activities
(in opposition to domestic animals) [9], disease is
strongly associated with environmental factors. Ecological factors are of major importance in the dynamics of

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

Page 3 of 16

Table 1 Classification, origin of the populations and geographical distribution of ungulates presents in Europe (from
[5])
Family

Sub-family

Natural/introduction

European location

Sus scrofa

Natural populations
Introductions in Great Britain

All European countries

Chital

Axis axis

Introductions

Croatia, Istrian peninsula

Dama dama

Introductions
Almost all populations are farmed animals.

All European countries

Red der

Cervus elaphus

Natural populations
Introductions in Corsica
Introduction in Sardaigna

All European countries

Sika deer

Cervus nippon

Introductions in the XIXe century

Northern Europe

Reeves’
muntjac

Cervinae

Latin name

Fallow deer

Cervidae

Species
Wild boar

Suidae

Muntiacus
reevesi

Introductions in beginning of XXe century
(native from China)

Great Britain

Introductions

Great Britain

Natural populations

All European countries

Hydropotinae Chinese water Hydropotes
deer
inermis
Capreolinae

European roe
deer

Capreolus
capreolus

Elk

Natural populations

Northern Europe

Odocoileus
virginianus

Introductions (native from North America)

Finland, Czech Republic, Serbia, Croatia

Reindeer

Rangifer
tarandus

Natural populations
Introduction in Iceland

Scandinavia
Iceland

Bovinae

European
bison

Bison bonasus

Natural populations or reintroductions

Central Europe (Poland, Byelorussia,
Lithuania, Ukraine)

Caprinae

Barbary sheep Amnotragus
lervia

Introductions

Spain

Muskox

Bovidae

Alces alces

White-tailed
deer

Introductions

Norway, Greenland

Ovibos
moschatus

Mouflon

Ovis gmelinii

Natural populations and introductions

All central and South of Europe

Alpine
chamois

Rupicapra
rupicapra

Natural populations

Alpine mountains

Pyrenean
chamois

Rupicapra
pyrenaica

Natural populations

Pyrenean mountains (France and Spain)
Cantabric mountains (Spain)
Abruzzi (Italia)

Wild goat

Capra aegragrus Introductions

Mediterranean islands (Balearic Islands,
Crete)

Alpine ibex

Capra ibex

Alpine mountains (France, Switzerland,
Italy)

Spanish ibex

Capra pyrenaica Natural populations and reintroductions

Natural populations and reintroductions

wild populations as their survival rate and fecundity may
be influenced by diseases [8]. A new concept of disease
ecology recently emerged. For a well defined target
population, the study of a disease/infection should be
related to the study of interactions between the environment, pathogens and human activities [1,10]. For practical reasons, in this review, the term disease will be used
to design both disease and infection.
2.2.2. Definitions of epidemiological roles

Studying and controlling an infectious disease implies
the knowledge of all actors involved in its transmission. A reservoir, or maintenance host, “is able to
maintain an infection in a given area, in the absence of
cross-contamination from other domestic or wild

Mountains of Spain and Portugal

animals” [11]. Some authors distinguish different types
of reservoirs (1) true reservoir (the species alone maintains the infection), (2) accessory reservoir (maintains
the infection secondarily to the main reservoir), (3)
opportunistic reservoir (accidentally infected, but without serious consequences) and (4) potential reservoir
(can be a reservoir for biological or ecological reasons,
but, to date, has not been identified as such under
field conditions) [7]. For each category, the reservoir is
related to a target population [12]. Spillover hosts can
maintain the infection after recurrent contacts with an
external source [11]. However, the categorisation of a
species is not definite and may be a question of time:
the integration in the maintenance or spillover

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

categories of hosts is dynamic as a spillover species
may become a reservoir as suspected in the French
Brotonne forest: cervids were initially spillover hosts
for Mycobacterium bovis but because of a high density
of animals, the infection spread among them and they
now act like maintenance hosts [13]. Wildlife pathogens can also spill back to domestic animals [3]. A
dead-end host may be infected by a pathogen but does
not allow its transmission in natural conditions; such
status may be lost by a species under modified environmental conditions [7]. Finally, an infected animal
can excrete a pathogen without showing obvious clinical signs. It is important to mention that the environmental survival of pathogens may also determine
wether or not an asymptomatic excretory animal may
be considered as reservoir.
Although definitions seem to be clearly delimited, it is
not so easy to determine the particular role of a species.
Indeed, out of 295 descriptions of wildlife infections
reported in the additional files, their epidemiological
role is only suggested by the authors in 34.2% of cases
(N = 101). Authors often lack of data concerning species
interactions as well as the infection status in other species. Besides, to determine the epidemiological role of a
wild species towards domestic animals, it is required to
assess the real status of livestock, which might not be
always the case [14].
2.3. Review of some infectious diseases already reported
in European wild ungulates

A global view of infectious diseases affecting domestic
animals but already reported in European wild ungulates
is presented in additional file 1 (bacteria), additional file
2 (viruses and prions) and additional file 3 (parasites).
The epidemiological role of each species with respect to
the pathological agent is specified. Nevertheless, it is not
an exhaustive list of all diseases affecting wild ungulates
as these studies only focused on pathogens affecting
domestic animals. Pathogens were generally characterized by laboratory tests developed for domestic livestock.
Some results such as apparent prevalence may therefore
be biased [14]. In addition, the achievement of studies
will also largely depend on the geographical accessibility
of the region [15].

3. Risks factors associated with the transmission
of diseases
A wide range of factors related to the ecology of diseases, e.g. environmental and ecological parameters, are
constantly changing and will subsequently induce modifications in the transmission of pathogens. According to
the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health Code, an EID is “a
new infection resulting from the evolution or change of
an existing pathogenic agent, a known infection

Page 4 of 16

spreading to a new geographic area or population, or a
previously unrecognised pathogenic agent or disease
diagnosed for the first time and which has a significant
impact on animal or public health” [16]. Approximately
75% of the pathogens having affected or affecting
humans for the last 20 years originate from animals
[17]. Moreover, 72% of human EIDs reported between
1940 and 2004 find their origin in wildlife [18]. The role
of wild ungulates as a reservoir of infectious diseases,
for both humans and livestock, is now well established
[19]. Over 250 species of human pathogens have been
isolated from ungulates [20]. The main factors affecting
the transmission of pathogens among populations of
wild ungulates are listed hereafter. Factors related to the
host, the pathogen and the environmental changes are
considered separately [21]. Most environmental modifications are anthropogenic because directly or indirectly
linked to human activities, thus, they are expected to
change with time [3]. A spatial classification (local vs.
global) of the main factors involved in the transmission
of pathogens between wild and domestic ungulates are
illustrated in Figure 1.
3.1. Global level (national or European level)
3.1.1. Environmental changes

3.1.1.1. Distribution of geographical spaces Different
factors can explain the constantly increasing interactions
between wild and domestic animals. A major parameter
is the growing human population, which increased four
times during the previous century to now reach 6.9 billion people [22]. Such human population involves a huge
and diversified protein demand constantly increasing
[23]. In most European countries, large populations of
wild ungulates are concentrated in small delimited areas
because of high human distribution and densities. Degradation and fragmentation of wild spaces are the main
anthropogenic factors associated with the emergence of
diseases in wildlife [10,24]. The Food and Agricultural
Organization (FAO) website [25] provides surface areas
of the different type of land cover (agricultural, forestry,
crops, meadows, etc.) since 1961 for almost all European
countries: their evolution rates in Europe are summarized
in Table 2. Until the nineties, areas dedicated to permanent crops and permanent pastures were increasing, leading to a diminution of natural landscape available for wild
animals. However, a recent increase in forests areas as
well as a global reduction of agricultural areas are
observed, reflecting a decreasing importance of agriculture in the economy and additional space for wild populations (positive for wildlife conservation). What will be
the real impact on the transmission on infectious diseases
between wild animals is still to be assessed.
3.1.1.2. Chemical pollution Chemical pollution may
have a negative impact on wildlife demography or

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

Page 5 of 16

“GLOBAL FACTORS”

“LOCAL FACTORS”

Global agricultural practices
-Agricultural intensification
-Organic farming
Climate change
-Distribution of vectors
-Modulations in diseases cycles

Natural dynamics of populations
-Gregarious vs. solitarious
animals

Wildlife diseases

Global human population
-Changes in distribution of
geographical spaces
-Higher protein demand
-Urbanisation

Environmental changes
-Chemical pollution
-Exploitation of natural resources
-Overabundance of some species

Hunters’behaviour
-Food supplementation programs
-Extinction of some predators
- Leaving of offals
-Type of hunting management

?
Livestock diseases

Microbial adaptation
-Generalized used of antibiotics
-Generalized used of vaccines

Local farming practices
-Massive transhumances
-Overgrazing pastures
-Mode of herdsheeping

Scientists’ behaviour
-Human more present
- Biomedical manipulations
Publics’behaviour
-Higher curiosity for wild spaces
-Development of games parks

Figure 1 Spatial classification (local vs. global) of the main factors involved in the transmission of pathogens between wild and
domestic ungulates.

disease susceptibility. Direct impact on reproductive
parameters and sex ration has been described [24].
Immunodepression can directly result from a toxic accumulation of chemicals at subclinical levels and increase
the susceptibility to infectious diseases [26]. Several studies targeting the consequences of chemical pollution
on wildlife reported a direct negative impact on birds
and rodents but only few studies focused on wild ungulates [27]. In France, wildlife intoxication reports are
registered by the SAGIR Network, in charge of the wildlife health surveillance [28]. Twenty five percent of
mammalian intoxication reports concerned ungulates,
but only 2.1% of cases were confirmed by positive findings [27]. Scientists reported a biomagnification of chemical concentrations via a food-chain transfer: for
instance, liver concentrations of chlordecone, a carcinogenic insecticide, were lower in herbivores (bottom of
the food chain) than in carnivores, and concentrations
in scavengers were still more elevated (top of the food
chain) [29]. The season of sampling should be considered whenever using wildlife as an accumulative bioindicator of environmental pollution. Indeed, seasonal
variability in metal levels measured in roe deer kidneys
found its origin in the difference of nutrition, both
quantitative and qualitative. Seasonal peaks for the

majority of metals are observed in a very narrow period
(summer-autumn). Some plant taxons, such as fungi, are
an important pathway for heavy metal intake into the
mammalian organism [30]. In addition, consequences
and interactions of chemicals on the expression of a disease are not entirely elucidated yet.
3.1.2. Global agricultural practices

The last century was marked by an evolution of agricultural practices especially through industrialisation. Until
the nineties, populations of “European classic livestock
species” (cattle, sheep, goat, pig) were globally increasing
(Table 3), along with an increase of areas dedicated to
farming (Table 2). In such systems, domestic animals
were genetically selected for a specific production, and
as a result, they are less hardy and resistant to a high
exposure rate of pathogens. However, since a few years,
everywhere in Europe, public opinion is getting worried
about the environment: people are in favour of an agriculture respectful of the environment. Development of
organic farming is thus gaining much interest: areas
dedicated to such farming were occupying more than
6% of the total agricultural areas in 2008 in Europe [25].
In opposite to the global intensification of agricultural
practices, extensive farming systems regain interest,
facilitating contacts between livestock and wildlife.

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

Page 6 of 16

2008/2000

ecological factors described below also favour their
emergence [26].
3.1.4. Climate change

Table 2 Evolution of European lands resources
1990/1961
Country area

1.000

1.000

Agricultural area

0.993

0.967

Arable land

0.935

0.964

Arable land and Permanent crops

0.939

0.963

Fallow land

*

*

Forest area

*

1.005

Inland water

1.003

1.008

Land area
Other land

1.000
*

1.000
1.014

Permanent crops

1.024

0.948

Permanent meadows and pastures

1.047

0.973

Temporary crops

*

*

Ratios (i) equal 1 mean that the area stayed constant during the period
considered (ii) lower than 1: diminution of the area (iii) higher than 1:
augmentation of the area concerned.
These ratios were obtained dividing land areas (in 1000 Ha) of 2 years. We
performed 2 ratios, [area in 1990]/[area in 1961] and [area in 2008]/[area in
2000], to have a constant total European countries area (which changed
between 1990 and 2000).
*unavailable data
Data obtained from the fao website, consulted 19 December 2010 (updated
on September 2010). http://faostat.fao.org/site/377/DesktopDefault.aspx?
PageID=377#ancor. Request was effectuated with the selection: (i) Country:
“Europe + (Total)” and “Europe > (List); (ii) Year: “1961, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000,
2008"; (iii) Item: “Country area, Agricultural area, Arable land, Arable land and
Permanent crops, Fallow land, Forest area, Inland water, Land area, Other
land, Permanent crops, Permanent meadows and pastures, Temporary crops”.

3.1.3. Microbial evolution and adaptation

Pathogens lacking intermediate stages such as viruses,
bacteria or protozoans are the main recently emerged
pathogens of wildlife [15]. Out of 31 pathogens identified as having a real impact on the dynamics of mammals, 41% are viruses [31]. Because of their high
mutational rate, RNA viruses are perfect candidates for
emergence. However, even if the evolution of pathogens
plays a key role in the emergence of diseases, the

According to the last report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the earth’s surface
and oceans temperatures are increasing by leading to
the constant reduction of land snow cover and the melting of sea ice and glaciers [32]. The global mean surface
air temperature increased of an average of 0.75 C since
the mid-twentieth century and climate experts expect
this increase to continue during the 21th century [33].
As a result, changes in ecosystems are occurring in
many parts of the world: the distribution of species and
timing of events in some seasonal cycles are affected
[34]. In Europe, changes are less obvious than in other
sensible parts of the world such as arctic or tropical
ecosystems. However, epidemiological cycles are affected
since the temperature threshold may modulate the cycle
of vector-borne microorganisms [35]. Climate changes
might favour the emergence of vector-borne diseases
and be responsible of outbreaks of known diseases in
regions where they were never reported before. The prevalence and distribution of well-known vector-borne diseases have already increased during the last decade [33].
In the Mediterranean region, bluetongue virus (BTV)
recently emerged and became enzootic in livestock [36].
Wild ungulates were proved to be receptive to the virus
in all European regions [37,38]. In southern Spain, BTV
antibodies were detected in wild ruminants in areas
where no outbreak had been reported in livestock, suggesting their potential role of reservoir for BTV, but this
statement requires further confirmation [39]. The distribution of ticks is evolving along with climate changes.
Indeed, during the last 20 years, the upper limit of tick
distributions shifted from 700-800 m to 1200-1300 m
above the sea level [40]. Consequences on wildlife

Table 3 Evolution of the number of living animals in Europe
1970/1961

1980/1970

1990/1980

2000/1990

2009/2000

Global rate
2009/1961

Cattle
Goats

1.13
0.76

1.15
1.01

0.98
1.28

0.60
0.86

0.85
0.84

0.65
0.71

Pigs

1.11

1.33

1.05

0.77

0.94

1.12

Sheep

0.96

1.04

1.11

0.50

0.89

0.49

Donkeys

0.69

0.72

0.81

0.59

0.79

0.19

Buffaloes

0.89

0.85

1.04

0.40

1.49

0.47

Camels

0.86

0.97

1.11

0.04

0.70

0.02

Horses

0.70

0.72

0.92

0.69

0.90

0.29

Mules

0.57

0.52

0.63

0.70

0.85

0.11

Ratios (i) of 1 mean the numbers remained constant during the period of concern (ii) ratios < 1: decreased number (iii) and > 1: increased number. These ratios
were obtained by dividing numbers of animals aged 2 years.
Data obtained from the fao website, consulted 19 December 2010 (updated on September 2010). http://faostat.fao.org/site/573/default.aspx#ancor. Request was
effectuated with the selection: (i) Country: “Europe + (Total)” and “Europe > (List); (ii) Year: “1961, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2009"; (iii) Item: “Cattle, Goats, Pigs,
Sheep, Asses, Buffaloes, Camels, Horses, Mules”.

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

infections were immediate: in 2005, tick-borne babesiosis was reported for the first time in chamois (Rupicapra
rupicapra) in Switzerland [41].
3.1.5. Global increased mobility and trade

The last decades were marked by an increased human
and animal mobility as well as a constantly evolving animal trade. The translocation of wild or domestic animals
is one of the major factors responsible for the introduction of diseases. The trade of living animals was multiplied by a factor 10 between 1995 and 2005: global
imports and exports were respectively 8.8 and 13.5
times more important in 2005 than in 1995 [42]. Transports are often carried out under very poor conditions
because animals are piled up and stressed. Their susceptibility to infections increases. Even if it mainly concerns species other than ungulates, wildlife trade is one
of the main problems in a potential cross-species transmission of infectious agents [43]. One should also consider (re)introduction of wild animals for hunting
purpose when focusing on wildlife trade. The presence
in Europe of most non-native species of ungulates may
be explained by such practices. It is currently almost
impossible to quantify the global wildlife trade as it is
mostly illegal. However, the economic impact resulting
from outbreaks caused by wildlife trade has globally
reached hundreds of billions dollars to date [23]. Spatial
mobility of humans was multiplied by more than 1000
since 1800. A 222% increase is expected for the number
of passenger per km by 2035 [44]. As the incubation
period of most infections exceeds the time necessary to
transfer an animal from a country to another [45], the
propagation of pathogens and vectors has reached an
unprecedented rate.
3.2. Local level (regional or district)
3.2.1. Natural dynamics of populations

The social organisation of populations impacts the
transmission rate of infections: the probability of contacts is higher for gregarious animals than for solitary
species. Besides, the reproduction period is characterised
by increased contacts between individuals [9]. Furthermore, the exposure to pathogens depends on the presence/absence of migratory flows [3]. European wild
ungulates are not migratory animals as such, except
reindeer (Rangifer tarandus). Nevertheless, once wild
populations colonize and occupy a given area, some animals might later radially disperse to close areas and be
at risk for contamination [5]. Natural and artificial barriers are likely to limit animal movements and may thus
reduce the transmission of pathogens.
3.2.2. Human behaviours

Contacts between wildlife and livestock are also increasing because behaviours of farmers, hunters, scientists
and the general public are changing.

Page 7 of 16

3.2.2.1. Farmers Along with a global change of agricultural practices at the European scale, it is important to
consider local agricultural practices. Changes of farmers’
behaviours mostly impact contact rates between wild and
domestic ungulates. Pastures are places where the transmission rate of infectious diseases is the highest [46].
Farmers’ management of pastures are thus of major
importance. Some practices such as salt deposits in alpine
pastures enhance the risk of indirect transmission of
pathogens, like Pasteurella for example [47]. Mountain
transhumance (summer moving of domestic flocks to
alpine meadows) was initially performed at walking-distance. Nowadays, flocks are moved by cattle-trucks, allowing long-distance transportations of more animals; alpine
meadows are overgrazed and the probability of contacts
with wildlife increases. Besides, whereas initially created to
protect biodiversity, national parks allow domestic flocks
to graze inside their central part in some countries, which
may have detrimental effects for both sides.
3.2.2.2. Hunters Hunting behaviours may play a major
role in the transmission of diseases between or among
wild populations. Food supplementation programs
implemented to increase the number of hunting bags
have drastically disturbed the natural regulation and
spatial distribution of populations. Various wild populations, e.g. wild boar [48] or red deer [49], are constantly
growing. For example, in Wallonia (Belgium), red deer
and roe deer populations have increased twofold while
wild boar populations have more than tripled between
1980 and 2005 [50]. In some other European areas,
populations are overabundant. The hunting of predators
led to their extinction and a subsequent imbalance of
interactions between species. Offals of dead wild ungulates are generally left in the field, which may reach at
the European scale thousands of tons of potentially
infected materials in free access to other species. When
an infectious disease is prevalent in wild populations,
directed shots of sick animals are often applied. However, during a recent outbreak of infectious keratoconjonctivitis in Alpine wild ungulates, such measure seems
to have prevented the natural immunisation of populations (Gauthier, personnal communication). A global
reduction in hunting pressure may therefore be preferred, especially to protect reproductive adults.
3.2.2.3. General public For many city dwellers, contacts
with nature are limited to controlled areas such as
national parks or wildlife game parks. National/regional
natural areas are government parks, of which the first
objective is to protect natural lands (ecosystems). Wild
ungulates may or may not be hunted in function of
local legislation. In these opened parks, public frequentation is constantly increasing, as people are in search of
a closer contact with nature under protected conditions.
The frequency of contacts between wild species and

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

humans increases as a consequence of natural tourism
[51]. Wildlife game parks could be associated to ‘game
zoos’: species belonging to the native European wild
fauna are parked in closed areas. Densities of populations are often high and animals are frequently translocated between different parks. The high density rate can
be implicated in the transmission of diseases [52]. Deer
farming is promoted by several European governments
like Switzerland [53]. In France, 400 deer farms are
inventoried [54]. The proximity of several species
(including humans) will subsequently play a key role in
the contact rate.
3.2.2.4. Scientists More and more scientific studies
focus on monitoring of wild populations. Even if carefully controlled, the intrusions of scientists may be a
risk of disease transmission. Even if some introduction
programs prevent animal transfers from one region to
another, or between different countries, some wounded
animals are brought to health cares and released after
successful treatment. While it mainly concerns wild species other than ungulates, such practices can also
increase the risk of diseases transmission.

4. Control measures of infectious diseases already
implemented in European wildlife
The section below develops the measures already implemented or to be implemented by European countries to
control the transmission of diseases between wild and
domestic animals, at three different levels: (i) European;
(ii) national, (iii) regional (local).
4.1. At European level

The continuity between all living beings involved in the
transmission of infectious diseases must be treated from
an international point of view.
4.1.1. Wildlife-livestock-human continuum

As previously described, the importance of contacts
between wildlife, livestock and humans is such that
some authors suggested a “wildlife-livestock-human continuum” [55]. In 2008, King suggested to use the term
“interdependence” instead of “independence” of these
three compartments [56]. As a consequence, a new concept of conservation medicine emerged for the protection of animal, human and ecosystem healths [57]. The
main goals are to promote the development of scientific
studies for problems occurring at the interface between
environmental and health (human and animal) sciences
[58]. In this context, studies of the community ecology
should be performed, in order to better understand the
epidemiological links between all actors of the wildlifelivestock-human-continuum [59].
4.1.2 Biodiversity and wild heritage

As already mentioned, infectious diseases affecting wildlife have several impacts such as depletion of

Page 8 of 16

populations and rare species (on their own or in concert
with other factors) but management actions also have
an environmental impact [60]. Nevertheless, if diseases
are a risk for wildlife conservation, preserving biodiversity helps also avoiding their emergence. For example,
the prevalence of vector-borne diseases will decrease if
the variety of food sources (native hosts) increases, as
the infestation rate within each species will be reduced
[61].
4.1.2.1. Wild mammals The first modern complete
inventory of mammals was established in 1982, with a
list of 4 170 species identified (cited in [62]). The 1993inventory included 4 629 different species [63]. In 2005,
the complete list of mammals indexed 5 416 species the
total number being estimated at around 5 500: 99% of
mammalian species are thus probably already known
[64]. Such increasing number of identified species is due
to the separate listing of newly discovered phenotypes
and genotyping through molecular biology (taxonomic
revision). Two hundred and forty species of Artiodactyla
pertaining to 89 genera are described, most of them living in the biodiversity “hot spots” located in SubSaharan Africa. European species of Artiodactyla are by
contrast less numerous (see Table 1).
4.1.2.2. Domestic species Through selection, man created numerous breeds of domestic animals, e.g. there
are approximately 700 breeds of cattle identified worldwide [65]. Nevertheless, many of them are on the verge
of extinction, decreasing the genetic variability of cattle.
4.1.2.3. Role of biodiversity in disease ecology The
influence of human activities on endangered and unmanaged wild fauna is of major concern. Out of 31 cases
of disease emergence in wildlife, only 6 were not influenced by humans [15]. Eighty-eight percent of mammals
at risk for severe infections and listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red
List of Threatened and Endangered Species are carnivores or artiodactyls [31]. Most livestock and companion
animals belong to these categories. The degradation of
ecosystems, the loss of habitats and diminishing food
resources force some species to use alternative alimentary sources [1]. Biodiversity acts as a primordial barrier
against infectious pathogens. Besides, anthropogenic factors causing losses of biodiversity increase the risk of
disease emergence [26] by modifying the abundance, the
behaviour or the condition of hosts or vectors [66]. It is
then crucial to preserve biodiversity in an integrated and
sustainable manner [67].
4.1.3. OIE working group on wildlife diseases

In order to develop specific surveillance guidelines for
wildlife diseases, the OIE recently created a Working
Group on Wildlife Diseases [68]. It provides information
on the wild animal health status, either in the wild or in
captivity. Its most important missions are: (i) the

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

elaboration of recommendations and the reviewing process of scientific publications on wildlife diseases; (ii) the
implementation of surveillance systems of the wildlifedomestic animals-human continuum and (iii) the control of emerging and re-emerging zoonoses.
4.1.4. Prioritization of wildlife diseases

Based on an OIE imported framework, a method of
“rapid risk analysis” was developed in New Zealand with
the aim to prioritize pathogens for the wildlife disease
surveillance strategy [69]. Authors first listed all wildlife
pathogens likely to interfere with animal or human
health. They selected the pathogens likely to have a serious impact on wildlife, livestock and/or humans, after
consulting experts of each sector. The risk estimate for
each pathogen was scored on a semi-quantitative scale
(from 1 to 4). The likelihood and consequences of spread
were assessed for free-living and captive wildlife, livestock
(distinction between consequences on productivity, welfare and trade), humans and companion animals. The
risk of introduction in New Zealand was also assessed
(scores: 0 or 1). Finally, pathogens were ranked and
authors listed the top exotic and endemic dangerous
wildlife pathogens for each population of interest (wildlife, domestic animals or human). Summing the risk estimate for each population gave a “total risk estimate” [69].
In Europe, the French agency for food, environmental
and occupational health safety (Anses) multidisciplinary
working group also elaborated a two-phase risk prioritization method [35]: (i) identification of diseases of which
the incidence or geographical distribution could be
affected by climate change, (ii) the risk assessment for
each disease. Twenty diseases likely to be influenced by
climate changes were selected. The authors qualitatively
assessed the risk of each disease for its impact on human
and animal health and on economy, considering the likelihood of disease evolution and the impact level. Three
diseases affecting ungulates were selected for which some
measures needed to be implemented (BTV, Rift Valley
Fever and African horse sickness).
The prioritisation of diseases is useful to (re)-direct
and target funds allocated to diseases surveillance and
research. Organisms involved in wildlife conservation
will be more inclined to financially support the control
of wildlife diseases [69]. However, several current EIDs
should in fact be considered as re-emerging [70]. To
focus wildlife surveillance on prioritized agents could
lead to a reduced vigilance/surveillance of “old” diseases.
Their implementation in a global surveillance of wildlife
diseases should be conducted carefully.
4.2. At country level

Some decisions will depend on the organization of
national governments and bodies in charge of sanitary
surveillance.

Page 9 of 16

4.2.1. Surveillance programs

Disease surveillance is defined by the World Health
Organization (WHO) as “the ongoing systematic collection, analysis and interpretation of data but also the dissemination of information to the different actors
involved in wildlife management” [71]. For the OIE, surveillance is “aimed at demonstrating the absence of disease/infection, determining the occurrence or
distribution of disease/infection, while also detecting as
early as possible exotic or emerging diseases” [72]. Several European Member States (MSs) have already implemented a health monitoring of their main wild
populations. Surveillance systems of wildlife diseases are
usually declined in passive surveillance, which consists
in reports and necropsies of all animals found dead, and
active surveillance, declined as the sampling of some
populations in order to assess the (sero)-prevalence of
infections. Such systems are now well developed in Belgium [37], Spain (Gortazar, personal communication),
France (SAGIR Network) [73] and Switzerland (RyserDegiorgis, personal communication). A National Health
Surveillance Program for cervids (HOP) was implemented in Norway in 2001 [74]. In Sweden, a monitoring of
wildlife health exists since 1945 and became an integrated part of the National Environmental Monitoring
Programs [75].
Such systems should be developed at a larger scale.
Each State should be able to provide relevant information on the health status of its wild populations. To help
other countries developing surveillance systems, it may
be interesting to provide guidelines with different modalities in function of the specific epidemiological situation. Standardization of protocols between the different
countries would permit a better global and harmonized
evaluation of diseases status, and would allow the implementation of an efficient surveillance system. Moreover,
the implementation of epidemiological surveillance
should be based on both epidemiological (regular collection and analysis of epidemiological information and
early warning systems for animal diseases) and ecological monitoring (surveillance of vectors and wild reservoirs) [35].
4.2.2. Vaccination programs

Several reasons may justify the implementation of vaccination programs in wild animals: (i) conservation of
endangered species, (ii) reduction of disease impacts,
(iii) protection of human health (zoonotic agents) and
(iv) prevention of transmission to domestic animals (and
subsequent economic losses) [58]. Besides, vaccination is
an alternative to global culling of wild reservoirs. However, it is important to keep in mind the goals of a vaccination programme. Indeed, a safe and effective vaccine
can be used in restricted threatened populations and
provide expected results. To eliminate a pathogen in a

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

large area or in large populations, vaccination programs
may be used in a multiple-hosts system or at a too-large
scale and be unsuccessful. The majority of available vaccines have been developed for domestic animals, and
their efficacy and safety are in most cases unknown for
wildlife. An ideal vaccine for wildlife should be (i) administered per os, (ii) mono-dose (iii) safe for target and
non-target species and, if possible, (iv) inexpensive to
produce [76]. For example, in Europe, vaccination programs have been implemented in wild boar for classical
swine fever (CSF). In France, a quantitative and retrospective study showed that a preventive vaccination
(using oral baits) in a determined region improved the
control of CSF, but did not eradicate the disease [77].
For multi-hosts pathogens such as Mycobacterium bovis,
vaccination programs may be more difficult to implement [78], the previous identification of reservoir(s)
being essential. Vaccination programs against M. bovis
were recently started in the UK for badgers [76] or in
Spain for wild boar [79]. In conclusion, vaccination programs can be used in wildlife under specific conditions,
especially for small populations or in restricted areas
[58].
4.2.3. Sentinel animals

A sentinel species is an animal/species different from
the target animal/species. The use of sentinel animals
may be applied in three main situations: when adequate
sampling of the target species is difficult (e.g. rare or
endangered species), when the sentinel species is more
abundant (e.g. use of sentinel chickens instead of wild
birds for West Nile virus monitoring) and finally, when
the species provides useful information on lower trophic
level (e.g. the study of scavengers or carnivores) [8,80].
The place a species occupies in the food chain determines its probability of contamination [81]. The target
and the sentinel population must be epidemiologically
linked, at least spatially and the response of sentinel animals against a particular pathogen must be demonstrable [82]. For example, red deer are used as a sentinel
species for the surveillance of BTV in Spain [38].
4.3. At local level (district or region)

(Inter)-national regulations must be implemented at
local levels also, involving the participation of local
structures, such as farmers groups or hunter
organisations.
4.3.1. Adaptation of livestock farming

Wild animals are often considered as reservoir of infectious diseases [19]. However, in many cases, infections
originate from domestic animals. For instance, bovine
herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) can induce a moderate infection
in deer, whereas cattle is not at risk for the cervid herpesvirus 1 [83]. Thus, contacts should be limited but, at
best, avoided between wild fauna and livestock [67]. In

Page 10 of 16

some regions of North America, brucellosis became endemic among wapitis (Cervus elaphus) and bisons (Bison
bison). Bisons were infected by cattle around 1900, and the
disease became endemic in those wild populations after
their release. Although this example concerns non-European wild populations, the measures implemented are
interesting to develop in this review. Despite the implementation of feedgrounds and vaccination, habitat
improvement and prevention of commingling, livestock
still remains infected. Other management options were
then proposed: (i) removing cattle from public lands, (ii)
developing and implementing brucellosis vaccines more
effective for elks and bisons, (iii) managing cattle through
vaccination and physical separation from elks and bisons
and (iv) using contraceptives in elks to reduce pregnancies
and abortions [84]. In the U.S. Sierra Nevada, a model
assessing the impact of different management strategies of
domestic sheep (grazing allotment closure, grazing time
reductions and reduced probability of contact with stray
domestic animals) on the transmission of respiratory diseases from domestic herds to endangered bighorn sheep
was built [85]. In order to reduce the risk of disease transmission, the best solution was to avoid an overlapping
between domestic sheep and bighorn sheep grazing areas.
Such epidemiologic studies show the importance of
identifying and assessing the risks in order to implement
preventive measures. Efforts should be devoted towards
avoiding contacts between wild and domestic animals.
Compartmentalisation and zoning are biosecurity measures advised by the OIE Terrestrial animal health code
to avoid contacts between domestic and wild animals.
However, such measures are often impossible to achieve
in field conditions. The total surface area of the European continent occupied by national parks, protected
zones where grazing is forbidden, is in fact very limited
[83]. Efforts should be devoted to improve biosecurity in
farms. In the UK, cattle often contract Mycobacterium
bovis tuberculosis in pasture contaminated by badger
excreta [86]. In order to reduce the risk of contamination in pasture, different practices such as the presence
of ungrazed wildlife strips, and the greater availability,
width and continuity of hedgerow may be proposed.
The management of grazing has shown to reduce the
risk of contamination. Here are other examples of efficient measures: rotational grazing system, off-fencing of
setts and latrines, the avoidance of grazing pasture too
short, the non-introduction of cattle to recently cut
fields, the moving of cattle to fresh pasture in the afternoon and the absence of supplementary feeding on pasture [87].
4.3.2. Specific hunting measures

While hunters may play an important role in the transmission of diseases, they can also be important for their
control. Indeed, most scientific studies dealing with

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

infectious pathogens in wildlife require an effective collaboration with hunters, as sampling is facilitated on
carcasses of hunted animals. Such collaborations should
be promoted at a larger scale. Besides, the establishment
of controlled management plans for different known diseases should be promoted.

5. Perspectives
Interdisciplinary collaboration is a requisite to the success of management programs. Studies involving biologists, ecologists, veterinarians, epidemiologists and
medical doctors should then be promoted. Nevertheless,
further research is needed to clearly assess all consequences of the diseases transmitted between wildlife,
livestock and humans. A better knowledge of wild populations (size and distribution) of each species should be
promoted by applying harmonized methods among the
different regions and/or countries. Besides, more studies
could be performed in order to understand and analyse
the infectious strains circulating among wild animals,
but, above all, to compare them to strains circulating
among domestic livestock. In most cases, researchers
ignore if strains circulating among domestic and wild
populations are similar. The epidemiological cycles of
infectious diseases in all populations of concern are not
well assessed to date. Then, it would be interesting to
study methods of space sharing between wild and
domestic animals. Costs associated as well as benefits
for biodiversity and economical incentives for livestock
farming should be evaluated. Because of numerous factors such as globalisation or climate changes, the threat
of EIDs is clearly present. The impact of EIDs on economy and public health is not always easily predictable,
and should receive more attention, through prioritization procedures for example. Awareness campaigns of
politics via a direct estimation of costs generated by
EIDs would allow funding research projects for wildlife
health surveillance. Ecology and protection of the environment should also be integrated in research programmes without neglecting the surveillance of already
known ‘old’ diseases.
To focus wildlife surveillance on prioritized agents
could lead to a reduced vigilance/surveillance of “old”
diseases. Their implementation in a global surveillance
of wildlife diseases should be conducted carefully. The
implementation of surveillance programs and research
studies is not achievable without the involvement of
local partners. However, the latter often complain about
significant discordances between research (most of the
time carried out at the European Union level) and field
conditions (regional level). Awareness campaigns and a
better communication between all sectors would ensure
a better involvement of all surveillance actors and thus
benefit to the global system. For example, the

Page 11 of 16

attribution of definite roles at the different levels would
provide a more efficient distribution of work. Furthermore, information provided by the surveillance of wildlife should be available for the whole scientific
community, in order to facilitate the development of
spatio-temporal epidemiological methodologies to
improve and refine it. Such approach would encourage
interdisciplinary collaborations by involving all partners.
Surveillance programs have already been implemented
in wildlife such as the PREDICT project [88] developed
by the Davis University of California: it uses a risk-based
approach focused in areas where zoonotic diseases are
most likely to emerge and where host species are likely
to have significant interaction with domestic animals
and high density human populations [88]. This proactive
novel approach should be adapted to the specific EU
situation. For some domestic species, epidemiologic networks are already in place, such as the RESPE network
(Epidemiosurveillance Network of Equine diseases) in
France [89]. This network is based on the existence of
different specialized networks. It involves owners/farmers, veterinarians and laboratories. The role of each
member is well definite, which comes out onto a wellworking network. Besides, decisional trees may be suggested to local partners in order to adapt their management of wild populations and surveillance of diseases.
These trees may propose different approaches for the
populations’ management in function of diseases or clinical signs reported. Such trees may simplify the decision
making for local partners, when, for example, an epizooty starts in wildlife populations. Management plans
will then be adapted more easily and more quickly.
A preliminary stage would be to categorise the diseases according to different parameters such as its mode
of transmission, its pathogeny or the type of clinical
signs it generates. Demographic specificities of the
populations of interest (gregarious vs. solitary) must be
taken into account also. According to the category of
disease and the type of populations, management plans
may be well adapted or not.

6. Conclusion
In 2004, King [45] reminded that knowledge and strategy were still missing for the prevention and control of
wild animal diseases. Nowadays, governments and scientists become aware of the necessity to provide means
for research on wildlife; scientific studies focusing on
wildlife ecology as well as surveillance programs are
indeed in expansion [1]. Nevertheless, numerous factors
influencing the transmission and ecology of diseases
reached a threshold without precedent, and are of major
concern for the control of wildlife diseases, such as
increasing pressure of humans on natural ecosystems
and rising interactions between the different species. A

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

Page 12 of 16

better surveillance of wildlife diseases implemented in
an integrated system involving international, national
and local actors would be of major relevance to understand the origin of diseases and subsequently to control
them. Efforts are required to reduce disagreements and
misunderstandings between all actors involved in sanitary surveillance of wildlife. The preservation of biodiversity is crucial for diminishing the risk of disease
transmission, as well as the improvement of farm
biosafety.

5.

Additional material

11.

Additional file 1: [90-137]. Selected bacterial diseases reported in
wild ungulates in Europe. This file is a table presenting a list of
bacterial diseases already reported in wild ungulates in Europe.

6.

7.

8.
9.
10.

12.

Additional file 2: [138-171]. Selected viral diseases reported in wild
ungulates in Europe. This file is a table presenting a list of viral diseases
already reported in wild ungulates in Europe.

13.

Additional file 3: [172-202]. Selected parasitic diseases reported in
wild ungulates in Europe. This file is a table presenting a list of
parasitic diseases already reported in wild ungulates in Europe.

14.

15.
16.

Acknowledgements
Dr Claire Martin was funded by a research grant of the University of Liege
(Belgium). There are no potential conflicts of interest for any of the authors.

17.

Author details
1
Research Unit in Epidemiology and Risk Analysis Applied to Veterinary
Sciences (UREAR), Department of Infectious and Parasitic diseases, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Boulevard de Colonster, 20, B42, B4000 Liège, Belgium. 2Publications Unit, World Organisation for Animal
Health (OIE), 12 Rue Prony, 75017 Paris, France. 3Scientific Institute of Public
Health, Department of Microbiology, Division of Virology, Rue Juliette
Wytsman 14, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium. 4Anses, Sophia-Antipolis Laboratory,
Unit of Ruminant Pathology, 105 Route des Chappes B.P.111, 06902 Sophia
Antipolis Cedex, France.

18.

Authors’ contributions
CM and CS participated in the conception and the design of the survey. CM
carried out the majority of the bibliographic search and the redaction of the
manuscript. PPP and BB revised the manuscript. MFH participated in the
English improvement and in the revision of the manuscript. CS participated
in the coordination as well as in the revision and commenting of the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

19.
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

27.
28.

Received: 22 August 2010 Accepted: 2 June 2011
Published: 2 June 2011

29.

References
1. Gortázar C, Ferroglio E, Höfle U, Frölich K, Vicente J: Diseases shared
between wildlife and livestock: A European perspective. Eur J Wild Res
2007, 53:241-256.
2. Cutler SJ, Fooks AR, van der Poel WH: Public health threat of new,
reemerging, and neglected zoonoses in the industrialized world. Emerg
Infect Dis 2010, 16:1-7.
3. Daszak P, Cunningham AA, Hyatt AD: Emerging infectious diseases of wildlife threats to biodiversity and human health. Science 2000, 287:443-449.
4. The NCBI Entrez Taxonomy Homepage. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
taxonomy].

30.

31.
32.
33.

34.

Conner MM, Ebinger MR, Blanchong JA, Cross PC: Infectious disease in
cervids of North America: data, models, and management challenges.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2008, 1134:146-172.
Aulagnier S, Haffner P, Mitchell-Jones AJ, Moutou F, Zima J: Guide des
Mammifères d’Europe, d’Afrique du Nord et du Moyen-Orient Delachaux et
Niestlé; 2008, (in French).
Toma B, Benet J-J, Dufour B, Eloit M, Moutou F, Sanaa M: In Glossaire
d’épidémiologie animale Edited by: Editions du Point Vétérinaire: MaisonsAlfort 1991, (in French).
Wobeser G: Disease in Wild Animals: Investigation and Management Berlin:
Spinger-Verlag; 2007.
Artois M, Caron A, Leighton FA, Bunn C, Vallat B: Wildlife and emerging
diseases. Rev Sci Tech 2006, 25:897-912, (in French).
Hudson PJ, Rizzoli AP, Grenfell BT, Heesterbeek JAP, Dobson AP: The ecology
of wildlife diseases Oxford; 2001.
Naranjo V, Gortázar C, Vicente J, De La Fuente J: Evidence of the role of
European wild boar as a reservoir of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
complex. Vet Microbiol 2008, 127:1-9.
Haydon DT, Cleaveland S, Taylor LH, Laurenson MK: Identifying reservoirs
of infection: a conceptual and practical challenge. Emerg Infect Dis 2002,
8:1468-1473.
Zanella G, Durand B, Hars J, Moutou F, Garin-Bastuji B, Duvauchelle A,
Fermé M, Karoui C, Boschiroli ML: Mycobacterium bovis in wildlife in
France. J Wildl Dis 2008, 44:99-108.
Martin C, Letellier C, Caij B, Gauthier D, Jean N, Shaffii A, Saegerman C:
Epidemiology of Pestivirus infection in wild ungulates of the French
South Alps. Vet Microbiol 2011, 147(3-4):320-328.
Dobson A, Foufopoulos J: Emerging infectious pathogens of wildlife.
Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 2001, 356:1001-1012.
Terrestrial Animal Health Code. [http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/
Health_standards/tahc/2010/en_glossaire.pdf].
Vallat B: Improving wildlife surveillance for its protection while
protecting us from the diseases it transmits.[http://www.oie.int/en/forthe-media/editorials/detail/article/improving-wildlife-surveillance-for-itsprotection-while-protecting-us-from-the-diseases-it-transmit/].
Jones KE, Patel NG, Levy MA, Storeygard A, Balk D, Gittleman JL, Daszak P:
Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature 2008, 451:990-993.
Simpson VR: Wild animals as reservoirs of infectious diseases in the UK.
Vet J 2002, 163:128-146.
Woolhouse ME, Gowtage-Sequeria S: Host range and emerging and
reemerging pathogens. Emerg Infect Dis 2005, 11:1842-1847.
Harrus S, Baneth G: Drivers for the emergence and re-emergence of
vector-borne protozoal and bacterial diseases. Int J Parasitol 2005,
35:1309-1318.
Worldometers. [http://worldometers.info/].
Karesh WB, Cook RA, Bennett EL, Newcomb J: Wildlife trade and global
disease emergence. Emerg Infect Dis 2005, 11:1000-1002.
Acevedo-Whitehouse K, Duffus AL: Effects of environmental change on
wildlife health. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 2009, 364:3429-3438.
FAO STAT. [http://faostat.fao.org/site/377/default.aspx#ancor].
Daszak P, Cunningham AA, Hyatt AD: Anthropogenic environmental
change and the emergence of infectious diseases in wildlife. Acta Trop
2001, 78:103-116.
Guitart R, Sachana M, Caloni F, Croubels S, Vandenbroucke V, Berny P:
Animal poisoning in Europe. Part 3: Wildlife. Vet J 2010, 183:260-265.
Lamarque F, Artois M, Berny P, Hatier C: Réseau SAGIR: douze ans de
toxicovigilance. Bull Mens Off Nat Chasse 1999, 246:18-26, (in French).
Yamamoto JT, Donohoe RM, Fry DM, Golub MS, Donald JM: Environmental
estrogens: implications for reproduction in wildlife. In Non infectious
diseases of wildlife. Edited by: Fairbrother A, Locke LN, Hoff GL. London:
Manson Publishing; 1996:31-51.
Pokorny B, Ribaric-Lasnik C: Seasonal variability of mercury and heavy
metals in roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) kidney. Environ Pollut 2002,
117:35-46.
Pedersen AB, Jones KE, Nunn CL, Altizer S: Infectious diseases and
extinction risk in wild mammals. Conserv Biol 2007, 21:1269-1279.
Delecluse P: The origin of climate changes. Rev Sci Tech 2008, 27:309-317.
De La Rocque S, Rioux JA, Slingenbergh J: Climate change: effects on
animal disease systems and implications for surveillance and control.
Rev Sci Tech 2008, 27:339-354.
Lovejoy T: Climate change and biodiversity. Rev Sci Tech 2008, 27:331-338.

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

35. Dufour B, Moutou F, Hattenberger AM, Rodhain F: Global change: impact,
management risk approach and health measures - the case of Europe.
Rev Sci Tech 2008, 27:529-550.
36. Saegerman C, Berkvens D, Mellor PS: Bluetongue epidemiology in the
European Union. Emerg Infect Dis 2008, 14:539-544.
37. Linden A, Mousset B, Grégoire F, Hanrez D, Vandenbussche F,
Vandemeulebroucke E, Vanbinst T, Verheyden B, De Clercq K: Bluetongue
virus antibodies in wild red deer in southern Belgium. Vet Rec 2008,
162:459.
38. Ruiz-Fons F, Reyes-García AR, Alcaide V, Gortázar C: Spatial and temporal
evolution of bluetongue virus in wild ruminants, Spain. Emerg Infect Dis
2008, 14:951-953.
39. García I, Napp S, Casal J, Perea A, Allepuz A, Alba A, Carbonero A, Arenas A:
Bluetongue epidemiology in wild ruminants from Southern Spain. Eur J
Wild Res 2009, 55:173-178.
40. Materna J, Daniel M, Metelka L, Harcarik J: The vertical distribution, density
and the development of the tick Ixodes ricinus in mountain areas
influenced by climate changes (The Krkonose Mts., Czech Republic). Int J
Med Microbiol 2008, 298:25-37.
41. Hoby S, Robert N, Mathis A, Schmid N, Meli ML, Hofmann-Lehmann R,
Lutz H, Deplazes P, Ryser-Degiorgis MP: Babesiosis in free-ranging
chamois (Rupicapra r. rupicapra) from Switzerland. Vet Parasitol 2007,
148:341-345.
42. Food and Agriculture Organization. Trade. [http://faostat.fao.org/site/604/
DesktopDefault.aspx?PageID=604#ancor].
43. Gómez A, Aguirre AA: Infectious diseases and the illegal wildlife trade.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2008, 1149:16-19.
44. Climate Neutral Network. [http://www.unep.org/climatechange/].
45. King LJ: Maladies zoonotiques émergentes et ré-émergentes: défis et
opportunités. Proceedings of the 72° session générale de l’Organisation
mondiale de la santé animale 2004, Paris (in French).
46. Van Campen H, Rhyan J: The role of wildlife in diseases of cattle. Vet Clin
North Am Food Anim Pract 2010, 26:147-161.
47. Richomme C, Gauthier D, Fromont E: Contact rates and exposure to interspecies disease transmission in mountain ungulates. Epidemiol Infect
2006, 134:21-30.
48. Laddomada A: Incidence and control of CSF in wild boar in Europe. Vet
Microbiol 2000, 73:121-130.
49. Gortázar C, Acevedo P, Ruiz-Fons F, Vicente J: Disease risks and
overabundance of game species. Eur J Wild Res 2006, 52:81-87.
50. Dataset of annual estimations of wild species (red deer, roe deer, fallow
deer, mouflons, wild boar and foxes). [http://environnement.wallonie.be/
cgi/dgrne/plateforme_dgrne/visiteur/v2/frameset.cfm?page=http://
environnement.wallonie.be/administration/dnf.htm].
51. Vistnes I, Nelleman C: The matter of spatial and temporal scales: a review
of reindeer and caribou response to human activity. Polar Biol 2008,
31:399-407.
52. Audigé L, Wilson PR, Morris RS: Disease and mortality on red deer farms
in New Zealand. Vet Rec 2001, 148:334-340.
53. Sieber V, Robert N, Schybli M, Sager H, Miserez R, Engels M, RyserDegiorgis MP: Causes of mortality and diseases in farmed deer in
Switzerland. Vet Med Int 2010.
54. Brelurut A, Chardonnet P, Benoît M: Deer farming in mainland France and
french overseas territories. Proceedings of the Quatrièmes rencontres autour
des recherches sur les ruminants 1997, Paris.
55. Collinge SK, Ray C: Disease ecology: community structure and pathogen
dynamics Oxford; 2006.
56. King LJ: Understanding the factors of animal disease emergence: a world
of one health. Colloquium Belgian Federal Agency for the Safety Food Chain;
Brussel 2008, 15-18.
57. Ostfeld RS, Meffe GK, Pearl MC: Conservation medicine: the birth of
another crisis discipline. In Conservation medicine: ecological health in
practice. Edited by: Aguirre AA, Ostfeld RS, Tabor GM, House C, Pearl MC.
New-York: Oxford University Press; 2002:.
58. Plumb G, Babiuk L, Mazet J, Olsen S, Rupprecht C, Pastoret PP, Slate D:
Vaccination in conservation medicine. Rev Sci Tech 2007, 26:229-241.
59. Osburn B, Scott C, Gibbs P: One world–one medicine–one health:
emerging veterinary challenges and opportunities. Rev Sci Tech 2009,
28:481-486.
60. Lafferty KD: Is disease increasing or decreasing, and does it impact or
maintain biodiversity? J Parasitol 2003, 89:S101-S105.

Page 13 of 16

61. Ostfeld RS: Biodiversity loss and the rise of zoonotic pathogens. Clin
Microbiol Infect 2009, 15(Suppl 1):40-43.
62. Pastoret PP, Moutou F: Invasive species. Part 1: general aspects and
biodiversity. Part 2: concrete examples. Rev Sci Tech 2010, 29:421-422.
63. Mammal Species of the World. [http://www.bucknell.edu/msw3/].
64. Don Wilson E, Reeder Dee Ann M: Mammal species of the world - a
Taxonomic and Geographic reference Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press; 2005.
65. Felius M: Cattle breeds, an encyclopedia Doetinchem; 1995.
66. Keesing F, Belden LK, Daszak P, Dobson A, Harvell CD, Holt RD, Hudson P,
Jolles A, Jones KE, Mitchell CE, Myers SS, Bogich T, Ostfeld RS: Impacts of
biodiversity on the emergence and transmission of infectious diseases.
Nature 2010, 468:647-652.
67. Maillard JC, Gonzalez JP: Biodiversity and emerging diseases. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 2006, 1081:1-16.
68. Planté C: Current position of the OIE on the approach of emerging
animal diseases. Colloquium Belgian Federal Agency for the Safety Food
Chain; Brussel 2008, 11-13.
69. McKenzie J, Simpson H, Langstaff I: Development of methodology to
prioritise wildlife pathogens for surveillance. Prev Vet Med 2007,
81:194-210.
70. De Meneghi D: Wildlife, environment and (re)-emerging zoonoses, with
special reference to sylvatic tick-borne zoonoses in North-Western Italy.
Ann Ist Super Sanità 2006, 42:405-409.
71. Protocol for the evaluation of epidemiological systems WHA/EMC/DIS/
97.2. [http://www.who.int/vaccines-documents/DocsWord/word577.doc].
72. Animal Health Surveillance. [http://www.oie.int/index.php?
id=169&L=0&htmfile=glossaire.htm#sous-chapitre-2].
73. Lamarque F, Hatier C, Artois M, Berny P, Diedler C: The SAGIR Network, a
national network for surveillance of wildlife diseases in France.
Epidémiologie et Santé Animale 2000, 37:21-30.
74. Lillehaug A, Bergsjø B, Schau J, Bruheim T, Vikøren T, Handeland K:
Campylobacter spp., Salmonella spp., verocytotoxic Escherichia coli, and
antibiotic resistance in indicator organisms in wild cervids. Acta Vet
Scand 2005, 46:23-32.
75. Mörner T: The domestic animal/wildlife interface: issues for disease
control, conservation, sustainable food production, and emerging
diseases. Conference of the Soc Trop Vet Med and Wild Dis Assoc; Pilanesberg
National Park 2001, 34-38.
76. Corner LA, Murphy D, Gormley E: Mycobacterium bovis Infection in the
Eurasian Badger (Meles meles): the disease, pathogenesis, epidemiology
and control. J Comp Pathol 2010, 144:1-24.
77. Rossi S, Pol F, Forot B, Masse-provin N, Rigaux S, Bronner A, Le Potier MF:
Preventive vaccination contributes to control classical swine fever in
wild boar (Sus scrofa sp.). Vet Microbiol 2010, 142:99-107.
78. Marano N, Rupprecht C, Regnery R: Vaccines for emerging infections. Rev
Sci Tech 2007, 26:203-215.
79. Ballesteros C, Vicente J, Morriss G, Jockney I, Rodriguez O, Gortazar C, De La
Fuente J: Acceptance and palatability for domesticand wildlife hosts of
baits designed to deliver a tuberculosis vaccine to wildboar piglets. Prev
Vet Med 2011, 98:198-203.
80. Rizzoli A, Rosa R, Rosso F, Buckley A, Gould E: West Nile virus circulation
detected in northern Italy in sentinel chickens. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis
2007, 7:411-417.
81. Wobeser G: Disease in Wild Animals: Investigation and Management Berlin:
Springer; 2007.
82. Hallyday JEB, Gjerde B, Robertson L, Vikøren T, Handeland K: A framework
for evaluating animals as sentinels for infectious disease surveillance. J R
Soc Interface 2007, 4:973-984.
83. Pastoret PP, Thiry E, Brochier B, Schwers A, Thomas I, Dubuisson J: Maladies
de la faune sauvage transmissibles aux animaux domestiques. Rev Sci
Tech 1988, 7:661-704, (in French).
84. Kreeger TJ: Brucellosis in wapiti (Cervus elaphus) and bison (Bison bison)
in the United States: a classic wildlife-human-livestock problem. 8th
Conference of the European Wildlife Disease Association, 2-5 October 2008;
Rovinj 2008, 31.
85. Clifford DL, Schumaker BA, Stephenson TR, Bleich VC, Cahn ML, Gonzales BJ,
Boyce WM, Mazet JAK: Assessing risk at the wildlife-livestock interface: a
study of Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep. Biol Conserv 2009, 142:2559-2568.
86. Hutchings MR, Harris S: Quantifying the risks of TB infection to cattle
posed by badger excreta. Epidemiol Infect 1999, 122:167-173.

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

87. Ward AI, Judge J, Delahay RJ: Farm husbandry and badger behaviour:
opportunities to manage badger to cattle transmission of
Mycobacterium bovis? Prev Vet Med 2010, 93:2-10.
88. UC Davis School of Vet Med: One Health Institute: PREDICT. [http://www.
vetmed.ucdavis.edu/ohi/predict/index.cfm].
89. Réseau d’Epidemio-Surveillance en Pathologie Equine. [http://www.respe.
net/].
90. De La Fuente J, Ruiz-Fons F, Naranjo V, Torina A, Rodriguez O, Gortázar C:
Evidence of Anaplasma infections in European roe deer (Capreolus
capreolus) from southern Spain. Res Vet Sci 2008, 84:382-386.
91. Adamska M, Skotarczak B: Wild game as a reservoir of Anaplasma
phagocytophilum in north-western Poland. Wiad Parazytol 2007,
53:103-107.
92. Carpi G, Bertolotti L, Pecchioli E, Cagnacci F, Rizzoli A: Anaplasma
phagocytophilum groEL gene heterogeneity in Ixodes ricinus larvae
feeding on roe deer in Northeastern Italy. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2009,
9:179-184.
93. Petrovec M, Bidovec A, Sumner JW, Nicholson WL, Childs JE, AvsicZupanc T: Infection with Anaplasma phagocytophila in cervids from
Slovenia: evidence of two genotypic lineages. Wien Klin Wochenschr 2002,
114:641-647.
94. Beninati T, Piccolo G, Rizzoli A, Genchi C, Bandi C: Anaplasmataceae in wild
rodents and roe deer from Trento Province (Northern Italy). Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 2006, 25:677-678.
95. Polin H, Hufnagl P, Haunschmid R, Gruber F, Ladurner G: Molecular
evidence of Anaplasma phagocytophilum in Ixodes ricinus ticks and wild
animals in Austria. J Clin Microbiol 2004, 42:2285-2286.
96. Skarphédinsson S, Jensen PM, Kristiansen K: Survey of tickborne infections
in Denmark. Emerg Infect Dis 2005, 11:1055-1061.
97. Stuen S, Moum T, Bernhoft A, Vene S: A paretic condition in an
Anaplasma phagocytophilum infected roe deer calf. J Wildl Dis 2006,
42:170-174.
98. De La Fuente J, Vicente J, Höfle U, Ruiz-Fons F, Fernádez de Mera IG, Van
Den Bussche RA, Kocan KM, Gortázar C: Anaplasma infection in freeranging Iberian red deer in the region of Castilla-La Mancha, Spain. Vet
Microbiol 2004, 100:163-173.
99. Grzeszczuk A, Ziarko S, Prokopowicz D, Radziwon PM: Evidence of
Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection in European Bisons in the
Bialowieza Primeral Forest, Poland. Med Weter 2004, 60:600-601.
100. Ebani VV, Cerri D, Fratini F, Ampola M, Andreani E: Anaplasma
phagocytophilum infection in a fallow deer (Dama dama) population in
a preserve of central Italy. New Microbiol 2007, 30:161-165.
101. Stoebel K, Schoenberg A, Streich WJ: The seroepidemiology of Lyme
borreliosis in zoo animals in Germany. Epidemiol Infect 2003, 131:975-983.
102. Al Dahouk S, Nöckler K, Tomaso H, Splettstoesser WD, Jungersen G, Riber U,
Petry T, Hoffmann D, Scholz HC, Hensel A, Neubauer H: Seroprevalence of
brucellosis, tularemia, and yersiniosis in wild boars (Sus scrofa) from
North-Eastern Germany. J Vet Med B 2005, 52:444-455.
103. Cvetnic Z, Spicic S, Toncic J, Majnaric D, Benic M, Albert D, Thiebaud M,
Garin-Bastuji B: Brucella suis infection in domestic pigs and wild boar in
Croatia. Rev Sci Tech 2009, 28:1057-1067.
104. Bergagna S, Zoppi S, Ferroglio E, Gobetto M, Dondo A, Di GE, Gennero MS,
Grattarola C: Epidemiologic survey for Brucella suis biovar 2 in a wild
boar (Sus scrofa) population in northwest Italy. J Wildl Dis 2009,
45:1178-1181.
105. Ferroglio E, Tolari F, Bollo E, Bassano B: Isolation of Brucella melitensis from
alpine ibex. J Wildl Dis 1998, 34:400-402.
106. Garin-Bastuji B, Oudar J, Richard Y, Gastellu J: Isolation of Brucella
melitensis biovar 3 from a chamois (Rupicapra rupicapra) in the southern
French Alps. J Wildl Dis 1990, 26:116-118.
107. Pastoret PP, Thiry E, Brochier B, Schwers A, Thomas I, Dubuisson J: Maladies
de la faune sauvage transmissibles aux animaux domestiques. Rev Sci
Tech 1988, 7:661-704, (in French).
108. Muñoz PM, Boadella M, Arnal M, de Miguel MJ, Revilla M, Martínez D,
Vicente J, Acevedo P, Oleaga A, Ruiz-Fons F, Marín CM, Prieto JM, de la
Fuente J, Barral M, Barberán M, de Luco DF, Blasco JM, Gortázar C: Spatial
distribution and risk factors of Brucellosis in Iberian wild ungulates. BMC
Infect Dis 2010, 10:46.
109. Leuenberger R, Boujon P, Thür B, Miserez R, Garin-Bastuji B, Rüfenacht J,
Stärk KD: Prevalence of classical swine fever, Aujeszky’s disease and

Page 14 of 16

110.

111.

112.
113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

brucellosis in a population of wild boar in Switzerland. Vet Rec 2007,
160:362-368.
Montagnaro S, Sasso S, De ML, Longo M, Iovane V, Ghiurmino G,
Pisanelli G, Nava D, Baldi L, Pagnini U: Prevalence of antibodies to
selected viral and bacterial pathogens in wild boar (Sus scrofa) in
Campania Region, Italy. J Wildl Dis 2010, 46:316-319.
Blancou J: Serologic testing of wild roe deer (Capreolus capreolus L.) from
the Trois Fontaines forest region of eastern France. J Wildl Dis 1983,
19:271-273.
Kita J, Anusz K: Serologic survey for bovine pathogens in free-ranging
European bison from Poland. J Wildl Dis 1991, 27:16-20.
Hotzel H, Berndt A, Melzer F, Sachse K: Occurrence of Chlamydiaceae spp.
in a wild boar (Sus scrofa L.) population in Thuringia (Germany). Vet
Microbiol 2004, 103:121-126.
Gaffuri A, Monaci C, Vicari N, Paterlini F, Magnino S: Dectection of
Chamydophila pecorum in the lung of an alpine chamois (Rupicapra
rupicapra) in Northern Italy. Proceedings of the 8th Conference of the
European Wildlife Disease Assciation, 2-5 October 2008; Rovinj 2008, 60.
Marreros N, Albini S, Hüssy D, Frey CF, Vogt RR, Abril C, Holzwarth N,
Borel N, Dittus S, Willisch C, Signer C, Ryser-Degiorgis MP: Serological
survey of infectious abortive agents in free-ranging alpine ibex (Capra
ibex ibex) in Switzerland. Proceedings of the 8th Conference of the European
Wildlife Disease Association, 2-5 October 2008; Rovinj 2008, 73.
Astobiza I, Barral M, Ruiz-Fons F, Barandika JF, Gerrikagoitia X, Hurtado A,
García-Pérez AL: Molecular investigation of the occurrence of Coxiella
burnetii in wildlife and ticks in an endemic area. Vet Microbiol 2011,
147:190-194.
Ruiz-Fons F, Rodríguez O, Torina A, Naranjo V, Gortázar C, De La Fuente J:
Prevalence of Coxiella burnetti infection in wild and farmed ungulates.
Vet Microbiol 2008, 126:282-286.
Barrat J, Gerard Y, Schwers A, Thiry E, Dubuisson J, Blancou J: Serological
survey in free-living red deer (Cervus elaphus) in France. The
management and health of farmed deer 1988, 123-127.
Szarek J, Rotkiewicz T, Anusz Z, Khan MZ, Chishti MA: Pathomorphological
studies in European bison (Bison bonasus Linnaeus, 1758) with
seropositive reaction to Coxiella burnetii. J Vet Med B 1994, 41:618-624.
García-Sánchez A, Sánchez S, Rubio R, Pereira G, Alonso JM, Hermoso de
Mendoza J, Rey J: Presence of Shiga toxin-producing E. coli O157:H7 in a
survey of wild artiodactyls. Vet Microbiol 2007, 121:373-377.
Handeland K, Boye M, Bergsjø B, Bondal H, Isaksen K, Agerholm JS: Digital
necrobacillosis in Norwegian wild tundra reindeer (Rangifer tarandus
tarandus). J Comp Pathol 2010, 143:29-38.
Vicente J, Höfle U, Garrido JM, Fernández de Mera IG, Juste R, Barral M,
Gortázar C: Wild boar and red deer display high prevalences of
tuberculosis-like lesions in Spain. Vet Res 2006, 37:107-119.
Pavlik I, Machackova M, Yayo Ayele W, Lamka J, Parmova I, Melicharek I,
Hanzlikova M, Körmendy B, Nagy G, Cvetnic Z, Ocepek M, Lipiec M:
Incidence of bovine tuberculosis in wild and domestic animals other
than cattle in six central European countries during 1990-1999. Vet Med
Czech 2002, 47:122-131.
Gortázar C, Torres MJ, Vicente J, Acevedo P, Reglero M, De La Fuente J,
Negro JJ, Aznar-Martín J: Bovine tuberculosis in Doñana Biosphere
Reserve: The role of wild ungulates as disease reservoirs in the last
Iberian lynx strongholds. PLoS One 2008, 3:e2776.
Aranaz A, De Juan L, Montero N, Sánchez C, Galka M, Delso C, Alvarez J,
Romero B, Bezos J, Vela AI, Briones V, Mateos A, Domínguez L: Bovine
tuberculosis (Mycobacterium bovis) in wildlife in Spain. J Clin Microbiol
2004, 42:2602-2608.
Candela MG, Serrano E, Martinez-Carrasco C, Martín-Atance P, Cubero MJ,
Alonso F, León L: Coinfection is an important factor in epidemiological
studies: the first serosurvey of the aoudad (Ammotragus lervia). Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 2009, 28:481-489.
Tryland M, Mørk T, Ryeng KA, Sorensen KK: Evidence of parapox-,
alphaherpes- and pestivirus infections in carcasses of semi-domesticated
reindeer (Rangifer tarandus tarandus) from Finnmark, Norway. Rangifer
2005, 25:75-83.
Machackova M, Svastova P, Lamka J, Parmova I, Liska V, Smolik J,
Fischer OA, Pavlik I: Paratuberculosis in farmed and free-living wild
ruminants in the Czech Republic (1999-2001). Vet Microbiol 2004,
101:225-234.

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

129. Carta T, Gortázar C, Vicente J, Reyes-García R, Perez-de-la-Lastra JM, Torres
Sanchez MJ, Negro JJ, Aznar-Martin J: Prevalence of Mycobacterium avium
paratuberculosis in wild ruminants (Cervus elaphus, Dama dama, Sus
scrofa) from Doñana National Park. Proceedings of the 8th Conference of
the European Wildlife Disease Association, 2-5 October 2008; Rovinj 2008, 29.
130. Reyes-García R, Pérez-de-la-Lastra JM, Vicente J, Ruiz-Fons F, Garrido JM,
Gortázar C: Large-scale ELISA testing of Spanish red deer for
paratuberculosis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2008, 124:75-81.
131. Alvarez J, De JL, Briones V, Romero B, Aranaz A, Fernández-Garayzbal JF,
Mateos A: Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis in fallow
deer and wild boar in Spain. Vet Rec 2005, 156:212-213.
132. Marco I, Ruiz M, Juste R, Garrido JM, Lavín S: Paratuberculosis in freeranging fallow deer in Spain. J Wildl Dis 2002, 38:629-632.
133. Ryser-Degiorgis MP, Bischof DF, Marreros N, Willisch C, Signer C, Filli F,
Brosi G, Frey J, Vilei EM: Detection of Mycoplasma conjunctivae in the
eyes of healthy, free-ranging Alpine ibex: possible involvement of Alpine
ibex as carriers for the main causing agent of infectious
keratoconjunctivitis in wild Caprinae. Vet Microbiol 2009, 134:368-374.
134. Verbisck-Bucker G, González-Candela M, Galián J, Cubero-Pablo MJ, MartínAtance P, León-Vizcaíno L: Epidemiology of Mycoplasma agalactiae
infection in free-ranging Spanish ibex (Capra pyrenaica) in Andalusia,
southern Spain. J Wildl Dis 2008, 44:369-380.
135. Hoelzle K, Engels M, Kramer MM, Wittenbrink MM, Dieckmann SM,
Hoelzle LE: Occurrence of Mycoplasma suis in wild boars (Sus scrofa L.).
Vet Microbiol 2010, 143:405-409.
136. Sibila M, Mentaberre G, Boadella M, Huerta E, Casas-Díaz E, Vicente J,
Gortázar C, Marco I, Lavín S, Segalés J: Serological, pathological and
polymerase chain reaction studies on Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae
infection in the wild boar. Vet Microbiol 2010, 144:214-218.
137. Ytrehus B, Bretten T, Bergsjø B, Isaksen K: Fatal pneumonia epizootic in
musk ox (Ovibos moschatus) in a period of extraordinary weather
conditions. Ecohealth 2008, 5:213-223.
138. Müller T, Teuffert J, Ziedler K, Possardt C, Kramer M, Staubach C,
Conraths FJ: Pseudorabies in the European wild boar from eastern
Germany. J Wildl Dis 1998, 34:251-258.
139. Gortázar C, Vicente J, Fierro Y, Léon L, Cubero MJ, González M: Natural
Aujeszky’s disease in a Spanish wild boar population. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2002, 969:210-212.
140. Sedlak K, Bartova E, Machova J: Antibodies to selected viral disease
agents in wild boars from the Czech Republic. J Wildl Dis 2008,
44:777-780.
141. Lutz W, Junghans D, Schmitz D, Moller T: A long-term survey of
pseudorabies virus infections in European wild boar of western
Germany. Z Jagdwiss 2003, 49:130-140.
142. Ruiz-Fons F, Vidal D, Höfle U, Vicente J, Gortázar C: Aujeszky’s disease virus
infection patterns in European wild boar. Vet Microbiol 2007, 120:241-250.
143. Vengust G, Valencak Z, Bidovec A: Presence of antibodies against
Aujeszky’s disease virus in wild boar (Sus scrofa) in Slovenia. J Wildl Dis
2005, 41:800-802.
144. Lari A, Lorenzi D, Nigrelli D, Brocchi E, Faccini S, Poli A: Pseudorabies virus
in European wild boar from central Italy. J Wildl Dis 2006, 42:319-324.
145. Vicente J, Ruiz-Fons F, Vidal D, Höfle U, Acevedo P, Villanúa D, Fernández
de Mera IG, Martín MP, Gortázar C: Serosurvey of Aujeszky’s disease virus
infection in European wild boar in Spain. Vet Rec 2005, 156:408-412.
146. Lelesius R, Sereika V, Zienius D, Michalskiene I: Serosurvey of wild boar
population for porcine parvovirus and other selected infectious diseases
in Lithuania. Bull Vet Inst Pulawy 2006, 50:143-147.
147. Albina E, Mesplède A, Chenut G, Potier MFl, Bourbao G, Gal Sl, Leforban Y:
A serological survey on classical swine fever (CSF), Aujeszky’s disease
(AD) and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS) virus
infections in French wild boars from 1991 to 1998. Vet Microbiol 2000,
77:43-57.
148. Zupancic Z, Jukic B, Lojkic M, Cac Z, Jemersic L, Staresina V:
Prevalence of antibodies to classical swine fever, Aujeszky’s disease,
porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome, and bovine viral
diarrhoea viruses in wild boars in Croatia. J Vet Med B 2002,
49:253-256.
149. Pérez J, Fernández AI, Sierra MA, Herráez P, Fernández A, Martín de las MJ:
Serological and immunohistochemical study of African swine fever in
wild boar in Spain. Vet Rec 1998, 143:136-139.

Page 15 of 16

150. Pioz M, Loison A, Gibert P, Dubray D, Menaut P, Le Tallec B, Artois M, GilotFromont E: Transmission of a pestivirus infection in a population of
Pyrenean chamois. Vet Microbiol 2007, 119:19-30.
151. Marco I, Rosell R, Cabezon O, Mentaberre G, Casas E, Velarde R, LopezOlvera JR, Hurtado A, Lavín S: Epidemiological study of border disease
virus infection in Southern chamois (Rupicapra pyrenaica) after an
outbreak of disease in the Pyrenees (NE Spain). Vet Microbiol 2008,
127:29-38.
152. Lillehaug A, Vikøren T, Larsen IL, A.kerstedt J, Tharaldsen J, Handeland K:
Antibodies to ruminant alpha-herpesviruses and pestiviruses in
Norwegian cervids. J Wildl Dis 2003, 39:779-786.
153. Frölich K, Hamblin C, Parida S, Tuppurainen E, Schettler E: Serological
survey for potential disease agents of free-ranging cervids in six
selected national parks from Germany. J Wildl Dis 2006, 42:836-843.
154. Gentile L, Mari F, Cardeti G, Macri G: Serologic survey in a chamois
population of Abruzzo. Hystrix 2000, 11:115-119.
155. Fernández-Pacheco p, Fernández-Pinero J, Agüero M, Jiménez-Clavero MA:
Bluetongue virus serotype 1 in wild mouflons in Spain. Vet Rec 2008,
162:659-660.
156. Henrich M, Reinacher M, Hamann HP: Lethal bluetongue virus infection in
an alpaca. Vet Rec 2007, 161:764.
157. Frölich K: Bovine virus diarrhea and mucosal disease in free-ranging and
captive deer (Cervidae) in Germany. J Wildl Dis 1995, 31:247-250.
158. Nielsen SS, Roensholt L, Bitsch V: Bovine virus diarrhea virus in free-living
deer from Denmark. J Wildl Dis 2000, 36:584-587.
159. Pol F, Rossi S, Mesplède A, Kuntz-Simon G, Le Potier MF: Two outbreaks of
classical swine fever in wild boar in France. Vet Rec 2008, 162:811-816.
160. Meloni D, Maurella C, Carnieri L, Cavarretta M, Orusa R, Cocco C, Ru G,
Bozzetta E: Results of a survey for chronic wasting disease in Italian
cervids. Proceedings of the 8th Conference of the European Wildlife Disease
Association, 2-5 October 2008; Rovinj 2008, 75.
161. Roels S, Saegerman C, De Bosschere H, Berkvens D, Gregoire F, Hoyoux A,
Mousset B, Desmecht D, Vanopdenbosch E, Linden A: First results of
chronic wasting disease (CWD) surveillance in the south-eastern part of
Belgium. Vet Q 2005, 27:98-104.
162. Billinis C: Encephalomyocarditis virus infection in wildlife species in
Greece. J Wildl Dis 2009, 45:522-526.
163. Elbers ARW, Dekker A, Dekkers LJM: Serosurveillance of wild deer and wild
boar after the epidemic of foot-and-mouth disease in the Netherlands
in 2001. Vet Rec 2003, 153:678-681.
164. Boadella M, Carrasco R, Bibiana P, Segalés J, Gortázar C: Seroprevalence of
Hepatitis E virus in European wild boars (Sus scrofa) from different areas
of Spain. Proceedings of the 3rd European Wildlife Disease Association Student
Workshop, 19-22 March 2009; Veyrier-du-Lac 2009, 45.
165. Reuter G, Fodor D, Forgach P, Kátai A, Szucs G: Characterization and
zoonotic potential of endemic hepatitis E virus (HEV) strains in humans
and animals in Hungary. J Clin Microbiol 2009, 44:277-281.
166. Rutjes SA, Lodder-Verschoor F, Lodder WJ, van der Giessen J, Reesink H,
Bouwknegt M, de Roda Husman AM: Seroprevalence and molecular
detection of hepatitis E virus in wild boar and red deer in The
Netherlands. J Virol Meth 2010, 168:197-206.
167. Vikøren T, Lillehaug A, Akerstedt J, Bretten T, Haugum M, Tryland M: A
severe outbreak of contagious ecthyma (orf) in a free-ranging musk ox
(Ovibos moschatus) population in Norway. Vet Microbiol 2008, 127:10-20.
168. Reiner G, Bronnert B, Hohloch C, Reinacher M, Willems H: Distribution of
ORF2 and ORF3 genotypes of porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV-2) in wild
boars and domestic pigs in Germany. Vet Microbiol 2011, 148:372-376.
169. Vicente J, Segalés J, Höfle U, Balasch M, Plana-Duran J, Domingo M,
Gortázar C: Epidemiological study on porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2)
infection in the European wild boar (Sus scrofa). Vet Res 2004, 35:243-253.
170. Olde Riekerink RG, Dominici A, Barkema HW, de Smit AJ: Seroprevalence of
pestivirus in four species of alpine wild ungulates in the High Valley of
Susa, Italy. Vet Microbiol 2005, 108:297-303.
171. Erhouma E, Guiguen F, Chebloune Y, Gauthier D, Lakhal LM, Greenland T,
Mornex JF, Leroux C, Alogninouwa T: Small ruminant lentivirus proviral
sequences from wild ibexes in contact with domestic goats. J Gen Virol
2008, 89:1478-1484.
172. Hoby S, Mathis A, Doherr MG, Robert N, Ryser-Degiorgis MP: Babesia
capreoli infections in alpine chamois (Rupicapra r. Rupicapra), roe deer
(Capreolus c. Capreolus) and red deer (Cervus elaphus) from Switzerland.
J Wildl Dis 2009, 45:748-753.

Martin et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:70
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/70

173. García-Sanmartín J, Aurtenetxe O, Barral M, Marco I, Lavín S, García-Pérez AL,
Hurtado A: Molecular detection and characterization of piroplasms
infecting cervids and chamois in Northern Spain. Parasitology 2007,
134:391-398.
174. Duh D, Petrovec M, Bidovec A, Avsic-Zupanc T: Cervids as Babesiae hosts,
Slovenia. Emerg Infect Dis 2005, 11:1121-1123.
175. Ferrer D, Castellá J, Gutiérrez JF, Lavín S, Marco I: Seroprevalence of
Babesia ovis in mouflon sheep in Spain. J Wildl Dis 1998, 34:637-639.
176. Ferrer D, Castellá J, Gutiérrez JF, Lavín S, Marco I: Seroprevalence of
Babesia ovis in Spanish ibex (Capra pyrenaica) in Catalonia, northeastern
Spain. Vet Parasitol 1998, 75:93-98.
177. Marco I, Velarde R, Castellá J, Ferrer D, Lavín S: Presumptive Babesia ovis
infection in a spanish ibex (Capra pyrenaica). Vet Parasitol 2000,
87:217-221.
178. Paziewska A, Bednarska M, Nieweglowski H, Karbowiak G, Bajer A:
Distribution of Cryptosporidium and Giardia spp. in selected species of
protected and game mammals from North-Eastern Poland. Ann Agric
Environ Med 2007, 14:265-270.
179. Hamnes IS, Gjerde B, Robertson L, Vikøren T, Handeland K: Prevalence of
Cryptosporidium and Giardia in free-ranging wild cervids in Norway. Vet
Parasitol 2006, 141:30-41.
180. Sturdee AP, Chalmers RM, Bull SA: Detection of Cryptosporidium oocysts in
wild mammals of mainland Britain. Vet Parasitol 1999, 80:273-280.
181. Shimalov VV, Shimalov VT: Helminth fauna of cervids in Belorussian
Polesie. Parasitol Res 2003, 89:75-76.
182. Beck R, Maringulic A, Lucinger S, Tonanzi D, Pozio E, Caccio SM: Prevalence
and molecular characterization of Giardia isolates from wild mammals.
Proceedings of the 8th Conference of the European Wildlife Disease
Association, 2-5 October 2008; Rovinj 2008, 13.
183. Bastian S, Brisseau N, Jouglin M, Klegou G, alandrin L, hostis M, hauvin A:
Seroprevalence of Babesia species infecting roe deer (Capreolus
capreolus). Proceedings of the 8th Conference of the European Wildlife Disease
Association, 2-5 October 2008; Rovinj 2008, 43.
184. Lebbad M, Mattsson JG, Christensson B, Ljungström B, Backhans A,
Andersson JO, Svärd SG: From mouse to moose: multilocus genotyping
of Giardia isolates from various animal species. Vet Parasitol 2010,
168:231-239.
185. Almería S, Vidal D, Ferrer D, Pabón M, Fernández de Mera IG, Ruiz-Fons F,
Alzaga V, Marco I, Calvete C, Lavín S, Gortázar C, López-Gatius F, Dubey JP:
Seroprevalence of Neospora caninum in non-carnivorous wildlife from
Spain. Vet Parasitol 2007, 143:21-28.
186. Bártová E, Sedlák K, Literák I: Prevalence of Toxoplasma gondii and
Neospora caninum antibodies in wild boars in the Czech Republic. Vet
Parasitol 2006, 142:150-153.
187. Vikøren T, Tharaldsen J, Fredriksen B, Handeland K: Prevalence of
Toxoplasma gondii antibodies in wild red deer, roe deer, moose, and
reindeer from Norway. Vet Parasitol 2004, 120:159-169.
188. Gauss CB, Dubey JP, Vidal D, Cabezón O, Ruiz-Fons F, Vicente J, Marco I,
Lavín S, Gortázar C, Almería S: Prevalence of Toxoplasma gondii antibodies
in red deer (Cervus elaphus) and other wild ruminants from Spain. Vet
Parasitol 2006, 136:193-200.
189. Masoero L, Guglielmetti C, Pitti M, De Marco L, Ferroglio E, Gennero S:
Serological monitoring of mouflon (Ovis orientalis musimon) in the
archipelago Toscano National Park, Italy. Proceedings of the 8th Conference
of the European Wildlife Disease Association, 2-5 October 2008; Rovinj 2008,
74.
190. Richomme C, Aubert D, Gilot-Fromont E, Ajzenberg D, Mercier A, Ducrot C,
Ferte H, Delorme D, Villena I: Genetic characterization of Toxoplasma
gondii from wild boar (Sus scrofa) in France. Vet Parasitol 2009,
164:296-300.
191. Rossi L, Fraquelli C, Vesco U, Permunian R, Sommavilla G, Carmignola G, Da
Pozzo R, Meneguz P: Descriptive epidemiology of a scabies epidemic in
chamois in the Dolomite Alps, Italy. Eur J Wild Res 2007, 53:131-141.
192. Fernández-Moran J, Gomez S, Ballesteros F, Quiros PQ, Benito JL, Feliu C,
Nieto JM: Epizootiology of sarcoptic mange in a population of
cantabrian chamois (Rupicapra pyrenaica parva) in Northwestern Spain.
Vet Parasitol 1997, 73:163-171.
193. Alasaad S, Granados JE, Cano-Manuel FJ, Meana A, Zhu XQ, Pérez JM:
Epidemiology of fasciolosis affecting Iberian ibex (Capra pyrenaica) in
southern Spain. Parasitol Res 2008, 102:751-755.

Page 16 of 16

194. León-Vizcaíno L, Ruíz de Ybañez MR, Cubero MJ, Ortíz JM, Espinosa J,
Pérez L, Simón MA, Alonso F: Sarcoptic mange in Spanish ibex from
Spain. J Wildl Dis 1999, 35:647-659.
195. Rossi L, Meneguz PG, De MP, Rodolfi M: The epizootiology of sarcoptic
mange in chamois, Rupicapra rupicapra, from the Italian eastern Alps.
Parassitologia 1995, 37:233-240.
196. La grande douve du foie (Fasciola hepatica): quelques notions. [http://
www.oncfs.gouv.fr/IMG/Lettre%20SAGIR%20159.pdf], (in French).
197. Beck A, Beck R, Vrkic V, Conrado Sostaric Zuckerman I, Hohsteter M,
Artukovic B, Janicki Z, Konjevic D, Maringulic A, Grabarevic Z: Red deer
(Cervus elaphus) are not a perfect host for Fascioloides magna: evidence
from a histopathological study. Proceedings of the 8th Conference of the
European Wildlife Disease Association, 2-5 October 2008; Rovinj 2008, 45.
198. Antolová D, Reiterová K, Dubinsky P: The role of wild boar (Sus scrofa) in
circulation of trichinellosis, toxocarosis and ascariosis in the Slovak
Republik. Helminthology 2006, 43:92-97.
199. Richomme C, Lacour SA, Ducrot C, Gilot-Fromont E, Casabianca F,
Maestrini O, Vallée I, Grasset A, van der Giessen J, Boireau P:
Epidemiological survey of trichinellosis in wild boar (Sus scrofa) and fox
(Vulpes vulpes) in a French insular region, Corsica. Vet Parasitol 2010,
172:150-154.
200. Schynts F, van der Giessen J, Tixhon S, Pozio E, Dorny P, de Borchgrave J:
First isolation of Trichinella britovi from a wild boar (Sus scrofa) in
Belgium. Vet Parasitol 2006, 135:191-194.
201. Blaga R, Gherman C, Cozma V, Zocevic A, Pozio E, Boireau P: Trichinella
species circulating among wild and domestic animals in Romania. Vet
Parasitol 2009, 159:218-221.
202. van der Giessen JW, Rombout Y, van der Veen A, Pozio E: Diagnosis and
epidemiology of Trichinella infections in wildlife in The Netherlands.
Parasite 2001, 8:S103-S105.
doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-70
Cite this article as: Martin et al.: A survey of the transmission of
infectious diseases/infections between wild and domestic ungulates in
Europe. Veterinary Research 2011 42:70.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
