<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The four hexamerin genes in the honey bee: structure, molecular evolution and function deduced from expression patterns in queens, workers and drones</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-23"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Juliana R Martins, Francis MF Nunes, Alexandre S Cristino, Zil_ LP Sim_es, M_rcia MG Bitondi"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

The four hexamerin genes in the honey bee:
structure, molecular evolution and function
deduced from expression patterns in queens,
workers and drones
Research article

Juliana R Martins1, Francis MF Nunes2, Alexandre S Cristino3, Zilá LP Simões2 and Márcia MG Bitondi*2

Abstract
Background: Hexamerins are hemocyanin-derived proteins that have lost the ability to bind copper ions and
transport oxygen; instead, they became storage proteins. The current study aimed to broaden our knowledge on the
hexamerin genes found in the honey bee genome by exploring their structural characteristics, expression profiles,
evolution, and functions in the life cycle of workers, drones and queens.
Results: The hexamerin genes of the honey bee (hex 70a, hex 70b, hex 70c and hex 110) diverge considerably in
structure, so that the overall amino acid identity shared among their deduced protein subunits varies from 30 to 42%.
Bioinformatics search for motifs in the respective upstream control regions (UCRs) revealed six overrepresented motifs
including a potential binding site for Ultraspiracle (Usp), a target of juvenile hormone (JH). The expression of these
genes was induced by topical application of JH on worker larvae. The four genes are highly transcribed by the larval fat
body, although with significant differences in transcript levels, but only hex 110 and hex 70a are re-induced in the adult
fat body in a caste- and sex-specific fashion, workers showing the highest expression. Transcripts for hex 110, hex 70a
and hex70b were detected in developing ovaries and testes, and hex 110 was highly transcribed in the ovaries of egglaying queens. A phylogenetic analysis revealed that HEX 110 is located at the most basal position among the
holometabola hexamerins, and like HEX 70a and HEX 70c, it shares potential orthology relationship with hexamerins
from other hymenopteran species.
Conclusions: Striking differences were found in the structure and developmental expression of the four hexamerin
genes in the honey bee. The presence of a potential binding site for Usp in the respective 5' UCRs, and the results of
experiments on JH level manipulation in vivo support the hypothesis of regulation by JH. Transcript levels and patterns
in the fat body and gonads suggest that, in addition to their primary role in supplying amino acids for metamorphosis,
hexamerins serve as storage proteins for gonad development, egg production, and to support foraging activity. A
phylogenetic analysis including the four deduced hexamerins and related proteins revealed a complex pattern of
evolution, with independent radiation in insect orders.
Background
Hexamerins essentially participate in the dynamics of
amino acid storage and exploitation that occurs during
insect development. These six-subunit proteins are primarily synthesized by the larval fat body and are massively stored in hemolymph as an amino acid source for
* Correspondence: mmgbit@usp.br
2

Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciências e Letras de Ribeirão Preto, Departamento de
Biologia, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil

development toward the adult stage [1]. They also may
function as JH-binding proteins [2,3], and in addition,
there is circumstantial evidence supporting the hypothesis that larval hexamerins are targeted for egg production
[4-8].
While hexamerins have been the focus of numerous
studies in solitary insects [9,10], the characterization of
these proteins in social insects has received much less
attention, in spite of the potential for discovering unique

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Martins et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

physiological functions linked to aspects of the social way
of life. Workers of an ant species may use hexamerins as
an amino acid source for brood nourishment, and there is
circumstantial evidence that, by acting as a JH-binding
protein, hexamerins regulate JH titer and caste differentiation in a termite species [11-15].
The highly eusocial honey bee hatches as a larva after a
72 h embryonic stage, and develops through a series of
molts that define the five larval instars. This is a period of
feeding, and the larva gains weight while it is continuously fed by worker bees. During the larval stage, queens,
workers and drones have distinct nutritional requirements. Depending on the quality and quantity of nutrition, a diploid female larva develops as a queen or as a
worker. A queen-destined larva is fed with secretions
produced by worker hypopharyngeal and mandibular
glands, the royal jelly, in a much higher proportion than a
worker-destined larva. As a supplement to its nutritional
regime, the worker larva also receives pollen, nectar and
honey. Drone larval nourishment is composed of these
same nutrients, but they are fed on a larger quantity of
food, and their diet also differs in quality when compared
to that given to workers [16]. Female and male larvae
grow enormously because of these nutrients, and accumulate proteins, lipids and glycogen for use as structural
materials and energy during the subsequent non-feeding
pupal and pharate-adult stages. Duration of development
from egg to adult eclosion differs considerably among
queens, workers and drones, spanning 16, 21 and 24 days,
respectively [17] with some differences among A. mellifera subspecies.
The single adult queen in the hive is adapted to egg production. When fertilized, the eggs will give rise to workers and occasionally to a new queen, while non-fertilized
eggs become drones. The functionally sterile workers
perform a series of flexible but age-correlated tasks, a
phenomenon known as age polyethism. The younger
worker bees usually stay inside the hive and are engaged
in brood rearing, queen tending, nest building, nest
cleaning, and food processing. Older workers take over
the duties of foraging for pollen and nectar that are used
to provision and maintain the hive. Drones do not have
any known function other than mating with the queen
[18].
Our goal was to determine whether these morphotypes
(queen, worker, drone), which are so divergent in their
developmental rate, size, morphology and other essential
characteristics, and which perform very distinct functions as adults in the hive, also show hexamerin gene
expression profiles that are correlated with their unique
developmental trajectories. The current study was undertaken to deepen our knowledge of the four hexamerin
genes found in the honey bee genome [19-21] by exploring their structures, expression patterns, and putative

Page 2 of 20

functions using a comparative approach. To this end we
determined (1) the features of the full-length cDNA coding sequences and their conceptual translation products;
(2) the potential regulatory sequences present in the
respective 5' UCRs; (3) the expression patterns in the fat
body and gonads of developing and adult queens, workers
and drones; (4) the effect of JH on the expression in larval
fat body; (5) the relative quantities of hexamerin transcripts in females and drones during the metamorphic
molt and adult stage, and (6) the evolutionary relationships among the honey bee hexamerins and related members of the hemocyanin superfamily in other insect
species. Consistent with the hypothesis that hexamerins
have multiple functions in the honey bee, our findings
disclosed striking structural differences among the hexamerin gene sequences and tissue-, caste- and sex-specific expression patterns. Additionally, the recognition of
potential JH-target sites in 5' UCR of all hexamerin genes
together with the observed JH-effect on the levels of hexamerin transcripts indicate regulation by this hormone.

Results
Structural characteristics of the hexamerin CDSs and
respective translation products

The entire CDSs of hex 70b and hex 70a, as well as a portion of their respective 5' and 3' untranslated regions
(UTRs), were previously sequenced by our research
group [19,21]. Part of the hex 110 CDS (a cDNA fragment
of 180 bp) also was previously cloned and sequenced in
our laboratory [20]. In the current work, the sequencing
of hex 110 was extended to the entire CDS and part of the
5' and 3' UTRs. In addition, we cloned and sequenced the
hex 70c CDS as well as segments of its UTRs. Sequence
analyses using the Artemis platform [22] allowed comparisons of the structural characteristics of hex CDSs
(Figure 1A, Additional files 1, 2, 3 and 4). Each of these
sequences is present as a single copy in the Honeybee
Genome Assembly (version 4.0) as confirmed by BLAST
searches. The hex 70a, hex 70b and hex 70c sequences are
tandemly arrayed in GroupUn.53, whereas hex 110 is separately positioned in Group 11.32.
The translation products contain the N-terminal
sequences determined by Danty et al [23] using automated Edman degradation. The conserved N, M and C
hemocyanin domains (Figure 1B) were identified in all
hexamerin subunits (HEX 70a, HEX 70b, HEX 70c and
HEX 110), but as previously observed [20], the hemocyanin C domain of HEX 110 is interrupted by a 291 amino
acid insertion. This insertion is very rich in glutamine
and glutamic acid (Glx) and contributes significantly to
the total Glx content (20.9%) of HEX 110.
Some features of the honey bee hexamerin genes and of
the respective deduced subunits are compiled in Table 1.
The four hexamerin subunits are also characterized by

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Page 3 of 20

Figure 1 Hexamerin genes and deduced protein subunits. (A) Schematic diagram of hexamerin genes structure. Exons and introns are represented by boxes and lines, respectively. Arrows at the right and left of each gene indicate initiation and termination codons, respectively. Sequenced untranslated regions (UTR) are marked in dark gray. Number of nucleotides (nt) are indicated for exons and introns (exons and the primers used for
hexamerin sequencing are marked in the nucleotide sequences shown in Additional files 1, 2, 3 and 4). (B) Diagrams of the deduced hexamerin proteins showing the N, M and C hemocyanin domains. Note that the C domain is interrupted in the HEX 110 sequence. Signal peptides and conserved
motifs are marked in hexamerin sequences shown in Additional files 5, 6, 7 and 8.

the presence of glycosylation sites, a conserved histidine
and motifs typically found in other insect hexamerins
(Additional files 5, 6, 7 and 8). We used the software
http://phobius.sbc.su.se for prediction of signal peptides
and transmembrane topology from the amino acid
sequences of each of the hexamerin subunits in the honey
bee, HEX110, HEX70a, HEX 70b and HEX 70c. Hydropathy profiles were produced for each of them and included
in the Additional file 9. The subunits are predicted to

contain each a signal peptide (Table 1, hydrophobic
amino acids specified in Additional file 9) that directs
transport of the protein through the secretory pathway.
As expected, none of the subunits contain transmembrane helices. With respect to amino acid composition,
HEX 70a and HEX 70c contain a relatively high quantity
of phenylalanine, tryptophan and tyrosine (18.2% and
16.9%, respectively), and thus belong to the class of aromatic amino acid-rich hexamerins (or arylphorins) [24].

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Page 4 of 20

Table 1: Characteristics of hexamerin genes and respective subunits in the honey bee.
Gene structure

Conceptual product

Hexamerin
genes/
subunits

ORF (nt)

Exon number

Amino acid
Number

Molecular
mass (kDa)

pI

Signal
peptide
length

hex 70a/HEX
70a

2,055

6

684

79.19

6.45

21

hex 70b/HEX
70b

2,052

7

683

77.26

6.64

21

hex 70c/HEX
70c

2,061

6

686

79.44

7.67

19

hex 110/HEX
110

3,027

8

1008

110.21

6.37

24

Molecular mass and pI calculated using http://expasy.org/cgi-bin/protparam and http://phobius.sbc.su.se/

With their relatively high methionine content, HEX 70b
(4.4%) and HEX 70c (6.4%) can be included in the class of
methionine-rich hexamerins, which are composed of 4 to
11% methionine [10].
The overall amino acid identity shared among the
deduced honey bee hexamerins varies from 30% to 42%.
A multiple alignment using ClustalW 1.83 (Additional
file 10) revealed that HEX 70a, HEX 70b and HEX 70c are
more similar to each other (39 to 42% identity) than they
are to HEX 110 (30 to 32% identity).

erin UCRs. Site1 is shared by all four hexamerin genes;
site2 is shared by hex 70a and hex 70b; site3 is present in
hex 70b, hex 70c and hex 110; site4 is specific to the hex
70 genes (it is absent from the hex 110 UCR); and site5
and site6 were both detected in hex 70b, hex 70c and hex
110 (Figure 2B). Therefore, the hex 70b and hex 70c
UCRs share a maximum of five of these motifs whereas
the hex 70a and hex 110 UCRs share only one motif (Figure 2C). This relationship suggests that at least some of
the hexamerin genes are co-regulated.

Overrepresented motifs in upstream control regions (UCRs)

Effect of JH on the expression of hexamerin genes

Motif analyses of the UCRs were carried out with two
goals in mind: to search for potential JH response elements, and to search for hexamerin-specific conserved
regions. Table 2 shows six DNA motifs, here named site1
to site6, that are overrepresented in the UCRs of the four
hexamerin genes. All of the six motifs were mapped on an
extension of the UCR corresponding to 1.5 kb from the
translation start codon (Figure 2A). Site1 is 80% identical
to the D. melanogaster Ultraspiracle (Usp) binding site,
also known as chorion factor-1 (CF1, [Flybase ID:
FBgn0003964]) [25], and is located very close to the 5'
end (Figure 2A and 2D). Two site1 motifs enrich the hex
110 UCR, whereas only one was found in each of the
UCRs of the three hex 70 genes. None of the other five
motifs (site2 to site6) are similar to any binding site
described to date in the TRANSFAC database, and may
be specific to hexamerin gene UCRs. The hex 70b UCR
showed the greatest complexity because it is the only one
containing all six motifs. Few of these motifs were found
in the hex 70a UCR, possibly because it is still a gapped
DNA region (Figure 2A).
Based on Figure 2A, we graphically represented the
types (Figure 2B) and quantities (Figure 2C) of the potential regulatory sites shared by the four honey bee hexam-

JH-treatment was performed at the feeding phase of the
5th larval instar. During this developmental phase, larvae
have a high titer of JH in hemolymph [26]. The treatment
with exogenous hormone aimed to maintain JH titer at a
high level for a prolonged period of time, thus circumventing the normal decay that normally occurs at the
transition from the feeding to the spinning phase [26].
Figure 3 shows that expression of the genes hex 70b and
hex 70c is higher in JH-treated larvae than in the controls,
although the JH-effect on the expression of hex 70a and
hex 110 is more discrete. Together, these results support a
function of JH in inducing the expression of hexamerin
genes in honey bee larvae.
Evolutionary relationship among the honey bee
hexamerins and related proteins

We investigated the evolutionary relationships among 45
hexamerin amino acid sequences from six insect orders
(Hymenoptera, Diptera, Lepidoptera, Coleoptera,
Isoptera, and Orthoptera), and hemocyanins from 8
insect species and from a crustacean. The tree structure
mainly reflects the molecular relationship at the level of
insect order (Figure 4). Within the hymenopteran cluster,
the honey bee HEX 110 (named AmeHEX 110 in the

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Page 5 of 20

Table 2: DNA motifs discovered in the 5' UCRs of the honey bee hexamerin genes.
Motif name

Motif

Church

Roc-auc

P-value

site1

GnnGwnnmCsskC

9.3E-09

0.98

3.5E-06

site2

TTGyGngnnrrnAawk

3.8E-06

0.87

4.4E-04

site3

GsnsakwCgmnmG

3.9E-06

0.97

2.2E-04

site4

gwnAtnnnanwnwTCG
AwAwys

3.8E-06

1.00

8.0E-07

site5

awCGAwAAAwnnknn
wwRnA

9.3E-09

1.00

2.1E-05

site6

ATykCGAaTnmrannA

4.1E-06

0.99

9.5E-06

Site 1 motif is 80% similar to the USP binding site of D. melanogaster. The other motifs (sites 2 to 6) do not have similarity to any binding site
sequences in TRANSFAC database, and may be specific of hexamerin genes.

tree) grouped with two hexamerins from Nasonia vitripennis wasps, NviHEX102 and NviHEX109. Like the
honey bee HEX 110 (with ~110 kDa and 20.9% Glx),
these wasp hexamerins have a molecular mass higher
than that typically exhibited by hexamerins (102 kDa and
109 kDa, respectively) and are composed of a high or very
high proportion of Glx (here defined as 10% to 15%, and
>15%, respectively). Explicitly, NviHEX102 and
NviHEX109 are composed of 14.2% and 15.1% Glx,
respectively. The other hymenopteran hexamerins
[NviHEX79, NviHEX75, NviHEX81, NviHEX94,
NviHEX83; CfeHEX2; AmeHEX70a (HEX 70a),
AmeHEX70b (HEX 70b), AmeHEX70c (HEX 70c)],
which are in the range of 70-95 kDa, generally display an
intermediary Glx content (7%<Glx<10%). Exceptions in
this group are NviHEX79 and NviHEX81, which have
higher amounts of Glx (10.1% and 11.8%, respectively).
Most of the hymenopteran hexamerins (seven of
twelve) contain more than 15% aromatic amino acids, and
are therefore considered arylphorins. Five of twelve meet
the criterion for inclusion in the methionine-rich class. A
wasp hexamerin (NviHEX79) and two of the honey bee
hexamerins (HEX 70a, HEX 70b) contain more than 10%
leucine and are here defined as leucine-rich.
Hexamerins from the coleopterans Tribolium castaneum and Tenebrio molitor form a well-defined group
(Figure 4). Without exception, they are all arylphorins.
Aside from TcaHEX5, they all have a high Glx content (at
9.8% Glx, TcaHEX5 fails to meet our criterion for inclusion among the high-Glx hexamerins by a small margin).
Among lepidopterans (Figure 4), the arylphorin
BmoSP2 is positioned separately from the methioninerich hexamerins HceHEX1, HzeHEX, TniJHSP2,
CfuDAP2, BmoSP1 and HceHEX2, which are organized
in two branches, one of them also including HviHEX. As
only part of the HviHEX sequence is available in data
Bank, we could not classify it as an arylphorin or a methionine-rich hexamerin. All lepidopteran hexamerins contain intermediary or low Glx (< 7%) content, and only

three of them (HceHEX1, HzeHEX and TniJHSP) are rich
in leucine. Interestingly, these leucine-rich hexamerins
were grouped in a single branch.
A branch of dipteran hexamerins (Figure 4) included
the very high Glx (20%)/high molecular mass DmeFBP1
and two other hexamerins from D. melanogaster,
Dme7320 and Dme8100, both containing a high Glx content (13.7% and 10.8%, respectively), but a typical molecular mass ~70 kDa. All hexamerins in this branch are rich
in leucine. The other three main branches consist of hexamerins in the range of 82-99 kDa. One of them clustered
the DmeLSP1 isoforms (α, β and γ). The other two
branches grouped some Anopheles gambiae hexamerins
with OatHEX 1.2 from the mosquito Ochlerotatus atropalpus, and some A. gambiae hexamerins with DmeLSP2.
Except for some incomplete sequences (Aga29840,
Aga16795, and Aga31208) for which we could not determine the exact amino acid composition, all the hexamerins forming these three branches are arylphorins, and
OatHEX1.2, DmeLSP1α and DmeLSP1β are also rich in
methionine. Several of them have a high Glx content.
None is rich in leucine.
The only orthopteran hexamerin used in tree construction, LmiJHBS (Figure 4), is distinguished by a high proportion of leucine. The basal position of this hexamerin is
evident. Two isopteran hexamerins, RflHEX1 and
RflHEX2 clustered in a single branch. Both are
arylphorins, but RflHEX1 is also rich in methionine.
RflHEX2, but not RflHEX1, has a high Glx content
(10.4%).
As expected, the insect hemocyanins clustered separately from the hexamerins (Figure 4), and formed a wellsupported monophyletic clade (1.0 Bayesian posterior
probability), with ScuHC1 at the most basal position.
Expression of hexamerin genes in the fat body of
developing and adult workers, queens and drones

Figure 5 schematically represents RT-PCR transcriptional
profiles from the current and previous studies of the four

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Page 6 of 20

Figure 2 Overrepresented motifs in the upstream control regions of the hexamerin genes. (A) Spatial distribution of the six overrepresented
DNA motifs in the 1.5 kb-long upstream control regions (UCRs) of the four honey bee hexamerin genes. Motif sequences are specified in Table 2. The
N series in the hex 70a UCR indicates that this DNA region is still undefined in the honey bee genome. (B) Putative co-regulatory network showing the
relationship between the six overrepresented motifs and hexamerin genes (orange circles). The site 1 motif (red square) is similar to the Usp binding
element (also named CF1) in D. melanogaster. Sites 2 to 6 (grey squares) are not similar to any of the D. melanogaster binding site sequences described
in the TRANSFAC database, and may be specific to hexamerin genes; (C) Based on the co-regulatory network, a scheme was constructed using the
number of sites shared among hexamerin gene UCRs. The thickness of the bars linking hexamerin genes (orange circles) is directly proportional to
the quantity of putative co-regulatory sites (the number of sites is indicated) shared by the four genes. (D) Alignment of the target sites similar to CF1Usp found in the 5' UCR of honey bee hexamerin genes. The graph shows the sequence conservation at each position while the height of symbols
indicates the relative frequency of each nucleotide at that position.

hexamerin genes in the fat body of workers, queens and
drones (see Additional file 11). Relative expression is
shown from the 5th larval instar throughout the pupal
and adult stages. Because the expression data on earlier
larval phases (2nd to 4th larval instars) was mostly
obtained using workers instead of queens and drones,
they are not shown here.
In the fat body of workers, hex 110 transcripts were
abundant from the 5th larval instar throughout the pupal
stage, with a decrease in the amount of transcripts nearby

the time of adult eclosion. But expression increased again
in adult workers. In contrast, in the fat body of drones
and queens, hex 110 expression was found basically in the
5th larval instar, extending up to the early pupal stage in
queens. The expression of hex 70a differs from hex 110
mainly in adults, which showed sex- and caste-specific
patterns of hex 70a transcription. Workers and drones
showed high levels of hex 70a transcripts up to the ages of
30 and 5 days, respectively. In 3- to 7-day-old virgin
queens, hex 70a expression was reduced in comparison

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Figure 3 Effect of juvenile hormone on the expression of the four
hexamerin genes. The hormone (diluted in acetone) was topically applied on the dorsum of 5th instar larvae (feeding phase, L5F). Controls
were treated with acetone only. Gene expression was analyzed 24 h after treatment. Hexamerin transcript abundance analyzed by RT-PCR
followed by electrophoresis of the amplified cDNA on ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels. The A. mellifera rp49 gene was used as a
loading control.

to the newly emerged ones, but increased again in older,
egg-laying queens. Comparatively, the expression of hex
70a is lower in adult queens than in adult workers. The
expression of the other two hexamerin genes, hex 70b
and hex 70c, was detectable only in the 5th larval instar of
females and males.
Together, the data summarized in Figure 5 highlight
that: (1) all the honey bee hexamerin genes are highly
expressed in the larval fat body of workers, queens and
drones, and (2) hex 110 and hex 70a were transcribed in a
caste- and sex-specific fashion in pupal and adult fat
body. These expression patterns suggest that in addition
to their primary role as storage proteins that supply
amino acids during non-feeding pupal development, hexamerins have different functions in the adult stage.
Using real-time RT-PCR we quantified the levels of the
four hexamerin transcripts in the fat body at two periods
of the honey bee life cycle: during larval-pupal transition
and in adults. Figure 6A shows that the transcriptional
profiles are similarly modulated, with an abrupt increase
in the quantity of transcripts in the 5th larval instar, followed by a marked decrease in newly ecdysed pupae.
However, at definite points of this developmental period,
we found interesting differences among the honey bee
morphotypes. In workers and drones, the four hexamerin
transcripts reached maximal levels during the feeding
phase of the 5th larval instar (L5F). In queens, maximal
transcript levels were detected at the subsequent spinning phase (L5S) (except for hex 70b transcripts, which
reached maximal levels in L5F). Moreover, the maximal
expression in workers and drones was significantly higher
than the maximal expression in queens (except for hex

Page 7 of 20

70c). Figure 6A also shows that in workers and drones at
the L5F phase, when expression of the four hexamerin
genes reached a maximum, the levels of hex 110/hex 70b
transcripts were much higher than the levels of hex 70a/
hex 70c transcripts.
Pearson's correlation coefficient (R) was used to evaluate the relationship among these expression profiles. Figure 6B graphically represents the hexamerin genes
(orange circles) linked by bars. The greater the thickness
of the bar, the greater the R value. In queens, the expression profiles of hex 110 and hex 70c were the only positively correlated. In drones, by contrast, the expression
profiles of all the hexamerin genes except hex 70b/hex
110 were positively correlated. Similarly, in workers the
expression profiles of all but hex 70b/hex 110 and hex
70b/hex 70c were positively correlated. Therefore, workers and drones share similar transcriptional profiles during the larval-pupal transition that are distinct from those
exhibited by queens. In other words, workers and drones
differ from queens in the patterns of co-expression of the
four hexamerin genes.
Fat body from adult females was also used to quantitatively compare the levels of hex 70a and hex 110 transcripts (the only ones found at this stage). We compared
age-matched workers and queens (3-day-old), but to
investigate the effect of mating in transcript levels, we
also included egg-laying queens in this analysis. Figure 7
shows that 3-day old workers have a significantly higher
quantity of both transcripts than queens, independent of
their reproductive status.
Expression of hexamerin genes in the gonads of
developing and adult workers, queens and drones

The expression of hexamerin genes was also investigated
in developing and adult female and male gonads using
RT-PCR (Figure 8; see Additional file 12). The only hexamerin gene apparently inactive in ovaries and testes is
hex 70c, as presumed from the complete absence of its
transcript in these organs. The levels of hex 70b transcripts were abundant, but only in the larval gonads of
queens and drones. A high level of hex 110 mRNA was
found in the larval gonads of workers, queens, and
drones. Expression then decreases during the pupal stage
to be resumed exclusively in the ovaries of egg-laying
queens. Similarly, a relatively high level of hex 70a transcripts was found in the gonads of workers and drones at
the larval/pupal stages, and in the ovaries of queens at the
pupal/early adult stages. This is followed by transcript
depletion in the gonads of workers and drones, but not in
the ovaries of virgin and egg-laying queens where hex 70a
expression is maintained, although at a low level,
throughout the adult stage.
In summary, the presence of hexamerin transcripts in
larval and pupal gonads of workers, drones and queens

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Page 8 of 20

Figure 4 Evolutionary relationships among insect hexamerins and hemocyanins. The phylogenetic tree was inferred by bayesian method and
the posterior probabilities are represented at each node. [See Additional data for the accession numbers of hexamerins and hemocyanins included
in the tree (file 14), and for the alignment use in tree reconstruction (file 15)]. Symbols and letters in brackets indicate: ** very high-Glx content (>15%);
* high-Glx content (between 10% and 15%); A: arylphorin; M: methionine-rich; L: leucine-rich; ? indicates that amino acid composition could not be
determined. The first three letters of the protein's abbreviation represent the species: Cma:Cancer magister; Scu: Sinella curviseta; Pma:Perla marginata;
Cac: Chelidurella acanthopygia; Sam: Schistocerca americana; Cmo: Carausius morosus; Cse: Cryptotermes secundus; Pam: Periplaneta americana; Hme:
Hierodula membranacea; Rfl: Reticuliformis flavipes; Lmi: Locusta migratoria; Ame: Apis mellifera; Nvi: Nasonia vitripennis; Cfe: Camponotus festinatus; Tca:
Tenebrio castaneum; Tmo: Tenebrio molitor; Bmo: Bombyx mori; Hce: Hyalophora cecropia; Hze: Helicoverpa zea; Tni: Trichoplusia ni; Cfu: Choristoneura
fumiferana; Hce: Hyalophora cecropia; Hvi: Heliothis virescens; Dme: Drosophila melanogaster; Aga: Anopheles gambiae; Oat:Ochlerotatus atropalpus.

suggests roles in ovary and testis development, and in
spermatogenesis, which occurs during the pupal stage.
The higher expression of hex 110 in the ovaries of egglaying than virgin queens is remarkable, and suggests a
function in reproduction.

Discussion
Hexamerin genes and deduced proteins revealed striking
structural differences

The tandem organization of the hex 70a, 70b and 70c
genes in the honey bee genome supports the hypothesis
of origin by gene duplication, a common phenomenon

among insect hexamerins [27]. The separately located
hex 110 gene exhibits unusual features throughout its
sequence. It encodes a subunit that is longer than those
usually found, and which carries a very high proportion
of Glx (20.9%). Because these features are also displayed
by hexamerins found in some species of ants [28] and
wasps [29], it had been previously thought that they were
restricted to hymenopterans. In fact, two hexamerins in
the N. vitripennis wasp (NviHEX102 and NviHEX109)
exhibit such characteristics (see Figure 4). However, a
receptor in Drosophila, DmFBP1 (which is closely related
to its own ligand DmLSP1) [30], is also composed by a

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Page 9 of 20

Figure 5 Patterns of hexamerin gene expression in the fat body of immature and adult stages of workers, queens and drones. The simplified
diagrams represent expression patterns based on hexamerin transcript abundance as detected by RT-PCR followed by electrophoresis of the amplified cDNA on ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels using A. mellifera actin as a loading control (see Additional file 11). The thick, thin and dashed
lines in the diagrams represent high, intermediary and low transcript levels, respectively. L5: 5th larval instar. L5F and L5S: feeding and spinning phases
of the 5th larval instar. NE: newly emerged queens. EL: egg-laying queens. 3d, 6d, and 7d: adult age in days. Data previously published by our laboratory
are indicated by the respective bibliographic reference.

very high Glx content (20%) and has a high molecular
mass (116 kDa). We also identified hexamerins containing slightly lower Glx percentages (between 10% and
15%) among the dipterans, coleopterans and in the
isopteran included in the tree (see Figure 4). The physiological significance of such a high proportion of glutamine and glutamic acid in hexamerins remains to be
elucidated.
A conserved histidine residue was identified in each of
the four amino acid sequences. In the ancestral hemocyanins, six copper-liganding histidines confer the ability to
bind and transport oxygen. The insect hexamerins lost
most or all of the histidine residues and, thus, the oxygenbinding function [31].
The ~70 kDa hexamerins in the honey bee were classified as arylphorins and/or methionine-rich, according to
their particular amino acid composition. Due to the
importance of aromatic amino acids in sclerotization, the
HEX 70a and HEX 70c arylphorins may contribute to

exoskeleton hardening and differentiation during pharate
adult development. HEX 70c is also rich in methionine,
and like HEX 70b (also a methionine-rich hexamerin) it
may act as a sulfur reserve for development toward the
adult stage.
The search for cis-acting elements in the UCR of each
hexamerin gene using bioinformatic analyses revealed a
total of six overrepresented DNA motifs. It was very
interesting to find out that all four hexamerin genes
exhibit potential binding sites for the protein Usp, thus
suggesting regulation by JH and/or ecdysteroids. Usp has
been primarily studied as part of the 20-hydroxyecdysone
(20E)-binding nuclear receptor complex [32,33]. However it was recently also identified as a potential target for
compounds based on a methyl farnesoid structure, like
JH [34]. The potential Usp binding motif is located near
the start codon of each hexamerin gene (see Figure 2A), a
conserved pattern that increases the likelihood of its
functionality. Using a hormone manipulation experi-

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Page 10 of 20

Figure 6 Relative quantification of hexamerin transcripts in the larval and pupal fat body. (A) Levels of hex 70a, hex 70b, hex 70c and hex 110
mRNAs measured by real time RT-PCR in workers, queens and drones during the 4th larval instar (L4), the feeding (L5F) and spinning (L5S) phases of
the 5th larval instar and in newly ecdysed pupae (Pw). All points in the curves represent means and standard errors of three biological samples each
prepared twice (experimental replicates). For a better visualization of the data, the Y axis scale was extended in the graphs representing hex 70a and
hex 70c expression. Letters indicate significant differences: (ab) workers ≠ queens/drones; (ac) queens ≠ workers/drones; (bc) drones ≠ workers/
queens; (abc) workers ≠ queens ≠ drones. Statistical analysis was carried out with Jandel SigmaStat 3.1 software (Jandel Corporation, San Rafael, CA,
USA), using two way ANOVA with post-hoc comparisons by the Holm-Sidak multiple comparison test. * p = 0.04, ** p ≤ 0.001. (B) Correlation among
transcriptional profiles of the four honey bee hexamerin genes in queens, workers and drones during larval-pupal transition. The greater the thickness
of the bar linking the encircled hexamerin genes, the higher the Pearson's correlation coefficient and association among expression profiles.

ment, we recently demonstrated that hex 70b is induced
by JH and repressed by 20E [19]. In the current study we
expanded this experiment to investigate the action of JH
on the expression of the other honey bee hexamerin
genes. To make this approach comparative, we re-tested
the expression of hex 70b in the same fat body samples
used for the analysis of the other genes. The results
showed a strong and positive JH-influence on the expression of hex 70b and hex 70c, and a weaker effect on the
expression of hex 70a and hex 110. The observed differential effect of JH on expression levels suggests that the
JH titer that induces a hexamerin gene for maximal

expression may differ from the JH-threshold needed for
maximal expression of their homologous. Further studies
using a series of JH doses for treating aged-synchronized
honey bee larvae may confirm (or refute) this hypothesis.
These results are in accord with the proposed functionality of the Usp regulatory element in UCRs.
In addition to the potential Usp binding motif, five
additional motifs (site2 to site6) were overrepresented in
the UCRs of all four hexamerin genes, suggesting co-regulation. In the context of metamorphosis, or larval-pupal
transition, this would assure the massive and synchronized production of hexamerins in late larvae for using

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Page 11 of 20

Figure 7 Relative quantification of hexamerin transcripts in the fat body of adult females. Levels of (A) hex 70a and (B) hex 110 transcripts in 3day-old workers and virgin queens, and in egg-laying queens. Different letters indicate significant differences between groups (p ≤ 0.001; one-way
ANOVA with post-hoc comparisons by the Holm-Sidak test; SigmaStat 3.1 software; Jandel Corporation, San Rafael, CA, USA).

during pupal and pharate-adult development. In fact, all
four hexamerin genes reached their highest expression
level during the very same stage, the 5th larval instar (see
Figure 6A). Lending support to the idea of co-regulation,
we found that the transcriptional profiles of the hexamerin genes in each caste and sex during the larval-pupal
transition are in general positively correlated. Regulatory
factors could interact with the common sequence motifs,
thus influencing the correlated expression. However, the
transcriptional profiles of hex 70b/hex 110 in workers
and drones, and of hex 70b/hex 70c in workers, did not
show a positive correlation (see Figure 6B). Furthermore,
in metamorphosing queens, only the hex 70c and hex 110
transcriptional profiles showed a significant Pearson's
correlation coefficient. Such differences might be due to
structural features in the architecture of each hexamerin
gene UCR, such as the type, number and spatial distribution of the overrepresented motifs, which raises the possibility of nuanced differences in the co-regulatory
mechanism.
Diversification of hexamerins associated with independent
radiation within insect orders

Based on amino acid sequence similarities and hexameric
structure, it has been proposed that arthropod hemocyanins gave rise to the insect hexamerins [31,35], which lost
the ability to bind Cu2+ ions. Therefore, in contrast to the
ancestral molecule, hexamerins do not bind and deliver

hemolymph oxygen, but mainly have a role as storage
proteins. The molecular phylogeny shown in Figure 4
shows a complex pattern of hexamerin evolution, with
independent radiation in each of the selected insect
orders. In general, our analysis resulted in a similar tree
topology as those published before [36], with the
hemimetabola (orthopteran and isopteran) hexamerins in
a basal position, followed by hymenopteran and
coleopteran hexamerins, which are basal to the lepidopteran and dipteran ones. As previously noticed, these
evolutionary relationships are in good agreement with
phylogeny of insect orders [37].
Most of the information on hexamerin evolution
derives from studies on dipteran and lepidopteran species, with a few studies on other holometabolous and
hemimetabolous orders, although data from an evolutionarily less-derived order (Plecoptera) have been
recently published [38]. The main contribution of the
current phylogenetic analysis was to explore the evolutionary relationship among the honey bee hexamerins
and their homologue sequences in other insect orders. It
is evident in our phylogenetic tree that the high molecular mass AmeHEX110 is located at the most basal position among the holometabola hexamerins. AmeHEX110
shares this position with two probable orthologues,
NviHEX102 and NviHEX109. Similarly, the gene encoding AmeHEX70a apparently has an orthologue,
NviHEX81, in the genome of N. vitripennis. Other poten-

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Page 12 of 20

Figure 8 Patterns of hexamerin genes expression in the gonads of immature and adult stages of workers, queens and drones. The simplified
diagrams represent expression patterns based on the hexamerin transcript abundance as detected by RT-PCR followed by electrophoresis of the amplified cDNA on ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels using A. mellifera actin as a housekeeping gene (see Additional file 12). The black, dark-grey,
light-grey and dashed lines in the diagrams represent high, intermediary, low and very low transcript levels, respectively. Data not shown are indicated
(/////). L4 and L5: 4th and 5th larval instars. NE: newly emerged queens. EL: egg-laying queens. 3d and 7d: adult age in days. Data previously published
by our laboratory are indicated by the respective bibliographic reference.

tial orthology relationship was exhibited by the honey bee
AmeHEX70c, and the ant CfeHEX2.
The molecular phylogeny also revealed a potential
orthology relationship outside the hymenopteran clade,
between the hexamerins from T. molitor, TmoHEX2, and
T. castaneum, TcaHEX2, but a definitive conclusion
would only be possible if T. molitor had its genome
sequenced. For the lepidopteran hexamerin sequences it
is more complicated to infer orthology relationships, at
least until they were available in public databases. Orthology may be a reflection of functional equivalence,
although it is important to consider that in view of gene
loss and other events in evolution of a group of organisms, genes from different species sharing high sequence
similarity may be not orthologues at all [39]. Functional
studies are therefore decisive to elucidate this complex
relationship among hexamerin genes.
A relevant observation taken from our molecular phylogeny is the well-supported split between dipteran hexamerins and the group formed by the hexamerin receptor
DmeFBP1 and Dme8100 plus Dme7320 (0.82 posterior
probability; Figure 4). It has already been suggested that
dipteran hexamerin receptors, which also belong to the

hemocyanin-hexamerin superfamily, form a separate
group in phylogenetic trees [37]. Whether these other
two DmeFBP1 paralogs have a similar function is still
unknown.
It is also obvious that most of the lepidopteran hexamerins used in tree reconstruction are methionine-rich
proteins, thus suggesting that they derived from an
ancestral molecule containing a high proportion of this
amino acid. We also observed that, except for
AmeHEX110 every basal hexamerin in each insect order
is an arylphorin, thus suggesting that insect hexamerins
have evolved from an ancestral arylphorin. Our phylogenetic analysis also supports the hypothesis of gene duplication events taking place mainly after the split of insect
orders.
Expression of hexamerin genes in larval fat body: the wellknown role in metamorphosis and a putative role in
binding JH and regulating caste differentiation

The four hexamerin genes were highly transcribed in the
larval fat body of workers, queens and drones, and are
probably involved in hexamerin synthesis for amino acid
storage to support metamorphosis and development

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

toward the adult stage. However, these genes were differentially co-expressed in the honey bee morphotypes, as
revealed by transcript quantification during the critical
period of larval-pupal transition. The most evident difference occurred during the feeding phase of the 5th larval
instar (L5F), where we observed a higher level of hex 110,
hex 70a and hex 70b transcripts in workers and drones
than in queens. This is a very interesting finding if contrasted to the caste and sex-specific JH titer at this stage,
which is higher in queens than in workers and drones
[26,40]. It is known that JH plays a central role in phenotypic caste differentiation in A. mellifera. This hormone
triggers specific physiological responses in the bipotent
female larvae, a high titer inducing development of a
queen and a low titer specifying the worker phenotype
[41,42]. The inverse relationship between levels of hexamerin transcripts and JH titers leads us to speculate that,
as was proposed for the termite Reticulitermis flavipes
[14,15,43,44], the honey bee hexamerins may function as
JH-binding proteins. By binding and controlling JH levels,
hexamerins were implicated in the process of JH-dependent caste differentiation in this termite. By applying this
model to the honey bee, we may hypothesize that if JH
titer exceeded the binding capacity of hexamerins, it
would interact with target receptors and therefore cause
the bipotent female larva to develop as a queen. If not, the
larva would develop as a worker. Interestingly, all the four
hexamerin genes showed a significantly higher expression
in drone feeding larvae (low JH titer) than in queens at
the same stage (high JH titer), thus reinforcing our
hypothesis on a role for the honey bee hexamerins in
binding and controlling JH action. But this needs further
validation.
To our knowledge, hexameric JH-binding proteins have
been characterized only in orthopterans [2,3,45]. The
cDNA and predicted amino acid sequences of the high
affinity JH-binding hexamerin from L. migratoria (LmiJHBS) show peculiar structural features. It is clear that
LmiJHBS is not closely related to any other hexamerin,
including the potential JH-binding hexamerin from R.
flavipes (RfHEX1) and the honey bee hexamerins (see
Figure 4). The lack of homology clearly indicates that
these hexamerins have evolved independently, and it is
unlikely that comparisons among their primary
sequences will bring to light amino acid regions or
domains that could be involved in JH binding. Such
regions or domains could not be identified in the
LmJHBS sequence [3]. Thus, functional binding assays
and determination of dissociation constants are required
to assess the potential role of hexamerins in binding JH
and, by extension, to verify the role of the honey bee hexamerins in caste determination.
An interesting finding is that insect hexamerins may
not directly bind JH but may be part of a multiprotein

Page 13 of 20

complex engaged in JH sequestration and transport. The
first demonstration of a physical interaction among JHbinding proteins (both free and in a complex with JH),
two hexamerins (one of them is an arylphorin), and an
apolipophorin was recently provided [46]. This interaction implies an important participation of hexamerins in
regulating JH levels, and action, even if they do not
directly bind to JH.
Re-induction of hexamerin gene expression in the adult fat
body: differential roles in workers and queens

In agreement with previous reports on hemolymph proteins in the honey bee [23,47], lower levels of hexamerin
gene expression were found in adult workers in comparison to larvae. Of the four hexamerin genes, hex 70a and
hex 110 were the only ones with detectable expression in
the adult fat body. Their transcriptional profiles differed
conspicuously among adult queens, drones and workers.
Levels of hex 70a transcripts were very low in queens and
abundant in drones and workers. However, in drones, the
abundance is limited to the five first post-emergence
days, whereas, in workers, it is extended up to the 30th
day of adult life. These transcriptional profiles in workers
and drones match the respective HEX 70a profiles in
hemolymph [21], and are closely connected with adult life
duration. Workers live longer than drones [48,49], and
their respective patterns of hex 70a expression reflects fat
body metabolic activity and lifespan. But the higher
expression of hex 70a in the fat body of adult workers in
comparison to queens (see Figures 5 and 7) suggests an
important role in worker physiology. This is discussed
below.
The expression of hex 110 is somewhat different when
compared to that of hex 70a. Like hex 70a, the hex 110
gene is considerably active in the fat body of adult workers, but it is practically silent in queens (see Figures 5 and
7) and drones (see Figure 5). Yet, in spite of the evident
presence of hex 110 transcripts in adult workers, a negligible amount of HEX 110 subunits were detected in
hemolymph [20], indicating that this hexamerin does not
function as a storage protein at this stage. But a potential
function in the fat body of adult workers cannot be ruled
out, given its specific and abundant expression in this tissue.
Our results are consistent with re-induction of hex 70a
and hex 110 expression in adult bees, although only the
product of hex 70a accumulates in hemolymph at this
stage. The presence of hexamerins in adult insects may
occur either because they were carried over from the larval stage, or due to a specific induction in adults. As
examples, some lepidopterans that do not feed on protein
as adults may use the larval store of hexamerins for egg
production [5]; mRNAs for an adult-specific hexamerin
appears in Musca domestica females only after induction

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

by a rich protein meal [50]. Differently, the presence of
HEX 70a in the adult honey bee results from gene reinduction after a drastic reduction in transcript levels
during adult ecdysis (see Figure 5).
The honey bee queen continuously receives, via trophallaxis, a proteinaceous glandular secretion, the royal
jelly, which is produced by nurse workers [51]. She may
not need to allocate amino acids from larval hexamerins
for egg production, since such compounds are continuously derived from her protein-enriched diet. The structural nutrients and energy contained in royal jelly
administered to queens are not used for the synthesis and
storage of hexamerins (levels of hexamerin transcripts are
very low, or undetectable, in the fat body of adult queens;
see Figures 5 and 7) but must be mainly directed to vitellogenesis and egg production. In contrast to the queen,
workers normally do not produce eggs, although they
also have access to a rich source of dietary proteins. They
actively consume pollen when they are younger, i.e., during the first two weeks of adult life [52]. Pollen consumption increases the expression of hex 70a and hex 110 in
the fat body, and increases the abundance of HEX 70a in
hemolymph [20,21]. This is consistent with dietary protein consumption causing reinduction of both hexamerin
genes in adult workers, and thereby enabling the storage
of HEX 70a. Whether hex 110 mRNAs are translated and,
if so, why their subunits do not accumulate in hemolymph are questions that remain unanswered.
Pollen consumption also causes the accumulation of
vitellogenin, the yolk protein precursor, in the hemolymph of young workers [53]. Vitellogenin is continuously
produced and stored in hemolymph during the first two
weeks of adulthood to be subsequently depleted as
worker bees get older and become foragers [54-57]. HEX
70a follows a similar pattern.
Since workers normally do not reproduce and in general have a short life, the question that remains unanswered is: why do they store proteins? We suggest that
the consumption of pollen by young workers exceeds
demand, and the excess is hoarded in the form of storage
proteins to be consumed later, when they become foragers. Foragers rather eat nectar [58], which is composed
primarily by carbohydrates [59]. By this means, stored
proteins could provide amino acids for sustaining worker
basal metabolism during foraging. The well documented
observations that HEX 70a [21], vitellogenin [55-57], and
total hemolymph protein titers [60] decrease gradually in
foragers is consistent with this hypothesis.
The destination of proteins stored in worker hemolymph would not be fixed, but dependent on the social
context. In case there is queen loss, workers may activate
their ovaries for drone production. Their protein reserves
would then be directed to meet reproduction demands.
Interestingly, workers accumulate storage proteins when

Page 14 of 20

they are younger and more prone to activate their ovaries
if separated from the queen. Also in the ant Camponotus
festinatus, hexamerins are possibly involved in important
facets of sociality. It was demonstrated that in the presence of larvae, adult workers do not store, but apparently
make use of hexamerins to nourish larvae. Conversely,
hexamerins accumulate in hemolymph of workers with
no larvae to feed. It was also observed that hexamerins
exist in great amounts in virgin queens and are depleted
when they seal themselves in a chamber to lay eggs to
found a new colony, thus indicating utilization for egg
production and rearing the first brood [11,12]. The high
levels of hexamerins stored by certain species of termites
were also found to be related to colony founding and to
the production of initial broods [13].
In adult honey bee workers, vitellogenin and HEX 70a
may be part of the above mentioned multiprotein complex engaged in JH binding and sequestration [46], since
the presence of both in hemolymph coincides with a low
JH titer (in younger workers), and their depletion occurs
in synergy with JH titer increase (in foragers). If so, as
proposed for vitellogenin [61], HEX 70a also may be a
player in the physiological process of JH-regulated transition to forager.
Yet, HEX 70a may have developed another role in adult
workers. A protein fragment found in the honey bee
venom [62] matched HEX 70a N-terminal sequence. Its
function in the venom, and whether it is synthesized by
the venom gland or sequestered from hemolymph, was
not yet determined.
Hexamerin gene expression in gonads: a proposed role in
ovary and testis development and activity

Among solitary insects there is circumstantial evidence
supporting the hypothesis that hexamerins are also used
for reproduction. In lepidopteran species, for example, it
was established a correlation between egg production
and depletion of the larval reserve of hexamerins [4,5].
Autogenous mosquitoes that produce their first batch of
eggs without a feeding may use larval storage proteins,
mainly hexamerins, as amino acid source for this purpose
[6,7]. It has also been suggested that amino acids held in
storage proteins are used for provisioning eggs of Schistocerca americana [8].
To shed light on whether the "adult" honey bee hexamerins are important or not for reproduction, we checked
for the presence of transcripts in the gonads. Except for
hex 70c, hexamerin transcripts were abundant in the
gonads of larvae and pupae, suggesting roles in ovary differentiation, and also in spermatogenesis, which in
drones occurs during pupal stage and is finalized before
adult emergence. Two of the hexamerin genes, hex 70a
and hex 110, were also expressed in adult gonads, and this
was exclusively in queen ovaries. Interestingly, the

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

expression of hex 110 is higher in the ovaries of mated,
egg-laying queens than in the young, virgin ones.
It is known that mating triggers changes in gene expression in Drosophila females [63]. Mating also elicits physiological and behavioral changes in honey bee queens, and
although the molecular mechanisms underlying such
responses are largely unknown, it was verified that they
involve differential gene expression into the ovaries.
Based on gene ontology annotation, a function in oogenesis and reproduction was attributed to these differentially expressed genes [64]. The high expression of hex
110 in the ovaries of egg-laying queens suggests a role
linked to ovary activity and reproduction.
Ovaries of egg-laying queens have a lower level of hex
70a transcripts than ovaries of newly emerged ones. But
HEX 70a subunits exist in equivalent amounts in the ovaries of both, newly emerged and egg-laying queens, as
confirmed by Western blots using a specific antibody
[21]. Therefore, ovarian HEX 70a molecules seem to have
a dual origin. It is produced by the fat body of egg-laying
queens (see Figure 5) and secreted in hemolymph [21,23],
implying that it could be incorporated into the ovaries in
addition to being synthesized by them. The function of
HEX 70a in the ovaries of virgin and egg-laying queens is
to be determined.

Conclusions
Our study revealed dramatic differences in structure,
organization and expression of the four hexamerin genes
of the honey bee, where these differences might have
arisen concurrently with their functional diversification.
The amino acid composition, motifs and conserved
regions were identified in the deduced protein subunits,
which were also used in a phylogenetic analysis to explore
their evolutionary relationship with homologue
sequences of other insect species. Analyses of the UCR of
each hexamerin gene revealed a total of six overrepresented DNA motifs, indicating co-regulation. One of
these motifs is a potential binding site for the protein
Usp, and suggested gene regulation by JH. This hypothesis was reinforced by manipulating JH-levels in experiments in vivo, which resulted in JH-induction of the
expression of hexamerin genes in larval fat body. Apparently under a high dietary protein input as occurring during larval stage, JH induces hexamerins for a high
expression.
The detailed expression studies using fat body, ovaries
and testes revealed that: (1) the four hexamerin genes are
highly transcribed in the larval fat body, and are likely
involved in hexamerin synthesis for amino acid storage
and use during pupal stage; (2) in young adult workers,
the expression of hex 70a in the fat body is in accordance
with the idea of amino acid storage for a later support of
foraging; (3) the expression of hexamerin genes in larval

Page 15 of 20

and pupal gonads suggests a role in ovaries and testes differentiation, and in spermatogenesis; (4) the expression of
hex 110 in the ovaries of egg-laying queens, was associated with ovary activity for egg production; (5) at definite
points of the honey bee development, the inverse relationship between the fat body levels of hexamerin transcripts and JH titer suggests that hexamerins regulate JH
availability and, consequently, may be involved in the processes of caste-differentiation and worker transition to
foraging.
Together, the findings of the present study are significant in that they highlighted the potential participation of
hexamerins in important aspects of the life cycle of a
social insect, in addition to their primordial role in metamorphosis.

Methods
Honey bees

Africanized honey bees were collected from hives maintained at the apiary of the University of São Paulo in
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. Developing queens (reared by
standard apicultural procedures), workers and drones
were staged according to Rembold et al [65], Michelette
and Soares [66], and Tozetto et al [67], respectively. Adult
workers and drones of known ages were obtained by
paint marking the newly emerged ones and returning
them to their hives to be collected a specified number of
days later. Adult virgin queens were used at the third day
after emergence, and egg-laying queens of unknown ages
were collected from colonies kept in our apiary.
Fat body and gonad samples used in hexamerin expression
studies

Transcripts for the four hexamerin genes were assessed in
the fat body of workers, queens and drones collected at
different ontogenetic stages (larval, pupal and adult). Larvae were collected at the 4th and 5th instars, and individually sampled for total RNA extraction. As at the 4th instar
the fat body removed by dissection frequently resulted in
small quantities of total RNA, we opted to use the whole
larvae as fat body source. To optimize comparisons
within larval stage, the same was done for the 5th instar
larvae. The abdominal carcass (dorsal integument and
subjacent fat body) from pupae, pharate-adults and adults
was sufficient to obtain individual RNA amounts, and
then it was used as fat body source. Expression was also
investigated in the ovaries of queens and workers, and in
the testes of drones, during pre-imaginal and adult stages.
Ovaries and testes were carefully dissected and exhaustively washed in Ringer saline to eliminate contaminant
fat body before being used for RNA extractions. Data
from our laboratory concerning hex 110 [20], hex 70b
[19] and hex 70a [21] gene expression in the worker fat

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

body, and concerning that of hex 70a [21] in female and
male gonads, were used for comparisons.
Testing the effect of JH on the expression of hexamerin
genes

To test the effect of JH on the expression of hexamerin
genes, a commercial JH III (Fluka) was diluted in acetone
to make 10 μg per μl, and 1 μl was topically applied on 5th
instar worker larvae at the feeding phase (L5F). Control
larvae at the same age were topically treated with 1 μl acetone. To obtain age-controlled worker larvae, the queen
was caged on a comb and left to lay eggs for 6 h. When
age-synchronized larvae reached the L5F stage, the comb
was retrieved from the hive and transported to the laboratory for hormone treatment. The hormone (or acetone
only) was carefully deposited on each larva in its comb
cell using a micropipette. In this occasion, the comb was
mapped for further identification of treated and control
larvae, and thereafter they were returned to the hive.
Treated and control larvae were collected after 24 h for
RT-PCR analyses.
Characterization of hexamerin coding sequences (CDSs)

The previously described N-terminal sequences of two of
the honey bee hexamerins, HEX 70c (AYYAGRHTADMFFLH) and HEX 110 (APNVKQRAADQDLLNKQQDVIQLLQKISQPIPNQELQNLG) [23], were individually
aligned against the Official Gene Set database [68,69].
Matching predicted amino acid sequences (GB13613-PA
and GB14361-PA) were identified, and the corresponding
nucleotide sequences (GB13613-RA and GB14361-RA)
were annotated in the Artemis 7.0 platform [22] and used
to design primers for experimental determination of the
complete hex 70c and hex 110 CDSs (a short hex 110
cDNA fragment of 180 bp had been previously cloned
and sequenced by our research group, [20]). The primers
[hex 70c (PIR and 3F; 2R and PIF), and hex 110 (5R and
2F; 2R and 0F)] (see Additional file 13) were combined for
PCR amplification from first-strand cDNAs obtained by
reverse transcription (see RT-PCR analysis below) of total
RNA from 5th instar worker larvae.
Amplicons were purified and subcloned using the
TOPO TA-cloning kit (Invitrogen). Insert-containing
plasmids were subjected to sequencing reactions using
the primers described in Additional file 1 and M13-forward and reverse universal primers. Dideoxy sequencing
was performed in an automatic sequencer (ABI Prism
310, Applied Biosystems) using BigDye Terminator v3.0
Cycle Sequencing Reaction (Applied Biosystems).
Sequences were analyzed using Sequencher (version 4.7,
Gene Codes Corporation), Artemis software and BLAST
algorithms.
For purposes of data comparison, we used the hex 70b
CDS, and the hex 70a CDS plus part of its 5' and 3' UTRs

Page 16 of 20

previously cloned and sequenced by our research group
([19,21]; see Additional file 14 for the accession numbers).
Characterization of potential regulatory sequences in UCRs

A pipeline for motif discovery was designed based on
reliable strategies previously proposed by MacIsaac et al
[70], and adapted to analyze the honey bee genome
[71,72]. This pipeline integrates three motif-detection
programs: AlignAce [73], MEME [74] and MDscan [75].
Honey bee intergenic databases were constructed for 1.5,
3 and 6 kb sequence sizes that were trimmed whenever
another open reading frame (ORF) was found to be flanking these regions. These databases were exploited for
score calculations using group specificity scores (Church
scores) [76], ROC-AUC scores [77] and Enrichment
scores [78]. Two additional specific score metrics, the
MAP score from AlignAce and MDscan and the E-value
from MEME, were also used as a first filter for selecting
the most significant motifs (MAP > 5 and E-value ≤ 1e05). The second filter was set up to decrease the amount
of spurious hits among the identified DNA motifs
(Church ≤ 1e-04, ROC-AUC ≥ 0.7 and P-value for enrichment ≤ 1e-04). The main criterion for identifying known
regulatory sites among the six overrepresented motifs
was the alignment of the PSSM (Position-Specific Scoring
Matrix) for each hexamerin motif with the D. melanogaster sites as described in the TRANSFAC database, version 2008.2 [79]. Only the alignments passing a threshold
of 80% identity for each PSSM were considered as significant matches. The correlation among hexamerin transcription profiles in developing queens, workers and
drones, and the occurrence of DNA motifs in hexamerin
gene UCRs were represented as networks based on concepts from graph theory [80] and complex networks
[81,82].
Molecular phylogenetic analysis

Hexamerins and hemocyanins were searched for in public databases of protein sequences (Additional file 14) by
using HMMER [83] for identifying the hemocyanin C
(PF03723.5), N (PF03722.5) and M (PF00372.10) domains
as described in the Pfam database [84]. A multiple alignment was performed using Muscle [85] with default
parameters (Additional file 15). The phylogenetic tree
was reconstructed by bayesian inference (MrBayes v3.1.2)
using the Blosum model and gamma distribution of substitution rates. Metropolis-coupled Markov chain Monte
Carlo sampling was performed (with one cold and three
heated chains) setting the number of generations to
300,000 and trees were sampled every 100th generations.
The average standard deviation of split frequency was
0.005 after 300,000 generations. The posterior probabilities were estimated by discarding the first 30% samples.

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

RT-PCR analysis

The expression of hexamerin genes was evaluated in the
fat body and gonads of developing queens, workers and
drones by semi-quantitative RT-PCR using specific primers (hex 110: 2F and 2R; hex 70b: RT-PCR-F and RT-PCRR; hex 70c: JUF and JUR, see Additional file 13) to generate 659, 456 and 171 bp cDNA fragments, respectively.
Total RNA was extracted from fat body, ovaries and testes
using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). The RNA concentration of each extracted sample was measured using a
GeneQuant spectrophotometer (Pharmacia). Purity was
determined by the 260/280 nm ratio considering values
between 1.8 and 2. RNA integrity was verified using
denaturing agarose gel (1.2%) electrophoresis and ethidium bromide staining. RNA samples were incubated at
37°C in the presence of 3 units of RNase-free DNase (Promega) for 40 min to eliminate contaminant DNA, followed by 15 min at 70°C to inactivate the enzyme. Firststrand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription
using 2.5 μg of total RNA, SuperScript II reverse transcriptase and an oligo dT(12-18) primer (Invitrogen).
Negative control reactions without the enzyme were also
prepared in parallel. After establishing the adequate
number of cycles to avoid saturation, aliquots of cDNAs
diluted 1:5 (v/v) in water were subjected to PCR (27
cycles of 30 s at 94°C, 1 min at 58°C and 1 min at 72°C).
The amplified products were analyzed by electrophoresis
in 1.2% agarose gels containing ethidium bromide. An A.
mellifera actin gene (GenBank accession number
AB023025), which is constitutively expressed during
development [86], was used to control for cDNA loading.
The primers used for actin gene amplification were ACT
- F and ACT - R (Additional file 13), and the thermal
cycling program was the same as described above. Primer
pairs used in RT-PCR analysis (as well as those specified
in Additional file 13) were designed to span at least one
intron. Therefore, possible contamination by genomic
DNA in RT-PCRs could be easily identified by the detection of a distinct, larger, band following electrophoresis in
ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels.
Real-time RT-PCR analysis

In order to quantitatively compare the levels of hexamerin transcripts in queens, workers and drones during the
larval-pupal transition and in adults, we used the ΔΔCT
method where the relative amount of transcripts is given
by 2-ΔΔCT (Applied Biosystems User bulletin #2; [87]). We
previously performed validation experiments to verify
the efficiencies of amplification of the targets and the
endogenous reference. The rp 49 gene [GenBank:AF441189], which is expressed in similar levels during honey bee development [86] was used as the
endogenous reference. Amplification of rp 49 was done
with the primers R and F (Additional file 13). Specific

Page 17 of 20

primers were used to amplify hexamerin genes (hex 70a:
RTR and RTF; hex 70c: 2F and 1R; hex 110: 3R and 4F; hex
70b: RTR and RTF; Additional file 13). Using serial cDNA
dilutions, the efficiency (E) of the reactions was calculated (E = 10(-1/slope)) for each gene and showed to be
approximately equal. Amplifications were conducted in a
7500 Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) using
20 μL reaction volumes containing 10 μL SYBR Green
Master Mix 2× (Applied Biosystems), 1 μL first-strand
cDNA (0.25 μg/μL, prepared from total RNA extracted
from the fat body as described above for RT-PCR analysis), 7.4 μL water and 1 pmol of each specific primer.
Reactions not including the SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen), or cDNA template, were prepared
as negative controls. We used an initial cycle of 50°C for 2
min, a denaturation step of 95°C for 10 min, followed by a
two-step cycling condition (40 cycles of 95°C for 15 s, and
60°C for 1 min). Each run was followed by a melting curve
analysis to confirm the specificity of amplification and
absence of primer dimers. To check reproducibility, each
SYBR green assay was done in duplicate and repeated
with three independent samples. Baseline and threshold
were correctly set to obtain accurate CT values, which
were exported into an MS Excel spreadsheet (Microsoft
Inc.) for 2-ΔΔCT calculations.
Pearson's Correlation Coefficient R was used to verify a
possible association among the expression profiles of the
four honey bee hexamerin genes in queens, workers and
drones during the larval-pupal transition. The statistical
significance of the R values was evaluated using a t-test,
with R > 0.81 indicating 95% confidence that the variables
are truly correlated.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Complete coding sequence of the hex110 gene.
Exons are separated by asterisks. Primer sequences used for expression studies and gene sequencing are underlined. hex110 complete
coding sequence.
Additional file 2 Complete coding sequence of the hex70a gene.
Exons are separated by asterisks. Primer sequences used for expression studies and gene sequencing are underlined. Dashed lines indicate 5' and 3' UTR regions. hex70a complete coding sequence.
Additional file 3 Complete coding sequence of the hex70b gene.
Exons are separated by asterisks. Primer sequences used for expression studies and gene sequencing are underlined. hex70b complete
coding sequence.
Additional file 4 Complete coding sequence of the hex70c gene.
Exons are separated by asterisks. Primer sequences used for expression studies and gene sequencing are underlined. Dashed lines indicate 5' and 3' UTR regions. hex70c complete coding sequence.
Additional file 5 HEX110 deduced amino acid sequence. Signal peptide is indicated by a dotted line, and a dashed line shows Danty's
hexamerin motif [23]. Asterisks indicate glicosylation sites. The conserved histidine is double underlined. HEX110 deduced amino acid
sequence.

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

Additional file 6 HEX70a deduced amino acid sequence. Signal peptide is indicated by a dotted line, and a dashed line shows Danty's
hexamerin motif [23]. Asterisks indicate glicosylation sites. The conserved histidine is double underlined. LSP signature-1 motif is indicated (+++). LSP signature-2 motif is in bold. Protease cleavage site is
underlined. The exopterygote and endopterygote conserved glycine14 is indicated (#). HEX70a deduced amino acid sequence.
Additional file 7 HEX70b deduced amino acid sequence. Signal peptide is indicated by a dotted line, and a dashed line shows Danty's
hexamerin motif [23]. Asterisks indicate glicosylation sites. The conserved histidine is double underlined. LSP signature-1 motif is indicated (+++). LSP signature-2 motif is in bold. Protease cleavage site is
underlined. The exopterygote and endopterygote conserved glycine14 is indicated (#). HEX70b deduced amino acid sequence.
Additional file 8 HEX70c deduced amino acid sequence. Signal peptide is indicated by a dotted line, and a dashed line shows Danty's
hexamerin motif [23]. Asterisks indicate glicosylation sites. The conserved histidine is double underlined. LSP signature-1 motif is indicated (+++). LSP signature-2 motif is in bold. The exopterygote and
endopterygote conserved glycine-14 is indicated (#). HEX70c deduced
amino acid sequence.
Additional file 9 Hydropathy profiles produced for HEX70a, HEX70b,
HEX70c and HEX110 sequences using Phobius http://phobius.sbc.su.se.
Hydropathy profiles of the deduced hexamerin sequences of the honey
bee.
Additional file 10 Multiple alignment including HEX 70a, HEX 70b,
HEX 70c and HEX110 using ClustalW 1.83. Multiple alignment of the
deduced hexamerin sequences of the honey bee.
Additional file 11 Expression of hexamerin genes in the fat body of
developing and adult workers, queens and drones. The abundance of
hex110, hex70a, hex70b and hex70c transcripts as detected by semiquantitative RT-PCR followed by electrophoresis of the amplified
cDNA on ethidium bromide-stained agarose gel using an A. mellifera
actin as a loading control. L5F and L5S: feeding and spinning phases
of the 5th larval instar. PP: pharate pupae. Pw, Pp, Pdp, Pb, Pbl, Pbm
and Pbd: successive phases of the worker and queen pupal stage. P1
to P13: successive phases of the drone pupal stage. NE: newlyemerged adults. Numbers indicate adult age in days. Expression of hexamerin genes in the fat body of developing and adult workers, queens and
drones.
Additional file 12 Expression of hexamerin genes in the gonads of
developing and adult workers, queens and drones. The abundance of
hex110, hex70a, hex70b and hex70c transcripts as detected by semiquantitative RT-PCR followed by electrophoresis of the amplified
cDNA on ethidium bromide-stained agarose gel using an A. mellifera
actin as a housekeeping gene. L5F and L5S: feeding and spinning
phases of the 5th larval instar. PP: pharate pupae. Pw, Pp, Pb, Pbl, Pbm
and Pbd: successive phases of the worker and queen pupal stage. P1
to P13: successive phases of the drone pupal stage. NE: newlyemerged adults. EL: egg-laying queens. Numbers indicate adult age
in days. Expression of hexamerin genes in the gonads of developing and
adult workers, queens and drones.
Additional file 13 Specific primers used for sequencing and expression analyses. as title.
Additional file 14 Accession numbers and references concerning to
hexamerins and hemocyanins included in molecular phylogeny analysis. as title.
Additional file 15 Multiple alignment used for phylogenetic tree
reconstruction. as title.
Abbreviations
cDNA: complementary DNA; RT-PCR: reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction; UCR: upstream control region; CDS: coding sequence; UTR: untranslated region; hex, hexamerin gene; HEX: hexamerin subunit; JH: juvenile hormone; DNAse: deoxyribonuclease; Glx: glutamine/glutamic acid; Usp:
ultraspiracle.

Page 18 of 20

Authors' contributions
JRM conducted the bioinformatic analyses, directed laboratory activities,
undertook statistical analyses, interpretation of results and assisted with preparation of this manuscript. FMFN assisted with primers design, bioinformatic
analyses, and manuscript edits. ASC conducted the bioinformatic and phylogenetic analyses and authored the corresponding Method and Result sections.
ZLPS assisted with project design and development. MMGB conducted project
design with considerable input into direction of research, interpretation of
results and preparation of this manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Luiz Roberto Aguiar for expert assistance in the apiary.
Financial support was provided to ZLP Simões (05/03926-5) by the Fundação
de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo, which also provided a fellowship to JR Martins (08/00541-3).
Author Details
1Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Departamento de Genética,
Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil, 2Faculdade de Filosofia,
Ciências e Letras de Ribeirão Preto, Departamento de Biologia, Universidade de
São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil and 3The Queensland Brain Institute, The
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
Received: 15 May 2009 Accepted: 26 March 2010
Published: 26 March 2010
© 2010 MartinsBiology from: 11:23 Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This article is available 2010, http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23
BMC is an Open et al; licensee BioMed
Molecular Access article distributed under the

References
1. Burmester T, Scheller K: Ligands and receptors: common theme in
insect storage protein transport. Naturwissenschaften 1999, 86:468-474.
2. Ismail SM, Gillott C: Identification, characterization, and developmental
profile of a high molecular weight, juvenile hormone-binding protein
in the hemolymph of the migratory grasshopper, Melanoplus
sanguinipes. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol 1995, 29:415-430.
3. Braun RP, Wyatt GR: Sequence of the hexameric juvenile hormonebinding protein from the hemolymph of Locusta migratoria. J Biol
Chem 1996, 271:31756-31762.
4. Pan ML, Telfer WH: Methionine-rich hexamerin and arylphorin as
precursor reservoirs for reproduction and metamorphosis in female
luna moths. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol 1996, 33:149-162.
5. Wheeler DE, Tuchinskaya II, Buck NA, Tabashnik BE: Hexameric storage
proteins during metamorphosis and egg production in the
diamondback moth, Plutella xylostella (Lepidoptera). J Insect Physiol
2000, 46:951-958.
6. Wheeler DE, Buck NA: A role for storage proteins in autogenous
reproduction in Aedes atropalpus. J Insect Physiol 1996, 42:961-966.
7. Zakharkin SO, Headley VV, Kumar NK, Buck NA, Wheeler DE, Benés H:
Female-specific expression of a hexamerin gene in larvae of an
autogenous mosquito. Eur J Biochem 2001, 268:5713-5722.
8. Hahn DA, Wheeler DE: Presence of a single abundant storage
hexamerin in both larvae and adults of the grasshopper, Schistocerca
americana. J Insect Physiol 2003, 49:1189-1197.
9. Kanost MR, Kawooya JK, Law JH, Ryan RO, Van Heusden MC, Ziegler R:
Insect hemolymph proteins. Adv Insect Physiol 1990, 22:299-396.
10. Telfer WH, Kunkel JG: The function and evolution of insect storage
hexamers. Annu Rev Entomol 1991, 36:205-228.
11. Martinez T, Wheeler DE: Identification of two storage hexamers in the
ant, Camponotus festinatus: accumulation in adult queen-less workers.
Insect Biochem Mol Biol 1993, 23:309-317.
12. Martinez T, Wheeler DE: Storage proteins in adult ants (Camponotus
festinatus): roles in colony founding by queens and in larval rearing by
workers. J Insect Physiol 1994, 40:723-729.
13. Johnston ML, Wheeler DE: The role of storage proteins in colonyfounding in termites. Insect Soc 2007, 54:383-387.
14. Zhou X, Oi FM, Scharf ME: Social exploitation of hexamerin, RNAi reveals
a major caste-regulatory factor in termites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:4499-4504.
15. Zhou X, Tarver MR, Bennett GW, Oi FM, Scharf ME: Two hexamerin genes
from the termite Reticulitermes flavipes, sequence, expression, and
proposed functions in caste regulation. Gene 2006, 376:47-58.

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

16. Haydák MH: The food of the drone larvae. Ann Entomol Soc Am 1957,
50:73-75.
17. Jay SC: The development of honeybees in their cells. J Apic Res 1963,
2:117-134.
18. Winston ML: The biology of the honeybee Cambridge: Harvard University
Press; 1987.
19. Cunha AD, Nascimento AM, Guidugli KR, Simões ZL, Bitondi MM:
Molecular cloning and expression of a hexamerin cDNA from the
honey bee, Apis mellifera. J Insect Physiol 2005, 51:1135-1147.
20. Bitondi MM, Nascimento AM, Cunha AD, Guidugli KR, Nunes FM, Simões
ZL: Characterization and expression of the Hex 110 gene encoding a
glutamine-rich hexamerin in the honey bee, Apis mellifera. Arch Insect
Biochem Physiol 2006, 63:57-72.
21. Martins JR, Nunes FMF, Simões ZLP, Bitondi MMG: A honeybee storage
protein gene, hex 70a, expressed in developing gonads and
nutritionally regulated in adult fat body. J Insect Physiol 2008,
54:867-877.
22. Rutherford K, Parkhill J, Crook J, Horsnell T, Rice P, Rajandream MA, Barrell
B: Artemis: sequence visualization and annotation. Bioinformatics 2000,
16:944-945.
23. Danty E, Arnold G, Burmester T, Huet JC, Huet D, Pernollet JC, Masson C:
Identification and developmental profiles of hexamerins in antenna
and hemolymph of the honeybee, Apis mellifera. Insect Biochem Mol Biol
1998, 28:387-397.
24. Telfer WH, Keim PS, Law JH: Arylphorin, a new protein from Hyalophora
cecropia: comparisons with calliphorin and manducin. Insect Biochem
1983, 13:601-613.
25. Christianson AMK, King DL, Hatzivassiliou E, Casas JE, Hallenbeck PL,
Nikodem VM, Mitsialis SA, Kafatos FC: DNA binding and
heteromerization of the Drosophila transcription factor chorion factor
1/ultraspiracle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:11503-11507.
26. Rachinsky A, Strambi C, Strambi A, Hartfelder K: Caste and
metamorphosis: hemolymph titers of juvenile hormone and
ecdysteroids in last instar honeybee larvae. Gen Comp Endocrinol 1990,
79:31-38.
27. Burmester T: Evolution and function of the insect hexamerins. Eur J
Entomol 1999, 96:213-225.
28. Wheeler DE, Buck NA: Storage proteins in ants during development and
colony founding. J Insect Physiol 1995, 41:885-894.
29. Hunt JH, Buck NA, Wheeler DE: Storage proteins in vespid wasps:
characterization, developmental pattern, and occurrence in adults. J
Insect Physiol 2003, 49:785-794.
30. Burmester T, Antoniewski C, Lepesant JA: Ecdysone-regulation of
synthesis and processing of fat body protein 1, the larval serum
protein receptor of Drosophila melanogaster. Eur J Biochem 1999,
262:49-55.
31. Beintema JJ, Stam WT, Hazes B, Smidt MP: Evolution of arthropod
hemocyanins and insect storage proteins (hexamerins). Mol Biol Evol
1994, 11:493-503.
32. Yao TP, Segraves WA, Oro AE, McKeown M, Evans RM: Drosophila
ultraspiracle modulates ecdysone receptor function via heterodimer
formation. Cell 1992, 71:63-72.
33. Yao TP, Forman BM, Jiang Z, Cherbas L, Chen JD, McKeown M, Cherbas P,
Evans RM: Functional ecdysone receptor is the product of EcR and
Ultraspiracle genes. Nature 1993, 366:476-479.
34. Jones G, Jones D, Teal P, Sapa A, Wozniak M: The retinoid-X receptor
ortholog, ultraspiracle, binds with nanomolar affinity to an
endogenous morphogenetic ligand. FEBS J 2006, 273:4983-4996.
35. Burmester T: Origin an evolution of arthropod hemocyanins and
related proteins. J Comp Physiol B 2002, 172:95-117.
36. Burmester T, Hankeln T: The respiratory proteins of insects. J Insect
Physiol 2007, 53:285-294.
37. Burmester T, Massey HC Jr, Zakharkin SO, Benes H: The Evolution of
Hexamerins and the Phylogeny of Insects. J Mol Evol 1998, 47:93-108.
38. Hagner-Holler S, Pick C, Girgenrath S, Marden JH, Burmester T: Diversity of
stonefly hexamerins and implication for the evolution of insect storage
proteins. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2007, 37:1064-1074.
39. Theißen G: Secret life of genes. Nature 2002, 415:741.
40. Rembold H: Caste specific modulation of juvenile hormone titers in
Apis mellifera. Insect Biochem 1987, 17:1003-1006.

Page 19 of 20

41. Wirtz P, Beetsma J: Induction of caste differentiation in the honeybee
(Apis mellifera L.) by juvenile hormone. Entomol Exp Appl 1972,
15:517-520.
42. Rembold H, Czoppelt C, Rao PJ: Effect of juvenile hormone treatment on
caste differentiation in the honeybee, Apis mellifera. J Insect Physiol
1974, 20:1193-1203.
43. Zhou X, Tarver MR, Scharf ME: Hexamerin-based regulation of juvenile
hormone-dependent gene expression underlies phenotypic plasticity
in a social insect. Development 2007, 134:601-610.
44. Scharf ME, Buckspan CE, Grzymala TL, Zhou X: Regulation of polyphonic
caste differentiation in the termite Reticulitermes flavipes by
interaction of intrinsic and extrinsic factors. J Exp Biol 2007,
210:4390-4398.
45. Tawfik AI, Kellner L, Hoffman KH, Lorenz MW: Purification,
characterization and titre of the haemolymph juvenile hormone
binding proteins from Schistocerca gragaria and Gryllus bimaculatus. J
Insect Physiol 2006, 52:255-268.
46. Zalewska M, Kochman A, Estève JP, Lopez F, Chaoui K, Susini C, Ozyhar A,
Kochman M: Juvenile hormone binding protein traffic - interaction
with ATP synthase and lipid transfer proteins. Biochim Biophys Acta
2009, 1788:1695-1705.
47. Chan QWT, Howes CG, Foster LJ: Quantitative comparison of caste
differences in honeybee hemolymph. Mol Cell Proteomics 2006,
5:2252-2262.
48. Currie RW: The biology and behaviour of drones. Bee World 1987,
68:129-143.
49. Page RE Jr, Peng CYS: Aging and development in social insects with
emphasis on the honey bee, Apis mellifera L. Exp Gerontol 2001,
36:695-711.
50. Capurro ML, Moreira-Ferro CK, Marinotti O, James AA, de Bianchi AG:
Expression patterns of the larval and adult hexamerin genes of Musca
domestica. Insect Mol Biol 2000, 9:169-177.
51. Haydák MH: Honey bee nutrition. Annu Rev Entomol 1970, 14:143-156.
52. Hrassnigg N, Crailsheim K: The influence of brood on the pollen
consumption of worker bees (Apis mellifera L.). J Insect Physiol 1998,
44:393-404.
53. Bitondi MMG, Simões ZLP: The relationship between level of pollen in
the diet, vitellogenin, and juvenile hormone titres in Africanized Apis
mellifera workers. J Apic Res 1996, 35:27-36.
54. Rutz W, Gerig L, Wille H, Lüscher M: The function of juvenile hormone in
adult worker honeybees, Apis mellifera. J Insect Physiol 1976,
22:1485-1491.
55. Engels W, Kaatz H, Zillikens A, Simões ZLP, Trube A, Braun R, Dittrich F:
Honeybee reproduction: vitellogenin and caste-specific regulation of
fertility. In Advanced Invertebrates Reproduction Edited by: Hoshi M,
Yamashita O. Elsevier, Oxford; 1990.
56. Hartfelder K, Engels W: Social insect polymorphism: Hormonal
regulation of plasticity in development and reproduction in the
honeybee. Curr Top Dev Biol 1998, 40:45-77.
57. Piulachs MD, Guidugli KR, Barchuck AR, Cruz J, Simões ZLP, Bellés X: The
vitellogenin cDNA of the honey bee, Apis mellifera: structural analysis
and expression studies. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2003, 33:459-465.
58. Crailsheim K, Schneider LHW, Hrassnigg N, Buhlmann G, Brosch U,
Gmeinbauer R, Schoffmann B: Pollen consumption and utilization in
worker honey bees (Apis mellifera carnica): dependence on individual
age and function. J Insect Physiol 1992, 38:409-419.
59. Slansky JR, Scriber JM: Food consumption and utilization. In
Comprehensive Insect Physiology Biochemistry and Pharmacology Edited by:
Kerkut GA, Gilbert LI. New York: Oxford Pergamon Press; 1985.
60. Crailsheim K: Dependence os protein metabolism on age and season in
the honeybee (Apis mellifera carnica Pollm). J Insect Physiol 1986,
32:629-634.
61. Guidugli KR, Nascimento AM, Amdam GV, Barchuk AR, Omholt S, Simões
ZLP, Hartfelder K: Vitellogenin regulates hormonal dynamics in the
worker caste of a eusocial insect. FEBS Letters 2005, 579:4961-4965.
62. Hoffman DR: Hymenoptera Venom Allergens. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
2006, 30:109-128.
63. McGraw LA, Gibson G, Clark AG, Wolfner MF: Genes regulated by mating,
sperm, or seminal proteins in mated female Drosophila melanogaster.
Curr Biol 2004, 14:1509-1514.
64. Kocher SD, Richard FJ, Tarpy DR, Grozinger CM: Genomic analysis of postmating changes in the honey bee queen. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:232.

Martins et al. BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2199/11/23

65. Rembold H, Kremer JP, Ulrich GM: Characterization of postembryonic
developmental stages of the female castes of the honeybee, Apis
mellifera L. Apidologie 1980, 11:29-38.
66. Michelette ERF, Soares AEE: Characterization of preimaginal
developmental stages in Africanized honeybee workers (Apis mellifera
L.). Apidologie 1993, 24:431-440.
67. Tozetto SO, Bitondi MMG, Dallacqua RP, Simões ZLP: Protein profiles of
testes, seminal vesicles and accessory glands of honeybee pupae and
their relation to the ecdysteroid titer. Apidologie 2006, 38:1-11.
68. Elsik CG, Mackey AJ, Reese JT, Milshina NV, Roos DS, Weinstock GM:
Creating a honey bee consensus gene set. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R13.
69. The Honey Bee Genome Sequencing Consortium: Insights into social
insects from the genome of the honeybee Apis mellifera. Nature 2006,
443:919-920.
70. MacIsaac KD, Fraenkel E: Practical strategies for discovering regulatory
DNA sequences motifs. PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2:e36.
71. Cristino ADS, Nunes FMF, Lobo CH, Bitondi MMG, Simões ZLP, Costa LDF,
Lattorff HMG, Moritz RFA, Evans JD, Hartfelder K: Caste development and
reproduction - a genome-wide analysis of hallmarks of insect
eusociality. Insect Mol Biol 2006, 15:703-714.
72. Barchuk AR, Cristino AS, Kucharski R, Costa LF, Simões ZLP, Maleszka R:
Molecular determinants of caste differentiation in the highly eusocial
honeybee Apis mellifera. BMC Dev Biol 2007, 7:70.
73. Roth FP, Hughes JD, Estep PW, Church GM: Finding DNA regulatory
motifs within unaligned noncoding sequences clustered by wholegenome mRNA quantification. Nature Biotechnol 1998, 16:939-945.
74. Bailey TL, Elkan D: Unsupervised learning of multiple motifs in
biopolymers using expectation maximization. Mach Learn 1995,
21:58-83.
75. Liu XS, Brutlag DL, Liu JS: An algorithm for finding protein-DNA binding
sites with applications to chromatin-immunoprecipitation microarray
experiments. Nature Biotechnol 2002, 20:835-839.
76. Hughes JD, Estep PW, Tavazole S, Church GM: Computational
identification of cis-regulatory elements associated with groups of
functionally related genes in Saccharomyces cervisiae. J Mol Biol 2000,
296:1205-1214.
77. Clarke ND, Granek JA: Rank order metrics for quantifying the association
of sequence features with gene regulation. Bioinformatics 2003,
19:212-218.
78. Harbison CT, Gordon DB, Lee TI, Rinaldi NJ, Macisaac KD, Danford TW,
Hannett NM, Tagne JB, Reynolds DB, Yoo J, Jennings EG, Zeitlinger J,
Pokholok DK, Kellis M, Rolfe PA, Takusagawa KT, Lander ES, Gifford DK,
Fraenkel E, Young RA: Transcriptional regulatory code of a eukaryotic
genome. Nature 2004, 431:99-104.
79. Wingender E, Chen X, Hehl R, Karas H, Liebich I, Matys V, Meinhardt T, Prüb
M, Reuter I, Schacherer F: TRANSFAC: an integrated system for gene
expression regulation. Nucl Acids Res 2000, 28:316-319.
80. Chartrand G, Lesniak L: Graphs and Digraphs 3rd edition. Chapman and
Hall/CRC; 1996.
81. Newman MEJ: Structure and function of complex networks. SIAM
Review 2003, 45:167-256.
82. Costa LF, Rodrigues FA, Cristino AS: Complex networks: The key to
systems biology. Genet Mol Biol 2008, 31:591-601.
83. Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998,
14:755-763.
84. Bateman A, Coin L, Durbin R, Finn RD, Hollich V, Griffiths-Jones S, Khanna
A, Marshall M, Moxon S, Sonnhammer EL, Studholme DJ, Yeasts C, Eddy
SR: The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acid Res 2004,
32:D138-141.
85. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy
and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
86. Lourenço AP, Mackert A, Cristino AS, Simões ZLP: Validation of references
genes for gene expression studies in the honey bee, Apis mellifera, by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Apidologie 2008, 39:372-385.
87. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD: Analysis of relative gene expression data using
real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) method.
Methods 2001, 25:402-408.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-23
Cite this article as: Martins et al., The four hexamerin genes in the honey
bee: structure, molecular evolution and function deduced from expression
patterns in queens, workers and drones BMC Molecular Biology 2010, 11:23

Page 20 of 20

</pre>
</body>
</html>
