<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2148-4-9.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Evolutionary Biology

BioMed Central

Open Access

Research article

Upstream plasticity and downstream robustness in evolution of
molecular networks
Sergei Maslov*1, Kim Sneppen2, Kasper Astrup Eriksen3,1 and KoonKiu Yan1,4
Address: 1Department of Physics, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA, 2Nordita, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen
Ø, Denmark, 3Department of Theoretical Physics, Lund University, Sölvegatan 14A, SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden and 4Department of Physics and
Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA
Email: Sergei Maslov* - maslov@bnl.gov; Kim Sneppen - sneppen@nbi.dk; Kasper Astrup Eriksen - kasper@thep.lu.se; KoonKiu Yan - kyan@grad.physics.sunysb.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 08 March 2004
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4:9

Received: 10 October 2003
Accepted: 08 March 2004

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9
© 2004 Maslov et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: Gene duplication followed by the functional divergence of the resulting pair of
paralogous proteins is a major force shaping molecular networks in living organisms. Recent
species-wide data for protein-protein interactions and transcriptional regulations allow us to assess
the effect of gene duplication on robustness and plasticity of these molecular networks.
Results: We demonstrate that the transcriptional regulation of duplicated genes in baker's yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae diverges fast so that on average they lose 3% of common transcription
factors for every 1% divergence of their amino acid sequences. The set of protein-protein
interaction partners of their protein products changes at a slower rate exhibiting a broad plateau
for amino acid sequence similarity above 70%. The stability of functional roles of duplicated genes
at such relatively low sequence similarity is further corroborated by their ability to substitute for
each other in single gene knockout experiments in yeast and RNAi experiments in a nematode
worm Caenorhabditis elegans. We also quantified the divergence rate of physical interaction
neighborhoods of paralogous proteins in a bacterium Helicobacter pylori and a fly Drosophila
melanogaster. However, in the absence of system-wide data on transcription factors' binding in
these organisms we could not compare this rate to that of transcriptional regulation of duplicated
genes.
Conclusions: For all molecular networks studied in this work we found that even the most
distantly related paralogous proteins with amino acid sequence identities around 20% on average
have more similar positions within a network than a randomly selected pair of proteins. For yeast
we also found that the upstream regulation of genes evolves more rapidly than downstream
functions of their protein products. This is in accordance with a view which puts regulatory changes
as one of the main driving forces of the evolution. In this context a very important open question
is to what extent our results obtained for homologous genes within a single species (paralogs)
carries over to homologous proteins in different species (orthologs).

Page 1 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

Background
Biological processes are rarely performed by single isolated molecules. Instead, they typically involve a coordinated activity of many molecules forming a
neighborhood in biomolecular networks. Changes in
these networks are thus coupled to the evolution of new
functions and functional relationships in the organism.
Gene duplication is an important source of raw material
for the molecular evolution [1]. Immediately after a duplication event the pair of freshly duplicated genes is thought
to be identical in both sequences and functional roles in
the cell. However, with time their properties including
their positions within molecular networks diverge. Here
we quantify this divergence in the baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae using several recent system-wide data sets.
To this end we measure: 1) The similarity of positions of
duplicated genes in the transcription regulatory network
[2] given by the number of transcription regulators that
regulate both of them; 2) The similarity of the set of binding partners [3,4] of their protein products, and their ability to substitute for each other in knock-out experiments
[5]. These measures reflect, correspondingly, the upstream
and downstream properties of molecular networks
around duplicated genes. We then repeat this analysis
using species-wide data on protein interaction networks
in a bacterium Helicobacter pylori [6] and a fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster [7], as well as a systematic RNAi gene
inactivation assay [8] in a nematode worm Caenorhabditis
elegans.

Results and discussion
Divergence of the upstream transcriptional regulation of
duplicated genes in S. cerevisiae
The first measure of the divergence of duplicated genes
compares sets of their transcriptional regulators. Such a
set contains information about different conditions under
which a given gene is expressed, and thus reflects the spectrum of its functional roles in the cell. To quantify the similarity of transcriptional regulation of a pair of genes we
use "regulatory overlap" Ωreq given by the number of transcription factors that bind to upstream regulatory regions
of both these genes (see Fig. 1 for a general illustration).
The information about gene duplications used in this
study was extracted from the list of all pairs of paralogous
(evolutionary related) proteins found in the yeast genome
by the blastp program [9] with a conservative 10-10 E-value
cutoff (see Methods for more details). The system-wide
data for the transcription regulatory network in yeast was
taken from the chip-on-chip experiment by Lee et al. [2]
which investigated in-vivo binding patterns between 106
yeast transcription factors and upstream regulatory
regions of all 6270 yeast genes. Fig. 2A shows the distribution of the regulatory overlap for different values of the
percent identity (PID) of amino acid sequences of paralogous proteins. From this figure one can see that the regu-

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

latory overlap has a tendency to decrease as a function of
PID. While multiple overlaps dominate the distribution
for PID ≥ 80%, they gradually disappear at lower PIDs.
Fig 2B shows the average value of the regulatory overlap as
a function of PID. The regulatory overlap in this plot is
normalized by a proxy to the ancestral connectivity of a
gene, estimated as the total number of distinct transcription factors that are involved in regulation of at least one
of the pair of proteins (see Fig 1). The correlation between
the normalized regulatory overlap Ωreg and the PID is
highly statistically significant: the Pearson correlation is
0.34 (P-value around 10-70 for 2275 data points). Even for
the lowest value of PID = 20% the average Ωreg significantly exceeds its value in non-paralogous proteins. One
interesting feature of the graph in Fig. 2B is that even pairs
of proteins whose amino acid sequences are 100% identical to each other on average have only about 30% overlap
in their upstream regulation. Such low regulatory overlap
of recently duplicated genes can be partially attributed to
false positives and false negatives present in the dataset of
Ref. [2] (see Methods for extended discussion.) It might
also be sometimes caused by an incomplete duplication
of the upstream regulatory region of a gene, or by a burst
of very rapid evolution of the regulatory region immediately following the duplication event. The second feature
of the Fig. 2B is a gradual decline of the average regulatory
overlap over the whole range of sequence similarities. The
data in Fig. 2B can be fitted with an exponential decay
with a rate corresponding to an average 3% loss of common regulators of a paralogous pair for every 1% decrease
in their amino acid sequence identity. Thus already at PID
= 80% about half of the common regulations present at
PID = 100% are lost. The decline in the regulatory overlap
at lower PIDs clearly visible in Fig. 2A,2B is in accord with
a recently published analysis [11] of similarity between
microarray profiles of paralogs. In fact, due to a more
direct information about transcriptional regulation contained in the chip-on-chip dataset of Ref. [2] compared to
microarray experiments, our analysis extends the gradual
decline to much lower PID than was detected in Ref. [11].
After we submitted this manuscript another group of
authors [12] has reported a rapid decline in the number of
shared regulatory motifs of duplicated genes. This study,
carried out as a function of a much faster silent substitution rate Ks, nicely complements our own findings.
Indeed, in their analysis Papp et al. [12] logarithmically
binned the Ks into four broad bins: below 0.01, 0.01–0.1,
0.1–1, and above 1. Since the reliability of the measured
silent substitution rate dramatically decreases at high values of Ks, the whole long-time behavior (i.e. that for PID
< 75% which in yeast roughly corresponds to Ks > 1) of the
regulatory overlap remained inaccessible to the analysis of
Ref. [12].

Page 2 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

overlap (Ω)

a pair of paralogs
Figure 1
The illustration of a concept of overlap in a molecular network
The illustration of a concept of overlap in a molecular network. For a pair of paralogs the overlap Ω is defined as the number
of their common neighbors in the network. In the case of a transcription network the (upstream) regulatory overlap Ωreg is
given by the number of transcription factors regulating both paralogs, while for the physical interaction network the interaction
overlap Ωint counts their common binding partners. The pair of paralogs used in this illustration has the overlap Ω = 2 out of
the total of 5 distinct neighbors of the pair. That corresponds to a normalized overlap of 2/5 = 0.40.

Divergence in downstream functional roles of duplicated
genes in S. cerevisiae
The rate of divergence between sets of upstream transcriptional regulators of paralogous proteins has an obvious
downstream counterpart: it is the rate at which paralogous
transcription factors loose their downstream targets.
Unfortunately, an attempt to quantify this rate using the
same dataset that we used above for the rate of upstream
divergence would be limited to only 4 paralogous pairs
formed by 106 transcriptional regulators studied in Ref.
[2]. In general, relatively small number of paralogous
transcription factors in any given species makes it difficult
to go beyond just describing anecdotal cases in such an
analysis. Thus in the remaining part of this study we concentrate on another measure of the downstream diver-

gence, systematically comparing functional roles of
duplicated (paralogous) proteins. The functional similarity of a pair of proteins is in part reflected in the "interaction overlap" Ωint given by the number of other proteins
that physically interact with both of them (See Fig. 1). In
our study we use the system-wide information about protein-protein physical interactions obtained by combining
two high-throughput two-hybrid experiments [3,4]. Fig
3A shows the average value of the interaction overlap Ωint
between pairs of paralogous proteins as a function of PID
– their amino-acid similarity. Again Ωint typically
decreases with decreasing PID, reflecting the gradual loss/
change of binding partners of proteins in the course of
evolution. A similar analysis, but as a function of the
silent substitution rate (Ks) was previously reported by

Page 3 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

1

A
0.3

8
0.1
6
0.03
4
0.01
2
0.003

Ω

reg

- number of common regulators

10

0
20

40

60
80
sequence similarity (%)

100

40
60
80
sequence similarity (%)

-3

100

0

fraction of shared regulators

10

B

-1

10

-2

10

20

Figure 2
Divergence of the upstream transcriptional regulation of duplicated genes in yeast
Divergence of the upstream transcriptional regulation of duplicated genes in yeast. A) The distribution of the regulatory overlap Ωreg of paralo-gous proteins. The y-axis – Ωreg – is the number of transcription factors that cis-regulate both genes encoding
a given pair of paralogous proteins. The x-axis is the percent identity (PID) of amino acid sequences of these two proteins. The
colorbar shows the likelihood of finding a given Ωreg in a given 10% PID bin (note the logarithmic scale). The data describing the
yeast regulatory network were taken from the whole genome chip-on-chip binding assay of 106 transcription factors [2], while
the list of pairs of paralogous proteins was obtained by the whole genome blastp search (see Methods for more details.). B)
The PID dependence of the average regulatory overlap Ωreg normalized by the total number of regulators of either one or the
other paralog. Relative error bars are estimated by the inverse square root of the total number of shared regulators in a given
PID bin. The solid line is the best fit to the exponential form: Ωreg ~ exp(γ PID) with γ = 0.03 (3% change in Ωreg for every 1%
change in PID.) The dashed horizontal line at 0.015 is a null-model expectation of the normalized overlap of two randomly
selected proteins (not necessarily paralogs).

Page 4 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

number of shared interactions

A

10

0

All
Ito core
Uetz

10

-1

20

40

0.3

100

0.8

B

0.6

0.25

fraction of essential proteins

60
80
sequence similarity (%)

0.4
0.2

0.2
0
0

0.15

50

100

0.1
0.05
0

0

20

40
60
sequence similarity (%)

80

100

Figure 3 of downstream functions of duplicated genes in the baker's yeast S. cerevisiae
Divergence
Divergence of downstream functions of duplicated genes in the baker's yeast S. cerevisiae. A. The average value of the interaction overlap Ωint – the number of physical interaction partners shared by a pair of paralo-gous proteins – as a function of the
similarity of their amino acid sequences. The physical interaction data are taken from the set of Uetz et al. [3] (open circles),
the core dataset of Ito et al. [4] (diamonds), and the non-redundant combination of the two (filled circles). Note the apparent
plateau for PID's between 70% and 100% in all three datasets. Solid lines are guides for the eye. A randomly selected (usually
non-paralogous) pair of proteins in the combined dataset on average has Ωint around 8 × 10-3 (off-limits in this figure). All data
points at all PIDs are significantly above this null-model value. B. The fraction of essential (lethal null-mutant) proteins among all
proteins tested in Ref. [5] as a function of PID to their most similar paralog in the yeast genome. Proteins with no paralogs (singletons) are binned at 0% PID. Note the apparent plateau between 50% and 100% PID. The inset (note the change of scale on
the y-axis) shows the fraction of essential proteins in the subset of all proteins known to be localized in the yeast nucleus [17].
Here the effect becomes even more pronounced so that all 18 nuclear proteins protected by a paralog with at least 50% similarity were found to be non-essential.

Page 5 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

Wagner [13]. In agreement with that study, we find that
paralogous proteins are more likely to share interaction
partners than one expects by pure chance alone (see the
caption to the Fig. 3). Our set of yeast paralogs contains
189 paralogous pairs such that both paralogs physically
interact with at least one other protein in the combined
dataset of Refs. [3,4]. Out of these pairs 60 (30%) share at
least one interaction partner. The correlation between the
Ωint and the PID in the combined two-hybrid dataset is
highly statistically significant: the Pearson correlation is
0.36 (P-value around 5 × 10-6 for 189 data points). We
also find that in yeast the divergence in the set of binding
partners becomes systematic only for PID < 70%, while
above 70% it remains roughly constant in both Uetz [3],
Ito [4], and combined datasets (Fig. 3A).
An alternative way to quantify the extent of divergence/
redundancy of duplicated genes is to examine phenotypes
of of null-mutants lacking one of them. A systematic genedeletion study in yeast [10] was recently used [14] to compare the fraction of essential genes (so that their nullmutants have lethal phenotype) between genes with and
without paralogs in the genome. It was found that the
fraction of essential genes is approximately 4 times higher
among singleton genes than among ones protected by a
highly similar paralog. It was also demonstrated that such
protection by a paralog persists down to rather low levels
of its amino-acid sequence similarity (PID) with the
deleted protein. In Fig. 3B we confirm these findings using
a more recent and larger systematic study [5] of viability
of null-mutants in yeast as well as demonstrate that the
magnitude of this protective effect is the strongest in the
nucleus, where the largest fraction of essential proteins
resides. Notice that the fraction of essential proteins
(especially that of nuclear proteins) shows a dramatic
increase as the PID to their closest paralog falls below
50%. Thus paralogous proteins with sequence similarity
above 50% can typically substitute for each other.
Having presented different measures of upstream and
downstream divergence of duplicated genes in yeast S. cerevisiae we are now in a position to discuss them in a wider
context. Comparing Fig. 2B to Figs 3A,3B one concludes
that changes in the upstream regulation of duplicated
genes happen more readily than changes in their downstream function. The overlap in the set of binding partners
(Fig. 3A) and the ability of duplicates to substitute for
each other (Fig. 3B) remain virtually constant down to
PID of 70%, at which point their average regulatory overlap has dropped to about 40% of its maximum (Fig. 2B).
To summarize: our results indicate that duplicated genes
would still have the ability to partially substitute for
downstream functions of each other even at the time
when the repertoire of their regulatory connections has
already substantially changed from its ancestral state

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

before the duplication. Such genes would be less constrained in evolving new functions [15], and thus would
contribute to a greater evolutionary plasticity of the
network.
Functional redundancy of paralogous proteins from RNAi
experiments on C. elegans
One might expect the protective effect of paralogs to be
unique to single-celled organisms such as yeast. Indeed, in
multicellular organisms duplicated proteins are often
expressed only in specific tissues and therefore unable to
substitute for each other. However, using a systematic
study of RNAi (RNA Interference) phenotypes in a nematode worm C. elegans [8] we found such protection [16] to
be equally strong in this multicellular organism (See Fig.
4). As in Fig. 3B, the x-axis in Fig. 4 is PID – the similarity
of amino acid sequences between a given protein and its
closest related paralog (all singleton proteins without paralogs are clumped into the 0% PID bin). The y-axis is the
fraction of tested proteins whose elimination by the RNAi
technique was found [8] to give rise to a nonviable phenotype (embryonic or larval lethality or sterility). In worm
the protection of having a paralog starts to gradually
weaken for PID < 70%. In both worm and yeast there
seems to be a four-fold drop in the fraction of essential
proteins between PID = 0% and 100%.

In the inset to Fig. 4 we kept all successfully cloned
genepairs, while in the main panel we dropped those
genepairs whose product was predicted [8] to target
mRNA product of more than one gene in the genome (see
Methods for more details). It is instructive that the fraction of essential genes as a function of PID shown in the
inset to Fig. 4 has a well pronounced minimum around
PID = 70% and then subsequently starts to rise for higher
values of PID. The tentative explanation for this behavior
is that unlike single-gene deletion technique used in yeast,
the RNAi technique is based on RNA complementarity
and can eliminate several different mRNAs with similar
sequences. Therefore, paralogous genes with nearly identical DNA sequences prove to be useless from the point of
view of protection against RNAi since their mRNA products would be eliminated at nearly the same rate as the
intended targets. This neatly explains why in the inset to
Fig. 4 the fraction of nonviable phenotypes for genes with
a 100% identical paralog in the genome approaches that
of unprotected genes without paralogous partners (keep
in mind that in this plot we use amino acid sequence identity of proteins and not of their mRNA precursors.) This
observation also reinforces the point of view that the
decline in the fraction of essential genes vs PID shown in
Figs 3B,4 is indeed caused by protective effects of paralogs
and cannot be explained by a possible tendency of nonessential genes to duplicate more frequently.

Page 6 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

fraction of nonviable RNAi phenotypes

0.1

0.1

0.08

0.06
0

0

50

100

0.04

0.02

0

0

20
40
60
80
amino acid sequence similarity

100

Figure 4 effect of paralogs in a nematode worm C. elegans
Protective
Protective effect of paralogs in a nematode worm C. elegans. The fraction of essential (non-viable RNAi phenotype [8]) proteins
among all tested worm proteins as a function of PID to their most similar paralog in the worm genome. Note the apparent plateau between 70% and 100% PID. The plot in the inset shows the fraction of essential proteins among all RNAis tested in Ref.
[8], while that in the main panel drops RNAis that are predicted [8] to target mRNA products of more than one gene. Note
that while the graph in the main panel is qualitatively similar to that in Fig. 3B, in the inset the fraction of essential proteins at
PID = 100% rises to its level for singleton proteins. Thus when mRNAs of highly similar paralogs are eliminated along with the
targeted mRNA, the protective effect of paralogs totally disappears.

Divergence of physical interactions of paralogous genes in
H. pylori and D. melanogaster
The analysis of evolution of molecular networks advocated in this paper requires a large (preferably genomewide) and unbiased (i.e. no anthropogenic selection
present in databases) dataset describing a molecular network in a given species. Apart from yeast, which is arguably the best studied model organism, system-wide twohybrid physical interaction assays were published for a

simple bacterium Helicobacter pylori [6], and a fly Drosophila melanogaster [7]. In Fig. 5 we used these two datasets to quantify the decay of the average interaction
overlap as a function of amino-acid sequence similarly
(see Fig. 3A for the same analysis in yeast.) The correlation
between Ωint and PID is highly statistically significant in
both cases: the Pearson correlation of 0.43 (P-value
around 3 × 10-4 for 65 data points) for H. pylori, and 0.19
(P-value around 10-26 for 2843 data points) in D.

Page 7 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

number of shared interactions

A
0

10

-1

10

20

number of shared interactions

0

40

60
80
sequence similarity (%)

100

B

10

-1

10

-2

10

20

40
60
80
sequence similarity (%)

100

Figure 5 of physical interaction neighborhoods of duplicated genes in a bacterium H. pylori and a fly D. melanogaster
Divergence
Divergence of physical interaction neighborhoods of duplicated genes in a bacterium H. pylori and a fly D. melanogaster. The
average value of the interaction overlap Ωint of paralogous proteins in H. pylori (A) and D. melanogaster (B) as a function of the
amino acid sequence similarity. The physical interaction data are taken from Ref. [6] for H. pylori (A) and from Ref. [7] for D.
melanogaster. Note the apparent plateau for PID's between 50% and 100% in panel A and its absence in panel B. Dashed horizontal lines show the average interaction overlap of a random (usually non-paralogous) pair of proteins. The solid line in B is
the best fit to the exponential form: Ωint ~ exp(γFLYPID) with γfly = 0.045.

Page 8 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

melanogaster. Our basic conclusions agree for all quite
diverse organisms used in this study: paralogous proteins
are much more likely to share binding partners than
expected by pure chance alone. Furthermore, the number
of common interaction partners goes down as PID of their
amino acid sequences decreases. In the yeast and H. pylori
we see the evidence of an initial plateau at which the average overlap appears to be independent of PID. On the
other hand in the fly there is no evidence of such plateau,
which makes the average rate of loss of common binding
partners (about 4.5% for every 1% of change in PID) quite
high in this organism. However, in the absence of systemwide data on transcription factors' binding in the fly and
H. pylori we could not quantify rates of upstream changes
in these two organisms, and consequently cannot compare them to the corresponding downstream rates.

Conclusions
The evolution of a biological organism modifies it on
multiple levels ranging from sequences of individual molecules, to their coordinated activity in the cell (molecular
networks), all the way up to the phenotype of the organism itself. While its manifestations both on the level of
protein sequences and phenotypes are reasonably well
documented, the data needed to quantify evolutionary
changes taking place on the level of molecular networks
have appeared only very recently. Systematic experiments
such as high-throughput two hybrid assays of protein-protein interactions [3,4,6,7], chip-on-chip studies of wholegenome binding of a large number of transcription factors
[2], and whole-genome assays of inactivations of single
genes [5] or proteins [8] allowed us to go beyond describing particular cases of evolution of molecular networks
and look at its large scale dynamics.
For all molecular networks studied in this work we found
that even the most distantly related paralogous proteins
with amino acid sequence identities around 20% on average have more similar positions within a network than a
randomly selected pair of proteins. That means that some
pairs of paralogous proteins at least partially retain their
functional redundancy for extremely long time after the
duplication event.
Our results also indicate that the genetic regulation of paralogous proteins changes faster than both their amino
acid sequences and the set of their protein interactions
partners. It is tempting to extend this observation to pairs
of homologous proteins in different species (orthologs)
that diverged from each other as a result of a speciation (as
opposed to a gene duplication) event. This would help to
explain how species with very similar gene contents can
evolve novel properties on a relatively short timescale.
However, such an inter-species comparison of molecular
networks has to wait for the appearance of whole-genome

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

data on molecular networks in closely related model
organisms.

Methods
As a source of information about yeast duplicated genes
we use the dataset consisting of 3909 pairs of paralogous
yeast proteins. This set was obtained by blasting all yeast
proteins against each other with a conservative E-value
cutoff of 10-10 and leaving only pairs in which the aligned
region constituted at least 80% of the length of a longer
protein. This prevented the appearance of pairs of multidomain proteins paralogous over only one of their
domains. We further curated this dataset by removing 72
known [17] transposable elements and all their paralogs
(108 proteins all together). That left us with 2299 paralogous pairs formed by 1596 yeast proteins (about 25% of
the genome). These pairs are characterized by a broad and
relatively uniform distribution of the percent identity
(PID) of amino acid sequences ranging from 20% to
100% (See Fig. 6) The histogram in the Fig. 6 is binned at
5% PID (as the data used to plot the Fig. 2B), and one can
see that even in the least represented bins there are over 40
paralogous pairs providing sufficient statistics for our
analysis. Our set of all possible pairs of paralogous proteins contains some redundant information especially for
large protein families. Indeed, a family of, say, 4 proteins
would contribute (4·3)/2 = 6 paralogous pairs to our
analysis, while it contains at most 3 true duplicated pairs.
However, in the situation where the data describing
molecular networks are incomplete and noisy such redundancy is rather beneficial by providing better statistics. We
have verified that apart from somewhat larger errorbars all
our quantitative findings remained virtually unchanged
when we repeated our analysis of upstream regulations in
yeast using only 938 pairs of putative duplicated proteins.
These pairs were obtained from the full set of 2299 paralogous pairs by the detailed phylogenetic analysis of
individual families. It is also worthwhile to note that
while the average number Ks of silent substitutions per
substitution site in a pair of duplicated genes is commonly
used as a proxy of the time elapsed since the duplication
event [1], the PID (or Ka – the number of non-silent substitutions per site – related to PID via PID = 100 exp(2Ka)) is rather a crude estimate of the extent of their functional similarity. Hence, our analysis emphasizes function-dependent rather than time-dependent divergence
between paralogous proteins.
The system-wide data describing the transcription regulatory network of yeast was taken from the Ref. [2], which
reports the so-called "chip-on-chip" study of in-vivo binding of 106 transcription factors to upstream regulatory
regions of genes encoding all 6270 of yeast proteins. Since
the number of transcriptional regulators in this dataset is
quite large, the probability that by pure chance the same

Page 9 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

number of duplicate pairs in 5% bin

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
0

20
40
60
80
amino acid sequence similarity (%)

100

Figure 6
The histogram of amino acid sequence identities (PID) of 2299 pairs of paralogous yeast proteins used in our study
The histogram of amino acid sequence identities (PID) of 2299 pairs of paralogous yeast proteins used in our study.

transcription factor would be incorrectly detected among
upstream regulators of both duplicated genes is small (of
order of 1%). Thus the contribution of false positives of
the dataset of Ref. [2] to the regulatory overlap Ωreg is quite
insignificant. This allowed us to use a P-value cutoff equal
to 10-2 (12854 regulations) less conservative than the 10-3
cutoff (4418 regulations) of Lee et al. [2]. On the other
hand, false positives (if present in the data) could significantly affect the average number of regulatory inputs of
individual proteins used to normalize the regulatory overlap in Fig. 2B. However, we found that both the initial
drop and the rate of exponential decay of the normalized
regulatory remains virtually unchanged when Fig. 2B is
repeated for different values of the P-value cutoff ranging
from 10-2 to 10-4 (data not shown). In the same range of

P-values the average number of regulations per gene
changes six-fold (from 2 to 0.33)! This suggests that false
positives are not a significant part of the experimental
dataset of Ref. [2] at least up to 10-2, and validates the
robust nature of parameters extracted from the Fig. 2B. In
the analysis shown in Fig. 2 we have dropped 3 paralogous pairs sharing the same intergenic sequence since by
design of the chip-on-chip experiment [2] such pairs
would have 100% regulatory overlap. We also checked
that Fig. 2A does not change significantly if one limits the
analysis to genes without diverging promoters ensuring
that a given intergenic could possibly regulate only one
gene.

Page 10 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

As a source of information about binding partners of yeast
proteins we combined the data from two independent
high-throughput two-hybrid experiments: the core dataset
of Ito et al. [4] (806 interactions among 797 proteins) and
the extended Uetz et al. dataset [3], downloaded from the
website of this group (1446 interactions among 1340 proteins). The resulting network consists of 1734 proteins
joined by 2111 non-redundant interactions. Using this
combined dataset we found that even 100% identical proteins share on average only 30% of their binding partners.
However, unlike for upstream regulation, the set of interaction partners of a protein is fully determined by its
amino acid sequence. Therefore, an imperfect overlap in
the set of binding partners of identical proteins has to be
attributed to false positives/negatives inevitably present in
high-throughput two-hybrid experiments. The relatively
high rate of false negatives in genome-wide two-hybrid
experiments is further corroborated by the fact that datasets used in our study coming from two independent
experiments [3,4] have only 141 interactions in common.
The abundance of missing interactions makes the normalization of the interaction overlap impractical. That was
the reason why unlike in Fig. 2B in Fig. 3A we used the raw
(unnormalized) interaction overlap. To make sure that
differences between Figs. 2B and 3A are not caused by differences in normalization we repeated them using various
normalization schemes as well as altogether unnormalized (data not shown). We found that apart from the
overall scale of the y-axis, changes in normalization do
not affect exponential decay parameters of Figs 2B,3A.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

obtained by blasting all protein sequences found in the
fully sequenced genome against each other with a conservative E-value cutoff of 10-10 and leaving only pairs in
which the aligned region constituted at least 80% of the
length of a longer protein.
Finally, our analysis of the interaction overlap between
paralogous proteins in D. melanogaster is based on the full
dataset of the high-throughput two-hybrid experiment
[7]. It consists of 20671 protein-protein physical interactions involving 7002 of fly proteins obtained in. To generate Fig. 5B we also used the set of 16713 paralogous pairs
involving 2827 fly proteins.

Authors Contributions
SM, KS, and KAE contributed to both the ideas and writing
of the manuscript in close collaboration. Koon-Kiu Yan
has generated blastp datasets for H. pylori, yeast, and fly, as
well as performed the analysis of RNAi experiment shown
in Fig. 4. All authors read and approved the manuscript.

Acknowledgments
Work at Brookhaven National Laboratory was carried out under Contract
No. DE-AC02-98CH10886, Division of Material Science, U.S. Department
of Energy. Two of us (K.E and K.S.) thank the Institute for Strongly Correlated and Complex Systems at Brookhaven National Laboratory for hospitality and financial support during visits when part of this work was
completed. S.M. and K.S. acknowledge the support of the NSF grant
PHY99-07949 (work at the KITP, University of California at Santa Barbara).
We thank John Little for critically reviewing the manuscript.

References
The system-wide data on viability of S. cerevisiae nullmutants used in our study was obtained from Ref. [5] in
which 1103 essential (non-viable null-mutants) and 4678
non-essential (viable null-mutants) yeast proteins were
reported. The lists of viable and non-viable null-mutants
as discovered in Ref. [5] were downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database [17].
Our analysis of protective effects of paralogs in C. elegans
is based on the set of 15587 viable and 1170 non-viable
(embryonic or larval lethality or sterility) RNAi phenotypes reported in [8]. The information about worm paralogs is obtained from the EuGenes database [18] and
consists of 30036 paralogous pairs involving 10071 worm
proteins (blastp with 10-30 cutoff and no requirements on
the length of aligned region). In Fig. 4 we used 13884
RNAi phenotypes for which we were able to uniquely map
the genepair name to the worm protein name used in
EuGenes.

1.
2.

3.

4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

The two-hybrid assay of protein-protein inetractions in H.
pylori [6] used in Fig. 5A contains 1465 interactions
between 732 proteins, while there are only 260 paralogous pairs involving 140 proteins. As in yeast this set was

10.

Ohno S: Evolution by gene duplication Berlin: Springer-Werlag; 1970.
Lee TI, Rinaldi NJ, Robert F, Odom DT, Bar-Joseph Z, Gerber GK,
Hannett NM, Harbison CT, Thompson CM, Simon I et al.: Transcription Regulatory Networks in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Science 2002, 298:799-804.
Uetz P, Giot L, Cagney G, Mansfield TA, Judson RS, Knight JR, Lockshon D, Narayan V, Srinivasan M, Pochart P et al.: A comprehensive
analysis
of
protein-protein
interactions
in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2000, 403:623-627.
Ito T, Chiba T, Ozawa R, Yoshida M, Hattori Ma, Sakaki Y: A comprehensive two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein
interactome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:4569-4574.
Giaever G, Chu AM, Ni L, Connelly C, Riles L, Véronneau S, Dow S,
Lucau-Danila A, Anderson K, André B et al.: Functional profiling
of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Nature 2002,
418:387-391.
Rain JC, Selig L, Reuse HD, Battaglia V, Reverdy C, Simon S, Lenzen
G, Petel F, Wojcik J, Schachter V et al.: The protein-protein interaction map of Helicobacter pylori. Nature 2001, 409:211-215.
Giot L, Bader JS, Brouwer C, Chaudhuri A, Kuang B, Li Y, Hao YL,
Ooi CE, Godwin B, Vitols E et al.: A Protein Interaction Map of
Drosophila melanogaster. Science 2003, 302:1727-1736.
Kamath RS, Fraser AG, Dong Y, Poulin G, Durbin R, Gotta M, Kanapink A, Le Bot N, Moreno S et al.: Systematic functional analysis
of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome using RNAi. Nature
2003, 421:231-237.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local
alignment search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
Steinmetz LM, Scharfe C, Deutschbauer AM, Mokranjac D, Herman
ZS, Jones T, Chu AM, Giaever G, Prokisch H et al.: Systematic
screen for human disease genes in yeast. Nature Genetics 2002,
31:400-404.

Page 11 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/9

Gu Z, Nicolae D, Lu HH-S, Li W: Rapid divergence in expression
between duplicate genes inferred from microarray data.
Trends in Genetics 2002, 18:609-613.
Papp B, Pál C, Hurst LD: Evolution of cis-regulatory elements in
duplicated genes of yeast. Trends in Genetics 2003, 19:417-422.
Wagner A: The yeast protein interaction network evolves
rapidly and contains few redundant duplicate genes. Mol Biol
Evol 2001, 18:1283-1292.
Gu Z, Steinmetz LM, Gu X, Scharfe C, Davis RW, Li WH: Role of
duplicate genes in genetic robustness against null mutations.
Nature 2003, 421:63-66.
Kondrashov FA, Rogozin IB, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Selection in the
evolution of gene duplications. Genome Biology 2002,
3(2):RESEARCH0008.10008.9.
After our study was completed we learned of a similar analysis submitted for publication, Conant GC, Wagner A: Duplicate genes
and robustness to transient gene knockouts in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc R Soc Lond B in press.
Saccharomyces Genome Database, [http://genome-www.stan
ford.edu/Saccharomyces]
Gilbert DG: euGenes: a eucaryote genome information
system. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:145-148.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 12 of 12
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
