<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Detection of vitellogenin incorporation into zebrafish oocytes by FITC fluorescence</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2011, 9:45. doi:10.1186/1477-7827-9-45"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Yohei Matsuda"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Matsuda et al. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2011, 9:45
http://www.rbej.com/content/9/1/45

METHODOLOGY

Open Access

Detection of vitellogenin incorporation into
zebrafish oocytes by FITC fluorescence
Yohei Matsuda1, Yoshie Ito1,3, Hisashi Hashimoto2, Hayato Yokoi1 and Tohru Suzuki1*

Abstract
Background: Large volumes of lymph can be collected from the eye-sacs of bubble-eye goldfish. We attempted
to induce vitellogenin (Vtg) in the eye-sac lymph of bubble-eye goldfish and develop a method for visualizing Vtg
incorporation by zebrafish oocytes using FITC-labeling.
Methods: Estrogen efficiently induced Vtg in the eye-sac lymph of goldfish. After FITC-labeled Vtg was prepared, it
was injected into mature female zebrafish.
Results: Incorporation of FITC-labeled Vtg by zebrafish oocytes was detected in in vivo and in vitro experiments.
The embryos obtained from zebrafish females injected with FITC-labeled Vtg emitted FITC fluorescence from the
yolk sac and developed normally.
Conclusion: This method for achieving Vtg incorporation by zebrafish oocytes could be useful in experiments
related to the development and endocrinology of zebrafish oocytes.

Background
Zebrafish (Danio rerio), a small teleost fish belonging to
the family Cyprinidae, is widely used as a model organism in developmental biology and endocrinology. Most
studies on oocyte development in zebrafish have focused
on the elucidation of the molecular basis of vitellogenesis and oocyte maturation, with a particular emphasis
on the molecular aspects of maternal mRNA accumulation associated with axial formation during early embryogenesis [1,2]. Vitellogenin (Vtg) is a female-specific
phospholipoglycoprotein that is secreted by the liver and
taken up by growing/vitellogenic oocytes where it is
processed and stored as yolk proteins in the ooplasm
[1,2]. The development of systems for both visualizing
the incorporation of Vtg into oocytes and for allowing
Vtg incorporation in vitro would be particularly useful
in the fields of endocrinology and embryology. The
in vitro oocyte culture systems that have been developed
in the rainbow trout and eel to date both use Vtg prepared from the plasma of these species [3,4]. However,
since obtaining sufficiently large volumes of zebrafish
plasma for Vtg preparation is complicated by their small
* Correspondence: suzukitr@bios.tohoku.ac.jp
1
Laboratory of Marine Life Science and Genetics, Graduate School of
Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, Sendai 981-8555, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

body size, developing an alternate source of Vtg for
incorporation into the cytoplasm of zebrafish oocytes
would be beneficial.
A system for synthesizing and incorporating Vtg into
the oocytes of teleosts such as zebrafish has recently
been reviewed [1,5]. Briefly, follicular stimulating hormone (FSH) from the pituitary stimulates the follicular
cells surrounding the oocytes to produce estrogen (E2),
which then stimulates Vtg synthesis in the liver. Once
secreted into the plasma by the liver, the Vtg is quickly
incorporated into the yolk granules of the oocytes by a
plasma membrane Vtg-receptor (VtgR) system. The
incorporation of Vtg into oocytes has been reported to
be stimulated by FSH in rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri)
[6]. At this vitellogenic stage, the oocytes increase
rapidly in size and accumulate fat-soluble vitamin A
metabolites, such as retinal, which are essential for
embryogenesis [7,8]. At the same time, maternal
mRNAs related to germline specification and axial formation in embryos are transcribed and accumulate in
the oocytes during vitellogenesis [2,9-11]. The Vtg that
is stored in the yolk functions as a source of amino
acids, lipids, and sugars during embryogenesis [1,2].
Interestingly, the administration of exogenous E2 has
been experimentally shown to induce Vtg synthesis in
the livers of both male and female rainbow trout [12].

© 2011 Matsuda et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Matsuda et al. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2011, 9:45
http://www.rbej.com/content/9/1/45

Page 2 of 7

Bubble-eye goldfish, a variety of crucian carp (Carassius auratus) belonging to the same family as the zebrafish (Cyprinidae), are commonly sold at pet shops.
The variety is characterized by having unique, sac-like
structures (eye sacs) containing lymph below the eyes
(Figure 1A). Relatively large quantities of this lymph can
be collected with ease using a syringe. Since the eye-sac
lymph does not clot after collection, it has been used to
supplement the tissue culture media to stimulate the
proliferation of zebrafish cells without any chemical or
physical treatment after collection [13]. In addition, with
77.6% identity and 87.2% similarity, zebrafish Vtg1
(NP_001038362) and goldfish Vtg (ABG22139) are
highly homologous with respect to their amino acid
sequences. We therefore had the idea to induce Vtg in
the lymph of the eye sacs of this goldfish by E2 administration and to use the Vtg harvested in this way as a
source for experiments with zebrafish oocytes. We also
established a system for visualizing the incorporation of
Vtg into zebrafish oocytes by FITC labeling in the five
experiments shown in Figure 1. Briefly, the first experiment examined whether Vtg could be induced in the
eye-sac lymph of bubble-eye goldfish by E2 injection
(Figure 1A). The second experiment attempted to label
goldfish Vtg with FITC (Figure 1B). The third experiment examined whether zebrafish oocytes incorporated
goldfish Vtg into the cytoplasm, using FITC fluorescence to trace the Vtg (Figure 1C). The fourth experiment assessed whether the zebrafish oocytes that
accumulated exogenous FITC-labeled Vtg remained
viable and whether embryogenesis could proceed normally (Figure 1D). The fifth experiment examined
whether zebrafish oocytes incorporate FITC-labeled Vtg
in vitro (Figure 1E).

Methods
Experiment 1: E2-induced Vtg accumulation in eye-sac
lymph of bubble-eye goldfish

Bubble-eye goldfish and zebrafish were purchased from
a local pet shop in Sendai, Japan. All of the fish were
maintained at 28°C under photoperiod conditions of 14
h light and 10 h dark. Fish were anesthetized with MS222 (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan)
before E2 (Wako) injection and lymph collection. Fifty
μl of dimethyl sulfoxide (Wako) containing E2 at 0.12
ng/μl was injected into the abdominal cavities of male
and female bubble-eye goldfish weighing approximately
20 g. Lymph was collected from the eye-sac using a
plastic syringe immediately before the injection of E2
and then 7 days thereafter. Collected lymph was boiled
for 5 min with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 2-mercaptoethanol (Wako), and then subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) [14]. The protein
bands were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250.

Figure 1 Schematic representation of a system for monitoring
Vtg incorporation into zebrafish oocytes using FITC-labeled
Vtg prepared from bubble-eye goldfish.

Experiment 2: Preparation of FITC-labeled Vtg

For the preparation of FITC-labeled Vtg, E2 was
injected into the abdominal cavity three times over a
seven-day period to induce high concentrations of Vtg
in eye-sac lymph. Lymph was then collected from the
eye sac four days after the final E2 injection. A total of
approximately 2 ml of lymph was obtained from both
eye sacs of one fish. Obtained lymph was dialyzed
against 0.05 M Na2 CO 3/NaHCO3 (sodium carbonate)
buffer (pH9.5) overnight at 4°C. Fluorescein 5(6)-isothiocyanate (FITC; Wako) was dissolved in sodium carbonate buffer to a concentration of 10% and added to
the dialyzed lymph at a ratio of 1:100, before being

Matsuda et al. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2011, 9:45
http://www.rbej.com/content/9/1/45

incubated at 4°C in the dark for 6 h to facilitate FITC
conjugation. The lymph was then dialyzed twice against
phosphate buffered saline (PBS) for 12 h at 4°C to
remove unconjugated FITC; this solution is referred to
as FITC-labeled Vtg solution hereafter. To confirm that
FITC had covalently bonded to the Vtg, the sample was
subjected to SDS-PAGE and irradiated with UV light to
detect FITC-labeled proteins. As controls, we prepared
FITC-labeled lymph proteins from male goldfish without
E2 treatment and FITC-labeled bovine serum albumin
(BSA; Rockland, Philadelphia, USA).
To separate the FITC-labeled Vtg from low molecular
weight lymph proteins, 200 μl of FITC-labeled Vtg solution was eluted through a Sephacryl S-200 HR (GE
Healthcare, Little Charfont, England) column (1 cm ×
30 cm). Protein elution was monitored by FITC-fluorescence and the first peak was identified as the FITClabeled, purified Vtg.
Experiment 3: Monitoring incorporation of fluorescent
Vtg in vivo

One hundred μl of FITC-labeled Vtg solution prepared
as described above was injected into the abdominal cavities of zebrafish (n = 10) that had started spawning.
Observations in zebrafish were performed after anesthetization with MS-222 and dissection of the left side of
the abdomen. Incorporation of FITC-labeled Vtg into
oocytes was examined using a Leica MZ15F fluorescence stereomicroscope (Wetzlar, Germany). Photographs were taken using a Leica DFC500 digital CCD
camera (Wetzlar, Germany) and processed using Adobe
Photoshop (version 7, Adobe Inc., San Jose, CA). To
observe the intracellular localization of FITC-labeled
Vtg, some of experimental fish were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 8
μm sections for observation under the fluorescence
stereomicroscope after paraffin removal.

Page 3 of 7

(Sigma, St. Louis, MO), 200 ng/ml of carp pituitary acetone power (Sigma), and 5 mM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N’-2-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES; Wako) (pH7.2)
were added to the medium.

Results
Experiment 1

To determine whether Vtg could be induced in the eyesac lymph by E2, the protein components of the lymph
were compared before and after E2 injection by SDSPAGE. Before stimulation by E2, a protein band of
approximately 150 kDa was detected in female goldfish
(Figure 2). Since biochemical assays have revealed that
the molecular mass of Vtg from carp, Cyprinus carpio,
which is phylogenetically closely related to goldfish, is
also 150 kDa [15], the 150 kDa band in goldfish lymph
was considered to be goldfish Vtg. At 7 days after E2
injection, the Vtg band was further enhanced in female
lymph and newly induced in male lymph (Figure 2). It
was thus shown that Vtg is inducible in the eye-sac
lymph of both sexes of bubble-eye goldfish.
Experiment 2

We found that the three E2 injections administered over
a seven-day period were sufficient for inducing Vtg as

Experiment 4: Assessing viability of zebrafish oocytes
after incorporation of goldfish Vtg

Zebrafish females injected with FITC-labeled Vtg were
maintained in a tank and mated with males. Fertilized eggs
exhibiting FITC fluorescence were collected and reared.
Experiment 5: Monitoring incorporation of fluorescent
Vtg in vitro

The ovaries of a mature female zebrafish that had been
anesthetized and sterilized in 0.2% sodium hypochlorite
solution for 5 min were removed and washed three
times in L15 medium. The ovaries were then separated
into tissue explants containing 20-40 oocytes using forceps. Explants were then cultured at 28°C in the L15
medium as described by Sawatari et al. [13], except that
2% FITC labeled-Vtg solution, 5% fetal bovine serum

Figure 2 Vtg induction in the eye sac of bubble-eye goldfish
by E2 injection. Lymph was collected from the eye sacs of male
and female goldfish before (-) and after (+) E2 injection, and
analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Position of the Vtg band is indicated by the
arrow.

Matsuda et al. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2011, 9:45
http://www.rbej.com/content/9/1/45

the predominant protein component of eye-sac lymph
(Figure 3A). The lymph obtained after three E2 injections was conjugated with FITC in alkaline buffer as
described in the Methods section above. After being
processed with FITC, strong FITC-fluorescence emission
was detected from the Vtg band by SDS-PAGE analysis
(Figure 3A). Using this simple alkaline labeling method,
FITC was considered to bind covalently to Vtg, and the
FITC-labeled Vtg was a major fluorescent protein component of the prepared solution.

Page 4 of 7

of these eggs was normal and all of the eggs hatched at
2 days post-fertilization (dpf) (Figure 4A-C). After
hatching, the intensity of FITC fluorescence decreased
rapidly as the yolk decreased in size, disappearing
entirely by 9 dpf (Figure 4D-G). The results clearly
showed that FITC-labeled Vtg prepared from the bubble-eye goldfish does not adversely affect zebrafish
oocyte development and subsequent embryogenesis after
being incorporated into the yolk.
Experiment 5

Experiment 3

To examine whether heterogeneous Vtg prepared from
goldfish could be incorporated by zebrafish oocytes, FITClabeled Vtg solution prepared as described above was
injected into the abdominal cavities of females and FITC
fluorescence was then traced in the specimen under a
fluorescent microscope. Although FITC fluorescence was
detected in the ovary at 24 h after injection, incorporation
into oocytes was not yet apparent (Figure 3B). However, at
48 and 72 h after injection, strong FITC fluorescence was
detected in vitellogenic oocytes (Figure 3C,D), with sectioning of the ovaries revealing that yolk granules emitted
FITC fluorescence (Figure 3E). When purified FITClabeled Vtg was injected into females, zebrafish oocytes
also started emitting FITC fluorescence (Figure 3F).
To examine the stability of goldfish Vtg in zebrafish,
body fluid (approximately 1 μl) emitting FITC fluorescence was collected from the abdominal cavity of zebrafish under a fluorescence stereomicroscope at 24 h after
injection, and subjected to SDS-PAGE analysis. A FITCpositive band was detected at the position of the original
Vtg molecular weight, indicating that goldfish Vtg
remained relatively stable in the zebrafish body fluid and
did not degrade rapidly (Figure 3A).
As controls for determining whether zebrafish oocytes
specifically incorporate goldfish Vtg as a yolk protein
precursor, we prepared FITC-labeled, male lymph proteins from gold fish and FITC-labeled BSA (Figure 3G,
H), and injected these into female zebrafish; neither of
these control preparations was incorporated into in the
oocytes (Figure 3G,H). Taken together, these findings
indicated that the zebrafish oocytes incorporated the
FITC-labeled goldfish Vtg into the yolk granules.
Experiment 4

We then examined the viability of zebrafish oocytes that
had accumulated heterogeneous goldfish Vtg. Eight days
after injection of the FITC-labeled Vtg into the abdominal cavity of mature females, eggs with yolks emitting
FITC fluorescence were spawned by these females and
were normally fertilized. Approximately 30 eggs were
collected from each female and labeled with FITC.
Compared with wild type embryos, the embryogenesis

Finally, we sought to determine whether FITC-labeled
Vtg prepared from goldfish is incorporated into zebrafish oocytes under cell culture conditions. Dissected
ovary explants were cultured using standard culture
conditions [13] with the addition of 2% FITC-labeled
Vtg solution. During culture for 48 h, goldfish Vtg was
not markedly degraded in the culture medium containing fetal bovine serum (Figure 5A). At 48 h, florescence
was detected in some of the vitellogenic oocytes in the
ovary explants cultured with FITC-labeled Vtg solution
(Figure 5B,C). Oocytes emitted granular fluorescence,
indicating incorporation of FITC-labeled Vtg into yolk
granules (Figure 5D). Purified FITC-labeled Vtg, shown
in Figure 3F, was also incorporated by some of the ovaries under culture conditions (Figure 5E).

Discussion
We demonstrated that Vtg can be induced by E2 injection in the eye-sac lymph of bubble-eye goldfish, and that
the induced Vtg can be conjugated with FITC using a
standard technique. Both female and male goldfish can
be used for Vtg preparation, with three injections of E2
administered over a seven-day period being sufficient for
obtaining enough Vtg for FITC-labeling. We also demonstrated that it was possible to monitor Vtg incorporation
into zebrafish oocytes by FITC fluorescence, both in vivo
and in vitro. By using a recently developed transparent
zebrafish line [16], it would be possible to monitor the
incorporation of FITC-labeled Vtg in a living specimen.
In addition, when accumulated in yolk, goldfish Vtg
did not affect zebrafish oocyte development and subsequent embryogenesis, even though the Vtg was heterogeneous in origin. Approximately 2 ml of lymph can be
harvested from the eye-sacs of bubble-eye goldfish
weighing 20 g, which is sufficient for performing the
Vtg incorporation experiment in 20 zebrafish and for
preparing 60 ml of culture medium for examining Vtg
incorporation into oocytes. The eye-sac lymph of bubble-eye goldfish is thus considered to be a superior
source of Vtg for developmental and endocrine experiments using zebrafish oocytes.
This method is important because there are two possible supplemental sources of exogenous Vtg for oocyte

Matsuda et al. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2011, 9:45
http://www.rbej.com/content/9/1/45

Page 5 of 7

Figure 3 Preparation and subsequent monitoring of FITC-labeled Vtg accumulation in the ovary after abdominal injection. (A) SDSPAGE analysis of eye-sac lymph proteins after FITC labeling (two leftmost lanes), and assessment of FITC-labeled Vtg stability in zebrafish body
fluid (two rightmost lanes). Leftmost lane shows FITC-fluorescence, indicating strong emission from Vtg, and the next lane shows the same gel
stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB). Of the two rightmost lanes, the first shows FITC-fluorescence in zebrafish body fluid collected 24 h
after injection of FITC-labeled Vtg solution into the abdominal cavity, and the next lane shows the same sample stained with CBB. (B-D)
Fluorescent images of zebrafish with the left abdominal wall dissected at 1, 2 and 3 days after injection of FITC-labeled Vtg solution. (E) Section
of the zebrafish ovary shown in D. (F) SDS-PAGE of purified FITC-labeled Vtg and its incorporation into oocytes. (G) SDS-PAGE of FITC-labeled
male goldfish lymph, and zebrafish ovary 72 h after injection of this solution. (H) SDS-PAGE of FITC-labeled BSA, and zebrafish ovary 72 h after
injection of this solution. Li: liver; Oc: oocyte; Ov: ovary. Scale bar = 2 mm in B-D and F-H, 200 μm in E.

development, recombinant Vtg and plasma- or lymphderived Vtg. Since preparing a structurally complicated
phospholipoglycoprotein, like Vtg, using recombinant
protein methods is difficult, the application of plasma- or
lymph-derived Vtg is considered to be preferable. We

propose that Vtg induced in the eye-sac lymph is well
suited for use as a source of Vtg for studies on zebrafish
oocyte development. In addition, several possible applications of FITC-labeled Vtg prepared from goldfish exist.
First, the effects of hormones on Vtg incorporation into

Matsuda et al. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2011, 9:45
http://www.rbej.com/content/9/1/45

Page 6 of 7

Figure 5 In vitro incorporation of FITC-labeled Vtg derived from
the bubble-eye goldfish by zebrafish oocytes. (A) Stability of FITClabeled Vtg in the culture medium. The medium was subjected to
SDS-PAGE after 48 h of incubation at 28°C. (B) Ovarian explant at 48 h
of culture with FITC-labeled Vtg solution. (C) FITC fluorescence in the
explant. (D) Enlargement of the ovary emitting FITC fluorescence. (E)
Ovary explant cultured with purified FITC-labeled Vtg. Arrows show
ovaries emitting FITC fluorescence. Scale bar = 200 μm.

visualizing Vtg incorporation by zebrafish oocytes in in
vitro and in vivo systems using FITC-labeled goldfish Vtg.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Akihiko Hara of Hokkaido University for advice on Vtg
induction. This research was supported by a Grant-in-Aid from the Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan to TS
(22380104, 22658063).

Figure 4 Development of zebrafish embryos that incorporated
FITC-labeled Vtg, heterogeneously prepared from the bubbleeye goldfish, in the yolk during oocyte growth. Embryonic stage
is given as days post fertilization (dpf). Scale bar = 200 μm.

zebrafish oocytes could be quantified by determining the
FITC content of oocytes after hormonal treatment. Second, further development of a culture system using
FITC-labeled Vtg may facilitate the culture of zebrafish
oocytes in vitro. Third, goldfish Vtg may function as a
carrier for introducing external proteins, such as antibodies, into zebrafish oocytes by conjugation with Vtg.

Conclusion
We developed methods for preparing FITC-labeled Vtg
from the eye-sac lymph of bubble-eye goldfish and for

Author details
1
Laboratory of Marine Life Science and Genetics, Graduate School of
Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, Sendai 981-8555, Japan.
2
Bioscience and Biotechnology Center, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601,
Japan. 3Industrial Technology Institute, Miyagi Prefectural Government,
Sendai, 981-3206, Japan.
Authors’ contributions
YM, YI and TS performed the experiments. HS and HY interpreted the data
and participated in the writing of the manuscript. TS conceived and
designed the study and wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 26 November 2010 Accepted: 11 April 2011
Published: 11 April 2011
References
1. Clelland E, Peng C: Endocrine/paracrine control of zebrafish ovarian
development. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2009, 312:42-52.

Matsuda et al. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2011, 9:45
http://www.rbej.com/content/9/1/45

2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

Page 7 of 7

Abrams EW, Mullins MC: Early zebrafish development: it’s in the maternal
genes. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2009, 19:396-403.
Kayaba T, Sasaki N, Adachi S, Yamauchi K: Effects of pituitary glycoprotein
hormones and thyroid hormones on in-vitro vitellogenin incorporation
into organ-cultured oocytes in the Japanese eel, Anguilla japonica. Zool
Sci 2008, 25:334-343.
Tyler CR, Sumpter JP, Bromage NR: An in vitro culture system for studying
vitellogenin uptake into ovarian follicles of the rainbow trout, Salmo
gairdneri. J Exp Zool 1990, 255:216-231.
Lubzens E, Young G, Bobe J, Cerda J: Oogenesis in teleosts: how eggs are
formed. Gen Comp Endocrinol 2010, 165:367-389.
Tyler CR, Sumpter JP, Kawauchi H, Swanson P: Involvement of
gonadotropin in the uptake of vitellogenin into vitellogenic oocytes of
the rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss. Gen Comp Endocrinol 1991,
84:291-299.
Costaridis P, Horton C, Zeitlinger J, Holder N, Maden M: Endogenous
retinoids in the zebrafish embryo and adult. Dev Dyn 1996, 205:41-51.
Lubzens E, Lissauer L, Levavi-Sivan B, Avarre JC, Sammar M: Carotenoid and
retinoid transport to fish oocytes and eggs: what is the role of retinol
binding protein? Mol Aspects Med 2003, 24:441-457.
Knaut H, Pelegri F, Bohmann K, Schwarz H, Nusslein-Volhard C: Zebrafish
vasa RNA but not its protein is a component of the germ plasm and
segregates asymmetrically before germline specification. J Cell Biol 2000,
149:875-888.
Pelegri F: Maternal factors in zebrafish development. Dev Dyn 2003,
228:535-554.
Reim G, Brand M: Maternal control of vertebrate dorsoventral axis
formation and epiboly by the POU domain protein Spg/Pou2/Oct4.
Development 2006, 133:2757-2770.
Le Guellec K, Lawless K, Valotaire Y, Kress M, Tenniswood M: Vitellogenin
gene expression in male rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Gen Comp
Endocrinol 1988, 71:359-371.
Sawatari E, Hashimoto H, Matsumura T, Iwata Y, Yamamoto N, Yokoyama Y,
Wakamatsu Y: Cell growth-promoting activity of fluid from eye sacs of
the bubble-eye goldfish (Carassius auratus). Zool Sci 2009, 26:254-258.
Laemmli UK: Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the
head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 1970, 227:680-685.
Fukada H, Fujiwara Y, Takahashi T, Hiramatsu N, Sullivan CV, Hara A: Carp
(Cyprinus carpio) vitellogenin: purification and development of a
simultaneous chemiluminescent immunoassay. Comp Biochem Physiol A
Mol Integr Physiol 2003, 134:615-623.
White RM, Sessa A, Burke C, Bowman T, LeBlanc J, Ceol C, Bourque C,
Dovey M, Goessling W, Burns CE, Zon LI: Transparent adult zebrafish as a
tool for in vivo transplantation analysis. Cell Stem Cell 2008, 2:183-189.

doi:10.1186/1477-7827-9-45
Cite this article as: Matsuda et al.: Detection of vitellogenin
incorporation into zebrafish oocytes by FITC fluorescence. Reproductive
Biology and Endocrinology 2011 9:45.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
