<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.3)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Mattick BMC Biology 2010, 8:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/67

QUESTION & ANSWER	

Open Access

Video Q&A: Non-coding RNAs and eukaryotic
evolution - a personal view
John Mattick*
John Mattick graduated from the University of Sydney in
1972 and finished his PhD from Monash University in
1977, after which he entered on postdoctoral studies on
fatty acid synthase at Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston. While in Houston he first became interested in
the question of whether non-coding RNA has a function,
when introns were discovered in the coding sequences of
genes. But most of his work for the next 25 years was in
microbiology, and it was not until the genomic studies of
the past 15 years, and the revelation that most of the noncoding DNA of the human genome is transcribed, that he
turned in earnest to the question of what the non-coding
transcripts might be contributing. This is now the focus
of his laboratory at the Institute for Molecular
Biosciences at the University of Queensland, where he
has worked since 1988.
In this interview, he explains why he thinks non-coding
RNA is fundamental to eukaryotic evolution.

Edited transcript
When people talk about the RNA world, they
usually mean a pre-protein world, but you would
say there is a largely unexplored RNA world today.
Why?
The thesis that RNA was the primordial molecule of life
is compelling because RNA has both functional and
information-carrying capacity. But there’s no reason to
think those capacities were ever lost. It does appear that
early in the evolution of cellular life RNA devolved its
informational storage functions to DNA, as a much more
stable and easily replicable molecule, and its analog
functions to proteins, which have much greater chemical
versatility. So on that basis the idea grew up that RNA
had become an ephemeral intermediate between the hard
disk - the DNA - and the analog outputs, the proteins.
But what I think then happened is that later in evolution
*Correspondence: j.mattick@imb.uq.edu.au
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, 306 Carmody
Road, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia

John Mattick talks on the modern world of non-coding RNA.

RNA re-entered the scene to fulfill a regulatory
imperative associated with the emergence of develop­
mentally complex organisms, acquiring a whole range of
functions based on those same primordial properties of
sequence specificity and the ability to fold into complex
shapes to interact with other molecules in specific and
dynamic ways.

But we know that proteins have regulatory
functions, and can interact in many ways. Why
postulate regulatory RNA?
There are a few key points. The first - and this is one of
the great surprises of the genome projects, that very few
people have commented on because of their background
assumptions - is that both the number and range of
protein-coding genes have remained largely the same
since the base of the metazoan radiation. Caenorhabditis
elegans, which is a worm of only 1,000 cells, has almost
precisely the same number of protein-coding genes as a
human - about 20,000 is the latest estimate - and most of
those genes encode similar functions. So the basic parts
set for animal development was established several

© 2010 Mattick; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Mattick BMC Biology 2010, 8:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/67

hundred million years ago. In fact, I understand the
sponge genome also encodes most, if not all, of the key
protein families that are involved in regulating develop­
ment. Now C. elegans has only got 1,000 cells - a few
muscle cells, a few nerve cells, and a gut. We humans
have 30 trillion to 100 trillion cells, and the complexity of
our body plan organization - including all of the muscles
in the face that reflect the range of human emotions, the
different bones and organs, and the brain - is enormous.

So did the limited diversity of proteins in
phylogeny lead to the suggestion that non-coding
RNA might have important regulatory functions?
Yes. Since the protein-coding repertoire (notwithstanding
some clade-specific innovations) has remained relatively
static, the differences in developmental complexity must
be due to an expansion of the accompanying regulatory
architecture, which presumably lies outside the proteincoding sequences. Now, interestingly, that problem, I
think, has been swept under the intellectual carpet because
of the relatively facile and widely accepted assumption,
which has not been challenged, nor justified, that the
combinatorics of transcription factors provide an explosive
number of regulatory possibilities - with enough capacity
in the system to program anything from a worm to human.
But you certainly need to have a more complex regulatory
framework to get to a more complex organism, and the
astounding thing is that the only thing that does scale with
complexity - because the number of genes does not - is the
extent of the non-protein-coding genome.
Now of course that’s going to include regulatory
elements, but it’s so large - in humans 98.8% - that most
molecular biologists have not considered that this could
all be regulatory and have consequently assumed that
most of it must be just evolutionary debris - a view that
was compounded by the fact that roughly half our
genome derives from transposons - something we might
come back to.
In any case, protein-coding genes do not scale with
complexity, whereas the non-coding genome does, at
least to first approximation. And here’s the interesting
thing: surprisingly, virtually all of these non-coding
sequences are transcribed into non-protein-coding
RNAs, apparently in a differential fashion that seems to
be developmental-stage specific, tissue specific, and cell
specific. So there are only two alternatives, which is what
occurred to me back in 1978 when I first bumped into
introns as a postdoctoral fellow. At the time it was
universally assumed - by everybody, including Crick that because these sequences did not code for protein
they must be junk, and they were rationalized as
hangovers of early evolution. At the time I remember
thinking to myself that this was a very strange
observation. Huge genes are transcribed into RNA and

Page 2 of 5

then the RNA introns are cut out and apparently
discarded. So, yes, one possibility is that the RNA is junk
and this is just useless recycling of ribonucleotides. But
the other possibility is, and was then, that the expressed
non-coding RNA is functional. This to me was much
more interesting, indeed exciting, with potentially
profound consequences. So it became my intellectual
hobby to explore the idea, although in those days there
were very few tools with which to do so - so for a long
time it simmered on my backburner while I did more
conventional things.

But doesn’t the relative non-conservation of
non‑coding RNA mean that it can’t have important
functions?
The level of conservation is an old chestnut, and in your
question about the relative conservation is in fact
embedded the answer. The non-coding RNAs that are
differentially transcribed and developmentally regulated
are on the whole less conserved than protein-coding
sequences. But lack of relative conservation does not
mean lack of function. Conservation is imposed by
structure-function relationships, which vary between
different types of sequences. Structure-function relation­
ships in most proteins are very strict. There are only so
many ways to make an oxygen-binding protein, or a
wheel for that matter. Analog functions have particular
structural imperatives. But regulatory sequences can be
much more plastic, just like your credit card. It doesn’t
mean they don’t have important information and indeed
I think most people - even those who are sceptical about
the level of importance of RNAs - would acknowledge
that most phenotypic radiation occurs in the regulatory
architecture. We take a relatively common set of compo­
nents and arrange their expression in different ways to
produce a range of phenotypic outcomes both between
species and within species.
Are you arguing that you wouldn’t expect
regulatory RNAs to be conserved?
There is not a lack of conservation of regulatory RNAs.
Indeed some are very highly conserved. In general,
however, they have a lower relative conservation
compared with sequences encoding proteins. The level of
conservation of regulatory sequences varies, reflecting
the greater plasticity of regulatory molecules and the fact
that this is where evolution is selecting, initially
positively, and subsequently negatively, for regulatory
variation that underpins phenotypic radiation.
So do you believe that we simply haven’t understood
the regulatory mechanisms underlying evolution?
It does seem that we’ve fundamentally misunderstood
the structure of genetic programming of higher

Mattick BMC Biology 2010, 8:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/67

organisms because of the assumption, which is largely
true for bacteria, but turning out not to be true for the
complex eukaryotes, that most genetic information is
transacted by proteins. The evidence, dating back in fact
to 1977, is that there is a vast hidden layer of regulatory
RNAs that are involved in directing the epigenetic
trajectories of differentiation and development, and this
is now just beginning to be peeled back.

What is the evidence for regulatory functions for
non-coding RNAs?
Perhaps the best way to answer the question is to give
two examples of how these RNAs are functioning and
why the system has superimposed an RNA regulatory
system on top of a protein-based regulatory system. The
first is microRNAs, which were discovered ten years ago
through some terrific genetics in C. elegans in the preced­
ing decade. MicroRNAs are now known to regulate
virtually all known developmental processes in animals
and plants. They have no known catalytic function - they
are just 22 or so nucleotides that target another RNA,
and the resulting complex, in some fashion that’s not
fully understood, is then recognized and acted upon by a
generic protein complex, the so-called RISC complex.
The cell, and indeed evolution, can dial up these micro­
RNAs very flexibly in different cells to address various
targets, and they only need one protein complex to come
and do the job. So the signal has been separated from the
consequent analog action, and instead of having one
protein or protein complex for every regulatory event, its
function has been allocated to a single generic complex
which is directed to different targets using much more
genomically compact and evolutionarily flexible small
RNAs.
That’s one example of a regulatory function. What’s
the other?
It’s not as well accepted yet, but it is looking increasingly
likely that an analogous process occurs in the regulation
of chromatin modification and epigenetic processes.
{OK?} The modulation of chromatin structure and
epigenetic memory is critical to development of complex
organisms. Chromatin architecture is controlled by DNA
methylases and a set of relatively generic enzymes and
enzyme complexes that modify histones in different
ways: about 60 of them in all. What determines their
selectivity, at myriad different sites around the genome, is
not known, but it had been assumed to be ‘transcription
factors’ - itself a very vague term. However it’s looking
increasingly as though the site selectivity of these
enzymes is actually being controlled by RNAs that
provide the sequence-specific signals with the adaptor
functions that then recruit generic protein complexes at
the relevant sites of action during differentiation and

Page 3 of 5

development. And now there’s good evidence from our
lab and others that at least a subset of the long noncoding RNAs that are differentially expressed during
development fulfill this function, because they associate
physically with complexes involved in chromatin
modification.

Are there any specific examples of regulatory
functions of non-coding RNAs in development?
We’ve pinned function to a few. There are tens if not
hundreds of thousands of long non-coding RNAs. Very
few have been studied in detail: I recently wrote a review
for PLoS Genetics that lists those for which there are good
functional data, of which there are about 40 or so. That’s
a small number, but it’s enough to give you an idea. For
example, we and others have shown that one of these
non-coding RNAs is required for the formation of
paraspeckles, a sub-nuclear compartment that’s induced
upon cellular differentiation. Other non-coding RNAs
are associated with chromatin complexes; and some noncoding RNAs have been shown by biological assays to be
critical for such things as eye development, and some
have been associated with different sorts of diseases,
including heart disease and cancer.
So there’s not very much direct functional
evidence  yet?
It’s early days. In fact almost every time you functionally
test a non-coding RNA that looks interesting because it’s
differentially expressed in one system or another, you get
functionally indicative data coming out. But the
compelling point is that regulatory RNAs provide an
explanation as to why complexity doesn’t scale with the
number of protein-coding genes. It was originally
assumed that as complexity increased there would be
more and more such genes - before the genome was
sequenced there was speculation that humans might have
a hundred thousand or more, and it was a huge shock
that it’s much less, and doesn’t scale with complexity. But
there are very large numbers of long non-coding RNAs,
so this is where the real genetic scaling has occurred.
You mentioned that non-coding RNAs are
implicated in disease. Could they explain why
in genome-wide association studies diseaseassociated polymorphisms turn up in non-coding
regions of the genome?
It’s perfectly possible. There’s no doubt that in genomewide association studies looking into the genetic
components of complex diseases and complex traits,
most of the mapped locations are non-coding and there­
fore almost by definition regulatory. So it’s really a
question of what form that regulatory variation takes. But
there’s an important point here. In the early days of

Mattick BMC Biology 2010, 8:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/67

Page 4 of 5

human gene mapping, people were searching for the
genes responsible for diseases such as cystic fibrosis,
Huntington’s disease, thalassemias and so on, which
cause what I call catastrophic component damage: if you
lack a functional protein component, it’s like losing a
light switch or a wheel - in most cases it’s a very serious
problem. So the genetic signature is very strong, and the
gene is relatively easy to map. But with complex diseases,
there are often multiple genetic components, which are
very difficult to map. It turns out that most of the classic
monogenic diseases are caused by protein-coding
mutations. However, not surprisingly, most of the genetic
variation that affects complex human traits appears to lie
in regulatory mutations. Well over 90% of all the loci
mapped in genome-wide association studies are noncoding, and many of them are miles from any coding
sequences. It is possible that all of these could be
conventional cis-acting promoter or enhancer mutations
affecting DNA sequences recognized by regulatory
proteins - but intriguingly, at least some of these loci are
turning out to be in non-coding regions that are
differentially expressing non-coding RNAs.
Indeed, I’d like to emphasize the following point about
the expression of non-coding RNAs: it is extraordinarily
specific, both spatially and temporally. For example, we
did a study in conjunction with the Allen Institute for
Brain Science in Seattle in which we looked at well over
1,000 of these non-coding RNAs, and found that half are
expressed in brain and show extremely precise spatial
expression. Some are only expressed in the dentate gyrus
of the hippocampus, others in particular layers of the
cortex, and others in Purkinje cells in the cerebellum.
Moreover, in 80% of the cases where we had sufficient
resolution to tell, these RNAs are trafficked to specific
subcellular locations. So this is not some fuzzy random
signal: their expression is extremely precise, both in
terms of the cell specificity and in terms of subcellular
localization. That seems to me to have none of the
characteristics you would expect if these RNAs are just
some sort of background noise. On the contrary, I think
the differential expression of these RNAs is the only
reliable genome-wide index of their function.

distribute functional cassettes. So it’s equally possible
that a large fraction of the transposon-derived sequences
that are in our genome are actually functional.

You mentioned earlier the possible significance
of transposons. What part do you think they have
played?
That is one of my many favourite topics. It is widely
assumed - though not by everybody - that transposonderived sequences are simply ‘selfish’ mobile genetic
elements that have no function other than their own
propagation. Books have been written about such things,
and that is indeed one possibility. But the raw material
for evolution is duplication and transposition, with the
latter having the great advantage of being able to

Where can I find out more?

It’s not generally believed that transposon
sequences have regulatory functions, is it?
I predict that there will be a very rapid change of attitude
to transposon-derived sequences. We are already seeing
papers showing their differential expression. Many of
them are transcribed by RNA polymerase III, so they
have been under the radar of poly(A)-based approaches
to the transcriptome. But I predict we are going to see
that they are critical drivers of evolution - critical in
embryogenesis and development, and extremely critical
in the brain.
Is there anything you can say to support the
prediction that regulatory RNA will be particularly
important in the brain?
One point about RNA that has really not penetrated the
consciousness of most biologists yet is that it is
extensively edited, and by editing I mean deamination of
adenosines to form inosines, and cytosines to form uracil,
which changes the sequence and structure of the RNA.
RNA-editing enzymes have expanded greatly during
vertebrate, mammalian and primate evolution. They
occur in most, if not all, tissues, but are especially active
in the brain. Some are brain specific, and RNA editing is
approximately 30 times more intensive in the human
brain than in the mouse. So it seems to me increasingly
obvious that RNA editing is the principal means by which
environmental information is transmitted to the epi­
genome, and is the mechanism for connecting the
environ­ ent to the genome, the expansion of which was
m
critically important to the evolution of the plasticity and
the molecular mechanisms of learning and memory. In
other words, RNA regulation is central not only to
development, but also to the ability to plastically alter the
genetically encoded information without changing the
hard-wired DNA (although that may occur in some cells
as well). That makes it the key to the evolution of
cognition.

Articles
Mattick JS: RNA regulation: a new genetics? Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5:316-323.
Pang KC, Frith MC, Mattick JS: Rapid evolution of noncoding RNAs: lack of
conservation does not mean lack of function. Trends Genet 2006, 22:1-5.
Taft RJ, Pheasant M, Mattick JS: The relationship between non-protein-coding
DNA and eukaryotic complexity. BioEssays 2007, 29:288-299.
Mattick JS: A new paradigm for developmental biology. J Exp Biol 2007,
210:1526-1547.
Amaral PP, Dinger ME, Mercer TR, Mattick JS: The eukaryotic genome as an RNA
machine. Science 2008, 319:1787-1789.
Amaral PP, Mattick JS: Noncoding RNA in development. Mamm Genome 2008,
19:454-492.

Mattick BMC Biology 2010, 8:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/67

Dinger ME, Amaral PP, Mercer TR, Pang KC, Bruce SJ, Gardiner BB, Askarian-Amiri
ME, Ru K, Soldà G, Simons C, Sunkin SM, Crowe ML, Grimmond SM, Perkins
AC, Mattick JS: Long noncoding RNAs in mouse embryonic stem cell
pluripotency and differentiation. Genome Res 2008, 18:1433–1445.
Mercer TR, Dinger ME, Sunkin SM, Mehler MF, Mattick JS: Specific expression of
non-coding RNAs in mouse brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:716-721.
Mattick JS, Mehler MF: RNA editing, DNA recoding and the evolution of human
cognition. Trends Neurosci 2008, 31:227-233.
Mattick JS, Amaral PP, Dinger ME, Mercer TR, Mehler MF: RNA regulation of
epigenetic processes. BioEssays 2009, 31:51-59.
Guttman M, Amit I, Garber M, French C, Lin MF, Feldser D, Huarte M, Zuk O, Carey
BW, Cassady JP, Cabili MN, Jaenisch R, Mikkelsen TS, Jacks T, Hacohen N,
Bernstein BE, Kellis M, Regev A, Rinn JL, Lander ES: Chromatin signature
reveals over a thousand highly conserved large non-coding RNAs in
mammals. Nature 2009, 458:223-227.
Mattick JS: The genetic signatures of noncoding RNAs. PLoS Genet 2009,
5:e1000459.
Khalil AM, Guttman M, Huarte M, Garber M, Raj A, Rivea Morales D, Thomas K,
Presser A, Bernstein BE, van Oudenaarden A, Regev A, Lander ES, Rinn JL:
Many human large intergenic noncoding RNAs associate with

Page 5 of 5

chromatin-modifying complexes and affect gene expression. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:11667-11672.
Taft RJ, Glazov EA, Cloonan N, Simons C, Stephen S, Faulkner GJ, Lassmann T,
Forrest ARR, Grimmond SM, Schroder K, Irvine K, Hume DA, Suzuki H, Orlando
V, Carninci P, Arakawa T, Nakamura M, Kubosaki A, Hayashida K, Kawazu C,
Murata M, Nishiyori H, Fukuda S, Kawai J, Daub CO, Hayashizaki Y, Mattick JS:
Tiny RNAs associated with transcription start sites in animals. Nat Genet
2009, 41:572-578.
Taft RJ, Pang KC, Mercer TR, Dinger ME and Mattick JS: Noncoding RNAs:
regulators of disease. J Pathol 2010, 220:126-139.
Mattick JS, Taft RJ, Faulkner GJ: A global view of genomic information - moving
beyond the gene and the master regulator. Trends Genet 2010, 26:21-28.
Published: 16 July 2010

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-67
Cite this article as: Mattick J: Video Q&A: Non-coding RNAs and eukaryotic
evolution - a personal view. BMC Biology 2010, 8:67.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
