<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.3)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
McDougall and Degnan BMC Biology 2011, 9:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/6

CO M M E N TA R Y 	

Open Access

Modularity of gene-regulatory networks revealed
in sea-star development
Carmel McDougall and Bernard M Degnan*
See research article: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/143/abstract

Abstract
Evidence that conserved developmental gene-regulatory
networks can change as a unit during deutersostome
evolution emerges from a study published in BMC
Biology. This shows that genes consistently expressed in
anterior brain patterning in hemichordates and chordates
are expressed in a similar spatial pattern in another
deuterostome, an asteroid echinoderm (sea star), but
in a completely different developmental context (the
animal-vegetal axis). This observation has implications for
hypotheses on the type of development present in the
deuterostome common ancestor.
The deuterostomes comprise a group of related phyla
that includes the echinoderms (sea urchins, sea stars and
their relatives), the hemichordates (for example, acorn
worms and pterobranchs) and the chor­ ates (the phylum
d
to which vertebrates belong). Under­ tanding the origin
s
and evolution of deuterostome phyla (Figure 1) is
hampered by the vastly different develop­ ental modes
m
and adult body plans exhibited by their members.
Deuterostomes can either develop indirectly into the
juvenile/adult form via one or more larval phases, or
develop directly, lacking a morphologically distinct larval
stage. Within the indirect developers, larvae can be either
planktotrophic, actively feeding and possessing a
functional larval gut, or lecithotrophic, gaining
nourishment from yolk reserves in the egg. In the latter
case, the gut often forms during metamorphosis.

Deployment of a developmental gene-regulatory
network in different deuterostomes
The presence of a direct-developing deuterostome
ancestor has been suggested on the basis of evidence that
Centre for Marine Science, School of Biological Sciences, University of Queensland,
Brisbane 4072, Australia
*Correspondence: Email: b.degnan@uq.edu.au

includes the discovery of similar molecular pathways
responsible for patterning of prospective neural tissue
(the neuroectoderm) along the anterior-posterior (AP,
head to tail) axis of direct-developing hemichordates and
vertebrates (which both have bilateral symmetry) [1]. In a
recent paper in BMC Biology, however, Yankura and
colleagues [2] now find that the indirectly developing sea
star Patiria miniata (which has radial symmetry as an
adult) also uses components of these pathways in
spatially restricted patterns, but in this case to pattern
the larval ectoderm along the animal-vegetal (AV) axis
(the axis running from the animal pole to the vegetal pole
of the early embryo or blastula).
This finding indicates that the genes involved in these
patterning processes could be components of a conserved
gene regulatory network (GRN) - a set of genes that
operate together in a predicted pattern of activation or
repression to control a particular process within an
organism - and that this GRN is deployed regardless of
developmental mode. The sea-star data reveal that this
GRN is not restricted to patterning the anterior neuro­
ectoderm or brain. The corollary to this is that the
presence of conserved GRNs cannot by itself be taken as
evidence for the particular form or developmental mode
of a common deuterostome ancestor. Yankura et al. [2]
also describe the uncoupling of a conserved retinal deter­
mination GRN from the anterior brain GRN, both of
which are expressed in the neuroectoderm of chordates.
In both sea stars and sea urchins, however, the anterior
brain GRN is expressed in the larval ectoderm, as noted
earlier, while the ‘retinal’ GRN is expressed in the larval
mesoderm. Their study therefore highlights the
evolvability of GRNs in deuterostome development.

GRNs as phylogenetic characters
Evolutionary speculation has traditionally been based on
morphological studies. But as gene-expression data rolls
in from an ever-increasing number of animal phyla, new
insights and new questions arise. For example, the
neuroectoderm of the annelid Platynereis dumerilii (a

© 2011 McDougall and Degnan; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

McDougall and Degnan BMC Biology 2011, 9:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/6

Page 2 of 3

Echinodermata (Sea stars, sea urchins)
Hemichordata (Acorn worms)

Annelida (Earthworms, leeches, polychaetes)

Nematoda (Roundworms)

Ecdysozoa

Arthropoda (Insects, crustaceans)

Metazoa
Bilateria

Mollusca (Snails, clams, squid)

Deuterostomia Lophotrochozoa

Chordata (Vertebrates, sea squirts)

Cnidaria (Jellyfish, corals)
Ctenophora (Comb jellies)
Porifera (Sponges)
Figure 1. The position of the deuterostomes within the Metazoa.

non-deuterostome) exhibits similar patterns of gene
expression to various domains of the vertebrate neural
tube [3], and eye formation in the fruit fly Drosophila
(another non-deuterostome) and vertebrates utilizes
similar regulatory pathways [4]. These highly conserved
gene-expression patterns point to widespread conser­
vation of GRNs across the animal kingdom. Changes in
the way in which these networks are deployed might
therefore provide phylogenetic signals that could aid our
understanding of evolutionary processes.
Such evolutionary insights are already being revealed.
One much debated evolutionary question concerns the
origins of the larval stages of marine invertebrates (both
deuterostome and non-deuterostome). Did the animal
forms we see today evolve from a larva-like animal, or
have extant larval types evolved multiple times indepen­
dently, or is the biphasic (larval to adult) life cycle an
ancient, shared feature of the Metazoa [5,6]? This issue is
complicated by the huge diversity of larval forms present
today, and uncertainty over the homology of various
larval structures.
Many marine invertebrate larvae, from different phyla,
have a tuft of cilia at their apical (anterior) end (the apical
tuft), which is generally thought to have a sensory
function. Whether this apical tuft is homolo­ ous between
g
the different larval types or arose multiple times during

evolution is unknown, and weighs in on the debate of
possible independent origins of marine larvae. Expression
of the transcription-factor gene COE in the vicinity of
apical tufts of cnidarian, mollusc, annelid and
echinoderm larvae suggests underlying genetic
similarities and possible homo­ogy of these structures
l
[7]. However, when Dunn and colleagues [8] examined
the expression of genes involved in cilium formation in
the apical ectoderm of an echinoderm and a mollusc,
they found that although these genes are conserved, the
upstream genes that regulate the network are different in
the two species. They conclude that the apical tuft is not
homologous between molluscs and echinoderms, which
is consistent with multiple origins of ciliated larval types.

Modularity of GRNs and their redeployment in
evolution
The study of Dunn et al. [8] also demonstrates that GRNs
can drive evolution via the linking of existing GRNs to
different inputs. It is therefore becoming evident that the
redeployment of GRNs at different times of development,
in different developmental contexts, or in completely new
territories within the organism, is an important process
in metazoan evolution, and that the circuitry of these
networks can provide more robust evolutionary infor­
mation than the expression patterns of individual genes.

McDougall and Degnan BMC Biology 2011, 9:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/6

Historically, the notion that large-scale evolution could
be driven by a multiplicity of small changes in DNA
sequences was theoretically challenging, as the majority
of these changes are likely to be deleterious, and cause
decreased fitness. The discovery of GRNs makes this
conceptually less of a problem, as base-pair changes in
the regulatory region of one gene could alter the binding
affinities of various transcription factors, effectively plac­
ing the entire network under the operation of differ­ nt
e
drivers. One can then envisage the situation where a
given gene network could be induced to turn on at a
different stage of development (a heterochronic shift) or
in a different spatial location within the organism. This
has several implications, namely that large-scale morpho­
logical change could occur quickly, and that similar
rearrange­ ents could occur by chance in different
m
contexts.
In many cases, the conservation of a number of geneexpression patterns in a similar process in two organisms
(usually in two different phyla) is used as evidence that a
shared GRN is in operation, and that, presumably, this
GRN was used in the same way in the last common
ancestor of those two organisms. Even if this is the case,
it is generally not appreciated that a particular GRN can
also be deployed in different ways among more closely
related taxa. Across metazoans, it has been demonstrated
that developmental mode is evolutionarily labile, with
closely related species displaying a mixture of plankto­
trophy, lecithotrophy and direct development (for
example, in gastropods [9] and echinoderms [10]). The
development of body plans in animals with different lifehistory strategies requires heterochronic shifts in the
deployment of GRNs [10]. Therefore, the existence of
common mechanisms of patterning in distantly related
animals with similar life strategies does not necessarily
provide iron-clad evidence for the presence of that
developmental type in their last common ancestor.
Indeed, the regulatory network similarities observed by
Yankura et al. [2] between head/anterior brain patterning
genes in the bilaterian hemichordates and vertebrates
and their orthologs in the sea star ectoderm reveals a
deeply conserved systemic patterning system that may
ante­ ate the bilaterian morphogenetic systems with
d
which it is often associated (that is, the axial neuro­ cto­
e
derm). Such observations should be factored into recon­
structions of the origin and early evolution of the
deutero­ tomes, which will require the analysis of contem­
s
porary echinoderms, hemichordates and chor­ ates with
d
both directly and indirectly forming body plans.
An exciting and necessary direction of future research
will involve understanding the mechanisms by which
heterochronic shifts in development are controlled. For
example, how is the switch between planktotrophy and
lecithotrophy governed? A key facet of this research is

Page 3 of 3

the question of the inputs that govern the switching of
key GRNs and how these operate in the context of
different developmental modes. Closely related species
with varying life-history strategies, such as sea urchins of
the genus Heliocidaris [10], are ideal systems in which to
investigate these questions. Such research will also
contribute to the general understanding of the modular
nature of GRNs and their underlying role in the major
changes in developmental programs observed through­
out the Metazoa.
By investigating gene expression in the AV axis of an
indirectly developing sea star, Yankura et al. [2] provide
further evidence for the modularity of GRNs and for their
evolvability and differential deployment in related
animals with different developmental modes. These
comparisons and conclusions are facilitated by the
diversity of model species and the extent of the genomic
resources that are available for deuterostome species,
making them the metazoan group currently best suited
to unravel the function of GRNs in the evolution of
animal body plans.
Acknowledgements
BMD is supported by grants from the Australian Research Council.
Published: 31 January 2011
References
1.	 Lowe CJ, Wu M, Salic A, Evans L, Lander ES, Stange-Thomann N, Gruber CE,
Gerhart J, Kirschner M: Anteroposterior patterning in hemichordates and
the origins of the chordate nervous system. Cell 2003, 113:853-865.
2.	 Yankura KA, Martik ML, Jennings CK, Hinman VF: Uncoupling of complex
regulatory patterning during evolution of larval development in
echinoderms. BMC Biol 2010, 8:143.
3.	 Denes AS, Jékely G, Steinmetz PR, Raible F, Snyman H, Prud’homme B, Ferrier
DEK, Balavoine G, Arendt D: Molecular architecture of annelid nerve cord
supports common origin of nervous system centralization in Bilateria. Cell
2007, 129:277-288.
4.	 Wawersik S, Maas RL: Vertebrate eye development as modeled in
Drosophila. Hum Mol Genet 2000, 9:917-925.
5. 	 Nielsen C: Six major steps in animal evolution: are we derived sponge
larvae? Evol Dev 2008, 10:241-257.
6.	 Degnan SM, Degnan BM: The initiation of metamorphosis as an ancient
polyphenic trait and its role in metazoan life cycle evolution. Phil Trans R
Soc B 2010, 365:641-651.
7.	 Jackson DJ, Meyer NP, Seaver E, Pang K, McDougall C, Moy VN, Gordon K,
Degnan BM, Martindale MQ, Burke RD, Peterson KJ: Developmental
expression of COE across the Metazoa supports a conserved role in
neuronal cell-type specification and mesodermal development. Dev Genes
Evol 2010, 220:221-234.
8.	 Dunn EF, Moy VN, Angerer LM, Angerer RC, Morris RL, Peterson KJ: Molecular
paleoecology: using gene regulatory analysis to address the origins of
complex life cycles in the late Precambrian. Evol Dev 2007, 9:10-24.
9.	 Collin R: Phylogenetic effects, the loss of complex characters, and the
evolution of development in calyptraeid gastropods. Evolution 2004,
58:1488-1502.
10.	 Raff RA, Byrne M: The active evolutionary lives of echinoderm larvae.
Heredity 2006, 97:244-252.

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-6
Cite this article as: McDougall C, Degnan BM: Modularity of generegulatory networks revealed in sea-star development. BMC Biology 2011,
9:6.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
