<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The public goods hypothesis for the evolution of life on Earth</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:41. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-41"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="James O McInerney"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

HYPOTHESIS

Open Access

The public goods hypothesis for the evolution of
life on Earth
James O McInerney1*, Davide Pisani1, Eric Bapteste2 and Mary J O’Connell3

Abstract
It is becoming increasingly difficult to reconcile the observed extent of horizontal gene transfers with the central
metaphor of a great tree uniting all evolving entities on the planet. In this manuscript we describe the Public
Goods Hypothesis and show that it is appropriate in order to describe biological evolution on the planet.
According to this hypothesis, nucleotide sequences (genes, promoters, exons, etc.) are simply seen as goods,
passed from organism to organism through both vertical and horizontal transfer. Public goods sequences are
defined by having the properties of being largely non-excludable (no organism can be effectively prevented from
accessing these sequences) and non-rival (while such a sequence is being used by one organism it is also available
for use by another organism). The universal nature of genetic systems ensures that such non-excludable sequences
exist and non-excludability explains why we see a myriad of genes in different combinations in sequenced
genomes. There are three features of the public goods hypothesis. Firstly, segments of DNA are seen as public
goods, available for all organisms to integrate into their genomes. Secondly, we expect the evolution of
mechanisms for DNA sharing and of defense mechanisms against DNA intrusion in genomes. Thirdly, we expect
that we do not see a global tree-like pattern. Instead, we expect local tree-like patterns to emerge from the
combination of a commonage of genes and vertical inheritance of genomes by cell division. Indeed, while genes
are theoretically public goods, in reality, some genes are excludable, particularly, though not only, when they have
variant genetic codes or behave as coalition or club goods, available for all organisms of a coalition to integrate
into their genomes, and non-rival within the club. We view the Tree of Life hypothesis as a regionalized instance
of the Public Goods hypothesis, just like classical mechanics and euclidean geometry are seen as regionalized
instances of quantum mechanics and Riemannian geometry respectively. We argue for this change using an
axiomatic approach that shows that the Public Goods hypothesis is a better accommodation of the observed data
than the Tree of Life hypothesis.
Background
The “Tree of Life” hypothesis has been in existence for
most of the last two centuries and is one of several
hypotheses that have been put forward to explain the
diversity of life on the planet [1]. In its recent practice,
this theory focusses on the vertical inheritance of genes
from parent to offspring and the continuous division of
lineages in the process of speciation. The theory was largely formulated in the days when the science of systematics was mostly concerned with the analysis of
plant, fungi and animals and the study of evolution was
essentially focussed on the study of these three
* Correspondence: james.o.mcinerney@nuim.ie
1
Molecular Evolution and Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Biology,
National University of Ireland Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

eukaryotic lineages. Indeed, arguably the greatest contributor to the definition of the species concept, Ernst
Mayr, was so adamant in pinpointing that his views specifically applied to sexual organisms that he clearly titled
his major work on speciation mechanisms “Systematics
and the origin of species from the viewpoint of a Zoologist“ [2].
Microbiologists engaged in a long and largely unsatisfying search for the tree of prokaryotic life for most of
the 20th Century [3,4] (also see [5] for review). Woese
detailed this search in his treatise on bacterial evolution
[6], where he also wrote about the ideas and false-starts
that arose from time to time in the earlier part of the
century. The 1970s had resulted in significant developments in the sequencing of genes and this led Woese
and others to the belief that there was a new tool

© 2011 McInerney et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

available to systematists that would ultimately lead to a
satisfactory and detailed resolution of the entire Tree of
Life [7-9]. The fine-grained picture of the tree of life
was rapidly being brought into focus by the use of ribosomal RNA sequencing and analysis. Indeed, so powerful was this line of argument that today, the world’s
most targeted gene for sequencing is the small subunit
ribosomal RNA gene. However, and remarkably so, the
most sequenced and most ubiquitous kind of gene in
the world is not the small subunit ribosomal RNA gene.
Transposases, typically known to function by frequent
movement from one genetic element to another are the
most abundantly discovered genes in metagenomic studies where sampling of genes is undirected [10]. This
discrepancy between the most abundant marker
sequenced in the traditional phylogenetic framework
and the most abundant genes actually obtained in nature by chance, suggests that the scope of phylogenetic
analysis is focussed on the analysis of certain genes,
while if a different perspective was taken - to focus on
the most abundant genes - then a different interpretation of evolutionary history might be more readily
obtained.
Commonly, by the 1990s, the optimism surrounding
the reconstruction of a tree of life was giving way to a
more realistic picture of life on the planet. Hilario and
Gogarten [11] and Martin et al. [12] pointed out
remarkable inconsistencies in molecular phylogenies
derived from ATPase and Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase genes when these phylogenies were compared with ribosomal RNA phylogenies. A genome analysis showed that a substantial portion of the known E.
coli genome was acquired by horizontal gene transfer
since its separation from Salmonella [13]. At the end of
the century, Doolittle [14,15] and Martin [16] summarized these growing problems with the tree of life model.
Soon afterwards, serious efforts were being made to
identify interspecies gene transfer events and to quantify
the extent of HGT in prokaryotic genomes [17-19] and
phylogenetic tree diagrams have been increasingly giving
way to network models of genome evolution in prokaryotes [20,21]. It must be pointed out, however, that the
focus on HGT events has been strongly criticized
[22,23] and some congruence between gene trees is
easily found [24].
It is not the case, however, that network diagrams are
being universally employed and indeed they still appear
in only a minority of studies that deal with the molecular systematics of prokaryotes. Tree diagrams, inferred
from a subset of genes with a wide or universal distribution are still the most commonly used models for prokaryotic evolution [25], though it has been pointed out
that usually these diagrams are only constructed from
less than one percent of the genome of these organisms

Page 2 of 17

[26]. When a larger portion of the genome is used, then
the resulting tree diagram is highly dependent on the
method used in its construction [27] and in any case, no
strongly-supported nodes are found when moving
towards the base of this tree [24,27]. In the middle
ground are studies that try to reconstruct a tree or forest of trees in the presence of HGT events [28-33].
What is becoming increasingly obvious is the need to
either improve the Tree of Life model, if that is indeed
possible, or replace it with one (or several) hypotheses
that better fit the data. At the moment the interpretations of this model seem to be straddling the middle
ground - there is a great Tree of Life (sensu Darwin,
Lamarck, etc.) but it has annotations and complications
superimposed on its great frame, caused by interspecies
gene transfer. The problem with this model is that it is
becoming increasingly implausible. Recent estimates
show, for instance, that Escherichia coli as a species uses
approximately 18,000 genes [34,35], while the percent of
gene families that are now known to be found in every
E. coli is just 6% of the total (see also Beauregard-Racine
et al. [36]), though a typical E. coli strain only possesses
4,000-5,500 genes. This kind of scenario is seen again
and again during genome resequencing projects where
multiple strains of the same species are sequenced. A
minority of the genes that are found in a prokaryotic
species are found in just one genome of that species. As
a consequence, the Tree of Life hypothesis has been
modified extensively from its original description, in
order to avoid its rejection. We now know - unlike the
originators of the hypothesis almost two centuries ago that the main process of genome innovation for many
of the evolving entities on this planet is not vertical descent, rather it is recombination and gene acquisition
[37]. Genes and genomes did not form part of the original formulation of the Tree of Life hypothesis and processes such as horizontal gene transfer and mobile
genetic elements such as viruses, plasmids and transposons obviously did not feature. In order to accommodate
these newly discovered, important features, the hypothesis has been stretched to fit the data, however, given
our knowledge of the data, it seems that the elastic limit
of the original hypothesis has been passed.
In Darwin’s formulation of the Tree of Life hypothesis,
he said that he attempted “[...] to show that there is a
constant tendency in the forms that are increasing in
number and diverging in character, to supplant and
exterminate the less divergent, the less improved, and
preceding forms.” This particular quotation gets to the
heart of tree-thinking: that evolving entities would
always diverge away from one another and that evolution is a process of divergence. To put it another way, all
formulations of the Tree of Life hypothesis have at their
core the basic tenet that the pattern of diversity that we

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

see on the planet is caused by a tree-like evolutionary
process and the differences in these formulations is to
be found in how much they allow deviation from this
central idea. Almost without exception, efforts to
describe the diversity of life on the planet have focussed
on the construction of this tree. The tree has been portrayed as a strictly bifurcating tree, as a fuzzy tree, as a
tree with cobwebs hanging from it and so forth. Likewise, the number and kinds of evolving entities has
changed over time, prokaryotes being largely ignored
initially (see [5]), mainly due to the difficulties of generating interpretable trees from the available data.
The current attempts at constructing the tree of life
can be roughly divided into four approaches (though,
other classifications of the approaches are easily constructed). Firstly, there is the tree as exemplified by the
small subunit ribosomal RNA gene [6]. Next, there is
the multi-gene approach using widely distributed genes,
usually of informational function [25]; the third
approach is to search for the biggest observable trend
embedded in the data [31], and the fourth is to construct phylogenetic supertrees, the so-called tree-fromtrees method. These approaches have different meanings
and care must be taken to interpret what they say.
When the ribosomal RNA approach was first advocated
by Woese and co-workers, the ubiquity of the gene and
its attractive properties in terms of rapidly and slowlyevolving sites, its conserved structure and its supposed
recalcitrance to horizontal gene transfer meant that it
was simply being used as a surrogate for the evolution
of the entire organism, a position that is no longer tenable. Using multiple genes in a concatenated superalignment is designed to overcome the limitations of using a
single gene, however the interpretation of this tree is
somewhat similar to the interpretation of the rRNA tree
and this approach has been criticised as a “Tree of 1%”,
not a tree of life [26]. The Statistical Tree of Life
(STOL) and phylogenetic supertrees are constructed
from a much larger sample of genomes and attempt to
either construct a single tree (supertree approaches) or a
statistical trend that is tree-like from a large sample of a
genome. The interpretation of these structures is somewhat difficult, though they may approximate a “Tree of
Cells”. Unfortunately, it is now necessary to carefully
read each manuscript to find out what the authors are
calling the “Tree of Life”.
Presentation of the Hypothesis

Clearly, if it is our ambition to question or test the Tree
of Life hypothesis, then many approaches are inappropriate because they conflate the explanandum and the
explanans (as already pointed out by Bapteste and Doolittle [38]) - constructing a tree, however slender, weak or
fuzzy and using this tree to provide proof that there is a

Page 3 of 17

tree. However, with few exceptions [21,39], all
approaches to date suffer from starting at the same place
- assuming that there is a fundamental tree-like structure
at the heart of biological evolution and then invoking ad
hoc criteria to explain data that does not conform (the
presence of plasmids, viruses, horizontal gene transfer,
genome fusion, endosymbioses and so forth). Tree of Life
efforts have generally had no regard for mobile genetic
elements such as plasmids and viruses and their classification and evolution is typically discussed in a completely
separate body of literature (e.g. [40]).
Tree-like patterns undeniably exist but a tree is the
incorrect starting proposition and no matter how much
we customize the interpretation of this metaphor, we
will not be able to make it fit the observed data. In this
manuscript, inspired by patterns observed in genomic
data, we present a model of evolution explaining both
the reason why genomes have an almost endless combination of genes and why modest tree-like patterns are
seen when some small subsets of the data are compared
with each other. First of all we present two axioms
(uncontroversial starting points that are self-evidently
true) on which our model is based.
Axiom 1

All evolving entities should be included in a model that
aims at providing the highest-level evolutionary picture.
Axiom 2

Genes move both horizontally and vertically.
For axiom 1, we include all nucleotides that are part
of a replicating system - chromosomal, plasmid, viral
and so forth. Given that these two conditions are
uncontroversial, any hypothesis or model that purports
to describe biological evolution on the planet should be
compatible with these two desiderata. With these
axioms in mind, we move on to describing the public
goods hypothesis, which is our replacement for the Tree
of Life hypothesis.
The Public Goods model of evolution

While John Locke wrote about ownership of property
and its governance in 1690 [41], it is usually Paul
Anthony Samuelson, the first American to win the
Nobel Prize in Economics who is credited with being
the person who introduced the notion of public goods
and private goods [42]. In drawing the distinction
between different kinds of goods, Samuelson said:
“[...] I explicitly assume two categories of goods:
ordinary private consumption goods [...] which can be
parcelled out among different individuals [...] and
collective consumption goods [...] which all enjoy in
common in the sense that each individual’s consumption of such a good leads to no subtraction from any
other individual’s consumption of that good [...].”

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

Today four categories of goods have been characterized (see table 1). These goods differ in two of the features that can be said to describe goods: whether the
good is rival and/or whether the good is excludable.
Rival refers to the availability of the good. A good is
non-rival if the consumption of the good by one individual does not reduce the availability of that good for
another individual. A good is non-excludable if it is
impossible or at least very difficult to exclude the good
from being available to everybody. The air we breathe is
a good example of a public good. The consumption of
clean air by one individual does not greatly reduce the
availability of air for other individuals, so this makes air
a non-rival good and it is impossible to effectively
exclude all other individuals from accessing air, so this
makes air a non-excludable good. Consequently, we
think of air as a public good.
In order to elaborate on our hypothesis, we must first
of all explore genes to show that some may be considered as public goods. For the rest of this manuscript we
will use the term “gene”, but in reality we are talking
about any sequence of nucleotides that can reasonably
be considered to be a functioning unit or good (a gene,
portion of gene, promoter sequence, etc.). Genes can be
classified into homologous families and sub classified
into orthologous and paralogous genes (also other classifications such as ohnologs and xenologs exist), but for
the purposes of simplification we will speak generally
about homologs, defined by Richard Owen as “the same
organ in different animals under every variety of form
and function” (Owen, 1843), though of course, we are
speaking about genes and not animal organs. As far as
we know, there is no limit to the number of gene copies
that can exist for any given family of genes on Earth,
though obviously we see that individual evolving entities
have finite genome sizes. We see some gene families
widely distributed (say, transposases, informational
genes [25] or enzymes such as Rubisco [43]) and conversely, many genes have so far been only seen in a single sequenced genome (personal observation). In
addition, a particular gene copy from a homologous
gene family can be used without “using up” the gene
family, in the same way that molecules of air can be
used by some organisms without appreciably using-up
the air. When gene copies are moved laterally, they are
usually moved using a copy-and-paste mechanism (e.g.
Table 1 The four categories of goods classified according
to the criteria of whether they are rival and/or
excludable
Excludable

Non-excludable

Rival

Private goods

Common goods

Non-Rival

Club goods

Public goods

Page 4 of 17

in plasmids, phage, class I transposons, outer membrane
vesicles and gene transfer agents), not a ‘stealing’
mechanism such as cut-and-paste (e.g. class II Transposons, nanotubes [44]). These features seem to suggest
that some genes are non-rival - the use of such a gene
by one organism does not preclude its use by another
organism.
If we furthermore consider the observations that have
been made on the widespread and easy gene availability
to single-celled prokaryotes: conjugation by plasmids
[4,45], the transformation of prokaryotes by phages [46],
the natural competence of some organisms like Neisseria [47], the secretion of outer membrane vesicles
packaging DNA in bacteria [48,49], the ability of gene
transfer agents to release small sections of DNA into
the environment [50], particularly, it seems in the
oceans [51], the sharing of DNA material through nanotubes [44] and the experimental demonstration that barriers to forced gene transfer by cloning are almost nonexistent [52,53], these empirical observations all point to
many genes having the property of being non-excludable. That is to say, it is very difficult for prokaryotes to
completely prevent other prokaryotes from obtaining a
particular gene. Indeed, the evolution of CRISPR elements [54] and restriction-modification systems [55],
themselves laterally transferred [56] testifies to the evolutionary success of (and obvious need for) mechanisms
that protect against the (passive or aggressive) acquisition of genes.
Genuine public goods (non-excludable and non-rival)
are relatively rare, often somewhat intangible and
sometimes context-dependent. Knowledge is considered to be a public good - it is difficult to prevent the
spread of knowledge and facts don’t get “used up” if
many people know them. In an earlier example, we
cited clean air as a public good. However, in the context of scuba divers under water, bottled air is not a
public good, it is a private good. In another example this time somewhat analogous to gene sharing - it is
asserted that file-sharing on the internet has the hallmark of a public good (the files are spread by a copying mechanism and once a file is freely available on
the internet, it is very difficult to completely prevent
people from accessing that file and making copies
available for further sharing) [57]. Legislation and
other means could conceivably restrict file-sharing on
the internet and therefore, while it might be considered to be a public good, its classification might be
context dependent.
We may conclude, therefore, that if some genes are
non-excludable and non-rival, they are public goods.
Likewise, it can be argued (and empirically tested) that
some genes might be de facto non-rival but excludable
to some extent and in some contexts, therefore, they

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

might be better described as club goods rather than
public goods.
A protein-coding gene could be excludable, for
instance, if it uses a genetic code that is unique to a particular group of organisms. This DNA sequence could
produce a defective protein in an organism with a more
orthodox (universal) genetic code and consequently the
gene would not be fixed in that population, but would
be lost. Excludability of the gene in this case would
come from an intrinsic characteristic of the molecular
sequence and would be somewhat independent of function. In another scenario, a protein might only function,
say, in the absence of oxygen and therefore all aerobic
organisms would be excluded from using the gene that
encodes this protein. In this case, the function of the
encoded gene is the feature that would make a gene
into a club good. In a recent study it has been shown
that the connectivity of a protein in a protein-protein
interaction network plays a large part in whether it can
be successfully transferred to another species [58]. It is
possible that genes encoding very highly connected proteins are effectively excludable and therefore could be
considered club goods.
We might also consider the case where the composition of the club plays a central role in whether a gene
remains a public good or becomes a club good. Symbiotic association of multiple lineages, have frequently been
observed and indeed, these organisms might be
“addicted” to one another. For instance, phylogenetically
heterogeneous communities (or coalitions [59]) found in
gut microbiomes, comprised of archaebacteria and
eubacteria, have converged in their repertoires of carbohydrate-active enzymes to adapt to shared challenges.
This is in large part thanks to lateral gene transfer
mediated by mobile elements [60]. Such genes whose
exchanges are restricted between members of the coalition, but that are not so widely spread outside the coalition, constitute a particular type of club goods, because
of the original nature of the club itself.
We can call these genes “coalition goods”, because
they might represent a class of genes that, although they
are potentially public goods, are generally excluded from
being used by cells outside of the coalition, which is
commonly illustrated by metagenomic studies reporting
stronger functional signatures in microbial communities
over phylogenetic signatures, i.e. in which the presence
of particular genes coding for a certain function is more
essential than the presence of a particular lineage for
the community to evolve in a sustainable way [61]. The
dependency of the different lineages in the coalition on
one another thriving under particular selective pressures
may be sufficient to set up a barrier to gene availability.
Therefore such coalition goods are ultimately bounded
by the spatial distribution and the ecological interactions

Page 5 of 17

of the members of the coalition. The genes might be
theoretically public goods, but practically, they are club
or coalition goods.
Most importantly, the notion of a gene as a public
good or a coalition good is entirely at odds with the
Tree of Life hypothesis, which implies that genes are
either private goods (excludable and rival) or club goods
(excludable and non-rival) as long as we define the club
to be a single clade (monophyletic group).
How are the goods kept in public ownership?

To be sustainable, public goods need to last and remain
available. In the case of genes, the maintenance of these
public goods and coalition goods is taken on board by
the organisms and mobile genetic elements. There is a
single genetic code (allowing for the numerous variants,
which are mostly, though not always, found in limited
kinds of organisms - Mycoplasma and Spiroplasma for
instance have a variant of the genetic code). This genetic
code is maintained by almost all the organisms that use
it. Mutations to genes that introduce stop codons are
generally weeded out by natural selection. Genes that
have proved useful to organisms, mobile elements, or
their coalitions have been replicated, while acquisition
of deleterious genes has led to the extinction of their
carriers. Therefore, organisms and mobile genetic elements patrol the public goods and these goods are
maintained over some evolutionary time by natural
selection. Nonetheless, a turnover in the composition of
the gene families is expected, because the nature of
selective advantages can evolve over time, i.e. after oxygen level raised in the atmosphere, numerous gene
families involved in O2 metabolism likely became public
goods [62]. The same logic applies for antibiotic resistance genes, etc. This is another feature of genes that
legitimise the classification of some genes as public
goods, though it is not a necessary feature. If genes were
private goods, then we might expect alternative genetic
codes to evolve over time thereby helping to keep the
private goods private. This is the case to some extent
with epigenetic modifications of DNA, yet overall this is
not what we see.
Implications of the Hypothesis

One of the consequences of tree-thinking [63] is that
genes are thought of as private goods or lineage goods
(i.e. club goods in which the club strictly matches a
monophyletic group). That is to say that if inheritance
of genes proceeds in a tree-like fashion, with genes only
passed down through time from ancestor to direct descendent, then genes are seen as being available only to
one particular lineage, with other lineages being effectively excluded from using these genes (this would
define genes as being excluded). The absence of

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

reticulation in the tree of life hypothesis implies that,
when genes evolve de novo, they become a synapomorphy for the descendents: only descendents of the entity
in which the new gene first appeared will have the gene.
This makes genes non-rival for this group of organisms
and consequently genes can be throught of as club
goods under a Tree of Life hypothesis. Animals for
example, generally do not share their genes with animals
of other species and more broadly with other organisms.
That said, there is evidence that such events can and do
occur. We see, for instance, genes from endosymbionts
in the genomes of their hosts [64,65], multiple transfers
of glycolytic enzymes into animals [66], transfer of the
shikimate pathway into a basal metazoan [67] and genes
enabling parasitism in nematodes [68] that are normally
found in bacteria. Yet in general tree-thinking and the
focus on the animal-based species concept, sensu Mayr
[2], could lead us to view gene ownership to be a club
where genes are kept for use only by members of the
club. Hierarchical tree-thinking promotes an idea of a
club within a club within a club. However, this situation,
which is typical of animals is far from universal. Therefore tree-thinking cannot be suited for all biological evolution: goods thinking is an appealing alternative.
It is undeniable that tree-like patterns are also found
by the analysis of phylogenetic trees from prokaryotes
[23-26,31,69,70]. This is evidenced by gene trees constructed from samples of presumed orthologs that agree
with each other far more than expected by random
chance and that agree with each other far more than
they disagree with each other [71]. This, however,
should not be taken as evidence in favor of a general
tree like evolutionary process and against the Public
Goods hypothesis. According to the Public Goods
hypothesis, we expect that if genes are public goods we
would see a local tree-like pattern to emerge from the
process of gene acquisition by a genome, followed by its
inheritance by the offspring, however, we would also
expect to see that there is no global tree-like pattern.
This is exactly the pattern found by Schliep and coworkers [33]. In contrast, the Tree of Life hypothesis
predicts a tree-like pattern throughout and this is not
what we see [24,31]. We are careful to include Tree of
Life concepts such as those envisioned by the “Statistical
Tree of Life” or any of the other approaches that have
fuzzy tree concepts. These hypotheses are ‘regionalized’
within the public goods hypothesis (we discuss regionalized hypotheses later).
Public goods genes are continuously acquired by genomes, they are integrated into these genomes and participate in transcription, translation and crucially,
replication [72]. The replication of the genes and the
cell in which the genes are found, facilitates the passage
of these genes vertically from parent to offspring.

Page 6 of 17

Lineages in which the combination of genes is less fit
than their competitors are removed and those lineages
that produce more offspring that live long enough to
reproduce in turn, are privileged. They form part of the
selective landscape of the genome and population processes such as random genetic drift and natural selection act on these genomes, preserving those mutations
that are advantageous or nearly so and rejecting those
that are bad. Genomes do not have to use all the publicly available genes as this would lead to genome sizes
that prokaroytes cannot support [73] and it would lead
to a homogenization of all prokaryotic genomes so that
they would all have the same genes. Clearly this does
not happen. The ocean might be seen as a public good,
but not everybody likes to swim, all the time.
When genes are seen as public goods, horizontal
transfer of many gene families is possible. Not only is it
possible, but it has almost certainly happened [39].
Dagan and co-workers have shown that in the history of
life on the planet “at least two-thirds and probably all”
genes have been affected by HGT at some time in their
history [39]. The rate of retention of genes in a given
genome is what is different. There is an obvious gradient of gene retention from high to low, with many
genes that encode highly-connected proteins in the protein-protein interaction network being retained and coevolving together for long periods of time [58], but
other metabolic genes, antibiotic resistant genes, mobile
genetic element genes, among others only being retained
for very short periods of time (these timescales can
range from one cell division to 4.5 billion years). The
consequence of natural selection (sensu Darwin) retaining genes for varying amounts of time means that recent
and ancient tree-like structures - some compatible,
other not- might emerge, and this is precisely what we
see [25,33].
Figure 1 shows clearly how local tree-like signals must
emerge from a continuous process of sampling genes
from the public/coalition pool of genes and their subsequent retention. Genes are acquired by a genome,
retained for varying amounts of time, duplicated by
DNA polymerases, (unless they produce an adverse or
deleterious reaction in the organism), passed to offspring through cell division and are subsequently
replaced by other genes, perhaps from the same or perhaps from different families, or they are simply lost.
One pattern that has been observed consistently
across life is a pattern where genes naturally fall into
two categories, delineated by the frequency with which
they are involved in horizontal gene transfer. These are
the “informational” and the “operational” classes of
genes and the theory covering this observation is the
“complexity hypothesis” [74,75]. According to this
hypothesis, the complex interactions that information

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

Page 7 of 17

the rate of retention of genes. This creates a tree-like
pattern, or a “central tendency” [31] for a tiny number
of genes [25], while the majority of genes display a variety of other patterns with varying amounts of conflict to
the ‘nearly universal’ genes [31,69] (and see also Leigh et
al. [76] for an even finer description of the variation in
the rate of retention of genes in the ‘nearly universal’
genes). We feel that such empirical observations from
numerous studies fit the public goods hypothesis much
more closely than any Tree of Life hypothesis.
Regionalization of previous hypotheses

Figure 1 This figure is a cartoon diagram representing the
movement of genes from a variety of gene families as they
are sampled by different genomes. Each tree diagram embedded
in this network represents the evolutionary history of that particular
gene. Genes are continously sampled as public goods and this
leads to anastomoses, coalitions and mosaic genomes. Part of this
diagram is magnified to demonstrate that the local tree-like pattern
that seems to emerge really just results from varying periods where
genes co-exist in the same evolving entity.

processing genes - those involved in transcription, translation and replication - are involved in makes it more
difficult for these genes to be readily exchanged between
organisms and so they tend to be inherited together
more often than the operational genes which are
involved in fewer interactions. In a very significant
update to this hypothesis, Cohen at al., [58] have shown
that the propensity for a gene to be horizontally transferred correlates negatively with the number of proteinprotein interactions of its protein product. In fact, connectivity is much more important than function in
determining the likelihood that a gene is involved in
HGT. In other words, many more genes would become
involved in frequent HGT were it not for their high
levels of connectivity preventing the success of these
events. The Tree of Life hypothesis does not predict
that these kinds of pattern should emerge. However,
according to the public goods hypothesis this is exactly
the kind of pattern that is expected and indeed we view
hypotheses like the complexity hypothesis to be regionalized within the public goods hypothesis.
Typically, we can describe the complexity hypothesis
in terms of public goods as follows: sampling of genes
from the public goods pool is a continuous process,
however natural selection for fitter genomes in a constantly changing world decides whether these combinations of genes will work together for a short or long
period of time. We therefore, expect to see variation in

In 1854, Bernhard Riemann delivered a lecture at the
University of Göttingen describing his theory that Euclidean space could be extended beyond the three or four
dimensions that were being used at that time. This differential geometry of Riemann was subsequently developed and provided some of the foundations for
Einstein’s theory of relativity a half-century later. This
development does not mean that euclidean geometry is
not useful in some contexts, just that it is insufficient to
explain all the data. Similarly, classical (Newtonian or
Hamiltonian) mechanics, which describes the motion of
bodies when force is applied, has given way to quantum
mechanics, due to the fact that at atomic or subatomic
scales, classical mechanics is unable to describe the
observations of the behaviours of systems. Classical
mechanics is still useful in a practical sense for macroscopic applications, however, it is insufficient to explain
all mechanical interactions and indeed many quantum
effects run counter to the expectation from classical
mechanics [77]. In these examples, classical mechanics
and euclidean space can be said to be regionalized
instances within the universe of mechanics theories and
geometrical spaces. In other words, these disciplines can
be studied as long as the monist view is not taken that
they are correct for all observations. We would advocate
the pluralistic position that all Tree of Life and indeed
many other, hypotheses are regionalized instances of the
public goods hypothesis. The Tree of Life hypotheses
can be studied and may have heuristic power (see Koonin and O’Malley, this special issue), but they are insufficient for describing all of biological evolution and
indeed contradict many important observations.
Summary

The public goods hypothesis for the evolution of life on
the planet views some, perhaps most, genes as nonexcludable, non-rival goods that are acquired by genomes for varying amounts of time before usually being
replaced. From this continuous process of sampling of
public goods, integration of the goods into a genome
followed by genomic and cellular replication and division, we can see a net-like structure emerge with some

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

local parts of this structure is expected to look tree-like
(see Figure 1). The Public Goods hypothesis does not
view any tree as being of particular significance as the
process of evolution does not follow any particular tree
and indeed tree-thinking is an incorrect starting point,
likely to conflate explanandum and explanans. The Public Goods hypothesis is a much better fit to the observed
data from genetic sequences, and it is not restricted
solely to the evolution of cellular organisms, as it offers
an important role and room for mobile genetic elements. It is consistent with the clear lateral connections
between lineages that otherwise have little in common,
it is consistent with the patchy distribution of most
genes, it is consistent with the near-universality of the
genetic code, it is consistent with the complexity
hypothesis and it explains how we see a weak tree-like
signal embedded in the net of life. It encourages predictions and testing of the extent of coalitions and barriers
or ‘road-bumps’ to HGT in the environment (i.e. consistent with microbial ecology studies), and for the fundamental role of public goods in evolution, two features
lacking from the Tree of Life hypothesis.
We view the complexity hypothesis [58,74], the selfish
operon model [78], the Tree of Life model, endosymbiotic gene transfer [12], fusion models for eukaryogenesis
[79,80], the arm races between systems favouring HGT
and their corresponding defense mechanisms, even
within mobile elements [56,81,82] and HGT hypotheses
to be regionalized instances of the Public Goods
hypothesis.
Finally, we feel that a fundamentally important feature
of the public goods hypothesis is that it satisfies both of
the axioms that we have outlined previously: axiom 1,
that all evolving entities are included in the presumably
highest-level evolutionary picture, and axiom 2 that
genes can be inherited both vertically and horizontally.
We know of no version of the Tree of Life hypothesis
that satisfies axiom 1 and we believe that no version of
the Tree of Life hypothesis sufficiently satisfies axiom 2.
We hope this manuscript, despite the relatively alien
nature of the language in the evolutionary biology literature, provides an impetus for a programme of experimental and theoretical work testing the Public Goods
hypothesis.

Reviewers comments
Reviewer 1: W. Ford Doolittle (Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Canada)
This paper is both fun and serious. There is a need
to develop new ways of conceptualizing gene and genome evolution, globally, and borrowing from economics is potentially fruitful. I also agree with the authors’
characterization of the state of play, that as a community we are now “straddling the middle ground - there

Page 8 of 17

is a great Tree of Life (sensu Darwin, Lamarck, etc)
but it has annotations and complications superimposed
upon its great frame, caused by interspecies gene
transfer.”
As well, I’d agree that “the Tree of Life hypothesis is
almost unique in having been modified so extensively
from its original description, in order to avoid its rejection”. But I do wonder at the third author’s acceptance
of such a malleable notion, in the context of the 2007
paper [38] in which he and I were rather more specific
about what we called the “Tree of Life hypothesis”. We
described it there as the notion that the tree-like patterns of “groups subordinate to groups” already recognized as natural before 1859 could be explained by
(were caused by) an underlying tree-like pattern of successive lineage branchings. This is a testable casual
hypothesis not least because there are alternatives, as
presented by Peter Gogarten and colleagues elsewhere
in this issue. And, we claimed, it was a cornerstone of
Darwin’s theory.
The chameleon-like Tree of Life hypothesis that seems
to be referred to here (as a foil to the authors’ Public
Goods Hypothesis) must be a weaker conjecture, maybe
something so vague as “There is a Tree of Life”, or so
vacuous as “Application of tree-building algorithms will
build a tree”, or (best case scenario) “There is a Tree of
Cell Divisions that we can know, even if it is way less
predictive than we had hoped”. It is perhaps something
like this, more casual than causal, that most treebuilders do have in mind and is thus referred to in this
paper.
Author’s response:We have been more explicit about
Tree of Life hypotheses and indeed we are not talking
about the casual ToL nor are we talking about the Public Goods hypothesis as something casual - we describe it
as the basic model for producing the variation in heritable features that we see in evolving entities. We have
included clearer statements on the ToL hypothesis such
as “To put it another way, all formulations of the Tree
of Life hypothesis have at their core the basic tenet that
the pattern of diversity that we see on the planet is
caused by a tree-like evolutionary process and the differences in these formulations is to be found in how much
they allow deviation from this central idea”.
I would quibble with the authors’ assertion that the
existence of CRISPRs and restriction-modification systems “testifies to the evolutionary success of (and
obvious need for) mechanisms that protect against the
(passive or aggressive) acquisition of genes”. CRISPRs do
seem to have evolved as protection against phages and
maybe burdensome plasmids but it seem most unlikely
that there is serious selection against importation of foreign genes per se, and restriction-modification systems
may be selfish in nature [83].

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

Author’s response:We agree with the comment on RM systems being selfish in nature, but our comment on
CRISPRs and R-M systems is simply the observation that
these are genes that have evolved to counter the dangers
of parasite DNA being incorporated into the host genome
or cell. They can successfully prevent this from happening. This is in contrast to being eaten by parasites (antibiotic genes, for instance, function to resist being engulfed
or outcompeted). Therefore, our difference in opinion
might come down to the interpretation of the word “serious” in the phrase “serious selection against importation
of foreign genes”.
I also think there is much more that can be done with
such public goods thinking in terms of what’s in it for
the genes themselves. If a particular sort of function is
dispensable (what Lawrence and Roth [78] called a
weakly selected function), and if the function can be
performed by many different genes (and maybe even
many different families of genes), there will be competition among such genes. How might one win out over
others? Possibilities would be to have fewer prior coevolved attachments (as in the “complexity hypothesis”
of Jain et al. [75]) Another would to be not to use too
many generally rare codons or expensive amino acids. A
third might be to be short. It may be that such selected
properties of public goods genes determine some of the
global properties of bacteria and their genomes that we
currently think of us selected at the level of cells and
genomes, for instance the lesser level of connectivity
(number of protein-protein interactions) of prokaryotic
as opposed to eukaryotic proteomes. Once we start
thinking this way it is not easy to stop.
Author’s response: We agree with all of this. “Goods
thinking” will certainly provide a different perspective.
Reviewer 2: Eugene Koonin (NCBI, NLM, NIH, United States)
This is an interesting and entertaining essay on “horizontal genomics” and the inadequacy of the Tree of Life
hypothesis. To me, the most appealing part of the article
is Table 1 and the accompanying text where the authors
introduce Samuelson’s classification of goods and advocate its use in phylogenomics for an evolutionary classification of genes. This classification is interesting and
useful, and might even stick although I think the
authors could have been more explicit in discussing it,
for instance, whether some genes can and should be
viewed as ‘common goods’ as opposed to ‘public goods’.
Author’s response: We feel this is part of a multi-disciplinary programme of research and worthy of further
publication at a later stage. For now, we wished to present the model.
Without any pejorative implications, it is my impression that beyond this fresh interdisciplinary perspective,
there is little in this manuscript that is genuinely novel.

Page 9 of 17

In more conventional terms, the “public goods” concept
looks familiar. To honk my own horn for once, here is a
quote from the abstract of a 2008 review article on
genomics of Bacteria and Archaea: “...comparative genomics also shows that horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is
a dominant force of prokaryotic evolution, along with
the loss of genetic material resulting in genome contraction. A crucial component of the prokaryotic world is
the mobilome, the enormous collection of viruses, plasmids and other selfish elements, which are in constant
exchange with more stable chromosomes and serve as
HGT vehicles. Thus, the prokaryotic genome space is a
tightly connected, although compartmentalized, network,
a novel notion that undermines the ‘Tree of Life’ model
of evolution and requires a new conceptual framework
and tools for the study of prokaryotic evolution” [84]. I
believe the “public goods” view is right there, even
though the language is different.
Author’s response: We have, of course, built on previous work and in particular, we have been very aware
of the body of work that has emphasized the role of
HGT, the problems with the ToL and the need for a
‘new conceptual framework’. We feel we have cited many
of the reviewers manuscripts and we naturally give as
much credit as we can in the available space for others
who have made these valuable contributions.
I should further note that the authors could have been
more specific about their understanding of the “Tree of
Life Hypothesis”. What is that hypothesis that they consider to be refuted by comparative genomics? Clearly,
this cannot be Tree of Life sensu Darwin because in the
19th century (and for much of the 20th century as well),
the very idea of evolving genes and genomes did not
exist, and so the Tree of Life hypothesis could not have
been properly explicated (the authors of this article do
make a note to that effect). Neither is it the modern
“Statistical Tree of Life” hypothesis (see our article with
Maureen O’Malley in this thematic series [85]) because
to refute that hypothesis, actual statistical analysis is
required that would prove false previous conclusions on
the detectability of a central trend in the “Forest of Life”
[31]. It seems to me that the hypothesis McInerney et
al. are so adamant about refuting is a straw man of
“fully coherent evolution of (nearly) all genes in all genomes”, with the implication that a 16S RNA tree or a
tree of a small number of highly conserved genes could
be an adequate Tree of Life. Surely, that hypothesis is
blatantly false and hopeless, but it hardly has been ever
formulated in those explicit terms. The original publications by Woese (e.g.,[6]) simply assumed that the Tree
of Life was embodied in the 16S RNA phylogeny, without much conceptual analysis of what this assumption
entailed. Conversely, in the genomic era, it has become
clear early on that the Tree of Life concept needed

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

serious revamping if it were to survive (e.g.,[14]). I think
that the image of the straw man can be only implied by
some publications defending the traditional Tree of Life
even in the face of extensive HGT (e.g.,[25,86]). Certainly, these authors were well aware of the wide spread
of HGT and simply have chosen to emphasize what
they saw as the continued importance and heuristic
power of trees of universal genes. That latter idea can
be meaningfully debated even now but to that end, it
would help to formulate more clearly the hypothesis for
which a replacement is proposed.
Author’s response: We have been clearer in this
revised version concerning ToL hypotheses - from the
causal Tree as envisioned by Darwin and which is, we
feel, still at the very heart of ToL hypotheses, to the modern searches for Trees among forests, which are more
weakly causal, but nonetheless still focus on some weak
tree-likeness. We have also addressed these ToL hypotheses in terms of an axiomatic approach.
In terms of ‘refuting’ the ToL hypotheses, we refute the
causal notion of a Tree of Life because clearly it is false.
We replace it with the causal idea that acquiring genetic
goods, either vertically or horizontally, leads to the patterns we see today in the data and that it is not a “just
so” story that can be represented by drawing a network,
rather it is a causal story that says that genes (or portions of genes or collections of genes) are acquired in the
same way that goods are acquired in the world of economics. We reject the causal notions of a ToL, not from
the perspective of being incorrect analyses, but from the
perspective of being inadequate as the highest-level
hypothesis. To this end we have clarified our ideas about
the regionalization of ToL hypotheses.
Reviewer 3: John Dupré (University of Exeter, UK)
This paper nicely summarises the decline of the tree
in microbiology, and provides for philosophers a rare
but paradigmatic account of what Imre Lakatos [87]
called a degenerating research programme. The “hard
core"–the commitment to an underlying tree–is protected at all cost, despite ever-growing bodies of contrary evidence, by an ever more elaborate “protective
belt”. The next stage in the Lakatosian picture of scientific progress is the rise of an alternative and progressive
research programme, and of course this is the project to
which the present paper aims to contribute.
Somewhat tangentially to the question of the merits of
theories old and new, I have quite frequently heard the
suggestion that one of the most pressing needs in promoting some of the more radical ideas arising from contemporary biology is to find alternative metaphors as
effective as those that have become so widely
entrenched and disseminated, from the selfish gene and
the struggle for existence, to the tree of life. The idea of
(some) genes as public goods is an original and

Page 10 of 17

interesting contribution to this need. The interchange of
concepts between biology and economics has been a
productive one for two centuries, and this suggests an
exciting new addition to this tradition.
Author’s response: Just to clarify - we see the public
goods hypothesis as providing not only a metaphor
(clearly the Tree of Life provided a diagram/metaphor
that could be used to describe evolving cellular life), but
we see the Public Goods hypothesis as a description of
the process of evolution - genes as goods that can be utilized, exchanged, protected, etc. So, while we would say
that this is a metaphor, it is also a very real description
of how genes are used by cells, viruses, plasmids etc.
Goods thinking implies process as well as pattern.
Second Review by John Dupré

I did not mean to imply that metaphors were suspect
tools in science; quite the opposite: they are crucial to
scientific practice. In this regard, I agree with the
authors about the importance of finding the appropriate
concepts for evolutionary analysis.
First review by John Dupré

There are, of course, a few questions that will need to
be pursued further before this metaphor becomes widely
accepted. Most obviously, and fundamental to the whole
debate from which the suggestion arises, is the extent to
which genes are really non-excludable goods. I take it
that all genes are non-rival, unless perhaps for some
very special situations involving competition within a
species. Tree aficionados, then, will take all genes to be
club goods, excluded to all except for a club often containing no more than the members of a species.
Although different clubs may, by reason of homology,
have access to the same gene, there is no trading
between clubs and eventually their products will presumably drift apart. It is worth noting that the clubs
may be a lot bigger than has often been supposed. Contrary to a strict interpretation of McInerney et al.’s
remark that ‘animals... do not generally share their genes
with animals of other species’ it now appears that there
is a great deal more hybridisation than was once supposed [88]. But while this may produce larger clubs and
perhaps even clubs with fuzzy membership rules, this is
a long way from a fully non-excludable public good.
Author’s response: We call this hypothesis the “Public
Goods” hypothesis to emphasise that genes, by virtue of
using the same four (five) nucleotides, by using triplets of
nucleotides in codons, by widespread use of the exact
same genetic code and by virtue of known mechanisms of
gene transfer, have the theoretical property of being public goods, but might find themselves in reality being part
of a club (because of variant genetic code, function of the
encoded protein, etc.). Goods are generally found

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

somewhere on a gradient between one extreme of
description and another, the categories are not discrete.
However, there is indeed a programme of research in trying to understand the extent to which genes can be
viewed, in reality, as public, private, club or common
goods.
The important question to begin with, anyhow, is
whether the public good concept is useful for understanding the evolution of prokaryotes, and the extent to
which it remains so for various parts of the eukaryote,
or perhaps just the sexual, world can wait. Two billion
years of cellular evolution would make a good start. I
take it that economists tend to think of a public good as
something easily available to anyone. An interpretation
of this for the evolutionary case might be, a public good
gene is one such that any lineage for which it would be
useful, i.e. that would be fitter with the addition of this
genetic resource, will find it. I leave microbiologists to
say how close reality comes to this, but I suppose that it
would be unusual at best to achieve this fully. As McInerney et al. say, there is a good deal of variation in the
ease with which different genes can be horizontally
transferred, and there is also variation in the competence of different lineages to acquire genes. It might be
in the end that a more literal-minded exploration of this
metaphor would lead to a quite complex mapping of the
various channels and obstacles to genetic trade.
Central to the variation just mentioned between
degrees of excludability of genes, McInerney et al. suggest a dichotomy between informational and operational
genes, and it is operational genes, due to the greater
simplicity of their embedding in the functioning of the
organism, that are liable to be public goods. Here the
analogy with economics begins to limp. In the economic
context information is a key example of a public good,
perhaps in the age of the internet it has become the
most important example of a potentially public good. It
is the informational character of genes that underlies
the non-rival character central to the possibility of their
being public goods. Perhaps one way out of this rather
confusing situation would be to replace the dichotomy
just mentioned with one between information-processing genes as opposed to mere informational genes (i.e.
operational genes). Alternatively, as a general sceptic
about dichotomies, I am more tempted to suspect that
this is more of a continuum of embeddedness and transferability, and as such might fit well enough into the
mapping suggested at the end of the last paragraph.
Author’s response: While this manuscript has been
written, a very important manuscript [58] has emerged
that has updated the complexity hypothesis and we have
written about this in the revised version of the paper.
A final reflection on the public goods analogy is the
following. Perhaps the most fundamental issue involving

Page 11 of 17

public goods in economics is the possibility of free
riders to which it gives rise; and of course the possibility
of free riding has figured in many evolutionary discussions. It would be a strong endorsement of the public
goods metaphor if parallel issues could be discovered in
prokaryote evolution. In some sense a cell or a cell lineage that avoids the cost of carrying a gene (say antibiotic
resistance) that is not currently needed, safe in the
‘knowledge’ that some other lineages were keeping it
readily available, might be said to free-ride. Is there a
story to be told about the division of the costs of maintaining the stock of genetic resources in an otherwise
free genetic commons? If so, the metaphor might show
itself productive as well as expository.
Author’s response: Indeed free riders do exist - plasmids that are non-conjugative can only transfer with the
assistance of conjugative plasmids and so these are candidates for the category of ‘free-riders’, though this is only
a suggestion. As we said previously, the current manuscript is designed to propose the Public Goods hypothesis
and to propose “goods thinking” instead of “tree-thinking”. Future work will be needed to evaluate free-riders,
clubs, genetic commons, etc.
In summary, I am not yet convinced that the public
goods hypothesis is a metaphor with the potential to do
all the theoretical and public relations work formerly
carried out by the Tree of Life. But it is at worst an
intriguing way of raising a range of interesting questions, and may yet develop into a powerful and productive intellectual tool.
Reviewer 4: Gregory Morgan (College of Arts and
Letters, Stevens Institute of Texhnology, United States)
Over the last two centuries, there have been many
instances of the lateral exchange of ideas between biology and economics. Famously, Darwin was inspired by
Malthus’s work on reasons for declining living conditions in 18th century England [89,90]. Social Darwinists
like Herbert Spencer thought that biological concepts
like “survival of the fittest” also applied in economic
contexts [91]. More recently, game theory developed
outside of biology has been used to analyze evolutionary
stable strategies [92].
McInerney et al. propose another exchange: that biologists should co-opt the economic concept of public
goods for biology and think of genes or sets of homologous genes as public goods. They cite the economist
Paul Samuelson as the originator of the idea of public
goods, although there are earlier versions of the concept
going back as far as John Locke’s discussion of property
[41].
Author’s response: We have now made this comment
in the main body of the manuscript.
If the Public Goods Hypothesis is advanced as a metaphor, then it might supplement the tree of life.

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

Presumably, McInerney et al. do not treat the Public
Goods Hypothesis as a mere metaphor since they claim
the Public Goods Hypothesis is an alternative to and
indeed a replacement of the Tree of Life Hypothesis.
What is literally true of (many) genes, they contend, is
that they share with public goods the properties of
being non-rival and non-excludible.
Author’s response: This is correct, we do not see the
Public Goods hypothesis as providing an alternative as a
wooly metaphor, we feel that it is a sensible way of looking at how genes are treated by evolving entities - as
goods that might or might not be used in different circumstances and as such, these genes have properties that
are also recognized in things like cups of coffee and air.
What these concepts mean in a biological context is
not made completely clear. By non-excludible, they say,
“it is impossible or a least very difficult to exclude the
good from being available to everybody.” In the biological case, presumably one replaces “everybody” with
“every genome” or perhaps “every genotype over a certain amount of time.” Depending on what time scale we
select, a gene might vary in its excludability. Perhaps
McInerney et al. could quantify “very difficult” with a
certain probability of horizontal exchange in a given
unit of time to make what counts as a public good in
biology more precise.
Author’s response: We have cited the very important
paper by Cohen et al. where they quantify the rates of
HGT across a large sample of genes and show how it
correlates with the connectivity of the encoded protein
product. However, the rate of HGT and excludability
may be two different things, though this needs further
investigation. We still have outstanding questions such
as whether or not all the gene sequences within, say, a
particular ribosomal protein family are so well adapted
to the ribosome in which they find themselves that they
are effectively excluded from ever becoming involved in
an HGT event. Given the limits of what can be done in
any one manuscript, we feel that this is a significant
question that warrants investigation, but is outside the
scope of the current manuscript.
Unfortunately, a gene’s probability of transfer will vary
depending on the nature of the recipient genome in
question. The concept of being “non-rival,” too, needs
further elaboration in the biological context. The idea is
that a gene can be laterally transferred into a different
organism without being “used up.” But what does it
mean to say that a copy of a gene on one organism precludes its use in another organism? One way to examine
this question would be to look at what effect transfers
of the gene has on the fitness of its instances. If an
increase in copy number of a gene in a population
decreases the fitness of any given instance of the gene,
then there is a sense that its adaptive utility is being

Page 12 of 17

“used up” and the various copies are to some extent rivals with one another. On this suggestion, being a rival is
a matter of degree. At one extreme when the utility of a
gene is “all used up” because of prolific copying there is
now selection against the gene in the donor genome in
question. Perhaps there are other ways also to elaborate
what it means for a gene to be “used up,” but the
authors do not pursue them. In any case, as one
attempts to make the Public Goods Hypothesis more
precise, the hypothesis becomes more complicated.
Author’s response: Goods are generally viewed as
being somewhere along the gradient from one extreme to
the other extreme and the neat classification of goods is
often not possible in reality. We gave the example of
clean air, which is normally a public good, but for deepsea divers with bottled air, it becomes a private good
available only to the owner of the tank of air. In terms of
rival genes, if a gene becomes too common in a particular environment it is likely that there is overuse of the
environment and therefore, genes can become rival.
Again, we feel that this is part of a progressive research
programme to evaluate these kinds of genes.
One virtue of the Tree of Life Hypothesis is its simplicity, especially before the use of reticulation to account
for lateral gene transfer. It was applied to all of life and
any organism could in theory be placed at one and only
one place in the tree. The Public Goods Hypothesis is
not as simple. While many (McInerney et al. say “perhaps most”) genes can be thought of as public goods,
others cannot. Some should be thought of as being
“club goods” i.e., they are excludible but non-rival.
Furthermore, as McInerney et al. point out, what type
of good a gene is classified under will depend on context. The tree of life offers powerful visual images that
summarize patterns of relatedness. Is it possible for the
public goods hypothesis also to offer an efficient and
powerful means of visualizing patterns of relatedness? It
is not clear.
Author’s response: First of all, we would contend that
the Tree of Life hypothesis was indeed applied to all of
organismal life, but not to all evolving entities - it conspicuously left out plasmids, viruses, phage etc. Simpler
ideas are appealing and indeed parsimonious reasoning
is a powerful argument that is applied for many explanations in biology. However, evolution is dynamic and in
our opinion a dynamic, pluralistic interpretation of the
evolution of life on the planet is needed. The elegance, or
otherwise, of the model is subjective.
On a positive note, if McInerney et al. are correct in
claiming that the public goods hypothesis predicts local
tree-like structure and global non-tree-like patterns,
then this is a significant point in favor of the hypothesis.
To make this point more strongly, a quantitative
dynamic model of public goods that shows how patterns

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

like their Figure 1 might be produced would be of
interest.
Author’s response: We agree with this, but feel that
quantitative analysis is best left for another manuscript.
In this current paper, we are explaining the model.
To make the public good hypothesis more plausible
and move it beyond a speculative hypothesis, it would
be useful to quantify the evidence in its favor. McInerney et al. claim that their hypothesis describes the genomic data better than the tree of life, and they may be
right, but they do not offer any quantitative measures of
degree of fit. In the longer run, proponents the Public
Goods Hypothesis need testable novel predictions that
cannot be explained, or at least explained only poorly,
with a tree, sets of trees, or trees with reticulated
branches. In sum, the Public Goods Hypothesis is a cute
idea, but needs further quantitative development before
it rises to the level of a genuine challenger to the Tree
of Life Hypothesis.
Reviewer 5: Davide Vecchi (Universidad de Santiago
de Chile, Chile)
The idea of the authors is to use concepts originally
formulated in economics in order to offer a categorisation of genetic resources. This interdisciplinary ethos is
to be welcomed, if only because contemporary science is
too compartmentalised. The big question is whether the
ensuing categorisation is effectively carving nature in an
interesting and heuristically useful way.
Heuristic power

The authors contend that the analogy of genes to public
goods and club goods is at odds with the Tree of Life
(ToL) hypothesis. They also argue that the idea that
genetic resources can be categorised using the concepts
of rival and excludable goods makes sense of various
observations (e.g. that it seems difficult for prokaryotes
to prevent other prokaryotes from eventually exploiting
a particular genetic resource). There is no doubt that
using such new categorisation is in principle heuristically useful. In fact, it could highlight phenomena that
possibly were previously considered of secondary interest. For instance, consider the existence of genetic clubs:
the public goods (PG) hypothesis emphasises the theoretical significance of questions such as “why do such
clubs exist?” and highlights the importance of studying
the phenomenon of genetic retention within clubs.
Using different theoretical tools and analogies - even
drawn from distantly related sciences - with the aim of
understanding in novel ways biological reality is highly
commendable.
Nevertheless, even though the PG hypothesis could
generate interesting insights, many questions remain
concerning its theoretical status. One is whether the PG
hypothesis is on a better epistemic footing than the ToL

Page 13 of 17

hypothesis, as argued by the authors. Another is
whether it is general enough to be applicable to all
genetic resources. A third is whether it is general
enough to be applicable to all kinds of shared resources.
I will comment on these issues in turn while also asking
unashamedly speculative questions.
Saving the phenomena

The authors claim that the ToL hypothesis is almost
unique in having been modified so extensively from its
original proposal. This seems to me an overstatement.
An interesting aspect of the history of geocentrism concerns the creativity of astronomers and the variety of
solutions they devised in order to save the observed
phenomena. This process lasted nearly twenty centuries.
Is the ubiquitous practice of devising “epicycles” (aka
ad-hoc hypotheses) justifiable? Many philosophers of
science have argued that it is not. As a matter of fact, it
looks more like a functional element of science: defending one’s hypothesis is necessary for the dialectical process of theory change. This could also mean that there
is no expiry date for the ToL hypothesis, even though
all that is left of the original proposal is a rather unimpressive “tree of 1%“.
Author’s response: We ‘toned down’ this sentence
about the ToL being ‘unique’. We recognize that it is not
unique in being stretched so far from its original proposal. We have also been careful to say that the ToL if it is
properly interpreted (though there are so many interpretations it is difficult to keep track) can be considered a
regionalized hypothesis within the public goods
hypothesis.
The problem always concerns the quality of the alternative to the mainstream hypothesis. When the authors
sustain that the PG is the best explanation of the evidence of lateral connections between lineages, critics are
bound to be sceptical, mainly because the PG hypothesis
is designed in order to accommodate these data. The
critical question is whether the PG hypothesis can bring
something new to the fore (e.g. unexpected and successful predictions concerning novel kinds of phenomena).
Can it?
Author’s response: When we formulated this hypothesis in 2010 we proposed, privately, that there are more
mechanisms of gene transfer that have yet to be discovered and then in 2011 there has been the publication of
nanotubes being observed ferrying genes fro one cell to
another [43]. We feel that goods thinking has many predictions concerning gene transfer, defence against transfer
and so on.
Second review by Davide Vecchi

The authors clarify in what sense the PG hypothesis is a
radical alternative to the tree of life hypothesis. They say

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

that the essence of tree thinking is that evolution is a
process of continuous divergence. Tree thinking is
inconsistent with the existence of HGT and of the
mobilome. The alternative is that evolution is a continuous process of sampling of genes from the public goods
pool. From this perspective the tree of life hypothesis is
the incorrect starting phylogenetic assumption, the
wrong null or default hypothesis, the reason being that
the “primitive evolutionary state” is the public state. Seeing evolution as a process of continuous divergence and
seeing evolution as a process of sampling from a public
pool of goods are two radically different perspectives.
Author’s response: This is indeed what we have been
trying to achieve for this manuscript. We feel you have
summarized it very nicely.
Davide Vecchi continues

The epistemic advantages of the PG hypothesis are
many: it accommodates the evidence in favour of the
existence of extensive HGT; it “makes unsurprising” (i.e.
explains) the inevitable existence of the mobilome
(given the nature of the ancestral evolutionary state); it
makes sense of the existence of many evolving entities
that do not belong to the cellular level of biological
organisation. In addition to such accommodating roles,
however, the PG hypothesis also fulfils other epistemic
roles: it focuses its research on the discovery of new
mechanisms of gene transfer [43] as well as on the discovery of barriers to HGT that have evolved in the history of life; it encourages testing of the extent to which
coalitions of genes or club goods affect evolutionary
dynamics; it provides the theoretical basis for new
experimental results and new predictions (such as the
role of genomic connectivity [58]) etc. In all these senses
the PG hypothesis is clearly more than a metaphor.
Author’s response: Yes, we have been trying to infer
that it is more than a metaphor - it describes something
causal.
Unification

The aim of the ToL hypothesis is to unify: the pattern of
evolution is assumed to be the same for all organisms,
multi-cellular eukaryotes and prokaryotes alike. Nonetheless, it turns out that the ToL creates a big divide:
there is a fracture between normal organisms (those for
which trees can be constructed) and “freaks” (for which
we cannot). The PG hypothesis attempts to provide a
picture of biological evolution that does not treat microbial phylogenetics as a special case, and that tries to
finally re-unify microbial freaks and eukaryotes. But I
wonder whether the PG hypothesis runs the risk of
creating a converse divide, one where eukaryotes assume
the new role of freaks of nature. The PG hypothesis
rests on the implicit assumption that it will eventually

Page 14 of 17

be discovered that the same interactive and cooperative
dynamics that affect the world of microbes also affect
the world of macrobes. However, what are the theoretical reasons behind this implicit assumption? Why
should we consider the PG hypothesis as general
enough to encompass all genetic resources, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic, given the different systems of
inheritance? Finally, in the eventuality that micro and
macrocosms turn out to be governed by deeply different
processes, what will be the consequences for the old
idea of biology as a unified science of all life?
Author’s response: Obviously, the use of the word
‘freaks’ entails a particular perspective that may not be
held by all. Multicellular organisms engage in hybridization, we have seen Wolbachia genomes with perfect
pieces of their hosts DNA integrated, we see transposons
in multicellular organisms, so for sure nobody is completely excluded from accessing goods - vertical descent
ensures that goods are available. Although the ocean
might be considered to be a pubic good, we don’t all
have to go for a swim. There are many theories for why
multicellular eukaryotes engage less in HGT than single
cell prokaryotes, but labeling one or the other as freaks
seems unnecessary.
Second review by Davide Vecchi

I think the new axiomatic approach of the paper is problematic. In the first place, the two axioms presented by
the authors strike me as not being uncontroversial. The
authors call them in turns “axioms”, “conditions” and
“desiderata”, showing that there might be some confusion about their ontological status. Clearly, axiom 2 was
a recent empirical discovery, while axiom 1 has even
deeper problems because, as it is formulated, is eminently ambiguous: what are the “evolving entities"? Why
should we take all of them into consideration? And
what does “highest level evolutionary picture” mean?
These are difficult questions.
Author’s response: We have endeavoured to clear up
some of these issues by stating that we mean all nucleotides that are to be found in a replicating system. The
fact that axiom 2 is a consequence of recent scientific
findings and not older findings does not negate its usefulness as a self-evident fact now.
Davide Vecchi continues

That the axioms are not self-evident can be shown very
simply. It is sufficient to take Mayr’s position into consideration. In a famous exchange with Woese, Mayr [93]
proposed the following argument: evolution is about
phenotypes; prokaryotes show uninteresting phenotypes;
hence evolution is about eukaryotic phenotypes. Here
we have, clearly, a biased conception of prokaryotes as
“freaks” as well as an equally biased (i.e. non pluralistic)

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

interpretation of axiom 1. The point is that, according
to Mayr, the only evolutionarily important entities are
phenotypes. Additionally, clearly not all kinds of evolving entities can be taken into account in order to build
an informative evolutionary picture. For these reasons
my opinion is that Mayr would deny the legitimacy of
axiom 1, as would many other taxonomists. More generally, axiom 1 does not propose a solution to the problem of establishing what the units of evolution are. It is
subject to interpretation, and until the interpretation
favoured by the authors is not universally accepted,
there will be division between accounts of prokaryotic
and eukaryotic evolution. And there will be freaks.
Author’s response: Our interpretation of Mayr’s ideas
are somewhat different. Mayr said that “Evolution is an
affair of phenotypes. It is phenotypes, not genes, that are
the objects (targets) of selection” [93]. Mayr, in advocating that there were just two fundamental kinds of organisms simply said that the phenotypic similarities of
eubacteria and archaebacteria logically placed them into
one category and the phenotypic diversity of the eukaryotes identified them as a different category. In contrast
to what is being asserted here, Mayr said in the same
manuscript “[...] the possession of certain ancestral characters is often the most characteristic feature of a taxon.”
Therefore, we do not believe that Mayr found archaebacterial and eubacterial phenotypes uninteresting - in fact
he found their relative lack of phenotypic diversity to be
very interesting indeed. So, we will have to differ on this
issue and re-state that we feel that both axioms are
indeed uncontroversial.
Sharing resources

My last comment concerns the way in which communal
goods are conceptualised by the authors. They only
refer, understandably, to genetic goods, without considering the eventuality that a variety of gene products or
other higher-level (e.g. phenotypic) resources could be
exchange material in the microcosm. In fact, DNA
resources are not the only types of resources that can be
transmitted and shared. Contemporary theoretical biology also emphasises ecological inheritance, namely the
inheritance of the set of environmental resources that
are needed for the reconstruction of the phenotype. Can
the PG hypothesis be enlarged as to encompass all kinds
of resources (i.e. genetic, phenotypic, ecological and
environmental)?
Author’s response: We feel that the Public Goods
hypothesis emphasizes ecology much more than treethinking does, however we are careful to say that this
current manuscript really does focus on the genetic elements and not on proteins, which have long been viewed
through the lens of goods-thinking.

Page 15 of 17

I am asking this because I believe that even cultural
change can be partially understood by means of the
conceptual tools introduced in this paper. In fact, in cultural change cross-lineage borrowing mediated by
mobile elements is very common and some cultural
items are clearly public goods. However, the big difference is that in culture shared resources and mobile elements are not solely genetic.
Put another way, the primacy of genes as the sole
resource of evolutionary interest is criticised in many
parts of “eukaryotic biology” (e.g. developmental biology). The same idea requires profound extensions in
order to make sense of cultural evolution. Nonetheless,
genetic resources seem to be the sole focus in this
paper, and possibly in microbiology. I wonder what the
authors think about the prospects of unifying the study
of evolutionary processes under a framework that takes
into account all kinds of material resources exchanged
and shared between organisms and lineages.
Author’s response: We have tried in this most recent
draft of the manuscript to emphasise that genes do not
exist in isolation from their genetic code, the functions of
the proteins they produce or the content of the rest of the
genome in which they find themselves. We are not sure if
there is a unifying theory of all goods thinking, but it is
certainly an avenue worth pursuing.
Acknowledgements
JMcI, DP and MOC were funded by Science Foundation Ireland Research
Frontiers Programme Grants. We would like to thank all five reviewers of this
manuscript. Their comments have contributed significantly towards making
this a better paper. We would like to thank Maureen O’Malley and John
Dupré for organising the “Questioning the Tree of Life” network, which has
helped enormously in formulating many of the ideas in this manuscript.
JMcI and EB received funding from the Leverhulme Trust as part of this
network and for this we are very grateful.
Author details
1
Molecular Evolution and Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Biology,
National University of Ireland Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland. 2Uniteé Mixte
de Recherche, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 7138,
Systeématique, Adaptation, Evolution, Universiteé Pierre et Marie Curie,
75005 Paris, France. 3Bioinformatics and Molecular Evolution Group, School
of Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland.
Authors’ contributions
JMcI conceived the work and drafted the first version of the manuscript. DP,
EB and MOC contributed ideas, corrections and substantial amounts of text
to subsequent drafts. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 17 April 2011 Accepted: 23 August 2011
Published: 23 August 2011
References
1. Ragan MA: Trees and networks before and after Darwin. Biol Direct 2009,
4:43, discussion 43.
2. Mayr E: Systematics and the origin of species from the viewpoint of a
zoologist. 1 edition. Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press; 1963.

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.
24.

25.

26.
27.

28.
29.

30.
31.
32.
33.

Stanier RY, Van Niel CB: The Main Outlines of Bacterial Classification. J
Bacteriol 1941, 42:437-466.
Lederberg J, Tatum EL: Gene recombination in Escherichia coli. Nature
1946, 158:558.
McInerney JO, Cotton JA, Pisani D: The prokaryotic tree of life: past,
present... and future? Trends Ecol Evol 2008, 23:276-281.
Woese CR: Bacterial evolution. Microbiol Rev 1987, 51:221-271.
Woese CR, Fox GE: Phylogenetic structure of the prokaryotic domain: the
primary kingdoms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977, 74:5088-5090.
Maidak BL, Larsen N, McCaughey MJ, Overbeek R, Olsen GJ, Fogel K,
Blandy J, Woese CR: The Ribosomal Database Project. Nucleic Acids Res
1994, 22:3485-3487.
Olsen GJ, Woese CR, Overbeek R: The winds of (evolutionary) change:
breathing new life into microbiology. J Bacteriol 1994, 176:1-6.
Aziz RK, Breitbart M, Edwards RA: Transposases are the most abundant,
most ubiquitous genes in nature. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:4207-4217.
Hilario E, Gogarten JP: Horizontal transfer of ATPase genes–the tree of
life becomes a net of life. Biosystems 1993, 31:111-119.
Martin W, Brinkmann H, Savonna C, Cerff R: Evidence for a chimeric nature
of nuclear genomes: eubacterial origin of eukaryotic glyceraldehyde-3phosphate dehydrogenase genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993,
90:8692-8696.
Lawrence JG, Ochman H: Molecular archaeology of the Escherichia coli
genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:9413-9417.
Doolittle WF: Phylogenetic classification and the universal tree. Science
1999, 284:2124-2129.
Doolittle WF: Lateral genomics. Trends Cell Biol 1999, 9:M5-8.
Martin W: Mosaic bacterial chromosomes: a challenge en route to a tree
of genomes. Bioessays 1999, 21:99-104.
Beiko RG, Harlow TJ, Ragan MA: Highways of gene sharing in prokaryotes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:14332-14337.
Kunin V, Goldovsky L, Darzentas N, Ouzounis CA: The net of life:
reconstructing the microbial phylogenetic network. Genome Res 2005,
15:954-959.
Nakamura Y, Itoh T, Matsuda H, Gojobori T: Biased biological functions of
horizontally transferred genes in prokaryotic genomes. Nat Genet 2004,
36:760-766.
Dagan T, Martin W: Getting a better picture of microbial evolution en
route to a network of genomes. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009,
364:2187-2196.
Halary S, Leigh JW, Cheaib B, Lopez P, Bapteste E: Network analyses
structure genetic diversity in independent genetic worlds. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2010, 107:127-132.
Kurland CG, Canback B, Berg OG: Horizontal gene transfer: a critical view.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:9658-9662.
Daubin V, Moran NA, Ochman H: Phylogenetics and the cohesion of
bacterial genomes. Science 2003, 301:829-832.
Creevey CJ, Fitzpatrick DA, Philip GK, Kinsella RJ, O’Connell MJ, Pentony MM,
Travers SA, Wilkinson M, McInerney JO: Does a tree-like phylogeny only
exist at the tips in the prokaryotes? Proc Biol Sci 2004, 271:2551-2558.
Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.
Dagan T, Martin W: The tree of one percent. Genome Biol 2006, 7:118.
McCann A, Cotton JA, McInerney JO: The tree of genomes: an empirical
comparison of genome-phylogeny reconstruction methods. BMC Evol Biol
2008, 8:312.
Ge F, Wang LS, Kim J: The cobweb of life revealed by genome-scale
estimates of horizontal gene transfer. PLoS Biol 2005, 3:e316.
Lake JA, Rivera MC: Deriving the genomic tree of life in the presence of
horizontal gene transfer: conditioned reconstruction. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21:681-690.
Koonin EV, Wolf YI, Puigbo P: The phylogenetic forest and the quest for
the elusive tree of life. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 2009, 74:205-213.
Puigbo P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Search for a ‘Tree of Life’ in the thicket of
the phylogenetic forest. J Biol 2009, 8:59.
Ding G, Yu Z, Zhao J, Wang Z, Li Y, Xing X, Wang C, Liu L: Tree of life
based on genome context networks. PLoS One 2008, 3:e3357.
Schliep K, Lopez P, Lapointe FJ, Bapteste E: Harvesting evolutionary signals
in a forest of prokaryotic gene trees. Mol Biol Evol 2011, 28:1393-1405.

Page 16 of 17

34. Touchon M, Hoede C, Tenaillon O, Barbe V, Baeriswyl S, Bidet P, Bingen E,
Bonacorsi S, Bouchier C, Bouvet O, et al: Organised genome dynamics in
the Escherichia coli species results in highly diverse adaptive paths. PLoS
Genet 2009, 5:e1000344.
35. Lukjancenko O, Wassenaar TM, Ussery DW: Comparison of 61 sequenced
Escherichia coli genomes. Microb Ecol 2010, 60:708-720.
36. Beauregard-Racine J, Bicep C, Schliep K, Lopez P, Lapointe FJ, Bapteste E: Of
Woods and Webs: Possible alternatives to the tree of life for studying
genomic fluidity in E. coli. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39.
37. Gogarten JP, Townsend JP: Horizontal gene transfer, genome innovation
and evolution. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3:679-687.
38. Doolittle WF, Bapteste E: Pattern pluralism and the Tree of Life
hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:2043-2049.
39. Dagan T, Martin W: Ancestral genome sizes specify the minimum rate of
lateral gene transfer during prokaryote evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104:870-875.
40. Baltimore D: Expression of animal virus genomes. Bacteriol Rev 1971,
35:235-241.
41. Locke J: Second Treatise of Government Cambridge: Hackett Publishing
Company; 1690.
42. Samuelson PA: The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure. The Review of
Economics and Statistics 1954, 36:387-389.
43. Dhingra A, Portis AR Jr, Daniell H: Enhanced translation of a chloroplastexpressed RbcS gene restores small subunit levels and photosynthesis
in nuclear RbcS antisense plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004,
101:6315-6320.
44. Dubey GP, Ben-Yehuda S: Intercellular nanotubes mediate bacterial
communication. Cell 2011, 144:590-600.
45. Wozniak RA, Waldor MK: Integrative and conjugative elements: mosaic
mobile genetic elements enabling dynamic lateral gene flow. Nat Rev
Microbiol 2010, 8:552-563.
46. Zinder ND, Lederberg J: Genetic exchange in Salmonella. J Bacteriol 1952,
64:679-699.
47. Aas FE, Wolfgang M, Frye S, Dunham S, Lovold C, Koomey M: Competence
for natural transformation in Neisseria gonorrhoeae: components of
DNA binding and uptake linked to type IV pilus expression. Mol Microbiol
2002, 46:749-760.
48. Yaron S, Kolling GL, Simon L, Matthews KR: Vesicle-mediated transfer of
virulence genes from Escherichia coli O157:H7 to other enteric bacteria.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2000, 66:4414-4420.
49. Klieve AV, Yokoyama MT, Forster RJ, Ouwerkerk D, Bain PA, Mawhinney EL:
Naturally occurring DNA transfer system associated with membrane
vesicles in cellulolytic Ruminococcus spp. of ruminal origin. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2005, 71:4248-4253.
50. Lang AS, Beatty JT: Genetic analysis of a bacterial genetic exchange
element: the gene transfer agent of Rhodobacter capsulatus. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:859-864.
51. McDaniel LD, Young E, Delaney J, Ruhnau F, Ritchie KB, Paul JH: High
frequency of horizontal gene transfer in the oceans. Science 2010, 330:50.
52. Sorek R, Zhu Y, Creevey CJ, Francino MP, Bork P, Rubin EM: Genome-wide
experimental determination of barriers to horizontal gene transfer.
Science 2007, 318:1449-1452.
53. McInerney JO, Pisani D: Genetics. Paradigm for life. Science 2007,
318:1390-1391.
54. Barrangou R, Fremaux C, Deveau H, Richards M, Boyaval P, Moineau S,
Romero DA, Horvath P: CRISPR provides acquired resistance against
viruses in prokaryotes. Science 2007, 315:1709-1712.
55. Roberts RJ: Restriction endonucleases. CRC Crit Rev Biochem 1976,
4:123-164.
56. Skippington E, Ragan MA: Lateral genetic transfer and the construction of
genetic exchange communities. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2011.
57. Bhattacharjee S, Gopal RD, Sanders GL: Digital music and online sharing:
software piracy 2.0? Communications of the ACM 2003, 46:107-111.
58. Cohen O, Gophna U, Pupko T: The complexity hypothesis revisited:
connectivity rather than function constitutes a barrier to horizontal gene
transfer. Mol Biol Evol 2011, 28:1481-1489.
59. Bapteste E, Bouchard F, Burian RM: Philosophy and evolution: minding
the gap between evolutionary patterns and tree-like patterns. In
Evolutionary genomics: statistical and computational methods Edited by:
Anisimova M 2011.

McInerney et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:41
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/41

60. Lozupone CA, Hamady M, Cantarel BL, Coutinho PM, Henrissat B, Gordon JI,
Knight R: The convergence of carbohydrate active gene repertoires in
human gut microbes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:15076-15081.
61. Dinsdale EA, Edwards RA, Hall D, Angly F, Breitbart M, Brulc JM, Furlan M,
Desnues C, Haynes M, Li L, et al: Functional metagenomic profiling of
nine biomes. Nature 2008, 452:629-632.
62. David LA, Alm EJ: Rapid evolutionary innovation during an Archaean
genetic expansion. Nature 2011, 469:93-96.
63. O’Hara R: Population thinking and tree thinking inf systematics. Zoologica
scripta 1998, 26:323-329.
64. Dunning Hotopp JC, Clark ME, Oliveira DC, Foster JM, Fischer P, Munoz
Torres MC, Giebel JD, Kumar N, Ishmael N, Wang S, et al: Widespread
lateral gene transfer from intracellular bacteria to multicellular
eukaryotes. Science 2007, 317:1753-1756.
65. Nikoh N, Tanaka K, Shibata F, Kondo N, Hizume M, Shimada M, Fukatsu T:
Wolbachia genome integrated in an insect chromosome: evolution and
fate of laterally transferred endosymbiont genes. Genome Res 2008,
18:272-280.
66. Kondrashov FA, Koonin EV, Morgunov IG, Finogenova TV, Kondrashova MN:
Evolution of glyoxylate cycle enzymes in Metazoa: evidence of multiple
horizontal transfer events and pseudogene formation. Biol Direct 2006,
1:31.
67. Starcevic A, Akthar S, Dunlap WC, Shick JM, Hranueli D, Cullum J, Long PF:
Enzymes of the shikimic acid pathway encoded in the genome of a
basal metazoan, Nematostella vectensis, have microbial origins. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:2533-2537.
68. Danchin EG, Rosso MN, Vieira P, de Almeida-Engler J, Coutinho PM,
Henrissat B, Abad P: Multiple lateral gene transfers and duplications have
promoted plant parasitism ability in nematodes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2010, 107:17651-17656.
69. Puigbo P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The tree and net components of prokaryote
evolution. Genome Biol Evol 2010, 2:745-756.
70. Koonin EV, Puigbo P, Wolf YI: Comparison of Phylogenetic Trees and
Search for a Central Trend in the “Forest of Life”. J Comput Biol 2011.
71. Fitzpatrick DA, Creevey CJ, McInerney JO: Genome phylogenies indicate a
meaningful alpha-proteobacterial phylogeny and support a grouping of
the mitochondria with the Rickettsiales. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:74-85.
72. Boucher Y, Bapteste E: Revisiting the concept of lineage in prokaryotes: a
phylogenetic perspective. Bioessays 2009, 31:526-536.
73. Lane N, Martin W: The energetics of genome complexity. Nature 2010,
467:929-934.
74. Rivera MC, Jain R, Moore JE, Lake JA: Genomic evidence for two
functionally distinct gene classes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:6239-6244.
75. Jain R, Rivera MC, Lake JA: Horizontal gene transfer among genomes: the
complexity hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:3801-3806.
76. Leigh JW, Schliep K, Lopez P, Bapteste E: Let Them Fall Where They May:
Congruence Analysis in Massive, Phylogenetically Messy Datasets. Mol
Biol Evol 2011.
77. Kuhn TS: The Structure of Scientific Revolutions Chicago: University of
Chicago Press; 1996.
78. Lawrence JG, Roth JR: Selfish operons: horizontal transfer may drive the
evolution of gene clusters. Genetics 1996, 143:1843-1860.
79. Martin W, Muller M: The hydrogen hypothesis for the first eukaryote.
Nature 1998, 392:37-41.
80. Cotton JA, McInerney JO: Eukaryotic genes of archaebacterial origin are
more important than the more numerous eubacterial genes, irrespective
of function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:17252-17255.
81. Matic I, Taddei F, Radman M: Genetic barriers among bacteria. Trends
Microbiol 1996, 4:69-72.
82. Boyer M, Azza S, Barrassi L, Klose T, Campocasso A, Pagnier I, Fournous G,
Borg A, Robert C, Zhang X, et al: Mimivirus shows dramatic genome
reduction after intraamoebal culture. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011,
108:10296-10301.
83. Kobayashi I: Behavior of restriction-modification systems as selfish
mobile elements and their impact on genome evolution. Nucleic Acids
Res 2001, 29:3742-3756.
84. Koonin EV, Wolf YI: Genomics of bacteria and archaea: the emerging
dynamic view of the prokaryotic world. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:6688-6719.

Page 17 of 17

85. O’Malley MA, Koonin EV: How stands the Tree of Life a century and a half
after The Origin? Biol Direct 2011, 6:32.
86. Pace NR: Time for a change. Nature 2006, 441:289.
87. Lakatos I: The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes.
Philosophical papers 1978, 1.
88. Mallet J: Hybridization as an invasion of the genome. Trends Ecol Evol
2005, 20:229-237.
89. Darwin C: On the origin of species London: John Murray; 1859.
90. Spencer H: Collected writings London: Routledge; 1996.
91. Malthus T: An Essay on the Principle of Population Oxford: Oxford University
Press; 1798.
92. Maynard-Smith J: The Logic of Animal Conflict. Nature 1973, 246:15-18.
93. Mayr E: Two empires or three? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:9720-9723.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-41
Cite this article as: McInerney et al.: The public goods hypothesis for
the evolution of life on Earth. Biology Direct 2011 6:41.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
