<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Site-Specific Mobilization of Vinyl Chloride Respiration Islands by a Mechanism Common in Dehalococcoides</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-287"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Paul J McMurdie"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Site-Specific Mobilization of Vinyl Chloride
Respiration Islands by a Mechanism Common in
Dehalococcoides
Paul J McMurdie1, Laura A Hug2, Elizabeth A Edwards2,3, Susan Holmes4 and Alfred M Spormann1,5*

Abstract
Background: Vinyl chloride is a widespread groundwater pollutant and Group 1 carcinogen. A previous comparative
genomic analysis revealed that the vinyl chloride reductase operon, vcrABC, of Dehalococcoides sp. strain VS is
embedded in a horizontally-acquired genomic island that integrated at the single-copy tmRNA gene, ssrA.
Results: We targeted conserved positions in available genomic islands to amplify and sequence four additional
vcrABC -containing genomic islands from previously-unsequenced vinyl chloride respiring Dehalococcoides
enrichments. We identified a total of 31 ssrA-specific genomic islands from Dehalococcoides genomic data,
accounting for 47 reductive dehalogenase homologous genes and many other non-core genes. Sixteen of these
genomic islands contain a syntenic module of integration-associated genes located adjacent to the predicted site
of integration, and among these islands, eight contain vcrABC as genetic ‘cargo’. These eight vcrABC -containing
genomic islands are syntenic across their ~12 kbp length, but have two phylogenetically discordant segments that
unambiguously differentiate the integration module from the vcrABC cargo. Using available Dehalococcoides
phylogenomic data we estimate that these ssrA-specific genomic islands are at least as old as the Dehalococcoides
group itself, which in turn is much older than human civilization.
Conclusions: The vcrABC -containing genomic islands are a recently-acquired subset of a diverse collection of ssrAspecific mobile elements that are a major contributor to strain-level diversity in Dehalococcoides, and may have
been throughout its evolution. The high similarity between vcrABC sequences is quantitatively consistent with
recent horizontal acquisition driven by ~100 years of industrial pollution with chlorinated ethenes.

Background
Chlorinated ethene congeners (“chloroethenes”) are
among the most frequently detected groundwater contaminants in the United States of America and other
industrialized countries [1]. Chloroethenes are often
incompletely dechlorinated by bacteria in these anoxic
environments, leading to an accumulation of vinyl chloride, a Group 1 human carcinogen [2,3]. Growth-linked
reductive dechlorination of vinyl chloride is critical to
avoid its accumulation and achieve in situ remediation
of chloroethenes [1], but vinyl chloride respiration has
only been observed in certain strains of Dehalococcoides
[4,5]. Dehalococcoides is a genus-level phylogenetic
* Correspondence: spormann@stanford.edu
1
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, California, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

group within the Chlorofiexi phylum [6]. Dehalococcoides are strictly anaerobic bacteria that gain metabolic
energy exclusively via the oxidation of H 2 coupled to
the reduction of organohalide compounds [7-9]. This
catabolic reductive dehalogenation of organohalide compounds (“organohalide respiration”) is catalyzed in
Dehalococcoides by heterodimeric, membrane-bound
enzymes called “reductive dehalogenases” [10]. Reductive dehalogenases typically contain corrinoid and ironsulfur clusters as cofactors, and have varied substrate
ranges that do not necessarily overlap [10,11].
The catalytic subunit of reductive dehalogenases is
encoded in Dehalococcoides by reductive dehalogenase
homologous genes (rdhA). Dehalococcoides possess as
many as 36 rdhA per genome [9], but few of the encoded
enzymes, RdhA, have been purified and characterized in
vitro. Many rdhA are co-expressed [12-16], further

© 2011 McMurdie et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

confounding a determination of the RdhA responsible for
catalysis of an observed reductive dehalogenation activity.
The only reductive dehalogenase shown to catabolically
reduce vinyl chloride, VcrA, was purified from a highlyenriched vinyl chloride respiring culture dominated by
Dehalococcoides strain VS [5]. The operon encoding VcrA,
vcrABC, was identified by reverse genetics, and highlysimilar vcrA were detected in other vinyl chloride respiring
Dehalococcoides cultures [5,17,18]. Primers targeting vcrA
are now commonly used as an indicator of attenuation
potential at vinyl chloride contaminated sites ([5], U.S.
Patent Application 20090176210). A putative VC reductase operon, bvcAB, shares only limited similarity with
vcrAB and is present in a different VC respiring Dehalococcoides strain, BAV1, which does not contain vcrABC
[19].
Although Dehalococcoides are the only known microorganisms capable of vinyl chloride respiration, both vcrA
and bvcA appear to be horizontally acquired [9]. Both
vcrA and bvcA have a highly unusual, low %(G+C) codon
bias that appears maladapted to Dehalococcoides genomes [20], and both are found within a low %(G+C)
“genomic island” (GI) [21] that interrupts local gene synteny relative to other Dehalococcoides strains. In strain
VS, this vcrABC -containing genomic island (vcr-GI)
integrated at the ssrA locus, and as a result is flanked by
ssrA and a 20 bp direct repeat of the ssrA 3’ end [9]. ssrA
is a single-copy gene essential in bacteria [22] encoding
transfer messenger RNA (tmRNA), which plays a key
role in maintaining the fidelity of protein synthesis [23].
Specific integration of genetic elements at ssrA is also
common across many bacterial phyla, and often results
in a direct repeat at the genomic island boundary opposite the site of integration [24]. In addition to the vcr-GI,
over a dozen ssrA direct repeats were previously detected
downstream of ssrA in Dehalococcoides, collocated with
many strain-specific rdhA in a region of high genomic
variability between Dehalococcoides strains [9]. To
further understand the acquisition and dissemination of
vcrABC, as well as the impact of ssrA-specific integration
on Dehalococcoides genome dynamics, we determined
the conserved features of Dehalococcoides ssrA-specific
genomic islands (ssrA-GIs) from all publicly available
genomes and metagenomes of Dehalococcoides cultures,
including the recently-sequenced Dehalococcoides strain
GT [17] and the metagenome sequences of the vinyl
chloride respiring Dehalococcoides enrichment cultures
KB-1 [25,26] and ANAS [27]. We also amplified and
sequenced ssrA-GIs from the vinyl chloride respiring
Dehalococcoides enrichment cultures Evanite (EV) [28],
PM [28], WBC-2 [29], and WL [30] using primers
designed to target either vcr-GIs specifically, or conserved features present in all available Dehalococcoides
ssrA-GIs. Previous studies have implicated a subset of

Page 2 of 15

rdhAB with horizontal gene acquisition, but evidence for
the method of integration, mobilization, replication, and
transfer is limited [31,32]. We describe here a family of
putative ssrA-specific integrative and mobilizable elements [33] that share a conserved ‘integration module’
while also encoding a broad variety of putative and
unknown functions, including reductive dehalogenation.
The key conserved integrase encoded on these elements
is a homolog of the CcrB family of site-specific serine
recombinases that specifically integrate/excise the methicillin-resistance element “SCCmec” in Staphylococcus
aureus [34]. Using a robust whole-genome phylogeny
and several estimates for mutation rate, we estimate the
age of the most recent common ancestor of contemporary Dehalococcoides strains, as well as the age of divergence for Dehalococcoides ssrA-GI integration module
components.

Results
ssrA Genomic Islands in Dehalococcoides

The region downstream of ssrA in available Dehalococcoides (meta)genome sequences contains multiple tandem
genomic islands that are primarily distinguished by their
boundaries - ssrA or its 20 bp direct repeat - as well as disruption to local gene synteny and in many cases the presence of a characteristic cluster of integration-associated
genes adjacent to the left edge (Figure 1). All direct repeats
are located within 100 kbp downstream of ssrA, with varying numbers per strain and no duplicate genomic islands
within any strain. These findings are consistent with ssrAspecific integration described for other bacteria [21,24], as
well as a class of integrating and mobilizing elements that
encode their own specific integration but do not replicate
independently from the chromosome nor encode for conjugation [33]. From available Dehalococcoides genomic
data (including this study) we have detected a total of 31
ssrA-GIs containing 47 rdhA, 75 hypothetical protein
encoding genes, 2 putative complete CRISPR modules and
arrays [35], as well as other genes; most of which are not
believed to encode a core function and are present in only
a subset of Dehalococcoides strains.
Sixteen of the identified Dehalococcoides ssrA-GIs
contain an integration module comprised of 6 syntenic
protein encoding genes oriented on the reverse strand
and located adjacent to attL (in this context, attL and
attR are the ssrA direct repeat sequence at the left or
right boundary, respectively; Figure 1A).
Beginning from attL, the integration module contains
genes that appear to encode (1) a 540 residue serine
recombinase family putative site-specific integrase
we call Dehalococcoides ssrA-specific integrase, DsiB
(Figure 2); (2) a smaller (200aa) PinR (COG1961)
homolog that also contains a serine recombinase catalytic domain (cd00338), DsiA; (3) a small (150aa) RecF

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 General structure of ssrA genomic islands (ssrA-GIs). (A) Generalized structure of Dehalococcoides ssrA-GIs, oriented according to
published Dehalococcoides complete genomes. Labels below genes in the integration module indicate the most informative homolog of the
protein encoding gene. (B) Alignment of the 84 bp region surrounding the 3’ end of ssrA or its direct repeat (DR) fragments (shaded black in
the consensus) from 40 such positions in available Dehalococcoides genomes. Each sequence is labeled by its strain or enrichment name,
underscore, and the order in which it occurs, beginning with the 3’ end of ssrA. Positions in the alignment that disagree with the 75%
consensus sequence are shaded in darker grey. The alignment is ordered such that sequences corresponding to Dehalococcoides ssrA ("_01”) are
the top 10 sequences, emphasizing a conserved position of disagreement between ssrA sequences and the direct repeat regions, position 15 in
the alignment, 333 in ssrA. The two bases flanking the inferred integration site are marked with a hash. (C) To-scale genomic maps of region
downstream of Dehalococcoides ssrA in (meta)genomic datasets. Orientation of genes is indicated with arrows. Key genes are shaded according
to the provided legend.

homolog likely involved in DNA recombination or
repair [36], (4) a 210 residue protein with ParBc
domain, possibly catalyzing single-stranded DNA cleavage, circular element nicking, element segregation
([37,38], PF02195); (5) a Mom [39] homolog (270 aa),
predicted to play a role in restriction endonuclease
resistance via methylation [40,41]; and (6) a large (700
aa) protein containing a DNA-directed RNA polymerase domain in the first 85 residues (GO:0003899).
These integration modules also contain a 76 bp conserved tRNA-like locus embedded within the first 150
bp of the fifth protein encoding gene, approximately
4400 bp from attL (Figure 1A). It is usually labeled as

‘pseudo-tRNA’ by automated annotation pipelines, but
alignment-based RNA folding analysis predicts a complete tRNA-Gly-like structure (Additional file 1 Figure
S1). The elevated sequence conservation at its 3’ end
provides an effective target for primers, as do the
regions surrounding ssrA direct repeats and a site of
locally high nucleotide conservation within dsiB
(Figures 1B, Additional file 1 Figure S2).
Alignment of the ~85 bp surrounding each of the 28 ssrA
direct repeats reveals additional nucleotide conservation
and allows identification of the site of insertion in ssrA
(Figure 1B). A 15 bp motif (TTCAGRSMGMRKCCA)
occurs adjacent upstream of the direct repeat and does not

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

0.2

Dehalococcoides

Figure 2 Phylogeny of ssrA-GI integrase, DsiB. (A) Grey-scale
similarity ‘barcode’ representation (black is identical sites) of pairwise
global alignment (Needleman-Wunsch, free end-gaps) between a
representative DsiB [DhcVS_1282, Genbank: ACZ62382], and CcrB1
of Staphylococcus aureus [Genbank: ADC39978]. Key domains of
CcrB1 are annotated below the alignment, and traced in black if
they are also detected in DhcVS_1282 by the conserved domain
database search [84] incorporated in PSI-BLAST [85]. (B) Maximum
Likelihood tree of the putative integrases encoded on
Dehalococcoides ssrA-GIs, DsiB, as well as key integrases involved in
mobility of SCCmec in Staphylococcus aureus [64] (unless otherwise
noted). The clade of integrase sequences found on vcr-GIs are
shaded in blue. Nodes with 100% bootstrap support are bolded
with a filled circle. CisA of Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824 is
rooted as an outgroup, as in [86]. The following abbreviations are
used to label CcrA, CcrB, or CcrC from bacteria other than S. aureus:
‘Lys spha’ - Lysinibacillus sphaericus C3-41; ‘Clost perf’ - Clostridium
perfringens C str. JGS1495; ‘Macca’ - Macrococcus caseolyticus [86].

align well with the corresponding positions in Dehalococcoides ssrA (318-333), indicating that insertion likely occurs
between 333 and 334 in ssrA. This location corresponds to
the middle of the T-loop of the encoded tmRNA, between
the canonical insertion positions called ‘Sublocations II and
III’ [24] (Figure 1B).
Specific features of vcr-GIs

vcr-GIs are a distinct subset of Dehalococcoides ssrA-specific genomic islands, present in two Dehalococcoides
genomes (VS [GenBank:CP001827], GT [GenBank:
NC_013890]) and two metagenomes (KB-1 [JGI:4083612],
ANAS [JGI:4085297]). Using primers that target conserved

Page 4 of 15

features of all ssrA-GIs or specific features of vcrABC, we
amplified and sequenced 4 additional vcr-GIs from independently derived vinyl chloride respiring Dehalococcoides
enrichment cultures (WBC-2, PM, EV, WL [GenBank:
JN034252-JN034255] see Methods). In all instances the
vcr-GI is located immediately adjacent to ssrA, except
strain GT where it is the second genomic island downstream of ssrA. Because ssrA is an essential single-copy
gene encoding a structural RNA [42], its sequence provides a coarse phylogenetic identity of the chromosome
from which it was amplified [43]. This allowed confirmation that the vcr-GIs acquired via metagenomic and
targeted sequencing are Dehalococcoides chromosomal
segments, even though the source genomic DNA
was from a mixed culture (Figure 3, Additional file 1
Figure S3).
These vcr-GIs contain integration and cargo (vcrABC )
modules with discordant evolutionary histories. The
boundary between integration module and vcrABC is delineated by an unambiguous difference in nucleotide identity, 75.0 and 99.4%, respectively (Figure 3). This boundary
reveals that vcr-GI integration modules contain a seventh
protein encoding gene oriented in the opposite (forward)
direction encoding a rubredoxin domain protein, in
addition to the 6 integration module genes described
previously (Figure 3). These integration modules (9164 11361 bp) are related as three distinct branches with
nearly-identical leaves (masking a ~2200 bp deletion in
PM, EV), grouped in a topology that is discordant with
the corresponding tree of the 3784 bp vcrABC cargo
(Figure 3). Relatedness of vcrABC -cargo sequences was
estimated based on the 44 variant positions in their alignment, appearing mostly (66%) in the form of substitutions
in the leader sequence of vcrA [5] (Figure 3). Ka/Ks ratios
for the vcrA leader sequence (first 129 bp) ranged between
approximately 0.05 and 0.2 for different pairwise combinations [44] and phylogenetic nodes [45], suggesting this
region is under purifying selection. By contrast, the Ka/Ks
ratio for the remainder of vcrA was incalculable because
all 15 variant positions (out of 1431 bp) were non-synonymous substitutions, suggesting recent positive selection
on the mature VcrA enzyme. This latter conclusion must
be tempered by the limited information available in just 15
variant sites, the complete lack of indels detected in any
vcrA (suggesting some purifying selection in the leader
sequence), as well as the clear influences of recent horizontal gene transfer and recombination on these vcr-GIs.
For example, vcrC is identical across all strains, within a
1650 bp region of perfect identity.
Age of Dehalococcoides

A core-gene phylogenetic tree was constructed to support
age estimates based on evolutionary models. The coregene tree was built from 432 core orthologous protein

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

Page 5 of 15

Figure 3 Organization, alignment, and phylogenetic comparison of 8 vinyl chloride reductase genomic islands (vcr-GIs). (A) To scale
summary plot (0 - 100% ID. 14 bp window) of a multiple alignment of all 8 vcr-GIs. Horizontal axis numbers indicate the distance downstream
of ssrA, in nucleotides. Bar heights are shaded darker grey when their value is 100%. Position and orientation of genes are annotated above the
plot, shaded according to Figure 1. Regions of categorically different similarity correspond to the integration and vcrABC cargo modules, with
region-wide average % IDs of 75.0 and 99.4, respectively. (B) Enlarged view of the multiple alignment at key positions. (Left) The presumed
boundary between integration and cargo modules. (Right) The region of atypically high substitutions occurring in the leader sequence of vcrA.
Identical sequence is shaded light-grey, nucleotides that disagree with the consensus are indicated with tick marks shaded red, green, yellow or
blue representing nucleotides A, T, G, C, respectively. (C) Phylogenetic discontinuity between integration modules (left) and their attached vcrABC
cargo (right), represented by separately calculated Maximum Likelihood trees. Middle cartoon summarizes the major phylogenetic separations of
the trees, with curves connecting modules if one of the 8 vcr-GIs contains the corresponding combination of module types. vcr-GIs sequences
are from Dehalococcoides strain VS [GenBank:CP001827], strain GT [GenBank:NC_013890]) and two metagenomes (KB-1 [JGI:4083612], ANAS
[JGI:4085297]), as well as targeted sequencing (this study) from the vinyl chloride-respiring Dehalococcoides enrichment cultures WBC-2, PM, EV,
and WL [GenBank:JN034252-JN034255].

encoding genes shared between available Dehalococcoides
(meta)genomes and Dehalogenimonas lykanthroporepellens BL-DC-9, a Chlorofiexi strain that is a phylogenetic
outgroup to Dehalococcoides and its closest completelysequenced relative [46]. Age estimates depend heavily on
the assumed rate of mutation. We iterated our calculations
on multiple published mutation rates (see Methods), as
well as an empirical observation for mutation rate derived
from the known divergence time (16 years, S. Zinder, pers.
comm.) between the isolation of Dehalococcoides ethenogenes strain 195 [6] and the generation of a metagenome
of its parent culture, DONNA2 (R. E. Richardson, pers.
comm.). The latter empirical rate is substantially faster
than the published values of faster-growing microbes
(Additional file 4 Table S1), possibly because it includes
mutations that already existed between strain variants

within the DONNA2 culture prior to isolation of strain
195. Although we expect a long-term average mutation
rate in the natural environment to be slower, and hence
ages based on this rate to be an underestimate, it remains
useful as a conservative bound on the ‘recentness’ of the
events in question. Similarly, we used a range of growth
rates to estimate the age of Dehalococcoides. For a recent
bound we used the fastest reported Dehalococcoides doubling time (0.8 days [6]), as well as a range of slower
reported growth rates from anaerobic environmental systems for more realistic estimates (11-14 days [47-49]). The
corresponding estimates and lower (recent) bounds are
presented in Table 1.
In relative terms, the divergence of Dehalococcoides and
Dehalogenimonas are comparable to the predicted most
recent common ancestor (MRCA) of available integration

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

Page 6 of 15

Table 1 Divergence Time Estimates Under Different Rates of Evolution
Divergence of interest

Tree
Calculation
Method

Divergence time estimates from different proposed rates

Universal bacterial rate
in nature
Dehalogenimonas/Dehalococcoides MRCA Splitstree

Empirical E. coli rates
in culture

DONNA2/
16S clock
strain 195
divergence

5

(1.9/28/33/34)

0.9

(0.4/5.3/6.2/6.3)

0.5

ML

3

(1.2/18/21/21)

0.5

(0.2/3.2/3.8/3.9)

0.3

Splitstree

0.3

(0.14/2/2.4/2.4)

0.06

(0.03/0.37/0.44/0.44)

0.04

ssrA-GI integration modules MRCA

ML
ML

0.4
3

(0.17/2.5/3/3)
(1.1/16/19/19)

0.08
0.5

(0.03/0.47/0.55/0.56)
(0.2/3/3.5/3.6)

0.04
0.2

integration modules MRCA, vcr-GIs only

ML

1

(0.4/5.5/6.5/6.6)

0.2

(0.07/1/1.2/1.2)

0.08

vcrAB MRCA

ML

0.05 (0.02/0.27/0.31/0.32)

vcrAB, leader masked

ML

0.01 (0.004/0.057/0.067/0.068) 0.002 (0.001/0.010/0.012/0.013) 0.0009

Dehalococcoides MRCA

0.008 (0.03/0.47/0.55/0.56)

200-600
30-60

0.004

Reported age estimates (left, no parenthesis) are based on the rate of evolution listed in the column header as well as the average Dehalococcoides doubling
time from published values (2 days). All estimates are reported in units of 1 million years. Age estimates of the Dehalococcoides clade from the Splitstree
consensus network are based on branch lengths of strains to the common network node. ‘16S clock’ is based on 1-2% 16S rRNA gene divergence per 50 million
years [83]. Values in parenthesis are results from different doubling time estimates: 0.8 days - the fastest reported doubling time for Dehalococcoides [6]; 11.71
days - anaerobic benthic sediment community doubling time [49]; 13.76 days - bacterial doubling time in anaerobic seawater [48]; 14 days - approximate
doubling time of the strictly anaerobic annamox bacteria [47]. For the secondary calculations of age estimates, an extra significant digit has been reported to
allow distinguishing of estimates.

modules, approximately an order of magnitude earlier
than the MRCA of Dehalococcoides strains. The MRCA
of vcr-GI integration modules also significantly precedes
the divergence of contemporary Dehalococcoides strains.
In contrast, the high similarity among vcrABC sequences
results in an estimated age that is at least an order
of magnitude younger than Dehalococcoides speciation
(Figure 4, Table 1).

Discussion
Age and specific features of vcrABC acquisition

Nucleotide similarity is significantly higher between
vcrABC cargo modules than can be expected if it was
an orthologous locus present in the Dehalococcoides
common ancestor (Figures 3, 4). In all cases vcrABC is
located within a syntenic putatively-mobile element, vcrGI, that is part of a broader class of ssrA-specific mobile
elements that appear to be common among Dehalococcoides. In all vcrABC -containing strains except GT, the
vcr-GI is located adjacent to the primary site of integration, ssrA, structural evidence that vcr-GIs are among
the most recently integrated of the available Dehalococcoides ssrA-GIs. Within phylogenetic branches, integration modules are perfectly identical, except for a large
identical deletion in the EV and PM vcr-GIs. The significantly unusual nucleotide signature of vcr-GIs [9,20], as
well as the discordance between the vcrA tree and the
corresponding Dehalococcoides strain phylogeny, indicate that vcrABC has not been stably maintained in
Dehalococcoides genomes since their divergence. Taken
together, these observations suggest recent horizontal
acquisition and dissemination of vcrABC across all
Dehalococcoides ecotypes by way of a ssrA-specific

mobile element with conserved attachment site and
integration module.
Because anthropogenic release of chloroethenes into
the environment is a relatively recent phenomenon
(~100 years [3]), we are particularly interested in the
recent bounds for estimates of the age of the MRCA of

(0.013 - 1.69 MY)

Figure 4 Date Estimates of Key Events in Dehalococcoides
Evolution. Maximum likelihood phylogeny of 432 ‘core’ orthologs.
Timing of key evolutionary events are mapped onto the tree. The
horizontal line below the tree represents the divergence time to the
Dehalococcoides (Dhc) and Dehalogenimonas (Dehly) MRCA, while
vertical hash marks indicate the relative divergence times of
Dehalococcoides ssrA genomic island (GI) components. These include
Dehalococcoides ssrA integration modules, vcrABC-attached
integration modules, and vcrAB. Relative divergence times are based
on the estimated age of the MRCA of Dehalococcoides and
Dehalogenimonas (set to 1). The scale bar represents 5% of the total
divergence time. Absolute time scales are from published mutation
rate estimates and rate estimates based on the Dehalococcoides
strains DONNA2/strain 195 divergence. Black points on the tree are
nodes with 100% bootstrap support.

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

these vcrABC sequences as a proxy for their horizontal
acquisition by Dehalococcoides. Using our highest estimated rates of mutation and chromosomal replication,
the divergence of these vcrABC sequences appears to
have occurred 4000 years ago. This value is in flated by
the inexplicably high variation within the leader sequence
of vcrA. If we remove the vcrA leader sequence from the
calculation, the age of divergence decreases to 900 years.
However, there is clear signal for positive selection in the
remaining vcrAB sequence alignment: all 16 variant positions (15 in vcrA and 1 in vcrB) are predicted to result in
amino acid substitutions. If positively selected, these
mutations may have accumulated faster than the background rates assumed in our molecular dating calculations. Because the relative increase in substitution rate is
unclear and the total information represented by just 16
variant positions is low, we cannot confidently distinguish the divergence of these vcrABC from the first
industrial production of chloroethenes. By contrast, our
most conservative estimate for the MRCA of contemporary Dehalococcoides strains is 40,000 years ago (ranging
as high as 3 Mya, Table 1), long before industrial civilization had a chance to influence the evolution of Dehalococcoides and their streamlined genomes specialized for
organohalide respiration.
It is important to note that these molecular dating estimates use the available vcrABC sequences to predict the
first horizontal acquisition of vcrABC by Dehalococcoides.
This analysis is not meant to predict the age of genesis of
the first vinyl chloride reductase. We did not detect partial homology with other rdhA that would suggest vcrA is
a chimera resulting from a recent homologous recombination event. Moreover, the existence of an alternate
vinyl chloride reductase from strain BAV1, BvcA [19],
that shares deeply branching ancestry with VcrA on a
tree of available RdhA [9], suggests that vinyl chloride
reductases have existed for a considerable period of time,
just not within strains of Dehalococcoides for which
sequence data is currently available. In fact, naturally
occurring vinyl chloride has been detected in soils [50],
providing a plausible source of selective pressure to
explain the existence of vinyl chloride reductases in nature prior to human pollution. However, we have not
identified any candidate lineages as the possible progenitor of vinyl chloride reductases, and we have no way of
knowing whether the primary substrate for the ancestral
VcrA or BvcA was consistently vinyl chloride, leaving
their ancestral history unclear.
The phylogenetic discord between integration modules
and their attached vcrABC indicates that homologous
recombination - or perhaps a more directed form of ‘module swapping’ - has recently occurred between vcr-GIs
(Figure 3). This additional inter-element recombination
may be independent of ssrA-specific integration, but it

Page 7 of 15

would still require horizontal transfer so that 2 or more
vcr-GIs are collocated within the same cell. Multiple vcrGI variants have not been detected in the same complete
genome. However, we did detect a low-coverage variant in
the KB-1 metagenome assembly with 3 corroborating
reads that perfectly match a different vcr-GI integration
module found in VS, WL, GT, and WBC-2 cultures, providing preliminary evidence of the physical collocation of
two vcr-GIs within the KB-1 culture (Additional file 5
Figure S4).
ssrA-GIs appear to be integrative and mobilizable
elements

A subset of Dehalococcoides rdhAB were previously
implicated in horizontal transfer [31,32], including the
trichloroethene reductase gene, tceAB [32]. Although the
selective conditions in chloroethene-contaminated environments favors maintenance of tceAB and vcrABC, the
genes implicated in tceAB transfer [32] share no detectable homology with the ssrA-specific system described in
detail here. We hypothesize that these Dehalococcoides
ssrA-GIs behave as integrative and mobilizable elements
("IMEs”) because they do not appear to encode conjugation, although they share many other features of the
broadly defined class of integrative and conjugative elements ("ICEs”) [33]. It may be possible that conjugation
is encoded by a surprisingly minimal gene set within the
integration modules [33], similar to the small (10.9 kbp)
integrating and conjugating element ‘pSAM2’ of Streptomyces ambofaciens, which requires only a single gene,
traSA, for inter-mycelial (conjugal) transfer [51]. Dehalococcoides core genes do include putative pil genes, the
functions of which are unclear but may play a role in
conjugation. Some strains of Dehalococcoides contain
unambiguous prophages, providing an alternative
hypothesis for the mechanism of ssrA-GI transfer, via
illegitimate packaging of the excised ssrA-GI into a phage
capsule. The length of Dehalococcoides ssrA-GIs is within
the range of typical phage genomes. However, evidence
for a complete prophage is not as ubiquitous among
Dehalococcoides as the presence of ssrA-GIs, and there
have been no descriptions to date of Dehalococcoides
phage that also encode an rdhA, leaving the influence of
phage on rdhA evolution unclear. Based on currently
available evidence, we hypothesize that Dehalococcoides
ssrA-GIs are mobilizable but not conjugating elements
that sometimes mobilize adjacent tandem islands but in
all cases rely on a host- or phage-encoded system for
cell-cell transfer of a transient, presumably circular,
intermediate.
Dehalococcoides also contains comEA, and it is
unknown if Dehalococcoides is transiently competent for
uptake of exogenous DNA. However, transfer via stochastic competence is an unsatisfying explanation, mainly

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

because Dehalococcoides ssrA-GIs appear to lack genes
encoding independent replication, and stable non-phage
extrachromosomal elements have not been observed in
Dehalococcoides [7-9].
Occasionally integrating and conjugating elements do
have replicative forms [33], as in the case of rolling circle
replication of pSAM2 in the donor cell [52]. Maphosa et
al. recently described a field site in which there were 1 to
2 orders of magnitude more vcrA copies detected than
copies of tceA, bvcA, or Dehalococcoides 16S rRNA genes
[53]. vcrA was also more abundant than Dehalococcoides
16S rRNA genes in a dechlorinating bioreactor inoculated from the site [53], suggesting either (1) there exists
a vcr-IME that can replicate independently or has integrated within an element that can replicate independently, or (2) they detected a non-Dehalococcoides
population that also possesses vcrA, coexisting with a
Dehalococcoides population.
It is important to note that, while a conspicuous and
common feature, not all Dehalococcoides ssrA-GIs contain
an integration module. We identified 15 ssrA-GIs without
integration modules, containing a total of 38 rdhA as well
as other genes. These might be ‘cis-mobilizable elements’
that encode neither integration nor transfer, but retain
functional attL/attR sites [33] and are occasionally or constitutively mobilized with adjacent genomic islands
through a process known as accretion [54]. In some cases
these tandem ssrA-GIs may have been previously mobile
but are now fixed in the chromosome. For example, there
is a region immediately downstream of the direct repeats
furthest from ssrA that is similarly dense in rdhA while
also syntenic across Dehalococcoides strains, phylogenetically coherent with whole genome estimates, and devoid
of ssrA-GI signatures (Additional file 6 Figure S5); suggesting this region was present in the MRCA of available
Dehalococcoides [9]. Some or all of this region may have
been acquired originally as an ssrA-GI, but deletion and
amelioration has erased evidence of horizontal gene
transfer.
Likely Roles within ssrA-GI Integration Modules

The first identified Dehalococcoides ssrA-specific integrase gene (dsiB) (DhcVS_1292) was sequenced following
the original identification and characterization of VcrA,
and noted for its proximity to vcrA on the chromosome
[5]. It is now clear that DhcVS_1292 is part of an integration module in an adjacent downstream ssrA-GI (GI 02
in VS, Figure 1), one of 16 dsiB homologs detected in
Dehalococcoides genome sequences. The closest relative
to dsiB in the public database is present on a fullysequenced metagenomic fosmid from a deep (4000 m)
ocean subsurface sample (EU016565, Figure 2), within an
apparent integration module that also includes homologs
to dsiA, parB, mom, and a putative tRNA embedded in

Page 8 of 15

mom, as well as an unambiguous ssrA-direct repeat at the
homologous attL position embedded in dsiB (Additional
file 7 Figure S6). This is especially intriguing in light of
the recent sequencing of 32 novel rdhA amplified from
various marine subsurface sediments [55], many of which
appear phylogenetically within a major rdhA branch
(Cluster I [9]) that is otherwise populated only by rdhA
from Dehalococcoides or Dehalogenimonas. Given this
indirect evidence and the large diversity of organohalogens detected in marine systems [56], it is tempting to
speculate that Dehalococcoides plays a role in these settings. However, in the absence of direct observation of
Dehalococcoides-like microorganisms in marine (subsurface) settings, this role remains unclear.
A more sensitive database search indicated that DsiB is a
structurally similar homolog of CcrB, containing the serine-recombinase-catalytic domain at the N terminus, as
well as similar motifs along its ~500 residue length (mean
22% ID, Figure 2A). CcrB specifically integrates/excises
the so-called ‘Staphylococcus Cassette Chromosome’ (SCC
[57]) family of mobile elements that are a vector of antimicrobial resistance (among other phenotypes [58,59]), with
major consequences for hospitals and the greater community [60-63]. CcrB was shown to have DNA-binding and
recombination activity for attS of SCC [64], but SCC integration [57] and attB-specific excision both required the
product of a smaller, co-transcribed serine recombinase
gene, ccrA, that does not encode a DNA-binding domain
[64]. Similarly, Dehalococcoides integration modules
encode on a putative operon a second, smaller serine
recombinase, DsiA, that also lacks a detectable DNA-binding motif. Dehalococcoides ssrA-GIs and SCC also share
overlapping size ranges and specifically integrate at a nontRNA, single-copy essential gene. We hypothesize that
integration/excision of Dehalococcoides ssrA-GIs occurs in
a homologous mechanism to SCC, via DsiB in concert
with DsiA, with other integration module elements likely
playing a role in regulation of integrase/excisionase activity
or modification of the excised element to facilitate transfer
or maintenance. Unfortunately, the mode of SCC transfer
among Staphylococcus is unclear [65], and so does not
provide additional clues regarding a likely transfer
mechanism.
Interestingly, dsiB is always found overlapping attL at its
3’ end. A stop codon occurs only upstream of the genomic
island, even if that means overlapping substantially with
an adjacent genomic island or ssrA itself. Complimentary
overlap of ssrA with small open reading frames has been
detected in some bacteria with ambiguous implications
[66]. It seems unlikely in this instance that the 3’ terminal
~70 bp of ssrA also encode a functional region of dsiB on
its complementary strand. Accordingly, alignments of
DsiB are divergent at this portion of their sequence, both
in length and amino acid similarity. The majority of dsiB

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

is upstream of ssrA or its direct repeat, and already comprises the expected length for homologs of ccrB (1600 bp).
In addition to a trivial explanation in which dsiB undergoes low-efficiency translation that is variable at the
C-terminus, it may be that dsiB is only fully functional
when encoded on the circularized element, or alternatively
when encoded on the chromosome downstream of an
adjacent genomic island containing the requisite 3’ gene
fragment. In any case, the overlap of dsiB with attP/attL
leaves the stop codon of dsiB unclear, and may have functional relevance or affect regulation of dsiB.

Conclusions
Structural comparison of new (meta)genomic data, as
well as targeted sequencing from unsequenced vinyl
chloride respiring enrichment cultures, resulted in identification of 8 homologous mobile elements containing the
vinyl chloride reductase operon, vcrABC. These vcr-GIs
are a subset of mobile genetic elements in Dehalococcoides that specifically integrate at the single-copy gene,
ssrA. A detailed comparison of these ssrA-GIs allowed
identification of the precise position of insertion, the
direct repeat created by the insertion event, as well as a
conserved module of syntenic integration-associated
genes that includes the likely ssrA-specific integrase,
which we named dsiB. ssrA-GIs are most likely ‘integrating and mobilizable elements’ (IMEs) that do not encode
their own mechanism of cellular transfer. Core (meta)
genome phylogenetic analysis allowed an estimation of
timing of divergence of Dehalococcoides strains, between
40,000 and 400,000 years ago, suggesting that the specialization by Dehalococcoides for respiration of organohalide compounds far precedes industrial synthesis by
humans. By contrast, time estimates for the first horizontal acquisition of vcrABC sequences by Dehalococcoides
are not confidently distinguishable from the first industrial synthesis of chloroethenes ~100 years ago. Vinyl
chloride reductases may be ancient, nevertheless, and the
donor(s) of recent genetic diversity to Dehalococcoides
remain undetermined.
Methods
Identification of Dehalococcoides sequences in
metagenome data

For ANAS and KB-1 enrichment cultures, complete genomes have not been assembled. However, identification
of Dehalococcoides contigs was performed by comparison
with closely-related complete genomes of strains 195 and
CBDB1, respectively. For KB-1, gap closure was performed to create a closed draft genome of the dominant
Dehalococcoides strain in the metagenome, including primer-walking of gap-spanning fosmid inserts, as well as
gap-spanning PCR amplification from an aliquot of the
originally-submitted KB-1 genomic DNA. For ANAS,

Page 9 of 15

structural genomic information comes from a single
contig (contig 2014738012; 119815 bp) that contains a
Dehalococcoides ssrA on one end and a series of tandem
ssrA-GIs downstream (Figure 1). A second contig containing a Dehalococcoides ssrA was also detected
(2014739670), but it contained no detectable ssrA-GIs.
Dehalococcoides orthologs present in the ANAS dataset
were detected using reciprocal best-hit BLASTp criteria
described previously [8,9], treating the collection of all
Dehalococcoides protein encoding genes in ANAS as if it
were one genome. Although ANAS contains more than
one Dehalococcoides strain, this approach had little effect
on the number of orthologous groups considered ‘core’
between all Dehalococcoides, mainly because sequencing
was sufficiently deep and because the Dehalococcoides
strains in ANAS are closely-related to the Cornell lineage
from which ethenogenes 195 is the only completelysequenced representative [67].
DNA Source, Primer Design, Amplification Optimization

Enrichment cultures were derived from samples from
geographically distinct contaminated sites (Additional file
8 Figure S7): WL from Western Louisiana [30]; EV from
the Evanite site in Corvallis, Oregon [28]; PM from the
Point Mugu Naval Weapon Facility, California [28]; and
WBC-2 from the West Branch Canal Creek, Aberdeen
Proving Ground, Maryland [29]. Culture, culture pellets,
or genomic DNA were provided by L. Semprini (EV, PM)
or E. Edwards (WL, WBC-2).
Nucleotide positions strongly conserved at ssrA, its
direct repeat, and a few locations within integration modules were used for primer design (Additional file 2 Figure
S2). Amplification was successful with a variety of combinations of predicted melting temperature and degeneracy.
We described only the best-performing primer pairs,
especially those that contributed to vcr-GI amplification
and sequencing. All PCR amplifications from mixed cultures were performed using Phusion polymerase under
standard conditions using ‘HF’ buffer. Primer pairs were
optimized toward amplification of regions of ssrA-GIs in
mixed genomic DNA template by DMSO and annealing
temperature gradients. For most target amplicons
the optimal DMSO concentration was at or near 4%,
with optimal annealing temperature depending on the
primer, and summarized in Additional file 2 Figure S2. In
particular, a 20 bp forward primer beginning at Dehalococcoides ssrA position 8 (CGTGG TTTCGACAGGGAAGG - ‘ssrA_03F’), successfully amplified ~90% of all
4 novel vcr-GIs when paired with a reverse primer
upstream of vcrA (GTTCCTGACCA TGCCGTACC ‘vcrA_05R’). The resulting (8.3 - 10.5 kbp) amplicons
were purified in agarose gel electrophoresis and
sequenced directly by the Sanger method (MCLAB,
ELIM) and primer walking. No single primer-pair was

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

determined that could amplify a complete ssrA-GI in one
reaction from attL to attR, as these would be reverse
complements of one another and produce primer dimers.
Instead, combinations of PCR reactions were amplified
and sequenced separately, and their resulting sequence
data was assembled in silico and verified manually. For
example, forward primers targeting a conserved position
in the integration module (TGGAGCGCCGCCGTNGG ‘REC_003eF’) amplify a portion of the integration module
and all of the genetic cargo (~7 kbp) when coupled with
a reverse primer that targets the ssrA-direct repeat
(TGGTGGAGACGGGGGAGGG - ‘REC_001eR’). Twofold or greater coverage and perfect agreement between
different amplicons from the same sample was required
in assembly. In some instances ssrA-GI-derived amplicons
were cloned in Escherichia coli following agarose gel
purification. Efficient ligation to a vector was achieved
with Enzymatic Assembly [68] and pSMART-LC-Kan
(AF532106; Lucigen Corp.) or by blunt ligation into
the pJAZZ-OK linear vector (FJ160465; Lucigen). Transformation was achieved chemically in E. coli DH5a
or electrically in E. coli BigEasy-TSA (Lucigen) cells,
respectively.
Core Genome and Genomic Island Phylogenies

The reciprocal BLASTp procedure for identifying orthologous groups among Dehalococcoides was also applied to
Dehalogenimonas lykanthroporepellens BL-DC-9 in comparison to Dehalococcoides ANAS, KB-1, 195, DONNA2,
CBDB1, BAV1, GT, and VS; resulting in 432 core orthologous groups that were also free of paralogs. Global alignments of each orthologous group were performed by
Muscle (version 3.8.31) [69]. Single gene trees were generated using RAxMLHPC (version 7.0.3) [70] under the
GTR + g model [71] with Dehalogenimonas lykanthroporepellens BL-DC-9 constrained as the outgroup to prevent
long-branch artifacts. The resulting trees were entered
into Splitstree4 [72] and a consensus network was generated. The single gene global alignments were concatenated
to generate a single large alignment for the 9 organisms. A
core-genome phylogeny was generated using RAxMLHPC
as described above, with 10 initial random starting tree
iterations and 100 bootstrap replications. The tree with
the highest likelihood is presented in Figure 4 and used
for evolutionary analysis. Alignments for components of
genomic islands were generated using Muscle and refined
with hmmer (version 2.3.2) [73], then masked manually.
Phylogenies were generated in RAxMLHPC under the
GTR + g model with 10 random starting trees and 100
bootstrap replications. In each case, the appropriate
sequence was constrained as an outgroup. The trees with
the best likelihood were identified and used for further age
estimate calculations.

Page 10 of 15

Date Estimations

Estimates of the age of the Dehalococcoides/Dehalogenimonas divergence, the Dehalococcoides clade, as well as
the various components of the genomic islands were
determined under three different estimates for the rate of
Dehalococcoides evolution. Two mutation rates from
published values were used: one from a universal estimate of bacterial mutation rates in natural environments
[74], and one from an empirical analysis of E. coli in lab
cultures [75] (Additional file 3 Table S1). A third rate
was based on a known divergence time of approximately
16 years between the separation of Dehalococcoides ethenogenes strain 195 ("strain 195”) [6] from its mother culture - the “TCE/MeOH” culture (Prof. S. Zinder, pers.
comm.) - in 1992, and the 2008 metagenome sequencing
of the “DONNA2” enrichment culture. DONNA2 was
also derived from the TCE/MeOH culture and maintained in parallel from strain 195 until its subsequent
metagenome sequencing (R. E. Richardson, pers. comm.,
see DONNA2 Mutation Detection, below). Branch
lengths between strain 195/DONNA2 were calculated
from single-gene trees of the 387 core protein encoding
genes, after excluding 45 trees that did not have strain
195 and DONNA2 as a monophyletic group, most likely
resulting from frame-shift mutations. The mean branch
length of the 387 protein encoding gene trees, the coregene concatenated ML tree, as well as the splitstree [72]
network average branch length were all approximately
3(10) -5. For a minimum separation of 16 years, this corresponds to 2(10) -6 branch length per year of Dehalococcoides divergence. It is important to note that some
unknown fraction of the observed mutations could have
already existed within the mother culture prior to isolation of strain 195 if parents of the two contemporary
strain variants coexisted at that time. Combined with the
imposed pressures for rapid growth inherent to a laboratory culture, we expect that the Dehalococcoides mutation rates observed by this approach represent an
unrealistic upper bound to what is likely to occur in
Dehalococcoides in nature. This value is still useful, however, for creating lower bounds in molecular dating estimates that are compared with relatively recent events
(e.g. human civilization, anthropogenic chloroethene pollution, etc.).
DONNA2 Dehalococcoides Mutation Detection

Because the dominant bacterium in the DONNA2 culture was our target variant of strain 195, the DONNA2
metagenome data included a high coverage of this variant. A comparative assembly of the DONNA2 shotgun
reads on the strain 195 genome allowed identification of
reliable mutations between these two strains, using the
Variant Ascertainment Algorithm (VAAL) under default

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

settings [76]). The DONNA2 metagenome project has
gone through successive rounds of sequencing, and the
mutation analysis described here is based on the raw
454 GS FLX Titanium shotgun reads available on 06
November 2009, which were subsequently filtered by
alignment to the genome sequence of Dehalococcoides
strain 195. The resulting 455,062 Dehalococcoidesderived reads had a mean length of 365 ± 142 nucleotides, and %(G+C) of 48.8. Our version of VAAL did
not produce assembly statistics, but a separate comparative assembly using Geneious Pro v5.4 (medium-sensitivity default parameters) successfully aligned 454,342
reads to the strain 195 genome, for a coverage of
115.2 ± 41.2. The consensus sequence of the comparative assembly produced by VAAL formed the basis for
the subsequent strain-level mutation analysis. Gene
annotations from strain 195 were mapped onto the
DONNA2-variant genome sequence and the proteinencoding genes among these were extracted and
included as a separate whole-genome collection in the
genome-wide core gene phylogenetic analysis (above).
The cumulative length of the protein encoding genes
shared between 195 and DONNA2 was 1,301,665 bp;
and among these genes we detected a total of 192 mutations, with adjacent SNPs considered part of a single
mutation. Of these 192 mutations, 39% were deletions,
28% were insertions, 28% were transitions, and 4% were
transversions. With respect to the predicted effects relative to the encoded protein in strain 195, 40% were
frame-shift mutations, 40% were synonymous (probably
no change), 19% were non-synonymous substitutions,
and 1% were predicted to cause a truncation due to an
early stop codon. It should be noted that frame-shift
and truncation mutations would probably not directly
affect our subsequent tree calculations because those
genes would likely fail our orthology criteria (above) and
thus would not be included in the set of “core” genes.
Ka/Ks ratios

Ka/Ks ratios are an intrinsically pairwise calculation that
was performed on a subset of the most different pairs of
vcrA (full-length, and leader sequence only) using the
‘kaks’ function in the SeqinR package [44] of R [77]. Ka/Ks
ratios were also calculated for all adjacent branches in
a phylogenetic tree of the 8 sequences, using the Ka/Ks
Calculation tool [45].
Integration Module tRNA Secondary Structure

The putative tRNA sequence was originally detected by
ARAGORN [78] and annotated previously in publicly
available annotations of Dehalococcoides strains CBDB1
and VS. Secondary structure was predicted from the
alignment of all 16 detected tRNAs in available ssrA-GI
integration modules, submitted to the RNAalifold

Page 11 of 15

[79,80], Pfold [81], and PETfold [82] web servers for
independent calculations. The resulting structures were
compared manually, including a comparison to classical
tRNA secondary structure for identification of the conserved “DCC” anti-codon within a 5 nt anti-codon loop
(Additional file 1 Figure S1).

Description of additional data files
Additional data file 1 is a PDF format file containing the
supplemental figures and associated legends. Additional
data file 2 is a Microsoft excel (.xls) file containing
tables of growth rates and rates of evolution, as well as
other parameters and example calculations used in the
molecular dating analyses.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1: Alignment and Predicted Secondary
Structure of Putative tRNA-gly. These tRNA-gly are strongly conserved
in 16 Dehalococcoides ssrA-GI integration modules. Bases are shaded
according to the Vienna RNA conservation coloring schema in both the
alignment (A) and secondary structure cartoon indicating the majority
consensus with degeneracy (B). Secondary structure prediction was
unanimous from three independent secondary structure prediction
servers [80-82]. Free energy of the thermodynamic ensemble is -54.26
kcal/mol [80]. Substructure labels correspond to classical tRNA, including
the apparent anti-codon ‘DCC’.
Additional file 2: Figure S2: Primers Mapped onto an Alignment of
16 ssrA Integration Modules. (A) Annotated alignment of the 16
integration modules discussed in this study. Individual sequences are
shown as a thick black line, with gaps indicated by a thin horizontal line.
Plot of average nucleotide identity (14 bp window) for all 16 sequences
is shown along the top of the alignment. Three main target locations for
primer design are indicated with downward-pointing black triangles,
numbered beginning at ssrA (left). (B) Zoomed-in view of the alignment
at the three target locations for primer binding. The 75% Consensus
sequence is depressed slightly at the region targeted by primers, which
are annotated along the top. Exact position of putative tRNA-gly is also
shown.
Additional file 3: Figure S3: Phylogenetic Tree of ssrA Versus 16S
rRNA gene. The most likely of 100 bootstrap Maximum Likelihood trees
with bootstrap support shown at nodes. Support not shown at nodes
with poor or ambiguous support. (A) Phylogenetic tree of ssrA, the ~350
bp gene encoding tmRNA. (B) Similarly calculated tree based on the 16S
rRNA gene (~1500 bp), reflected relative to typical tree orientation to
emphasize topological similarity with (A). Other Chlorofiexi are included,
with Staphylococcus aureus as an outgroup. Full name and accession
number correspond to the following abbreviations: Dehalococcoides Dhc; CBDB1 - Dhc CBDB1 NC_007356; GT - Dhc GT NC_013890; BAV1 Dhc BAV1 NC_009455; 195 - Dhc ethenogenes 195 NC_002936; VS - Dhc
VS NC_013552; Deha lyk - Dehalogenimonas lykanthroporepellens BL-DC-9
NC_014314; Staph aur - Staphylococcus aureus NC_002952; Rose cast Ro-seiflexus castenholzii DSM 13941 NC_009767; Rose RS-1 - Roseiflexus sp.
RS-1 NC_009523; Chlo aur - Chloroflexus aurantiacus J-10-fl NC_010175;
Chlo agg - Chloroflexus aggregans DSM 9485 NC_011831.
Additional file 4: Table S1: Parameters and example calculations
utilized in divergence age estimates. (Top table) Summary of age
estimates for Dehalococcoides-related genetic divergence utilizing four
different models for rate of evolution: (1) estimated universal bacterial rate
of evolution in nature [74], (2) in vitro E. coli empirically derived rate of
evolution [75], (3) empirical Dehalococcoides rate based on observed
mutations in the whole genomes of strain 195 and its resequenced variant
in the DONNA2 sister culture (see Methods), and (4) the 16S rRNA gene
clock model. For ages based on the first two rates of evolution, we further

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

Page 12 of 15

considered six different values for doubling time that span a range
relevant to Dehalococcoides, including four published values for
Dehalococcoides growth in laboratory culture [4,6,88,96], other anaerobic
bacterial growth rates [47], and values derived from environmental
anaerobic systems [48,49], as well as one arbitrarily large value (130 days)
intended to represent general substrate-limited conditions. The left two
columns indicate the divergence being considered and the tree
calculation method, respectively. Ages are presented in units of 1 million
years. (Middle Two Tables) Referenced summary of growth rates utilized
for the age estimate calculations. (Bottom Table) Sample calculation for
length of time to a single mutation, given rates of evolution taken from
literature and the averaged Dehalococcoides growth rate.
Additional file 5: Figure S4: KB-1 variant at vcr-GI module transition.
(A) Cartoon representation of the vcr-GI observed in all 8 versions, as
shown in Figure 3. (B) Alignment of the region at the transition between
integration and vcrABC cargo modules, including reads in the KB-1
metagenome dataset that disagree with the main consensus at this
location. All 3 of these variant reads are perfectly identical to the VS, GT,
WL, and WBC-2 vcr-GIs at this position.
Additional file 6: Figure S5: Genetic Map of Putative Fixed rdhA
Region Downstream of Direct Repeats. (Top) Genetic map output
from a Mauve alignment of the portion of High Plasticity Region 2
(HPR2) downstream of any ssrA direct repeats in the Dehalococcoides
genomes. Each sequence was first aligned at tRNA-Ala-3 previously
defining the boundary of HPR2 closest to the Ori [9], with local collinear
blocks (LCBs) indicating large collinear homologous region that are free
from rearrangements, but not necessarily indels. Large gaps were
manually inserted such that vertical positions also containing the identity
graph indicate aligned positions within the LCB. The darker grey LCB is
the putative ‘fixed’ region of HPR2 downstream of any ssrA direct
repeats. The lighter grey LCB is a portion of the Dehalococcoides core
genome that surrounds the Ori. Annotated genes are shown beneath
each LCB, with genes on the forward and reverse strands drawn as
rectangles above or below the midline, respectively. rdhA are shaded red
for emphasis. Scale bar shown in top left corner. Note that two different
contigs from the ANAS genome are included. (Bottom) Phylogenetic
trees of three semi-core (missing strain BAV1) rdhA that share a syntenic
neighborhood within the putative fixed region. Each orthologous rdhA
group recapitulates the topology and approximate genetic distances of
the whole-genome tree (Figure 4). HPR2 was deleted in strain BAV1 [9],
save for a ~600 bp rdhA fragment (DehaBAV1_1302) that is the basis for
the tree on the right-hand side.
Additional file 7: Figure S6: Genetic Map of a dsiB-Containing DeepSea Environmental Fosmid. The fosmid, EU016565, contains the most
similar non-Dehalococcoides integration module(s) detected in the public
database. EU016565 is part of an environmental shotgun sequencing
dataset of genomic DNA obtained from a 4000 m sub-seafloor sediment
[87]. Two partial Dehalococcoides ssrA integration modules are detectable,
one of which contains an ssrA direct repeat at the expected location
within a dsiB homolog. It also contains 4 of the 6 protein encoding
genes typically found in integration modules as well as the putative
tRNA embedded within mom homolog. The reverse-complement of
EU016565 is displayed for consistent orientation with other figures. Light
grey, dark grey, and black indicate protein encoding genes for which the
annotation is hypothetical, identifiable, or part of the integration module,
respectively.
Additional file 8: Figure S7: Geographic locations of Dehalococcoides
strains and cultures mentioned in this article. The underlying map was
created using Google Earth. Labels have a dark red border if they are
cultures/strains for which high throughput sequencing data is available
and vinyl chloride respiration is reported. Blue borders indicate the vinyl
chloride respiring cultures for which genomic island data was obtained
during this study. White stars indicate cultures/strains for which no high
throughput sequencing data was available at the time of this publication.
The origin of the Dehalococcoides isolate FL2 [88] and the Dehalococcoides
enrichment culture ‘Pinellas’ [89] are also shown. The following isolated
bacterial strains were discussed in the manuscript: Dehalococcoides
ethenogenes 195 - Ithaca Wastewater Treatment Plant, Ithaca, NY, USA
[6,90]; CBDB1 - Saale River, Jena, Germany [91-93]; BAV1 - Bachman Road

Site, Oscada, MI, USA [94]; VS - Contaminated Site, Victoria, Texas, USA [95];
GT - Hydrite Chemical Co., Cottage Grove, WI, USA [17]; Dehalogenimonas
lykanthroporepellens BL-DC-9 [46]. The following Dehalococcoides
enrichments were discussed. An asterisk indicates that no highthroughput sequence data is currently available: KB-1 - Southern Ontario,
Canada [25]; ANAS - Alameda Naval Air Station, CA, USA [27] *PM - Point
Mugu Naval Weapon Facility, CA, USA [28]; *EV - Evanite contaminated
site, Corvallis, Oregon, USA [28]; *WBC-2 - West Branch Canal Creek,
Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD [29] *WL - contaminated site, Western
Louisiana, USA [30].

Abbreviations
vcrABC: the vinyl chloride reductase operon; ssrA: the tmRNA encoding
gene; ssrA-GI: ssrA-specific genomic island; vcr-GI: a vcrABC -containing ssrAspecific genomic island, a subclass of ssrA-GI; DsiB: predicted
Dehalococcoides ssrA-specific integrase; dsiB: gene encoding DsiB; MRCA:
most recent common ancestor; ML: Maximum Likelihood; DMSO: dimethyl
sulfoxide; CRISPR: clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats;
SCC: Staphylococcus Cassette Chromosome; attL/attR: the extreme left or
right edge, respectively, of the genomic island that likely participates in sitespecific recombination; attB/attP: the DNA motif on the bacterial
chromosome or mobile element, respectively, that likely participates in sitespecific recombination; IME: integrative and mobilizable elements; ICE:
integrative and conjugative elements; pSAM2: an integrative and
conjugative plasmid found in many Streptomyces; EV, PM, WBC2, WL,
ANAS, KB1, DONNA2: Dehalococcoides enrichment culture names; CBDB1,
GT, VS, BAV1: Dehalococcoides strain names.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Ruth Richardson (Cornell University) for
advance access to the DONNA2 metagenome raw sequence data, Steve
Zinder (Cornell University) for sharing insight into the minimum timing of
culture divergence, Lew Semprini (Oregon State) for providing samples from
the Evanite and Point Mugu enrichment cultures, Michelle Lorah for
providing the WBC-2 enrichment culture, and John Roth for helpful
comments on the manuscript, as well as Koshlan Mayer-Blackwell and Daniel
M. Callahan for assistance with cloning and sequencing. This work was
supported by the Strategic Environmental Research Defense Project (SERDP)
to AMS by grant ER-1588. SH was partially funded by NIH grant
R01GM086884, PJM was partially funded by fellowship grant FP-91671901
from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Science to Achieve Results
(STAR) program. (Meta)Genome sequencing and assembly was made
available under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy Joint
Genome Institute, supported by the Office of Science of the U.S.
Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
Author details
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, California, USA. 2Department of Cell and Systems Biology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 3Department of Chemical
Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. 4Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, California,
USA. 5Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
PJM conceived of the experiments, carried out the molecular experiments,
performed the comparative analyses, and drafted the manuscript. LAH
maintained the WBC-2 and WL cultures, assisted with the molecular
experiments, performed the molecular dating analyses and helped to draft
the manuscript. EAE participated in the design of the study and helped to
draft the manuscript. SH consulted on the molecular dating analyses and
helped to draft the manuscript. AMS participated in the design of the study
and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 31 January 2011 Accepted: 2 June 2011
Published: 2 June 2011

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

References
1. McCarty PL: Breathing with chlorinated solvents. Science 1997,
276(5318):1521-1522.
2. International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC): Vinyl Chloride.
Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans IARC; 1987,
311-443.
3. Kielhorn J, Melber C, Wahnschaffe U, Aitio A, Mangelsdorf I: Vinyl chloride:
still a cause for concern. Environ Health Perspect 2000, 108(7):579-88.
4. He J, Ritalahti KM, Yang KL, Koenigsberg SS, Löffler FE: Detoxiflcation of
vinyl chloride to ethene coupled to growth of an anaerobic bacterium.
Nature 2003, 424(6944):62-5.
5. Muller JA, Rosner BM, Von Abendroth G, Meshulam-Simon G, McCarty PL,
Spormann AM: Molecular identification of the catabolic vinyl chloride
reductase from Dehalococcoides sp. strain VS and its environmental
distribution. Appl Environ Microbiol 2004, 70(8):4880-4888.
6. Maymó-Gatell X, Chien Y, Gossett JM, Zinder SH: Isolation of a bacterium
that reductively dechlorinates tetrachloroethene to ethene. Science 1997,
276(5318):1568-71.
7. Seshadri R, Adrian L, Fouts DE, Eisen JA, Phillippy AM, Methe BA, Ward NL,
Nelson WC, Deboy RT, Khouri HM, Kolonay JF, Dodson RJ, Daugherty SC,
Brinkac LM, Sullivan SA, Madupu R, Nelson KE, Kang KH, Impraim M, Tran K,
Robinson JM, Forberger HA, Fraser CM, Zinder SH, Heidelberg JF: Genome
sequence of the PCE-dechlorinating bacterium Dehalococcoides
ethenogenes. Science 2005, 307(5706):105-108.
8. Kube M, Beck A, Zinder SH, Kuhl H, Reinhardt R, Adrian L: Genome
sequence of the chlorinated compound-respiring bacterium
Dehalococcoides species strain CBDB1. Nat Biotechnol 2005,
23(10):1269-1273.
9. McMurdie PJ, Behrens SF, Müller JA, Göke J, Ritalahti KM, Wagner R,
Goltsman E, Lapidus A, Holmes S, Löffler FE, Spormann AM: Localized
plasticity in the streamlined genomes of vinyl chloride respiring
Dehalococcoides. PLoS Genet 2009, 5(11):e1000714.
10. Magnuson JK, Stern RV, Gossett JM, Zinder SH, Burris DR: Reductive
dechlorination of tetrachloroethene to ethene by a two-component
enzyme pathway. Appl Environ Microbiol 1998, 64(4):1270-5.
11. Holliger C, Wohlfarth G, Diekert G: Reductive dechlorination in the energy
metabolism of anaerobic bacteria. FEMS Microbiol Rev 1998, 22(5):383-398.
12. Waller AS, Krajmalnik-Brown R, Löffler FE, Edwards EA: Multiple reductivedehalogenase-homologous genes are simultaneously transcribed during
dechlorination by Dehalococcoides-containing cultures. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2005, 71(12):8257-64.
13. Fung JM, Morris RM, Adrian L, Zinder SH: Expression of reductive
dehalogenase genes in Dehalococcoides ethenogenes strain 195 growing
on tetrachloroethene, trichloroethene, or 2,3-dichlorophenol. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2007, 73(14):4439-45.
14. Rahm BG, Richardson RE: Correlation of respiratory gene expression levels
and pseudo-steady-state PCE respiration rates in Dehalococcoides
ethenogenes. Environ Sci Technol 2008, 42(2):416-21.
15. Johnson DR, Brodie EL, Hubbard AE, Andersen GL, Zinder SH, AlvarezCohen L: Temporal Transcriptomic Microarray Analysis of
Dehalococcoides ethenogenes Strain 195 During the Transition into the
Stationary Phase. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74(9):2864-2872.
16. Wagner A, Adrian L, Kleinsteuber S, Andreesen J, Lechner U: Transcription
analysis of genes encoding homologues of reductive dehalogenases in
Dehalococcoides sp. strain CBDB1 using terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphism and quantitative PCR. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009,
75(7):1876-1884.
17. Sung Y, Ritalahti KM, Apkarian RP, Löffler FE: Quantitative PCR confirms
purity of strain GT, a novel trichloroethene-to-ethene-respiring
Dehalococcoides isolate. Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72(3):1980-7.
18. Holmes VF, He J, Lee PKH, Alvarez-Cohen L: Discrimination of multiple
Dehalococcoides strains in a trichloroethene enrichment by
quantification of their reductive dehalogenase genes. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2006, 72(9):5877-83.
19. Krajmalnik-Brown R, Hölscher T, Thomson IN, Saunders FM, Ritalahti KM,
Löffler FE: Genetic identification of a putative vinyl chloride reductase in
Dehalococcoides sp. strain BAV1. Appl Environ Microbiol 2004,
70(10):6347-6351.
20. McMurdie PJ, Behrens SF, Holmes S, Spormann AM: Unusual codon bias in
vinyl chloride reductase genes of Dehalococcoides species. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2007, 73(8):2744-2747.

Page 13 of 15

21. Langille MGI, Hsiao WWL, Brinkman FSL: Detecting genomic islands using
bioinformatics approaches. Nat Rev Microbiol 2010, 8(5):373-82.
22. Keiler KC: Biology of trans-translation. Annu Rev Microbiol 2008, 62:133-51.
23. Keiler KC, Waller PR, Sauer RT: Role of a peptide tagging system in
degradation of proteins synthesized from damaged messenger RNA.
Science 1996, 271(5251):990-3.
24. Williams KP: Traffic at the tmRNA gene. J Bacteriol 2003, 185(3):1059-70.
25. Major DW, McMaster ML, Cox EE, Edwards EA, Dworatzek SM,
Hendrickson ER, Starr MG, Payne JA, Buonamici LW: Field demonstration of
successful bioaugmentation to achieve dechlorination of
tetrachloroethene to ethene. Environ Sci Technol 2002, 36(23):5106-16.
26. Duhamel M, Mo K, Edwards EA: Characterization of a highly enriched
Dehalococcoides-containing culture that grows on vinyl chloride and
trichloroethene. Appl Environ Microbiol 2004, 70(9):5538-5545.
27. Richardson RE, Bhupathiraju VK, Song DL, Goulet TA, Alvarez-Cohen L:
Phylogenetic characterization of microbial communities that reductively
dechlorinate TCE based upon a combination of molecular techniques.
Environ Sci Technol 2002, 36(12):2652-62.
28. Yu S, Semprini L: Comparison of trichloroethylene reductive
dehalogenation by microbial communities stimulated on silicon-based
organic compounds as slow-release anaerobic substrates. Water Res
2002, 36(20):4985-96.
29. Lorah MM, Majcher EH, Jones EJ, Voytek MA: Microbial consortia
development and microcosm and column experiments for enhanced
bioremediation of chlorinated volatile organic compounds, West Branch
Canal Creek wetland area, Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland. U.S.
Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2007, 2007-5165:1-79.
30. Grostern A, Edwards EA: Growth of Dehalobacter and Dehalococcoides
spp. during degradation of chlorinated ethanes. Appl Environ Microbiol
2006, 72:428-36.
31. Regeard C, Maillard J, Dufraigne C, Deschavanne P, Holliger C: Indications
for acquisition of reductive dehalogenase genes through horizontal
gene transfer by Dehalococcoides ethenogenes strain 195. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2005, 71(6):2955-61.
32. Krajmalnik-Brown R, Sung Y, Ritalahti KM, Saunders FM, Löffler FE:
Environmental distribution of the trichloroethene reductive
dehalogenase gene (tceA) suggests lateral gene transfer among
Dehalococcoides. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2007, 59:206-14.
33. Wozniak RAF, Waldor MK: Integrative and conjugative elements: mosaic
mobile genetic elements enabling dynamic lateral gene flow. Nat Rev
Microbiol 2010, 8(8):552-63.
34. Ito T, Katayama Y, Hiramatsu K: Cloning and nucleotide sequence
determination of the entire mec DNA of pre-methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus N315. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999,
43(6):1449-58.
35. Jansen R, van Embden JDA, Gaastra W, Schouls LM: Identification of genes
that are associated with DNA repeats in prokaryotes. Mol Microbiol 2002,
43(6):1565-75.
36. McGlynn P, Lloyd RG: Recombinational repair and restart of damaged
replication forks. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2002, 3(11):859-70.
37. Hayes F, Barillà D: The bacterial segrosome: a dynamic nucleoprotein
machine for DNA trafficking and segregation. Nat Rev Microbiol 2006,
4(2):133-43.
38. Schumacher MA, Funnell BE: Structures of ParB bound to DNA reveal
mechanism of partition complex formation. Nature 2005, 438(7067):516-9.
39. Toussaint A: The DNA modification function of temperate phage Mu-1.
Virology 1976, 70:17-27.
40. Allet B, Bukhari AI: Analysis of bacteriophage mu and lambda-mu hybrid
DNAs by specific endonucleases. J Mol Biol 1975, 92(4):529-40.
41. Swinton D, Hattman S, Crain PF, Cheng CS, Smith DL, McCloskey JA:
Purification and characterization of the unusual deoxynucleoside, alphaN-(9-beta-D-2’-deoxyribofuranosylpurin-6-yl)glycinamide, specified by
the phage Mu modification function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1983,
80(24):7400-4.
42. Hayes CS, Keiler KC: Beyond ribosome rescue: tmRNA and co-translational
processes. FEBS Lett 2010, 584(2):413-9.
43. Mao C, Bhardwaj K, Sharkady S, Fish R, Driscoll T, Wower J, Zwieb C,
Sobral B, Williams K: Variations on the tmRNA gene. RNA Biol 2009, 6(4).
44. Charif D, Lobry J: SeqinR 1.0-2: a contributed package to the R project
for statistical computing devoted to biological sequences retrieval and
analysis. In Structural approaches to sequence evolution: Molecules, networks,

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

45.
46.

47.
48.

49.
50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.
57.

58.
59.

60.

61.

62.
63.

64.

65.
66.

populations, Biological and Medical Physics, Biomedical Engineering. Edited by:
U Bastolla HR M Porto, Vendruscolo M. New York: Springer Verlag;
2007:207-232, [ISBN: 978-3-540-35305-8].
2011 [http://services.cbu.uib.no/tools/kaks].
Moe WM, Yan J, Nobre MF, da Costa MS, Rainey FA: Dehalogenimonas
lykanthroporepellens gen. nov., sp. nov., a reductively dehalogenating
bacterium isolated from chlorinated solvent-contaminated groundwater.
Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2009, 59(11):2692-7.
Strous M, Jetten MSM: Anaerobic oxidation of methane and ammonium.
Annu Rev Microbiol 2004, 58:99-117.
Pollard PC, Moriarty DJ: Validity of the tritiated thymidine method for
estimating bacterial growth rates: measurement of isotope dilution
during DNA synthesis. Applied and environmental microbiology 1984,
48(6):1076-1083.
Brock T: Microbial growth rates in nature. Bacteriological Reviews 1971,
35:39-58.
Keppler F, Borchers R, Pracht J, Rheinberger S, Scholer HF: Natural
formation of vinyl chloride in the terrestrial environment. Environmental
Science & Technology 2002, 36(11):2479-2483.
Hagège J, Pernodet JL, Sezonov G, Gerbaud C, Friedmann A, Guérineau M:
Transfer functions of the conjugative integrating element pSAM2 from
Streptomyces ambofaciens: characterization of a kil-kor system associated
with transfer. J Bacteriol 1993, 175(17):5529-38.
Hagège J, Pernodet JL, Friedmann A, Guérineau M: Mode and origin of
replication of pSAM2, a conjugative integrating element of Streptomyces
ambofaciens. Molecular Microbiology 1993, 10(4):799-812.
Maphosa F, Smidt H, de Vos WM, Röling WFM: Microbial community- and
metabolite dynamics of an anoxic dechlorinating bioreactor. Environ Sci
Technol 2010, 44(13):4884-90.
Pavlovic G, Burrus V, Gintz B, Decaris B, Guédon G: Evolution of genomic
islands by deletion and tandem accretion by site-specific recombination:
ICESt1-related elements from Streptococcus thermophilus. Microbiology
(Reading, Engl) 2004, 150(Pt 4):759-74.
Futagami T, Morono Y, Terada T, Kaksonen AH, Inagaki F: Dehalogenation
activities and distribution of reductive dehalogenase homologous genes
in marine subsurface sediments. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009,
75(21):6905-9.
Gribble GW: The diversity of naturally produced organohalogens.
Chemosphere 2003, 52(2):289-297.
Katayama Y, Ito T, Hiramatsu K: A new class of genetic element,
Staphylococcus Cassette Chromosome mec, encodes methicillin
resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000,
44(6):1549-55.
Hanssen AM, Sollid JUE: SCCmec in Staphylococci : genes on the move.
FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2006, 46:8-20.
Noto MJ, Kreiswirth BN, Monk AB, Archer GL: Gene acquisition at the
insertion site for SCCmec, the genomic island conferring methicillin
resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. J Bacteriol 2008, 190(4):1276-83.
de Lencastre H, Oliveira D, Tomasz A: Antibiotic resistant Staphylococcus
aureus: a paradigm of adaptive power. Curr Opin Microbiol 2007,
10(5):428-35.
Nübel U, Roumagnac P, Feldkamp M, Song JH, Ko KS, Huang YC,
Coombs G, Ip M, Westh H, Skov R, Struelens MJ, Goering RV,
Strommenger B, Weller A, Witte W, Achtman M: Frequent emergence and
limited geographic dispersal of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(37):14130-5.
Chambers HF, Deleo FR: Waves of resistance: Staphylococcus aureus in
the antibiotic era. Nat Rev Microbiol 2009, 7(9):629-41.
Harris SR, Feil EJ, Holden MTG, Quail MA, Nickerson EK, Chantratita N,
Gardete S, Tavares A, Day N, Lindsay JA, Edgeworth JD, de Lencastre H,
Parkhill J, Peacock SJ, Bentley SD: Evolution of MRSA during hospital
transmission and intercontinental spread. Science 2010,
327(5964):469-74.
Wang L, Archer GL: Roles of CcrA and CcrB in excision and integration of
staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec, a Staphylococcus aureus
genomic island. J Bacteriol 2010, 192(12):3204-12.
Barlow M: What antimicrobial resistance has taught us about horizontal
gene transfer. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 532:397-411.
Montero CI, Lewis DL, Johnson MR, Conners SB, Nance EA, Nichols JD,
Kelly RM: Colocation of genes encoding a tRNA-mRNA hybrid and a
putative signaling peptide on complementary strands in the genome of

Page 14 of 15

67.

68.

69.
70.

71.

72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

77.

78.
79.
80.

81.
82.

83.
84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga maritima. J Bacteriol 2006,
188(19):6802-7.
West K, Johnson D, Hu P, Desantis T, Brodie E, Lee P, Feil H, Andersen G,
Zinder S, Alvarez-Cohen L: Comparative Genomics of Dehalococcoides
ethenogenes 195 and an Enrichment Culture Containing Unsequenced
Dehalococcoides Strains. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74(11):3533-3540.
Gibson DG, Young L, Chuang RY, Venter JC, Hutchison CA, Smith HO:
Enzymatic assembly of DNA molecules up to several hundred kilobases.
Nat Methods 2009, 6(5):343-5.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-7.
Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(21):2688-90.
Shapiro B, Rambaut A, Drummond AJ: Choosing appropriate substitution
models for the phylogenetic analysis of protein-coding sequences. Mol
Biol Evol 2006, 23:7-9.
Huson DH, Bryant D: Application of phylogenetic networks in
evolutionary studies. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(2):254-67.
Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998, 14(9):755-63.
Ochman H, Elwyn S, Moran NA: Calibrating bacterial evolution. PNAS 1999,
96(22):12638-43.
Drake JW, Charlesworth B, Charlesworth D, Crow JF: Rates of spontaneous
mutation. Genetics 1998, 148(4):1667-86.
Nusbaum C, Ohsumi TK, Gomez J, Aquadro J, Victor TC, Warren RM,
Hung DT, Birren BW, Lander ES, Jaffe DB: Sensitive, specific polymorphism
discovery in bacteria using massively parallel sequencing. Nat Methods
2009, 6:67-9.
R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria; 2009,
[ISBN 3-900051-07-0].
Laslett D, Canback B: ARAGORN, a program to detect tRNA genes and
tmRNA genes in nucleotide sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:11-6.
Hofacker IL, Fekete M, Stadler PF: Secondary structure prediction for
aligned RNA sequences. J Mol Biol 2002, 319(5):1059-66.
Bernhart SH, Hofacker IL, Will S, Gruber AR, Stadler PF: RNAalifold:
improved consensus structure prediction for RNA alignments. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:474.
Knudsen B, Hein J: Pfold: RNA secondary structure prediction using
stochastic context-free grammars. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(13):3423-8.
Seemann SE, Gorodkin J, Backofen R: Unifying evolutionary and
thermodynamic information for RNA folding of multiple alignments.
Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(20):6355-62.
Kuo CH, Ochman H: Inferring clocks when lacking rocks: the variable
rates of molecular evolution in bacteria. Biol Direct 2009, 4:35.
Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Chitsaz F, Derbyshire MK, DeWeese-Scott C,
Fong JH, Geer LY, Geer RC, Gonzales NR, Gwadz M, He S, Hurwitz DI,
Jackson JD, Ke Z, Lanczycki CJ, Liebert CA, Liu C, Lu F, Lu S, Marchler GH,
Mullokandov M, Song JS, Tasneem A, Thanki N, Yamashita RA, Zhang D,
Zhang N, Bryant SH: CDD: specific functional annotation with the
Conserved Domain Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37 Database:
D205-10.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-402.
Tsubakishita S, Kuwahara-Arai K, Baba T, Hiramatsu K: Staphylococcal
cassette chromosome mec-like element in Macrococcus caseolyticus.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010, 54(4):1469-75.
Konstantinidis K, Delong E: Genomic patterns of recombination, clonal
divergence and environment in marine microbial populations. ISME J
2008.
He J, Sung Y, Krajmalnik-Brown R, Ritalahti KM, Löffler FE: Isolation and
characterization of Dehalococcoides sp. strain FL2, a trichloroethene
(TCE)- and 1,2-dichloroethene-respiring anaerobe. Environ Microbiol 2005,
7(9):1442-50.
Ellis D, Lutz E, Odom J, Buchanan R, Bartlett C, Lee M, Harkness M,
Deweerd K: Bioaugmentation for accelerated in situ anaerobic
bioremediation. Environ Sci Technol 2000, 34(11):2254-2260.
Freedman DL, Gossett JM: Biological reductive dechlorination of
tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylene to ethylene under
methanogenic conditions. Appl Environ Microbiol 1989, 55(9):2144-51.

McMurdie et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:287
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/287

Page 15 of 15

91. Nowak J, Kirsch N, Hegemann W, Stan HJ: Total reductive dechlorination
of chlorobenzenes to benzene by a methanogenic mixed culture
enriched from Saale river sediment. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 1996,
45(5):700-709.
92. Adrian L, Manz W, Szewzyk U, Görisch H: Physiological characterization of
a bacterial consortium reductively dechlorinating 1,2,3- and 1,2,4trichlorobenzene. Appl Environ Microbiol 1998, 64(2):496-503.
93. Adrian L, Szewzyk U, Wecke J, Görisch H: Bacterial dehalorespiration with
chlorinated benzenes. Nature 2000, 408(6812):580-583.
94. He J, Sung Y, Dollhopf ME, Fathepure BZ, Tiedje J, Löffler FE: Acetate
versus hydrogen as direct electron donors to stimulate the microbial
reductive dechlorination process at chloroethene-contaminated sites.
Environ Sci Technol 2002, 36(18):3945-3952.
95. Rosner B, McCarty P, Spormann A: In Vitro Studies on Reductive Vinyl
Chloride Dehalogenation by an Anaerobic Mixed Culture. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1997, 63(11):4139-4144.
96. Cupples , Spormann , McCarty : Growth of a Dehalococcoides-like
microorganism on vinyl chloride and cis-dichloroethene as electron
acceptors as determined by competitive PCR. Appl Environ Microbiol 2003,
69(2):953-959.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-287
Cite this article as: McMurdie et al.: Site-Specific Mobilization of Vinyl
Chloride Respiration Islands by a Mechanism Common in
Dehalococcoides. BMC Genomics 2011 12:287.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
