<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Ortho2ExpressMatrixa web server that interprets cross-species gene expression data by gene family information</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-483"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Thomas Meinel"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

SOFTWARE

Open Access

Ortho2ExpressMatrix—a web server that
interprets cross-species gene expression data by
gene family information
Thomas Meinel1,2*, Michal R Schweiger2, Andreas H Ludewig3, Ramu Chenna4, Sylvia Krobitsch5 and Ralf Herwig2

Abstract
Background: The study of gene families is pivotal for the understanding of gene evolution across different
organisms and such phylogenetic background is often used to infer biochemical functions of genes. Modern highthroughput experiments offer the possibility to analyze the entire transcriptome of an organism; however, it is
often difficult to deduct functional information from that data.
Results: To improve functional interpretation of gene expression we introduce Ortho2ExpressMatrix, a novel tool
that integrates complex gene family information, computed from sequence similarity, with comparative gene
expression profiles of two pre-selected biological objects: gene families are displayed with two-dimensional
matrices. Parameters of the tool are object type (two organisms, two individuals, two tissues, etc.), type of
computational gene family inference, experimental meta-data, microarray platform, gene annotation level and
genome build. Family information in Ortho2ExpressMatrix bases on computationally different protein family
approaches such as EnsemblCompara, InParanoid, SYSTERS and Ensembl Family. Currently, respective all-against-all
associations are available for five species: human, mouse, worm, fruit fly and yeast. Additionally, microRNA
expression can be examined with respect to miRBase or TargetScan families. The visualization, which is typical for
Ortho2ExpressMatrix, is performed as matrix view that displays functional traits of genes (differential expression) as
well as sequence similarity of protein family members (BLAST e-values) in colour codes. Such translations are
intended to facilitate the user’s perception of the research object.
Conclusions: Ortho2ExpressMatrix integrates gene family information with genome-wide expression data in order
to enhance functional interpretation of high-throughput analyses on diseases, environmental factors, or genetic
modification or compound treatment experiments. The tool explores differential gene expression in the light of
orthology, paralogy and structure of gene families up to the point of ambiguity analyses. Results can be used for
filtering and prioritization in functional genomic, biomedical and systems biology applications. The web server is
freely accessible at http://bioinf-data.charite.de/o2em/cgi-bin/o2em.pl.

Background
Development and progression of diseases are to a large
amount linked to evolutionary conserved genes [1] as
well as to reactions on environmental factors such as
infection or nutrition. Many experimental model organisms including mouse, worm, fruit fly or yeast were
established to study such factors when human material
could not sufficiently be exploited. Such developments
* Correspondence: thomas.meinel@charite.de
1
Structural Bioinformatics Group, Institute for Physiology, Charité - University
Medicine Berlin, Thielallee 71, 14195 Berlin, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

necessitate tracing the descendents of common ancestor
genes in these organisms where gene conservation is
typically judged by sequence similarity. Genes similar in
sequence can be found not only in different organisms
but also in a single organism after the appearance of
evolutionary events such as genome duplications or the
invention of alternative splicing isoforms (ASIs).
Today’s attempts to systems biology integrate experimental insights from wet labs combining the fields of
functional genomics, biomedicine and bioinformatics.
The function of genes is either determined experimentally or predicted by similarity of respective sequences.

© 2011 Meinel et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

In the same way, sequence similarity is commonly
regarded as a valid measure for gene evolution. Hence,
the conservation of gene sequences as well as of gene
function refers to a common origin but this conservation does not exclude that gene function probably
changes [2-5]. On the other hand, gene function can be
indirectly derived from gene expression analyses regarding expression profiles as reactions patterns. Several
aspects such as the essentiality of homologous genes [6]
in normal and disease networks [7] are studied quantitatively using genome-wide gene, transcript or protein
expression data. Hence, it would be beneficial to infer
gene function with an integrated approach combining
sequences and quantitative measurements.
The basis for such cross-species comparisons is the
precise determination of orthology relationships between
full-length protein sequences. Current family inferring
approaches are aiming at the computation of the closest
proteins of two organisms, the orthologs, or of a single
organism, the paralogs, but the approaches are generally
not capable to discriminate molecular individuals of
similar functionality among a set of similar genes, e.g.
within a single organism [8,9]. Such approaches have
been analysed and compared [10]; essentially, these
approaches consist of a sequence similarity comparison
with tools like BLAST [11] along with specific categorization algorithms and processing pipelines that exploit
the results of the sequence similarity. Sets resulting
from such categorizations are named orthologs clusters
or protein families; the latter term is used for all such
results in this paper. Depending on the specific algorithm for determining protein families, either a reduced
[12-14] or the completely available organism range [15]
is used. Strategies of the implementations aim at performing a strictly pairwise organism comparison [16,17],
large-scale comparisons for multiple species [15,18],
robust clustering algorithms in uncurated pipelines
[15,19], or the algorithm pipelines include reconciliations or further phylogenetic data [13]. During the last
two decades, a large amount of such approaches were
created [10,20] and it is often difficult to retrace the
results of such procedures. Respective repositories were
established as searchable databases and are, currently,
the ends of the information processing queue. In the
context of quantitative analytics or systems biology it is
desired that such successful and excellent information
resources are used, for example as components of integrative data pipelines. As well, comparisons across particular established family sets by a single-standing or
integrative application tool are sparse.
Because of the complexity of evolution it becomes
necessary to broaden gene expression analyses to the
full set of paralogous genes. Current gene expression
studies are able to quantify expressed genes in a

Page 2 of 11

genome-wide manner using microarray chip technology
and, more recently, quantitative high-throughput
sequencing. One problem of microarray analyses is that
expression data are often compressed to gene level
annotation, which does not reflect alternatively spliced
isoforms. It is important to note that large repositories
for microarray experiments, the Gene Expression Omnibus GEO, ArrayExpress, or the Gene Expression ATLAS
[21-23], store, beside the raw data, already normalized
data. Such resources are used to retrieve or derive differential expression data of published research on
immune response, ageing, nutrition, compound or drug
treatment, or experimental gene manipulations such as
knock-out or gene silencing. There already exist helper
tools [24] that facilitate cross-species queries in such
repositories for finding ortholog relationships.
In this work we describe the web server Ortho2ExpressMatrix (O2EM) that integrates evolutionary information on gene (protein or microRNA) families and
whole-genome expression data in order to i) compare the
experimentally comparable settings for two biological
objects; ii) find functional orthologs in a pair of species;
iii) help to infer a meaningful sub-clustering of large gene
families by gene expression data; and, iv) disclose a row
of similarly differentially expressed genes in the light of
sequence similarity. The tool represents a systematic
approach for genome and proteome research and aims to
contribute to functional orthology detection.

Construction and context
Organisms

O2EM requires background data for each organism
including the entire protein family information and gene
annotation cascade from gene names to protein identifiers. The current organism space for O2EM comprises
H. sapiens (Hs; human), M. musculus (Mm; mouse), D.
melanogaster (Dm; fruit fly), C. elegans (Ce; worm), S.
cerevisiae (Sc; yeast).
Gene annotation

Basic gene and protein information was retrieved from
Ensembl [25] using the BioMart [26] service. The download includes gene names, descriptions and UniProt protein identifiers [27], separately for the four Ensembl
releases 63 (of June 2011), 59 (of August 2010), 53 (of
March 2009) and 49 (of March 2008). This variability
opens the user the opportunity to retrieve results for a
previous genome build, e.g. NCBI37 for human or to
compare results across different genome builds (genome
build versions for the five organisms and respective
Ensembl versions can be found in Additional file 1,
Table S1). Annotation of worm protein sequences was
adjusted using the WormBase [28] for the sake of conformity with Ensembl.

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

Protein family approaches

We retrieved publicly available data of four different
protein family approaches (EnsemblCompara, InParanoid, SYSTERS, Ensembl Family) and integrated them
into O2EM conserving the original associations. This
selection of protein family approaches was based on
coverage of the pre-defined organism space, diversity in
general methodology (multi-organism and pairwise
organism approaches), varying granularity of the families
and acceptance by the community. We generated family
data sets for pairs of organisms in a common file format. Additionally, we created data sets for paralogs to
be able to compare two individuals from the same species. For all approaches it can be observed that family or
cluster IDs are generally not stable beyond a particular
version.
EnsemblCompara

Ensembl provides orthology relationships according to
the EnsemblCompara method [13] in BioMart generally
for pairs of species. Association data were retrieved for
all organisms in the given organism space twice, in the
forward way (querying orthologs of organism 2 by
organism 1) as well as in the reciprocal way. Because
EnsemblCompara does not provide own families or
family identifiers, we determined connected components
of orthologs integrating relationships of both directions.
We generated unique and disjunct families out of the
results and introduced a default numbering system. We
additionally retrieved and generated separate paralog
families for each of the organisms; the family identification was introduced analogously. However, only multiprotein families (one-to-many or many-to-many) were
available; hence, all singleton paralog families must be
ignored in O2EM.
InParanoid

The InParanoid database [16,17] is aimed to restrictively
infer clusters of orthologous genes between two organisms [29]. InParanoid data are therefore available in
O2EM only for cross-species queries. We included the
InParanoid6 data set for Ensembl version 49 and InParanoid7 for Ensembl version 59 and above. Mouse and
worm proteins identifiers were converted to standard
Ensembl IDs where necessary.
SYSTERS

The SYSTERS set of protein families [30] for multiple
organisms was parsed to retrieve protein sequence identifiers and SYSTERS family identifiers for pairs of organism as well as for single organisms in the given
organism space. Because SYSTERS [15] mainly refers to
the UniProt/Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL nomenclature, respective identifiers were converted to Ensembl protein IDs
for each Swiss-Prot accession number (AC) and, if no
conflict occurred, for each related TrEMBL AC. Conflicts can arise if a TrEMBL AC reflects a fragmentary

Page 3 of 11

sequence, which is then (by Ensembl/BioMart) associated with multiple genes and therefore could be
assigned to multiple SYSTERS families. Hence, ambiguity was prevented because protein sequences are in
SYSTERS methodologically associated to disjunct
families. The update of SYSTERS release 5 is based on
UniProt release 12.4 and was integrated into O2EM.
Ensembl Family

Families are generated for similar protein sequences [12]
over a large set of organisms using the Markov Clustering algorithm [19]. This procedure is performed separately for each Ensembl version, introducing non-stable
identifiers in early Ensembl versions, whereas newer
Ensembl versions reflect the family generation in identifiers. We retrieved Ensembl Family sets and identifications separately for each of the three Ensembl versions.
Subsets of respective protein families were established
by filtering subsets of sequences separately for each pair
of organisms (orthologs) and, additionally for each single
organism, subsets of multiple sequences from single
families (paralogs).
MicroRNA approaches

The two family approaches for microRNAs, miRBase [31]
and TargetScan [32], reflect either sequence similarities of
microRNAs or the association of microRNAs to a shared
set of target genes. Two sequence forms of microRNAs
are systematically maintained by miRBase, which was
selected as the reference resource for O2EM: the hairpin
sequence, which is the precursor microRNA, and the
mature microRNA, which is biologically processed from
the hairpin and the regulating molecule. MicroRNA data
sets are available for human, mouse, worm and fruit fly.
miRBase

The miRBase provides microRNA gene families as sets
of similar microRNA sequences across multiple organisms. We excerpted associations of mature microRNAs
to microRNA families and pre-defined miRBase family
sets for each pair of organisms in the organism space.
We also added respective star microRNAs to miRBase
family sets to take a putative functional impact of star
microRNAs into account.
TargetScan

We retrieved microRNA family associations from the
TargetScan sets of human and mouse (TargetScan
release 5.1) as well as of worm and fly from TargetScanWorm 5.1 and TargetScanFly 5.1. The mature and hairpin association in TargetScan refers to miRBase. In
contrast to the data extraction for that resource, star
microRNAs are ignored in O2EM’s TargetScan families.
Microarray platforms and probe set information

A number of prominent microarray platforms both for
mRNA and microRNA analysis of the manufacturers

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

Affymetrix, Illumina and Agilent are recorded in O2EM.
The actual list of supported platforms—together with
the corresponding GEO platform identification—is
shown separately (Additional file 1, Table S2 and in the
web tool’s FAQs page). Associations of probe set identifiers to Ensembl transcript, protein or gene identifiers
were retrieved from the BioMart service of Ensembl.
They were not filtered according to ambiguity in any
direction and were generated for the Ensembl versions
49, 53, 59, and 63 separately.
Similarity measures between protein sequences

Reciprocal best hits were derived from pairwise allagainst-all BLAST queries for each pair of organisms.
Respective BLAST e-values were collected for all family
members to characterize all pairs of the constituents of
a protein family. However, it should be noted that
O2EM families can not be re-computed with the tool
since it uses already existing gene families according to
the established approaches. Because BLAST e-values
depend on the sequence length and the size of the reference database, they can differ significantly from family
to family but are a good measure for the similarity
between the homologs within a single protein family.

Implementation
Data input

The two organisms under analysis need to be preselected either by defining two (organism-specific)
microarray platforms or directly by the organism names
if data are associated to gene annotations (genes, transcripts or proteins). Data must be loadable in tab-delimited file format from the user’s local computer. The tool
accepts separate expression values for the two organisms
to be compared (which also can be the same species) of
both the treatment and the control experiments (i.e., as
four plain text columns in total). Alternatively, pre-calculated ratios can be loaded (in two columns for each
organism; options: ratios, log2-ratios, log10-ratios). Data
may be given in one or two separate files; examples for
data import are provided and the usage is described in
the web tool. Annotation information can be given in
one shared column or two separate columns for each
organism. Input data can be assigned to probe set identifiers—a row of microarray platforms is integrated into
O2EM and the association is then automatically performed—or to Ensembl gene, transcript or protein identifiers. Additionally, a separate microRNA annotation
category is available beside respective microRNA-specific probe sets of several manufacturers.
Prior to starting the query and as an alternative to
scrolling through the complete query result of all available protein families, the user can reduce the O2EM display to gene families of interest. Family identifiers must

Page 4 of 11

then correspond to those of the selected protein or
microRNA family approach, or, if a list of genes is
given, the display is reduced to respective (full) families.
Furthermore, singleton families can be excluded which
enables the user to set the research focus on either
multi-gene families (i.e., two and more paralogous genes
for at least one organism) or multi-protein families (two
or more ASIs).
Pre-selection criteria

O2EM supports the pre-selection of the output result
according to significance of gene expression. The tool
performs an automatic pre-selection and data filtering
for significant values as well as for criteria of co-direction in both organisms; O2EM exploits HTML checkboxes for both purposes. Significance of differential
expression in O2EM is judged by a fold-change threshold (default is < 3/4 or > 4/3) which can be set by the
user. Co-directed expression, i.e., identical direction of
fold-changes in the two organisms, can be used as an
important data filtering criterion: co-directed over
expression only, co-directed repression only, both
together, both anti-directed directions (under-over and
over-under expressions). The pre-selection enforces the
automatic check-in of HTML check boxes which the
user can manipulate after the pre-selection. As option of
the pre-selection, the tool generates a plain text ASCII
output in the subsequent step.
Operations during the procedure

The data processing pipeline (Figure 1) comprises the
automatic annotation from a given probe set to the
transcript, and from the transcript to the respective protein as well as back to the gene. O2EM automatically
performs the ratio calculation of differential expression
if expression values for treatment and control are
imported. Differential expression of all transcripts in a
family is always re-calculated to log2-ratios and is colour-coded. Family members without expression values
are automatically excluded from the matrix display.
Ambiguous probe-to-gene or probe-to-transcript annotation does not lead to exclusion of respective probes to
elucidate ambiguity. Expression values of redundant
probes are averaged (arithmetic mean) in the colour
boxes. Additionally, single probe sets and values
assigned to each single transcript are displayed in a
separate column to identify ambiguity and divergent
expression directions of particular probe sets. BLAST evalues indicating similarity for each protein sequence
pair are loaded from the tool’s data background.
Statistical analysis

O2EM allows over-representation analyses (ORA) based
on Fisher’s exact test [33] to validate the significance of

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

Page 5 of 11

Figure 1 Ortho2ExpressMatrix workflow and usage. Several different formats of the user’s data are accepted by the web tool that allows the
entry at several stages of the processing pipeline (step 1, input). Input data comprise either expression values for treatment and control or
respective expression ratios of each of the two organisms or individuals to be compared. The processing, shown in step 2, covers the gene
annotation levels from probe sets across transcript, protein to protein family annotation. Here, several external sources are named such as
EnsemblCompara, InParanoid, SYSTERS, Ensembl Families for protein family approaches. The other annotation associations are derived, mainly
from Ensembl, for the five species human, mouse, fruit fly, worm and yeast. Step 3 symbolizes the web server output (A) as matrix visualization
and (B) as table. Similarly to the shown protein family association, the tool performs the association task also for family information of
microRNAs.

the expression status for each protein family separately
and for each organism. This analysis compares the list
of differentially expressed genes and assesses for each
family whether an over-representation is observed. As
population background O2EM uses the number of all
genes. In O2EM, significant differential expression is
summarized according to gene annotation based on
probe sets, genes, transcripts or protein levels as it is
selected by the user on the tool’s entry page. Consequently in O2EM, each level can be used for the ORA
according to the user’s definition.
The mathematical background of the ORA is the
hypergeometric distribution which is implemented in
O2EM comparably to the function ‘phyper’ of the R
package. The procedure in O2EM regards the ratio
selected in the entry page as significance threshold.
Separate calculations are performed for each of the two
organisms (the objects along the two axes of a matrix)
as well as for higher and lower differential expression.
Hence, the results comprise four p-values for each
family.

Utility
Online matrix visualization

O2EM is designed to give the user full control—and
responsibility—over input and quality of expression data
assuming that the data for upload into O2EM are

already normalized and summarized to a single expression value for each feature (e.g. median or average
expression value associated to any gene annotation).
The intention of O2EM is that the user shall be free to
combine data levels of annotation and expression values
with one out of several different gene family approaches.
O2EM visualizes each single gene family in a matrix
format. Figure 2 illustrates the schema of the O2EM
matrix display in the web. All members of a single gene
family are assigned to the row and the column of the
matrix. The assignments for row and column with
respect to the two biological objects include the gene
annotation and the information on differential gene
expression. Each single cell in the matrix symbolizes the
membership in the gene family which is connected with
the similarity of the two joined sequences; such a
sequence pair can also be selected for data display with
a HTML check box.
O2EM matrix displays of gene families provide intuitively insights into experimental gene expression and
sequence similarity data. The two dimensions of the
matrix indicate simultaneously (i) the sequence identifiers—cursor mouse-over function and URL link to the
data origin and thereby external information on gene
function—and (ii) the expression values as colour-coded
fields in three grades: green/black/red for the directionality of differential gene expression (lower/not

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

Page 6 of 11

encode non-protein coding genes and a protein family
approach is selected; (iii) if gene sequences are not covered by a (microarray) platform; (iv) if significance criteria, as defined by the user, are not satisfied. However,
data quality criteria are in the user’s responsibility and
data will not be validated by the tool (e.g., if probe signals are not distinguished from the background; ‘absent
calls’). Information on complete data reduction is given
for several mapping steps at the end of the O2EM result
pages.
Table output

Figure 2 Information content of gene family matrix view. The
two biological objects 1 and 2 (organisms, individuals, see text) that
are influenced by a disturbing factor (disease, treatment,
experimental setting, see text) are placed along the axes together
with corresponding arrays of gene annotation and the first gene
parameter, the ‘differential gene expression’. The second gene
parameter ‘sequence similarity’ connects all members of a single
protein family in the matrix field of the visualization.

significant/upper). Averaged differential expression
values are presented by curser mouse-over. Each cell of
the matrix is coloured representing the sequence similarity of the respective pair of protein sequences; for this
purpose, BLAST e-values are translated into colours; the
colour code is explained in the web tool’s FAQs page.
The respective BLAST e-value is visible by cursor
mouse-over or in the table output (see below).
Furthermore, additional information is given for genes
in the vertical axis: each gene is linked to the source
database (i.e., Ensembl) and, additionally, to the KEGG
database [34] in order to explore gene functionality in
signalling and metabolic pathways. A further link to the
ATLAS database [23] is provided to give the user the
opportunity to explore similar gene expression data in
foreign studies for the respective gene (in a particular
row) as well as for the full set of orthologous genes (all
columns) in the compared organism. Matrices can be
transposed if the orders of input organisms as well as of
the data files are mutually changed. The genome-wide
set of gene family matrices is continuously displayed.
Scrolling through batches of 50 consecutively displayed
families provides genome-wide insight into differential
gene expression across gene families.
Reports on data loss

Data loss occurs in several ways and depends on the
data configuration: (i) if proteins are not assigned to a
family in a particular family approach; (ii) if transcripts

Three table output options are available in addition to
the matrix view. The pre-selection—HTML check boxes
allow (i) for a table view of the selection content shown
on the actual matrix result page; furthermore, (ii) the
entire result set as well as (iii) the set of all relations of
significant ratios can be retrieved either from the entry
page or from each single matrix result page, independently from the actually displayed batch. The output
comprises information on family, gene, protein (or
mature microRNA, respectively), the differential expression as log2-ratio for each of the two organisms as well
as the BLAST e-value for each protein sequence pair;
the format is tab-delimited ASCII plain text.
Case study

In order to exemplify the usability and capability of O2EM,
and also to clarify technical and information utilities of
O2EM we conducted a case study. To elucidate connections within single families, we take two example families
with co-directed expression from the literature. The first
example comprises RUNX1 genes in human as well as in
mice and further differential expression data of RUNX1
paralogs (RUNX2, RUNX3). Additionally to the RUNX
family, we present a second protein family that is reported
to be functionally connected to RUNX1 depletion.
Silencing or knock-out studies with the human transcription factor RUNX1 have been performed using the
human megakaryoblastic leukaemia cell line Meg-01
[35] as well as juvenile mice [36]. As reaction on the
RUNX1 knock down, a significantly decreased gene
expression is reported for the delta polypeptide of the
catalytic Phosphoinositide-3-kinase, PIK3CD, a member
in the human PI3K family. Similar genome-wide experiments explored reactions of Pik3cd on Runx1 silencing
in somatic cells of juvenile mice. We retrieved resulting
gene expression data, series GSE17311 and GSE2592,
from the GEO repository [21].
Figure 3 and Figure 4 show two O2EM matrices for the
respective two protein families in order to provide family
information on both organisms (by calling two alternative
protein family approaches). The paralogous sequences of
RUNX1/Runx1 (Figure 3; SYSTERS4 family 149072) as

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

Page 7 of 11

Figure 3 Ortho2ExpressMatrix case study A. RUNX1 data were extracted from two different public resources. Data in GEO series GSE17311
(related literature, see text) include log10-ratios of two channel differential expression data in four experiments using the human
megakaryoblastic leukaemia cell line Meg-01; GSE2592 comprises expression data for Runx1 knock-out and wild-type mice at two time points
and for all conditions done in duplicate. We extracted particular experiments from both data series for comparison with O2EM. Data for the
human cell line were prepared for upload into O2EM by pre-calculation of the median from four biological replicates (combining data of
biological or technical replicates are always in the user’s control). Mouse data were separately averaged for the four knock-out and for the four
wild-type experiments. The annotation function of O2EM associates probe information to gene and protein identifiers (transcripts and proteins
stand, according to Ensembl, in a 1-to-1 correlation; transcript annotation is generally ignored in O2EM matrices) and finally to the families. This
Figure, SYSTERS protein family 149072, in detail: annotation for RUNX genes of mouse (number 1) is displayed on the vertical axis, human
orthologs are displayed on the horizontal axis. Gene names including links to Ensembl and gene description (near number 2) are located in the
blue fields (additional links to KEGG genes and ATLAS experiments are truncated). The two items of the matrix borders comprise gene
annotations in outer sphere (number 3) and, in the inner sphere (number 4), expression values of transcripts and information on related proteins;
log2-ratios of differential expression intensities are averaged across all probe sets and translated to red/green colours (see section: Utility/Online
visualization). Additionally, identifiers and intensities for each single probe set are given in a separate column (number 5; mouse-over).
Background colours of the matrix cells (number 6) indicate similarity of the protein sequence pairs in the respective columns and rows. The
reader should note the violet cell background that indicates the most similar proteins and respective genes and hence the respective closest
orthologs, here distinguishing RUNX1-Runx1 genes from RUNX2-Runx2 and RUNX3-Runx3 genes and vice versa.

well as of PIK3CD/Pik3cd (Figure 4; Ensembl Family
Ensembl:ENSFM00520000517795) were taken as screen
shots from the O2EM output displays. The RUNX1/Runx1
knock-out/silencing can be traced by a lowered expression
in human knock-out cells (indicated by green boxes near
the Ensembl ID ENSG00000159216) as well as in mouse
(background of the box for Ensembl ID
ENSMUSP00000109589). In mouse knock-out animals,
expressions of all other Runx genes were also lowered
while in human RUNX2 was over-expressed and RUNX3
was not significantly expressed. Such different co-directional behaviours discriminate the genes in the RUNX
family from each other. In agreement with Edwards et al.
[35], the genes PIK3CD and Pik3cd are repressed after the
knock-out of RUNX1/Runx1, which could be quickly
traced in the corresponding O2EM matrix, see green
boxes at the matrix borders and the check box ticks in the
matrix cells. Relationships of corresponding paralogs in
both organisms can be easily traced by the coloured
matrix cells in Figure 3 and Figure 4.

Discussion
In order to exemplify the biological complexity covered
by O2EM, we discuss the main features in the sequel.

Selection features

O2EM features variability in: technology of measurements (microarray, microarray two-channel, quantitative
next generation sequencing, etc.); microarray platforms
(more than thirty platforms; see the web tool’s FAQs
page); homology relationship for orthology studies
across two species (within the current organism space)
or across paralog families of single species (tissue, technology comparison); gene family approaches (currently
four for proteins and two for microRNAs); gene annotation levels if input data (probe set, gene, transcript, protein); form of differential expression data (two values to
be calculated, ratio, log2-ratio, log10-ratio); actuality of
the transcriptomes according Ensembl versions 63, 59,
53 and 49.
Interpretation of the matrix

O2EM is open for investigations in both directions: finding similar genes and discriminating them by differential
gene expression, for instance, finding candidates of functional orthologs for two different organisms—inside-tooutside of the matrix—; or discriminating similar gene
expression of transcripts within a protein family by
sequence similarity—outside-to-inside. None of the

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

Page 8 of 11

Figure 4 Ortho2ExpressMatrix case study B. PIK3CD data were extracted from two different public resources, confer Figure 3. This Figure
shows the respective Ensembl Family ENSFM00520000517795 for PIK3 genes (alpha to delta subunits of the catalytic phosphoinositide-3-kinase)
of human and mouse; the reader should note that the organism configuration is mutual to Figure 3. Explanations in numbers 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6
correspond to the numbers in Figure 3. Pre-selection such as ‘lower differential expression parallel in both organisms’ enforces the automatic
check-in of the HTML check boxes and the mouse-over explanation as shown (the lower differential expression of PIK3CD in both organisms as
reaction on RUNX1 silencing/depletion is the focus of the original literature, see text). This Figure shows a manually reduced pre-selection that
shall indicate that there are now three proteins (ASIs) of the human gene PIK3CD and six proteins (ASIs) of the mouse gene Pik3cd selected for
the Table output display (number 4; see also ‘Utility/Table output’). The statistical analysis (number 7) shows significances given by downregulated probe sets and calculated by over-representation analysis p-values in mouse and human.

directions overrules the other; moreover, both information trajectories contribute to a more complete picture.
Ambiguity

The steadily increasing number of transcript annotations
for a single gene reflects the continuous progress in the
development of ASI prediction algorithms. It ends up
also in an increase in ambiguity of probe sequence associations to transcripts since microarray designs are
fixed. O2EM additionally favours transcript-associated
expression data and, thus, circumvents ambiguity problems of the probe set annotation level. Coping with the
transcript annotation level O2EM supports also more
recent technologies such as next generation sequencing.
Even ambiguity of probes on gene level is traceable;
examples are genes in families of gene of the major histocompatibility complex.
Family approach benchmarking

The functionality of the O2EM web server is enabled by
several pre-generated data that are stored in the tool’s
data background. For instance, the tool holds the proteins as members of established protein family

approaches, and the total number of stored proteins and
protein families varies for each pair of organisms and
for each single protein family approach. We counted
such numbers to provide an overview over content and
granularity of the single approaches. Comparably,
Ensembl version 59 (Additional file 1, Table S3) and
Ensembl version 49 (Additional file 1, Table S4) show
protein numbers in families as well as numbers of protein families for organism pairs and single organisms.
The increase in protein numbers between Ensembl versions 49 and 59 reflects the improvements of splicing
isoform detection by respective algorithms. A similar
compilation can be found in [13].
Established protein family inferences

Established protein family inferences of all in O2EM
integrated (external) approaches possess often limitations in the analysis of a sequence comparison [10], the
evaluation step (clustering, phylogenomic analysis, etc.).
O2EM attacks the problem indirectly by the implementation of methodologically different family approaches.
This makes family inference results biologically more
comprehensible since the approaches can be indirectly

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

compared by successively running a discrete data set
through all implemented family approaches.
In O2EM, all protein family data sets are based on full
protein sequence length. In contrast to data of those
established approaches (each of them is characterized by
the evaluation step), pure BLAST searches could induce
misleading results since BLAST best hit results, evaluated by e-values, are often driven by ubiquitary domains.
Hence, the whole sequence length definition of the
family generally overrules also a protein domain family
definition, as for example provided by Pfam [37], and
moreover a single best hit between two sequences. This
is a strong argument for an integrating tool like O2EM
that utilizes established protein family inferences based
on full sequence lengths.
In O2EM, the user better exploits larger families
(SYSTERS, Ensembl Family) to study the set of paralogs
or finer granular families (EnsemblCompara, InParanoid)
for the detection of the closer orthologs. Sequence relationships within larger protein families can be explored
by the matrix visualization through colours that are coding sequence similarity. This feature facilitates and expedites visual analyses of lots of gene families.
Candidates of functional orthology

O2EM with its attributes as an exploration tool bears
forthcoming aspects for potential research. Generally, a
sub-clustering of large families should be successful
using differential expression data. This hint shall indicate that such principal observations can be made with
O2EM. This can directly focus into the detection of candidates of functional orthology, which concerns the
functional identity of an orthologous pair of proteins in
two species. Expression traits of orthologous genes
should be similar if such proteins stand in a functional
context of pathways or protein complexes. Strength of
O2EM is that common functional contexts can be compared with particular similarities of the proteins in a
family.
MicroRNA families

Similar to protein coding genes, also microRNA families
can be analyzed due to their activation status. Results
are displayed in Additional file 1, Figure S5 for the two
implemented microRNA family approaches miRBase
and TargetScan simulated with random data for two
patients. The Figure highlights the visualization of gene
identity, pre-selection of co-directional expression, star
microRNAs and family size. Members of microRNA
families show a high sequence similarity which is a hint
at common targets (a strong argument of the TargetScan approach); and moreover, O2EM provides insights
in the regulation of such microRNAs. - As a further filtering function, the variation of the significance criterion

Page 9 of 11

(Additional file 1, Figure S6) can be used to set the
focus on stronger activated or deactivated microRNAs. To elucidate the genetics of several diseases it is an eminent research topic to explore the expression status not
only of microRNAs but also of the potential target
mRNA. Studying both RNA sets together makes O2EM
to a basic application in functional genomics.
Paralog-rich protein families

Such families consist of genes with common evolutionary background, such as genome duplication before or
after speciation, or with qualities that require high functional specificity such as binding specificity of genes in
the major histocompatibility complex MHC. Cancerrelevant genes such as caspases, cytochromes, kinases,
or genes of the BCL2 family are potential candidates for
a gene family investigation. Antigen families located in
the MHC on human chromosome 6 are moreover a rich
source for expression studies on large paralog families.
Here, O2EM can be used to disclose the functionality as
well as the sequence similarity within a family and the
combination of both issues. Similarity of protein
sequences is visualized by BLAST e-values which are
translated to colours. Through this feature, the closest
similar sequences can be compared with the genes similar in function. Functionality of such genes can be
retraced by (coloured) expression data if respective
mRNA is distinguishable.
Proteins in functional contexts

Paralogous genes sometimes furnish protein complexes
as subunits, for example PI3K genes (Figure 4). This
special case of genes in a functional context is an interesting object for studies on gene regulation. O2EM can
answer the question whether only one or all subunits
are deregulated by a disturbing factor since O2EM is
capable to give answers regarding co-directed differential expression of respective paralogs.
Functional context features are also covered by phylogenetic profiling [38,39], the presence or absence of proteins in organisms, which works beyond protein families
and on a larger number of organisms; a corresponding
approach is implemented for instance in SYSTERS [30].
O2EM complements phylogenetic profiling by elucidating the paralog populations in single protein families
and extends binary presence/absence data with quantitative experimental data.
Tissue specificity

Paralogous genes can possess different function in different tissues. After gene duplication neofunctionalization can emerge for the given gene pair and can lead to
a new expression pattern of the genes across the tissues
of a single organism. Hence expression profiles of

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

orthologs may play a significant role in tissues [40]
wherein orthologs with lineage-specific gene duplications tend not to have highly correlated expression profiles or even orthologs with multiple duplications show
weaker correlations of expression profiles. O2EM can
elucidate such traits if tissues of one organism are compared or tissue-specific samples of two species are
compared.

Conclusions
Gene expression in two organisms or individuals is, until
now, compared only for the most similar genes, which is
the identical gene in one organism (and two individuals)
or the gene pair of closest orthologs in two different
organisms. Ortho2ExpressMatrix is developed to broaden
this narrow gene identity, not leaving the field of homology. Gene or protein families are visually organized into
two-dimensional matrices that help users to elucidate
traits of functionally connected gene family entities in two
whole genomes. Future work can be expected by addition
of other species, further gene family inferring approaches
or even another categorization systematic: the technical
background of O2EM is in principle capable to visualize
gene groups beyond a categorization in families.
Availability and requirements
O2EM is freely accessible at http://bioinf-data.charite.de/
o2em/cgi-bin/o2em.pl. It is written in Perl and runs on
a Linux platform using Apache2.x server. Data in the
background are organized as plain text files and are
available as download together with the source code for
the tool (< 300 Mb). A rough database schema, the
HowTo for short description and installation as well as
the download link are available via the project server.
The visualization of results in batches allows the installation as single-standing online application in a standard
computer with adequate performance times. An interface between Laboratory Information and Management
Systems or other applications and O2EM on HTTP
basis is available upon request.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary tables and figures. Table S1 lists the
genome builts for five organisms with respective Ensembl versions
integrated into Ortho2ExpressMatrix at the time of publication. Table S2
lists the implemented Microarray platforms and respective and GEO
platform identifiers at the time of publication. Table S3 reports the
assessment of numbers of proteins in families and protein families for
pairs of organisms of four protein family inferring approaches basing on
sequence data of Ensembl version 59, Table S4 reports the assessment of
Ensembl 49. Figure S5 displays O2EM output examples for miRBase and
TargetScan families. Figure S6 displays variations of the ratio threshold as
significance criterion, which is an important O2EM selection parameter.

Page 10 of 11

List of abbreviations used
ASI: alternative splicing isoform; BLAST: Basic Local Alignment Search Tool;
GEO: Gene Express Omnibus; HTTP: Hypertext Transfer Protocol; O2EM:
Ortho2ExpressMatrix; PIK3CD: phosphoinositide-3-kinase, catalytic, delta
polypeptide; RUNX1: runt-related transcription factor 1; URL: Uniform
Resource Locator.
Acknowledgements and funding
TM is funded by the BMBF (Federal Ministry of Education and Research),
MedSys project ‘Therapeutic Systems Immunology’ (0315450A); MRS by the
BMBF, MedSys project PREDICT (0315428A) and RH by the Max Planck
Society.
Author details
1
Structural Bioinformatics Group, Institute for Physiology, Charité - University
Medicine Berlin, Thielallee 71, 14195 Berlin, Germany. 2Vertebrate Genomics
Department, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-73,
14195 Berlin, Germany. 3Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science,
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Heinrich-Hecht-Platz 10, 24118 Kiel,
Germany. 4Biotechnology Center, Technical University Dresden, Tatzberg 4749, 01307 Dresden, Germany. 5Otto Warburg Laboratories, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
TM conceived the basic idea to O2EM, he developed and implemented the
tool; AHL, SK and MRS supported the development of the tool with insights
from biology; RC prepared the SYSTERS version 5 data; TM, RH, MRS, and SK
wrote the final manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 7 April 2011 Accepted: 4 October 2011
Published: 4 October 2011
References
1. Domazet-Loso T, Tautz D: An ancient evolutionary origin of genes
associated with human genetic diseases. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25(12):2699-2707.
2. Abhiman S, Sonnhammer EL: Large-scale prediction of function shift in
protein families with a focus on enzymatic function. Proteins 2005,
60(4):758-768.
3. Valencia A: Automatic annotation of protein function. Curr Opin Struct Biol
2005, 15(3):267-274.
4. Krishnamurthy N, Brown DP, Kirshner D, Sjölander K: PhyloFacts: an online
structural phylogenomic encyclopedia for protein functional and
structural classification. Genome Biol 2006, 7(9).
5. Brown DP, Krishnamurthy N, Sjölander K: Automated protein subfamily
identification and classification. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3(8).
6. Liao BY, Zhang J: Null mutations in human and mouse orthologs
frequently result in different phenotypes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105(19):6987-6992.
7. Goh KI, Cusick ME, Valle D, Childs B, Vidal M, Barabasi AL: The human
disease network. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104(21):8685-8690.
8. Sonnhammer EL, Koonin EV: Orthology, paralogy and proposed
classification for paralog subtypes. Trends Genet 2002, 18(12):619-620.
9. Koonin EV: Orthologs, paralogs, and evolutionary genomics. Annu Rev
Genet 2005, 39:309-338.
10. Frech C, Chen N: Genome-wide comparative gene family classification.
PLoS One 2010, 5(10):e13409.
11. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
12. Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Beal K, Ballester B, Caccamo M, Chen Y, Clarke L,
Coates G, Cunningham F, Cutts T, et al: Ensembl 2007. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, 35(Database):D610-617.
13. Vilella AJ, Severin J, Ureta-Vidal A, Heng L, Durbin R, Birney E:
EnsemblCompara GeneTrees: Complete, duplication-aware phylogenetic
trees in vertebrates. Genome Res 2009, 19(2):327-335.
14. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 1997, 278(5338):631-637.

Meinel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:483
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/483

15. Krause A, Stoye J, Vingron M: Large scale hierarchical clustering of protein
sequences. BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:15.
16. Berglund AC, Sjölund E, Ostlund G, Sonnhammer EL: InParanoid 6:
eukaryotic ortholog clusters with inparalogs. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36(Database):263-266.
17. Ostlund G, Schmitt T, Forslund K, Kostler T, Messina DN, Roopra S, Frings O,
Sonnhammer EL: InParanoid 7: new algorithms and tools for eukaryotic
orthology analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38(Database):D196-203.
18. Enright AJ, Kunin V, Ouzounis CA: Protein families and TRIBES in genome
sequence space. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(15):4632-4638.
19. Enright AJ, Van Dongen S, Ouzounis CA: An efficient algorithm for largescale detection of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30(7):1575-1584.
20. Krause A: Large Scale Protein Sequence Clustering - Not Solved But
Solvable. Current Bioinformatics 2006, 1(2):247-254.
21. Barrett T, Troup DB, Wilhite SE, Ledoux P, Rudnev D, Evangelista C, Kim IF,
Soboleva A, Tomashevsky M, Marshall KA, et al: NCBI GEO: archive for
high-throughput functional genomic data. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37(Database):D885-890.
22. Parkinson H, Kapushesky M, Kolesnikov N, Rustici G, Shojatalab M,
Abeygunawardena N, Berube H, Dylag M, Emam I, Farne A, et al:
ArrayExpress update–from an archive of functional genomics
experiments to the atlas of gene expression. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37(Database):D868-872.
23. Kapushesky M, Emam I, Holloway E, Kurnosov P, Zorin A, Malone J,
Rustici G, Williams E, Parkinson H, Brazma A: Gene expression atlas at the
European bioinformatics institute. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38(Database):
D690-698.
24. Le HS, Oltvai ZN, Bar-Joseph Z: Cross-species queries of large gene
expression databases. Bioinformatics 2010, 26(19):2416-2423.
25. Flicek P, Aken BL, Ballester B, Beal K, Bragin E, Brent S, Chen Y, Clapham P,
Coates G, Fairley S, et al: Ensembl’s 10th year. Nucleic Acids Res 2010,
38(Database):D557-562.
26. Haider S, Ballester B, Smedley D, Zhang J, Rice P, Kasprzyk A: BioMart
Central Portal–unified access to biological data. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37(Web Server):W23-27.
27. The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic Acids Res 2010,
38(Database):D142-148.
28. Harris TW, Antoshechkin I, Bieri T, Blasiar D, Chan J, Chen WJ, De La Cruz N,
Davis P, Duesbury M, Fang R, et al: WormBase: a comprehensive resource
for nematode research. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38(Database):D463-467.
29. Remm M, Storm CE, Sonnhammer EL: Automatic clustering of orthologs
and in-paralogs from pairwise species comparisons. J Mol Biol 2001,
314(5):1041-1052.
30. Meinel T, Krause A, Luz H, Vingron M, Staub E: The SYSTERS Protein Family
Database in 2005. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(Database):226-229.
31. Griffiths-Jones S, Saini HK, van Dongen S, Enright AJ: miRBase: tools for
microRNA genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(Database):154-158.
32. Friedman RC, Farh KK, Burge CB, Bartel DP: Most mammalian mRNAs are
conserved targets of microRNAs. Genome Res 2009, 19(1):92-105.
33. Rivals I, Personnaz L, Taing L, Potier MC: Enrichment or depletion of a GO
category within a class of genes: which test? Bioinformatics 2007,
23(4):401-407.
34. Kanehisa M, Goto S, Furumichi M, Tanabe M, Hirakawa M: KEGG for
representation and analysis of molecular networks involving diseases
and drugs. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38(Database):D355-360.
35. Edwards H, Xie C, LaFiura KM, Dombkowski AA, Buck SA, Boerner JL,
Taub JW, Matherly LH, Ge Y: RUNX1 regulates phosphoinositide 3-kinase/
AKT pathway: role in chemotherapy sensitivity in acute megakaryocytic
leukemia. Blood 2009, 114(13):2744-2752.
36. Michaud J, Simpson KM, Escher R, Buchet-Poyau K, Beissbarth T,
Carmichael C, Ritchie ME, Schutz F, Cannon P, Liu M, et al: Integrative
analysis of RUNX1 downstream pathways and target genes. BMC
Genomics 2008, 9:363.
37. Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, et al: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38(Database):D211-222.
38. Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: protein
phylogenetic profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96(8):4285-4288.
39. Meinel T: Sequence Similarity and Function of Homologous Proteins Phylogenetic Profiling. In Handbook of Research on Systems Biology

Page 11 of 11

Applications in Medicine. Volume 1. Edited by: Daskalaki A. Hershey,
Pennsylvania, USA: IGI Global; 2009:143-166.
40. Huminiecki L, Wolfe KH: Divergence of spatial gene expression profiles
following species-specific gene duplications in human and mouse.
Genome Res 2004, 14(10A):1870-1879.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-483
Cite this article as: Meinel et al.: Ortho2ExpressMatrix—a web server
that interprets cross-species gene expression data by gene family
information. BMC Genomics 2011 12:483.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
