<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Isomin: a novel cytoplasmic intermediate filament protein from an arthropod species</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2011, 9:17. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-17"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Caterina Mencarelli"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Isomin: a novel cytoplasmic intermediate filament
protein from an arthropod species
Caterina Mencarelli*, Silvia Ciolfi, Daniela Caroti, Pietro Lupetti, Romano Dallai

Abstract
Background: The expression of intermediate filaments (IFs) is a hallmark feature of metazoan cells. IFs play a
central role in cell organization and function, acting mainly as structural stress-absorbing elements. There is
growing evidence to suggest that these cytoskeletal elements are also involved in the integration of signalling
networks. According to their fundamental functions, IFs show a widespread phylogenetic expression, from simple
diblastic animals up to mammals, and their constituent proteins share the same molecular organization in all
species so far analysed. Arthropods represent a major exception in this scenario. Only lamins, the nuclear IF
proteins, have so far been identified in the model organisms analysed; on this basis, it has been considered that
arthropods do not express cytoplasmic IFs.
Results: Here, we report the first evidence for the expression of a cytoplasmic IF protein in an arthropod - the
basal hexapod Isotomurus maculatus. This new protein, we named it isomin, is a component of the intestinal
terminal web and shares with IFs typical biochemical properties, molecular features and reassembly capability.
Sequence analysis indicates that isomin is mostly related to the Intermediate Filament protein C (IFC) subfamily of
Caenorhabditis elegans IF proteins, which are molecular constituents of the nematode intestinal terminal web. This
finding is coherent with, and provides further support to, the most recent phylogenetic views of arthropod
ancestry. Interestingly, the coil 1a domain of isomin appears to have been influenced by a substantial molecular
drift and only the aminoterminal part of this domain, containing the so-called helix initiation motif, has been
conserved.
Conclusions: Our results set a new basis for the analysis of IF protein evolution during arthropod phylogeny. In the
light of this new information, the statement that the arthropod phylum lacks cytoplasmic IFs is no longer tenable.
See commentary article: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/16.

Background
Intermediate filaments (IFs) are major cytoskeletal elements of metazoan cells. They form an integrated system
that extends from the cell membrane to the nucleus and,
by anchoring at intercellular junctions, contribute to
coordinate individual cells into tissues (reviewed in [1,2]).
The mechanical properties of IFs are crucial for the
maintenance of cell shape and tissue integrity, both in
the adult organism and during embryonic development
and differentiation of specific tissues. Being very strong
and extensible elements, they provide the cell with
unique mechanical properties and act as stress-absorbing
cytoskeletal components. Recently, it has been proposed
* Correspondence: mencarelli@unisi.it
Department of Evolutionary Biology, University of Siena, Via Aldo Moro 2,
53100 Siena, Italy

that IFs act as a scaffold for the transduction of not only
mechanical perturbations but also of other types of signals from the exterior to all internal compartments of the
cell and, from this, the idea of IFs as ‘regulatory platforms’ implicated in the regulation of key signalling pathways has emerged [2]. IF proteins are encoded by a large
family of genes, which includes both nuclear lamins and
cytoplasmic IF proteins; their expression is developmentally-regulated and tissue-specific [1]. Consistent with the
central role of IFs in cell function, mutations in genes
encoding IFs have been shown to cause, or predispose, to
more than 30 different human diseases [3].
All members of the IF family share a typical tripartite
molecular organization which has been conserved during
metazoan evolution. It consists of a central assemblycompetent a-helical domain with coiled-coil forming

© 2011 Mencarelli et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

ability - the so-called rod domain - and of amino and carboxyterminal domains, named the head and the tail
domain, respectively, which are variable in length,
sequence and properties [4]. The rod domain is divided
into subdomains (coils 1a, 1b, 2a and 2b) by short nonhelical linkers (L1, L12, L2). The length of the rod and of
its different subdomains is defined and conserved across
species. Nuclear lamins are characterized by a longer rod
domain, due to an extra 42 residues in their coil 1b subdomain [4,5]. For cytoplasmic IF proteins, phylogenetic
surveys have shown evidence of the occurrence of two
molecular prototypes, which segregate according to phylogenetic lineages: the L-type, which shares with lamins a
longer rod domain and is expressed in protostome phyla;
and the S-type, endowed with a shorter rod domain,
which is thought to be arisen from the L-type by a deletion event and, until now, has only been detected in the
three deuterostome chordate phyla [6]. On this basis, it
has been speculated that cytoplasmic IFs arose early in
evolution from a mutated lamin gene [7]. Duplications of
IF genes followed by diversification and specialization of
the new genes have occurred during the evolution of
most phyla. The complexity of the cytoplasmic IF protein
repertoire expressed in different metazoan phyla thus
varies, reaching its maximum in vertebrates which
express up to 70 proteins belonging to six distinct IF subfamilies [8].
In such a scenario, arthropods, the largest metazoan
phylum, are a major exception. In fact, both electron
microscopy [9] and molecular cloning studies [6,10]
have been unable to detect any cytoplasmic IF protein
in these organisms, although they do express a nuclear
IF system made of authentic lamins. Other cytoskeletal
components have been proposed to have assumed, in
arthropods, the mechanical functions that are usually
played by cytoplasmic IFs in other organisms (discussed
in [11]). For example, wing epithelial cells are stabilized
in insects by a cytoskeletal array consisting of parallel
bundles of 15-protofilament microtubules and actin filaments [12]. However, the absence of cytoplasmic IFs in
this phylum is still puzzling.
In the collembolan species belonging to the genera
Isotomurus and Isotoma the organization of the midgut
epithelium is unusual for the presence of a peculiar, filamentous web [13,14] which has been preliminarily
shown not to consist of actin, contrary to what is seen
in the vertebrate intestinal terminal web [15]. We
describe the identification and molecular characterization of the protein forming such a peculiar cytoskeletal
array. This protein, that we named isomin, shares with
cytoplasmic IFs typical molecular features and in vitro
assembly properties. Thus, our results provide the first
evidence of a cytoplasmic IF protein expressed in an
arthropod species.

Page 2 of 14

Results
A peculiar terminal web in Isotomurus midgut epithelium

Collembolan species belonging to the genus Isotomurus
express, in their midgut epithelium, a peculiar terminal
web- consisting of a dense belt-like layer of closely
intertwined filaments of about 8-10 nm in diameter,
which crosses the apical cytoplasm and contacts laterally
the membrane at the septate junction level where filaments adhere to and reinforce the cytoplasmic face of
the junction (Figure 1a and 1b). This cytoskeletal array
appears to act as an anchoring structure for the microfilament bundles descending from microvilli and segregates the cytoplasm into an apical and a basal region
that are structurally distinct, the latter containing most
part of the cellular organelles. The web is not continuous but shows several fenestrations which appear to be
somehow reinforced at their edges (Figure 1a and 1b).
We have preliminarily reported that the web does not
consist of actin, since it is not decorated by specific antibodies or by heavy meromyosin fragments and does not
disassemble after treatment with cytochalasin B [15].
Also, it is strongly resistant to extraction with high salt/
detergent-containing solutions, which solubilize most
cytoplasmic components (Figure 1c). The main component of the residual fraction is a protein with an apparent molecular weight of about 40 kDa which migrates
immediately below actin after SDS-page (Figure 1d).
The ultrastructural organization of the apical epithelial
region in the midgut of Isotomurus sp. is strongly reminiscent of the terminal web described in the intestine of
some nematode species [16]. In Caenorhabditis elegans,
the web contains a group of IF proteins [17]. The possibility that the Isotomurus filamentous web is also assembled
by IF-related proteins is, indeed, suggested by its insolubility properties. On this basis, and in order to confirm this
hypothesis, we decided to characterize the 40 kDa protein
(that we named isomin). at the molecular level and to
ascertain its relationship with the intestinal web.
Sequencing and molecular analysis of isomin protein

Isomin was first enzymatically digested and the major
tryptic peptides were analysed by mass spectrometry. This
analysis provided a series of short aminoacid sequences
that did not match with any protein in protein or
Expressed Sequence Tags (EST) databases. However, some
of these fragments contain a definite stretch of aminoacids
that allowed the design of degenerate sense and antisense
primers (Additional File 1, Table S1). Among the primer
combinations we tested, only one (B2/D1) was successful.
A series of reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) experiments resulted in the amplification of a
360 bp fragment, which was cloned and sequenced on
both strands. The corresponding deduced amino acid
sequence (120aa) contains some of the partial aminoacid

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

Page 3 of 14

Figure 1 Electron microscopy and electrophoretic analysis of Isotomurus intestinal terminal web. (a,b) The terminal web (tw) is a
discontinuous structure formed by filaments which contact the septate junction (sj). Microfilaments (mf) descending from microvilli insert onto
the terminal web. Bars = 1 μm. (c) Electron microscopy analysis of cytoskeletal Triton-resistant midgut preparations obtained as described in
Material and methods: the terminal web is not affected by treatment with detergent and high ionic strength solutions. Bar = 200 nm. (d)
Electrophoretic analysis on an 8% SDS-polyacrylamide gel of the detergent-insoluble fraction from Isotomurus intestine: a major protein band (I)
is present, which migrates immediately below actin (A).

sequences obtained by mass spectrometry, thus confirming the specificity of the amplified sequence (Additional
File 2, Figure S1). The complete isomin sequence was successively obtained by 5’-3’ rapid amplification of complementary DNA ends (RACE) using specific primers
designed on the 360 bp sequence. The full-length complementary DNA is 1570 bp: it contains a 1236 bp open reading frame corresponding to a deduced amino acid
sequence of 411 residues, with a predicted molecular mass
of 48,036 Da and a theoretic isoelectric point of 6.65. The
open reading frame is flanked by 5’ and 3’ untranslated
regions of 72 bp and 262 bp, respectively, with a polyadenylation signal located 15 bp upstream of the polyA tail
(Additional File 2, Figure S1).

A BLASTp search for isomin homologues resulted in
the 10 best scores reported in Table 1. Among these,
eight protein sequences are deduced from the genome
of different Drosophila species and are annotated in Flybase as potential members of the Pfam family of intermediate filament proteins: the presence of the nuclear
localization signal suggests that these proteins are
lamins. The remaining two sequences are IF proteins
from Danio rerio and Ciona intestinalis. The observed
percentage of similarity between the identified proteins
and isomin (24%-25% identity, 40%-43% positives) is in
the range usually found among IF proteins, which primarily conserve sequence principles rather than actual
sequences.

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

Page 4 of 14

Table 1 BLASTP best 10 alignments
Accession No.

Species

Description

% Identity

E-value

XP_001985993.1

Drosophila grimshawi

Gene product from transcript GH21120-RA*

25%

4e-06

XP_002049707.1

D. virilis

Gene product from transcript GJ21743-RA*

25%

3e-04

XP_002016166.1

D. persimilis

Gene product from transcript GL10641-RA*

24%

3e-04

XP_001360601.1

D. pseudoobscura

Gene product from transcript GA10086-RA*

24%

3e-04

XP_002063755.1

D. willistoni

Gene product from transcript GK15736-RA*

25%

0.002

†

XP_001002383.1

Danio rerio

Hypothetical protein LOC436656

25%

0.005

XP_001975619.1

D. erecta

Gene product from transcript GG22418-RA*

24%

0.010

XP_002091326.1

D. yakuba

Lamin C

24%

0.010

XP_001988956.1

D. grimshawi

Gene product from transcript GH10295-RA*

24%

0.022

XP_001027681.1

Ciona intestinalis

Intermediate filament protein IF-A

24%

0.026

*All the Drosophila genes are classified by Pfam as intermediate filament proteins and are homologs of lamin sequences.
†
This gene has been characterized as cytokeratin E7.

According to the BLAST results, a secondary structure
prediction analysis indicates that isomin possesses a
molecular organization closely resembling the typical tripartite structure of IF proteins, with non-helical head
and tail domains encompassing a central coiled coil rod
which is, in turn, divided in subdomains. Figure 2 documents such a similarity by aligning isomin sequence and
the predicted domain organization with those exhibited
by Drosophila lamin C and by a series of proteins representative of protostome cytoplasmic IFs (see also Additional File 3, Figure S2 for the heptad repeat along the
three coiled coil domains)
As in all IF proteins, the isomin rod domain is delimited by conserved aminoacid sequences, the so-called
helix initiation and helix termination motifs [4] and is
divided into three distinct coiled-coil subdomains by
short non-helical linker segments (Figure 2). The consensus sequence at the beginning of the isomin rod
shows the absolutely conserved sequence LNXR. Within
the helix termination motif, the consensus sequence of
the so-called IFA epitope (YRKLLEGEE) appears to be
poorly conserved. However, the reactivity with the IFA
(intermediate filament antigen) monoclonal antibody is
much less conserved among invertebrate phyla than it is
in vertebrates [9,18] and the occurrence of IF proteins
which do not contain the canonical IFA sequence has
been reported [19].
Apart from very short variations, isomin coil 1b and coil
2 display the conserved length observed in other IF proteins. In particular, coil 1b exhibits the longer prototype
typical of lamins and of protostome cytoplasmic IFs [6]. As
in other invertebrate IF proteins (for example [20]), coil 2
is a continuous coiled coil domain, which is not predicted
to be interrupted by a non-helical linker region in the two
subdomains usually indicated as coil 2a and coil 2b in the
consensus IF structure. However, crystallographic data
have also recently indicated a continuous coiled coil structure for this domain in vertebrate vimentin [21]. In all IFs,

an obligatory feature is the presence of a stutter - a discontinuity in the heptad repeat pattern that is equivalent to an
insertion of four extra residues at the end of a heptad. The
position of the stutter is quite conserved, indicative of its
fundamental role in filament assembly [4]. In isomin, coil 2
also exhibits at this position a discontinuity in the heptade
phasing. It should be noted that such a discontinuity corresponds to the insertion of two (f, g) - rather than four (d, e,
f, g) - extra residues (Figure 2; Additional File 3, Figure S2).
Interestingly, the alignment of isomin with other IF proteins reveals a gap of two residues in the protein just at this
site (Figure 2). The same feature is also present in the IFC2 protein from C. elegans [20]. Thus, isomin shares the
consensus organization of coil 1b and coil 2 segments in IF
proteins but, on the contrary, coil 1a shows peculiar features. This region can be easily identified by the occurrence
of the helix initiation motif. However, the subsequent aminoacid sequence is profoundly altered, the heptade repeat
underlying the coiled-coil structure is lost and only a residual coiled coil-forming capability is predicted at residues
15-33, which contain the conserved helix initiation motif
(Figure 2; Additional File 3, Figure S2). A brief sequence
rich in glycine and serine residues follows the conserved
motif, forming a region of high predicted flexibility (data
not shown). This is a structural feature that, in most IF
proteins, characterizes the L1 spacer and which is crucial
for the correct IF assembly [4].
Besides the hydrophobic interactions involving the
apolar residues of the heptad repeats, the correct assembly of IFs is specified and stabilized by the formation of
both intra- and interchain salt bridges arising from the
regular disposition of oppositely charged residues [4].
Like other IF proteins, isomin contains a high percentage of charged residues. The observed linear distribution of acidic and basic residues within coil 1b and coil
2 could allow the formation of several stabilizing ionic
interactions. Both coil 1b and coil 2 are basic segments,
with an isoelectric point of 8.78 and 9.39, respectively.

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

Page 5 of 14

Figure 2 Alignment of the isomin sequence with other intermediate filaments (IFs) reveals that isomin shares the IF tripartite
molecular organization. Sequences reported in figure are representatives of protostome cytoplasmic IFs and lamins. They include: two
Caenorhabditis elegans proteins, IFC-1 [Swiss-Prot: O45168] and IFA-1 [Swiss-Prot: P90901]; the non-neuronal IF protein from the mollusc Helix
aspersa (IFEA, [Swiss-Prot:P22488]); the IF protein from the annelid Lumbricus terrestris (Lumte, [Swiss-Prot: Q25421]), and lamin Dm0 from
Drosophila melanogaster [Swiss-Prot: P08928]. Predicted coiled coil segments forming the central rod domain are shaded in grey. The rod
domain is delimited by the conserved helix initiation and helix termination motifs; in the figure, those residues of these signature sequences that
are shared by both isomin and at least one of the other IF sequences are evidenced in red. The different coiled coil subdomains within the rod
are indicated by horizontal lines. The isomin region still endowed with coiled coil-forming capability that contains most of the helix initiation
motif and partly coincides with the beginning of coil 1a in other IFs is boxed in red. The discontinuity in isomin coil 2 that occurs in
correspondence of the stutter region of other IFs is marked by an arrowhead. In the lamin sequence, the nuclear signature motif and the
terminal CaaX box are evidenced in yellow and in green, respectively; the lamin homology domain, occurring in all the sequences reported in
the figure except isomin and IFC-1, is boxed in grey. Symbols underlying the sequence alignment indicate aminoacids that at a given position
are identical (*), strongly similar (:) or weakly similar (.).

This is quite an unusual feature among IF proteins
which, most commonly, possess acidic coiled-coil segments. Basic coiled coil domains, however, also occur in
a few IF proteins from C. elegans (coil 1a of the IFA-3
protein, coil 1b in IFD-1 and in IFD-2).

No obvious sequence relationship is evident with
other IF proteins along the isomin head and tail regions
(Figure 2). Both the head and the tail are short acidic
segments. The tail domain lacks the hallmark motifs of
nuclear lamins (the nuclear localization signal and the

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

C-terminal CaaX box) thus confirming that isomin is a
cytoplasmic IF protein. It shows a peculiar internal
stretch of alternating arginine and proline (residues 371376) and a high content in glycine (20.4%) and serine
(18.5%). The latter feature relates the isomin tail domain
to the unusual tail of C. elegans IFC-1 and IFC-2 proteins
[20]. Similarly, the isomin tail lacks the lamin-homology
domain that is present in the tail domain of most protostome IF proteins except a few proteins, among which
are C. elegans IFC-1 and IFC-2 proteins [6,20].
IF proteins can undergo multiple posttranslational
modifications. In particular, phosphorylation is crucial
for the control of IF dynamics and function [22].
In vivo, this posttranslational modification is modulated
by many kinases and phosphorylated sites are clustered
in the accessible head and/or tail domains, probably
because of limited kinase access along the coiled coil
rod domain [22]. Like other IFs, isomin contains several
sites that are predicted to be specifically phosphorylable
by different kinases (Additional File 4. Figure S3); these
are more abundant in the tail domain (14.8% of the
domain aminoacid content) than in the rod (6.4%) or in
the very short head domain, which contains only one
predicted phosphorylable threonine residue.
Two sumoylation sites are also predicted at Lys308 and
Lys347 (Additional File 4, Figure S3). This protein modification - which has been recently reported to occur also
on cytoplasmic intermediate filaments expressed in the
hemidesmosome-like structures of C. elegans epidermis
- has been implicated in the regulation of IF assembly,
affecting the exchange rate between the soluble and the
polymerized IF fraction [23].
Isomin is a true component of the Isotomurus terminal
web

In order to confirm that isomin is a true component of
the Isotomurus terminal web, specific polyclonal antibodies were raised against the recombinant 120 aa protein
fragment, obtained by cloning of the 360 bp amplification
product (Additional File 2, Figure S1): the specificity of
the affinity-purified antibodies is shown in Figure 3a.
Immunofluorescence experiments on Isotomurus wholebody sections revealed a strong specificity of the staining
for the midgut epithelium, since no other tissue reacted
(data not shown). Only the apical region of the midgut
epithelium was strongly stained (Figure 3b). Sections
tangential to the epithelial surface showed a reticulate
staining within the cell, which is compatible with the
occurrence of a subapical network of filaments, and a
reinforcement of the fluorescent signal along cell boundaries where the filaments of the web adhere to and run
along the intercellular junctions (Figure 3c).
Localization of isomin by immunoelectron microscopy
experiments unequivocally established that this protein

Page 6 of 14

is a specific component of the Isotomurus midgut terminal web. Gold labelling was localized exclusively on the
filamentous web and no other cellular components were
labelled by the anti-isomin antibodies (Figure 3d).
Isomin is able to form filaments in vitro

A hallmark feature of IF proteins is their capability to
renature after solubilization by urea treatment and to
undergo a spontaneous re-assembly process in appropriate conditions. Thus, we preliminarily tested the capability of recombinant isomin to assemble in vitro into
filaments, using the standard re-assembly conditions
described for other IF proteins [24]. Following this protocol, we observed the formation of morphologically distinct filaments (Figure 4a); parallel electrophoretic
analysis showed them to consist essentially of the
40 kDa isomin band (Figure 4b). Most reconstituted filaments were about 9-12 nm in diameter but some unwoven filaments also occurred, revealing the presence
of thinner, 2-4 nm protofilaments (see arrowheads in
Figure 4a, inset). The in-vitro formation of such ‘loose’
filaments could result from suboptimal reassembly conditions. The requirement for peculiar reassembly conditions might be related to the unusual structure of the
isomin molecule, which is characterized by an extremely
short head domain and by a modified coil 1a segment.
In addition, we do not know whether, in vivo, isomin
forms homopolimers or is, instead, part of a heteropolimeric IF system, requiring a partner to correctly assemble into stable filament.
Though further studies are required to address these
points, our first insight into the reassembly properties of
isomin clearly indicates its capability to assemble into
filaments.
Phylogenetic analysis

When isomin is compared with the cytoplasmic IF
sequences available in databank from other protostome
phyla, it appears to cluster with those nematode IF proteins forming the IFC, IFD and IFP classes (Figure 5).
Remarkably, the C. elegans IF proteins that cluster
together with isomin are all constituents of the intestinal
apical terminal web [17] and, like isomin, proteins IFC-1
and IFC-2 are characterized by a shorter tail domain for
the lack of the lamin-homology segment that occurs in
the tail of all other protostome cytoplasmic IFs [6,20].

Discussion
Isomin is a true but peculiar intermediate filament
protein

All the members of the IF protein family share typical
biochemical properties, the same molecular organization, peculiar sequence aspects and the capability to
reassemble spontaneously in vitro, without requiring

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

Page 7 of 14

Figure 3 Isomin is a constituent of Isotomurus terminal web. (a) Specificity of the anti-isomin polyclonal antibodies: (1) Coomassie-blue
staining; (2) immunostaining. A = actin; I = isomin. Electrophoresis on an 8% SDS-polyacrylamide gel. (b, c) Immunofluorescence staining of
paraffin-embedded intestine sections. Bars = 20 μm. (d) Immunoelectron microscopy localization of isomin at the terminal web. Bar = 200 nm.

cofactors. Our results indicate that isomin possesses all
the IF distinctive features.
First, it forms cytoskeletal filaments that are part of
the detergent-resistant fraction of the cell. Second, it follows the consensus tripartite molecular architecture
based on a central coiled coil domain flanked by nonhelical terminal extensions. Third, it possesses all the
signature sequences that characterize IF proteins: the
helix initiation and termination motifs and the conserved discontinuity in the heptade phase in coil 2.
Fourth, it is able to spontaneously self-assemble into
filaments in vitro. Thus, the accumulated evidence
clearly establishes isomin as a new member of the IF
protein family.

However, some very peculiar aspects do occur in the
first coiled coil segment of the isomin molecule, making
this protein a very unique member of the IF family.
This part of the molecule appears to deviate from the
consensus organization of coil 1a subdomain. In isomin,
this region retains the capability to form a coiled coil
structure only over its aminoterminal part, which comprises the helix initiation motif, and only the presence
of this conserved sequence clearly indicates that it is
related to coil 1a of other IF proteins. Thus, a strong
sequence drift has influenced coil 1a in isomin which
appears, however, to be still compatible with the filament assembly process. It is interesting to note that the
glycine and serine-rich sequence following the residual

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

Page 8 of 14

Figure 4 Isomin in vitro reassembly. (a) Negative staining of in vitro-reassembled isomin filament. Bar = 200 nm. The inset shows at a greater
magnification two loosely packed filaments, revealing thinner protofilaments (arrowheads); bar = 100 nm. (b) Electrophoretic analysis on a 12%
SDS-polyacrylamide gel of the sedimented (P) and supernatant (S) fraction after centrifugation of in-vitro reassembled isomin filaments. Migration
of molecular weight reference proteins is indicated on the right.

coiled coil segment is predicted to possess a high flexibility. This is a structural feature that, in most IF proteins, characterizes the L1 spacer and which is crucial
for the correct IF assembly [4]. Thus, the occurrence of
the helix initiation motif followed by a flexible region
might still provide the isomin molecule with the essential structural features required for filament assembly.
It is also worth noting that, in IF proteins, coil 1a is
thought to possess properties distinct from the other
rod subdomains [25]. The possibility that it might form
a dynamic structure able to switch between a twostranded coiled-coil and an open conformation consisting of two separate a-helical strands has been proposed
for vertebrate vimentin [26]. It has also been suggested
that the capability of coil 1a to undergo a structural
rearrangement might be important during the elongation phase of vimentin IF assembly which occurs by the
longitudinal annealing of short, but already full-width,
unit-length filaments (ULFs). The assembly of the longrod invertebrate cytoplasmic IFs follows a different
route, which does not imply the formation of ULFs [27].
Rather, tetramers anneal longitudinally to form long
protofilaments which then associate laterally to yield the
mature filament; this process is essentially mediated by
the antiparallel association of coil 2 domains [27]. It is
possible that this route of IF assembly is more compatible with the deviations from the consensus structure
that have occurred in isomin coil 1a.
Isomin exhibits other unusual features besides the
striking divergence observed in coil 1a region. First, it

possesses very short end domains: it is tempting to
relate the notable reduction of the head region - which
is only 13 residues long - to the divergence of the aminoterminal part of the rod domain discussed above. Second, the tail domain is characterized by both an unusual
aminoacid composition and the absence of the so-called
lamin-homology domain which is a feature shared by all
protostome IF proteins, with only a very few exceptions
(see below). Third, the discontinuity in the heptad
repeat, that is observed in all IF proteins at a conserved
position of coil 2, consists in isomin of the insertion of
two rather than of four positions. Fourth, coil 1b and
coil 2 subdomains are characterized by overall basic
properties which is quite an unusual feature among IF
rod domains that more commonly show acidic charge
features.
Thus isomin, while showing the common IF molecular
hallmarks, exhibits a considerable divergence from the
IF consensus structure.
Evolutionary considerations

Isomin is the first cytoplasmic intermediate filament
that, so far, has been found to be expressed in an
arthropod species. Until now, arthropods have been
thought not to express cytoplasmic intermediate filaments on the basis of both electron microscopy and
molecular cloning [6,9,10]. However, these studies
referred to a limited number of species. I. maculatus
belongs to collembolans, a group of basal hexapods that
has been recently positioned close to the branching of

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

Page 9 of 14

Figure 5 Distance analysis of isomin and protostome cytoplasmic intermediate filament (IF) proteins. Reconstruction of the phylogenetic
tree was performed using the neighbour-joining method of the PHYLIP software package. GenBank accession numbers, referred to the trmbl (tr)
and swiss-prot (sp) databank, respectively, are followed by species names. Different phyla are represented by diverse colours. Note: molluscan IF
proteins cluster into two groups, corresponding to neuronal and non neuronal IF proteins. Only cytoplasmic complete IF sequences from
protostome species have been included in this analysis.

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

the arthropod phylogenetic tree, among Pancrustacea
[28]. So, with respect to the other species analysed, collembolans might be more likely to have retained characters which occurred in the common ancestor but that
have been subsequently lost during arthropod evolution.
Both the organization of the cytoskeletal array it
assembles in vivo and some of its molecular aspects
relate isomin to a group of IF proteins that are
expressed in the intestinal epithelium of nematodes. The
filamentous terminal web found in I. maculatus is ultrastructurally very similar to that described in some nematodes (compare our results with Figure 2 in [16]).
Notably, the occurrence of such a peculiar array of IFs
in the sub-microvillar region of the intestinal epithelium
has not, so far, been detected in any other invertebrate
group, although most phyla are likely to express IF proteins in their internal epithelia [9].
At the molecular level, phylogenetic analysis relates
isomin to a group of nematode proteins - the members
of the Intermediate Filament protein C, D and P (IFC,
IFD and IFP) subfamilies. Remarkably, these proteins
are all components of the terminal web in C. elegans
intestine [17]. In particular, some of the unusual structural features that are exhibited by the isomin molecule
(the absence of the lamin-homology segment as well as
the occurrence in the tail of motifs rich in glycine and
serine residues) are also present in the worm IFC-1 and
IFC-2 proteins [6,20]. Moreover, IFC-2 has been
reported to possess in coil 2 the same type of unusual
structural discontinuity we have found in isomin [20].
These findings relate isomin mostly to the IFC nematode proteins and it is interesting to note that the latter
are divergent proteins within the C. elegans IF family
[6,20].
It is important to stress that the observed relatedness
between isomin and nematode IFs is consistent with,
and provides further support to, the recently established
phylogenetic relationship between arthropods and nematodes. Nematodes have been proposed to be a sister
group of arthropods within the Ecdisozoa clade on the
basis of morphological, developmental and molecular
characters [29]. In this context, the expression of an IF
terminal web in the midgut of Isotomurus species
appears to be evolutionarily related to the original intestine organization present in the ancestor common to
arthropods and nematodes.
In C. elegans, IFs have been proposed to provide the
intestinal wall with a high degree of mechanical and
osmotic resilience. This view is mainly based on the
observation that down-regulation of the IFC-2 protein
induces multiple bubble-shaped invaginations of the
lumen into intestinal cells, suggesting the occurrence of
an increased epithelial fragility [30]. At the same time,
the integrity of the terminal web is not required for the

Page 10 of 14

establishment and maintenance of the epithelial polarity,
since the general organization of the apical domain and
the junctional integrity are not affected. As to the other
components of the terminal web, while the loss of a single protein, other than IFC-2, does not induce major
defects on intestine organization [30], a pronounced
defective phenotype is observed after simultaneous
down-regulation of two or three IF proteins [31] - a fact
that has been interpreted in light of the redundancy of
IF proteins in nematodes.
Thus, the available evidence points to a central role
for IFs in nematode intestine. This organ is subjected to
a substantial mechanical stress from all directions, due
both to the transport of nutrients and to the peculiar
body plan organization and motility of these organisms,
which are dominated by the high hydrostatic pressure
present within their body cavity. The terminal web possesses peculiar mechanical properties able to provide the
apical region of the cell with enhanced stability, as it is
also indicated by the possibility to dissect, from various
nematode species, the so-called endotube, a single and
mechanically resistant unit which consists of both
microvilli and the apical layer of the epithelium, including the web [16].
Isomin may have a similar stabilizing role in Isotomurus midgut epithelium. Notably, the terminal web is
by far the most stable cellular component also in the
intestine of this organism, since, at molt, it persists in
the lumen as a compact filamentous network even after
cell lysis (unpublished results).
However, during arthropod evolution, the accomplishment of a protective cuticle, in addition to maintaining
a constant internal environment, has relieved most
organs - and also the intestine - from external mechanical stress. In the light of this, the peculiarities observed
in the molecular organization of isomin may either
serve specific functions or, on the contrary, may be indicative of an increased rate of molecular drift which is, in
turn, related to the development of the cuticle and of
the new arthropod body plan. Thus, the reinforcing IFbased intestinal cytoskeleton - which is not essential for
the establishment of epithelial polarity and function - is
no longer subject to functional constraint and the onset
of structural variations in its molecular components is
more likely to occur. If the latter was the case, isomin
should then be considered as a sort of molecular remnant leading to the loss of IF proteins during arthropod
evolution.

Conclusions
Our results provide the first characterization of an IF
protein from an arthropod species and set a new basis
for the analysis of IF protein evolution during arthropod
phylogeny. In the light of this new information, the

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

statement that the arthropod phylum lacks cytoplasmic
IFs is no longer tenable. The unusual structure of the
isomin protein and the strong molecular drift that has
influenced the original coil 1a segment suggest the possibility that during arthropod evolution IF proteins
might have subsequently accumulated further molecular
modifications, eventually leading to the loss of IFs or to
the expression of IF-related proteins with modified organizations that fail to assemble in canonical filaments,
and may, therefore, be difficult to identify. A very limited number of species from this huge phylum has been
analysed so far and further thorough molecular analyses
on a more representative number of species will be
necessary to address this important question.

Methods
Specimens of the collembolan species Isotomurus maculatus (Arthropoda, Schäffer 1986) were collected in the
neighbourhood of Siena and dissected in phosphate buffered saline (PBS; 171 mM NaCl, 6 mM Na phosphate,
3 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM EGTA, pH 7.4). Midguts were then processed for electron microscopy, protein analysis, RNA extraction and immunomicroscopy as
described below.
Cytoskeletal preparations

Midgut cytoskeletal insoluble fractions were obtained
following the procedure described by Pruss et al. [32].
Briefly, 300-500 midguts were homogenized in a volume
of 1.5 mL of PBS added with a cocktail of protease inhibitors (P2714, Sigma, NY, USA) and centrifuged at
10,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. The sediment was then
extracted in 1.5 mL of PBS containing 0.6 M KCl and
0.5% Triton X-100 and centrifuged as above. The resulting pellet was washed twice in PBS and then either fixed
for electron microscopy analysis or denatured for successive sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS)-acrylamide gel
electrophoresis.
Gel electrophoresis and immunoblot

Electrophoretic analysis of cytoskeletal fractions was carried out on 8% or 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gels according to the method used by Laemmli [33]. Gels were
either stained using standard Coomassie blue staining
procedures or transferred onto nitrocellulose for subsequent immunoblot analysis.
Electrophoretic transfer of proteins onto nitrocellulose
was performed as described by Towbin et al. [34], using
a modified transfer buffer, consisting of 50 mM Tris, 38
mM glycine and 5% methanol. Transferred protein
bands were immunostained using the affinity-purified
anti-isomin polyclonal antibody (see below) and a peroxidase-labelled anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Cappel,
PA, USA). Blots were then processed for ECL detection

Page 11 of 14

(GE Healthcare, NJ, USA), with exposure times from 5 s
to 5 min.
Protein analysis by mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS)

Analysis by mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) of the
main tryptic fragments obtained by digestion of the isomin band was performed by the Swiss-2D Service (Geneva, Switzerland); the obtained peptide aminoacid
sequences are listed in Additional File 1, Table S1.
RNA preparation and RT-PCR

Total RNA was isolated from adults of I. maculatus frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized using a Polytron homogenizer (Kinematica AG, Littau, Switzerland)
according to the method described by Chomczynski and
Sacchi [35]. RNAs (1 μg) were converted to cDNAs with
an oligo(dT) 18 primer and SuperScript™ II Reverse
Transcriptase (Invitrogen, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Forward and reverse degenerate
primers were designed on the basis of three amino acid
sequences obtained by mass spectrometry: (B1-B2)
YEAEAAK, (C1-C2) ESTGDAE and (D1-D2) FGHADQEK. Their sequences are listed in Additional File 1,
Table S1. A partial 360 bp fragment of the isomin protein was amplified by RT-PCR using the combination
B2/D1 of degenerate primers. Reactions were performed
using Expand High Fidelity PCR System (Roche, Basel,
Switzerland) under the following conditions: 95°C for 10
min; cycles 1-5: 94°C for 1 min, 35°C for 1 min, 72°C
for 1 min; cycles 6-46: 94°C for 1 min, 54°C for 1 min,
72°C for 1 min and 72°C for 10 min. PCR products
were purified using Wizard® SV Gel and PCR Clean-Up
System (Promega, WI, USA), cloned into a TA cloning
vector (Invitrogen) and sequenced using a CEQ 8000XL
automated DNA Analysis System (Beckman Coulter,
CA, USA) on both strands. The 360 bp deduced amino
acid sequence showed the complete sequences used to
design B2 and D1 degenerate primers plus an additional
one corresponding to the mass spectrometry fragment 5
(Additional File 1, Table S1).
Cloning of full length cDNA by rapid amplification of the
complementary DNA ends (RACE)

In order to obtain the full-length cDNA for isomin, a 5’
and 3’ RACE was performed on I. maculatus total RNA
using a GeneRacer™ Kit (Invitrogen) and following
manufacturer’s instructions. Isomin specific primers D1_FEcoRI, Iso112_for (3’ nested primer; Additional
File 1, Table S1) used in 3’ amplification, B2_RBamHI
and iso577_rev (5’ nested primer; Additional File 1,
Table S1) used in 5’ amplification - were designed based
on the partial 360 bp sequence mentioned above. Both
nested PCR reactions gave a single product of ≈1200 bp
and ≈ 500 bp, respectively. The 5’ and 3’ RACE products

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

were purified, cloned and sequenced as described above.
The complete isomin cDNA sequence has been deposited in GenBank under accession number FJ264504.
Sequence analysis

Homology searches for nucleotide and amino acid
sequences were performed using the BLAST suite of
programs (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi).
Programs employed for the prediction of molecular
domains implicated in coiled coils formation were Coils
(http://www.ch.embnet.org/software/COILS_form.html)
and Marcoil (http://bioinf.wehi.edu.au/folders/mauro/
Marcoil/index.html); sequence alignments were obtained
using ClustalW (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw2/
index.html). Prediction of phosphorylated sites and of
sumoylated residues was performed using NetPhos
2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetPhos/) and
SUMOsp 2.0 (http://sumosp.biocuckoo.org/prediction.
php), respectively. Distance analysis of protostome cytoplasmic IF sequences was carried out using the Protdist
and Neighbor programs of the Phylip package (JTT
matrix, 100 bootstrap replicates) available at the Pasteur
Institute web server (http://mobyle.pasteur.fr/cgi-bin/
portal.py).
Bacterial expression of recombinant protein

For the preparation of the glutathione S-transferase
(GST) fusion constructs, either a portion (360 bp, coding the protein region from Phe 11 to Lys 131 ) or the
whole isomin protein coding region (1236 bp) were
amplified by PCR. Oligonucleotide pairs containing sites
for in-frame directional cloning in the pGEX-6P-2 vector (GE Healthcare, NJ, USA) were: D1_FBamHI/
B2_RSmaI for the 360 bp fragment and isoml_BamHI/
isoml_SmaI for the 1236 bp one (Additional File 1,
Table S1). PCR cycling, for the short fragment amplification, included an initial denaturation at 94°C for
5 min followed by 40 cycles of 94°C for 1 min, 52°C for
1 min, 72°C for 1 min and a final extension step at 72°C
for 10 min. The 1236 bp region was amplified under the
same PCR conditions but with an annealing temperature
of 56°C. The PCR products were cloned into the BamHI
and SmaI sites of the bacterial expression vector pGEX6P-2 (GE Healthcare, NJ, USA) in frame with the
upstream gene GST. Expression of the fusion protein
was induced in E. coli by addition of Isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG; see below).
Purification of the fusion protein and production of
specific antibodies

Recombinant bacterial strains expressing the fusion protein - either the whole isomin molecule or its 120 aa
fragment from Phe 11 to Lys 131 (see Additional File 2,
Figure S1) - were grown at 37°C in 400 mL of Luria-

Page 12 of 14

Bertani (LB) medium added with 50 μg/mL of ampicillin, until an OD 600 of about 0.6-0.8 is achieved. After
the addition of IPTG to a final concentration of 0.1 mM,
the culture was incubated at 37°C for 2 h under shaking.
Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3500 g for
10 min, resuspended by vortexing in 25 mL of B-PER™
reagent (Pierce) and shaken at room temperature for
10 min; soluble proteins were separated by insoluble
material by centrifugation at 27000 g for 15 min.
Most part of the fusion protein was contained in
inclusion bodies. Only in the case of the 120 aa fragment it was possible to recover an amount of soluble
protein sufficient for the subsequent purification by affinity chromatography on Gluthatione Sepharose 4B (GE
Healthcare, NJ, USA). This procedure was carried out
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the
recovered soluble fraction was added with 1 mL of a
50% slurry of resin and incubated for 1 h with gentle
agitation. Resin was then collected by centrifugation at
500 g for 5 min and washed twice in PBS. Protein
bound to the resin was eluted with 10 mM glutathione
in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, dialyzed against 0.9% NaCl
and used for rabbit immunization following standard
procedures. The resulting polyclonal antibodies were
blot-affinity purified according to Tang (36), using nitrocellulose membrane fragments containing the isomin 40
kDa protein band.
Isomin in vitro reassembly

Recombinant isomin was essentially recovered in the
insoluble inclusion bodies. For their purification, the
insoluble pelleted material obtained from a 50 mL-culture after cell lysis was resuspended by vortexing in
5 mL B-PER™, added with 200 μg/mL lysozime and
incubated at room temperature for 5 min. The suspension was then added with 15 mL of B-PER™ diluted
1:10 in 20 mM Tris pH 7.5 and centrifuged for 15 min
at 27000 g. Pelleted inclusion bodies were washed twice
in B-PER™ diluted 1:10 in 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, then
twice in 2% TRITON 10 mM EDTA. The final pellet
essentially consisted of a band of about 66 kDa, corresponding to the recombinant protein (Additional File 5,
Figure S4A). For cleavage of the GST moiety, pelleted
inclusion bodies were thoroughly resuspended at about
75 μg/mL in a buffer consisting of 50 mM Tris-HCl,
150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.0,
added with 10 U of PreScission Protease (GE Healthcare, NJ, USA) and incubated at 5°C for 20 h. After centrifugation at 8000 g for 20 min, both supernatant and
sediment fractions were analysed by SDS-page (Additional File 5, Figure S4B); most part of the recombinant
protein was shown to be cleaved and still to be contained in the insoluble fraction, while the GST protein
was recovered in the soluble fraction.

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

The insoluble pellet recovered after cleavage was dissolved in 10 mM Tris, 9.5 M urea, pH 7.0 and incubated
for 1 h at room temperature. After centrifugation for
1 h at 150000 g, analysis by SDS-page of the soluble and
insoluble fractions revealed that urea treatment solubilised about 50% of the isomin protein (Additional File 5,
Figure S4C). As described by Herrmann et al. [24],
urea-solubilized protein was then dialyzed against a series of solutions (1 h each) containing decreasing concentrations (8 M, 6 M, 4 M, 2 M) of urea dissolved in 5
mM Tris, 0.1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT,
pH8.4 and, finally, against the same buffer containing no
urea. After dialysis, the sample was added with an
appropriate volume of 10× reassembly buffer (0.2 M
Tris, 0.5 M NaCl, pH 7.0), incubated for 1 h at room
temperature and then centrifuged at 150000 g for 1 h.
Sediment and supernatant were analysed by both SDSpage and negative staining.
Immunomicroscopy

For immunofluorescence microscopy, midguts were fixed
in absolute ethanol for 1 h at 4°C and then paraffinembedded. After rehydration, sections were treated with
1% NaBH4 for 30 min to quench autofluorescence and
washed twice for 5 min with PBS. Successively, sections
were incubated for 1 h in PBS containing 3% bovine
serum albumine and 0.5% Tween-20, and for 2-4 h in the
affinity-purified primary antibody. After two 10-min
washes in PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20, sections were
incubated for 1 h in the secondary antibody (fluoresceinconjugated anti-rabbit antibodies, Cappel), washed again
in PBS-T and finally mounted in 90% glycerol.

Page 13 of 14

Wales, UK). Grids were then washed 5 × 10 min in PBS
and 5 × 10 min in distilled water, then counterstained as
above reported. All the ultrathin sections were observed at
a Philips CM10 EM operating at 80 kV.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1. Mass spectrometry fragments and primers
used in polymerase chain reaction.
Additional file 2: Figure S1. Nucleotide and deduced aminoacid
sequences of isomin complementary DNA. The aminoacid stretches
corresponding to the sequences obtained by mass spectrometry analysis
of tryptic fragments are underlined; the 360 bp fragment that has been
initially obtained by reverse transciptase polymerase chain reaction is
shaded. The start codon and the poly(A) signal are underlined. The stop
codon is marked with an asterisk.
Additional file 3: Figure S2. Heptad repeats along the three coiled coil
domains of the isomin molecule. The (abcdefg) positions of consecutive
heptads are reported above the isomin aminoacid sequence; coiled coil
domains are highlighted in grey. The arrowhead indicates the position of
the stutter. The heptad positions and the ends of the coiled coil
domains were inferred by comparison of the secondary structure
prediction results with the sequence alignment of isomin and other
invertebrate intermediate filament proteins.
Additional file 4: Figure S3. Predicted sites of posttranslational
modification in the isomin molecule: isomin is predicted to be a
phosphorylated and sumoylated protein. Phosphorylable serine and
threonine residues are in red, the two predicted sumoylated lysine
residues are in green. Arrowheads indicate the region of the molecule
comprised between the helix initiation and the helix termination motifs;
coil 1b and coil 2 are highlighted in pale blue.
Additional file 5: Figure S4. Purification of recombinant isomin. (A)
Purified inclusion bodies contain a band of about 66 K, corresponding to
the fusion protein GST-isomin. (B) After treatment of inclusion bodies
with the preScission protease, isomin still occurs in the insoluble fraction
(P), while GST is solubilised (S). (C) Urea treatment results in the
solubilization of about 50% isomin from inclusion bodies. Electrophoresis
on a 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel.

Electron microscopy

Whole midguts or midgut TRITON-resistant fractions
were fixed with glutaraldehyde and tannic acid, post
fixed with uranyl acetate and embedded in an Epon/
Araldite mixture as previously described in [37]. Before
observation by TEM, thin sections were routinely
stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate.
For post-embedding electron microscopy immunolocalization, whole midguts were fixed at 4°C for 2 h in 0.1 M
phosphate buffer (PB) pH 7.2, containing 0.2% glutaraldehyde and 2% p-formaldehyde, rinsed overnight in PB, dehydrated at 4°C in a graded ethanol series and embedded in
Lowicryl K4M as described in [38]. For immunogold staining, sections were saturated with 3% bovine serum albumin
(BSA), 15% normal serum in PBS (2 h), treated with
20 mM glycine in PBS (20 min), and then incubated overnight at 4°C in the primary antibody diluted in PBS containing 0.2% BSA. After one 10-min wash with PBS
containing 0.5% Tween 20 and five 10-min washes in PBS,
sections were incubated for 1 h at room temperature in the
secondary antibody (GAM IgG-G10, Biocell, Cardiff,

Abbreviations
BSA: bovine serum albumin; GST: glutathione S-transferase; IF: intermediate
filament; IPTG: Isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside; RT-PCR = reversetranscriptase polymerase chain reaction; RACE: rapid amplification of cDNA
ends; cDNA; complementary DNA; SDS: sodium dodecyl sulphate.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to David Mercati for helping in the preparation of the
figures and to Eugenio Paccagnini for technical support during antibody
production.
Authors’ contributions
CM conceived the experimental project and wrote the paper. CM and DC
performed the biochemical and immunolocalization experiments. SC
performed the molecular studies. CM and SC were responsible for molecular
data analyses and interpretation. RD and PL performed the ultrastructural
analyses. All the authors discussed, revised and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 4 October 2010 Accepted: 28 February 2011
Published: 28 February 2011
References
1. Herrmann H, Bär H, Kreplak L, Strelkov S, Aebi U: Intermediate filaments:
from cell architecture to nanomechanics. Nature Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007,
8:562-573.

Mencarelli et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/17

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.
25.

Kim S, Coulombe PA: Intermediate filament scaffolds fulfill mechanical,
organizational and signaling functions in the cytoplasm. Genes Dev 2007,
21:1581-1597.
Omary MB: ’IF-pathies’: a broad spectrum of intermediate filamentassociated diseases. J Clin Invest 2009, 119:1756-1762.
Parry DAD: Microdissection of the sequence and structure of
intermediate filaments chains. Adv Prot Chem 2005, 70:113-142.
Erber A, Riemer D, Hofemeister H, Bovenschulte M, Stick R, Panopoulou G,
Lehrach H, Weber C: Characterization of the Hydra lamin and its gene: a
molecular phylogeny of metazoan lamins. J Mol Evol 1999, 49:260-271.
Erber A, Riemer D, Bovenshulte M, Weber K: Molecular phylogeny of
metazoan intermediate filament proteins. J Mol Evol 1998, 47:751-762.
Dodemont H, Riemer D, Weber K: Structure of an invertebrate gene
encoding cytoplasmic intermediate filament (IF) proteins: implications
for the origin and the diversification of IF proteins. EMBO J 1990,
9:4083-4094.
Hesse M, Magin TM, Weber C: Genes for intermediate filament proteins
and the draft sequence of the human genome: novel keratin genes
related to keratin genes 8 and 18. J Cell Sci 2001, 114:2569-2575.
Bartnik E, Weber K: Widespead occurrence of intermediate filaments in
invertebrates; common principles and aspects of diversion. Eur J Cell Biol
1989, 50:17-33.
Goldstein LSB, Gunawardena S: Flying through the Drosophila cytoskeletal
genome. J Cell Biol 2000, 150:F63-F68.
Gregory SL, Brown NH: kakapo, a gene required for adhesion between
and within cell layers in Drosophila, encodes a large cytoskeletal linker
protein related to plectin and dystrophin. J Cell Biol 1998, 143:1271-1282.
Mogensen MM, Tucker JB: Intermicrotubular actin filaments in the
transalar cytoskeletal arrays of Drosophila. J Cell Sci 1988, 91:431-438.
Eisenbeis G, Meyer E: Some ultrastructural features of glacier Collembola,
Isotoma ’Sp. G’ and Isotomurus Palliceps (Uzel, 1891) from the Tyrolean
central Alps. In Second International Seminar on Aperygota: 4-6 September
1986, Siena. Edited by: Dallai R. Tuscany: University of Siena; 1986:257-272.
Barra JA, Poinsot-Balaguer N: Un ‘terminal web’ fenêtré dans le
mésentéron Isotoma viridis Bourlet (Collembola, Isotomidae). Ecol Biol Sol
1987, 24:75-84.
Dallai R, Trastullo E, Lupetti P, Mencarelli C: Unusual cytoskeletal
association with the intercellular septate junction in the midgut of
Collembola (Insecta: Apterygota). Int J Insect Morphol Embryol 1993,
22:473-486.
Munn EA, Greenwood CA: The occurrence of submicrovillar endotube
(modified terminal web) and associated cytoskeletal structures in the
intestinal epithelia of nematodes. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 1984, 306:1-18.
Carberry K, Wiesenfahrt T, Windoffer R, Bossinger O, Leube RE: Intermediate
filaments in Caenorabditis elegans. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 2009, 66:852-864.
Bartnik E, Kossmagk-Stephan K, Osborn M, Weber K: In gastropods
intermediate filaments occur in epithelia, glia, connective tissue cells,
and neurons but not in muscle. Eur J Cell Biol 1987, 43:329-338.
Riemer D, Dodemont H, Weber K: Cloning of the neuronal intermediate
filament protein of the gastropod Aplysia californica; identification of an
amino acid residue essential for the IFA epitope. Eur J Cell Biol 1991,
56:351-357.
Dodemont H, Riemer D, Ledger N, Weber K: Eight genes and alternative
RNA processing pathways generate an unexpectedly large diversity of
cytoplasmic intermediate filament proteins in the nematode
Caenorabditis elegans. EMBO J 1994, 13:2625-2638.
Nicolet S, Herrmann H, Aebi U, Strelkov SV: Atomic structure of vimentin
coil 2. J Struct Biol 2010, 170:369-376.
Omary MB, Ku NO, Tao GZ, Toivola DM, Liao J: ’Heads and tails’ of
intermediate filament phosphorylation: multiple sites and functional
insights. Trends Biochem Sci 2006, 31:383-394.
Kaminsky R, Denison C, Bening-Abu-Shach U, Chisholm AD, Gygi SP,
Broday L: SUMO regulates the assembly and function of a cytoplasmic
intermediate filament protein in C. elegans. Dev Cell 2009, 17:724-735.
Herrmann H, Kreplak L, Aebi U: Isolation, characterization and in vitro
assembly of intermediate filaments. Meth Cell Biol 2004, 78:3-24.
Parry DA, Strelkov SV, Burkhard P, Aebi U, Herrmann H: Towards a
molecular description of intermediate filament structure and assembly.
Exp Cell Res 2007, 313:2204-2216.

Page 14 of 14

26. Meier M, Padilla GP, Herrmann H, Wedig T, Hergt M, Patel TR, Stetefeld J,
Aebi U, Burkhard P: Vimentin coil 1A-A molecular switch involved in the
initiation of filament elongation. J Mol Biol 2009, 390:245-261.
27. Geisler N, Schünemann J, Weber K, Häner M, Aebi U: Assembly and
architecture of invertebrate cytoplasmic intermediate filaments reconcile
features of vertebrate cytoplasmic and nuclear lamin-type intermediate
filaments. J Mol Biol 1998, 282:601-617.
28. Nardi F, Spinsanti G, Boore JL, Carapelli A, Dallai R, Frati F: Hexapod origins:
monophyletic or paraphyletic? Science 2003, 299:1887-1889.
29. Schmidt-Rhaesa A, Bartolomaeus T, Lemburg C, Ehlers U, Garey JR: The
position of the Arthropoda in the phylogenetic system. J Morphol 1998,
238:263-285.
30. Hüsken K, Wiesenfahrt T, Abraham C, Windoffer R, Bossinger O, Leube RE:
Maintenance of the intestinal tube in Caenorhabditis elegans: the role of
the intermediate filament protein IFC-2. Differentiation 2008, 76:881-896.
31. Karabinos A, Schünemann J, Weber K: Most genes encoding cytoplasmic
intermediate filament (IF) proteins of the nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans are required in late embryogenesis. Eur J Cell Biol 2004,
83:457-468.
32. Pruss RM, Mirsky R, Raff MC, Thorpe R, Dowding AJ, Anderton BH: All
classes of intermediate filaments share a common antigenic
determinant defined by a monoclonal antibody. Cell 1981, 27:419-428.
33. Laemmli UK: Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the
head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 1970, 227:680-685.
34. Towbin H, Staehelin J, Gordon J: Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from
polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets. Procedure and some
applications. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1979, 76:4350-4354.
35. Chomczynski P, Sacchi N: Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid
guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. Anal Biochem
1987, 162:156-159.
36. Tang WJ: Blot-affinity purification of antibodies. Methods Cell Biol 1993,
37:95-104.
37. Dallai R, Afzelius BA: Microtubular diversity in insect spermatozoa: results
obtained with a new fixative. J Struct Biol 1990, 103:164-179.
38. Carlemalm E, Villiger W, Hobot JA, Acetarin JD, Kellenberger E: Low
temperature embedding with Lowicryl resins: two new formulations and
some applications. J Microsc 1985, 140:55-63.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-17
Cite this article as: Mencarelli et al.: Isomin: a novel cytoplasmic
intermediate filament protein from an arthropod species. BMC Biology
2011 9:17.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
