<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1475-2875-2-21.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Malaria Journal

BioMed Central

Open Access

Research

Pilot survey of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) from the asexual
blood stages of Plasmodium vivax in human patients
Emilio F Merino1, Carmen Fernandez-Becerra1, Alda MBN Madeira2,
Ariane L Machado3, Alan Durham3, Arthur Gruber2, Neil Hall4 and
Hernando A del Portillo*1
Address: 1Departamento de Parasitologia, ICB, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Departamento de Patologia, FMVZ, Universidade
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Departamento de Ciências da Computação, IME, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil and 4The Sanger
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK
Email: Emilio F Merino - efmerino@yahoo.com; Carmen Fernandez-Becerra - carmenfb@icb.usp.br; Alda MBN Madeira - albackx@usp.br;
Ariane L Machado - ariane@ime.usp.br; Alan Durham - alan@ime.usp.br; Arthur Gruber - argruber@usp.br; Neil Hall - nh1@sanger.ac.uk;
Hernando A del Portillo* - hernando@icb.usp.br
* Corresponding author

Published: 21 July 2003
Malaria Journal 2003, 2:21

Received: 02 May 2003
Accepted: 21 July 2003

This article is available from: http://www.malariajournal.com/content/2/1/21
© 2003 Merino et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: Plasmodium vivax is the most widely distributed human malaria, responsible for 70–
80 million clinical cases each year and large socio-economical burdens for countries such as Brazil
where it is the most prevalent species. Unfortunately, due to the impossibility of growing this
parasite in continuous in vitro culture, research on P. vivax remains largely neglected.
Methods: A pilot survey of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) from the asexual blood stages of P.
vivax was performed. To do so, 1,184 clones from a cDNA library constructed with parasites
obtained from 10 different human patients in the Brazilian Amazon were sequenced. Sequences
were automatedly processed to remove contaminants and low quality reads. A total of 806
sequences with an average length of 586 bp met such criteria and their clustering revealed 666
distinct events. The consensus sequence of each cluster and the unique sequences of the singlets
were used in similarity searches against different databases that included P. vivax, Plasmodium
falciparum, Plasmodium yoelii, Plasmodium knowlesi, Apicomplexa and the GenBank non-redundant
database. An E-value of <10-30 was used to define a significant database match. ESTs were manually
assigned a gene ontology (GO) terminology
Results: A total of 769 ESTs could be assigned a putative identity based upon sequence similarity
to known proteins in GenBank. Moreover, 292 ESTs were annotated and a GO terminology was
assigned to 164 of them.
Conclusion: These are the first ESTs reported for P. vivax and, as such, they represent a valuable
resource to assist in the annotation of the P. vivax genome currently being sequenced. Moreover,
since the GC-content of the P. vivax genome is strikingly different from that of P. falciparum, these
ESTs will help in the validation of gene predictions for P. vivax and to create a gene index of this
malaria parasite.

Page 1 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

Malaria Journal 2003, 2

Background
Plasmodium vivax is the most widely distributed human
malaria and responsible for 70–80 million clinical cases
each year and large socio-economical burdens for countries such as Brazil and India, where it is the most prevalent species [1]. Unfortunately, due to the problem of
maintaining this parasite in continuous in vitro culture,
the fact that vivax malaria is not as life threatening as falciparum malaria, the low parasitemias associated with
natural human infections and the difficulty of adapting
field isolates to growth in monkeys, research on P. vivax
remains largely neglected. Moreover, the strict species-specificity of the naturally acquired antimalarial protective
immune responses, makes it unlikely that a vaccine
against Plasmodium falciparum will be active against P.
vivax. Together, these data call for a comprehensive
research effort to study P. vivax.
A genomics approach was used to accelerate gene discovery in P. vivax by constructing a library in yeast artificial
chromosomes using parasites obtained directly from a
human patient [2]. Indeed, sequencing of a 155,771 bp
telomeric YAC from this library revealed the existence of a
multi-gene family termed vir (P. vivax variant genes). vir
genes are most likely involved in immune evasion and
represents 15–20% of the total gene content of the parasite assuming a vir gene copy number of 600–1000 copies
per haploid genome [3]. Further sequencing of a 199,866
bp internal YAC clone from this same library identified 41
genes in conserved synteny with a region of chromosome
3 in P. falciparum, but found the YAC sequence to lack
orthologs of the P. falciparum genes that code for cytoadherence phenotypes within the same region [4].
Large-scale sequence analysis of two mung-bean nucleasedigested genomic DNA libraries: the Pv MBN library from
the Belem strain [5] and the Pv MBN library #30 from the
Salvador I strain [6], have also accelerated gene discovery
in P. vivax. Indeed, comparative in silico analyses of GSS
sequences from these two libraries with GSS and ESTs
sequences from libraries of P. falciparum and Plasmodium
berghei, increased by at least 10-fold the number of predicted P. vivax genes. Technical problems with extractions
of poly(A) mRNA from P. vivax, however, have hampered
the construction of cDNA libraries of the parasite destined
for high-throughput sequencing [6]. Data on ESTs of P.
vivax are, therefore, needed to validate these gene predictions and to create a gene index of this malaria parasite.
Most important, data on ESTs of P. vivax will be key to
assist in the annotation of the genome of the El Salvador
I strain presently sequenced to fivefold coverage by TIGR
[7].
The construction of a P. vivax cDNA library obtained with
parasite material collected directly from 10 different

http://www.malariajournal.com/content/2/1/21

human patients in the Brazilian Amazon was recently
reported [8]. This paper presents a survey of ESTs from this
library, which includes similarity analyses, annotations
and assignment of gene ontology terminology.

Methods
Web-based resources
Fasta files and results from all analyses including clustering, BLAST similarity searches against the different databases and GO links of all the ESTs are available at http://
malariadb.ime.usp.br/pvivax-ESTs.
cDNA clones and sequencing
The cDNA library was constructed from mRNA extracted
from parasites obtained directly from 10 different human
patients from Belem de Pará in the Brazilian Amazon [8].
High quality double-stranded DNA from 1,184 individual
bacterial clones from this library was prepared and used as
template in sequencing reactions. Single-pass automated
sequencing reactions were performed with T3 (forward)
primer and the ABI PRISM BigDye terminator cycle
sequencing kit version 2.0 (Applied Biosystems). Poor
quality sequences were also sequenced with the T7
primer. Samples were resolved and analyzed in an
ABI3700 96-capillary DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Bacterial clones from all the ESTs are available on
request via the Malaria Research and Reference Reagent
Resource Center (MR4) at http://www.malaria.mr4.org.
BLAST analysis, Pfam and HMMs
An automated analysis pipeline was constructed to process the reads (E-Gene – a pipeline generation system, A.
Gruber & A.M. Durham, manuscript in preparation). The
trace files were initially submitted to Phred [9] for basecalling and quality assignment. Then, sequences were
sequentially submitted to a quality filter where accepted
reads had to present at least 85 bases with a phred quality
above 15 in a sliding window of 100 bp. After vector
masking using default parameters, end trimming and size
filtering (reads with <70 bp were discarded), sequences
were checked for bacterial, ribosomal and human contamination and filtered when positive. EST clustering was
performed by the program CAP3 using default parameters
[10]. The average length of the EST clusters was 586 bp
and regions of low complexity were masked using the program DUST (Tatusov & Lipman, unpublished; http://
blast.wustl.edu/pub/dust) and SEG [11] before submission to similarity searches. Sequences were searched
against the following databases: 1) PlasmoDB: P. vivax
(release
date:
12/06/2001;
http://plasmodb.org/
restricted/GridddPv.shtml), P. falciparum (release date 10/
09/2002;
http://plasmodb.org/restricted/Grid
ddPf.shtml), and Plasmodium knowlesi (release date 10/03/
2002; http://plasmodb.org/restricted/GridddPk.shtml);
2) TIGR: P. vivax (release date: 01/15/2003; preliminary

Page 2 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

Malaria Journal 2003, 2

sequence data was obtained from The Institute for
Genomic Research through the website at http://
www.tigr.org/tdb/ezk1/pva1); 3) Sanger Centre: P. knowlesi (release date 18/09/02; these sequence data were produced by the Pathogen Sequencing Group at the Sanger
Institute and can be obtained from ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/
pub/pathogens/P_knowlesi/PKN.contigs.18.9.02;
4)
GenBank: Plasmodium yoelii, Apicomplexa and the nonredundant (nr) databases (release date 11/27/2002; http:/
/www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), by using BLAST [12]. Matches
with E-value of <10-30 for both BLASTN and BLASTX were
considered as putative hits. Pfam [13] domains were identified using ESTwise http://www.no.embnet.org/Pro
grams/SAL/Wise2/) and each Pfam domain was mapped
to Interpro [14] annotation. Hidden Markov Models
(HMMs) were built from alignments generated using
Clustal [15]. HMMbuild, part of the HMMer package
http://hmmer.wustl.edu/, was used to generate the HMMs
and sequences were searched using ESTwise.

Results and Discussion
P. vivax cDNA library
ESTs have proven an invaluable resource for gene discovery [16], including genes of parasitic protozoa [17–19].
Unfortunately, there are no reported ESTs from any life
stage of P. vivax, the most widely distributed human
malaria. This lack of ESTs from P. vivax is undoubtedly the
result of the difficulties in working with this parasite species which lacks a continuous in vitro culture system and
whose parasitemias in natural or experimental monkey
infections are low. To partially circumvent this problem, a
cDNA library was constructed using parasites obtained
from Brazilian human patients during their acute attacks
[8]. Several aspects of the construction of this cDNA
library are worth mentioning here: 1) priming can and
does occur along Plasmodium A-T rich messages and therefore some ESTs could represent different segments of P.
vivax genes, not necessarily cDNAs synthesized from the 3'
ends; 2) genes expressed during all asexual blood stages as
well as gametocytes should be represented in this library;
3) before library construction, parasite material from all
patients was PCR-screened to exclude the possibility of
contamination with P. falciparum since this malarial species is sympatric with P. vivax in the Brazilian Amazon; 4)
it was necessary to pool the mRNAs extracted from parasites of 10 different patients for cDNA library construction; 5) in spite of destroying the human red blood cells
prior to library construction, most of the mRNAs (> 60%)
represented contaminants of human globin genes.
Together, this data clearly exemplifies the difficulties of
constructing cDNA libraries from the asexual blood stages
of P. vivax and reinforces the biological value of the ESTs
characterized here.

http://www.malariajournal.com/content/2/1/21

BLAST analyses
Out of 1,184 clones fully sequenced from both ends, a
total of 806 were high quality P. vivax ESTs with an average length of 586 bp, which allowed robust similarity
analyses. Clustering of the 806 ESTs with CAP3 revealed
that they correspond to 571 singlets and 95 contigs representing 666 cluster events. The majority of the contigs
(91.48%) comprised 2–3 sequences and the largest one
contained 16 sequences. The complete set of 666 cluster
events was used in similarity searches against different
databases using BLAST (Figure 1). An E-value of <10-30 for
both BLASTN and BLASTX was used to define a significant
database match. Considering this E-value, 641 cluster
events were identified by similarity, whereas 25 did not
meet this criterion and were considered unidentified. As
expected, the vast majority of the cluster events were similar to P. vivax and more events matched entries in the
databases of P. knowlesi than those of P. falciparum or P.
yoelii, even though the genomes of the latter two have
been completely sequenced [20,21]. These data are in
agreement with a closer phylogenetic relationship
between P. vivax and monkey malaria parasites than to P.
falciparum or rodent malaria parasites [22]. Interestingly,
127 ESTs (corresponding to 103 cluster events) were identified in all plasmodia, probably representing ancestral
genes involved in essential functions during the asexual
blood stages. Fasta files and results from all analyses are
available as supplementary material at the Malaria DataBank of the University of São Paulo http://malari
adb.ime.usp.br/Pvivax_ESTs.
Annotations
For annotations, a BLASTX search was initially performed
against the P. falciparum genome databases and, for all
positive matches with an E-value of <10-30, the same
annotations were adopted as reported by the international
P. falciparum consortium and deposited at PlasmoDB (an
international consortium was established in 1996 to
sequence the genome of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, strain 3D7. The sequencing centers
involved in this research program are: The Institute for
Genomic Research in collaboration with the US Naval
Medical Research Center, The Sanger Institute, and the
Stanford Genome Technology Center at Stanford University. To facilitate the access and divulgation of genomic
information, the malaria sequencing consortium established a centralized database, PlasmoDB, http://
www.plasmodb.org). Using this procedure, 231 ESTs were
annotated. A BLASTX search of the remaining ESTs was
performed against P. knowlesi databases; positive matches
with an E-value of <10-30 were blasted again against the P.
falciparum genome and for those entries with an E-value of
<10-30, the falciparum annotations were adopted (presently, there are no annotations available from the genome
of P. knowlesi). Fifty-six new ESTs were annotated. This

Page 3 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

Malaria Journal 2003, 2

http://www.malariajournal.com/content/2/1/21

Figure 1
Overview of the pipeline used in the ESTs identification process
Overview of the pipeline used in the ESTs identification process. Sequences were automatically assessed for quality
and removal of contaminants. BLAST similarity searches against PlasmoDB (PDB), GenBank (GB), and TIGR (preliminary
sequence data was obtained from The Institute for Genomic Research through the website at http://www.tigr.org) data bases
were performed after assembling the sequences with CAP3 [10] and masking regions of low complexity with the SEG [11] or
DUST (Tatusov & Lipman, unpublished; http://blast.wustl.edu/pub/dust) programs. An E-value of < 10-30 for both BLASTN and
BLASTX defined a significant database match.

same procedure was used for the remaining ESTs against
P. yoelii, Apicomplexa and GenBank nr databases. These
latter BLAST searches did not provide additional annotation information (data not shown).
Two other programmes were used to assist in annotations.
Firstly, Pfam [13] domains were identified using ESTwise
and each Pfam domain was mapped to Interpro annotations. Out of sixty-two ESTs matching to ESTwise, five had

not been identified by BLAST analysis and adopted the
Interpro annotations. Secondly, the HMMs performed to
predict vir genes were unsuccessful. Thus, using three different approaches to assist in annotations, BLAST, Pfam,
and HMMS, we were able to confidently annotate 292
ESTs of which 127 were annotated as hypothetical proteins in P. falciparum. These results reinforce the value of
these ESTs to assist in the future annotation of the P. vivax
genome where most experimental data is missing.

Page 4 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

Malaria Journal 2003, 2

http://www.malariajournal.com/content/2/1/21

Figure 2
Gene Ontology classification of the P. vivax ESTs
Gene Ontology classification of the P. vivax ESTs Classification of P. vivax ESTs according to "Molecular Function" of the
GO system [21]. Figures on "Biological Process" and "Cellular Component" can be obtained from http://malariadb.ime.usp.br/
Pvivax_ESTs.

Assignation of GO terms and comparison with P.
falciparum
The gene ontology terminology is a controlled vocabulary
to describe each product in terms of its molecular function, biological process or cellular [23] and which has
been expanded to include specialized and parasite-specific terms [24]. We assigned GO terms manually to 164
ESTs and these results were compared with the annotations from the P. falciparum genome project (Figure 2 and
supplementary figures at http://malariadb.ime.usp.br/
Pvivax_ESTs). The remaining ESTs did not have sufficient
protein similarity to justify GO terminology. During the
asexual blood stages, malaria parasites undergo several
rounds of invasion, growth, differentiation and mitotic
replication. Accordingly, biological processes were mostly
related to metabolism such as glycolysis, haem digestion,
and ubiquitin-dependent proteasome degradation. Furthermore, this data is in agreement with recent expression
and proteome analyses of the asexual blood stages of P.
falciparum [25–27]. Interestingly, ESTs representing molecules involved in cell adhesion and antigenic variation

were absent in P. vivax. Unlike P. falciparum, P. vivax does
not cytoadhere and thus the absence of cell adhesion molecules was not unexpected. In fact, absence of genes coding for cytoadherent molecules had been previously
documented from the complete sequence of a 199,866 bp
genome region of P. vivax [4]. In contrast, the lack of
immune evasion molecules within the P. vivax ESTs was
striking, since P. vivax contains the vir multi-gene family
with circa 600–1000 copies per haploid genome likely
involved in antigenic variation [3].
vir genes
vir genes are highly variable and expressed during the
asexual blood stages [3]. Moreover, recent data has demonstrated that vir genes are expressed in the trophozoite
and schizont stages of individual parasites (FernandezBecerra and del Portillo, unpublished). Thus, ESTs corresponding to vir genes should have been represented in
this cDNA library and yet BLAST analysis failed to identify
any single one corresponding to vir genes. This result is
most likely due to the variant nature of vir genes and the

Page 5 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

Malaria Journal 2003, 2

E-value threshold of <10-30 used throughout this work to
define a positive match. Indeed, a BLASTX search of all the
vir genes described in IVD10 [3] was performed and found
that, excluding the E-value of each vir BLAST hit to itself,
most E-values ranged from 10-10 to 9.0. Moreover, manual
inspection of BLASTX and ESTwise alignments to previously described vir peptide sequences suggests that two
ESTs are vir transcripts: PVBE06F08.E which is most similar to vir11 (ESTwise BITS score 95 BLASTX E-value 1.5e29) and PVBE12B11.E which is most similar to vir35,
(ESTwise BITS score 34.54 and BLASTX E-value 5.7e-14).
Accordingly, many of the unidentified ESTs from this
cDNA library might correspond to highly variant regions
of vir genes not identified by BLAST analysis. Alternatively, vir messages were not abundant and/or unstable
precluding their representation in this cDNA library.
Worth of mentioning, an attempt to predict ESTs corresponding to vir genes by making HMMs for all the vir
genes described in the telomere YAC IVD10 was also
unsuccessful.
AT-content
The genome of P. vivax is remarkably different from that
of P. falciparum in that it is composed of two major isochores with different GC-contents [22]. Moreover, analysis of the GC-content of two P. vivax YAC clones revealed
that the AT-content augments towards the telomeres and
that genes within the subtelomeric regions are AT-rich
(>70%) [3,4]. Interestingly, analysis of the different ESTs
from this work revealed an average GC-content of 46.48%
for the whole set of ESTs, displaying a large extent of variation ranging from ~20% to 65%. It is, therefore, tempting to speculate that P. vivax genes will have genes with
varying GC-content depending on the genome region
where they reside. Those within internal genome regions
will have genes that are GC-rich and mostly related to
house-keeping functions whereas those within subtelomeric regions will be mostly AT-rich variant vir genes
involved in immune evasion. Indeed, the putative vir gene
sequences [3] and PVBE12B11.E and PVBE06F08.E have a
GC-content of 25.1% and 25.9% respectively.

Conclusions
Research on Plasmodium vivax has been largely neglected
due to the problems of in vitro culture of this malaria parasite. Genomics-based approaches including the construction of a YAC library and sequences from it [2–4], the
generation of GSS sequences from other genomic libraries
[5,6], and the present effort of TIGR in finishing the complete genome sequence of the P. vivax El Salvador I strain
[7], all are accelerating gene discovery of this human
malaria. Presently however, there are no expressed
sequence tags available for P. vivax in any public databases. This pilot survey of ESTs from the parasite asexual
blood stages obtained directly from human patients thus

http://www.malariajournal.com/content/2/1/21

represents a valuable resource to validate gene predictions, to create a gene index for this malaria parasite and
to help in the annotation of the P. vivax genome. Indeed,
BLASTN analysis using the recently released P. vivax database of TIGR http://www.tigr.org/tdb/e2k1/pva1 scored
an E-value of <10-30 in 736/806 ESTs of which 404 are P.
vivax-specific. Moreover, it was possible to confidently
annotate 292 ESTs of which 105 already had been predicted [6] and assigned GO terminology to 164. Most
important, as these ESTs represent parasite genes
expressed during the stages responsible for the pathology
associated with vivax malaria, sequence comparisons with
the data from the P. vivax genome should assist in identifying SNPs for genetic mapping and population diversity
studies [28,29].

Author's contributions
EFM performed all BLAST analyses, manually annotated
and assigned GO terminology to the ESTs and prepared all
web-pages available at http://malariadb.ime.usp.br/
Pvivax_ESTs. CFB screened the cDNA library for human
contaminants. CFB and AMBNM coordinated all the
sequencing. ALM wrote perl programs to facilitate the
analysis of data. AD and AG developed an automated
pipeline to process the reads and AG facilitated the process of annotations and contributed significantly to writing
the manuscript. NH suggested the process for annotations, made GO comparisons between P. vivax and the P.
falciparum genome and made HMMs to predict vir genes.
HAP conceived the study, coordinated all aspects of this
work and drafted the manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewer 1 for the criticisms and
suggestions that significantly increased the quality of this manuscript. To
Professor Michael Lanzer for his initial support to this project. To Marcio
M. Yamamoto for technical support with the cDNA library and to Luciana
Terumi Nagao, Fernando Tadashi G. Matsunaga and Paulo H. Ahagon for
other technical assistance. We are also grateful to Marcio K. Oikawa for
putting the initial supplementary information into the malaria server at USP.
Sequence data from rodent and monkey malaria parasites were produced
by the Pathogen Sequencing Group at the Sanger Institute. Sequencing of
the Plasmodium vivax Salvador I strain from TIGR was accomplished with
support from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases/
Department of Defense (NIAID/DoD). This work was supported by
"Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Sâo Paulo (FAPESP, ID 01/
09401-0), Malaria Research and Reference Reagent Resource Center
(MR4), and "Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico" (CNPq, ID 304651/90-7).

References
1.
2.

Mendis K, Sina BJ, Marchesini P and Carter R: The neglected burden of Plasmodium vivax malaria Am J Trop Med Hyg 2001,
64:97-106.
Camargo AA, Fischer K, Lanzer M and del Portillo HA: Construction and characterization of a Plasmodium vivax genomic
library in yeast artificial chromosomes Genomics 1997,
42:467-473.

Page 6 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

Malaria Journal 2003, 2

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

del Portillo HA, Fernandez-Becerra C, Bowman S, Oliver K, Preuss M,
Sanchez CP, Schneider NK, Villalobos JM, Rajandream MA, Harris D,
Pereira da Silva LH, Barrell B and Lanzer M: A superfamily of variant genes encoded in the subtelomeric region of Plasmodium
vivax Nature 2001, 410:839-842.
Tchavtchitch M, Fischer K, Huestis R and Saul A: The sequence of
a 200 kb portion of a Plasmodium vivax chromosome reveals
a high degree of conservation with Plasmodium falciparum
chromosome 3 Mol Biochem Parasitol 2001, 118:211-222.
Galinski MR, Medina CC, Ingravallo P and Barnwell JW: A reticulocyte-binding protein complex of Plasmodium vivax merozoites Cell 1992, 69:1213-26.
Carlton JM, Muller R, Yowell CA, Fluegge MR, Sturrock KA, Pritt JR,
Vargas-Serrato E, Galinski MR, Barnwell JW, Mulder N, Kanapin A,
Cawley SE, Hide WA and Dame JB: Profiling the malaria genome:
a gene survey of three species of malaria parasite with comparison to other apicomplexan species Mol Biochem Parasitol
2001, 118:201-210.
Carlton JM: The Plasmodium vivax genome sequencing project
Trends Parasitol 2003, 19:227-231.
Speranca MA, Vinkenoog R, Ocampos M, Fischer K, Janse CJ, Waters
AP and del Portillo HA: Primary structure of the Plasmodium
vivax crk2 gene and interference of the yeast cell cycle upon
its conditional expression Exp Parasitol 2001, 97:119-128.
Ewing B and Green P: Base-calling of automated sequencer
traces using phred. II. Error probabilities Genome Res 1998,
8:186-94.
Huang X and Madan A: CAP3: A DNA sequence assembly
program Genome Res 1999, 9:868-877.
Wooton JC and Federhen S: Analysis of compositionally biased
regions in sequence databases Methods Enzymol 1996,
266:554-71.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW and Lipman DJ: Basic local
alignment search tool J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-10.
Bateman A, Birney E, Cerruti L, Durbin R, Etwiller L, Eddy SR, Griffiths-Jones S, Howe KL, Marshall M and Sonnhammer EL: The Pfam
protein families database Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:276-80.
Mulder NJ, Apweiler , Attwood TK, Bairoch A, Barrell D, Bateman A,
Binns D, Biswas M, Bradley P, Bork P, Bucher P, Copley RR, Courcelle
E, Das U, Durbin R, Falquet L, Fleischmann W, Griffiths-Jones S, Haft
D, Harte N, Hulo N, Kahn D, Kanapin A, Krestyaninova M, Lopez R,
Letunic I, Lonsdale D, Silventoinen V, Orchard SE, Pagni M, Peyruc D,
Ponting CP, Selengut JD, Servant F, Sigrist CJA, Vaughan R and Zdobnov EM: The InterPro Database, 2003 brings increased coverage and new features Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:315-318.
Higgins DG, Thompson JD and Gibson TJ: Using CLUSTAL for
multiple sequence alignments Methods Enzymol 1996,
266:383-402.
Adams MD, Kelley JM, Gocayne JD, Dubnick M, Polymeropoulos MH,
Xiao H, Merril CR, Wu A, Olde B, Moreno RF, Kerlavage AR,
McCombie WR and Venter JC: Complementary DNA sequencing: expressed sequence tags and human genome project Science 1991, 252:1651-1656.
Chakrabarti D, Reddy GR, Dame JB, Almira EC, Lapis PJ, Ferl RJ, Yang
TP, Rowe TC and Schuster SM: Analysis of expressed sequence
tags from Plasmodium falciparum Mol Biochem Parasitol 1994,
66:97-104.
Ajioka JW, Boothroyd JC, Brunk BP, Hehl A, Hillier L, Manger ID,
Marra M, Overton GC, Roos DS, Wan KL, Waterston R and Sibley
LD: Gene discovery by EST sequencing in Toxoplasma gondii
reveals sequences restricted to the Apicomplexa Genome Res
1998, 8:18-28.
Li L, Brunk BP, Kissinger JC, Pape D, Tang K, Cole RH, Martin J, Wylie
T, Dante M, Fogarty SJ, Howe DK, Liberator P, Diaz C, Anderson J,
White M, Jerome ME, Johnson EA, Radke JA, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Waterston RH, Clifton SW, Roos DS and Sibley LD: Gene discovery in
the Apicomplexa as revealed by EST sequencing and assembly of a comparative gene database Gen Res 2003, 13:443-454.
Gardner MJ, Hall N, Fung E, White O, Berriman M, Hyman RW, Carlton JM, Pain A, Nelson KE, Bowman S, Paulsen IT, James K, Eisen JA,
Rutherford K, Salzberg SL, Craig A, Kyes S, Chan MS, Nene V, Shallom SJ, Suh B, Peterson J, Angiuoli S, Pertea M, Allen J, Selengut J, Haft
D, Mather MW, Vaidya AB, Martin DM, Fairlamb AH, Fraunholz MJ,
Roos DS, Ralph SA, McFadden GI, Cummings LM, Subramanian GM,
Mungall C, Venter JC, Carucci DJ, Hoffman SL, Newbold C, Davis
RW, Fraser CM and Barrell B: Genome sequence of the human

http://www.malariajournal.com/content/2/1/21

21.

22.
23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum Nature 2002,
419:498-511.
Carlton JM, Angiuoli SV, Suh BB, Kooij TW, Pertea M, Silva JC, Ermolaeva MD, Allen JE, Selengut JD, Koo HL, Peterson JD, Pop M, Kosack
DS, Shumway MF, Bidwell SL, Shallom SJ, van Aken SE, Riedmuller SB,
Feldblyum TV, Cho JK, Quackenbush J, Sedegah M, Shoaibi A, Cummings LM, Florens L, Yates JR, Raine JD, Sinden RE, Harris MA, Cunningham DA, Preiser PR, Bergman LW, Vaidya AB, van Lin LH, Janse
CJ, Waters AP, Smith HO, White OR, Salzberg SL, Venter JC, Fraser
CM, Hoffman SL, Gardner MJ and Carucci DJ: Genome sequence
and comparative analysis of the model rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium yoelii yoelii Nature 2002, 419:512-519.
McCutchan TF, Dame JB, Miller LH and Barnwell J: Evolutionary
relatedness of Plasmodium species as determined by the
structure of DNA Science 1984, 225:808-811.
Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM,
Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, IsselTarver L, Kasarskis A, Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M,
Rubin GM and Sherlock G: Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium Nat Genet
2000, 25:25-29.
Berriman M, Aslett M and Ivens A: Parasites are GO Trends Parasitol
2001, 17:463-464.
Florens L, Washburn MP, Raine JD, Anthony RM, Grainger M, Haynes
JD, Moch JK, Muster N, Sacci JB, Tabb DL, Witney AA, Wolters D,
Wu Y, Gardner MJ, Holder AA, Sinden RE, Yates JR and Carucci DJ:
A proteomic view of the Plasmodium falciparum life cycle
Nature 2002, 419:520-526.
Lasonder E, Ishihama Y, Andersen JS, Vermunt AM, Pain A, Sauerwein
RW, Eling WM, Hall N, Waters AP, Stunnenberg HG and Mann M:
Analysis of the Plasmodium falciparum proteome by highaccuracy mass spectrometry Nature 2002, 419:537-542.
Bozdech Z, Zhu J, Joachimiak MP, Cohen FE, Pulliam B and DeRisi JL:
Expression profiling of the schizont and trophozoite stages
of Plasmodium falciparum with a long-oligonucleotide
microarray Genome Biol 2003, 4:1-15.
Volkman SK, Hartl DL, Wirth DF, Nielsen KM, Choi M, Batalov S,
Zhou Y, Plouffe D, Le Roch KG, Abagyan R and Winzeler EA: Excess
Polymorphisms in Genes for Membrane Proteins in Plasmodium falciparum Science 2002, 298:216-218.
Feng X, Carlton JM, Joy DA, Mu J, Furuya T, Suh BB, Wang Y, Barnwell
JW and Su X-Z: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms and genome
diversity in Plasmodium vivax Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:8502-8507.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 7 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
