<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Functional analysis of metagenomes and metatranscriptomes using SEED and KEGG</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:S21. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-S1-S21"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Suparna Mitra"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Mitra et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S21

RESEARCH

Open Access

Functional analysis of metagenomes and
metatranscriptomes using SEED and KEGG
Suparna Mitra1*, Paul Rupek1, Daniel C Richter1,2, Tim Urich3,4, Jack A Gilbert5,6, Folker Meyer6,
Andreas Wilke6, Daniel H Huson1*
From The Ninth Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Conference (APBC 2011)
Inchon, Korea. 11-14 January 2011

Abstract
Background: Metagenomics is the study of microbial organisms using sequencing applied directly to
environmental samples. Technological advances in next-generation sequencing methods are fueling a rapid
increase in the number and scope of metagenome projects. While metagenomics provides information on the
gene content, metatranscriptomics aims at understanding gene expression patterns in microbial communities. The
initial computational analysis of a metagenome or metatranscriptome addresses three questions: (1) Who is out
there? (2) What are they doing? and (3) How do different datasets compare? There is a need for new
computational tools to answer these questions. In 2007, the program MEGAN (MEtaGenome ANalyzer) was
released, as a standalone interactive tool for analyzing the taxonomic content of a single metagenome dataset.
The program has subsequently been extended to support comparative analyses of multiple datasets.
Results: The focus of this paper is to report on new features of MEGAN that allow the functional analysis of
multiple metagenomes (and metatranscriptomes) based on the SEED hierarchy and KEGG pathways. We have
compared our results with the MG-RAST service for different datasets.
Conclusions: The MEGAN program now allows the interactive analysis and comparison of the taxonomical and
functional content of multiple datasets. As a stand-alone tool, MEGAN provides an alternative to web portals for
scientists that have concerns about uploading their unpublished data to a website.

Background
Metagenomics seeks to understand microbial communities by DNA sequencing. Deeper sequencing and better reference databases are advancing the potential and
success of such analyses. While metagenomics provides
information on the gene content of a microbial community, metatranscriptomics promises to reveal the actual
metabolic activities of this community at a specific time
and place, and how those activities change in response
to environmental forces or biotic interactions.
A number of different systems and resources for
metagenome or similar analysis, which are offered in the
* Correspondence: mitra@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de; huson@informatik.unituebingen.de
1
Center for Bioinformatics ZBIT, Tübingen University, Sand 14, 72076
Tübingen, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

form of databases, web portals, web services and basic
stand-alone programs [1-11]. These resources are mainly
focused on the analysis of individual metagenomes and
currently do not have the capacity for rapid and highly
interactive comparison of multiple datasets. Furthermore, many of these resources are suitable only for
taxonomic analysis. In our experience, only the MGRAST web server [1,11] currently provides a readily useable service for analyzing a new metagenomic dataset.
However, while web portals are attractive because they
offer large computational resources for data analysis,
some scientists have concerns about uploading their
unpublished data to a website. To address this problem
of taxonomic analysis, the program MEGAN [12] was
published in 2007, as the first stand-alone interactive
tool for analyzing the taxonomic content of a dataset.
A subsequent version of the program was developed

© 2011 Mitra et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Mitra et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S21

that allows one to compare the taxonomic content of
different datasets [13,14]. MEGAN is easy to install and
use, and requires only a BLAST output file as input to
operate. The program is designed to allow both highlevel analysis that summarizes data at different ranks of
the NCBI taxonomy, and detailed analysis that drills
down to individual reads and their BLAST matches. The
goal of this paper is to describe new features of
MEGAN that allow the functional analysis of a microbial community. This type of analysis can assist in
understanding biochemical processes or in estimating
the influence of environmental changes on biospheres.
The next major release of MEGAN allows the functional
analysis of metagenomic and metatranscriptomic datasets using the SEED classification, based on the given
BLAST file. For comparative purposes, one can simultaneously map multiple datasets onto the SEED hierarchy
and also compute distance matrices on datasets based
on their SEED content.
For the pathway analysis, the field of systems biology
already possesses a high-quality database, namely the
Kyoto Encyclopedia for Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
[15]. MEGAN provides a KEGG analysis window that
reports which KEGG pathways are present in a dataset
and allows one to then inspect these pathways; for
example, MEGAN can capture all reads that are mapped
to a given pathway of interest.

Page 2 of 8

Results and discussion
SEED analysis with MEGAN

MEGAN performs a taxonomic analysis of a dataset by
mapping reads onto different taxa in the NCBI taxonomy, depending on the phylogenetic footprint of the
gene that a read contains (using the lowest common
ancesstor algorithm, as described in [12]). The result is
displayed as a rooted tree where the nodes represent the
different taxa and are scaled and labeled by the number
of reads assigned to the taxon.
Now, as a new feature, MEGAN uses the SEED classification [1] for functional analysis. In this classification,
genes are assigned to functional roles and different functional roles are grouped into subsystems. The SEED
classification can be represented by a rooted tree where
the internal nodes represent the different subsystems
and where the leaves represent the functional roles.
Note that the tree is “multi-labeled” in the sense that
different leaves may represent the same functional role,
if a role occurs in different subsystems. The current
SEED tree has about 10,000 nodes.
To perform a functional analysis, MEGAN assigns
each read to the functional role of the highest scoring
gene in a BLAST comparison against a protein database.
Figure 1 shows a part of the functional analysis of a
marine metagenome sample. The program reports the
numbers of reads assigned to each functional role.

Monosaccharides 1850
Fermentation 1150
Sugar alcohols 911
Organic acids 729
Carbohydrates 0

Central carbohydrate metabolism 3934
CO 2 fixation 131 6
Di- and oligosaccharides 793
One-carbon metabolism 1794
Polysaccharides 42
Aminosugars 340
Glycoside hydrolases 102
Lacto-N-biose_I_and_Galacto-N-biose_metabolic_pathway 1
Photosynthesis 45
Cofactors, vitamins, prosthetic groups, pigments 551
Virulence 8867
Sulfur metabolism 1162
Stress response 403 0
Protein metabolism 8417
RNA metabolism 4944

SEED

Motility and chemotaxis 115 5
Secondary metabolism 725

Figure 1 SEED-based functional assignment. Part of a SEED-based functional analysis of a marine metagenome sample. Each item represents
a functional role in the SEED and is labeled by the number of reads assigned to this.

Mitra et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S21

KEGG analysis with MEGAN

To perform a KEGG analysis, MEGAN attempts to
match each read to a KEGG orthology (KO) accession
number, using the best hit to a reference sequence for
which a KO accession number is known. MEGAN then
calculates the number of hits to each KEGG pathway
and reports these numbers to the user. The user can
request to see the hits to a given pathway and an appropriate image of the pathway is generated by coloring the
pathways based on the KEGG mapping. MEGAN allows
one to analyze several datasets together, using different
colors to show which parts of a pathway are present in
which datasets. Because different genes that are present
in different organisms in a consortium of microbes will
often not operate together in a single pathway, MEGAN
allows one to restrict the pathway analysis to a set of
one or more taxa in the NCBI taxonomy [15].
Comparing functional content of different datasets

MEGAN supports the simultaneous analysis and comparison of the taxonomic content and now also the
functional content of multiple datasets in several ways.
The functional content of a set of metagenomes can be
simulteniously opened and compared using a new
SEED-based tree view (see Figure 2). Furthermore a

Time1_Bag1_DNA
Time1_Bag6_DNA
Time2_Bag1_DNA
Time2_Bag6_DNA
Time1_Bag1_cDNA
Time1_Bag6_cDNA
Time2_Bag1_cDNA
Time2_Bag6_cDNA

Carbohydrates

SEED

Page 3 of 8

collection of datasets can be compared using six different ecological indices, the UniFrac measure [2] and different distance analysis techniques (see [14] for details).
As an example Figure 3, shows the comparison of eight
Bergen marine samples based on their functional content using Goodall’s index. Finally it is also possible
to compare pathways present in multiple microbial communities using MEGAN’s KEGGviewer. One can compare multiple datasets using different colors see Figure 4.
MEGAN and MG-RAST

A first comparison between MEGAN and MG-RAST
was performed with a small subset of an FLX-titanium
pyrosequencing dataset (Roche-454) obtained from a
hydrothermal vent microbial community. Out of a total
of 1408 sequences, MG-RAST assigned 831 functions
and MEGAN 727; the latter amounts to 88% of the
assignments from MG-RAST. Figure 5 shows the comparison of assignments on the highest SEED subsystem
hierarchy. Both tools assign a very similar number of
sequences to most of the subsystems, although some
subsystems vary by a factor of 2 or more.
In addition, we have tested our program on a published dataset (the Time1-Bag1-DNA sample from the
Bergen marine datasets, see [16] for details). Out of a

2-Ketogluconate_utilization
Mannose_metabolism
D-Sorbitol(D-g lucitol)_and_L-s orbose_utilization

Monosaccharides

D-galactonate_catabolism
Hexose_p hosphate_up take_s ystem
L-ascorbate_utilization_(and_related_gene_clusters)
L-rhamnose_utilization
L-a rabinose_utilization
D-g alacturonate_and_D-g lucurona te_u tilization
Xylose_utilization
D-gluconate_and_ketogluconates_metabolism
D-t agatose_and_g alactitol_u tilization
Fructose_utilization
L-fucose_utilization
D-galactarate,_D-glucarate_and_D-glycerate_catabolism
D-ribose_utilization
L-fucose_utilization_temp
Deoxyribose_and_deoxynucleoside_cat abolism
D-allose_utilization
Fermentation
Sugar alcohols
Organic acids
Central carbohydrate metabolism
CO 2 fixation
Di- and oligosaccharides
One-carbon metabolism
Polysaccharides
Aminosugars
Glycoside hydrolases
Lacto-N-b iose_I_and_g alacto-N-b iose_metabolic_p athway
Photosynthesis

Figure 2 SEED-based functional comparison. Part of a SEED-based functional comparison of eight marine samples.

Mitra et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S21

Page 4 of 8

0.1
Bag1_19thMay_cDNA-seed

Time2_Bag6_DNA-seed
Time1_Bag6_DNA-seed
Time1_Bag1_DNA-seed

Time2_Bag1_DNA-seed
Bag6_19thMay_cDNA-seed
13thMay_Bag1_cDNA
Bag6_13thMay_cDNA-seed
Figure 3 Network comparison based on functional content. Network comparison of eight marine samples based on functional content.

total of 209, 073 sequences MG-RAST assigned 86, 167
functions and MEGAN 97, 748; here MEGAN has more
assignments. Figure 6 shows the comparison of
MEGAN and MG-RAST assignments for these data. In
both cases, we see that the number of reads assigned to
different subsystems by MG-RAST and MEGAN are
very similar, but with some large differences. These differences are to be expected, as MEGAN and MG-RAST
use different reference databases for their analysis. In
the MEGAN analysis, we used the March’10 version of
the NCBI-NR (non-redundant) protein database [17],

whereas MG-RAST (version 2) used an expert-annotated, NR database build from all organisms curated in
the SEED.
For pathway analyses using KEGG metabolic maps

We have performed pathway analyses for pooled DNA
samples from the PLM-Bergen datasets. To compare
MEGAN against MG-RAST, we have concentrated on
two different pathways, namely the ‘citrate cycle (TCA
cycle)’ and ‘photosynthesis’.
The citrate cycle (TCA cycle): The citric acid cycle is of
central importance for cells that use oxygen as part of

Figure 4 MEGAN’s KEGGviewer. MEGAN’s KEGGviewer, showing a comparison of the ‘citrate cycle’ for a metagenome sample (blue) and an
associated transcriptome sample (green).

Mitra et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S21

Page 5 of 8

Figure 5 Comparison of MEGAN and MG-RAST assignments using a small unpublished dataset. Absolute comparison of MEGAN and
MG-RAST assignments for a small unpublished dataset of 1408 sequence reads.

cellular respiration. We compared the results for this cycle
produced by both tools (MEGAN and MG-RAST) using
pooled DNA samples from the PLM-Bergen datasets. The
resulting pathway graphs (Figure 7) look very similar in
both the cases when we consider only the presence or
absence of enzymes. MG-RAST only colors the enzyme
nodes if they are present (labelled in green in Figure 7a) in
the pathways, but MEGAN’s KEGGviewer is able to scale
the color of the enzymes according to their read abundances (scaled in yellow to red in Figure 7b). This color
gradient can help in understanding the enzyme kinetics, as
the abundance of reads assigned to an enzyme can be proportional to the turnover frequency (TOF) associated with
that enzyme. If we assume that the TCA cycle is the most
prominent cycle of a cell, then all the enzymes are supposed to be present with some level of abundance. Here,
we can see some nodes (EC 1.2.7.1, EC 2.3.3.8, EC
1.1.1.41, EC 1.3.5.1) are absent in the MG-RAST analysis,
but are present with a very low read abundance in
MEGAN’s KEGGviewer.
Photosynthesis: For all the datasets considered, for
the photosynthesis KEGG map, MG-RAST only provides hits associated with ‘F-type ATPase’, ‘Cytochrome b6/f complex (PetC)’ and ‘Photosynthetic
electron transport (PetH)’. For example, using the four

pooled DNA samples from the PLM-Bergen datasets,
the MG-RAST server states that all the ‘F-type
ATPase’ enzymes are present (labeled in green in Figure 8a). But with MEGAN’s KEGGviewer we can also
see the Photosystem I or II, ‘Cytochrome b6/f complex
(PetC)’ and reads associated with ‘Photosynthetic electron transport (PetH) (scaled in yellow to red in
Figure 8b).
These results show the advantages of MEGAN’s
KEGGviewer for KEGG-based functional analysis.

Conclusions
Here we have presented the functional assignment module of MEGAN. Using two examples, we show that
MEGAN and SEED obtain comparable results to MGRAST. With this new version of MEGAN, researchers
can perform a functional analysis using the SEED classification. Because MEGAN performs this analysis directly
from the BLAST input file, no additional calculations
are required. Thus, MEGAN provides a stand-alone
alternative to the MG-RAST server. In future work, we
plan to integrate MEGAN into the MG-RAST portal.
This will bring together the highly interactive features of
MEGAN and the computational power of MG-RAST
together.

Mitra et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S21

Page 6 of 8

Figure 6 Comparison of MEGAN and MG-RAST assignments using a published marine sample. Absolute comparison of MEGAN and
MG-RAST assignments for a published marine sample (Time1-Bag1-DNA sample from the Bergen marine datasets) of 209, 073 sequence reads.

Methods
Data preparation

For the first case study, we used a small subset consisting
of 1408 sequences from an FLX-titanium pyrosequencing
dataset (Roche-454) obtained from a hydrothermal vent
microbial community. We used eight marine datasets
from Plymouth Marine Laboratory, consisting of four
metagenomes (DNA) and four metatranscriptomes

(cDNA) from a mesocosm experiment performed in
Bergen, Norway (see [16] for details). In this paper, we
refer to these as the PLM-Bergen datasets. All metagenomes and metatranscriptomes were aligned against
the NCBI-NR database using the BLASTX tool [18].
The results were then imported into MEGAN [12] (with
default parameters), using the ‘Import from BLAST’
option and saved as MEGAN own ‘rma files’.

Figure 7 Comparison of MEGAN and MG-RAST in the ‘citrate cycle KEGG map’. Figure shows the ‘citrate cycle KEGG map’ obtained using
(a) MG-RAST web server and (b) MEGAN’s KEGGviewer, for four pooled DNA samples from PLM-Bergen datasets, based on SEED subsystems.

Mitra et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S21

Page 7 of 8

Figure 8 Comparison of MEGAN and MG-RAST in the ‘photosynthesis KEGG map’. Figure shows the ‘photosynthesis KEGG map’ obtained
using (a) MEG-RAST web server and (b) MEGAN’s KEGGviewer, for four pooled DNA samples from PLM-Bergen datasets, based on SEED subsystems.

Functional Assignment Based on MEGAN-SEED

MEGAN places each read of a given dataset onto one of
the taxa (or “nodes”) of the NCBI taxonomy, based on
the BLAST matches provided for the read, using the
LCA algorithm. For functional assignment in a similar
fashion, MEGAN provides a hierarchical representation
using the SEED classification. Normally, reads are
mapped to the NCBI taxonomy, and the program provides the exact numbers of reads assigned to any given
node and the number of hits to any nodes in the subtree
rooted at the node. In a similar fashion for the functional analysis, reads are mapped to SEED subsystems
using the ‘seed2ncbi.gz’ file from the SEED server.
Multiple metagenome comparison using the functional
content
Multiple Comparison Tree-view

After opening all the samples in MEGAN, we compared
the taxonomic content using the ‘Compare’ menu item to
obtain the comparison in a new window. Choosing the
‘SEED’ menu from the comparison window allowed us to
get a functional comparison of the samples directly in a
new window (Figure 2).
Multiple Comparison Network-view

To compare six PLM-Bergen marine samples, based on
their functional content, we chose ‘Networks’ from the
‘Option’ menu of MEGAN’s SEEDviewer to see the network comparison view of multiple datasets that are
under consideration (Figure 3). Moreover, one has six
different choices of distance measures to compute the
networks (see [14] for details).
Comparison of MEGAN and MG-RAST assignments

MG-RAST is a leading service for functional annotation.
To test the functional assignment of MEGAN, we compared MEGAN’s functional assignment with MG-

RAST’s assignment in two datasets which are described
using two case studies below.
We first performed MEGAN-SEED annotations on an
unpublished dataset of 1408 sequences (454 FLX-titanium
pyrosequencing) of a metatranscriptome obtained from a
hydrothermal vent microbial community and compared
them with the parallel assignments obtained by MGRAST. We then performed the same study with a published marine dataset (the Time1-Bag1-DNA sample from
the Bergen datasets; 209, 073 sequences) and compared
the results with MG-RAST’s assignment.
Pathway analyses based on KEGG

MEGAN includes a module called ‘KEGGviewer’ for the
analysis of metagenomic data in the context of pathways. It is designed to consume a list of RefSeq accession numbers and maps them to KEGG orthologies (KO
numbers). The functionality of this program has been
compared to MG-RAST, which also provides basic pathway analysis methods for some of the above mentioned
PLM-Bergen marine samples by selecting different
metabolic pathways.
Acknowledgements
This article has been published as part of BMC Bioinformatics Volume 12
Supplement 1, 2011: Selected articles from the Ninth Asia Pacific
Bioinformatics Conference (APBC 2011). The full contents of the supplement
are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12?
issue=S1.
Author details
1
Center for Bioinformatics ZBIT, Tübingen University, Sand 14, 72076
Tübingen, Germany. 2Eurofins Medigenomix GmbH, Anzinger Str. 7, 85560
Ebersberg, Germany. 3Department of Genetics in Ecology, Vienna Ecology
Center, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. 4Centre for Geobiology,
University of Bergen, 5007 Bergen, Norway. 5Department of Ecology and
Evolution, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. 6Mathematics
and Computer Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL
60439, USA.

Mitra et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S21
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S21

Authors’ contributions
SM and DHH designed the project and wrote the manuscript. PR performed
the KEGG analysis and wrote necessary codes. DHH wrote necessary codes
for SEED. SM performed all the BLAST, SEED analysis, and multiple
comparison. All other authors contributed in MG-RAST analysis and in
helpful discussion.

Page 8 of 8

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-S1-S21
Cite this article as: Mitra et al.: Functional analysis of metagenomes and
metatranscriptomes using SEED and KEGG. BMC Bioinformatics 2011 12
(Suppl 1):S21.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 15 February 2011
References
1. Overbeek R, Begley T, Butler RM, Choudhuri JV, Chuang HY, Cohoon M,
et al: The subsystems approach to genome annotation and its use in the
project to annotate 1000 genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33(17):5691-5702.
2. Lozupone C, Hamady M, Knight R: UniFrac - An Online Tool for
Comparing Microbial Community Diversity in a Phylogenetic Context.
BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:371.
3. Krause L, Diaz NN, Goesmann A, Kelley S, Nattkemper TW, Rohwer F,
Edwards RA, Stoye J: Phylogenetic classification of short environmental
DNA fragments. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(7):2230-2239.
4. Markowitz VM, Korzeniewski F, Palaniappan K, Szeto E, Werner G, Padki A,
Zhao X, Dubchak I, Hugenholtz P, Anderson I, Lykidis A, Mavrommatis K,
Ivanova N, Kyrpides N: The integrated microbial genomes (IMG) system.
Nucleic Acids Research 2006, 34(Database-Issue):344-348.
5. Markowitz VM, Ivanova NN, Szeto E, Palaniappan K, Chu K, Dalevi D,
Chen IA, Grechkin Y, Dubchak I, Anderson I, Lykidis A, Mavromatis K,
Hugenholtz P, Kyrpides NC: IMG/M: a data management and analysis
system for metagenomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D534-D538.
6. von Mering C, Hugenholtz P, Raes J, Tringe SG, Doerks T, Jensen LJ,
Ward N, Bork P: Quantitative phylogenetic assessment of microbial
communities in diverse environments. Science 2007, 315(5815):1126-1130.
7. McHardy AC, Martin HG, Tsirigos A, Hugenholtz P, Rigoutsos I: Accurate
phylogenetic classification of variable-length DNA fragments. Nat
Methods 2006, 4(1):63-72.
8. Dutilh BE, He Y, Hekkelman ML, Huynen MA: Signature, a web server for
taxonomic characterization of sequence samples using signature genes.
Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(Web Server issue):W470-W474.
9. Seshadri R, Kravitz SA, Smarr L, Gilna P, Frazier M: CAMERA: A Community
Resource for Metagenomics. PLoS Biology 2007, 5(3).
10. Teeling H, Waldmann J, Lombardot T, Bauer M, Glöckner FO: TETRA: a webservice and a stand-alone program for the analysis and comparison of
tetranucleotide usage patterns in DNA sequences. BMC Bioinformatics
2004, 5:163.
11. Meyer F, Paarmann D, D’Souza M, Olson R, Glass EM, Kubal M, Paczian T,
Rodriguez A, Stevens R, Wilke A, Wilkening J, Edwards RA: The
metagenomics RAST server - a public resource for the automatic
phylogenetic and functional analysis of metagenomes. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:386.
12. Huson DH, Auch AF, Qi J, Schuster SC: MEGAN analysis of metagenomic
data. Genome Res 2007, 17(3):377-386.
13. Mitra S, Klar B, Huson DH: Visual and statistical comparison of
metagenomes. Bioinformatics 2009, 25(15):1849-1855.
14. Mitra S, Gilbert JA, Field D, Huson DH: Comparison of multiple
metagenomes using phylogenetic networks based on ecological indices.
ISME J 2010, Epub. doi:10.1038/ismej.2010.51.
15. Kanehisa M, Goto S: KEGG: Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28:27-30.
16. Gilbert JA, Field D, Huang Y, Edwards R, Li W, et al: Detection of large
numbers of novel sequences in the metatranscriptomes of complex
marine microbial communities. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e3042.
17. Benson D, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman D, Ostell J, Wheeler D: GenBank.
Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(Database issue):D34-D38.
18. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
