<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Characterization of wheat Bell1-type homeobox genes in floral organs of alloplasmic lines with Aegilops crassa cytoplasm</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-2"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kota Mizumoto"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Characterization of wheat Bell1-type homeobox
genes in floral organs of alloplasmic lines with
Aegilops crassa cytoplasm
Kota Mizumoto1, Hitoshi Hatano1, Chizuru Hirabayashi2, Koji Murai2, Shigeo Takumi1*

Abstract
Background: Alloplasmic wheat lines with Aegilops crassa cytoplasm often show homeotic conversion of stamens
into pistils under long-day conditions. In the pistillody-exhibiting florets, an ectopic ovule is formed within the
transformed stamens, and female sterility is also observed because of abnormal integument development.
Results: In this study, four wheat Bell1-like homeobox (BLH) genes were isolated and named WBLH1 to WBLH4.
WBLH1/WBLH3/WBLH4 expression was observed in the basal boundary region of the ovary in both normal pistils
and transformed stamens. WBLH2 was also strongly expressed in integuments not only of normal ovules in pistils
but also of the ectopic ovules in transformed stamens, and the WBLH2 expression pattern in the sterile pistils
seemed to be identical to that in normal ovules of fertile pistils. In addition, WBLH1 and WBLH3 showed
interactions with the three wheat KNOX proteins through the BEL domain. WBLH2, however, formed a complex
with wheat KNOTTED1 and ROUGH SHEATH1 orthologs through SKY and BEL domains, but not with a wheat
LIGULELESS4 ortholog.
Conclusions: Expression of the four WBLH genes is evident in reproductive organs including pistils and
transformed stamens and is independent from female sterility in alloplasmic wheat lines with Ae. crassa cytoplasm.
KNOX-BLH interaction was conserved among various plant species, indicating the significance of KNOX-BLH
complex formation in wheat developmental processes. The functional features of WBLH2 are likely to be distinct
from other BLH gene functions in wheat development.

Background
Alien cytoplasm largely alters gene expression profiles,
affecting growth and organogenesis. Nuclear-cytoplasm
incompatibility results in abnormal growth phenotypes
in higher plants [1,2]. Recurrent backcrossing has been
commonly used for production of nuclear-cytoplasmic
substitution plants called alloplasmic lines, in which the
cytoplasmic genomes are replaced by ones from a
related species [3]. Cytoplasmic male sterility is a major
phenomenon among the abnormal phenotypes of the
alloplasmic lines [1,4]. In many cases of cytoplasmic
male sterility, nuclear-cytoplasm incompatibility induces
abortion of pollen. Homeotic transformation of stamens
into pistil-like structures is sometimes observed in
* Correspondence: takumi@kobe-u.ac.jp
1
Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, Nada-ku, Kobe
657-8501, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

alloplasmic lines of carrot, Brassica napus, tobacco and
wheat [5-9], a phenomenon called pistillody.
Cytoplasm of a wild wheat relative, Aegilops crassa,
homeotically affects floral organ development and
induces pistillody in some alloplasmic common wheat
lines lacking fertility restorer genes against Ae. crassa
cytoplasm (Figure 1) [10,11]. The mitochondrial orf260
gene in the Ae. crassa cytoplasm might be associated
with induction of the floral homeotic change [12]. An
alloplasmic line of the wheat cultivar Norin 26 (N26)
with Ae. crassa cytoplasm [(cr)-N26] exhibits male sterility under long-day conditions (> 15 h light period) due
to pistillody (Figure 1E, F), a phenomenon termed
photoperiod-sensitive cytoplasmic male sterility [10].
However, an alloplasmic line of the wheat cultivar Chinese Spring (CS) does not because of a fertility restorer
gene Rfd1, located on the long arm of chromosome 7B
(Figure 1A) [13]. An alloplasmic line of CS (ditelosomic

© 2011 Mizumoto et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

Page 2 of 15

Figure 1 Photoperiod-sensitive cytoplasmic male sterility in alloplasmic wheat with Ae. crassa cytoplasm. Genetic characteristics of
nuclear and cytoplasmic types and floral organ morphology without the lemma in the alloplasmic lines are schematically represented. (A) (cr)-CS
has normal stamens because of the fertility restorer gene Rfd1 against the Ae. crassa cytoplasm on the long arm of chromosome 7B. (B) (cr)-CS
monotelodisomic 7BS, which has Rfd1 in a hemizygous state, shows partial pistillody (arrow) and reduced female fertility. (C) (cr)-CS ditelosomic
7BS, which lacks both of the long arms pair of chromosome 7B and therefore lacks Rfd1, shows complete pistillody and female sterility,
independent of day length. Floral organ morphology of CS ditelosomic 7BS was indistinguishable from that of CS. (D) Euplasmic CS. (E) (cr)-N26
shows homeotic transformation of stamens into pistils (pistillody) only under long-day conditions. (F) (cr)-N26 occasionally shows partial pistillody
(arrow) and reduced female fertility under short-day conditions. (G) An EMS-induced mutant of (cr)-N26 shows normal floral phenotype [36]. This
mutant fails to measure day length. (H) (cr)-N61, which contains multiple loci for Rfd genes, shows normal floral phenotype. Pa, palea; P, pistil; S,
stamen; L, lodicule; pTs, partially transformed stamen; Ts, transformed stamen.

7BS) with Ae. crassa cytoplasm [(cr)-CSdt7BS] lacking
both long arms of the homologous chromosome 7B
shows pistillody unrelated to day length (Figure 1C), but
CS ditelosomic 7BS with the intrinsic cytoplasm
(CSdt7BS) forms normal stamens (Figure 1D) [6].
The Ae. crassa cytoplasm alters expression patterns of
wheat class B MADS-box genes at the floral meristem
of (cr)-CSdt7BS [6]. Primordia of the pistil-like stamens
lack expression of wheat APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI) orthologs such as WAP3, WPI-1 and WPI-2
[14], whereas two wheat class C MADS-box genes,
wheat AGAMOUS paralogs (WAG-1 and WAG-2), are
ectopically expressed at the pistil-like stamens [15,16].
Despite initiation of ovule formation in these transformed stamens, ectopic ovules incompletely develop,
and the transformed stamens are sterile. In addition, pistils are also sterile in the (cr)-CSdt7BS alloplasmic line,
and female sterility is due to abnormal ovule development [6]. Both the ovules and ectopic ovules fail to
form an inner epidermis and integuments in the chalaza

region. This incomplete development of the ovules
strongly suggests alteration of gene expression patterns
essential to normal ovule formation in pistils and pistillike stamens of the (cr)-CSdt7BS alloplasmic line. However, there is little information about gene expression
associated with wheat ovule development.
Following determination of carpel identity via AGAMOUS (AG), a class C MADS-box gene acting to specify
stamen and carpel development in Arabidopsis [17],
ovule primordia are initiated within pistils. The initiation of ovule primordium formation is caused by expression of class D MADS-box genes such as Arabidopsis
SEEDSTICK (STK) and petunia floral binding protein 7
(FBP7) and FBP11 [18-20]. ARABIDOPSIS BSISTER
(ABS) and FBP24 from petunia are members of the Bsister subfamily, and are necessary to determine the identity
of the endothelial layer within the inner integument of
the ovule [21,22]. Our previous study using wheat alloplasmic lines with Ae. crassa cytoplasm demonstrated
that alteration of class B and C MADS-box genes was

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

connected with continuous transcript accumulation of
class D and Bsister MADS-box genes, WSTK and WBsis,
respectively, in primordia of ectopic ovules within the
pistil-like stamens [23]. Moreover, the WBsis transcript
is not restricted to the endothelium and appears at the
nucellus in ectopic ovules in (cr)-CSdt7BS. Arabidopsis
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) plays an important role in
ovule development along the proximal-distal axis [24].
ant mutants fail to both initiate and elongate the integument [25,26]. The aberrant ovule formation is at least
partly associated with the weak expression of a wheat
ANT homolog WANT-1 around ovule primordia in (cr)CSdt7BS [16]. Therefore, alteration of gene expression
after initiation of ovule primordia results in abnormal
ovule development in alloplasmic wheat with Ae. crassa
cytoplasm.
Arabidopsis homeodomain protein BELL1 (BEL1) is
also required for ovule morphogenesis [27], suggesting
that wheat BEL1 homologs may be associated with
ovule development. BEL1 acts to specify integument
identity by controlling AG activity [28]. BEL1 encodes a
TALE homeodomain transcription factor distantly
related to the PBX family [27]. Plant BEL1-like homeobox (BLH) genes form a small gene family functioning
in various developmental aspects such as seed shattering
in rice [29] and leaf shape establishment in Arabidopsis
[30]. For many of the BLH functions, molecular interaction with KNOTTED1-type homeodomain (KNOX) proteins is required. Barley JuBel1 and JuBel2 were
originally isolated as interaction partners of the KNOX
protein BKN3 [31]. Arabidopsis BELLRINGER (syn.
PENNYWISE) functions with KNOX genes in early patterning of inflorescence architecture and in maintenance
of the inflorescence meristem [32,33]. The BEL domain
of BLH directly interacts with the MEINOX domain of
KNOX, and the interaction is evolutionarily conserved
between animals and plants [34,35].
To elucidate molecular mechanisms of the abnormal
ovule development in alloplasmic wheat with Ae. crassa
cytoplasm, we first isolated wheat cDNA clones for the
BLH homologs, and then studied their differential
expression patterns and interaction with wheat KNOX
proteins. Association of the BLH homologs with pistillody and female sterility in (cr)-CSdt7BS is discussed
based on the results.

Methods
Plant materials

Three common wheat (Triticum aestivum L., genome
constitution AABBDD) cultivars, Chinese Spring (CS),
Norin26 (N26) and Norin61 (N61), and a ditelosomic
7BS line of CS (CSdt7BS) were used in this study.
Euplasmic lines of each with their intrinsic cytoplasm
develop normal fertile reproductive organs. Alloplasmic

Page 3 of 15

lines with the cytoplasm of a wild relative, Aegilops
crassa, used in the study were respectively abbreviated
as (cr)-CS, (cr)-N26, (cr)-N61 and (cr)-CSdt7BS. The
(cr)-N26 shows pistillody when grown under long-day
conditions (Figure 1E), and exhibits partial pistillody
under short-day conditions, implying that N26 might
contain a fertility restorer (Rf) gene functioning under
short-day conditions (Figure 1F) [10]. Both (cr)-CS and
(cr)-N61 show normal male fertility because of their
possession of Rf gene(s) against the Ae. crassa cytoplasm
in their nuclear genome (Figure 1A, H) [11]. CS has a
single dominant Rf gene, Rfd1, on the long arm of chromosome 7B (7BL) and N61 has multiple Rf genes. A CS
monotelodisomic line of chromosome 7BS with the Ae.
crassa cytoplasm [(cr)-CSmt7BS] is hemizygous for Rfd1
and partially fertile (Figure 1B). (cr)-CSdt7BS, which was
generated from a cross of (cr)-CSmt7BS with CSdt7BS,
shows not only pistillody but also female sterility, independently of day length (Figure 1C) [6]. An Fr mutant
of (cr)-N26 obtained after EMS mutagenesis of (cr)-N26
shows no pistillody even under long-day conditions
(Figure 1G) [36], and was used in the expression analysis.
Three accessions of ancestral diploid species, Triticum
urartu (AA), Aegilops speltoides (SS) and Aegilops
tauschii (DD), and the tetraploid wheat (Triticum durum,
AABB) cultivar Langdon were used in DNA gel blot analysis. A nulli-tetrasomic series of CS produced by Sears
[37] was used for chromosome assignment of the isolated
wheat cDNAs. Each line of the nulli-tetrasomic series
lacks a given pair of homoeologous A, B or D genome
chromosomes (the nullisomic condition) that have been
replaced by the corresponding homoeologous chromosome pair (the tetrasomic condition).
Cloning and sequencing of wheat BELL1 homologs

Degenerate primers, 5’-CGA(A/G)CACTTCCT(A/G/C/T)
CACCCGT-3’ and 5’-AC(C/G)C(G/T)(C/G/T)GCGTTGAT
(A/G)AACCA-3’, were designed and used for amplification
of the BEL domain regions in RNA from pistils of CS and
(cr)-CSdt7BS. The reverse transcription (RT)-PCR products
were cloned into the pGEM-T Easy vector (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and nucleotide sequences were determined
by an automated fluorescent DyeDeoxy terminator cycle
sequencing system using an ABI PRISM 310 genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Nucleotide
sequences of the isolated cDNA fragments were analyzed by
DNASIS software (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) and the sequence
was searched for homology using the BLAST algorithm [38].
The cDNA fragments were used to search wheat
expression sequence tag (EST) clones, and the identified
EST clone TaLr1107F03R contained the complete open
reading frame (ORF). To identify other BLH cDNA
clones, first-strand cDNA was synthesized using total
RNA from pistils of CS and (cr)-CSdt7BS, and 5’ and 3’

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

RACE-PCR was performed with a SMART-RACE PCR
kit (BD Bioscience Clontech, Tokyo, Japan) according to
the manufacturer’s procedure. Gene-specific primers for
RACE-PCR were designed based on the nucleotide
sequences of the degenerate primer-amplified RT-PCR
products. For 5’ and 3’ RACE-PCR, the following primers were respectively used: 5’-TCCTCGCCGCCAGCATGTCCTTCTCGT-3’ and 5’-AAGTCCGTCGC
CGTGCTCAAAGCCTGG-3’ for WBLH2, 5’-TTTGAGACCTGATTCCTCGTTAAGCCTG-3’ and 5’-CAGCAAGGTGGCCGCCGGGAAAGACAG-3’ for WBLH3,
and 5’-GGCCAGCATTTGCTTGTCGCCATCGGTA-3’
and 5’-GCGCAACACCAGCAAGATGCCGGTCAA-3’
for WBLH4. A cDNA fragment containing the complete
ORF was amplified with the following primer sets: 5’CCGACGACGACGATGATGAC-3’ and 5’-CCTTAG
CCCCCCCAAGAATA-3’ for WBLH1, 5’-CGGTGCT
TTCTCTCTCCATG-3’ and 5’-TTCCTAGCCGACGACGTCTT-3’ for WBLH2, and 5’-CCTCCCTCT
CTCTCCCCCTT-3’ and 5’-TGATCCCAGCAATGGAGCAA-3’ for WBLH3. The nucleotide sequences of
the isolated cDNA clones were analyzed as mentioned
above, and a phylogenetic tree was constructed by GENETYX-MAC version 12.00 software (Whitehead Institute
for Biomedical Research, Cambridge MA) based on
Nei’s genetic distance. The phylogenetic tree was constructed according to the unweighted pair group method
with arithmetic mean (UPGMA) method [39].
Southern blot and RT-PCR analyses

For genomic Southern blot analysis, total DNA
extracted from CS, Langdon and diploid wheat was
digested with the restriction enzyme HindIII. Total
DNA extracted from the nulli-tetrasomics was also
digested with HindIII, DraI and BamHI. The digested
DNA was fractionated by electrophoresis through a
0.8% agarose gel, transferred to Hybond N+ nylon membrane (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) and hybridized with 32P-labeled partial BLH cDNA fragments as a
probe (Figure 2). Probe labeling, hybridization, washing
and autoradiography were performed according to
Takumi et al. [40].
Total RNA was extracted by guanidine thiocyanate
from various tissues at the vegetative and reproductive
phases in the euplasmic and alloplasmic wheat lines.
Accumulation of the four BLH and three KNOX transcripts was detected by RT-PCR amplification as previously reported [41]. RT-PCR was conducted with the
following gene-specific primer sets: 5’-TCAACCGACAGCAGCAGCAG-3’ and 5’-CCGAACCCCATCACCGAGTC-3’ for WBLH1, 5’-GTGCCCAGTCTTCCTCG
GTC-3’ and 5’-TCCATCCACCTCCCGCCGTC-3’ for
WBLH2, 5’-CGCTGTCCTCGTCCTCCTCG-3’ and 5’GGAGAGCGATGGAGGCAAAG-3’ for WBLH3, and

Page 4 of 15

Figure 2 Four BEL1-type homeobox genes in common wheat.
(A) Schematic representation of structures of four putative WBLH
proteins. Probe positions used in Southern blot analyses are
underlined. Numbers indicate the amino acid positions of individual
domains. (B) A phylogenetic tree based on the homeodomain
sequences of BLH proteins. In addition to WBLH1 to WBLH4, six rice
BLH, eight Arabidopsis BLH and barley JUBEL1 and JUBEL2 proteins
were included. Homeodomain sequences of WKNOX1, which is a
member of the wheat class 1 KNOX protein family, and
Caenorhabditis elegans CEH-20, which is a homolog of PBX protein,
were used as outgroups. The phylogenetic tree was constructed
according to the UPGMA method.

5’-CCCTCTCCTCCGCCTCGTCC-3’ and 5’-CGGGG
CGGCGTTGCTGAACC-3’ for WBLH4. Primers for
amplification of Wknox1, WRS1 and WLG4 (AB465042)
transcripts are described in our previous studies [42-44].
The ubiquitin (Ubi) and actin (Act) genes were used as
internal controls [41,45]. The PCR-amplified products
were separated by electrophoresis through a 1.5% agarose gel and stained with ethidium bromide. RT-PCR
analysis was performed at the exponential range of
amplification, and the entire experiment was conducted
twice. Two technical replicates were performed for each
biological replicate.
Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using a TaKaRa
Thermal Cycler Dice Real Time System (TaKaRa Bio,
Ohtsu, Japan) and gene-specific primer sets. As an endogenous control, the wheat Act gene was used. The rate of
amplification was monitored using THUNDERBIRD
SYBR pPCR Mix (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan) according to

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

the manufacturer’s protocol. Results were obtained as 2Δ Ct values, where Ct is the number of PCR cycles
required to reach the log phase of amplification for the
examined genes minus the same measure for Act, and
were represented as values relative to the transcript levels
in pistils of CS, N61 or CSdt7BS.
mRNA in situ hybridization

Pistils and young spikes at the stage of floral organ development in the lines CSdt7BS and (cr)-CSdt7BS were
fixed in 3.7% p-formaldehyde, 5% acetic acid at 4°C overnight. The fixed tissues were embedded in Paraplast
medium (Oxford Labware, St. Louis, MO, USA) after
dehydration with ethanol and infiltration with xylene.
The embedded samples were sliced into 8-μm sections
and dried overnight onto slides coated with VECTABOND Reagent (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA,
USA). Tissue sections were deparaffinized with xylene
and hydrated through an ethanol series, then dehydrated
through an ethanol series after treatment with proteinase
K and triethanolamine. Hybridization of the four BLH
mRNAs with digoxigenin-labeled probe produced from
the coding regions was performed overnight at 52°C. The
RNA probes were directly synthesized with T3 and T7
RNA polymerase (Toyobo) from the isolated cDNA
clone. After hybridization, the sections were washed and
treated with RNase. Immunological detection of the
hybridized probe was according to Morimoto et al.[42].
Yeast two-hybrid assay

A HybriZAP-2.1 two-hybrid undigested vector kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) was used to study proteinprotein interaction between BLH and KNOX. The entire
ORF sequences of wheat BLH and KNOX cDNA fragments were amplified with the following primer sets
containing either an EcoRI, BamHI, SalI or XbaI linker:
5’-CCGAATTCATGGGAATAGCGGCGCCACC-3’ and
5’-CCGTCGACTCAACAACCATTGTAGTCTC-3’ for
WBLH1, 5’-GGGGATCCATGTCTAGCAATCCATC
CTA-3’ and 5’-GGTCTAGATTCCTAGCCGACGACGT
CTT-3’ for WBLH2, 5’-GGGGATCCGCCGCCGCCATGTCATCGG-3’ and 5’-GGGGATCCGTCGACGATCACCCAACGAGTCAT-3’ for WBLH3, 5’CCGAATTCATGGAGGAGATCGGCCACCA-3’ and
5’-CCCCCGGGCTAGCCGAACCTGTAGAGCC-3’ for
Wknox1, 5’-GGGAATTCATGGAGAAGTTCCCTAAT3’ and 5’-GGGTCGACTGGAGAAAGGGAGAGAGG-3’
for WRS1, and 5’-GGGAATTCATGGAGGATCTGTACAGCA-3’ and 5’-GGGTCGACAGCAATCATCCATCCATCT-3’ for WLG4. The PCR products were digested
with EcoRI and SalI and cloned into the EcoRI/SalI sites
of pAD-GAL4-2.1 and pBD-GAL4 Cam vectors, resulting in pAD-WBLH1, pAD-WBLH2, pAD-WBLH3,
pBD-WKNOX1, pBD-WRS1, pBD-WLG4 and pBD-

Page 5 of 15

WBLH1. Deletion derivatives of pAD-WBLH1,
pAD-WBLH2 and pBD-WBLH1 were generated using
internal restriction enzyme recognition sites and internal
primers with the linker sequence. pAD-WT and pBDWT, containing the wild-type fragment C of lambda cI,
were used as controls according to the manufacturer’s
protocol (Stratagene). These pAD and pBD constructs
were introduced into yeast strain YRG-2 (Stratagene).
The interaction was assessed on SD medium (Q-BIOgene, Irvine, CA, USA) without leucine (Leu), tryptophan (Trp) or histidine (His) and containing 3 mM
3-amino-1,2,4-triazole.

Results
Cloning of wheat Bell1-like homeobox genes

The CS line ditelosomic 7BS lacking Rfd1 with normal
cytoplasm (CSdt7BS) forms normal stamens, whereas
the alloplasmic line of CSdt7BS with Ae. crassa cytoplasm ((cr)-CSdt7BS) showed pistillody in all florets
(Figure 1). To identify wheat BLH homologs associated
with pistillody, we designed degenerate primers based
on the nucleotide sequences of rice and barley BLH
homologs, and amplified the 108-bp regions encoding
the conserved BELL1-type homeodomains using total
RNA from pistils of CS and (cr)-CSdt7BS. In total, 63 of
the RT-PCR products were sequenced and classified
into seven groups based on their nucleotide sequences
(Additional file 1), indicating that at least seven members of the BLH gene family were identified in the
wheat genome. Four of the identified BLH members,
groups 1, 2, 3 and 7, appeared favored by either CS or
(cr)-CSdt7BS.
In the wheat EST database of the Cereal Research
Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, one EST
clone showed high homology to barley JuBel1 [31], and
the cDNA clone TaLr1107F03R contained an entire
ORF. The wheat JuBel1 homolog corresponding to the
group 3 RT-PCR products was named WBLH1. Two
additional cDNA sequences for WBLH1 were isolated
from CS. The three WBLH1 cDNAs contained single
ORFs encoding 767, 765 and 771 amino acid residues,
and were respectively designated WBLH1-1, WBLH1-2,
and WBLH1-3. To isolate full-length cDNA clones for
the group 1, 2 and 7 RT-PCR products, 5’- and 3’RACE-PCR were conducted with gene-specific primers
designed for the homeobox regions. Based on the
nucleotide sequences of the RACE-PCR products, three
cDNA-specific primer sets were designed, and the
cDNA clones identified were named WBLH2, WBLH3
and WBLH4. A WBLH2 cDNA clone encoding 547
amino acid residues was obtained, and the cDNA
sequence included an 18-bp deletion in the ORF compared with the RACE-PCR product. The WBLH3 and
WBLH4 cDNA clones contained an entire ORF

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

encoding 580 and 623 amino acids, respectively. The
isolated cDNA sequences were deposited in the DDBJ
database under the accession numbers AB546641AB546647.
Putative amino acid sequences of the four wheat BLH
proteins contained three conserved domains, SKY, BEL
and homeodomains (Figure 2A). Based on the homeodomain sequences of four WBLH and related proteins, a
phylogenetic tree was constructed (Figure 2B). The
amino acid sequence of WBLH1-1 showed the highest
similarity (90.2% identity) to that of barley JuBEL1, and
JuBEL2 was closely related (78.7% identity) to WBLH4.
WBLH3 showed high similarity to rice qSH1, a major
quantitative trait locus controlling seed shattering
through formation of an abscission layer [29]. The
homeodomain of WBLH2 was highly similar to that of
Arabidopsis light-induced ATH1 [46] and distantly
divergent from other BEL1-related proteins. In all three
conserved domains, WBLH1 showed the highest similarity to Arabidopsis BEL1 of the four WBLH proteins.
Among these WBLH proteins, homeodomain sequences
were highly conserved, while the SKY and BEL domains
were relatively more diverged (Additional file 2). In particular, the SKY and BEL domains of WBLH2 were distinct from those of the other three WBLH proteins.
To study the copy number of WBLH1 in the wheat
genome, Southern blots were analyzed using total DNA
isolated from diploid, tetraploid and hexaploid wheat.
Southern blots using the shorter cDNA fragment as a
probe (Figure 2A) showed low copy numbers of WBLH1
in tetraploid and hexaploid wheat genomes, and a single
major and a few minor bands for WBLH1 in the A, S
and D diploid genomes (Additional file 3). To assign the
WBLH1 homologous loci to wheat chromosomes, aneuploid analysis was performed using a series of nullitetrasomic lines. Southern blots using the longer cDNA
fragment as a probe (Figure 2A) showed that WBLH1homologous bands could be assigned to chromosomes
2B, 4A, 4D, 5A, 5B and 5D (Additional file 3), meaning
that the three isolated WBLH1 cDNAs were not necessarily homoeologous. Two major bands of WBLH2 were
observed in the A, S and D diploid genomes (data not
shown), and the WBLH2-specific bands were absent
only in the nulli-tetrasomic lines of homoeologous
group 7 chromosomes and chromosomes 1A, 2A and
2D (Additional file 3). WBLH2 and its homologous loci
were assigned to the six chromosomes in common
wheat. Similarly, a single major band for WBLH3 and
WBLH4 was detected in the A, S and D diploid genomes (data not shown). The WBLH3- and WBLH4specific bands were absent in the nulli-tetrasomic lines
of homoeologous group 1 and 3 chromosomes, respectively (Additional file 3). These Southern bots indicated
that WBLH3 and WBLH4 respectively represented three

Page 6 of 15

homoeologous loci of group 1 and 3 chromosomes in
common wheat.
Expression patterns of the four WBLH genes revealed by
RT-PCR analyses

To study expression patterns of the four WBLH genes in
wheat, RT-PCR analysis was conducting using total
RNA from various tissues of CS. Single bands were
clearly visualized for the four WBLH genes, although the
gene-specific primers did not distinguish the three A, B,
and D homoeoalleles of the target genes. The four
wheat BLH genes showed tissue-specific expression patterns (Figure 3). WBLH1 transcripts accumulated predominantly in floral organs than in vegetative organs,
suggesting that these genes play important roles in
wheat reproductive organ development. WBLH2 transcripts were detected in shoot and inflorescence meristem-containing tissues, and in floral organs. WBLH3
expression was observed in most tissues examined, and
the expression pattern of WBLH4 closely resembled that
of WBLH3.
Next, to compare expression patterns of the four
WBLH genes in wheat florets, semi-quantitative and
quantitative RT-PCR analyses were conducted using
total RNA isolated from floral organs of various alloplasmic wheat lines with Ae. crassa cytoplasm. WBLH1

Figure 3 RT-PCR analysis of four BLH and three KNOX genes in
the normal line (CS). Total RNA was isolated from roots, embryos
on day 1 of germination, leaf blades, leaf sheaths, ligules and
auricle-containing leaf regions, glumes, paleae, lemmas, stamens,
pistils, young spikes (15-25 mm in length) and immature embryos
10 days after anthesis. The Act gene was used as an internal control.
Number of PCR cycles is shown on the right of each panel.

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

transcripts were more abundantly accumulated in stamens than in pistils and lodicules of CS, and were
observed at a low level in leaves of CS seedlings (Figure
4). Similarly, abundant accumulation of WBLH1 transcripts was observed in partially transformed stamens of
(cr)-CSmt7BS, but no significant difference in the
WBLH1 transcript level was observed between stamens
of (cr)-CS and the partially transformed stamens of (cr)CSmt7BS (Figure 5). In transformed stamens of (cr)CSdt7BS, the transcript level was similar to that in the
pistils of both euplasmic and alloplasmic CS lines. To
confirm abundant expression in stamens, WBLH1
expression was also analyzed using the other series of
euplasmic and alloplasmic wheat lines. The WBLH1
transcripts similarly accumulated in stamens of all the
lines examined (Figure 4). In partially transformed stamens of (cr)-N26, the WBLH1 transcript level was significantly reduced compared with euplasmic N26
(Figure 5).
Abundant accumulation of WBLH2 transcripts was
observed in pistils and lodicules, with no transcript
detected in leaves and roots of CS (Figure 4). The abundant expression of WBLH2 in pistils was also observed
in the other euplasmic and alloplasmic lines. The
WBLH2 transcript levels in transformed stamens of (cr)CSdt7BS and partially transformed stamens of (cr)CSmt7BS and (cr)-N26 were significantly reduced

Page 7 of 15

compared with those in pistils, whereas transformed stamens of (cr)-CSdt7BS had an increased WBLH2 transcript level compared with normal stamens of CSdt7BS
(Figure 5). The WBLH2 transcripts in the partially transformed stamens of (cr)-CSmt7BS and (cr)-N26 accumulated at lower levels than those of fully transformed
stamens.
WBLH3 and WBLH4 transcripts more abundantly
accumulated in pistils and lodicules compared with stamens of CS (Figure 4). WBLH3 expression was also
detected in leaves and roots. WBLH4 transcript levels
were more abundant in the lodicules than in the pistils.
In pistils of the other euplasmic and alloplasmic lines,
predominant expression of WBLH3 and WBLH4 was
clearly observed. The WBLH3 and WBLH4 transcript
levels in transformed stamens of (cr)-CSdt7BS were
similar to those in pistils.
Wknox1 is an ortholog of the maize kn1 homeobox
gene functioning mainly in shoot, inflorescence and
floral meristem [40,42]. WRS1 and WLG4 are wheat
orthologs of maize rough sheath1 (rs1) and liguleless4
(lg4) KNOX genes, respectively [43,44]. Maize rs1 and
lg4 belong to the class I KNOX gene family and play
important roles in maintenance of shoot apical meristem
(SAM) indeterminancy and differentiation of lateral
organs [47-49]. Transcripts of Wknox1, WRS1 and
WLG4 accumulated abundantly in SAM-containing

Figure 4 RT-PCR analysis of WBLH and Wknox1 in various euplasmic and alloplasmic wheat lines. The Ubi gene was amplified as a
control for normalization. Number of PCR cycles is shown on the right of each electropherogram. P, pistil; S, stamen; L, lodicule; pTs, partially
transformed stamen; tSt, transformed stamen.

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

Figure 5 Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of WBLH1 and WBLH2 in
euplasmic and alloplasmic lines of CS. Act was used as an
internal control. The transcript levels are shown as values relative to
the mRNA levels in pistils of CS. Data are represented as means
with standard deviation (n = 3 or n = 4). One and two asterisks
respectively indicate statistical significance between pistil and
stamen at the 5% and 1% levels (Student’s t test). P, pistil; S, stamen;
pTs, partially transformed stamen; tSt, transformed stamen.

embryos and young spikes and in floral organs, but not
in fully developed leaf blades (Figure 3). Accumulation
of Wknox1 transcript was observed in pistils and lodicules of CS (Figure 4). Low levels of Wknox1 transcripts
were detected in stamens of euplasmic and alloplasmic
lines of CS, whereas slight Wknox1 transcript accumulated in partially transformed stamens of (cr)-CSmt7BS.
Wknox1 transcripts accumulated abundantly in transformed stamens of (cr)-CSdt7BS, and the accumulation
level was similar to that in pistils. Abundant expression
of Wknox1 in pistils was also observed in the other
euplasmic and alloplasmic lines.
In situ localization of the four WBLH transcripts in pistils

Fully developed ovules in normal pistils are surrounded by
the inner and outer integuments, all enveloped by an
inner epidermis (Figure 6A) [23]. To compare the expression patterns of the four WBLH genes in pistil development of common wheat in detail, in situ hybridization
analysis was conducted using pistils and young spikes at
the floral organ developing stage, in which stamen and pistil primordia develop. In transverse sections of pistils from
CS and CSdt7BS, accumulation of WBLH1 transcript was
found in the ovary, but not the ovule (Figure 6B). In both
pistils and transformed stamens of (cr)-CSdt7BS, WBLH1

Page 8 of 15

transcripts were localized to the ovary but not the ovule.
No significant differences in WBLH1 localization were
observed among fertile pistils, sterile pistils, and transformed stamens. WBLH1 transcripts were also found in
longitudinal sections of anthers, especially in tapetum and
anther epidermis of CS (Figure 6C).
WBLH2 transcripts highly accumulated at the stage of
floral organ development in the ovule of the CS,
CSdt7BS and (cr)-CSdt7BS pistils (Figure 6D). WBLH2
mRNA was present at higher levels in the inner integument than in the outer integument and nucellus of the
pistils. No significant difference in WBLH2 mRNA localization was observed between fertile and sterile pistils.
Even in ectopic ovules of the transformed stamens,
WBLH2 transcripts highly accumulated, although the
integument developed incompletely.
In longitudinal sections of young spikes at the floral
organ developing stage from CSdt7BS, WBLH3 mRNA
was detected in the anther walls of the stamen and the
basal region of the carpel but not in the ovule (Figure
6E). WBLH3 transcripts accumulated in the central
region of the transformed stamens of (cr)-CSdt7BS,
where the ectopic ovule was presumed to develop. Similar expression patterns were observed for WBLH4 (data
not shown).
Protein-protein interaction between wheat BLH and
KNOX

Protein-protein interactions between BLH and KNOX
were previously reported in Arabidopsis and barley
[31,34]. The BLH-KNOX heterodimers play important
roles in plant development [30,32,33,50]. To confirm the
interactions between wheat BLH and KNOX proteins, a
yeast two-hybrid assay was conducted. Entire ORF
sequences of Wknox1, WRS1 and WLG4 were fused to
the nucleotide sequence for the yeast GAL4 DNA binding domain (BD-WKNOX1, BD-WRS1 and BD-WLG4),
and the WBLH1, WBLH2 and WBLH3 ORFs were fused
to the sequence for the yeast GAL4 transcriptional activation domain (AD-WBLH1, AD-WBLH2 and ADWBLH3). The yeast two-hybrid assay indicated that
WBLH1 interacts with WKNOX1, WRS1 and WLG4
(Figure 7). WBLH3 also showed interaction with the
three wheat KNOX proteins. WBLH2, however, formed
a complex with WKNOX1 and WRS1, but not with
WLG4.
To determine the KNOX-interacting domain of wheat
BLH proteins, deletion-mutant constructs of WBLH1
and WBLH2 were produced, and protein-protein interaction of the WBLH1 and WBLH2 deletion proteins
with WKNOX1 and WLG4 was examined by yeast twohybrid assay (Figure 8). NoWBLH1 deletion construct
lacking the BEL domain showed positive interaction
with WKNOX1 and WLG4 (Figure 8A). Neither

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

Page 9 of 15

Figure 6 In situ hybridization of WBLH transcripts in floral organs of CS (wild-type), CSdt7BS (normal flower) and (cr)-CSdt7BS (flower
showing pistillody). (A) Transverse (left) and longitudinal (right) sections of a normal, fully developed pistil from CSdt7BS. The ovule is
enveloped by an inner epidermis. The vascular bundle is connected to the chalaza. (B) In situ localization of WBLH1 transcripts in transverse
sections of pistils of euplasmic and alloplasmic CS lines. (C) In situ localization of WBLH1 transcripts in longitudinal sections of the CS stamens.
(D) In situ localization of WBLH2 transcripts in transverse sections of pistils and stamens of euplasmic and alloplasmic CS lines. Lower panels
show higher magnification images of the pistils. The magnified image of CS was derived from another section for in situ hybridization analysis of
WBLH2 transcript. (E) In situ localization of WBLH3 transcripts in longitudinal sections of developing florets from euplasmic and alloplasmic lines
of CSdt7BS. St, stamen; Pi, pistil; tSt, transformed stamen; Ov, ovule; Ie, inner epidermis; Ch, chalaza; Vb, vascular bundle; Es, embryo sac; Mi,
micropyle; Oi, outer integument; Ii, inner integument; Nu, nucellus; eOv, ectopic ovule. Scale bars represent 100 μm.

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

Page 10 of 15

activator (Figure 8A). Deletion of the N-terminal region
failed to activate reporter gene expression. These results
revealed that the N-terminal region (119th to 349th
amino acid residues) was essential for transcriptional
activation.

Discussion
WBLH2 function is distinct from those of other three BLH
genes

Figure 7 Interaction of WBLH and WKNOX proteins in a yeast
two-hybrid system. (A) Transformed yeast lines were grown on SD
medium without Trp and Leu (SD-Trp-Leu) (left) or SD medium
lacking Trp, Leu and His (SD-Trp-Leu-His) (right). Protein interaction
is assessed by the viability of yeast transformants on SD-Leu-Trp-His
containing 3mM 3-AT. AD-WT and BD-WT, control plasmids.
(B) Summary of the results of the yeast two-hybrid assay. Circles and
crosses respectively indicate interacting or activating, and
noninteracting or nonactivating. N.D., not determined. Interaction of
BD-WBLH1 and AD-WT is not shown.

deletion in the SKY domain nor the homeodomain of
WBLH1 had any effect on protein-protein interactions
with the two KNOX proteins. The N-terminal region of
WBLH1 was also not required for the interactions. Arabidopsis BEL1 interacts with KNOX proteins through
the N-terminal to homeodomain regions [34]. The interaction domain with KNOX was more restricted in
WBLH1 than in BEL1. Similarly, deletions in the SKY
and BEL domain region of WBLH2 abolished the interaction with WKNOX1, and a WBLH2 deletion without
the homeodomain had no influence on the interaction
(Figure 8B). Deletion analysis of WBLH2 indicated that
the region from the SKY domain to the BEL domain
was required for the interaction with WKNOX1. In
addition, no deletion derivatives of WBLH2 showed
positive interactions with WLG4, meaning the absence
of any region inhibiting the interaction with WLG4 in
WBLH2.
The entire ORF of WBLH1 was fused to the nucleotide sequence for the yeast GAL4 DNA binding domain.
Yeast transformants carrying the BD-WBLH1 construct
survived on His - selection medium, indicating that
WBLH1 could activate transcription of the reporter
gene used in yeast. To identify the activation-related
domain, deletion derivatives of WBLH1 fused to the
DNA binding domain were introduced, and transformants were recovered on His - selection medium. No
WBLH1 constructs lacking either the SKY, BEL or
homeodomains lost function as a transcriptional

Bell1-type homeobox genes play important roles in plant
development. In this study, four wheat BLH genes were
isolated and named WBLH1 to WBLH4. WBLH1, a
putative ortholog of barley JuBEL1 [31], was highly similar to Arabidopsis SAWTOOTH1 (SAW1) and SAWTOOTH2 (SAW2), which act redundantly to suppress
expression of the KNOX gene BREVIPEDICELLUS (BP)
in leaf margins [30]. SAW1 and SAW2 expression was
also observed in lateral organs including the adaxial side
of developing sepals but not in developing ovules, and
therefore SAW1 and SAW2 are unlikely to be redundant
with BEL1 function in ovule development, although the
two genes are the most closely related in sequence to
BEL1 [30]. WBLH1 was expressed in the ovary but not
the ovule (Figure 6B), indicating that WBLH1 function
also does not correspond to that of BEL1.
Both BEL1 and SAW1 are able to interact with class I
KNOX proteins, STM, BP and KNAT2, and with the
class II KNOX protein KNAT5, but not with other class
II KNOX proteins, KNAT3, KNAT4 and KNAT7
[30,35]. The class I KNOX genes are considered to play
a role in establishment and maintenance of meristematic
identity and in the initiation of lateral organ primordia,
and their expression patterns were temporally and spatially regulated, whereas expression of the class II
KNOX genes is constitutive [47,51,52]. Similarly,
WBLH1 could interact with three class I KNOX proteins, WKNOX1, WRS1 and WLG4 (Figure 7). Wknox1,
WRS1 and WLG4 are related to KNAT1, BP and
KNAT5, respectively [36,40,43]. Barley JuBEL1 also
interacts with class I KNOX proteins BKN1 and BKN3,
but not with class II KNOX protein BKN7 [31]. The
interacting domain of WBLH1 could be defined to the
BEL domain in this study (Figure 8), which was included
in the interacting region of JuBEL1 [31]. These results
imply evolutionary conservation of the protein-protein
interaction between the class I KNOX proteins and
WBLH1-related proteins since the divergence of monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants. In animals,
interaction between two types of TALE-homeobox protein families plays important roles in development, and
an N-terminal portion of the PBX subclass proteins is
essential for heterodimerization with the MEINOX subclass proteins [53,54]. The MEINOX-PBX complex in
animals is evolutionarily conserved as the KNOX-BLH

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

Page 11 of 15

Figure 8 Structures of deletion derivatives of WBLH1 and WBLH2 and their interactions with wheat KNOX proteins. The SKY, BEL and
homeobox domains are shown by yellow, green and red boxes, respectively. Numbers indicate amino acid residue numbers at the deletion
break points. Interaction activity with WKNOX1 and WLG4 and transcriptional activity are also summarized on the right side. Circles indicate
interacting or activating, and crosses indicate noninteracting or nonactivating.

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

complex in plants [34]. KNOX-BLH interaction likely
alters intracellular localization of the KNOX transcription factor [55], and the KN1-BLH complex binds to the
specific DNA motif, TGACAG(G/C)T, with higher affinity compared with KN1 alone [56]. These observations
surely indicate the significance of KNOX-BLH complex
formation in various plant developmental processes.
WBLH3 also interacted with the three class I KNOX
proteins (Figure 7). WBLH3 was phylogenetically close
to WBLH4, a putative ortholog of barley JuBEL2 [31,57],
although the chromosomal locations of WBLH3 and
WBLH4 were different. RT-PCR and in situ mRNA
hybridization analyses revealed that the gene expression
profile of WBLH3 was generally identical to that of
WBLH4. WBLH3 and WBLH4 were homologous to Arabidopsis BLH1 (Figure 2B). WBLH3 and WBLH4 expression was observed in the basal region of the carpel but
not the ovule (Figure 6E). Similarly, Arabidopsis BLH1
expression is restricted to the transmitting tract and the
base of the funiculus, but is not observed in the ovule
or embryo sac [58]. Therefore, the WBLH3/4 expression
patterns were well conserved with that of BLH1. Misexpression of BLH1 affects normal embryo sac development in ovules of the Arabidopsis eostre mutant [58]. A
mutation of the class II KNOX gene KNAT3 suppresses
the eostre mutant phenotype [58], and KNAT3 is able to
interact with BLH1 [58]. Hackbusch et al. [59] and Pagnussat et al. [58] also reported that the function of the
Arabidopsis KNOX-BLH complexes requires the ovate
family proteins. No misexpression of WBLH3/4 was
observed in ovules of the euplasmic and alloplasmic
wheat lines, and therefore we have no information
about functional orthology between BLH1 and WBLH3/
4. WBLH3 displays similarity to the rice qSH1 homeobox protein, a putative ortholog of the Arabidopsis
REPLUMLESS (RPL) homeobox protein [29,60]. RPL
and qSH1 are associated with seed shattering. RPL is
expressed in Arabidopsis stem, pedicels and replum of
developing ovaries, and qSH1 is expressed in rice inflorescence meristem, anther and the boundary of the spikelets. WBLH3 might function to define the boundary
regions as do RPL and qSH1.
WBLH2, closely related to the Arabidopsis ATH1
homeobox gene, was phylogenetically distinct from
other wheat BLH genes (Figure 2B). ATH1 was originally isolated as a light-induced homeobox gene [46].
ATH1 is expressed in shoot, inflorescence and floral
meristems, developing stamens and carpels, and basal
regions of lateral organs including leaves, sepals and
petals [61]. The mutant phenotype of ath1 indicates that
ATH1 controls the development of the boundary region
between shoot lateral organs and the stem [61]. The
ATH1-STM complex is associated with initiation and
maintenance of Arabidopsis SAM [50]. AHT1 expression

Page 12 of 15

in stamens and carpels is consistent with the activation
of ATH1 by AGAMOUS [62]. In contrast to the ATH1
expression pattern, WBLH2 was abundantly expressed
in ovules but not in ligule or auricle regions (Figure 3,
Figure 6D). The WBLH2 expression pattern is likely to
be analogous to that of BEL1 rather than ATH1. Especially in integuments of ovules, WBLH2 transcripts
accumulated abundantly, indicating that WBLH2 might
be associated with development of integuments in
wheat. The ovule-specific expression of WBLH2 clearly
differed from the expression patterns of three other
wheat BLH genes. In addition, of the class I KNOX proteins examined, WBLH2 was not able to interact with
WLG4 (Figure 7). The interacting region of WBLH2
with WKNOX1 was defined from the SKY domain to the
BEL domain, which was broader than the interacting
region of WBLH1 with WKNOX1 and WLG4 (Figure 8).
These observations reveal that the functional features of
WBLH2 are distinct from those of the other BLH gene
functions in wheat development. In particular, the role of
WBLH2 in ovule development should be elucidated in
further studies.
Altered expression of BEL1-type homeobox genes in floral
organs of alloplasmic lines

Pistillody is one of the typical phenomena appearing in
nuclear-cytoplasm incompatibility of higher plants. For
expression of pistillody, the expression patterns of a
large number of nuclear genes including class B MADSbox genes are altered [6,63]. The downregulation of the
class B MADS-box genes in stamen primordia results in
homeotic conversion at floral whorl three in the pistillody-showing alloplasmic lines as well as loss-of-function
mutants of the class B MADS-box genes. Within their
pistil-like stamens, ectopic ovules are surely formed as
reported in Arabidopsis, rice and alloplasmic wheat
[6,64,65]. Our previous studies revealed that wheat class
B MADS-box genes WPI1, WPI2 and WAP3 are downregulated at floral whorl three in alloplasmic wheat lines
showing pistillody [6,14], whereas two class C MADSbox genes, WAG-1 and WAG-2, and TaDL, an ortholog
of rice DROOPING LEAF (DL), are ectopically expressed
in primordia of the pistil-like transformed stamens
[15,16,23,66]. After floral organ identity is homeotically
changed at whorl three, ovule formation is likely to
automatically occur within the transformed stamens
through expression of the class D MADS-box gene
TaAGL2/WSTK [23]. During ectopic ovule development,
expression of WBsis and WANT-1 is observed in integuments of the ovules [16,23]. WBLH2 was also strongly
expressed in integuments not only of normal ovules in
pistils but also of ectopic ovules in transformed stamens
(Figure 6). WBLH1/WBLH3/WBLH4 expression was
observed in the basal boundary region of the ovary in

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

both normal pistils and transformed stamens. These
observations suggest that expression of the four WBLH
genes is associated with development of transformed
stamens in alloplasmic wheat lines with Ae. crassa
cytoplasm.
Ectopic ovules in transformed stamens and ovules in
pistils of (cr)-CSdt7BS are sterile due to abnormal development of the inner epidermis and integuments [6,23]. It
was thought that aberrant expression of WBsis and a
reduced transcript level of WANT-1 might at least partially result in the sterility of the ovules and ectopic
ovules [16,23] (Murai et al. unpublished results). Such an
obvious alteration of gene expression in the ovules and
ectopic ovules was not observed in WBLH2. The WBLH2
expression pattern in the sterile pistils seemed to be identical to that in normal ovules of fertile pistils (Figure 6D).
Therefore, we have no evidence for WBLH2 being associated with the female sterility of the transformed stamens and pistils in (cr)-CSdt7BS. The regulatory pathway
of WBLH2 expression in ovule development might be
independent of those of WBsis and WANT-1. After
WAG-1 and WAG-2 expression in the transformed stamens and sterile pistils, WSTK initiates ovule development [23]. WBLH2 expression occurs continuously in the
developing ovules of the transformed stamens and sterile
pistils, whereas WBsis is ectopically expressed in the marginal region of ovule primordia and WANT-1 expression
level is reduced around ovule primordia [16,23] (Murai et
al. unpublished results). After ovule initiation via WSTK,
some of the ovule development-related genes such as
WBsis and WANT-1 should be abnormally expressed,
which in turn might be associated with the aberrant
ovule development. In further studies, signal cascades
from initiation of ovule primordia to WBsis/WANT-1 or
WBLH2 expression should be elucidated to investigate
how the Ae. crassa cytoplasm and Rfd1 affect female
sterility in the pistillody-exhibiting alloplasmic wheat
lines.

Conclusions
Wheat BLH genes consist of a small multigene family.
Four wheat Bell1-like homeobox (BLH) genes, WBLH1
to WBLH4, were isolated in this study. A yeast twohybrid assay showed that KNOX-BLH interaction was
conserved in wheat similarly to in various other plant
species, indicating the significance of KNOX-BLH complex formation in wheat developments. Of the class I
KNOX proteins examined, WBLH2 was unable to interact with WLG4. The interacting region of WBLH2 with
WKNOX1 was defined from the SKY domain to the
BEL domain, which was broader than the interacting
region of WBLH1 with WKNOX1 and WLG4. In addition, the ovule-specific expression of WBLH2 clearly differed from the expression patterns of three other wheat

Page 13 of 15

BLH genes. Therefore, the functional features of
WBLH2 are likely to be distinct from other BLH gene
functions in wheat development. WBLH2 was also
strongly expressed in integuments not only of normal
ovules in pistils but also of ectopic ovules in transformed stamens. WBLH1/WBLH3/WBLH4 expression
was observed in the basal boundary region of the ovary
in both normal pistils and transformed stamens. These
results indicated that the four WBLH genes may participate in development of pistils and transformed stamens
but are not associated with female sterility in alloplasmic
wheat lines with Ae. crassa cytoplasm.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Comparison of nucleotide sequences of 63 RT-PCR
products with BLH-degenerate primers.
Additional file 2: Amino acid sequence alignment of three
conserved domains in the WBLH proteins.
Additional file 3: Copy number and chromosome assignment of the
four WBLH genes.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. S. Cloutier for providing the EST clone TaLr1107F03R. Wheat
seeds used in this study were supplied by the National BioResource ProjectWheat (Japan; http://www.nbrp.jp). This work was supported by a grant from
the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan
(Basic Research B, No. 21380005) to ST, and partially supported by Special
Coordination Funds for Promoting Science and Technology, Creation of
Innovation Centers for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research Areas (Innovative
Bioproduction Kobe), MEXT, Japan.
Author details
Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, Nada-ku, Kobe
657-8501, Japan. 2Department of Bioscience, Fukui Prefectural University,
Yoshida-gun, Fukui 910-1195, Japan.

1

Authors’ contributions
KMi designed the experiments, carried out the molecular genetic studies,
and drafted the manuscript. HH participated in the real-time RT-PCR analysis.
CH carried out the in situ hybridization. KMu participated in the design and
coordination of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. ST conceived
of the study, designed and coordinated the study, and wrote the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 7 September 2010 Accepted: 4 January 2011
Published: 4 January 2011
References
1. Kaul MLH: Male sterility in higher plants Berlin: Springer; 1988.
2. Tsunewaki K: Genome-plasmon interactions in wheat. Jpn J Genet 1993,
68:1-34.
3. Tsunewaki K, Wang GH, Matsuoka Y: Plasmon analysis of Triticum (wheat)
and Aegilops. 1. Production of alloplasmic common wheats and their
fertilities. Genes Genet Syst 1996, 71:293-311.
4. Schnable PS, Wise RP: The molecular basis of cytoplasmic male sterility
and fertility restoration. Trends Plant Sci 1998, 3:175-180.
5. Zubko MK, Zubko EI, Patkovsky YV, Khvedynich OA, Fisahn J, Gleba YY,
Schieder O: Novel ‘homeotic’ CMS patterns generated in Nicotiana via
cybridization with Hyoscyamus and Scopolia. J Exp Bot 1996, 47:1101-1110.
6. Murai K, Takumi S, Koga H, Ogihara Y: Pistillody, homeotic transformation
of stamens into pistil-like structures, caused by nuclear-cytoplasm
interaction in wheat. Plant J 2002, 29:169-181.

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.

Linke B, Nothnagel T, Böner T: Flower development in carrot CMS plants:
mitochondria affect the expression of MADS box genes homologous to
GLOBOSA and DEFICIENS. Plant J 2003, 34:27-37.
Teixeira RT, Farbos I, Glimelius K: Expression levels of meristem identity
and homeotic genes are modified by nuclear-mitochondrial interactions
in alloplasmic male-sterile lines of Brassica napus. Plant J 2005,
42:731-742.
Fitter JT, Thomas MR, Niu C, Rose RJ: Investigation of Nicotiana tabacum
(+) N. suaveolens cybrids with carpelloid stamens. J Plant Physiol 2005,
162:225-235.
Murai K, Tsunewaki K: Photoperiod-sensitive cytoplasmic male sterility in
wheat with Aegilops crassa cytoplasm. Euphytica 1993, 67:41-48.
Murai K: Genetic analysis of fertility restoration against photoperiodsensitive cytoplasmic male sterility in Triticum aestivum cv. Norin 61.
Plant Breed 1997, 116:592-594.
Zhu Y, Saraike T, Yamamoto Y, Hagita H, Takumi S, Murai K: orf260cra, a
novel mitochondrial gene, is associated with the homeotic
transformation of stamens into pistil-like structures (pistillody) in
alloplasmic wheat. Plant Cell Physiol 2008, 49:1723-1733.
Murai K, Tsunewaki K: Genetic analysis on the fertility restoration by
Triticum aestivum cv. Chinese Spring against photoperiod-sensitive
cytoplasmic male sterility. Jpn J Genet 1994, 69:195-202.
Hama E, Takumi S, Ogihara Y, Murai K: Pistillody is caused by alterations
to the class-B MADS-box gene expression pattern in alloplasmic wheats.
Planta 2004, 218:712-720.
Meguro A, Takumi S, Ogihara Y, Murai K: WAG, a wheat AGAMOUS
homolog, is associated with development of pistil-like stamens in
alloplasmic wheats. Sex Plant Reprod 2003, 15:221-230.
Mizumoto K, Hatano H, Hirabayashi C, Murai K, Takumi S: Altered
expression of wheat AINTEGUMENTA homolog, WANT-1, in pistil and
pistil-like transformed stamen of an alloplasmic line with Aegilops crassa
cytoplasm. Dev Genes Evol 2009, 219:175-187.
Riechmann JL, Meyerowitz EM: MADS domain proteins in plant
development. Biol Chem 1997, 378:1079-1101.
Angenent GC, Franken J, Busscher M, van Dijken A, van Went JL, Dons HJM,
van Tunen AJ: A novel class of MADS box genes is involved in ovule
development. Plant Cell 1995, 7:1569-1582.
Colombo L, Franken J, Koetje E, van Went J, Dons HJM, Angenent GC, van
Tunen AJ: The Petunia MADS box gene FBP11 determines ovule identity.
Plant Cell 1995, 7:1859-1868.
Favaro R, Pinyopich A, Battaglia R, Kooiker M, Borghi L, Ditta G,
Yanofsky MF, Kater MM, Colombo L: MADS-box protein complexes control
carpel and ovule development in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2003,
15:2603-2611.
Nesi N, Debeaujon I, Jond C, Stewart AJ, Jenkins GI, Caboche M, Lepiniec L:
The TRANSPARENT TESTA 16 locus encodes the ARABIDOPSIS BSISTER
MADS domain protein and is required for proper development and
pigmentation of the seed coat. Plant Cell 2002, 14:2463-2479.
de Folter S, Shchennikova AV, Franken J, Busscher M, Baskar R,
Grossniklaus U, Angenent GC, Immink RGH: A Bsister MADS-box gene
involved in ovule and seed development in petunia and Arabidopsis.
Plant J 2006, 47:934-946.
Yamada K, Saraike T, Shitsukawa N, Takumi S, Murai K: Class D and Bsister
MADS-box genes are associated with the ectopic ovule formation in the
pistil-like stamens of alloplasmic wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Plant Mol
Biol 2009, 71:1-14.
Schneitz K: The molecular and genetic control of ovule development.
Curr Opi Plant Biol 1999, 2:13-17.
Baker SC, Robinson-Beers K, Villanueva JM, Gaiser JC, Gasser CS: Interactions
among genes regulating ovule development in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Genetics 1997, 145:1109-1124.
Schneitz K, Hülskamp M, Kopczak SD, Pruitt RE: Dissection of sexual organ
ontogenesis: a genetic analysis of ovule development. Development 1997,
124:1367-1376.27.
Reiser L, Modrusan Z, Margossian L, Samach A, Ohad N, Haughn GW,
Fishcher RL: The BELL1 gene encodes a homeodomain protein involved
in pattern formation in the Arabidopsis ovule primordium. Cell 1995,
83:735-742.
Western T, Haughn G: BELL1 and AGAMOUS genes promote ovule
identity in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 1999, 18:329-336.

Page 14 of 15

29. Konishi S, Izawa T, Lin SY, Ebana K, Fukuta Y, Sasaki T, Yano M: An SNP
caused loss of seed shattering during rice domestication. Science 2006,
312:1392-1396.
30. Kumar R, Kushakappa K, Godt D, Oidkowich MS, Pastorelli S, Hepworth SR,
Haughn GW: The Arabidopsis BEL1-LIKE HOMEODOMAIN protein SAW1
and SAW2 act redundantly to regulate KNOX expression spatially in leaf
margins. Plant Cell 2007, 19:2719-2735.
31. Müller J, Wang Y, Franzen R, Santi L, Salamini F, Rohde W: In vitro
interactions between barley TALE homeodomain proteins suggest a role
for protein-protein associations in the regulation of Knox gene function.
Plant J 2001, 27:13-23.
32. Bryne ME, Groover AT, Fontana JR, Martienssen RA: Phyllotactic pattern
and stem cell fate are determined by the Arabidopsis homeobox gene
BELLRINGER. Development 2003, 130:3941-3950.
33. Smith HM, Hake S: The interaction of two homeobox genes,
BREVIPEDICELLUS and PENNYWISE, regulates internode patterning in the
Arabidopsis inflorescence. Plant Cell 2003, 15:1717-1727.
34. Bellaoui M, Pidkowich MS, Samach A, Kushalappa K, Kohalmi SE,
Modrusan Z, Crosby WL, Haughn GW: The Arabidopsis BELL1 and KNOX
TALE homeodomain proteins interact through a domain conserved
between plants and animals. Plant Cell 2001, 13:2455-2470.
35. Mukherjee K, Brocchieri L, Bürglin TR: A comprehensive classification and
evolutionary analysis of plant homeobox genes. Mol Biol Evol 2009,
26:2775-2794.
36. Murai K, Ogihara Y, Tsunewaki K: An EMS-induced wheat mutant restoring
fertility against photoperiod-sensitive cytoplasmic male sterility. Plant
Breed 1995, 114:205-209.
37. Sears ER: Nullisomic-tetrasomic combinations in hexaploid wheat. In
Chromosome manipulation and plant genetics. Edited by: Riley R, Lewis KR.
Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd; 1966:29-45.
38. Karlin S, Altschul SF: Applications and statistics for multiple high-scoring
segments in molecular sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993,
90:5873-5877.
39. Sneath PHA, Sokal RR: Numerical Taxonomy Freeman: San Francisco; 1973.
40. Takumi S, Kosugi T, Murai K, Mori N, Nakamura C: Molecular cloning of
three homoeologous cDNAs encoding orthologues of maize KNOTTED1
homeobox protein from young spikes of hexaploid wheat. Gene 2000,
249:171-181.
41. Mizumoto K, Murai K, Nakamura C, Takumi S: Preferential expression of a
HLP homolog encoding a mitochondrial L14 ribosomal protein in
stamens of common wheat. Gene 2004, 343:281-289.
42. Morimoto R, Kosugi T, Nakamura C, Takumi S: Intragenic diversity and
functional conservation of the three homoeologous loci of the KN1-type
homeobox gene Wknox1 in common wheat. Plant Mol Biol 2005,
57:907-924.
43. Morimoto R, Nishioka E, Murai K, Takumi S: Functional conservation of
wheat orthologs of maize rough sheath1 and rough sheath2 genes. Plant
Mol Biol 2009, 69:273-285.
44. Ishida Y, Takumi S: Cloning of a wheat cDNA encoding an ortholog of
the maize LIGULELESS4 homeobox protein. Wheat Inf Serv 2009, 107:9-12.
45. Saraike T, Shitsukawa N, Yamamoto Y, Hagita H, Iwasaki Y, Takumi S,
Murai K: Identification of a protein kinase gene associated with pistillody,
homeotic transformation of stamens into pistil-like structures, in
alloplasmic wheat. Planta 2007, 227:211-221.
46. Quaedvlieg N, Dockx J, Rook F, Weisbeek P, Smeekens S: The homeobox
gene ATH1 of Arabidopsis is depressed in the photomorphogenic
mutants cop1 and det1. Plant Cell 1995, 7:117-129.
47. Kerstetter RA, Vollbrecht E, Lowe B, Veit B, Yamaguchi J, Hake S: Sequence
analysis and expression patterns divide the maize knotted1-like
homeobox genes into two classes. Plant Cell 1994, 6:1877-1887.
48. Kerstetter RA, Laudencia-Chigcuanco D, Smith LG, Hake S: Loss-of-function
mutations in the homeobox gene, knotted1, are defective in shoot
meristem maintenance. Development 1997, 124:3045-3054.
49. Bauer P, Lubkowitz M, Tyers R, Nemoto K, Meeley RB, Goff SA, Freeling M:
Regulation and a conserved intron sequence of liguleless3/4 knox class-I
homeobox genes in grasses. Planta 2004, 219:359-368.
50. Rutjens B, Bao D, van Eck-Stouten E, Brand M, Smeekens S, Proveniers M:
Shoot apical meristem function in Arabidopsis requires the combined
activities of three BEL1-like homeodomain proteins. Plant J 2009,
58:641-654.

Mizumoto et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/2

Page 15 of 15

51. Jackson D, Veit B, Hake S: Expression of maize KNOTTED1 related
homeobox genes in the shoot apical meristem predicts patterns of
morphogenesis in the vegetative shoot. Development 1994, 120:405-413.
52. Sentoku N, Sato Y, Kurata N, Ito Y, Kitano H, Matsuoka M: Regional
expression of the rice KN1-type homeobox gene family during embryo,
shoot, and flower development. Plant Cell 1999, 11:1651-1663.
53. Bürglin TR: The PBC domain contains a MEINOX domain: Coevolution of
Hox and TALE homeobox genes? Dev Genes Evol 1998, 208:113-116.
54. Mann RS, Affolter M: Hox proteins meet more partners. Curr Opin Genet
Dev 1998, 8:423-429.
55. Cole M, Nolte C, Werr W: Nuclear import of the transcription factor
SHOOT MERISTEMLESS depends on heterodimerization with BLH
proteins expressed in discrete sub-domains of the shoot apical
meristem of Arabidopsis thaliana. Nucleic Acid Res 2006, 34:1281-1292.
56. Smith HM, Boschke I, Hake S: Selective interaction of plant homeodomain
proteins mediates high DNA-binding affinity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99:9579-9584.
57. Dabbert T, Okagaki RJ, Cho S, Heinen S, Boddu J, Muehlbauer GJ: The
genetics of barley low-tillering mutants: low number of tillers-1 (lnt1).
Theor Appl Genet 2010, 121:705-715.
58. Pagnussat GC, Yu HJ, Sundaresan V: Cell-fate switch of synergid to egg
cell in Arabidopsis eostre mutant embryo sacs arises from misexpression
of the BEL1-like homeodomain gene BLH1. Plant Cell 2007, 19:3578-3592.
59. Hackbusch J, Richter K, Müller J, Salamini F, Uhrig JF: A central role of
Arabidopsis thaliana ovate family proteins in networking and subcellular
localization of 3-aa loop extension homeodomain proteins. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:4908-4912.
60. Roeder AHK, Ferrándiz C, Yanofsky MF: The role of the REPLUMLESS
homeodomain protein in patterning the Arabidopsis fruit. Curr Biol 2003,
13:1630-1635.
61. Gómez-Mena C, Sablowski R: ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA HOMEOBOX GENE1
establishes the basal boundaries of shoot organs and controls stem
growth. Plant Cell 2008, 20:2059-2072.
62. Gómez-Mena C, de Folter S, Costa MMR, Angenent GC, Sablowski R:
Transcriptional program controlled by the floral homeotic gene
AGAMOUS during early organogenesis. Development 2005, 132:429-438.
63. Carlsson J, Lagercrantz U, Sundström J, Teizeira R, Wellmer F,
Meyerowitz EM, Gilmelius K: Microarray analysis reveals altered expression
of a large number of nuclear genes in developing cytoplasmic male
sterile Brassica napus flower. Plant J 2007, 49:452-462.
64. Hill JP, Lord EM: Floral development in Arabidopsis thaliana: a
comparison of the wild type and the homeotic pistillata mutant. Can J
Bot 1989, 67:2922-2936.
65. Nagasawa N, Miyoshi M, Sano Y, Satoh H, Hirano H, Sakai H, Nagato Y:
SUPERWOMAN1 and DROOPING LEAF genes control floral organ identity
in rice. Development 2003, 130:705-718.
66. Ishikawa M, Ohmori Y, Tanaka W, Hirabayashi C, Murai K, Ogihara Y,
Yamaguchi T, Hirano H: The spatial expression patterns of DROOPING
LEAF orthologs suggest a conserved function in grasses. Gene Genet Syst
2009, 84:137-146.
doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-2
Cite this article as: Mizumoto et al.: Characterization of wheat Bell1-type
homeobox genes in floral organs of alloplasmic lines with Aegilops
crassa cytoplasm. BMC Plant Biology 2011 11:2.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
