<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary patterns and processes in the radiation of phyllostomid bats</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-137"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Leandro R Monteiro"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolutionary patterns and processes in the
radiation of phyllostomid bats
Leandro R Monteiro1,2* and Marcelo R Nogueira3

Abstract
Background: The phyllostomid bats present the most extensive ecological and phenotypic radiation known
among mammal families. This group is an important model system for studies of cranial ecomorphology and
functional optimisation because of the constraints imposed by the requirements of flight. A number of studies
supporting phyllostomid adaptation have focused on qualitative descriptions or correlating functional variables and
diet, but explicit tests of possible evolutionary mechanisms and scenarios for phenotypic diversification have not
been performed. We used a combination of morphometric and comparative methods to test hypotheses
regarding the evolutionary processes behind the diversification of phenotype (mandible shape and size) and diet
during the phyllostomid radiation.
Results: The different phyllostomid lineages radiate in mandible shape space, with each feeding specialisation
evolving towards different axes. Size and shape evolve quite independently, as the main directions of shape
variation are associated with mandible elongation (nectarivores) or the relative size of tooth rows and mandibular
processes (sanguivores and frugivores), which are not associated with size changes in the mandible. The early
period of phyllostomid diversification is marked by a burst of shape, size, and diet disparity (before 20 Mya), larger
than expected by neutral evolution models, settling later to a period of relative phenotypic and ecological stasis.
The best fitting evolutionary model for both mandible shape and size divergence was an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process with five adaptive peaks (insectivory, carnivory, sanguivory, nectarivory and frugivory).
Conclusions: The radiation of phyllostomid bats presented adaptive and non-adaptive components nested
together through the time frame of the family’s evolution. The first 10 My of the radiation were marked by strong
phenotypic and ecological divergence among ancestors of modern lineages, whereas the remaining 20 My were
marked by stasis around a number of probable adaptive peaks. A considerable amount of cladogenesis and
speciation in this period is likely to be the result of non-adaptive allopatric divergence or adaptations to peaks
within major dietary categories.

Background
The Phyllostomidae (leaf-nosed bats) is the dominant
family of bats in Central and South America. This family
has undergone an adaptive radiation unparalleled among
other mammals in terms of ecological and morphological diversity [1]. Starting from an insectivore ancestor in
the late Eocene [2-4], the 53 extant genera in this family
have diversified into specialized forms for insectivory,
carnivory, frugivory, granivory, nectarivory, and sanguivory (although many species have mixed diets) [5-7].
* Correspondence: lrmont@uenf.br
1
Department of Biological Sciences and Hull York Medical School, The
University of Hull, Hull, HU6 7RX, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

This ecological diversity and specialisation originates
from an intricate partitioning of resources [8,9], and is
probably responsible for the high local species richness
(ranging between 31-49 syntopic species [10,11])
observed for leaf-nosed bats. The evolution of specialised diets created functional demands, apparently determining changes in cranial and mandibular shape [1,12].
The magnitude of skull form (shape + size) variation
among phyllostomid lineages is large and has been
assessed by correlational studies both qualitatively
and quantitatively, using measurement ratios of functional relevance or traditional distance measurements
[1,12-16]. One important aspect of phenotypic variation
in the family is the snout elongation associated with

© 2011 Monteiro and Nogueira; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

nectarivory. This elongation is thought to be responsible
for a trade-off between two functional demands: tongue
support and bite force [8,9,17]. Bats with longer snouts
might have longer operational tongue lengths [18], but
are known to have weaker bites than bats with short
snouts, what might restrict the dietary range accessible
to them [9] and lead to seasonal migrations [19].
Nogueira et al. (2009) [17] have shown that apart from
the general elongation, other skull and mandible shape
changes are associated with (size-independent) bite
force, such as the relative size of mandibular processes
(coronoid, angular), zygomatic arch position and robustness and the relative position and sizes of tooth rows.
The feeding behaviour is also relevant to the understanding of the biomechanics of feeding and resource
partitioning in bats [14,20], but is less studied than
morphology.
The ecomorphological diversification of phyllostomids
has long been considered the result of an adaptive radiation, but no specific tests of the responsible mechanisms
have been performed, apart from the correlational studies mentioned before (most of them not using comparative methods). An analysis of diversification rates
indicated a significant shift at the base of the phyllostomid tree [21], that could be associated with an adaptive
diversification, but increased speciation is not an
unequivocal evidence of adaptive radiation [22,23].
Monteiro and Nogueira (2010) [24] provide indirect evidence of adaptive evolution, assessing the integration
patterns in the phyllostomid mandible during evolutionary shape changes. The interspecific integration patterns
(correlated shape changes among mandibular components) were independent from pooled within-species
integration patterns (which mirrored mammalian developmental genetics patterns), as expected during adaptive
evolution on an adaptive landscape [25,26]. Long term
selection on species means (macroevolutionary changes)
is expected to be independent from the structure of
genetic correlations among morphological variables,
depending only on selection gradients [25,26] associated
with specific adaptive peaks. In this context, we can
move beyond the usual phenotype-ecology correlation
approach, assessing the likelihood of different evolutionary scenarios through recent model-based approaches
for comparative analyses [27,28]. It is possible to select
between alternative adaptive models with different postulated selective agents or adaptive peaks [29]. It is also
possible to estimate optimal phenotypic values for each
adaptive peak to use as a basis for testing hypotheses
regarding the adaptive evolution of lineages [29], and to
cast light on the evolutionary processes responsible for
species diversity [30].
We focus our study on the variation of mandible form
(shape and size), which is a model for the evolution of

Page 2 of 23

complex morphological structures [31]. The mandible
can be used as a proxy for the facial skull due to developmental integration of jaw (mandible-maxilla) parts
[32]. Unlike other parts of the skull that harbour different functions (protecting the brain and sensory organs),
the mandible’s main functional demands are related to
feeding, and dietary changes are expected to be the
main selective agent for this structure. We combine ecomorphological correlations, patterns of disparity through
time and a model-based comparative analysis to test
evolutionary mechanisms and scenarios during the
radiation of phyllostomid bats.

Results
Structure of morphological and dietary variation

The distribution of dietary preferences along the phylogenetic tree of phyllostomids (Figure 1) indicate that most
dietary shifts occurred only once during the evolution of
the family, but nectarivory seems to have evolved twice
independently and a return to insectivory is observed in
the ancestor of Trinycteris and Glyphonycteris. Dietary
specialisation has been a major theme in phyllostomid
evolution, but the data from our literature review suggests that many species present mixed diets and will use
both plant and animal food items, with geographical and
seasonal variation in relative importance. Sanguivores and
some frugivores are more strict. A principal component
analysis (PCA) of dietary preferences (not shown here,
but published in [24], see also the Additional file 1),
shows a strong correlation between carnivory and insectivory as a feature of the first diet PC, suggesting that
they might be considered a single group of animalivores.
The first diet PC contrasts animalivory and frugivory as
opposite trends. The summarisation of three diet variables in the first diet PC explains why there was strong
multicollinearity in preliminary analyses of the diet data
(see methods), justifying the PCA transformation. The
second diet PC separates sanguivores from the rest and
the third diet PC separates the nectarivores from the rest
(the two remaining PCs were not clearly interpretable as
simple diet contrasts).
The shape space for phyllostomid mandible evolution
was assessed by superimposed coordinates of landmarks
and semilandmarks (Figure 2). A principal component
analysis (PCA) of superimposed coordinates returned
five over-dispersed shape principal components, according to a parallel analysis (a Monte Carlo approach that
compares observed eigenvalues with a distribution of
eigenvalues from PCAs of random data sets with uncorrelated variables). The first five shape PCs explained
90.6% of total shape variation and are strongly associated with the divergence among dietary groups (Figure
3, see also Additional file 2 for an animation of the ordination with names of genera). Mapping the phylogenetic

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 3 of 23

Figure 1 Phylogenetic relationships among phyllostomid bats with dietary preferences. Phylogeny based on concatenated mtDNA and
RAG2 data (modified from Baker et al. [2003-2010] [3,33]). Branch lengths are proportional to time since divergence (in millions of years). Pie
graphics depicted at tree tips depict approximate contribution of different diet items according to our ranked estimates from the literature (see
methods section).

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Figure 2 Phyllostomid mandible showing reference points
used for morphometric analysis. (A) Mandible of Phyllostomus
hastatus, showing landmarks (squares) and semilandmarks (circles).
Landmark descriptions as in [17]. (B) Average shape calculated by
Procrustes superimposition over all 49 species.

tree (with maximum likelihood ancestral character
estimation) onto the space of the first three shape PCs
(Figure 3A), each dietary group represents an independent direction of shape variation, with few convergences
in the separate lineages (Figure 3A also depicts model
OU.5 from the model-based analysis, see below). This is
observed both considering the dietary groups as discrete
categories (Figure 3A) and the relative contribution of
diet items by multivariate regression (Figure 3B). The
regression of the five shape PCs on dietary PCs and
skull length (used as a more familiar and intuitive proxy
for mandible centroid size - see methods) was significant at the multivariate level, but the fifth shape PC was
not particularly associated with any dietary PC or skull
length (Table 1). The principal component analysis of
dietary variables worked satisfactorily to remove multicollinearity among independent variables, as indicated
by the low variance inflation factors (≤ 1.271). It should
be emphasised that the principal components of species
means depict the major axes of shape change among
species, without the constraint to depict shape changes
associated with diet (as differences among dietary types
could be aligned with none of the PCs). However, the
strong association of dietary PCs with independently
derived shape PCs suggests common evolutionary processes behind the ordination patterns.
The first shape vector is mostly associated with the second (sanguivory) and third (nectarivory) diet PCs in
opposite directions (Figure 3B, Table 1). The patterns of
shape change associated with the first shape PC are
dominated by a relative lengthening (positive direction -

Page 4 of 23

associated with nectarivory) and shortening or deepening (negative direction - associated with sanguivory) of
the mandible (Figure 4). This is not a uniform shape
change, as the mandibular elongation is not evenly distributed throughout the mandible (e.g. the region below
the premolars is more elongated and shortened than the
region below the molars and incisors). The second
shape PC is the only shape axis significantly associated
with all three diet PCs (and the model with larger coefficient of determination R2). It is mostly associated with
diet PCs 2 and 3 (sanguivory and nectarivory) (Table 1),
but showing a shared morphological change, rather than
a contrast. This axis of shape change is more closely
associated with sanguivory in its negative direction (Figure 3B, Table 1), depicting a noticeable relative decrease
of the molar row and a relative decrease of the coronoid
process (Figure 4). This decrease in the coronoid process is also evident in nectarivores hence its significant
association with diet PC3. The diets with stronger masticatory demands (frugivory and animalivory) present
positive scores along shape PC2. This direction of shape
change is dominated by relatively larger molar rows and
larger coronoids (Figure 4). The relative increase in the
molar row is a feature of animalivores, hence the weak
(but significant) correlation observed between the second shape PC and the first diet PC (Table 1). The third
shape PC is strongly associated with the first diet PC
(Table 1), which contrasts animalivores and frugivores.
The shape change depicted by this shape axis is dominated by a change in the shapes of mandibular processes
and relative differences in relative sizes of molar teeth
(Figure 4). In the positive direction (associated with animalivory), the coronoid is wider, the angular relatively
larger and the molar teeth row longer. In the negative
direction (associated with frugivory), the coronoid is
narrower, slightly curved posteriorly, the angular is relatively smaller and the molar teeth row shorter (but premolars row longer). There is also a weak but significant
partial correlation of the third shape PC and the third
diet PC (nectarivory). The fourth shape PC explains a
small, but still over-dispersed, amount of the variation
among species (Figure 4). The multivariate regression
results indicate that this shape feature is correlated with
mean size differences (evolutionary allometry) and the
first diet PC. The scatter of PC scores (not shown, but
scores available in Additional file 1) ordinates apart six
short-faced frugivore species (Ametrida, Sphaeronycteris,
Pygoderma, Centurio, Stenoderma, Ariteus) comprising
the clade Stenodermatina from Baker et al. (2003) [33].
These species are strict frugivores and present high
positive scores on shape PC4. High negative scores on
shape PC4 are observed among insectivores and the
large carnivore bats (Vampyrum, Chrotopterus). The
shape changes depicted by the fourth shape PC (Figure

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 5 of 23

Figure 3 Scatterplots of first three shape Principal Components with superimposed phylogenetic tree and diet variables. (A) The
phylogeny tips (species mean shapes) are depicted as spheres, coloured according to major dietary preferences (green - insectivores, yellow carnivores, red - frugivores, purple - sanguivores, blue - nectarivores). Connecting lines determined by phylogeny branches, where nodes
correspond to estimated ancestral shapes. The tree root shape is depicted as a black sphere. Branch colours correspond to estimated ancestral
diets. (B) Scatterplot of first three shape PCs with associated diet PCs. Diet PC vectors directions based on partial correlations from the
multivariate PGLS regression. Names in parentheses after diet PCs indicate the main dietary item associated with that PC direction.

4) are related to the mandibular processes (similar to
those observed along shape PC 3) and the anterior
region. A noticeable aspect of the shape change is the
“chin” formed in these short-faced frugivores, as well as
changes in the relative sizes of molar and premolar
rows. The fifth shape PC was not associated with any
dietary PC or skull length.
Patterns of phenotypic and ecological disparity through
time

The scatterplot of morphometric (Procrustes) distances
versus genetic distances shows a combination of two
scatter patterns (Figure 5A). For larger genetic distances
(> 0.10), there is a positive linear relationship between
the two types of distances, whereas for small genetic

distances (< 0.10) there seems to be no relationship.
This distance plot suggests at least two different evolutionary processes operating at different moments along
the evolution of phyllostomids. The inference of evolutionary modes can be made qualitatively by comparison
with Polly’s simulated patterns of morphological divergence (see Figure 16 in Polly (2004) [34]). The linear
relationship between distances with a steep slope is
expected under directional selection, and the lack of
relationship is expected under stabilising selection. The
scatterplot comparing morphometric distances and time
since divergence (Figure 5B) shows a less clear pattern
at large times since divergence due to species that are
phenotypically and (to a certain extent) genetically similar but diverged early (27-30 Mya) during phyllostomid

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 6 of 23

Table 1 Multivariate PGLS regression results for the
shape PCs on size and diet.

neutral evolution simulations (median and 95% confidence intervals of simulations depicted as solid and
dashed red lines, respectively). During this initial period,
there is a high average disparity within existing lineages.
Both shape and diet disparities peak above the expected
neutral disparity around 25 Mya. There is also a turning
point after this early diversification (around 20 Mya),
when observed disparity within lineages is smaller than
expected under neutral evolution, suggesting that stabilising selection was the main evolutionary force constraining diversification within lineages after the main
ecological divergence had taken place. Size disparity
through time follows a similar pattern initially, but there
is a second peak above expected median disparity
between 16-7 Mya. This second peak is unique for size
disparity and takes place after the main dietary categories
were established. The relevance of this pattern is not so
clear because the confidence limits for univariate characters are considerably large and much of the size disparity
fluctuation within lineages falls inside the confidence
intervals. The five panels (Figure 5A, B, C, D, E) are complementary in the sense that they are indicating a duality
of evolutionary processes at different times during the
phyllostomid radiation, and that shape and size did not
have a correlated pattern of disparity through time. The
steep slopes observed in the right hand extremity of
Figures 5A and 5B are consistent with the larger than
expected shape disparity in the deeper parts of the tree
(between 30 and 20 Mya - Figure 5C), and both are predicted under directional selection. The near zero slopes
in the left hand extremity of Figures 5A and 5B are consistent with the lower than expected disparity within
younger clades (Figures 5C and 5D), and both patterns
are likely under stabilising selection.

Shape PC1

R2 = 0.570
b

r

P

CL

0.0000

0.0022

0.9886

Diet PC1
Diet PC2

0.0303
-0.0903

0.2242
0.5631

0.1340
< 0.0001

0.1162

0.6312

< 0.0001

Diet PC3
Shape PC2

R2 = 0.807
b

CL

r

P

-0.0010

-0.2116

0.1581

Diet PC1

0.0190

0.2998

0.0429

Diet PC2
Diet PC3

-0.1047
-0.0754

-0.8650
-0.7549

< 0.0001
< 0.0001

Shape PC3

R2 = 0.444
b

r

P

CL

-0.0008

-0.1592

0.2907

Diet PC1

0.0545

0.6420

< 0.0001

Diet PC2

0.0079

-0.1201

0.4264

Diet PC3

-0.0226

-0.3049

0.0394

b

r

P

CL

-0.0020

-0.4482

0.0018

Diet PC1

-0.0233

-0.4031

0.0054

Diet PC2

-0.0003

-0.0056

0.9705

Diet PC3

-0.0016

-0.0273

0.8573

b

r

P

CL

-0.0008

-0.1974

0.1884

Diet PC1

0.0151

0.2877

0.0525

Diet PC2

-0.0007

-0.0142

0.9255

Diet PC3

0.0140

0.2484

0.0960

Shape PC4

Shape PC5

R2 = 0.440

R2 = 0.159

The partial regression (b) and partial correlation (r) coefficients and their
significances (P) are depicted for each independent variable: CL Condylobasal Length, and diet principal components. Diet PC1 is a contrast
between animalivores (positive) and frugivores (negative). Diet PC2 separates
sanguivores (positive scores) from the rest. Diet PC3 separates nectarivores
(positive) from the rest. The variance inflation factors were small, ranging from
1.249 (Diet PC1) to 1.007 (Diet PC2). The multivariate model was significant
(Wilk’s Λ = 0.0092, F = 15.23, df1 = 25, df2 = 150.1, P < 0:00001).

evolution (Macrotus, Lampronycteris, Micronycteris and
the other insectivores - see Figure 1). This pattern suggests that the early period of phyllostomid divergence
was marked by a combination of directional and stabilising selection.
The disparity through time (DTT) plots provide further
evidence of a two-mode evolutionary history for shape
and diet (Figures 5C and 5E). These plots show average
sums of morphometric and dietary distances (relative to
the total sum or total disparity) for lineages of a given
(relative) age range through the phylogenetic tree. The
early evolution of phyllostomid lineages is marked by
larger disparity (blue solid line) than expected by 1000

Evolutionary models of phenotypic divergence

We tested five alternative models of the evolution of
mandible shape (Figure 6, Table 2). The first model
(BM) was a neutral Brownian motion along the phyllostomid phylogenetic tree, whereas the remaining models
(OU.2-OU.5) incorporated a deterministic component
(selection) similar to adaptive radiations with varying
numbers of fitness peaks (2 to 5), according to increasingly complex ecological assumptions, causing dietary
types to be lumped together or split into separate peaks.
The model-fitting results are summarised in Tables 2
and 3. The phenotypic variables used were the first
three or five shape PCs (multivariate models were used
for fitting all PCs at the same time). Fitting multivariate
models with different numbers of variables allowed for
some insight into the sensitivity of results to model
degrees of freedom. Using more shape variables
increases the amount of information about variation
patterns in the model, but also increases the number of

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 7 of 23

Figure 4 Mandible shape variation associated with Principal Components. Shape icons depicted as grid deformations relative to the grand
average shape (Fig. 2B). Shape changes correspond to maximum observed range of scores. Numbers in parentheses indicate the amount of
total shape variation explained by each PC.

parameters, causing problems for estimation. The criteria used for model selection: weights of Akaike information criteria corrected for sample size w(AICc) and
weights of Schwarz information criteria w(SIC) for a
particular model Mi can be interpreted as the probability of Mi being the “best” model given the data and the
set of candidate models (the SIC being more conservative in relation to model complexity than AICc). For the

models with three PCs, according to all criteria used,
the best fitting model was OU.4, an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process (stabilising selection) with four adaptive peaks
(frugivores, nectarivores, sanguivores and animalivores).
For the models with five shape PCs, however, the
increased complexity of the models (as measured by the
number of parameters being estimated (the degrees of
freedom in Table 2) caused the model OU.5 (the most

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 8 of 23

Figure 5 Patterns of morphological, dietary and genetical divergence through time. (A) Scatterplot between shape distances (Procrustes)
between pairs of species and genetic distances (percent sequence divergence [33]) for the same pairs. (B) Scatterplot between shape distances
(Procrustes) between pairs of species and time since divergence. (C) Line plot showing changes in relative morphological disparity through time
(DTT). Relative morphological disparity measured as average squared Euclidean distances (with the full set of shape PCs) among existing clades
at a given point in relative time. The blue solid line shows the observed disparity, and the red dashed line shows the expected disparity under a
neutral evolution model as the average of 1000 simulations. (D) Same as C, but showing changes in relative size disparity through time. (E) Same
as C, but showing changes in relative dietary disparity through time. Relative dietary disparity measured as average Manhattan distances using
relative importance of diet items for each species.

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 9 of 23

Figure 6 Adaptive regime models for association between mandible shape and diet. Model OU.2 discriminates two adaptive optima, one
for species with feeding modes that involve a considerable amount of mastication (Insectivory, Carnivory and Frugivory), and species with
feeding modes involving little or no mastication (Sanguivory and Nectarivory). Model OU.3 discriminates three adaptive optima: two with little or
no mastication, but with fundamental differences (Sanguivory and Nectarivory), and one involving mastication (lumping Insectivory, Carnivory
and Frugivory). Model OU.4 discriminates four dietary adaptive optima, lumping Insectivores and Carnivores in the Animalivore category. Model
OU.5 discriminates optima for the five main dietary groups. All ancestral states estimated by a maximum likelihood algorithm (see methods).

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 10 of 23

Table 2 Performance of alternative models for the
evolution of mandible shape using principal components.
Models with 3 PCs
BM

OU.2

OU.3

OU.4

OU.5

AICc

-503.15

-521.09

-557.23

-571.23

-568.09

Δ(AICc)
W(AICc)

68.08
0.0000

50.14
0.0000

14
0.0008

0
0.8272

3.14
0.1721

SIC

-500.05

-477.55

-472.61

-501.83

-509.29

Δ(SIC)

31.74

36.68

7.46

0

9.24

w(SIC)

0.0000

0.0000

0.0232

0.9673

0.0095

9

18

21

24

27

DOF
Models with 5 PCs

BM

OU.2

OU.3

OU.4

OU.5

-953.13

AICc

-963.13

-994.16

-1016.73

-1022.49

Δ(AICc)

69.36

59.36

28.33

5.76

0

w(AICc)

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0532

0.9468

SIC

-862.51

-886.85

-839.13

-857.41

-867.95

Δ(SIC)

0

47.72

29.44

18.9

24.34

W(SIC)

0.9999

0.0000

0.0000

0.0001

0.0000

20

40

45

50

55

DOF

Model names defined as follows: BM - Brownian motion, OU - OrnsteinUhlenbeck with two (OU.2), three (OU.3), four (OU.4), and five (OU.5) adaptive
optima (see text and Fig. 7 for details). AICc is the corrected Akaike
Information Criterion for small sample sizes, Δ(AICc) is the difference relative
to the model with smaller AICc, w(AICc) is the Akaike weight for each model.
SIC is the Schwartz Information Criterion, Δ(SIC) and w(SIC) are the differences
and weights as defined above. DOF are the numbers of parameters estimated
by each model. All models were multivariate. The upper part of the table
shows models fitting the first three shape PCs simultaneously, whereas the
bottom part of the table shows models fitting the first five shape PCs.

complex model) to have the higher w(AICc), but the
Brownian motion (the simplest model) to have the
higher w(SIC). This is an expected result of model
dimensionality, since the SIC criterion penalises more
complex models more severely than the AICc.
The 95% confidence ellipsoids for predicted optimal
shapes (θ i ) from model OU.5 do not overlap in the
Table 3 Performance of alternative models for the
evolution of skull length.
BM
AICc
Δ(AICc)

OU.2

OU.3

OU.4

OU.5

307.59
9.48

309.30
11.19

311.75
13.64

311.86
13.74

298.11
0

w(AICc)

0.0086

0.0037

0.0011

0.0010

0.9856

SIC

311.11

315.96

319.82

321.21

308.62

Δ(SIC)

2.49

7.33

11.19

12.58

0

w(SIC)

0.2184

0.0194

0.0028

0.0014

0.7580

2

4

5

6

7

DOF

Model names defined as follows: BM - Brownian motion, OU - OrnsteinUhlenbeck with two (OU.2), three (OU.3), four (OU.4), and five (OU.5) adaptive
optima (see text and Fig. 7 for details). AICc is the corrected Akaike
Information Criterion for small sample sizes, Δ(AICc) is the difference relative
to the model with smaller AICc, w(AICc) is the Akaike weight for each model.
SIC is the Schwartz Information Criterion, Δ(SIC) and w(SIC) are the differences
and weights as defined above. DOF are the numbers of parameters estimated
by each model.

space spanned by the first five shape PCs (Figure 7, but
only the first three PCs are shown). Their centroid positions correspond roughly to the averages of points with
the same colours in Figure 3. There is some overlap
between carnivore and insectivore ellipsoids (about half
the insectivore ellipsoid is within the carnivore ellipsoid), and the complete separation of the two peaks is
only achieved in the scores of the fifth shape PC (result
not shown). This is consistent with the numeric results
in Table 2 where the “best” model with three PCs lumps
carnivores and insectivores into an animalivore peak.
The predicted optimal shapes for each dietary adaptive
peak in the best fitting model OU.5 (Figure 8) reproduce
the shape changes described above in the correlational
analysis. The grand average shape (Figure 2B) was used
as reference for the grid deformations, but the patterns
of shape changes are the same if using an estimated
root shape for the phyllostomid tree (using MorphoJ to
map shape onto phylogeny [35]), as the difference
between the grand average and the estimated root shape
are negligible (results not shown). The earliest adaptive
peak is the one for insectivores, with a relatively large
molar series and well developed mandibular processes.
The first off shoot to an alternative adaptive peak is
towards sanguivory, where the molar series is greatly
reduced and the mandibular processes are reduced (but
the central part of the ramus is relatively expanded).
The carnivory optimum shape shares the enlarged molar
series with insectivores, but the mandible is deeper.
Further changes occurred independently towards frugivory and nectarivory. The optimal shape for frugivores
present a higher mandible with a smaller angle at the
symphysis. The mandibular processes are relatively well
developed and the posterior border of the coronoid
forms a characteristic curve (the coronoid of animalivores has a straight border). The shift to the nectarivore
adaptive peak involved an elongation of the mandible
and a corresponding decrease of mandibular processes,
particularly the coronoid.
We also tested five alternative models for the evolution of skull length (Figure 6, Table 3). According to
both AICc and SIC weights, the best fitting model was
OU.5, an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process with five adaptive
peaks (one for each main dietary category considered).
In fact, OU.5 was the only model that performed significantly better than Brownian motion. The five size
optima (θi) estimates and their 95% confidence intervals
(Figure 9) show a considerable overlap with the exception of the optimum for carnivory, what explains the
best fit presented by OU.5. It is the only model that
separates carnivores from insectivores. Frugivores and
nectarivores present smaller and larger skull length
optima relative to insectivores, but these estimates fall
within the confidence interval for insectivory. When

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 11 of 23

Figure 7 Bootstrap confidence ellipsoids for dietary adaptive optima (θi) in shape space. Confidence ellipsoids (95%) calculated after
bootstrap resampling under model OU.5 for five shape PCs (only the first three PCs shown). Dietary optima ellipsoids are colour-coded following
key in Figs. 3 and 6 (OU.5).

interpreting these results, it is important to bear in mind
that skull length is not a proxy for body mass and will
be influenced by patterns of cranial elongation or
shortening.

Discussion
The combination of ecomorphological correlations, disparity analysis and model-based comparative techniques
provided strong evidence for the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for the phyllostomid radiation. Although
there are a few instances of convergence in phyllostomids
[3,4], the dietary divergence presents a strong phylogenetic structure [24,36], where most specialisations
occurred only once and many of the main lineages
(recognised as subfamilies in most taxonomic studies
[33]) are relatively homogeneous morphologically and

ecologically. Convergence is an important part of the
study of adaptation [37], and its absence makes it harder
to infer the role of natural selection in biological diversification. One has to be particularly careful with the comparative methods and evolutionary model assumptions,
for using the wrong models or methods are likely to lead
to erroneous conclusions [28,38,39]. For example, in the
present study, forcing a Brownian model of evolution
into the phylogenetic regression model would lead to
non-significant associations among shape and diet principal components (results not shown). Flexible approaches
allowing for different evolutionary models [27,28,40]
provide more sophisticated and interpretable results [39],
as well as more interesting questions to be explored.
The model-based approach used in this study shed light
on the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for the

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 12 of 23

Figure 8 Shape changes associated with dietary adaptive optima (θi) for the best fitting evolutionary model. Shape icons for each diet
optimum depicted as grid deformations relative to the grand average shape (Fig. 2B). Shape changes obtained by shape principal component
scores estimated as θi by the model OU.5 (Fig. 6). Arrows indicate directions of evolutionary change between adaptive peaks according to
ancestral diet estimates.

evolutionary radiation of phyllostomid bats and makes it
possible to generate predictions of optimal shapes (or
ratios of functional relevance) for dietary specialisations
that can be used in the future to test hypotheses of biomechanical optimisation [41].
The major axis of shape variation among phyllostomid
species (first shape principal component) ordinates species with contrasting degrees of rostral elongation. This
shape change is regarded by Freeman (2000) [1] as one
of the “cheap tricks” of mammal diversification, and studies on other groups of mammals such as domestic dogs
[42] suggest that this pattern of shape variation can arise
in a microevolutionary scale (~10000 years) as a response
to selective processes. Rostral elongation in phyllostomids
is associated with a trade-off between support for the
elongated tongue and bite force (species with shorter rostra usually have stronger bites) [17,43,44]. This reduced

bite force is a result not only of the increased out-lever
[44], but also of the relative decrease of muscle insertion
areas and robustness of elongated skulls and mandibles
[17]. The bite force constraint caused by morphological
specialisation is known to limit the dietary scope [8,9]
and might have important ecological consequences, particularly regarding patterns of resource use and foraging
strategies within guilds [19].
Mandible and palate length are generally good predictors of operational tongue length in most nectarivores
[18] (but see [45,46] for an alternative adaptation in
Anoura fistulata). Longer tongues are considered an
adaptation for nectar extraction, not only because these
will reach flowers with longer corollas [46], but because
they allow the nectar specialists to explore a larger variety
of plant species more efficiently (avoiding seasonal
changes to insects and fruit when local nectar abundance

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Figure 9 Cranial size adaptive optima (θi) for the best fitting
evolutionary model. Size optima (Condylobasal Length) and
confidence intervals for each dietary adaptive peak in model OU.5.
Circles represent median and whiskers represent 95% confidence
intervals of bootstrap resampling estimates for each θ.

decreases) [19,47], and possibly to maintain a longer distance from the flower during feeding (reducing predation
risk) [18]. It is currently established that nectarivory has
evolved twice independently within phyllostomids [3,4],
and despite a superficial phenotypic convergence (both
lineages do present the mandibular elongation), there are
many anatomical differences, particularly in tongue morphology [4]. All this morphological variation suggests
that, in this system, there are many ways to achieve the
same function (many-to-one relationships [48]) and that
there is more variation in diet and foraging strategies
among nectarivores than implied by the common use of
such category. Brachyphylla is a singular nectarivore in
the sense that it presents a short mandible (the blue
sphere with negative score on shape PC1 - Figure 3A, see
also Additional file 2) and is phenotypically similar to
Phylloderma and Sturnira, being ordinated between frugivore and insectivore species. The similarity between
Brachyphylla and the frugivore Stenodermatine lineage
has been recognised for other morphological characters
in the dentition and cranial shape [1,49] and could be the
result of dietary changes to exploit open niches during
island colonisation, as suggested by Griffiths (1985) [49].
The second principal component of interspecific shape
variation depicts a common pattern of shape change for
diets with low mastication (shared features between nectarivores and sanguivores) versus high mastication
(shared features between animalivores and frugivores).
Both sanguivore and nectarivore specialists do present
lower bite forces than expected for their sizes [8].
Although nectarivores and sanguivores are in extreme

Page 13 of 23

opposites regarding the mandibular elongation pattern
of shape PC1, they do present similarities in the relative
reduction of mandibular processes (particularly the coronoid) and molar series (more pronounced in sanguivores). These shared features are consistent with
developmental consequences of selection for morphological specialisations [24]. This is clear for nectarivores,
where selection for a longer, narrower skull has limited
the relative size of muscles and their areas of attachment [17]. The explanation for the pattern of shape
changes in sanguivores is not as direct as that for nectarivores, as the evolution of different mandibular components towards this adaptive peak has been shown to
disagree with expected developmental patterns [24],
where tooth bearing components and mandibular processes form almost independent modules. This is
because the two tooth bearing components seem to
change their shapes independently: a relative increase in
the anterior alveolar (incisives and canines), combined
with a relative decrease in the posterior alveolar (molar
series). This emphasis in anterior dentition is also
observed in tooth development as well, and was
hypothesised to be the result of selection to sanguivory
[50]. Therefore, even though a reduction of bite force
and muscle masses is observed in both sanguivores and
nectarivores [8,51], the developmental consequences of
these changes are more localised (in the posterior
mandible) in sanguivores than in nectarivores. This is
probably due to stronger stabilising selection in the
anterior region of the mandible of sanguivores [24]. The
evolution of sanguivory has been discussed in the literature, but the current limitations of available data make
it difficult to get past the delineation of general scenarios and hypotheses [3] to actually testing functional predictions about agents of selection and phenotypic
variation. Sanguivore skulls did not evolve according to
expected developmental integration patterns [24], and
do not meet traditional biomechanical predictions based
on models of mastication [16]. The functional demands
on the skull associated with sanguivory are not known
in detail, but should include not only biting off flesh
and lapping blood, but also sensorial tasks in finding
and approaching potential bloodmeal sources. Sanguivores are unique among phyllostomids in that there are
no known intermediate forms (both in diet and phenotype), whereas for the species that specialised in plant
items (frugivores and nectarivores) there are plenty of
intermediate species with mixed diets. This pattern suggests that the divergence of frugivores and nectarivores
might have occurred along ridges and local maxima on
the adaptive landscape, but the evolution of sanguivores
has probably occurred via a leap over a fitness valley in
a short period of time (between 31 and 21 Mya [3]).
Because the transition period was very short, useful

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

fossils documenting it would need to be obtained from
this specific window on the late Oligocene. However, all
known fossils of vampire bats are Plio-Pleistocenic Desmodus and Diphylla [52], which are the same or very
similar to extant vampire species.
The first and second major axes of variation in the
mandibular shape space of phyllostomids mostly contrast groups that present high and low masticatory
demands. The phenotypic differences between dietary
specialists with high masticatory demands (frugivores
and animalivores) are depicted only on the third and
fourth principal components of shape. These differences
are associated with relative positions and sizes of mandibular processes (lower condyle, smaller angular in frugivores), tooth row lengths (longer molar rows in
animalivores), and the anterior region of the mandible
(mandible shorter and deeper, forming a “chin” in frugivores). Aside from large beetles (which seem to be
harder than any other food item processed by bats [9]),
insects and fruit do not present significantly different
hardnesses and there is a lot of variation within these
general groups, mostly due to size differences of the
dietary items (larger items are harder [9,15,53]). Animalivores and frugivores do not present noticeable differences in size-independent bite forces [9,17], and there is
a considerable amount of behavioural plasticity that
allows them to modulate the bite force according to
food hardness [20]. The extensive shape changes in the
skull, mandible and dentition [1,13] observed in the evolutionary transition towards frugivory did not seem to
be associated with changes in bite force [17]. Different
from sanguivores and nectarivores, frugivores needed to
maintain the bite strength for mastication, while adjusting for their specific functional needs (which are varied,
according to the main type of fruit consumed
[6,13,15,54]). The morphological changes observed in
frugivores seem to sacrifice precision of dental occlusion
(a feature apparently more important in animalivores) to
favour skull and mandible robustness [13], while maintaining a small body size [15], particularly in the shorter,
deeper mandibles observed in the small clade of specialist frugivores (the Stenodermatina).
Allometric variation is a controversial theme in phyllostomid evolution and ecology. There is no doubt that
body size is the main factor causing differences of absolute bite force [8] and will have a consequence on the
dietary scope of particular species [9,12]. On the other
hand, small frugivores, such as Centurio are able to produce higher bite forces than expected for their sizes [43]
due to cranial shape changes. Carnivory is traditionally
associated with an increase in body size and is considered an allometric extrapolation of insectivory [36]. One
small group of strict frugivores (Stenodermatina, see
above) presents small average size, but it is not clear

Page 14 of 23

whether their size evolution was associated with diet or
with the postulated insular origin of the clade [55] (see
[56] for a review of insular size patterns in vertebrates).
No obvious size trends can be associated with nectarivores or sanguivores. The ecological evidence for size as
a structuring influence in phyllostomid communities is
equivocal [57], even when considering more detailed
dietary compositions. Our results do show that the evolutionary trajectories followed by diverging phyllostomid
lineages in mandible shape space were too complex to
be explained by simple allometric changes, and the
shape changes associated with size differences, as measured by skull length (towards extreme frugivores and
carnivores) were small, when compared to the drastic
shape changes associated with nectarivory and sanguivory, which did not involve significant size changes.
Shape and size divergence patterns seem to be
decoupled in phyllostomid evolution (see also discussion
below), but size is nevertheless a relevant dimension in
the phyllostomid adaptive landscape. A measure of body
size would probably be more suited for such ecological
associations than cranial length.
The patterns of morphological and ecological divergence over time were informative regarding possible
evolutionary mechanisms in the radiation of phyllostomid bats. When considering the parallel evolution of
mandibular shape and diet, one sees clearly a two step
radiation, marked by strong directional selection and
divergence in the first phase (30-20 Mya) followed by
stabilising selection and stasis in the second phase, after
the main phyllostomid lineages (and diet specialities)
appeared. The scatterplots comparing morphometric
distances with genetic distances and time since divergence can be qualitatively compared to patterns from
Polly’s simulations [34] of evolutionary mechanisms.
Different mechanisms are expected to leave distinctive
imprints in the patterns of morphological divergence
over time. In real data, noisy patterns are expected from
the juxtaposition or superimposition of different evolutionary processes and it is harder to extricate the processes from the patterns. The scatterplots of genetic
distances (percentage of sequence divergence), time
since divergence and morphometric distances in Figures
5A, B show a two-phase pattern, which is more obvious
in Figure 5A (genetic distances) than in Figure 5B (time
since divergence) because of species that are phenotypically and genetically similar (insectivores) but have
diverged in beginning of the radiation. The disparity
through time plots for mandible shape and diet suggest
also a two-phased radiation, marked initially by larger
disparity than expected by neutral evolution simulations
and changing lo lower disparity than expected by neutral evolution after around 20 Mya (the transition
between Oligocene and Miocene - see discussion of the

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

time frame for the phyllostomid diversification in [3,4]).
At this transition point, the main lineages leading to
dietary specialisations were established and most shape
and diet disparity is observed among these lineages. Size
disparity presents a different pattern from shape and
diet, with at least two distinctive peaks at different times
in phyllostomid evolution. The first peak occurring
between 30 and 20 Mya, and it was probably caused by
the large carnivores sharing the same branch with other
groups until nearly 20 Mya (these are very different in
skull length but not so different in mandible shape).
The second peak happens between 16-7 Mya and is
likely to be caused by disparity within Stenodermatinae
[33] (The clade in Figure 1 joining species from Sturnira
to Ametrida). The Stenodermatina (the clade joining
species from Ariteus to Ametrida) have the shorter
skulls among the phyllostomids (all of them smaller
than 14 mm average - see Additional file 1), the within
lineage disparity only decreases after they separate from
the other Stenodermatinae (which have skull lengths
comparable to the remaining lineages) around 10 Mya.
Because the confidence limits for the neutral simulations
are very wide, the fluctuation of size disparity through
time never exceeds the expected disparity. On the other
hand, it is not clear whether these confidence limits are
too conservative or realistic. Therefore we have interpreted and discussed the size disparity results. This pattern of size disparity is clearly not associated with the
mandibular shape disparity and dietary disparity. From
the other analyses performed in this study, it is clear
that evolutionary allometry is a significant but minor
influence in mandibular shape diversification. On the
other hand, the lack of correspondence between diet
disparity and size disparity might also be explained
by the lack of detail of the diet data within major
categories.
The radiation of phyllostomid bats has commonly
been referred to as an adaptive radiation [1,16]. However, a complete test of this hypothesis has not been
thoroughly performed (although different criteria have
been examined separately). According to Schluter (2000)
[22], there are four criteria to determine if a radiation
was adaptive: common ancestry, phenotype-environment
correlation, trait utility and rapid speciation. The monophyly of phyllostomids (common ancestry criterion) was
long established by a number of studies using molecular
and morphological data sets [3-5,21,33]. The rapid speciation criterion has been assessed by Jones et al [21]
whose findings indicate a statistically significant shift in
diversification rates in phyllostomids (a hypothesis that
would not be testable with the incomplete tree used in
the present study). These authors found two significant
shifts in phyllostomids: one just after the vampire bats
(Desmodontinae) branch out and one within the genus

Page 15 of 23

Artibeus. The first diversification rate shift observed by
Jones et al [21] within phyllostomids coincides with the
morphological and ecological disparity peak observed by
us at the base of the phylogenetic tree. The phenotypeenvironment correlation and trait utility criteria have
been discussed before in the literature and in the
present study. The radiation of phyllostomids in mandibular shape space occurred along axes leading to postulated adaptive peaks determined by the relative
importance of dietary items. The shape changes along
these main axes of variation have a clear functional relevance for the acquisition and processing of food, as discussed above and in the literature [1,16,17,24,58].
The model-based analysis presented in this study provided quantitative evidence of evolutionary mechanisms
and scenarios. The models describing phenotypic evolution on an adaptive landscape with five different peaks
fit the data better than the neutral evolution model
(Brownian motion) and simpler models with less peaks.
The favoured scenario combining all analyses would be
one early burst of phenotypic and ecological diversification caused by directional selection towards five different adaptive peaks (insectivory, carnivory, sanguivory,
nectarivory and frugivory). In our interpretations, we
gave more weight to the Akaike information criteria corrected for sample size because in simulations, it performs better than the Schwarz information criteria when
reality is assumed to be infinitely dimensional and the
true model is not in the candidate set [59]. The results
for models with different numbers of variables (shape
PCs) show how sensitive the methods are to the number
of parameters being estimated. In the models with the
first three shape PCs, the number of parameters being
estimated (DOF in Table 2) is never larger than the
number of species (49), whereas with the first five shape
PCs, OU.4 and OU.5 (the best fitting models otherwise)
do exceed the number of species and are severely penalised by the more conservative criterion (SIC, which
assumes that the true model is in the candidate set and
is low dimensional [59]). As a consequence, Brownian
motion is suggested as the best fitting model because it
requires estimation of the smallest number of parameters. These results indicate that we were working at
the limit of model complexity given our sample size,
and more complex models would require considerably
larger data sets (in terms of number of species) to avoid
problems in estimation and model comparisons.
When using the first three shape PCs, model OU.4
was favoured, whereas model OU.5 was favoured by the
models with five PCs. The separation of the carnivore
from the insectivore peak is only accomplished when
the fifth PC is added to the models. One might expect
that five groups would span a space with four dimensions, however, because principal components do not

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

maximise among group differences, there will be processes other than diet-related adaptive changes contributing to the observed interspecific variation patterns.
These could be associated with neutral evolution or
changes related to factors not measured in this study. In
any case, it is a noticeable point that Horn’s parallel
analysis used to choose the number of principal components to be considered in the comparative analyses,
independently indicated the number of components
needed to discern all possible adaptive peaks in the
most complex model. Parallel analysis is often shown by
statistical simulations to be the best performing method
to choose principal components [60,61].
The early burst of phyllostomid divergence was followed by consistent stabilising selection keeping mandible shape relatively constant around postulated dietary
optima. The apparent phenotypic and ecological stasis
that persists from the early Miocene (20 Mya) to the
present was not followed by a lack of speciation, and
the lineages of specialist nectarivores and frugivores
seem to be particularly speciose [4]. This pattern suggests either a non-adaptive radiation [22] or agents of
selection not specifically examined in the present study.
Allopatry and biogeographic distribution patterns
account for a considerable proportion of speciation
within diverse phyllostomid genera where stabilising
selection seems to constrain phenotypic and ecological
variation [62-64]. In fact, niche conservatism and stabilising selection are expected to play a significant role in
allopatric speciation processes [65], what seems to fit
well with the environmental changes during the Tertiary
[4,66], when the global temperature decrease, tectonic
processes (Andes uplift) and sea level fluctuations created large expanses of dry open areas in South America
and are linked with the diversification of many other
mammal clades [67-69]. On the other hand, further
selective episodes cannot be discarded, as there might
be smaller adaptive peaks within the main dietary
groups and the temporal and spatial variation in
resource availability (particularly fruits and flowers)
might generate randomly fluctuating selection that is
hardly discernible from a Brownian motion [25,34]. Frugivore phyllostomid species are known to largely occur
in sympatry [10,15], possibly due to further specialisation, such as the dichotomy between ground-story frugivores and fig-feeders [15], or the recently discovered
granivory [6] associated with functional and morphological specialisations [58]. Nectarivore guilds can also be
diverse [19] due to nomadic behaviour, seasonal and
spatial changes in resource use [18,47] and different
degrees of specialisation and dietary item mixtures [70].
The radiation of phyllostomid bats is actually a number
of radiation episodes nested within each other, caused
by a mixture of adaptive and non-adaptive evolutionary

Page 16 of 23

mechanisms. This is expected as real data is more likely
to fall along a continuum caused by a mixture of evolutionary processes, rather than fit yes/no definitions for
the adaptive radiation metaphor [71].
The radiation of phyllostomid bats is a unique example among mammals in terms of ecological and phenotypic diversity, and should be considered an important
model system for studies of the evolution of functional
optimisation due to the ecological diversity under the
constraints imposed by powered flight [72]. Further
research should provide a deeper understanding of the
myriad of evolutionary mechanisms at work in this lineage. The foundations of phyllostomid ecomorphology,
based on rather limited morphological, ecological, phylogenetic and functional data painted an interesting picture and provided important references and new
questions to be addressed. Recent contributions comprise functional studies [41,73] that go beyond traditional biomechanics to examine the functional
consequences of shape change in terms of energy efficiency and structural resistance, comparative analyses of
detailed morphological, functional, and ecological data
[17,24], comparative analyses combining field data on
function, behaviour and ecology [7-9,20,43,44,74] and
phylogenetic diversification patterns using complete species-level trees [21]. Whereas a lot of attention has been
paid to the biomechanics of mastication and bite force,
the functional demands associated with nectar and
blood-feeding are still underrepresented in the literature.
Of particular importance would be the identification of
functionally relevant measurements (with fitness consequences) with regard to different dietary compositions
to be associated with phenotypic data. When comparing
the abundance of phyllostomid species in scientific collections, Freeman (2000) [1] has pointed out that species
with specialised phenotypes and diets are rarer than the
species with intermediate phenotypes and mixed diets.
Are dietary specialisations equivalent to local optima on
the adaptive landscape with lower fitness than optima
for mixed diets? This is an important question for future
research with possible implications for the dynamics of
assemblages [7] and biodiversity conservation. Other
promising areas are the ecological influences on cranial
phenotypes outside dietary differences, such as echolocation and roost building [1,75]. The ever increasing
literature is producing a massive database of morphological, ecological, functional and phylogenetic data that
will be instrumental to elucidate the questions in future
studies of phyllostomid ecomorphology.

Conclusions
The patterns of phenotypic and ecological divergence
are consistent with an evolutionary scenario with at
least five main adaptive peaks during the early radiation

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

of phyllostomid bats. Starting from an insectivore ancestor around 30 Mya, different lineages specialised into
carnivores, sanguivores, frugivores and nectarivores.
Some species are strict diet specialists with extreme
morphologies, but a considerable number present intermediate diets and phenotypes, possibly as a result
of adaptive ridges or multiple local optima (many phenotypes with equivalent or similar fitness) and geographical/temporal variation in resource availability.
Nevertheless, some trade-offs are clear, such as the
mandibular elongation observed in specialised nectarivores, which supports a longer tongue but decreases
bite force changing the scope of usable resources
(increased variety of flowers versus harder fruit and
insects). Size and shape have evolved almost independently in this family, where the major axes of shape
change (towards nectarivory and sanguivory) in phyllostomid mandibular morphospace were not correlated
with size differences. On the other hand, the most
impressive size differences (towards carnivory) are associated with minor shape changes. After the early burst
of ecomorphological divergence, when directional selection was possibly a dominating evolutionary mechanism,
some of the lineages went into a long period of stasis or
non-adaptive radiations, but further selective episodes
cannot be ruled out, particularly for size variation
among frugivores, although the role of diet as selection
agent is not entirely clear in this case. The radiation of
phyllostomid bats was marked by a complex mixture of
adaptive and non-adaptive mechanisms through a period
of extreme environmental changes when new ecological
niches were probably emerging and disappearing
quickly. This led the leaf-nosed bats to present unparalleled morphological and ecological variation among
mammals, which, together with the vast amount of
information available in the literature, makes phyllostomids one of the most important model systems for the
study of morphological, functional and ecological
diversification.

Methods
Samples, diet and morphological data

A total of 443 specimens representative of 49 genera of
phyllostomid bats were analysed (Figure 1). Sample sizes
and species names are detailed in Additional file 1. All
specimens were identified as adults based on the ossification of the basisphenoid region. Mandible images
were obtained with a digital camera Nikon Coolpix
8700. All specimens were photographed under the same
plane in relation to the camera lens (reference points in
the specimens were used to align the mandible with the
focal plane). To capture as much shape variation as possible, 11 landmarks, and 25 semilandmarks were used
(Figure 2). The reference points were digitalised in the

Page 17 of 23

TpsDig software [76]. The landmark configurations were
superimposed according to a least squares criterion
(Procrustes superimposition) [77-79], first calculating a
mean for each species and then superimposing all configurations to calculate a grand average. The semilandmarks were slid to minimize the least squares criterion
[80] in TPSRelw [81]. Even though slid semilandmarks
do not hold biological correspondence (just like type II
or III landmarks), there is a gain in the information on
shape variation (as ascertained from a comparison of
superimposed warped images in the program TpsSuper
[82] - results not shown), and the correlation of Procrustes distance matrices obtained from data sets with
and without semilandmarks was 0.956. After Procrustes
superimposition, the aligned coordinates present more
dimensions than the actual shape space (aside from the
degrees of freedom lost in superimposition, a maximum
of 48 dimensions is needed to describe 49 species
means). To reduce dimensionality, the aligned coordinates were transformed to shape principal components
[78]. Principal component analyses of aligned coordinates and the visualisation of shape changes associated
with each principal component (shape PC) axis were
performed in MorphoJ (importing the aligned landmarks
and semilandmarks from TPSRelw) [35]. We have used
Horn’s parallel analysis [60,61] to choose the number of
principal components to be retained. Parallel analysis is
a method of consensus in the literature [61], and consists of generating a large number of random samples
with the same number of variables (but uncorrelated)
and specimens as the original data, and comparing the
observed eigenvalues to the distribution of random
eigenvalues. The observed PCs that presented eigenvalues larger than a percentile (we used 95%) of the random eigenvalue distribution are retained. We used the
paran package [83] in the R environment [84] to perform the parallel analysis. Size was measured both as
the centroid size (square root of summed squared distances from each landmark to the centroid of points)
from mandible landmark configurations [77], and as
Condylobasal Length (CL - from the anteriormost point
on the premaxilla to the condyle). These two measures
of size were highly correlated (r = 0.983), and all results
were the same for both variables. Because cranial length
is a more intuitive measure, and to facilitate further
comparisons, we chose to report results using CL
instead of mandible centroid size.
Dietary information was obtained from the literature
(modified and updated from [5]). We organized the
quantitative and qualitative information for the 49 bat
species into five categories comprising the main food
items identified in phyllostomid diets (insectivory
[arthropods], carnivory [small vertebrates], frugivory,
nectarivory [pollen and nectar], and sanguivory). With

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

the exception of sanguivore bats, all phyllostomid species present mixed diets, with varying levels of specialization and predominance of items from a given
category. To compare the relative importance of structurally different items, such as nectar and arthropods in
the diet of a single species is a challenging task. We
defined rank categories based on relative usage of food
items (0 - absent, 1 - complementary, 2 - predominant,
3 - strict), and a rank was attributed to each dietary
item for each species (see Additional file 1). The distribution of diet variables along the phylogenetic tree used
[33] is depicted in Figure 1. The diet variables were
used later as independent variables in a multivariate
regression model. Preliminary analyses indicated strong
multicollinearity among the diet variables, mostly caused
by a positive correlation between insectivory and carnivory (sometimes lumped as animalivory), and a negative
correlation between frugivory and animalivory. To avoid
multicollinearity, we calculated the principal components (PCs) of a correlation matrix among the diet variables [85]. Details of this analysis have been published
elsewhere [24]. The former approach allows for testing
gradual shape changes in species groups with mixed
diet. However, diet was also analysed as a discrete variable, using the predominant (or strict) diet item as category (see model-based analyses below).
Phylogenetic comparative analysis of ecomorphological
associations

Shape variation among species was summarised by principal components (the major axes of shape variation).
The shape PCs were fitted to a phylogeny by estimating
ancestral character states (nodes) for each PC and plotting the scores for OTUs (operational taxonomic units the species at tree tips) and HTUs (hypothetical taxonomic units - the nodes) along with the branches linking the tree nodes. Each OTU and tree branch was
plotted with a colour according to the predominant diet
(estimated ancestral diet for the branches). A maximum
likelihood algorithm [86] was used in the estimation of
ancestral states, using the function ace in the APE package for the R environment for statistical computing
[87,84]. The phylogeny of Baker et al. (2003; 2010)
[3,33] (Figure 1), based on mtDNA and RAG2
sequences, was used as a framework for all the comparative analyses performed. The branch lengths used
were the divergence time estimates obtained from
Baker et al. (2010) [3]. This phylogeny has been independently corroborated in a recent paper [4], although
the time estimates are slightly different between the
publications.
Principal components of species average shapes depict
the major axes of variation among species in shape
space. These linear combinations of the original

Page 18 of 23

superimposed coordinates ordinate species means
according to gradients formed by unknown latent factors. Associations of PC scores with measured factors
can be performed a posteriori to aid in the interpretation of ordinations. The linear associations between
mandible shape and diet principal components were
tested by multivariate regression (where each data point
is a species average), using a phylogenetic generalized
linear model (PGLS - [40,88]). Generalized least squares
(GLS) models allow for the phylogenetic non-independence to be incorporated into the error structure as an
among species covariance matrix. Unlike spatially organised data (which share a similar problem of non-independence), where geographic distances among samples
can be measured with small error, the phylogenetic covariances depend on the phylogenetic hypothesis they
derive from and the evolutionary model assumed for
character change. When phylogenetic covariances are
based on the sum of branch lengths from the root of
the tree to the most recent ancestral for each pair of
species, a Brownian model of evolution is assumed,
where the expected phenotypic differences among
OTUs are directly related to their distance to the last
common ancestor [88]. The Brownian model of evolution has been increasingly considered an unlikely
assumption for comparative methods (particularly when
dealing with adaptive radiations [28,38,39]). We used
the estimate of covariance structure proposed by Martins and Hansen [40], that results from an evolutionary
model that incorporates stabilising selection as a constraint. According to this model, covariances among
OTUs are determined as Vij = g exp(-atij), where a is a
parameter determining the magnitude of a restraining
force or pull towards an optimum phenotype, and g is a
parameter loosely interpreted as the interspecific variance in equilibrium (due to the balance between selective and neutral evolutionary forces). This model causes
the influence of a common ancestor to decrease exponentially with the sum of branch lengths leading to that
ancestor, as a consequence of stabilising selection “erasing” the evolutionary history. The value of a was interactively estimated via maximum likelihood during model
fitting, providing flexibility of evolutionary models
assumed. For the multivariate regression, the phylogenetic covariance matrix was estimated via the APE package [87] and the multivariate model fit with NTSYS-PC
[89]. The shape PCs were included as dependent variables and the first three diet PCs plus average cranial
size (Condylobasal Length - CL) were included as independent variables. The partial correlation coefficients
from the multivariate regression were used to produce
biplots showing the species ordination within the shape
PC space and the associated directions of variation of
diet PC vectors.

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Patterns of phenotypic and ecological disparity
through time

Adaptive radiations commonly generate a distinctive
pattern of temporal change in disparity, where morphological divergence increases quickly in the first phase,
and slows down towards present time, as the niches are
filled [22]. The change in disparity patterns through
time (DTT) is usually studied by the comparison of fossil taxa [90]. However, Harmon and colleagues [91] have
proposed and implemented (in the geiger package for
the R environment [92]) a method to evaluate the
changes in disparity patterns along a phylogenetic tree,
using exclusively phenotypic measurements of terminal
taxa. Using the full space of shape principal components
(including all components with non zero eigenvalues)
for the mandible shape, disparity was calculated from
average pairwise Euclidean distances between species
[91]. For this data set, this is equivalent to using average
pairwise Procrustes distances (summed squared distances among corresponding landmarks after Procrustes
superimposition) [79]. Using the full shape space is possible in this case because the data are reduced to pairwise distances regardless of dimensionality, and no
parameters are estimated. However, the number of
dimensions might have an effect in the simulations
described below and the confidence intervals calculated,
so it is more consistent to work with the full shape
space. Size disparity was calculated using the same procedure, but using average Condylobasal Length as the
single variable. Diet disparity was calculated as well,
using the relative importance of dietary items (see Additional file 1) as data and average pairwise Manhattan
distances as measure of disparity. Disparity through
time (DTT) plots can be generated by first calculating
the disparities for the entire tree and for each subclade
defined by a node in the phylogeny. Relative disparities
are obtained for each node by dividing its disparity by
the tree disparity. Moving up from the root of the phylogeny, a mean disparity is calculated at each node
(divergence event) as the average of the relative disparities of all lineages whose ancestral lineages were present
at that point [91]. The DTT plots allow for insight on
the relative timing of phenotypic divergence while
avoiding the need of ancestral character estimation. The
inference of disparity deviations from a neutral evolution
pattern was performed by a comparison of observed patterns with the average of 1000 simulated DTT patterns
after evolving the shape variables according to Brownian
motion along the phylogenetic tree [91,93]. These simulations generate random phenotypes as phylogenetic
independent contrasts along the tree (for each node)
using a multivariate normal distribution with zero
means and a covariance matrix based on the observed phylogenetic independent contrasts. A disparity

Page 19 of 23

distribution based on a neutral evolutionary process is
then generated for each relative time (node) of the tree
and the observed disparity can be compared to neutral
confidence intervals.
A second approach to the investigation of evolutionary
processes via a comparison of shape variation and relative time was based on Polly (2004) [34] simulation
study. This author showed that different evolutionary
models leave distinctive imprints on the distribution of
shape distances versus time of divergence. We have
compared the pairwise shape distances (Procrustes distances) to pairwise genetic distances (proportional to
percent sequence divergence from Baker et al. (2003)
[33]), and estimated time since divergence (from Baker
et al. (2010) [3]) in a matrix scatterplot. This method
allowed for a qualitative comparison of the observed
pattern to the expected under different evolutionary
modes by visual inspection [34].
Modelling phenotypic evolution

The comparative methods based on GLS described
above provide a direct test of linear relationships among
major axes of diet and shape variation. Whereas this
class of comparative methods might provide a statistically valid test of association, it provides no direct
insight into the evolutionary processes responsible for
the observed variation. A more recent approach, based
on the simultaneous fit and comparison of evolutionary
hypotheses combining evolutionary models, phenotypic
and ecological information has been proposed by Butler
and King (2004) [27] after Hansen’s (1997) [94] method
for the estimation of selective factors on adaptive
optima (see also [28]). The model-based approach fits
distributions predicted under a number of evolutionary
hypothesis to observed data, allowing for simultaneous
inference of model likelihood using information criteria.
The simplest model of phenotypic evolution is the
neutral Brownian motion [25], where total evolutionary
change in a continuous character is distributed normally, with a mean equal to the ancestral value for the
entire tree and variance proportional to the amount of
time elapsed from tree root to tips. An alternative evolutionary model (or class of models) for phenotypic
change under stabilising selection that has gained popularity recently is based on the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
(O-U) process [27,28,40,94]. These models incorporate a
constraint as a constant pulling force (measured by a
parameter a) towards a central point (θ) which can
mimic the action of stabilising selection on the phenotype. The central point can be interpreted as an adaptive
optimum. In the approach proposed by Butler and
King [27], the O-U models can have any number of
adaptive optima (θ i ), which are proposed according
to hypotheses of ecological diversification. The models

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

then incorporate a specific evolutionary process, a
phylogeny with branch lengths (assumed to be at least
proportional to time), and the selective regimes operative in each branch (derived from ancestral estimation
of ecological changes).
All dietary ancestral states (branch colours in Figure 6)
were estimated using the maximum likelihood algorithm
implemented in the function ace in the APE package for
the R environment [87]. The ancestral states and the terminal states form a design matrix that determines for each
lineage leading to a particular terminal branch which
optima where influential and the length of influence period. For example, in the lineage leading to Glyphonycteris
in model OU.5 in Figure 6, the ancestors corresponding to
the earlier branches were insectivores (for 8 My), then
they are postulated to have switched to frugivory for
around 5 My and switched back to insectivory for the
remaining 17 My. The estimated phenotypic mean vector
for Glyphonycteris would be a weighted sum of optima (θi)
leading to the terminal branch (see equation 5 in [27]).
The weights determine that the most influential optima
will be the ones closest to the terminal branch, and the
influence reduces exponentially for optima that influenced
a lineage near the root. In the case of Glyphonycteris, the
most influential optimum would be insectivory (because of
the terminal branch optimum, not the root), then frugivory. The optima for nectarivory, sanguivory and carnivory
would have weight = 0 because there is no postulated Glyphonycteris ancestor with these optima. The models were
fitted to the mandible shape data (the first three and five
shape PCs) in a multivariate fashion and to cranial size
(Condylobasal Length - CL). We used different numbers
of shape PCs to assess the sensitivity of the models to the
dimensionality of the subspace, changing both the number
of parameters being estimated (see below) and the amount
of variation being explained by the subspaces. Five PCs
were indicated by parallel analysis to have larger eigenvalues than the random distribution of eigenvalues, whereas
three PCs provide an optimal (maximum variance) visualisation of the shape subspace. In the Hansen model
[27,94,95], the evolution of a multivariate phenotype with
p variables assumes the form of the stochastic differential
equation
dx(t) = A(q − x(t))dt + S dB(t),

where A is a p × p square symmetric matrix of
a parameters that measure the strength of selection. the
vector q is the optimum corresponding to the θi for the
particular branch, S is a p × p square symmetric matrix
with sigma parameters that can be interpreted as the
strength of random drift, and B(t) is a standard Wiener
(Brownian motion) process [95]. The alpha and sigma
matrices have each p × (p + 1)/2 independent parameters (one for each variable and one for each pair of

Page 20 of 23

variables). These are estimated via an iterative optimisation procedure (we used identity matrices as starting
forms) minimising the error of a multivariate GLS
model that uses the alpha and sigma matrices to estimate the vector of optima q and the expected multivariate phenotype for each species (terminal branches) in
the tree. Each model has to estimate 2 × p × (p + 1)/2
+ p × nθ parameters, where nθ is the number of optima
in the model. Because matrices of alpha and sigma parameters are calculated, the models do not constrain
selection strength and the random drift disturbances to
be isotropic in shape space. On the other hand, a simplification is accomplished because the same alpha
matrix is used for all postulated adaptive optima, requiring the selective constraints to be the same for all peaks.
This is true also for univariate models because they use
a single a parameter for all adaptive peaks [27].
The ecological (dietary) information available allowed
for the elaboration of five alternative models of evolutionary change (BM, OU.2, OU.3, OU.4, OU.5). The
first model only incorporates neutral evolution expectations along the phylogenetic tree according to a Brownian motion (BM) process. The other models use the
O-U process with a number of different optima (Figure
6) according to postulated selective regimes. We start
with a simple discrimination of two adaptive optima
related to high and low mastication regimes (Model
OU.2). Model OU.3 breaks the low mastication selective
regimes into nectarivory and sanguivory, recognising the
fundamental ecological and functional differences
between them. Model OU.4 separates all dietary optima,
but lumps insectivory and carnivory together into the
animalivory category. A justification for this is the
strong correlation between insectivory and carnivory
observed in the diet PCA [24]. It has been suggested
that carnivory is just an allometric extension of insectivory [36] and that these two categories share the same
adaptive peak [24]. Model OU.5 discriminates adaptive
optima for five selective regimes associated with each
dietary category, representing the most complex hypothesis about the adaptive radiation of phyllostomid bats.
The models were compared by information loss criteria [59], such as the Akaike Information Criterion corrected for sample size (AICc) [29] and the more
conservative Schwarz or Bayesian information criterion
(SIC or BIC) [27]. The Information criteria were first
transformed into differences from the minimum
observed AICc value Δ i (AICc) = AICc i - min AICc.
The differences are then transformed into AICc weights
−1
× i (AICc)]
2
wi (AICc) = K
,
−1
exp [
× i (AICc)]
2
k=1
exp [

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 21 of 23

for which ∑w i (AICc) = 1. The Akaike weight for a
particular model Mi can be interpreted as the probability of Mi being the “best” model given the data and the
set of candidate models [59]. The same procedure was
applied for the SIC to calculate SIC weights. The
Schwarz information criterion is more conservative than
the AICc, because it imposes larger penalties for more
complex models. The SIC also assumes that the true
model is within the candidate set of models, and is low
dimensional, whereas the AICc assumes that the true
model is not within the candidate set and is infinitely
dimensional [59]. Confidence limits (ellipsoids) for adaptive optima were estimated by a parametric bootstrap
(resampled 5000 times). All model fitting procedures
were performed using package OUCH (version 2.7-1)
[95] for the R environment.

10.

Additional material

11.

Additional file 1: Table of sample sizes, diet and shape variables
per species. File in pdf format with sample sizes, dietary preferences,
cranial size and shape principal component scores for each species.
Additional file 2: Animation showing the principal component
ordination of shape. File in gif format (animated gif) showing a rotating
shape principal component ordination with species names.

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

12.

13.

14.

Acknowledgements
We are thankful to A. L. Peracchi (Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de
Janeiro), M. de Vivo (Museu de Zoologia, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil),
and N. B. Simmons (American Museum of Natural History, EUA) for allowing
access to specimens under their care, to J. Barros and E. Westwig for
assistance in finding specimens in their respective institutions. Financial
support was provided by FAPERJ and CNPq (Brazil) and The University of
Hull (UK). A. Cardini, C. P. Klingenberg and an anonymous reviewer provided
important comments and suggestions that greatly improved the manuscript.
We also would like to thank L. Harmon for help and discussions about the
package geiger.
Author details
1
Department of Biological Sciences and Hull York Medical School, The
University of Hull, Hull, HU6 7RX, UK. 2Laboratorio de Ciencias Ambientais,
Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense, Av. Alberto Lamego 2000,
Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. 3Departamento de Biologia Animal,
Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, Seropedica, RJ, Brazil.
Authors’ contributions
Both authors contributed to the design of the study. MRN collected the
shape data (travelled to Museums, photographed specimens and digitized
landmarks) and assembled the diet data from the literature. Both authors
performed the analyses. LRM wrote a first draft with contributions from
MRN. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 1 November 2010 Accepted: 23 May 2011
Published: 23 May 2011
References
1. Freeman PW: Macroevolution in Microchiroptera: recoupling morphology
and ecology with phylogeny. Evol Ecol Res 2000, 2:317-33.
2. Simmons NB: An Eocene big bang for bats. Science 2005, 307:527-528.
3. Baker RJ, Bininda-Emonds ORP, Mantilla-Meluk H, Porter CA, Van den
Bussche RA: Molecular timescale of diversification of feeding strategy
and morphology in new world leaf-nosed bats (Phyllostomidae): a

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

phylogenetic perspective. In Evolutionary history of bats: fossils, molecules
and morphogy, Cambridge Studies in Molecules and Morphology - New
Evolutionary Paradigms. Edited by: Gunnel GF, Simmons NB. Cambridge
University Press; 2010:.
Datzmann T, von Helversen O, Mayer F: Evolution of nectarivory in
phyllostomid bats (Phyllostomidae Gray, 1825, Chiroptera: Mammalia).
BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:165.
Wetterer AL, Rockman MV, Simmons NB: Phylogeny of phyllostomid bats
(Mammalia, Chiroptera): data from diverse morphological systems, sex
chromosomes, and restriction sites. B Am Mus Nat Hist 2000, 248:1-200.
Nogueira MR, Peracchi AL: Fig-seed predation by two species of
Chiroderma: discovery of a new feeding strategy in bats. J Mammal
2003, 84:225-233.
Rex K, Czaczkes BI, Michener R, Kunz TH, Voigt C: Specialization and
omnivory in diverse mammalian assemblages. Ecoscience 2010, 17:37-46.
Aguirre LF, Herrel A, van Damme R, Matthysen E: Ecomorphological
analysis of trophic niche partitioning in a tropical savannah bat
community. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2002, 269:1271-1278.
Aguirre LF, Herrel A, van Damme R, Matthysen E: The implications of food
hardness for diet in bats. Funct Ecol 2003, 17:201-212.
Simmons NB, Voss RS: The Mammals of Paracou, French Guiana: a
Neotropical lowland rainforest fauna. Part 1 Bats. B Am Mus Nat Hist
1998, 237:1-219.
Voss RS, Emmons LH: Mammalian diversity in neotropical lowland
rainforests: a preliminary assessment. B Am Mus Nat Hist 1996, 230:1-115.
Swartz SM, Freeman PW, Stockwell EF: Ecomorphology of bats:
comparative and experimental approaches relating structural design to
ecology. In Bat Ecology. Edited by: Kunz TH, Fenton MB. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press; 2003:580-621.
Freeman PW: Form, function, and evolution in skulls and teeth of bats. In
Bat biology and conservation. Edited by: Kunz TH, Racey PA. Washington,
DC: Smithsonian Institution Press; 1998:140-156.
Dumont ER: The effect of food hardness on feeding behaviour in
frugivorous bats (Phyllostomidae): an experimental study. J Zool 1999,
248:219-229.
Dumont ER: Bats and fruit: an ecomorphological approach. In Bat Ecology.
Edited by: Kunz TH, Fenton MB. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press;
2003:298-429.
Van Cakenberghe V, Herrel A, Aguirre LF: Evolutionary relationships
between cranial shape and diet in bats (Mammalia: Chiroptera). In Topics
in Functional and Ecological Vertebrate Morphology. Edited by: Aerts P,
D’aout K, Herrel A, Van Damme R. Maastricht: Shaker Publishing;
2002:205-236.
Nogueira MR, Peracchi AL, Monteiro LR: Morphological correlates of bite
force and diet in the skull and mandible of phyllostomid bats. Funct Ecol
2009, 23:715-723.
Winter Y, von Helversen O: Operational tongue length in phyllostomid
nectar-feeding bats. J Mammal 2003, 84:886-896.
Tschapka M: Energy density patterns of nectar resources permit
coexistence within a guild of Neotropical ower-visiting bats. J Zool Lond
2004, 263:7-21.
Santana SE, Dumont ER: Connecting behaviour and performance: the
evolution of biting behaviour and bite performance in bats. J Evol Biol
2009, 22:2131-2145.
Jones KE, Bininda-Emonds ORP, Gittleman JL: Bats, clocks, and rocks:
diversification patterns in Chiroptera. Evolution 2005, 59:2243-2255.
Schluter D: The ecology of adaptive radiation Oxford Univ. Press; 2000.
Gavrilets S, Losos JB: Adaptive radiation: constrasting theory and data.
Science 2009, 323:732-737.
Monteiro LR, Nogueira MR: Adaptive radiations, ecological specialization,
and the evolutionary integration of complex morphological structures.
Evolution 2010, 64:724-744.
Felsenstein J: Phylogenies and quantitative characters. Annu Rev Ecol Syst
1988, 19:455-471.
Zeng ZB: Long-term correlated response, interpopulation covariation,
and interspecific allometry. Evolution 1988, 42:363-374.
Butler MA, King A: Phylogenetic comparative analysis: a modeling
approach for adaptive evolution. Am Nat 2004, 164:683-695.
Hansen TF, Pienaar J, Orzack SH: A comparative method for studying
adaptation to a randomly evolving environment. Evolution 2008,
62:1965-1977.

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

29. Scales JA, King AA, Butler MA: Running for your life or running for your
dinner: what drives fiber-type evolution in lizard locomotor muscles? Am
Nat 2009, 173:543-553.
30. Collar DC, O’Meara BC, Wainwright PC, Near TJ: Piscivory limits
diversification of feeding morphology in centrarchid fishes. Evolution
2009, 63:1557-1573.
31. Atchley WR, Hall BK: A model for the development and evolution of
complex morphological structures. Biol Rev 1991, 66:101-157.
32. Depew MJ, Simpson CA: 21st century neontology and the comparative
development of the vertebrate skull. Dev Dyn 2006, 235:1256-1291.
33. Baker RJ, Hoofer SR, Porter CA, Van Den Bussche RA: Diversification among
New World leaf-nosed bats: an evolutionary hypothesis and
classification inferred from digenomic congruence of DNA sequence.
Occasional papers, Museum of Texas Tech University 2003, 230:1-32.
34. Polly D: On the simulation of the evolution of morphological shape:
multivariate shape under selection and drift. Palaeontol Electron 2004,
7(2;7A):1-28.
35. Klingenberg CP: MorphoJ. Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester
2008 [http://www.flywings.org.uk/MorphoJ_page.htm].
36. Giannini NP, Kalko EKV: The guild structure of animalivorous leaf-nosed
bats of Barro Colorado Island, Panama, revisited. Acta Chiropterol 2005,
7:131-146.
37. Harmon LJ, Kolbe JJ, Cheverud JM, Losos JB: Convergence and the
multidimensional niche. Evolution 2005, 59:409-421.
38. Harvey PH, Rambaut A: Comparative analyses for adaptive radiations. Phil
Trans R Soc Lond B 2000, 355:1599-1605.
39. Freckleton RP: The seven deadly sins of comparative analysis. J Evol Biol
2009, 22:1367-1375.
40. Martins EP, Hansen TF: Phylogenies and the comparative method: a
general approach to incorporating phylogenetic information into the
analysis of interspecific data. Am Nat 1997, 149:646-667.
41. Dumont ER, Grosse IR, Slater GF: Requirements for comparing the
performance of nite element models of biological structures. J Theor Biol
2009, 256:96-103.
42. Drake AG, Klingenberg CP: Large-scale diversification of skull shape in
domestic dogs: disparity and modularity. Am Nat 2010, 175:289-301.
43. Dumont ER, Herrel A, Medellin RA, Vargas-Contreras JA, Santana SE: Built to
bite: cranial design and function in the wrinkle-faced bat. J Zool 2009,
279:329-337.
44. Santana SE, Dumont ER, Davis JL: Mechanics of bite force production and
its relationship to diet in bats. Funct Ecol 2010, 24:776-784.
45. Muchhala N: Nectar bat stows huge tongue in its rib cage. Nature 2006,
444:701-702.
46. Muchhala N, Thomson JD: Going to great lengths: selection for long
corolla tubes in an extremely specialized bat- flower mutualism. Proc Roy
Soc Lond B 2009, 276:2147-2152.
47. Tschapka EBM, Sperr , Caballero-Martinez LA, Medellin RA: Diet and cranial
morphology of Musonycteris harrisoni, a highly specialized nectarfeeding bat in Western Mexico. J Mammal 2008, 89:924-932.
48. Wainwright PC: Functional versus morphological diversity in
macroevolution. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2007, 38:381-401.
49. Griffiths TA: Molar cusp patterns in the bat genus Brachyphylla: some
functional and systematic observations. J Mammal 1985, 66:544-549.
50. Phillips CJ: A theoretical consideration of dental morphology, ontogeny,
and evolution of bats. In Ontogeny, functional ecology and evolution of
bats. Edited by: Adams RA, Pedersen SC. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press; 2000:247-274.
51. Herrel A, De Smet A, Aguirre LF, Aerts P: Morphological and mechanical
determinants of bite force in bats: do muscles matter? J Exp Biol 2008,
211:86-91.
52. Eiting T, Gunnel GF: Global completeness of the bat fossil record. J
Mammal Evol 2009, 16:151-173.
53. Freeman PW, Lemen CA: Using scissors to quantify hardness of insects:
do bats select for size or hardness? J Zool 2007, 271:469-476.
54. Dumont : Patterns of diversity in cranial shape among plant-visiting
bats. Acta Chiropterol 2004, 6:59-74.
55. Davalos LM: Short-faced bats (Phyllostomidae: Stenodermatina): a
Caribbean radiation of strict frugivores. J Biogeogr 2007, 34:364-375.
56. Lomolino MV: Body size evolution in insular vertebrates: generality of
the island rule. J Biogeogr 2005, 32:1683-1699.

Page 22 of 23

57. Willig MR, Camilo GR, Noble S: Dietary overlap in frugivorous and
insectivorous bats from edaphic cerrado habitats of Brazil. J Mammal
1993, 74:117-128.
58. Nogueira MR, Monteiro LR, Peracchi AL, de Araujo AFB: Ecomorphological
analysis of the masticatory apparatus in Chiroderma (Chiroptera:
Phyllostomidae). J Zool 2005, 266:355-364.
59. Wagenmakers E, Farrel S: AIC model selection using Akaike weights.
Psychon Bull Rev 2004, 11:192-196.
60. Peres-Neto PR, Jackson DA, Somers KM: How many principal components?
stopping rules for determining the number of non-trivial axes revisited.
Comput Stat Data Anal 2005, 49:974-997.
61. Dinno A: Exploring the sensitivity of Horn’s parallel analysis to the
distributional form of random data. Multivariate Behav Res 2009,
44:362-388.
62. Redondo RAF, Brina LPS, Silva RF, Ditchfield AD, Santos F: Molecular
systematics of the genus Artibeus (Chiroptera: Phyllostomidae). Mol Phyl
Evol 2008, 49:44-58.
63. Velazco PM, Patterson BD: Phylogenetics and biogeography of the broadnosed bats, genus Platyrrhinus (Chiroptera: Phyllostomidae). Mol Phyl
Evol 2008, 49:749-759.
64. Marchan-Rivadeneira MR, Phillips CJ, Strauss RE, Guerrero JA, Mancina CA,
Baker RJ: Cranial differentiation of fruit-eating bats (genus Artibeus)
based on size-standardized data. Acta Chiropterol 2010, 12:143-154.
65. Wiens JJ, Graham CH: Niche conservatism: integrating evolution, ecology,
and conservation biology. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2005, 36:519-539.
66. Zachos J, Pagani M, Sloan L, Thomas E, Billups K: Trends, rhythms, and
aberrations in global climate 65 Ma to present. Science 2001, 292:686-693.
67. Delsuc F, Vizcaino SF, Douzery EJP: Influence of Tertiary
paleoenvironmental changes on the diversification of South American
mammals: a relaxed molecular clock study within xenarthrans. BMC Evol
Biol 2004, 4:11.
68. Galewski T, Mauffrey JF, Leite YLR, Patton JL, Douzery EJP:
Ecomorphological diversification among South American spiny rats
(Rodentia; Echimyidae): a phylogenetic and chronological approach. Mol
Phyl Evol 2005, 34:601-615.
69. Poux C, Chevret P, Huchon D, de Jong WW, Douzery EJP: Arrival and
diversification of caviomorph rodents and platyrrhine primates in South
America. Syst Biol 2006, 55:228-244.
70. Soto-Centeno JA, Kurta A: Diet of two nectarivorous bats, Erophylla
sezekorni and Monophylus redmani (Phyllostomidae), on Puerto Rico.
J Mammal 2006, 87:19-26.
71. Olson ME, Arroyo-Santos A: Thinking in continua: beyond the “adaptive
radiation” metaphor. BioEssays 2009, 31:1337-1346.
72. Dumont ER: Feeding mechanisms in bats: variation within the
constraints of fiight. Integr Comp Biol 2007, 47:137-146.
73. Dumont ER, Piccirillo J, Grosse IR: Finite-element analysis of biting
behavior and bone stress in the facial skeletons of bats. Anat Rec 2005,
283A:319-330.
74. Dumont ER, Herrel A: The effects of gape angle and bite point on bite
force in bats. J Exp Biol 2003, 206:2117-2123.
75. Dechmann DKN, Santana SE, Dumont ER: Roost-making in bats adaptations for excavating active termite nests. J Mammal 2009,
90:1461-1468.
76. Rohlf FJ: TPSDig, Version 2.10. Department of Ecology and Evolution, State
University of New York, Stony Brook 2004 [http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/].
77. Monteiro LR, Reis SF: Princípios de morfometria geométrica Ribeirão Preto,
Brazil: Holos Editora; 1999.
78. Dryden IL, Mardia KV: Statistical shape analysis New York: John Wiley & Sons;
1998.
79. Rohlf FJ: Shape statistics: Procrustes superimpositions and tangent
spaces. J Class 1999, 16:197-223.
80. Monteiro LR, Guillermo LH, Rivera LA, Di Beneditto APM: Geometric
methods combining contour and landmark information in the statistical
analysis of biological shape. In Proceedings of the Third Brazilian
Symposium on Mathematical and Computational BIology. Edited by:
Mondaini R. E-papers; 2004:336-355.
81. Rohlf FJ: TPSRelw, Version 1.45. Department of Ecology and Evolution, State
University of New York, Stony Brook 2007 [http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/].
82. Rohlf FJ: TpsSuper. Version 1.14. Department of Ecology and Evolution, State
University of New York, Stony Brook 2004 [http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/].

Monteiro and Nogueira BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:137
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/137

Page 23 of 23

83. Dinno A: paran: Horn’s Test of Principal Components/Factors 2010 [http://
CRAN.R-project.org/package=paran], [R package version 1.4.3].
84. R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria; 2010
[http://www.R-project.org/], [ISBN 3-900051-07-0].
85. Johnson RA, Wichern DW: Applied multivariate statistical analysis New York:
Prentice-Hall; 1988.
86. Schluter D, Price T, Mooers AO, Ludwig D: Likelihood of ancestor states in
adaptive radiation. Evolution 1997, 51:1699-1711.
87. Paradis E, Claude J, Strimmer K: APE: Analyses of phylogenetics and
evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:289-290.
88. Rohlf FJ: Comparative methods for the analysis of continuous variables:
geometric interpretations. Evolution 2001, 55:2143-2160.
89. Rohlf FJ: NTSYS-PC, Numerical Taxonomy and Multivariate Analysis System,
V 2.1. Applied Biostatistics Inc 2000 [http://www.exetersoftware.com/cat/
ntsyspc/ntsyspc.html].
90. Foote M: The evolution of morphological diversity. Annu Rev Ecol Syst
1997, 28:129-152.
91. Harmon LJ, Schulte JA, Larson A, Losos JB: Tempo and mode of
evolutionary radiation in iguanian lizards. Science 2003, 301:961-964.
92. Harmon LJ, Weir JT, Brock CD, Glor RE, Challenger W: GEIGER: investigating
evolutionary radiations. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:129-131.
93. Kozak KH, Larson A, Bonnet RM, Harmon LJ: Phylogenetic analysis of
ecomorphological divergence, community structure and diversification
rates in dusky salamanders (Plethodontidae Desmognathus). Evolution
2005, 59:2000-2016.
94. Hansen TF: Stabilizing selection and the comparative analysis of
adaptation. Evolution 1997, 51:1341-1351.
95. King AA, Butler MA: ouch: Ornstein-Uhlenbeck models for phylogenetic
comparative hypotheses (R package) 2009 [http://ouch.r-forge.r-project.org].
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-137
Cite this article as: Monteiro and Nogueira: Evolutionary patterns and
processes in the radiation of phyllostomid bats. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2011 11:137.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
