<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Diversity of metalloproteinases in Bothrops neuwiedi snake venom transcripts: evidences for recombination between different classes of SVMPs</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94. doi:10.1186/1471-2156-12-94"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ana M Moura-da-Silva"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Diversity of metalloproteinases in Bothrops
neuwiedi snake venom transcripts: evidences for
recombination between different classes of SVMPs
Ana M Moura-da-Silva1*, Maria Stella Furlan1, Maria Cristina Caporrino1, Kathleen F Grego2,
José Antonio Portes-Junior1, Patrícia B Clissa1, Richard H Valente3 and Geraldo S Magalhães1

Abstract
Background: Snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs) are widely distributed in snake venoms and are versatile
toxins, targeting many important elements involved in hemostasis, such as basement membrane proteins, clotting
proteins, platelets, endothelial and inflammatory cells. The functional diversity of SVMPs is in part due to the
structural organization of different combinations of catalytic, disintegrin, disintegrin-like and cysteine-rich domains,
which categorizes SVMPs in 3 classes of precursor molecules (PI, PII and PIII) further divided in 11 subclasses, 6 of
them belonging to PII group. This heterogeneity is currently correlated to genetic accelerated evolution and posttranslational modifications.
Results: Thirty-one SVMP cDNAs were full length cloned from a single specimen of Bothrops neuwiedi snake,
sequenced and grouped in eleven distinct sequences and further analyzed by cladistic analysis. Class P-I and class
P-III sequences presented the expected tree topology for fibrinolytic and hemorrhagic SVMPs, respectively. In
opposition, three distinct segregations were observed for class P-II sequences. P-IIb showed the typical segregation
of class P-II SVMPs. However, P-IIa grouped with class P-I cDNAs presenting a 100% identity in the 365 bp at their
5’ ends, suggesting post-transcription events for interclass recombination. In addition, catalytic domain of P-IIx
sequences segregated with non-hemorrhagic class P-III SVMPs while their disintegrin domain grouped with other
class P-II disintegrin domains suggesting independent evolution of catalytic and disintegrin domains.
Complementary regions within cDNA sequences were noted and may participate in recombination either at DNA
or RNA levels. Proteins predicted by these cDNAs show the main features of the correspondent classes of SVMP,
but P-IIb and P-IIx included two additional cysteines cysteines at the C-termini of the disintegrin domains in
positions not yet described.
Conclusions: In B. neuwiedi venom gland, class P-II SVMPs were represented by three different types of transcripts
that may have arisen by interclass recombination with P-I and P-III sequences after the divergence of the different
classes of SVMPs. Our observations indicate that exon shuffling or post-transcriptional mechanisms may be driving
these recombinations generating new functional possibilities for this complex group of snake toxins.

Background
In some reptiles and other animals, protein recruiting to
specialized glands and their diversification throughout
evolution resulted in venoms, which represent a key
evolutionary innovation used by these animals for
defense, competitor deterrence or predation [1]. When
* Correspondence: anamoura@butantan.gov.br
1
Laboratório de Imunopatologia, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

inoculated into a prey/predator, these proteins target
important physiological pathways and tissue types. Toxins impairing prey motility have been particularly
selected during this process being the neurotoxins available in almost all taxons of venomous animals. On the
other hand, the distribution of toxins by the bloodstream makes the hemostatic system also an important
venom target. Despite the functional versatility of
venom proteins, only a few protein families are frequent
in venom composition and this aspect is compensated

© 2011 Moura-da-Silva et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

by a high degree of sequence variability, within the
superfamily, generated by accelerated evolution [2].
In viper snake venoms, the most abundant protein
families are serine proteinases, metalloproteases, Lamino acid oxidases, phospholipases A2 (PLA2s), disintegrins, C-type lectins, myotoxins, and CRISP toxins [3],
represented by a number of distinct copies with variable
structural motifs and functional activities. To explain
the generation of such diversity, evolutionary relationships of venom PLA2s [4,5], C-type lectin-like proteins
[6], serine proteinase inhibitors [7], and metalloproteinases [8] described that these different sequences
evolved by gene duplications followed by positive selection of non-synonymous mutations accumulated in the
genomes under strong positive adaptive selection. High
levels of variation in venom proteins would confer an
advantage to adapt to a variety of different prey [9,10].
Besides the diversity generated during evolution,
sequence variability may further increase during posttranslational modifications of nascent toxins [11] and by
differential expression of toxin groups according to
snake geographical distribution [12], sex [13] or ontogenesis [14,15]. For example, in Costa Rica, toxin profiles of Bothrops asper venom from adult snakes are
characterized by the predominance of PI-SVMPs and
K49-PLA2s [16] whereas in Brazil, venom of adult
Bothrops atrox present the paedomorphic phenotype
with predominance of PIII-SVMPs and D49-PLA2s [17].
The paedomorphic phenotype is prevalent in the most
important species of Bothrops snakes in Brazil, with predominance of P-III SVMPs in venom proteomes or
transcriptomes [18-20].
SVMPs are encompassed in the M12 subfamily of
metalloproteinases (reprolysins). They are composed of
an independent proteolytic domain or of combination
between the proteolytic domain and additional adhesive/
anti-adhesive domains, as disintegrin or disintegrin-like/
cysteine-rich domains, preceded by a N-terminal well
conserved pro-domain. Following different steps of posttranslational modifications, distinct types of SVMPs may
be found in viper venoms, being originally derived from
distinct precursor molecules. SVMPs were formerly classified as four distinct classes of nucleotidic sequences
(N-classification) that after translation would give rise to
four classes of mature proteins (P-classification) with
different domain organization. Precursors belonging to
class N-I (pre-, pro- and catalytic domains), N-II (pre-,
pro-, catalytic and disintegrin domains), N-III (pre-,
pro-, catalytic, disintegrin-like and cysteine-rich
domains) and N-IV (pre-, pro-, catalytic, disintegrin-like,
cysteine-rich and lectin-like domains) would allow biosyntheses of P-I to P-IV SVMPs that include the same
domains present on precursors, but with removal of
pre- and pro-domains. According to this classification,

Page 2 of 14

catalytic domains of P-II, P-III and P-IV SVMPs could
also be proteolytically removed to generate P-I SVMPs
[21]. However, N-IV precursors have never been found
in gland transcriptomes and independent catalytic
domains of P-III or P-IV SVMPs have never been isolated as a P-I SVMP in snake venoms. Therefore, classification of SVMPs was reviewed several times and what
is currently accepted is the same terminology for N- or
P- classes, now referred only as P-classes, and inclusion
of the N/P-IV class as a post-translational modification
of a class P-III SVMP, presently classified as P-IIId [11].
It is now accepted 11 different subclasses of SVMPs
with the following distribution: one type in class P-I, 6
in class P-II and 4 in class P-III, each generating different possibilities of mature proteins depending on dimerization or proteolytic release of independent disintegrin
or disintegrin-like domains [11]. The presence and
structural features of the domains characterize the function and toxicity of SVMPs. In this regard, SVMPs play
important roles in hemostatic disorders and local tissue
damage that follows snakebite showing diverse effects
both on soluble factors and cellular components. The
action of SVMPs involves catalytic and adhesive/antiadhesive properties, as well as direct cellular activation
and/or the release of endogenous bioactive components.
They hydrolyze extracellular matrix, plasma and cellsurface proteins, interfere with blood coagulation and
fibrinolysis, inhibit platelet aggregation, and show a
diversity of activities towards inflammatory and
endothelial cells compromising the integrity of capillary
vessels [22].
To understand the structural complexity and functional diversity of SVMPs, some studies attempted to
explain the recruitment and evolution of this protein
family within venom glands of viper snakes. In early studies, we suggested a common ancestry of mammalian
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) with a P-III-type of
SVMP that underwent divergence after gene duplications generating P-II and P-I classes scaffolds [8].
Further studies attempted to elucidate the evolutionary
history of SVMPs and one important aspect that has
been speculated is that loss of domains in the P-III
ancestor gene could be attributed to the neofunctionalization of the disintegrin domain in some of the duplicated P-III genes [23,24]. Recently, Casewell et al. [25]
proposed that the evolution of SVMPs is repeatedly
punctuated by domain loss to form multiple P-I and PII SVMP structures. However, it remains untested if the
gain of domain structures through mechanisms as exon
shuffling or pre- or post-transcriptional recombination
could also play a role in the diversification of SVMP
structures.
In this study, we have unveiled the diversity of SVMPs
expressed by a specimen of Bothrops neuwiedi snake by

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

Page 3 of 14

cloning, sequencing and analyzing the SVMP cDNAs
transcribed in a single venom gland. A great diversity in
the SVMP repertoire was confirmed. Moreover, evidences emerged for recombination between genes of
SVMP sequences from different classes and also
between their primary mRNA transcripts, enlarging the
possibilities of mechanisms involved in generation of
diversity of this class of toxins and defining new perspectives in the classification and function prediction of
this group of toxins.

Results
Diversity of SVMP sequences in Bothrops neuwiedi
venom

In this study, thirty-one cDNA regions coding for
mature SVMPs, isolated from a single venom gland of
Bothrops neuwiedi snake, were completely sequenced
and compared. Total RNA was isolated from the venom
gland and SVMP cDNAs were amplified using primers
corresponding to conserved regions flanking the segment coding for mature SVMPs in P-I, P-II and P-III
classes. At the first cDNA amplification, three distinct
bands between 700 and 1500 bp were detected and the
more intense was the fraction of medium size that corresponds to P-II SVMPs (Figure 1). These bands were
cut from the agarose gels and independently cloned into
pGEM-T vector for sequencing. After complete sequencing of the inserts, cDNAs were classified according to
size, seven sequences corresponding to PI, ten to P-II
and four to P-III SVMPs. Amongst P-II cDNAs, two
clones presented interesting unique sequences and
therefore were submitted to further sequencing by independent cDNA amplification using other primers to
confirm different types of P-II SVMPs in the venom
gland generating ten more clones. Out of the thirty-one
clones sequenced, identical cDNAs were grouped in eleven distinct sequences of SVMPs which were named
according to the snake species (Bn), toxin function
(MP), class (I, II or III), subclass (a, b or x) and isoform
(1, 2 or 3) as depicted in Table 1. These sequences were
deposited in the GenBank under accession numbers
HM443632 to HM443642.
Sequence alignments predict rearrangements of cDNAs

Sequences were aligned and analyzed according to general domain structure, presence of repeats within the
domains and phylogenetic relationships with SVMPs
from other snake venoms. Figure 2 shows a schematic
representation of the eleven sequences alignment using
as query the longest sequence, BnMP-III1. The complete
alignment is shown in the additional file 1. BnMP-III
sequences showed the length of other P-III SVMPs,
with approximately 1250 bp coding for the mature protein. A gap corresponding to the C-terminus of

Figure 1 Amplification of SVMP cDNAs by PCR. Total cDNA
obtained by reverse transcription of venom gland isolated mRNA
was submitted to PCR using as primers PRODOM and 3’UTR as
described in Methods. Samples were analyzed in 1.5% agarose gels
stained with GelRedTM (Biotium). (MM) Molecular markers Biolab
ladder; (PCR) amplification product. Note the bands with expected
sizes of SVMPs classes P-I, P-II and P-III.

disintegrin domain and the entire cysteine-rich domain
was evidenced in BnMP-II sequences. In BnMP-I
sequences this gap included the entire disintegrin-like
and cysteine-rich domains (dotted lines). Figure 2 also
shows %identities within the sequences compared to
BnMP-III1 . Similarities confirmed the expected divergence between BnMP-I, BnMP-II and BnMP-III
sequences with %identities varying from 88% among
SVMPs class P-III and 72 to 77% between P-III and P-I
or P-II SVMPs. Interestingly, the identities of 3’UTRs
(untranslated regions) among all sequences were more
than 90%.
Additionally, our alignments have shown segments of
approximately 12 bp, present in all sequences, complementary to or repeated in other regions of the same
sequence or sequences from different classes (Figure 2,
triangles and circles, respectively). Complementary

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

Page 4 of 14

Table 1 cDNAs characterized from Bothrops neuwiedi venom gland.
Common Name

Accession Numbers

Lenght (bp)

SVMP class

Clones sequenced (number)

BnMP-I1

HM443635

777

P-I

2

BnMP-I2

HM443636

826

P-I

5

BnMP-IIa

HM443642

1031

P-II

8

BnMP-IIb1

HM443637

1053

P-II

4

BnMP-IIb2

HM443638

975

P-II

1

BnMP-IIx1

HM443639

1068

P-II

3

BnMP-IIx2

HM443640

991

P-II

2

BnMP-IIx3

HM443641

991

P-II

2

BnMP-III1

HM443632

1360

P-III

2

BnMP-III2

HM443633

1357

P-III

1

BnMP-III3

HM443634

1360

P-III

1

segments were conserved in the different subclasses and
were located enclosing the RGD motif or at the Zincbinding site with its complement at the end of cysteinerich domain. These complementary regions could be
involved in eventual recombination within SVMPs of
different types or even classes. This is further supported
by evidences of recombination of P-I and P-II sequences
shown in Figure 3. Alignments of cDNAs coding for
catalytic domains of BnMP-I1, BnMP-I2 and BnMP-IIa
showed that at the 5’ catalytic region (0-246 bp), BnMPI 1 is identical to BnMP-IIa while at the same region
BnMP-I2 presented 4% divergence. This region was followed by a segment of 121 bp where the three
sequences were identical (246-365 bp). This region was
denominated a “shift region” since after that we find an
inversion of sequence identity. At the 3’ catalytic region
(365-630 bp), the complete identity was between BnMPI 1 and BnMP-I 2 sequences while BnMP-IIa diverged
14% (Figure 3).
Cladograms derived from cDNA alignments (region
coding for mature protein) showed that class P-I
(BnMP-I 1 and BnMP-I 2 ) and class P-III (BnMP-III 1 ,
BnMP-III2 and BnMP-III3) sequences were grouped in
their own single branch. In opposition, sequences of
class P-II (BnMP-IIa, BnMP-IIb 1,2 and BnMP-IIx 1-3 )
were distributed in distinct branches and BnMP-IIa segregated with BnMP-I group (Figure 4). Taken together,
these observations show the heterogeneity of SVMPs
class P-II and suggest that recombination between
SVMPs may occur, explaining the identity observed
between regions of SVMP sequences from classes P-I
and P-II.
Interclass recombination may be seen in other SVMPs

In order to evaluate if the transcripts described here
would fit the nucleotide classification of SVMPs, BnMP
protein sequences deduced from the cDNAs described
above were aligned with sequences of SVMPs present in

venoms of other viper snakes. As shown in Figure 5,
independent alignments of catalytic (residues 1-214) or
disintegrin/disintegrin-like domains (residues 215-307)
resulted in distinct trees. In trees corresponding to catalytic domains (Figure 5A), four groups may be distinguished. One group included the catalytic domains of PI and P-II SVMPs previously classified as P-Ia and P-IIa,
respectively [11]; BnMP-I isoforms and BnMP-IIa were
clustered into this group. Another cluster included only
catalytic domains of P-II SVMPs which correspond to
the non-processed forms classified as P-IIb, according to
Fox and Serrano [11]; at this group we found BnMP-IIb
sequences. The third group includes the catalytic
domain of non-hemorragic class P-III SVMPs and, interestingly, BnMP-IIx isoforms (class P-II). Catalytic
domains of P-III SVMPs linked to RGD disintegrin
domain are not considered in the previous classification;
therefore, we named these sequences as P-IIx. The last
group included only SVMPs class P-III and BnMP-III
isoforms (Figure 5A).
Phylogenetic inferences of disintegrin domains also
showed a monophyletic distribution of disintegrin
domain of P-II SVMPs (branch support value = 94%),
further clustered in distinct branches. The first cluster
included disintegrin domains from P-II sequences (PIIa) and also BnMP-IIa that grouped with P-I SVMPs in
the catalytic domain phylogeny; disintegrin domains of
BnMP-II sequences type b were located together with
other disintegrin domains of P-IIb SVMPs and disintegrin domains of P-IIx appeared as an independent
branch sharing the same origin (branch support value =
93%) as P-IIb (Figure 5B). Distinct clusters included disintegrin-like domains of hemorrhagic or non-hemorrhagic P-III SVMPs. BnMP-III isoforms were included in
the first cluster, together with hemorrhagic toxins, more
specifically HR1a. Disintegrin domains from non-hemorragic were located closer to P-II disintegrin domains.
However, in these cases, the statistical significance is

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

Page 5 of 14

Figure 2 Schematic representation of sequence alignment of cDNAs encoding B. neuwiedi SVMPs. Complete cDNA sequences were
aligned using the Blastn program for multiple sequences alignments using as query BnMP-III1 sequence (additional file 1). Boxes represent
similarity regions (5’UTR plus mature protein coding regions or 3’UTR) with %identities in relation to the query. Triangles represent positions of
complementary regions (⇆) and circles represent the repeated regions (⇉) relatively to BnMP-III1 sequence. DM corresponds to the approximate
position of the RGD or ECD motifs in disintegrins or disintegrin-like domains, respectively. Dots represent the gaps corresponding to cysteinerich or disintegrin-like/cysteine-rich domains introduced to maximize sequence alignments.

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

Page 6 of 14

Figure 3 Schematic representation of sequence alignment of cDNAs encoding BnMP-I 1 , BnMP-I 2 and BnMP-IIa. Complete cDNA
sequences were aligned using the Blastn program for multiple sequences alignments using as query BnMP-I1 sequence. Percentage similarity of
different regions of the catalytic domain relatively to the query is shown. Gray boxes correspond to the spacer segment and the dashed boxes
to the 3’UTR. Dots represent the gap corresponding to the RGD-disintegrin domain, represented in black in the P-II sequence. For the complete
alignment, see additional file 2.

low and a broader set of sequences would be necessary
to evidence monophyly of P-III SVMP disintegrin
domains.
These observations suggest that there are at least three
distinct precursors of class P-II SVMPs in venom gland
and, in two of them, the catalytic domain may be shared
with either P-I or P-III SVMPs. According to the high
level of identity between sequences, these precursors

might have been assembled by recombination between
precursors of different classes of SVMPs. Evidences of
high similarity between P-I and P-II cDNAs suggest
post-transcriptional recombinations. Supporting this
hypothesis, the 5’ region of BnMP-I1 sequence (365 bp)
was identical to BnMP-IIa isoforms (Figure 3). Considering that genes coding for SVMPs are subjected to
accelerated evolution and that most of substitutions

Figure 4 Phylogetic representation of sequence alignments of cDNA regions coding for the mature proteins. Trees were obtained as
described in Methods section at http://www.phylogeny.fr. Numbers close to the nodes represent the support value for each branch.

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

Page 7 of 14

Figure 5 Phylogetic representation of amino acid sequence alignments of independent domains. Trees were obtained as described in
Methods section at http://www.phylogeny.fr. Numbers close to the nodes represent the support value for each branch. Prior to phylogenetic
analyses, cDNA sequences were translated and datasets were partitioned into a group with sequences of catalytic domains (amino acid residues
at positions 1-214 of BnMP-III) or disintegrin/disintegrin-like domains (amino acid residues at positions 215-307 of BnMP-III). (*) indicates
sequences of SVMPs class P-II; (#) indicates non-hemorrhagic class P-III SVMPs. The description, accession numbers and SVMP classification for
other species sequences are shown in Table 2.

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

accumulate in coding regions, it is very unlike to expect
100% identity in cDNA regions of genes diverged previously, even though the time of divergence between P-I
and P-II SVMPs is not reported in previous papers
[8,24,25]. In this case, we hypothesize that the fragment
of RNA coding for catalytic domain alternatively recombined with distinct 3’s of SVMP transcripts, with or
without the regions coding for the disintegrin domain,
generating P-I or P-II SVMPs. The same hypothesis is
not adequate to explain similarities among BnMP-IIx
isoforms and class P-III catalytic domains. In this case,
the 5’ region was closely related but not identical to
class P-III catalytic domains and alternative recombination with P-II disintegrin or P-III disintegrin-like/
cysteine-rich domains are likely to have occurred at
genomic level. The schematic representation of this
hypothesis is shown in Figure 6.
The abundance of the different precursors of class P-II
SVMPs in B. neuwiedi venom gland was then evaluated
by qPCR. Specific primers for each type of BnMP-II
sequence allowed quantifying ~ 3.5 × 10 6 copies of
BnMP-IIa, ~5 × 105 copies of BnMP-IIb and ~1.5 × 105
copies of BnMP-IIx per ng cDNA transcribed from the
total venom gland RNA. According to these numbers,
sequences coding for precursors that can be processed
to generate class P-I SVMPs and free disintegrins are
the most abundant in this group of P-II cDNAs.
Distinct proteins are predicted by class P-II precursors

Figure 7 shows the alignments of the putative proteins
predicted by BnMP-II sequences. BnMP-IIa precursors
code for sequences with the typical cysteine distribution
of medium size disintegrins [26], with the RGD motif
and no N-glycosylation sites. These precursors are very
likely to be responsible for the generation of independent catalytic and disintegrin domains in the venom.
BnMP-IIb and BnMP-IIx sequences also present disintegrin domains with RGD motifs but with additional
cysteines at positions 218 (spacer region), 237, 284 and
298. Cysteines at positions 218/237 are also found in

Page 8 of 14

jerdonitin (GenBank: AAQ63966.1), agkistin (Swiss-Prot:
Q8AWX7.1) and bilitoxin (Swiss-Prot: P0C6E3.1) P-II
SVMPs and are frequent in P-III SVMPs [11]. These
cysteines could be bound in order to provide stability
for the proteins, avoiding the hydrolysis of the disintegrin domain. If this is true, it is reasonable to expect the
presence of BnMP-IIb and BnMP-IIx in venoms in the
unprocessed form (catalytic + disintegrin domains).
However, cysteines at positions 292 and 306 were not
found in any other disintegrins reported up to the
moment. They may be involved in an extra S-S bound
and give additional stability to the disintegrin domain.
At catalytic domain, BnMP-IIx sequences differ from
BnMP-IIb by two important aspects: they present an
additional cysteine in the same position (59) found in
berythractivase (GenBank: AAL47169.1) and two N-glycosylation sites at positions 70 and 191, which are found
in several class P-III SVMPs. Catalytic domain of
BnMP-IIb contain one additional pair of cysteines (positions 48 and 171) and a single N-glycosylation site at
the same position (116) found in trigramin (GenBank:
CAA35910.1) and flavoridin (GenBank: BAC00515.1)
sequences (Figure 7). Interestingly, BnMP-IIb isoforms
presented a substitution of histidines for tyrosines
within the zinc-binding motif. These substitutions
would impair the coordination of the zinc atom that is
essential for catalysis, suggesting either that these
cDNAs code for non functional enzymes or the proteins
synthesized by these cDNAs may be used for further
processing and generation of free disintegrins. This evidence was not due to experimental artifacts since the
mutation responsible for H/Y substitution was detected
in two independent RNA transcriptions and cloning.

Discussion
Recently, transcriptomics and proteomics approaches
have been extensively used to analyze the global composition of venoms from viper snakes. These studies provide a comprehensive knowledge of primary structure
data based on sequences available in databanks. They

Figure 6 Schematic representation of domain assembly possibilities between different classes of SVMPs.

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

Page 9 of 14

Figure 7 Sequence alignment of class P-II SVMPs predicted by the cDNAs isolated from B. neuwiedi venom gland. Sequences were
aligned by ClustalW program. Cysteines are shadowed in gray; circles indicate the putative N-glycosylation sites; rectangles indicate the zincbinding and RGD motif and dark gray the substitution by tyrosine of the histidine involved in zinc coordination.

are very important for an accurate description of the
protein families expressed allowing evolutionary inferences about the generation of venom diversity and the
toxin arsenal present in snake venoms [27,28]. In most
of the referred studies, SVMPs appear as the major
component in venoms of viper snakes and representatives of P-I, P-II and P-III classes were detected in all of
them. However, these approaches are not the most
appropriate for inferences of functional diversity since
sequence characterization is usually based on molecular
fragments of varying sizes that may omit structural rearrangements or motifs involved in important functions of
a particular toxin. In this study, thirty-one cDNAs coding for mature SVMPs were completely sequenced from
a gland of one specimen of B. neuwiedi snake. Internal
alignments and phylogenetic inferences with databank
SVMPs revealed new aspects of the evolution of

functional diversity of this protein family not evidenced
before by high throughput approaches.
Sequences of SVMPs from classes P-I, P-II and P-III
were amplified from B. neuwiedi venom gland with particular abundance of cDNA sequences from class P-II
SVMPs (BnMP-II). Representatives of each class were
not identical, with at least two distinct copies of P-I
cDNAs (with 98% identity) and three of P-III (with %
identity values above 88). In opposition, great variability
was observed amongst class P-II sequences with six distinct clones presenting a greater number of nucleotide
substitution and divergence (identity from 73%). High
sequence variability is not surprising since, considering
that toxins evolved by accelerated evolution, a number
of non-synonymous substitutions is predicted in coding
regions driving to diversity of venom proteins, including
SVMPs. Indeed, nucleotide substitutions were

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

apparently required for the emergence of new functions
as disclaimed for disintegrins [24]. Moreover, toxin
genes contain in their exons a greater number of
unstable triplets that were subjected to a faster pointmutation rate than constitutive genes [29]. In this
regard, we suggest that point mutations are occurring in
SVMPs with a higher frequency in representatives of
class P-II, reflecting a higher plasticity in this class of
genes that reflects in the generation of new functions in
the venoms.
Besides the diversity of class P-II SVMPs generated by
nucleotide substitutions, evidences of recombination
between P-II disintegrin domain with catalytic domains
of P-I or P-III SVMPs were also noted. When B. neuwiedi sequences were clustered by cladistic analysis,
three distinct types of P-II sequences were detected with
distinct branching: BnMP-IIa grouped with P-I SVMPs,
BnMP-IIx with P-III, and BnMP-IIb in a third group,
composed only of P-II SVMPs. This evidence suggests
that recombination between genes encoding SVMPs
might have occurred after the emergence of the primary
gene copies coding for each scaffold. In their recent
publication, Casewell et al. [25] suggest that different
scaffolds of SVMPs were generated by minimization of
genes with domain loss, which have occurred several
times during evolution of this protein family. The loss
of cysteine rich domain would have occurred once to
generate P-II SVMPs and the loss of disintegrin domains
would have occurred at least 8 times in P-II to generate
P-I SVMPs. Indeed, this is a very plausible hypothesis
already supported by other reports in the literature
[8,24]. The data presented in this study is not in disagreement with this theory. However, we add an alternative mechanism to explain the diversity of precursors
coding for SVMPs. The topology of the trees shown in
this study indicates recombination of P-II genes with
members from P-I and P-III classes both at DNA and
RNA levels after the emergence of the three different
scaffolds. The hypothetical recombination between P-I
and P-II SVMPs might occur at the post-transcriptional
level, supported by the striking identity (100%) between
the 5’-terminal 365 bp fragment of BnMP-I and BnMPIIa cDNA sequences that apparently were alternatively
joined with two distinct fragments at 5’, which diverged
by nucleotide substitutions and the inclusion in only
one of the fragments the region coding for the disintegrin domain. According to the previous papers [8,24,25],
P-I SVMPs were derived from a PII ancestor and this
would imply high similarity between such precursors.
However, considering that genes coding for SVMPs are
subjected to accelerated evolution and that most of substitutions accumulate in coding regions, it is very unlike
to expect 100% identity in cDNA regions of genes that
diverged previously, even though the time of divergence

Page 10 of 14

between P-I and P-II SVMPs is not reported in previous
papers [8,24,25]. In this regard, post-transcriptional
recombination is an appealing hypothesis to explain,
together with genetic events, the generation of class P-I
SVMPs in different events of SVMPs evolutionary history, as reported previously [25]. Corroborating this
hypothesis we found complementary regions in B. neuwiedi cDNA sequences that could be involved in loop
assembly in the RNAs enabling them for alternative
trans-splicing leading to the formation of “hybrid”
mRNAs. Evidences for alternative splicing have been
shown in Bungarus fasciatus acetylcholinesterase gene
generating different proteins in liver or venom gland
[30]. This was also suggested by Siigur and colleagues
[31], when studying the generation of diversity of serineproteinases from Vipera lebetiba venom and, more
recently, Zeng et al. [32] provided evidences of transsplicing for generation of toxin diversity in the venom
of Buthus martensii scorpion. Alternative splicing may
explain the intriguing distribution of class P-I SVMPs in
previous phylogenetic studies of SVMPs, also grouped
with class P-IIa SVMPs in different branches of their
phylogenetic tree [25].
The other evidence of recombination between different classes of SVMPs was deduced from the phylogenetic inferences of independent domains. Several studies
report the phylogenetic relationships of SVMPs isolated
from closely-related species, or of specific classes or
domains [8,23,24,33-36]. Usually, these studies deal with
a large number of sequences with different degrees of
similarity. In this study, the hypothesis of interclass
recombination arose from experimental data, during
sequence alignments. Thus, the analyses were carried
out using a different approach driven to identify such
recombination in other snake species. For this purpose,
we selected by megablast [37] only the most similar
sequences (>85% identity) of independent domains from
each BnMP sequences and carried out the phylogenetic
analysis with this selected group of toxins. This
approach may not represent the evolutionary history of
the protein family, but allowed the characterization of
closest relationships between catalytic domains from different classes of SVMPs, with statistically supported
clusters enclosing P-I and P-IIa (99%) or including P-IIx
and P-III (100%) catalytic domains. Considering the disintegrin domain, P-IIa, P-IIb and P-IIx sequences were
monophyletic (94%). We understand that this is strong
evidence that the multiple domain structure observed in
SVMPs has undergone different evolutionary history,
and the protein variability of this protein family may be
dependent on recombination at different points of the
evolution of this protein family. In the case of BnMP-IIx
and P-III SVMPs, recombination events might occur at
the genomic level with the assembly of P-II disintegrin

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

domains with catalytic regions from genes of nonhemorrhagic SVMPs class P-III. The possibility that
genomic recombination of independent domains occurs
by exon shuffling cannot be ruled out since this is an
accepted mechanism for evolution of modular molecules, particularly plasma and extracellular matrix proteins [38,39]. In venoms, segment switches in exons
(ASSETS) have been demonstrated and correlated to
targeting diversification [40]. Moreover, it has also been
reported by different authors the occurrence of SVMP
structures that might have been assembled by P-III catalytic domain with P-IIa disintegrin domain [41] or by
PIIa catalytic domains with P-III disintegrin-like
domains lacking the cysteine-rich domain [42]. These
evidences supporting recombination between P-III catalytic and P-II disintegrin domains indicate that the loss
of cysteine rich domain may be a more frequent
mechanism and may have occurred in different events
during evolution of SVMPs. Unfortunately, these
mechanisms of recombination are still speculative since,
up to the moment, genomic sequences coding for
SVMPs were not completely disclosed and the exon/
intron distribution at catalytic domain is still unknown.
Regardless of the mechanisms used for generation of
new genes/mRNAs encoding class P-II SVMPs, this is
certainly the class under highest adaptative pressure and
positive selection. Soto et al. [36] showed that accumulation of mutations is less frequent in class P-III SVMPs
than in class P-II. In this study, we noted in a single
snake three independent P-II structures, coding for distinct proteins. BnMP-IIa sequence shares catalytic
domain with P-I SVMPs and representatives enclosed in
this cluster generate, by processing, the P-I SVMPs
(only catalytic domains) and the classical RGD-disintegrins; BnMP-IIb sequences grouped with other class PIIb SVMPs corresponding to the non-proteolytic processed P-II SVMPs; BnMP-IIx group corresponds to a
new subclass of P-II SVMP precursor which predicts
proteins with catalytic domain of non-hemorrhagic P-III
SVMPs and a disintegrin domain with a higher number
of cysteines, an extra pair at C-termini that may be
involved in a new disulfide bond reported here for the
first time. This domain association has not been
reported yet and the presence of these molecules in
venoms in the unprocessed form is still unknown and
the possibility that this precursor is a pseudogene is not
ruled out up to the moment. This distribution is in
agreement to the gene tree reported by Casewell et al.
[25] with a few differences: the authors include a fourth
group with dimeric P-IId SVMP and did not evidence
the P-IIx SVMPs. It is important to note the large number of sequences enclosed on their P-I/P-IIa group. In
our case, BnMP-IIa was the most abundant cDNA in
the gland of B. neuwiedi, but in the pool of B. neuwiedi

Page 11 of 14

venom, the most abundant proteins are two isoforms of
a class P-I SVMP, BnP1 and BnP2, which were partially
sequenced revealing approximately 90% identity with
either BnMP-I or BnMP-IIa cDNAs [43]. Taken
together, the great number of P-I/P-IIa SVMPs
described and their high expression levels in venom
glands point to the advantage of this form of precursor
since it generates both P-I SVMPs and free disintegrins
from a single precursor. The possible recombination
between P-I and P-II precursors shown in this study is
of great relevance for the evolution of SVMPs and the
generation of the functionally active representatives of
this family of proteins.

Conclusions
A great diversity was observed in cDNAs encoding
SVMPs in a single venom gland of a B. neuwiedi specimen. The most complex group was the class P-II represented by three independent subclasses with evidences
that they may be arisen by recent recombination either
at genomic level or post-transcription between different
classes of SVMPs. This includes a new subclass of P-II
SVMP precursor, P-IIx, composed of a combination of
P-III catalytic domain and a RGD disintegrin domain
with extra cysteines at C-termini. These evidences add
new possibilities of SVMPs scaffolds by the inclusion of
a P-IIx type of SVMP. In regard to biosynthesis of the
P-I group, at least in our set of precursors, P-I proteins
appeared to be synthesized from both P-I and P-II precursors, and it is very likely that P-I precursors were
derived from P-II post-transcriptionally. Moreover, our
data enlarge the possibilities of mechanisms involved in
generation of diversity of this class of toxins. However, a
complete understanding of the genesis of venom diversity and definite evidences of recombination are still
dependent on the resolution of the genome of a viper
snake.
Methods
Amplification and sequencing of SVMP cDNAs

A specimen of Bothrops neuwiedi snake was collected at
the city of Itu, São Paulo, Brazil (23°15’56″S and 47°
17’56″W). After quarantine, the snake was milked to stimulate mRNA synthesis and 4 days later euthanized with
CO2 for extraction of the venom glands. Gland tissue was
homogenized with Trizol (Invitrogen) and total RNA isolated using the RNAEasy Lipid Tissue mini kit (Qiagen).
Double stranded cDNA was generated by reverse transcription with Superscript III (Invitrogen) and oligo(dT)
as primers. SVMP cDNAs were amplified by PCR using
Platinum® Taq DNA Polymerase High Fidelity (Invitrogen) with specific primers able to amplify P-I, P-II and PIII classes. The forward primer (5’CCAAAATGTGTGG
(A/G)GTAACT 3’) corresponded to bases coding for the

Page 12 of 14

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

cysteine-switch motif present in P-I, P-II and P-III prodomains which is approximately 150 bp upstream the Nterminal of mature SVMPs (PRODOM) and the reverse
primer (5’CCAAAATGTGTGG(A/G)GTAACT 3’) was
designed from a conserved region at the 3’UTR sequence,
80 bp downstream the stop codon, also common to P-I,
P-II and P-III classes (3’UTR). PCR amplification consisted of 30 cycles of 94°C (30 s), 55°C (1 min), and 68°C
(1 min). A final extension step was performed for 7 min,
at 68°C. PCR cDNA products were separated by 1.5%
agarose gel electrophoresis, and purified using the Gelclean Extraction Kit (Promega). Amplification products
were independently cloned into pGEM-T Easy Vector
(Promega) and transfected into E. coli DH5a. Ten colonies were randomly selected from each transformation
tube, their plasmids were amplified and submitted to
cDNA sequencing using the ABI Prism Big Dye Terminator Cycle Sequence Ready Reaction kit and the ABI 3100
sequenator (Applied Biosystems). Inserts from selected
clones were completely sequenced in both directions
(plus and minus strands) with at least three independent
readings from each cDNA region.
Quantification of copy numbers of BnMP-II cDNAs

The copy numbers of BnMP-II cDNAs were determined
by absolute quantitative real-time PCR [44] in the Line
Gene K Thermal Cycler (Hangzhou Bioer Technology
Co.) using the fqdpcr-4.2.20 software. Briefly, cDNA
copy number reverse transcribed from isolated mRNA

was estimated based on calibration curves of absolute
number of plasmids containing either BnMP-IIa, BnMPIIb or BnMP-IIx cDNAs. The real-time qPCR was performed using a mixture of 12.5 μL Master Mix - Sybr
Green Rox Plus (LGC Biotechnology), 200 ng cDNA,
170 nM of each primer (P-IIa FW (5’ GAACAACAAAGATTCT 3’), P-IIa RV (5’ AAATCTGCACTGGTC 3’),
P-IIb FW (5’ CATGACCAAAGATACATTGA 3’), P-IIx
FW (5’ GCACAACAAGCATACTTG 3’) and P-IIbx RV
(5’ GGACCAAA(T/C)TTCTA 3’) and RNAse free water
adjusted to 25μL final volume. The following thermal
cycling protocol was used for all primers: 15 min at 95 °
C followed by 40 cycles of 15 s at 95 °C, 30 s at 60 °C
and 30 s at 72 °C. After the amplification, the melting
curve analysis was performed with a temperature gradient from 65 to 90 °C at 1 °C/min and the resulting band
visualized in 1.5% agarose gels. The cDNA copy numbers were the average of triplicates of each sample.
SVMP sequences from databanks

Nucleotide and amino acid SVMP sequences were
retrieved from the National Center for Biotechnology
Information database http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Due
to the great availability of SVMP sequences in databanks
and the frequency of partial length sequences, in order
to detect the closest relationships between SVMPs we
selected for our study only complete sequences and the
most similar to each domain characterized in B. neuwiedi SVMPs. For that, we carried out independent

Table 2 SVMP protein sequences used for phylogenetic inferences
Protein

Description

SVMP Class

Accession

BmooMP

Bothrops moojeni zinc metalloproteinase BmooMPalfa-I

P-I

P85314

LeucA

Bothrops leucurus zinc metalloproteinase leucurolysin-A

P-I

P84907

BaP1

Bothrops asper hemorrhagic metalloproteinase BaP1

P-I

P83512.2

Insularinase

Bothrops insularis insularinase precursor mRNA

P-II

AY736107.1

BasperMPII

Bothrops asper type II metalloproteinase mRNA

P-II

DQ247725.1

Agkistin

Gloydius halys zinc metalloproteinase-disintegrin agkistin

P-II

AAL60587.1

Jerdonitin

Trimeresurus jerdonii jerdonitin mRNA

P-II

AY364231.1

Albolatin

Trimeresurus albolabris metalloproteinase homolog disintegrin albolatin

P-II

P0C6B6.1

Trimucin

Protobothrops mucrosquamatuspro-trimucin

P-II

CAA54364.1

TM3

Protobothrops mucrosquamatus trimutase precursor

P-II

AAB94016.1

Elegantin

Trimeresurus elegans elegantin-1a precursor mRNA

P-II

AB059571.1

HF3

Bothrops jararaca hemorrhagic metalloproteinase HF3 mRNA

P-III

AF149788.5

HR1a

Trimeresurus flavoviridis hemorrhagic metalloproteinase HR1a

P-III

Q8JIR2.1

Catrocollastatin

Crotalus atrox catrocollastatin precursor

P-III

AAC59672.1

Jararhagin

Bothrops jararaca zinc metalloproteinase-disintegrin jararhagin

P-III

CAA48323.1

ACLD

Agkistrodon contortrix laticinctus zinc metalloproteinase-disintegrin ACLD

P-III

AAC18911.1

VMP3

Agkistrodon contortrix laticinctus metalloproteinase VMP-III precursor mRNA

P-III

GQ451435.1

Berythractivase

Bothrops erythromelas berythractivase (ery1) mRNA

P-III

AF450503.1

ADAM-2

Human

root

GI55743079

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

Page 13 of 14

searches for highly similar nucleotide sequences using
the Megablast Algorithm and the non-redundant
nucleotide collection [37] taking as query sequence catalytic, disintegrin, disintegrin-like or cysteine-rich
domains coding regions of each BnMP cDNA sequence.
Sequences with domain identity higher than 80% and
query coverage higher than 90% were selected excluding
partial length cDNAs. The sequences selected by each
independent domain were then reunited in a single
dataset, used for the phylogenetic inferences as nucleotide sequences or after translation using the Translate
Tool algorithm at ExPASy http://expasy.ch/tools/dna.
html. The description, accession numbers and SVMP
classification of each sequence is shown in Table 2.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. ILM Junqueira-de Azevedo and Leonardo Kobashi (Centro de
Biotecnologia, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil) for cDNA
sequencing. This work was supported by grants from Fundação de Amparo
à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP), Conselho Nacional de
Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) and Instituto Nacional de
Ciência e Tecnologia em Toxinas (INCTTox).

Sequence Alignments and Phylogenetic Inferences

Received: 2 June 2011 Accepted: 1 November 2011
Published: 1 November 2011

Protein or cDNA sequences were aligned using ClustalW
[45]. Alternatively, Blastn program for multiple
sequences alignments [37] was used for alignments of B.
neuwiedi nucleotide sequences. Phylogenetic trees were
set based on either nucleotide sequence or the amino
acid sequence alignments, which combined proteinderived sequences and DNA-translated amino acid
sequences. Phylogenetic analyses were run at http://www.
Phylogeny.fras described [46]. Sequences were aligned
using the MUSCLE program [47] according to the mer
distances clustered by UGPMA. The Gblocks program
[48] was used to eliminate poorly aligned positions and
divergent regions. PhyML 3.0 was used for phylogenies
[49] including substitution models HKY85 for DNA and
WAG for proteins. The ALTR test (SH-like) was used to
access the support values of each branch [50]. In some
cases, prior to phylogenetic analyses, datasets were partitioned into three groups: 1-complete SMVP (catalytic,
disintegrin/disintegrin-like and cysteine-rich domains); 2catalytic domains (amino acid residues at positions 1-214
of BnMP-III); 3-disintegrin/disintegrin-like domains
(amino acid residues at positions 215-307 of BnMP-III).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Sequence alignment of cDNAs encoding B.
neuwiedi SVMPs. Complete cDNA sequences were aligned using the
Blastn program for multiple sequences alignments using as query BnMPIII1 sequence: (.) identical nucleotides to the first sequence; (-) gaps
introduced to maximize sequence alignments; regions coding for
functional motifs as the zinc-bindin residues and RGD disintegrin
tripeptide are boxed; alignments of complementary (-) or repeated (+)
regions in relation to BnMP-III1 sequence are highlighted in gray.
Additional file 2: Sequence alignment of cDNAs encoding BnMP-I1,
BnMP-I2 and BnMP-IIa. Complete cDNA sequences were aligned using
the Blastn program for multiple sequences alignments using as query
BnMP-I1 sequence: (.) identical nucleotides to the first sequence. Note
the absence of disintegrin domain coding region in BnMP-I1 and BnMP-I2
sequences.

Author details
1
Laboratório de Imunopatologia, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil. 2Laboratório de Herpetotologia, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil. 3Laboratório de Toxinologia, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz),
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Authors’ contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: GSM, RHV, AMMS. Performed the
experiments: KFG, MSF, MCC, PBC, JAPJ. Analyzed the data: GSM, PBC, RHV,
AMMS. Wrote the paper: GSM, PBC, JAPJ, RHV, AMMS. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

References
1. Fry BG, Scheib H, van der Weerd L, Young B, McNaughtan J, Ramjan SFR,
Vidal N, Poelmann RE, Norman JA: Evolution of an arsenal. Structural and
functional diversification of the venom system in the advanced snakes
(Caenophidia). Mol Cell Prot 2008, 7:215-246.
2. Ohno S: Evolution by gene duplication. Springer Verlag Berlin; 1970.
3. Calvete JJ, Juárez P, Sanz L: Snake venomics. Strategy and applications. J
Mass Spectrom 2007, 42:1405-1414.
4. Lynch VJ: Inventing an arsenal: adaptive evolution and
neofunctionalization of snake venom phospholipase A2 genes. BMC Evol
Biol 2007, 7:2.
5. Gibbs HL, Rossiter W: Rapid evolution by positive selection and gene
gain and loss: PLA2 venom genes in closely related Sistrurus
rattlesnakes with divergent diets. J Mol Evol 2008, 66:151-166.
6. Ogawa T, Chijiwa T, Oda-Ueda N, Ohno M: Molecular diversity and
accelerated evolution of C-type lectin-like proteins from snake venoms.
Toxicon 2005, 45:1-14.
7. Zupinski V, Kordis D, Gubensek F: Adaptative evolution in the snake
venom Kunitz/BPTI protein family. FEBS Lett 2003, 547:131-136.
8. Moura-da-Silva AM, Theakston RGD, Crampton JM: Evolution of disintegrin
cystein-rich and mammalian matrix-degrading metalloproteinases: gene
duplication and divergence of a common ancestor rather than
convergent evolution. J Mol Evol 1996, 43:263-269.
9. Greene HW: Dietary correlates of the origin and radiation of snakes. Am
Zool 1983, 23:431-441.
10. Daltry JC, Wüster W, Thorpe RS: Diet and snake venom evolution. Nature
1996, 379:537-540.
11. Fox JW, Serrano SMT: Insights into and speculations about snake venom
metalloproteinase (SVMP) synthesis, folding and disulfide bond
formation and their contribution to venom complexity. FEBS J 2008,
275:3016-3030.
12. Alape-Girón A, Sanz L, Escolano J, Flores-Díaz M, Madrigal M, Sasa M,
Calvete JJ: Snake venomics of the lancehead pitviper Bothrops asper:
geographic, individual, and ontogenetic variations. J Proteome Res 2008,
7(8):3556-71.
13. Menezes MC, Furtado MFD, Travaglia-Cardoso SR, Camargo AC,
Serrano SMT: Sex-based individual variation of snake venom proteome
among eighteen Bothrops jararaca siblings. Toxicon 2006, 47:304-12.
14. Saldarriaga MM, Otero R, Núñez V, Toro MF, Díaz A, Gutiérrez JM:
Ontogenetic variability of Bothrops atrox and Bothrops asper snake
venoms from Colombia. Toxicon 2003, 42:405-411.
15. Guércio RAP, Shevchenko A, Shevchenko A, López-Lozano JL, Sousa MV,
Ricart CAO: Ontogenetic variations in the venom proteome of the
Amazonian snake Bothrops atrox. Protein Sci 2006, 4:11.
16. Núñez V, Cid P, Sanz L, Torre P, Angulo Y, Lomonte B, Gutiérrez JM,
Calvete JJ: Snake venomics and antivenomics of Bothrops atrox venoms
from Colombia and the Amazon regions of Brazil, Perú and Ecuador

Moura-da-Silva et al. BMC Genetics 2011, 12:94
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/12/94

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

suggest the occurrence of geographic variation of venom phenotype by
a trend towards paedomorphism. J Proteomics 2009, 73:57-78.
Calvete JJ, Sanz L, Pérez A, Borges A, Vargas AM, Lomonte B, Angulo Y,
Gutiérrez JM, Chalkidis HM, Mourão RH, Furtado MF, Moura-Da-Silva AM:
Snake population venomics and antivenomics of Bothrops atrox:
Paedomorphism along its transamazonian dispersal and implications of
geographic venom variability on snakebite management. J Proteomics
2011, 74(4):510-27.
Cidade DAP, Zingali RB, Davila AR, Wagner G, Junqueira-de-Azevedo ILM,
Ho PL, Bon C, Simão TA, Albano RM: Bothrops jararaca venom
transcriptome: analysis of the gene expression pattern. Toxicon 2006,
48:437-6.
Neiva M, Arraes FB, de Souza JV, Rádis-Baptista G, Prieto da Silva AR,
Walter ME, Brigido Mde M, Yamane T, López-Lozano JL, Astolfi-Filho S:
Transcriptome analysis of the Amazonian viper Bothrops atrox venom
gland using expressed sequence tags (ESTs). Toxicon 2009, 53(4):427-36.
Valente RH, Guimarães PR, Junqueira M, Neves-Ferreira AG, Soares MR,
Chapeaurouge A, Trugilho MR, León IR, Rocha SL, Oliveira-Carvalho AL,
Wermelinger LS, Dutra DL, Leão LI, Junqueira-de-Azevedo IL, Ho PL,
Zingali RB, Perales J, Domont GB: Bothrops insularis venomics: a
proteomic analysis supported by transcriptomic-generated sequence
data. J Proteomics 2009, 72:241-255.
Hite LA, Jia LG, Bjarnason JB, Fox JW: cDNA sequences for four snake
venom metalloproteinases: structure, classification, and their
relationshipo to mammalian reproductive proteins. Arch Biochem Biophys
1994, 308:182-191.
Moura-da-Silva AM, Butera D, Tanjoni I: Importance of snake venom
metalloproteinases in cell biology: effects on platelets, inflammatory and
endothelial cells. Curr Pharmaceut Des 2007, 13:2893-2905.
Calvete JJ, Marcinkiewicz C, Monleón D, Esteve V, Celda B, Juárez P, Sanz L:
Snake venom disintegrins: evolution of structure and function. Toxicon
2005, 45:1063-1074.
Juárez P, Comas I, González-Candelas F, Calvete JJ: Evolution of Snake
Venom Disintegrins by Positive Darwinian Selection. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25:2391-2407.
Casewell NR, Wagstaff SC, Harrison RA, Renjifo C, Wüster W: Domain loss
facilitates accelerated evolution and neofunctionalization of duplicate
snake venom metalloproteinase toxin genes. Mol Biol Evol 2011,
28(9):2637-49, Epub 2011 Apr 4.
Calvete JJ, Moreno-Murciano MP, Theakston DG, Kisiel DG, Marcinkiewicz C:
Snake venom disintegrins: novel dimeric disintegrins and structural
diversification by disulphide bond engineering. Biochem J 2003,
372:725-734.
Junqueira-de Azevedo ILM, Diniz M, Ho PL: Venom gland transcriptomic
analysis. In Animal Toxins: State of the art. Perspectives in health and
biotechnology Edited by: Lima ME, Pimenta AMC, Martin-Eauclaire MF,
Zingali R, Rochat H, Belo Horizonte, Editora UFMG 2009, 693-714.
Gutiérrez JM, Lomonte B, León G, Alape-Girón A, Díaz MF, Sanz L, Angulo Y,
Calvete JJ: Snake venomics and antivenomics: Proteomic tools in the
design and control of antivenoms for the treatment of snakebite
envenoming. J Proteomics 2009, 72:165-182.
Kini RM, Chinnasamy A: Nucleotide sequence determines the accelerated
rate of point mutations. Toxicon 2010, 56:295-304.
Cousin X, Bon S, Massoulie J, Bon C: Identification of a novel type of
alternatively spliced exon from the acetylcholinesterase gene of
Bungarus fasciatus. Molecular forms of acetylcholinesterase in the snake
liver and muscle. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:9812-9820.
Siigur E, Aaspõllu A, Siigur J: Sequence diversity of Vipera lebetina snake
venom gland serine proteinase homologs - result of alternative-splicing
or genome alteration. Gene 2001, 263(1-2):199-203.
Zeng XC, Feng L, Wen-Xin L: Characterization of a novel cDNA encoding
a short venom peptide derived from venom gland of scorpion Buthus
martensii Karsch: Trans-splicing may play an important role in the
diversification of scorpion venom peptides. Peptides 2006, 27:675-68.
Tsai IH, Wang YM, Chiang TY, Chen YL, Huang RJ: Purification, cloning and
sequence analysis for pro-metalloproteinase-disintegrin variants from
Deinagkistrodon acutus venom and subclassification of the small venom
metalloproteinases. Eur J Biochem 2000, 267:1359-1367.
Chen RQ, Jin Y, Wu JB, Zhou XD, Lu QM, Wang WY, Xiong YL: A new
protein structure of P-II class snake venom metalloproteinases: it

Page 14 of 14

35.

36.

37.
38.
39.
40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.
48.
49.
50.

comprises metalloproteinase and disintegrin domains. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 2003, 310(1):182-187.
Guo XX, Zeng L, Lee WH, Zhang Y, Jin Y: Isolation and cloning of a
metalloproteinase from King Cobra snake venom. Toxicon 2007,
49:954-965.
Soto JG, White SA, Reyes SR, Regalado R, Sanchez EE, Perez JC: Molecular
evolution of PIII-SVMP and RGD disintegrin genes from the genus
Crotalus. Gene 2007, 389:66-72.
Zhang Z, Schwartz S, Wagner L, Miller W: A greedy algorithm for aligning
DNA sequences. J Comput Biol 2000, 7(1-2):203-14.
Patthy L: Evolution of the proteases of blood coagulation and fibrinolysis
by assembly from modules. Cell 1985, 41:657-663.
Patth BL: Evolutionary assembly of blood coagulation proteins. Semin
Thromh Haemost 1990, 16:245-259.
Doley R, Mackessy SP, Kini RM: Role of accelerated segment switch in
exons to alter targeting (ASSET) in the molecular evolution of snake
venom proteins. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:146.
Mazzi MV, Magro AJ, Amui SF, Oliveira CZ, Ticli FK, Stábeli RG, Fuly AL,
Rosa JC, Braz ASK, Fontes MRM, Sampaio SV, Soares AM: Molecular
characterization and phylogenetic analysis of BjussuMP-I: A RGD-P-III
class hemorrhagic metalloprotease from Bothrops jararacussu snake
venom. J Mol Graph Model 2007, 26:69-85.
Cidade DAP, Wermelinger LS, Lôbo-Hajduc G, Dávila AMR, Bon C,
Zingali RB, Albano RM: Molecular diversity of disintegrin-like domains
within metalloproteinase precursors of Bothrops jararaca. Toxicon 2006,
48:590-599.
Baldo C, Tanjoni I, León IR, Batista IF, Della-Casa MS, Clissa PB, Weinlich R,
Lopes-Ferreira M, Lebrun I, Amarante-Mendes GP, Rodrigues VM, Perales J,
Valente RH, Moura-da-Silva AM: BnP1, a novel P-I metalloproteinase from
Bothrops neuwiedi venom: biological effects benchmarking relatively to
jararhagin, a P-III SVMP. Toxicon 2008, 51(1):54-65.
Lee C, Kim J, Shin SG, Hwang S: Absolute and relative QPCR
quantification of plasmid copy number in Escherichia coli. J Biotechnol
2006, 123:273-280.
Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
Dereeper A, Guignon V, Blanc G, Audic S, Buffet S, Chevenet F, Dufayard JF,
Guindon S, Lefort V, Lescot M, Claverie JM, Gascuel O: Phylogeny.fr: robust
phylogenetic analysis for the non-specialist. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36
Web Server: W465-9.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:540-52.
Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
Anisimova M, Gascuel O: Approximate likelihood ratio test for branchs: A
fast, accurate and powerful alternative. Syst Biol 2006, 55(4):539-52.

doi:10.1186/1471-2156-12-94
Cite this article as: Moura-da-Silva et al.: Diversity of metalloproteinases
in Bothrops neuwiedi snake venom transcripts: evidences for
recombination between different classes of SVMPs. BMC Genetics 2011
12:94.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
