<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2148-4-20.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Evolutionary Biology

BioMed Central

Open Access

Methodology article

Accurate and robust phylogeny estimation based on profile
distances: a study of the Chlorophyceae (Chlorophyta)
Tobias Müller*1, Sven Rahmann2,3,4, Thomas Dandekar1 and Matthias Wolf1
Address: 1Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Würzburg, Germany, 2Department of
Computational Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestraße 73, D-14195 Berlin, Germany, 3Department of
Mathematics and Computer Science, Free University of Berlin, Arnimallee 2–6, D-14195 Berlin, Germany and 4Genome Informatics, Faculty of
Technology, University of Bielefeld, D-33594 Bielefeld, Germany
Email: Tobias Müller* - tobias.mueller@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de; Sven Rahmann - sven.rahmann@cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de;
Thomas Dandekar - dandekar@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de; Matthias Wolf - matthias.wolf@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de
* Corresponding author

Published: 28 June 2004
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4:20

doi:10.1186/1471-2148-4-20

Received: 05 January 2004
Accepted: 28 June 2004

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/20
© 2004 Müller et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: In phylogenetic analysis we face the problem that several subclade topologies are
known or easily inferred and well supported by bootstrap analysis, but basal branching patterns
cannot be unambiguously estimated by the usual methods (maximum parsimony (MP), neighborjoining (NJ), or maximum likelihood (ML)), nor are they well supported. We represent each
subclade by a sequence profile and estimate evolutionary distances between profiles to obtain a
matrix of distances between subclades.
Results: Our estimator of profile distances generalizes the maximum likelihood estimator of
sequence distances. The basal branching pattern can be estimated by any distance-based method,
such as neighbor-joining. Our method (profile neighbor-joining, PNJ) then inherits the accuracy and
robustness of profiles and the time efficiency of neighbor-joining.
Conclusions: Phylogenetic analysis of Chlorophyceae with traditional methods (MP, NJ, ML and
MrBayes) reveals seven well supported subclades, but the methods disagree on the basal branching
pattern. The tree reconstructed by our method is better supported and can be confirmed by
known morphological characters. Moreover the accuracy is significantly improved as shown by
parametric bootstrap.

Background
There exist many methods for phylogenetic tree reconstruction, based on different concepts and models. Each
method has its strengths and weaknesses. Neighbor-joining [1] or other improved distance methods, e.g., WEIGHBOR [2], BIONJ [3], FASTME [4] and a further approach
considering maximum-likelihood estimated triplets of
sequences [5], are relatively fast (O(n3) for n taxa), but
first reduce the information contained in the characters to
a matrix of distances.

Character-based methods, such as maximum parsimony
[6] or maximum-likelihood [7], would require an evaluation of super-exponentially many topologies, so one
reverts to heuristics. There seems to be no universally
accepted best method.
All of the above methods aim to estimate a fully resolved
tree from scratch. Occasionally, this is more information
than one needs, or than the data support. In several analyses, we are only interested in the basal branching pattern

Page 1 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

of known or clearly separated and fully supported subclades. In other words, given families of closely related
sequences, what is the topology showing the relationships
between these families?
This problem arises, for example, when estimating the
phylogeny of the Chlorophyceae. In recent studies, e.g. by
Buchheim et al. [8] and Wolf et al. [9], a data set of 18S or
18S + 26S rRNA genes was examined using maximum parsimony (MP), neighbor-joining (NJ) and maximum-likelihood (ML). These methods show clear support of seven
Chlorophyceae subclades (Oedogoniales, Chaetophorales, Chaetopeltidales, Chlamydomonadales, the core
Sphaeropleales, the Sphaeropleaceae and one clade incertae sedis called the Cylindrocapsa-clade), but disagree on
the the basal branching pattern, i.e., the relationships
between these subclades. This is the same with the
improved methods BIONJ and FASTME.
In this paper, we complement the traditional methods
with a Bayesian approach (MrBayes) by Huelsenbeck and
Ronquist [10]. While we do derive a fully resolved tree
with high posterior probabilities on each edge (>90),
showing only one intermediate posterior value of 70 (see
also Shoup and Lewis [11]), up to now it is not clear how
posterior probabilities relate to bootstrap values.
MrBayes was the only tool that was able to reconstruct
robustly the phylogenetic tree. Our decision to compare
our results to the MrBayes tree was strengthened by a fairly
well fit to some well known morphological markers (e.g.,
basal body configuration and pyrenoid invagination
type). We conclude that the presented MrBayes tree is the
most robust and most accurate tree out of all calculated
trees (Parsimony, distance based, maximum likelihood
and MrBayes tree) and therefore we choose this tree as our
reference tree in this studied case.
However, we propose the following new method to derive
more robust and accurate trees: We replace the set of taxa
forming a known subclade by a single supertaxon, which
we represent by a sequence profile [12]. To estimate the
evolutionary distances between supertaxa, we generalize
the maximum-likelihood distance estimator of two
sequences to evolutionary distances of profiles. The
derived distance matrix can be used to reconstruct a tree
by the neighbor-joining method, and we refer to the
resulting method as Profile Neighbor-Joining (PNJ). Evaluations indicate that PNJ is both more robust and accurate.
We show that the PNJ tree is resolved with bootstrap values greater than obtained by standard methods, and
agrees with the MrBayes tree concerning the Cylindrocapsaclade, the Chlamydomonadales, the core Sphaeropleales
and the Sphaeropleaceae.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/20

An extended abstract of this work [13] appeared at the
German Conference on Bioinformatics (GCB'03).

Results
Chlorophycean data set (18S + 26S ribosomal RNA)
A multiple 18S + 26S rRNA sequence alignment of 52
Chlorophyceae species, based on secondary structure was
given by Buchheim et al. [8] and deposited at TreeBASE
[14,15]. We applied Bayesian methods and Profile Neighbor-Joining to this alignment.
Bayesian analysis
The Bayesian approach to tree reconstruction is reviewed
by Holder and Lewis [16] and implemented in the
"MrBayes" program by Huelsenbeck and Ronquist [10].
Our analysis is based on a general time reversible (GTR)
substitution model with a gamma rate distribution estimated from the data set. Starting from random trees, eight
Markov chains are run in parallel to sample trees using the
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) principle. After the
burn-in phase every 100-th sample out of 106 generations
is considered, and results are compared among the eight
chains in order to confirm that stationarity has been
reached. Finally, a 50% majority rule consensus tree is
constructed. The resulting tree is shown in Fig. 2(B).
PNJ tree
Using the substitution model estimated by the MrBayes
software, we apply the profile distance estimator to the
known subclades of the Chlorophyceae and obtain a
matrix of evolutionary distances between the subclades
(shown in Table 1).

From this distance matrix we derive the basal branching
pattern of the chlorophycean subclades using neighborjoining. The Bootstrap analysis indicates that all splits in
the profile tree are better supported than by standard
methods (no support at the branching pattern), see Fig.
2(A). The branching pattern of this tree coincides with the
MrBayes tree regarding the Cylindrocapsa-clade, the
Chlamydomonadales, the core Sphaeropleales and the
Sphaeropleaceae.
Evaluation of Profile Neighbor-Joining
A high bootstrap support is a necessary, but not sufficient
condition for high confidence in an estimated tree. As
mentioned by Hillis and Bull [17], bootstrap values are
sometimes wrongly interpreted as a measure of accuracy,
i.e., the probability that a given result represents a true
tree. However, bootstrap values only evaluate the robustness of the tree estimation method, or in other words,
yield a measure of repeatability. To estimate the accuracy of
profile neighbor-joining (PNJ), we perform the following
procedure, which is often referred to as parametric bootstrap. We start with the chlorophycean tree topology and

Page 2 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/20

Chlamydomonadales
70
Chlamydomonadales

Cylindrocapsa-clade
63

core Sphaeropleales
59
33

Incertae Sedis

Sphaeropleaceae

Chaetophorales
100

95
Sphaeropleales

Chaetopeltidales

Oedogoniales
Oedogoniales
Chaetopeltidales

Trebouxiophyceae
0.1

Chaetophorales

A

B

Figure 2
Phylogenetic trees
Phylogenetic trees. (A): Neighbor-joining tree based on subclade profiles. (B): Tree produced by MrBayes. In both trees F.
perforate, and C. ellipsoidea (Trebouxiophyceae) were chosen as outgroup. Brackets indicate taxonomical groupings. Edges are
annotated with bootstrap values, resp. percent posterior probabilities. Both trees show the same branching pattern concerning
sister group relations of the Sphaeropleales, the Chlamydomonadales and the Cylindrocapsa-clade. Note that the Sphaeropleales (core Sphaeropleales plus Sphaeropleaceae) are supported by 59% resp. 70%.

Table 1: Distance matrix. Estimated profile distance matrix on the seven chlorophycean subclades and the outgroup
(Trebouxiophyceae).

1
Cylindrocapsa-clade 1
Chlamydomonadales 2
Sphaeropleaceae 3
core Sphaeropleales 4
Oedogoniales 5
Chaetopeltidales 6
Chaetophorales 7
Trebouxiophyceae 8

2

3

4

5

6

7

13.65
13.34
12.63
13.08
12.05
12.01
14.98

12.97
11.97
13.57
11.69
12.05
15.18

10.89
12.50
10.80
11.53
14.42

11.05
9.55
9.97
13.14

10. 10
10. 93
13. 73

8.27
12.58

12.40

Page 3 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/20

substitution model estimated by MrBayes and sample 100
multiple sequence alignments using Rose [18,19]. In this
artificial setup we increased the mutation rate 12-fold,
such that both methods are getting difficulties in reconstructing the right topology. From each multiple alignment we calculate a phylogenetic tree by NJ and PNJ. The
accuracy is measured by the fraction of splits (bipartitions) that are shared by the estimated tree and the simulated tree. As a distance measure between two tree
topologies T 1 and T 2 , we use an equivalent form of the
Robinson-Foulds distance [20],

d( T 1 ,T 2 ) = |( S ( T 1 ) \ S ( T 2 )) ∪ ( S ( T 2 ) \ S ( T 1 )) | / 2,
where S ( T ) denotes the set of all splits of tree T .
The PNJ method receives the correct subclades as additional information; the NJ method recovered these in 54
out of 100 sampling runs. In order not to bias the comparison against NJ, we only compare these 54 NJ trees against
the 100 PNJ trees. The distribution of the RobinsonFoulds distance for both methods is shown in Fig. 3. The
Wilcoxon signed rank test shows that PNJ is significantly
more accurate than NJ (p = 6·10-6).

0.5
Profile Neighbor Joining
Neighbor Joining
0.45

0.4

Relative Frequencies

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
−1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Robinson−Foulds Error
Figure 3
Robinson-Foulds error distributions
Robinson-Foulds error distributions. Robinson-Foulds error distributions of NJ and PNJ on the chlorophycean tree topology and substitution model.

Page 4 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

Discussion
Contributions
On the methodological side, we recognize a prominent
problem in phylogenetic analysis: the reconstruction of
the basal topology when several subclades have been well
identified. Whereas available tools attempt to estimate a
fully resolved tree from scratch, the profile neighbor-joining
(PNJ) method we introduce focuses directly on the mentioned problem. Naturally, other approaches are possible:
For example, we might simply use one representative
taxon from each subclade, or estimate the most likely
sequence in the subclade root. The profile-based approach
appears preferable because it integrates information from
all family members. A similar approach would be to constrain subtrees.

However, consider that, if we generate the profile by
implicitly constraining the topology of the considered
subtree, we still believe fully in all the estimated distances
in the subtree and in their dependencies. However, we
have to take into account the possibility that our sequence
alignment contains e.g. fast evolving species or strong variation over sites. Then it could happen that one or more
sequences in the subtree are connected accidently to the
rest by a long branch attraction. This would result in a very
strong signal of this sequence in the weighted profile generated from these sequences. In this sense, our approach
is more robust.
Moreover in contrast to distances between consensus
sequences, profile distances can be viewed more or less as
averaged sequence distances. But there is one difference
between profile distances and average distances: Average
distances are a mean of maximum-likelihood distances of
sequences between sequences of both groups, whereas the
profile distance is a maximum-likelihood estimation
between the "mean" of the sequences in both groups. In
this sense the profile distance results in a more computational efficient estimator and leads in contrast to a consensus approach to a more robust formulation.
Summarizing, as we are working with distances, we can
directly apply neighbor-joining (or any other improved
distance-based method); so we obtain a more robust and
time-efficient method. We have also shown that PNJ can
be significantly more accurate than simple NJ.
On the biological side, the phylogeny of Chlorophyceae is
re-examined using profile-based distances between subclades. The resulting neighbor-joining tree agrees with the
MrBayes tree on four of the seven chlorophycean subclades (but note that Bayesian methods are much more
time consuming and computationally demanding than
neighbor-joining). While Bayesian analysis show high
posterior probabilities which are difficult to corelate to

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/20

bootstrap values, the new proposed method show
improved real bootstrap values at the splits in question,
Fig. 2(A).
The profile neighbor-joining method supports the first
time especially the Sphaeropleales with a bootstrap value
higher than 50. This is in contrast to the traditional methods (MP, ML and NJ) used by Buchheim et al. [8] and
Wolf et al. [9]. In general, both the PNJ tree and the
MrBayes tree can be brought into agreement with the proposed morphological character evolution (absolute orientation of basal bodies and pyrenoid invagination type) as
discussed by Buchheim et al. [8] and Wolf et al. [9].
Regarding the topology differences one could argue that
the positions of the Oedogoniales, the Chaetophorales,
and the Chaetopeltidales can still not be unambiguously
resolved. However, the evaluation shows the improved
robustness and the high accuracy of PNJ. Therefore we
prefer the PNJ tree topology, where (1) the Oedogoniales
cluster is at the basis of the Chlorophyceae, (2) the quadriflagellated Chaetopeltidales and Chaetophorales are sister groups, and (3) the biflagellated Sphaeropleales are
the most supported as monophyletic compared to the
trees derived by other methods (MP, NJ, ML and
MrBayes).

Conclusions
The proposed method helps to solve a general problem in
phylogeny. It is applicable to all trees with low bootstrap
support on the basal branching pattern.
From a computational point of view, there are some
promising approaches. For example, we may use the concept of profile distance in a divide-and-conquer algorithm
that iteratively applies neighbor-joining on growing wellsupported subclades. In this way we may obtain better
support on basal branching patterns in supertrees, e.g., in
the tree of life or within the crown eukaryotes.
From a statistical point of view, one could investigate
more elaborate methods (e.g., sequence weighting) than
simple averaging to derive more accurate family profiles.
In particular, this could result in even higher bootstrap
values. Additionally, the accuracy of the proposed profile
neighbor-joining method should be compared with the
other traditional tree reconstruction methods as MP, ML
and especially MrBayes. Another interesting direction
would be the transfer of profile distances into the maximum likelihood tree estimation procedures.

Methods
Profiles
A sequence profile is a stochastic model of a sequence family. It can also be pictured as a fuzzy or "smeared-out"
sequence. Formally, a profile is also a sequence, but it is

Page 5 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

composed of probability distribution vectors instead of
characters. Each position k specifies its own nucleotide
distribution αk = (αk,A, αk,C, αk,G, αk,T). Nucleotide
sequences are special profiles, where each αk is given by
one of the unit vectors A = (1, 0, 0, 0), C = (0, 1, 0, 0), and
so on.
Several philosophies and methods for estimating profiles
from families exist. For example, given a phylogenetic tree
of sequence families, we could estimate the most likely
profile at the root. In the context of this paper, however,
we are more interested in the "center of gravity" of the
sequence family distribution. Therefore, we simply take
the position-specific relative nucleotide frequencies over
all sequence family members. This results in a robust estimate that is independent of estimated subclade
topologies.
Distance estimation
Maximum-likelihood methods for tree and distance estimation rely on a model of nucleotide substitution. Substitutions are modeled by an evolutionary Markov process
(EMP) acting independently on each site of the sequence
[21,22]. The EMP is uniquely described by its starting distribution and its rate matrix Q, often called the substitution
model. We assume that Q has a unique stationary distribution π that satisfies π·Q = 0, and that the process starts in
its stationary distribution. The model is calibrated in such

a way that

∑ i πi ∑ j≠i Qij = −∑ i πiQii = 1 /100 , i.e., that

per 100 time units, one substitution is expected to occur.
Depending on its parameterization, the rate matrix Q is
called Jukes-Cantor Model (1 parameter), Kimura Model
(2 parameters), or general time reversible (GTR) model (6
parameters). The parameters (such as the transition-transversion ratio in the Kimura model) must be estimated
from the data.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/20

principle. If the distance is t time units, the joint probability of all events is given by

L (t ) =

∑ Nij log(Pijt ).

. We seek the value

(1)

i, j

t
Note that L (t ) is a sum of log-probabilities log( Pij ),
weighted by their observed counts Nij. Of course, the
counts sum up to the total number n of sites in the alignment. For general models Q, the solution of this onedimensional maximization problem cannot be given in
closed form, but is easily obtained by numerical methods.

We now generalize this estimator from sequences to profiles. A site need not contribute an integer count of 1 to a
single substitution category, but fractional counts summing to 1 can be spread out over all 16 categories. Assume
that the profiles at a particular site of the two families are
given by α = (αA, αC, αG, αT) and β = (βA, βC, βG, βT),
respectively. Intuitively, if the sequence families consist of
m1 and m2 sequences and we independently draw a
sequence from each family, we observe the nucleotide
pair (i, j) on average m1αi·m2βj times, corresponding to a
relative frequency of αiβj. The product distribution mirrors the conditionally independent drawing from within
the sequence families and does not imply that the families
might be unrelated. Thus the total counts Nij for event i
‫ ۋ‬j are given by the sum over all n sites:

Nij = ∑ k =1α ki β kj (see Fig. 1). Otherwise, the likelihood
n

function in Eq. (1) and the maximization procedure
remain unchanged.

t

i,j

t
Nij log(Pij )

t

t

a • −→ • b
Nij =

sites k

α 2 −→ 2 β

I{ak = i, bk = j}

A
To estimate the evolutionary distance between two
sequences, we first compute a pairwise alignment and
count the number of all nucleotide pair types in the alignment. Let Nij be the number of observed events "i ‫ ۋ‬j".

Nij

t maximizing this probability, or equivalently, the log-likelihood function,

L(t) =

We symbolically write " i j " for the event that nucleotide i has been substituted by nucleotide j after time t.
The probability of this substitution is given by (i, j) entry
of the time-t transition matrix Pt, which is related to Q via
the matrix exponential Pt = exp(tQ).

∏ i, j (Pijt )

Nij =

sites k

αki · βkj

B

Figure 1
Counting substitutions
Counting substitutions. Counting substitutions Nij
between sequences a and b (A), and between profiles α and
β (B).

In general, the higher the off-diagonal entries (mismatch
counts) are in comparison to the diagonal entries (match
counts), the larger is the evolutionary distance. A wellfounded framework is given by the maximum likelihood
Page 6 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2004, 4

Bootstrapping
To assess the robustness of an estimated tree under perturbations of the input alignment, it is customary to perform
a bootstrap analysis [23,24], where entire columns of the
alignment are resampled with replacement. This immediately carries over to the new setting where we are not given
an alignment of sequences, but an alignment of profiles,
i.e., we re-sample columns of profiles.

Authors' contributions
TM, SR (from the mathematical point of view) and TD,
MW (from the biological point of view) conceived the
study and the PNJ algorithm, drafted the manuscript and
participated in its design and coordination. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/4/20

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Stoye J, Evers D, Meyer F: Rose: Generating Sequence Families.
Bioinformatics 1998, 14:157-163.
BiBiServ [http://bibiserv.techfak.uni-bielefeld.de/rose]
Robinson D, Foulds L: Comparison of phylogenetic trees. Math
Biosci 1981, 53:131-147.
Lanave C, Preparata G, Saccone C, Serio G: A new method for calculating evolutionary substitution rates. J Mol Evol 1984,
20:86-93.
Müller T, Vingron M: Modeling amino acid replacement. J Comput Biol 2000, 7:761-776.
Efron B, Halloran E, Holmes S: Bootstrap confidence levels for
phylogenetic trees. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:7085-7090.
Felsenstein J: Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach
using the bootstrap. Evolution 1985, 39:783-791.

Acknowledgments
We thank the two anonymous referees for improving the manuscript, as
well as Mark A. Buchheim (Tulsa, USA), Hannes Luz (Berlin, Germany),
Joachim Friedrich (Aachen, Germany) and Martin Vingron (Berlin, Germany) for fruitful discussions.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.

Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method
for reconstructing phylogenetic trees. J Mol Evol 1987,
4:406-425.
Bruno WJ, Socci ND, Halpern AL: Weighted Neighbor Joining: A
Likelihood-Based Approach to Distance-Based Phylogeny
Reconstruction. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:189-197.
Gascuel O: BIONJ: an improved version of the NJ algorithm
based on a simple model of sequence data. Mol Biol Evol 1997,
14:685-695.
Desper R, Gascuel O: Fast and Accurate Phylogeny Reconstruction Algorithms Based on the Minimum-Evolution
Principle. J Comput Biol 2002, 19:687-705.
Ranwez V, Gascuel O: Improvement of Distance-Based Phylogenetic Methods by a Local Maximum Likelihood Approach
Using Triplets. Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19:1952-1963.
Camin J, Sokal R: A method for deducing branching sequences
in phylogeny. Evolution 1965, 19:311-326.
Felsenstein J: Evolutionary trees from DNA sequences: a maximum likelihood approach. J Mol Evol 1981, 17:368-376.
Buchheim MA, Michalopulos EA, Buchheim JA: Phylogeny of the
Chlorophyceae with special reference to the Sphaeropleales:
A study of 18S and 26S rDNA data. J Phycol 2001, 37:819-835.
Wolf M, Buchheim M, Hegewald E, Krienitz L, Hepperle D: Phylogenetic position of the Sphaeropleaceae (Chlorophyta). Plant
Syst Evol 2002, 230:161-171.
Huelsenbeck J, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of
phylogeny. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
Shoup S, Lewis L: Polyphyletic origin of parallel basal bodies in
swimming cells of chlorophycean green algae (Chlorophyta).
J Phycol 2003, 39:789-796.
Gribskov M, McLachlan A, Eisenberg D: Profile analysis: detection
of distantly related proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987,
84:4355-4358.
Müller T, Rahmann S, Dandekar T, Wolf M: Robust estimation of
the phylogeny of Chlorophyceae (Chlorophyta) based on
profile distances. In Proceedings of the German Conference on Bioinformatics (GCB'03) 2003:97-101.
Morell V: TreeBASE: the roots of phylogeny. Science 1996,
273:569.
TreeBASE [http://www.treebase.org]
Holder M, Lewis P: Phylogeny estimation: traditional and Bayesian approaches. Nature Rev 2003, 4:275-284.
Hillis D, Bull J: An empirical test of bootstrapping as a method
for assessing confidence in phylogenetic analysis. Syst Biol 1993,
42:182-192.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 7 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
