<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Reconstruction of the yeast protein-protein interaction network involved in nutrient sensing and global metabolic regulation</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-68"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Subir K Nandy, Paula Jouhten, Jens Nielsen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Reconstruction of the yeast protein-protein
interaction network involved in nutrient sensing
and global metabolic regulation
Research article

Subir K Nandy, Paula Jouhten and Jens Nielsen*

Abstract
Background: Several protein-protein interaction studies have been performed for the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
using different high-throughput experimental techniques. All these results are collected in the BioGRID database and
the SGD database provide detailed annotation of the different proteins. Despite the value of BioGRID for studying
protein-protein interactions, there is a need for manual curation of these interactions in order to remove false positives.
Results: Here we describe an annotated reconstruction of the protein-protein interactions around four key nutrientsensing and metabolic regulatory signal transduction pathways (STP) operating in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The
reconstructed STP network includes a full protein-protein interaction network including the key nodes Snf1, Tor1, Hog1
and Pka1. The network includes a total of 623 structural open reading frames (ORFs) and 779 protein-protein
interactions. A number of proteins were identified having interactions with more than one of the protein kinases. The
fully reconstructed interaction network includes all the information available in separate databases for all the proteins
included in the network (nodes) and for all the interactions between them (edges). The annotated information is
readily available utilizing the functionalities of network modelling tools such as Cytoscape and CellDesigner.
Conclusions: The reported fully annotated interaction model serves as a platform for integrated systems biology
studies of nutrient sensing and regulation in S. cerevisiae. Furthermore, we propose this annotated reconstruction as a
first step towards generation of an extensive annotated protein-protein interaction network of signal transduction and
metabolic regulation in this yeast.
Background
The development of high-throughput analytical methods
for genes and gene products and the wealth of information obtained in recent years combined with extensive
annotation allows for a genome-wide view on the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome. In systems biology studies
of signal transduction pathways, the natural first step to
model the dynamics operation of these pathway are to
identify the proteins acting in the studied pathway and
the interactions between them. Therefore there is an
increasing interest in identification of all protein-protein
interactions in the model organism S. cerevisiae [1,2], and

* Correspondence: nielsenj@chalmers.se
1

Systems Biology Group, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering,
Chalmers University of Technology, Kemivägen 10, SE-412 96, Gothenburg,
Sweden
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

in recent studies the protein-protein interactions for single protein kinases were mapped [3,4].
There have been many attempts to reconstruct signal
transduction pathways (STPs) [5], and extensive databases are available, e.g. BIOGRID, SGD, containing information on the components of different STPs. There is
also an increasing amount of data on how proteins
assemble in cells. The analysis of all this data has allowed
for identification of new pathways and also refined our
models for previously known pathways [4], and using
protein chips more than 4000 phosphorylation events
including 1325 different proteins have been identified by
Snyder et. al., 2005.
The full datasets of protein-protein interaction used in
our study were available from different sources such as
the literature, large scale microarray experiments and
whole genome two hybrid screenings. Whole proteinprotein interaction networks allows for inferring protein

© 2010 Nandy et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

networks that are involved in the same cellular processes
[6], and through comparison with published data the
most likely topologies of specific pathways can be identified and this can be used to design further experiments
that can test the different predictions.
In this study we present the first step towards an integrated reconstruction of key signal transduction pathways in S. cerevisiae. Our focus is on the interactions of
the protein kinases Snf1, Tor1, Hog1 and Pka1, as these
protein kinases play a central role in regulation of nutrient uptake, energy, carbon and nitrogen metabolisms.
These four protein kinases are all involved in the regulation of energy homeostasis in the cell. Snf1 is one of the
main regulators of the diauxic shift from fermentative to
respirative metabolic state in S. cerevisiae [7] and its
mammalian counterpart, AMPK, is a metabolic regulator
involved in activation of catabolic processes such as βoxidation and repression of energy consuming reactions
such as lipid biosynthesis, and hereby it plays a central
role in metabolic disorders such as diabetes and the metabolic syndrome [8]. TOR controls cell growth in
response to nutrient availability and stress and it exists in
S. cerevisiae in two structurally and functionally distinct
protein complexes termed TorC1 and TorC2 [9]. Global
nutrient-sensing signal transduction cascades like TOR
and RAS activate Pka1 in response to glucose availability
[10]. Protein kinase A, or Pka1, is a key player in regulation of carbon metabolism. When the cAMP concentration increases and binds to the regulatory subunits of
protein kinas A, the subunits dissociate from the protein
complex and the kinase is activated [11]. Stress resistance
of S. cerevisiae is to a large extent dependent on the protein kinase Hog1, which among other things regulate the
glycerol production in response to hyper osmotic conditions [12]. Since these four protein kinases are key players
in regulation of energy metabolism and highly conserved
among eukaryotes [3], they are also of relevance in understanding of metabolic diseases such as the metabolic syndrome related diseases, such as arteriosclerosis, diabetes
type II and hypertension. Therefore, understanding the
integrated function of these protein kinases is of great
importance in development of effective therapies for
metabolic diseases. The four protein kinases are also considered to be crucial elements of transcriptional, metabolic and developmental regulation in response to stress
[13-15]. Inactivation of Hog1 has for example been
observed to significantly attenuate the transcriptional
response to osmotic stresses [16].
Reconstruction of protein-protein interactions are
important for understanding cellular networks [17], and
based on recent development of new high throughput
technologies PPIs have accumulated rapidly [18]. There
are several methods available to find PPIs such as Yeast
Two Hybrid [19,20], Tandem Affinity Purification and

Page 2 of 12

computational method like Phylogenic profile, Correlated
Domain Signature Method and Integrative methods [21].
Most of these approaches cover only a sub-set of possible
interactions. Wang et. al., 2009 tried to integrate proteinprotein features from multiple data sources [21]. Besides
the reconstruction of PPIs there have also been developed different methods for analysis of these networks
[22,23], such as residue spatial sequence profile and evolution rate [24], structural information [25], and residue
conservation scores [26].
Here the reconstructed network is presented in a platform that will allow continued annotation, e.g. in a community based effort in analogy with what has recently
been done for genome-scale metabolic models of yeast
[27]. Databases like SGD, BioGRID and several papers
describe the function and interaction of the individual
kinases, but there has so far not been an made an integrated interaction networks of these four key protein
kinases that unite all key nutrient and energy sensing
STPs in S. cerevisiae. The aim of our reconstruction is to
present the first integrated network reconstruction of
how these four key protein kinases interact, with annotations of the different interactions according to the current
knowledge, and further evaluate the role of this interaction network in global metabolic regulation. We specifically wanted to study how these four protein kinase
function in concert and we therefore only considered
direct neighbours of these protein kinases. The reconstructed protein-protein network is analyzed in terms of
its connectivity, and the network is used as a framework
for analysis of transcriptome data of S. cerevisiae grown
at different environmental conditions expected to affect
the function of these key STP.

Results
Annotations for protein-protein interactions

Towards the aim of reconstructing a global protein-protein interaction map for S. cerevisiae, we focused on protein interactions with the four key protein kinases Snf1,
Tor1, Hog1 and Pka1. These four protein kinases are
highly conserved among eukaryotic cells and they play a
central role in integrating cellular responses to nutrients
and stress, and hereby balancing metabolic functions to
ensure proper cell growth and proliferation. Due to their
central role in regulating key pathways these protein
kinases are also key drug targets for many important diseases e.g. diabetes and cancer. The protein-protein interaction network around these four protein kinases was
reconstructed and annotated in CellDesigner using the
following steps (see Figure 1).
a. For each of the four key protein kinases the interaction neighbors were identified using different databases and literature information. Each interaction was
annotated into the following categories:

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

Page 3 of 12

Figure 1 The process of the reconstruction of the key signal transduction pathways embedded in the global protein-protein interaction
network of S. cerevisiae. From different types of available information such as different biochemical pathway databases, different textbooks, recent
publications and reviews and genome annotations, a physical reconstruction of a protein-protein interaction network was designed and annotated
so that each protein and their interactions include all information. The pathway map picture was taken from the KEGG database (www.genome.ad.jp)
and SGD, Biogrid, Cytoscape and CellDesigner logos were taken from their respective websites.

(i) Known physical interactions
(ii) Known functional interactions
b. All interactions were annotated with available
information as references in the CellDesigner model.
c. The reconstructed interaction network was integrated into a novel visualization mode named the
Binary Matrix. The Binary Matrix is a simple representation of the whole interaction network with

annotations for each protein and interaction stored in
an Excel sheet.
d. Finally the reconstructed sub-networks of each of
the protein kinases were combined into one supernetwork through shared proteins.
Thus, the large-scale protein-protein interaction reconstruction includes four key protein kinases and their
neighboring proteins, and with the use of the CellDe-

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

signer platform the reconstructed model can easily be
represented in SBML. Furthermore, the network is
curated with 154 references and it therefore also represents a valuable database on protein-protein interaction.
The 4 key proteins connect with other proteins in different combinations (see Figure 2a), and these connections can be represented as a Venn diagram that indicates
the overlap in interaction around the four protein kinases
(Figure 2b). The positions of the proteins in the network
are defined by the number 1 to 13 in the Venn diagram.
From the reconstructed protein-protein interaction network, the number of neighbors of the four key protein
kinases could be identified (see Table 1).
Information on second and third order interactions

From the Venn diagram the numbers of neighboring proteins to the key protein kinases was found and the results
are summarized in Figure 3. It is found that Pka1 interacts
with most proteins while Snf1 is the second largest hub in
the network.
To mathematically represent the structure of the complex protein-protein interaction network, we converted
the interactions into a square matrix where all the proteins are listed in both the row and column dimensions
and the matrix elements represent interactions between
two proteins. If there is an interaction between two pro-

Page 4 of 12

teins the matrix element is set to 1 and if there is no interaction it is set to 0 as a sparse array. This binary
representation of protein-protein interactions in square
matrix form is an approach equivalent to adjacency
matrix in graph theory that enables straightforward analysis of second and third order interactions in the network. Taking a square of the initial Binary matrix returns
the second order interactions through one intermediate
protein (two edges). Similarly, if a square of the second
order matrix is taken, the third order interactions
through two intermediate proteins (three edges) are
directly obtained. The numbers of intermediate proteins
involved in the second and the third order interactions
for each protein kinase are shown in Figures 3b and 3c,
respectively. Pka1 and Snf1 are found to have the highest
number of proteins involved in their second and third
order interactions, respectively.
Figure 4 shows the second and third order intermediate
interactions obtained from the multiplication of the
Binary matrix (see additional file 1 for the binary matrix
of proteins used in this study). Here it is assumed that
these interactions can be found solely from the upper triangular matrix, meaning that it is assumed that the interactions do not possess directionalities. From the
reconstructed protein-protein interaction network, the
number of neighbors of the four key protein kinases and

Figure 2 A global protein-protein interaction network of four key protein kinases was reconstructed and annotated. The protein-protein interaction map includes four key protein kinases and their neighbouring proteins. (a) The four key protein kinases interact with other proteins: Ash color:
direct interaction, Deep Ash color: diagonal interaction and Red color: more than two proteins interact with the same protein. (b) Positions 1, 2, 3, and
4 show the neighbors of the four key proteins; Positions 5, 6, 7, and 8 show the proteins having interactions with any two of the four key proteins;
Positions 9, 10, 11 and 12 show the proteins having interactions with any three of the four key proteins; and Position 13 shows the proteins having
interactions with all the four key proteins.

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

Page 5 of 12

Table 1: Schematic representation of the reconstruction of the protein-protein interaction map of the four key protein
kinases of S. cerevisiae.
Snf1

Tor1

Pka1

Hog1

Snf1

241

0

0

0

Tor1

0

129

0

0

Pka1

0

0

300

0

Hog1

0

0

0

98

their intermediate proteins in second order could also be
identified (see Table 2).
Figure 4a and 4b show all interactions between the
combination of the four protein kinases through other
proteins in second and third order respectively. From Figure 4a it is seen that there is about the same number of
second order interactions for the four key protein kinases
whereas the number of interactions vary more in the

third order (see Figure 4b). It is interesting to note that in
particular the Snf1 and Hog1 interacts extensively
through third order interactions, whereas at the first level
it is Snf1 and Pka1 that interacts most extensively. This
indicated that Snf1 and PKA act in concert, i.e. on the
same protein kinases, whereas Snf1 and Hog1 seem to
integrate quite extensively through more complex routes.

Figure 3 Number of proteins and ORF's of S. cerevisiae included in the protein-protein interaction map with the key protein kinases in (a)
first order, (b) second order and (c) third order. The four key protein kinases are sorted based on metabolism, energy and nutrient sensing metabolism.

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

Page 6 of 12

Figure 4 Number of interactions involved in the protein-protein interaction map for S. cerevisiae in the combinations of intermediate protein- protein interactions in (a) second and (b) third order.

The matrix representation of the protein-protein interaction network is interesting as it allows for easy analysis
of interactions. It also allows for evaluation of the effects
of deletion of specific proteins and how this affects different orders of interaction, and hence be used for easy evaluation of robustness of the network to different
perturbations.

and Tor1 share no common transcription factor interactions according to our current knowledge.
Highly active sub-networks

A search for transcriptionally highly active sub-networks
[29,30] was performed in the reconstructed STP network
to identify active transcriptional regulatory structures in
S. cerevisiae in carbon- and nitrogen-limited conditions
at three different specific growth rates: 0.20, 0.10 and 0.03
h-1. The search of highly active sub-networks was performed twice in series, since the first sub-networks identified were found to be large including a high fraction of
nodes of the reconstructed network. The second search
was performed inside the networks identified with the
first search. The transcriptionally highly active subnetworks are shown in Figure 6. The first sub-networks
included all the four hub proteins except in case of specific growth rate 0.10 h-1 where Snf1 was not found to be
included in the sub-network. The sub-networks from the
second search included Tor1 and Pka1 interactions for
growth rates of 0.10 h-1 and 0.20 h-1. For the growth rate
of 0.10 h-1 the second sub-network showed that Tor1 and
Pka1 had three common interaction proteins: Gat1,
Hom2, and Rim15. These three proteins are annotated to
have nitrogen metabolism or glucose repression depen-

Transcription Factors in the Reconstruction

The reconstructed network contains a total of 44 proteins
that have been annotated as transcription factors (TF).
The transcription factor annotations were taken from
http://www.yeastract.com[28]. The percentage of interactions with transcription factors were 41%, 32%, 13.5%,
and 13.5% for Snf1, Pka1, Tor1 and Hog1, respectively.
Five transcription factors were observed to interact with
two of the hub proteins in the network and only two transcription factors had interactions with more than two of
the hub proteins. Interactions of the transcription factors
with the key protein kinases are visualized as Venn diagrams (Figure 5). The transcription factor interactions
with Snf1, Tor1 and Pka1 and Snf1, Hog1 and Pka1 are
shown in Figures 5a and 5b, respectively. The intercepts
in the Venn diagrams show the shared transcription factor interactions among the three protein kinases. Hog1

Table 2: Reconstruction of the second order protein-protein interactions and intermediate proteins involved in the
protein-protein interaction map of the four key protein kinases of S. cerevisiae.
Snf1

Tor1

Pka1

Hog1

Snf1

112

5

10

7

Tor1

0

31

7

3

Pka1

0

0

333

6

Hog1

0

0

0

206

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

Page 7 of 12

Figure 5 Percentages of interactions of the key protein kinases with Transcription Factors in the protein-protein interaction map. The transcription factor interactions with (a) Snf1, Tor1 and Pka1 and (b) Snf1, Hog1 and Pka1, respectively.

dent function. For the growth rate of 0.20 h-1 the second
sub-network showed that Tor1 and Pka1 shared interactions to Gat1 and Rim15 both related to nitrogen metabolism. For the lowest growth rate, 0.03 h-1, the second
sub-network showed that Tor1 and Pka1 shared interac-

tions only to Gat1 whereas Snf1 shared interactions to
Fox2, Pfk2, Pfk26 and Pho91 with Pka1.
The proteins included in the highly active sub-networks
having interactions with more than one key protein
kinases are particularly interesting as they point to cross
talk between the four different regulatory networks. Fur-

Figure 6 Transcriptionally highly active sub-networks of the reconstructed protein-protein interaction network were identified under carbon- vs nitrogen- limited conditions at three different specific growth rates 0.2, 0.1 and 0.03 h-1 for S. cerevisiae. The gene expression data
were taken from Fazio et al. (2008) [6].

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

thermore, the transcription factors having shared interactions to the protein kinases, that were present in the subnetworks, have probably been active regulators of transcription in the conditions studied. Thus, Tor1 and Pka1
share interactions to the transcription factors Gat1, Gln3
and Gzf3 that are involved in nitrogen metabolism and
could have been mediators of the transcriptional changes
in the studied conditions. Especially Gat1 is interesting as
the directions of its interactions with the key kinases
allow for information passing from Tor1 to Pka1. At the
low specific growth rate (0.03 h-1) in addition to Tor1 and
Pka1 also Snf1 interactions were found. Low specific
growth rates have been proposed to cause stress in S. cerevisiae [28] and the Snf1 interaction network activity
could be seen as a stress response. Thus, at the low specific growth rate there was observed a probable interaction between the global energy metabolism regulation
and nutrient-sensing through common protein components. Tor1, Pka1 and Snf1 share interactions to the transcription factors Gln3 and Gzf3 that thus can be
considered as probable active transcriptional regulators
at low specific growth rate conditions.
Comparison to published large scale protein-protein
interaction networks

The congruity of large scale protein-protein interaction
networks and the large-scale study of the substrates of the
yeast kinases by Snyder et al. (2005) [29] with the reconstructed protein-protein interaction network of the four
key protein kinases studied here was investigated. The
large scale protein-protein interaction networks investigated were Uetz-Screen [23], Ito-Core [24], Y2H-Union
[30], Combined-AP/MS [31,32], LC-multiple [33,34] and
CCSB-YI1 [30] all recently compared in extent and quality by Yu et al. (2008) [30]. Only a small fraction of the
interactions to the four key protein kinases Snf1, Tor1,
Hog1 and Pka1 were included in the previous large scale
protein-protein interaction networks compared to what
is reported here. None of the investigated large scale protein-protein interaction networks included proteins having interactions with more than one of the four key
proteins. Thus, all the investigated large scale networks
lacked the information on possible signal passing components between the regulatory systems around these four
key protein kinases studied here (Figure 7).
The large-scale study of the substrates of protein
kinases in yeast [29] included the substrates identified by
proteome chip technology for Snf1 and Pka1. In this
study Snf1 and Pka1 was found to share 55 substrates in
vitro of which 53 proteins with well annotated interactions to both Snf1 and Pka1 are also included in the network reconstruction presented here. The other two key
protein kinases Tor1 and Hog1 were not included in the
study by Snyder et al. (2005) [29] and thus it lacked the

Page 8 of 12

information on the possible signal transfer components
between the pathways of all the four key protein kinases.

Discussion
As a starting point for the development of a comprehensive protein-protein interaction network spanning four
key protein kinases, we performed a manual annotation
process that combines different kinds of information for
every single protein and interactions. The results are presented as files in SBML format (.xml) available on our
website http://www.sysbio.se/users/Subir. This SBML
format .xml file will open directly in CellDesigner and the
full interaction map describes all the available information. The information of protein-protein interactions for
these four key protein kinases represents an extensive
starting point for further reconstruction of protein-protein interactions in yeast. The main contribution of this
paper is the collection of all the interaction partners of
the four key protein kinases from different sources into a
protein-protein interaction network and to describe the
full annotation of the interactions. The reconstructed
network serves as an initial platform for reconstruction
and annotation of a genome-wide signal transduction
network. The presented network includes the four key
protein kinases of nutrient sensing and regulation of
metabolism, their interaction partners and all the interactions between the key protein kinases and the other proteins. Thus, the topology of the network is
predetermined.
Our reconstruction process resulted in a network that
consists of 623 proteins and 779 protein-protein interactions. In line with the nomenclature used for genomescale metabolic models we propose to call this reconstructed network ppSK623 (see Figure 8). In this paper,
interactions are fully annotated in the reconstruction
which gives more than just a score for a user to evaluate
how reliable the interaction is in his/her case and can be
able to score the different sources that have been used to
collect the interactions (see additional file 1 for the cell
designer file with all protein list in .xls form).
Furthermore, compared to different databases like
STRING where only 185 similar interactions have scores
our database covered 594 more interactions than
reported in STRING based only on the four key protein
kinases. Annotated information on the interactions is
given in the CellDesigner file that includes all information together. Furthermore the interactions between
Transcription Factors and different protein kinases provides a scaffold for building more detailed models, e.g. to
study the dynamics of signal transduction pathways.
The analysis of transcriptionally highly active sub-networks of the integrated protein-protein interaction
reconstruction allowed for identification of possible
information carriers between the interaction networks of

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

Page 9 of 12

Figure 7 Comparison of the published large scale protein-protein interaction networks: (a) Uetz-Screen, (b) Ito-core, (c) Y2H-Union, (d)
Combined AP/MS, (e) LC-multiple, and (f) CCSB-YI1 for S. cerevisiae from Yu et al. 2008 [30].

the four key protein kinases in S. cerevisiae in carbon- vs
nitrogen-limited conditions at three different specific
growth rates. This would not have been feasible using
separate regulatory networks for the kinases.
None of the studied large protein-protein interaction
networks included the wealth of information on the probable global metabolic regulation and interactions
between the nutrient-sensing protein kinases included in
the reconstructed network described in this study. Thus,
the large protein-protein interaction networks could not
have supported the above discussed analysis of integrated
response of the pathways and identification of probable
information carriers between signal transduction pathways of the four key protein kinases. This is the first
attempt to combine the signal transduction networks of
the four key protein kinases. Previously the interaction
networks of the key protein kinases have been studied
separately. The reconstructed protein-protein interaction
network serves as a framework for analysis of nutrient
sensing and global regulation of metabolism, for analysis

of data, for analysis of information transfer between the
regulatory networks of the individual protein kinases and
as an initial platform where the reconstruction and annotation of global signal transduction network can be conveniently continued. The modelling format is carefully
chosen to suit continuation of the reconstruction and
annotation.

Conclusions
The SBML-encoded version representation of the model
is made available in one of the preferred software platforms for system biology, namely CellDesigner. We have
examined the SBML format in .XML state in CellDesigner and shown that it loads successfully for visualization.
Subsets of this model are relevant for some applications
and through the CellDesigner representation the data are
made available as a database that facilitates easy searching in the network. An important function of the CellDesigner format is that this is an open ended source that

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

Page 10 of 12

Figure 8 Illustration of the global protein-protein interaction network involving the four key protein kinases Snf1, Hog1, Tor1 and Pka1.

allows each researcher to edit the model and hereby
improve the model based on new information. Our
reconstruction and the used platform are, therefore, well
suited for initiating a community effort towards reconstruction of a highly annotated protein-protein interaction network for yeast. This nutrient sensing and global
metabolic regulation map in yeast will offer as a valuable
resource for the research of S. cerevisiae and also provides insight into this important regulatory network in
eukaryotes in general.

Methods
Annotation of the key STP of S. cerevisiae has made it
possible to obtain information of physical interaction
between the proteins involved in this reconstruction.
Information on this is available in the Saccharomyces
Genome Database (SGD) that includes much information
for individual proteins, but little information about protein networks. In our study we combine all the proteins
involved in key nutrient sensing pathway, i.e. pathways
involving the protein kinases Snf1, Tor1, Hog1 and Pka1.
To provide a platform that allows for future revisions and
expansion of the interaction network we organized the
information about all the proteins and their interaction

information in CellDesigner, which allows easy transfer
also to Cytoscape.
Reconstruction of protein-protein interaction network

Figure 1 demonstrates the reconstruction process. In
brief, we integrated all the different types of available
information to present and annotate a single protein-protein interaction network using different sources like databases, textbooks, publications and reviews. In this
protein-protein interaction map all proteins and interactions are referenced, both in terms of proteins and interactions.
Network modeling in CellDesigner and Cytoscape

The network reconstruction was built in the CellDesigner
network modeling software and both CellDesigner and
Cytoscape were utilized for visualization of the network.
The network nodes and edges were annotated in CellDesigner, i.e. there is a reference for each protein and its
interactions. The advantage of CellDesigner is that a lot
of information can be stored in the notes part for each
protein and interaction. The network model and the
annotation data are stored in the same .xml file in CellDesigner. The reconstruction interaction network can be

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

exported to Cytoscape, and both software platforms have
a number of adjustable visualization options.
Databases

Many different databases are available for S. cerevisiae.
Here we used BIOGRID, SGD and specific research
papers as information input to the annotation process.
The biological general repository [35] for interaction
datasets (BIOGRID) is one of the most important datasets for protein-protein interaction but the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) is also providing much
information. Our reconstruction model combines information from these different databases to make a common
platform to study the interaction between the studied
protein kinases. SGD and BIOGRID collect and organize
biological information on proteins and their interactions
of the budding yeast S. cerevisiae, but we also used published data [4] from traditional experimental methods
and also from computational predictions, as these can
give additional valuable information.

Page 11 of 12

Additional material
Additional file 1 Detail demonstration of the proteins in PPI (protein
protein interaction). The file contains a list of all proteins used in this study
visualized in Cell Designer from SBML file and also explained the protein list
in .xls form. The binary matrix of the proteins used in this study is also
included. In addition, the Renata Usaite paper is also added for more information.
Authors' contributions
SKN created and tested the key four protein kinase interactions in CellDesigner
and wrote the manuscript. PJ provided input into the analysis and were
involved in writing the manuscript. JN supervised the work and were involved
in writing the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of
the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
Our work is financially supported by the Chalmers Foundation and Knut and
Alice Wallenberg Foundation. This project has also part of the EU funded coordination action YSBN LSHG-CT2005-018942 and the EU funded project UNICELLSYS LSHG-201142. Paula Jouhten acknowledges financial support from
the Finnish Foundation for Technology Promotion and from the Academy of
Finland Centre of Excellence, White Biotechnology - Green Chemistry 20082013; project number 118573. We would also like to thank Professor Stefan
Hohmann and Dr Markus Krantz, both University of Gothenburg, for useful discussions and for sharing information.

Identification of highly active sub-networks

We identified highly active sub-networks in the reconstructed protein-protein interaction network for differential gene expression of S. cerevisiae in carbon- and
nitrogen-limited conditions at three different specific
growth rates. The Affymetrix gene expression data were
taken from Fazio et al. (2008) [6]. The algorithm used for
identification of highly active sub-networks was the one
developed by Patil et al. (2005) [36] based on the original
work by Ideker et al. (2002) [37]. The analysis of Affymetrix microarray data was done using R/Bioconductor, version 2.6.1 [38]. The raw data were normalised with
Robust Multichip Average (RMA) normalisation [39-41].
Statistical differences in expression were calculated using
linear modelling tools of the limma package [42,43]. For
each gene, a linear model was fitted by the least squares
method and differential expression within pairs of experimental conditions was computed using the empirical
Bayesian approach [44,45]. Empirical Bayes adjusted pvalues of statistical significance of expression changes
were used to score the nodes in the network for identification of transcriptionally highly active sub-networks in
the reconstructed network of the key STP in S. cerevisiae.
The algorithm developed by Patil et al. (2005) [36] converted the p-values to Z scores of the protein nodes by
using the inverse normal cumulative distribution (θ-1),
calculated then a combined score Zs of the protein node
Z scores for a connected subnetwork s, and corrected the
Zs score for the background distribution. Then the algorithm utilizes simulated annealing for solving the problem of finding the subnetwork having the highest score.

Author Details
Systems Biology Group, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering,
Chalmers University of Technology, Kemivägen 10, SE-412 96, Gothenburg,
Sweden
Received: 7 September 2009 Accepted: 25 May 2010
Published: 25 May 2010
© 2010 Nandy Access from: BioMed Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Openet al; licensee http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68
BMC article is Biology 2010, 4:68
Systems available article distributed under the

References
1. Landry CR, Oh J, Hartl DL, Cavalieri D: Genome-wide scan reveals that
genetic variation for transcriptional plasticity in yeast is biased towards
multi-copy and dispensable genes. Gene 2006, 366:343-351.
2. Feder ME, Mitchell-Olds T: Evolutionary and ecological functional
genomics. Nature Rev Genetics 2003, 4:651-657.
3. Polge C, Thomas M: SNF1/AMPK/SnRK1 kinases, global regulators at the
heart of energy control? TRENDS in Plant Sc 2006, 12:20-28.
4. Usaite R, Jewett MC, Oliveira AP, Yates JR III, Olsson L, Nielsen J:
Reconstruction of the yeast Snf1 kinase regulatory network reveals its
role as a global energy regulator. Mol Sys Biol 2009, 5:319-330.
5. Levine AJ, Hu W, Feng Z, Gil G: Reconstructing signal transduction
pathways: Challenges and Oppurtunities. Annals New York Acad Sci
2007, 1115:32-50.
6. Fazio A, Jewett MC, Daran-Lapujade P, Mustacchi R, Usaite R, Pronk JT,
Workman CT, Nielsen J: Transcription factor control of growth rate
dependent genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: A three factor design.
BMC Genomics 2008, 9:341.
7. Nicklas B, Ferndahl C, Mostad P, Wilks MDB, Chang C, Showe L, Gustafsson
L, Larsson C, Bill RM: Transcriptome analysis of a respiratory
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain suggests the expression of its
phenotype is glucose insensitive and predominantly controlled by
Hap4, Cat8 and Mig1. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:365.
8. Lage R, Dieguez C, Vidal-Puig A, Lopez M: AMPK: a metabolic gauge
regulating whole-body energy homeostasis. Cell 2008, 14:539-549.
9. Yang Q, Inoki K, Kim E, Guan K-L: TSC1/TSC2 and Rheb have different
effects on TORC1 and TORC2 activity. PNAS 2006, 103:6811-6816.
10. Fabrizio P, Longo VD: Chronological aging-induced apoptosis in yeast.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 2008, 1783:1280-1285.
11. Ciesla M, Towpik J, Graczyk D, Oficjalska-Pham D, Harismendy O, Suleau A,
Balicki K, Conesa C, Lefebvre O, Boguta M: Maf1 Is Involved in Coupling
Carbon Metabolism to RNA Polymerase III Transcription. Molecular and
Cellular Biol 2007, 27:7693-7702.

Nandy et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/68

12. Nordlander B, Krantz M, Hohmann S: Hog1-mediated metabolic
adjustments following hyperosmotic shock in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Topics in Current Genet 2008, 20:141-158.
13. Vincent O, Townley R, Kuchin S, Carlson M: Subcellular localization of the
Snf1 kinase is regulated by specific β subunits and a novel glucose
signaling mechanism. Genes and Dev 2001, 15:1104-1114.
14. Schneper L, Duvel K, Broach JR: Sense and sensibility: nutritional
response and signal integration in yeast. Curr Opin Microbiol 2004,
7:624-630.
15. Capaldi AP, Kaplan T, Liu Y, Habib N, Regev A, Friedman N, O'Shea EK:
Structure and function of a transcriptional network activated by the
MAPK Hog1. Nat Genet 2008, 40:1300-1306.
16. Enjalbert B, Smith DA, Cornell MJ, Alam I, Nicholls S, Brown AJP, Quinn J:
Role of the Hog1 Stress-activated Protein Kinase in the Global
Transcriptional Response to Stress in the Fungal Pathogen Candida
albicans. Molecular Biol Cell 2006, 17:1018-1032.
17. Lin N, Wu BL, Jansen R, Gerstein M, Zhao HY: Information assessment on
predicting protein-protein interactions. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:154.
18. Cao JP, MA YC, Li YX, Shi TL: The application of the computational
methods in protein-protein interaction study. Chinese Bulletin of Life Sci
2005, 17:82-87.
19. Uetz P, Giot L, Cagney G, Mansfield TA, Judson RS, Knight JR, Lockshon D,
Narayan V, Srinivasan M, Pochart P, Qureshi-Emili A, Li Y, Godwin B,
Conover D, Kalbfleisch T, Vijayadamodar G, Yang M, Johnston M, Fields S,
Rothberg JM: A comprehensive analysis of protein-protein interactions
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2000, 403:623-631.
20. Ito T, Chiba T, Ozawa R, Yoshida M, Hattori M, Sakaki Y: A comprehensive
two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein interactome. Proc Natl
acad Sci 2001, 98:4569-4574.
21. Wang J, Li C, Wang E, Wang X: Uncovering the rules for protein-protein
interactions from genomic data. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2009, 106:3752-3757.
22. Beltrao P, Serrano L: Specificity and Evolvability in Eukaryotic Protein
Interaction Networks. PLOS Comput Biol 2007, 3:e25.
23. Bader S, Kuhner S, Gavin AC: Interaction networks for system biology.
FEBS Lett 2008, 582:1220-1224.
24. Wang B, Chen P, Huang DS, Li JJ, Lok TM, Lyu MR: Predicting protein
interaction sites from residue spatial sequence profile and evlution
rate. FEBS Lett 2006, 580:380-384.
25. Kie C, Beltrao P, Serrano L: Analyzing protein interaction networks using
structural information. Annual Rev Biochem 2008, 77:415-441.
26. Li JJ, Huang DS, Wang B, Chen P: Identifying protein-protein interfacial
residues in heterocomplexes using residue conservation scores. Int J
Biol Macromol 2006, 38:241-247.
27. Herrgård MJ, Swainston N, Dobson P, Dunn WB, Arga KY, Arvas M,
Bluthgen N, Borger S, Costenoble R, Heinemann M, Hucka M, Novere NL,
Li P, Liebermeister W, Mo ML, Oliveira AP, Petranovic D, Pettifer S,
Simeonidis E, Smallbone K, Spasic I, Weichart D, Brent R, Broomhead DS,
Westerhoff HV, Kirdar B, Penttila M, Klipp E, Palsson BO, Sauer U, Oliver SG,
Mendes P, Nielsen J, Kell DB: A consensus yeast metabolic network
reconstruction obtained from a community approach to systems
biology. Nature Biotechnol 2008, 26:1155-1160.
28. Monteiro PT, Mendes ND, Teixeira MC, d'Orey S, Tenreiro S, Mira NP, Pais H,
Francisco AP, Carvalho AM, Lourenco AB, Sa-Correia I, Oliveira AL, Freitas
AT: YEASTRACT-DISCOVERER: new tools to improve the analysis of
transcriptional regulatory associations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Nucl Acids Res 2008, 36:D132-D136.
29. Ptacek J, Devgan G, Michaud G, Zhu H, Zhu X, Fasolo J, Guo H, Jona G,
Breitkreutz A, Sopko R, McCartney RR, Schmidt MC, Rachidi N, Lee S-J, Mah
AS, Meng L, Stark MJR, Stern DF, Virgilio CD, Tyers M, Andrews B, Gerstein
M, Schweitzer B, Predki PF, Snyder M: Global analysis of protein
phosphorylation in yeast. Nature 2005, 438:679-684.
30. Yu H, Braun P, Yildirim MA, Lemmens I, Venkatesan K, Sahalie J, HirozaneKishikawa T, Gebreab F, Li Na, Simonis N, Hao T, Rual JF, Dricot A, Vazquez
A, Murray RR, Simon C, Tardivo L, Tam S, Svrzikapa N, Fan C, Smet de A-S,
Motyl A, Hudson ME, Park J, Xin X, Cusick ME, Moore T, Boone C, Snyder M,
Roth FP, Barabasi A-L, Tavernier J, Hill DE, Vidal M: High-quality binary
protein interaction map of the yeast interactome network. Science
2008, 322:104-110.
31. Collins SR, Kemmeren P, Zhao X-C, Greenblatt JF, Spencer F, Holstege FCP,
Weissman JS, Krogan NJ: Toward a comprehensive atlas of the physical
interactome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol Cell Proteomics 2007,
6:439-450.

Page 12 of 12

32. Reguly T, Breitkreutz A, Boucher L, Breitkreutz BJ, Hon GC, Myers CL,
Parsons A, Friesen H, Oughtred R, Tong A, Stark C, Ho Y, Botstein D,
Andrews B, Boone C, Troyanskya OG, Idekar T, Dolinski K, Batada NN, Tyers
M: Comprehensive curation and analysis of global interaction
networks in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Biol 2006, 5:11.
33. Castrillo JI, Zeef LA, Hoyle DC, Zhang N, Hayes A, Gardner DCJ, Cornell MJ,
Petty J, Hakes L, Wardleworth L, Rash B, Brown M, Dunn WB, Broadhurst D,
O'Donoghue K, Hester SS, Dunkley TPJ, Hart SR, Swainston N, Li P, Gaskell
SJ, Paton NW, Lilley KS, Kell DB, Oliver SG: Growth control of the
eukaryote cell: a systems biology study in yeast. J Biol 2007, 6:4.
34. Brauer MJ, Huttenhower C, Airoldi EM, Rosenstein R, Matese JC, Gresham
D, Boer VM, Troyanskaya OG, Botstein D: Coordination of Growth Rate,
Cell Cycle, Stress Response, and Metabolic Activity in Yeast. Mol Biol Cell
2008, 19:352-367.
35. Stark C, Breitkreutz BJ, Reguly T, Boucher L, Breitkreutz A, Tyers M:
BioGRID: a general repository for interaction datasets. Nucleic Acids Res
2006, 34:D535-D539.
36. Patil KR, Nielsen J: Uncovering transcriptional regulation of metabolism
by using metabolic network topology. PNAS 2005, 22:2685-2689.
37. Ideker T, Thorsson V, Ranish JA, Christmas R, Buhlar J, Eng JK, Burngarner R,
Goodlett DR, Aebersold r, Hood L: Integrated genomic and proteomic
analyses of a systematically perturbed metabolic network. Science
2001, 292:929-934.
38. R: A language and environment for statistical computing [http://
www.R-project.org]
39. Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA, Åstrand M, Speed TP: A comparison of
Normalization Methods for High Density Oligonucleotides Array Data
Based on Bias and Variance. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:185-193.
40. Irizarry RA, Hobbs B, Collin F, Beazer-Barclay YD, Antonellis KJ, Scherf U,
Speed TP: Exploration, normalization, and summaries of high density
oligonucleotide array probe level data. Biostatistics 2003, 4:249-264.
41. Gautier L, Cope L, Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA: affy---analysis of Affymetrix
GeneChip data at the probe level. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:307-315.
42. Smyth GK: Limma: linear models for microarray data. In Bioinformatics
and Computational Biology Solutions using R and Bioconductor Edited by:
Gentleman R, Carey V, Dudoit S, Irizarry R, Huber W. Springer, New York;
2005:397-420.
43. Wettenhall JM, Simpson KM, Satterley K, Smyth GK: affylmGUI: a graphical
user interface for linear modeling of single channel microarray data.
2006, 22:897-899.
44. Schäfer J, Strimmer K: An empirical Bayes approach to inferring largescale gene association networks. Bioinformatics 2004, 21:754-764.
45. Smyth GK: Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing
differential expression in microarray experiments. Statistical Appl
Genetics and Molecular Biol 2004, 3:3.
doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-68
Cite this article as: Nandy et al., Reconstruction of the yeast protein-protein
interaction network involved in nutrient sensing and global metabolic regulation BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:68

</pre>
</body>
</html>
