<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Phosphorylation meets nuclear import: a review</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32. doi:10.1186/1478-811X-8-32"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jonathan D Nardozzi"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

REVIEW

Open Access

Phosphorylation meets nuclear import: a review
Jonathan D Nardozzi1, Kaylen Lott1,2, Gino Cingolani2*

Abstract
Phosphorylation is the most common and pleiotropic modification in biology, which plays a vital role in regulating
and finely tuning a multitude of biological pathways. Transport across the nuclear envelope is also an essential cellular function and is intimately linked to many degeneration processes that lead to disease. It is therefore not surprising that phosphorylation of cargos trafficking between the cytoplasm and nucleus is emerging as an important
step to regulate nuclear availability, which directly affects gene expression, cell growth and proliferation. However,
the literature on phosphorylation of nucleocytoplasmic trafficking cargos is often confusing. Phosphorylation, and
its mirror process dephosphorylation, has been shown to have opposite and often contradictory effects on the
ability of cargos to be transported across the nuclear envelope. Without a clear connection between attachment of
a phosphate moiety and biological response, it is difficult to fully understand and predict how phosphorylation
regulates nucleocytoplasmic trafficking. In this review, we will recapitulate clue findings in the field and provide
some general rules on how reversible phosphorylation can affect the nuclear-cytoplasmic localization of substrates.
This is only now beginning to emerge as a key regulatory step in biology.
Introduction
Principles of Nucleocytoplasmic Transport

The nucleus is the key organelle where most of the cellular genetic information is stored. Transcription is also
compartmentalized to the nucleus to keep it separate
from translation, which occurs in the cytoplasm. The
nucleus is separated from the cytoplasm by a double
lipid bilayer known as the nuclear envelope (NE), which
is composed of an outer and an inner nuclear membrane (abbreviated as ONM and INM). At distinct
points, the ONM and INM are conjoined by large
macromolecular assemblies known as nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). Because of this peculiar morphology, all
transport across the nuclear envelope is physically
restricted to occur through the NPC. The NPC is not
simply a channel, but mediates the exchange of macromolecules into and out of the nucleus imposing selectivity like a semi-permeable filter [1]. Accordingly, proteins
smaller than ~40 kDa can usually diffuse through the
NPC, while larger proteins are shuttled through the
NPC by dedicated nuclear transport receptors of the
b-karyopherin family, which includes at least 20 different
known importins and exportins in humans [2]. Much is
* Correspondence: gino.cingolani@jefferson.edu
2
Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

known about the molecular basis for the recognition of
import/export cargos by b-karyopherins. As a general
rule, substrates moving through the NPC typically expose
molecular flags on their surface, thereby promoting efficient recognition and binding by karyopherins. Import
cargos posses a Nuclear Localization Signal (NLS) that
can be recognized by a karyopherin directly or in the presence of an adaptor protein (reviewed in [3-7]). Typically,
NLSs are highly enriched in basic residues (e.g. Lysine,
Arginine). Well-studied examples of classical NLSs are
those of the SV40-Large T antigen [6], and the bipartite
NLS of nucleoplasmin, which contains two basic clusters
spaced by ~10 less conserved residues (Figure 1A). In
contrast, cargos traveling toward the cytoplasm usually
display a leucine-rich Nuclear Export Signal (NES),
which contains critical hydrophobic residues, necessary
for recognition by the nuclear export receptor Crm1[8].
b-karyopherins were originally identified based on their
ability to bind the small GTPase Ran through an N-terminal binding domain [9]. Ran, a small GTPase of the Rassuperfamily, is recognized as the main source of both the
energy and directionality of nucleocytoplasmic transport
[10,11]. This GTPase exists in different nucleotide-bound
states across the nuclear envelope. The nuclear population of Ran is predominately GTP-bound, whereas the
cytoplasmic pool of Ran is GDP-bound due to the
sequestering of its RanGEF (named RCC1) and RanGAP

© 2010 Nardozzi et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

A. Classical Nuclear Localization Signal

SV40 T antigen:
Human c-MYC:
Nucleoplasm:

126

PKKKRKV 132
PAAKRVKLD 328
155
KR….X(10)….KKKK 170
320

B. Transport Signals of cargos up-regulated by Phosphorylation

EBNA-1 NLS:
HBV core:
SV40 T antigen:
STAT1-dsNLS:
ERK5-NLS:

379

KRPRSPSS 386
VRRRDR…X(17)…SPRRRR 180
110
PSS…X(7)…S…X(5) …PKKKRKV 132
378
RK…X(30) …KEQKNAGTR…X(283) …Y 701
520
KRRRR…X(8) …KRR 535

ERK1/2-NTS:

232

149

LDQLNHILGILGSPSQEDL 250

C. Transport Signals of cargos down-regulated by Phosphorylation

Msn2p:
NFATc1:
Pho4-NLS:
PTHrP-ncNLS:
Swi6:

575

SSLRRKS…X(34)…RRPSYRRKSMTSRRSS 633
RSSRPASPCNKRKYS 641
140
SANKVTKNKSNSSPYLNKRKGKPGPDS 166
66
RYLTQETNKVETYKEQPLKTPGKKKKGKP 94
241

157

ELGSPLKKLKIDT 169

Figure 1 Amino acid sequence of several known nuclear
targeting sequences. (A) Classical Nuclear Localization Signals.
Nuclear import signals of cargos (B) up-regulated and (C) downregulated by phosphorylation. Colored in blue are basic amino acids
within the import signal, usually critical for recognition by
karyopherins. In red are sites of phosphorylation that have been
shown to modulate nuclear import.

to the nucleus and cytoplasm, respectively [12,13]. The
high concentration of Ran-GTP found in the nucleus is
needed to dissociate incoming import complexes, and
also to assemble outgoing export complexes.
The most widely characterized b-karyopherin family
member, importin b1 (reviewed in [2,14]) imports substrates directly or in complex with the adaptor proteins
such as importin a or snurportin [15]. In the ‘classical’
nuclear import pathway [3-7], the adaptor importin a1
recognizes and binds a cytoplasmic cargo bearing a classical NLS. Importin a1 is tethered to importin b1 via its
N-terminal importin b binding (IBB) domain [16] and
the ternary complex of importin 1/importin 1/NLS is
shuttled through the nuclear pore complex. Upon binding to RanGTP, the import complex falls apart, thereby
releasing the import cargo in the cell nucleus, and
importin b1 is shuttled back to the cytoplasm. In addition to importin a1, which recognizes classical NLSs,
humans posses five additional isoforms of importin a,
which fall into three distinct phylogenetic groups,
namely the a1s, a2s and a3s [17,18] (Figure 2A). The
functional diversification of importin as occurred
throughout evolution along with the evolution of multicellular animals. This reflects the increasingly complex
and regulated nature of higher organisms and the need
to perform cell and tissue specific functions during
development and differentiation [17]. Whereas different
importin a paralogs share the ability to bind and import
classical NLS substrates only certain animal isoforms
can recognize specific non-classical cargos. For instance,
importin a5 (also known as NPI-1 is involved in the
nuclear import of dimeric phosphorylated STAT1 [19]

Page 2 of 17

and influenza virus polymerase PB2 (Figure 2B) [20],
while importin a3 (Qip-1) mediates translocation of
NF-B p50/p65 heterodimer into the nucleus [21].
In addition to the prototypical receptor importin b1,
other b-karyopherins are well characterized. For
instance, importin b2 (also known as transportin) mediates nuclear import of cargos containing an M9-signal
[22]; or Crm1 recognizes NES-containing cargos in the
presence of RanGTP and is responsible for their export
out of the nucleus [3-7]. Overall, import and export
complexes moving between the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm travel approximately 200 nm through the NPC to
complete a round of translocation. This is a dynamic
process that requires extensive interactions of b-karyopherins with the NPC.
The Nuclear Pore Complex

It is impossible to appreciate the complexity of nucleocytoplasmic trafficking without acknowledging the morphology and composition of the NPC. In vertebrates, the NPC
is a ~125 MDa macromolecular assembly composed of
approximately thirty proteins, termed nucleoporins (nups)
(reviewed in [23-26]). The nups are arranged into an octagonal symmetric pore that contains a central channel,
sandwiched between a cytoplasmic and a nucleoplasmic
ring of nucleoporins. These rings extend eight filaments
deep into their respective cellular compartments. The
cytoplasmic filaments, composed mainly of Nup358,
extend flexibly into the cytoplasm and contain four
RanBP1-like domains [27]. SUMO1 targets the Ran
GTPase-activating protein RanGAP1 to Nup358, and
together, these two proteins play a critical role in maintaining the Ran gradient across the nuclear envelope [13].
In contrast, the ends of the nucleoplasmic filaments, composed mainly of Nup153, are joined in a distal ring called
the nuclear basket, which functions to arrest nuclear transport receptors awaiting cargo release in the nucleus [28].
About one third of nucleoporins in the NPC is highly
enriched in phenylalanine-glycine repeats (FG-nups).
These FG-nups are highly unstructured and are thought
to be responsible for gating the NPC [29]. Increasing evidence indicates that the soluble FG-nups adopt a natively
unfolded conformation [30] that may ‘fill’ the NPC inner
channel and make it impermeable to cargos larger than
~40 kDa. Several models for translocation through the
NPC have been proposed [30-33], although the lack of a
direct way to study the movement of protein through the
NPC hinders an accurate and quantitative characterization
of the translocation mechanisms.
Phosphorylation in Nuclear Transport

Reversible phosphorylation of amino acid side chains is the
most widely characterized post-translational modification
in biology (reviewed in [34-37]). Phosphorylation can either

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

Page 3 of 17

B

Importin 1
ARM 1
ARM 2
ARM 3
ARM 4
ARM 5
ARM 6

A

ARM 7
ARM 8

Importin 1
mportin
n
Importin 3
n
Importin 4
Importin 5
Importin 6

ARM 10

C

ARM 9

Importin 5
ARM 1
ARM 2

Importin 7

ARM 3
ARM 4
ARM 5
ARM 6
ARM 7
ARM 8
ARM 10

ARM 9

Figure 2 Diversification of the human nuclear import adaptor importin a. (A) A phylogenetic tree showing the evolutionary divergence of
the six different human importin a isoforms. The branch lengths are proportional to the predicted evolutionary time between sequences. Three
subfamilies of importin a (shaded in green, yellow and magenta) are identified. Both sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree were generated
using the program ClustalW [164]. Ribbon diagram of the mammalian importin a1 (B) (pdb 1EJL) and importin a5 (C) (pdb 2JDQ) (in green and
violet, respectively). Both structures consist of 10 tandemly repeated Armadillo repeats (ARM), each formed by three a-helices. Significant
differences can be seen between importin a1 and a5 C-terminal ARM-10, which is partially extended in a5 [20]. Both crystal structures in panel
(B-C) lack the N-terminal Importin b binding (IBB) domain, which promotes binding to the receptor importin b.

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

activate or inactivate biological pathways and is commonly
used to switch enzyme activity “on” or “off”. The enzymes
responsible for addition and removal of a phosphate moiety, kinases and phosphatases, respectively, are highly
abundant in nature. Genomics studies have shown that the
human genome contains 518 protein kinases and only 147
protein phosphatase catalytic subunits, of which 107 belong
to the Tyrosine phosphatase family [38]. This gives rise to
countless networks of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
events that control the most diverse biological pathways.
This review will focus only on the regulatory role of phosphorylation in nuclear transport.
Phosphorylation can have either an enhancing or an inhibitory effect on nuclear import, and unfortunately the
molecular consequences of phosphorylation have been elucidated in very few systems [7]. Understanding how phosphorylation affects nuclear import is a difficult task and
likely many more cargos than those few characterized to
date (discussed in this review) are regulated by phosphorylation. It is generally accepted that cargos smaller than ~40
kDa can slowly diffuse into the nucleus, while larger cargos
are actively imported by karyopherins. However, some of
the smallest proteins in a cell (e.g. Hiv-1 Rev [39], PTHrP
[40], histone H1 [41], etc.) use karyopherin-mediated, signal-dependent import pathways, clearly demonstrating that
nuclear import is about the rate at which cargos enter the
cell nucleus, and not their size. Unfortunately, the two
most common assays used to study nuclear transport, the
nuclear import assay in digitonin permeabilized mammalian cells [42] and transfection, are both carried out at equilibrium. These assays do not measure rates of import, but
just the resultant of import and export localization at
steady-state. This makes it difficult, if not impossible, to
dissect the role of phosphorylation in cases where the posttranslational modification does not completely stimulate or
repress nuclear import. As often in biology, phosphorylation and other post-translational modification finely tune
biochemical reactions by up- or downregulating basal levels
of transport. Thus, a quantitative analysis of the role of
phosphorylation on nuclear import is still in its infancy. In
reviewing the literature on this topic, we have identified at
least six ways by which phosphorylation can stimulate
nuclear import. In contrast, there are only two characterized ways by which phosphorylation has been shown to
down-regulate passage of cargos through the NPC. Both
aspects of the phosphorylation-mediated regulation of
nuclear transport will be discussed below.

Up-Regulation of Nuclear Import by
Phosphorylation
Phosphorylation within an NLS enhances the binding
affinity for the isoform importin a5

Perhaps the most intuitive way by which phosphorylation enhances nuclear import of a cargo is by increasing

Page 4 of 17

its affinity for a specific import factor. There are several
well-documented examples of import cargos that fall
under this category. One case is the Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA-1) protein (Figure 3A),
which is essential for the replication of EBV DNA in
latently infected cells [43]. During infection EBNA-1
enters the nucleus of infected cells and functions as a
transactivator of latent genome transcription [44]. It was
shown that phosphorylation of Ser 385 in the EBNA-1
NLS (Figure 1B) up-regulates its nuclear transport by
increasing the binding affinity for the import adaptor
importin a5 (Figure 2C), which in turn recruits the
receptor importin b1 [45].
Interestingly, replacement of Ser385 with the phosphomimetic aspartic acid decreases the binding affinity for
importin a5, demonstrating that the specificity of the
response is dependent on the phosphate moiety. Additionally, biophysical studies using chemically synthesized
peptides and isothermal titration calorimetry determined
that phosphorylation of Ser385 in EBNA-NLS increases
the binding affinity for importin a5 by ~20-fold, compared to the unphosphorylated NLS (Kd ~3 μM versus
60 μM) [46]. Thus the phosphate moiety within EBNA1 NLS functions as a direct binding determinant for
importin a5; phosphorylation of Ser385 within the NLS
stimulates nuclear import by enhancing the binding affinity of EBNA-1 for the import adaptor importin a5.
Phosphorylation enhances docking of cargos to the
Nuclear Pore Complex

The human Hepatitis B virus (HBV) undergoes an elegant and tightly regulated mechanism of entry into the
host nucleus to replicate its genome. A mature HBV
particle contains an envelope with surface glycoproteins
that surrounds an icosohedral capsid (composed of 180
or 240 copies of the 21 kDa core protein) containing
the viral dsDNA genome, a viral polymerase and the
host proteins Protein Kinase C (PKC) and hsp90 [47].
Progeny HBV particles assemble in the cytoplasm, but
require the host RNA polymerase II in the nucleus for
viral genome replication [48], making nuclear import of
the genome a necessary step in viral replication. It was
shown by Rabe et al. that the entire HBV core particle
(32-36 nm diameter [49]) traverses the NPC in a phosphorylation-dependent manner [50]. The core protein
displays an arginine-rich NLS at its C-terminus [51]
(Figure 1B), which overlaps with a nucleic acid binding
domain [52] and five serine phosphorylation sites [53].
The C-terminus of the core protein is buried inside the
capsid [54] and interacts with the viral genome through
the nucleic acid binding domain. The host PKC, also
present in the infectious virion, phosphorylates the core
protein at Ser172 , thereby triggering a conformational
change that exposes the core protein C-terminal NLS

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

C

D
STAT1

B

NLS

NLS
NLS

EBNA-1

HBV C

P

SV400
-T
SV40
SV40

N

P

P

P

P

NLS

NLS
NLS

P

EBNA-1

HBV N

5



P

NLS

NLS

SV40 -T

P P

C

5

1





P

5

EBNA-1

P

NLS

1

P
HBV N

NLS

1

C

NLS



NLS

1

P P

SV40 -T




STAT1

A

Page 5 of 17

5




Cytoplasm

Nucleoplasm
Figure 3 Schematic representation of four distinct mechanisms by which phosphorylation can up-regulate importin b1-dependent
nuclear import. (A) Phosphorylation within the NLS of EBNA-1 enhances the binding affinity for importin a5. (B) Phosphorylation of the HBV
core antigen causes a conformational change that positions the NLS on the exterior of the capsid, and hence promotes its nuclear import. (C)
Phosphorylation of serines upstream of the NLS of SV40 large T-antigen enhances nuclear import likely by enhancing the cargo recognition by
importin a1. (D) Phosphorylation of STAT1 at Tyr701 induces a conformational rearrangement that exposes a non-classical dsNLS that is bound
specifically and with high affinity by importin a5. In all diagrams, import cargos and importin b1 are colored in cyan and blue, respectively while
importin a1 is in green and a5 in violet. The NLS is depicted as a yellow flag and the phosphorylation site, or the kinase responsible for
phosphorylation, is in red.

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

on the capsid surface (Figure 3B). Upon phosphorylation, the HBV core particle is recognized by an importin
b1/importin a1 heterodimer and imported into the
nucleus in a Ran and energy-independent manner [47].
Nuclear transport of the HBV core particle arrests at
the nuclear basket [55], the capsid disassembles, and the
viral genome is released into the nucleus and transcribed
by the host RNA polymerase II. Core protein phosphorylation is clearly the key step in the nuclear import of
HBV particles, but it is tightly coupled to the maturity of
the viral genome. The host RNA polymerase II transcribes a pregenomic RNA, which is exported from the
nucleus and trapped within newly forming capsids.
Within the capsid, pregenomic RNA is then reverse-transcribed, and an incomplete complementary DNA strand
is created. The genome maturity is not only dependent
on the aforementioned events, but also on phosphorylation of the capsid proteins, which are thought to stabilize
the HBV genome [56]. It was shown that the exposure of
the core protein C-terminal NLS is directly proportional
to genome maturity, and while immature virions are
arrested at the NPC, only replication-competent capsids
are imported into the nucleus [50].
Phosphorylation upstream the classical SV40 NLS
enhances its recognition by importin a1

The enhanced nuclear import of phosphorylated cargos
does not always depend on direct interaction of the
import machinery with the phosphate moiety. The first
identified and likely one of the best-characterized NLSs is
that of the large tumor antigen of simian-virus 40 (SV40)
(Figure 1B). Upstream of the basic cluster, which spans
residues 127-131, there are several phosphorylation sites
(110-PS111S112DDEAAADS120QHAAPPKKKRKVG-133)
(Figure 1B). It was reported that phosphorylation at S111/
S112 by protein kinase CK2 accelerates the nuclear import
of SV40 large T-antigen 50-fold [57,58] and phosphorylation at an additional site, S120, by the double-stranded
DNA-dependent protein kinase, further enhances nuclear
import [59]. However, a crystal structure of importin a1
(lacking the IBB domain) in complex with a phosphoNLS peptide spanning region 109-133 of the SV40 large
T-antigen showed that the phosphorylation sites do not
make specific contacts with importin a1 (Figure 2B).
Likewise, binding studies revealed that phosphorylation
upstream of the SV40 T-antigen NLS does not increase
the affinity of the NLS to importin a1 [60]. Interestingly,
in the same crystal structure, it was observed that certain
SV40 T-antigen residues upstream of the basic cluster
also make specific contacts with importin a that are distinct from the binding sites of classical NLSs [61]. Based
on these findings, it was proposed that phosphorylation
upstream of the classical NLS might play a role in nuclear
import by modulating the recognition of the NLS, rather

Page 6 of 17

than increasing the binding affinity of the NLS for importin a1 (Figure 3C). Furthermore, the observation that
importin a1 does not bind the phosphate moiety directly
further reinforces the idea that phosphorylation can play
a regulatory role outside of the simple NLS-binding
groove.
Phosphorylation of STAT1 induces a conformational
change that exposes a dimer-specific NLS

STATs (Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription) form an important family of transcription factors
that play a critical role in cellular viability, immune
response, and development. There are seven known
human STAT isoforms that share a fundamentally conserved multi-domain architecture composed of an
N-terminal dimerization domain [62], a core consisting
of a coiled-coil domain, DNA-binding domain, Src2
Homology domain (SH2) [63-65], and a C-terminal
transactivation domain [66]. Each domain has critical
roles in STAT activation, nuclear transport, or transcriptional activity. Consistent with their function of transcription factors, STATs have developed numerous ways
to traverse the NPC and gain access to the nucleus;
phosphorylation plays an essential role in this process.
The first STAT family member to be characterized,
STAT1, mediates the innate immune response [67].
Upon stimulation of extracellular receptors, STAT1 is
recruited to the cell surface and activated through tyrosine phosphorylation at position Tyr701 [68]. Phosphorylation of STAT1 induces homodimerization through a
reciprocal SH2-phosphoTyr interaction with another
STAT1 monomer [68]. This dimerization leads to a
structural rearrangement [69] of STAT1 that exposes a
dimer-specific NLS (dsNLS) in its DNA-binding domain
(Figure 1B) [70-73]. The STAT1 dsNLS differs from a
classical NLS (cNLS) in numerous ways. First, the
dsNLS is not recognized by importin a1, but as in the
case of EBNA-1 phosphoNLS, by the isoform importin
a5 (Figure 3D) [74]. Second, STAT1 does not bind only
the major and minor NLS binding grooves of importin
a5, but requires importin a5 C-terminal Armadillo
repeats (ARM) 9 and 10 for high affinity binding [46].
The final and most unconventional characteristic of the
dsNLS is that it only functions in the context of phosphorylated STAT1 [70]. Whereas classical NLSs can be
removed from the context of the native protein and
function in trans when attached to an exogenous protein, the STAT1 NLS is only functional in cis, within
the context of the pSTAT1 tertiary structure. This was
elegantly shown by Meyer et al. who studied a peptide
spanning residues 376-427 of the STAT1 DNA-binding
domain and found that it did not accumulate in the
nucleus in a micro-injection nuclear import assay [70].
Because the STAT1 DNA binding domain is exposed in

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

the active dimer of phosphorylated STAT1, the dsNLS
can only act as a nuclear import signal within the context of phosphorylated STAT1. In addition, STAT1 can
heterodimerize with STAT2 and STAT3 [67], and
requires the dsNLS in the DNA-binding domain to
accumulate in the nucleus. Interestingly, STAT2 cannot
form homodimers or enter the nucleus on its own, suggesting that the dsNLS is a unique to STAT1 or
STAT1-associated complexes [75].
Phosphorylation unmasks an NLS through disruption of
an NES

The extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) cascade
has an important role in cellular development and phase
transitions in the cell cycle [76]. The cytoplasmic bottleneck of this cascade is the ERK kinase, which accumulates in the nucleus 15 minutes after the mitogenic
stimulus, and phosphorylates transcription factors critical for development [77]. ERK5 is an important member
of the MAP kinase family that stimulates the transcriptional activity of c-Fos, c-Myc, MEF2 and numerous
other factors involved in cardiovascular development
and S-phase entry [76-79]. ERK5 (also termed Big MAP
Kinase) is the largest of the ERK family members as it
contains an extended C-terminal domain with two proline-rich regions, a transcriptional activation domain
(TAD), and a bipartite NLS (Figure 1B), in addition to
its N-terminal kinase domain [80]. Interestingly, ERK5
does not display a classical NES, but undergoes Crm1mediated nuclear export [81,82]. Similar to the STAT1
dimer-specific NLS, ERK5 displays a conditional NES
that only acts in cis [83]. In resting cells, the ERK5
N- and C-termini interact, which conceals the bipartite
NLS, and creates an interface for Crm1 recognition [83].
The Map Kinase Kinase of ERK5 (MEK5) disrupts the
ERK5 termini-dependent binding interface through
phosphorylation of tyrosine and threonine residues in
the Thr-Glu-Tyr (TEY) activation motif [84]. Upon
phosphorylation, the putative NES is silenced, thereby
exposing the bipartite NLS in the C-terminus, and
hence promoting ERK5 nuclear accumulation [83]. It is
unclear whether the ERK5 NES region recruits Crm1
directly, or via another NES-containing binding partner.
Undoubtedly, phosphorylation plays a role in the
nuclear import of ERK5 by altering the balance between
NLS/NES signaling. In addition to multi-domain regulation of ERK5 nuclear transport, the N- and C-terminal
domains are essential for transactivation of the transcription factor AP-1 [80]. AP-1 controls a number of
cellular processes including proliferation, differentiation,
and apoptosis. Upon activation, the ERK5 N-terminal
kinase domain auto-phosphorylates the ERK5 C-terminal TAD, which has been shown to increase the transcriptional activity of AP-1 20-fold [80]. When

Page 7 of 17

expressed in the absence of the ERK5 kinase domain,
the ERK5 TAD has no affect on AP-1 transcription.
Notably, ERK5 is the only known cellular target of
MEK5, and overexpression of MEK5 is associated with
aggressive prostate cancer [85], cellular hypertrophy in
cardiomyocytes [86], and impaired angiogenesis [87].
Thus, ERK5 phosphorylation plays a critical role in the
coordination of inter- and intra-molecular binding interactions responsible for regulation of numerous cellular
processes.
Phosphorylation activates non-canonical transport signals
that mediate nuclear import

In addition to basic NLSs (Figure 1B), several other
small epitopes have been identified that when phosphorylated can promote nuclear import. For the purpose
of this review, we will discuss two examples of these
phosphorylation-activated transport signals: 1) the
Nuclear Transport Signal (NTS) of ERK1/2 and 2) the
arginine/serine (RS) dipeptide repeats of serine/argininerich proteins (SR proteins). The ERK family members
ERK1 and ERK2 play a critical role in cellular development and cell cycle regulation. ERK1 and ERK2 are the
cytoplasmic targets of the Ras-Ref-MEK-ERK signaling
network, responsible for driving cellular proliferation
through activation of transcription factors such as Fos
and Elk-1 [88]. The MAPKK MEK1/2 is responsible for
the activation of ERK1 and ERK2 [89]. Interestingly,
MEK1/2 acts as a scaffold protein for ERK1/2, and
anchors ERK in the cytoplasm under non-stimulating
conditions [90,91]. Upon activation, MEK1/2 phosphorylates ERK1/2 at a TEY motif, which induces a conformational change in ERK1/2 and leads to its dissociation
from MEK1/2 (Figure 4A). Until recently, the details of
ERK1/2 nuclear transport were unclear. Unlike ERK5,
which displays a bipartite NLS in its C-terminus [80],
no obvious NLS or NES are discernable in the ERK1/2
primary sequence. Initially, it was believed that phosphorylated ERK1/2 entered the nucleus passively as a
monomer, and that its more rapid, energy-dependent
transport could involve dimerization and direct interaction with the NPC [92-94]. Recently, a novel NTS was
identified for ERK1/2 in its kinase insert domain (Figure
1), which contains a characteristic Ser-Pro-Ser (SPS)
motif. Upon stimulation, the SPS is phosphorylated and
becomes functionally active. The phosphorylated motif
is recognized by the nuclear transport receptor importin
b7 [95] (Figure 4A), also a b-karyopherin implicated in
the nuclear transport of two other proteins, MEK1 and
SMAD3, which also contain SPS or TPT motifs [95,96].
Highlighting the importance of tightly regulated ERK1/2
phosphorylation in human biology, upregulation of
MEK1/2 in brain tissue is linked to neurofibrillary
degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease [97].

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

A

Page 8 of 17

B
ERK 1/2
Anchors

MEK

ASF/SF2

P

Anchors

P
ERK
1/2

P

P

ASF/SF2



P
ERK
1/2
P
7



P
ERK
1/2
P

P

ASF/SF2
7

Cytoplasm

Nucleoplasm
Figure 4 Schematic representation of two phosphorylation-activated transport signals that confer nuclear import independent of
importin b1. (A) ERK1/2 (cyan) is sequestered in the cytoplasm by anchoring proteins (shown in grey). Upon phosphorylation at its TEY site,
ERK1/2 undergoes a conformational change, causing it to dissociate from the anchoring proteins. This allows MEK access to the NTS which it
phosphorylates. Upon NTS phosphorylation, ERK1/2 is recognized and imported into the nucleus by importin b7 (yellow). (B) The SR protein
ASF/SF2 (cyan) is phosphorylated at Arg-Ser (RS) dipeptide repeats that function as an NLS for the import receptor importin b2 (also known as
transportin), shown in purple.

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

Similar to NTS-containing proteins, serine/argininerich (SR) proteins rely on phosphorylation-dependent
recognition of a small epitope for their nuclear import.
SR proteins are fundamental to mRNA metabolism in
the nucleus [98], and cycle between the cytoplasm and
nucleoplasm depending on the level of transcription
[99]. The prototypical SR protein ASF/SF2 is essential to
genome stability, and depletion of this factor in metazoa
was shown to induce G2 cycle arrest and apoptosis
[100,101]. The RS domain of ASF/SF2 spans the Cterminal residues 198-248, and contains a series of ArgSer (RS) dipeptide repeats that can function as an NLS
[99,102]. Interestingly, the RS-motif is only functional as
an NLS when phosphorylated, as unphosphorylated
ASF/SF2 localizes to the cytoplasm [103,104]. The
importin b-like nuclear transport receptor importin b2
(also known as transportin) contains a unique internal
domain responsible for the recognition of phosphorylated SR proteins [103,104] (Figure 4B). Like for importin b-1, nuclear import of phosphorylated SR proteins
by importin b2 is expected to be regulated by RanGTP.
With further investigation into the role of phosphorylation in nuclear transport, it is likely that various signaling clusters similar to the non-canonical NLSs of ERK1/
2 and ASF/SF2 will be identified.

Down-Regulation of Nuclear Import by
Phosphorylation
A phosphorylation-sensitive component of the nuclear
transport machinery controls nuclear import

While phosphorylation of the nuclear envelope and NPC
are necessary steps in cell cycle progression and the
onset of mitosis, phosphorylation of the nuclear transport machinery in resting cells has a dramatic inhibitory
effect on nuclear import. Kehlenbach et al. investigated
the effect of phosphatase and kinase inhibitors on the
nuclear transport of NLS-bearing cargos in a nuclear
transport assay in digitonin-permeabilized cells [105].
This technique involves permeabilizing the cell membrane without disrupting the nuclear envelope so that
the endogenous cytosol (soluble cellular proteins and
transport factors) can be washed away and replaced
with a controlled nuclear transport reaction mixture
(e.g. purified importins, energy, etc.) [42] This allows
dissecting the effect of individual components of the
nuclear transport machinery on the nuclear transport of
NLS- or NES-containing cargos. Kehlenbach et al.
showed that the phosphatase inhibitors Okadoic Acid
(OA) and microcystin dramatically inhibit nuclear
import pathways mediated by transportin and importin
b. Treatment with the broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor,
staurosporine, was able to partially reverse the import
inhibition, thereby suggesting that staurosporine-resistant kinases are also involved in the inhibition. They

Page 9 of 17

concluded that the phosphorylation targets were most
likely nucleoporins in the NPC central channel because
OA did not affect karyopherin recognition of NLS-cargo
or the cellular localization of RanGTP. In addition, they
suggested that the responsible kinases were both membrane associated and cytoplasmic. Interestingly, a recent
investigation of the Picornaviruses EMCV and Theiler’s
murine encephalomyelitis virus showed the negative
effects of the Leader protein (L-protein) on the nuclear
transport machinery. The L-protein blocks nuclear
transport in two known ways: 1) direct binding of Ran,
which leads to misregulation of its activity [106], and 2)
upregulation of cellular kinases, leading to the hyperphosphorylation of nucleoporins (specifically Nup62,
Nup214, and Nup153) [107]. It will be interesting to
define the exact kinase(s) responsible for Nup hyperphosphorylation, and whether the same kinase(s) is involved
in the regulation of nuclear transport under normal
physiological conditions.
Cytoplasmic retention of cellular cargos by direct
phosphorylation of an NLS

A simple way to retain cargos in the cytoplasm is by
inactivating the NLS. This can be achieved either by
direct binding and sequestering of the NLS, like the
inhibitory protein of NF-kB (IKB) [108], or by phosphorylation of certain residues within the NLS. The latter is well documented for at least five cargos, two in
humans and three in budding yeast, which will be discussed here.
The nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) is a
well-characterized example of cargo retained in the
cytoplasm by a phosphorylation in its NLS. First identified as a critical transcription factor for T-cell activity
[109,110], NFAT is involved in numerous biological processes including the growth and development of muscle
and neuronal cells as well as the immune response.
There are four NFAT family members, which share
highly conserved DNA-binding domains and serine- and
proline-rich regions [110,111]. NFAT activity it tightly
regulated by kinases and phosphatases in a calciumdependent manner. Under normal physiological
conditions, NFAT is localized to the cytoplasm due to
phosphorylation of its serine-rich region (SRR2) [112],
which overlaps with the NFAT NLS (Figure 1C). In
addition to kinases that sequester NFAT in the
cytoplasm, NFAT also contains a strong NES for Crm1mediated nuclear export, which aids in its cytoplasmic
localization [113]. Elevated cellular Ca2+ levels stimulate
Calcineurin, a Ca 2+ dependent serine phosphatase,
which then binds to NFAT and dephosphorylates the
NLS, making it accessible for recognition by the nuclear
import machinery [114]. A drop in Ca2+ levels or inactivation of Calcineurin by CsA or FK506, results in the

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

phosphorylation of the NFAT NLS [115], which inhibits
its nuclear accumulation. Calcineurin is a popular target
of immunosuppressive drugs because its inactivation
inhibits the ability of NFAT to enter the nucleus and
stimulate an immune response. In addition to its role in
the immune response, precise Calcineurin/NFAT signaling is required for axonal outgrowth of embryonic neurons [116], a process tightly linked to memory and
learning [117].
The second important example of phosphorylationmediated down-regulation of nuclear import that has
important physiological consequences in humans is the
parathyroid hormone related protein (PTHrP). This
small secreted protein is best known for its role in
chondrocyte maturation, but it is also expressed in a
range of tumors as it has fundamental roles in cell cycle
control and apoptosis [118,119]. The PTHrP gene yields
three distinct alternative splice products, in a tissue specific manner that can display both paracrine and intracrine activities [120]. Its paracrine characteristics are
attributed to the N-terminus of PTHrP, which is highly
homologous to the secreted peptide hormone PTH,
while PTHrP intracrine activities in the nucleus rely on
its C-terminus [121]. After internalization by receptormediated endocytosis, PTHrP is rapidly transported into
the nucleus, where it is involved in accelerating cell
cycle and cell proliferation [122]. PTHrP displays a long
non-classical NLS (ncNLS) between residues 66-97
(Figure 1C), which is recognized directly by importin b,
independent of importin a [123]. Structural studies in
complex with an N-terminal fragment of importin b
revealed that the PTHrP-ncNLS binds HEAT repeats
2-11 of importin b HEAT, which are also responsible
for binding to RanGTP and importin a [40]. The
nuclear import of PTHrP is down regulated by the cell
cycle-dependent kinases p33 and p34, which phosphorylate Thr85 in the ncNLS (Figure 1C) [124]. Interestingly,
in the crystal structure of PTHrP-ncNLS bound to
importin b, the site of phosphorylation at Thr 85 is
located in close proximity to two well conserved tryptophan residues of importin b, which are known to be
important for nuclear import of classical NLS cargos
[125]. A phosphate moiety at this position could disrupt
the interaction of the tryptophan side chains with the
PTHrP-ncNLS, likely reducing the binding affinity for
importin b and hence down-regulating nuclear import
of PTHrP. However, since PTHrP is small enough to
diffuse into the nucleus, phosphorylation in this case
only slows down and does not completely obliterate the
biological effect of PTHrP.
The transduction of extracellular signals to the
nucleus displayed by higher eukaryotes occurs through
analogous pathways in lower eukaryotes. Not surprisingly, phosphorylation plays a critical role in this

Page 10 of 17

process. The cellular localization of the transcription
factor Msn2p in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is highly sensitive to stress response elements (STREs) [126]. Activation of Msn2p leads to the up-regulation of over 150
genes responsible for coping with environmental stresses
such as osmotic shock, oxidative damage, chemical
insult, and heat and nutrient depravation [127]. In particular, Msn2p nuclear transport under nutrient deprived
conditions is regulated by the cAMP-dependent protein
kinase (cAPK). The C-terminus of Msn2p contains four
arginine- and lysine-rich clusters that function as a classical NLS [128]. These clusters overlap with serine phosphorylation sites (RRXS) targeted by cAPK (Figure 1C).
Under normal physiological conditions, Msn2p is
restricted to the cytoplasm due to phosphorylation of
one or more of its basic clusters by cAPK, which inhibits importin a recognition and thus nuclear import of
Msn2p [129]. Under glucose-deprived conditions, cAPK
is down regulated, which leads to the accumulation of
unphosphorylated Msn2p in the nucleus, and ultimately
a transcriptional response to extracellular stress.
Similar to Msn2p, phosphorylation-mediated down
regulation of nuclear import has been described for the
S. cerevisiae transcription factor Pho4. Budding yeast
has an extensive network of proteins involved in regulation of inorganic phosphate availability [130]. Upon
phosphate starvation, dephosphorylated Pho4 is
recruited to the nucleus where it in turn activates genes
that respond to the levels of cellular phosphate [131].
When there is a supply of inorganic phosphate available
to the cell, Pho4 is phosphorylated on five separate
serine/proline motifs [132]. Two of these motifs are
required for nuclear export, as binding to Pho4’s export
factor, Msn5, is strictly dependent on the phosphorylation state [131,133]. A third serine/proline phosphate
site is contained within Pho4’s NLS (Figure 1C). Upon
phosphorylation, the import factor Pse1 is no longer
able to bind to Pho4 [131,133]. Together, the increase in
nuclear export signal potency and hindrance of nuclear
import synergize to assure that Pho4 is retained in the
cytoplasm during times of inorganic phosphate
availability.
Another example of down-regulation of nuclear
import by phosphorylation was reported for the S. cerevisiae transcription factor Swi6. Swi6p regulates the
expression of several genes during the G1 phase of the
cell cycle [134,135], when it enters the nucleus by active
signal-mediated transport. Interestingly, hypophosphorylation of serine 160 of Swi6p located immediately
upstream of the NLS correlates with Swi6p nuclear
import [135] (Figure 1C). In contrast, hyperphosphorylation of serine 160 during the other phases of the cell
cycle correlates with cytoplasmic localization [135].
Thus, the cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation of Swi6p

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

correlates with its localization, and ultimately expression
of downstream genes [135]. Using in vitro solution binding assays, Harreman et al. demonstrated that phosphorylation of serine 160 upstream of Swi6-NLS causes a
4-fold decreased binding affinity between the Swi6 and
importin a1 [136]. A similar drop in affinity for
observed by replacing serine 160 with a glutamic acid
(S160E-NLS), which functions as a phosphomimetic. In
addition, a GFP-tagged Swi6 S160E-NLS mutant showed
a decreased rate of nuclear import when compared to
wild type GFP-Swi6-NLS supporting the hypothesis that
phosphorylation directly adjacent to an NLS decreases
the binding affinity for importin a1, which correlates
with reduced nuclear import efficiency of the phosphorylated cargo.

Role of Phosphatases in Regulating
Phosphorylation-Dependent Nuclear Transport of
Stat1
Cellular Phosphatases target STAT1

Because STAT1 is the most well studied example of
phosphorylation-dependent nuclear transport, there has
been much interest in the identification of phosphatases
that counteract STAT1 activation. IFN signaling cascades undergo rapid activation-inactivation cycles that
require tight regulation. The IFNg signaling pathway is
negatively regulated in at least three ways: 1) suppressors of Cytokine Signaling inhibition of JAKs and the
IFNg receptor at the cell membrane [137], 2) nuclear
localization of the Protein Inhibitor of STAT1 factor
[138], and 3) tyrosine and dual-specificity phosphatases
that dephosphorylate STAT1 at Tyr701. One of the first
phosphatases identified in the regulation of STAT signaling was the T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase (TCPTP). The TC-PTP gene is alternatively spliced, yielding
a longer ER-associated form TC48, and a nuclear form
TC45 [139,140]. The nuclear form of TC-PTP is responsible for the cooperative deactivation of STAT1 when it
is released from target DNA [141]. Upon dephosphorylation by TC45, STAT1 undergoes Crm1-mediated
nuclear export and participates in successive activationinactivation cycles in stimulated cells [142]. In addition
to its role in STAT1 deactivation, TC45 has also been
implicated in the dephosphorylation of STAT3 in the
nucleus.
The Src homology domain (SHP) family of dual-specificity phosphatases (SHP-1 and SHP-2) also plays a regulatory role in STAT nuclear localization; SHP’s have a
unique dephosphorylation mechanism, utilizing two tandem N-terminal SH2-domains (N-SH2 and C-SH2), a
tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) domain and two C-terminal
Tyr phosphorylation sites. Structural investigations of
SHP-2 reveal an auto-inhibitory mechanism of the PTP
domain by the N-SH2 in the absence of a pTyr

Page 11 of 17

substrate [143]. When the C-SH2 domain recognizes a
bipartite pTyr ligand it binds one pTyr, and the N-SH2
domain binds the other pTyr, reversing the autoinhibition of the phosphatase. The SHP Tyr residues in its
C-terminus can also represent the bipartite ligand when
these residues are phosphorylated. While SHP-1 is
primarily expressed in hematopoetic cells, SHP-2 is constitutively expressed in most cell types, and regulates a
number of pathways including JAK/STAT, MAP Kinase,
NFB, and PI3 kinase [144]. SHP-2 negatively regulates
the JaK/STAT pathway through dephosphorylation of a
number of receptor tyrosine kinases at the cell membrane [67], Jak2 in the cytoplasm [145], and STAT1 in
the nucleus [146]. Each of these substrates contains two
or more proximal phospho-tyrosine residues most likely
targeted by the SHP domain architecture. The examples
described above only represent a few of the many ways
that native phosphatases maintain balance within the
Jak/STAT pathway, and control the nuclear transport of
STAT1.
Viral Phosphatases target cytokine signaling pathways

Out of necessity, viruses have developed a number of
mechanisms to evade the host innate immune response
and neutralize cytokine signaling pathways, specifically
the Jak/STAT pathway. Many virus families encode
enzymes responsible for the evasion of host defense
mechanisms, but few viruses like Poxviridae (e.g. vaccinia, variola virus etc) are known to encode phosphatases. Members of the Poxviridae family of double
stranded DNA viruses carry a large, linear, genome of
approximately 200-kbp, and assemble entirely in the
cytoplasm of host cells [147]. Poxviridae encodes the
dual-specificity phosphatase VH1, which is highly conserved among poxviruses and essential for the viability
of Vaccinia virus in tissue cultures [148]. VH1 is
expressed in late-stage of viral infection and an estimated 200 copies of VH1 are packaged within the virion
[148]. VH1 has at least two important functions in the
Vaccinia virus lifecycle: first, it dephosphorylates twovirion membrane-associated factors A17 [149] and A14
[150], in vivo. Second, VH1 was shown to deactivate
host IFNg signaling through dephosphorylation of specific tyrosine and serine residues required for STAT1
nuclear import and transcriptional activity [151]. It has
been proposed that VH1 targets phosphorylated STAT1
(pSTAT1) in the cytoplasm as pSTAT1 bound to DNA
is resistant to VH1 dephosphorylation, in vitro [152].
Moreover, STAT1’s dedicated import adaptor importin
a5 efficiently competes with VH1 for STAT1 dephosphorylation, suggesting both importin a5 and VH1
encounter pSTAT1 in the cytoplasm prior to its nuclear
import [152]. Dephosphorylation of STAT1 at Try701
blocks carrier mediated nuclear accumulation of STAT1

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

Page 12 of 17

VH1 protomer 1
otomer
r

VH1 proto
protomer 2

P
P

STAT protomer 1

S
STAT protomer 2

Figure 5 Structural model of the Vaccinia virus phosphatase, VH1 (pdb 3CM3) in the act of dephosphorylating activated STAT1 (pdb
1BF5). Surface representation of the dimeric phosphatase VH1 modeled in the act of dephosphorylating phosphorylated STAT1 core (in gray and
orange, respectively). Ribbon diagram of VH1 and phosphorylated STAT1 are overlaid to their surface. The two active sites within VH1 are spaced
39Å apart. STAT1 flexible moiety connecting phosphorylated Tyr701 to the SH3 domains is modeled as a black dashed line; the two
phosphorylated Tyr701 (shown in red) are modeled inside each of VH1 active sites. It is intriguing to speculate that VH1 specificity for activated
STAT1 may be mediated by a dimeric quaternary structure. Accordingly, VH1 positions two active sites in the correct three-dimensional
complementarity to recognize and dephosphorylate activated STAT1.

[19] but does not affect the carrier independent import of
unphosphorylated STAT1, which occurs via direct binding to nucleoporins [153]. Like phosphorylated STAT1
[69], VH1 displays a dimeric quaternary structure [152].
Interestingly, the active sites of the VH1 monomers are
spaced 39Å apart, which is equal to the distance between
the phospho-Tyr residues seen in the crystal structure of
pSTAT1 bound to DNA [63]. This raises the intriguing
possibility that VH1 dimeric quaternary structure has
been specifically evolved as a dedicated solution to

optimize recognition and dephosphorylation of STAT1
(Figure 5). This, in turn, prevents nuclear import of
STAT1 and transcription of interferon-g genes, thereby
blocking the antiviral response.
In the past decade, an increasing number of phosphatases have been implicated in the deactivation of JaK/
STAT signaling through the dephosphorylation of
STAT1 or its upstream effectors. For example, two Flaviviruses, the mosquito-borne flavivirus JEV and the
tick-borne TBE both encode the protein NS5, which

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

was shown to disrupt IFN signaling. While NS5 does
not display a structurally conserved phosphatase motif,
treatment of infected cells with the PTP inhibitor
sodium orthovanadate restored IFNg and IFNa signaling
[154,155]. This suggests that although NS5 is not a
phosphatase itself, it may function by upregulating the
activity of endogenous phosphatases that dephosphorylate members of the JaK/STAT pathway. A recent investigation of the Dengue virus NS5 protein and STAT2
showed that NS5 directly binds STAT2, inhibiting
STAT2 phosphorylation and IFNa signaling (mediated
by STAT1/2 heterodimers) [156], but this effect did not
affect IFNg signaling (mediated by STAT1 homodimers).
Although it remains unclear how Flavivirus-specific NS5
proteins inhibit IFN signaling pathways, one shared
characteristic seen in different viruses is that evasion of
the immune response occurs by blocking STAT nuclear
import, and hence, STAT-mediated antiviral response.

Conclusions
It has been 55 years since the groundbreaking study on
the conversion of phosphorylase b to phosphorylase a,
by Fisher and Krebs, that first emphasized the importance of reversible phosphorylation in biology [157].
Today, we know that phosphorylation is the key regulatory step in signaling pathways responsible for cellular
development and differentiation, cell cycle control,
metabolism, and the immune response. It acts not only
as a veritable on and off switch for protein activity, but
also as a precise mechanism of redirecting a protein’s
cellular localization, and thus its function in the cell. As
described in this review, the role of phosphorylation in
the nuclear transport of cargos has only now begun to
be elucidated. We have discussed key examples of the
different mechanisms by which this occurs. In this final
section, we will try to summarize the broad significance
of this novel regulatory mechanism. Although the phosphorylated cargos described in this review are seemingly
diverse, some general rules emerge comparing their
function. Nearly all known cargos whose nuclear import
is regulated by phosphorylation act directly (or indirectly) on the control of gene expression. Certain cargos
are transcription factors (e.g. STAT1, NFAT, Msn2p,
Pho4, Swi6) that directly bind DNA and trigger expression of critical genes, or kinases that specifically phosphorylate transcription factors critical for development
(e.g. ERK proteins). Other cargos (mainly viral) function
as transactivators of genome transcription (EBNA-1), or
like SV40 T-large antigen, bind to important cellular
proteins such as p53 and retinoblastoma protein (pRb),
and thereby are capable of transforming a variety of cell
types. Finally, other cargos such as SR proteins or
PTHrP [158] are linked to RNA metabolism. Thus,
phosphorylation of these import cargos alters their

Page 13 of 17

nuclear availability and thereby functions as a liaison
between extracellular stimuli and gene expression in the
nucleus. This provides a novel and useful level of regulation that allows turning genes on and off when cellular
and developmental conditions demand it. By controlling
the availability of transcription factors in the nucleus,
cells respond to extracellular stimuli and trigger proliferation or defense mechanisms. Intuitively, the regulation of nuclear import and nuclear availability of
transcription factors and certain proteins that directly
affect gene expression is vital for cell proliferation and
linked to human disease. For instance, STAT1 is becoming increasingly important in cancer biology [159-163].
Although the IFN-g/STAT1 signaling is usually connected with anti-viral response and pro-apoptotic
tumor-suppressor functions, constitutively activated
IFN-g/STAT1 pathway has been recently associated with
aggressive tumor phenotypes [163]. For instance, high
level of nuclear phosphorylated STAT1 is hallmark of
resistance to IFN-g and radiation therapy, which is commonly acquired during radiotherapy treatment and
accounts for many treatment failures [160]. In this
respect, nuclear entry of activate STAT1 is also of
potential pharmacological interest. Small molecule inhibitors that reduce accumulation of phosphorylated
STAT1 in the nucleus would function as useful anticancer agents and likely prevent radiation resistance. Similarly, PTHrP’s role as a growth/malignancy factor clearly
correlates to its ability to localize in the nucleus/nucleolus and thereby delay apoptosis [158]. In conclusion,
there is little doubt that phosphorylation adds another
level of regulation to the already tightly control trafficking of proteins between the nucleus and cytoplasm. The
challenge is now to expand the analysis of import cargos
that are phosphorylated and develop more quantitative
methods to measure how phosphorylation affects the
kinetic of nuclear localization as well as protein turnover, in vivo. This is likely to have a very significant
impact on our ability to understand how extracellular
stimuli (e.g. cytokines, hormones, environmental stress)
affect, modulate and control gene expression in the cell
nucleus.
List of Abbreviations used
NLS: nuclear localization signal; NPC: nuclear pore complex; NE: nuclear
envelope; ONM: outer nuclear membrane; INM: inner nuclear membrane;
IBB: importin b binding; NES: nuclear export signal; NUP: nucleoporin; EBV:
Epstein-Barr virus; EBNA-1: Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 1; HBV: Hepatitis
B virus; PKC: protein kinase C; STATs: signal transducers and activators of
transcription; SH2: Src2 Homology domain; dsNLS: dimer-specific NLS; cNLS:
classical NLS; ncNLS: non classical NLS; ARM: armadillo; ERF: extracellular
signal regulated kinase; TAD: transcriptional activation domain; TEY: Thr-GluTyr; NTS: Nuclear Transport Signal; SR protein: serine/arginine-rich proteins;
SPS: Ser-Pro-Ser; OA: okadoic acid; IKB: inhibitory protein of NF-kB; NFAT:
nuclear factor of activated T-cells; SRR2: serine-rich region; PTHrP: parathyroid
hormone related protein; STREs: stress response elements; cAPK: cAMP-

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

dependent protein kinase; TC-PTP: T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase; PTP:
protein tyrosine phosphatase; SHP: SH2-containing tyrosine phosphatase;
pSTAT1: phosphorylated STAT1; IFN: interferon; JaK: Janus Kinase; PIAS:
Protein Inhibitor of STAT1; SOCS: Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling; VH1:
Vaccinia virus H1 gene product; JEV: Japanese Encephalitis Virus; TBE: TickBorne Encephalitis Virus.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NIH grant GM074846-01A1 to GC. We apologize
to all authors whose work could not be cited in this review due to lack of
space. Where possible, reviews have been referenced instead of the original
research papers.
Author details
1
Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical
University, 750 E. Adams Street, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA. 2Dept. of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 233 South
10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
Authors’ contributions
JN wrote the initial draft of the manuscript; KL expanded and revised the
manuscript, and generated all figures. GC revised both text and figures
critically for important intellectual content; all three authors have given final
approval of the version to be published.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests
Received: 30 September 2010 Accepted: 23 December 2010
Published: 23 December 2010
References
1. Strambio-De-Castillia C, Niepel M, Rout MP: The nuclear pore complex:
bridging nuclear transport and gene regulation. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
11:490-501.
2. Mosammaparast N, Pemberton LF: Karyopherins: from nuclear-transport
mediators to nuclear-function regulators. Trends Cell Biol 2004, 14:547-556.
3. Gorlich D, Kutay U: Transport between the cell nucleus and the
cytoplasm. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1999, 15:607-660.
4. Stewart M: Molecular mechanism of the nuclear protein import cycle.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007, 8:195-208.
5. Pemberton LF, Paschal BM: Mechanisms of receptor-mediated nuclear
import and nuclear export. Traffic 2005, 6:187-198.
6. Lange A, Mills RE, Lange CJ, Stewart M, Devine SE, Corbett AH: Classical
nuclear localization signals: definition, function, and interaction with
importin alpha. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:5101-5105.
7. Kaffman A, O’Shea EK: Regulation of nuclear localization: a key to a door.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1999, 15:291-339.
8. Chook YM, Blobel G: Karyopherins and nuclear import. Curr Opin Struct
Biol 2001, 11:703-715.
9. Gorlich D, Dabrowski M, Bischoff FR, Kutay U, Bork P, Hartmann E, Prehn S,
Izaurralde E: A novel class of RanGTP binding proteins. J Cell Biol 1997,
138:65-80.
10. Richards SA, Carey KL, Macara IG: Requirement of guanosine triphosphatebound ran for signal-mediated nuclear protein export. Science 1997,
276:1842-1844.
11. Moroianu J, Blobel G: Protein export from the nucleus requires the
GTPase Ran and GTP hydrolysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995,
92:4318-4322.
12. Ohtsubo M, Okazaki H, Nishimoto T: The RCC1 protein, a regulator for the
onset of chromosome condensation locates in the nucleus and binds to
DNA. J Cell Biol 1989, 109:1389-1397.
13. Matunis MJ, Wu J, Blobel G: SUMO-1 modification and its role in targeting
the Ran GTPase-activating protein, RanGAP1, to the nuclear pore
complex. J Cell Biol 1998, 140:499-509.
14. Harel A, Forbes DJ: Importin beta: conducting a much larger cellular
symphony. Mol Cell 2004, 16:319-330.
15. Lott K, Bhardwaj A, Mitrousis G, Pante N, Cingolani G: The importin beta
binding domain modulates the avidity of importin beta for the nuclear
pore complex. J Biol Chem 2010, 285:13769-13780.

Page 14 of 17

16. Lott K, Cingolani G: The IBB Domain as a Master Regulator of
Nucleocytoplasmic Transport. Biochimica et biophysica acta 2010.
17. Goldfarb DS, Corbett AH, Mason DA, Harreman MT, Adam SA: Importin
alpha: a multipurpose nuclear-transport receptor. Trends Cell Biol 2004,
14:505-514.
18. Mason DA, Stage DE, Goldfarb DS: Evolution of the metazoan-specific
importin alpha gene family. J Mol Evol 2009, 68:351-365.
19. Meyer T, Vinkemeier U: Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of STAT transcription
factors. Eur J Biochem 2004, 271:4606-4612.
20. Tarendeau F, Boudet J, Guilligay D, Mas PJ, Bougault CM, Boulo S, Baudin F,
Ruigrok RW, Daigle N, Ellenberg J, et al: Structure and nuclear import
function of the C-terminal domain of influenza virus polymerase PB2
subunit. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2007, 14:229-233.
21. Fagerlund R, Kinnunen L, Kohler M, Julkunen I, Melen K: NF-{kappa}B is
transported into the nucleus by importin {alpha}3 and importin {alpha}4.
J Biol Chem 2005, 280:15942-15951.
22. Lee BJ, Cansizoglu AE, Suel KE, Louis TH, Zhang Z, Chook YM: Rules for
nuclear localization sequence recognition by karyopherin beta 2. Cell
2006, 126:543-558.
23. Lim RY, Ullman KS, Fahrenkrog B: Biology and biophysics of the nuclear
pore complex and its components. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol 2008, 267:299-342.
24. Brohawn SG, Partridge JR, Whittle JR, Schwartz TU: The nuclear pore
complex has entered the atomic age. Structure 2009, 17:1156-1168.
25. D’Angelo MA, Hetzer MW: Structure, dynamics and function of nuclear
pore complexes. Trends Cell Biol 2008, 18:456-466.
26. Drummond S, Allen T: Structure, function and assembly of the nuclear
pore complex. Symp Soc Exp Biol 2004, 89-114.
27. Yaseen NR, Blobel G: Two distinct classes of Ran-binding sites on the
nucleoporin Nup-358. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:5516-5521.
28. Walther TC, Fornerod M, Pickersgill H, Goldberg M, Allen TD, Mattaj IW: The
nucleoporin Nup153 is required for nuclear pore basket formation,
nuclear pore complex anchoring and import of a subset of nuclear
proteins. Embo J 2001, 20:5703-5714.
29. Terry LJ, Wente SR: Flexible gates: dynamic topologies and functions for
FG nucleoporins in nucleocytoplasmic transport. Eukaryot Cell 2009,
8:1814-1827.
30. Patel SS, Belmont BJ, Sante JM, Rexach MF: Natively unfolded
nucleoporins gate protein diffusion across the nuclear pore complex.
Cell 2007, 129:83-96.
31. Peters R: Translocation through the nuclear pore complex: selectivity and
speed by reduction-of-dimensionality. Traffic 2005, 6:421-427.
32. Tran EJ, Wente SR: Dynamic nuclear pore complexes: life on the edge.
Cell 2006, 125:1041-1053.
33. Weis K: The nuclear pore complex: oily spaghetti or gummy bear? Cell
2007, 130:405-407.
34. Deribe YL, Pawson T, Dikic I: Post-translational modifications in signal
integration. Nat Struct Mol Biol 17:666-672.
35. Lin J, Xie Z, Zhu H, Qian J: Understanding protein phosphorylation on a
systems level. Brief Funct Genomics 9:32-42.
36. Shi Y: Serine/threonine phosphatases: mechanism through structure. Cell
2009, 139:468-484.
37. Hunter T: Protein kinases and phosphatases: the yin and yang of protein
phosphorylation and signaling. Cell 1995, 80:225-236.
38. Moorhead GB, Trinkle-Mulcahy L, Ulke-Lemee A: Emerging roles of nuclear
protein phosphatases. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007, 8:234-244.
39. Arnold M, Nath A, Hauber J, Kehlenbach RH: Multiple importins function
as nuclear transport receptors for the Rev protein of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:20883-20890.
40. Cingolani G, Bednenko J, Gillespie MT, Gerace L: Molecular basis for the
recognition of a nonclassical nuclear localization signal by importin
beta. Mol Cell 2002, 10:1345-1353.
41. Jakel S, Albig W, Kutay U, Bischoff FR, Schwamborn K, Doenecke D,
Gorlich D: The importin beta/importin 7 heterodimer is a functional
nuclear import receptor for histone H1. Embo J 1999, 18:2411-2423.
42. Cassany A, Gerace L: Reconstitution of nuclear import in permeabilized
cells. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 464:181-205.
43. Sugden B, Warren N: A promoter of Epstein-Barr virus that can function
during latent infection can be transactivated by EBNA-1, a viral protein
required for viral DNA replication during latent infection. J Virol 1989,
63:2644-2649.

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

44. Kennedy G, Sugden B: EBNA-1, a bifunctional transcriptional activator.
Mol Cell Biol 2003, 23:6901-6908.
45. Kitamura R, Sekimoto T, Ito S, Harada S, Yamagata H, Masai H, Yoneda Y,
Yanagi K: Nuclear import of Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 1
mediated by NPI-1 (Importin alpha5) is up- and down-regulated by
phosphorylation of the nuclear localization signal for which Lys379 and
Arg380 are essential. J Virol 2006, 80:1979-1991.
46. Nardozzi J, Wenta N, Yasuhara N, Vinkemeier U, Cingolani G: Molecular
basis for the recognition of phosphorylated STAT1 by importin alpha5. J
Mol Biol 2010, 402:83-100.
47. Kann M, Sodeik B, Vlachou A, Gerlich WH, Helenius A: Phosphorylationdependent binding of hepatitis B virus core particles to the nuclear
pore complex. J Cell Biol 1999, 145:45-55.
48. Kock J, Schlicht HJ: Analysis of the earliest steps of hepadnavirus
replication: genome repair after infectious entry into hepatocytes does
not depend on viral polymerase activity. J Virol 1993, 67:4867-4874.
49. Crowther RA, Kiselev NA, Bottcher B, Berriman JA, Borisova GP, Ose V,
Pumpens P: Three-dimensional structure of hepatitis B virus core
particles determined by electron cryomicroscopy. Cell 1994, 77:943-950.
50. Rabe B, Vlachou A, Pante N, Helenius A, Kann M: Nuclear import of
hepatitis B virus capsids and release of the viral genome. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2003, 100:9849-9854.
51. Eckhardt SG, Milich DR, McLachlan A: Hepatitis B virus core antigen has
two nuclear localization sequences in the arginine-rich carboxyl
terminus. J Virol 1991, 65:575-582.
52. Hatton T, Zhou S, Standring DN: RNA- and DNA-binding activities in
hepatitis B virus capsid protein: a model for their roles in viral
replication. J Virol 1992, 66:5232-5241.
53. Liao W, Ou JH: Phosphorylation and nuclear localization of the hepatitis
B virus core protein: significance of serine in the three repeated SPRRR
motifs. J Virol 1995, 69:1025-1029.
54. Zlotnick A, Cheng N, Stahl SJ, Conway JF, Steven AC, Wingfield PT:
Localization of the C terminus of the assembly domain of hepatitis B
virus capsid protein: implications for morphogenesis and organization of
encapsidated RNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:9556-9561.
55. Schmitz A, Schwarz A, Foss M, Zhou L, Rabe B, Hoellenriegel J, Stoeber M,
Pante N, Kann M: Nucleoporin 153 arrests the nuclear import of hepatitis
B virus capsids in the nuclear basket. PLoS Pathog 6:e1000741.
56. Seeger C, Mason WS: Hepatitis B virus biology. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2000,
64:51-68.
57. Xiao CY, Hubner S, Elliot RM, Caon A, Jans DA: A consensus cAMPdependent protein kinase (PK-A) site in place of the CcN motif casein
kinase II site simian virus 40 large T-antigen confers PK-A-mediated
regulation of nuclear import. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:6451-6457.
58. Hubner S, Xiao CY, Jans DA: The protein kinase CK2 site (Ser111/112)
enhances recognition of the simian virus 40 large T-antigen nuclear
localization sequence by importin. J Biol Chem 1997, 272:17191-17195.
59. Xiao CY, Hubner S, Jans DA: SV40 large tumor antigen nuclear import is
regulated by the double-stranded DNA-dependent protein kinase site
(serine 120) flanking the nuclear localization sequence. J Biol Chem 1997,
272:22191-22198.
60. Fontes MR, Teh T, Toth G, John A, Pavo I, Jans DA, Kobe B: Role of flanking
sequences and phosphorylation in the recognition of the simian-virus40 large T-antigen nuclear localization sequences by importin-alpha.
Biochem J 2003, 375:339-349.
61. Fontes MR, Teh T, Kobe B: Structural basis of recognition of monopartite
and bipartite nuclear localization sequences by mammalian importinalpha. J Mol Biol 2000, 297:1183-1194.
62. Vinkemeier U, Moarefi I, Darnell JE Jr, Kuriyan J: Structure of the aminoterminal protein interaction domain of STAT-4. Science 1998, 279:1048-1052.
63. Chen X, Vinkemeier U, Zhao Y, Jeruzalmi D, Darnell JE Jr, Kuriyan J: Crystal
structure of a tyrosine phosphorylated STAT-1 dimer bound to DNA. Cell
1998, 93:827-839.
64. Mao X, Ren Z, Parker GN, Sondermann H, Pastorello MA, Wang W,
McMurray JS, Demeler B, Darnell JE Jr, Chen X: Structural bases of
unphosphorylated STAT1 association and receptor binding. Mol Cell
2005, 17:761-771.
65. Becker S, Corthals GL, Aebersold R, Groner B, Muller CW: Expression of a
tyrosine phosphorylated, DNA binding Stat3beta dimer in bacteria. FEBS
Lett 1998, 441:141-147.

Page 15 of 17

66. Wojciak JM, Martinez-Yamout MA, Dyson HJ, Wright PE: Structural basis for
recruitment of CBP/p300 coactivators by STAT1 and STAT2
transactivation domains. EMBO J 2009, 28:948-958.
67. Darnell JE Jr: STATs and gene regulation. Science 1997, 277:1630-1635.
68. Shuai K, Stark GR, Kerr IM, Darnell JE Jr: A single phosphotyrosine residue
of Stat91 required for gene activation by interferon-gamma. Science
1993, 261:1744-1746.
69. Wenta N, Strauss H, Meyer S, Vinkemeier U: Tyrosine phosphorylation
regulates the partitioning of STAT1 between different dimer
conformations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:9238-9243.
70. Meyer T, Begitt A, Lodige I, van Rossum M, Vinkemeier U: Constitutive and
IFN-gamma-induced nuclear import of STAT1 proceed through
independent pathways. Embo J 2002, 21:344-354.
71. Fagerlund R, Melen K, Kinnunen L, Julkunen I: Arginine/lysine-rich nuclear
localization signals mediate interactions between dimeric STATs and
importin alpha 5. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:30072-30078.
72. Melen K, Fagerlund R, Franke J, Kohler M, Kinnunen L, Julkunen I: Importin
alpha nuclear localization signal binding sites for STAT1, STAT2, and
influenza A virus nucleoprotein. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:28193-28200.
73. McBride KM, Banninger G, McDonald C, Reich NC: Regulated nuclear
import of the STAT1 transcription factor by direct binding of importinalpha. Embo J 2002, 21:1754-1763.
74. Sekimoto T, Imamoto N, Nakajima K, Hirano T, Yoneda Y: Extracellular
signal-dependent nuclear import of Stat1 is mediated by nuclear poretargeting complex formation with NPI-1, but not Rch1. Embo J 1997,
16:7067-7077.
75. Li X, Leung S, Qureshi S, Darnell JE Jr, Stark GR: Formation of STAT1-STAT2
heterodimers and their role in the activation of IRF-1 gene transcription
by interferon-alpha. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:5790-5794.
76. Kato Y, Tapping RI, Huang S, Watson MH, Ulevitch RJ, Lee JD: Bmk1/Erk5 is
required for cell proliferation induced by epidermal growth factor.
Nature 1998, 395:713-716.
77. Meloche S, Pouyssegur J: The ERK1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway as a master regulator of the G1- to S-phase transition.
Oncogene 2007, 26:3227-3239.
78. Kato Y, Kravchenko VV, Tapping RI, Han J, Ulevitch RJ, Lee JD: BMK1/ERK5
regulates serum-induced early gene expression through transcription
factor MEF2C. Embo J 1997, 16:7054-7066.
79. Kamakura S, Moriguchi T, Nishida E: Activation of the protein kinase ERK5/
BMK1 by receptor tyrosine kinases. Identification and characterization of
a signaling pathway to the nucleus. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:26563-26571.
80. Morimoto H, Kondoh K, Nishimoto S, Terasawa K, Nishida E: Activation of a
C-terminal transcriptional activation domain of ERK5 by
autophosphorylation. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:35449-35456.
81. Raviv Z, Kalie E, Seger R: MEK5 and ERK5 are localized in the nuclei of
resting as well as stimulated cells, while MEKK2 translocates from the
cytosol to the nucleus upon stimulation. J Cell Sci 2004, 117:1773-1784.
82. Buschbeck M, Ullrich A: The unique C-terminal tail of the mitogenactivated protein kinase ERK5 regulates its activation and nuclear
shuttling. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:2659-2667.
83. Kondoh K, Terasawa K, Morimoto H, Nishida E: Regulation of nuclear
translocation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 by active nuclear
import and export mechanisms. Mol Cell Biol 2006, 26:1679-1690.
84. Chao TH, Hayashi M, Tapping RI, Kato Y, Lee JD: MEKK3 directly regulates
MEK5 activity as part of the big mitogen-activated protein kinase 1
(BMK1) signaling pathway. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:36035-36038.
85. McCracken SR, Ramsay A, Heer R, Mathers ME, Jenkins BL, Edwards J,
Robson CN, Marquez R, Cohen P, Leung HY: Aberrant expression of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 in human prostate cancer.
Oncogene 2008, 27:2978-2988.
86. Nicol RL, Frey N, Pearson G, Cobb M, Richardson J, Olson EN: Activated
MEK5 induces serial assembly of sarcomeres and eccentric cardiac
hypertrophy. EMBO J 2001, 20:2757-2767.
87. Pi X, Garin G, Xie L, Zheng Q, Wei H, Abe J, Yan C, Berk BC: BMK1/ERK5 is a
novel regulator of angiogenesis by destabilizing hypoxia inducible
factor 1alpha. Circ Res 2005, 96:1145-1151.
88. Mebratu Y, Tesfaigzi Y: How ERK1/2 activation controls cell proliferation
and cell death: Is subcellular localization the answer? Cell Cycle 2009,
8:1168-1175.

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

89. Yu W, Fantl WJ, Harrowe G, Williams LT: Regulation of the MAP kinase
pathway by mammalian Ksr through direct interaction with MEK and
ERK. Curr Biol 1998, 8:56-64.
90. Tanoue T, Adachi M, Moriguchi T, Nishida E: A conserved docking motif in
MAP kinases common to substrates, activators and regulators. Nat Cell
Biol 2000, 2:110-116.
91. Chuderland D, Seger R: Protein-protein interactions in the regulation of
the extracellular signal-regulated kinase. Mol Biotechnol 2005, 29:57-74.
92. Adachi M, Fukuda M, Nishida E: Two co-existing mechanisms for nuclear
import of MAP kinase: passive diffusion of a monomer and active
transport of a dimer. Embo J 1999, 18:5347-5358.
93. Khokhlatchev AV, Canagarajah B, Wilsbacher J, Robinson M, Atkinson M,
Goldsmith E, Cobb MH: Phosphorylation of the MAP kinase ERK2
promotes its homodimerization and nuclear translocation. Cell 1998,
93:605-615.
94. Robinson FL, Whitehurst AW, Raman M, Cobb MH: Identification of novel
point mutations in ERK2 that selectively disrupt binding to MEK1. J Biol
Chem 2002, 277:14844-14852.
95. Chuderland D, Konson A, Seger R: Identification and characterization of a
general nuclear translocation signal in signaling proteins. Mol Cell 2008,
31:850-861.
96. Hill CS: Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of Smad proteins. Cell Res 2009,
19:36-46.
97. Pei JJ, Braak H, An WL, Winblad B, Cowburn RF, Iqbal K, Grundke-Iqbal I:
Up-regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK1/2 and MEK1/2
is associated with the progression of neurofibrillary degeneration in
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2002, 109:45-55.
98. Lin S, Fu XD: SR proteins and related factors in alternative splicing. Adv
Exp Med Biol 2007, 623:107-122.
99. Caceres JF, Screaton GR, Krainer AR: A specific subset of SR proteins
shuttles continuously between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Genes
Dev 1998, 12:55-66.
100. Li X, Manley JL: New talents for an old acquaintance: the SR protein
splicing factor ASF/SF2 functions in the maintenance of genome
stability. Cell Cycle 2005, 4:1706-1708.
101. Li X, Manley JL: Inactivation of the SR protein splicing factor ASF/SF2
results in genomic instability. Cell 2005, 122:365-378.
102. Hedley ML, Amrein H, Maniatis T: An amino acid sequence motif sufficient
for subnuclear localization of an arginine/serine-rich splicing factor. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:11524-11528.
103. Lai MC, Lin RI, Tarn WY: Transportin-SR2 mediates nuclear import of
phosphorylated SR proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:10154-10159.
104. Lai MC, Lin RI, Huang SY, Tsai CW, Tarn WY: A human importin-beta family
protein, transportin-SR2, interacts with the phosphorylated RS domain
of SR proteins. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:7950-7957.
105. Kehlenbach RH, Gerace L: Phosphorylation of the nuclear transport
machinery down-regulates nuclear protein import in vitro. J Biol Chem
2000, 275:17848-17856.
106. Porter FW, Bochkov YA, Albee AJ, Wiese C, Palmenberg AC: A picornavirus
protein interacts with Ran-GTPase and disrupts nucleocytoplasmic
transport. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:12417-12422.
107. Porter FW, Palmenberg AC: Leader-induced phosphorylation of
nucleoporins correlates with nuclear trafficking inhibition by
cardioviruses. J Virol 2009, 83:1941-1951.
108. Chen LF, Greene WC: Shaping the nuclear action of NF-kappaB. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2004, 5:392-401.
109. McCaffrey PG, Luo C, Kerppola TK, Jain J, Badalian TM, Ho AM, Burgeon E,
Lane WS, Lambert JN, Curran T, et al: Isolation of the cyclosporin-sensitive
T cell transcription factor NFATp. Science 1993, 262:750-754.
110. Jain J, McCaffrey PG, Miner Z, Kerppola TK, Lambert JN, Verdine GL,
Curran T, Rao A: The T-cell transcription factor NFATp is a substrate for
calcineurin and interacts with Fos and Jun. Nature 1993, 365:352-355.
111. Ho SN, Thomas DJ, Timmerman LA, Li X, Francke U, Crabtree GR: NFATc3, a
lymphoid-specific NFATc family member that is calcium-regulated and
exhibits distinct DNA binding specificity. J Biol Chem 1995,
270:19898-19907.
112. Ortega-Perez I, Cano E, Were F, Villar M, Vazquez J, Redondo JM: c-Jun Nterminal kinase (JNK) positively regulates NFATc2 transactivation
through phosphorylation within the N-terminal regulatory domain. J Biol
Chem 2005, 280:20867-20878.

Page 16 of 17

113. Kehlenbach RH, Dickmanns A, Gerace L: Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling
factors including Ran and CRM1 mediate nuclear export of NFAT In
vitro. J Cell Biol 1998, 141:863-874.
114. Belfield JL, Whittaker C, Cader MZ, Chawla S: Differential effects of Ca2+
and cAMP on transcription mediated by MEF2 D and cAMP-response
element-binding protein in hippocampal neurons. J Biol Chem 2006,
281:27724-27732.
115. Loh C, Shaw KT, Carew J, Viola JP, Luo C, Perrino BA, Rao A: Calcineurin
binds the transcription factor NFAT1 and reversibly regulates its activity.
J Biol Chem 1996, 271:10884-10891.
116. Graef IA, Wang F, Charron F, Chen L, Neilson J, Tessier-Lavigne M,
Crabtree GR: Neurotrophins and netrins require calcineurin/NFAT
signaling to stimulate outgrowth of embryonic axons. Cell 2003,
113:657-670.
117. Mansuy IM: Calcineurin in memory and bidirectional plasticity. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2003, 311:1195-1208.
118. Kronenberg HM, Karaplis AC, Lanske B: Role of parathyroid hormonerelated protein in skeletal development. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1996,
785:119-123.
119. Philbrick WM, Wysolmerski JJ, Galbraith S, Holt E, Orloff JJ, Yang KH,
Vasavada RC, Weir EC, Broadus AE, Stewart AF: Defining the roles of
parathyroid hormone-related protein in normal physiology. Physiol Rev
1996, 76:127-173.
120. Clemens TL, Cormier S, Eichinger A, Endlich K, Fiaschi-Taesch N, Fischer E,
Friedman PA, Karaplis AC, Massfelder T, Rossert J, et al: Parathyroid
hormone-related protein and its receptors: nuclear functions and roles
in the renal and cardiovascular systems, the placental trophoblasts and
the pancreatic islets. Br J Pharmacol 2001, 134:1113-1136.
121. Lam MH, Thomas RJ, Martin TJ, Gillespie MT, Jans DA: Nuclear and
nucleolar localization of parathyroid hormone-related protein. Immunol
Cell Biol 2000, 78:395-402.
122. Henderson JE, Amizuka N, Warshawsky H, Biasotto D, Lanske BM,
Goltzman D, Karaplis AC: Nucleolar localization of parathyroid hormonerelated peptide enhances survival of chondrocytes under conditions
that promote apoptotic cell death. Mol Cell Biol 1995, 15:4064-4075.
123. Lam MH, Briggs LJ, Hu W, Martin TJ, Gillespie MT, Jans DA: Importin beta
recognizes parathyroid hormone-related protein with high affinity and
mediates its nuclear import in the absence of importin alpha. J Biol
Chem 1999, 274:7391-7398.
124. Lam MH, House CM, Tiganis T, Mitchelhill KI, Sarcevic B, Cures A, Ramsay R,
Kemp BE, Martin TJ, Gillespie MT: Phosphorylation at the cyclindependent kinases site (Thr85) of parathyroid hormone-related protein
negatively regulates its nuclear localization. J Biol Chem 1999,
274:18559-18566.
125. Koerner C, Guan T, Gerace L, Cingolani G: Synergy of silent and hot spot
mutations in importin beta reveals a dynamic mechanism for
recognition of a nuclear localization signal. J Biol Chem 2003,
278:16216-16221.
126. Ruis H, Schuller C: Stress signaling in yeast. Bioessays 1995, 17:959-965.
127. Gasch AP, Spellman PT, Kao CM, Carmel-Harel O, Eisen MB, Storz G,
Botstein D, Brown PO: Genomic expression programs in the response of
yeast cells to environmental changes. Mol Biol Cell 2000, 11:4241-4257.
128. Gorner W, Durchschlag E, Martinez-Pastor MT, Estruch F, Ammerer G,
Hamilton B, Ruis H, Schuller C: Nuclear localization of the C2H2 zinc
finger protein Msn2p is regulated by stress and protein kinase A
activity. Genes Dev 1998, 12:586-597.
129. Gorner W, Durchschlag E, Wolf J, Brown EL, Ammerer G, Ruis H, Schuller C:
Acute glucose starvation activates the nuclear localization signal of a
stress-specific yeast transcription factor. Embo J 2002, 21:135-144.
130. Oshima Y: The phosphatase system in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genes
Genet Syst 1997, 72:323-334.
131. Komeili A, O’Shea EK: Roles of phosphorylation sites in regulating activity
of the transcription factor Pho4. Science 1999, 284:977-980.
132. O’Neill EM, Kaffman A, Jolly ER, O’Shea EK: Regulation of PHO4 nuclear
localization by the PHO80-PHO85 cyclin-CDK complex. Science 1996,
271:209-212.
133. Kaffman A, Rank NM, O’Shea EK: Phosphorylation regulates association of
the transcription factor Pho4 with its import receptor Pse1/Kap121.
Genes Dev 1998, 12:2673-2683.
134. Queralt E, Igual JC: Cell cycle activation of the Swi6p transcription factor
is linked to nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. Mol Cell Biol 2003, 23:3126-3140.

Nardozzi et al. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010, 8:32
http://www.biosignaling.com/content/8/1/32

135. Sidorova JM, Mikesell GE, Breeden LL: Cell cycle-regulated
phosphorylation of Swi6 controls its nuclear localization. Mol Biol Cell
1995, 6:1641-1658.
136. Harreman MT, Kline TM, Milford HG, Harben MB, Hodel AE, Corbett AH:
Regulation of nuclear import by phosphorylation adjacent to nuclear
localization signals. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:20613-20621.
137. Alexander WS: Suppressors of cytokine signalling (SOCS) in the immune
system. Nat Rev Immunol 2002, 2:410-416.
138. Rogers RS, Horvath CM, Matunis MJ: SUMO modification of STAT1 and its
role in PIAS-mediated inhibition of gene activation. J Biol Chem 2003,
278:30091-30097.
139. Lorenzen JA, Dadabay CY, Fischer EH: COOH-terminal sequence motifs
target the T cell protein tyrosine phosphatase to the ER and nucleus. J
Cell Biol 1995, 131:631-643.
140. Tillmann U, Wagner J, Boerboom D, Westphal H, Tremblay ML: Nuclear
localization and cell cycle regulation of a murine protein tyrosine
phosphatase. Mol Cell Biol 1994, 14:3030-3040.
141. ten Hoeve J, de Jesus Ibarra-Sanchez M, Fu Y, Zhu W, Tremblay M, David M,
Shuai K: Identification of a nuclear Stat1 protein tyrosine phosphatase.
Mol Cell Biol 2002, 22:5662-5668.
142. Begitt A, Meyer T, van Rossum M, Vinkemeier U: Nucleocytoplasmic
translocation of Stat1 is regulated by a leucine-rich export signal in the
coiled-coil domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:10418-10423.
143. Hof P, Pluskey S, Dhe-Paganon S, Eck MJ, Shoelson SE: Crystal structure of
the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2. Cell 1998, 92:441-450.
144. Neel BG, Gu H, Pao L: The ‘Shp’ing news: SH2 domain-containing tyrosine
phosphatases in cell signaling. Trends Biochem Sci 2003, 28:284-293.
145. Klingmuller U, Lorenz U, Cantley LC, Neel BG, Lodish HF: Specific
recruitment of SH-PTP1 to the erythropoietin receptor causes
inactivation of JAK2 and termination of proliferative signals. Cell 1995,
80:729-738.
146. Wu TR, Hong YK, Wang XD, Ling MY, Dragoi AM, Chung AS, Campbell AG,
Han ZY, Feng GS, Chin YE: SHP-2 is a dual-specificity phosphatase
involved in Stat1 dephosphorylation at both tyrosine and serine
residues in nuclei. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:47572-47580.
147. Pogo BG, Melana SM, Blaho J: Poxvirus infection and apoptosis. Int Rev
Immunol 2004, 23:61-74.
148. Liu K, Lemon B, Traktman P: The dual-specificity phosphatase encoded by
vaccinia virus, VH1, is essential for viral transcription in vivo and in vitro.
J Virol 1995, 69:7823-7834.
149. Derrien M, Punjabi A, Khanna M, Grubisha O, Traktman P: Tyrosine
phosphorylation of A17 during vaccinia virus infection: involvement of
the H1 phosphatase and the F10 kinase. J Virol 1999, 73:7287-7296.
150. Mercer J, Traktman P: Investigation of structural and functional motifs
within the vaccinia virus A14 phosphoprotein, an essential component
of the virion membrane. J Virol 2003, 77:8857-8871.
151. Najarro P, Traktman P, Lewis JA: Vaccinia virus blocks gamma interferon
signal transduction: viral VH1 phosphatase reverses Stat1 activation. J
Virol 2001, 75:3185-3196.
152. Koksal AC, Nardozzi JD, Cingolani G: Dimeric quaternary structure of the
prototypical dual specificity phosphatase VH1. J Biol Chem 2009,
284:10129-10137.
153. Marg A, Shan Y, Meyer T, Meissner T, Brandenburg M, Vinkemeier U:
Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling by nucleoporins Nup153 and Nup214 and
CRM1-dependent nuclear export control the subcellular distribution of
latent Stat1. J Cell Biol 2004, 165:823-833.
154. Best SM, Morris KL, Shannon JG, Robertson SJ, Mitzel DN, Park GS, Boer E,
Wolfinbarger JB, Bloom ME: Inhibition of interferon-stimulated JAK-STAT
signaling by a tick-borne flavivirus and identification of NS5 as an
interferon antagonist. J Virol 2005, 79:12828-12839.
155. Lin RJ, Chang BL, Yu HP, Liao CL, Lin YL: Blocking of interferon-induced
Jak-Stat signaling by Japanese encephalitis virus NS5 through a protein
tyrosine phosphatase-mediated mechanism. J Virol 2006, 80:5908-5918.
156. Mazzon M, Jones M, Davidson A, Chain B, Jacobs M: Dengue virus NS5
inhibits interferon-alpha signaling by blocking signal transducer and
activator of transcription 2 phosphorylation. J Infect Dis 2009,
200:1261-1270.
157. Krebs EHFaEG: Conversion of Phosphorylase b to Phosphorylase a in
Muscle Extracts. Journal of Biological Chemistry 1955, 216:121-132.

Page 17 of 17

158. Jans DA, Thomas RJ, Gillespie MT: Parathyroid hormone-related protein
(PTHrP): a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein with distinct paracrine
and intracrine roles. Vitam Horm 2003, 66:345-384.
159. Khodarev NN, Minn AJ, Efimova EV, Darga TE, Labay E, Beckett M,
Mauceri HJ, Roizman B, Weichselbaum RR: Signal transducer and activator
of transcription 1 regulates both cytotoxic and prosurvival functions in
tumor cells. Cancer Res 2007, 67:9214-9220.
160. Khodarev NN, Beckett M, Labay E, Darga T, Roizman B, Weichselbaum RR:
STAT1 is overexpressed in tumors selected for radioresistance and
confers protection from radiation in transduced sensitive cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:1714-1719.
161. Meng Y, Mauceri HJ, Khodarev NN, Darga TE, Pitroda SP, Beckett MA,
Kufe DW, Weichselbaum RR: Ad.Egr-TNF and local ionizing radiation
suppress metastases by interferon-beta-dependent activation of
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells. Mol Ther 2010, 18:912-920.
162. Pitroda SP, Wakim BT, Sood RF, Beveridge MG, Beckett MA,
MacDermed DM, Weichselbaum RR, Khodarev NN: STAT1-dependent
expression of energy metabolic pathways links tumour growth and
radioresistance to the Warburg effect. BMC Med 2009, 7:68.
163. Khodarev NN, Roach P, Pitroda SP, Golden DW, Bhayani M, Shao MY,
Darga TE, Beveridge MG, Sood RF, Sutton HG, et al: STAT1 pathway
mediates amplification of metastatic potential and resistance to therapy.
PLoS One 2009, 4:e5821.
164. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
doi:10.1186/1478-811X-8-32
Cite this article as: Nardozzi et al.: Phosphorylation meets nuclear
import: a review. Cell Communication and Signaling 2010 8:32.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
