<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Chasing the hare - Evaluating the phylogenetic utility of a nuclear single copy gene region at and below species level within the species rich group Peperomia (Piperaceae)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-357"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Julia Naumann"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Chasing the hare - Evaluating the phylogenetic
utility of a nuclear single copy gene region at
and below species level within the species rich
group Peperomia (Piperaceae)
Julia Naumann1*†, Lars Symmank1†, Marie-Stéphanie Samain2, Kai F Müller3, Christoph Neinhuis1,
Claude W dePamphilis4 and Stefan Wanke1

Abstract
Background: The rapidly increasing number of available plant genomes opens up almost unlimited prospects for
biology in general and molecular phylogenetics in particular. A recent study took advantage of this data and
identified a set of nuclear genes that occur in single copy in multiple sequenced angiosperms. The present study is
the first to apply genomic sequence of one of these low copy genes, agt1, as a phylogenetic marker for specieslevel phylogenetics. Its utility is compared to the performance of several coding and non-coding chloroplast loci
that have been suggested as most applicable for this taxonomic level. As a model group, we chose Tildenia, a
subgenus of Peperomia (Piperaceae), one of the largest plant genera. Relationships are particularly difficult to
resolve within these species rich groups due to low levels of polymorphisms and fast or recent radiation. Therefore,
Tildenia is a perfect test case for applying new phylogenetic tools.
Results: We show that the nuclear marker agt1, and in particular the agt1 introns, provide a significantly increased
phylogenetic signal compared to chloroplast markers commonly used for low level phylogenetics. 25% of aligned
characters from agt1 intron sequence are parsimony informative. In comparison, the introns and spacer of several
common chloroplast markers (trnK intron, trnK-psbA spacer, ndhF-rpl32 spacer, rpl32-trnL spacer, psbA-trnH spacer)
provide less than 10% parsimony informative characters. The agt1 dataset provides a deeper resolution than the
chloroplast markers in Tildenia.
Conclusions: Single (or very low) copy nuclear genes are of immense value in plant phylogenetics. Compared to other
nuclear genes that are members of gene families of all sizes, lab effort, such as cloning, can be kept to a minimum.
They also provide regions with different phylogenetic content deriving from coding and non-coding parts of different
length. Thus, they can be applied to a wide range of taxonomic levels from family down to population level. As more
plant genomes are sequenced, we will obtain increasingly precise information about which genes return to single copy
most rapidly following gene duplication and may be most useful across a wide range of plant groups.

Background
Molecular phylogenetics has made remarkable progress
in recent decades toward the reconstruction of a largely
resolved ‘tree of life’ [1]. In flowering plants, the relationships are now clear from the deepest branches
* Correspondence: julia.naumann@tu-dresden.de
† Contributed equally
1
Technische Universität Dresden, Institut für Botanik, D-01062 Dresden,
Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

through to the family level, with only a few exceptions
[2-4]. However, developing strong phylogenetic hypotheses for more closely related plants at the interface of
species level and population level has been, and still is,
quite challenging. At this level, gene exchange and
recombination is still possible, and low sequence divergence often limits phylogenetic resolution. As a result,
multiple independent phylogenetic markers with sufficient sequence divergence are necessary, and analytical
approaches from population genetics may in some cases

© 2011 Naumann et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

be more appropriate than traditional phylogenetic methods [5,6].
The most commonly used marker regions in plant
phylogenetics are coding and non-coding sequences
from the chloroplast genome and ribosomal gene
regions located in the nucleus. Recently, whole plastid
genomes (plastomes) have been used to address deep
branching questions [e.g. [7-11]] in plants, and a rapid
increase in plastome scale data is underway. Mitochondrial genes are not as widely used because of typically
very slow sequence evolution and some complexities
such as extreme rate variation in some lineages and
occurrences of horizontal gene transfer [12,13], gene
conversion and processed paralogy [e.g. [14]]. Nevertheless, these genes do play a substantial role for phylogenies of for instance parasitic plants [e.g. [13,15]] where
plastid genomes can be highly modified [16,17]. However, some of the most extensive efforts to date to
resolve the “deep branches” in flowering plant phylogenetics have involved large taxon samples with sequence
data obtained from up to 17 genes representing all three
genomic compartments [18].
“The Tortoise and the Hare” series [19-21] addressed
the utility of nuclear and chloroplast loci for low level
phylogenetics. These authors noticed an increased resolution for recent branching events with the nuclear gene
Adh, but the chloroplast markers required much less
laboratory effort. Subsequently, a number of promising
chloroplast regions have been used to address questions
at low taxonomic levels [21]. Plastomes provide numerous genes, introns, and intergenic regions; amplification
and direct sequencing of PCR product is easy as a single
cell harbors 1000 or more plastids with multiple (essentially) identical plastid genomes. Plastomes provide an
almost unmatched source of orthologous sequence that
is not complicated by gene family duplication, and multiple genes can be concatenated to provide a very long
sample of orthologous sequence. However, plastome
markers are tightly linked on a single (typically) nonrecombining molecule that usually reflects only the
maternal lineage in angiosperms, limiting the generality
of plastid DNA as the sole source of evolutionary markers at and below species level. In addition, plastomes
are limited in their variability (i.e. substitution rates, parsimony informative sites) and therefore their utility for
low taxonomic level studies may be restricted [19,22].
The intergenic spacer (ITS) regions of nrDNA often
provide higher variability, but their orthology usually
remains an assumption not tested prior to their use in
phylogenetic analysis. Hundreds to thousands of copies
of highly conserved nrDNA gene regions located in the
nucleus make those markers easy to amplify, but their
evolution by tandem duplication events results in a gene
array more accurately described as a gene family or

Page 2 of 19

large collection of paralogs [23,24]. The paralogous nature of nrDNA can complicate the reconstruction of phylogenetic relationships, as it is impossible to determine
orthologous copies from such a large copy number. As
a consequence, divergent paralogs may be inadvertently
sampled from different organisms in a study; when
included in phylogenetic reconstruction, artifacts can
appear [e.g. [25]].
Nuclear markers (excluding nrDNA marker) are
essential for a broad range of evolutionary investigation,
including systematics and character evolution [e.g. [26]],
hybridization [e.g. [27]], polyploidization [e.g. [28]], biogeography [29], origins of domestication [e.g. [30]], and
speciation [e.g. [31]]. Occurring independently all over
the nuclear genome in a virtually inexhaustible repertoire in terms of both number and variability, bi-parentally inherited nuclear loci are promising on different
levels, especially when compared to organellar markers.
The first attempts to establish nuclear markers other
than ribosomal genes yielded a substantial number of
low copy nuclear genes (LCNG) [32]. LCNG, such as
the ADH-genes [33], pistillata [34], GPAT [35], PRK
[36] or LEAFY [37] were applied in numerous studies.
These genes are known to occur either in single copy in
one or more focal species in the study group, or as
members of small gene families [38] and may not occur
in any specific plant lineage. Complete sampling of gene
families often involves intense experimental efforts to
clone and sequence all members of a family. Thus, for
practical reasons, single loci are mostly preferred.
Many different approaches have been used to identify
useful nuclear single copy loci in plants, with results
varying widely in terms of both the general idea and
computational effort. In recent years, the advent of next
generation sequencing technologies (NGS), bioinformatic progress, and publicly available sequence data
have greatly facilitated the identification of such loci [e.
g. [39]]. These rich sources of sequence information
have been utilized by many research groups, who identified new nuclear markers for plant, animal and fungal
phylogenetics to reveal relationships that could not be
resolved with organelle or nuclear ribosomal DNA markers [22,40-47]. All of them focus on genes that occur
in the nucleus in single copy in a sample of organisms
with sequenced genomes. The nucleus provides a vast
repertoire of unlinked markers. However, since there are
thousands of genes in the nucleus, marker selection is
challenging and the majority of nuclear genes occur in
small to large gene families. The present study is based
on the approach published in Duarte et al. [22], where a
global classification of plant protein coding sequences
(Tribes) was used to identify a collection of 959 genes
that are represented by exactly one copy in each of four
sequenced angiosperm genomes (Arabidopsis, Populus,

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

Vitis, and Oryza). “Tribes” are collections of related
genes in a specified set of genomes produced by the
gene clustering program MCL-Tribe [39,48]. While
many PlantTribes approximate gene families [39], the
global classification also identifies genes that are members of highly distinctive clusters that lack closely
related paralogs, including clusters with only a single
gene in each taxon. The set of genes identified in the
analysis was called APVO SSCG (Arabidopsis, Populus,
Vitis, Oryza shared single copy genes). The agt1 gene,
applied in the present study, is part of that set and the
abbreviation nSCG (nuclear single copy gene) that is
used here refers to this approach. We use the term
nSCG operationally, referring to a gene that has been
identified as single copy in global gene classification of a
specified set of genomes, here APVO. This does not
necessarily mean that the gene will be single copy in
any given lineage, particularly in very recent polyploids
[22,49], where the entire gene set has been recently
duplicated, and the process of duplicate gene loss is
underway. However, as larger numbers of genomes are
interrogated, genes that continue to be found in single
copy in all but the most recent polyploids are more
likely to be single copy in a given uncharacterized
lineage.
Hughes et al. [50] proposed the exploration of nuclear
loci other than nrDNA for phylogenetic reconstruction,
which would require the abandonment of ‘universal
thinking’. The enhanced variability of nuclear loci compared to other markers provides great potential, but limits the likelihood of identifying universal amplification
primers that will function across a wide taxonomic
range. In fact, it might be difficult to identify universal
gene loci because polyploidy is prevalent and frequent
in plants. Duplicated genes are often lost by both random and selective processes in a short time, but that
also means there is a chance to encounter multiple gene
copies in a specific lineage [22].
Peperomia (Piperaceae) ranks among the ten largest
angiosperm genera, with approximately 1,650 species
[51]. The phylogenetics and classification of such species-rich clades has long been very challenging. In addition, morphological characters have been shown to be
subject to parallel evolution and extreme reduction,
resulting in a paucity of synapomorphies [52,53]. Moreover, speciation within Peperomia has likely happened
comparatively recently [51], and as a consequence,
reconstructed phylogenies often lack resolution at the
species and population level [54]. Recent backbone phylogenies were based on over 4000 molecular characters
to overcome the lack of variability [52,53]. Therefore,
Peperomia is an ideal candidate for testing the performance of a nSCG region and comparing outcomes with
variable chloroplast markers such as those suggested by

Page 3 of 19

Shaw et al. [20,21]. Within this study, we focus on closely related species belonging to Peperomia subgenus
Tildenia where currently 59 species are recognized
[55,56].

Results
The agt1 gene studied here is an ortholog of At2G13360
in Arabidopsis thaliana, where it is known to catalyze
the Alanine:Glyoxylate Aminotransferase reaction located
in peroxisomes [57]. It was identified to be shared
between four angiosperm genomes (Arabidopsis, Populus,
Vitis, and Oryza) as a nSCG [22]. We have chosen this
region as an example to test the utility of a nSCG for
low-level phylogenies in comparison to eight widely studied chloroplast markers [20,21]. A single copy of this
gene was identified in large EST sets from multiple basal
angiosperms [22], making it a suitable candidate for our
basal angiosperm test group Tildenia. The agt1 region
was amplified, sequenced, and aligned for 62 accessions
covering 33 out of the 59 species of Peperomia subgenus
Tildenia resulting in a dataset of 2088 characters (Additional File 1: Taxa used in the present study, Additional
File 2: Sequence statistics for the coding and non-coding
regions for all markers in this study calculated with SeqState). A dataset with an identical sampling was generated for the trnK intron, the matK gene and the trnKpsbA spacer resulting in an aligned dataset of 3049 characters (sequences obtained in part from [51]. To allow
further exploration of the utility of the agt1, we added
additional chloroplast markers for a sub-sample of 26
representative accessions. These markers comprised the
psbA-trnH spacer plus short parts of flanking genes (353
bp), as well as the ndhF-rpl32-trnL gene region, consisting of a partial sequence of the ndhF gene (204 bp), the
ndhF-rpl32 spacer (620 bp), the rpl32 gene (158 bp) and
partial sequence of the rpl32-trnL spacer (1048 bp)
(Additional File 2: Sequence statistics for the coding and
non-coding regions for all markers in this study calculated with SeqState). The ndhF-rpl32 spacer, rpl32 gene
and rpl32-trnL spacer were co-amplified and yielded an
aligned dataset of 2030 bp. All markers are among the
most variable loci for phylogenetic studies according to
Shaw et al. [20,21].
An important feature of agt1 in Peperomia is that PCR
amplicons typically were resolved as a single sharp target sized band on agarose gels and, for most samples,
could be sequenced directly without cloning. Only a few
(roughly 10%) accessions required a cloning step. In
those cases, a single band was detected in the agarose
gel, but sequencing revealed short (1 to 10 bp) indels.
Structure and characterization of agt1

In Peperomia, the agt1 gene comprises five coding
regions (exons) separated by four intronic sections with

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

Page 4 of 19

a total length of 1542 to 1827 bp. In comparison to agt1
in Arabidopsis thaliana, the Peperomia gene contains an
additional intron, which is located in the second exon
and has a length of 211-390 bp (Figure 1). This intron is
also present in the genomic sequences of Populus trichocarpa, Medicago truncatula, Solanum lycopersicon,
Oryza sativa, and Carica papaya, as well as in all Peperomia species generated in the present study. Hence, it
can be inferred that it was lost during the diversification
of Brassicales. We named this additional non-coding
section that splits exon II into two parts, intron X, and
the two resulting exons that derive from exon II were
named exon IIa and exon IIb (Figure 1). In the Peperomia accessions we studied, the agt1 exons are highly
conserved in length and lack any indels. In contrast,
intron X was the most variable in length among the
respective four introns, showing a length range of 552739 bp.
Variability of agt1 versus the chloroplast regions

To characterize the markers in more detail, several
variability parameters were estimated for both coding
and non-coding regions and for the full as well as the
reduced sampling datasets (Figure 2, Additional File 2:
Sequence statistics for the coding and non-coding
regions for all markers in this study calculated with SeqState). In the agt1 full sampling dataset, introns and
exons are roughly equally represented (introns 1000 bp,
exons 1088 bp, see Additional File 2: Sequence statistics
for the coding and non-coding regions for all markers
in this study calculated with SeqState). Coding parts

Exon I
Arabidopsis
thaliana

possess 20% variable characters (VC) and 11% parsimony informative characters (PIC), whereas non-coding
parts contain 46% VC and 27% PIC. Thus, the content
of PIC varies largely among different sections of the
gene and in non-coding parts it is twice as high as in
coding parts. In total, one fifth of the characters in the
agt1 gene are parsimony informative.
The trnK-matK-psbA region does not vary significantly among coding and non-coding regions on this
taxonomic level (Additional File 2: Sequence statistics
for the coding and non-coding regions for all markers
in this study calculated with SeqState). Compared to the
agt1 with the identical sampling this region shows less
than half of the ratio of VC and PIC (Additional File 2:
Sequence statistics for the coding and non-coding
regions for all markers in this study calculated with SeqState). Thus, the agt1 is much more effective in yielding
PIC per sequenced bp than the widely applied trnKmatK-psbA region. Furthermore, the nuclear gene segments provide different amounts of variability, which
make them useful for many taxonomic levels.
A similar pattern is visible in the reduced sampling of
all utilized markers (Additional File 2: Sequence statistics for the coding and non-coding regions for all markers in this study calculated with SeqState). In total, the
percentages of both variable sites (25%) and PIC (15%)
of agt1 are much higher than those of the chloroplast
markers. However, it has to be noted that the VC percentage of the reduced sampling is 7% lower than that
of the full sampling and that there are only half of the
PIC in the reduced dataset. In contrast, the trnK-matK-

Exon II

II

I

Pe114
Peperomia
cyclaminoides

coding

III

Exon IIb

Exon III

non-coding

Exon V

IV

III

II

X
Exon IIa

Exon IV

Exon III

IV
Exon IV Exon V

UTR

100 bp

Figure 1 The Alanine:Glyoxylate-Aminotransferase (agt1) gene model in Arabidopsis thaliana and in Peperomia cyclaminoides. The gene
model for the agt1 gene in P. cyclaminoides Pe114 was derived from both genomic and cDNA sequences. Compared with the gene model in
Arabidopsis thaliana, Peperomia cyclaminoides has an additional intron (intron X) that is 380 bp long and located in exon II. This intron can be
found among all sequenced Peperomia accessions and ranges in length from 211-390 bp. We also checked its presence in a number of
sequenced plant genomes available in Phytozome (v.7.0); the intron is absent only from Arabidopsis and grasses. Since it can be found in
papaya, we suggest two independent losses of this intron: within the diversification of both Poaceae (or possibly a larger monocot group) and
Brassicales.

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

Page 5 of 19

Figure 2 Characteristics of utilized markers. Portions of constant (green), variable (red) and parsimony informative characters (dashed) for
coding and non-coding parts of all markers used in this study. Chloroplast markers suggested by Shaw et al. [19,20] for species level were
combined into the longer regions that we co-amplified with single primer pairs. Full sampling comprises 62 accessions. Reduced sampling is a
dataset that contains a sub-sampling of 26 selected accessions from the full sampling. The percentage of variability of the chloroplast markers is
very similar between regions and among coding and non-coding portions at the taxonomic level in this study. In contrast, the nuclear gene has
highly variable introns, which yields a total variability that is two to three times greater than any of the chloroplast markers.

psbA does not possess large differences between reduced
and full sampling datasets. The decrease of VC in the
reduced sampling suggests that the potential of agt1 is
not exhausted and deeper sampling would likely
increase available variability and thus phylogenetic
resolution.
The variabilities of the different gene regions are graphically displayed in Figure 2. It is remarkable that the

chloroplast markers are very similar in their overall fractions of variable sites (Figure 2). Thus, the number of
PIC is directly proportional to the number of sequenced
bp and thus on this phylogenetic level marker selection
does not seem to be crucial in terms of phylogenetic
content. Furthermore, non-coding regions of all chloroplast markers are just as informative as non-coding
regions on this phylogenetic level. To look for potential

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

saturation of the markers, the retention index (RI) was
calculated with and without indel-coded length mutations. Generally, for the chloroplast markers the RI does
not differ between the datasets that include indels and
those without indels (Table 1). The RI values of both
trnK-matK-psbA datasets (full sampling including indels:
RI = 0.873, reduced sampling including indels: RI =
0.828) as well as ndhF-rps32-trnL dataset (reduced sampling including indels RI = 0.836) indicate low homoplasy. The homoplasy of agt1 full sampling (including
indels, RI = 0.802) is little homoplastic as well. Only the
RI values of psbA-trnH (reduced sampling including
indels RI = 0.697) and agt1 reduced sampling datasets
(including indels: RI = 0.658) datasets are a little lower,
which suggests that they are more homoplastic and
likely closer to saturation. Considering the RI, both
trnK-matK-psbA and ndhF-rpl32-trnL can be regarded
as little homoplastic. The RI of the different agt1 datasets differs and is lower in the reduced sampling. Consequently, a smaller sampling is more homoplastic than a
denser sampling with the same breadth. This fact is congruent with the phylogenies of the agt1 gene, resulting
in less resolution and support in the reduced dataset.
This leads to the conclusion that a high variability as
detected for the agt1 gene requires a dense sampling to
keep the risk for artifacts low.
To summarize, a quarter of the total agt1 dataset is
parsimony informative, while having a low homoplasy
level at the same time. All calculations were based on
nucleotide substitutions only (indels not included), as

Page 6 of 19

RIs of all data sets revealed this to be less homoplastic
than the data sets containing indels (Table 1).
Phylogenetic output

To obtain insights into agt1’s phylogenetic performance
in terms of topology, resolution and support, we performed identical phylogenetic analyses with identical
sampling and a reduced sub-sampling for all markers
(Figure 3). For those analyses, Maximum Likelihood
(ML) and Bayesian Inference (BI) were used. For simplicity, the clades have been named with numbers based
on the study of Symmank et al. [51].
By looking at the trees derived from different markers,
here summarized at the clade level (Figure 3), it is
obvious that agt1 and the chloroplast gene trees result
in different topologies. Although the majority of clades
are recovered as monophyletic among all gene trees, a
few clades are unresolved in the agt1 tree (Figure 3).
All phylogenetic trees obtained from the different
markers show species from clade I and II as the first
diverging branches followed by a polytomy formed by
the remaining clades. The nuclear trees all show four
clades out of seven being monophyletic and statistically
supported (clade II, IV, VI and VII) (Figure 3). Clade I
is polyphyletic in the agt1 tree, but monophyletic with
any of the chloroplast markers. A new clade is formed
in the agt1 phylogeny, consisting of P. cerrateae, P. sp.
Pe411, P. pugnicaudex, and P. chutanka. Clade VI is sister to this clade, which is supported with 0.97 Posterior
Probability (PP) in the full sampling. Thus, clades III

Table 1 Statistics based on a Maximum Parsimony Ratchet analysis showing the retention index as a measure of
homoplasy.
total characters (with indels) Trees found (with indels) Steps (with indels) RI (with indels)
agt1 full sampling

405 (N/A)

0.827 (N/A)

1721 (1539)

978 (1205)

0.799 (0.794)

total

2097 (2280)

232 (362)

1395 (1622)

0.802 (0.798)

coding

1088 (1088)

206 (N/A)

260 (N/A)

0.742 (N/A)

non-coding 856 (971)

323 (55)

613 (746)

0.636 (0.628)

total
coding

50 (64)
158 (172)

876 (1010)
448 (461)

0.667 (0.658)
0.882 (0.883)

non-coding 1475 (1554)

39 (85)

422 (518)

0.879 (0.877)

total

3085 (3174)

1007 (1356)

881 (990)

0.874 (0.873)

1606 (1614)

18 (15)

303 (312)

0.840 (0.383)

non-coding 1310 (1361)

9 (28)

287 (343)

0.837 (0.831)

total

matK-trnK-psbA full sampling

1253 (N/A)

non-coding 1009 (1192)
agt1 reduced sampling

coding

2916 (2974)

12 (21)

587 (651)

0.832 (0.828)

362 (367)

2 (2)

58 (63)

0.962 (0.964)

10 (8)
1 (65)

246 (382)
305 (448)

0.822 (0.823)
0.847 (0.836)

matK-trnK-psbA reduced sampling coding

ndhF-rpl32-trnL reduced sampling coding

1088 (1088)

1944 (2059)
1609 (1621)

non-coding 1668 (1783)
total
2030 (2150)
psbA-trnH reduced sampling

coding

1 (N/A)

2 (N/A)

1.000 (N/A)

non-coding 324 (370)

29 (29)

810 (28)

46 (100)

0.727 (0.714)

total

1044 (38)

49 (103)

0.696 (0.700)

353 (399)

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

Page 7 of 19

Figure 3 Schematic summary of topologies. Summarized topologies are based on Bayesian inference. Numbers above branches are posterior
probabilities (PPs) from Bayesian inference (BI) (left) and ML bootstrap values (right). Agt1 and trnK-matK-psbA are shown for both full and
reduced sampling, and ndhF-rpl32-trnH for reduced sampling. Clades were named based on the topology obtained from the trnK-matK-psbA
region. Full sampling reflects a 63 accession dataset, while reduced sampling comprises 26 accessions. The chloroplast regions do not provide
congruent signal. From all these trees, the nuclear gene provides the best resolution with the full sampling. In this tree, an additional clade is
formed, consisting of P. chutanka, P. pugnicaudex and P. cerrateae. Clade VI is sister to this new clade. These (statistically supported) relationships
cannot be observed in any of the trees based on chloroplast markers.

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

and V are not monophyletic in the nuclear-based tree or
in the tree resulting from ndhF-rps32-trnL. In the trnKmatK-psbA tree, P. cerrateae was part of clade V, P. sp.
Pe411 and P. pugnicaudex formed clade III and the
position of P. chutanka could not be resolved. In summary, agt1 yields a deeper resolution compared to any
individual or combined chloroplast dataset by forming a
new clade that has clade VI as a sister. Sampling density
does not seem to influence the phylogenies obtained
from the chloroplast markers as much as it affects the
nuclear trees. Denser sampling seems to improve resolution with agt1. Statistical evaluation of phylogenetic signals between datasets was done using SH tests [58].
These tests reveal a significant conflict between the
chloroplast markers and the nuclear agt1 gene,
expressed by the rejection of all respective topology/
dataset combinations (Additional File 3: Results from
topology tests). The only exception to this pattern is the
combination of the ndhF-rpl32-trnL topology and the
agt1 dataset (p = 0.070). The trnH-psbA spacer was not
used for this test due to insufficient phylogenetic resolution. In accordance with the result of Shaw et al. [20],
this finding states the inappropriateness of this region
for phylogenetic studies on a low taxonomic level.
To determine the source of conflict between the
nuclear and chloroplast markers we tested 10 alternative
hypotheses by changing the topologies of the reduced
agt1 and trnK-matK-psbA datasets. In most cases a single clade was replaced according to its phylogenetic
position in the opposed topology. Additionally, clades
that appear polyphyletic in one topology were constrained to be monophyletic and placed at different
positions. All alternative hypotheses resulted in significant rejection by the tested datasets. The alternative
topologies and the SH-values of the accordant combinations are summarized in Additional File 3: Results from
topology tests. The results indicate a general incongruence between the phylogenetic signal derived from the
nuclear and chloroplast genome. The rejection of the
alternative hypothesis clearly shows that the conflict is
not caused by a single subset of species or clade, but is
reflecting multiple inconsistencies between the nuclear
versus the chloroplast gene regions at lower nodes of
the tree. Such a pattern might be expected if an early
hybridization and chloroplast capture event had
occurred early in the evolution of the subgenus. Such an
event can lead to incongruence between the histories of
nuclear and plastid marker regions.
The combination of agt1, trnK-matK-psbA, ndhFrpl32-trnL, and trnH-psbA data set (7243 total characters) yields a topology possessing all the monophyletic
clades identified by trnK-matK-psbA with maximal support. In addition, P. chutanka is resolved in the combined analysis as sister to clade III (0.99 PP). A

Page 8 of 19

phylogeny of trnH-psbA alone did not yield any resolution (results not shown).
The resolution of the two full sampling phylogenies
(Figure 4, Figure 5) was measured using the normalized
consensus fork index (CFI), which divides the number
of nodes found in a strict consensus tree by the number
of possible nodes [59]. To increase the information
value of this index with respect to the resolution capacity of the respective molecular markers, we consider
the nodes that appear in the trees inferred from BI and
ML, where nodes below 50% were collapsed (Figure 4
and 5). According to this, the agt1 yields a considerably
higher total resolution (CFI = 0.74) than the trnK-matKpsbA region (CFI = 0.58). Comparison of the phylograms show that the substitution rate in the agt1 data
set is about twice as great as in the trnK-matK-psbA
dataset (BI, Figure 6 and 7).
The phylograms also suggest that a sudden and fast
radiation occurred that gave rise to clades III-VII. This
radiation has been linked directly to the formation of
new habitats during the uplift of the inner Andean valleys in Peru and Bolivia [51]. Generally, the agt1 resolution is much higher within the clades and on population
level, which is very obvious for P. peruviana, P. cerrateae, and P. radiadinervosa as well as within clade IV
and VI (Figure 4). Furthermore, the agt1 phylogeny suggests that P. cyclaminoides and P. verruculosa are not
monophyletic and P. bracteata is polyphyletic on the
agt1 tree. Clade VII shows better resolution of the deeper branches with the chloroplast dataset (Figure 5),
whereas the nuclear gene resolves relationships better in
shallower parts of the tree. In the trnK-matK-psbA phylogenetic tree, P. gracillima aff. is the first branch, followed by P. schizandra as sister to the rest of clade VII.
The nuclear gene, however, reveals a well-resolved subclade comprising P. elatior as the first branch, followed
by P. ovatopeltata aff., P. questionis and P. cavispicata.
Furthermore, in the nuclear phylogeny, P. exclamationis
is resolved as sister to P. schizandra.
Single Copy vs. Multicopy status of agt1

As described above, approximately 90% of the PCR
amplicons could be directly sequenced from PCR product; only 10% required cloning to obtain distinct
sequences. Multiple copies were detected in at least one
accession from every clade except clade I and III. Putative pseudogenes, e.g. ones with frameshift mutations,
were removed from the analysis. A resulting phylogeny,
which contained all detected copies excluding putative
pseudogenes, and which did not comprise sequence data
downstream from intron III, revealed that the copies of
eight accessions are monophyletic, and thus do not
influence the final analysis (Additional File 4: Phylogram
of agt1 based on BI of entire dataset including cloned

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

Page 9 of 19

Figure 4 Phylogenetic hypothesis for Peperomia subgenus Tildenia based on ML and BI analysis of agt1. This topology is derived from ML;
nodes supported at < 50% in at least one of the two analyses were collapsed. Numbers above branches are PPs from BI (left) and ML bootstrap
values (right).

sequences). Therefore, a cloned copy representing the
particular accession could have been randomly chosen
for the main phylogeny. However, agt1 copies sequenced
from four of the accessions are not monophyletic. These
copies cluster together with copies from other

accessions of the respective species, indicating duplication during radiation of the respective species (P. cerrateae Pe417, P. parvisagittata Pe113, P. schizandra Pe24
and P. wernerrauhii Pe481) (Additional File 4: Phylogram of agt1 based on BI analysis of the entire dataset

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

Page 10 of 19

Figure 5 Phylogenetic hypothesis for Peperomia subgenus Tildenia based on ML and BI analysis of trnK-matK-psbA. This topology is
derived from ML; nodes supported at < 50% in at least one of the two analyses were collapsed. Numbers above branches are PPs from BI (left)
and ML bootstrap values (right).

including cloned sequences). The only accessions for
which the situation seems to be more complex are P.
bracteata Pe28 and Pe32, as well as P. cyclaminoides
Pe115 and P. verruculosa Pe414. Both cases show a

similar pattern: copies of a single accession are not
monophyletic, but are sister to their orthologous copy
from other accessions. Thus, cloned sequences of such
an accession are likely to be paralogous.

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

Page 11 of 19

Figure 6 Phylogram of agt1 based on Bayesian inference. Phylogram obtained from the Bayesian inference of the agt1 data set with relative
substitution rates using the GTR+G+I model and posterior probabilities plotted above the branches. This phylogenetic tree is summarized in
Figure 3. Clades are colored according to Figure 3. In accessions that are represented in the tree by different ‘types’, multiple copies were
detected that are not monophyletic. A closer look to the resolution within the clades shows highly supported relationships down to the
population level.

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

Page 12 of 19

Figure 7 Phylogram of the trnK-matK-psbA region based on Bayesian inference. Phylogram from Bayesian inference of the trnK-matK-psbA
data set with relative substitution rates using the GTR+G model and posterior probabilities plotted above the branches. This phylogenetic tree is
summarized in Figure 3. Clades are colored according to Figure 3.

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

Discussion
Rapidly radiating genera and single copy nuclear genes

Rapidly radiating taxa and species-rich groups have
been, and remain, challenging for high resolution phylogenetic analyses with widely used chloroplast markers
[e.g. [60-62]].
Independent of the applied marker, most of these
groups tend to share a well-resolved base with several
long branches followed by several clades branching from
a polytomy with rather short branches. This could indicate that some lineages within species-rich groups
radiated over a comparatively short time span, possibly
as a result of the availability of new habitat or some
other opportunity. In the case of Tildenia, this branching pattern can be seen in the phylograms (Figure 6 and
7) and has been linked to geological events during the
uplift of the Andes as well as the climatic oscillation
during the period of diversification in the mid-Miocene
between 15-10 MYA [51]. As we had expected, the agt1
gene resolves short and deep branches much better in
Tildenia, since substitution rates for the non-coding
parts are much greater than for coding or for non-coding chloroplast markers. Shaw et al. [21] concluded that
non-coding chloroplast regions are the most useful for
resolving relationships of closely related species, but we
found non-coding parts of all chloroplast markers
employed in the present study to be very similar in
terms of variability compared to the coding sections of
the chloroplast genome at this very low taxonomic level.
In contrast, non-coding parts of nuclear genes show a
three-fold increased variability compared to non-coding
chloroplast markers.
Another reason why species rich genera are not as
well studied as other groups is certainly because they
are much more difficult to sample thoroughly and
require both extensive field and herbarium work. This is
the case for Peperomia where highly reduced flower
morphology makes correct species identification a significant challenge [53]. The study by Wanke et al. [52] was
the first to apply molecular markers to Peperomia. Currently, Tildenia is the best-studied subgenus of Peperomia, since there were many new species from the Andes
and Mexico described recently [[55,56] respectively] and
an extensive phylogeny was combined with a molecular
dating approach to detect biogeographical migration
patterns [51]. Our current study is primarily focused on
the phylogenetic performance of agt1 compared to
chloroplast markers, and thus, we applied a broad taxon
sampling rather than several nSCG markers with a less
dense sampling. For this reason, only limited conclusions can be drawn concerning the origin of the multiple copies as well as incongruent topologies of nuclear
versus chloroplast trees. However, obtaining different

Page 13 of 19

signals from the nuclear gene in comparison to various
chloroplast regions highlights how important it is to
apply independent markers. In fact, many cases of
incongruence between chloroplast and nuclear marker
based topologies can be found in the literature [e.g.
[63]]. However, the potential sources of novel clades in
the nuclear gene tree seem to be very complex. There
are completely different relationships formed on an
interspecific level, deriving from many different clades
in the trnK-matK-psbA tree. Peperomia cerrateae, P.
parvisagittata, P. ayacuchoana and P. pseudoverruculosa
formed a clade in the chloroplast-based tree. In the
nuclear-based tree however, the species themselves are
still monophyletic, but the relationships among species
are poorly resolved. The simplest explanation for this
pattern is that the trnK-matK-psbA tree lacks resolution
at this level. This is because in the ndhF-rpl32-trnL tree
a similar tendency is visible, in which P. cerrateae, P.
parvisagittata, P. ayacuchoana and P. pseudoverruculosa
are not a monophyletic clade and that P. chutanka
might be related to clade III with P. pugnicaudex.
In the nuclear-based phylogenetic tree some cases are
found where duplicated, paraphyletic copies of agt1
occur in a particular accession. An example for this is
clade VI, which is formed of P. radiatinervosa, P. cyclaminoides and P. verruculosa. Since the four copies from
P. radiatinervosa form a monophyletic clade, the duplication event could, for example, be due to alloploidy
between the two other taxa. Another scenario that
would explain this pattern is a duplication event that
occurred after the split from P. radiatinervosa, but prior
to the diversification of P. cyclaminoides and P. verruculosa. Under the latter scenario, duplicated copies in P.
radiatinervosa and the other species evolved independently and are still retained in the respective accessions.
A second case of multiple agt1 copies in a species
involves P. bracteata. Agt1 copies from this species form
three different clades within clade VII: in two clades the
different copies of Pe28 and Pe32 cluster together,
whereas Pe31 and Pe33 lack duplicates. Incomplete lineage sorting could be an explanation for this pattern,
since it is not shared with other species in this clade.
Our results confirm the conclusion that it is essential
to use several unlinked markers for phylogenetic reconstruction to improve phylogenetic resolution, and to
identify and limit gene tree artifacts, which can be
caused by hybridization, polyploidy, introgression or
lineage sorting [e.g. [50]]. However, to refine our understanding of the reasons for the observed conflicts
between agt1 and chloroplast regions, additional nuclear
loci would be required. The suite of AVPO SSCG loci
identified by Duarte et al. [22] provide numerous candidates for further analysis.

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

To be or not to be single copy

The starting point for the present study was a Tildenia
phylogeny based on several chloroplast markers. In
order to obtain a better resolution in Tildenia, in particular below the species level, we investigated the phylogenetic performance of the non-coding parts of one of
the APVO SSCG [22]. Among the large collection of
965 SSCGs identified in Arabidopsis, Populus, Vitis, and
Oryza, several were selected for further analysis of public EST datasets, and a trial analysis of Brassicaceae was
performed using direct sequencing and phylogenetic
analysis of a dozen of the genes using RT-PCR (cDNA)
amplicons [22]. In both analyses, results were generally
consistent with a single gene being detected in the
expressed gene sets across diverse angiosperms, though
duplicates were indicated in some species, particularly in
recent polyploid taxa [49]. Thus, we reasoned that genes
from among this collection were good candidates for
further study in Peperomia, a basal angiosperm without
prior nuclear gene sequence data. By amplifying and
sequencing through intronic as well as exonic regions
using primers grounded in conserved exons, a large collection of highly variable sites was obtained that were
especially valuable for phylogenetic at and below the
species level.
An advantage of the approach developed here is that it
should be possible to take any angiosperm group of
interest and quickly identify whether SSCG are likely to
work well for species level phylogenetics. The only
major requirement is a pair of unambiguous amplification primers that will work for the particular group of
interest. In some cases, primers from Duarte et al. [22]
or this study may serve as amplification or sequencing
primers. However, additional steps can be taken to
enhance the chances of success in any given study. Publicly available EST data can easily be queried to extract
sequences from closely related taxa, perform alignments
with genome and coding regions of the sequenced species obtained from the PlantTribes database [39], and
design primers that have an increased likelihood of success. Given the large number of 965 APVO SSCG [22],
successful primer pairs should be identified for at least a
handful of genes for any angiosperm group. In our
study, after one initial round of primer design for Tildenia and the first sequencing run, agt1 was one of six
genes that immediately yielded good results. This gene
did prove to be low copy (rather than single copy) in
some Tildenia accessions, which is not unexpected
given that all angiosperms have a history of ancient
polyploidy and both polyploidy and gene duplication is
a frequent process in plants [64-66].
The rapidly increasing number of sequenced plant
genomes allows the identification of genes that are present in single copy across increasingly many species.

Page 14 of 19

The recently updated PlantTribes database 2.0 [67] provides a publicly available tool that can be used for identifying such genes. If the database is queried (at
moderate stringency, 3.0) for Tribes containing a single
gene in each of the seven angiosperm genomes (Arabidopsis, Populus, Vitis, Oryza, Sorghum, Medicago and
Carica), this number decreases to 223 genes and if three
non-angiosperm plant genomes are added (Selaginella,
Physcomitrella, and Chlamydomonas), 36 genes pass the
criteria. We see that as new genomes are added to this
approach, there is a decrease in the number of shared
single copy genes. However, this set of genes is much
more refined and thus may be more likely to be single
copy throughout plants in general. In the case of agt1,
beside the APVO species, it occurs in a single copy in
Sorghum bicolor and Carica papaya, but there are six
copies in the Medicago truncatula (Version MT3.5) genome. In the three non-angiosperm plant genomes, two
annotated copies can be identified in Selaginella moellendorfii, three in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and five
in Physcomitrella patens.
The approach we develop here differs from another
recent method to identify orthologous nuclear markers
within a particular plant family or other relatively specific lineage [e.g. [44]]. In a group that already has multiple genome-scale datasets, such as the large angiosperm
families Asteraceae, Solanaceae, Poaceae, and Fabaceae,
genomes and EST datasets can be leveraged to identify
genes that exist in single copy across the range of
sampled taxa. In this case, larger numbers of shared single copy genes may be obtained within a family, but the
marker set will include many genes that are multicopy
in other lineages.
Even if a number of ‘nearly universal’ nSCGs are eventually identified in angiosperms, universal amplification
and sequencing primers that can be used in an arbitrarily chosen lineage are perhaps less likely to exist than
for chloroplast genes due to the relatively rapid underlying substitution rates for nuclear genes. Nucleoribosomal markers, such as the intergenic transcribed spacer
region (ITS), can often be amplified and sequenced with
widely conserved primers because it is flanked by highly
conserved nucleoribosomal gene sequence [68] and do
provide an independent estimate of phylogenetic history
in comparison to chloroplast DNA. However, because
ITS regions form a large multicopy “family” where
copies are (often incompletely) homogenized through
concerted evolutionary processes, assessment of orthology in nuclear ITS sequences is very complex, even
when multiple copies are cloned and sequenced [23,24].
We found that nSCG amplification and primer design
requires a little more lab effort compared to chloroplast
markers, but on the other hand, unlinked loci from different genomic compartments are essential in order to

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

reconstruct and fully interpret phylogenetic relationships
[69]. It is comparably easy to generate a data set of several chloroplast markers, but those results need to be
complemented and compared to unlinked nuclear
markers.

Conclusions
Considering topology, variability and homoplasy, we can
conclude that agt1 is highly valuable for phylogenetics
at a low taxonomic level such as species level and
below. Beyond that, agt1 was useful for identifying
further evolutionary biological processes such as recent
gene duplication. When combined with additional
nuclear genes, numerous concurrent duplications would
be indicative of recent polyploidization in a species or
even in particular populations. In combination with uniparentally inherited loci, biparentally inherited nSCGs
can also provide evidence for hybridization and potentially for organelle capture. The nSCG applied in the
present study provides regions with different quantitative levels of variability deriving from coding and noncoding parts of different length. While the percentage of
PIC of the coding sections does not vary significantly
among the chloroplast and nuclear markers, the noncoding sections of the agt1 in Peperomia is three times
higher than the most rapidly evolving chloroplast
regions.
Methods
Sampling Strategy

Based on Symmank et al. [51], Mathieu et al. [55] and
Samain et al. [56], we sampled a phylogenetically representative subset (29 out of 59 species) of Peperomia subgenus Tildenia (Additional File 1: Taxa used in the
present study). As outgroup taxon, Peperomia pinoi aff.
Pe474, closely related to this subgenus, was chosen
[52,53]. For a comprehensive approach to compare the
agt1 gene with the trnK intron, matK gene and the
trnK-psbA spacer region, 70 accessions including the
outgroup species were sampled. In addition, the agt1
gene was compared to two additional chloroplast gene
clusters containing both introns and spacers (ndhFrpl32-trnL and psbA-trnH). A restricted set of 26 accessions including outgroup was utilized for this.
Marker selection

The starting point for the present study were 959 genes
identified by Duarte et al. [22], that are shared in single
copy in the annotated genomes of Arabidopsis thaliana,
Populus trichocarpa, Vitis vinifera and Oryza sativa.
These authors used a high throughput comparative proteomic approach to identify genes that occur in single
copy in all of the four genomes. This comprehensive
approach suggests candidate markers for any

Page 15 of 19

angiosperm of interest, because the genes captured this
way are present in phylogenetically diverse angiosperms
and thus potentially suitable useful as common phylogenetic markers in varied taxa.
Starting from 13 potential nSCGs compared by Duarte
et al. [22], ESTs (Expressed Sequence Tags) obtained
from the MAGIC database from the Ancestral Angiosperm Genome Project [70] were screened for homologues in other representatives of basal angiosperm
lineages. The sequences of these 13 loci were extracted
from all available plant genomes in order to check the
variation of total length as well as the length and number of introns. Our decision to use the agt1 gene was
made based on the number of introns and the positive
impact that introns would have on the expected variability for that gene. Comparison of EST data and further
characterization was done using PlantTribes [39,67] and
TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies [71,72]. Initial primer
sets were designed for this particular region using both
Sanger and 454 (Roche) EST data from other basal
angiosperm lineages (Amborella trichopoda, Nuphar
advena, Liriodendron tulipifera, Persea americana, Aristolochia fimbriata) to subsequently amplify and
sequence the gene region in a RT-PCR approach for
Piper nigrum and Peperomia prostrata (4474-390F:
ACCAGGGAGGAACCATCTCTTTG; 4474-1530R:
TTYTTCARMCCCCATGCTTC). These sequences were
used to build primers that are more specific for Piperaceae to amplify and sequence Peperomia accessions. A
single primer was designed in a highly conserved 5’
region of the gene (Pe-4474-1800F: TTCTTTGAYTGGAATGACTACTTGA) which was applied in a 3’RACE (3’ RACE System for Rapid Amplification of
cDNA Ends, Invitrogen Corporation) for Peperomia
cyclaminoides Pe114. Based on the resulting sequence,
primers at the outermost end of the gene were generated and then used for a broad set of Peperomia accessions (Additional File 5: Primers used for amplification
and sequencing of both the nuclear and chloroplast
markers applied in this study).
DNA isolation, RNA isolation, cloning, amplification, RTPCR and sequencing

DNA was isolated from silica dried material using the
CTAB method. Most of the sequences of the trnKmatK-psbA gene region are obtained from Symmank et
al. [51]. Amplification of additional trnK-matK-psbA
sequences as well as other chloroplast sequences followed the procedure described in Symmank et al. [51].
Primers used for amplification and sequencing of the
chloroplast markers are listed in Additional File 5: Primers used for amplification and sequencing of both the
nuclear and chloroplast markers applied in this study.
For the nuclear marker, both 25 μl and 50 μl reactions

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

were run containing between 0.5 and 4 μl DNA template (100 to 200 ng) for a 50 μl reaction. A ‘master
mix’ for a 50 μl reaction contained 8 μl dNTP (Roth,
1.25 mM each), 5 μl red Taq-buffer for high yields (PeqLab), 1.5 μl MgCl 2 (25 mM), 1 μl of each primer (50
pmol/μl) and 0.5 μl of Taq DNA polymerase (PeqLab).
Water was added to obtain a total reaction volume of
50 μl. For amplification of the agt1 we modified a standard PCR-program for low concentration of target
DNA. The program started with an initial denaturation
step at 94°C for 2 min, followed by 45 cycles of denaturation at 96°C for 45 sec, annealing at 51°C for 30 sec
and elongation at 72°C for 90 sec, and a final elongation
72°C for 7 min. Annealing temperature was adjusted to
the melting point of the primers. PCR was run on a T3
Thermocycler (Biometra). After gel electrophoresis
through a 1.2% agarose gel, the PCR products were purified using a gel extraction kit (Macherey&Nagel). Some
of the PCR products required an additional cloning step.
In those cases the T/A Cloning Kit (Genaxxon
BioScience) was applied following the manufacturer’s
protocol. A ligation reaction was set up with 2-4 μl
PCR-product, 1 μl of each ligase buffer, ligase and vector and filled up with water to a total reaction volume
of 10 μl. Three to nine clones were arbitrarily chosen
and directly amplified via colony PCR using M13 primers under the following conditions: initial denaturation
at 95°C for 2 min, denaturation at 95°C for 1 min,
annealing at 55°C for 1 min, elongation at 72°C for 1.5
min and a final elongation at 72°C for 10 min. This
PCR was run with 36 cycles and the products were
directly sequenced after purification (Macherey&Nagel).
RNA was isolated using peqGold Plant RNA Kit (PeqLab) following the manufacturer’s instructions. A 3’
RACE kit (Invitrogen Life Science) was used following
the manufacturer’s protocol. For RT-PCR the Access
RT-PCR System (Promega) was used following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Direct sequencing was conducted either using a Beckman Coulter CEQ DTCS Quick Start Kit (Beckman
Coulter) with the CEQ 8000 sequencer or using Macrogen’s sequencing service (Macrogen Inc., Korea).
Sequences were edited and aligned manually using
PhyDE [73]. Regions of uncertain homology (e.g. long
monobase repeats) were excluded from all subsequent
analyses.
Due to the length of the agt1 gene, DNA was not
amplified in a single reaction but in three parts with
substantial overlap (50 to 150 bp) to ensure efficient
amplification. The ESTs and cDNA sequences of basal
angiosperms mentioned above, which were available to
generate initial amplification primers, did not cover the
entire region. The 3’-ends of the ESTs usually reached
exon IV, making a RACE approach necessary to include

Page 16 of 19

full-length gene information including intron IV and
exon V. The middle section comprising only the short
intron II (between exon IIb and exon III) yielded
sequences without any length mutations, whereas either
the first or the third part or both sections required a
cloning step for several accessions and were treated
individually. Very few PCR amplicons (approximately
10%) revealed differences in length among amplified
products. The three sections of those accessions had to
be assembled together to gain a full sequence. The
assemblage yielded up to three different ‘types’ of copies
and the fragments were sorted phylogenetically. This
method allowed us to avoid artifacts due to incorrect
sequence combinations.
However, most of the detected multicopy accessions
were monophyletic in the phylogenetic tree and thus, a
copy could be chosen at random for the further analysis.
For the few accessions that appeared polyphyletic in our
analyses, a copy of each ‘type’ was left in the dataset and
was distinguished by ‘type I’ and ‘type II’. All major
clades of subgenus Tildenia contained at least one
accession that required cloning steps; thus multiple
copies are not unique to a particular lineage.
Phylogenetic analyses

Several mostly small regions of uncertain sequence
homology (hotspots) had to be excluded from the different data matrices (Additional File 6: Hotspots excluded,
due to ambiguous homology assessments). All alignments are available from TreeBASE.
Indel matrices were calculated using the “simple indel
coding” approach (SIC) [74]. This indel matrix was generated automatically by the indel coding tool of SeqState
[75]. Substitution models for Bayesian inference (BI)
were determined using jModelTest [76]. For the agt1
dataset the general time reversible model of nucleotide
substitution and site-specific rate categories following a
gamma distribution (GTR+I+Γ) was assigned as the best
fitting model considering the Akaike information criterion (AIC). For the three chloroplast datasets, GTR+Γ
was the best fitting model. Bayesian MCMC inferences
were performed with MrBayes v3.1 [77] using the substitution models mentioned above.
The BI was applied with four Markov chains running
simultaneously for 4 million generations, saving trees
every 100 generations. The burn-in was individually set
for each analysis between 5% and 20% after determining
stationarity of each run with Tracer v1.5 [78]. At least
ten runs were assembled to generate the consensus trees
and posterior probabilities for each individual analysis.
Maximum Likelihood as implemented in RAxML Version 7.2.7.a [79] using the rapid bootstrap algorithm was
used in order to increase the number of bootstrap replicates to 1,000.

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

The degree of homoplasy of each dataset both with
and without indels was assessed on a Maximum Parsimony (MP) tree that was obtained using a parsimony
ratchet approach. Command files for MP analyses were
created using PRAP [80] and executed in PAUP*4b10
[81]. Topologies were obtained with the heuristic search
strategy and 10 random addition cycles of 200 iterations
each with a 25% upweighting of the characters in the
iterations. For compiling and drawing all trees TreeGraph2 [82] was employed.
Sequence statistics for specified regions of each marker were obtained utilizing SeqState [75]. The Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH) test [58] was performed in
PAUP*4b10 [81] with full optimization to evaluate the
topologies obtained by the different genetic markers
against each other. The SH test simultaneously compensates for a posteriori hypotheses of multiple alternative
topologies by adjusting the expected difference in loglikelihood values. Topology tests were performed on the
agt1 dataset containing one randomly selected single
copy to comply with the congruence of sampling. In
case of conflict between two markers (p ≤ 0.05) the test
was repeated with a manually modified topology to
determine the conflict. In the process, one hypothesis
(topology) was stepwise adjusted to the phylogenetic
results of the conflicting marker to evaluate the effects
of single clade position changes.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Taxa used in the present study. Excel file listing the
species used in this study including voucher information and GenBank
accession numbers (provided upon final acceptance of manuscript). For
detailed information of origin and collection sites see [49].
Additional file 2: Sequence statistics for the coding and non-coding
regions for all markers in this study calculated with SeqState. This
table provides information about the general characteristics of the
coding, and non-coding parts of the study sequences for different
sampling densities.
Additional file 3: Results from topology tests. Excel file showing
Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH) test results of different topology/dataset
combinations. Asterisk indicates a significant rejection (p ≤ 0.05) of the
respective combination.
Additional file 4: Phylogram of agt1 based on a Bayesian inference
of full dataset containing cloned sequences. Phylogram from the
Bayesian inference of the agt1 data set with relative substitution rates
using the GTR+G+I model and posterior probabilities plotted above the
branches. Clades are colored according to Figure 3. The applied data set
comprises part I and part II of the nuclear gene including all cloned
sequences.
Additional file 5: Primers used for amplification and sequencing of
both the nuclear and chloroplast markers applied in this study.
Excel file listing primer sequences of the respective gene region that
were used for both PCR and sequencing.
Additional file 6: Hotspots excluded, due to ambiguous homology
assessments. Regions of uncertain sequence homology (hotspots)
excluded from the different datasets. Positions are given equivalent to
files downloadable from TreeBase.

Page 17 of 19

Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the German Research Foundation
(DFG; NE681/5-1, NE681/5-2, NE681/10-1) to CN, SW; the Research
Foundation Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen; FWO G.0172.07; FWO travel grants to
MSS); a postdoctoral fellowship from the DAAD to SW; the German
Academic Exchange Service (PPP Colombia) to SW, the German Academic
Exchange Service (PPP USA) to KFM, CWD, SW; “Gesellschaft der Freunde
und Förderer der TU Dresden” ("Friends of the TU Dresden”), and the Friends
of the Botanical Garden Ghent. We are grateful to the Botanical Gardens of
Ghent University and University of Technology Dresden for general support.
We thank the authorities of Bolivia (permit number MDRAyMA-VBRFMADGBAP-UAVPS N° 046/08), Mexico (permit numbers SGPA/DGGFS/712/1397/
07 and SGPA/DGGFS/712/2486/09) and Peru (permit number 009-2009-AGDGFFS-DGEFFS) for permission to collect material. We are grateful to the
following persons for assistance with field work and our Peperomia research
in general: Joaquina Albán, Pieter Asselman, Carlos Bambarén, Brian Bates,
Stephan Beck, Nelson Cieza, Hilda Flores, Paul Goetghebeur, Esteban
Martínez, Robert Maijer, Guido Mathieu, Victor Morales, Helga Ochotorena
and Guillermo Pino.
Author details
Technische Universität Dresden, Institut für Botanik, D-01062 Dresden,
Germany. 2Ghent University, Department of Biology, Research Group
Spermatophytes, B-9000 Gent, Belgium. 3University of Münster, Institute for
Evolution and Biodiversity, D-48149 Münster, Germany. 4Department of
Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
JN: laboratory work for the nSCG dataset, cloning, phylogenetic analyses and
drafted the paper. LS: collected samples, contributed the cpDNA datasets,
carried out phylogenetic analyses, statistical tests, and helped draft the
paper. MSS: collected samples, helped with the sampling design (including
identification and nomenclature) and proofread the paper. KFM: supplied
funding for the study, edited the draft version, helped with the statistical
analysis. CN: supplied funding for the study and lab space for parts of the
study, and proofread the paper. CWD: helped draft the manuscript, supplied
funding and lab space for parts of the study, contributed in the discussion
in various phases, analysis of EST datasets, and proofread the paper. SW:
designed and supervised the study, supplied funding for the study,
performed RT-PCR, primer design, and sample collection, and helped draft
the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 22 June 2011 Accepted: 12 December 2011
Published: 12 December 2011
References
1. Maddison DR, Schulz KS, Maddison WP: The Tree of Life Web Project.
Zootaxa 2007, 1668:19-40.
2. Angiosperm Phylogeny Website. [http://www.mobot.org/mobot/research/
apweb/].
3. APG III: An update of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification for
the orders and families of flowering plants: APG III. Bot J Linn Soc 2009,
161:105-121.
4. Burleigh JG, Bansal MS, Eulenstein O, Hartmann S, Wehe A, Vision TJ:
Genome-scale phylogenetics: Inferring the plant tree of life from 18,896
gene trees. Syst Biol 2011, 60:117-125.
5. Huson DH, Bryant D: Application of Phylogenetic Networks in
Evolutionary Studies. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(2):254-267.
6. Fu BY, Allaby RG: Phylogenetic network of Linum species as revealed by
non-coding chloroplast DNA sequences. Genet Resour Crop Evo 2010,
57:667-677.
7. Parks M, Cronn R, Liston A: Increasing phylogenetic resolution at low
taxonomic levels using massively parallel sequencing of chloroplast
genomes. BMC Biol 2009, 7:84.
8. Jansen RK, Cai Z, Raubeson LA, Daniell H, dePamphilis CW, Leebens-Mack J,
Müller KF, Guisinger-Bellian M, Haberle RC, Hansen AK, Chumley TW, Lee S,
Peery R, McNeal JR, Kuehl JV, Boore JL: Analysis of 81 genes from 64

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.
26.
27.

28.

29.

plastid genomes resolves relationships in angiosperms and identifies
genome-scale evolutionary patterns. PNAS 2007, 104:19369-19374.
Moore MJ, Bell CD, Soltis PS, Soltis DE: Using plastid genome-scale data to
resolve enigmatic relationships among basal angiosperms. PNAS 2007,
104(49):19363-19368.
Wang HC, Moore MJ, Soltis PS, Bell CD, Brockington SF, Alexandre R,
Davis CC, Latvis M, Manchester SR, Soltis DE: Rosid radiation and the rapid
rise of angiosperm-dominated forests. PNAS 2009, 10:3853-3858.
Moore MJ, Soltis PS, Bell CD, Burleigh JG, Soltis DE: Phylogenetic analysis
of 83 plastid genes further resolves the early diversification of eudicots.
PNAS 2010, 107:4623-4628.
Richardson AO, Palmer JD: Horizontal gene transfer in plants. J Exp Bot
2007, 58(1):1-9.
Barkman TJ, McNeal JR, Lim S-H, Coat G, Croom HB, Young ND,
dePamphilis CW: Mitochondrial DNA suggests at least 11 origins of
parasitism in angiosperms and reveals genomic chimerism in parasitic
plants. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:248.
Bowe LM, dePamphilis CW: Effects of RNA editing and gene processing
on phylogenetic reconstruction. Mol Biol Evol 1996, 13:1159-1166.
Nickrent DL, Blarer A, Qiu Y-L, Soltis DE, Soltis PS, Zanis M: Molecular data
place Hydnoraceae with Aristolochiaceae. Am J Bot 2002, 89:1809-1817.
dePamphilis CW, Palmer JD: Evolution and Function of Plastid DNA: A
Review With Special Reference to Nonphotosynthetic Plants. In
Physiology, biochemistry, and genetics of nongreen plastids. Edited by: Boyer
CD, Shannon JC, Hardison RC. Rockville: The American Society of Plant
Physiologists; 1989:182-202.
Wicke S, Schneeweiss GM, Mueller KF, dePamphilis CW, Quandt D: The
evolution of the plastid chromosome in land plants: gene content, gene
order, gene function. Plant Mol Biol 2011, DOI 10.1007/s11103-011-9762-4.
Soltis DE, Smith SA, Cellinese N, Wurdack KJ, Tank DC, Brockington SF,
Refulio-Rodriguez NF, Walker JB, Moore MJ, Carlsward BS, Bell CD, Latvis M,
Crawley S, Black C, Diouf D, Xi Z, Rushworth CA, Gitzendanner MA,
Sytsma KJ, Qiu YL, Hilu KW, Davis CC, Sanderson MJ, Beaman RS,
Olmstead RG, Judd WS, Donoghue MJ, Soltis PS: Angiosperm phylogeny:
17 genes, 640 taxa. Am J Bot 2011, 98:704-730.
Small RL, Ryburn JA, Cronn RC, Seelanan T, Wendel JF: The tortoise and
the hare: choosing between non-coding plastome and nuclear Adh
sequences for phylogeny reconstruction in a recently diverged plant
group. Am J Bot 1998, 85:301-1315.
Shaw J, Lickey EB, Beck JT, Farmer SB, Liu W, Miller J, Siripun KC, Winder CT,
Schilling EE, Small RL: The tortoise and the hare II: relative utility of 21
noncoding chloroplast DNA sequences for phylogenetic analysis. Am J
Bot 2005, 92:142-166.
Shaw J, Lickey EB, Schilling EE, Small RL: Comparison of whole chloroplast
genome sequences to choose noncoding regions for phylogenetic
studies in angiosperms: the tortoise and the hare III. Am J Bot 2007,
94:275-288.
Duarte JM, Wall KP, Edger PP, Landherr LL, Ma H, Pires JC, Leebens-Mack J,
dePamphilis CW: Identification of shared single copy nuclear genes in
Arabidopsis, Populus, Vitis and Oryza and their phylogenetic utility across
various taxonomic levels. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:61.
Alvarez I, Wendel JF: Ribosomal ITS sequences and plant phylogenetic
inference. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 29:417-434.
Bailey CD, Carr T, Harris S, Hughes C: Characterization of angiosperm
nrDNA polymorphim, paralogy, and pseudogenes. Mol Phylogenet Evol
2003, 29:435-455.
Koonin EV: Orthologs, Paralogs, and Evolutionary Genomics. Annu Rev
Genet 2005, 39:309-38.
Schultheis LM, Baldwin BG: Molecular phylogenetics of Fouquieriaceae:
evidence from nuclear rDNA ITS studies. Am J Bot 1999, 86:578-589.
Sang T, Crawford DJ, Stuessy TF: Chloroplast DNA phytogeny, reticulate
evolution, and biogeography of Paeonia (Paeoniaceae). Am J Bot 1997,
84:1120-1136.
Doyle JJ, Doyle JL, Rauscher JT, Brown AHD: Diploid and polyploid
reticulate evolution throughout the history of the perennial soybeans
(Glycine subgenus Glycine). New Phytol 2004, 161:121-132.
Lavin M, Schrire BP, Lewis G, Pennington RT, Delgado-Salinas A, Thulin M,
Hughes CE, Matos AB, Wojciechowski MF: Metacommunity process rather
than continental tectonic history better explains geographically
structured phylogenies in legumes. Philos Trans R Soc B 2004,
359:1509-1522.

Page 18 of 19

30. Nesbitt TC, Tanksley SD: Comparative sequencing in the genus
Lycopersicon. Implications for the evolution of fruit size in the
domestication of cultivated tomatoes. Genetics 2002, 162:365-379.
31. Barraclough T, Nee S: Phylogenetics and speciation. Trends Ecol Evol 2001,
16:391-399.
32. Strand AE, Leebens-Mack J, Milligan BG: Nuclear DNA-based markers for
plant evolutionary biology. Mol Ecol 1997, 6:113-118.
33. Sang T, Zhang D: Reconstructing hybrid speciation using sequences of
Low Copy Nuclear Genes: hybrid origins of five Paeonia species based
on Adh gene phylogenies. Syst Bot 1999, 24:148-163.
34. Bailey CD, Doyle JJ: Potential Phylogenetic Utility of the Low-Copy
Nuclear Gene pistillata in Dicotyledonous Plants: Comparison to nrDNA
ITS and trnL Intron in Sphaerocardamum and Other Brassicaceae. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 1999, 1:20-30.
35. Tank D, Sang T: Phylogenetic utility of the glycerol-3-phosphate
acyltransferase gene: Evolution and implications in Paeonia
(Paeoniaceae). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2001, 19:421-429.
36. Thomas MM, Garwood NC, Baker WJ, Henderson SA, Russell SJ, Hodel DR,
Bateman RM: Molecular phylogeny of the palm genus Chamaedorea,
based on the low-copy nuclear genes PRK and RPB2. Mol Phylogenet Evol
2006, 38:398-415.
37. Kim S, Sultan SE, Donoghue MJ: Allopolyploid speciation in Persicaria
(Polygonaceae): Insights from a low-copy nuclear region. PNAS 2008,
105:12370-12375.
38. Sang T: Utility of low-copy nuclear gene sequences in plant
phylogenetics. Crit Rev Biochem Mol 2002, 37:121-147.
39. Wall PK, Leebens-Mack J, Müller KF, Dawn Field, Altman NS,
dePamphilis CW: PlantTribes: a gene and gene family resource for
comparative genomics in plants. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D970-D976.
40. Fulton TM, Van der Hoeven R, Eannetta NT, Tanksley SD: Identification,
analysis, and utilization of conserved ortholog set markers for
comparative genomics in higher plants. Plant Cell 2002, 14:1457-1467.
41. Wu F, Mueller LA, Crouzillat D, Petiard V, Tanksley SD: Combining
bioinformatics and phylogenetics to identify large sets of single-copy
orthologous genes (COSII) for comparative, evolutionary and systematic
studies: A test case in the Euasterid plant clade. Genetics 2006,
174:1407-1420.
42. Whittall JB, Medina-Marino A, Zimmer EA, Hodges SA: Generating single
copy nuclear gene data for a recent adaptive radiation. Mol Phylogenet
Evol 2006, 39:124-134.
43. Chapman BA, Bowers JE, Feltus FA, Paterson AH: Buffering of crucial
functions by paleologous duplicated genes may contribute cyclicality to
angiosperm genome duplication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103(8):2730-2735.
44. Alvarez I, Costa A, Feliner GN: Selecting Single-Copy Nuclear Genes for
Plant Phylogenetics: A Preliminary Analysis for the Senecioneae
(Asteraceae). J Mol Evol 2008, 66:276-291.
45. Wahlberg N, West Wheat C: Genomic Outposts Serve the Phylogenomic
Pioneers: Designing Novel Nuclear Markers for Genomic DNA Extractions
of Lepidoptera. Syst Biol 2008, 57(2):231-242.
46. Wiegmann B, Trautwein M, Kim J, Cassel B, Bertone M, Winterton S,
Yeates D: Single-copy nuclear genes resolve the phylogeny of the
holometabolous insects. BMC Biol 2009, 7:34.
47. Aguileta G, Marthey S, Chiapello H, Lebrun MH, Rodolphe F, Fournier E,
Gendrault-Jacquemard A, Giraud T: Assessing the performance of singlecopy genes for recovering robust phylogenies. Syst Biol 2008, 57:613-627.
48. Hutcheon K, Ditt RF, Beilstein M, Comai L, Schroeder J, Goldstein E,
Shewmaker CK, Nguyen T, De Rocher J, Kiser J: Polyploid genome of
Camelina sativa revealed by isolation of fatty acid synthesis genes. BMC
Plant Biol 2010, 10:233.
49. Enright AJ, Van Dongen S, Ouzounis CA: An efficient algorithm for largescale detection of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30(7):1575-1584.
50. Hughes CE, Eastwood RJ, Donovan Bailey C: Review. From famine to
feast? Selecting nuclear DNA sequence loci for plant species-level
phylogeny reconstruction. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 2006, 361:211-225.
51. Symmank L, Samain MS, Smith JF, Pino G, Stoll A, Goetghebeur P,
Neinhuis C, Wanke S: From the Andean cradle in Peru to the TransVolcanic Mexican Belt: the extraordinary journey of the geophytic
Peperomia subgenus Tildenia (Piperaceae). J Biogeography , doi:10.1111/
j.1365-2699.2011.02586.x.

Naumann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:357
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/357

52. Wanke S, Samain MS, Vanderschaeve L, Mathieu G, Goetghebeur P,
Neinhuis C: Phylogeny of the genus Peperomia (Piperaceae) inferred
from the trnK/matK region (cpDNA). Plant Biol 2006, 8:93-102.
53. Samain MS, Vanderschaeve L, Chaerle P, Goetghebeur P, Neinhuis C,
Wanke S: Is morphology telling the truth about the evolution of the
species rich genus Peperomia (Piperaceae)? Plant Sys Evol 2009, 278:1-21.
54. Bradley U: Biogeography and speciation of the genus Peperomia Ruiz
and Pavon in Eastern Polynesia. PhD thesis University of Dublin, Trinity
College; 2002.
55. Mathieu G, Symmank L, Callejas R, Wanke S, Neinhuis C, Goetghebeur P,
Samain MS: New geophytic Peperomia (Piperaceae) species from Mexico,
Belize and Costa Rica. Rev Mex Biodiv 2011, 82:357-382.
56. Samain MS, Mathieu G, Pino G, Symmank L, Cieza N, Neinhuis C,
Goetghebeur P, Wanke S: The geophytic Peperomia subgenus Tildenia
(Piperaceae) in the Andes with the description of new species in a
phylogenetic framework. Plant Ecol Evol 2011, 144(2):1-29.
57. Liepman AH, Olsen LJ: Alanine aminotransferase homologs catalyze the
glutamate:glyoxylate aminotransferase reaction in peroxisomes of
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2003, 131:215-227.
58. Shimodaira H, Hasegawa M: Multiple comparisons of log-likelihoods with
applications to phylogenetic inference. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:114-1116.
59. Colless DH: Congruence between morphometric and allozyme data for
Menidia species: a reappraisal. Syst Zool 1980, 29:288-299.
60. Berry PE, Hipp AL, Wurdack KJ, Van Ee B, Riina R: Molecular phylogenetics
of the giant genus Croton and tribe Crotoneae (Euphorbiaceae sensu
stricto) using ITS and trnL-trnF DNA sequence data. Am J Bot 2005,
92:1520-1534.
61. Richardson JE, Chatrou LW, Mols JB, Erkens RHJ, Pirie MD: Historical
biogeography of two cosmopolitan families of flowering plants:
Annonaceae and Rhamnaceae. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 2004,
359:1495-1508.
62. Kårehed J, Groeninckx I, Dessein S, Motley TJ, Bremer B: The phylogenetic
utility of chloroplast and nuclear DNA markers and the phylogeny of
the Rubiaceae tribe Spermacoceae. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2008, 49:843-866.
63. Mort ME, Soltis DE, Soltis PS, Francisco-Ortega J, Santos-Guerra A:
Phylogenetics and Evolution of the Macaronesian Clade of Crassulaceae
Inferred from Nuclear and Chloroplast Sequence Data. Syst Bot 2002,
27(2):271-288.
64. Cui L, Wall PK, Leebens-Mack JH, Lindsay BG, Soltis DE, Doyle JJ, Soltis PS,
Carlson JE, Arumuganathan K, Barakat A, Albert VA, Ma H, dePamphilis CW:
Widespread genome duplications throughout the history of flowering
plants. Genome Res 2006, 16:738-749.
65. Jiao Y, Wickett NJ, Ayyampalayam S, Chanderbali A, Landherr L, Ralph PE,
Tomsho LP, Hu Y, Liang H, Soltis PS, Soltis DE, Clifton SW, Schlarbaum SE,
Schuster SC, Ma H, Leebens-Mack J, dePamphilis CW: Ancestral polyploidy
in seed plants and angiosperms. Nature 2011, doi:10.1038/nature09916
Letter.
66. Van de Peer Y: A mystery unveiled. Genome Biol 2011, 12:113.
67. PlantTribes. [http://fgp.bio.psu.edu/tribedb/10_genomes/index.pl].
68. Wicke S, Costa A, Muñoz J, Quandt D: Restless 5S: The re-arrangement(s)
and evolution of the nuclear ribosomal DNA in land plants. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2011, 61:321-332.
69. Nichols R: Gene trees and species trees are not the same. Trends Ecol Evol
2001, 16:358-64.
70. Ancestral Angiosperm Genome Project. [http://ancangio.uga.edu/].
71. TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies. [http://plantta.jcvi.org].
72. Childs KL, Hamilton JP, Zhu W, Ly E, Cheung F, Wu H, Rabinowicz PD,
Town CD, Buell CR, Chan AP: The TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D846-51.
73. Müller J, Müller KF, Neinhuis C, Quandt D: PhyDE - Phylogenetic Data
Editor. 2006 [http://www.phyde.de].
74. Simmons MP, Ochoterena H: Gaps as Characters in Sequence-Based
Phylogenetic Analyses. Syst Biol 2000, 49(2):369-381.
75. Müller KF: SeqState: Primer design and sequence statistics for
phylogenetic DNA datasets. Appl Bioinformatics 2005, 4:65-69.
76. Posada D: jModelTest: Phylogenetic Model Averaging. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25:1253-1256.
77. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes. 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
78. Rambaut A, Drummond A: Tracer. 2009 [http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/
tracer], version 1.5.

Page 19 of 19

79. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(21):2688-2690.
80. Müller KF: PRAP - computation of Bremer support for large data sets. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2004, 31:780-782.
81. Swofford DL: PAUP* Phylogenetic Analysis using Parsimony (*and other
Methods). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates; 2003, Version 4.
82. Stöver BC, Müller KF: TreeGraph 2: Combining and visualizing evidence
from different phylogenetic analyses. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:7.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-357
Cite this article as: Naumann et al.: Chasing the hare - Evaluating the
phylogenetic utility of a nuclear single copy gene region at and below
species level within the species rich group Peperomia (Piperaceae). BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:357.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
