<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Local Knowledge and Conservation of Seagrasses in the Tamil Nadu State of India</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37. doi:10.1186/1746-4269-7-37"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="AF Newmaster"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

JOURNAL OF ETHNOBIOLOGY
AND ETHNOMEDICINE

RESEARCH

Open Access

Local Knowledge and Conservation of Seagrasses
in the Tamil Nadu State of India
AF Newmaster1, KJ Berg1, S Ragupathy1, M Palanisamy2, K Sambandan3 and SG Newmaster1*

Abstract
Local knowledge systems are not considered in the conservation of fragile seagrass marine ecosystems. In fact,
little is known about the utility of seagrasses in local coastal communities. This is intriguing given that some local
communities rely on seagrasses to sustain their livelihoods and have relocated their villages to areas with a rich
diversity and abundance of seagrasses. The purpose of this study is to assist in conservation efforts regarding
seagrasses through identifying Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) from local knowledge systems of seagrasses
from 40 coastal communities along the eastern coast of India. We explore the assemblage of scientific and local
traditional knowledge concerning the 1. classification of seagrasses (comparing scientific and traditional
classification systems), 2. utility of seagrasses, 3. Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) of seagrasses, and 4. current
conservation efforts for seagrass ecosystems. Our results indicate that local knowledge systems consist of a
complex classification of seagrass diversity that considers the role of seagrasses in the marine ecosystem. This finescaled ethno-classification gives rise to five times the number of taxa (10 species = 50 local ethnotaxa), each with a
unique role in the ecosystem and utility within coastal communities, including the use of seagrasses for medicine
(e.g., treatment of heart conditions, seasickness, etc.), food (nutritious seeds), fertilizer (nutrient rich biomass) and
livestock feed (goats and sheep). Local communities are concerned about the loss of seagrass diversity and have
considerable local knowledge that is valuable for conservation and restoration plans. This study serves as a case
study example of the depth and breadth of local knowledge systems for a particular ecosystem that is in peril.
Key words: local health and nutrition, traditional ecological knowledge (TEK), conservation and natural resources
management, consensus, ethnomedicine, ethnotaxa, cultural heritage
Introduction
Seagrasses are an artificial grouping of grass-like plants
that grow in or around aquatic marine ecosystems. The
name seagrass is purely descriptive as is the name seaweed with respect to marine algae [1]. Despite popular
misunderstanding of the taxonomic relation of seagrasses to the grass family (Poaceae), seagrasses in fact
have no relation to grasses as supported by systematic
and phylogenetic evidence. However, the term seagrass
aptly defines a group of angiosperms that are specially
adapted to grow in estuaries and marine ecosystems. As
such, this group of plants includes 13 genera and
approximately 72 species that belong to the families
Zosteraceae, Potamogetonaceae, Posidoniaceae, Cymodoceaceae, Hydrocharitaceae and Ruppiaceae [2,3].
* Correspondence: snewmast@uoguelph.ca
1
Biodiversity Institute of Ontario Herbarium, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Seagrasses have adapted to grow in coastal marine
environments in both tropical and temperate regions on
almost every continent in the world [2,4]. In tropical
seas, genera such as Cymodocea, Enhalus, Halodule,
Halophila, Syringodium, Thalassia and Thalassodendron
are represented. However, some species of these genera
are also found in temperate regions, whereas species of
Amphibolis, Heterozostera, Phyllospadix, Posidonia,
Pseudalthenia and Zostera are usually restricted only to
temperate seas [5-7]. Growing erect from rhizomes
embedded in the sediment and debris on the ocean
floor, seagrasses are the only angiosperms that are able
to thrive underwater in marine environments [2]. In
general seagrasses inhabit the tidal and subtidal zones of
shallow and sheltered localities of seas, gulfs, bays, backwaters, lagoons and estuaries. They usually prefer
muddy, sandy, clayey and coral rubble substrate, but
they also grow on rocks and in crevices. They are found
to grow either homogenously or heterogeneously,

© 2011 Newmaster et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

forming thick and dense meadows that produce considerable biomass, provide excellent habitat, and perform
multiple ecosystem services for some of the world’s
most biodiverse and productive marine ecosystems [8].
Some of the important ecosystem services attributed to
seagrasses include the recycling of nutrients, and the
stabilization of seafloor sediment, which prevents erosion during storms and provides critical habitat for
spawning fish and many juvenile marine invertebrates.
Seagrasses also serve as habitat and a food source. They
serve as the primary food for green sea turtles, manatees
and dugongs [2,4], and they support a rich variety of
fish, which in turn attracts a diversity of predators
including a rich diversity of birds and some large
mammals.
The importance of seagrasses has been documented in
many coastal communities around the world, including
India [9], Africa [10], Canada [11,12], Mexico [13,14]
and Sweden [15]. Some of these studies describe the
role of seagrasses in ecosystem function [15], while
others highlight their economic and traditional value,
such as the research of Wyllie-Echeverria and Cox [11]
concerning wild and commercial gathering of seagrass
(Zostera marina) by North American fishing communities during the early to mid 1900s for use as green
manure and insulating products. Seagrasses have also
been studied for their potential use in modern medicine
[9,16-18]. Recent research on seagrass phyochemistry
has shown that they are an important source of antioxidants [9], antibacterial agents [17], minerals [18] and
possibly anticancer compounds [19].
The literature documenting the traditional knowledge
of seagrasses is sparse, but there are a number of important sources that describe the plant’s unique value and
varied uses within coastal indigenous societies. Communities that value seagrass are often suitably located in
coastal areas of abundant seagrass meadows that serve
as rich and accessible habitat for fishing, and from
which seagrass can be easily gathered for use as garden
fertilizers [20] and as a source of food [21]. In India,
coastal indigenous people claim that their ancestors
have used seagrasses for thousands of years for a variety
of uses from food to medicine [22,23]. Similarly, seagrass (the eelgrass Z. marina) was a vitally important
source of food and medicine, and had both cultural and
socio-economic value for the Seri Indians from the Gulf
of California in Sonora, Mexico. Studies by Felger and
Moser [13,14] reveal that not only did eelgrass supply
the Seri with their key grain resource, but eelgrass was
also a primary food of green sea turtles (Chelonia), the
single most important traditional food of the Seri. The
authors describe how, as a reflection of the central role
of eelgrass in Seri culture, eelgrass is prominently
imprinted in the Seri language, and Seri elders retain

Page 2 of 17

detailed knowledge of the distribution and ecology of
eelgrass within their territory. The eelgrass Z. marina
was also favored by several coastal groups of British
Columbia, but instead of harvesting the seeds, the eelgrass was gathered for consumption of its rhizomes and
leaf bases, or for collecting herring eggs in the spring
[12].
In addition to research by Felger and Moser [14],
there is only one other published report [21], to our
knowledge, on the medicinal use of seagrasses by an
indigenous community. This study explores the interactions between seagrasses and coastal dwelling stakeholders in Chwaka Bay, on the East Coast of Zanzibar,
Africa. However, rather than working from surveys or
quantitative analyses, the research is based only on qualitative data, simply listing seagrasses and their associated use for ethnomedicine. It is our view that
rigorous experimental design and consensus analysis of
traditional knowledge among informants provides quantitative support for local knowledge that may impact
society-at-large [24,25]. There is an immediate need to
quantitatively survey the traditional knowledge of seagrasses in areas where they are abundant and serve as
an important resource to coastal communities.
Society is in a quandary concerning the conservation
of seagrasses [26]. Seagrass ecosystems are being
destroyed at a rapid rate [20] in spite of the fact that
they support high biodiversity and sustain many cultures
as a vital source of their livelihood [27,28]. Conservation
measures for protecting these biodiversity hotspots have
been established in North America and Australia, and
countries such as India have been included in the
Coastal Regulation Zone Act to protect species such as
seagrasses [8]. However, seagrasses are rarely considered
in resource management, education and ecological conservation plans. In order to conserve and raise awareness on these vital plants, political mandates need to be
informed by the perspective of traditional knowledge
and the associated value to coastal communities around
the world that reside near seagrass ecosystems.
India has a vast coastal belt extending up to 6000 km,
which provides excellent habitat for seagrasses. This
coastal area is immense (2,013,440 sq. km) and has conflicting land resource management needs; on one hand,
there is rapid, ongoing development of India’s Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ); the EEZ is a zone that extends
for a distance of 200 nautical miles seaward from the
coastal edge of a nation’s territorial waters. Within this
zone, a nation has rights to exploit marine resources,
primarily in the form of fishing and seabed mining, but
also including the harvesting of energy from water and
wind [29].
There is also an urgent need for biodiversity conservation within a large (452,060 sq. km), unique coastal

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

oceanic shelf [29]. This shelf includes the Bay of Bengal,
spanning from West Bengal to Kodikarai Tamil Nadu,
and includes estuaries fed by five major rivers in Tamil
Nadu, namely Palar, south Pennar, Kollidam, Cauvery
and Thamiraparani. These rivers all play a major role in
the growth of seagrass along the river mouths of the
estuaries. This is an inimitable biosphere inhabited by a
diversity of cultures that have utilized resources in a
sustainable way for many years, yet it lacks protection
[30]. The Coromandel Coast comprises a major part of
the Bay of Bengal, the Palk Bay and the Gulf of Mannar,
and a wide variety of unique landscapes along this
coastline contributes to a rich diversity of plant communities; seagrass habitats within this zone are supported
by sheltered bays, gulfs, straits, channels, lagoons, estuaries, salt water lakes and backwater ponds. Thirteen
seagrass species are found in the Tamil Nadu state,
including: Enhalus acoroides (L.F.) Royle, Halophila beccarii Asch., Halophila decipiens Ostenf., Halophila stipulacea, Halophila ovalis (R.Br.) Hook. F, Halophila
ovalis ssp. ramamurthiana, Halophila ovata Gaud., Thalassia hemprichii (Ehrenb.) Asch., Cymodocea rotundata
Ehrenb. & Hempr. Ex Asch., Cymodocea serrulata, (R.
Br.) Asch. & Magnus, Halodule pinifolia (Miki) Hartog,
Halodule uninervis (Forssk.) Asch., and Syringodium isoetifolium (Asch.) Dandy [20].
In India, detailed distributional or taxonomical information on seagrasses is sparse, and ethnobotanical literature is lacking. There are a number of studies in
which seagrasses were included in floristic surveys in
India, and across these studies, a total of only 12 seagrass species were reported [20,31-34]. However, there
is only limited research that exclusively focuses on seagrasses in a few locations [20]. We are not aware of any
publication on the traditional or local knowledge of seagrasses in India. The purpose of this study is to assemble the local Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) of
seagrasses from communities along the eastern coast of
India in order to assist in conservation of marine ecosystems. More specifically, we explore scientific and traditional local knowledge concerning the 1. classification
of seagrasses (comparing scientific and traditional classification systems), 2. utility of seagrasses, 3. Traditional
Ecological Knowledge (TEK) of seagrasses, and 4. current conservation efforts for seagrass ecosystems.

Methods
Study site

The area of study included the eastern coast of India
from Chennai (Pulicat-lake) to Kannyakumari in the
state of Tamil Nadu. Sampling for traditional knowledge
of seagrasses occurred within 40 rural fishing villages
(Figure 1).

Page 3 of 17

Ethnography

There was exceptional cultural diversity in our study
where the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea meet (Figure 1), and each of the 40 villages surveyed contained a
number of different religious groups, including Hindu,
Islam and Christian. Mixed tribal groups who represent
the Dravidians, the ancestors of ancient southeastern
India, were also represented in the villages [35]. Religions of the tribal groups include Hindu and Christianity, and they speak a number of different dialects that
are slightly different from the modern Dravidian [36].
Many people within these groups also speak Islam and
Tamil.
Ethnobotanical Surveys

Ethnobotanical explorations were made in the study
area in 2011 (Figure 1). Our research team included
local “informants” (Figure 2) from the villages, and botanists from the Centre for Biodiversity Genomics (CBG)
at the University of Guelph and the Botanical Survey of
India. The informants were selected following standard
interview protocols [37,38], and key informants of TEK
(i.e., local experts, of which two were chosen for each
village) were identified using Bernard’s [39] methodology. From a total of 130 possible participants we
selected 90 informants, including 60 men, 10 women,
and 10 of each male and female children. Ages of informants ranged from 10 to 85, and occupations of informants (excluding fishing, which was the most common
occupation) included sales, truck driving, tailoring,
teaching, local politics, and business. We intended to
interview a balanced ratio of men and women, but circumstances prevented us from doing so; the majority of
women denied their knowledge of seagrass and refused
to be interviewed. Women are directly involved in the
processing of marine resources and it may be entirely
possible that they have a specialized knowledge of seagrasses, but during our surveys they seemed to spend
most of their time working with the fish. It may be for
this reason that most women denied to be interviewed.
Verbal consent was obtained from all individual participants involved in our surveys. The consent statement
presented to participants included the following: If you
agree to participate in this study, we will request your
involvement each day for 3 days between 8 a.m. to 12
noon. In the case that we need data validation you will
be contacted again for an hour if necessary. The interviews will be conducted in your native language, and all
interview and consent records will be stored under lock
and key. The results of this study will first be published
in your language as research notes and distributed to
your community, and later, following your consent, the
results will be published in a scientific journal.

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

Page 4 of 17

Figure 1 Study area including 40 villages along the eastern coast of India from Chennai (Pulicat-lake) to Kannyakumari in the state of
Tamil Nadu.

Figure 2 Interview with a local elder about seagrass traditional
knowledge.

The field data were collected in a series of unstructured, semi-structured and structured interviews [40,41]
over the course of two stages. First, in an initial period
of participant observation, researchers accompanied
local informants in their boat-based activities and other
interactions with seagrasses. For each seagrass species
encountered, the plant was identified, a voucher specimen collected and labeled, and informants were surveyed in an unstructured and semi-structured format as
to the plant’s utility. Second, the collected voucher samples were then the subject of semi-structured and structured interviews in the 40 villages. Using various
research protocols such as free recall lists, pile sorts,
and consensus analysis [37,38], this stage served to garner additional TEK, validate the identification of voucher samples, and determine differences in knowledge
and taxonomy among local informants in other villages.
Other interview protocols and methods of data

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

collection and confirmation were based on Pelto and
Pelto [42], Etkin [43], Bernard [39], Vogl et al. [44], and
Stepp and Thomas [45].
Semi-structured interviews involved flexible, openended questions and conversations with informants in
fishing boats, at village areas where fishing nets and
boats were being prepared, in fish sorting locations, and
in both small and large fish markets. At times, visual
cues (e.g., photos, plants) were used to trigger memories
or insight for informants that may not arise in unfamiliar interview locations (e.g., 46). This technique helps
to promote spaces where participants can guide the
inquiry process as to the perceptions and values related
to seagrasses [47].
Throughout the semi-structured and structured interview process, a number of participatory tools were used
to elicit additional traditional uses, identifications,
nomenclature, classifications and other associated TEK
of each voucher specimen. These tools included Community Biodiversity Registers and Diversity Fairs, a participatory approach that involves exploring ethnotaxa
diversity through pile-sorting activities based on names,
utility, or other factors [48,49]. Boat-hold surveys were
also used to understand (a) the contribution of seagrasses to a family’s household activities (i.e., economy,
food, medicine) and (b) the access to and control over
coastal areas and seagrass resources needed for nutritional self-sufficiency.
Selected key interview questions (using the ‘Kadal
passi’ ethnotaxa as an example):
1) Do you know about ‘Kadal passi’ seagrass?
2) Do you know this name?
3) Do you ever use this plant?
4) How important is ‘Kadal passi’ seagrass to you?
5) Do you sell ‘Kadal passi’ seagrass?
6) If yes, what part of the plant do you sell?
7) Why do you sell this plant?
8) Where do you sell the plant?
9) How often do you sell the plant?
10) How much money do you earn for selling this
plant?
11) Is the money you earn enough for your daily
meals?
13) What is ‘Kadal passi’ seagrass used for?
14) From whom did you learn the uses of ‘Kadal passi’
seagrass?
15) How is the seagrass habitat important to you?
16) How is this ecosystem important to you?
17) What is good about being at this site?
18) What is the name of this area?
19) Why is this important to you?
In addition to members of the fishing community, we
also interviewed other actors (e.g. biodiversity resource
managers, conservation practitioners) that were relevant

Page 5 of 17

to understanding the processes (and discourses) that
shaped resource access. For all actors, we conducted
oral history interviews to elicit the memories and personal commentaries relevant to coastal activities and
resource assess. All interviews were conducted using the
Tamil language.
Plant samples of each ethnotaxa were collected from
all of the local indigenous communities and preserved
for both herbaria and DNA barcode analysis. Leaf, stem
and flower parts collected in situ were fixed in silica gel,
FAA (50% ethanol, 5% acetic acid, 10% formalin, 35%
water) and stored in 70% ethanol for morphological
study ex situ. These samples were used for measuring
the variation in morphological characters and molecular
markers. Herbarium voucher specimens were deposited
in the Center for Bio-Cultural Diversity (CBD) in Chennai, India. Scanned herbarium images are available in
the OAC Herbarium, Biodiversity Institute of Ontario,
University of Guelph, Ontario.
Identification and TEK Consensus Analysis

Calculation of pile sorting relative frequency (RF) and a
consensus factor (FIC) was used to test homogeneity of
knowledge (scientific knowledge, SK, and traditional
knowledge, TEK) in the identification of specimens,
revealing cryptic taxa (ethnotaxa) or limitations of the
classification without the use of molecular data. Voucher
samples collected from the 40 villages were systematically identified by taxonomists at the University of
Guelph Herbarium, the Botanical Survey of India and by
local informants at the time of their collection in India.
The relative frequency (RF) of each specimen from the
interviews was calculated to determine a quantitative
value for choosing a plant name (Latin binomial or TEK
ethnotaxa) from the pool of collected vouchers placed in
a species concept [50]. RF is the simple calculation of
the percentage of specimens associated with a taxon
when taxonomists or local informants are presented
with a pool of vouchers and asked to perform “pile sorting” [37]. Trotter and Logan [51,52] provide the calculation of a consensus factor [Fic=Nur-Nt/(Nur-1)], which
was adopted to evaluate the degree of partition into
categories [24]. We have adopted this calculation as a
means to examine plant utility by the indigenous informants [24,25,53], where Nur is the number of usereports of informants for a particular category (TEK
plant use), where a use-report is a single record for use
of a plant mentioned by an individual, and where Nt
refers to the number of species used for that particular
category for all informants [53,54].
Seagrass Multivariate Classification Analyses

Bray-Curtis average linkage was used to classify 155 specimens of seagrass ethnotaxa using four TEK

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

classification characters (morphology, ecology, experience, gestalt). These four characters were recorded for
all ethnotaxa during the interviews and represent the
primary characteristics used by the informants; their use
in this study follows methods previously established
[50]. Morphological characters included visual morphological features (e.g., leaf size or color). Ecological characters included those associated with sites where the
informants collect seagrasses. Experience refers to personal skills used by the informants to identify seagrass ethnotaxa. These experiences are comprised of olfaction
(smell), palpation (touch), gustation (taste), and visual
and auditory cues. Previous research [50] has demonstrated that some cultures can recognize plants without
the use of any specific characters. This is often called
“Gestalt” identification; we know some things by the
whole and not by its finer physical properties. We
recorded the seagrass ethnotaxa that informants could
distinguish without reference to any other recognition
characters. This classification included plant “utility”,
which is defined as an informant’s use (e.g., nutritional,
medicinal, technical or ritual) of seagrass. The similarity
matrix of species by characters was used to build a cluster diagram, which is useful in assessing the ability of
the characters in classifying all ethnotaxa.
Detrended Correspondence Analysis (DCA) [55] was
used to produce a SK classification of 155 seagrass specimens using 21 morphometric characters, and a TEK
classification using 22 characteristics from the ethnoclassification surveys (i.e., morphology, ecology, experience, gestalt). The 21 morphometric characters used in
the SK classification included: leaf arrangement, leaf
complexity, leaf number, leaf width, leaf color, flower
color, flower symmetry, ovary position, calyx number,
calyx type, corolla number, corolla type, stamen number,
stamen type, carpel number, carpel type, growth form,
habit and other. Interset Pearson correlations were calculated between every characteristic and each of the
first four axes in each ordination. Canonical ordination
was used to detect groups of specimens and to estimate
the contribution of each variable to the ordination. A
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [55] was used to
identify the length of the ordination axis and the need
for either a linear or unimodal ordination technique.
Unimodal, indirect ordination Detrended Correspondence Analysis (DCA) was used to explore variation in
species scores in this study. A cluster analysis was used
to classify the specimens, as it is better in representing
distances among similar specimens, whereas DCA is
better in representing distances among groups of specimens [56]. Cluster analysis was performed with NTSYS
[57]. A distance matrix was generated using an arithmetic average (UPGMA) clustering algorithm and

Page 6 of 17

standardized data based on average taxonomic distance
subjected to the unweighted pair-group method.

Results
Identification of Seagrasses

Although the ability of field taxonomists and local informants to identify species of seagrasses was high, the
respective classifications of SK and TEK are not homogeneous. Taxonomists identified 10 species of seagrasses
from 155 specimens with 88% (RF) accuracy among
individuals. Species were identified through the use of
floristic keys, and by comparing 21 vegetative and floral
characters to known herbarium specimens. Local informants identified 50 seagrass ethnotaxa from the same
155 specimens with 95% (RF) accuracy among the informants. The primary characteristics used by informants
to identify seagrasses fall into four categories: morphology, experience, ecology and gestalt. Morphological
characters were used most often to recognize plants,
and of these, vegetative features (78%) were more commonly used than floral features (22%). This may be
because some of the seagrass species flower regularly,
while others rarely have flowers (Figure 3). These vegetative and floral characteristics could be easily distinguished through visual inspection of the samples as they
include several salient features that differ in shape, color
and size. Ecological knowledge, such as knowledge of
microhabitat and site conditions, is a key factor that is
used by the locals to distinguish seagrasses (Figure 3).
Personal experience with plants accounts for a considerable portion of the skills used by the locals to identify
seagrasses (Figure 3). These experiences are hierarchical
in usage and are comprised of olfaction (smell), palpation (touch), gustation (taste), auditory (sound) and
visual cues, respectively. The last category called
“gestalt” refers to the ability to recognize ethnotaxa as a
whole without any reference to specific characteristics.
Often the locals said that they could identify some ethnotaxa simply because they know them; elders and
respected individuals had introduced them to specific
ethnotaxa.
Classification of Seagrasses

The morphometric classification indicates a clear
separation of six groups from the 155 specimens that
were analyzed. These six groups correspond with the six
genera identified: Enhalus, Halophila, Thalassia, Cymodocea, Halodule, and Syringodium (Figure 4). Intraspecific variation prevents clear distinction among the ten
species. Principal Components Analysis (PCA) provided
a character gradient that was unimodal (4.5 SD), violating the assumption of a linear model. Consequently, a
Detrended Correspondence Analysis (DCA) was used to

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

Page 7 of 17

Figure 3 Usage (%) of four ethno-classification categories ranked in order of preference (1st-5th choice) to identify 155 specimens into
50 ethnotaxa.

Figure 4 Morphometric scatter plot of the first two axes from a Detrended Correspondence Analysis (DCA) for 155 specimens
(classification of 10 seagrass species) constrained by 21 quantitative variables (taxonomic characters). Intraspecific variance is shown by
error bars (2SD). Bi-plot arrows represent the strength of the correlations among explanatory variables and the first two DCA axes. Numbers of
ethnotaxa are shown in parentheses for each species of seagrass indicating the fine-scale ethno-classification of intraspecific variation.

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

classify the 155 specimens into groups representing 10
species. This is supported by eigenvalues that were moderate (0.192) for the first two DCA axes, and low for the
third DCA axis (Table 1). Correlations among the explanatory variables and the first two gradients indicate the
importance of vegetative and floral characters for the
classification of 10 seagrasses (Figure 4). The first axis is
significantly (p<0.01) correlated with the number of
leaves (Pcor. 0.948) and leaf width (Pcor. 0.948). The
second axis is significantly (p<0.01) correlated with fruit
morphology (Pcor. 0.911) and the orientation of androecium (Pcor. 0.748).
The ethno-classification indicates considerable diversity at a finer scale than the SK classification. Intraspecific variation from the morphometric SK classification
represented several ethnotaxa (Figure 4). Principal Components Analysis (PCA) identified a unimodal (5 SD)
gradient in the ethno-classification analysis. Consequently, a Detrended Correspondence Analysis (DCA)
was used to classify the 155 specimens into groups
representing 50 ethnotaxa (Figure 5). This is supported
by eigenvalues that were high (0.901) for the first three
DCA axes and low for the fourth DCA axis (Table 1).
Correlations among the explanatory variables and the
first three gradients indicate the importance of morphology, ecology and experience for the classification of 50
seagrasses (Figure 5). The first axis is significantly
(p<0.01) correlated with morphological characters (Pcor.
0.944), such as the type of leaf, color of the plant, or
growth form. The second axis is significantly (p<0.01)
correlated with ecological factors (Pcor. 0.795), such as
microhabitat and site characteristics. The third DCA
axis is significantly (p<0.01) correlated with experience
factors (Pcor. 0.659), such as the taste or smell of the
seagrass.
Utility of seagrasses

There were many uses for seagrasses recorded in our
surveys. Our research indicates a high level of consensus
of TEK concerning utility of seagrasses within (Fic =
0.91) and among (Fic = 0.86) the local communities.
The relative frequency (RF) of TEK from each individual
ethnotaxa from the interviews was high (mean RF =
0.94 ± 0.04). The informant consensus of seagrass usage

Page 8 of 17

resulted in Fic ranging from 0.78 to 1.00 per utility category (Table 2). Many ethnotaxa (94%) have ecological
utility as they are recognized as having a key role in the
environment and serve as a measure of health of any
coastal marine ecosystem (Table 3). The level of consensus among the informants concerning the ecology of
seagrasses was considerably high (Fic = 0.78) given that
almost all of the 50 ethnotaxa were associated with multiple ecological variables. Surprisingly, all of the ethnotaxa have medicinal utility with relatively high
consensus (Fic = 0.80-1.00). Some of the medicinal uses
listed included the maintenance of general health, and
the treatment of a variety of ailments including heart
problems, mental disorders, dermatological problems,
various infections and gastrointestinal ailments (Table
3). Species that are found in high abundance such as
Thalassia hemprichii (Ehrenb.) Asch., Cymodocea serrulata, (R.Br.) Asch. & Magnus and Syringodium isoetifolium (Asch.) Dandy are used as animal feed largely for
goats and pigs serving as a viable enterprise for smallscale farmers along the coast. Relatively few species
(35%) have aesthetic or spiritual utility among the
coastal cultures. The consensus among informants was
high (Fic = 0.97) regarding the use of seagrasses within
coastal communities for animal feed, aesthetic or spiritual purposes.

Discussion
Classification of Seagrasses

Our interpretation of diversity is entirely dependent on
the classification lens with which we view the landscape.
The coastal landscape of Tamil Nadu, India is abundant
with seagrasses. A scientific classification lens provides
resolution at a scale that identifies 12 species, 10 of
which are important to local cultures. Two tiny
(<1.5cm) species (Halophila decipiens and Halophila
beccarii) are restricted to specific habitats and are recognized, but not used by the local cultures. These cultures
appear to use a finer scaled lens for classification than
SK, based on a system of traditional knowledge that has
been in place for centuries, if not longer. This traditional classification interprets intraspecific variation
revealing 50 ethnotaxa that have considerable utility
among the local villages along the coast. This was

Table 1 Summary of Detrended Correspondence Analysis (DCA) for the ordination of 155 specimens of seagrass
classified using scientific (SK = 10 species) and traditional (TEK = 50 ethnotaxa).
DCA Metrics

Classification

DCA Axis
1

Cumulative % variance of species/ethnotaxa data explained

3

4

SK

0.075

0.052

0.007

0.004

TEK

Eigenvalue

2

0.339

0.322

0.236

0.000

SK

53.4

90.8

95.4

98.0

TEK

37.7

73.5

100.0

100.0

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

Page 9 of 17

26
23

1
15

39 20

24

34

40
36

2

18 19
18-19
27
28

25

6

29
2
22
21
21 30

4

3

3
31

46

49
50

33
35

12-14

11

9

48

32

5

4
44 45

17
7
8

42 10
38
37

41

43

1
16

7
47

Figure 5 Morphometric scatter plot of the first three axes from a Detrended Correspondence Analysis (DCA) for 155 specimens
(classification of 50 seagrass ethnotaxa) constrained by 22 quantitative variables (ethno-taxonomic characters). Bi-plot arrows represent
the strength of the correlations among explanatory variables and the first three DCA axes. Symbols for species are defined in the legend from
Figure 3. Numbers within and beside symbols represents specific ethnotaxa of which the respective names can be found in Table 3.

consistent both in the field and when specimens were
displayed within local villages. This is not the first
account where TEK classification systems record diversity at a finer-scale than SK systems. In a review of indigenous biological classification systems [50,58], we
found a handful of studies where indigenous informants
recorded more taxa in a particular area than taxonomists using a SK classification system [59-61]. However,
none of these studies allowed a direct comparison

within an experimental design in the same area. Our
earlier research incorporated such a research design
with the Irulas in a remote area of Tamil Nadu and discovered that for surveys of a diverse group of plants in
exactly the same area, the Irula TEK classification system was more robust than the SK classification [50].
Our seagrass study corroborates this earlier evidence
[50,58], which defines a multi-mechanistic model for
classification systems based on traditional knowledge.

Table 2 Ethnobotanical consensus index for traditional knowledge concerning the utility of 50 seagrass ethnotaxa.
Utility category
Heart

Number of use reports (Nur)
29

Number of Exthnotaxa per use report (Nt)
2

Informants’ consensus index factor (Fica)
0.96
0.89

General health

40

5

Mental disorder

27

1

1.00

Dermatological

15

2

0.92

Infection

3

0.80

32

2

0.96

Ecological

37

9

0.78

Animal feed
Spiritual

40
36

2
2

0.97
0.97

Aesthetic
a

11

Gastrointestinal

36

2

0.97

Fic = Nur-Nt/(Nur-1), providing a value between 0 and 1, where high value indicates a high rate of informant consensus.

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

Page 10 of 17

Table 3 Utility of 10 seagrass species, including habitat and etymology of 50 ethnotaxa.
Ethnotaxa (Species & CBD Habitats
Herbarium Accession
Number

Etymology & Main Utility

Cymodocea rotundata Asch. Purely marine; shallow regions of tidal and
& Schweinf.
subtidal zones; sandy and muddy
substratum

Id: Rhizome creeping, branched, white to pale brown; shoots erect;
sheaths pale white; stems less sweet but more salty; leaves straight and
slightly falcate; lamina width narrow.
Etymology:$(10) Alai vaari: Alai means waves, vaari means drifted or
taking away; used together, Alai vaari means leaves floating along the
wave.$(11) Kadal korai: Kadal means sea, korai means$sedge.$(12) Kadal
karumbu: means sea sugar cane.$(13) Kadal thazahi pasi: Kadal means
sea, thazahi means leafy, pasi refers to thalloid form.$(14) Vellai kadal
korrai pasi: Vellai means white, kadal means sea, korrai means sedge,
pasi means thalloid form of a seawater alga.$(9) Vellai thazahi pasi:
Vellai means white, thazahi means Pandanus leaf type, pasi means
thalloid form of a seawater alga.
Utility: Branches and leaves used as feed for goats and pigs. Paste from
leaves used to treat wounds. Collected biomass used as green manure
for gardens.

Cymodocea serrulata (R.Br.)
Asch. & Magnus

Purely marine; deep shallow regions of
Id: Rhizomes creeping, branched; stems reddish brown to white; shoots
tidal and subtidal zones; sandy and muddy long, more sweet and less salty, juicy; leaves falcate; lamina broad.
substratum
Etymology:$(15) Karumbu: means sugar cane.$(16) Karumbu pasi:
Karumbu means sugarcane thalloid, pasi means thalloid form of a
seawater alga.$(17) Kadal karumbu: Kadal means sea, karumbu means
sugarcane.$(18) Peria korai pasi: Peria means big, korai means sedge,
pasi means thalloid.$(19)Peria thazai pasi: Peria means big, thazai means
Pandanus leaf type, pasi means thalloid.
Utility: Branches and leaves used as feed for goats and pigs. Paste from
leaves used to treat wounds. Collected biomass used as green manure
for gardens.

Enhalus acoroides (L.f.) Royle Pure marine; shallow water; sandy to fine
mud substratum

Id: Leaves long, dark green, ribbon-like; rhizome very thick; roots stout;
female inflorescence on long peduncles, single flowered like a lily.
Etymology:$(1) Olai pasi: Olai means palm leaf, pasi means thalloid form
of a seawater alga.$(2) Vaata alai: Vaataa means running toward the
wave, alai means waves; together name means the direction the leaves
float along the waves.$(3) Alai vaari: Alai means waves, vaari means
floating away; together name means leaves that float along the wave.$(4)
Kadal vaari: Kadal means sea, vaari means floating away; together name
means leaves swaying in the wave.$(5) Thittu pasi: thittu means patches,
pasi means thalloid form of a seawater alga.
Utility: Rhizome and root juices consumed raw to treat seasickness.
Rhizome (peeled of skin) consumed fresh with cup of seawater to treat
heart conditions and low blood pressure. Rhizomes consumed fresh to
ease indigestion and hangover. Paste of fresh leaves used to treat many
kinds of skin diseases. Seeds, which taste like almonds, are eaten by
people or fed to goats and sheep.

Halodule pinifolia (Miki)
Hartog

Tidal and subtidal zones; fine sandy and
muddy bottoms; mangrove creeks and
swamps

Id: Rhizomes creeping, white to pale brown; shoots long, erect; leave flat,
long.
Etymology:$(34) Nedung korai: Nedung means long, korai refers to
sedge.$(35) Neettu korai: Neettu means long, korai means sedge.$(36)
Korai: Korai means sedge.$(37) Kadal korai: Kadal means sea, korai
means sedge.$(38) Kadal korai pasi: Kadal means sea, korai means
sedge, pasi means thalloid form of a seawater alga.$(33) Arugampul
pasi: Arugampul refers to the terrestrial plant called Cynodon dacylon,
which is traditionally called Arugampul; pasi means thalloid form of a
seawater alga.$(39) Peria eekku thazhai: Peria means long/big, eekku
means sharp tiny stick (like tooth pick), thazhai refers to terrestrial plant of
the Pandanus genus.
Utility: Stems are washed and used as goat feed.

Halodule uninervis (Forssk.)
Boiss.

Purely marine; deeper tidal and subtidal
zones in muddy bottoms

Id: Rhizomes creeping, white to pale brown; shoots short, erect; leave flat,
narrow, short;

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

Page 11 of 17

Table 3 Utility of 10 seagrass species, including habitat and etymology of 50 ethnotaxa. (Continued)
Etymology:$(41) Kothu korai: Kothu means forms in patches, korai
means sedge.$(42) Kattai korai: Kattai refers to stout-strong stem, korai
means sedge.$(43) Pullu korai: Pullu means grass, korai means grassy
sedge.$(44) Korai: Korai means sedge.$(45) Sinna eekku thazahi: Sinna
means small, eekku refers to a sharp tiny stick, thazhai refers to terrestrial
plant of the Pandanus genus.$(40) Panjipul pasi: Panjipul means the
whole plant is soft to the touch, and tiny; pasi means thalloid form or
seaweed.
Utility: Stems are washed and used as goat feed.
Halophila ovalis (R.Br.) Hook. Tidal and subtidal zones; coral debris and
f.
muddy substratum

Id: Rhizome creeping, branched, slender, semi-transparent, fleshy, brittle;
lamina oblong-elliptic, pale to dark green.
Etymology:$(25) Kadal sedi pasi: Kadal means sea, sedi means herb,
pasi means thalloid form or seaweed; together the name means flat
seaweed.$(26) Kouthu pasi: Kouthu means bunch, pasi means thalloid
form or seaweed.$(23) Murungai pasi: Murungai refers to Moringa plant,
pasi means thalloid form or seaweed$(28) Sedi pasi: Sedi means herb,
pasi means thalloid form or seaweed.$(24) Seathu pasi: Seathu means
mud, pasi means thalloid form or seaweed.$(27) Kadal pasi: Kadal means
sea, pasi means thalloid form or seaweed; together name means
seaweed.
Utility: A handful of leaves is toasted with three drops of sesame oil and
consumed for three days to treat iron deficiency. A leaf paste is mixed
with turmeric and applied to cure various skin ailments, including burns
and boils.

Halophila gaudichaudii J.
Kuo (syn. Halophila ovata
Gaud.)

Low tide, wave-less open sea; coarse sandy Id: Rhizome slender, terete, fleshy, unbranched, semi-transparent; leaves
and soft muddy bottoms
oblong - elliptic, linear-oblong.
Etymology:$(31) Sedi pasi: Sedi means herb, pasi means thalloid form
or seaweed; together the name means herb type pasi.$(32) Elai pasi: Elai
means leaf, pasi means thalloid form or seaweed; name means leaf-like
structure found in sea.$(29) Poduthali: Poduthali refers to Phyla nodiflora,
the leaf of which is is brittle.$(30) Pottal pasi: Pottal refers to the plain
sandy substratum where this plant is found, pasi means thalloid form or
seaweed.
Utility: A handful of leaves is toasted with three drops of sesame oil and
consumed for three days to treat iron deficiency. A leaf paste is mixed
with turmeric and applied to cure various skin ailments, including burns
and boils.

Halophila stipulacea (Forssk.)
Asch.

Id: Herbaceous and creeping; runner slender, transparent, brittle; lamina
lanceolate; pedicle short.
Etymology:$Minni pasi: Minnal means lightning, pasi means thalloid
form or seaweed; name refers to the reflective light and color of water.
$Kadal pasi Kadal means sea, pasi means thalloid form or seaweed; a
thalloid looking seaweed.$Sedi pasi: Sedi means terrestrial seaweed, pasi
means thalloid form or seaweed.

Syringodium isoetifolium
(Asch.) Dandy

Purely marine; occur in deeper zones on
coral flats; sandy to muddy bottoms

Id: Rhizomes creeping, slender, semi-fleshy, white to pale yellow; shoots
long; leaves long, lamina terete, succulent/fleshy and thick.
Etymology:$(46) Neer pasi: Neer refers to the watery substance that
comes out of the succulent leaves when squeezed, pasi means thalloid
or seaweed type.$(47) Oosi korai: Needle type sedge.$(48) Neer korai:
Neer refers to the watery substance, korai means sedge; a watery/fleshy
sedge.$(49) Korai pasi: Korai means sedge, pasi means thalloid or
seaweed type.$(50) Nool pasi: Thread like thalloid form.
Utility: Fresh leaf juice consumed to ease acid reflux. Stems fed to goats.
Biomass used as green manure for garden.

Thalassia hemprichii
(Ehrenb. ex Solms) Asch.

Purely marine; tidal and subtidal zones;
black muddy, and loose sandy soils

Id: Rhizomes creeping, branched, brittle; leaves falcate; shoots brownishblack, internodes short, many.
Etymology:$(6) Kattai korai pasi: Kattai means woody and refers to the
plant’s stout rhizomes, korai means sedge, pasi means thalloid or
seaweed type.$(7) Korai pasi: Korai means sedge, pasi means thalloid or
seaweed type.$(8) Kadal korai: Kadal means sea, korai means sedge.
Utility: Dried rhizome powder consumed to treat mental disorders. The
same powder mixed with coconut oil and applied on wounds. Biomass
used as green manure for gardens.

(Herbarium accession voucher numbers are provided for the Center for Biocultural Diversity in Chennai, India, and the ARK collection at the Biodiversity Institute
of Ontario, University of Guelph).

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

The direct comparison of SK and TEK classifications of
155 seagrass specimens was not congruent. This is
because the TEK classification system considers other
classification variables such as ecology and sensory perception (e.g., smell, taste), differentiating seagrasses at a
very fine-scale. The TEK classification does not align
itself to the SK classification; ethnotaxa are not clustered
within a species concept, such as subspecies or varieties.
Instead, the ethnotaxa data cluster with respect to morphology, ecology, experience and gestalt categories. This
illustrates that local coastal cultures have a classification
based on both salient and functional characters. This
evidence of classification using the latter functional
characters reflects a natural interpretation of seagrass
diversity based on how these species respond to ecological gradients. Perhaps TEK classification is more aligned
with evolutionary principles as these cultures have had
the opportunity to observe how species respond to different environments. This natural interpretation of the
variation in taxa is critical for those cultures that utilize
seagrasses on a day-to-day basis. The need to classify is
underpinned by the utility of the various seagrass ethnotaxa, which has been entrenched within these coastal
cultures for centuries.
Variation in Seagrass Morphology

The TEK interpretation of morphological variation
among seagrasses is very detailed. The morphological
characteristics used within the TEK classification are
similar to that of the SK classification, including plant
size (e.g., height, leaf width) or features such as rhizomes (e.g., size, shape and structure), seeds (e.g., colour, shape and lustre) or stems (e.g., diameter, colour).
For example, some fishermen recognize Minnipassi
(Halophila stipulacea) based on color alone. All of the
species within the Halophila complex look morphologically similar when viewed through a SK lens; using characters found in the SK classification system. However,
TEK morphological characters can differentiate much
more variation within the Halophila complex, including
the ethnotaxa Minnipassi, which is distinguished by the
color of its leaves in its natural habitat; the leaves are a
variegated pinkish brown color and float on water with
a distinctive sparkle and radiant colour (Minnal means
sparkling/lighting). Halophila ovata and Halophila ovalis look very similar macroscopically, but fishermen can
recognize these species by comparing them to leaves
from the terrestrial plants Moringa oleifera and Phyla
nodiflora. Kouthupasi (H. ovalis) leaves are similar in
size and shape to M. oleifera, and Poduthali passi (H.
ovata) has leaves that are similar to Phyla nodiflora.
The M. oleifera leaves are popular among fisherman for
use as an ingredient in a vegetarian soup.

Page 12 of 17

The Halodule spp. complex is also difficult for SK to
differentiate. Local people call this group of plants
‘Eekku passi’. The name ‘Eekku’ could be used as a substitute for Halodule, and it refers to the tip of the leaves,
which can be oblique, dentate, serrate and minute spiny.
The ethnotaxa ‘Sinna eekku passi’ (Halodule uninervis)
refers to the slightly shorter leaf of this species; ‘sinna’
means ‘the leaf is short’. The ethnotaxa ‘Peria eekku
passi’ (Halodule pinnifolia) has longer leaves; ‘peria’
means ‘the leaf is longer’. Another ethnotaxa called
‘Panjipull passi’ (H. uninvervis) is distinguished by its
soft texture. Local people identify the ethnotaxa ‘Arugampul passi’ (H. pinnifolia) by comparing it to a similar
looking terrestrial plant of a different genus (Cynodon
dacylon), which locals call ‘Arugampul’. Other seagrasses
in genera such as Thalassia and Cymodocea look similar
to sedges, and as a general name, the TEK classification
regards this group as ‘Kattai korai’. Kattai refers to the
genus Thalassia, which has a thick and stout rhizome,
whereas korai refers to the genus Cymodocea. The fishermen easily distinguish all species in these two genera.
Many traditional cultures around the world identify
and classify plants using sensory perception, namely
sight, touch, taste, smell and sound. In our study, informants identified many seagrasses using experiential
characters. For example, the ethnotaxa ‘Neer pasi’ (Syringodium isoetifolium) is identified by the texture of the
watery substance that comes out of its succulent leaves
when squeezed; ‘Neer pasi’ means ‘watery substance’.
Similarly, the two species of the Cymodocea spp. complex, Cymodocea serrulata and Cymodocea rotundata,
look more or less similar to scientists macroscopically.
However, as perceived by local people, C. serrulata
(Karumbu pasi; Karumbu means sugar cane) is sweeter
than C. rotundata (Vellai thazhai pasi). ‘Vellai thazhai
pasi’ is sometimes misidentified as ‘Vellai karumbu pasi’,
which is sweeter than ‘Vellai thazhai pasi’, and saltier
than ‘Karumbu pasi’.
Variation in Seagrass Ecology

TEK uses fine-scaled variation in seagrass habitat and
ecology. In this study, many people in the fishing communities recognize sea grasses by their associated habitat. For example, local people see the black patches over
water bodies in shallow regions during high or medium
tides as an indication of the presence of submerged seagrass beds. Locally, these patchy areas are called the
‘Saethupasi’, and they are an easy way for people to
locate seagrass. ‘Saethupasi’ zones can be sandy or
muddy, stretching as an extensive scattered pattern half
a kilometer out to sea, and within these zones, many
different seagrass taxa inhabit specific ecological niches.
These niche relationships are recognized and used by
locals to identify the different ethnotaxa. As an example,

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

‘Pottal pasi’ (H. ovata) is found in clear water zones
where there is a sandy substratum called ‘Pottal’, which
means ‘useless’. The term “pottal” is used among the
fishermen to describe clear water areas where fish populations are low (presumably because of low nutrient
content); hence, local fishermen view these areas as ‘useless’ for fishing. The ethnotaxa ‘Saethu pasi’ (H. ovalis)
is found in dark water zones that have a muddy substratum. Fishermen find these muddy or ‘saethu’ zones very
interesting because they provide habitat for numerous
crabs, shrimps and fish. Although it is difficult for a
trained taxonomist to distinguish H. ovata (’Pottal pasi’)
from H. ovalis (’Saethu pasi’) without using macroscopic
characters (e.g., seed number and cross venation pattern), local people can easily distinguish the two species
based on the different habitats they grow in.

Page 13 of 17

Figure 6 Fresh rhizomes of Olai pasi (Enhalus acoroides), which
is used to treat heart conditions.

Seagrass Ethnomedicine and Nutrition

There is very little information in the literature concerning the traditional use of seagrass as ethnomedicine. In
research by de la Torre-Castro and Rönnbäck [21], seagrasses are reported as treatment for a number of ailments in a rural economy in Zanzibar, including stings,
muscle pain, wounds, stomach problems, fever, malaria
and coughs, among others. Another study, Felger and
Moser [14], describes the use of seagrass by the Seri
Indians in Mexico as treatment for diarrhea. However,
none of these claims are supported by survey data,
quantitative analyses, consensus or any other kind of
analysis typical for ethnobiology research. Our study
provides the first detailed account on the traditional
knowledge of seagrasses used as ethnomedicine. We
provide detailed records of 12 ailments (wounds, sea
sickness, heart disease, low blood pressure, indigestion,
hangover, skin disease, iron deficiency, burns, boils, acid
reflux and mental disorders) for which 50 ethnotaxa
serve as treatment. For serious medical conditions such
as heart disease and low blood pressure, people peel off
the skin and eat the fresh rhizome of Olai pasi (Enhalus
acoroides) with a cup of sea-water (Figure 6). Locals also
use seagrasses to treat common ailments such as dandruff; the fresh leaves of ‘Poduthali pasi’ (H. ovata) are
ground in to paste and applied onto the scalp for a
week. It is interesting to note that another terrestrial
ethnotaxa called ‘Poduthali’ (Phyla nodiflora) is also
used to control dandruff, but this plant belongs to the
Verbenaceae family and is not a seagrass. The leaves of
both P. nodiflora and H. ovata are brittle. For mental illnesses, people use the dried rhizome powder of ethnotaxa ‘Kadal korai’ (Thalassia hemprichii) as a treatment.
For iron deficiencies, a handful of ‘Elai pasi’ (H. ovata)
leaves is mixed with sesame oil and consumed daily for
three days. Various skin diseases, burns and boils are
treated with the leaves of ‘Murungai pasi’ (H. ovalis) and

a paste made from turmeric. Many of the seagrasses are
used for general good health.
Seagrasses have nutritional value for people and livestock. Some ethnic groups in the Philippines [62] and in
Mexico [13,14] have traditionally used the seeds of seagrasses as food. Our study revealed similar findings. Eaten
fresh, ‘Vattalai’ seeds (Enhalus acoroides) taste sweet and
crunchy like groundnuts or almonds and are commonly
eaten by locals in many of the coastal villages in this study,
including Pamban, Munaikadu, Ariaman, Devipattinam,
Thondi, Pasipattinam, Namputhazai, Thirupazhkudi,
Mimisal and Kattumavadi. The local fishermen often eat
Vattalai seeds while out fishing, saying it increases their
energy. They also claim that eating the seeds increases
libido, a finding also discussed by Montaño et al. [62].
Enhalus acoroides seeds are high in starch, with energy
values similar to terrestrial plant flours and starches, and
when cooked the seeds taste starchy like sweet potato [62].
In this study, villagers used these seeds as feed to bulk up
livestock such as goats, sheep, pigs and cattle (Figure 7).
During the dry season, livestock are herded onto the shore
where they left to graze on seagrass, consuming large
quantities of seeds. However, we were told that the animals would get sick and die if they feed on seagrass during
the rainy season; thus, animals are kept away from the
shore during this time of year. We were also told that the
sick animals would search for and consume ‘Neer pasi’
(Syringodium isoetifolium), which could apparently cure
their illness.
This research found that the leaves of seagrasses were
also used locally for a number of other practical functions.
First, seagrass leaves of Cymodocea serrulata and Thalassia hemprichii were used by local fishing market as insulation during the hot summer to keep stored ice and fish
cool. Second, the biomass of seagrasses that accumulates

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

Figure 7 Goats grazing on seagrasses along the shoreline
pasture.

on the shore is considerable and the locals use this as
manure in coconut and tobacco plantations. Wyllie-Echevarria and Cox [11] also discuss the use of seagrasses as
insulation and green manure. For the coastal community
of Yarmouth County, Nova Scotia, the authors provide a
detailed account of the traditional and commercial importance of Zostera marina gathering during the early to mid
1900s. In our study, the importance of seagrasses to local
coastal economies in the state of Tamil Nadu is apparent
by the engagement of the community in collecting and
sorting seagrasses (Figure 8). In fact, trading depots are
established along the coast where people trade or buy
local produce including seagrasses (Figure 9).
Seagrass Ecosystem Biodiversity

The Coromandel Coast on the Gulf of Mannar is the
first marine biosphere reserve in South Asia, and

Figure 8 Fishermen bringing seaweeds from the sea for
sorting.

Page 14 of 17

Figure 9 Shoreline depot where local people trade or buy
seagrass by-products (Vatala payasam refers to ‘seagrass
pudding’).

harbors all 12 species of seagrasses found in India. This
biodiverse ecosystem is supported by a variety of substratum. The islands of this gulf are surrounded in large
part by coral rubble, coral reefs, sandstone, sand and
mud, providing ideal habitat for the luxurious growth of
the many seagrasses including species of Cymodocea,
Enhalus, Halodule, Thalassia and Syringodium. The predominant species are Cymodocea rotundata, C. serrulata, Halodule pinifolia, Halophila ovalis, Syringodium
isoetifolium and Thalassia hemprichii. These seagrasses
provide critical habitat for diverse marine fauna such as
cuttlefish, dugongs, sea horses, eels, rays and scorpion
fish, sea cucumbers and sea snakes, among others. Seagrass species in the Enhalus genus serve as habitat for
sea snakes, and can thus prove perilous to the unwary
as the seagrass leaves resemble the snakes themselves,
providing good camouflage. The locals told us that sea
snakes gather on the leaves of these seagrasses every
year at a certain time to engage in pseudo-copulation,
which we observed in our research sites near Kattumavdi, Thirupazhkudi and Thondi. Some of the less
predominant seagrasses along the Coromandel Coast
include Halophila beccarii, Halodule uninervis and
Halophila ovata. These species are found in specific,
sometimes sheltered habitats that are known to local
informants.
Palk Bay is a shallow sheltered bay with extraordinary
seagrass diversity. Here the substratum is uniformly
loose, black and muddy, with some sand, and locals
explained that there are two distinct habitat zones in
the bay that are recognized by the types of seagrasses
they host. The first of these habitats is a shallow marginal zone dominated by Halodule spp. and Halophila
spp., while a second, deeper zone is located

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

approximately a half kilometer from shore and hosts
species of Cymodocea, Enhalus and Syringodium. The
most common seagrasses in Palk Bay are Cymodocea
serrulata, Halodule pinifolia, Halophila ovalis and Syringodium isoetifolium. Uncommon species include Halodule uninervis, Halophila ovata and H. stipulacea.
Enhalus acoroides is located in isolated patches and is
restricted to Kattumavadi, Mimisal, Thirupazhkudi,
Namputhazai, Passipattinum, Thondi, Devipattinam and
Ariaman. Local fishermen are concerned that an
increased frequency of violent tidal action is responsible
for the loss of seagrass habitat. They say that it is getting difficult to collect certain seagrass ethnotaxa and
that good fishing sites are increasingly harder to find.
These changes have important consequences for coastal
communities that have been dependent on seagrass ecosystems for centuries.
Mangrove creeks and river estuaries are important traditional seagrass collection sites. Although seagrass
diversity is low compared to that found in Gulf of Mannar and Palk Bay, informants impressed upon us how
vital these ecosystems are for collecting large quantities
of specific ethnotaxa. Estuaries near the mouth of rivers
harbor extensive beds of Halodule spp. and Halophila
spp., while some of the other seagrass species found (e.
g., Cymodocea rotundata, C. serrulata, Enhalus acoroides, Syringodium isoetifolium and Thalassia hemprichii) drift in after storms. The substrata of these
estuaries are usually clayey to black muddy with fine to
coarse sand. There is concern among the local communities that the depletion of seagrasses in these backwaters might be due to an unstable sandy substratum
associated with certain anthropogenic disturbances on
the rivers, such as dams, irrigation for large-scale farming and building developments.
Littoral Drift and Seagrasses

An important issue concerning the conservation of seagrasses lies in the erosion of spits, shoals, and the coastline in general. While much of this erosion is due to
concentrated wave energy, there is also a growing loss
of natural sediment aggradation by rivers due primarily
to upstream damming and irrigation barrages [63]. This
lack of deposition results in a net loss of seagrass habitat
and the nutrients that would otherwise be deposited
with the sediment, and produces a cascade of biological
and ecological problems. Seagrasses are an important
sediment stabilizer as they provide a vital buffer against
wave action [2], and with wave action left unimpeded,
the degradation and erosion of the shoreline is inevitable. Seagrasses are also important in recycling nutrients
and filtering contaminants in the transition zone
between land and sea. They provide innumerable
resources for thousands of plant and animal species that

Page 15 of 17

rely on land-sea transition zones for protection, breeding, sustenance and habitat, and are thus of vital importance to the overall health of ocean life [2]. Critical
action is therefore needed for the conservation of seagrass ecosystems, and such action must consider the
assemblage of both scientific and traditional knowledge.
Seagrass Ecosystem Conservation

The importance of seagrass meadows to estuarine and
coastal marine ecosystems is generally underestimated.
Seagrasses have a high growth rate, produce abundant
biomass, and they support major food chains including
direct grazers and animals that feed on their epiphytic
associates, as well as the decomposer communities that
are sustained by seagrass detritus [64]. Seagrasses also
contribute to an active sulfur cycle through decomposition, increase sedimentation of organic and inorganic
materials by the buffering action of leaves, and reduce
surface erosion by the sediment binding action of roots,
thereby preserving the microbial flora of the sediment
and the sediment-water interface. Following from these
diverse roles, seagrass meadows require special management and conservation strategies. Research is needed to
understand the abiotic factors (e.g., light, temperature,
salinity, nutrient cycling, substratum, ocean currents and
tidal rhythms), as well as the natural and anthropogenic
disturbances that shape seagrass community composition. Local communities are often the first to notice
environmental change due to these forces and factors.
As an example, local people interviewed in this study
reported decreases in productive fishing habitat, and a
recent increase in the scale and frequency of disturbances, particularly in riverine systems that feed into
estuaries. These disturbances include natural phenomena such as floods and wave action, as well as the following large-scale anthropogenic disturbances: forestry;
irrigation; dams; channeling and stream diversion; sewage treatment discharge; and soil erosion from inland
development [27]. However, anthropogenic disturbance
also occurs at the local level. In this study, some of the
more serious concerns with regard to seagrass habitat
degradation at the community level were discharge of
household wastes and use of mechanized boats. Understanding this full assortment of factors that drive and
shape seagrass communities is essential for developing
integrated conservation strategies that support the complex seagrass food web and their associated faunal
relationships.
Although conservation measures for seagrass ecosystems have been established in marine biodiversity hotspots around the world, such as in North America and
Australia, there are no adaptive management strategies, public education plans or conservation measures
in place for seagrass ecosystems in India. As a first

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

step towards a management strategy for seagrass ecosystems, it is already well understood that the success
of any integrated science-based strategies require
effective conservation management in the field at the
local level [28]. However, as a further step, an adaptive
management strategy would facilitate the assemblage
of multiple knowledge systems (SK and TEK), public
education and the initiation of conservation policy in
an iterative process that would evolve as we learn how
to preserve these delicate ecosystems. This could start
by bringing local communities, scientists, resource
managers and government officials together in symposia to design an action plan for seagrass conservation.
Such a strategy would be in accordance with Agenda
21, Chapter 17, of the 1992 Earth Summit (Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil), which states that government agencies
charged with coastal zone protection must integrate
TEK and socio-cultural values with management agendas [65].
The importance of seagrass ecosystems to traditional
cultures has been neglected and deserves stronger
recognition and respect. Historically, this resource has
sustained coastal livelihoods for centuries based on their
agricultural (fishing and farming) and medicinal utility.
In this study, the locals shared with us their belief that a
healthy ecosystem supports healthy livelihoods. Elders
told us that that the sustenance of life in their communities is dependent upon stable seagrass habitat, and
that it is for this reason that traditionally they have
moved their communities in search of healthy seagrass
ecosystems. Seagrasses are fundamental components of
healthy marine ecosystems and the local livelihoods that
rely on them.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained for publication
of accompanying images. A copy of the written consent
is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal.
Acknowledgements
This project is funded by a SSHRC Standard Research Grant to Dr.
Newmaster, the Canadian Foundation for Innovation, and the Shastri IndoCanadian Institute. The Director (Central Circle) and the Joint Director
(Southern Circle) of the Botanical Survey of India, as well as the Principal of
the Avvaiyar Government College for Women, Karaikal, are all greatly
acknowledged for their help and support. We would like to thank Dr. Usher
Posluszny at the University of Guelph for reviewing a previous version of the
manuscript and offering valuable advice. Thanks to Jose Maloles for
providing assistance with editing, map production and referencing.
Authors’ contributions
AFN and SGN conceived of and designed the study, and carried out analysis
and writing of the manuscript. MP, SR and KS carried out the field and lab
work, and contributed to the study design and writing of the manuscript.
KJB contributed to writing and editing the final manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.

Page 16 of 17

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
Biodiversity Institute of Ontario Herbarium, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada. 2Botanical survey of India, Southern Regional
Centre, Coimbatore-641003 Tamil Nadu, India. 3Post Graduate Department of
Plant Science, Avvaiyar Government College for Women, Karaikal 609 602, U.
T. of Puducherry, India.
1

Received: 6 June 2011 Accepted: 23 November 2011
Published: 23 November 2011
References
1. Pettitt JM: Reproduction in seagrasses. Pollen development in Thalassi
hemprichii, Halophila stipulacea, and Thalassodendron ciliatum. Ann Bot
1981, 48:609-622.
2. Short FT, Coles RG, Pergent-Martini C: Global seagrass research methods
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V.; 2001.
3. Dawes CJ: The dynamic seagrasses of the Gulf of Mexico and Florida
Coasts. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Subtropical-Tropical Seagrasses
of the Southeastern United States. Edited by: Durako MJ, Phillips RC, Lewis RR
III. St. Petersburg, FL. Florida Department of Natural Resources, Bureau of
Marine Research; 1987:25-38.
4. Green EP, Short FT: World Atlas of Seagrasses Berkeley, University of
California Press; 2003.
5. Hartog CD: The Seagrasses of the World Amsterdam: North-Holland
Publishing Company; 1970.
6. Hartog CD: Structure, function and classification of seagrass
communities. In Seagrass ecosystems: a scientific perspective. Edited by:
McRoy CP, Helfferich C. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1977:89-121.
7. Yang ZD: Occurrence of the seagrass Halodule pinifolia (Miki) Hartog in
the Indian Ocean. Curr Sci India 1988, 57:1172-1174.
8. Jagtap TG, Komarpant DS, Rouchelle SR: Status of a seagrass ecosystem:
An ecologically sensitive wetland habitat from India. Wetlands 2003,
23(1):161-170.
9. Rengasamy RRK, Rajasekaran A, Perumal A: In vitro antioxidant activities of
ethanol extract from Enhalus acoroides (L.F.) Royle. Asian Pac J Trop Med
2010, 898-901.
10. Pillay D, Branch GM, Griffiths CL, Williams C, Prinsloo A: Ecosystem change
in a South African marine reserve (1960-2009): the role of seagrass loss
and anthropogenic disturbance. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 2010, 415:35-48.
11. Wyllie-Echeverria S, Cox PA: The seagrass (Zostera marina [Zosteraceae])
industry of Nova Scotia. Econ Bot 1999, 53:419-426.
12. Kuhnlein HV, Turner NJ: Traditional plant ioods of Canadian indigenous
peoples: Nutrition, botany and use Philadelphia: Gordon and Breach
Publishers; 1991.
13. Felger RS, Moser MB: Eelgrass (Zostera marina L.) in the Gulf of California:
Discovery of its nutritional value by the Seri Indians. Science 1973,
181:355-356.
14. Felger RS, Moser MB: People of the desert and sea: Ethnobotany of the Seri
Indians Tucson: The University of Arizona Press; 1985.
15. Rönnbäck P, Kautsky N, Pihl L, Troell M, Söderqvist T, Wennhage H:
Ecosystem goods and services from Swedish coastal habitats:
Identification, valuation, and implications of ecosystem shifts. Ambio
2007, 36:534-544.
16. Alam K, Agua T, Maven H, Taie R, Rao KS, Burrows I: Preliminary screening
of seaweeds, seagrass and lemongrass oil from Papua New Guinea for
antimicrobial and antifungal activity. Pharm Biol 1994, 32:396-399.
17. Rengasamy RRK, Rajasekaran A, Perumal A: Antibacterial potential of three
seagrasses against human pathogens. Asian Pac J Trop Med 2010,
890-893.
18. Rengasamy RRK, Rajasekaran A, Perumal A: Chemometric studies of
multielemental composition of few seagrasses from Gulf of Mannar,
India. Biol Trace Elem Res 2010.
19. Folmer F, Jaspars M, Dicato M, Diederich M: Photosynthetic marine
organisms as a source of anticancer compounds. Phytochem Rev 2010,
9:557-579.
20. Ramamurthy K, Balakirishnan NP, Ravikumar K, Ganesan R: Seagrasses of
Coromandel Coast India. Flora of India-Series 4, Botanical Survey of India,
Southern Circle, Coimbatore 1992.

Newmaster et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:37
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/37

21. de la Torre-Castro M, Rönnbäck P: Links between humans and seagrassesan example from tropical East Africa. Ocean Coast Manage 2004,
47:361-387.
22. Anonymous: The wealth of India. Publications and Iniormation Directorate,
CSIR, New Delhi 1952.
23. Anonymous: The wealth of India. Publications and Iniormation Directorate,
CSIR, New Delhi 1959.
24. Heinrich M: Ethnobotany and its role in drug development. Phytother Res
2000, 14:479-488.
25. Ragupathy S, Newmaster SG, Murugesan M, Balasubramanian V: Consensus
of the Malasars traditional aboriginal knowledge of medicinal plants in
the Velliangiri holy hills, India. J Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2008, 4:8.
26. Kannan L, Thangaradjou T, Anantharaman P: Status of seagrasses of India.
Seaweed Res Util 1999, 21:25-33.
27. Ralph PJ, Tomasko D, Seddon S, Moore K, Maciniis-Ng C: Human impact
on seagrasses: Contamination and eutrophication. In Seagrass biology,
ecology and conservation. Edited by: Larkum AWD, Orth RJ, Duarte CM.
Dordrecht (The Netherlands): Springer; 2006:567-593.
28. Kenworthy WJ, Wyllie-Echeverria S, Coles RG, Pergent G, Pergent-Martini C:
Seagrass conservation biology: An interdisciplinary science for
protection of the seagrass biome. In Seagrasses: Biology, Ecology and
Conservation. Edited by: Larkum AWD, Orth RJ, Duarte CM. Dordrecht (The
Netherlands): Springer; 2006:595-623.
29. Khoshoo TN: Environmental priorities in India and sustainable
development. Presidential Address, 73rd Session, Indian Science Congress
Association, New Delhi 1986, 226.
30. Qasim SZ: Biological productivity of the Indian Ocean. Indian J Mar Sci
1977, 6:122-137.
31. Hooker JD: In Flora of British India. Volume 6. Ashford, Kent, England: L.
Reeve & Co. Ltd., NR; 1894.
32. Gamble JS, Fischer CES: Flora of the Presidency of Madras Parts 1-11.
London: Adlard and Sons; 1936.
33. Ravikumar K, Ganesan R: A new subspecies of Halophila ovalis (R.Br.) J.D.
Hook. (Hydrocharitaceae) from the Eastern Coast of Peninsular India.
Aquat Bot 1990, 36:351-358.
34. Ravikumar K, Ganesan R, Ramamurthy K: Frist report of a seagrass,
Halodule wrightii Asch. (Potamogetonaceae) from India. Journ Econ Tax
Bot 1990, 14(3):711-714.
35. Jeyadev CJ, Ragupathy M: Ancient Culture and Tribal Culture (Tamil).
Chennai, Publications of the Government Museum 1962.
36. Jebadhas WA, Noble WA: The Irulas. In Blue Mountains: The ethnography
and biogeography of a South Indian region. Edited by: Hockings P. Oxford,
Oxford University Press; 1989:281-303.
37. Weller SC, Romney AK: Systematic Data Collection Newbury Park, California:
Sage Publications, Inc.; 1988.
38. Werner O, Fenton J: Method and theory in ethnoscience or
ethnoepistemology. In A Handbook of Method in Cultural Anthropology.
Edited by: Naroll R, Cohen R. New York, Columbia University Press;
1973:537-578.
39. Bernard HR: Research Methods in Anthropology: Qualitative and Quantitative
Approaches Newbury Park, California: Sage Publications, Inc.; 1994.
40. Berg BL: Qualitative Research Methods for the Social Sciences Boston: Allyn
and Bacon; 1998.
41. Dunn K: Interviewing. In Qualitative Research Methods in Human Geography.
Edited by: Hay I. Melbourne: Oxford University Press; 2005:79-105.
42. Pelto PJ, and Pelto GH: Field methods in medical anthropology. Medical
Anthropology: A Handbook of Theory and Method New York: Greenwood
Press; 1990, 269-297.
43. Etkin NL: Anthropological methods in ethnopharmacology. J
Ethnopharmacol 1993, 38:93-104.
44. Vogl CR, Vogl-Lukasser B, Puri RK: Tools and methods for data collection
in ethnobotanical studies of homegardens. Field Method 2004, 16:285-306.
45. Stepp JR, Thomas M: Managing ethnopharmacological data: Herbaria,
relational data bases, literature. Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems:
Ethnopharmacology Oxford, UK: UNESCO, EOLSS; 2005.
46. Hitchings R, Jones V: Living with plants and the exploration of botanical
encounter within human geographic research practice. Ethics Place Envir
2004, 7:3-28.
47. Beckley TM, Stedman RC, Wallace SM, Ambard M: Snapshots of what
matters most: Using resident-employed photography to articulate
attachment to place. Soc Nat Resour 2007, 20:913-929.

Page 17 of 17

48. Sthapit BR, Rijal D, De NN, Jarvis DI: A role for diversity fairs: Experiences
from Nepal and Vietnam. Conservation and Sustainable use of Biodiveristy. A
Source Book, Vol. II: Strengthening Local Management of Agricultural
Biodiversity The International Potato Center. Los Baños, Philippines: CIPUPWARD; 2003, 271-276.
49. Anonymous: People’s Biodiversity Register. National Biodiversity Authority
(NBA), India. Chennai, Tamil Nadu 2009 [http://www.nbaindia.org/docs/
PBR_2009.pdf].
50. Newmaster SG, Ragupathy S, Balasubramaniam NC, Ivanoff RF: The multimechanistic taxonomy of the Irulas in Tamil Nadu South India. J
Ethnobiol 2007, 27:31-44.
51. Trotter R, Logan M: Informant consensus: A new approach for identifying
potentially effective medicinal plants. Plants in Indigenous Medicine and
Diet: Biobehavioural Approaches Redgrave: Nova York; 1986, 91-112.
52. Ragupathy S, and Newmaster SG: Valorizing the ‘Irulas’ traditional
knowledge of medicinal plants in the Kodiakkarai Reserve Forest, India. J
Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2009, 5(10).
53. Ali-Shtayeh MS, Yaniv Z, Mahajna J: Ethnobotanical survey in the
Palestinian area: a classification of the healing potential of medicinal
plants. J Ethnopharmacol 2000, 73:221-232.
54. Camejo-Rodrigues J, Ascensao L, Bonet MA, Valles J: An ethnobotanical
study of medicinal and aromatic plants in the Natural Park of “Serra de
Sao Mamede” (Portugal). J Ethnopharmacol 2003, 89:199-209.
55. ter Braak CJF, Smilauer P: CANOCO Version 4.0. Wageningen, The
Netherlands: Centre for Biometry CPRO-DLO 1998.
56. Sneath PHA, Sokal RR: Numerical taxonomy: The principles and practice of
numerical classification San Francisco, California: W. H. Freeman; 1973.
57. Rohlf F: NTSYS. Numerical taxonomy and multivariate analysis system, v. 2.1.
New York: Exeter Software 2000.
58. Newmaster SG, Ragupathy S, Rebecca FI, Nirmala CB: Mechanisms of
ethnobiological classification. Ethnobot 2006, 18:4-26.
59. Conklin HC: The relation of Hanunóo culture to the plant world. Ph.D.
dissertation Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut; 1954.
60. Balakrishnan V, Narayanan MKR, Kumar NA: Ethnotaxonomy of Dioscorea
among the Kattunaikka people of Wayanad District, Kerala, India. Plant
Gen Resour News 2003, 135:24-32.
61. Rengalakshmi R: Folk biological classification of minor millet species in
Kolli Hills, India. J Ethnobiol 2005, 25(1):59-70.
62. Montaño NME, Bonifacio RS, Rumbaoa RGO: Proximate analysis of the
flour and starch from Enhalus acoroides (L.f.) Royle seeds. Aquat Botany
1999, 65:321-325.
63. Chandramohan P, Jena BK, and Kumar SV: Littoral drift sources and sinks
along the Indian coast. Curr Sci India 2001, 81(3):292-296.
64. Thayer GW, Wolf DA, Williams RB: The impact of man on seagrass
systems. American Scientist 1975, 63:288-296.
65. Wyllie-Echeverria S, Gunnarsson K, Mateo MA, Borg JA, Renom P, Kuo J,
Schanz A, Hellblom F, Jackson E, Pergent G, Pergent-Martini C, Johnson M,
Sanchez-Lizaso J, Boudouresque CF, Aioi K: Protecting the seagrass biome:
Report from the traditional seagrass knowledge working group. Bull Mar
Sci 2002, 71(3):1415-1417.
doi:10.1186/1746-4269-7-37
Cite this article as: Newmaster et al.: Local Knowledge and Conservation
of Seagrasses in the Tamil Nadu State of India. Journal of Ethnobiology
and Ethnomedicine 2011 7:37.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
