<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Regional regulation of transcription in the chicken genome</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:28. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-28"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Haisheng Nie"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Regional regulation of transcription in the
chicken genome
Haisheng Nie, Richard PMA Crooijmans, John WM Bastiaansen, Hendrik-Jan Megens, Martien AM Groenen*

Abstract
Background: Over the past years, the relationship between gene transcription and chromosomal location has
been studied in a number of different vertebrate genomes. Regional differences in gene expression have been
found in several different species. The chicken genome, as the closest sequenced genome relative to mammals, is
an important resource for investigating regional effects on transcription in birds and studying the regional
dynamics of chromosome evolution by comparative analysis.
Results: We used gene expression data to survey eight chicken tissues and create transcriptome maps for all
chicken chromosomes. The results reveal the presence of two distinct types of chromosomal regions characterized
by clusters of highly or lowly expressed genes. Furthermore, these regions correlate highly with a number of
genome characteristics. Regions with clusters of highly expressed genes have higher gene densities, shorter genes,
shorter average intron and higher GC content compared to regions with clusters of lowly expressed genes. A
comparative analysis between the chicken and human transcriptome maps constructed using similar panels of
tissues suggests that the regions with clusters of highly expressed genes are relatively conserved between the two
genomes.
Conclusions: Our results revealed the presence of a higher order organization of the chicken genome that affects
gene expression, confirming similar observations in other species. These results will aid in the further
understanding of the regional dynamics of chromosome evolution.
The microarray data used in this analysis have been submitted to NCBI GEO database under accession number
GSE17108. The reviewer access link is: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
token=tjwjpscyceqawjk&acc=GSE17108

Background
Gene expression in eukaryotes is regulated on two different levels, i.e. individual gene level and regional level
in the genome. The best studied, and generally considered the major level of regulation, is the regulation at
the level of individual genes. Although a number of well
studied exceptions have identified a number of tightly
co-regulated gene clusters, such as the globin, MHC and
the Hox gene gene clusters [1-4], the common model
for eukaryotic gene transcription involves the binding of
several transcription factors (TFs) to promoter regions
and enhancers, resulting in activation of the individual
genes. It has become increasingly evident that in addition to gene regulation by TF binding to regulatory
* Correspondence: martien.groenen@wur.nl
Animal Breeding and Genomics Centre, Wageningen University, Marijkeweg
40, 6709 PG, Wageningen, the Netherlands

sequences, eukaryotic gene expression is also regulated
at a higher level, and several studies have demonstrated
the dependency of gene expression on the location of
the gene within the genome [5-7].
Over the past years, the relationship between gene
transcription and chromosomal location has been studied in a number of different vertebrate genomes. Analysis of the human transcriptome map based on SAGE
(serial analysis of gene expression) data from 12 human
tissues [8] revealed the clustering of highly expressed
genes within specific chromosomal regions; these
regions were termed “RIDGEs”, or “Regions of IncreasedGene Expression”. Genomic regions containing genes
expressed at much lower levels were termed antiRIDGEs, and these regions exhibit characteristics opposite those of RIDGEs [8,9]. A similar region-wide regulation of gene expression was later reported in the

© 2010 Nie et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

Drosophila genome [10,11]. RIDGEs were also found in
the mouse genome [12] and are reported to be relatively
conserved between the mouse and human genome [13].
A later study [14] showed gene expression to be regulated at a region-wide level in the human genome. Insertion of green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter
constructs at 90 different chromosomal positions in the
human genome showed that gene transcription was
regulated through a novel region-wide regulatory
mechanism as well as via specific transcription factors,
thereby demonstrating dual mechanisms in the regulation of gene transcription.
Regional differences in gene expression have been
found in two distinct clades (mammals and flies) of the
metazoan phylogeny, suggesting a common mechanism
of regulation of transcription in all animals. Other characteristics of eukaryotic genomes such as gene density
and recombination have also been implied to exhibit
domain-like features [15]. In addition, levels of gene
expression have been found to correlate with time of
chromatin replication during the cell cycle, i.e. the early
replication of actively expressed regions of the genome
[15]. Striking in this respect is the observed location of
gene-dense and highly expressed chromosomes towards
the center of the nucleus and the location of gene-poor
and weakly expressed chromosomes towards the nuclear
envelope in both human [16] and chicken cells [17].
Furthermore, in chicken, this spatial organization seems
to correlate with chromosome size [17].
The chicken genome sequence, published in 2004, was
the first non-mammalian amniote genome to become
available [18]; its karyotype (2n = 78) consists of 38
autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes, with the
female being the heterogametic sex (ZW female, ZZ
male). Thus far, there are 31 known chromosomes
assembled in the chicken genome, including six macrochromosomes (GGA1-5, Z), five intermediate-chromosomes (GGA6-10) and twenty micro-chromosomes
(GGA11-28, 32, W) [18]. The existence of micro-chromosomes is one of the interesting features of the
chicken genome [19], micro-chromosomes are also
found in some primitive amphibians [20,21] and most
reptiles [22]. Besides the huge differences on sizes,
microchromosomes also exhibit higher gene density,
smaller gene size, and higher recombination rates compared with those in macrochromosomes [18,23]. As the
best-studied bird genome currently available, and the
closest sequenced genome relative to mammals, the
chicken genome is an important resource for comparative genomics, including comparative studies on gene
transcription.
To investigate regional effects on transcription in
birds, we analyzed chicken gene expression data across
a number of different tissues to address three major

Page 2 of 12

questions: (i) if there are regional differences in the regulation of transcription in the chicken genome, (ii) if
these regions are conserved during evolution, and (iii)
the characteristics of these genomic regions in the
chicken.

Results
Gene expression data

Eight different chicken tissues were used for the analysis
of whole genome gene expression profiles using chicken
20 k oligonucleotide microarrays (GEO [24] accession
GPL8861, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.
cgi?token=tjwjpscyceqawjk&acc=GPL8861). All array
probes were designed from known transcripts and ESTs
based on the chicken genome assembly WASHUC1
(Dec. 2004), and a stringent selection of probes was performed before the analysis. A total of 7,477 probes failed
to map to unique chicken Ensembl genes, and these
were excluded to avoid the introduction of additional
noise into the analysis. In total, 11,361 chicken Ensembl
gene IDs located on 27 chromosomes were included in
the expression study. These 27 chromosomes cover over
90% of the chicken genome, and include all macro-chromosomes and many of the micro-chromosomes. The
number of Ensembl genes on each of these chromosomes is shown in Figure 1. On average, about 70% of
all the known ensemble genes on each of these 27 chromosomes were included in this analysis.
In this study, we define the chicken transcriptome
map as the median expression levels of the 11,361
chicken Ensembl genes across eight tissues on 27 chromosomes. The start position of the first Ensembl gene
and the end position of the last Ensembl gene on each
chromosome were considered the start and end of each
chicken chromosome. The combined size of the chromosomal sequences analyzed in this study is
1,022,830,111 bp, which covers 97% of the total length
of build 2 (WASHUC2, May 2006) of the chicken (Gallus gallus) genome.
Regional differences of transcription in the chicken
genome

To create the chicken transcriptome map, the Ensembl
genes were ordered based on the middle positions of
the genes on each chromosome, and a robust scatter
plot smoothing (running median) technique was applied
to the median expression values of the genes on each
chromosome (see Materials and Methods for details).
The resulting transcriptome map revealed clusters of
highly expressed genes on all chicken chromosomes
(Figure 2). Marked differences were observed in the
overall expression levels of the different chicken chromosomes, with GGA 2, GGA14 and GGAZ showing
relatively lower overall gene expression compared to the
other chromosomes. Furthermore, the gene expression

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

Page 3 of 12

Figure 1 Distribution of genes on individual chicken chromosomes. The number of Ensembl genes on each chicken chromosome used in
the analysis is shown on the y-axis on the left; the y-axis on the right shows the size of the individual chromosomes.

levels of the micro-chromosomes were observed to be
higher than those of intermediate- and macro-chromosomes; the median expression level of each chromosome
was observed to decrease with increased chromosome
size (Figure 3). Interestingly, the sex chromosome
GGAZ shows an extremely low median expression level.
To further investigate the unequal distribution of gene
transcription activity along chicken chromosomes, we
selected regions with clusters of the most highly
expressed genes and regions with clusters of most lowly
expressed genes, such that each region type covered
approximately ten percent of the chicken genome. To
be consistent with previous studies in humans [8,9],
here we use the terms “RIDGE” and “anti-RIDGE” to
refer to regions showing the highest and lowest expression levels, respectively, in the chicken genome. Similar
to Caron et al. [8], we define RIDGEs in the chicken
genome as genomic regions with at least 10 consecutive
running medians larger than 1.19 times the median
expression of the chicken transcriptome, i.e. all 11,361
Ensembl genes. With a running median of a window
size of 39 genes, we identified 64 RIDGEs in the chicken
genome that cover approximately 10% of the genome.
Using the same window size, we identified 27 antiRIDGEs, which cover approximately 10% of the chicken
genome; these anti-RIDGEs are defined as genomic
regions with at least 10 consecutive running medians
smaller than 0.78 times the median expression of the
chicken transcriptome. The total number of Ensembl
genes located in RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs is 3,260 and

1,051, respectively. The mean of the median expression
values of genes located in RIDGEs across the tissue
panel is approximately 1.8 times higher than that of
genes in anti-RIDGEs (Additional file 1). More detailed
information of RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs can be found
in Additional file 1.
The distribution of the expression of the genes located
in RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs is shown in Figure 4. The
majority of genes in anti-RIDGEs is below 7 (the log2
transformed intensities of the green channel). This is in
strong contrast with the distribution observed for
RIDGEs, which show a much broader distribution;
furthermore, the majority of genes in RIDGEs show an
expression above 7 (the log2 transformed intensities of
the green channel).
Transcriptome maps in different tissues are highly
correlated

To next evaluate transcriptome maps of different types
of tissues, we created transcriptome maps for each individual tissue type by applying a running median on
expression values within each tissue using a window size
of 39 genes. Chromosome 1 is shown in Figure 5 as an
example, and the transcriptome maps for the different
tissues were observed to be very similar. We performed
a correlation test between the transcriptome map created using the median expression values across the eight
tissues and the transcriptome maps created using the
expression values from each tissue type. All transcriptome maps are highly correlated, with an average correlation of 0.88. All pair-wise correlations were highly

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

Page 4 of 12

Figure 2 Regional clusters of highly expressed genes in the chicken genome. Gene expression is plotted for chicken chromosomes 1-15,
17-24, 26-28, and Z. The expression values are plotted as a moving window with a size of 39 genes to calculate the running median along the
chromosomes. The log2 transformed intensities of green channel are shown; the start of the chromosomes correspond with the top of the plot,
and the window width indicates the expression levels, ranging between 6.6-8.3 (log2 scale).

significant, with p-values less than 2.2 × 10-16. (All pairwise correlations between the tissue-specific transcriptome maps are shown in Additional file 2).
Random permutation tests of RIDGE identification

To test the significance of the number of RIDGEs identified in our analysis, we performed random permutation
tests using the same window size and threshold for
RIDGE identification. In total, 10,000 random transcriptome maps were generated by permutating the gene
orders throughout the genome. The permutation tests,
shown in Additional file 3, clearly show that the number
of RIDGEs identified in our analysis is higher than
would have been expected merely by chance (i.e. that
4.7% of random permutations gave higher numbers of
RIDGEs than that observed).

RIDGEs are relatively conserved between chicken and
human

The observation that highly expressed genes tend to be
clustered within RIDGEs in the chicken as well as the
human genome suggests a conserved functional organization of the genome of these vertebrates. We therefore
decided to assess whether genes in RIDGEs remain associated during evolution. Thus, we consider two different
forms of functional constraint. The first possibility is
that specific genes within a particular RIDGE need to be
co-regulated; in this case, one would expect relatively
few syntenic breaks to occur within the RIDGEs. The
other possibility is that genes do not need to co-localize
with specific genes, but rather remain spatially associated with other highly expressed genes in general. In
this case, one would expect syntenic breaks to occur
specifically between two different RIDGEs. Random

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

Figure 3 Relationship between median expression levels and
chromosome length (correlation = -0.67, Pearson correlation).

Page 5 of 12

rearrangements of RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs, on the
other hand, would reduce the clustering of genes, and
therefore abolish the effect of regional regulation of
transcription. First we tested if the observed RIDGEs
were less prone to be broken down during evolution
from chicken to human. Previous studies comparing the
human, mouse, rat, and chicken genomes identified a
total of 586 conserved synteny blocks [25]. Because the
identification of these synteny blocks was based on
chicken genome assembly WASHUC1 (Dec. 2004), we
mapped the ends of these syntenic blocks to the current
chicken genome assembly (WASHUC2, May 2006)
(Additional file 4), and considered each end as an evolutionary break point. In total, we mapped 1130 break
points on the WASHUC2 chicken genome assembly; we
found 253 break points within RIDGEs, and 50 break
points within anti-RIDGEs. Chi-square tests showed a
significantly higher average number of break points in
RIDGEs compared to regions outside RIDGEs (p value
< 2.2 × 10-16) and a significantly lower number of break
points in anti-RIDGEs compared to regions outside
anti-RIDGEs (p value = 4.18 × 10-10) (Additional file 5).
To compare the transcriptome maps between chicken
and human, we downloaded human gene expression

Figure 4 Histograms of gene expression values across 8 tissues for genes in RIDGEs and anti-RIDGES. Gene expression on the x-axis is
the log2 transformed intensity of the green channel.

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

Page 6 of 12

Figure 5 Transcriptome maps of chromosome 1 for different tissue types, the expression values are plotted as a moving window with
a size of 39 genes to calculate the running median along the chicken chromosome 1. the start of the chromosomes correspond with the
top of the plot, and the window width indicates the expression levels, ranging between 6.6-8.3 (log2 scale).

data for the same types of tissues (see Materials and
Methods) from the Human Transcriptome Map website
[26]. Using the median of the expression values across
the seven human tissues for each human gene, we performed an identical analysis on the human data as the
chicken expression data to identify RIDGEs and antiRIDGEs in the human genome. Similar to the chicken,
in the human genome, RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs each
cover about ten percent of the genome. Defining the
syntenic break points in the human genome using data
described by Bourque et al. [25], we found a total of 143
and 86 break points in RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs,
respectively. Again, similar to results seen in the
chicken, chi-square tests show a higher average number
of break points in RIDGEs compared to regions outside
of RIDGEs (p value = 0.01) and a lower number of
break points in anti-RIDGEs compared to outside antiRIDGEs (p value = 0.002) (Additional file 5).
We identified 46 RIDGE-to-RIDGE break points and
11 anti-RIDGE-to-anti-RIDGE break points between the
chicken and human genomes. Chi-square tests showed a
significantly higher number of RIDGE-to-RIDGE break
points between the chicken and human genomes (p
value < 2.2 × 10 -16 ) compared to that expected by
chance, and no significant difference in the number of
anti-RIDGE-to-anti-RIDGE break points (p value = 0.8).
Genomic characteristics of RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs in
chicken

Next we evaluated whether RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs
were associated with other genome characteristics. Positive correlations were found between chicken transcriptome map and gene density (p value < 2.2 × 10-16), GC
content (p value < 2.2 × 10-16) and average intron length

(p value < 2.2 × 10-16). As an example, the whole chromosome views of the transcriptome map, gene density,
GC content, gene length, average intron length and
recombination rate are shown for chromosome 1 (Figure
6); these various parameters were similar in RIDGEs and
anti-RIDGEs. To further investigate the specific genomic
characteristics of RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs, we compared the average intron length (averaged intron length
of all transcripts per gene), gene length (genomic
length), gene density (number of genes per 100 kb), and
GC content between genes located in RIDGEs and antiRIDGEs (Figure 7). Compared to the entire chicken genome, RIDGEs, on average, harbor genes with shorter
average intron length (p value < 2.2 × 10 -16 ), shorter
gene length (p value < 2.2 × 10 -16 ), and a higher GC
content (p value < 2.2 × 10-16 ). Anti-RIDGEs, on the
other hand, show opposite trends, with genes with
longer average intron length (p value < 2.2 × 10 -16 ),
longer gene length (p value < 2.2 × 10-16 ), and lower
GC content (p value < 2.2 × 10 -16 ). Furthermore,
RIDGEs also have a significantly higher gene density (p
value = 1.29 × 10-9) than anti-RIDGEs.
Gene Ontology term enrichment analysis for genes in
RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs

Our results indicate that RIDGEs are relatively conserved between human and chicken. Assuming RIDGEs
are the result of evolutionary events favoring the clustering of genes with higher expression levels, one can
hypothesize that genes within RIDGEs may share similar
functions or biological pathways. To investigate this possibility, we performed Gene Ontology (GO) [27] term
enrichment analysis on genes located in RIDGEs and
anti-RIDGEs using R package GOstats [28]. However,

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

Page 7 of 12

Figure 6 Whole-chromosome view of (a) transcriptome map (plotting running medians of gene expression values along chromosome 1
with window size of 39 genes); (b) transcriptome map on separate strands (plotting running medians of gene expression values on separate
strands with window size of 19 genes on each individual strand (left side: + strand; right side: - strand) along chromosome 1); (c) gene density
(gene density was defined as number of genes per 100 kb genomic region, running medians of gene densities with window size 39 gene were
plotted along chromosome 1); (d) GC content; (e) gene length; (f) average intron length (GC content, gene length, and average intron
length were calculated for each gene, the running medians of values for those three features with a window size of 39 genes were plotted
along chromosome 1); (g) “minimal intron” density (the minimal intron here were defined as introns sizing from 50 to 150 bp, and minimal
intron density was defined as the number of minimal introns per 500 kb genomic region, then the running medians of minimal intron
intensities with window size of 39 genes were ploted along chromosome 1); and (h) recombination rate (recombination rate data of chicken
chromosome 1 was obtained from previous study by Groenen et al.[25], and plotted in the same way as described by Groenen et al.) plotted on
chicken chromosome one. The start of the chromosome corresponds with the top of the plot.

Figure 7 Boxplot of average intron length, gene length, gene density (number of genes per 100 kb) and GC content for genes in
RIDGEs, anti-RIDGEs, and the complete chicken genome. The middle line of each box represents the median values. The edges of each box
represent the first and third quartile values.

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

no significant GOBP terms (the minimum FDR of all
three tests is 0.4) were found for genes in RIDGEs and
anti-RIDGEs after correcting for multiple testing (Additional file 6).

Discussion
Gene expression data

The annotated genes on the array platform used in this
study cover most of the current chicken genome assembly. The number of genes analyzed on each chromosome is also in good proportion with chromosome
length (Figure 1), which suggests against a bias in the
analysis due to uneven distribution of the genes in the
chicken genome. We chose to exclude chromosome 16
and 25 from our analysis, as only 24 and 59 Ensembl
genes are represented on the array; this number is too
low to identify any meaningful high or low expressing
regions with the window size of 39 genes used in this
analysis.
No major effect of different tissues on chicken
transcriptome map

We observed high correlations (average correlation =
0.88) among the different transcriptome maps based on
the expression data from the eight different individual
tissues as well as between these transcriptome maps and
the transcriptome map of the combined expression data
of all eight tissues. This indicates that use of the median
expression value or the expression values from individual tissues only has a minor effect on the transcriptome maps and on the identification of RIDGEs and
anti-RIDGEs. This shows that regional differences in
transcription are a general trend in the chicken genome,
even among different tissue types.
Regional differences of transcription in the genome

This is the first study in birds to construct a transcriptome map and to confirm the existence of regional differences on transcription regulation in the chicken
genome. RIDGEs have been discovered in several animal
species from phylogenetically distinct groups, suggesting
that the existence of RIDGEs may be universal in the
animal kingdom [8,10-14].
Gierman et al. [14] showed that RIDGEs contain up to
80 genes and can exert an eightfold difference on the
expression levels of integrated genes. They found that
gene expression levels are not highly correlated to adjacent genes, but instead more correlated to the entire
block of up to 80 genes, demonstrating regional effects
on gene transcription. The exact mechanism underlying
how gene expression occurs in RIDGEs is still unknown.
One hypothesis is that evolution favors highly expressed
genes to be physically close to each other, as transcription of one gene would help the chromatin of neighboring genes to “open up” during transcription. This
hypothesis is in agreement with our observation of no

Page 8 of 12

apparent evolutionary constraint on the co-localization
of specific genes, whereas we observed specific localization of specific genes within RIDGEs (see below). Goetze
et al. [29] showed that RIDGEs in general are less condensed, more irregularly shaped, and are located more
closely to the nuclear center than anti-RIDGEs. Furthermore, the chromatin structures of RIDGEs and antiRIDGEs are largely independent of tissue-specific variations in gene expression and differentiation state. Their
discovery again confirms the hypothesis that the different regional effect of gene transcription in RIDGEs and
anti-RIDGEs is, at least in part, explained by the chromatin structure of the two types of genomic regions.
Genomic Characteristics in RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs in
chicken

Many studies have shown that chicken genome characteristics such as recombination frequency, gene density
and GC density correlate with chromosome size [18,23].
Our results show a similar trend with regard to the level
of gene expression and density of RIDGEs. In the
chicken, the median expression values decrease with
increased chromosome length (Figure 3), which can
only be partly explained by the higher gene density of
the micro-chromosomes. Our permutation analysis
clearly shows that the organization of genes in clusters
of highly expressed genes is not random and suggests a
functional mechanism. This is further strengthened by
our observation that the same distribution of RIDGEs is
seen when both strands of the same chromosome are
analyzed separately (Figure 6). This is additional confirmation of region-like regulation of transcription during
gene expression, since the opening of chromatin structures during gene expression will affect both strands by
facilitating the access of transcription factors to target
genes, thus enhancing gene expression in that region.
Furthermore, we also found a correlation between the
transcriptome maps and gene density, GC content, gene
length, average intron length, “minimal intron” density,
and recombination rate in the chicken genome (Figure
6). A correlation between recombination rate and GC
content in the chicken genome has been recently
reported [23], and these authors therefore link recombination rate with the transcriptome map, as reported in
the current study. This can be explained by the more
open chromatin structure of the transcriptionally active
RIDGEs, which would also facilitate recombination
within these regions. Furthermore, “minimal introns”
have been reported to be GC-rich and to enhance the
rate at which mRNA is exported from the cell nucleus
[30] (Yu et al. 2002). These findings link the “minimal
introns” distribution via GC content with the transcriptome map in the current study. This can be explained,
at least in part, by the need for efficient export of highly
expressed mRNA from the nucleus. Many genomic

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

characteristics in eukaryotic genomes, such as RIDGEs,
early replication and recombination, appear to be linked.
RIDGEs are associated with higher expression, higher
gene density, higher GC content, shorter gene introns,
shorter genes, higher “minimal intron” density, and
higher recombination rate (Figure 6). This is congruent
in human studies, in which similar correlations were
found [9]. Shorter introns and shorter genes in RIDGEs
may indicate the need for increased transcription efficiency. Castillo-Davis et al. [31] showed that introns in
highly expressed genes are substantially shorter than
those in genes that are expressed at low levels in the
human genome, and the authors hypothesized that transcription efficiency is enhanced when intron length is
shorter. The clustering of highly expressed genes in
RIDGEs therefore would result in clustering of genes
with, on average, shorter introns. Although GC content,
gene density, gene length, average intron length, “minimal intron” distribution and recombination rate are all
correlated with gene transcriptional activity in the
chicken genome, the exact causative mechanisms of
these relationships are still unknown.
RIDGEs are relatively conserved between chicken and
human

In comparing evolutionary break points between
RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs, we found a higher number of
break points within RIDGEs than anti-RIDGEs in both
the chicken and the human genome. Similar as for
recombination, it is possible that the more open chromatin structure within RIDGEs facilitates an increase in
the likelihood of rearrangement events, and thus in an
increase in the observed syntenic breaks.
Although RIDGEs clearly show an increase in the
number of evolutionary break points, we also showed a
significantly higher number of RIDGE-to-RIDGE break
points between the chicken and human genomes.
Hence, although RIDGEs are more prone to be interrupted by evolutionary break points, there still seems to
be an evolutionary constraint that favors recombination
between RIDGEs, i.e. the resulting parts of a “broken
RIDGEs” from one species were more likely to stay
together with a part of another broken RIDGE during
genome evolution, thereby keeping specific genes
together within RIDGEs. In other words genes within a
RIDGE in one species are likely to end up in a RIDGE
in another species even when syntenic rearrangements
occur. There are in total 11,407 1-to-1 human-chicken
homolog genes downloaded via biomaRt [32]. Of these
genes, 1,351 are located In RIDGEs and 857 genes are
located in anti-RIDGEs in the human genome. 27% of
these 1-to-1 human-chicken homolog genes (361 out of
1351 genes) located in human RIDGEs are also located
in chicken RIDGEs (p-value smaller than 2.2 × 10 -16 ,
Chi-square tests). This again supports our hypothesis

Page 9 of 12

that genes within a RIDGE in one species are likely to
end up in a RIDGE in another species.
This result suggests that the clustering of specific
genes is not so much important, but rather the clustering of any genes that are highly expressed. The relative
low number of syntenic breaks within anti-RIDGEs, on
the other hand, might be linked to another feature of
vertebrate chromosomes, namely the occurrence of
regions with a relatively low number of genes, so called
“gene deserts” [33]. In particular, the so-called “stable
gene deserts” colocalize with developmentally active
genes and genes coding for transcription factors, both
gene types that generally show relatively low levels of
expression. These “stable gene deserts” showed extremely low numbers of syntenic breaks [33].
Our results clearly show the existence of a higher level
organization of the vertebrate genome affecting not only
the expression of genes but also other features such as
recombination and genome rearrangements during
evolution.

Conclusion
This is the first study describing a transcriptome map in
birds. This study has revealed regional regulation of
gene expression in chicken that is consistent with previous studies in flies and mammals [8,10,12]. Since features correlating with high regional transcription are
more pronounced in the microchromosomes leading to
overall higher expression compared to genes on the
macrochromosomes. Our analysis on evolutionary break
points shows that the regional regulation of gene transcription is relatively conserved between chicken and
human. Given the evolutionary position of chicken on
the phylogenetic tree, our results provide a unique perspective for future comparative studies on transcriptome
maps between vertebrate species.
Methods
Gene expression data

The gene expression data used in this analysis was
obtained from a gene expression survey in chicken
brain, bursa of Fabricius, kidney, liver, lung, small intestine, spleen and thymus, using the chicken 20 k oligonucleotide microarray (see below). Five biological replicates
were used for each tissue type, resulting in a total of 40
arrays. Each individual sample was compared to the
pooled reference, and data was normalized using the R
[34] package limma [35]. The mean expression value for
each Ensembl gene was calculated for each tissue type,
and the average expression value of each Ensembl gene
was determined by calculating the median expression
values across all eight tissues.
The microarray data have been deposited in the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) public repository [24]. The

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

accession number for the series is GSE17108, and the
sample series can be retrieved with accession numbers
from GSM427873 to GSM427912. The sample series
contains the raw data (median signal) of each Cy5 (red)
and Cy3 (green) channels as well as the normalized data
for each microarray.
Chicken 20 k array platform and oligonucleotide probe
re-annotation

The chicken 20 k array was obtained from ARK-Genomics [36]. The array design has been published in Gene
Expression Omnibus with the platform name GPL8861
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
token=tjwjpscyceqawjk&acc=GPL8861.
The probe sequences of the chicken 20 k oligonucleotide microarray used in this study were designed based
on chicken genome assembly WASHUC1 (Dec. 2004),
and all sequences were mapped to the chicken genome
assembly WASHUC2. An updated array re-annotation
file based on Ensembl 50 is available at EADGENE
Oligo Set Annotation Files homepage [37]. Of the total
20,460 oligonucleotide probes on the chicken 20 k array,
13,431 mapped to unique locations in the chicken genome. All the probes for genes that mapped to chromosome “unknown” were excluded in the analysis, and all
probes for genes on chromosome 16, 25, and W were
excluded due to the very low number of probes that
mapped to those chromosomes. For probes that mapped
to the same known Ensembl gene ID [38], the expression data were averaged and assigned to the Ensembl
gene. In total, in this study, 12,983 oligo probes were
used that mapped to 11,361 unique chicken Ensembl
gene IDs located on 27 chromosomes.
Identification of RIDGEs in the chicken genome

Individual gene expression data was ordered according
to the middle position of the gene. A Robust Scatter
Plot Smoothing (function runmed in R package stats)
technique was applied to each chromosome separately,
with a window size of 39 genes, i.e. the expression value
of each gene was replaced by the median expression
value of the neighboring 39 genes. Similar to the definition for RIDGEs in humans [8], here we defined a
RIDGE by window size for calculating median expression, minimum length of the run, and the threshold for
the lower limit of the median. The selection of window
size of 39 genes was based on the following two points:
1) Permutation analysis performed by both Caron et al.
[8] and our analysis indicated a window size of 39 genes
gives a reasonable number of RIDGEs; 2) To be able to
compare the results of RIDGE identification between
human and chicken, we decided to use the same threshold as described by Caron et al. The bigger the window
size is, the smaller number of RIDGEs will be identified
as indicated in the permutation results in Additional
file 3.

Page 10 of 12

The threshold for RIDGEs was set to 1.19 times the
genomic median value (the data are log2 transformed,
and the values used here is the running median values
of a window size of 39 genes) along the length of a run
of at least 10 median values. The threshold used for
anti-RIDGEs was a median expression of 0.78 times the
genomic median. The thresholds used for the classification of the RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs were chosen such
that RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs each cover 10% of the
genome.
Correlation analysis between tissue-specific transcriptome
maps

Spearman rank correlation test was performed to test
for pairwise correlations among the transcriptome maps
on all the chromosomes (applied to the running median
with window size of 39 genes). The running median
expression values are not normally distributed, and the
non-parametric Spearman correlation test was used on
the ranks of the paired transcriptome maps.
Random permutation tests for RIDGE identification in
chicken

Random permutation tests were done in R by permuting
the genomic locations of Ensembl genes and repeating
the RIDGE analysis 10,000 times to create 10,000 random transcriptome maps. The number of RIDGEs identified in these 10,000 random transcriptome maps was
compared to the actual number of identified RIDGEs in
this analysis using the same threshold.
Syntenic break points

Human-chicken synteny block data from Bourque et al.
[25] was used in this study, and genomic locations of
synteny blocks from assembly WASHUC1 (Dec 2004)
were mapped to assembly WASHUC2 (May 2006) using
BLAT (see Additional file 4). Each end of every syntenic
block was considered a break point, and the number of
break points in RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs was subsequently summarized.
Human gene expression data

Human Transcriptome Map data was downloaded from
the HTM website [26]. We selected Affymetrix U133A
human whole genome array data from seven tissues
(thymus, spleen, lung, small intestine, brain, liver, and
kidney) from a healthy individual; data (normalized
data) was log2 transformed and the median expression
value across the seven different tissues was used to
build the transcriptome map. RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs
were identified using the same approach as for the
chicken data.
Genome characteristics of RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs in
chicken

Genomic location, transcript length, exon number and
GC content for the individual Ensembl chicken genes
were downloaded from the Ensembl genome database
using biomaRt [32]. The averaged intron length was

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

calculated by averaging the intron length of all transcripts per gene. The statistical test for differences in
average intron length, gene length, gene density, and
GC content between RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs was performed using Wilcoxon rank-sum test (function Wilcox.
test function in R package stats).

Page 11 of 12

Acknowledgements
This work was financed by European Union grant FOOD-CT-2004–506416
(EADGENE). We would like to acknowledge Aart Lammers and Basav
Hangalapura from Wageningen University for helping with collection of
chicken tissues, Richard Talbot from Ark-Genomics for providing the
microarrays, Pieter Neerincx and Jack Leunissen from Wageningen University
and Christophe Klopp and Pierrot Casel from INRA for help with updating
the annotation for the chicken 20 k oligo array.

GO term enrichment analysis

GO term enrichment analysis was performed using R
package Gostats [28]. The conditional algorithm was
used for the hypergeometric test. The gene annotation
package for the GOstats analysis was built using R package AnnotationDbi [39]. Mapping of chicken Ensembl
gene IDs and other genomic information (e.g. entrezgene) was performed using the R package biomaRt [32].

List of abbreviations used
MHC: Major Histocompatibility Complex; TF: Transcription Factor; SAGE: Serial Analysis of Gene Expression; RIDGE: Regions of Increased Gene Expression;
GFP: Green Fluorescent Protein; EST: expressed
sequence tag; GO: Gene Ontology.
Additional file 1: Genomic location of RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs.
Genomic location of RIDGEs and anti-RIDGEs identified in the chicken
genome in this study.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1128-S1.XLS ]
Additional file 2: Correlations of transcriptome maps in different
tissues. All pairwise correlations between the tissue-specific
transcriptome maps.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1128-S2.XLS ]
Additional file 3: Random permutation test. Random permutation test
results for RIDGE identification with different window sizes.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1128-S3.XLS ]
Additional file 4: Positions of the synteny block in the chicken
genome. Genomic positions of the ends of the synteny block on
genome build WASHUC2.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1128-S4.XLS ]
Additional file 5: Evolutionary breaks within RIDGEs and antiRIDGEs. Chi-square test of evolutionary break points within RIDGEs and
anti-RIDGEs.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1128-S5.XLS ]
Additional file 6: GO enrichment analysis for genes in RIDGEs and
anti-RIDGEs. Enriched GOBP terms for all genes located within RIDGEs
and anti-RIDGEs. BY: adjusted p-values for the Benjamini & Yekutieli stepup FDR controlling procedure.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1128-S6.XLS ]

Authors’ contributions
HN carried out the experiment, performed data analysis and drafted the
manuscript, JB helped with statistical analysis of this work, HJM, RC, and MG
helped with interpretation of the results, all authors were involved in
improving the manuscript. The final version of the manuscript was approved
by all the authors.
Received: 6 August 2009
Accepted: 14 January 2010 Published: 14 January 2010
References
1. Kielman MF, Smits R, Devi TS, Fodde R, Bernini LF: Homology of a 130-kb
region enclosing the alpha-globin gene cluster, the alpha-locus
controlling region, and two non-globin genes in human and mouse.
Mamm Genome 1993, 4(6):314-323.
2. The MHC sequencing consortium: Complete sequence and gene map of
a human major histocompatibility complex. Nature 1999, 401(6756):921923.
3. Amores A, Force A, Yan YL, Joly L, Amemiya C, Fritz A, Ho RK, Langeland J,
Prince V, Wang YL, Westerfield M, Ekker M, Postlethwait JH: Zebrafish hox
clusters and vertebrate genome evolution. Science 1998, 282(5394):17111714.
4. Garcia-Fernandez J: The genesis and evolution of homeobox gene
clusters. Nat Rev Genet 2005, 6(12):881-892.
5. Hurst LD, Pal C, Lercher MJ: The evolutionary dynamics of eukaryotic
gene order. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5(4):299-310.
6. Sproul D, Gilbert N, Bickmore WA: The role of chromatin structure in
regulating the expression of clustered genes. Nat Rev Genet 2005,
6(10):775-781.
7. Michalak P: Coexpression, coregulation, and cofunctionality of
neighboring genes in eukaryotic genomes. Genomics 2008, 91(3):243-248.
8. Caron H, van Schaik B, Mee van der M, Baas F, Riggins G, van Sluis P,
Hermus MC, van Asperen R, Boon K, Voute PA, Heisterkamp S, van
Kampen A, Versteeg R: The human transcriptome map: clustering of
highly expressed genes in chromosomal domains. Science 2001,
291(5507):1289-1292.
9. Versteeg R, van Schaik BD, van Batenburg MF, Roos M, Monajemi R,
Caron H, Bussemaker HJ, van Kampen AH: The human transcriptome map
reveals extremes in gene density, intron length, GC content, and repeat
pattern for domains of highly and weakly expressed genes. Genome Res
2003, 13(9):1998-2004.
10. Spellman PT, Rubin GM: Evidence for large domains of similarly
expressed genes in the Drosophila genome. J Biol 2002, 1(1):5.
11. Boutanaev AM, Kalmykova AI, Shevelyov YY, Nurminsky DI: Large clusters
of co-expressed genes in the Drosophila genome. Nature 2002,
420(6916):666-669.
12. Mijalski T, Harder A, Halder T, Kersten M, Horsch M, Strom TM, Liebscher HV,
Lottspeich F, de Angelis MH, Beckers J: Identification of coexpressed gene
clusters in a comparative analysis of transcriptome and proteome in
mouse tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(24):8621-8626.
13. Singer GA, Lloyd AT, Huminiecki LB, Wolfe KH: Clusters of co-expressed
genes in mammalian genomes are conserved by natural selection. Mol
Biol Evol 2005, 22(3):767-775.
14. Gierman HJ, Indemans MH, Koster J, Goetze S, Seppen J, Geerts D, van
Driel R, Versteeg R: Domain-wide regulation of gene expression in the
human genome. Genome Res 2007, 17(9):1286-1295.
15. Chakalova L, Debrand E, Mitchell JA, Osborne CS, Fraser P: Replication and
transcription: shaping the landscape of the genome. Nat Rev Genet 2005,
6(9):669-677.
16. Croft JA, Bridger JM, Boyle S, Perry P, Teague P, Bickmore WA: Differences
in the localization and morphology of chromosomes in the human
nucleus. J Cell Biol 1999, 145(6):1119-1131.

Nie et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/28

Page 12 of 12

17. Habermann FA, Cremer M, Walter J, Kreth G, von Hase J, Bauer K,
Wienberg J, Cremer C, Cremer T, Solovei I: Arrangements of macro- and
microchromosomes in chicken cells. Chromosome Res 2001, 9(7):569-584.
18. International Chicken Genome Sequencing Consortium: Sequence and
comparative analysis of the chicken genome provide unique
perspectives on vertebrate evolution. Nature 2004, 432(7018):695-716.
19. Rodionov AV: Micro vs. macro: structural-functional organization of avian
micro- and macrochromosomes. Genetika 1996, 32(5):597-608.
20. Morescalchi A, Odierna G, Olmo E: Karyological relationships between the
Cyptobranchid salamanders. Specialia 1977, 15:1579.
21. Morescalchi A, Odierna G, Olmo E: Karyology of the primitive
salamanders, family Hynobiidae. Experientia 1979, 35:1434-1436.
22. Mengden GA, Stock AD: Chromosomal evolution in Serpentes: a
comparison of G and C chromosome banding patterns of some
Colubrid and Boid genera. Chromosoma 1980, 79:53-64.
23. Groenen MA, Wahlberg P, Foglio M, Cheng HH, Megens HJ, Crooijmans RP,
Besnier F, Lathrop M, Muir WM, Wong GK, Gut I, Andersson L: A highdensity SNP-based linkage map of the chicken genome reveals
sequence features correlated with recombination rate. Genome Res 2009,
19(3):510-519.
24. National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression
Omnibus. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/.
25. Bourque G, Zdobnov EM, Bork P, Pevzner PA, Tesler G: Comparative
architectures of mammalian and chicken genomes reveal highly variable
rates of genomic rearrangements across different lineages. Genome Res
2005, 15(1):98-110.
26. Human Transcriptome Map website. http://bioinfo.amc.uva.nl/HTMseq/.
27. Gene Ontology website. http://www.geneontology.org/.
28. Falcon S, Gentleman R: Using GOstats to test gene lists for GO term
association. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(2):257-258.
29. Goetze S, Mateos-Langerak J, Gierman HJ, de Leeuw W, Giromus O,
Indemans MH, Koster J, Ondrej V, Versteeg R, van Driel R: The threedimensional structure of human interphase chromosomes is related to
the transcriptome map. Mol Cell Biol 2007, 27(12):4475-4487.
30. Yu J, Yang Z, Kibukawa M, Paddock M, Passey DA, Wong GK: Minimal
introns are not “junk”. Genome Res 2002, 12(8):1185-1189.
31. Castillo-Davis CI, Mekhedov SL, Hartl DL, Koonin EV, Kondrashov FA:
Selection for short introns in highly expressed genes. Nat Genet 2002,
31(4):415-418.
32. Durinck S, Moreau Y, Kasprzyk A, Davis S, De Moor B, Brazma A, Huber W:
BioMart and Bioconductor: a powerful link between biological databases
and microarray data analysis. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(16):3439-3440.
33. Ovcharenko I, Loots GG, Nobrega MA, Hardison RC, Miller W, Stubbs L:
Evolution and functional classification of vertebrate gene deserts.
Genome Res 2005, 15(1):137-145.
34. R Development Core Team: R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria 2008.
35. Smyth GK: Limma: linear models for microarray data. Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology Solutions using R and Bioconductor New York:
SpringerGentleman R, Carey V, Dudoit S, Irizarry R, Huber W 2005, 397-420.
36. Ark-Genomics, Roslin institute, UK. http://www.ark-genomics.org/.
37. EADGENE Oligo Set Annotation Files homepage. http://www.eadgene.
info/TheProject/Integration/BiologicalresourcesandfacilitiesWP1/
EADGENEOligoSetsAnnotationFiles/tabid/324/Default.aspx.
38. Ensembl Genome Database. http://www.ensembl.org/.
39. Pages H, Carlson M, Falcon S, Li N: AnnotationDbi: Annotation Database
Interface. R package version 1.4.0 2008.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-28
Cite this article as: Nie et al.: Regional regulation of transcription in the
chicken genome. BMC Genomics 2010 11:28.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

BioMedcentral

</pre>
</body>
</html>
