<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-5-87.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Software

galaxieEST: addressing EST identity through automated
phylogenetic analysis
R Henrik Nilsson1, Balaji Rajashekar2, Karl-Henrik Larsson1 and
Björn M Ursing*3
Address: 1Göteborg University, Botanical Institute, Box 461, SE-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden, 2Lund University, Department of Microbial Ecology,
SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden and 3Karolinska Institutet, Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Berzelius väg 35 SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden
Email: R Henrik Nilsson - henrik.nilsson@botany.gu.se; Balaji Rajashekar - Balaji.Rajashekar@mbioekol.lu.se; Karl-Henrik Larsson - KarlHenrik.Larsson@systbot.gu.se; Björn M Ursing* - Bjorn.Ursing@cgb.ki.se
* Corresponding author

Published: 05 July 2004
BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:87

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-5-87

Received: 05 April 2004
Accepted: 05 July 2004

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/87
© 2004 Nilsson et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: Research involving expressed sequence tags (ESTs) is intricately coupled to the
existence of large, well-annotated sequence repositories. Comparatively complete and satisfactory
annotated public sequence libraries are, however, available only for a limited range of organisms,
rendering the absence of sequences and gene structure information a tangible problem for those
working with taxa lacking an EST or genome sequencing project. Paralogous genes belonging to the
same gene family but distinguished by derived characteristics are particularly prone to
misidentification and erroneous annotation; high but incomplete levels of sequence similarity are
typically difficult to interpret and have formed the basis of many unsubstantiated assumptions of
orthology.
In these cases, a phylogenetic study of the query sequence together with the most similar
sequences in the database may be of great value to the identification process. In order to facilitate
this laborious procedure, a project to employ automated phylogenetic analysis in the identification
of ESTs was initiated.
Results: galaxieEST is an open source Perl-CGI script package designed to complement traditional
similarity-based identification of EST sequences through employment of automated phylogenetic
analysis. It uses a series of BLAST runs as a sieve to retrieve nucleotide and protein sequences for
inclusion in neighbour joining and parsimony analyses; the output includes the BLAST output, the
results of the phylogenetic analyses, and the corresponding multiple alignments. galaxieEST is
available as an on-line web service for identification of fungal ESTs and for download / local
installation for use with any organism group at http://galaxie.cgb.ki.se/galaxieEST.html.
Conclusions: By addressing sequence relatedness in addition to similarity, galaxieEST provides an
integrative view on EST origin and identity, which may prove particularly useful in cases where
similarity searches return one or more pertinent, but not full, matches and additional information
on the query EST is needed.

Page 1 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:87

Background
The capture of mRNA from living cells represents an
intriguing opportunity to study gene expression at various
stages and conditions. Using the mRNA as template, DNA
is synthesized and subsequently sequenced as expressed
sequence tags (ESTs), numerous small sequence fragments, which singly or when assembled form the initial
sequences in question. The genes can then be identified
through similarity searches like BLAST [1] on Genbank or
other dedicated sequence repositories.
The identification process is, however, often hampered by
the lack of fully matching sequences in the reference databases; comparatively complete and satisfactory annotated
public libraries exist only for a limited number of organisms. Ideally, even in the absence of full matches, the reference database holds sequences that are related to the
query sequence through common ancestry. Such homologues are likely to constitute an invaluable information
source for the elucidation of identity and function of the
gene which the query EST represents, and unless they are
very divergent, these sequences will typically be retrieved
by a standard BLAST search. A sequence similarity search
does not per se reveal information about the sequence
relatedness, but it does provide a qualified platform for
further analyses such as phylogenetic inference. The use of
phylogenetic inference in EST annotation may prove to be
of particular relevance when dealing with large gene families where the individual genes show secondarily derived
characteristics / high mutation rates.
Carrying out phylogenetic analysis on Genbank EST
sequences is, however, an onerous undertaking, generally
calling for application of several external computer programs and numerous manual steps. The authors present a
Perl-CGI script package, galaxieEST, designed to facilitate
the identification of EST sequences through automated
BLAST searches and phylogenetic analysis of the results.
The package collects an EST sequence from the user
through a web interface and uses the EST as a query in a
series of BLAST runs on nucleotide, EST, and protein databases. Each positive BLAST outcome is subjected to a joint
phylogenetic analysis with the query EST and the best
BLAST matches from each stage. The output includes the
BLAST results, the outcome of the phylogenetic analysis
and the corresponding multiple alignment. galaxieEST is
available as a web service for identification of fungal EST
sequences and for download / local installation, in which
case the organism group and EST coverage can be set as
seen fit.

Implementation
galaxieEST is based on the galaxie package [2]. It is written
in Perl [3] and runs as a CGI script under the Apache httpd
web server [4] on a Red Hat Linux server [5]. All sequences

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/87

are stored in local MySQL databases [6] from which data
is extracted using the DBI Perl-MySQL package [7]. BLAST,
Clustal W [8], and PHYLIP [9] are used for sequence similarity searches, multiple alignment, and phylogenetic
analysis, respectively.
For the web service installation, three reference sets of fungal sequences were collected from Genbank and stored in
separate MySQL databases (May 25; 2004): all Genbank /
EMBL / DDBJ nucleotide sequences (excluding ESTs)
between 110 and 1100 base paires (bp) in length (76,064
sequences), all EST sequences between 60 and 1100 bp in
length (306,307 sequences), and all protein sequences
between 10 and 400 amino acids in length (66,873
sequences). No patented sequences or working drafts
were included. A parser script to format Genbank
sequence files for easy addition into MySQL tables was
written and is available for download.
galaxieEST has a six-step analysis procedure. It collects the
query EST and analysis parameters from the web interface
and runs BLASTn locally against the nucleotide database.
Significant matches – as judged by the BLAST e-value – are
displayed and aligned together with the query sequence
for joint phylogenetic analysis using either neighbour
joining (NJ) or the maximum parsimony (MP) optimality
criterion. The phylogenetic analyses feature random
sequence addition, outgroup rooting, bootstrapping, and
branch swapping (MP). The user specifies whether to
include all significantly matching sequences or only
matches of unique e-values from the BLAST run; the latter
option can be used to reduce the impact of identical
sequences on the analysis (the inclusion of too many
identical sequences in a phylogenetic analysis is likely to
yield a tree with little, if any, resolution, such trees being
unsound bases for inferences on sequence relatedness).
The results from BLAST and the phylogenetic tree are displayed and the multiple alignment is accessed through a
hyperlink. The output of galaxieEST is hyperlinked into
Genbank for rapid retrieval of complementary information, and several of the information items of the output
can be copied into external tools for further processing.
The second analysis step is similar to the first one but uses
the EST database as reference. For the third step, all three
forward reading frames of the query EST are translated
into amino acid sequences and compared with the protein
database records using BLASTx. Significant matches are
collected and analysed as above. Finally, the query
sequence is reversed and its complementary DNA string is
computed. Steps one through three are repeated for the
reverse complementary strand of the query EST; this
accounts for cases where, unintentionally or otherwise,
the direction of either the query EST or (some of) the reference sequences is reverse and complementary.

Page 2 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:87

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/87

Results and discussion

Conclusions

Research involving EST sequences relies heavily upon the
existence of wide-scoped and well-annotated sequence
repositories. Many tools have been developed to annotate
EST sequences; the examples include Gene2EST [10],
cDNA2Genome [11], and EST_Genome [12]. Despite
recent progress, many newly sequenced ESTs are left
poorly matched when performing traditional similarity
searches on available databases. It might in these cases be
a good idea to set up separate BLAST runs against different
databases, such as EST-nucleotide, EST-EST, and EST-protein. galaxieEST automates these searches for any given
query EST. Moreover, for each positive outcome, galaxieEST collects the best matches and performs a phylogenetic analysis of these sequences together with the query
EST.

The elucidation of sequence identity, origin, and properties is best done in an evolutionary context. Sequences but
partly matched in publicly available sequence repositories
are typically difficult to process, but much information
may be gained from the investigation of related sequences
and the information they are likely to convey. The PerlCGI package galaxieEST was written for that purpose in
that it represents an attempt to employ automated phylogenetic analysis in the EST identification process; it is
freely available as an on-line web service for fungal ESTs
and for download / local installation for use with any
organism group.

Although the parameters of the phylogenetic analysis can
be set as extensive as seen fit upon script installation, the
phylogenetic analyses of galaxieEST should not be seen as
a rapid way to generate phylogenetic trees for publication
or to establish the true branching order amongst a set of
sequences. Such tasks call for more extensive analyses
(e.g., multiple outgroups, more thorough computer runs
/ analysis schemes, and manually adjusted alignments);
galaxieEST should rather be looked upon as an attempt to
utilise the powerful properties of phylogenetic inference
to get an alternative estimation of sequence relatedness.
Sequence coverage is another important issue; the fact
that BLAST is used as a sieve to find sequences for further
processing means that galaxieEST will not proceed with
the step in question unless there are significant BLAST
matches in the first place. The authors intend to update
the sequences of the fungal EST web service on a regular
basis.

Availability and requirements
Project name: galaxieEST – addressing EST identity
through automated phylogenetic analysis
Project
home
ieEST.html

page:

http://galaxie.cgb.ki.se/galax

Operating system(s): primarily Linux and UNIX / BSD
Programming language: Perl, SQL
Other requirements: Apache, MySQL, PHYLIP, DBI /
DBD, and Clustal W
License: GNU type
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: none

List of abbreviations
CGI – Common Gateway Interface
DBD – Database Driver

The galaxieEST output is composite, consisting of the
results from each of the six BLAST runs and up to six phylogenetic analyses. While the information from each analysis is easily interpreted, the penetration of the combined
results may be less straightforward. galaxieEST is a common roof for a series of analyses, each of which may give
a small contribution to the true nature of the EST at hand
and the totalling of which is likely to give more information on the attributes and ancestry of the query EST than
any single similarity search. galaxieEST gives a quick overview of what is present in the public databases and uses
several different tools to try to retrieve as much information as possible pertaining to the query EST. The price that
one pays – some 30 seconds for the analyses to complete
– may well be a negligible cost for examining information
otherwise partially overlooked.

DBI – Database independent Interface [for Perl]
EST – Expressed Sequence Tag
MP – Maximum Parsimony
NJ – Neighbour-Joining
SQL – Structured Query Language

Authors' contributions
RHN wrote large parts of the Perl source and the MySQL
interface. BR initiated the project and contributed with
advice on fungal ESTs and their processing. K-HL contributed with ideas on sequence sampling and phylogenetic
analysis. BMU was responsible for the web-interface and
the scientific aspects of the scripts. All authors drafted the
manuscript and approved the final version.

Page 3 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:87

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/87

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Helge Ax:son Johnson Foundation and the
Wilhelm and Martina Lundgren Science Foundation with grants to RHN; by
FORMAS with grant no. 23.0697/00 to K-HL; by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation with a fellowship and Medivir AB with a grant to BMU;
and by NorFA with grant no. 020725 to the UNITE group. The Göteborg
University / Chalmers Research School in Genomics and Bioinformatics is
gratefully acknowledged for bringing the authors together for this project
and for valuable support on related matters. Valuable comments from two
anonymous reviewers are also acknowledged.

References
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.

11.
12.

Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of
protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:3389-3402.
Nilsson RH, Larsson K-H, Ursing BM: galaxie – CGI scripts for
sequence identification through automated phylogenetic
analysis. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:1447-1452.
The Perl Directory [http://www.perl.org]
The Apache http Server Project [http://httpd.apache.org]
Red Hat, Inc [http://www.redhat.com]
MySQL AB [http://www.mysql.com]
DBI Database Interface Module [http://dbi.perl.org]
Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving
the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment
through sequence weighting, positions-specific gap penalties
and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
Felsenstein J: PHYLIP – Phylogeny Inference Package (Version
3.2). Cladistics 1989, 5:164-166.
Gemünd C, Ramu C, Altenberg-Greulich B, Gibson TJ: Gene2EST:
a BLAST2 server for searching expressed sequence tag
(EST) databases with eukaryotic gene-sized queries. Nucleic
Acids Res 2001, 29:1272-1277.
del Val C, Glatting K-H, Suhai S: CDNA2Genome: A tool for
mapping and annotation cDNAs. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:39.
Mott R: EST_GENOME: A program to align spliced DNA
sequences to unspliced genomic DNA. Comput Appl Biosci 1997,
13:477-478.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 4 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
