<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A glycine receptor is involved in the organization of swimming movements in an invertebrate chordate</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Neuroscience 2010 11:6. doi:10.1186/1471-2202-11-6"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Atsuo Nishino"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A glycine receptor is involved in the organization
of swimming movements in an invertebrate
chordate
Atsuo Nishino1,2, Yasushi Okamura2,3, Stefania Piscopo4, Euan R Brown4*

Abstract
Background: Rhythmic motor patterns for locomotion in vertebrates are generated in spinal cord neural networks
known as spinal Central Pattern Generators (CPGs). A key element in pattern generation is the role of glycinergic
synaptic transmission by interneurons that cross the cord midline and inhibit contralaterally-located excitatory
neurons. The glycinergic inhibitory drive permits alternating and precisely timed motor output during locomotion
such as walking or swimming. To understand better the evolution of this system we examined the physiology of
the neural network controlling swimming in an invertebrate chordate relative of vertebrates, the ascidian larva
Ciona intestinalis.
Results: A reduced preparation of the larva consisting of nerve cord and motor ganglion generates alternating
swimming movements. Pharmacological and genetic manipulation of glycine receptors shows that they are
implicated in the control of these locomotory movements. Morphological molecular techniques and heterologous
expression experiments revealed that glycine receptors are inhibitory and are present on both motoneurones and
locomotory muscle while putative glycinergic interneurons were identified in the nerve cord by labeling with an
anti-glycine antibody.
Conclusions: In Ciona intestinalis, glycine receptors, glycinergic transmission and putative glycinergic interneurons,
have a key role in coordinating swimming movements through a simple CPG that is present in the motor
ganglion and nerve cord. Thus, the strong association between glycine receptors and vertebrate locomotory
networks may now be extended to include the phylum chordata. The results suggest that the basic network for
‘spinal-like’ locomotion is likely to have existed in the common ancestor of extant chordates some 650 M years
ago.

Background
Ascidians (urochordates) and vertebrates are close relatives, and shared a common chordate ancestor around
650 million years ago [1]. For this reason, ascidians have
been studied for nearly 150 years as a means to uncover
the origin and evolution of their more complex vertebrate relatives [2]. With the recent sequencing of the
genome of Ciona intestinalis [3], there has been an
increase in interest in ascidians as useful models to
study the evolution of chordates. In addition, anatomical
traits and gene expression patterns have predicted
‘homologies’ between the ascidian larval nervous system
* Correspondence: Brown@szn.it
4
Laboratorio di Fisiologia Animale ed Evoluzione, Stazione Zoologica Anton
Dohrn, Villa Comunale, 80121 Napoli, Italia

and the vertebrate central nervous systems (CNS) [4,5]
that may indicate deeper homology at the level of the
neural networks to generate similar functions. The larval
nervous system is rather simple (shown diagrammatically in Figure 1A) when compared to that of vertebrates and consists of some 80-100 neurons [6], divided
into two or three main sub-divisions; a brain vesicle
(BV) that contains a photoreceptive ocellus and a gravity
sensing otolith; a presumptive motor ganglion (MG)
known variously as the visceral, trunk or tail ganglion;
and the nerve cord (NC). (Recently the use of ‘visceral
ganglion’ as the common term for the motor ganglion,
has been called into question [5,7], as there are no viscera in the larva. The alternatives suggested are ‘trunk’
[5] or ‘tail’ ganglion [7] though here we use motor

© 2010 Nishino et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

Page 2 of 12

Figure 1 Simplified diagrams showing Ciona intestinalis larval body plan and ‘central nervous system’. (A) Larval body plan showing the
central nervous system divisions. Orange, brain vesicle (BV) containing photoreceptive ocellus and a gravity sensing otolith (black spots). Green,
presumptive motor ganglion, known variously as the visceral, trunk or tail ganglion. Pink, nerve cord (NC). The upper dotted line shown the
region of the section made when preparing ‘headless’ larvae. The lower section on the line a’-b’ shows the region of the cross section shown
diagrammatically in B. (B) Diagram showing the main features of the nerve cord (pink), muscle (green) at the cross-section at the line a’-b’. The
blue arrow shows the angle of view in A. This diagram is used in the following figures to show the angle of view in the micrographs. Scale bar
in A, 100 μm.

ganglion (MG) as a more appropriate term). Although
these nervous system divisions express Hox genes in a
way that suggest these structures represent the equivalent of the forebrain, hindbrain and spinal cord [4,8],
another analysis suggests that there are two divisions
where the BV represents the forebrain, and the MG and
NC the spinal cord [5].
We examined the neural control of swimming in the
larva of C. intestinalis to understand if the similarities in
anatomy and gene expression patterns reflect similar
physiological mechanisms for the control of locomotion
in these two chordate subphyla (vertebrates and urochordates). Although ascidians have a sessile adult form,
the tadpole-like larva swims with rapidly alternating tail
beats that superficially resemble vertebrate swimming
(Figure 2A). Intracellular recording from muscle cells
from two distantly spaced electrodes shows however
near-simultaneous activation of the muscles on one side
of the tail during swimming strokes [9]. This means that
the traveling wave that is generated is due to the

interaction of the muscle, notochord and resistive forces
with the surrounding fluid and not because of sequential
activation of segmented muscle cells as in vertebrates. In
vertebrates, alternating activity during swimming is generated in the spinal cord by the activation of both excitatory glutamatergic interneurons and inhibitory
glycinergic commissural interneurons that periodically
inhibit contralaterally located motoneurons [10]. Thus,
the travelling wave during swimming is produced by
sequential activation of coupled spinal networks acting
on segmented muscle. Despite these fundamental differences, here we find that the contribution of glycinergic
inhibitory transmission is a common feature in both
vertebrate and non-vertebrate chordate locomotory
control.

Methods
Animals

Ciona intestinalis adults were collected in the bay of
Naples by the fishing service of the Stazione Zoologica

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

Page 3 of 12

Figure 2 Swimming patterns and pharmacological effects in the larva of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis. (A) Montage of images from high
speed video of swimming at 6 ms intervals showing alternating swimming movements and larval progression (in the last frame the final
position overlays the first position (grey). Sequence runs from left to right and top to bottom. Scale bar in frame 13, 100 μm. (B) Traces showing
strict left/right (L/R) alternation of tail movements during swimming strokes in a tethered decapitated larva in 1 mM L-glutamate. (C) Phase
relation of the autocorrelation on the left side (blue) with the cross correlation (red) between left and right sides. (D) The same larvae showing
loss of strict L/R alternation in the presence of strychnine. (E) Phase relation from the same larvae as in (C) showing a strong autocorrelation on
the left side and no positive correlation with the right side (red) in the presence of strychnine.

and also from Nishiura port and Issiki port in Gamagori
(Aichi, Japan). Adults were kept in the tanks of the Stazione Zoologica and Okazaki Institute for Integrative
Bioscience. For physiological experiments in Naples,
gametes were collected from the gonoducts of several
animals and used for in vitro fertilization. Fertilized eggs
were then raised in incubators in filtered seawater at
17°C (under these conditions larvae hatch at around
19.5-20.5 hr). In Okazaki, developing embryos were
reared at 18°C in artificial seawater (Jamarin U artificial
seawater, Jamarin Laboratory, Japan) (larvae hatched at
around 17 hours post-fertilization; hpf). Hatched larvae
were then transferred to experimental chambers for
recording at 18-20°C. Larvae were partially immobilized
by pinning them down by the tail or head with Opuntia
glochids to Sylgard coated Petri dishes. In some cases,
the ‘head’ was transected between the motor ganglion
(MG) and brain vesicle (BV) leaving only the MG and
tail intact (Figure 1A). Otherwise, after pinning down
the head, the tunic was removed from the tail with fine
forceps. This procedure allowed better penetration of
the drugs.
Motion analysis

Larval movements were recorded either with a high
speed video (FAST-CAM Rabbit mini 2, PHOTORON,
Tokyo, Japan) at 400-500 fps or were monitored in real

time using a novel dual emission detection unit consisting of two photomultipliers (PMTs, Cairn Research Ltd,
Faversham, Kent, UK) adapted to enable the simultaneous measurement of density from two regions of the
field of view. In brief, this involved producing two separate images by passing the emitted light through a
broad- band 50% split dichroic mirror. 50 % of the light
was sent to photomultiplier one and the rest of the light
filtered through a 600 nm band pass dichroic mirror
that passed all light under 600 nm to photomultiplier
two. >600 nm red light was passed to a video camera
(Sony CCD CC-7) that had been modified to be sensitive to red light (IR filter was removed). The rectangular
apertures of two variable shutters positioned in each of
the two light paths leading to the PMTs, were visualized
on the image produced by the video camera by backlighting each shutter aperture with light produced by
two red (635 nm) light emitting diodes. The ‘regions of
interest’ formed by the shutter apertures were the points
of maximum left and right excursion of the tail or head
of the tethered larva. The experiment was setup by
manually selecting the two areas of interest. The outputs
of the two photomultipliers, which were set to a moderate gain, were digitized as described below.
For video analysis, captured images were recorded on
videotape, digitized through a Digital Handycam (Sony,

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

Japan) or an A/D convertible video board mounted on a
PC. Two ‘regions of interest’ were selected either from
the video or with the dual photomultiplier system from
the screen, and the density changes measured to detect
alternate movements of the larval tail. Frames were analyzed using software (NIH Image, ver. 1.6), and photomultiplier records were digitized and stored using a
Digidata 1200 data acquisition system and finally analyzed using Clampfit software (ver. 9.0) (both from
Molecular Devices, formerly Axon Instruments, Union
City, CA, USA). The locomotor period was calculated
by carrying out an autocorrelation analysis on the left
side of each data trace and measuring the time between
peaks (eg, Figure 2). The contralateral phase relation
was determined by dividing the time difference between
the peak of the left side autocorrelation and the left/
right cross-correlation trace by the locomotory period
(Figure 2).
Drugs and solutions

Drugs, compounds and solutions were added or continuously perfused over the preparation at a rate of 8
mL/min. Picrotoxin was purchased from Tocris but
other drugs and compounds were from Sigma unless
otherwise specified. The drugs were prediluted from
concentrated stock solutions and added directly to the
bath or to the superfusate at the final concentrations
indicated. Picrotoxin and strychnine were dissolved as
concentrated stocks (1-10 mM) in absolute ethanol.
During these experiments, penetration of drugs through
the intact tunic was very limited (100 μM strychnine or
picrotoxin having no effect). Removal of the outer tunic
or section of the head gave reliable penetration at lower
concentrations.
Immunocytochemistry

Ciona intestinalis larvae were fixed by immersion in
0.1% glutaraldehyde and 4% formaldehyde (as paraformaldehyde) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at pH
7.0-7.4 diluted 50% in seawater. Samples (15 ml) were
microwaved at 550 W for 5 s, then washed in three
changes of 0.1 M PBS/0.25% Triton-X for 10-15 min
each. Larvae were mixed frequently to obtain uniform
permeabilization. They were then washed five times for
10 min each in 0.2% Triton-X in PBS before blocking in
1 mg/ml goat serum in 0.2% Triton-X PBS, all day or
overnight at 4°C. They were then incubated in a primary
antibody, rabbit anti-glycine polyclonal antiserum [11]
(AB139, Millipore Bioscience Research Reagents [formerly Chemicon], Temecula, CA, USA) in 0.2% TritonX PBS for 48 h at 4°C at a dilution of 1:250, followed by
six washes in 0.2% Triton-X PBS. The larvae were then
incubated in Alexafluor-594 conjugated goat anti-rabbit
secondary antibody (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad,
California, USA) at a dilution of 1:200 in 0.2% Triton-X
PBS for 3 h at 4°C and washed five times in PBS.

Page 4 of 12

Finally, larvae were mounted in Vectashield beneath 00
coverglass, viewed either with × 25/0.8 or ×40/1.3 Plan
Neofluar objectives and image stacks collected using a
confocal microscope (LSM510, Zeiss). Images from the
LSM510 software were prepared in Adobe Photoshop.
Molecular Biology

For isolation of the full-length cDNA of the glycine
receptor (Ci-GlyR) candidate from C. intestinalis, we
utilized the dataset from a collection of ion channel
sequences [12] and online databases for the genome
sequence (Joint Genome Institute, C. intestinalis ver. 1,
http://genome.jgi-psf.org/ciona4/ciona4.home.html, and
ver. 2, http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Cioin2/Cioin2.home.
html). We predicted the single cognate (ver. 1 gene
model “ci0100137620"; ver. 2 gene model
“gw1.106.72.1”) by online homology search and obtained
the full-length cDNA for that by performing 5’ and 3’
rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) using a kit
(GeneRacer, Invitrogen) and primers; outer reverse for
5’-RACE: GATGGATGAAGAGCAACCGCATCT, inner
reverse for 5’-RACE: GAACCCAGTGAACGCCATGCGTT, outer forward for 3’-RACE: ACACACACCGAATCCACTGAGGAA, inner forward for 3’RACE: GGTATGACCAAAGGATACGACCTCAT.
Template cDNA was prepared from a total RNA pool
from hundreds of hatched larvae (at about 18 hpf,
18°C). We cloned and sequenced multiple fragments for
both ends and compared the results with that predicted
from the genomic databases. We did not find any splice
variants in those RACE fragments. The fragment pair
with an identified open reading frame was combined via
constructive PCR, and the obtained full-length cDNA
was cloned into pCR4-TOPO (Invitrogen). The whole
cDNA sequence of Ci-GlyR was confirmed by reading
both strands.
The 2.5 kb upstream sequence from the predicted first
Met of Ci-GlyR gene was isolated by genomic PCR
using a pair of primers; GlyR-up-2500 (SalI):
GGCGGAGCTCTGCGTCGACGCAAGGCACATTA,
GlyR-up-0 (BamHI): GGTGGATCCATCTTTAGAAGATATTGAATAAATGA. The isolated fragment was
digested by SalI and BamHI and cloned into SalIBamHI site of a expression vector, pEGFPΔCMV,
derived from pEGFP-N1 (Clontech) with a deletion of
the original CMV promoter (AseI-NheI) (a gift from S.
Yamada and H. Takahashi at the National Institute of
Basic Biology, Okazaki, Japan). This PCi-GlyREGFP construct (10 μg/ml circular plasmid form dissolved in 200
mM KCl) was manually injected into C. intestinalis fertilized eggs as described previously [13].
Whole-mount in situ hybridization

The coding sequence and the full-length of cDNA were
linearized, and the sense and antisense probes were prepared using digoxigenin-labeling mix (Roche) and T3/

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

T7 RNA polymerase by standard methods. The synthesized RNA probes were fragmented to ~300 bp. Wholemount in situ hybridization was performed according to
the protocol described previously [14] with minor modifications. The embryos or larvae at several stages were
fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.5 M NaCl and 0.1
M MOPS (pH 7.5) overnight at 4°C. The specimens
were stored at -20°C in 80% ethanol. They were rehydrated in PBST (phosphate-buffered saline containing
0.1% Tween-20) and partially digested with Proteinase K
in PBST (3 μg/ml for embryos; 6 μg/ml for larvae) for
40 min at 37°C. After washes with PBST, the specimens
were postfixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBST for 1
hr at room temperature (pH 7.5). After thorough washes
with PBST, they were pre-hybridized with hybridization
buffer, containing 50% formamide, 5× SSC, 5× Denhart’s
Soln, 0.1 mg/ml (for embryos) or 1 mg/ml (for larvae)
yeast tRNA, and 0.1% Tween-20 for more than 2 hr at
50°C. Then, they were soaked in hybridization buffer
containing probes (0.1-0.3 μg/ml for embryos, 0.01-0.05
μg/ml for larvae) for two days at 50°C. The hybridized
embryos/larvae were thoroughly washed with 2× SSC,
50% formamide, 0.1% Tween-20 at 50°C for 30 min, and
then the excess probes were digested with RNase A (20
μg/ml in a reaction solution containing 0.5 M NaCl, 10
mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0), 5 mM EDTA, 0.1% Tween-20) for
30 min at 37°C. After further washes once with 2× SSC,
50% formamide, 0.1% Tween-20 at 50°C for 20 min,
twice with 0.5× SSC, 50% formamide, 0.1% Tween-20 at
50°C for 30 min, the samples were soaked in blocking
solution (0.5% (w/v) blocking reagent [Roche] in PBST),
and then in the 1/2000 alkaline phosphatase (AP)-conjugated anti-digoxigenin (anti-DIG) antibody (Fab fragment, Roche) in the blocking solution (1 day at 4°C).
After extensive washes of non-reacted antibodies with
PBST, the signal was detected with standard NBT/BCIP
staining for AP. After a few washes with PBST, the
stained specimens were observed under the light microscope. No evident signal was found with the sense
probe for Ci-GlyR (not shown); no difference was found
between the antisense probes from the coding sequence
only and from the full-length of Ci-GlyR cDNA.
For double labeling, the Ci-ChAT gene was used as
reference, whose coding sequence was amplified by PCR
using primers (ChAT-codeF: CATGCCTGGTGCACTACATCAGAA, ChAT-codeR: CGGATATTTAAGAAATGGTGATATTGT) from the larval cDNA, and
subcloned into pCR4-TOPO. Fluorescein-labeled (Fluolabeled) antisense probe was prepared from the cloned
Ci-ChAT (Roche), and it was hybridized together with
DIG-labeled Ci-GlyR probe at the same time. After
blocking as in the procedure above, 1:2000 anti-DIG-AP
and 1:2000 anti-Fluo-POD, or in some cases the same
concentrations of anti-DIG-POD and anti-Fluo-AP (all

Page 5 of 12

Fab fragments from Roche), antibodies in blocking solution were treated at 4°C overnight. After thorough
washes with PBST (1 hr, more than 4 times, RT), and
two times more with PBS, the tyramide signal amplification (TSA) reaction was carried out (Invitrogen; HRPgoat anti-mouse IgG and Alexafluor-647 tyramides) for
1 hr at 4°C and then 4 hr at RT. After several washes
with PBST and then with a buffer containing 0.1 M
Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.1 M NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, coloring
reaction were performed on AP labels by Fast-Red and
HNPP (Roche) for 1.5-4 hr at RT. The specimens were
washed with PBST and post-fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBST for 1 hr at RT. The nuclei were visualized with 1 μM SYTOX Green in PBST for more than
20 min at RT. The double- or triple-stained specimens
were observed in PBS under the confocal microscopy
through appropriate filter sets for green (optional), red
and infrared light detection. The images were shown
with pseudo-colors and processed in Adobe Photoshop.
Electrophysiology on Xenopus oocytes

The coding sequence of Ci-GlyR was amplified from the
full-length cDNA inserts via PCR using primers; CiGlyR_forward (SalI): GATCTGTCGACCGCCACCATGCAGTCGCAGTATAATG, Ci-GlyR_reverse (NotI):
CTAGAGTCGCGGCCGCTTTAAACAGACAACACATAACC. The amplified fragments were subcloned into
XhoI-NotI site of pSD64-TF (kindly provided by Dr. T.
Snutch, Univ. of British Columbia). After confirmation
of the sequence and linearization with XbaI, cRNA was
synthesized using the procedures provided by a commercially manufactured kit (mMessage mMachine SP6,
Ambion). Xenopus laevis oocytes were prepared as
described [15], and experiments were performed according to the guidelines of the Animal Care Committee of
the National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan. Frogs were anaesthetized by immersion in
water containing 0.15% tricaine. Isolated oocytes were
defolliculated with collagenase (1 mg/ml, S-1, Nitta
Gelatin), and 50 nl of 0.02-0.05 μg/ml cRNA solution
was injected. After incubation at 18°C for 2-5 days in
ND96++ solution (96 NaCl, 2 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1.8 MgCl2,
5 Hepes (pH 7.5), 550 μg/ml sodium pyruvate, 100 μg/
ml gentamicin; unit = mM if abbreviated), oocytes were
placed in a chamber of approximately 150 μl volume.
Macroscopic glycine-induced currents were recorded
under two-electrode voltage clamp using a ‘bath-clamp’
amplifier (OC-725C-HV, Warner Instruments). Data
acquisition and analysis were done on a Macintosh computer using an ITC-16 AD/DA converter and Pulse software (HEKA Electronik). Intracellular microelectrodes
were filled with 3 M KCl with resistances between 0.20.7 MΩ in the standard bath solution, ND96 (96 NaCl,
2 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1.8 MgCl2, 5 Hepes [pH 7.5]). Oocytes
were clamped at -50 mV, and ~2.5 μl of agonist solution

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

was added directly to the bath. The agonists were sometimes removed by perfusion of the external solutions.
To determine the ion selectivity from the shift of reversal potential, different bath solutions and a ramp pulse
protocol were used. The digitized traces were analyzed
offline using Pulse/Pulsefit (HEKA), Igor Pro (Wavematrix), and Excel (Microsoft).
Morpholino injection

To suppress the expression of Ci-GlyR, we utilized a
morpholino-oligo (MO) designed against the Ci-GlyR
(GeneTools). The sequence of antisense(+) MO was
GCAGACATTATACTGCGACTGCATC, while that of
the control MO with 5 nucleotide-mismatches(-) was
GCAcACATTATAgTcCGAgTGgATC. The MO was
injected manually into intact fertilized eggs without
dechorionation as above in the section Molecular Biology (ref. [13]), at concentrations of 0.5-0.6 mM in 200
mM KCl.
Molecular phylogeny

To determine the phylogenetic position of Ci-GlyR, the
predicted polypeptide sequence was aligned to the
known GlyR subunits from other organisms by ClustalW. After excluding gaps from the alignment, phylogenetic relationships were examined by neighbor-joining
methods using MEGA4 [16].
Accession numbers

The sequence of Ci-GlyR was deposited in DDBJ/EMBL/
GenBank under accession no: AB437088.
Statistics

Statistical significance was tested where appropriate
using Student’s paired or unpaired tests.

Results
Physiology and pharmacology of swimming

Ciona larvae swim with alternating beats of the tail (Figure 2A, B, Additional file 1). To analyze this tightly
alternating activity, movements of the tail were measured photometrically and the results subjected to autoand cross-correlation analysis. Intact tethered larvae
swam with a frequency of activity on the left side of
12.24 ± 1.0 Hz (n = 5) and with a left-right phase of
0.54 ± 0.01. To determine the role of the MG in pattern
generation, we microdissected away the ‘head’ region of
living larvae containing otolith and ocellus, leaving only
the MG and tail intact. Such ‘headless’ larvae were
immobile (Additional File 1). Addition of L-glutamate
(100 μM) induced ‘swimming’ that consisted of highly
precise alternating tail movements with an identical leftright phase to that seen in intact larvae (0.54 ± 0.02
[mean ± SEM], n = 5; Additional File 1) though at a significantly higher frequency 24.4 ± 1.0 Hz (P < .001 Student’s paired t- test). When 10 μM L-glutamate
was used the frequency of tail activity on one side was
11.68 ± 1.3 Hz with a left-right phase of 0.54 ± 0.006

Page 6 of 12

(n = 5), not significantly different from the swimming
rate of intact larvae.
To establish if inhibitory synaptic transmission is
involved in the production of appropriate swimming
patterns, we examined the effects of blocking glycinergic
or GABAergic transmission by adding strychnine or
picrotoxin to skinned or microdissected larvae (where
swimming had previously been activated with 10 μM Lglutamate). There was a loss of strict alternation of L/R
swimming in the presence of strychnine (Figure 2B, C,
D, E; 24/30 larvae). As can be seen in the figures, a regular pattern of activity is generated on each side that
may switch occasionally from one side to the other, but
the strict sequence of alternation (L/R/L/R/L/R) seen in
control larvae breaks down (e.g. L/L/L/R/R/R) (Figure 2
compare 2B and 2C). A more detailed analysis was carried out with the photomultipler system on six larvae
and the results subjected to cross-correlation analysis
(examples are shown in Figure 2C, D). The frequency of
activity on the left side was 12.5 ± 1.2 Hz (not significantly different from the control), and a reliable measure
of the left-right phase was not possible, as there was no
cross-correlated right phase peak (n = 6). As previously
reported [17], picrotoxin (Additional File 2B; 20/25 larvae) extended the swimming period and increased the
frequency of activity on one side. We subjected five larvae to photometric analysis and the results (Additional
File 2C, D) show an increase in frequency to 14 ± 1.5
Hz, and no disruption of the left-right phase (0.53 ±
0.005, n = 5).
Location of putative glycinergic interneurons

To locate possible glycinergic interneurons, we carried
out immunocytochemistry using an anti-glycine antibody. A strong positive signal was found in two to four
paired cells located in the nerve cord in a region posterior to the MG (Figure 3, and Additional File 3, representative of 20 larvae). Axons and apparent nerve terminals
from these cells ran in a posterior direction for around
200 μm. Double staining with the nuclear dye CY-green,
revealed denser parts of these positively staining elements to be ‘cell bodies’ and thus indicated that the
more distal parts may be synapse-like terminals on or
near the motoneuron axons and the upper two of the
three rows of muscle cells on each side. The dimensions
of the somata of these cells were around 4-5 μm fitting
well in the lower range given for the dimensions of
Ciona neurones of 5-10 μm [18], and unlike the motoneurones (to be described later), processes were not
seen to leave the nerve cord.
Glycine receptor

The post-synaptic targets of the putative glycinergic neurons were located by cloning the single copy glycine receptor predicted from the genome sequence (termed Ci-GlyR
Additional File 4, and reference [12]). Probes designed for

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

Page 7 of 12

Figure 3 Glycine immunocytochemistry at the junction of the ‘tail’ and ‘head’ region of Ciona larvae. (A) Fluorescent image of the
junction of tail and ‘head’ showing the location of glycine positive elements (red). Note the two clearly discernable glycine-positive cells (small
arrows) in the nerve cord. (B) Brightfield image of the same area. (C) Fluorescent image of a similar area as in A showing dual staining of glycine
positive material (red) and nuclei (green). In this case, at least four glycine positive elements may be identified as being cellular (yellow co-label).
Large arrows indicate the junction between the ‘head’ and tail of the larva. Scale bars = 10 μm.

in situ hybridization, and antisense incubation for the glycine receptor revealed a pattern of expression in the region
of the tail and the MG (Figure 4A, B, C, D,-E, black open
and red closed arrowheads, respectively). At least 100 larvae were used for each observation, the figures are representative examples of these patterns. The signals in the tail
correspond to the anterior population of developing muscle cells. Co-incubation of the Ci-GlyR probe and a choline
acetyltransferase probe (ChAT), revealed co-labeling of
cells in the MG (Figure 4F, G), thus positively identifying
the Ci-GlyR positive cells as motoneurons with their cell
bodies located in the MG. To establish better the identity
and form of the labeled cells, we cloned a promoter element of 2.5 kb upstream of the Ci-GlyR gene that we
coupled to a GFP reporter gene. Fertilized eggs were
injected with the promoter construct and 18 hours later,
fully developed larvae revealed strong GFP labeling of
motoneurons in the MG and the muscle cells (Figure 5A,
B, C), indicating that both cell types express glycine
receptors.
The ligand specificity of Ci-GlyR, was examined by
expressing the full length sequence in Xenopus oocytes.
The receptor is selectively gated by glycine over GABA
(Additional File 5A, B). Substitution of ion species in
extracellular solutions (Additional File 5C, D) revealed
that the reversal potential is sensitive to alterations in
chloride concentration, showing that Ci-GlyR is permeant to chloride and likely to be inhibitory.

Suppression of Ci-GlyR expression

To determine the involvement of the Ci-GlyR in the
alternation of tail beats during swimming activity, antisense (+) and 5 base-mismatched (-) morpholino oligonucleotides (MO) were designed and injected into
fertilized eggs, and the resulting larvae were assessed
phenotypically. 10/10 +MO larvae were unable to swim
progressively, and produced series of unilateral tail flicks
instead of strict left right alternation (as in the case of
the strychnine treated larvae above), and had an otherwise normal phenotype (Figure 6A, Additional File 6).
11/11 -MO larvae swam normally producing alternating
tail beats (Figure 6B, Additional File 6). When compared
by video analysis there was no significant difference in
the left-side swimming frequency between +MO and
-MO larvae (13.66 ± 0.01 [n = 10], and 14.20 ± 0.02 Hz
[n = 10], respectively). However, there was no organized
‘right/left’ regular alternation.
Phylogeny of Ci-GlyR

The phylogeny of Ci-GlyR was examined by comparing
available cognate sequences. The protein alignments
(Additional File 4) and a phylogenetic tree (Figure 6C)
show that Ci-GlyR clusters with vertebrate a-glycine
receptors. Although distantly related sequences exist in
the sea urchin genome, in non-deuterostome invertebrates no evidence for glycine receptor-like genes was
found, and the nearest ‘hits’ were other ligand-gated ion
channel members of the Cys-loop protein superfamily

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

Page 8 of 12

Figure 4 Expression pattern of Ci-GlyR. (A-E) Whole-mount in situ hybridization of the Ci-GlyR antisense probe during larval development. The
signal in the nervous system is marked with red arrowheads, and that in muscle cells is with open black arrowheads. eTB, early tailbud stage;
mTB, mid-tailbud stage; lTB, late tailbud stage; hL, hatched larva stage. Scale bar on E = 100 μm for A-E. (F-G). Pseudo-color images of
fluorescently detected Ci-GlyR and Ci-ChAT expression. (F) In early tailbud (eTB), Ci-GlyR (green, yellow arrowheads) and Ci-ChAT (magenta)
expression can be detected in the cytoplasm of single neuronal cells (determined by labeling the cell nuclei (blue) with SYTOX Green), although
it should be noted that the expression patterns do not overlap until the mid-tailbud stage (though nuclear staining show that the signals are in
the same cell). Scale bar = 10 μm. Beside the scale bar, the location of the depicted region is outlined with an orange rectangle. (G) Ci-GlyR and
Ci-ChAT transcripts are co-localized at the mid tailbud stage (mTB). The dashed line indicates the midline of the nerve cord. Scale bar = 10 μm.

Figure 5 (A-C) Expression of enhanced GFP under the control of a 2.5 kb 5’-flanking sequence of the Ci-GlyR gene containing a
putative Ci-GlyR promoter. (A) A brightfield image partially merged with the GFP expression pattern (red rectangle that corresponds with the
view in C). (C, D) The two image planes on right (C) and left (D) muscle bands from a typical sample that shows GFP expression in muscle cells
and motoneurons (large yellow arrows). Some nerve terminals are branched (red asterisks), while others have long axons that enter the tail
nerve cord (small yellow arrowheads not resolvable easily in I). Ciona muscle bands are composed of three rows of cells, dorsal (D), middle (M),
and ventral (V), and are numbered from anterior to posterior. Muscle cells with the highest expression in this specimen are underlined. The
background signal in the tunic cells on the surface of the larva is due to autofluorescence that is also present in the controls. Scale
bar = 100 μm.

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

Page 9 of 12

Figure 6 Function and evolution of Ci-GlyR. (A, B) Effect of gene suppression on larval swimming by morpholino injection into developing
eggs. (A) Antisense morpholino disrupts alternating swimming in a similar manner to strychnine. (B) 5-base mismatched control morpholino is
without effect on swimming, larvae are capable of normal alternating swimming (Supp. Video 2). (C) The phylogeny of Ci-GlyR compared to
other members of the Cys-loop superfamily of ligand gated chloride channels (Ci-GlyR is indicated in the box). Hs: H. sapiens, Zf: D. rerio
(zebrafish), Ci: C intestinalis, Ce: C. elegans, Dm: D. melanogaster, Sp: S. purpuratus (sea urchin).

(inhibitory glutamate- and histamine-gated chloride
channels).

Discussion
Physiology, pharmacology and phylogeny of locomotion

One of the main roles of the nervous system in the ascidian larva is to generate swimming movements that are
manifested in alternating tail beats that occur between
10-40 Hz. The motor ganglion (MG) contains around
10 cholinergic motoneurons (4-5 on each side of the
midline; [6,18]), and is believed to represent the main
motor area controlling swimming. Our microdissection
experiments confirm the role of the MG in controlling
and generating motor patterns, as ‘headless’ larvae lacking both otolith and ocellus, but with tail and MG
intact, are capable of coordinated swimming movements
when L-glutamate is added to the bath. This is reminiscent of the situation in vertebrates where excitatory
amino acids are known to induce fictive swimming in
isolated vertebrate spinal cords [19]. Thus, a minimal
CPG exists in the MG/NC complex.
Our investigations suggest that inhibitory glycinergic
transmission is involved in the production of appropriate swimming patterns by providing inhibition of the
excitatory activity across the midline, but this function
is not necessary for the generation of regular activity on
each side. This is based on the findings that strychnine
and MO suppression of the glycine receptor do not

block pattern generation on either side but disrupted
alternation between sides. This is similar to the situation in vertebrates where the effects of block by strychnine could be best explained by a model consisting of
elements that are able to convert tonic drive into regular activity with negative coupling across the midline
and an additional weak excitatory coupling between
both sides [20]. Our results show that rhythmic activity
is maintained in the presence of strychnine suggesting
that as in vertebrates the tonic drive to the network
(glutamate) creates rhythms in the network and that
this rhythmic activity is not generated per se by coupling between the two sides. It is more difficult to
determine if also excitatory cross coupling is present
but this seems unlikely as un-coordinated ‘writhing’
movements were not seen. Finally, we confirm that
GABAergic transmission has a modulatory role in controlling swimming rate and duration but has no role in
coupling the activity of muscle on either side of the
nerve cord [17].
Here we have compared the nature of the ascidian
network with the lamprey system because of this animals phylogenetic proximity to lower chordates. It is
worth underlining however that some major similarities extend to other simple vertebrate systems such as
the frog tadpole. In hatchling frog tadpoles, single
motoneurons on either side of the nerve cord produce
single spikes (a single action potential per cycle) to

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

drive swimming. At this stage, the cells are not inherently rhythmic though a strictly alternating pattern
may be produced by the network. Later in development, the systems matures, neurons develop rhythmicity, and the pattern becomes more complex and
flexible [21]. As it is shown here that despite block by
strychnine or knockdown by morpholino, activity continues rhythmically on each side, it would seem that
the Ciona tadpole resembles most closely the mature
frog tadpole, which is surprising considering the simplicity of the larval system.
Despite the above similarities, there are also significant
(perhaps unique) differences in the ascidian system that
are worth pointing out. The finding that the proximal
larval muscle cells express glycine receptors was unexpected and indicates that muscle fibers are a more closely integrated part of the network than in vertebrate
systems. Indeed, the precise role that these muscle cells
play in swimming coordination has yet to be established.
It is known that are differences during development in
the biophysical properties of muscle cells in pre-hatching and swimming larvae suggesting a period where
movements may be driven by myogenic activity [22]. In
other invertebrate models such as Drosophila, the neural
control of larval crawling has been shown to occur in
development after a period of purely myogenic movement [23]. The exact contribution and timing of myogenic vs. neutrally driven patterns and their integration
has yet to be established in the hatching larva of Ciona
and could be a promising avenue for future study.
Location of putative glycinergic interneurons

Our results suggest that at least a population of 2-4 cells
recently-identified as ‘caudal neurons’ or caudal motoneurons’ [18,24] that are present in the nerve cord and
that lie within the Hox5 positive ‘spinal’ zone [8] may be
glycinergic interneurons. This observation has been
recently reinforced by the finding that these same caudal
neurons express GABA/glycine transporters (VGAT)
[24]. It remains to be seen if these cells are a single
class of GABA/glycine interneuron or if indeed two
separate classes of neurons (GABA and glycine) exist.
We would tend to favor the latter hypothesis as the
actions of the two neurotransmitters are so different
(this paper and [17]. Interestingly, previous studies
[24,25] also reported a variation in the number of
labeled cells and we also noted a variation in cell numbers between animals. As our experiments were carried
out on 3-4 hour hatched larvae, this is unlikely to represent different developmental stages and is likely to be a
real (though surprising), animal to animal variation.
Future studies should resolve this issue and appropriate
molecular markers need to be developed to identify
these cells. It is noteworthy that the cell bodies and
their processes appear to be confined entirely to the

Page 10 of 12

nerve cord, unlike the motoneurons which extend processes along the cord, but also form terminals outside
the nerve cord on the muscle cells.
Glycine receptor function

Molecular markers for the Ciona single copy glycine
receptor (Ci-GlyR) allowed the potential targets of glycinergic inhibition to be identified. In situ hybridization
revealed a pattern of expression in the anterior tail muscle and MG neurons. The neural elements were identified as cholinergic motoneurones by double in situ
hybridization with a choline acetyltransferase probe
(ChAT). In addition, the 2.5 kb sequence upstream of
the Ci-GlyR gene, presumably containing the promoter
for Ci-GlyR, revealed strong GFP labeling of motoneurons in the MG and muscle cells confirming that both
cell types express glycine receptors. We interpret these
data as indicating that glycine may have a dual role in
inhibiting both motoneurons and muscle cells. Further
investigation (for example direct electrophysiological
recording from the anterior rows of muscle), should
help to resolve the issue.
Not surprisingly our results from the expression of the
full length sequence in Xenopus oocytes showed a very
high selectivity for glycine over GABA with a reversal
potential sensitive to alterations in chloride concentration. The results indicate that Ci-GlyR is permeant to
chloride in a similar way as vertebrate glycine receptors
are [26]. The selectivity for glycine over GABA could
lead one to speculate that this could be necessary
because GABA is active in the system and the short
cross-cord distances and the lack of glial sheathing in
this system would result in synaptic ‘spill over’.
Phylogeny of Ci-GlyR

The above results also point to the particular features of
the phylogeny of Ci-GlyR that we examined by comparing available cognate sequences. The protein alignments
and phylogenetic tree show that Ci-GlyR clusters with
vertebrate a-glycine receptors. No closely related
sequences were found in sea urchin and there were only
distant ‘hits’ with other ligand-gated ion channel members of the Cys-loop protein superfamily (inhibitory glutamate- and histamine-gated chloride channels) in other
invertebrates. Until full-sequencing and heterologous
expression analysis of sea urchin sequences are carried
out, one may conclude tentatively that glycine receptors
are likely to be a chordate innovation from an ancestral
bilaterian Cys-loop protein, and that they are specifically
associated with chordate locomotory networks.

Conclusions
While the details of the connectivity of motoneurons,
muscle and caudal neurons remain to be worked out,
these results provide additional evidence to support
basal similarities of function between the ascidian

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

MG/NC complex and the vertebrate spinal cord. Thus,
it is likely that the role of glycine inhibitory synaptic
transmission in controlling coupling of left-right alternation in vertebrate spinal CPGs and ascidians may be
traced back to their last common ancestor. The elaborate and cellularly numerous vertebrate network is minimally represented in this ascidian larva by a dramatically
reduced number of cells, and not more than 10 motoand 2-4 inhibitory interneurons that are located in the
MC and NC, respectively. These results, along with
other homologies between vertebrate and invertebrate
chordates, indicate that these animals represent highly
relevant models, not only to determine developmental
mechanisms, but also to understand the evolution and
physiology of the chordate nervous system.
Additional file 1: High speed video clip showing free-swimming,
and tethered larval swimming. Tethered larvae are immobile after
microdissection of the foremost part of the ‘head’, the area containing
the motor ganglion remains. Addition of 100 μM glutamate induces
regular alternating swimming.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2202-11-6S1.WMV ]
Additional file 2: Effect of picrotoxin on swimming in tethered
larvae. (A) Control showing strict left/right (L/R) alternation of tail
movements during swimming strokes. (B) Phase relation of the
autocorrelation on the left side (blue) with the cross correlation (red)
between left and right sides. (C) The same larvae as C after the addition
of picrotoxin. (D) Phase relation of the autocorrelation on the left side
(blue) with the cross correlation (red) between left and right sides in the
presence of picrotoxin. Note that swimming rate and duration increased
in picrotoxin
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2202-11-6S2.PDF ]
Additional file 3: Glycine immunocytochemistry at the junction of
the ‘tail’ and ‘head’ region of the ascidian larva. (A) test example with
primary antibody, (B) control (primary antibody omitted). Note the
glycine positive zone in the nerve cord (arrows).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2202-11-6S3.PDF ]
Additional file 4: Alignment of Ci-GlyR primary sequence with
mammalian glycine receptors. The well-conserved Cys-loop structures
are indicated with lines. Predicted signal peptides and trans-membrane
domains are labeled by dotted underlining and shaded rectangles
respectively.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2202-11-6S4.PDF ]
Additional file 5: Biophysical properties of Ci-GlyR heterologously
expressed in Xenopus oocytes at a holding potential of -50 mV. (A)
Inward currents generated by application of glycine (30 μM - 3 mM,
upper panel) or GABA (10 mM, lower panel). (B) Normalized doseresponse curve of Ci-GlyR in Xenopus oocytes. The EC50 of glycine gating
of the receptor is estimated to be about 7.5×10-4 M, a similar value to
that seen in vertebrate glycine receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes
[27]. (C, D) Ci-GlyR is selectively permeant to Cl-. (C) The normalized I-V
relationships of Ci-GlyR in the indicated extracellular solutions. Low Cl(thick curve), but not low Na+ and K+ (gray curve), causes a significant
shift in reversal potential. (D) Effects of ion substitution on the reversal
potential of glycine evoked currents. Small circles show the reversal
potential values in replicated experiments (n > 6) and bars at right

Page 11 of 12

indicate the mean and SD. NMDG, N-methyl-d-glucamine; MetS,
methanesulphonate.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2202-11-6S5.PDF ]
Additional file 6: High speed video clips showing the result of CiGlyR morpholino on larval swimming. After (+) Ci-GlyR morpholino
treatment, larvae are unable to swim in a coordinated way (clip shows
two larvae). The third clip shows that after treatment with (-) 5-base
mismatched Ci-GlyR morpholino, larvae swim normally.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2202-11-6S6.WMV ]

Acknowledgements
ERB was supported by NIPS as an invited scientist. AN was supported by a
JSPS grant-in-aid postdoctoral fellowship (2004-2006; No. 2291). SP was
supported by a Marine Genomics Europe grant to ERB (GOCE-CT-2004505403) and a 1 month Gender Action Plan fellowship from Marine
Genomics Europe. This work was also supported by Grants-in-aid from the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (to
Y.O.). The authors thank Drs Rosaria De Santis, and Paolo Sordino for critical
reading of the manuscript, Mr Gabriele Ferrandino for technical assistance in
the preparation of the figures and videos, Drs Hiroki Takahashi and Shigehiro
Yamada for support for the animal supply, Drs Shin-ichi Higashijima and
Hiroki Nishida for the encouragement.
Author details
1
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, Machikaneyama 1-1, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan. 2Okazaki
Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institutes of Natural Sciences,
Higashiyama 5-1, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan. 3Department of
Integrative Physiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Yamada-Oka 2-2, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. 4Laboratorio di Fisiologia
Animale ed Evoluzione, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Villa Comunale,
80121 Napoli, Italia.
Authors’ contributions
AN, YO and ERB designed the initial experiments, AN, ERB and SP carried
out the experiments, and analyzed the data. ERB wrote the paper. AN, YO
and SP edited and approved the paper.
Received: 19 June 2009
Accepted: 19 January 2010 Published: 19 January 2010
References
1. Benton MJ, Ayala FJ: Dating the tree of life. Science 2003, 300:1698-1700.
2. Kowalevsky A: Entwicklungsgeschichte der einfachen Ascidien. Mémoires
de l’Académie Impériale des Sciences de St.-Pétersbourg VIIe Série 1866,
10:1-19.
3. Dehal P, Satou Y, Campbell RK, Chapman J, Degnan B, De Tomaso A,
Davidson B, Di Gregorio A, Gelpke M, Goodstein DM, Harafuji N,
Hastings KE, Ho I, Hotta K, Huang W, Kawashima T, Lemaire P, Martinez D,
Meinertzhagen IA, Necula S, Nonaka M, Putnam N, Rash S, Saiga H,
Satake M, Terry A, Yamada L, Wang HG, Awazu S, Azumi K: The Draft
Genome of Ciona intestinalis: Insights into Chordate and Vertebrate
Origins. Science 2002, 298:2157-67.
4. Ikuta T, Yoshida N, Satoh N, Saiga H: Ciona intestinalis Hox gene cluster:
Its dispersed structure and residual colinear expression in development.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:15118-23.
5. Dufour HD, Chettouh Z, Deyts C, de Rosa R, Goridis C, Joly JS, Brunet JF:
Precraniate origin of cranial motoneurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:8727-32.
6. Nicol D, Meinertzhagen IA: Cell counts and maps in the larval central
nervous system of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis (L.). J Comp Neurol 1991,
309:415-29.

Nishino et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/6

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.
25.

26.
27.

Lacalli TC: Head organization and the head/trunk relationship in
protochordates:problems and prospects. Integrative and Comparative
Biology 2008, 48:620-629.
Gionti M, Ristoratore F, Di Gregorio A, Aniello F, Branno M, Di Lauro R:
Cihox5, a new Ciona intestinalis Hox-related gene is involved in
regionalization of the spinal cord. Dev Genes Evol 1998, 207:515-23.
Bone Q: On the locomotion of ascidian tadpole larvae. J Mar Biol Assoc
UK 1992, 72:161-186.
Grillner S, Ekeberg El, Manira A, Lansner A, Parker D, Tegnér J, Wallén P:
Intrinsic function of a neuronal network - a vertebrate central pattern
generator. Brain Res Rev 1998, 26:184-97.
Kalloniatis M, Fletcher EL: Immunocytochemical localization of the amino
acid neurotransmitters in the chicken retina. J Comp Neurol 1993,
336:174-93.
Okamura Y, Nishino A, Murata Y, Nakajo K, Iwasaki H, Ohtsuka Y, TanakaKunishima M, Takahashi N, Hara Y, Yoshida T, Nishida M, Okado H, Watari H,
Meinertzhagen IA, Satoh N, Takahashi K, Satou Y, Okada Y, Mori Y:
Comprehensive analysis of the ascidian genome reveals novel insights
into the molecular evolution of ion channel genes. Physiol Genomics
2005, 22:269-282.
Hikosaka A, Kusakabe T, Satoh N, Makabe KW: Introduction and Expression
of Recombinant Genes in Ascidian Embryos. Dev Growth Differ 1992,
34:627-634.
Satou Y: Posterior end mark 3 (pem-3), an ascidian maternally expressed
gene with localized mRNA encodes a protein with Caenorhabditis
elegans MEX-3-like KH domains. Dev Biol 1999, 212:337-50.
Goldin AL: Maintenance of Xenopus laevis and oocyte injection. Methods
Enzymol 1992, 207:266-279.
Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
Brown E R, Nishino A, Bone Q, Meinertzhagen IA, Okamura Y: GABAergic
synaptic transmission modulates swimming in the ascidian larva. Eur J
Neurosci 2005, 22:2541-8.
Imai JH, Meinertzhagen IA: Neurons of the ascidian larval nervous system
in Ciona intestinalis: I. Central nervous system. J Comp Neurol 2007,
501:316-34.
Brodin L, Grillner S, Rovainen CM: N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), kainate
and quisqualate receptors and the generation of fictive locomotion in
the lamprey spinal cord. Brain Res 1985, 325:302-6.
Cohen AH, Harris-Warrick RM: Strychnine eliminates alternating motor
output during fictive locomotion in the lamprey. Brain Res 1984,
293(1):164-7.
Roberts A, Soffe SR, Wolf ES, Yoshida M, Zhao FY: Central Circuits
Controlling Locomotion in Young Frog Tadpoles. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1998, 860:19-34.
Nakajo K, Okamura Y: Development of transient outward currents
coupled with Ca2+-inducedCa2+ release mediates oscillatory membrane
potential in Ascidian muscle cells. J Neurophysiol 2004, 92:1056-1066.
Crisp S, Evers JF, Fiala A, Bate M: The development of motor coordination
in Drosophila embryos. Development 2008, 135:3707-3717.
Takamura K: Nervous network in larvae of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis.
Dev Genes Evol 1998, 208(1):1-8.
Horie T, Nakagawa M, Sasakura Y, Kusakabe TG: Cell type and function of
neurons in the ascidian nervous system. Development Growth &
Differentiation 2009, 51(3):207-220.
Lynch JW: Molecular structure and function of the glycine receptor
chloride channel. Physiol Rev 2004, 84:1051-10.
David-Watine B, Goblet C, de Saint Jan D, Fucile S, Devignot V,
Bregestovski P, Korn H: Cloning, expression and electrophysiological
characterization of glycine receptor alphasubunit from zebrafish.
Neuroscience 1999, 90:303-17.

doi:10.1186/1471-2202-11-6
Cite this article as: Nishino et al.: A glycine receptor is involved in the
organization of swimming movements in an invertebrate chordate. BMC
Neuroscience 2010 11:6.

Page 12 of 12

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

BioMedcentral

</pre>
</body>
</html>
