<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A review of Brucella infection in marine mammals, with special emphasis on Brucella pinnipedialis in the hooded seal (Cystophora cristata)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93. doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-93"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ingebjørg H Nymo"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
VETERINARY RESEARCH

A review of Brucella infection in marine mammals,
with special emphasis on Brucella pinnipedialis in
the hooded seal (Cystophora cristata)
Nymo et al.
Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93 (5 August 2011)

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

VETERINARY RESEARCH

REVIEW

Open Access

A review of Brucella infection in marine
mammals, with special emphasis on Brucella
pinnipedialis in the hooded seal (Cystophora
cristata)
Ingebjørg H Nymo1,2*, Morten Tryland1,2 and Jacques Godfroid1,2

Abstract
Brucella spp. were isolated from marine mammals for the first time in 1994. Two novel species were later included
in the genus; Brucella ceti and Brucella pinnipedialis, with cetaceans and seals as their preferred hosts, respectively.
Brucella spp. have since been isolated from a variety of marine mammals. Pathological changes, including lesions
of the reproductive organs and associated abortions, have only been registered in cetaceans. The zoonotic
potential differs among the marine mammal Brucella strains. Many techniques, both classical typing and molecular
microbiology, have been utilised for characterisation of the marine mammal Brucella spp. and the change from the
band-based approaches to the sequence-based approaches has greatly increased our knowledge about these
strains. Several clusters have been identified within the B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis species, and multiple studies have
shown that the hooded seal isolates differ from other pinniped isolates. We describe how different molecular
methods have contributed to species identification and differentiation of B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis, with special
emphasis on the hooded seal isolates. We further discuss the potential role of B. pinnipedialis for the declining
Northwest Atlantic hooded seal population.
Table of contents
1. Genus Brucella - hosts and reservoirs 4
2. Infection with B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis 6
2.1. Pathology in association with B. ceti infection in
cetaceans 7
2.1.1. Gross pathology 7
2.1.2. Pathology in reproductive organs 8
2.2. Experimental infections in livestock and laboratory animals with marine mammal strains of
Brucella 8
2.3. The zoonotic potential of marine mammal
strains of Brucella 9

3. Characterization of B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis 10
3.1. Classical typing approaches 11
3.2. Identification of B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis as
part of the Brucella genus 11
3.3. Molecular characterisation: band-based approaches 12
3.3.1. Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE)
and early Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR) based approaches 12
3.3.2. Studies of the outer membrane protein
genes (omp-genes) 13
3.3.3. Studies of insertion sequence 711 (IS711) 14
3.4. Molecular characterisation: sequence-based
approaches 15

* Correspondence: ingebjorg.nymo@nvh.no
1
Department of Food Safety and Infection Biology, Section of Arctic
Veterinary Medicine, the Norwegian School of Veterinary Science,
Stakkevollveien 23, N-9010 Tromsø, Norway
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

3.4.1. Analysis based on tandem repeats 16
3.4.2. Multi locus sequence analysis (MLSA) 17
3.4.3. Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)
typing 18
3.4.4. Whole genome comparison 18

© 2011 Nymo et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

4. B. pinnipedialis in hooded seals 20
4.1. The biology of the hooded seal 20
4.2. Infection in hooded seals with B. pinnipedialis 21
4.3. Characterisation of the hooded seal strains of
B. pinnipedialis 22
5. Conclusions and future perspectives 22

1. Genus Brucella - hosts and reservoirs
The Genus Brucella, belonging to the class a-proteobacteria and order Rhizobiales [1,2], contains gram-negative,
non-motile, facultative intracellular, small coccobacilliary
bacteria. Classically there were six species; Brucella
melitensis, B. abortus, B. suis, B. ovis, B. neotomae and
B. canis [3]. Due to the high homogeneity demonstrated
by DNA-DNA hybridisation studies, it was suggested
that the entire genus should be one species [4]. This
was accepted by the Subcommittee on the Taxonomy of
Brucella in 1986 [5], but not by the Brucella research
community. In 2003, the Subcommittee on the Taxonomy of Brucella again accepted the six classical species
[6]. Recently, four additional species were added to the
genus, Brucella ceti and Brucella pinnipedialis, with
cetaceans and seals as their preferred hosts, respectively
[7], Brucella microti, isolated from the common vole
(Microtus arvalis) in the Czech Republic [8], from soil
in the same area years later [9], and from mandibular
lymph nodes of wild red foxes (Vulpes vulpes) in Austria
[10] and Brucella inopinata, isolated from a breast
implant wound of a woman with clinical signs of brucellosis [11]. A prospective Brucella species has been isolated from native rat species in Australia, but has not
yet been included in the genus [12].
Transmission of Brucella spp. between animals usually
takes place through contact with aborted, infected material, most often through ingestion, but also through
respiratory exposure, conjunctival inoculation and infection through damaged skin or mucosal membranes. Brucella spp. can also be transmitted during breeding and
lactation [13,14]. Brucella spp. do not multiply outside
the host, but persist for years in frozen aborted foetuses
or placentas, for months in moist conditions at 10-15°C,
and for hours at 45-50°C [15]. An exception is B.
microti, which have a long-term reservoir in soil [9].
Acute infection with Brucella spp. is initiated by the
entrance of the bacteria into the bloodstream after
which they are engulfed by circulating polymorphonuclear cells and macrophages, evading the bactericidal systems of the cells. Due to the bacterium’s predilection for
cells producing erythritol, Brucella spp. localise in the
pregnant uterus of ruminants, inducing abortions in late
pregnancy and premature births [3,13,14]. After the

Page 2 of 13

initial acute phase, brucellosis in the primary host
usually becomes latent, although abortions in the subsequent gestation may happen. Females may shed the bacterium periodically through milk and uterine and
vaginal discharges in subsequent parturitions, as
described in ewes [16]. In males, epididymitis and orchitis are typical clinical signs [3,13,14].
Brucella spp. belonging to the six classical species
have been isolated from a variety of terrestrial wildlife
species, including bison (Bison bison), muskoxen (Ovibos
moschatus), elk/wapiti (Cervus elaphus canadensis),
moose (Alces alces), reindeer (Rangifer tarandus tarandus), barren ground caribou (Rangifer tarandus groenlandicus), white tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), roe
deer (Capreolus capreolus), chamois (Rupicapra rupicapra), African buffalo (Syncerus caffer), impala (Aepyceros
melampus), waterbuck (Kobus elipsiprymnus), red fox,
Pampas fox (Dusicyon gymnocercus), Patagonian Gray
Fox (Dusicyon griseus), racoon (Procyon lotor), opossum
(Didelphis virginiana), European hare (Lepus europaeus),
feral pig (Sus scrofa), wild boar (Sus scrofa) and capybara (Hydrochaeris hydrochaeris) [17,18]. Nile catfish
(Clarias gariepinus) have been experimentally infected
with B. melitensis biovar 3. The fish seroconverted and
Brucella spp. were isolated from internal organs, but
transmission to non-infected sentinel fish did not occur
[19]. Recently, the first detection of naturally occurring
Brucella spp. in fish was reported when B. melitensis
biovar 3 was cultured from skin swabs from Nile catfish, and PCR confirmed the identity of the bacterium.
Antibodies against Brucella spp. were also detected in
the fish [20].
Brucella spp. have zoonotic potential. The main
source of human infection is production animals. The
most frequently reported cause of zoonotic Brucella
infection and the most clinically important is B. melitensis. B. suis (biovar 1, 3 and 4) and B. abortus are also
zoonotic. In humans, Brucella spp. produce varied and
nonspecific symptoms, most commonly undulant fever
[3,14,21]. Transmission of Brucella spp. from wildlife to
humans has been reported [17,22]. B. suis biovar 4, the
agent for brucellosis in reindeer and caribou, has been
isolated from clinically ill humans in northern Canada
and Alaska, having caribou as part of their diet, and
from caribou, reindeer and muskoxen in the same area
[23,24]. Characterisation of Brucella spp. isolated from
Alaskan Eskimos who consumed reindeer meat, showed
that this was B. suis biovar 4, indicating zoonotic transmission [25]. Zoonotic transmission of B. canis is rare
and zoonotic transmission of B. ovis has not been
reported [3]. Both B. canis and B. ovis have a rough
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) phenotype which is associated
with reduced pathogenicity compared to bacterial species with the smooth LPS [26,27].

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

2. Infection with B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis
Brucella spp. were initially isolated from marine mammals in 1994, from a harbour seal (Phoca vitulina), a
harbour porpoise (Phocoena phocoena) and a common
dolphin (Delphinus delphis) in Scotland [28], and an
aborted foetus from a captive bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus) in California, USA [29]. Since then,
Brucella spp. have been isolated from (Additional file 1.
Isolation of Brucella spp. from marine mammals) and
serologically indicated in (Additional file 2. Serological
evidence of Brucella spp. in marine mammals) a wide
range of marine mammal species from most parts of the
world. In this review, we summarise and discuss the
occurrence of B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis in marine
mammals, the pathology reported in marine mammals
and the possible implications of a B. pinnipedialis infection for the hooded seal, especially the Northeast Atlantic population. We also discuss the zoonotic potential of
B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis. Further, we describe how
different molecular methods have contributed to species
identification and differentiation of B. ceti and B.pinnipedialis, with emphasis on hooded seal isolates, and
how these methods can be used to increase our understanding of the marine mammal brucellae.
2.1. Pathology in association with B. ceti infection in
cetaceans

Gross pathology in association with Brucella infection in
marine mammals is seen exclusively in cetaceans. The
infection may have several outcomes and a wide range
of pathological changes have been reported (Additional
file 1. Isolation of Brucella spp. from marine mammals).
2.1.1. Gross pathology

B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis have been isolated from a
variety of organs in apparently healthy marine mammals
[30-34]. B. ceti has been associated with a range of pathological changes in cetaceans, including blubber abscesses,
subcutaneous lesions, skin lesions, hepatic and splenic
necrosis and inflammation, macrophage infiltration in
the liver and spleen, pneumonia, peritonitis and lymph
node inflammation and necrosis. Pathologic changes,
including spinal discospondylitis, meningoencephalitis,
meningitis, choroiditis, altered cerebrospinal fluid and
remodeling of the occipital condyles, often associated
with neurologic symptoms, have been reported several
times in cetaceans [35-44]. B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis
have been isolated from lungworms found in cetacean
and pinniped lungs, respectively [44-48].
2.1.2. Pathology in reproductive organs

B. ceti has been isolated from aborted foetuses and reproductive organs in captive bottlenose dolphins [29] with
placentitis [49], and from the reproductive organs, milk
and foetus of stranded striped dolphins [37]. Bacteria

Page 3 of 13

have also been isolated from the uterus and a dead foetus
of a stranded striped dolphin with placentitis [50]. Immunohistochemical investigations with polyclonal antiserum
and electron microscopy revealed B. ceti in a genital
ulcer, uterus, mammary gland and milk from a stranded
harbour porpoise with endometritis and signs of a recent
pregnancy [44]. B. ceti has also been isolated in association with mastitis and endometritis in cetaceans [35].
Suppurative granulomatous lesions have been found in
both female and male reproductive organs in seropositive
baleen whales [51]. B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis have also
been isolated from the testes [41], the uterus [40] and the
mammary gland [42] of cetaceans and pinnipeds without
any apparent pathology.
2.2. Experimental infections in livestock and laboratory
animals with marine mammal strains of Brucella

Abortion has been experimentally induced in cattle after
intravenous injection of B. pinnipedialis isolated from a
Pacific harbour seal [52]. Ten piglets were challenged
with marine mammal Brucella spp. [53], originally isolated from a human [54]. No pathological changes were
detected, transient and low antibody titres were
recorded from three of the piglets, and bacteria were
isolated from one lymph node of three other piglets.
The marine mammal isolate was unable to establish a
sustained infection in the piglets [53]. Experimental
infection in pregnant sheep with marine mammal Brucella isolates from seal, porpoise and dolphin resulted in
limited seroconversion in the sheep. The bacteria were
not able to fully establish an infection in the sheep and
showed limited pathogenicity [55]. Infection of guinea
pigs with the same three isolates resulted in splenomegaly and antibody titres comparable to the B. abortus
reference strains [55]. Another guinea pig study indicated that B. ceti isolated from the aborted foetus of a
bottlenose dolphin was less virulent than the reference
strains B. abortus and B. melitensis [29]. No studies
have till now been reported in the experimental mouse
model of infection.
2.3. The zoonotic potential of marine mammal strains of
Brucella

There are indications that certain of the marine mammal Brucella spp. have zoonotic potential. A laboratory
worker cultivating marine mammal Brucella strains
developed bacteraemia, and the bacteria isolated from
the blood matched one of the isolates she was working
with, indicating a laboratory infection [56]. Two patients
from Peru were presented with intracerebral granulomas
and marine mammal brucellae were isolated from the
lesions. Both had been at the coast and had eaten raw
shellfish [57]. Marine mammal brucellae have also been

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

isolated from a human case of spinal osteomyelitis in
New Zealand. The patient had eaten fish and been in
contact with raw fish bait [54]. There was no known
contact with marine mammals for any of these three
naturally acquired human cases. Characterisation [58] of
the four marine mammal Brucella spp. isolated from
humans [54,56,57] showed that the three strains from
the naturally acquired infections differed from the
strains isolated from marine mammals, and also from
the strain isolated in the case of the laboratory acquired
zoonotic marine mammal Brucella infection [58].
Experimental infection of human macrophage-like
cells in culture has shown that B. pinnipedialis from
harbour seal and B. ceti from striped dolphin showed
the classical pattern of infection. However, another
strain of B. pinnipedialis from harbour seal, and B. ceti
from porpoise and common dolphin were eliminated
from the infected cells after 48 h. Further, six strains of
B. pinnipedialis from hooded seal were unable to enter
the human macrophage-like cells [59].
The Brucella status of a country is based on the epidemiological situation in domestic animals and B. ceti
and B. pinnipedialis are not considered. Thus, countries
considered free of the disease [60] may have Brucella
spp. present in its marine mammal populations [30,34].
Because of the varied symptoms of human brucellosis
[14], and the very recent awareness of the existence of
Brucella spp. in marine mammals [28,29], transmission
from marine mammals to humans could historically
have been reported as terrestrial brucellosis or, even
more likely, have gone undetected. People at risk of
acquiring marine mammal brucellosis include individuals in traditional communities where products from
whales and seals are still an important part of the diet.
Also people with limited consumption of marine mammal meat, people handling stranded marine mammals,
whale and seal hunters, researchers and other people
handling raw products from the ocean could be
exposed.

3. Characterisation of B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis
Minimal standards for descriptions of new species and
biotypes of genus Brucella were proposed in 1975 [61].
In 2003, the Subcommittee on the Taxonomy of Brucella
reevaluated criteria for Brucella species definition to
respond to developments within molecular techniques,
especially focusing on the marine mammal strains with
the suggested names Brucella pinnipediae and Brucella
cetaceae [6,62]. Based on previous studies and recommendations [6,61-73], two novel species were validly published in 2007, labelled with corrected etymology, for
inclusion in the genus Brucella; Brucella ceti sp. nov. and
Brucella pinnipedialis sp. nov., with cetaceans and seals
as their preferred hosts, respectively [7].

Page 4 of 13

3.1. Classical typing approaches

A large study including 102 isolates of B. ceti and B.
pinnipedialis suggested that there is substantial variation
in biotyping characteristics for these strains, with the
requirement of CO 2 being especially useful since the
seal isolates need CO2 to grow, and the cetacean isolates
do not [74]. These characteristics were in line with previous findings of one marine mammal Brucella group
consisting of isolates from pinnipeds (including an
otter), and one cetacean group, based on their CO 2 dependency [41,64] and ability to grow on Farrell medium in primary culture [41]. The oxidative metabolic
pattern on different substrates supported this subdivision, with group one consisting of isolates from seals
and otters, and group two and three consisting of cetacean isolates [71]. A commercial biotyping system (Taxa
Profile™, Merlin Diagnostika, Bornheim-Hersel, Germany) testing the metabolization of various substrates
also readily differentiated between the strains from common seal and porpoise with a specificity of 100% [75].
3.2. Identification of B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis as part of
genus Brucella

Sequencing of the 16S rRNA from a minke whale Brucella isolate showed a 99.5% homology with the 16S
rRNA of the six classical Brucella species, above the
97% homology that often is quoted as the cut-off
between species [65]. Multiple sequence alignments of
partial recA and 16S rRNA gene sequences of the six
classical Brucella species and isolates from a whale and
a common seal (erroneously reported as a sea-lion isolate in the article, changed after personal communication with the author) also showed that all strains were
identical [68]. DNA-DNA hybridization studies showed
that the marine mammal brucellae belong to the monospecific genus Brucella (more than 77% DNA relatedness) [63,76].
The 16S-23S ribosomal spacer region, the most variable region of the ribosomal genes for bacteria of the aproteobacteria, has been used to identify a number of isolates [77,78]. However, some taxa having a high 16S
rRNA similarity still show low DNA-DNA binding values
[79], indicating that these methods might not accurately
reflect the strains’ phylogenetic status. There is also concern that single-gene trees, including those based on the
16S-23S ribosomal spacer region and housekeeping gene
recA, do not adequately portray the phylogenetic relationships [80], and it has been suggested that at least five
housekeeping genes should be sequenced to achieve adequate phylogenetic information [73].
3.3. Molecular characterisation: band-based approaches

Common for the band-based techniques is that they
rely on cutting of the genome, or PCR amplicons, by

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

restriction enzymes at specific sites, and the production
of specific band patterns which can be compared to
determine relatedness between isolates.
3.3.1. Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE) and early
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) based approaches

PFGE was used in early studies [81,82], but the method
was never widely used as a routine typing tool of Brucella spp., probably because of the limited diversity identified at a sub-species level [83]. In a study of brucellae
from dolphins, porpoises and seals, PFGE indicated that
the dolphin isolates clustered together, while the isolates
from seals and porpoises clustered together in another
main branch, separating at 57% relatedness [84]. A later
PFGE study gave three similar groups; group one with
isolates from seals and an otter, group two with strains
from dolphins and group three isolates from porpoises,
a white-sided dolphin and a minke whale [85]. A dendrogram based on IRS-PCR (Infrequent Restriction Site
PCR) showed that the marine mammal isolates formed
two groups distinct from the terrestrial strains; group
one containing the pinniped isolates, and group two the
cetacean isolates. The occurrence of a genomic island in
the pinniped isolates was also documented [69]. The
same IRS-PCR method later revealed five DNA fragments specific to the marine mammal strains. Two of
the new DNA fragments were present in all seal isolates,
except for the hooded seal isolates. The presence of
genomic islands was indicated in these fragments [86].
Although AFLP (Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism PCR) profiles were highly conserved through
the genus, indicating limited intraspecies diversity, B.
ovis, B. melitensis, B. abortus, B. neotomae and the marine mammal strains still fell into five separate clusters
with linkage levels above 93%. The linkage level within
the marine mammal group was 96%. This study confirmed the homogeneity of the genus and that the marine mammal strains belong to a separate branch of the
genus [87]. RAPD-PCR (Random Amplification Polymorphic DNA PCR) was applied to a large number of
terrestrial and marine mammal Brucella spp. and successfully separated the seal and cetacean strains. A 569bp band was amplified from all seal strains and one porpoise strain. The amplification of a 217-bp band from
the cetacean isolates was not consistent within the
group, indicating two possible subdivisions [88]. The
HindIII ribotyping restriction pattern from the six Brucella spp. reference strains and Brucella spp. from a harbour seal, a porpoise and a common dolphin showed
that the marine mammal strains had the same restriction pattern, different from the pattern of the terrestrial
strains. It was concluded that the marine mammal
strains may represent a separate subgroup of the Brucella genus and that further studies were needed to
define biovars within the group [76].

Page 5 of 13

3.3.2. Studies of the outer membrane protein genes
(omp-genes)

PCR-RFLP (PCR Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism) is a common approach for typing of Brucella
spp., providing a good tool for taxonomic, epidemiological, evolutionary and diagnostic studies. The method has
especially been utilized in studies of various outer membrane protein (omp) genes [89]. The omp2a and omp2b
genes encode the 36-kDa porin OMPs and exhibit the
highest degree of polymorphism among the Brucella
species and strains [90]. PCR-RFLP of the omp2 locus
has good reproducibility and has been useful for differentiation of Brucella species, even though it is somewhat
limited by the lack of natural sequence differences at the
biovar level. The omp25 and omp31 genes have been
found useful for differentiation of species [62,91-93].
A Brucella isolate from a minke whale (B202R) was
classified as belonging to the Brucella genus by conventional bacteriological typing methods, but it did not
match any of the previously known profiles. The omp25
and omp31 genes were amplified from the isolate, indicating that it belonged to the genus [65], but none of
the species-specific markers for the classical Brucella
species [92-95] were found. PCR-RFLP and sequencing
of the omp2a and omp2b genes showed that the isolate
carried two copies of omp2b, but no copies of omp2a, a
characteristic not previously seen in any other brucellae
[65]. A later study confirmed that the marine mammal
isolates were divided into two main groups; one group
with isolates from cetaceans possessing two omp2b
copies and one group with isolates from seals and an
otter possessing one omp2a and one omp2b gene copy
[62]. A DNA inversion of 1747 basepairs including the
omp25b gene was detected in 16 of 20 cetacean isolates,
but in none of the pinniped isolates. It was speculated
that this suggests the existence of biovars within the
marine mammal brucellae, but the findings nevertheless
supported two separate marine mammal species [70].
3.3.3. Studies of insertion sequence 711 (IS711)

The identification of the number and distribution of the
mobile genetic element IS711 is an important tool for
molecular characterisation of Brucella spp. even though
some of the reference strains have identical profiles and
no thorough studies evaluating this method have been
published. The number of IS711 varies from 6-12 copies
in most Brucella spp. to about 35 copies in B. ovis
[83,96-98].
RFLP and southern blotting conducted with an IS711
specific probe on the previously mentioned B202R Brucella isolate from a minke whale, showed more than 25
copies of this sequence [65]. A later study confirmed
that in the marine mammal isolates, IS711 occurred
invariably with at least 25 copies. The ten different
fingerprints found within the marine mammal group

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

tended to cluster by host species. Using a specific marker, an IS711 locus not present in the terrestrial strains
was identified in the marine mammal strains. It produced small amounts of PCR amplification products
from B. ovis, suggesting a possible closer relationship
between the marine mammal Brucella spp. and B. ovis
[66]. An extra IS711 element downstream of the bp26/
omp28 gene has been identified in marine mammal brucellae as a specific marker for the marine mammal
strains [67], and later included in a multiplex PCR assay
("Bruceladder”) [99,100].
3.4. Molecular characterisation: sequence-based
approaches

Since the first whole genome sequence publications for
Brucella spp. [101-103], a wide range of species and
strains have been sequenced and are available online
[104]. This information has enabled the progressive shift
from band-based to sequence-based approaches. Previous studies have indicated that inactivation of genes
may result in the lack of pathogenicity of B. ovis [105],
and that several genes important for pathogenicity may
have entered the Brucella genome by lateral gene transfer, despite their intracellular niche [106]. This highlights the need for full genome analysis methods.
3.4.1. Analysis based on tandem repeats

The identification of the number of tandemly repeated
sequences is useful for discrimination between bacterial
species that show very little genomic variability like Brucella spp. Microsatellite fingerprinting exploits the
occurrence of Variable Number of Tandem Repeats
(VNTR) in the genome. When considering multiple loci
simultaneously, the method achieves high discriminatory
power. With the appropriate choice of markers the
method yields information about both the faster (epidemiological level) and the slower (phylogenetic level)
evolving genes [83,107-109], though some caution
should be made regarding the rapidly evolving VNTR
markers which may suffer from homoplasy (the same
alterations happening in several branches of a phylogenetic tree), thus preventing accurate speciation of some
isolates [110]. The results are digital, making interlaboratory cooperation easier, and an online database
with Brucella spp. fingerprints is available [111].
Maximum parsimony analysis after Multiple Loci
VNTR Analysis (MLVA) using 15 discriminatory markers showed that the marine mammal isolates of Brucella were distinct from terrestrial isolates. The three
marine mammal isolates were different from each other
with the isolates from dolphin and porpoise more closely related, and the harbour seal isolate clustering
closer to B. suis [109]. Another dendrogram produced
from MLVA indexing 21 loci showed three major
groups of marine mammal strains, distinct from the

Page 6 of 13

terrestrial strains. Cluster A consisted only of dolphin
isolates and cluster B of mainly isolates from porpoises.
Cluster C consisted mostly of seal isolates which were
further divided into three minor groups. The authors
concluded that cluster C corresponded to B. pinnipedialis, while isolates previously categorized within B. ceti
were divided into two groups with isolates from dolphins in one group and porpoises in the other. These
findings were confirmed by sequencing of eight additional housekeeping genes from all isolates [112]. An
MLVA-16 assay [8-10,108,109,113-115] also revealed a
very similar grouping with three main marine mammal
Brucella groups; the seal group (1) including an isolate
from a sea otter, the cetacean group (2) and a human
isolate (3). The seal isolates (1) were divided into three
distinct subclusters, with the hooded seal isolates
grouped together in one subcluster. The cetacean group
(2) had three major subclusters, two with mostly dolphin isolates and one with mostly porpoises [116]. The
highly discriminatory nature of the microsatellite fingerprinting suggests a subdivision between the strains from
seals, porpoises and dolphins, and indicates that the
hooded seal strains cluster separately.
3.4.2. Multi locus sequence analysis (MLSA)

In recent years, sequencing of multiple genetic loci,
often housekeeping genes with few polymorphic sites,
has gained acceptance. Combined sequencing of multiple housekeeping genes allows conclusions to be based
on multiple loci, making them more representative for
the evolutionary development of the strain. The evolutionary signatures of the genes are preserved due to the
markers used which in general have slow molecular
clocks yielding information suited to monitor the longterm evolutionary development of the strains [83,117].
Another advantage of nucleotide sequencing is that both
protocols and primers are easily acquired and the results
are easily validated, stored and shared electronically,
facilitating inter-laboratory comparison of results.
MLSA was conducted using nine discrete genomic loci
on several terrestrial and marine mammal Brucella isolates, and one marine mammal strain [117] isolated
from a human [54]. In clustering analysis, marine mammal isolates represented one cluster with five sequence
types (STs): ST24 and ST25 with mostly seal isolates
(80%), ST23 with mostly porpoises (75%), ST26 with
only dolphins and ST27 with one bottlenose dolphin
isolate and a human isolate. The authors concluded that
the marine mammal isolates were so similar that they
could be classified as a single species, but based on the
genetic separation and the apparent host specificity they
could also be three distinct species (Brucella spp. from
seals, porpoises and dolphins) [117]. A larger MLSA
study [112], utilizing the same genomic loci [117],
showed the same pattern [112]. Similar to terrestrial

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

strains [117], the MLSA method is useful for differentiation between and characterisation of marine mammal
brucellae. A high degree of similarity between the
strains was confirmed, a possible subdivision of the marine mammal brucellae was indicated (strains from seals,
porpoises and dolphins) [112,117] and the hooded seal
isolates clustered together in a separate subgroup [112].
3.4.3. Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) typing

The SNPs are discovered utilising MLSA of housekeeping genes or whole genome comparisons. The slowly
evolving SNPs are used to define the major groups, and
the more rapidly evolving VNTR markers are thereafter
used to give higher resolution, yielding genotyping that
can be used for epidemiological investigations. The
increased level of genetic diversity in VNTRs compared
to SNPs is based on differences in mutation rates but
also because of the maximum number of possible allelic
states for each type of marker [107,118]. The method is
quick, technically straightforward and applicable to
crude DNA-material. The method has shown to be able
to identify any Brucella isolate as a member of the six
classical species or the marine mammal group. However,
it has not been possible to include SNP-markers to
identify the new species B. pinnipedialis and B. ceti
[119-121].
3.4.4. Whole genome comparison

Taxonomic classification of Brucella spp. is difficult due
to the lack of, or high degree of, similarity between traditional marker genes [122,123]. The marker genes may
not directly reflect the change in gene content between
strains and biovars [123]. Base compositional (Markov
chain based genomic signatures, genomic codon and
amino acid frequencies based comparison) and proteome based (BLAST comparison and pan-genomic analysis) methods are used for phylogenetic classification,
based on whole genome comparison. By utilising whole
genome based methods, one avoids drawing conclusions
on only limited parts of the genome [124]. Base compositional and proteome based methods were used to compare 32 sequenced genomes from the Brucella genus,
representing the six classical species, B. ceti and B. pinnipedialis. The codon and amino acid frequencies based
comparison made no distinction between the terrestrial
and marine mammal strains, confirming the homogeneity of the genus. The Markov chain based models
grouped the species according to host, while signatures
from the marine mammal isolates clustered together
and could be considered as one phylogenetically coherent group. Whole genome BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool; finds regions of local similarity
between sequences) comparisons were performed pairwise all-against-all and a distance matrix was calculated.
The marine mammal strains clustered together due to
similarity [124]. The findings were consistent with

Page 7 of 13

current taxonomy, indicating that the phylogenetic classification of Brucella spp. based on MLSA and marker
genes [117] had a high similarity to the results achieved
with the methods utilizing the whole gene content of
the Brucella species. The pan-genomic shell trees,
weighting shell (conserved) and cloud (variable) genes,
both clustered the marine mammal strains together with
a branching between the pinniped and the cetacean
strains, but with low bootstrap support, indicating that
the differences were negligible. The study confirmed the
high level of homogeneity of the genus Brucella with a
possible subdivision between seals and cetaceans. The
hooded seal strain differed from the other strains when
utilizing both base compositional and proteome based
methods [124].

4. B. pinnipedialis in hooded seals
4.1. The biology of the hooded seal

Hooded seals (family Phocidae, subfamily Phocinae, the
only species in genus Cystophora) are 2.2-2.5 meters
long and weigh 200-300 kg [125,126]. Hooded seals are
specialised divers, reaching depths of about 1000 meters
and staying under water for up to one hour [127]. The
hooded seal gives birth to a single pup and the lactation
period (and the mother-pup relationship) is extremely
short, lasting for about 3-5 days [128]. Mating takes
place in the water immediately after weaning and
implantation is delayed by 3-4 months. During birth
(March) and moulting (June/July), hooded seals are
gathered on the pack ice and during the rest of the year
they are pelagic, distributed throughout the North
Atlantic Ocean [126,129]. They feed primarily on squid
(Gonatus fabricii), polar cod (Boreogadus saida), capelin
(Mallotus villosus) and sand eel (Ammodytes tobianus)
[130]. The hooded seal form two populations, the
Northeast and the Northwest Atlantic population [126].
The Northeast Atlantic population has declined but stabilised at a level only 10-15% of what it was in 1946
[131]. Estimates of pup production suggested a production of 15-16 000 pups in 2005 and 2007, giving a stipulated population of 82 400 animals [132,133]. The
Norwegian commercial hooded seal hunt on this population has been regulated by quotas during the last 25
years, and the hunting was stopped in 2007. The number of hooded seals hunted annually has declined and
has not exceeded 10 000 since 1987 [131]. The situation
for the Northwest Atlantic hooded seal population is
very different where both the population size and the
pup production have increased since the mid-1980s.
Estimated pup production in 2005 was 120 100 and the
population was stipulated to consist of 593 500 individuals [134,135]. The commercial hooded seal hunt on
the Northwest Atlantic hooded seal population (Canada)
has also been regulated for the last 25 years with

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

approximately 6 000-7 000 animals hunted annually
since 1972 [131]. The reason for the difference in population development is unknown, but the decline in the
eastern stock has been so dramatic that the hooded seal
species is classified as vulnerable in the International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of
Threatened Species [136].
4.2. Infection in hooded seals with B. pinnipedialis

Isolations of B. pinnipedialis from hooded seals have
been conducted from either stranded animals [35,41] or
from apparently healthy individuals hunted in their natural environment [30]. In the various studies on the
characterisation and species and biovar determination
referred to in this article, the hooded seal isolates are
repeatedly classified as one group, distinct from other B.
pinnipedialis isolates.
Despite the high level of seropositive (31-35%) [30,34]
and bacteriological positive (38%) [30] hooded seals in
the Northeast Atlantic population, no associated gross
pathological changes have been reported [30,34]. A large
screening for anti-Brucella antibodies in the Northwest
Atlantic hooded seal population gave a seroprevalence
of 5% (n = 10/204). These animals were not investigated
for pathological changes [137]. Based on the restrictive
quotas and the low number of hunted seals it seems
unlikely that the large difference in population development can be due to seal hunting alone. Climatic changes
and poor ice quality probably have an impact on the
quality of the breeding habitat, but it is unlikely that
only the Northeast Atlantic population is affected. Other
possible factors include persistent organic pollutants
(POP) or infectious diseases affecting reproduction, survival and general health and fitness of the seals. Based
on available information, it is not possible to determine
if the high prevalence of B. pinnipedialis in the Northeast Atlantic population of hooded seals, associated with
POP exposure, may explain the decline in pup production, an issue which warrants further investigation.
4.3. Characterisation of the hooded seal strains of B.
pinnipedialis

In a comparative study, a hooded seal isolate was the
only Brucella isolate to have metabolic activity with urocanic acid [64]. PFGE showed that the Brucella isolate
from hooded seal lacked a 182 kB fragment and had
some minor differences in a 62 kB fragment, thereby
diverging from the other seal isolates [85]. IRS-PCR
showed two specific DNA fragments present in all isolates from seals, except the hooded seal isolates. It was
suggested that these fragments could be part of metabolic genomic islands. Their absence could be a result
of hooded seal isolates being an ancestor inside
the B. pinnipedialis species [86]. Studies of DNA

Page 8 of 13

polymorphism at the omp2 locus showed that the
hooded seal isolate was classified in a separate group. Of
special interest was the AluI restriction pattern of
omp2b, which was identical for all marine mammal isolates except the hooded seal isolate [62]. The results
from VNTR and MLSA on the same isolates were
coherent with each other and showed that the hooded
seal isolates clustered in a separate subgroup within the
pinniped group [112]. MLVA on 15 isolates from
hooded seals gave a clustering in 9 closely related genotypes within the pinniped cluster [116]. Whole genome
comparison by Markov chain based methods placed the
hooded seal isolate in a separate subgroup and indicated
large base compositional differences between this isolate
and the other Brucella spp., including the marine mammal isolates. The pan-genomic analysis showed that the
hooded seal isolate differed from all other brucellae. The
hooded seal genome was also the most GC rich of all of
the analysed genomes suggesting that the hooded seal
isolate might be closely related to an unknown ancestor
of Brucella spp. [124]. The differences between isolates
of Brucella spp. from hooded seals and other marine
mammals are summarised in Table 1.

5. Conclusions and future perspectives
Biotyping is time consuming and requires handling of
live brucellae. The number of characteristics defining a
biovar varies, the interpretation of results can be rather
subjective, requiring expertise and experience and some
strains can yield unexpected results. Although bacterial
isolation and biotyping are the gold standards [138],
these methods have to be complemented with molecular
studies to differentiate between the different Brucella
spp. [41,64,71,74].
Chromosomal rearrangements and gain/loss of restriction sites and/or primer binding sites have a great
impact on the banding patterns produced by PGFE
[80,139] and PCR-based methods [140]. The band-based
approaches in general lack the ability to discriminate at
a sub-species level and they pose a challenge when it
comes to inter-laboratory reproducibility [83,141-144].
Although several useful discriminatory markers for Brucella spp. have been identified by these methods, they
have limited applications for molecular characterisation
of the marine mammal brucellae.
Due to the limitations of the band-based methods and
the increasing availability of genome sequences, there
has been a gradual shift from band-based to sequencebased approaches; namely MLVA, MLSA, SNP-typing
and whole genome analysis techniques. The sequencebased approaches generate data that are easily stored
and shared electronically, making the development of
international generic databases possible, and facilitating
international cooperation. By choosing genetic markers

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

Page 9 of 13

Table 1 Differences between isolates of Brucella spp. from hooded seals and other marine mammals.
Methods

Results

Reference

Biotyping and metabolic activity

The only Brucella isolate to metabolize urocanic acid.

[64]

PFGE

The hooded seal isolate lacked a 182 kB fragment and had some minor differences in a 62
kB fragment which was specific for the pinniped strains.

[85]

IRS-PCR

There were two specific DNA fragments (fragments 2 and 3) present in all isolates from seals, [86]
except the hooded seal isolates. These fragments might be part of metabolic genomic
islands. Their absence suggests that the hooded seal isolates may be closely related to an
unknown ancestor of Brucella spp.

PCR-RFLP studies of DNA polymorphism
at the omp2 locus

The hooded seal isolate was classified in a separate group. The AluI restriction pattern of
omp2b was identical for all marine mammal isolates except the hooded seal isolate.

[62]

VNTR/MLVA

Both VNTR and MLVA subclustered the hooded seal isolates in a separate subcluster (C3),
within the B. pinnipedialis cluster.

[112,116]

MLSA

The hooded seal isolates belonged to ST25, corresponding to the C3 subcluster mentioned
above.

[112]

Whole genome comparison by Markov
chain based methods

The hooded seal isolate grouped separately indicating relatively large genomic compositional [124]
differences between this isolate and other brucellae.

Pan-genomic analysis

The hooded seal isolate differed from all other Brucella spp. in gene content. The hooded
seal genome was also the most GC rich of all the analysed genomes, suggesting that the
hooded seal isolate might be closely related to an unknown ancestor of Brucella spp.

[124]

Experimental infection of human
macrophage-like cells in culture

The six hooded seal isolates were unable to enter the human macrophage-like cells.

[59]

with slow or fast molecular clocks one can decide at
what level one gains information, ranging from local
epidemiological investigations to phylogeny analysis [83].
Several studies have indicated that the hooded
seal isolates form one group which differs from other
isolates obtained from seals (Summarised in Table 1)
[62,64,85,86,112,116,124]. Differentiation between Brucella spp. isolated from porpoises and dolphins have
also been indicated in several studies [84,85,112,116,
117]. This division is also in accordance with the classical taxonomy based on host specificity [83].
Marine mammal Brucella spp. are not a uniform
group when it comes to zoonotic potential. Only some
marine mammal Brucella isolates seem to be able to
infect humans, and further work on these isolates is
needed in order to characterise their zoonotic potential.
The pathogenicity of B. pinnipedialis in seals, and
hooded seals in particular, is unclear, and the impact this
infection has on the Northeast Atlantic hooded seal
population, having a decline in pup production, warrants
further investigation. Gross pathology induced by Brucella infection in marine mammals is only seen in cetaceans, supporting a difference either in the pathogenicity
of the marine mammal Brucella spp. or in the susceptibility of cetaceans as opposed to pinnipeds. Histopathology studies are needed in order to gain insight into the
pathogenicity of strains in their preferential hosts.
It has been suggested that lungworms carrying Brucella spp. are the means by which marine mammals
become infected [36,45,46,48]. Pinnipeds are infected
with lungworms by consumption of intermediate host
fish species. Parafilaroides decorus in the California sea

lion uses a tide pool fish (Girella nigricans) as an intermediate vertebrate host [145,146], whereas P. gymnurus
larvae and Pseudalius inflexus were isolated from plaice
(Platessa pleuronectes) and dab (Limanda limanda)
[147]. Whether the Brucella infection originates from
fish or from fish parasites is unknown and warrants
further investigation.
Since the Brucella isolates from hooded seals are
clearly diverging from other seal isolates [62,64,85,
86,112,116,124] and because the hooded seal biology
(pelagic life, deep divers, short mother-pup relationship)
is different from that of many other seal species
[126-129], further work is needed to characterise these
isolates and to address the impact that the infection
may have on hooded seals, both on individuals and at
the population level. This is especially important, since
the Northwest Atlantic population, which has a high
prevalence of B. pinnipedialis infection [30,34], has
declined [131-133], and the whole hooded seal species is
classified as vulnerable in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species [136].
Contaminants accumulate in the Arctic regions, and
very high levels, especially of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCB), have been reported in top predators and in the
environment [148-150]. Climate change may affect the
contamination pathways so that we may see an
increased level of POPs in the Arctic regions in the
future [149,151]. Several studies have indicated that
exposure to POPs leads to inadequate immune function
and higher risk of disease development [149,152-154].
Whether high levels of POPs affect the hooded seals to
such a degree that an infection with B. pinnipedialis can

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

develop into clinical disease, impacting hooded seal
population dynamics, warrants further investigation.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Isolation of Brucella spp. from marine mammals.
Overview of literature describing the isolation of Brucella spp. from
marine mammals, the prevalence of bacteriological positive animals, and
the organ of origin for isolation and pathology.
Additional file 2: Serological evidence of Brucella spp. in marine
mammals. Overview of literature describing the presence and
seroprevalence of anti-Brucella antibodies in marine mammal species.

Acknowledgements
Front page picture: Michael Poltermann, Institute of Marine Research,
Tromsø, Norway.
We thank Alina Evans and Arla Ritva Vilhelmsson for their help with the
language correction.
Author details
Department of Food Safety and Infection Biology, Section of Arctic
Veterinary Medicine, the Norwegian School of Veterinary Science,
Stakkevollveien 23, N-9010 Tromsø, Norway. 2Member of Fram - High North
Research Centre for Climate and the Environment, Hjalmar Johansens gate
14, N-9296 Tromsø, Norway.

1

Authors’ contributions
IHN did the main work with the manuscript. JG and MT gave advice in
drafting the manuscript and revised it critically. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 4 February 2011 Accepted: 5 August 2011
Published: 5 August 2011
References
1. Gupta RS: Protein signatures distinctive of alpha proteobacteria and its
subgroups and a model for alpha-proteobacterial evolution. Crit Rev
Microbiol 2005, 31:101-135.
2. Williams KP, Sobral BW, Dickerman AW: A robust species tree for the
Alphaproteobacteria. J Bacteriol 2007, 189:4578-4586.
3. Corbel MJ, Brinley-Morgan WJ: Genus Brucella Meyer and Shaw 1920. In
Bergey Manual of Systematic Bacteriology. Volume 1.. 2 edition. Edited by:
Krieg NR, Hold JG. Baltimore, London: Williams and Wilkins; 1984:377-388.
4. Verger JM, Grimont F, Grimont PAD, Grayon M: Taxonomy of the genus
Brucella. Ann Inst Pasteur Microbiol 1987, 138:235-238.
5. Corbel MJ: International committee on systematic bacteriology.
Subcommittee on the taxonomy of Brucella. Report of the meeting 5
September 1986, Manchester, England. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1988, 38:450-452.
6. Osterman B, Moriyon I: International committee on systematics of
prokaryotes. Subcommittee on the taxonomy of Brucella. Minutes of the
meeting 17 September 2003, Pamplona, Spain. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
2006, 56:1173-1175.
7. Foster G, Osterman BS, Godfroid J, Jacques I, Cloeckaert A: Brucella ceti sp. nov
and Brucella pinnipedialis sp. nov. for Brucella strains with cetaceans and
seals as their preferred hosts. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2007, 57:2688-2693.
8. Scholz HC, Hubalek Z, Sedlacek I, Vergnaud G, Tomaso H, Al Dahouk S,
Melzer F, Kampfer P, Neubauer H, Cloeckaert A, Maquart M, Zygmunt MS,
Whatmore AM, Falsen E, Bahn P, Göllner C, Pfeffer M, Huber B, Busse HJ,
Nöckler K: Brucella microti sp. nov., isolated from the common vole
Microtus arvalis. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2008, 58:375-382.
9. Scholz HC, Hubalek Z, Nesvadbova J, Tomaso H, Vergnaud G, Le Fleche P,
Whatmore AM, Al Dahouk S, Kruger M, Lodri C, Pfeffer M: Isolation of
Brucella microti from soil. Emerg Infect Dis 2008, 14:1316-1317.

Page 10 of 13

10. Scholz HC, Hofer E, Vergnaud G, Le Fleche P, Whatmore AM, Al Dahouk S,
Pfeffer M, Kruger M, Cloeckaert A, Tomaso H: Isolation of Brucella microti
from mandibular lymph nodes of red foxes, Vulpes vulpes, in lower
Austria. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2009, 9:153-155.
11. Scholz HC, Nockler K, Gollner C, Bahn P, Vergnaud G, Tomaso H, Al
Dahouk S, Kampfer P, Cloeckaert A, Maquart M, Zygmunt MS,
Whatmore AM, Pfeffer M, Huber B, Busse HJ, De BK: Brucella inopinata sp.
nov., isolated from a breast implant infection. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
2010, 60:801-808.
12. Tiller RV, Gee JE, Frace MA, Taylor TK, Setubal JC, Hoffmaster AR, De BK:
Characterization of novel Brucella strains originating from wild native
rodent species in North Queensland, Australia. Appl Environ Microbiol
2010, 76:5837-5845.
13. Radostits OM, Gay CC, Blood DC, Hinchcliff KW: Diseases caused by
Brucella spp. In Veterinary Medicine. A textbook of the Diseases of Cattle,
Sheep, Pigs, Goats and Horses.. 9 edition. Edited by: Radostits OM, Gay CC,
Blood DC, Hinchcliff KW. Edinburgh, London, New York, Oxford,
Philapelphia, St.Louis, Sydney, Toronto: Elsevier Limited; 2000:867-882.
14. Corbel MJ: Brucellosis in humans and animals Geneva, Switzerland; 2006.
15. Crawford RP, Huber JD, Adams BS: Epidemiology and Surveilance. In
Animal Brucellosis.. 1 edition. Edited by: Nielsen K, Duncan JR. Boca Raton:
CRC Press; 1990:131-152.
16. Tittarelli M, Di Ventura M, De Massis F, Scacchia M, Giovannini A, Nannini D,
Caporale V: The persistence of Brucella melitensis in experimentally
infected ewes through three reproductive cycles. J Vet Med B Infect Dis
Vet Public Health 2005, 52:403-409.
17. Davis DS: Brucellosis in wildlife. In Animal Brucellosis.. 1 edition. Edited by:
Nielsen K, Duncan JR. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1990:321-334.
18. Godfroid J: Brucellosis in wildlife. In Infectious Diseases in Livestock. Volume
3.. 2 edition. Edited by: Coetzer JAW, Tustin RC. Cape Town: Oxford
University Press; 2004:1546-1552.
19. Salem SF, Mohsen A: Brucellosis in fish. Vet Med (Praha) 1997, 42:5-7.
20. El-Tras WF, Tayel AA, Eltholth MM, Guitian J: Brucella infection in fresh
water fish: Evidence for natural infection of Nile catfish, Clarias
gariepinus, with Brucella melitensis. Vet Microbiol 2010, 141:321-325.
21. Corbel MJ: Brucellosis: an overview. Emerg Infect Dis 1997, 3:213-221.
22. Godfroid J: Brucellosis in wildlife. Rev Sci Tech 2002, 21:277-286.
23. Forbes LB: Isolates of Brucella suis biovar-4 from animals and humans in
Canada, 1982-1990. Can Vet J 1991, 32:686-688.
24. Dieterich RA: Brucellosis. In Alaskan Wildlife Diseases. Edited by: Dieterich
RA. Fairbanks, Alaska: Institute of Arctic Biology; 1981:53-58.
25. Meyer ME: Species identity and epidemiology of Brucella strains isolated
from Alaskan Eskimos. J Infect Dis 1964, 114:169-173.
26. Rittig MG, Kaufmann A, Robins A, Shaw B, Sprenger H, Gemsa D,
Foulongne V, Rouot B, Dornand J: Smooth and rough lipopolysaccharide
phenotypes of Brucella induce different intracellular trafficking and
cytokine/chemokine release in human monocytes. J Leukoc Biol 2003,
74:1045-1055.
27. Lapaque N, Moriyon I, Moreno E, Gorvel JP: Brucella lipopolysaccharide
acts as a virulence factor. Curr Opin Microbiol 2005, 8:60-66.
28. Ross HM, Foster G, Reid RJ, Jahans KL, MacMillan AP: Brucella species
infection in sea-mammals. Vet Rec 1994, 134:359.
29. Ewalt DR, Payeur JB, Martin BM, Cummins DR, Miller WG: Characteristics of
a Brucella species from a bottle-nosed-dolphin (Tursiops-truncatus). J Vet
Diagn Invest 1994, 6:448-452.
30. Tryland M, Sørensen KK, Godfroid J: Prevalence of Brucella pinnipediae in
healthy hooded seals (Cystophora cristata) from the North Atlantic
Ocean and ringed seals (Phoca hispida) from Svalbard. Vet Microbiol 2005,
105:103-111.
31. Forbes LB, Nielsen O, Measures L, Ewalt DR: Brucellosis in ringed seals and
harp seals from Canada. J Wildl Dis 2000, 36:595-598.
32. Maratea J, Ewalt DR, Frasca S, Dunn JL, De Guise S, Szkudlarek L, St
Aubin DJ, French RA: Evidence of Brucella sp. infection in marine
mammals stranded along the coast of southern New England. J Zoo
Wildl Med 2003, 34:256-261.
33. Prenger-Berninghoff E, Siebert U, Stede M, Koenig A, Weiss R, Baljer G:
Incidence of Brucella species in marine mammals of the German north
sea. Dis Aquat Organ 2008, 81:65-71.
34. Tryland M, Kleivane L, Alfredsson A, Kjeld M, Arnason A, Stuen S, Godfroid J:
Evidence of Brucella infection in marine mammals in the North Atlantic
Ocean. Vet Rec 1999, 144:588-592.

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

35. Foster G, MacMillan AP, Godfroid J, Howie F, Ross HM, Cloeckaert A,
Reid RJ, Brew S, Patterson IAP: A review of Brucella sp. infection of sea
mammals with particular emphasis on isolates from Scotland. Vet
Microbiol 2002, 90:563-580.
36. Dawson CE, Perrett LL, Young EJ, Davison NJ, Monies RJ: Isolation of
Brucella species from a bottlenosed dolphin (Tursiops truncatus). Vet Rec
2006, 158:831-832.
37. Hernandez-Mora G, Gonzalez-Barrientos R, Morales JA, Chaves-Olarte E,
Guzman-Verri C, Baquero-Calvo E, De-Miguel MJ, Marin CM, Blasco JM,
Moreno E: Neurobrucellosis in stranded dolphins, Costa Rica. Emerg Infect
Dis 2008, 14:1825.
38. Dagleish MP, Barley J, Howie FE, Reid RJ, Herman J, Foster G: Isolation of
Brucella species from a diseased atlanto-occipital joint of an Atlantic
white-sided dolphin (Lagenorhynchus acutus). Vet Rec 2007, 160:876-878.
39. Gonzalez L, Patterson IA, Reid RJ, Foster G, Barberan M, Blasco JM,
Kennedy S, Howie FE, Godroid J, MacMillan AP, Schock A, Buxton D:
Chronic meningoencephalitis associated with Brucella sp. infection in
live-stranded striped dolphins (Stenella coeruleoalba). J Comp Pathol
2002, 126:147-152.
40. Munoz PM, Garcia-Castrillo G, Lopez-Garcia P, Gonzalez-Cueli JC, De
Miguel MJ, Marin CM, Barberan M, Blasco JM: Isolation of Brucella species
from a live-stranded striped dolphin (Stenella coeruleoalba) in Spain. Vet
Rec 2006, 158:450-451.
41. Foster G, Jahans KL, Reid RJ, Ross HM: Isolation of Brucella species from
cetaceans, seals and an otter. Vet Rec 1996, 138:583-586.
42. Ross HM, Jahans KL, MacMillan AP, Reid RJ, Thompson PM, Foster G:
Brucella species infection in North Sea Seal and cetacean populations.
Vet Rec 1996, 138:647-648.
43. Davison NJ, Cranwell MP, Perrett LL, Dawson CE, Deaville R, Stubberfield EJ,
Jarvis DS, Jepson PD: Meningoencephalitis associated with Brucella
species in a live-stranded striped dolphin (Stenella coeruleoalba) in
south-west England. Vet Rec 2009, 165:86-89.
44. Jauniaux TP, Brenez C, Fretin D, Godfroid J, Haelters J, Jacques T, Kerckhof F,
Mast J, Sarlet M, Coignoul FL: Brucella ceti infection in harbor porpoise
(Phocoena phocoena). Emerg Infect Dis 2010, 16:1966-1968.
45. Perrett LL, Dawson CE, Davison N, Quinney S: Brucella infection of
lungworms from a harbour porpoise. Vet Rec 2004, 154:800.
46. Garner MM, Lambourn DM, Jeffries SJ, Hall PB, Rhyan JC, Ewalt DR,
Polzin LM, Cheville NF: Evidence of Brucella infection in Parafilaroides
lungworms in a Pacific harbor seal (Phoca vitulina richardsi). J Vet Diagn
Invest 1997, 9:298-303.
47. Dawson CE, Perrett LL, Stubberfield EJ, Stack JA, Farrelly SSJ, Cooley WA,
Davison NJ, Quinney S: Isolation and characterization of Brucella from the
lungworms of a harbor porpoise (Phocoena phocoena). J Wildl Dis 2008,
44:237-246.
48. Rhyan JC: Brucellosis in Terrestrial Wildlife and Marine Mammals. In
Emerging Diseases of Animals.. 1 edition. Edited by: Brown C, Bolin C.
Washington DS, USA: ASM Press; 2000:161-184.
49. Miller WG, Adams LG, Ficht TA, Cheville NF, Payeur JP, Harley DR, House C,
Ridgway SH: Brucella-induced abortions and infection in bottlenose
dolphins (Tursiops truncatus). J Zoo Wildl Med 1999, 30:100-110.
50. Gonzalez-Barrientos R, Morales JA, Hernandez-Mora G, Barquero-Calvo E,
Guzman-Verri C, Chaves-Olarte E, Moreno E: Pathology of striped dolphins
(Stenella coeruleoalba) infected with Brucella ceti. J Comp Pathol 2010,
142:347-352.
51. Ohishi K, Zenitani R, Bando T, Goto Y, Uchida K, Maruyama T, Yamamoto S,
Miyazaki N, Fujise Y: Pathological and serological evidence of Brucellainfection in baleen whales (Mysticeti) in the western North Pacific. Comp
Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis 2003, 26:125-136.
52. Rhyan JC, Gidlewski T, Ewalt DR, Hennager SG, Lambourne DM, Olsen SC:
Seroconversion and abortion in cattle experimentally infected with
Brucella sp. isolated from a Pacific harbor seal (Phoca vitulina richardsi). J
Vet Diagn Invest 2001, 13:379-382.
53. Bingham J, Taylor TK, Swingler JE, Meehan G, Middleton DJ, Mackereth GF,
O’Keefe JS, Daniels PW: Infection trials in pigs with a human isolate of
Brucella (isolate 02/611 ‘marine mammal type’). N Z Vet J 2008, 56:10-14.
54. McDonald WL, Jamaludin R, Mackereth G, Hansen M, Humphrey S, Short P,
Taylor T, Swingler J, Dawson CE, Whatmore AM, Stubberfield E, Perrett LL,
Simmons G: Characterization of a Brucella sp. strain as a marine-mammal
type despite isolation from a patient with spinal osteomyelitis in New
Zealand. J Clin Microbiol 2006, 44:4363-4370.

Page 11 of 13

55. Perrett LL, Brew SD, Stack JA, MacMillan AP, Bashiruddin JB: Experimental
assessment of the pathogenicity of Brucella strains from marine
mammals for pregnant sheep. Small Rumin Res 2004, 51:221-228.
56. Brew SD, Perrett LL, Stack JA, MacMillan AP, Staunton NJ: Human exposure
to Brucella recovered from a sea mammal. Vet Rec 1999, 144:483.
57. Sohn AH, Probert WS, Glaser CA, Gupta N, Bollen AW, Wong JD, Grace EM,
McDonald WC: Human neurobrucellosis with intracerebral granuloma
caused by a marine mammal Brucella spp. Emerg Infect Dis 2003,
9:485-488.
58. Whatmore AM, Dawson CE, Groussaud P, Koylass MS, King AC, Shankster SJ,
Sohn AH, Probert WS, McDonald WL: Marine mammal Brucella genotype
associated with zoonotic infection. Emerg Infect Dis 2008, 14:517-518.
59. Maquart M, Zygmunt MS, Cloeckaert A: Marine mammal Brucella isolates
with different genomic characteristics display a differential response
when infecting human macrophages in culture. Microbes Infect 2009,
11:361-366.
60. Godfroid J, Kasbohrer A: Brucellosis in the European Union and Norway
at the turn of the twenty-first century. Vet Microbiol 2002, 90:135-145.
61. Corbel MJ, Brinley-Morgan WJ: Proposal for minimal standards for
descriptions of new species and biotypes of genus Brucella. Int J Syst
Bacteriol 1975, 25:83-89.
62. Cloeckaert A, Verger JM, Grayon M, Paquet JY, Garin-Bastuji B, Foster G,
Godfroid J: Classification of Brucella spp. isolated from marine mammals
by DNA polymorphism at the omp2 locus. Microbes Infect 2001, 3:729-738.
63. Wayne LG, Brenner DJ, Colwell RR, Grimont PAD, Kandler O, Krichevsky MI,
Moore LH, Moore WEC, Murray RGE, Stackebrandt E, Starr MP, Trüper HG:
Report of the ad hoc committee on reconciliation of approaches to
bacterial systematics. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1987, 37:463-464.
64. Jahans KL, Foster G, Broughton ES: The characterisation of Brucella strains
isolated from marine mammals. Vet Microbiol 1997, 57:373-382.
65. Clavareau C, Wellemans V, Walravens K, Tryland M, Verger JM, Grayon M,
Cloeckaert A, Letesson JJ, Godfroid J: Phenotypic and molecular
characterization of a Brucella strain isolated from a minke whale
(Balaenoptera acutorostrata). Microbiology 1998, 144:3267-3273.
66. Bricker BJ, Ewalt DR, MacMillan AP, Foster G, Brew S: Molecular
characterization of Brucella strains isolated from marine mammals. J Clin
Microbiol 2000, 38:1258-1262.
67. Cloeckaert A, Grayon M, Grepinet O: An IS711 element downstream of the
bp26 gene is a specific marker of Brucella spp. isolated from marine
mammals. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 2000, 7:835-839.
68. Scholz HC, Tomaso H, Al Dahouk S, Witte A, Schloter M, Kampfer P,
Falsen E, Neubauer H: Genotyping of Ochrobactrum anthropi by recAbased comparative sequence, PCR-RFLP, and 16S rRNA gene analysis.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2006, 257:7-16.
69. Cloeckaert A, Grayon M, Grepinet O, Boumedine KS: Classification of
Brucella strains isolated from marine mammals by infrequent restriction
site-PCR and development of specific PCR identification tests. Microbes
Infect 2003, 5:593-602.
70. Vizcaino N, Caro-Hernandez P, Cloeckaert A, Fernandez-Lago L: DNA
polymorphism in the omp25/omp31 family of Brucella spp.:
identification of a 1.7-kb inversion in Brucella cetaceae and of a 15.1-kb
genomic island, absent from Brucella ovis, related to the synthesis of
smooth lipopolysaccharide. Microbes Infect 2004, 6:821-834.
71. Jacques I, Grayon M, Verger JM: Oxidative metabolic profiles of Brucella
strains isolated from marine mammals: contribution to their species
classification. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2007, 270:245-249.
72. Murray MJ, Brenner DJ, Colwell RR, De Vos P, Goodfellow M, Grimont PAD,
Pfenning N, Stackebrandt E, Zavarzin GA: Report of the ad hoc committee
on approaches to taxonomy within the proteobacteria. Int J Syst Bacteriol
1990, 40:213-215.
73. Stackebrandt E, Frederiksen W, Garrity GM, Grimont PAD, Kampfer P,
Maiden MCJ, Nesme X, Rossello-Mora R, Swings J, Truper HG, Vauterin L,
Ward AC, Whitman WB: Report of the ad hoc committee for the reevaluation of the species definition in bacteriology. Int J Syst Evol
Microbiol 2002, 52:1043-1047.
74. Dawson CE, Stubberfield EJ, Perrett LL, King AC, Whatmore AM,
Bashiruddin JB, Stack JA, MacMillan AP: Phenotypic and molecular
characterisation of Brucella isolates from marine mammals. BMC Microbiol
2008, 8:224.
75. Al Dahouk S, Scholz HC, Tomaso H, Bahn P, Gollner C, Karges W, Appel B,
Hensel A, Neubauer H, Nockler K: Differential phenotyping of Brucella

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.
81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

species using a newly developed semi-automated metabolic system.
BMC Microbiol 2010, 10:269.
Verger JM, Grayon M, Cloeckaert A, Lefevre M, Ageron E, Grimont F:
Classification of Brucella strains isolated from marine mammals using
DNA-DNA hybridization and ribotyping. Res Microbiol 2000, 151:797-799.
Normand P, Ponsonnet C, Nesme X, Neyra M, Simonet P: ITS analysis of
procaryotes. In Molecular Microbial Ecology Manual.. 1 edition. Edited by:
Akkermans ADL, van Elsas JD, De Brujin FJ. Dordrecht, Kluwer: Springer;
1995:1-12.
Rijpens NP, Jannes G, VanAsbroeck M, Rossau R, Herman LMF: Direct
detection of Brucella spp. in raw milk by PCR and reverse hybridization
with 16S-23S rRNA spacer probes. Appl Environ Microbiol 1996,
62:1683-1688.
Stackebrandt E, Goebel BM: A Place for DNA-DNA reassociation and 16S
ribosomal-RNA sequence-analysis in the present species definition in
bacteriology. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1994, 44:846-849.
Coenye T, Gevers D, Van de Peer Y, Vandamme P, Swings J: Towards a
prokaryotic genomic taxonomy. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2005, 29:147-167.
Michaux-Charachon S, Bourg G, Jumas-Bilak E, Guigue-Talet P, AllardetServent A, O’Callaghan D, Ramuz M: Genome structure and phylogeny in
the genus Brucella. J Bacteriol 1997, 179:3244-3249.
Allardet-Servent A, Bourg G, Ramuz M, Pages M, Bellis M, Roizes G: DNA
polymorphism in strains of the genus Brucella. J Bacteriol 1988,
170:4603-4607.
Whatmore AM: Current understanding of the genetic diversity of
Brucella, an expanding genus of zoonotic pathogens. Infect Genet Evol
2009, 9:1168-1184.
Jensen AE, Cheville NF, Thoen CO, MacMillan AP, Miller WG: Genomic
fingerprinting and development of a dendrogram for Brucella spp.
isolated from seals, porpoises, and dolphins. J Vet Diagn Invest 1999,
11:152-157.
Bourg G, O’Callaghan D, Boschiroli ML: The genomic structure of Brucella
strains isolated from marine mammals gives clues to evolutionary
history within the genus. Vet Microbiol 2007, 125:375-380.
Maquart M, Fardini Y, Zygmunt MS, Cloeckaert A: Identification of novel
DNA fragments and partial sequence of a genomic island specific of
Brucella pinnipedialis. Vet Microbiol 2008, 132:181-189.
Whatmore AM, Murphy TJ, Shankster S, Young E, Cutler SJ, MacMillan AP:
Use of amplified fragment length polymorphism to identify and type
Brucella isolates of medical and veterinary interest. J Clin Microbiol 2005,
43:761-769.
Huber B, Scholz HC, Lucero N, Busse HJ: Development of a PCR assay for
typing and subtyping of Brucella species. Int J Med Microbiol 2009,
299:563-573.
Al Dahouk S, Tomaso H, Prenger-Berninghoff E, Splettstoesser WA,
Scholz HC, Neubauer H: Identification of Brucella species and biotypes
using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Crit Rev Microbiol 2005, 31:191-196.
Ficht TA, Bearden SW, Sowa BA, Adams LG: DNA sequence and expression
of the 36-kilodalton outer membrane protein gene of Brucella-Abortus.
Infect Immun 1989, 57:3281-3291.
Cloeckaert A, Vizcaino N, Paquet JY, Bowden RA, Elzer PH: Major outer
membrane proteins of Brucella spp.: past, present and future. Vet
Microbiol 2002, 90:229-247.
Cloeckaert A, Verger JM, Grayon M, Grepinet O: Restriction site
polymorphism of the genes encoding the major 25 kDa and 36 kDa
outer-membrane proteins of Brucella. Microbiology 1995, 141:2111-2121.
Vizcaino N, Verger JM, Grayon M, Zygmunt MS, Cloeckaert A: DNA
polymorphism at the omp-31 locus of Brucella spp.: evidence for a large
deletion in Brucella abortus, and other species-specific markers.
Microbiology 1997, 143:2913-2921.
Cloeckaert A, Verger JM, Grayon M, Vizcaino N: Molecular and
immunological characterization of the major outer membrane proteins
of Brucella. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1996, 145:1-8.
Cloeckaert A, Verger JM, Grayon M, Zygmunt MS, Grépinet O: Nucleotide
sequence and expression of the gene encoding the major 25-kilodalton
outer membrane protein of Brucella ovis: evidence for antigenic shift,
compared with other Brucella species, due to a deletion in the gene.
Infect Immun 1996, 64:2047-2055.

Page 12 of 13

96. Bricker BJ, Halling SM: Differentiation of Brucella abortus bv. 1, 2, and 4,
Brucella melitensis, Brucella ovis, and Brucella suis bv. 1 by PCR. J Clin
Microbiol 1994, 32:2660-2666.
97. Halling SM, Tatum FM, Bricker BJ: Sequence and characterization of an
insertion-sequence, IS711, from Brucella ovis. Gene 1993, 133:123-127.
98. Ouahrani S, Michaux S, Widada JS, Bourg G, Tournebize R, Ramuz M,
Liautard JP: Identification and sequence-analysis of IS6501, an insertion
sequence in Brucella spp.: relationship between genomic structure and
the number of IS6501 copies. J Gen Microbiol 1993, 139:3265-3273.
99. Garcia-Yoldi D, Marin CM, De Miguel MJ, Munoz PM, Vizmanos JL, LopezGoni I: Multiplex PCR assay for the identification and differentiation of
all Brucella species and the vaccine strains Brucella abortus S19 and
RB51 and Brucella melitensis Rev1. Clin Chem 2006, 52:779-781.
100. Lopez-Goni I, Garcia-Yoldi D, Marin CM, De Miguel MJ, Munoz PM,
Blasco JM, Jacques I, Grayon M, Cloeckaert A, Ferreira AC, Cardoso R, Corrêa
de Sá MI, Walravens K, Albert D, Garin-Bastuji B: Evaluation of a multiplex
PCR assay (Bruce-ladder) for molecular typing of all Brucella species,
including the vaccine strains. J Clin Microbiol 2008, 46:3484-3487.
101. DelVecchio VG, Kapatral V, Redkar RJ, Patra G, Mujer C, Los T, Ivanova N,
Anderson I, Bhattacharyya A, Lykidis A, Reznik G, Jablonski L, Larsen N,
D’Souza M, Bernal A, Mazur M, Goltsman E, Selkov E, Elzer PH, Hagius S,
O’Callaghan D, Letesson JJ, Haselkorn R, Kyrpides N, Overbeek R: The
genome sequence of the facultative intracellular pathogen Brucella
melitensis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:443-448.
102. Halling SM, Peterson-Burch BD, Bricker BJ, Zuerner RL, Qing Z, Li LL,
Kapur V, Alt DP, Olsen SC: Completion of the genome sequence of
Brucella abortus and comparison to the highly similar genomes of
Brucella melitensis and Brucella suis. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:2715-2726.
103. Paulsen IT, Seshadri R, Nelson KE, Eisen JA, Heidelberg JF, Read TD,
Dodson RJ, Umayam L, Brinkac LM, Beanan MJ, Daugherty SC, Deboy RT,
Durkin AS, Kolonay JF, Madupu R, Nelson WC, Ayodeji B, Kraul M, Shetty J,
Malek J, Van Aken SE, Riedmuller S, Tettelin H, Gill SR, White O, Salzberg SL,
Hoover DL, Lindler LE, Halling SM, Boyle SM: The Brucella suis genome
reveals fundamental similarities between animal and plant pathogens
and symbionts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:13148-13153.
104. Pathogen-Host Interaction Data Integration and Analysis System
(PHIDIAS), Brucella Bioinformatics Portal Brucella Genome Data. [http://
www.phidias.us/bbp/data/index.php].
105. Tsolis RM, Seshadri R, Santos RL, Sangari FJ, Lobo JMG, de Jong MF,
Ren QH, Myers G, Brinkac LM, Nelson WC, Deboy RT, Angiuoli S, Khouri H,
Dimitrov G, Robinson JR, Mulligan S, Walker RL, Elzer PE, Hassan KA,
Paulsen IT: Genome degradation in Brucella ovis corresponds with
narrowing of its host range and tissue tropism. PLoS One 2009, 4(5):
e5519.
106. Wattam AR, Williams KP, Snyder EE, Almeida NF, Shukla M, Dickerman AW,
Crasta OR, Kenyon R, Lu J, Shallom JM, Yoo H, Ficht TA, Tsolis RM, Munk C,
Tapia R, Han CS, Detter JC, Bruce D, Brettin TS, Sobral BW, Boyle SM,
Setubal JC: Analysis of ten Brucella genomes reveals evidence for
horizontal gene transfer despite a preferred intracellular lifestyle. J
Bacteriol 2009, 191:3569-3579.
107. Bricker BJ, Ewalt DR, Halling SM: Brucella ’HOOF-Prints’: strain typing by
multi-locus analysis of variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs). BMC
Microbiol 2003, 3:15.
108. Whatmore AM, Shankster SJ, Perrett LL, Murphy TJ, Brew SD, Thirlwall RE,
Cutler SJ, MacMillan AP: Identification and characterization of variablenumber tandem-repeat markers for typing of Brucella spp. J Clin
Microbiol 2006, 44:1982-1993.
109. Le Fleche P, Jacques I, Grayon M, Al Dahouk S, Bouchon P, Denoeud F,
Nockler K, Neubauer H, Guilloteau LA, Vergnaud G: Evaluation and
selection of tandem repeat loci for a Brucella MLVA typing assay. BMC
Microbiol 2006, 6:9.
110. Lunt DH, Whipple LE, Hyman BC: Mitochondrial DNA variable number
tandem repeats (VNTRs): utility and problems in molecular ecology. Mol
Ecol 1998, 7:1441-1455.
111. Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS) MLVA-NET for
Brucella. [http://mlva.u-psud.fr/brucella/].
112. Groussaud P, Shankster SJ, Koylass MS, Whatmore AM: Molecular typing
divides marine mammal strains of Brucella into at least three groups
with distinct host preferences. J Med Microbiol 2007, 56:1512-1518.

Nymo et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:93
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/93

113. Al Dahouk S, Le Flèche P, Nockler K, Jacques I, Grayon M, Scholz HC,
Tomaso H, Vergnaud G, Neubauer H: Evaluation of Brucella MLVA typing
for human brucellosis. J Microbiol Methods 2007, 69:137-145.
114. Garcia-Yoldi D, Le Flèche P, De Miguel MJ, Munoz PM, Blasco JM, Cvetnic Z,
Marin CM, Vergnaud G, Lopez-Goni I: Comparison of multiple-locus
variable-number tandem-repeat analysis with other PCR-based methods
for typing Brucella suis isolates. J Clin Microbiol 2007, 45:4070-4072.
115. Kattar MM, Jaafar RF, Araj GF, Le Flèche P, Matar GM, Rached RA, Khalife S,
Vergnaud G: Evaluation of a multilocus variable-number tandem-repeat
analysis scheme for typing human Brucella isolates in a region of
brucellosis endemicity. J Clin Microbiol 2008, 46:3935-3940.
116. Maquart M, Le Flèche P, Foster G, Tryland M, Ramisse F, Djonne B, Al
Dahouk S, Jacques I, Neubauer H, Walravens K, Godfroid J, Cloeckaert A,
Vergnaud G: MLVA-16 typing of 295 marine mammal Brucella isolates
from different animal and geographic origins identifies 7 major groups
within Brucella ceti and Brucella pinnipedialis. BMC Microbiol 2009, 9:145.
117. Whatmore AM, Perrett LL, MacMillan AP: Characterisation of the genetic
diversity of Brucella by multilocus sequencing. BMC Microbiol 2007, 7:34.
118. Keim P, Van Ert MN, Pearson T, Vogler AJ, Huynh LY, Wagner DM: Anthrax
molecular epidemiology and forensics: using the appropriate marker for
different evolutionary scales. Infect Genet Evol 2004, 4:205-213.
119. Scott JC, Koylass MS, Stubberfield MR, Whatmore AM: Multiplex assay
based on single-nucleotide polymorphisms for rapid identification of
Brucella isolates at the species level. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007,
73:7331-7337.
120. Foster JT, Okinaka RT, Svensson R, Shaw K, De BK, Robison RA, Probert WS,
Kenefic LJ, Brown WD, Keim P: Real-time PCR assays of single-nucleotide
polymorphisms defining the major Brucella clades. J Clin Microbiol 2008,
46:296-301.
121. Gopaul KK, Koylass MS, Smith CJ, Whatmore AM: Rapid identification of
Brucella isolates to the species level by real time PCR based single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis. BMC Microbiol 2008, 8:86.
122. Moreno E, Cloeckaert A, Moriyon I: Brucella evolution and taxonomy. Vet
Microbiol 2002, 90:209-227.
123. Foster JT, Beckstrom-Sternberg SM, Pearson T, Beckstrom-Sternberg JS,
Chain PSG, Roberto FF, Hnath J, Brettin T, Keim P: Whole-genome-based
phylogeny and divergence of the genus Brucella. J Bacteriol 2009,
191:2864-2870.
124. Bohlin J, Snipen L, Cloeckaert A, Lagesen K, Ussery D, Kristoffersen AB,
Godfroid J: Genomic comparisons of Brucella spp. and closely related
bacteria using base compositional and proteome based methods. BMC
Evol Biol 2010, 10:249.
125. Lavigne DM, Kovacs KM: Harps & hoods: ice-breeding seals of the Northwest
Atlantic Waterloo, Ontario, Canada: University of Waterloo Press; 1988.
126. Kovacs KM: Hooded Seal. Cystophora cristata. In Encyclopedia of Marine
Mammals.. 2 edition. Edited by: Perrin WF, Wursig B, Thewissen JGM.
Burlington, USA. San Diego, USA. New York, USA. London, UK.: Academic
Press, Elsevier Inc.; 2009:569-573.
127. Folkow LP, Blix AS: Diving behaviour of hooded seals (Cystophora
cristata) in the Greenland and Norwegian Seas. Polar Biol 1999, 22:61-74.
128. Bowen WD, Oftedal OT, Boness DJ: Birth to weaning in 4 days remarkable growth in the hooded seal, Cystophora-Cristata. Can J Zool
1985, 63:2841-2846.
129. Stenson GB, Sjare B: Newfoundland hooded seal tag returns in the
Northeast Atlantic. NAFO Sci Coun Studies 1996, 26:115-118.
130. Haug T, Nilssen KT, Lindblom L, Lindstrom U: Diets of hooded seals
(Cystophora cristata) in coastal waters and drift ice waters along the east
coast of Greenland. Mar Biol Res 2007, 3:123-133.
131. International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES): Report of the
Working Group on Harp and Hooded Seals (WGHARP), 24-27 August 2009,
Copenhagen, Denmark 2009.
132. Salberg AB, Haug T, Nilssen KT: Estimation of hooded seal (Cystophora
cristata) pup production in the Greenland Sea pack ice during the 2005
whelping season. Polar Biol 2008, 31:867-878.
133. Øigård TA, Haug T, Nilssen KT, Salberg AB: Estimation of pup production
of hooded and harp seals in the Greenland sea in 2007: reducing
uncertainty using generalized additive models. J Northw Atl Fish Sci 2010,
42:103-123.
134. Hammill MO, Stenson G: Abundance of Northwest Atlantic hooded seals
(1960 - 2005). Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat (CSAS);[http://www.
dfo-mpo.gc.ca/csas/].

Page 13 of 13

135. Hammill MO, Stenson GB: Application of the precautionary approach and
conservation reference points to management of Atlantic seals. ICES J
Mar Sci 2007, 64:702-706.
136. Kovacs K: Cystophora cristata. International Union for Conservation of
Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species, Version 2010.4.
137. Nielsen O, Stewart REA, Nielsen K, Measures L, Duignan P: Serologic survey
of Brucella spp. antibodies in some marine mammals of North America.
J Wildl Dis 2001, 37:89-100.
138. Alton GG, Jones LM, Angus RD, Verger JM: Techniques for the brucellosis
laboratory Paris, France: Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique;
1988.
139. Tenover FC, Arbeit RD, Goering RV, Mickelsen PA, Murray BE, Persing DH,
Swaminathan B: Interpreting chromosomal DNA restriction patterns
produced by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis: criteria for bacterial strain
typing. J Clin Microbiol 1995, 33:2233-2239.
140. Gurtler V, Mayall BC: Genomic approaches to typing, taxonomy and
evolution of bacterial isolates. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2001, 51:3-16.
141. Bensch S, Akesson M: Ten years of AFLP in ecology and evolution: why
so few animals? Mol Ecol 2005, 14:2899-2914.
142. Fekete A, Bantle JA, Halling SM, Stich RW: Amplification fragment length
polymorphism in Brucella strains by use of polymerase chain-reaction
with arbitrary primers. J Bacteriol 1992, 174:7778-7783.
143. Bricker BJ: PCR as a diagnostic tool for brucellosis. Vet Microbiol 2002,
90:435-446.
144. Grif K, Dierich MP, Much P, Hofer E, Allerberger F: Identifying and
subtyping species of dangerous pathogens by automated ribotyping.
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2003, 47:313-320.
145. Dailey MD: The transmission of Parafilaroides decorus (Nematoda
Metastrongyloidea) in the California sea lion (Zalophus californianus). Proc
Helminthol Soc Wash 1970, 37:215-222.
146. Dailey MD: Restoration of Parafilaroides (Dougherty, 1946) (Nematoda:
Metastrongyloidea) with description of two new species from Pinnipeds
of eastern central Pacific. J Parasitol 2006, 92:589-594.
147. Lehnert K, von Samson-Himmelstjerna G, Schaudien D, Bleidorn C,
Wohlsein P, Siebert U: Transmission of lungworms of harbour porpoises
and harbour seals: Molecular tools determine potential vertebrate
intermediate hosts. Int J Parasitol 2010, 40:845-853.
148. Skaare JU, Bernhoft A, Derocher A, Gabrielsen GW, Goksoyr A, Henriksen E,
Larsen HJ, Lie E, Wiig O: Organochlorines in top predators at Svalbard occurrence, levels and effects. Toxicol Lett 2000, 112:103-109.
149. Nilsson AE, Huntington HP: Arctic Pollution 2009 Oslo, Norway; 2009.
150. Espeland O, Kleivane L, Haugen S, Skaare JU: Organochlorines in mother
and pup pairs in two Arctic seal species: Harp seal (Phoca groenlandica)
and hooded seal (Cystophora cristata). Mar Environ Res 1997, 44:315-330.
151. Nilsson AE: Arctic Pollution Issues: A State of the Arctic Environment Report
Oslo, Norway; 1997.
152. Lie E, Larsen HJS, Larsen S, Johansen GM, Derocher AE, Lunn NJ,
Norstrom RJ, Wiig O, Skaare JU: Does high organochlorine (OC) exposure
impair the resistance to infection in polar bears (Ursus maritimus)? Part
II: Possible effect of OCs on mitogen- and antigen-induced lymphocyte
proliferation. J Toxicol Environ Health A 2005, 68:457-484.
153. Letcher RJ, Bustnes JO, Dietz R, Jenssen BM, Jorgensen EH, Sonne C,
Verreault J, Vijayan MM, Gabrielsen GW: Exposure and effects assessment
of persistent organohalogen contaminants in arctic wildlife and fish. Sci
Total Environ 2010, 408:2995-3043.
154. Beckmen KB, Blake JE, Ylitalo GM, Stott JL, O’Hara TM: Organochlorine
contaminant exposure and associations with hematological and
humoral immune functional assays with dam age as a factor in freeranging northern fur seal pups (Callorhinus ursinus). Mar Pollut Bull 2003,
46:594-606.
doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-93
Cite this article as: Nymo et al.: A review of Brucella infection in marine
mammals, with special emphasis on Brucella pinnipedialis in the hooded
seal (Cystophora cristata). Veterinary Research 2011 42:93.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
