<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Chloroplast genome sequence of the moss Tortula ruralis: gene content, polymorphism, and structural arrangement relative to other green plant chloroplast genomes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:143. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-143"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Melvin J Oliver"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Oliver et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:143
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/143

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Chloroplast genome sequence of the moss
Tortula ruralis: gene content, polymorphism, and
structural arrangement relative to other green
plant chloroplast genomes
Melvin J Oliver1*, Andrew G Murdock2, Brent D Mishler2, Jennifer V Kuehl3, Jeffrey L Boore4, Dina F Mandoli5,
Karin DE Everett5, Paul G Wolf6, Aaron M Duffy6, Kenneth G Karol7

Abstract
Background: Tortula ruralis, a widely distributed species in the moss family Pottiaceae, is increasingly used as a
model organism for the study of desiccation tolerance and mechanisms of cellular repair. In this paper, we present
the chloroplast genome sequence of T. ruralis, only the second published chloroplast genome for a moss, and the
first for a vegetatively desiccation-tolerant plant.
Results: The Tortula chloroplast genome is ~123,500 bp, and differs in a number of ways from that of
Physcomitrella patens, the first published moss chloroplast genome. For example, Tortula lacks the ~71 kb inversion
found in the large single copy region of the Physcomitrella genome and other members of the Funariales. Also, the
Tortula chloroplast genome lacks petN, a gene found in all known land plant plastid genomes. In addition, an
unusual case of nucleotide polymorphism was discovered.
Conclusions: Although the chloroplast genome of Tortula ruralis differs from that of the only other sequenced
moss, Physcomitrella patens, we have yet to determine the biological significance of the differences. The
polymorphisms we have uncovered in the sequencing of the genome offer a rare possibility (for mosses) of the
generation of DNA markers for fine-level phylogenetic studies, or to investigate individual variation within
populations.

Background
Tortula ruralis (Hedw.) Gaertn., also known as Syntrichia ruralis (Hedw.) F. Weber & D. Mohr (Pottiaceae) is
a moss with a cosmopolitan distribution in relatively dry
habitats. In North America the species is widespread in
northern latitudes but is more common in the Western
U.S., south into Mexico [1]. Tortula ruralis has received
considerable attention over the last forty years as a
model for the study of vegetative desiccation tolerance,
i.e., the ability to equilibrate to the water potential of
dry air and survive, regaining growth and development
upon rehydration. Tortula ruralis offers much as an
experimental model for the study of environmental
* Correspondence: Mel.oliver@ars.usda.gov
1
USDA-ARS-MWA, Plant Genetics Research Unit, University of Missouri, 205
Curtis Hall, Columbia MO, 65211, USA

impacts on plants: it grows easily in culture, has a limited number of cell types, and, because of its morphology, experimental treatments act directly at the cellular
level [2,3]. It is the latter property that also makes it an
ideal choice for an indicator species in air pollution studies [4,5].
Tortula ruralis is among the most desiccation-tolerant
of land plants and it can recover from desiccation even
after at least three years in the dried state [6,7]. Physcomitrella patens is relatively tolerant of dehydration but
cannot tolerate the levels of drying that T. ruralis can
survive [8]. It is well established that the chloroplast
plays a central role in the recovery of vegetative plants
cells from desiccation [9] and it is possible that differences between the chloroplast genomes of T. ruralis and
P. patens may relate to this fundamental difference
between the two mosses.

© 2010 Oliver et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Oliver et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:143
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/143

The rapid recovery of photosynthesis is critical in
order to recover and re-establish growth when water is
available, thus maximizing the time available to the
moss for carbon fixation and productivity [10]. Following slow drying to -100 Mpa, photosystem II (PSII)
activity in T. ruralis recovers within minutes after rewetting [11], with normal rates of carbon fixation returning
within an hour [2]. Photosynthesis is essential for the
production of the energy required for repair and protein
synthesis following the desiccation event. Obviously, the
integrity and metabolic capacity of the chloroplast is
central to the speed of recovery of photosynthesis. It is
clear from electron microscopic observation of freezefracture preparations that chloroplast membranes, both
the envelope and thylakoid membranes, in T. ruralis are
unaltered by desiccation [12], which supports the idea
that desiccation does not damage the photosynthetic
apparatus. Such protection of chloroplast structure has
also been demonstrated for gametophytes of Polytrichum formosum, which also appear to be unaltered by
the imposition of desiccation and the rigors of rehydration [9]. Thus it is clear that the chloroplast holds a
central role in the response of T. ruralis to desiccation
and rehydration and it is important to study the nature
of its genome in this plant, the first vegetatively desiccation-tolerant plant to have its chloroplast genome
sequenced. The genome sequence of T. ruralis, and its
comparison to other chloroplast genomes, is critical if
we want to understand how the interplay between the
nuclear and chloroplast genomes plays a role in desiccation tolerance.
In addition to the relevance of the T. ruralis chloroplast genome to the important trait of desiccation tolerance, the genome sequence has considerable relevance
to our current understanding of evolutionary history of
the land plants. Current evidence suggests that mosses
are the sister group of hornworts plus tracheophytes,
diverging at least 450 million years ago [13,14]. As an
early diverging lineage, mosses hold a place in the phylogeny of land plants that is important for comparative
purposes to seed plants [15], although comparisons are
currently hampered because only one published chloroplast genome is available for mosses, while hundreds are
available for its sister group. Several chloroplast genome
sequences will be required to estimate the ancestral genome sequence for mosses, which will in turn allow comparisons with tracheophyte genomes.
The interest in Tortula ruralis as a model desiccationtolerant organism has increased as our need to understand how plants survive dehydration stress grows and
the global impact of climate change becomes more critical. This impetus and the need for increasing sampling
within the mosses for phylogenetic comparative

Page 2 of 8

purposes led to the choice of T. ruralis for chloroplast
genome sequencing. The assembly and annotation of
the T. ruralis chloroplast genome sequence is presented
here, only the second chloroplast genome sequenced for
a moss and the first for a desiccation tolerant plant. The
first chloroplast genome for a moss, Physcomitrella
patens, was completed in 2003 [16]. Because P. patens
was found to have a major rearrangement in the chloroplast compared to what PCR-based methods show for
most other moss lineages [17], the T. ruralis chloroplast
genome will serve as an important point of comparison
and will assist in ongoing efforts to utilize whole-genomic sequences and structural characters in a comparative phylogenetic framework [13,18].

Results
Whole chloroplast genome description

The chloroplast genome sequence comprises 122,530
bp; a gap of ~750 bp (an estimate based on comparison
to Physcomitrella patens) remains undetermined within
the coding region of ycf2 despite repeated attempts to
sequence this region using long-distance PCR and gene
walking. While the precise length of the chloroplast genome remains unknown, it is estimated to be 123.5 kb.
Figure 1 summarizes the structure of the T. ruralis
chloroplast genome and additional file 1 lists the genes
contained within it and their relative nucleotide positions. Structurally, T. ruralis lacks the large ~71 kb
inversion in the LSC region of the genome that is found
in P. patens. The gene list reveals the absence of petN, a
gene that is found in all other known land plant chloroplast genomes. The trnPGGG gene, although containing
an altered anticodon region similar to that seen in Physcomitrella, also contains significant mismatches in the
stem regions of the predicted tRNA structure. The inference is that this gene has become a pseudo gene in both
lineages (Figure 2.). The gene content of the inverted
repeat (IR) regions is conserved between T. ruralis and
P. patens.
Polymorphisms

One surprising discovery was the identification of
apparent polymorphism in the T. ruralis chloroplast
DNA. Overall, we observed 29 clearly polymorphic sites,
each of which appears to have two possible states
(Table 1). Two of the polymorphisms appear in the
non-coding region of the IR and so only 28 of the polymorphic sites are unique. Eleven of the sites were situated within protein coding sequences: five result in
synonymous amino acid codons and six are non-synonymous. The remaining polymorphic sites are situated in
non-coding regions: six in introns and ten in the intergenic regions.

Oliver et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:143
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/143

Page 3 of 8

Figure 1 Tortula ruralis chloroplast genome structure. Genes (colored boxes) on the right side of the map are transcribed in the top down
direction, whereas those on the left side are transcribed bottom up. The tRNA genes are indicated by the one-letter amino acid code (fM =
initiator methionine) followed by the anticodon. Introns are show with an asterisk (*), the trans-spliced gene rps12 is shown with two asterisks
(**) and the pseudogene trnPGGG is shown with a Psi (Ψ). Horizontal red lines along the genome indicate polymorphic nucleotides.

Oliver et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:143
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/143

Page 4 of 8

Figure 2 Alignment of trnPGGG coding regions from Tortula and eight other green plant chloroplast genomes. Columns from left to
right are: Species name, tRNA anticodon, and Cove score for tRNA structure derived from tRNAscan-SE [23]. The stem regions of the tRNA
molecule are indicated by grey boxes with corresponding internal stem segments indicated by brackets: the tRNA anticodon region is shown in
red. Alteration of the anticodon region is found in both moss lineages Tortula ruralis and Physcomitrella patens.

Discussion
Whole chloroplast genome description

Compared to other published chloroplast genomes, the
chloroplast genome of Tortula ruralis is most similar to
that of Physcomitrella patens. However, T. ruralis lacks
the large ~71 kb inversion in the LSC region of the genome that is found in P. patens. This large inversion is
found only in the moss order Funariales, whereas other
moss lineages have a more plesiomorphic gene order
similar to the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha [16,17].
It is interesting that the Tortula ruralis chloroplast
genome lacks the petN gene because the protein
encoded by this gene plays an important role in photosynthesis electron transport. The PetN protein is a subunit of the cytochrome b6f (Cyt b6f) complex of
cyanobacteria and plants. The Cytb6f complex is a plastoquinol-plastocyanin oxidoreductase within thylakoid
membranes that functions as the photosynthetic redox
control of energy distribution between the two photosystems, PSII and PSI, and gene expression [19]. With
such a critical role in chloroplast function it is clear that
T. ruralis cannot be devoid of the PetN polypeptide and
it is very likely, given the conservation of gene order in
plant chloroplasts, that the petN gene does not reside in
the region of the genome for which we do not yet have
a sequence (e.g., within ycf2). What remains is the probability that in T. ruralis the petN gene has moved into
the nuclear genome or there is a nuclear-encoded gene
product that serves the same function as the PetN protein. This hypothesis remains to be tested but it offers
an exciting speculation that the translocation of the
petN gene from the chloroplast to nuclear genome may
be related to the stability of the chloroplast in desiccation-tolerant mosses. Obviously, a much more detailed
survey of moss chloroplast genomes needs to be accomplished and further experimental evidence needs to be
collected before such speculation can be tested.
Polymorphism

Few studies have detected nucleotide polymorphism for
plastid DNA within plant populations [20]. Our results

suggest a considerable level of population polymorphism
in the Tortula ruralis chloroplast DNA. Mosses have
monoplastidic cell division [21,22], thus it is unlikely
that the polymorphism occurs within individual
plants. Because the sequenced material was grown from
wild-collected spores from multiple parents, the polymorphism is more likely to be due to genotypic races or
otherwise cryptic lineages within the source population.
One alternative source of polymorphism that is difficult
to discount completely is that the variation is caused by
inclusion of nuclear DNA which can occasionally contain fragments of chloroplast DNA [23]. We consider
this unlikely because our source of plastid DNA was
from isolated chloroplasts, so nuclear DNA levels would
be very low and the chances of capturing rare inserts
would be negligible. Also, the 29 polymorphisms were
distributed across the genome rather than clustered in
one region which is what would be expected if one or a
few nuclear regions had been captured. Many recently
sequenced plastid genomes have used shotgun or PCRbased approaches, and completely eliminating nuclear
DNA is impossible.
The polymorphisms that give rise to non-synonymous
changes in amino acid at a defined site in a protein coding region are possible targets for post transcriptional
editing should the non-synonymous change result in a
loss or detrimental change in protein function. For
example, the polymorphic position 744 in the matK
gene (A or C) could result in either leucine (UUA) or
phenylalanine (UUC) in the resultant peptide. Given the
importance of this group II intron maturase gene to
chloroplast function [24] this change either does not
result in a significant change in the normal activity of
the polypeptide or it would be corrected by the RNA
editing activity within the chloroplast prior to translation. Testing this hypothesis, and estimating the extent
of RNA editing will require sequencing of cDNA from
Tortula chloroplast genes.
The shotgun sequencing method used for assembling
this genome makes a determination of the number of
haplotypes in the sequenced sample impossible.

Oliver et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:143
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/143

Page 5 of 8

Table 1 List of all sequence polymorphisms located on
the Tortula ruralis chloroplast genome sequence.
position location

state

strand codon

7810

petD intron

Y (C/T)

-

7821

petD intron

M (A/C)

-

8076
9525

petD intron
petB intron

M (A/C)
Y (C/T)

-

19020

psbJ/petA IGR

K (G/T)

na

23480

psaI/ycf4 IGR

K (G/T)

na

23623

psaI/ycf4 IGR

K (G/T)

na

29394

trnM/trnV IGR

M (A/C)

na

41006

psaB/rps14 IGR

R (A/G)

na

45811

trnT/trnE IGR

W (A/T)

na

47128

ycf2

R (A/G)

-

GTA or GTG synonymous

47698

ycf2

M (A/C)

-

TTA or TTC nonsynonymous

49026

ycf2

K (G/T)

-

GTA or TTA nonsynonymous

49946

ycf2

K (G/T)

-

AGT or ATT nonsynonymous

50907

ycf2

R (A/G)

-

TAA or TAG synonymous

53115

trnH/psbA IGR

R (A/G)

na

55502

matK

K (G/T)

-

56736
65765

trnK intron
atpI/atpH IGR

Y (C/T)
K (G/T)

na

67161

rps12

R (A/G)

-

72206

rpoC1-exon2

K (G/T)

-

75462

rpoB

Y (C/T)

-

81152

ndhB intron

R (A/G)

-

82247

ndhB exon1

Y (C/T)

-

82463

rps7/ndhB IGR

W (A/T)

na

83334

rps12 exon2/rps7 IGR

W (A/T)

na

84909

Noncoding IR

K (G/T)

na

105822

ndhG

M (A/C)

+

121800

Noncoding IR

M (A/C)

na

regions from single individuals, gathered from across
the range of this species, would be very productive. It
would also be of interest to determine if the polymorphisms within the coding regions of the chloroplast genes
generate functional allelic variation in the gene products
involved.
trnPGGG

TTG or TTT nonsynonymous

CGA or CGG synonymous
TGT or TTT nonsynonymous
CGC or CGT synonymous
CCA or TCA
nonsynonymous

GTA or GTC synonymous

However, there are some indications that only two haplotypes may be present: (1) all variable sites were bimodal (e.g., either an A or G); and (2) in 5 instances,
multiple polymorphic sites were located within a single
DNA fragment and in all 5 cases only two versions of
the sequence were present. Interestingly, one third of
the variable sites occurred in coding regions of the
chloroplast, including two sites in rbcL and three in
ndhF. Polymorphic sites that can be easily sequenced
from chloroplast DNA have potential for future use in
population-level studies in T. ruralis. Future studies that
include cloning and sequencing chloroplasts genomic

Among the known chloroplast genomes of land plants,
the trnPGGG gene shows an unusual evolutionary pattern. In Physcomitrella patens and Tortula ruralis the
sequence data indicate that this gene has become a
pseudogene in these lineages (Figure 2); further substantiated by the low Cove scores for the tRNA structure
prediction from tRNAscan-SE [25]. In the liverwort
Marchantia polymorpha, the anticodon is intact but
there are stem mismatches and a deletion of 5 bases,
indicating that this gene may also be pseudogenized in
M. polymorpha. However, in the hornwort Anthoceros
formosae and in vascular plants trnPGGG appears to be
functional. It is of course possible that the change in the
anticodon sequence seen in T. ruralis and P. patens are
modified post-transcriptionally to allow non-wobble
interactions and thus rendering the tRNA functional.
However, if these alterations in the trnPGGG seen in T.
ruralis and P. patens do indicate a loss of function then
given the current understanding of land plant phylogeny, this would imply at least two independent deactivation events for the trnPGGG gene in the chloroplast.
Functional copies of trnPGGG occur in the chloroplast
genomes of the green algae Chaetosphaeridium and Zygnema, otherwise this gene appears to have been lost in
Chara and is absent in other examined green-algal
chloroplast genomes [26]. The GGG codon is used in
coding regions of the chloroplast with roughly equal frequency in all of these lineages.
Relationships to desiccation-tolerance

Protection of chloroplast structure appears to be a
major aspect of the mechanism for desiccation tolerance in bryophytes (for review see Oliver [27]). It is
unclear at the moment as to how much the chloroplast
genome, and the genes it encodes, influences the stability of the chloroplast during dehydration, or how
much it contributes to the rapid resumption of photosynthetic electron transport. However, the importance
of the chloroplast in the phenotype of desiccation tolerance cannot be underestimated. This is evident in
the percentage of transcripts encoding chloroplastdirected proteins that are present in the transcriptome
of recovering rapid-dried gametophytes of Tortula ruralis [28]. Of the transcripts that can be annotated in
the rehydration transcriptome, 12.5% are classified as
chloroplastic in the Gene Ontology (GO) functional

Oliver et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:143
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/143

classification scheme. One of the more prominent
being the transcript that encode the Early Light Inducible Protein (ELIP) which is described as being an
important protein for chloroplast structural protection
during desiccation and upon rehydration of T. ruralis
gametophytes [29]. Unfortunately, because of the nature of plastid transcripts (lack of a polyA tail) they are
generally not present in the cDNA preparations used
for transcriptome sequencing projects and thus we
know little of how their synthesis responds to desiccation and rehydration or what is the role of the chloroplast transcriptome in the mechanism of desiccation
tolerance we see in T. ruralis. Sequencing the chloroplast genome is an important first step in answering
these questions about the interplay between the two
genomes, nuclear and plastid, in this important trait.
The role of the chloroplast genome and the expression
of its genes remains a fertile area for study.

Conclusions
The Tortula ruralis genome differs from that of the only
other published chloroplast genome sequence, that of
Physcomitrella patens. The differences in chloroplast
genome structure and gene content offer some tantalizing hypotheses in relation to one of the fundamental differences between the two mosses in their ability to
tolerate the stresses associated with extreme water loss.
The most intriguing observation is the loss of the petN
gene, presumably to the nuclear genome, given its
important role in photosynthetic electron transport and
the significance of this with regards to desiccation
tolerance.
The polymorphisms we have uncovered in the sequencing of the genome offer the possibility of the generating
chloroplast DNA markers for future fine-level phylogenetic studies, or for future population genetic studies
examining individual variation within populations.
Methods
DNA Isolation and Sequencing

Material of Tortula ruralis for DNA extraction was
grown in sterile culture from spores collected from a
wild population located under a pine canopy along the
southern bank of the Bow River west of Calgary,
Alberta, Canada, approximately 51° 06’ 04° N, 114° 17’
10° W (voucher specimen deposited in the University
and Jepson Herbaria, University of California, Berkeley,
CA). Isolated sporophytes with intact capsules were
carefully removed from the parent gametophyte, washed
twice in 5% bleach solution each followed by a sterile
water wash, and placed on sterile minimal media and
the spores removed by breaking open the capsules. The
moss cultures used in the preparation of chloroplasts
for genome sequencing were derived from five different

Page 6 of 8

capsules. Isolation of intact chloroplasts was achieved
using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) wherein
fluorescently stained organelles can be visualized, separated, and collected using flow cytometry. Total chloroplast DNA was amplified using rolling circle
amplification (RCA) with random hexamer primers [30].
Amplified products were sheared in approximately
equal-sized fragments of ~3000 bp by repeated passage
through a narrow aperture using a Hydroshear (Genemachines, San Carlos, CA). The resulting fragments
were subcloned and sequenced by the Department of
Energy Joint Genome Institute (JGI). Detailed methods
for the complete process can be found in Wolf et al.,
[31].
Genome Assembly, Finishing & Annotation

Because the sequences covered random sections of the
chloroplast, sufficient numbers of DNA fragments were
sequenced to provide an average of eight times coverage
for the majority of the genome. Sequence fragments
were assembled using the Phrap software package, and
Consed was used to visualize assembly of contigs (see
http://www.phrap.org). Remaining gaps, low-coverage
regions, and areas of questionable assembly were manually resequenced from specific clones or from genomic
DNA. The finishing sequences were obtained by cloning,
and sequencing PCR-generated fragments obtained
using flanking primers from known sequence or by use
of a GenomeWalker™ kit (Clontech, Mountain View,
CA) using either purified chloroplast genomic DNA or
total genomic DNA extractions that contain significant
levels of chloroplast DNA.
The resulting genome was annotated using the on-line
Dual Organellar GenoMe Annotator (DOGMA) [32]
and tRNAscan-SE [25], and gene content was compared
to published annotated chloroplast genomes and in particular to the chloroplast genome of Physcomitrella
patens (NC_005087). Location of introns, pseudogenes,
and beginning and endpoints of many genes was aided
by the libraries of plastid DNA and annotated genomes
available through NCBI GenBank http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov[33].
The inverted repeat (IR) characteristic of the chloroplast genome in embryophytes causes problems for
automatic alignment programs such as Phrap, because
the two IR copies cannot be differentiated by the program. However, this apparent problem can be turned
into an advantage and can be used to determine the
ends of the IR. Consed (an assembly viewing program)
visually indicates when paired sequences from the same
clone are placed too far apart in a contig, making the
general area of the IR visually apparent if sufficient
reads are presented. A consensus sequence for this
region with an additional ~2 kb on either side was

Oliver et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:143
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/143

excised, and all reads were then aligned to this
sequence. Using the “color means match” option in
Consed, the ends of the IR were visually determined by
finding the points at which there was a transition from
all reads agreeing to the presence of two distinct
sequence motifs.
The sequence of the chloroplast genome for Tortula
ruralis (=Syntrichia ruralis) was deposited into the
NCBI GenBank http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov[33] and
given the accession number FJ546412.
Additional file 1: Table S1: Tortula ruralis chloroplast genome gene
list. List of all genes annotated for the chloroplast genome of Tortula
ruralis, indicating protein products position on genome and strand.
Exons are listed separately for genes with introns.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11143-S1.DOC ]

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by a collaborative grant from the US
National Science Foundation: ATOL: Collaborative Research: Deep Green
Plant Phylogenetics: Novel Analytical Methods for Scaling from Genomics to
Morphology http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/TreeofLife/, NSF grant numbers
0228729 to BDM and JLB, 0228660 to DFM, and 0228432 to PGW. Additional
funding was provided by the US National Institutes of Health
Interdisciplinary Training in Genomic Sciences Grant T32-HG00035 to KGK
and USDA-CSREES NRI grant 2007-02007 to MJO. The authors would like to
thank Dr Aru K. Arumuganathan, Director of the Flow Cytometry Core,
Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason for his excellent technical
assistance in the isolation of intact chloroplasts using fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS). We would also like to acknowledge the excellent
technical assistance of Dean Kelch, Jeremy Hudgeons, and Jim Elder. Work
presented here was also supported in part by USDA-ARS CRIS project 362221000-027-00 (MJO). This work was also partly performed under the auspices
of the US Department of Energy’s Office of Science, Biological and
Environmental Research Program, and by the University of California,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC0205CH11231. Mention of a trademark or proprietary product does not
constitute a guarantee or warranty of the product by the United States
Department of Agriculture, and does not imply its approval to the exclusion
of other products that may also be suitable.
Author details
1
USDA-ARS-MWA, Plant Genetics Research Unit, University of Missouri, 205
Curtis Hall, Columbia MO, 65211, USA. 2Department of Integrative Biology
and University and Jepson Herbaria, 1001 Valley Life Sciences Bldg,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-2465, USA. 3Physical
Biosciences, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Rd, Berkeley,
CA, 94720 USA. 4Genome Project Solutions, Inc, 1024 Promenade St,
Hercules, CA 94547, USA. 5Department of Biology, University of Washington,
106 Kincaid, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA. 6Department of Biology, Utah State
University, 5305 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT, 84322, USA. 7The Lewis B. and
Dorothy Cullman Program for Molecular Systematics Studies, 200th St &
Southern Boulevard, The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx NY 10458, USA.
Authors’ contributions
MJO cultured and maintained the experimental material, conducted the
finishing sequencing, participated in assembly and sequence analysis, and
drafted the manuscript, AGM and BDM participated in the genome
assembly, data analysis and comparative analyses, JVK and JLB sequenced
the isolated chloroplast DNA, ensured quality sequence data, and
participated in assembly of the genome, DFM and KDE were involved in the
conception of the project, isolated (FACS) and purified the chloroplast DAN
for sequencing, PGW, APD and KGK were involved in the conception of the

Page 7 of 8

project, participated in the assembly of the genome, annotated the genome,
and participated in the comparative analyses. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 27 August 2009
Accepted: 27 February 2010 Published: 27 February 2010
References
1. Mishler BD: Syntrichia. Flora of North America North of Mexico the Flora of
North America Editorial Committee: Oxford University Press, USA 2007,
27:618-627.
2. Bewley JD: Physiological aspects of desiccation-tolerance. Ann Rev Plant
Physiol 1979, 30:195-238.
3. Oliver MJ, Bewley JD: Desiccation-tolerance of plant tissues: A
mechanistic overview. Hort Reviews 1997, 18:171-214.
4. Winner WE, Bewley JD: Terrestrial mosses as bioindicators of SO2
pollution stress. Oecologia 1978, 35:221-230.
5. Naszradi T, Badacsonyi A, Németh N, Tuba Z, Bati F: Zinc, Lead, and
Cadmium content in meadow plants and mosses along the M3
motorway (Hungary). J Atmos Chem 2004, 49:593-603.
6. Alpert P, Oliver MJ: Drying without Dying. Desiccation and survival in
plants: Drying without Dying CABI Publishing, Wallingford, OxonBlack M,
Pritchard HW 2002, 3-43.
7. Oliver MJ, Mishler BD, Quisenberry JE: Comparative measures of
desiccation-tolerance in the Tortula ruralis complex. I. Variation in
damage control and repair. Am J Bot 1993, 80:127-136.
8. Wood AJ: The nature and distribution of vegetative desiccationtolerance in hornworts, liverworts and mosses. The Bryologist 2007,
110:163-177.
9. Proctor MCF, Oliver MJ, Wood AJ, Alpert P, Stark LR, Cleavitt N, Mishler BD:
Desiccation Tolerance in Bryophytes. The Bryologist 2007, 110:595-621.
10. Oliver MJ, Velten J, Mishler BD: Desiccation tolerance in bryophytes: a
reflection of the primitive strategy for plant survival in dehydrating
habitats?. Integ Comp Biol 2005, 45:788-799.
11. Tuba Z, Csintalan Z, Proctor MCF: Photosynthetic responses of a moss,
Tortula ruralis, ssp. ruralis, and the lichens Cladonia convoluta and C.
furcata to water deficit and short periods of desiccation, and their
ecophysiological significance: a baseline study at present-day CO2
concentration. New Phytol 1996, 133:353-361.
12. Platt KA, Oliver MJ, Thomson WW: Membranes and organelles of
dehydrated Selaginella and Tortula retain their normal configuration and
structural integrity: freeze fracture evidence. Protoplasma 1994, 178:57-65.
13. Kelch DG, Driskell A, Mishler BD: Inferring phylogeny using genomic
characters: a case study using land plant plastomes. Molecular Systematics
of Bryophytes [Monographs in Systematic Botany 98] Missouri Botanical
Garden Press, St. LouisGoffinet B, Hollowell V, Magill R 2004, 3-12.
14. Qiu Y-L, Li L, Wang B, Chen Z, Knoop V, Groth-Malonek M, Dombrovska O,
Lee J, Kent L, Rest J, Estabrook GF, Hendry TA, Taylor DW, Testa CM,
AMbros M, Crandall-Stotler B, Duff RJ, Stech M, Frey W, Quandt D, Davis CC:
The deepest divergences in land plants inferred from phylogenomic
evidence. PNAS 2006, 103:15511-1551.
15. Mishler BD, Oliver MJ: Putting Physcomitrella patens on the Tree of Life:
The evolution and ecology of mosses. The Moss Physcomitrella patens:
Annual Plant Reviews Wiley-Blackwell, New JerseyKnight C, Perroud P-F,
Cove D 2009, 36:1-15.
16. Sugiura C, Kobayashi Y, Aoki S, Sugita C, Sugita M: Complete chloroplast
DNA sequence of the moss Physcomitrella patens : evidence for the loss
and relocation of rpoA from the chloroplast to the nucleus. Nuc Acids
Res 2003, 31:5324-5331.
17. Goffinet B, Wickett N, Werner O, Ros RM, Shaw AJ, Cox CJ: Distribution and
phylogenetic significance of a 71 kb inversion in the chloroplast
genome of the Funariidae (Bryophyta). Annals of Botany 2007, 99:747-753.
18. Mishler BD, Kelch DG: Phylogenomics and early land plant evolution.
Bryophyte Biology Cambridge University Press, New YorkShaw AJ, Goffinet B
, Second 2009, 173-197.
19. Allen JF: Cytochrome b6f: structure for signalling and vectorial
metabolism. Trends Plant Sci 2004, 3:130-137.
20. Mccauley DE, Stevens JE, Peroni PA, Raveill JA: The spatial distribution of
chloroplast DNA and allozyme polymorphisms within a population of
Silene alba (Caryophyllaceae). Am J Bot 1996, 83:727-731.

Oliver et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:143
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/143

Page 8 of 8

21. Brown RC, Lemmon BL: Monoplastidic cell division in lower land plants.
Am J Bot 1990, 77:559-571.
22. Renzaglia KS, Brown RC, Lemmon BE, Duckett JG, Ligrone R: The
occurrence and phylogenetic significance of monoplastidic meiosis in
liverworts. Can J Bot 1994, 72:65-7.
23. Guo XY, Ruan SL, Hu WM, Ca DG, Fan LJ: Chloroplast DNA insertions into
the nuclear genome of rice: the genes, sites and ages of insertion
involved. Functional & Integrative Genomics 2008, 8:101-108.
24. Barthet MM, Hilu KW: Expression of matK : functional and evolutionary
implications. Am J Bot 2007, 94:1402-1412.
25. Lowe TM, Eddy SR: tRNAscan-SE: a program for improved detection of
transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:955-964.
26. Turmel M, Otis C, Lemieux C: The chloroplast genome sequence of Chara
vulgaris sheds new light into the closest green algal relatives of land
plants. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:1324-1338.
27. Oliver MJ: Lessons on dehydration tolerance from desiccation tolerant
plants. Plant Desiccation Tolerance Wiley-Blackwell, New JerseyJenks MA,
Wood AJ 2007, 11-50.
28. Oliver MJ, Dowd SE, Zaragoza J, Mauget SA, Payton PR: The rehydration
transcriptome of the desiccation-tolerant bryophyte Tortula ruralis :
Transcript classification and analysis. BMC Genomics 2004, 5(89):1-19.
29. Zeng Q, Chen X, Wood AJ: Two early light-inducible protein (ELIP) cDNAs
from the resurrection plant Tortula ruralis are differentially expressed in
response to desiccation, rehydration, salinity, and high light. J Exp Bot
2002, 53:1197-1205.
30. Dean FB, Nelson JR, Giesler TL, Lasken RS: Rapid amplification of plasmid
and phage DNA using Phi 29 DNA polymerase and multiply-primed
rolling circle. Genome Res 2001, 11:1095-1099.
31. Wolf PG, Karol KG, Mandoli DF, Kuehl J, Arumuganathan K, Ellis MW,
Mishler BD, Kelch DG, Olmstead RG, Boore JL: The first complete
chloroplast genome sequence of a lycophyte, Huperzia lucidula
(Lycopodiaceae). Gene 2005, 350:117-128.
32. Wyman SK, Boore JL, Jansen RK: Automatic annotation of organellar
genomes with DOGMA. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:3252-3255.
33. National Center for Biotechnology Information’s Genbank Database.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-143
Cite this article as: Oliver et al.: Chloroplast genome sequence of the
moss Tortula ruralis: gene content, polymorphism, and structural
arrangement relative to other green plant chloroplast genomes. BMC
Genomics 2010 11:143.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
