<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution of the Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis in bacteria</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-362"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Stephen O Opiyo"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolution of the Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis in bacteria
Stephen O Opiyo1,3, Rosevelt L Pardy1, Hideaki Moriyama1, Etsuko N Moriyama2*

Abstract
Background: Lipid A is the highly immunoreactive endotoxic center of lipopolysaccharide (LPS). It anchors the LPS
into the outer membrane of most Gram-negative bacteria. Lipid A can be recognized by animal cells, triggers
defense-related responses, and causes Gram-negative sepsis. The biosynthesis of Kdo2-lipid A, the LPS substructure,
involves with nine enzymatic steps.
Results: In order to elucidate the evolutionary pathway of Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis, we examined the distribution
of genes encoding the nine enzymes across bacteria. We found that not all Gram-negative bacteria have all nine
enzymes. Some Gram-negative bacteria have no genes encoding these enzymes and others have genes only for
the first four enzymes (LpxA, LpxC, LpxD, and LpxB). Among the nine enzymes, five appeared to have arisen from
three independent gene duplication events. Two of such events happened within the Proteobacteria lineage,
followed by functional specialization of the duplicated genes and pathway optimization in these bacteria.
Conclusions: The nine-enzyme pathway, which was established based on the studies mainly in Escherichia coli K12,
appears to be the most derived and optimized form. It is found only in E. coli and related Proteobacteria. Simpler
and probably less efficient pathways are found in other bacterial groups, with Kdo2-lipid A variants as the likely
end products. The Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic pathway exemplifies extremely plastic evolution of bacterial genomes,
especially those of Proteobacteria, and how these mainly pathogenic bacteria have adapted to their environment.

Background
Kdo2-lipid A is a complex glycolipid consisting of glucosamine, 3-OH fatty acids, and unusual sugar 3-deoxy-Dmanno-octulonsonic acid (Kdo) (Figure 1). Kdo2-lipid A
is the principle and essential component of the outer
leaflet of the outer cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria
[1]. It is the membrane anchor for a wide and variable
range of polysaccharide repeating units extending
beyond the cell wall. Together with Kdo 2 -lipid A the
polysaccharide repeating units constitute lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a class of molecules believed to occur
solely in Gram-negative bacteria and Cyanobacteria and
essential for their viability [2]. Lipid A is a potent
immunoreactive factor responsible for triggering a
macrophage mediated and frequently overwhelming
immune response resulting in endotoxic shock, a potentially lethal condition. Indeed, as far as is known, all vertebrates and an assortment of invertebrates exhibit a
robust and highly specific anti-LPS response.
* Correspondence: emoriyama2@unl.edu
2
School of Biological Sciences and Center for Plant Science Innovation,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588-0118, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

For decades lipid A/LPS has been essentially synonymous with Gram-negative organisms, yet, despite the
relative diversity of the Gram-negative bacteria, the origin and evolutionary pathway of this important molecule
is virtually unknown. Presently the complex, nineenzyme biosynthetic process of Kdo 2 -lipid A is best
known from Escherichia coli (Figure 1). The genetic
sequences for the enzymes have been derived from the
E. coli genome (Additional file 1). This pathway and the
concomitant genes in E. coli probably represent the
most highly evolved Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic pathway
given the highly adapted association of E. coli with vertebrate enteric habitats, which depends heavily on the
structure of LPS. Thus, the central question becomes:
can the evolutionary radiation of LPS be described by
understanding the comparative genomics of Kdo2-lipid
A biosynthetic pathway?
Traditional classification of bacteria: Gram-positive vs.
Gram-negative, is based on the Gram-staining procedure
[3]. Gram-positive bacteria retain the crystal-violet stain,
whereas Gram-negative bacteria are decolorized with
alcohol or acetone and stained red with safranin or
basic fuchsin. Different responses to the staining are

© 2010 Opiyo et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

HO
OH

HO

OH

OH

O

O

HO

Page 2 of 13

OH O

WaaA

O

OH

OO

O
O

LpxK

-O

4’

P

LpxB

6’

O

5’

O
3’

2’

LpxC

HO

NH

O

O

5

4

1’

O

OH
O

6

O

1

O

2
3

O

O

O

NH
O

O-

P
OH

O
O

O

HO

LpxH

HO

O

14

LpxM

14

12

14

14

LpxA

14

LpxA

LpxD

LpxD
LpxL
UDP-GlcNAc

Kdo2-Lipid A

LpxA LpxC LpxD LpxH LpxB
1

2

3

4

LpxK WaaA LpxL LpxM
DS-1-P

5

6

7

Figure 1 Structure of Kdo2-lipid A from E. coli K12. Parts joined
by the nine enzymes are indicated with shadow and dashed
surrounding. The nine-enzyme pathway is illustrated at the bottom.
Abbreviations for enzymes and substrates are as follows: LpxA: UDPN-acetylglucosamine acyltransferase, LpxC: UDP-3-O-(3hydroxymyristoyl) N-acetylglucosamine deacetylase, LpxD: UDP-3-O(3-hydroxymyristoyl) glucosamine N-acyltransferase, LpxH: UDP-2,3diacylglucosamine pyrophosphatase, LpxB: lipid-A-disaccharide
synthase, LpxK: lipid A 4’-kinase, WaaA (or KdtA): 3-deoxy-D-mannooctulosonate-lipid A transferase (or Kdo-lipid A transferase), LpxL (or
HtrB): Kdo2-lipid IVA lauroyl-ACP acyltransferase, LpxM (or MsbB):
Kdo2-lauroyl-lipid IVA -myristoyl-ACP acyltransferase, ACP: acyl carrier
protein, UDP: uridine diphosphate, UDP-GlcNAc: UDP-Nacetylglucosamine, and DS-1-P: tetraacyldisaccharide 1-phosphate. In
the pathway, substrates are shown with numbers as follows: 1: UDP3-O-(3-hydroxytetradecanoyl)-N-acetylglucosamine, 2: UDP-3-O-(3hydroxytetradecanoyl)-glucosamine, 3: UDP-2,3-bis(3hydroxytetradecanoyl)-glucosamine, 4: 2,3-bis(3hydroxytetradecanoyl)-beta-D-glucosaminyl 1-phosphate, 5:
tetraacyldisaccharide 1,4’-bis-phosphate (lipid IVA), 6: Kdo2-lipid IVA,
and 7: Kdo2-(lauroyl)-lipid IVA.

caused by the chemical properties of the cell walls.
Gram-positive bacteria have an impermeable cell wall
that is made of thick peptidoglycan and is not affected
by decolorization. Gram-negative bacteria, on the other
hand, have a thin peptidoglycan layer and an outer
membrane containing LPS, which can be disrupted by
decolorization.
Phylogenetic analysis of biomolecular sequences is
now considered to be more reliable for bacterial classification. Molecular phylogenies do not support the traditional simple grouping of eubacteria: Gram-negative vs.
Gram-positive [e.g., [4-6]]. The most important and
often used phylogenetic marker for bacteria is 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) due to their highly conserved nature
of sequences. The second edition of Bergey’s Manual of

Systematic Bacteriology [7], the gold standard of bacterial classification, is mostly based on 16S rRNA phylogenies. Gram-positive bacteria are now grouped into two
paraphyletic groups: the phylum Firmicutes (low G+C
content Gram-positive) and the phylum Actinobacteria
(high G+C content Gram-positive). Gram-negative bacteria are composed of more than 20 of highly diverged
phyla. Firmicutes, a Gram-positive phylum, forms a sister cluster with a Gram-negative phylum Cyanobacteria.
The phylum Proteobacteria, the largest Gram-negative
bacteria group that includes E. coli and many pathogens,
is the most derived group of bacteria.
Understanding the distribution and diversity of the
Kdo 2 -lipid A biosynthetic pathway among bacteria is
important for a multitude of reasons. Notwithstanding
its limitation, Gram-staining is still widely used in clinical practice. It is often the first diagnostic test, which is
crucial for the initial diagnostic and treatments. Kdo2lipid A is the highly immunoreactive endotoxic center
of LPS. The endotoxicity of LPS is dependent on and
mediated by the Kdo2-lipid A component. Furthermore,
the Kdo2-lipid A pathway is being considered as a target
for new antibiotic development [e.g., [8,9]]. Kdo2-lipid A
is required for growth of E. coli and most other Gramnegative bacteria. Inhibitors of the Kdo 2 -lipid A biosynthesis, therefore, can become good antibiotics against
these bacteria.
In order to elucidate how the Kdo 2 -lipid A biosynthetic pathway has evolved in the bacterial kingdom, we
examined the distribution of the nine enzymes involved
in this pathway across 61 bacterial genomes. With
Kdo 2 -lipid A as the final product, the entire pathway
was expected to be highly conserved among Gram-negative bacteria. On the other hand, Gram-positive bacteria
would lack some or all of the enzymes required for the
Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis. On the contrary, we identified
a widely varied level of conservation in this pathway
among Gram-negative bacteria. We showed that the
currently known, considered to be “canonical”, nineenzyme pathway, which has been characterized mainly
in E. coli and related bacteria, does not represent nor
should be considered as ancestral to all Gram-negative
bacteria. Rather, the nine-enzyme pathway represents
the product of genomic plasticity, evolved in highlyderived Proteobacteria, especially in those closely related
to E. coli.

Results and discussion
Distribution of Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic enzymes across
bacterial genomes

Gram-negative bacteria, by definition, should have LPScontaining outer membranes; hence all these bacteria
are expected to possess all genes encoding Kdo2-lipid A
biosynthetic enzymes. These genes, on the other hand,

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

are likely to be missing from Gram-positive bacteria
unless they are used in alternative functions in these
bacteria. As we expected, none of the seven Gram-positive bacteria we examined had the genes encoding these
enzymes. On the other hand, we found surprisingly a
wide range of presence/absence patterns with these
genes among 54 Gram-negative bacteria we studied
(Additional file 1). Only one group of Gammaproteobacteria including Escherichia, Vibrio, and Shewanella species had all nine genes required for Kdo 2 -lipid A
biosynthesis. We call them Group II Gammaproteobacteria (see Figure 2A). Remaining Gammaproteobacteria
(Group I; e.g., Pseudomonas, Xylella fastidiosa, Coxiella
burnetii) as well as Betaproteobacteria (e.g., Bordetella
parapertussis and Dechloromonas aromatica) had all
genes except lpxM. All other Gram-negative bacteria are
missing lpxH as well as lpxM genes. This implies that
the Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic pathway consisting of the
nine enzymes is not ancestral, but rather a specialized,
derived form found only in E. coli and closely related
Group II Gammaproteobacteria. The LpxM protein,
found only in this group, shares a sequence similarity of
47% with the LpxL protein, and appeared to be a product of gene duplication. We also found two exceptions
among Proteobacteria. Nitrosomonas europaea (Betaproteobacteria) had only one (lpxK) and two species of
Walbachia (Alphaproteobacteria) we examined had
none of the nine genes. Seven other bacteria also lacked
all of the nine genes although they are classified as
Gram-negative (Figure 2B and Additional file 1).
Gene duplication and functional specialization
characterize the evolution of the Kdo2-lipid A
biosynthetic pathway

We identified multiple gene-duplication events during
the evolution of the Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic pathway.
lpxA and lpxD are duplicated genes and share 45%
sequence similarity at the protein level. LpxA and LpxD
proteins have trimer structures with different quaternary
assembly and active sites [10,11]. All bacteria we examined either possess or lack both enzymes. Therefore,
generation of this pair of enzymes must have been an
early event in Gram-negative bacteria. Further duplications of either of the genes have happened in some
lineages independently (e.g., lpxA duplication in Geobacter sulfurreducens and lpxD duplication in Gloeobacter
violaceus) (see Additional file 1 for details). lpxH gene,
which encodes pyrophosphatase [12], appeared to have
arisen from a duplication of lpxH2 gene within the Proteobacteria lineage but before Beta- and Gammaproteobacteria divergence (Figure 2). Furthermore, lpxL gene
seems to be prone to duplicate. We identified several
such duplication events including one that generated
lpxM in the Group II Gammaproteobacteria (Figure 2).

Page 3 of 13

lpxH/lpxH2 duplication within Proteobacteria

LpxH and LpxH2 proteins share 42% sequence similarity
[13]. LpxH2 candidates were found mainly in the phylum
Proteobacteria, but also in some other Gram-negative
bacteria (Additional file 1, Figure 2). The duplication
event that created the lpxH gene happened within the
phylum Proteobacteria before the divergence of Betaand Gammaproteobacteria (Figures 2A and 3). Interestingly, after the duplication event, lpxH2 gene was lost
from the Group II Gammaproteobacteria except for Shewanella sp. MR-4 (Figure 2A). It implies that lpxH2 gene
is dispensable when lpxH gene exists. Since some of the
Gram-negative bacteria that have seven enzymes in the
pathway have only lpxH2 gene or neither lpxH nor lpxH2
genes, it is tempting to speculate that functions of LpxH
and LpxH2 proteins are interchangeable or can be
replaced by other non-specific phosphatases (see below
for LpxI discovery). Babinski et al. [12] showed that lpxH
gene from Pseudomonas aeruginosa compensated for the
loss of E. coli K12 lpxH, but lpxH2 of P. aeruginosa did
not. For those Proteobacteria that have both of LpxH and
LpxH2 proteins, the function of each protein may have
been optimized for their specific roles. Such specialized
proteins may not be as flexible as the ancestral form.
LpxH and LpxH2 proteins belong to the metallophosphoesterase superfamily (PF00149; the Pfam database
[14]). The LpxH and LpxH2 protein groups form two distinct clusters among similar bacterial proteins identified
(see the inset of Figure 3). All these proteins contain a
five-block motif: D-X n -GD-X n -GNH(E/D)-X n -H-X n GHXH, a signature of the metallophosphoesterase superfamily. Mutational and structural analyses showed that
these residues are involved in metal-ion binding and catalysis [15-18]. The five-block residues are completely conserved among all proteins we examined including LpxH
and LpxH2 (shown in the inset of Figure 3) except for the
third block, GNH(E/D), where the histidine (H) is substituted to arginine (R) only in LpxH (Additional file 2).
After the LpxH2/H ancestral protein was generated by a
duplication of a gene encoding a protein similar to calcineurin phosphohydrolase (the closest relative of LpxH2/
H), another duplication produced the two protein families,
LpxH2 and LpxH (Figure 3). Although the function of
LpxH2 has been unknown, comparisons of structural
models of LpxH and LpxH2 proteins indicate that the
five-block regions form similar cavities in these proteins
(see Methods and Additional file 2). The histidine-to-arginine substitution in the third block in LpxH may have
increased the LpxH activity significantly in Beta- and
Gammaproteobacteria.
Recently, Metzger and Raetz [19] identified a gene
located between lpxA and lpxB in Caulobacter crescentus (Alphaproteobacteria). This gene, named lpxI, which
does not share similarity with lpxH/lpxH2 genes, was

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

A

Page 4 of 13

Dictyoglomus turgidum (Di)
Dictyoglomus thermophilum (Di)
Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fu)
Thermodesulfovibrio yellowstonii (Ni)
Gloeobacter violaceus (Cn)
Prochlorococcus marinus (Cn)

4 enzymes

Brachyspira hyodysenteriae (Sp)

Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Cn)
Anabaena variabilis (Cn)
Rhodopirellula baltica (Pl)
Opitutus terrae (Ve)

Enzymes

Methylacidiphilum infernorum (Ve)

ACDHBKWLM
H2

Porphyromonas gingivalis (Ba)
Pelodictyon phaeoclathratiforme (Cr)

P

Geobacter sulfurreducens (δ)

Campylobacter jejuni (ε)
Helicobacter pylori (ε)

B
Di. thermophilum
Di. turgidum

Rickettsia prowazekii (α)
Brucella suis (α)
Agrobacterium tumefaciens (α)
Sinorhizobium meliloti (α)
Desulfovibrio vulgaris (δ)
Candidatus Koribacter versatilis Ellin345 (Ac)
Coxiella burnetii (γ)
gamma proteobacterium HTCC5015 (γ)
Dechloromonas aromatica (β)
Bordetella parapertussis (β)
Ralstonia solanacearum (β)
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (γ)
Xylella fastidiosa (γ)
Marinobacter aquaeolei (γ)

8 enzymes

Saccharophagus degradans (γ)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (γ)
Pseudomonas putida (γ)
Pseudomonas syringae (γ)
Shewanella sp. MR-4 (γ*)
Vibrio cholerae (γ*)
Haemophilus influenzae (γ*)
Pasteurella multocida (γ*)
Yersinia pestis (γ*)
Escherichia coli (γ*)

9 enzymes

Thermosipho africanus
Petrotoga mobilis
Coprothermobacter proteolyticus (Fr)
Candidatus Desulforudis audaxviator (Fr)
Alkaliphilus oremlandii (Fr)
Streptococcus pneumoniae (Fr)
Staphylococcus aureus (Fr)
Cellulomonas flavigena (At)
Acidimicrobium ferrooxidans (At)
Bra. hyodysenteriae
Treponema denticola
Borrelia burgdorferi
Thermod. yellowstonii
Thermus thermophilus
Deinococcus geothermalis
Roseiflexus sp RS-1
Ch. trachomatis
Ch. muridarum
O. terrae
Me. infernorum
Rh. baltica
Gl. violaceus
Pr. marinus
Synechocystis sp. PCC
An. variabilis
Po. gingivalis
Can. Koribacter versatillis Ellin345
Pel. phaeoclathratiforme
Cam. jejuni
He. pylori
Des. vulgaris
Ge. sulfurrenducens
F. nucleatum
Ag. tumefaciens
Bru. suis
Ri. prowazekii
Si. meliloti
Wolbachia pipientis
Cox. burnetii
Bord. parapertussis
Nitrosomonas europaea
Ra. solanacearum
Dec. aromatica
Ste. maltophilia
X. fastidiosa
Ps. syringae
Ps aeruginosa
Ps. putida
Ma. aquaeolei
Sac. degradans
gamma proteobacterium HTCC231
Shewanella sp.*
Vi. cholerae*
Ha. influenzae*
Pa. multocida*
Y. pestis*
0.2 nucleotide substitutions/site
Sal. enterica*
E. coli K12*
0.5 amino acid substitutions/site

7 enzymes

Chlamydia trachomatis (Ch)
Chlamydia muridarum (Ch)

Salmonella enterica (γ*)

Figure 2 Distribution of Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic enzymes across bacteria genomes. Maximum likelihood phylogenies were reconstructed
based on concatenated six protein sequences (A) and 16S rRNA nucleotide sequences (B). Enzymes identified are color-coded as follows: LpxA
(A, red), LpxC (C, red), LpxD (D, red), LpxH (H, red), LpxH2 (H2, yellow), LpxK (K, blue), WaaA (W, blue), LpxL (L, blue), LpxM (M, purple), and LpxP
(P, light blue). White boxes indicate the absence of the corresponding enzymes. Bacteria that have none of the enzymes and only LpxK are
marked with white and blue stars, respectively. Red arrowheads indicate the points inferred to be the emergence of the Kdo2-lipid A
biosynthetic pathway with the last four enzymes (LpxK-LpxM). Circles at internal nodes indicate bootstrap-supporting values as follows: black
circles ≥ 95%, gray circles ≥ 85%, and white circles ≥ 75%. Proteobacteria and Gram-positive bacteria are shown with green and orange letters/
lines, respectively. Bacterial classifications (phylum, and for Proteobacteria, class) are shown in parentheses using the following abbreviations. Ac:
Acidobacteria, Ba: Bacteroidetes, Ch: Chlamydiae, Cn: Cyanobacteria, Cr: Chlorobi, Di: Dictyoglomi, Fu: Fusobacteria, Ni: Nitrospire, Pl:
Planctomycetes, Sp: Spirochaetes, Ve: Verrucomicrobia, a: Alphaproteobacteria, b: Betaproteobacteria, δ: Deltaproteobacteria, ε:
Epsilonproteobacteria, and g: Gammaproteobacteria. Group-II Gammaproteobacteria, those that have all nine enzymes, are shown with *.

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

Page 5 of 13

Porphyromonas gingivalis (Ba)
Pelodictyon phaeoclathratiforme (Cr)
Geobacter sulfurreducens (δ)
Campylobacter jejuni (ε)
Coxiella burnetii (γ)
Helicobacter pylori (ε)
Candidatus Koribacter versatilis Ellin345 (Ac)
Rhodopirellula baltica (Pl)
Shewanella sp. MR-4 (γ*)
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (γ)
Sinorhizobium meliloti (α)
Agrobacterium tumefaciens (α)

LpxH2

Marinobacter aquaeolei (γ)

Bordetella parapertussis (β)
Ralstonia solanacearum (β)
Dechloromonas aromatica (β)
gamma proteobacterium HTCC5015 (γ)

LpxH2/LpxH
duplication

Pseudomonas aeruginosa (γ)
Pseudomonas putida (γ)
Pseudomonas syringae (γ)
Saccharophagus degradans (γ)
Opitutus terrae (Ve)
Marinobacter aquaeolei (γ)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (γ)

se

Pseudomonas putida (γ)

a
cle

u
on
ex 01)
air 037
ep 0
A r (IPR
DN

Pseudomonas syringae (γ)
Coxiella burnetii (γ)
Dechloromonas aromatica (β)
Bordetella parapertussis (β)
gamma proteobacterium HTCC5015 (γ)

H

Lpx

o
UD
luc
P-2,3-diacylg

yd

ro
la

LpxH2

se
)
(IPR
01 0 1 8 3

Saccharophagus degradans (γ)

ne
mi
sa

h

2.0 amino acid substitutions/site

Xylella fastidiosa (γ)

LpxH

Cy
phosp clic-AMP
hodie
steras
e,
class
(IPR0 -II
00396
)

cD
Sb
e )
as 93
le 45
uc 00
on IPR
(

Ex

e
ras )
9
ste
die 00097
ho
osp IPR
Ph 936 (
0
MJ

Ca
ph lcine
os
p uri
(IP hoes n-lik
e
R0
136 teras
22) e

Ralstonia solanacearum (β)

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (γ)
Shewanella sp. MR-4 (γ*)
Pasteurella multocida (γ*)
Haemophilus influenzae (γ*)
Vibrio cholerae (γ*)
Yersinia pestis (γ*)
Escherichia coli (γ*)
Salmonella enterica (γ*)
1.0 amino acid substitutions/site

Figure 3 The maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree of LpxH, LpxH2, and related proteins. Circles at internal nodes indicate bootstrapsupporting values as follows: black circles ≥ 95%, gray circles ≥ 85%, and white circles ≥ 70%. Proteobacteria are shown with green letters and
lines. Group-II Gammaproteobacteria are indicated by *. See Figure 2 legend for abbreviations used for bacterial classification. The red arrowhead
shows where the LpxH/LpxH2 duplication happened. The inset shows the maximum likelihood phylogeny reconstructed from all of the similar
proteins identified in this study. It shows that each protein family (indicated with triangles with InterPro accession numbers) forms a distinct cluster.

found to catalyze UDP-2,3-diacylglucosamine hydrolysis
by a mechanism different from lpxH. It also rescued
lpxH-deficient E. coli. lpxI orthologues were found in
many, but not all of, bacteria that lack lpxH [19] (see
also Additional file 1). Metzger and Raetz [19] reported

that lpxI was found even from Gram-positive bacteria
(e.g., Firmicutes). It suggests that replacement of lpxH
gene function appears to be not very difficult, and multiple gene recruitments may have happened during the
evolution of Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic pathway.

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

Multiple lpxL duplications within Gram-negative bacteria

Figure 4 shows the LpxL phylogeny for the entire set of
bacteria we examined. Among the Gram-negative bacteria, we identified three or more independent duplication as well as loss events that involved with lpxL. The
first duplication appears to have happened within the
phylum Proteobacteria. After Coxiella burnetti has
diverged from other Beta- and Gammabacteria, the
duplication event generated two lpxL genes (we call
them Types 1 and 2 in Figure 4). One of the duplicated
lpxL genes, Type 2, was lost before the divergence of
the Group-I Gammaproteobacteria. Interestingly this
event coincided with the second gene duplication that
created the lpxM gene in this group (Figure 4). The
third duplication event is identified only in the lineage
leading to closely related enterobacteria (E. coli, Salmonella enterica, and Yersinia pestis). The duplication product, LpxP, shares 74% sequence similarity with the
LpxL protein. The original lpxL gene (Type 1) was subsequently lost from the Y. pestis genome (Figure 4). In
addition to these major duplication events, we also identified at least two species-specific lpxL duplications in
Gammaproteobacteria: one for Type 1 (in Alcanivorax
borkumensis SK2; order Oceanospirillales) and another
for Type 2 (in Francisella novicida; order Thiotrichales).
Functional specialization in lpxL and its paralogues

Although it is not clear if Types-1 and -2 LpxL function
differently in all Beta/Gammabacteria, in some bacteria
duplicated LpxL copies have apparently evolved to have
slightly different functions. Type-1 LpxL (LpxL1) of Bordetella pertutssis adds secondary 2-hydroxy laurate at
the position 2 of Kdo 2 -lipid A, and Type-2 LpxL
(LpxL2) adds myristate at the position 2’ of Kdo2-lipid
A [20]. Francisella novicida has species-specific duplicated copies of Type-1 LpxL, LpxL1 and LpxL2, and
they function as Kdo-dependent and -independent acyltransferases, respectively. LpxL2 of F. novicida can add
laurate at the position 2’ of lipid IVA without Kdo addition by WaaA, which probably accounts for a large
amount of ‘free lipid A’ (lipid A not linked to Kdo, core
sugars, and O-antigen) [21].
Acyltransferases LpxL and LpxM share 47% sequence
similarity. In E. coli, LpxL and LpxM add laurate at the
position 2’ and myristate at the position 3’ of Kdo2-lipid
A, respectively [22], and have conserved catalytic dyad
motifs HX4D and HX4E, respectively [23]. LpxM is not
required for growth of E. coli K12 [24]. While E. coli
K12 mutants for lpxL and lpxM genes can grow on
minimum medium and at all temperatures, they do not
grow on rich media at temperatures above 32°C [24-26].
In Haemorphilus influenzae, LpxL and LpxM are both
myristoyl transferases [27]. Therefore, four types of
related enzymes appear to have evolved after duplications: “generalist” LpxL enzyme that catalyzes the

Page 6 of 13

transfer of both laurate and myristate, more “specialized” LpxL enzyme that acts only either on laurate or
myristate, and LpxM newly “specialized” as myristoyl
transferase. LpxM is especially optimized for Group II
Gammaproteobacteria, many of which live in warm
body temperatures of the hosts.
Cold-temperature adaptation with lpxP

Another lpxL duplicate, lpxP, is found in E. coli and
other closely related enterobacteria. While E. coli and S.
enterica have all three paralogous genes (lpxL, lpxM,
and lpxP), Y. pestis has only two derived copies (lpxM
and lpxP). lpxP encodes the palmitoleoyl transferase,
which is induced upon cold shock (12°C) [28]. In E. coli,
palmitoleate is incorporated to Kdo2-lipid IVA by LpxP
at the position where normally LpxL incorporates laurate (See Figure 1) [26]. Palmitoleoyl residue changes
the properties (e.g., fluidity) of the outer membrane and
makes bacteria adaptable to low growth temperatures.
While survival outside of an animal host is necessary in
bacteria such as E. coli, H. influenzae, for example, is
transmitted from animal to animal without being
exposed in the colder environment. These Gram-negative bacteria do not have lpxP gene.
Another example of lipid-A associated adaptation is
found in Y. pestis. Y. pestis changes its host from flea to
mouse, cold to warm temperature environment. Due to
the absence of the lpxL gene, Y. pestis produces only
tetra-acylated Kdo2-lipid IVA (see Figure 1) but not hexaacylated Kdo2-lipid A at 37°C (mammalian host temperature) contributing bacteria’s poor Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4) stimulating activity [29]. With lpxP activated,
however, at 21°C (flea temperature) hexa-acylated Kdo2lipid A with palmitoleate is synthesized in Y. pestis.
Four-enzyme pathway in Cyanobacteria and Dictyoglomi:
the primordial form?

Cyanobacteria (Cn in Figure 2) and Dictyoglomi (Di)
have only four of the nine genes: lpxA, lpxC, lpxD, and
lpxB (Figure 2). These genes encode the first four
enzymes of Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis up to the point of
producing the lipid A disaccharide (DS-1-P in Figure 1),
implying that this may be the primordial form of lipid
A. LPS from Cyanobacteria is simpler than that of LPS
of enteric bacteria and lacks Kdo, heptose, and phosphate [30-33]. It is reported that LPS from E. coli is
more toxic than LPS from Cyanobacteria [34].
Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic pathway gene clusters

In prokaryotic genomes, many functionally related gene
sets exist as gene clusters [e.g., [35-37]]. As shown in Additional file 3, genes encoding some or all of the first four
enzymes (lpxA , lpxC, lpxD, and lpxB) are often found in a
gene cluster. Dictyoglomi and Cyanobacteria have only
these four genes and all of them exist in a conserved gene

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

Page 7 of 13

Brachyspira hyodysenteriae (Sp)
Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fu)
Desulfovibrio vulgaris (δ)

LpxL

LpxM

Rhodopirellula baltica (Pl)
Pelodictyon phaeoclathratiforme (Cr)
Porphyromonas gingivalis (Ba)
Chlamydia trachomatis (Ch)
Chlamydia muridarum (Ch)
Geobacter sulfurreducens (δ)
Candidatus Koribacter versatilis Ellin345 (Ac)
Brucella suis (α)
Agrobacterium tumefaciens (α)
Sinorhizobium meliloti (α)
Rickettsia prowazekii (α)
Methylokorus infernorum (Ve)
Helicobacter pylori (ε)
Campylobacter jejuni (ε)
Thermodesulfovibrio yellowstonii (Ni)
Coxiella burnetii (γ)
Ralstonia solanacearum (β)
Bordetella parapertussis (β)
Dechloromonas aromatica (β)
Shewanella sp. MR-4 (γ*)
Vibrio cholerae (γ*)
Haemophilus influenzae (γ*)
Pasteurella multocida (γ*)
Yersinia pestis (γ*)
Salmonella enterica (γ*)
Escherichia coli (γ*)
Francisella novicida (γ) LpxL2
Francisella novicida (γ) LpxL1
Opitutus terrae (Ve)
Xylella fastidiosa (γ)
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (γ)
gamma proteobacterium HTCC5015 (γ)
Alcanivorax borkumensis (γ) LpxL1
Marinobacter aquaeolei (γ)
Saccharophagus degradans (γ)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (γ)
Pseudomonas putida (γ)
Pseudomonas syringae (γ)
Shewanella sp. MR-4 (γ*)
Pasteurella multocida (γ*)
Haemophilus influenzae (γ*)
Vibrio cholerae (γ*)
Salmonella enterica (γ*)
Escherichia coli (γ*)
Yersinia pestis (γ*)
Escherichia coli (γ*)
Salmonella enterica (γ*)
Xylella fastidiosa (γ)
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (γ)
gamma proteobacterium HTCC5015 (γ)
Marinobacter aquaeolei (γ)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (γ)
Pseudomonas putida (γ)
Pseudomonas syringae (γ)
Saccharophagus degradans (γ)
Alcanivorax borkumensis (γ) LpxL2
Alcanivorax borkumensis (γ) LpxL3
Ralstonia solanacearum (β)
Bordetella parapertussis (β)
Dechloromonas aromatica (β)

Type 1 LpxL

Type1/Type2
duplication

LpxP

Type 2 LpxL

0.5 amino acid substitutions/site

Figure 4 The maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree of LpxM and LpxL proteins. Circles at internal nodes indicate bootstrap-supporting
values as follows: black circles ≥ 95%, gray circles ≥ 85%, and white circles ≥ 70%. Proteobacteria are shown with green letters and lines. GroupII Gammaproteobacteria are indicated by *. See Figure 2 legend for abbreviations used for bacterial classification. Red arrowheads indicate where
the duplication events happened. Light-red arrowheads are where the species-specific duplications are found.

cluster, lpxD-lpxC-fabZ-lpxA-lpxB. Note that the majority
of these clusters include fabZ, which encodes (3R)-hydroxymyristoyl acyl carrier protein (ACP) dehydratase [38].
(3R)-hydroxymyristoyl-ACP serves as an important biosynthetic branch point. It is transferred to UDP-GlcNAc
to initiate lipid A biosynthesis (Figure 1). Or it is elongated

by FabZ and other enzymes of fatty acid synthesis to palmitate, which is a major component of the membrane glycerophospholipids. Therefore, this gene cluster is
important for regulating the proportion of LPS and phospolipids in bacterial membranes. In some bacteria (e.g.,
Bacteriodetes, Chorolobi, and Verrucomicrobia), the

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

lpxC-fabZ part of the cluster has been fused and exists as a
single gene (denoted as lpxC/fabZ in Additional file 3).
Although lpxH is not found as part of these gene clusters,
as mentioned before, its functional equivalent lpxI is
found as part of the cluster (existing between lpxA and B)
in Alphaproteobacteria and some other bacteria (see Additional file 3). Another often found gene cluster is waaAlpxK. Again these genes encode enzymes that catalyze the
two consecutive steps (see Figure 1) indicating the importance of their functional association in Kdo 2 -lipid A
biosynthesis.
Bacterial phylogeny based on Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic
enzymes

There have been a number of studies to reconstruct
bacterial phylogenies using various molecular data [e.g.,
[6,39-41]]. Our phylogenies based on Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis enzymes, analyzed concatenated (Figure 2A) or
individually (Figures 3 and 4), are largely consistent with
previous studies. The monophyletic cluster including
both Gamma- and Betaproteobacteria is strongly supported by high bootstrap values in both Lpx protein and
16S rRNA phylogenies (both 100% in Figure 2) as well
as by the shared events with lpxH2/lpxH and lpxL duplications. Group II Gammaproteobacteria, which includes
the orders Enterobacteriales (E. coli, S. enterica, Y. pestis), Pasteurellales (H. influenzae, Pasteurella multocida),
Vibrionales (V. cholerae), and Alteromonadales (Shewanella), also form a highly-supported cluster (100% bootstrap values in Figure 2) and all share the newly
emerged lpxM gene. This Group II Gammaproteobacteria clustering is also supported by the phylogenetic
study by Gao et al. [42] based on 36 protein data as
well as the existence of the unique indel within the
RNA polymerase b-subunit (RpoB).
Using the Dictyoglomi (Di) as the outgroup (see
Method), phylogenies based on both of the Kdo2-lipid A
biosynthetic enzymes and the 16S rRNA (Figure 2)
showed that most bacteria that have no or only four
enzymes (both Gram-positive and -negative bacteria) are
located at basal relative to those that have seven or
more of the enzymes. Exceptions include Brachyspira
hyodysenteriae (phylum Spirochaetes) and Thermodesulfovibrio yellowstonii (phylum Nitrospirae). Fusobacterium nucleatum (phylum Fusobacteria) was also located
outside of Cyanobacteria cluster in Kdo2-lipid A enzyme
phylogeney (Figure 2A). Note, however, that none of
their phylogenetic positions was supported with high
bootstrap values in 16S rRNA phylogeny (Figure 2B).
Gram-negative bacteria with no Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic
enzyme

Some Gram-negative bacteria (shown with stars in
Figure 2B; described also in [2]) as well as Gram-

Page 8 of 13

positive bacteria (shown with orange letters and lines in
Figure 2B) have none of the nine enzymes. As mentioned above, since both Dictyoglomi (used as the outgroup; Di) and Cyanobacteria (Cn) have the first four
enzymes of the pathway, having the four-enzyme pathway appears to be the ancestral form. It implies that
these enzymes must have been lost later in some groups
of bacteria. Many of the Gram-negative bacteria with no
Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic enzyme have specialized lifestyles: endosymbiomes (e.g., Wolbachia and Borrelia
burgdorferi), obligate chemolithoautotroph (e.g., Nitrosomonas europaea), or hyperthermophiles (e.g., Thermosipho africanus and Petrotoga mobilis).
Wolbachia is either a parasite in arthropod hosts or a
mutualist in nematode hosts. It belongs to the family Anaplasmataceae of the class Alphaproteobacteria. Bacteria in
this family include Ehrlichia chaffeensis, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, and Neorickettsia sennetsu; all are obligatory
intracellular and infect mononuclear cells and granulocytes.
They have been found to lack Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic
genes [43,44]. Therefore, the loss of these genes must have
happened in the ancestral lineage after the divergence from
other Alphaproteobacteria group (see Figure 2). Lipid A is
directly recognized by hosts to trigger innate-immune
responses [45,46]. It is likely that the endosymbiotic bacteria have adapted to their symbiosis conditions by losing
these enzymes and not producing lipid A to avoid the
induction of defense response in the hosts.
B. burgdorferi is also an endosymbiotic bacterium that
lives in ticks and transmits Lyme disease. T. denticola is
the cause of periodontal disease. They belong to the
family Spirochaetaceae (phylum Spirochaetes; order
Spirochaetales). While there have been conflicting
reports whether or not these bacteria have LPS [47-50],
genomic analyses showed that these bacteria as well as
T. pallidum lack Kdo 2 -lipid A biosynthetic enzymes
[51-53] (see also Additional file 1). The genes encoding
these enzymes have been identified from two other Spirochaetes families (Leptospiraceae and Brachyspiraceae),
which diverged earlier than the family Spirochaetaceae
(Figure 2A; also see [54,55]). Therefore, the gene loss
event is specific to the family Spirochaetaceae.
N. europaea is a obligate chemolithoautotroph that
derives all its energy and reductant for growth from the
oxidation of ammonia to nitrite [56,57]. Only lpxK was
detected from this Betaproteobacteria species. From the
closely related Nitrosospira multiformis genome, only
lpxA gene instead has been identified [58]. These
ammonia-oxidizing bacteria have the smallest genomes
(~3 Mb) among the Betaproteobacteria [59]. Such genome reduction is consistent with their limited lifestyles
as we also described earlier for obligate endosymbionts
and pathogens. Large numbers of insertion sequence
elements and pseudogenes have been also found in

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

these genomes, implying that the genomes are still
undergoing reductive evolution.
The origin of lpx genes found in plants

Although Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis is generally considered to be a prokaryote-specific function, at least six of
the nine lpx genes have been identified in Arabidopsis
thaliana, Oryza sativa, and other plant genomes (data
not shown; see also [2,60]). Furthermore, Armstrong et
al. [61] showed that green algae and chloroplasts of garden pea were stained with affinity reagents for lipid A,
indicating that these plants synthesize lipid A-like molecules. Since Cyanobacteria possess only the first four
genes, all or some of the lpx genes in plants must have
been transferred from bacteria other than Cyanobacteria.
Despite the presence of lipid A genes in plants,
attempts to isolate canonical lipid A from plants using
standard methods have been unsuccessful (Pardy, unpublished data); no structural data for putative lipid A in
higher plants has been reported. However, as mentioned
earlier, using a novel lipid A preparation technique, Snyder et al. [33] recently provided chemical composition
and structural data for a simple lipid A from strains of a
marine cyanobacteria, Synechoccoccus. The composition
and structure of this lipid A differs significantly from that
of canonical lipid A from enteric bacteria in ways
hypothesized to be adaptive to marine Synechoccoccus.
Although not only the first four genes exist in plants,
lipid A in plants likely has a structure different from
canonical lipid A. Further investigation is required to elucidate the origin and functions of eukaryotic lpx genes.

Conclusions
Bacterial genomes are extremely plastic. Although the
Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis is one of the most fundamental and most conserved pathways among Gram-negative
bacteria, this study showed that gene duplications as
well as partial or complete losses of the genes encoding
these enzymes have happened multiple times independently during bacterial evolution. Each group of bacteria
took advantage of such evolutionary events to optimize
the pathway and adapted to their specialized life style.
The most optimized form of the pathway is found in
the Proteobacteria lineage, especially among Gammaproteobacteria. The nine-enzyme pathway currently known
for the Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis, which is mainly studied in E. coli and related bacteria, is the most optimized, derived form of this pathway.
Methods

Page 9 of 13

of 61 bacterial species were sampled from 17 phyla
including seven species of Gram-positive bacteria as
controls. All species we examined were listed in Additional file 1. Accession numbers and sequences used in
this study are available upon request.
Searching for Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic enzymes
BLAST similarity search

We started our similarity searches using the nine enzyme
sequences obtained from the E. coli K12 genome as
queries against the other 60 bacterial genomes (Additional file 1). For LpxI, the protein sequence from Caulobacter crescentus (Accession # NP_420717) was used as
the query. blastp and tblastn [63] were used with a constant sample size (database length = 6,400,000; obtained
as the average length of the query, 320 amino acids, multiplied by a constant genome size, 20,000). A cut-off Evalue of 0.01 was used to define when there was no hit.
In order to identify the orthologues, ‘reciprocal’ searches
were performed against all genomes again using the top
hit from each genome as the query.
Note that for Brachyspira hyodysenteriae (phylum
Spirochaetes), although Bellgard et al. [54] mentioned
that seven of the nine genes including lpxM was identified from the genome, we found only one copy of the
LpxL protein and no other protein similar to LpxL.
Profile hidden Markov models (profile HMMs)

Each bacterial genome was further searched using profile
HMMs. The protein sequences found by BLAST similarity searches were used to build the profile HMM for each
enzyme using the w0.5 script of the Sequence Alignment
and Modeling Software System (SAM, version 3.5; [64]).
Since LpxH and LpxM were found only from a limited
number of Proteobacteria, additional protein sequences
of these enzymes (29 for LpxH, 42 for LpxM, and 47 for
LpxI) were added from other bacterial species to build
profile HMMs. A cut-off E-value of 0.01 and a constant
sample size of 20,000 were used for profile HMM
searches. To identify LpxH2 from the profile HMM
search results, all sequences with the metallophosphoesterase superfamily signature D-Xn-GD-Xn-GNH(E/D)X n -H-X n -GHXH were selected. Phylogenetic analysis
(described next) was performed on the selected
sequences to discriminate LpxH2 from other metallophosphoesterase. All sequences found in the cluster (78%
bootstrap support) that includes proteins identified as the
“UDP-2,3-diacylglucosamine hydrolase family” by InterPro (IPR010138; [65]) were selected as LpxH2 as well as
LpxH (see Figure 3). Based on the phylogenetic locations,
sequences belonging to LpxH and LpxH2 were decided.

Bacterial genomes used

All bacterial genomes were downloaded from National
Center for Biotechnology Information website [62] and
other sources (see Additional file 1). Complete genomes

Multiple alignment and phylogenetic tree inferences

Multiple alignments of protein sequences were generated using MAFFT with the FFT-NS-i algorithm

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

(version 6.24; [66]). The multiple alignment of 16S
rRNA sequences was reconstructed using cmalign
(Infernal package, version 1.02; [67]). Phylogenetic trees
were reconstructed by a maximum likelihood method
RAxML (version 7.0.4; [68]). The WAG and the general
time reversible substitution model both with Gamma
distribution for rate heterogeneity among sites were
used for protein and 16S rRNA sequences, respectively.
Bootstrap analysis was done with 1,000 replications for
all phylogenetic reconstructions.
Many previous studies based on various molecular
data showed that among the phyla included in this
study, Thermotogae, Dictyoglomi, Deinococcus-Thermus, and Chloroflex have diverged earlier than other
groups. Thermotogae and Dictyoglomi, for example,
were shown as outmost groups based on studies from
16S and 23S rRNAs, ribosomal and other proteins, as
well as based on the gene order [e.g., [6,41,69,70]]. Firmicutes as an outmost group has been also supported
by some other studies [40,71,72]. Our phylogenetic analysis showed paraphyly among Firmicutes. Among bacterial group that have Kdo 2 -lipid A biosynthetic
enzymes, we chose Dictyoglomi as the outgroup.
For the concatenated protein phylogeny for Figure 2A,
six proteins are included: LpxA, LpxC, LpxD, LpxB,
WaaA, and LpxL. Each set of protein sequences were
aligned individually, then concatenated as one alignment. For LpxA and LpxD, one copy was included
when there was more than one duplicated copy. For
LpxL, Type 1 was included when there was more than
one copy.
Structural analyses of LpxH and LpxH2 proteins
Conserved motifs

Figure S1A (Additional file 2) shows the five conserved
blocks found in multiple alignments of the calcineurinlike phosphoesterase (PF00149), LpxH, and LpxH2
families, illustrated by sequence logos [73-75]. For
PF00149, the Pfam seed alignment including 330
sequences was used. For LpxH and LpxH2, the alignments included 17 and 38 sequences, respectively, after
removing sequences from closely related Pseudomonas
species except for those from P. aeruginosa as
representatives.
Structural modeling of LpxH and LpxH2 proteins

Structural modeling is performed using SWISS-MODEL
Web server [76,77]. Figure S1B (Additional file 2) shows
the models for P. aeruginosa LpxH (Pa LpxH; the positions 2- 232 out of 240 amino acids were used for modeling), P. aeruginosa LpxH2 (Pa LpxH2; pos. 16- 253
out of 270 aa), Y. pestis LpxH (Yp LpxH; pos. 3-238 out
of 240 aa), and Sinorhizobium meliloti LpxH2 (Sm
LpxH2; pos. 15-252 out of 281 aa). These four proteins
were chosen to represent following different modes of

Page 10 of 13

LpxH/LpxH2 proteins: “LpxH2 only” mode before
LpxH/LpxH2 duplication (Sm LpxH2), “dual” mode
after the duplication (Pa LpxH and Pa LpxH2), and
“LpxH only mode” after losing LpxH2 (Yp LpxH;
modeling was not possible with the E. coli LpxH) (see
Figure 2 for the evolution of LpxH/LpxH2 proteins).
The template structure selected by the server was a
potential phosphoesterase, aq_1956 of Aquifex aeolicus
vf5 (PDB ID: 2YVT, A chain) [78]. The sequence similarities (E-values) of the four proteins against the template
are as follows: 2 × 10 -06 (Pa LpxH), 1.7 × 10 -26 (Pa
LpxH2), 3.70 × 10-5 (Yp LpxH), and 9.20 × 10-26 (Sm
LpxH2). All LpxH and LpxH2 models have the root
mean square deviations (RMSD) against the template
structure of less than 1 Å for the colored regions and
they are considered to be usable for modeling. Structural mining and graphic representation were done by
PyMol [79].
Structural comparisons between LpxH and LpxH2

The first step of the LpxH/H2 reaction is to fix the UDP
moiety (the substrate) to the enzyme. All four models
show that blocks 3 and 5 form a narrow gate in the
middle of the long cleft formed by blocks 1, 2, 3, and 4.
The block 3 potentially plays a key role in this UDPbinding. An arginine (R), included in the block 3 of
LpxH, has been found to bind directly to a uridine in a
deoxyuridine triphosphate pyrophosphatase (dUTPase)
[80,81]. The guanidine moiety in the arginine interacts
with the uridine in UDP. Németh-Pongrácz et al. [82]
showed that removal of the guanidine moiety almost
compromised the dUTPase activity. Therefore, it is plausible that the replacement of His253 (the position number is based on the alignment shown in the sequence
logo) in LpxH2 to Arg253 in LpxH has brought significant increase in the enzyme activity in LpxH. Based on
the studies on the dUTPase [80] as well as on metaldependent phosphatases [e.g., [15,17]], the roles of the
conserved residues in LpxH and LpxH2 proteins can be
inferred as follows. Negatively charged aspartic acids (D)
in blocks 1, 2, and 3 form metal-binding sites (e.g., for
magnesium). The block 4 provides an attacking-water.
Finally the block 5 holds the negatively charged sugar
moiety of UDP-2,3-diacylglucosamine.
LpxH2 does not have the key arginine in the block 3.
However, our modeling showed that the block 4 of Pa
LpxH2 is located inside of the molecule (not visible in
Figure S1B, Additional file 2) and the red-colored area
is occupied by the amino acids “NRW” providing an
arginine residue. Both in LpxH2 from S. meliloti (Sm
LpxH2) and in LpxH from Y. pestis (Yp LpxH), the
block 4’s are also inside of the molecules (not visible),
and other amino acids ("GDW” and “DTD”, respectively)
occupy the corresponding surface areas (red colored;
these amino acid positions are also marked with red

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

open boxes under the sequence logos for LpxH and
LpxH2). Although the block 4 is highly conserved
among LpxH and LpxH2 proteins, only the first histidine (H) is conserved among the metalophosphoesterase
family (see the PF00149 sequence logo in Figure S1A,
Additional file 2). Its exact spatial position may not significantly affect the enzyme function. Alternatively, a
neighboring histidine may be used for the same function. After the duplication, acquiring an arginine (R) in
the block 3 must have improved the enzymatic activity
of LpxH (Pa LpxH and Yp LpxH). Such change did not
happen in the duplicated counterpart protein, Pa
LpxH2. However, a mutation to gain another arginine
happened in the area structurally equivalent to the block
4. This could also increase the enzymatic activity of
LpxH2 in P. aeruginosa.

Additional material

Page 11 of 13

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Additional file 1: Distribution of Kdo2-lipid A biosynthetic enzymes
across bacteria.

15.

Additional file 2: Structural analysis of LpxH and LpxH2 proteins.

16.

Additional file 3: Distribution of Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis gene
clusters.
17.
Acknowledgements
We thank anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. This work
was supported in part by Nebraska Tobacco Settlement Biomedical Research
Development Funds to HM.

18.

Author details
School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE
68588-0118, USA. 2School of Biological Sciences and Center for Plant Science
Innovation, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588-0118, USA.
3
Molecular and Cellular Imaging Center-South, Ohio Agricultural Research
and Development Center, 2021 Coffey Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

19.

Authors’ contributions
SOO carried out bioinformatics analysis and drafted the manuscript. HM
carried out structural analysis and helped with interpretation of the data and
drafting of the manuscript. RLP and ENM conceived of the study and helped
with interpretation of the data and drafting of the manuscript. All authors
read and approved of the manuscript.

21.

1

Received: 20 July 2010 Accepted: 24 November 2010
Published: 24 November 2010

20.

22.

23.

24.
References
1. Raetz CRH: Biochemistry of endotoxins. Annual Review of Biochemistry
1990, 59:129-170.
2. Raetz CRH, Whitfield C: Lipopolysaccharide endotoxins. Annual Review of
Biochemistry 2002, 71:635-700.
3. Bartholomew JW, Mittwer T: The Gram stain. Bacteriological reviews 1952,
16:1-29.
4. Woese CR, Fox GE: Phylogenetic structure of the prokaryotic domain: the
primary kingdoms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA
1977, 74:5088-5090.
5. Ludwig W, Klenk HP: Overview: a phylogenetic backbone and taxonomic
framework for prokaryotic systematics. In Bergey’s Manual of Systematic
Bacteriology. Volume 1. 2 edition. Edited by: Boon DR, Castenholz RW. New
York, NY: Springer; 2001:49-65.

25.

26.

27.

Rappé MS, Giovannoni SJ: The uncultured microbial majority. Annu Rev
Microbiol 2003, 57:369-394.
Garrity GM, Brenner DJ, Krieg NR, Staley JR, (eds.): Bergey’s Manual of
Systematic Bacteriology. The Proteobacteria. New York, NY: Springer;, 2
2005.
Barb AW, McClerren AL, Snehelatha K, Reynolds CM, Zhou P, Raetz CR:
Inhibition of lipid A biosynthesis as the primary mechanism of CHIR-090
antibiotic activity in Escherichia coli. Biochemistry 2007, 46:3793-3802.
Onishi HR, Pelak BA, Gerckens LS, Silver LL, Kahan FM, Chen MH,
Patchett AA, Galloway SM, Hyland SA, Anderson MS, et al: Antibacterial
agents that inhibit lipid A biosynthesis. Science 1996, 274:980-982.
Williams AH, Raetz CRH: Structural basis for the acyl chain selectivity and
mechanism of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine acyltransferase. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, USA 2007, 104:13543-13550.
Bartling CM, Raetz CRH: Crystal structure and acyl chain selectivity of
Escherichia coli LpxD, the N-acyltransferase of lipid A biosynthesis.
Biochemistry 2009, 48:8672-8683.
Babinski KJ, Ribeiro AA, Raetz CRH: The Escherichia coli gene encoding the
UDP-2,3-diacylglucosamine pyrophosphatase of lipid A biosynthesis.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 2002, 277:25937-25946.
Babinski KJ, Kanjilal SJ, Raetz CRH: Accumulation of the lipid A precursor
UDP-2,3-diacylglucosamine in an Escherichia coli mutant lacking the
lpxH gene. Journal of Biological Chemistry 2002, 277:25947-25956.
Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, et al: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2009.
Zhuo S, Clemens JC, Stone RL, Dixon JE: Mutational analysis of a Ser/Thr
phosphatase. Journal of Biological Chemistry 1994, 269:26234-26238.
Tyagi R, Shenoy AR, Visweswariah SS: Characterization of an evolutionarily
conserved metallophosphoesterase that is expressed in the fetal brain
and associated with the WAGR syndrome. Journal of Biological Chemistry
2009, 284:5217-5228.
Miller DJ, Shuvalova L, Evdokimova E, Savchenko A, Yakunin AF,
Anderson WF: Structural and biochemical characterization of a novel
Mn2+-dependent phosphodiesterase encoded by the yfcE gene. Protein
Science 2007, 16:1338-1348.
Shenoy AR, Capuder M, Draškovič P, Lamba D, Visweswariah SS,
Podobnik M: Structural and biochemical analysis of the Rv0805 cyclic
nucleotide phosphodiesterase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Journal
of Molecular Biology 2007, 365:211-225.
Metzger LE, Raetz CR: An alternative route for UDP-diacylglucosamine
hydrolysis in bacterial lipid A biosynthesis. Biochemistry 2010,
49:6715-6726.
Geurtsen J, Angevaare E, Janssen M, Hamstra HJ, ten Hove J, de Haan A,
Kuipers B, Tommassen J, van der Ley P: A novel secondary acyl chain in
the lipopolysaccharide of Bordetella pertussis required for efficient
infection of human macrophages. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:37875-37884.
Raetz CR, Guan Z, Ingram BO, Six DA, Song F, Wang X, Zhao J: Discovery of
new biosynthetic pathways: the lipid A story. J Lipid Res 2009, 50(Suppl):
S103-108.
Clementz T, Zhou Z, Raetz CRH: Function of the Escherichia coli msbB
gene, a multicopy suppressor of htrB knockouts, in the acylation of lipid
A. Journal of Biological Chemistry 1997, 272:13353-11360.
Six DA, Carty SM, Guan Z, Raetz CR: Purification and mutagenesis of LpxL,
the lauroyltransferase of Escherichia coli lipid A biosynthesis. Biochemistry
2008, 47:8623-8637.
Karow M, Georgopoulos C: Isolation and characterization of the
Escherichia coli msbB gene, a multicopy suppressor of null mutations in
the high-temperature requirement gene htrB. Journal of Bacteriology
1992, 174:702-710.
Karow M, Fayet O, Cegielska A, Ziegelhoffer T, Georgopoulos C: Isolation
and characterization of the Escherichia coli htrB gene, whose product is
essential for bacterial viability above 33 degrees C in rich media. J
Bacteriol 1991, 173:741-750.
Vorachek-Warren MK, Ramirez S, Cotter RJ, Raetz CR: A triple mutant of
Escherichia coli lacking secondary acyl chains on lipid A. J Biol Chem
2002, 277:14194-14205.
Lee NG, Sunshine MG, Engstrom JJ, Gibson BW, Apicella MA: Mutation of
the htrB locus of Haemophilus influenzae nontypable strain 2019 is
associated with modifications of lipid A and phosphorylation of the lipooligosaccharide. Journal of Biological Chemistry 1995, 270:27151-27159.

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

28. Carty SM, Sreekumar KR, Raetz CR: Effect of cold shock on lipid A
biosynthesis in Escherichia coli. Induction At 12 degrees C of an
acyltransferase specific for palmitoleoyl-acyl carrier protein. J Biol Chem
1999, 274:9677-9685.
29. Montminy SW, Khan N, McGrath S, Walkowicz MJ, Sharp F, Conlon JE,
Fukase K, Kusumoto S, Sweet C, Miyake K, et al: Virulence factors of
Yersinia pestis are overcome by a strong lipopolysaccharide response.
Nat Immunol 2006, 7:1066-1073.
30. Keleti G, Sykora JL: Production and properties of cyanobacterial
endotoxins. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 1982, 43:104-109.
31. Weckesser J, Jurgens UJ: Cell walls and external layers. Methods in
Enzymology 1988, 67:173-188.
32. Trent SM: Biosynthesis, transport, and modification of lipid A. Biochemistry
and Cell Biology 2004, 82:71-86.
33. Snyder SD, Brahamsha B, Azadi P, Palenki B: Structure of compositionally
simple lipopolysaccharide from marine Synechococcus. Journal of
Bacteriology 2009, 191:5499-5509.
34. Stewart I, Schluter PJ, Shaw GR: Cyanobacterial lipopolysaccharides and
human health - a review. Environmental Health 2006, 5:7.
35. Demerec M, Ozeki H: Tests for Allelism among Auxotrophs of Salmonella
Typhimurium. Genetics 1959, 44:269-278.
36. Itoh T, Takemoto K, Mori H, Gojobori T: Evolutionary instability of operon
structures disclosed by sequence comparisons of complete microbial
genomes. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:332-346.
37. Overbeek R, Fonstein M, D’Souza M, Pusch GD, Maltsev N: The use of gene
clusters to infer functional coupling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999,
96:2896-2901.
38. Mohan S, Kelly TM, Eveland SS, Raetz CR, Anderson MS: An Escherichia coli
gene (FabZ) encoding (3R)-hydroxymyristoyl acyl carrier protein
dehydrase. Relation to fabA and suppression of mutations in lipid A
biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 1994, 269:32896-32903.
39. Brochier C, Bapteste E, Moreira D, Philippe H: Eubacterial phylogeny based
on translational apparatus proteins. Trends in Genetics 2002, 18:1-5.
40. Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, Mering Cv, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.
41. Battistuzzi FU, Hedges SB: A major clade of prokaryotes with ancient
adaptations to life on land. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2009,
26:335-343.
42. Gao B, Mohan R, Gupta RS: Phylogenomics and protein signatures
elucidating the evolutionary relationships among the
Gammaproteobacteria. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2009, 59:234-247.
43. Lin M, Rikihisa Y: Ehrlichia chaffeensis and Anaplasma phagocytophilum
lack genes for lipid A biosynthesis and incorporate cholesterol for their
survival. Infect Immun 2003, 71:5324-5331.
44. Wu M, Sun LV, Vamathevan J, Riegler M, Deboy R, Brownlie JC, McGraw EA,
Martin W, Esser C, Ahmadinejad N, et al: Phylogenomics of the
reproductive parasite Wolbachia pipientis wMel: a streamlined genome
overrun by mobile genetic elements. PLoS Biol 2004, 2:E69.
45. Aderem A, Ulevitch RJ: Toll-like receptors in the induction of the innate
immune response. Nature 2000, 406:782-787.
46. Janssens S, Beyaert R: Role of Toll-like receptors in pathogen recognition.
Clin Microbiol Rev 2003, 16:637-646.
47. Beck G, Habicht GS, Benach JL, Coleman JL: Chemical and biologic
characterization of a lipopolysaccharide extracted from the Lyme
disease spirochete (Borrelia burgdorferi). Journal of Infectious Diseases 1985,
152:108-117.
48. Takayama K, Rothenberg RJ, Barbour AG: Absence of lipopolysaccharide in
the Lyme disease spirochete, Borrelia burgdorferi. Infection and Immunity
1987, 55:2311-2313.
49. Dahle UR, Tronstad L, Olsen I: 3-hydroxy fatty acids in a
lipopolysaccharide-like material from Treponema denticola strain FM.
Endodontics and Dental Traumatology 1996, 12:205-209.
50. Schultz CP, Wolf V, Lange R, Mertens E, Wecke J, Naumann D,
Zähringer U: Evidence for a new yype of outer membrane lipid in oral
spirochete Treponema denticola. Functioning permeation barrier
without lipopolysaccharides. Journal of Biological Chemistry 1998,
273:15661-15666.
51. Fraser CM, Casjens S, Huang WM, Sutton GG, Clayton R, Lathigra R, White O,
Ketchum KA, Dodson R, Hickey EK, et al: Genomic sequence of a Lyme
disease spirochaete, Borrelia burgdorferi. Nature 1997, 390:580-586.

Page 12 of 13

52. Fraser CM, Norris SJ, Weinstock GM, White O, Sutton GG, Dodson R,
Gwinn M, Hickey EK, Clayton R, Ketchum KA, et al: Complete genome
sequence of Treponema pallidum, the syphilis spirochete. Science 1998,
281:375-388.
53. Seshadri R, Myers GS, Tettelin H, Eisen JA, Heidelberg JF, Dodson RJ,
Davidsen TM, DeBoy RT, Fouts DE, Haft DH, et al: Comparison of the
genome of the oral pathogen Treponema denticola with other
spirochete genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:5646-5651.
54. Bellgard MI, Wanchanthuek P, La T, Ryan K, Moolhuijzen P, Albertyn Z,
Shaban B, Motro Y, Dunn DS, Schibeci D, et al: Genome sequence of the
pathogenic intestinal spirochete Brachyspira hyodysenteriae reveals
adaptations to its lifestyle in the porcine large intestine. PLoS One 2009,
4:e4641.
55. Ren SX, Fu G, Jiang XG, Zeng R, Miao YG, Xu H, Zhang YX, Xiong H, Lu G,
Lu LF, et al: Unique physiological and pathogenic features of Leptospira
interrogans revealed by whole-genome sequencing. Nature 2003,
422:888-893.
56. Arp DJ, Stein LY: Metabolism of inorganic N compounds by ammoniaoxidizing bacteria. Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
2003, 38:471-495.
57. Chain P, Lamerdin J, Larimer F, Regala W, Lao V, Land M, Hauser L,
Hooper A, Klotz M, Norton J, et al: Complete genome sequence of the
ammonia-oxidizing bacterium and obligate chemolithoautotroph
Nitrosomonas europaea. J Bacteriol 2003, 185:2759-2773.
58. Norton JM, Klotz MG, Stein LY, Arp DJ, Bottomley PJ, Chain PS, Hauser LJ,
Land ML, Larimer FW, Shin MW, et al: Complete genome sequence of
Nitrosospira multiformis, an ammonia-oxidizing bacterium from the soil
environment. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74:3559-3572.
59. Arp DJ, Chain PS, Klotz MG: The impact of genome analyses on our
understanding of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria. Annu Rev Microbiol 2007,
61:503-528.
60. Raetz CR, Reynolds CM, Trent MS, Bishop RE: Lipid A modification systems
in gram-negative bacteria. Annu Rev Biochem 2007, 76:295-329.
61. Armstrong MT, Theg SM, Braun N, Wainwright N, Pardy RL, Armstrong PB:
Histochemical evidence for lipid A (endotoxin) in eukaryote chloroplasts.
FASEB J 2006, 20(12):2145-2146.
62. National Center for Biotechnology Information. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/].
63. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Research 1997, 25:3389-3402.
64. Hughey R, Krogh A: Hidden Markov models for sequence analysis:
extension and analysis of the basic method. Computer Applications in the
Biosciences 1996, 12:95-107.
65. Hunter S, Apweiler R, Attwood TK, Bairoch A, Bateman A, Binns D, Bork P,
Das U, Daugherty L, Duquenne L, et al: InterPro: the integrative protein
signature database. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37 Database: D211-215.
66. Katoh K, Toh H: Recent developments in the MAFFT multiple sequence
alignment program. Briefings in Bioinformatics 2008, 9:286-298.
67. Eddy SR: Computational analysis of RNAs. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on
Quantitative Biology 2006, 71:117-128.
68. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
69. Baldauf SL, Palmer JD, Doolittle FW: The root of the universal tree and the
origin of eukaryotes based on elongation factor phylogeny. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 1996, 93:7749-7754.
70. Fitz-Gibbon ST, House CH: Whole genome-based phylogenetic analysis of
free-living microorganisms. Nucleic Acids Research 1999, 27:4218-4222.
71. Gupta RS: The phylogeny of proteobacteria: relationships to other
eubacterial phyla and eukaryotes. FEMS Microbiology Reviews 2000,
24:367-402.
72. Lake JA, Skophammer RG, Herbold CW, Servin JA: Genome beginnings:
rooting the tree of life. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009,
364:2177-2185.
73. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14:1188-1190.
74. Schneider TD, Stephens RM: Sequence logos: a new way to display
consensus sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18:6097-6100.
75. WebLogo Web server. [http://weblogo.berkeley.edu/].

Opiyo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:362
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/362

Page 13 of 13

76. Arnold K, Bordoli L, Kopp J, Schwede T: The SWISS-MODEL workspace: a
web-based environment for protein structure homology modelling.
Bioinformatics 2006, 22:195-201.
77. SWISS-MODEL Web server. [http://swissmodel.expasy.org/].
78. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H,
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Research
2000, 28:235-242.
79. DeLano WL: The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System. San Carlos, CA:
DeLano Scientific; 2002.
80. Tarbouriech N, Buisson M, Seigneurin JM, Cusack S, Burmeister WP: The
monomeric dUTPase from Epstein-Barr virus mimics trimeric dUTPases.
Structure 2005, 13:1299-1310.
81. Homma K, Moriyama H: Crystallization and crystal-packing studies of
Chlorella virus deoxyuridine triphosphatase. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct
Biol Cryst Commun 2009, 65:1030-1034.
82. Németh-Pongrácz V, Barabas O, Fuxreiter M, Simon I, Pichova I, Rumlova M,
Zabranska H, Svergun D, Petoukhov M, Harmat V, et al: Flexible segments
modulate co-folding of dUTPase and nucleocapsid proteins. Nucleic Acids
Res 2007, 35:495-505.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-362
Cite this article as: Opiyo et al.: Evolution of the Kdo2-lipid A biosynthesis
in bacteria. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:362.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
