<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Zoonotic helminths affecting the human eye</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41. doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-41"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Domenico Otranto"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

REVIEW

Open Access

Zoonotic helminths affecting the human eye
Domenico Otranto1* and Mark L Eberhard2

Abstract
Nowaday, zoonoses are an important cause of human parasitic diseases worldwide and a major threat to the
socio-economic development, mainly in developing countries. Importantly, zoonotic helminths that affect human
eyes (HIE) may cause blindness with severe socio-economic consequences to human communities. These
infections include nematodes, cestodes and trematodes, which may be transmitted by vectors (dirofilariasis,
onchocerciasis, thelaziasis), food consumption (sparganosis, trichinellosis) and those acquired indirectly from the
environment (ascariasis, echinococcosis, fascioliasis). Adult and/or larval stages of HIE may localize into human
ocular tissues externally (i.e., lachrymal glands, eyelids, conjunctival sacs) or into the ocular globe (i.e., intravitreous
retina, anterior and or posterior chamber) causing symptoms due to the parasitic localization in the eyes or to the
immune reaction they elicit in the host. Unfortunately, data on HIE are scant and mostly limited to case reports
from different countries. The biology and epidemiology of the most frequently reported HIE are discussed as well
as clinical description of the diseases, diagnostic considerations and video clips on their presentation and surgical
treatment.
Homines amplius oculis, quam auribus credunt
Seneca Ep 6,5
Men believe their eyes more than their ears
Background
Blindness and ocular diseases represent one of the most
traumatic events for human patients as they have the
potential to severely impair both their quality of life and
their psychological equilibrium. Although it is highly
unusual, blindness has always been of great interest in
human medicine. For example, the evaluation of the
emotional and quality of life impacts in patients with
some diseases causing blindness (e.g., macular degeneration) gave results similar to those found in diseases such
as AIDS, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cardiac
disorders and leukemia [1]. In addition, blindness has
profound human and socio-economic consequences
with high costs for the individual, and society, linked to
lost productivity and rehabilitation estimated at $42
USD billion per year in 2000, and predicted to reach as
high as $110 USD billion per year in 2020 [2].
There are many causes of blindness and those induced
by parasitic agents (i.e., Protozoa, Helminths and Diptera) are of major public health concern in developed
* Correspondence: d.otranto@veterinaria.uniba.it
1
Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica e Zootecnia, Università degli Studi di Bari,
Valenzano, BA, Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

and developing countries. For example, eye disease
caused by river blindness (Onchocerca volvulus), affects
more than 17.7 million people inducing visual impairment and blindness elicited by microfilariae that migrate
to the eyes after being released by female adult worms
in the subcutaneous tissues [3]. Several parasites localize
in human eyes as an effect of a specific neurotropism
(e.g., Toxoplasma gondii in the foetuses), larval migration (e.g., ascarids, Dirofilaria spp., Trichinella spp.)
and, in a few cases, as a primary localization being
released directly into the eyes (e.g., Thelazia callipaeda
eyeworm and some oestrid fly larvae causing myiasis) [4].
The present article focuses on those zoonotic helminths transmitted from animals to humans that affect
the human eye. Undoubtedly, the parasitic zoonotic diseases and their epidemiology have been changing as a
result of complex factors including abiotic (e.g., increasing temperatures) and biotic (e.g., demographical
changes, political upheaval and land- use practices) that
render this topic of great interest for the scientific community [5]. In addition, the impact of zoonotic diseases
may vary in relationship to the socio-economic context
and to the public health systems in different geographical areas [6], and for some infections, a greater threat

© 2011 Otranto and Eberhard; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

exists for populations in developing countries [7]. Zoonotic helminths infecting eyes (HIE) include those transmitted by vectors (i.e., vector borne zoonosis, VbZ), by
food consumption (i.e., food-borne zoonosis, FbZ) and
those at direct transmission from the environment (i.e.,
water, soil, etc.) also known as environmentally-borne
zoonosis (EbZ). A list of those helminths along with
their route of transmission, geographical distribution,
localization in the eye and definitive host species is provided in Table 1. Unfortunately, data on HIE are scant
and mostly limited to case reports from different countries. Therefore a broad view of these infections on public health is lacking and ophthalmologists have
difficulties managing HIE caused diseases and providing
a clear diagnosis and therapeutic option for them. The
present article focuses on those zoonotic helminths
naturally infecting animals but which, occasionally, are
transmitted to humans and affect the eye. Recent
advances in the diagnosis and control of these parasitic
infestations are also discussed on the basis of their distribution in different geographical areas and of interest
in travel medicine.

Biology and pathogenic effects
Helminths at the adult and/or larval stages may infect
human ocular tissues externally (i.e., eyelids, conjunctiva
sacs, subconjunctiva, and lachrymal glands) or the ocular
globe (i.e., optical nerve, intravitreous retina, anterior and
posterior chamber). Several parasitic helminths adapted a
tropism for animal eyes and related tissues when migrating throughout the host body mainly during their immature stages. This is the case of ascarids and strongylids,
causing ocular larva migrans, filarioid species, and larvae
of Trichinella, as well of trematode and cestode parasites.
Nonetheless, human ocular infestations by zoonotic helminths may also be caused by the parasitic adult stages
as in the case of thelaziids (eye worm infestation) and
filarioid species including those belonging to the genera
Dirofilaria and Onchocerca [8-10]. Thus, ocular localization of helminths is mainly caused by aberrant migration
in host tissues and, only in one case (i.e., T. callipaeda),
by direct inoculation into the eyes. What is equally
unclear is the route that most follow to gain entry into
the eye. It is supposed that some migrate along and follow the optic nerve but others may enter the bloodstream
and be carried to the eye in that manner; however, it is
not known if these are the preferred or aberrant routes,
or even which is the most common route that helminths
follow to reach the eye. Once in the eye, larvae likely find
it to be a more protected site from host immune
responses, but it is not clear that a directed migration
into the eye had occurred.
Consequently, ocular alterations caused by zoonotic
helminths vary considerably causing mild to severe

Page 2 of 21

clinical signs, including lacrimation, epiphora, conjunctivitis, keratitis, corneal ulcers, or retinal lesions, resulting
in vision loss (Table 2). For example, in ascarid infections, visual impairment or blindness results from larval
migration, with destruction of the visual cortex. In addition, larvae might develop inside the patient’s eye (e.g.,
in baylisascariasis) progressively impairing the vision.
However, blindness might be also an effect of the
immune reaction the parasites elicit in the host body, or
of a combined effect of both presence of the parasite
and antibody-mediated reaction. This is the case of
ascarids in which ocular signs are related to inflammation because of the presence of larvae and a local
immune reaction to them in the retina [11,12].

The most commonly reported HIE
Nematodes

There are many nematode parasites that can be found in
the orbit or within the eye proper (Table 1). Although
most nematode infections of the eye are rare, some are
more frequently reported than others. In this section,
we will discuss those zoonotic nematodes that are most
likely to be encountered and reported, by examining
their aetiology, case reports and epidemiology.
Trichuroids

Trichinellosis (Trichuroidea, Trichinellidae) has a cosmopolitan distribution, but is generally less important as
an infection of humans in the tropics than in more temperate regions of the world. Once thought to be a single
species (Trichinella spiralis), there are now at least eight
distinct species recognized. Each of these species has a
slightly different geographical distribution and host
range, and only Trichinella zimbabwensis of crocodiles
in Tanzania, has not been reported from humans to
date. The most striking feature of this group of parasites
is their obligatory transmission by ingestion of infected
meat containing larvae, either in typical cysts or unencapsulated in the case of several species [13]. The clinical course is characterized by two phases, the enteric/
enteral phase, when adult worms are present in the
intestinal mucosa, and the parenteral phase, when the
released larvae invade the host muscles [14]. During the
parenteral phase, which follows the enteral, a typical
syndrome of fever, myalgia, periorbital edema and eosinophilia occur. In addition to periorbital and facial
edema, conjunctivitis is also frequent. The cause of the
orbital and facial edema is not well known. but probably
includes some component of an allergic response. Periorbital edema often appears early in the parenteral
phase, and typically begins to wane after several weeks.
Larvae also affect the macula and retina, causing hemorrhage and other damage as they migrate through and
into these ocular tissues [15]. The diagnosis can be suggested from clinical history of ingesting raw or

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

Page 3 of 21

Table 1 Classification (Order, Family and Species) of zoonotic helminths causing human blindness divided according
their route of transmission (Vector borne zoonosis, VbZ, food consumption, FbZ, and those at direct transmission
from the environment, EbZ), geographical distribution, localization in the eyes and zoonotic relevance
OrderOrder
(Family)

Species (common
name)

Route of transmission

Geographical distribution

Localization

Definitive
host

REF

Angiostrongylus
cantonensis (rat
lungworm)

Ingestion of snails,
slugs, shellfish and
crustacean (FbZ)

Asia, Australia, Africa, USA,
Pacific Islands, Caribbean
Islands, and South America

Anterior chamber,
vitreous

Rat

131,137

Toxocara canis (dog
roundworm)

Dog faeces (EbZ)

Worldwide

Eyebrows and
eyelds, aqueous
humor and
vitreous

Dog

11

Toxocara cati (feline
roundworm)

Cat faeces (EbZ)

Worldwide

Aqueous humor
and vitreous

Cat

11

Baylisascaris
procyonis (raccoon
roundworm)

Raccoon faeces (EbZ)

North America, Europe, Japan

Vitreous

Raccoon

46

Gnathostoma
spinigerum,
G. hispidum,

Ingestion of crustacean
(cyclops),

Worldwide

Anterior chamber,
eye lid

Dog, cat, wild
carnivores,

49

G. doloresi and
G. nipponicum

infected fish, frogs (FbZ)

Dirofilaria repens

Aedes, Anopheles, Culex
(VbZ)

Europe, Asia, Africa

Subconjunctival

Dog

8, 197

D. immitis

Aedes, Anopheles, Culex
(VbZ)

Worldwide

Anterior chamber

Dog, cat

8,76

D. tenuis

Aedes, Anopheles, (VbZ)

Canada, USA

Subconjunctival

Raccon

8

Acanthocheilonema
arbuta

Aedes, Taeniorhynchus
(VbZ)

Canada, USA

Anterior chamber

Porcupine

198

A. sprenti

Mosquitoes (VbZ)

Canada, Oregon, USA

Anterior chamber

Beaver

8

A. reconditum

Fleas, louses (VbZ)

Worldwide

Subconjunctival

Dog

79

Onchocerca
gutturosa

Simulium spp. (VbZ)

Worldwide

Subconjunctival,
cornea

Cattle

8

O. cervicalis

Culicoides spp. (VbZ)

Worldwide

Subconjunctival,
cornea

Horse

169

Onchocerca
jakutensis

Culicoides spp. (VbZ)

Europe, Austria

Subconjunctival,
cornea

Red deer

199

O. reticulata

Culicoides spp. (VbZ)

Europe, Asia, Africa

Subconjunctival,
cornea

Horse

170

O. dewittei japonica

Simulium spp. (VbZ)

Japan

Subconjunctival,
cornea

Bear

167

HELMINTHS
Strongylida

Ascaridida
(Ascarididae)

Spirurida Suborder
Spirurina

raccoon,
opossum

(Onchocercidae)

O. lupi

Simulium spp. (VbZ)

Europe

Subconjunctival

Dog

172

Loaina uniformis

Aedes, Anopheles, Culex

North America

Subconjunctival

Lagomorphs

8,62,64,83

P. (Loaina)
scapiceps

Aedes, Mansonia

North America

Subconjunctival

Lagomorphs

8,62,83

Thelazia callipaeda
T. californiensis

Phortica spp. (VbZ)

China, Southeastern Asia,
Europe, USA

Subconjunctival,
intraocular

Dogs, cats,
rabbits and
wild
carnivores

160

(Thelaziidae)

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

Page 4 of 21

Table 1 Classification (Order, Family and Species) of zoonotic helminths causing human blindness divided according
their route of transmission (Vector borne zoonosis, VbZ, food consumption, FbZ, and those at direct transmission
from the environment, EbZ), geographical distribution, localization in the eyes and zoonotic relevance (Continued)
Enoplida
(Trichuridae)

Trichinella spp.

Ingestion of raw meat
(FbZ)

Worldwide

Orbit, Ocular
muscles

Numerous,
domestic and
wild animals

15

Spirometra
erinaceieuropaei
(Sparganosis)

Ingestion of crustacean,
frogs, birds, snakes
(FbZ)

Middle East, Australia

Subconjunctival

Carnivores

102,109

Spargana (other
species)

Ingestion of crustacean,
frogs, birds, snakes
(FbZ)

South America, Asia

Subconjunctival

Carnivores

102,109

Taenia crassiceps

Food contaminated by
dog faeces (EbZ)

USA and Europe

Anterior
chamber

Carnivores

89

Echinococcus
granulosus

Food contaminated by
dog faeces (EbZ)

Worldwide

Intraocular

Dog

112

E. multilocularis

Food contaminated by
wild carnivores dog
faeces (EbZ)

Worldwide

Intraocular

Wolf, jackal,
coyote

115

E. oligharthrus

Food contaminated by
wild carnivores dog
faeces (EbZ)

South and Central America

Orbit

Wild felids

Wild
felids

Coenurus cerebralis
(Multiceps
multiceps)

dog faeces (EbZ)

Worldwide

Intraocular

Dog

95

Fasciola hepatica

water plants (FbZ)

Worldwide

Anterior chamber

Domestic and
wild
ruminants,
horse

120

Alaria mesocercaria,
A. americana

Frogs (FbZ)

Asia, USA, Canada

Intraocular

Canids

122

Philophthalmus
lacrimosus

Contaminated food or
direct contact with the
eye mucosa (EbZ)

Europe, Asia, and America

Conjunctival

Birds

124

CESTODA
Pseudophyllidea
(Diphyllobothriidae)

Cyclophyllidea
(Teniidae)

TREMATODA
(Fluke)

inadequately cooked meat, and the ophthalmologist is
often the first contact because of the swollen eyelids and
conjunctivitis. Demonstration of larvae in muscle biopsies of patients or in frozen sample of the ingested
meat, if available, is still standard procedure to confirm
infection. Good serological tests exist and are also very
useful in confirming infection, especially in cases with
low-level infection where symptoms may be minimal
and the number of larvae in muscle may be low. Some
areas of the world, such as the United States and
Europe, have effectively controlled the infection in
humans by removing the parasite from the domestic pig
cycle through heightened food safety regulations regarding inspection and feeding practices. In other areas of

the world, the domestic pig cycle continues to be
responsible for human infection, and in all areas, human
infection continues to occur when infected wild game
meat is ingested without proper cooking. Because of the
wide range of animals that can harbour infection with
Trichinella larvae, proper handling and cooking of all
meats is recommended.
Ascarids

Ascarids (Ascaridida, Ascaridiidae) occur worldwide
infecting various mammals, including humans [16,17].
Many of these nematodes are causative agents of zoonoses transmitted to humans via contaminated soil.
Within the ascarids, Toxocara canis, Toxocara cati and
Baylisascaris procyonis are zoonotic parasites of dogs,

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

Page 5 of 21

Table 2 Ocular tissue affected and symptoms caused by zoonotic helminths (Genus and/or Species) at different
stage [41,63]
Ocular tissue
affected

Signs

Helminths involved

Eyebrows and
eyelids

Eye lid edema

Taenia solium (cysticercus), Spirometra, Ancyclostoma, A. Americana Gnathostoma, Toxocara,
Trichinella, Dirofilaria

Lacrimal duts and
glands

Lacrymation

Mammomonogamus, Thelazia

Orbit

Exophthalmos

Echinococcus, coenurus, Taenia solium (cysticercus), spargana, Trichinella, Dirofilaria,
Gnathostoma

Ocular muscles

Diplopia

Trichinella, Angiostrongylus, Ancyclostoma, spargana,
Taenia

Conjunctiva

Subconjunctival cysts

Taenia, Dirofilaria, Acanthocheilonema, Habronema, Mansonella, spargana, Philophthalmus

Chemosis and conjunctivitis

Thelazia, Trichinella, Onchocerca

Hemorrhages

Trichinella

Cornea

Keratitis, scleritis

Onchocerca, Toxocara, Ancylostoma

Anterior chamber

Parasites in the anterior
Chamber
Cysts in the anterior chamber

Onchocerca, Schistosoma, Taenia, spargana, Angiostrongylus, Gnathostoma, Toxocara, Dirofilaria,
Thelazia, Acanthocheilonema
Taenia

Hypopyon

Taenia, Gnathostoma, Toxocara

Secondary glaucoma

Taenia, Echinococcus, Angiostrongylus, Dirofilaria, Onchocerca spp., Gnathostoma, Toxocara

Mydriasis

Trichinella

Iris

Miosis
Distortion of the pupil

Taenia, Angiostrongylus, Ancyclostoma, Trichinella Toxocara, Onchocerca, Pelecitus

Hemorrhages

Trichinella, cysticercus, Gnathostoma

Cysts

Vitreous body

Onchocerca

Iritis and iridocyclitis

Cysticercus, Echinococcus, coenurus

Parasites in the vitreous Cyclitis spargana, Acanthocheilonema, Dirofilaria, Onchocerca Gnathostoma, Onchocerca, Toxocara,
Trichinella
Optic nerve

Papilledema, papillitis, and
optic atrophy

Taenia, Ancylostyoma, Toxocyara, Trichinella, Onchocerca

Retina and
chorioidea

Hemorrhages

Ancylostoma, Gnathostoma, Toxocara, Trichinella

Retinal detachment

Taenia

Cysts

Echinococcus

Retinitis and choroiditis

Baylisascaris, Taenia, Toxocara, Trichinella, Onchocerca

cats and raccoons, respectively, and they are among the
most widespread causes of neural and ocular larva
migrans. Indeed, larvae of T. canis are probably the
most common nematode infection of the human eye,
also known as ocular larva migrans (OLM), and infection in humans occurs worldwide [11]. Infection occurs
through the ingestion of infective eggs, most often from
soil or other environmental surfaces that have been contaminated with faeces from infected animals. Examination of soil or sand from parks and playgrounds often
demonstrates infective Toxocara eggs, which might
remain infectious for long periods of time (even years)
in the environment [18]. When ingested, the eggs hatch
and larvae migrate in the tissues, most often to the liver,
but on occasion to other sites such as the eye and central nervous system (CNS). The wandering larvae cause
a syndrome, called visceral larva migrans (VLM), of

marked eosinophilia, hepatomegaly, fever, cough, and
pulmonary infiltrates. The severity of symptoms is often
related to the number of larvae acquired, and can range
from asymptomatic to acute, with a fatal outcome. The
ability of Toxocara larvae to cause OLM was recognized
about 60 years ago [19,20]. OLM occurs most typically
in older children (mean 8 yr versus 2 yr for VLM), generally have no other evidence of organ involvement, and
hypereosinophilia, hepatomegaly, and pulmonary symptoms are absent, there is no history of pica, and evidence suggests that OLM is caused by a single larva
entering the eye. Antibodies to Toxocara tend to be
lower in cases of OLM, possibly as a result of fewer
infective larvae, and there is experimental evidence that
somewhat different immune responses occur between
OLM and VLM [21]. Hundreds of cases have been
reported and described and untold thousands of cases

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

have probably occurred, even in developed countries, as
evidenced by seropositivity in population-based surveys
[22,23]. Worldwide, cases continue to be reported in the
literature, including descriptions of lesions, effective
treatments, and new/modified methods to observe the
infection in the eye [24-37]. Visual observation of motile
larvae in the eye is possible, although accurate diagnosis
is difficult; serodiagnosis continues to be very useful in
detecting and confirming cases [38,39]. Toxocara larvae
are approximately 400 by 20 μm and a larva of this size
in the eye is highly suggestive. In this presentation,
destruction of the larva by photocoagulation is recommended, and prognosis is favourable when recognized
early and prompt treatment is provided [40]. After an
undefined period of wandering in the tissues, but probably for several weeks or longer, larvae become encapsulated, including those in the eye. These cases, typically
present with unilateral visual deficits, with or without
ocular pain, and a raised white retinal mass that presents difficulty in distinguishing from retinoblastoma.
Unfortunately, in these situations, loss of visual acuity,
blindness, and even enucleation of the eye may result.
Toxocara larva seen in biopsy specimens or surgically
resected tissues are rather easily identified based on size
and morphological features. Generally the larva will be
enclosed in a granuloma, coiled, and one or more sections of the larva evident. In tissue sections, larvae measure 15-21 μm in diameter and are characterized by a
single prominent lateral ala, non- patent gut, and large
excretory columns [41]. The prevention of toxocariasis,
including OLM, is based on good personal hygiene,
including washing hands, and the proper disposal of pet
waste, including and specifically not letting pets and
stray animals defecate in public places where children
and others play and could come in contact with infective eggs. Rubinsky-Elefant and colleagues [11] recently
reviewed the subject.
Ocular disease in baylisascariasis occurs in association
with severe neural and VLM and, only rarely, alone.
Among the ascarids, Baylisascaris species are most often
implicated in serious cases of neural and OLM [42-45].
Baylisascaris procyonis, a common ascarid of raccoons in
many parts of the United States, Europe, and Japan, has
demonstrated potential for extensive larval migration in
rodents and birds or other accidental hosts where it can
produce a fatal eosinophilic meningoencephalitis. This
nematode, different from other causes of larva migrans,
has an aggressive somatic migration with larval invasion
of the central nervous system and capability for continued larval growth within intermediate hosts [46]. Recent
serological studies have indicated that significantly more
exposure to this parasite is occurring than previously
thought, and consequently, low level infections may also
be more common than believed [46]. As we recognize

Page 6 of 21

increased exposure, the potential exists for more cases of
serious visceral and CNS disease, including migration
into the eye (Figure 1). Baylisascariasis is acquired in the
same manner as other ascarids, through the ingestion of
infective eggs from the soil or other environmental
sources that have been contaminated by raccoon faeces.
Similar to other visceral or OLM, cases of baylisascariasis
undoubtedly span the spectra of asymptomatic to serious,
often fatal infections. Baylisascaris spp. differ from Toxocara spp. in that the larvae continue to grow, often
reaching 1-2 mm in length (by 50 - 60 μm in diameter)
in the tissues, including the eye. The migration of such
relatively large larvae can result in significantly more
pathology than that of Toxocara. The main symptoms
are represented by chorioretinitis, optic neuritis, or optic
nerve atrophy (Table 2) and examination occasionally
may reveal motile larvae migrating within the retina
[11,47] and vitreous humour [48]. Ocular signs are
related to the inflammation and local immune reaction of
the retina, retinal vasculature, and optic nerve to the larvae. Prevention of baylisascariasis is directed at avoiding
ingestion of infective eggs. This is best accomplished by
reducing the environmental contamination with raccoon
faeces through not feeding wild animals and not encouraging them to live in close proximity to humans, prompt
and safe clean up of raccoon faeces/latrines, and not letting children play in areas that have been contaminated
with raccoon faeces [46].
Spirurids

Gnathostoma spp. Another form of larva migrans is
caused by spirurid worms in the genus Gnathostoma
(Spirurida, Gnathostomatidae) [49]. The definitive hosts
include dogs, cats, wild carnivores, raccoons and otters.
Due to the large range of intermediate (e.g., fish, frogs,
chickens and other birds, snakes, pigs, lizards, some
crabs, monkeys, hamsters, rats, mice, squirrels, and guinea pigs) and paratenic (birds, snakes, and frogs) hosts,
the control of this parasitic infection is particularly

Figure 1 Nematode larva in the retinal fundus. Larva,
presumably of Baylisascaris procyonis, in the retinal fundus of a
patient. The infection was presumed to have been acquired in
Connecticut, USA. Larva measures approximately 1.4 mm and was
treated with retinal lasar. (Original; courtesy of Drs. Caplivski,
Bhatnagar, and Goldberg, Mount Sinai School of Medicine).

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

difficult. The zoonotic infections occur much more
commonly as cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) or VLM,
but on rare occasions can invade the eye [50-59]. Ocular
gnathostomiasis can involve both invasion of surrounding tissues or the eye itself by a wandering larva. In the
former, edema and hemorrhage of the eyelid or inflammation of the orbit may occur. When a larva enters the
tissue of the eye, corneal ulceration, iris perforation or
retinal artery occlusion may occur, with pronounced
uveitis, vitritis, vitreal hemorrhage, or secondary glaucoma. Infections are acquired through accidental ingestion of infected copepods that harbour 2nd stage larvae,
but more often through the ingestion of poorly-cooked
infected fish or other paratenic hosts such as frogs,
snakes, birds or even other mammals. Migration of larvae directly from infected animal tissues used as poultices may also occur and place the larvae in the
immediate vicinity of the eye. Four species of Gnathostoma have been reported from humans, including
Gnathostoma spinigerum, Gnathostoma hispidum,
Gnathostoma doloresi, and Gnathostoma nipponicum.
However, many other species occur in nature and may
pose a threat of zoonotic infection to man. These are
relatively stout larvae, and the 3rd stage larva in human
tissue can measure between 1 and 5 mm or more in
length by 200-600 μm in diameter. The larval stages
have many morphological features in common with
adult worms, including the prominent head bulb and
cuticular spines. In sectioned tissue, the size of the larva
is again distinguishing, and occasionally both the head
bulb and cuticular spines may be seen, but are absent in
many sections. The cuticle can vary between thin and
thick, and the muscle cells are numerous and well
defined; the lateral chords tend to be large and very prominent, and the gut is distinctive in nature, being composed of many cuboidal cells, each with multiple nuclei,
and a luminal brush border microvilli [41]. The intestine
and its lumen can be round or variously shaped but is
generally a prominent structure noted inside the larva.
Serology has proven useful in diagnosing cases
[49,60,61]. Because of the size of the larva, and their
ability to migrate readily in the tissue, its location within
the eye is generally of concern, although there are
reports of successful recovery of larva from the eye with
restoration of visual acuity (Figure 2) [50]. Prevention is
primarily through the avoidance of eating poorly-cooked
foods or use of raw flesh as poultice.
Filarioids

There are a number of different filarioids that have been
reported infecting the eye or the conjunctiva, and those
reports date back several hundred years, making them
one of the oldest groups of parasites known to occur in
or on the eye. Indeed, besides the well-known (but not
zoonotic) Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi and Loa

Page 7 of 21

Figure 2 Gnathostoma spinigerum larva in the anterior
chamber of the eye. Gnathostoma spinigerum larva in the anterior
chamber of the eye of patient in Thailand. (From Teekhasaenee C,
Richt R, Kanchanaranya. Ocular parasitic infection in Thailand. Rev
Inf Dis. 1986, 8:350-356).

loa, some filarioids from domestic and wild mammals
(e.g., Dirofilaria spp., Onchocerca spp., Acanthocheilonema (Dipetalonema) spp., Brugia spp., and Loaina spp.)
have a zoonotic origin and may infect human eyes
[8,62,63]. In addition, a number of yet incompletely identified filarioids have been described in human eyes in the
Amazon forest regions [64,65]. For many of them, the life
cycle and animal reservoir hosts are poorly known. Animal filarioids occur globally, in many different forms, and
all filarioid infections are transmitted by various bloodsucking arthropods; the majority of them, including zoonotic infections, by mosquitoes, although blackflies,
culicoids, and others may be involved. Most persons
worldwide are at some risk, and those who are more
likely to be exposed to the vectors may be at increased
risk, but given the worldwide occurrence of animal filaria,
there are probably other undefined risk factors.
The largest number of filarioid eye infections is caused
by species of Dirofilaria and these result in a worm that
migrates across the conjunctiva or is encapsulated in a
nodule on the conjunctiva or eyelid. These cases were
referred to as Filaria conjunctivae [66], for decades
until they were properly aligned with known animal species [67]. Hundreds of these cases have been reported
and new cases continue to be reported from wide geographic areas, including areas that have not previously
reported such cases [68-76]. Undoubtedly, many more
cases occur and are either not recognized or reported.
In the United States, these are most often caused by
Dirofilaria tenuis, a common parasite of raccoons, and

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

in Europe and other parts of the world, by D. repens, a
common parasite of dogs and other canids (See additional file 1: Movie1 Surgical removal of Dirofilaria
repens from patient’s conjunctiva) [77]. Other Dirofilaria
species, such as Dirofilaria ursi of bears, Dirofilaria subdermata of porcupines, Dirofilaria striata of wild cats,
and others have been isolated from humans on occasion
[8]. These species have not been reported to involve the
eye, but they certainly could in the future. In worms
removed intact or broken from the conjunctiva or seen
in histological sections of nodules, the morphologic features of most Dirofilaria make them relatively easy to
identify to genus level [8]. They tend to be large, robust
worms, and they have distinctive longitudinal and circular
cuticular ridging that gives the external cuticle a beaded
or corn-row appearance. This can be seen easily in gross
specimens that have been removed intact, and is one of
the more prominent features noted in histological section
as well. Additionally, in sections, the worms have numerous strong muscle cells (polymyarian and coelomyarian)
giving a strong body wall. Determining the species is
more difficult, especially if a male worm is not present,
and final diagnosis is often based on the presumed location of acquisition (i.e., D. tenuis if in the United States,
D. repens elsewhere). Once removed, clinical signs
quickly resolve and there are no residual sequelae.
Worms identified as Dirofilaria have also been reported
from within the eye, either the anterior chamber or vitreous. Some of these cases have been attributed to
D. immitis, the dog heartworm, D. repens, or Dirofilaria
roemeri of kangaroos [8]. A small number of them were
successfully removed and identified based on morphology. A case of intravitreal dirofilariasis was recently
reported from Turkey [78] and a case of human intraocular dirofilariasis has been reported from northern Brazil
(See additional file 2: Movie2 Surgical removal of Dirofilaria immitis like nematode) [65]. The nematode from
Brazil was morphologically and phylogenetically close to
D. immitis but genetically distinct from reference
sequences, including those of D. immitis collected from
infected dogs in the same area. The possible existence of
a closely related zoonotic Dirofilaria species in Brazil and
its implications have been discussed and serve to highlight the high number of yet unknown species infecting
wild mammals that have potential to cause zoonotic
infections. Different from the above reported case, worms
were generally of modest size, making removal rather
than photocoagulation the preferred method of treatment. Dirofilaria spp. worms are often motile, and
noticed by the patient because of interference with vision.
Removal is curative and full visual acuity is generally
restored with no long term sequelae.
In addition to Dirofilaria, several cases of small
Acanthocheilonema -like worms within the eye have also

Page 8 of 21

been reported (Figure 3) [63]. Although removed and
examined, it was not possible to positively identify these
worms to species. In a single case report, Acanthocheilonema (Dipetalonema) reconditum, a subcutaneous filarial infection in dogs worldwide, was removed from the
subconjunctiva in a patient from Australia [79]. Two
other unusual infections caused by Macacanema, a
parasite of monkeys, have been reported where worms
were removed from the conjunctiva of humans [80,81].
The zoonotic role of filarial infection in humans in some
regions is far from understood. Recently, a mature male
filaria extracted from the iris fibers of a man from the
Amazon region of Brazil was identified as belonging to the
genus Loaina or Pelecitus (See additional file 3: Movie 3
Surgical removal of Pelecitus sp. from the iris fibers of a
patient) [64]. This human case and a previous one from
Colombia [62] were of unknown origin and both occurred
in the tropical Amazon region but little is known about
the source of the infection. Vectors of species of Loaina
and Pelecitus are mosquitoes, mallophagans or tabanids, as
shown with the three cycles elucidated [82-84]. Unfortunately, despite some studies on these genera [85,86], information on these taxa is scant. In the same manner, worms
removed from the eye and identified as Brugia are often
hard to identify as B. malayi of human origin or Brugia
spp. of animal origin [87].
Cestodes
Taenia crassiceps

Human ocular infection by Taenia crassiceps occurs
when individuals accidentally ingest eggs in contaminated
food or water. Indeed, T. crassiceps is a tapeworm closely
related to Taenia saginata and Taenia solium and adult

Figure 3 Acanthocheilonema - Mansonella -like worm. Anterior
end of an Acanthocheilonema - Mansonella -like worm removed
from the posterior chamber of the vitreous of a patient in Kansas,
USA. Scale bar = 500 μm. Original; courtesy of DPDx, CDC.

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

stages live in the intestine of carnivores and pass eggs
with the faeces. In the intermediate hosts, primarily
rodents, the immature cestodes (i.e., cysticerci) develop in
the peritoneal cavity [88]. In humans, larvae invade the
bloodstream and reach subcutaneous and muscular tissues of immune- compromised individuals [88,89]. Interestingly, larval T. crassiceps in the anterior eye chamber
or subretinally (Figure 4) have been reported in immunocompetent humans, in the United States [90,91] and
Europe [92]. The infection by cysticerci of T. crassiceps
may be asymptomatic or cause iridocyclitis and/or retinitis [88,92]. Surgical intervention on the anterior chamber
or the subretinal space is successful in curing the infection [88,92]. Although not a zoonosis, cysticercosis
caused by Taenia solium, has been reported from the
human eye [93].
Coenurus cerebralis

Coenurus cerebralis is the larval stage of the tapeworm
T. multiceps (syn. Multiceps multiceps), which develops
in the small intestine of dogs, foxes, and other canids
(definitive hosts). After ingestion by the intermediate
hosts, the oncospheres penetrate the intestinal mucosa,
enter the bloodstream, and reach the brain where they
develop into the infective cystic coenuri [94,95]. Coenurosis rarely occurs in humans through accidental
ingestion of eggs, causing mainly cerebral lesions but
also localizing in the eyes [92]. C. cerebralis ocular
lesions cause severe anterior uveitis, retrolental or

Figure 4 Cysticercus cyst of Taenia crassiceps in situ. Retinal
photograph showing budding cysticercus of Taenia crassiceps in
situ. (From the collection of Herman Zaiman, “A Presentation of
Pictorial Parasites”).

Page 9 of 21

orbital cystic tumor-like masses, and subretinal lesions
(Figure 5). Subconjunctival localization may also occur
after accidental direct inoculation with infective eggs.
The onset of inflammatory responses result in a red and
painful eye, followed by development of glaucoma, retinal fibrosis, and ultimately blindness as the final result
of the infection [96,97]. Surgical removal of accessible
cysts (Figure 6). is the only choice to cure the infection
[96,98].
Spirometra spp.

Analogously, adult Spirometra cestodes live in the small
intestine of carnivores where they release eggs which
reach the environment with the host faeces. Larvae of
Spirometra spp. tapeworms infect domestic animals and
humans. Humans are dead-end hosts given that they
become infected mostly by drinking polluted water (via
ingesting the immature procercoid), or eating inected
intermediate hosts (i.e., frogs, birds, snakes, that, along
with rats and mice are infected with the larval stages)
and assuming the plerocercoid larvae. Once ingested,
the larvae ("spargana”) may invade muscles, subcutaneous tissue, urogenital and abdominal viscera, and,
sometimes, the central nervous system and the eyes
[99]. Human ocular sparganosis has been reported from
South America [100], Central Europe [101] and Asia
[102-105]. Spargana usually infect subconjunctival and
conjunctival tissues causing symptoms varying from
simple itching due to local granulomata to more serious
signs represented by local pain, epiphora, chemosis, and
ptosis [105,106]. Conjunctival infection may also be

Figure 5 Coenurus cyst behind displaced retina. Sagittal section
of eye from Ghanaian showing coenurus cyst with multiple
protoscoleces lying behind displaced retina. (From Parasites In
Human Tissues, Orihel and Ash, ASCP Press, 1995).

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

Page 10 of 21

and blindness as the hydatids have the ability to fill the
vitreous cavity [113] or severe inflammation of orbital
structures and acute eyesight loss due to the rupture of
intraorbital hydatids [114]. Ocular alveolar hydatidosis
caused by E. multilocularis may occur after spreading of
the larval cestodes to other sites. For instance a choroidal eye mass has been reported in a patient with history
of visceral alveolar hydatid disease with cerebral metastasis [115]. Human infection by E. oligarthrus is very
rare with only a few cases published in the international
literature, two of which involve the eye [116]. Nonetheless, the ocular localization of E. oligarthrus has a relevant clinical impact since it causes the presence of a
single orbital, retro-ocular cyst in the orbit [117] or the
occurrence of a retroocular cystic tumor-like mass inducing exophthalmia, chemosis, palpebral ptosis, and
blindness [108].
Trematodes
Figure 6 Coenurus cyst after surgical removing from the eye.
Intact coenurus cyst removed from subconjunctival tissue an
Ugandan child showing multiple protoscoleces. (Original by Paul
Beaver).

characterized by irritation, continued foreign body sensation, redness [104] and mimic signs and symptoms of
orbital cellulitis, with exophthalmia and corneal ulcers.
When the immature cestode invades the orbit it may
cause acute anterior uveitis and iridocyclitis [101] and
severe inflammation with blindness [107]. Unfortunately,
surgery is the only effective treatment [104,105].
Echinococcus granulosus, Echinococcus multilocularis and
Echinococcus oligarthrus

Echinococcus granulosus, Echinococcus multilocularis
and Echinococcus oligarthrus are tapeworms that occur
worldwide. Adult stages of E. granulosus and E. multilocularis infect mainly dogs or wild canids (e.g., wolves,
jackals, coyotes and foxes) while E. oligarthrus adults
infect wild felines [108-111]. Along with several other
animal species, human may act as (accidental) intermediate hosts of these cestodes by ingesting food contaminated by their eggs [110,111]. When a human being
inadvertently ingests eggs, the larvae hatch and disseminate via the bloodstream into different organs and viscera (mostly liver or lungs but also heart), where they
produce a typical hydatid cyst (E. granulosus, E. oligarthrus) or many alveolar small cysts (E. multilocularis)
causing a major zoonotic disease [108-111].
Although not very common, ocular infection by larval
Echinococcus spp. may thus occur as a consequence of
bloodborne dissemination of the oncospheres. Ocular
localization by the larval form of E. granulosus accounts
for 1 to 2% of all reports. Intra-orbital hydatid cysts by
E. granulosus may cause severe exophthalmia [112] pain

Fascioliasis, also known as liver fluke, is caused by Fasciola hepatica and Fasciola gigantica, trematodes which
localize in the biliary ducts of the definitive hosts, grassgrazing domestic and wild ruminants (i.e., cattle, sheep,
goats, buffaloes) and also horses and rabbits. This parasite develops through various larval stages in water
snails of the genus Limnaea which release cercariae that
encyst as metacercariae on aquatic vegetation. Infection
occurs when animals ingest freshwater plants or water
containing encysted metacercariae [118]. Within the last
decade, reports of human cases of fascioliasis have
increased [119]. Although migrating immature F. hepatica flukes in humans have been mainly reported in
blood vessels, lung, subcutaneous tissue, and ventricles
of the brain [119], they have also been recovered from
the anterior chamber of a patient in Iran [120].
Alaria americana (syn. canis) is a three-host trematode that lives as adults in the intestine of the dog definitive host. Eggs are passed in faeces and hatch in
water, releasing miracidia which penetrate the helisomid
snails (first intermediate host) and develop through the
sporocyst stage into cercariae [121]. Cercariae released
from snails actively penetrate the second intermediate
host (tadpoles) becoming infective mesocercariae in
about two weeks. In the tadpole or in the frogs (following the metamorphosis), mesocercariae accumulate and
may be ingested by a number of paratenic hosts (e.g.,
other frogs, snakes) or directly by the definitive host.
Cases of human intraocular infection with mesocercariae
of A. americana and other Alaria mesocercariae have
been recorded in patients who had ingested undercooked contaminated frogs legs [122]. Both patients presented with pigmentary tracks in the retina, areas of
active or healed retinitis and signs of diffuse unilateral
subacute neuroretinitis (Figure 7).

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

Page 11 of 21

highest number of reports may include changing epidemiological patterns in the natural definitive hosts,
leading to increased exposure of humans, and new geographic range because of spreading into new areas.
Three key examples, namely infections by Angiostrongylus cantonensis, Thelazia callipaeda and Onchocerca
spp., are discussed below.
Angiostrongylus

Figure 7 Alaria sp. in the eye. Freely moving Alaria mesocercaria
on the retina of the eye. The anterior sucker is evident on the left
side of the organism. (From the collection of Herman Zaiman,
“A Presentation of Pictorial Parasites”).

The trematode Philophthalmus lacrimosus (Philophthalmidae), as adults, parasitize the eyes of birds
(definitive host). Eggs containing miracidia hatch in the
water, miracidia penetrate snails (intermediate hosts)
and develop into redia and cercariae. When the metacercariae encyst on surfaces of food for birds the infection of a new definitive host can take place by entering
the eye or by oral intake [123]. Human cases of philophthalmosis have been reported in Europe (Yugoslavia), Israel, Asia (Thailand, Sri Lanka, Japan) and
America (i.e., Mexico, and the United States) [124].

New or reemerging zoonotic helminths infecting
human eyes
Over the last decade, parasitological knowledge has been
considerably refined and enhanced by the use of sophisticated technologies and molecular tools, and by the
interdisciplinary approach in many fields of the human
and veterinary medical sciences. Increasing awareness of
physicians on previously poorly known diseases likely is
an important part of this process. Reports of several of
these infections of the eye have been increasing, but
whether this is due to a higher awareness or increasing
rates of infection is unclear. Possible reasons for the

Metastrongylids encompass a large group of nematodes
(Strongylida, Metastrongyloidae) infecting organs and
tissues of different vertebrates [125]. A. cantonensis, also
known as rat lungworm, is a well recognized zoonotic
infection and, as such, is the primary cause of eosinophilic meningitis in Southeast Asia. The infection has
spread widely to many other areas of the world, including the Caribbean and Americas [126-130]. The parasite
also enters the eye with some frequency. In a review of
484 cases of eosinophilic meningitis, Punyagupta and
colleagues [131] noted that 47 (16%) of the cases had
reported ocular involvement, and in 7 cases an actively
motile worm (most probably A. cantonensis) was visualized and removed from the anterior chamber of vitreous of the eye [132,133]. Human ocular infections by
larval rat lungworm have been reported in several countries in Southeast Asia [134-143] and, they likely will
continue to be reported wherever the parasite occurs,
including in new geographical areas such as the Caribbean [144]. Ocular lesions by A. cantonensis may either
occur alone or may accompany other symptoms such as
meningitis [142,145]. Often these long and slender
worms reach considerable size in the eye, and are up to
a centimeter or more in length [141]. The female worm
has a distinctive helical pattern of dark intestine intertwined with light coloured reproductive tubes; male
worms have a copulatory bursa and very long (> 1 mm)
spicules. These features make it fairly simple to recognize and identify a large worm removed from the eye as
A. cantonensis.
Infections are acquired through the ingestion of
infected intermediate snail or slug hosts, or a variety of
paratenic hosts such as amphibians, reptiles, and some
crustaceans that have become infected by ingestion of
snails and/or slugs. Migrating larvae in the human host
make their way to the CNS, and occasionally into the
eye, possibly along the optic nerve. Caution in handling
and not eating raw or poorly cooked intermediate or
paratenic hosts should prevent most human infections.
There is some evidence that people can also be infected
by ingestion of produce that has been contaminated
with slime trails of snails or slugs into which infective
larvae have been shed. Washing produce may help
reduce the risk of infection but probably does not
remove all risk in endemic areas with high level of

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

transmission. Although in a number of cases, worms are
successfully removed, ocular disease caused by larval
A. cantonensis may vary from blurred vision due to
intraretinal haemorrhage [144] to severe optic neuritis
due to the presence of the nematode in the vitreous cavity [143]. Other signs include visual disturbances and
impairments, extraocular muscular paralysis and a wide
range of ocular inflammatory conditions [141,146,147].
Diagnosis is based on the identification of a (usually
single) living worm, in any eye localization (e.g., anterior
chamber, vitreous cavity, and subretinal space) (Figure 8).
The treatment regimen relies on the surgical removal or
laser therapy, accompanied by oral benzimidazole (e.g.,
mebendazole) and corticosteroids in the case of inflammatory manifestatios such as retinitis or optic neuritis
[147]. Ocular damage caused by A. cantonensis can be
severe and may be permanent, thus in some patients
the outcome is poor and depends on the initial visual
acuity [141,147].
Thelaziasis

Thelazia callipaeda (Spirurida, Thelaziidae) represents a
good example of HIE that is both spreading and new to
the scientific community in western countries. Along with
Thelazia californiensis that has been reported to infect
humans occasionally in the United States [148], T. callipaeda is the only helminth transmitted by secretophagous
flies directly into the orbit of humans [149]. This nematode primarily affects the eyes of domestic dogs and cats
and wild carnivores (e.g., foxes, wolves, beech martens and
wild cats) (See additional file 4: Thelazia callipaeda infecting the eye of a dog) [150]. Since its first description at the
beginning of the previous century, this nematode has been
known as the “oriental eye-worm” for its distribution in

Figure 8 Angiostrongylus cantonensis in the anterior chamber
of the eye. Angiostrongylus cantonensis in the anterior chamber.
(Original by John Cross, courtesy of Lawrence Ash).

Page 12 of 21

the former Soviet Union [151] and the Asian continent,
including China [10], Korea [152], Japan [153], Indonesia
[154], Thailand [155], Taiwan [156] and India [157].
Human thelaziasis may cause mild to severe clinical signs
(including lachrymation, epiphora, conjunctivitis, keratitis
and/or even corneal ulcers) [125]. The worm is transmitted by various secretophagous flies which feed on
lachrymal secretions of infected animals and/or humans,
thus ingesting Thelazia 1st stage larvae and, after obligate
development in the fly, depositing 3rd stage larvae directly
back into the orbit. The competence of drosophilid flies of
the genus Phortica (Diptera, Drosophilidae) as vectors of
T. callipaeda has recently been elucidated under both
laboratory and natural conditions [158,159]. We now
recognize that T. callipaeda infection is widespread
throughout Italy with infection prevalence as high as 60%
in dogs from some municipalities (Figure 9) [160] and also
in southwestern France (Dordogne area) [161,162] and
Switzerland [163]. In addition, four cases of human thelaziasis have been diagnosed in patients coming from an
area of north-western Italy and south-eastern France
[164]. Infected patients present with exudative conjunctivitis, follicular hypertrophy of the conjunctiva, foreign body
sensation, excessive lachrymation, itchiness, congestion,
hypersensitivity to light and keratitis, depending on the
number of nematodes present in the eye [10]. Children
and the elderly seem to be at higher risk. Thelazia worms
are generally removed intact from the eye, and there are
several morphological features that assist in identifying
them from other worms that might occur in the orbit,
including filaria such as Loa or Dirofilaria. The morphological identification of T. callipaeda has been reviewed
[165]. The adult worms measure from 5 to 20 mm in
length by 250 - 800 μm in diameter (males are smaller
than females). They have a distinct buccal capsule and
the cuticle has typical, regularly spaced distinct transverse

Figure 9 Thelazia calllipaeda in a heavily infected dog. Heavy
infection by Thelazia callipaeda nematodes in the conjunctiva of a
dog from Italy.

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

striations giving the cuticle a ridged appearance (Figure 10).
In addition, adult females of T. callipaeda are characterized by the position of the vulva located anterior to the
oesophagus-intestinal junction, and the males possess five
pairs of postcloacal papillae. Poor living conditions and
low socio-economic standards seem to be risk factors for
acquiring infection, and better hygiene would probably
contribute to prevention. The adults and larvae of T. callipaeda can be removed mechanically by rinsing the conjunctival sac with sterile physiological saline whereas
adults can also be isolated with forceps or cotton swabs
[10].
Onchocerca

As previously noted, the vast majority of filarioid infections of the eye occur on the conjunctiva, and are
caused by species of Dirofilaria. However, there is an
increasing number of reports of zoonotic Onchocerca
infections, and several of these have been either within

Figure 10 Thelazia californiensis from a human patient. Posterior
end of a female Thelazia californiensis from the conjunctiva of a
human patient in New Hampshire, USA showing cuticle serration.
Scale bar = 50 μm. Original; courtesy of DPDx, CDC.

Page 13 of 21

the eye or associated with the conjunctiva or connective
tissue of the orbit (See additional file 5: Onchocerca sp.
infecting the anterior chamber of a human patient). Of
the 15 clinical cases reported to date [166,167], five have
been associated with the eye; 3 involved the conjunctiva
and 2 involved the cornea. These have been reported
from Crimea, the United States, Albania, Hungary, and
Turkey [168-172]. The species causing infections of the
eye have tentatively been attributed to Onchocerca gutturosa or Onchocerca cervicalis [169,173], Onchocerca
reticulata [170], Onchocerca spp. [171], and, Onchocerca lupi [172]. This last species, O. lupi, is of particular interest because it affects dogs and it induces acute
or chronic ocular disease characterized by conjunctivitis,
photophobia, lacrimation, ocular discharge and
exophthalmia [166]. In most cases, zoonotic Onchocerca
spp. are encased in a nodular granuloma, are resected
and sectioned, and the worms identified morphologically
(Figure 11a). In section of Onchocerca the distinctive
muscle anatomy, composed of few, low, poorly developed cells, and the characteristic structures of the cuticle are often apparent, including the circular ridges and
inner cuticular striae, making the identification straightforward. The distances between the prominent, undulated annular ridges and the number of transverse striae
in the internal layer represent the morphological characters for differentiating filarioids belonging to the Onchocerca genus (Figure 11a). The apparent increase in
number and range of zoonotic Onchocerca infections
including those affecting the eye, is noteworthy but difficult to fully explain. Recent cases in both the US and
Europe highlight this trend. Case reports of canine ocular onchocerciasis by O. lupi [166] have also increased
in Europe, including in Greece, Portugal, Germany,
Hungary, and Switzerland [174-177]. The number of
cases of canine ocular onchocerciasis have also increased
in the United States but the species of parasite in the
United States has not been established [178-180]. The
role played by dogs as reservoir of this zoonotic agent
deserves to be investigated further to establish both the
primary definitive hosts as well as the vectors that serve
to transmit the infection naturally and to humans.

Diagnosis and cure
The diagnosis of the causative agent is usually only possible after surgery and extraction of the worm or tissue
containing the worm, and often requires the assistance
of a specialist with an appreciation of the microscopic
features of helminths. Generally, in those cases where
the parasite is amenable to obliteration with photocoagulation or laser surgery, only a tentative diagnosis is
possible. However, surgery remains the only option
available for treating a number of the HIE. Although
invasive, and often requiring sophisticated devices and

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

Page 14 of 21

Figure 11 Zoonotic Onchocerca from human ocular connective tissue. Zoonotic Onchocerca sp. from a nodular granuloma of the eye in a
patient from Ohio, USA. a) Transverse section of female worm shown in Fig. 5a encased in a nodular granuloma. Low cuticular ridges and inner
striae, 2 per ridge, are evident Hematoxylin and eosin stain. Scale bar = 50 μm. (Original; courtesy of Drs. Yassin and Hariri, University of Pittsburg
Medical Center). b) Short piece of female Onchocerca sp. removed from granuloma tissue before fixation, showing characteristic, diagnostic
structures of the cuticle with circular ridges and inner cuticular striae. Scale bar = 150 μm. (Original; courtesy of Drs. Yassin and Hariri, University
of Pittsburg Medical Center).

advanced medical expertise (not always available in
developing countries), ocular surgery is often curative
and also allows the recovery of helminths to identify
them (Table 3). At the time of ophthalmological examination, observation of motile larvae in the eye is

occasionally possible, although a diagnosis at species
level can be difficult. Indeed, in some cases it is possible
to tentatively identify helminths by measuring larvae in
the retina. This is the case with B. procyonis larvae
which are larger (1 to 2 mm by 50 to 60 μm) than those

Table 3 Informative morphological characters and measurements of different stage of helminths infecting human
eyes [41,63]
Parasite

Location

Size

Comments

Stage*

Toxocara canis

Intraocular

≤ 400 μm × 15-21 μm

Smallest of the nematode larvae encountered in the eye

ML

Baylisascaris spp.

Intraocular

1-2 mm × 50-60 μm

Relatively small but easily recognized as being larger than
Toxocara larvae

ML

Gnathostoma spp.

Intraocular

1-5 mm × 200-600 μm

Much more robust than other nematode larva; presence of
cuticular spines and head bulb distinctive

ML

Angiostrongylus
spp.

Intraocular

≤1-2 cm × 200-300 μm

One of the larger, more robust worms found in intraocular
location

L, SA

Thelazia callipaeda

Eye socket

5-20 mm × 250-800 μm

Distinct morphologic features; free in orbit

A, L

Philophthalmus

Intraocular

2-3 mm × 600-800 μm

Ovoid to oblong, flat, solid body

ML, SA

Spargana

Intraocular
or eyelid

5-20 mm × 1-2 mm

Long, flat solid body with pseudosegmentation

ML

Coenurus

Intraocular

< 1 cm

Fluid filled cyst ovoid in shape and of variable size

L

Dirofilaria tenuis/
Dirofilaria repens

Conjunctiva

2-15 cm × 150-400 μm

Males smaller than females; most often closely associated with
conjunctiva; worms in the eye are appreciably smaller than those
on conjunctiva

L

Dirofilaria immitis

Intraocular

1-1.65 cm × 160-400 μm

Not a common location for this worm and very few confirmed
cases exist

L

Conjunctiva

10 cm × 300 μm

SA

3-5 cm × 80-100 μm

L

total length unknown but several
cm or more × 150-250 μm

L, SA

Intraocular

1.6 - 2.1 cm × <100 μm

Conjunctiva

Acanthocheilonema
spp.

Intraocular
Conjunctiva

Onchocerca spp.

3.2 cm × <150 μm

*Larva = L; Migrating larva = ML; SA = Subadult; A = Adult.

Accurate identification to species has been

L, SA

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

of Toxocara spp. (< 400 by 15 to 20 μm) [47]. This larger size often allows a quick differentiation between
Toxocara and Baylisascaris larvae when seen either in
tissue sections or within the eye. Although Baylisascaris
larvae share several morphologic features in common
with Toxocara, including single lateral cuticular alae and
paired excretory columns, they differ markedly not only
in size but in the fact that the gut is patent (has a distinct lumen) in Baylisascaris spp. Other types of nematode larvae, such as those of Gnathostoma spp., are
relatively easy to identify because of their stout, robust
size and distinctive head bulb whether they are visualized in the eye or removed. Similarly, A. cantonensis
worms often reach considerable size in the eye, but are
long and slender worms, up to a centimetre or more in
length, and are not easily confused with ascarid or
Gnathostoma larvae, being more likely mistaken for a
filarioid. Microscopic examination, however, would
quickly allow separation of Angiostrongylus from a
filaria. Other HIE, such as Alaria mesocercaria could
be distinguished on the basis of its shape, size (500 ×
150 μm), and movement [122]. Their localization on the
conjunctiva surface, size, and morphologic features
would allow a relatively easy diagnosis of T. callipaeda.
On the other hand, when HIE are enclosed in a granuloma or within the subconjunctiva, the identification is
more difficult. Furthermore, in certain situations,
removal may increase the risk to the patient, as in the
case of the cystic forms of Echinococcus spp. which
could induce anaphylactic immunoreactions when disturbed. Indeed, although rare, the localization of Echinococcus spp. cysts in the eye are always cause of severe
disease, thus the careful surgical removal of the cysts is
the only option.
Where appropriate tests exist, serological diagnosis
can often contribute to a definitive diagnosis of infection, such as in the case of some ascarids for which serological testing using a sensitive, specific enzyme
immunoassay (EIA or ELISA) is available. Serological
testing is available for baylisascariasis and can be very
helpful in identifying and confirming infection, and, like
for toxocariasis, in conducting serosurveys to document
the degree of exposure in different populations. Unfortunately, individuals may not mount a measurable
immune response during the early phases of acute infection and serologic testing will not provide conclusive
evidence to help guide treatment, hence the need for
aggressive presumptive treatment in cases with solid
exposure history [46]. Serologic assays can be very helpful to confirm infections caused by Gnathostoma, especially in cases where no larva or tissue is available to
examine. Conversely, seropositivity to spargana in IFAT
or ELISA tests always needs to be confirmed by histological examination [104,105].

Page 15 of 21

Unfortunately, surgery is often the only effective treatment for many HIE (e.g., ocular sparganosis, A. cantonensis) and this is one of the reasons why these
infections represent a traumatic event for the patients
and treatment is not a particularly cost-effective manner
in which to manage the infection. In some cases, such
as the typical zoonotic filarial infection, only a single
worm is present and the surgical removal is both therapeutic and curative. In other instances, most notably
OLM or larval tapeworms, there is some likelihood that
additional larval stages may exist and chemotherapy
may be indicated with corticosteroids in the case of
inflammatory conditions such as retinitis or optic neuritis [147].
It should be noted that the use of photocoaggulation
and laser ablation continue to prove useful in a number
of cases infection with HIE, e.g., ascarid larvae, Alaria
mesocercaria, and often result in improved visual outcome while at the same time destroying the invading
helminth in situ [122].

Concerns, ignorance and new avenues linked
to HIE
Ophthalmologists and physicians often lack an in- depth
knowledge of parasites, rendering it difficult for them to
correctly address the etiological identification, treatments and control strategies for many HIE. In addition,
the scientific information on HIE available in the international literature is scarce and limited to single case
reports in which a clear comparative differentiation
among helminth infections is not considered. The main
limitation for correctly identifying the etiological agent
is that often helminths are not removed, or they are
seriously damaged during the surgical procedures thus
rendering an accurate morphological identification difficult, if not impossible. The microscopic identification of
helminths at the species level often relies on the examination of key morphological characters, not all of which
are present on any given specimen or not recognized by
the person making the examination, sometimes resulting
in an incorrect diagnosis. Accurate identification is
crucial to understanding both the source of infection
and environmental risks, as well as prescribing correct
treatment options.
There are several cases in the literature in which helminths were erroneously identified; for example, cases
of Trichinella sp. in the vitreous of a woman and Toxocara sp. in the retina of a man both from Germany, and
a case Angiostrongylus sp. recovered from the anterior
chamber of a man from Sri Lanka were all incorrectly
identified as filaria (reviewed in [63]). Twenty-eight
cases of human dirofilariasis from the Old World were
erroneously attributed to D. immitis, subsequently
reviewed and correctly attributed to D. repens [181].

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

Recently, the helminth causing a case of human intraocular infestation in Japan was erroneously identified as
T. callipaeda although the picture published in the article portrayed a filarioid [182]. In the same article, the
authors stated that the life cycle of T. callipaeda
remains unclear and discussed the possibility of human
infection through the skin or by drinking untreated
water. This somewhat implausible hypothesis was
already dispelled in the late 1990s [183]. The scant
attention of medical researchers towards human thelaziasis may also be attributable to the difficulties in its
clinical diagnosis and differentiation from allergic conjunctivitis, particularly when small numbers of adult or
larval stages are present in affected patients. More
recently, the advent of molecular biological techniques
has largely supplemented and enhanced knowledge of
parasitologists in areas such as systematics (taxonomy
and phylogeny), population genetics and molecular identification, diagnosis and control of some HIE [184].
Indeed, the advent of PCR made it possible to study
damaged and incomplete specimens, or fragments of
specimens encysted in tissues which otherwise would
not be morphologically identifiable [185]. The importance of molecular identification and barcoding
approach (by the specific PCR-amplification of the cox1
and 12S genes) for the rapid identification of specimens
has been emphasized, including for either recognized or
yet unknown species. Recently, an integrated DNA barcoding of cox1 and 12S markers and morphology
approaches was shown to be a powerful tool for the taxonomical identification of many filarioid species even if
small nematode fragments were available [184]. In addition, the delineation of Molecular Operational Taxonomical Units (MOUTS) was useful to infer potential new
species [184].
Basic parasitological research in this field is often fragmentary due to the fact that experimental human infections are rarely done, and the retrieval of helminths
from the patients’ eyes may be an infrequent occurrence
during the ophthalmologic examination. For a number
of these helminths, poor experimental models exist, or,
if good models exist, the infections generally do not
affect the eye in the same way that occurs in aberrant
human infections. Thus, scientific knowledge in this
field, as well the information on helminth migration patterns is limited, and often has been gained from studies
of the same parasites in other animal models. All the
above concerns need to be addressed through basic and
applied research. For example, many nematode species
have not yet been described and even those that are
known are often poorly studied such that there is a lack
of basic information on the helminth fauna of wild animals (e.g., O. lupi). This is particularly true, but not
restricted to, regions of the world, such as the Brazilian

Page 16 of 21

Amazon forest, where there is wide biodiversity and a
large amount of animal and plant species yet to be
described [186]. Consequently, species identification of
some groups of HIE, such as filarial nematodes, can be
difficult if not impossible. Another example of insufficient information is represented by the unknown risk of
zoonotic infection, such as other species of Baylisascaris
(in addition to B. procyonis), that may be considered as
potential zoonotic agents [46]. For example Baylisascaris
transfuga, infecting bears worldwide [45,187] has been
reported to produce visceral, neural, or OLM syndromes
in mice [188-190], gerbils [45,191], and guinea pigs
[192]. In addition, cases of fatal neurological diseases
have been reported in a colony of Japanese macaques
(Macaca fuscata fuscata) housed with American black
bears in a safari-zoo in Japan [193]. However, the zoonotic role of this parasite for humans has never been
demonstrated. Since bears are frequently kept in zoos
and game parks and often have high prevalence of the
infection in the population (up to 50-100% of bears harbour this parasite) studies on the zoonotic capacity of
this parasitic species would be pivotal for a better
understanding of the public health risk [194]. Overall, a
better understanding of the biology of a number of HIE
is crucial for addressing their prevention.
Better awareness among physicians (including
ophthalmologists) in the field of parasitology and more
active collaboration with parasitologists would be very
helpful in proper diagnosis, control and prevention of
HIE. This would also allow a better knowledge of the
potential risks for being infected by an HIE agent in a
given area as well as exposure when travelling in endemic areas. Physicians and ophthalmologists need
increased awareness about the existence of a range of
zoonotic helminths other than those natural parasites of
humans that might be expected to be found in patients’
eyes.
Unfortunately, there is a lack of knowledge about
many parasites in the local fauna and limited basic
research studies are carried out. Monitoring and periodic surveillance for the infections of both domestic and
wild animals is important to provide a better understanding of what potential pathogens exist locally, and
to prevent the HIE. This is the case with B. procyonis
which is an emerging infection in raccoons in the southeastern United States, an area traditionally considered to
be at low risk [195,196]. An increasing appreciation of
onchocerciasis in domestic and wild animals in Europe
and the United States is needed to accurately understand what species exist, what the natural definitive host
is and, ultimately, what the risks for human infection
are. Veterinarians, physicians, and public health officials
all share the need to be alert to the possibility of zoonotic infections inside and outside of traditional high-risk

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

areas. Lastly, we need a better understanding of why
some parasites migrate to and occasionally enter the
eye, especially given that none of these helminths typically resides in or around the eye.

Conclusions
Despite scientific advances and new methods for treating helminth infections in the human eye, therapies
available to patients are somewhat limited and can only
be applied in specific cases. This will lead to improvements in the clinical outcome in some cases, but for the
foreseeable future, a number of these HIE have complex
clinical presentations that still hold potential for serious
outcome, including blindness or death, such as in the
case of B. procyonis infections, where, despite treatment,
neurological outcome is dismal in the overwhelming
majority of documented cases [46]. However, many
cases of these zoonotic helminth infections are preventable by relatively simple measures of improved health
and sanitation conditions and awareness on the part of
both public and health care providers. Risks for toxocariasis and baylisascariasis could be significantly reduced
through better hygiene and reduction of the amount of
animal waste in areas where people, especially children,
might come in contact with it. For the foodborne zoonoses, such as angiostrongyliasis, gnathostomiasis and
others, proper handling and preparation of foods would
minimize the risk of infection. For the vector-borne zoonotic infections, control and prevention is likely going to
be much harder, as it involves not only the control of
the infection in the definitive animal host, but a concerted control of vectors, which is often outside the control of any individual but almost always done at the
community or regional level.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Surgical removal of Dirofilaria repens from
patient’s conjunctiva. This video shows the surgical removal of
Dirofilaria repens from the patient’s conjunctiva, after topical anaesthesia.
The palpebral fissure was maintained open by using the blefarostat, the
nematode was extracted after incision of the conjunctiva membranes
and it was collected. A shortened version of a video in Otranto D, Brianti
E, Gaglio G, Dantas-Torres F, Azzaro S, Giannetto S. Human ocular
infestation by Dirofilaria repens (Ralliet and Henry, 1911) in a
canine dirofilariosis-endemic area. Am Jour Trop Med Hyg 2011 (in
press).
Additional file 2: Surgical removal of a Dirofilaria immitis -like
nematode. This video shows the surgical removal of a Dirofilaria immitis
-like female nematode from the anterior eye chamber of a patient from
Parà, Brasil. Eye was clipped and the cornea incised with a crescent
Beaver corneal knife. The nematode was extracted alive with forceps and
Fukasacu hook. The patient recovered without complications after the
surgery. A shortened version of a video in Otranto D, Diniz DG, DantasTorres F, Casiraghi M, de Almeida INF, de Almeida LNF, Nascimento dos
Santos J, Penha Furtado A, de Almeida Sobrinho AF, Bain O Human
intraocular filariasis caused by Dirofilaria sp., Brazil. Emerg Infect Dis
2011 (in press).

Page 17 of 21

Additional file 3: Surgical removal of Pelecitus sp. from the iris
fibers of a patient. This video shows the surgical removal of a Pelecitus
sp. male nematode (approximately 4 mm in length) from the iris fibers
of a patient from the Amazon region, Brasil. After peribulbar anesthesia
and corneal incision of 2 mm. The nematode was extracted by aspiration
and the surgery had no complication. A shortened version of a video in
Bain O, Otranto D, Diniz DG, Nascimento dos Santos J, Pinto de Oliveira
N, Negrão Frota de Almeida I, Negrão Frota de Almeida R, Negrão Frota
de Almeida L, Dantas-Torres F, Frota de Almeida, Sobrinho E: Human
intraocular filariasis caused by Pelecitus sp., Brazil. Emerg Infect Dis
2011 (in press).
Additional file 4: Thelazia callipaeda infecting the eye of a dog in
Basilicata region (southern Italy). This video shows Thelazia callipaeda
nematodes floating in the eye of an infected dog in an endemic area of
Italy. Conjunctivitis and lacrymation were the main symptoms observed.
In the second part, numerous T. callipaeda specimens have been
collected by an ocular swab.
Additional file 5: Onchocerca sp. infecting the anterior eye chamber
of a human patient. This video shows the occurrence of Onchocerca sp.
in the anterior chamber of a patient from Colorado, United States. The
nematode was surgically removed, extracted alive and identified as
Onchocerca. The patient recovered without complications after the
surgery. A video from the case presented in Burr WE, Brown MF,
Eberhard ML: Zoonotic Onchocerca (Nematoda: Filarioidea) in the
cornea of a Colorado resident. Ophthalmology 105:1494-1497, 1998.
Video courtesy of Dr. W.E. Burr.

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Alessio Giannelli (University of Bari, Italy) and
Donato Traversa (University of Teramo, Italy), for their support during the
preparation of the manuscript. We are grateful to Emanuele Brianti
(University of Messina, Italy) and Riccardo Paolo Lia (University of Bari, Italy)
for their assistance with the video editing and figure preparation. The
authors thank Susan Montgomery, CDC, and of two anonymous reviewers
for their helpful suggestions. DO and MLE would like to thank their wives
Irene Canfora and Sandra Eberhard for their continuous support and
assistance during the preparation of this article.
Author details
1
Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica e Zootecnia, Università degli Studi di Bari,
Valenzano, BA, Italy. 2Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30341-3724, USA.
Authors’ contributions
DO and MLE equally contributed in writing the article.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 31 January 2011 Accepted: 23 March 2011
Published: 23 March 2011
References
1. Williams RA, Brody BL, Thomas RG, Kaplan RM, Brown SI: The psychosocial
impact of macular degeneration. Arch Ophthalmol 1998, 116:514-520.
2. Blindness and poverty. [http://webadmin.hollows.org/Assets/Files/Blindness
%20and%20Poverty%5B1%5 D.pdf].
3. World Health Organization 2003. Onchocerciasis. [http://www.who.int/
blindness/partnerships/onchocerciasis_home/en/index.html].
4. Ryan E, Durrand M: Ocular Disease. In Tropical Infectious Diseases Principals,
Pathogens, and Practices.. 2 edition. Edited by: Guerrant RL, WalkerDH,
Weller PF. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2005:1554-1600.
5. Cutler SJ, Fooks AR, van der Poel WH: Public health threat of new,
reemerging, and neglected zoonoses in the industrialized world. Emerg
Infect Dis 2010, 16(1):1-7.
6. Jones KE, Patel NG, Levy MA, Storeygard A, Balk D, Gittleman JL, Daszak P:
Global trends in emerging infections diseases. Nature 2008, 451:990-994.

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

7.
8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.

Irwin PJ, Jefferies R: Arthropod-transmitted diseases of companion
animals in Southeast Asia. Trends Parasitol 2004, 1:27-34.
Orihel TC, Eberhard ML: Zoonotic filariasis. Clin Microbiol Rev 1998,
11:366-381.
Pisella PJ, Assaraf E, Rossaza C, Limon S, Baudouin C, Richard-Lenoble D:
Conjunctivitis and ocular parasitic diseases. J Fr Ophtalmol 1999,
22:585-588.
Shen J, Gasser RB, Chu D, Wang Z, Yuan X, Cantacessi C, Otranto D: Human
thelaziosis a neglected parasitic disease of the eye. J Parasitol 2006,
92:872-875.
Rubinsky-Elefant G, Hirata CE, Yamamoto JH, Ferreira MU: Human
toxocariasis: diagnosis, worldwide seroprevalences and clinical
expression of the systemic and ocular forms. Ann Trop Med Parasitol
2010, 104:3-23.
Cortez RT, Ramirez G, Collet L, Giuliari GP: Ocular parasitic diseases: a
review on toxocariasis and diffuse unilateral subacute neuroretinitis. J
Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus 2010, 28:1-9.
Gottstein B, Pozio E, Nöckler K: Epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, and
control of trichinellosis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2009, 22(1):127-145.
Bruschi F, Murrell KD: Trichinellosis. In Tropical Infectious Diseases Principals,
Pathogens, and Practices.. 2 edition. Edited by: Guerrant RL, WalkerDH,
Weller PF. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2005:1225-1230.
Kociecki J, Kociecka W: Visual system involvement in selected zoonotic
diseases. II Trichinellosis. Klin Oczna 2004, 106(3):371-375.
World Health Organization: Report of the WHO Informal Consultation on the
use of chemotherapy for the control of morbidity due to soil-transmitted
nematodes in humans Geneva 1996.
O’Lorcain P, Holland CV: The public health importance of Ascaris
lumbricoides. Parasitology 2000, 121:S51-S71.
Carden SM, Meusemann R, Walker J, Stawell RJ, MacKinnon JR, Smith D,
Stawell AM, Hall AJ: Toxocara canis: egg presence in Melbourne parks
and disease incidence in Victoria. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol 2003,
31(2):143-146.
Wilder HC: Nematode endophthalmitis. Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol and
Otolaryngology 1950, 55:99-109.
Brown DH: Ocular Toxocara canis. II. Clinical review. Journal of Pediatric
Ophthalmology 1970, 7:182-191.
Schantz P: Toxocara larva migrans now. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1989,
41:21-34.
Logar J, Soba B, Kraut A, Stirn-Kranjc B: Seroprevalence of Toxocara
antibodies among patients suspected of ocular toxocariasis in Slovenia.
Korean J Parasitol 2004, 42(3):137-140.
Won Y, Kruszon-Moran D, Schantz PM, Jones JL: National seroprevalence
and risk factors for zoonotic Toxocara spp. infections. Am J Trop Med Hyg
2008, 79(4):552-557.
Sabrosa NA, de Souza EC: Nematode infections of the eye: toxocariasis
and diffuse unilateral subacute neuroretinitis. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2001,
12(6):450-454.
Moraes LR, Cialdini AP, Avila MP, Elsner AE: Identifying live nematodes in
diffuse unilateral subacute neuroretinitis by using the scanning laser
ophthalmoscope. Arch Ophthalmol 2002, 120(2):135-138.
Higashide T, Akao N, Shirao E, Shirao Y: Optical coherence tomographic
and angiographic findings of a case with subretinal Toxocara
granuloma. Am J Ophthalmol 2003, 136(1):188-190.
Altcheh J, Nallar M, Conca M, Biancardi M, Freilij H: Toxocariasis: clinical
and laboratory features in 54 patients. An Pediatr (Barc) 2003,
58(5):425-431.
Yokoi K, Goto H, Sakai J, Usui M: Clinical features of ocular toxocariasis in
Japan. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 2003, 11(4):269-275.
Garcia CA, Gomes AH, Garcia Filho CA, Vianna RN: Early-stage diffuse
unilateral subacute neuroretinitis: improvement of vision after
photocoagulation of the worm. Eye (Lond) 2004, 18(6):624-627.
Suzuki T, Joko T, Akao N, Ohashi Y: Following the migration of a Toxocara
larva in the retina by optical coherence tomography and fluorescein
angiography. Jpn J Ophthalmol 2005, 49(2):159-161.
Stewart JM, Cubillan LD, Cunningham ET Jr: Prevalence, clinical features,
and causes of vision loss among patients with ocular toxocariasis. Retina
2005, 25(8):1005-1013.
Rasquin F, Waterschoot MP, Termote H, Carlier Y: Diffuse unilateral
subacute neuroretinitis in Africa. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 2006,
14(1):59-62.

Page 18 of 21

33. Bertelmann E, Velhagen KH, Pleyer U, Hartmann C: Ocular toxocariasis.
Diagnostic and therapeutic options. Ophthalmologe 2003, 100(11):950-954.
34. Mori K, Ohta K, Murata T: Vasoproliferative tumors of the retina secondary
to ocular toxocariasis. Can J Ophthalmol 2007, 42(5):758-759.
35. Acar N, Kapran Z, Utine CA, Büyükbabani N: Pars plana vitrectomy
revealed Toxocara canis organism. Int Ophthalmol 2007, 27(4):277-280.
36. Urban B, Bakunowicz-Łazarczyk A, Michał S: Clinical features, the
effectiveness of treatment and function of vision organ in children and
adolescents with ocular toxocariasis. Klin Oczna 2008, 110(10-12):364-366.
37. Sivaratnam D, Subrayan V, Ali NA: Transvitreal migration of a Toxocara
larva resulting in a second chorioretinal granuloma. Jpn J Ophthalmol
2008, 52(5):416-417.
38. Bertelmann E, Velhagen KH, Pleyer U: Ocular toxocariasis. From biology to
therapy. Ophthalmologie 2007, 104:35-39.
39. de Visser L, Rothova A, de Boer JH, van Loon AM, Kerkhoff FT, Canningavan Dijk MR, Weersink AY, de Groot-Mijnes JD: Diagnosis of ocular
toxocariasis by establishing intraocular antibody production. Am J
Ophthalmol 2008, 145(2):369-374.
40. De A Garcia CA, Gomes AHB, de A Garcia Filho CA, Vianna RNG: Earlystage diffuse unilateral subacute neuroretinitis: imporvmenet of vision
after photocoagulation of the worm. Eye 2004, 18:624-627.
41. Ash LR, Orihel TC, (Eds): Ash & Orihel’s Atlas of Human Parasitology.
American Society for Clinical Pathology;, 5 2007.
42. Moertel CL, Kazacos KR, Butterfield JH, Kita H, Watterson J, Gleich GJ:
Eosinophil-associated inflammation and elaboration of eosinophilderived proteins in 2 children with raccoon roundworm (Baylisascaris
procyonis) encephalitis. Pediatrics 2001, 108:93.
43. Sorvillo F, Ash LR, Berlin OG, Morse SA: Baylisascaris procyonis: an
emerging helminthic zoonosis. Emerg Infect Dis 2002, 8(4):355-359.
44. Mets MB, Noble AG, Basti S, Gavin P, Davis AT, Shulman ST, Kazacos KR: Eye
findings of diffuse unilateral subacute neuroretinitis and multiple
choroidal infiltrates associated with neural larva migrans due to
Baylisascaris procyonis. Am J Ophthalmol 2003, 135(6):888-890.
45. Sato H, Matsuo K, Osanai A, Kamiya H, Akao N, Owaki S, Furuoka H: Larva
migrans by Baylisascaris transfuga: fatal neurological diseases in
Mongolian jirds, but not in mice. J Parasitol 2004, 90:774-781.
46. Gavin PJ, Kazacos KR, Shulman ST: Baylisascariasis. J Clin Microbiol 2005,
18:703-718.
47. Goldberg MA, Kazacos KR, Boyce WM, Ai E, Katz B: Diffuse unilateral
subacute neuritis. Morphometric, serologic and epidemiologic support
for Baylisascaris as a causative agent. Ophthalmology 1993, 100:1695-1701.
48. Brasil OF, Lewis H, Lowder CY: Migration of Baylisascaris procyonis into the
vitreous. Br J Ophthalmol 2006, 90:1203-1204.
49. Herman JS, Chiodini PL: Gnathostomiasis, another emerging imported
disease. Clin Microbiol Rev 2009, 22(3):484-492.
50. Biswas J, Gopal L, Sharma T, Badrinath SS: Intraocular Gnathostoma
spinigerum. Clinicopathologic study of two cases with review of
literature. Retina 1994, 14(5):438-444.
51. Kannan KA, Vasantha K, Venugopal M: Intraocular gnathostomiasis. Indian J
Ophthalmol 1999, 47(4):252-253.
52. Qahtani F, Deschênes J, Ali-Khan Z, Maclean JD, Codère F, Mansour M,
Burnier M Jr: Intraocular gnathostomiasis: a rare Canadian case. Can J
Ophthalmol 2000, 35(1):35-39.
53. Xuan le T, Rojekittikhun W, Punpoowong B, Trang le N, Hien TV: Case
report: intraocular gnathostomiasis in Vietnam. Southeast Asian J Trop
Med Public Health 2002, 33(3):485-489.
54. Baquera-Heredia J, Cruz-Reyes A, Flores-Gaxiola A, López-Pulido G, DíazSimental E, Valderrama-Valenzuela L: Case report: Ocular gnathostomiasis
in northwestern Mexico. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2002, 66(5):572-574.
55. Basak SK, Sinha TK, Bhattacharya D, Hazra TK, Parikh S: Intravitreal live
Gnathostoma spinigerum. Indian J Ophthalmol 2004, 52(1):57-58.
56. Bhende M, Biswas J, Gopal L: Ultrasound biomicroscopy in the diagnosis
and management of intraocular gnathostomiasis. Am J Ophthalmol 2005,
140(1):140-142.
57. Barua P, Hazarika NK, Barua N, Barua CK, Choudhury B: Gnathostomiasis of
the anterior chamber. Indian J Med Microbiol 2007, 25(3):276-278.
58. Bhattacharjee H, Das D, Medhi J: Intravitreal gnathostomiasis and review
of literature. Retina 2007, 27(1):67-73.
59. Chuenkongkaew W, Chirapapaisan N, Hongyok T, Yoolek A: Isolated optic
neuritis from an identified Gnathostoma spinigerum. Eur J Ophthalmol
2007, 17(1):130-132.

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

60. Anantaphruti MT, Nuamtanong S, Dekumyoy P: Diagnostic values of IgG4
in human gnathostomiasis. Trop Med Int Health 2005, 10(10):1013.
61. Sawanyawisuth K, Chlebicki MP, Pratt E, Kanpittaya J, Intapan PM:
Sequential imaging studies of cerebral gnathostomiasis with subdural
hemorrhage as its complication. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2009,
103(1):102-104.
62. Botero D, Aguledo LM, Uribe FU, Esslinger JH, Beaver PC: Intracoular filarial,
a Loaina species, from man in Colombia. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1984,
33:578-582.
63. Beaver PC: Intraocular filariasis: a brief review. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1989,
40:40-45.
64. Bain O, Otranto D, Diniz DG, Nascimento dos Santos J, Pinto de Oliveira N,
Negrão Frota de Almeida I, Negrão Frota de Almeida R, Negrão Frota de
Almeida L, Dantas-Torres F, Frota de Almeida , Sobrinho E: Human
intraocular filariasis caused by Pelecitus sp., Brazil. Emerg Infect Dis 2011.
65. Otranto D, Diniz DG, Dantas-Torres F, Casiraghi M, de Almeida INF, de
Almeida LNF, Nascimento dos Santos J, Penha Furtado A, de Almeida
Sobrinho AF, Bain O: Human intraocular filariasis caused by Dirofilaria sp.,
Brazil. Emerg Infect Dis 2011.
66. Addario C: Su di un nematode dell’occhio umano. Ann Oftalmol 1885,
14:135-147.
67. Orihel TC, Beaver PC: Morphology and relationship of Dirofilaria tenuis
and Dirofilaria conjunctivae. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1965, 14:1030-1043.
68. Mittal M, Sathish KR, Bhatia G, Chidamber MS: Ocular dirofilariasis in
Dubai, UAE. Indian J Ophthalmol 2008, 56(4):325-326.
69. Jamshidi A, Jamshidi M, Mobedi I, Khosroara M: Periocular Dirofilariasis in
a Young Woman: A Case Report. Korean J Parasitol 2008, 46(4):265-267.
70. Eccher A, Dalfior D, Gobbo S, Martignoni G, Brunelli M, Decaminada W,
Bonetti F, Rivasi F, Barbareschi M, Menestrina F: Periorbital subcutaneous
tumor-like lesion due to Dirofilaria repens. Int J Surg Pathol 2008,
16(1):101-103.
71. Fodor E, Fok E, Maka E, Lukáts O, Tóth J: Recently recognized cases of
ophthalmofilariasis in Hungary. Eur J Ophthalmol 2009, 19(4):675-678.
72. Khechine-Martinez R, Doucet C, Blanchard S, Rouland JF, Labalette P:
Subconjunctival dirofilariasis: a case report. J Fr Ophtalmol 2009,
32(5):350.
73. Rohela M, Jamaiah I, Hui TT, Mak JW, Ithoi I, Amirah A: Dirofilaria causing
eye infection in a patient from Malaysia. South Asian J Trop Med Public
Health 2009, 40(5):914-918.
74. Wesolowska M, Kisza K, Szalinski M, Zielinski M, Okulewicz A, Misiuk-Hojlo M,
Szostakowska B: First case of heterochthonous subconjunctival
dirofilariasis described in Poland. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010, 83(2):210.
75. Hasler S, Grimm F, Thiel MA, Müller NJ, Eberhard R, Bosch MM: Swiss
patient with a subconjunctival Dirofilaria repens. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd
2010, 227(4):332-333.
76. Avellis FO, Kramer LH, Mora P, Bartolino A, Benedetti P, Rivasi F: A Case of
Human conjunctival dirofilariosis by Dirofilaria immitis in Italy. Vector
Borne Zoonotic Dis , 2010.
77. Otranto D, Brianti E, Gaglio G, Dantas-Torres F, Azzaro S, Giannetto S:
Human ocular infestation by Dirofilaria repens (Ralliet and Henry, 1911)
in a canine dirofilariosis-endemic area. Am Jour Trop Med Hyg 2011.
78. Gungel H, Kara N, Pinarci EY, Albayrak S, Baylancicek DO, Uysal HK: An
uncommon case with intravitreal worm. Intravitreal Dirofilaria infection.
Br J Ophthalmol 2009, 93(5):573-574.
79. Huynh T, Thean J, Maini R: Dipetalonema reconditum in the human eye. Br
J Ophthalmol 2001, 85:1391.
80. Lau LI, Lee FL, Hsu WM, Pampiglione S, Fioravanti ML, Orihel TC: Human
subconjunctival infection of Macacanema formosana: the first case of
human infection reported worldwide. Arch Ophthalmol 2002,
120(5):643-647.
81. Natarajan R: Another case of human subconjunctival infection by
Macacanema formosana. Arch Ophthalmol 2003, 121(4):584-585.
82. Spratt DM: Natural occurrence, histopathology and developmental
stages of Dirofilaria roemeri in the intermediate host. Int J Parasitol 1972,
2:202-208.
83. Bartlett CM: Development of Dirofilaria scapiceps (Leidy, 1886)
(Nematoda: Filarioidea) in Aedes spp. and Mansonia perturbans (Walker)
and responses of mosquitoes to infection. Can J Zool 1984, 62:112-129.
84. Bartlett CM, Anderson RC: Pelecitus fulicaeatrae (Nematoda: Filarioidea) of
coots (Gruiformes) and grebes (Podicipediformes): skin-inhabiting
microfilariae and development in Mallophaga. Can J Zool 1987, 65:2803-2812.

Page 19 of 21

85. Pinto RM, Vicente JJ, Noronha D: Nematode parasites of Brazilian
psittacids birds, with emphasis on the genus Pelecitus Railiet & Henry,
1910. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 1993, 88:279-284.
86. Vicente JJ, Rodrigues HOR, Gomes DC, Pinto RM: Nematóides do Brasil.
Parte V: nematóides de mamíferos. Rev Bras Zool 1997, 14:1-452.
87. Rao NG, Mahapatra SK, Pattnayak S, Pattnaik K: Intravitreal live adult
Brugian filariasis. Indian J Ophthalmol 2008, 56(1):76-78.
88. Heldwein K, Biedermann HG, Hamperl WD, Bretzel G, Löscher T, Laregina D,
Frosch M, Büttner DW, Tappe D: Subcutaneous Taenia crassiceps infection
in a patient with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2006,
75(1):108-111.
89. Maillard H, Marionneau J, Prophette B, Boyer E, Celerier P: Taenia crassiceps
cysticercosis and AIDS. AIDS 1998, 20:1551-1552.
90. Shea M, Maberley AL, Walters J, Freeman RS, Fallis AM: Intraocular Taenia
crassiceps (Cestoda). Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol Otolaryngol 1973, 77:
OP778-OP783.
91. Chuck RS, Olk RJ, Weil GJ, Akduman L, Benenson IL, Smith ME, Kaplan HJ:
Surgical removal of a subretinal proliferating cysticercus of
Taeniaeformis crassiceps. Arch Ophthalmol 1997, 115:562-563.
92. Arocker-Mettinger E, Huber-Spitzy V, Auer H, Grabner G, Stur M: Taenia
crassiceps in the anterior chamber of the human eye. A case report. Klin
Monbl Augenheilkd 1992, 201:34-37.
93. Sinha S, Sharma BS: Neurocysticercosis: a review of current status and
management. J Clin Neurosci 2009, 16(7):867-876.
94. Gauci C, Vural G, Oncel T, Varcasia A, Damian V, Kyngdon CT, Craig PS,
Anderson GA, Lightowlers MW: Vaccination with recombinant oncosphere
antigens reduces the susceptibility of sheep to infection with Taenia
multiceps. Int J Parasitol 2008, 38:1041-1050.
95. Sabattani S, Marliani A, Roncaroli F, Zuccheli M, Zini A, Calbucci F, Chiodo F:
Cerebral coenurosis. J Neurosurg 2004, 100:964.
96. Williams PH, Templeton AC: Infection of the eye by tapeworm Coenurus.
Brit J Ophthal 1971, 55:766-769.
97. Manschot WA: Coenurus infestation of eye and orbit. Arch Ophthalmol
1976, 94:961-964.
98. Melhorn H: Encyclopedia of Parasitology Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag; 2008.
99. Ou Q, Li SJ, Cheng XJ: Cerebral sparganosis: A case report. Biosci Trends
2010, 4(3):145-147.
100. Leon LA, Almeida R, Mueller JF: A case of ocular sparganosis in Ecuador. J
Parasitol 1972, 58(1):184-185.
101. Rehák M, Kolárová L, Kohnová I, Rehák J, Mohlerová S, Fric E, Chrapek O:
Ocular sparganosis in the Czech Republic-a case report. Klin Mikrobiol
Infekc Lek 2006, 12:161-165.
102. Zhong HL, Shao L, Lian DR, Deng ZF, Zhao SX, Gao PZ, He LY, Yun CF,
Pan JY: Ocular sparganosis caused blindness. Chin Med J 1983,
96(1):73-75.
103. Wiwanitkit VA: Review of human sparganosis in Thailand. Int J Infect Dis
2005, 9(6):312-316.
104. Subudhi BN, Dash S, Chakrabarty D, Mishra DP, Senapati U: Ocular
sparganosis. J Indian Med Assoc 2006, 104:529-530.
105. Yang JW, Lee JH, Kang MS: A case of ocular sparganosis in Korea. Korean
J Ophthalmol 2007, 21(1):48-50.
106. Kittiponghansa S, Tesana S, Ritch R: Ocular sparganosis: a cause of
subconjunctival tumor and deafness. Trop Med Parasitol 1988, 39(3):247-248.
107. Sen DK, Muller R, Gupta VP, Chilana JS: Cestode Larva (Sparganum) in the
anterior chamber of the eye. Trop Geogr Med 1989, 41:270-273.
108. Basset D, Girou C, Nozais IP, D’Hermies F, Hoang C, Gordon R,
D’Alessandro A: Neotropical echinococcosis in Suriname: Echinococcus
oligarthrus in the orbit and Echinococcus vogeli in the abdomen. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 1998, 59:787-790.
109. Murthy R, Honavar SG, Vemuganti GK, Naik M, Burman S: Polycystic
echinococcosis of the orbit. Am J Ophthalmol 2005, 140:561-563.
110. Lightowlers MW: Cestode vaccines: origins, current status and future
prospects. Parasitology 2006, 133:S27-S42.
111. Kern P: Clinical features and treatment of alveolar echinococcosis. Curr
Opin Infect Dis 2010, 23:505-412.
112. Chaabouni M, Ben Zina Z, Ben Ayez H, Tounsi R, Trigui A, Ben Mansour H:
Hydatid orbital cyst: a unique intra-orbital locality. A case report. J Fr
Ophtalmol 1999, 22:329-334.
113. Sinav S, Demirci A, Sinav B, Oge F, Sullu Y, Kandemir B: A primary
intraocular hydatid cyst. Acta Ophthalmologica 1991, 69:802-804.

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

114. Ozek MM, Pamir MN, Sav A: Spontaneous rupture of an intraorbital
hydatid cyst. A rare cause of acute visual loss. J Clin Neuroophthalmol
1993, 13:135-137.
115. Williams DF, Williams GA, Caya JG, Werner RP, Harrison TJ: Intraocular
Echinococcus multilocularis. Arch Ophthalmol 1987, 105:1106-1109.
116. D’Alessandro A, Rausch RL: New aspects of neotropical polycystic
(Echinococcus vogeli) and unicystic (Echinococcus oligarthrus)
echinococcosis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2008, 21:380-401.
117. Lopera RD, Melendez RD, Fernandez I, Sirit J, Perera MP: Orbital hydatid
cyst of Echinococcus oligarthrus in a human in Venezuela. J Parasitol
1989, 75:467-470.
118. Möhl K, Grosse K, Hamedy A, Wüste T, Kabelitz P, Lücker E: Biology of
Alaria spp. and human exposition risk to Alaria mesocercariae-a review.
Parasitol Res 2009, 105(1):1-15.
119. Mas-Coma S, Valero MA, Bargues MD: Fasciola, lymnaeids and human
fascioliasis, with a global overview on disease transmission,
epidemiology, evolutionary genetics, molecular epidemiology and
control. Adv Parasitol 2009, 69:41-146.
120. Dalimi A, Jabarvand M: Fasciola hepatica in the human eye. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg 2005, 99:798-800.
121. Nithiuthai S, Anantaphruti MT, Waikagul J, Gajadhar A: Waterborne
zoonotic helminthiases. Vet Parasitol 2004, 126(1-2):167-193.
122. McDonald HR, Kazacos KR, Schatz H, Johnson RN: Two cases of intraocular
infection with Alaria mesocercaria (Trematoda). Am J Ophthalmol 1994,
117:447-455.
123. Diaz MT, Hernandez LF, Bashirullah AK: Experimental life cycle of
Philophthalmus gralli (Trematoda: Philophthalmidae) in Venezuela. Rev
Biol Trop 2002, 50:629-641.
124. Waikagul J, Dekumyoy P, Yoonuan T, Praevanit R: Conjunctiva
philophthalmosis: a case report in Thailand. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2006,
74(5):848-849.
125. Anderson RC: Nematode Parasites of Vertebrates. Their development and
transmission. 2 edition. Guilford: CABI; 2000.
126. Lindo JF, Waugh C, Hall J, Cunningham-Myrie C, Ashley D, Eberhard ML,
Sullivan JJ, Bishop HS, Robinson DG, Holtz T, Robinson RD: Enzootic
Angiostrongylus cantonensis in rats and snails after an outbreak of
human eosinophilic meningitis, Jamaica. Emerg Infect Dis 2002,
8(3):324-326.
127. Caldeira RL, Mendonça CL, Goveia CO, Lenzi HL, Graeff-Teixeira C, Lima WS,
Mota EM, Pecora IL, Medeiros AM, Carvalho Odos S: First record of
molluscs naturally infected with Angiostrongylus cantonensis (Chen,
1935) (Nematoda: Metastrongylidae) in Brazil. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz
2007, 102(7):887-889.
128. Lima AR, Mesquita SD, Santos SS, Aquino ER, Rosa Lda R, Duarte FS,
Teixeira AO, Costa ZR, Ferreira ML: Alicata disease: neuroinfestation by
Angiostrongylus cantonensis in Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil. Arq
Neuropsiquiatr 2009, 67(4):1093-1096.
129. Dorta-Contreras AJ, Magraner-Tarrau ME, Sánchez-Zulueta E:
Angiostrongyliasis in the Americas. Emerg Infect Dis 2009, 15(6):991.
130. Chikweto A, Bhaiyat MI, Macpherson CN, Deallie C, Pinckney RD, Richards C,
Sharma RN: Existence of Angiostrongylus cantonensis in rats (Rattus
norvegicus) in Grenada, West Indies. Vet Parasitol 2009, 162(1-2):160-162.
131. Punyagupta S, Juttijudata P, Bunnag T: Eosinophilic meningitis in Thailand.
Clinical studies of 484 typical cases probably caused by Angiostrongylus
cantonensis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1975, 24:921-31.
132. Prommindaroj K, Leelawongs N, Pradatsundarasar A: Human
angiostrongyliasis of the eye in Bangkok. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1962,
11(6):759-761.
133. Kumar V, Kyprianou I, Keenan JM: Ocular angiostrongyliasis: removal of a
live nematode from the anterior chamber. Eye 2005, 19:229-230.
134. Jindrak K: Angiostrongyliasis cantonensis (eosinophilic meningitis, Alicata’s
disease). Contemp Neurol Ser 1975, 12:133-166.
135. Dissanaike AS, Ihalamulla RL, Naotunne TS, Senarathna T, Withana DS: Third
report of ocular parastrongyliasis (angiostrongyliasis) from Sri Lanka.
Parassitologia 2001, 43(3):95-97.
136. Thu TP, Nguyen NX, Lan le T, Küchle M: Ocular Angiostrongylus
cantonensis in a female Vietnamese patient: case report. Klin Monbl
Augenheilkd 2002, 219(12):892-895.
137. Patikulsila D, Ittipunkul N, Theerakittikul B: Intravitreal angiostrongyliasis:
report of 2 cases. J Med Assoc Thai 2003, 86(10):981-985.

Page 20 of 21

138. Dissanaike AS, Cross JH: Ocular parastrongyliasis (= angiostrongyliasis):
probable first report of human infection from a patient in Ceylon (Sri
Lanka). Parassitologia 2004, 46(3):315-316.
139. Malhotra S, Mehta DK, Arora R, Chauhan D, Ray S, Jain M: Ocular
angiostrongyliasis in a child-first case report from India. J Trop Pediatr
2006, 52(3):223-225.
140. Liu IH, Chung YM, Chen SJ, Cho WL: Necrotizing retinitis induced by
Angiostrongylus cantonensis. Am J Ophthalmol 2006, 141(3):577-579.
141. Sawanyawisuth K, Kitthaweesin K, Limpawattana P, Intapan PM, Tiamkao S,
Jitpimolmard S, Chotmongkol V: Intraocular angiostrongyliasis: clinical
findings, treatments and outcomes. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2007,
101:497-501.
142. Baheti NN, Sreedharan M, Krishnamoorthy T, Nair MD, Radhakrishnan K:
Eosinophilic meningitis and an ocular worm in a patient from Kerala,
south India. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2008, 79:271.
143. Sawanyawisuth K, Kitthaweesin K: Optic neuritis caused by intraocular
angiostrongyliasis. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 2008,
39:1005-1007.
144. Mattis A, Mowatt L, Lue A, Lindo J, Vaughan H: Ocular angiostrongyliasisfirst case report from Jamaica. West Indian Med J 2009, 58:383-385.
145. Ramirez-Avila L: Eosinophilic Meningitis due to Angiostrongylus and
Gnathostoma Species. Emerging Infections 2009, 48:322-327.
146. Koo J, Pien F, Kliks MM: Angiostrongylus (Parastrongylus) eosinophilic
meningitis. Rev Infect Dis 1988, 10:1155-1162.
147. Sawanyawisuth K, Sawanyawisuth K: Treatment of angiostrongyliasis. Trans
R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2008, 102:990-996.
148. Doezie AM, Lucius RW, Aldeen W, Hale DV, Smith DR, Mamalis N: Thelazia
californiensis conjunctival infestation. Ophthalmic Surgery and Lasers 1996,
27:716-771.
149. Otranto D, Traversa D: Thelazia eyeworm: an original endo- and ectoparasitic nematode. Trends Parasitol 2005, 21:1-4.
150. Otranto D, Dantas-Torres F, Mallia E, DiGeronimo PM, Brianti E, Testini G,
Traversa D, Lia P: Thelazia callipaeda (Spirurida, Thelaziidae) in wild
animals: report of new host species and ecological implications. Vet
Parasitol 2009, 166:262-267.
151. Miroshnichenko VA, Desiaterik MP, Novik AP, Gorbach AP, Papernova N: A
case of ocular thelaziasis in a 3-year-old child in Russian. Vestn Oftalmol
1988, 104-64.
152. Min S, Jae RY, Hyun YP: Enzooticity of the dogs, the reservoir host of
Thelazia callipaeda in Korea. Kor J Parasitol 2002, 40:101-103.
153. Koyama Y, Ohira A, Kono T, Yoneyama T, Shiwaku K: Five cases of
thelaziasis. Br J Ophthalmol 2000, 84(4):441.
154. Kosin E, Kosman ML, Depary AA: First case of human Thelaziasis in
Indonesia. Southeast Asian. J Trop Med Public Health 1989, 20:233-236.
155. Yospaiboon Y, Sithithavorn P, Maleewong V, Ukosanakarn U, Bhaibulaya M:
Ocular thelaziasis in Thailand: a case report. J Med Assoc Thai 1989,
72:469-473.
156. Cheung WK, Lu HL, Liang CH, Peng ML, Lee HH: Conjunctivitis caused by
Thelazia callipaeda infestation in a woman. J Formos Med Assoc 1998,
97:425-427.
157. Singh TS, Singh KN: Thelaziasis: report of two cases. Br J Ophthalmol 1993,
77:528.
158. Otranto D, Lia RP, Cantacessi C, Testini G, Troccoli A, Shen JL, Wang ZX:
Nematode biology and larval development of Thelazia callipaeda
(Spirurida, Thelaziidae) in the drosophilid intermediate host in Europe
and China. Parasitology 2005, 131:847-855.
159. Otranto D, Cantacessi C, Testini G, Lia RP: Phortica variegata is an
intermediate host of Thelazia callipaeda under natural conditions:
evidence for pathogen transmission by a male arthropod vector. Int J
Parasitol 2006, 36(10-11):1167-1173.
160. Otranto D, Ferroglio E, Lia RP, Traversa D, Rossi L: Current status and
epidemiological observation of Thelazia callipaeda (Spirurida,
Thelaziidae) in dogs, cats and foxes in Italy: a “coincidence” or a
parasitic disease of the Old Continent? Vet Parasitol 2003, 116:315-325.
161. Dorchies P, Chaudieu G, Siméon LA, Cazalot G, Cantacessi C, Otranto D:
First reports of autochthonous eyeworm infection by Thelazia callipaeda
(Spirurida, Thelaziidae) in dogs and cat from France. Vet Parasitol 2007,
149:294-297.
162. Ruytoor P, Déan E, Pennant O, Dorchies P, Chermette R, Otranto D,
Guillot J: Ocular thelaziosis in dogs. Emerg Infect Dis 2010, 16:1943-1945.

Otranto and Eberhard Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:41
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/41

163. Malacrida F, Hegglin D, Bacciarini L, Otranto D, Nägeli F, Nägeli C,
Bernasconi C, Scheu U, Balli A, Marengo M, Togni L, Deplazes P,
Schnyder M: Emergence of canine ocular thelaziosis caused by Thelazia
callipaeda in southern Switzerland. Vet Parasitol 2008, 157:321-327.
164. Otranto D, Dutto M: Human thelaziasis, Europe. Emerg Infect Dis 2008,
4:647-649.
165. Otranto D, Lia RP, Traversa D, Giannetto S: Thelazia callipaeda (Spirurida,
Thelaziidae) of carnivores and humans: morphological study by light
and scanning electron microscopy. Parassitologia 2003, 45:125-133.
166. Sréter T, Széll Z: Onchocercosis: a newly recognized disease in dogs. Vet
Parasitol 2008, 151:1-13.
167. Uni S, Boda T, Daisaku K, Ikura Y, Maruyama H, Hasegawa H, Fukuda M,
Takaoka H, Bain O: Zoonotic filariasis caused by Onchocerca dewittei
japonica in a resident of Hiroshima Prefecture, Honshu, Japan. Parasitol
Int 2010, 59:477-80.
168. Azarova NS, Miretski OI, Sonin MD: 1st case of human infection by the
nematode Onchocerca Diesing, 1841 in the USSR. Med Parazitol 1965,
34(2):156-158.
169. Burr WE, Brown MF, Eberhard ML: Zoonotic Onchocerca (Nematoda:
Filarioidea) in the cornea of a Colorado resident. Ophthalmology 1998,
105:1494-1497.
170. Pampiglione S, Vakalis N, Lyssimachou A, Kouppari G, Orihel TC:
Subconjunctival zoonotic Onchocerca in an Albanian man. Ann Trop Med
Parasitol 2001, 95:827-832.
171. Sallo F, Eberhard ML, Fok E, Baska F, Hatvani I: Zoonotic intravitreal
Onchocerca in Hungary. Ophthalmology 2005, 112(3):502-504.
172. Otranto D, Sakru N, Testini G, Gürlü VP, Yakar K, Lia RP, Dantas-Torres F,
Bain O: First Evidence of Human Zoonotic Infestation by Onchocerca lupi
(Spirurida, Onchocercidae). Am J Trop Med Hyg 2011, 84(1):55-8.
173. Beaver PC, Horner GS, Bilos JZ: Zoonotic onchocercosis in a resident of
Illinois and observations on the identification of Onchocerca species. Am
J Trop Med Hyg 1974, 23(4):595-607.
174. Széll Z, Erdélyi I, Sréter T, Albert M, Varga I: Canine ocular onchocercosis in
Hungary. Vet Parasitol 2001, 97:245-251.
175. Komnenou A, Eberhard ML, Kaldrymidou E, Tsalie E, Dessiris A:
Subconjunctival filariasis due to Onchocerca sp. in dogs: report of 23
cases in Greece. Vet Ophthalmol 2002, 5:119-126.
176. Hermosilla A, Hetzel U, Bausch M, Grübl J, Bauer C: First autochthonous
case of canine ocular onchocercosis in Germany. Vet Rec 2005,
154:450-452.
177. Sréter-Lancz Z, Széll Z, Sréter T: Molecular genetic comparison of
Onchocerca sp. infecting dogs in Europe with other spirurid nematodes
including Onchocerca lienalis. Vet Parasitol 2007, 148:365-370.
178. Orihel TC, Ash LR, Holshuh HJ, Santenelli S: Onchocerciasis in a California
dog. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1991, 44:513-517.
179. Eberhard ML, Ortega Y, Dial S, Schiller CA, Sears W, Greiner E: Ocular
Onchocerca infections in western United States. Vet Parasitol 2000,
90:333-338.
180. Zarfoss MK, Dubielzig RR, Eberhard ML, Schmidt KS: Canine ocular
onchocerciasis in the United States: two new cases and a review of the
literature. Vet Ophthalmol 2005, 8:51-57.
181. Pampiglione S, Rivasi F, Gustinelli A: Dirofilarial human cases in the Old
World, attributed to Dirofilaria immitis: a critical analysis. Histopathology
2009, 54(2):192-204.
182. Kim HW, Kim JL, Kho WG, Hwang SY, Yun IH: Intraocular infestation with
Thelazia callipaeda. Jpn J Ophthalmol 2010, 54(4):370-372.
183. Zakir R, Zhong-Xia Z, Chiodini P, Canning CR: Intraocular infestation with
the worm, Thelazia callipaeda. Br J Ophthalmol 1999, 83:1194-1195.
184. Ferri E, Barbuto M, Bain O, Galimberti A, Uni S, Guerrero R, Ferté H, Bandi C,
Martin C, Casiraghi M: Integrated taxonomy: traditional approach and
DNA barcoding for the identification of filarioid worms and related
parasites (Nematoda). Front Zool 2009, 6:1.
185. Bimi L, Freeman AR, Eberhard ML, Ruiz-Tiben E, Pieniazek NJ:
Differentiating Dracunculus medinensis from D. insignis, by the sequence
analysis of the 18S rRNA gene. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2005, 99(5):511-517.
186. Barlow J, Gardner TA, Araujo IS, Avila-Pires TC, Bonaldo AB, Costa JE,
Esposito MC, Ferreira LV, Hawes J, Hernandez MI, Hoogmoed MS, Leite RN,
Lo-Man-Hung NF, Malcolm JR, Martins MB, Mestre LA, Miranda-Santos R,
Nunes-Gutjahr AL, Overal WL, Parry L, Peters SL, Ribeiro-Junior MA, da
Silva MN, da Silva Motta C, Peres CA: Quantifying the biodiversity value of

Page 21 of 21

187.

188.
189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

194.
195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

tropical primary, secondary, and plantation forests. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2007, 104:18555-18560.
Foster GW, Cunningham MW, Kinsella JM, Forrester DJ: Parasitic helminths
of black bear cubs (Ursus americanus) from Florida. J Parasitol 2004,
90(1):173-175.
Papini R, Casarosa L: Observations on the infectivity of Baylisascaris
transfuga eggs for mice. Vet Parasitol 1994, 51(3-4):283-288.
Papini R, Renzoni G, Malloggi M, Casarosa L: Visceral larva migrans in mice
experimentally infected with Baylisascaris transfuga (Ascarididae:
Nematoda). Parassitologia 1994, 36(3):321-329.
Papini R, Renzoni G, Lo Piccolo S, Casarosa L: Ocular larva migrans and
histopathological lesions in mice experimentally infected with
Baylisascaris transfuga embryonated eggs. Vet Parasitol 1996, 61(34):315-320.
Cho S, Egami M, Ohnuki H, Saito Y, Chinone S, Shichinohe K, Suganuma M,
Akao N: Migration behaviour and pathogenesis of five ascarid nematode
species in the Mongolian gerbil Meriones unguiculatus. J Helminthol 2007,
81(1):43-47.
Matoff K, Komandarev S: Comparative studies on the migration of the
larvae of Toxascaris leonina and Toxascaris transfuga. Z Parasitenkd 1965,
25:538-555.
Sato H, Une Y, Kawakami S, Saito E, Kamiya H, Akao N, Furuoka H: Fatal
Baylisascaris larva migrans in a colony of Japanese macaques kept by a
safari-style zoo in Japan. J Parasitol 2005, 91(3):716-719.
Sprent JF: Notes on Ascaris and Toxascaris, with a definition of
Baylisascaris gen. nov. Parasitology 1968, 58(1):185-198.
Eberhard ML, Nace EK, Won KY, Punkosdy GA, Bishop HS, Johnston SP:
Baylisascaris procyonis in the metropolitan Atlanta area. Emerg Infect Dis
2003, 9(12):1636-1637.
Blizzard EL, Yabasley MJ, Beck MF, Harsch S: Geographic expansion of
Baylisascaris procyonis roundworms, Florida, USA. Emerg Inf Dis 2010,
16(11):1803-1804.
Pampiglione S, Canestri Trotti G, Rivasi F: Human dirofilariasis due to
Dirofilaria (Nochtiella) repens in Italy: a review of word literature.
Parassitologia 1995, 37:149-193.
Beaver PC, Meyer EA, Jarroll EL, Rosenquist RC: Dipetalonema from the eye
of a man in Oregon, U.S.A. A case report. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1980,
29:369-372.
Koehsler M, Soleiman A, Aspöck H, Auer H, Walochnik J: Onchocerca
jakutensis filariasis in humans. Emerg Infect Dis 2007, 13:1749-1752.

doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-41
Cite this article as: Otranto and Eberhard: Zoonotic helminths affecting
the human eye. Parasites & Vectors 2011 4:41.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
