<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A combined approach for comparative exoproteome analysis of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-12"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Luis GC Pacheco"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A combined approach for comparative
exoproteome analysis of Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis
Luis GC Pacheco1,2,3, Susan E Slade4, Núbia Seyffert2, Anderson R Santos2, Thiago LP Castro2, Wanderson M Silva2,
Agenor V Santos1, Simone G Santos5, Luiz M Farias5, Maria AR Carvalho5, Adriano MC Pimenta1, Roberto Meyer3,
Artur Silva6, James H Scrivens4, Sérgio C Oliveira1, Anderson Miyoshi2, Christopher G Dowson4, Vasco Azevedo2*

Abstract
Background: Bacterial exported proteins represent key components of the host-pathogen interplay. Hence, we
sought to implement a combined approach for characterizing the entire exoproteome of the pathogenic
bacterium Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis, the etiological agent of caseous lymphadenitis (CLA) in sheep and
goats.
Results: An optimized protocol of three-phase partitioning (TPP) was used to obtain the C. pseudotuberculosis
exoproteins, and a newly introduced method of data-independent MS acquisition (LC-MSE) was employed for
protein identification and label-free quantification. Additionally, the recently developed tool SurfG+ was used for in
silico prediction of sub-cellular localization of the identified proteins. In total, 93 different extracellular proteins of
C. pseudotuberculosis were identified with high confidence by this strategy; 44 proteins were commonly identified
in two different strains, isolated from distinct hosts, then composing a core C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome.
Analysis with the SurfG+ tool showed that more than 75% (70/93) of the identified proteins could be predicted as
containing signals for active exportation. Moreover, evidence could be found for probable non-classical export of
most of the remaining proteins.
Conclusions: Comparative analyses of the exoproteomes of two C. pseudotuberculosis strains, in addition to
comparison with other experimentally determined corynebacterial exoproteomes, were helpful to gain novel
insights into the contribution of the exported proteins in the virulence of this bacterium. The results presented
here compose the most comprehensive coverage of the exoproteome of a corynebacterial species so far.

Background
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis is a facultative
intracellular pathogen that belongs to the so-called
CMN (Corynebacterium-Mycobacterium-Nocardia)
group, a distinct subgroup of the Actinobacteria that
also includes other highly important bacterial pathogens,
such as Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The most distinctive feature of these
Gram-positive bacteria is the unique composition of the
cell envelope, characterized by the presence of long
* Correspondence: vasco@icb.ufmg.br
2
Department of General Biology, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos, Belo Horizonte,
31.270-901, Brazil
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

chain fatty acids, known as mycolic acids, on the surface
of the cell [1,2].
The main recognizable disease caused by C. pseudotuberculosis is caseous lymphadenitis (CLA) in sheep and
goats, though this bacterium can also infect several
other hosts, including humans [1,3]. Typical manifestations of CLA in small ruminants include formation of
abscesses in superficial and internal lymph nodes, and in
visceral organs [3]. Despite the important economic
losses caused by this disease to sheep and goat husbandry worldwide, no effective treatment exists, and the
efficacy of the currently available vaccines and diagnostic methods is still controversial [4].
The search for C. pseudotuberculosis molecular determinants that contribute to CLA pathogenesis lead to the

© 2011 Pacheco et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

recognition of two exported proteins as the major virulence-associated factors of this bacterium known to date:
a secreted phospholipase D (PLD) [5]; and an ABC-type
transporter component of an iron uptake system (FagB)
[6]. In fact, one might expect that the majority of the
virulence determinants of C. pseudotuberculosis would be
present in the exoproteome, i.e. the entire set of bacterial
proteins found in the extracellular milieu [7]. This is
because exported proteins participate in essential steps of
the host-pathogen interplay, including: (i) adhesion to
host cells; (ii) invasion; (iii) damage to host tissues;
(iv) resistance to environmental stresses during infection;
and (iv) subversion of the host’s immune response
mechanisms [8-10].
In two previous attempts to characterize the C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome, our group optimized a protocol of salting out of proteins using sulfate and butanol,
known as three-phase partitioning (TPP), for isolation of
the extracellular proteins of this bacterium [11], and generated a library of C. pseudotuberculosis mutant strains
possessing transposon insertions in genes coding for
probable exported proteins [12]. In the former study, we
were able to determine the optimal conditions for obtaining the best recovery of immunoreactive extracellular
proteins of C. pseudotuberculosis [11]. The second study
in turn, enabled us to identify various previously uncharacterized C. pseudotuberculosis exported proteins, being
that at least two of them are apparently involved in virulence [12]. Now, the very recent conclusion of the C.
pseudotuberculosis Genome Project by our group, associated to the current availability of high-throughput proteomic technologies, permitted us to perform a much
more comprehensive analysis of this bacterium’s
exoproteome.
In this study, we sought to implement a combined
approach for comparative exoproteome analysis of different C. pseudotuberculosis strains. The strategy
included: (i) the previously optimized TPP protocol for
isolation of the extracellular proteins [11]; (ii) a newly
introduced method of data-independent LC-MS acquisition (LC-MSE) for protein identification and quantification [13,14]; and (iii) the recently developed tool SurfG+
for in silico prediction of protein sub-cellular localization in Gram-positive bacteria [15]. We believe that the
experimental approach used is very suitable for profiling
bacterial exoproteomes, as it shown to be easily applicable to different strains with very good reproducibility.
This is an advantage over what is commonly observed
for proteomic approaches based on two-dimensional
(2D) gel electrophoresis, where there is more variability,
but is apparently the method of choice for most of the
bacterial exoproteome studies published recently
[16-20]. Furthermore, the LC-MS E method provides
high subproteome coverage, due to enhanced sensitivity,

Page 2 of 14

and allows for label-free analysis of differentially
expressed proteins [14]; this latter possibility enables the
detection of variations in the exoproteomes of different
strains that could be missed by simply profiling the exoproteins, and meets the growing interest in performing
physiological proteomic studies of bacteria [21,22].
We were able to identify 93 different C. pseudotuberculosis extracellular proteins with high confidence by
analyzing the exoproteomes of two strains isolated from
different hosts that presented distinct virulence phenotypes under laboratory conditions [23,24]. Most of the
identified proteins were predicted in silico to have an
extracytoplasmic localization. To the best of our knowledge, these results compose the largest inventory of
experimentally confirmed exoproteins of a single corynebacterial species to date. Importantly, the comparative
exoproteome analyses permitted us to speculate on the
probable contributions of different C. pseudotuberculosis
extracellular proteins to the virulence of this bacterium.

Results and Discussion
Exoproteome analysis of Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis

The extracellular proteins of two C. pseudotuberculosis
strains, one isolated from a goat (strain 1002) the other
from a sheep (strain C231), cultivated in a chemicallydefined medium, were extracted/concentrated by the
TPP technique. The trypsinized protein samples were
then submitted to LC-MSE analysis.
Seventy soluble extracellular proteins of the 1002
strain could be confidentially identified by this methodology, whereas the number of proteins identified in the
exoproteome of the C231 strain was sixty-seven. Altogether, 93 different C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteins
were identified in this study (Figure 1). These findings
agree with the results of previous experiments by our
group, in which we have used a 2D-PAGE based strategy for a preliminary appraisal of the C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome (additional file 1). Eighty protein
spots, mostly concentrated in the pI range between 3.0
and 6.0, could be reproducibly visible in the 2D gels
generated from TPP-extracted extracellular proteins of
the 1002 strain (additional file 1). The fact that we have
found 70 proteins in the exoproteome of this strain
with high confidence when using the LC-MSE method
(Figure 1) indicates that this novel methodology allowed
us to identify virtually the complete set of extracellular
proteins that are commonly observed in the gel based
methodologies (additional file 1). Moreover, the
expected existence of protein isoforms among the eighty
protein spots observed in the 2D gels, and the identification by LC-MSE of many proteins out of the pI range
3.0-6.0, suggests that the latter methodology is much
more suitable for obtaining a comprehensive coverage of

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

Page 3 of 14

Figure 1 Analysis of the extracellular proteins of two different C. pseudotuberculosis strains allowed for identification of the core and
variant exoproteomes. TPP-extracted extracellular proteins of the strains 1002 and C231 of C. pseudotuberculosis were submitted to LC-MSE
analysis. The Venn-diagram shows the numbers of commonly identified and variant exoproteins between the strains. The number of replicates in
which a given protein was observed, the average peptides identified per protein, and the average sequence coverage of the proteins in each
exoproteome studied, are shown as frequency distributions for comparison purposes.

the bacterial exoproteome. Noteworthy, is the use of
LC-MS E for exoproteome profiling which required
(i) much less time and labor than the gel based proteomic strategy, and (ii) much less protein sample necessary for each experimental replicate, with only 0.5 μg
per replicate used in the LC-MSE compared to 150 μg
for the 2D gels [refer to Patel et al. [25] for a comprehensive comparison on these proteomic strategies].
The performance of the combined methodology used
in the present study (TPP/LC-MS E ) for mapping the
C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome was very similar for
both strains analyzed, as can be seen by the average
numbers of peptides observed per protein in the two
proteomes (16.5 and 15.0) and by the average sequence
coverage of the proteins identified (37.5% and 35.0%)
(Figure 1). Consistent with this, the majority of the proteins detected in each extracellular proteome were
shared by the goat and sheep isolates; this permitted us
to define a core C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome
composed of 44 proteins out of the 93 different

extracellular proteins identified. Additional files 2, 3 and
4 list all the proteins identified in the exoproteomes of
the two C. pseudotuberculosis strains, along with molecular weights, isoelectric points, main orthologs, predicted sub-cellular localizations, number of peptides
experimentally observed, and sequence coverage.
Searches of similarity against publicly available protein
databases using the Blast-p tool [26] showed that ortholog proteins can be found in the pathogenic Corynebacterium diphtheriae for most of the identified
C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteins (additional files 2, 3
and 4), as would be expected due to the close phylogenetic relationship of these species [27]. Nevertheless, no
significant orthologs could be found for six proteins of
the C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome, even when using
the position-specific iterated BLAST (PSI-BLAST) algorithm [28], namely the proteins [GenBank:ADL09626],
[GenBank:ADL21925], [GenBank:ADL11253], [GenBank:
ADL20222], [GenBank:ADL09871], and [GenBank:
ADL21537] (additional files 2, 3 and 4). With the

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

exception of [GenBank:ADL11253], all these proteins
were predicted by different tools as being truly exported
proteins. This means they are the only five exoproteins
identified in this study which are probably unique for
C. pseudotuberculosis.
Prediction of sub-cellular localization of the identified
proteins

Most of the proteins identified in the exoproteomes of
the two C. pseudotuberculosis strains were also predicted
to have a probable extracytoplasmic localization after in
silico analysis of the sequences of these proteins with
different bioinformatics tools, thereby corroborating our
in vitro findings (Figure 2, additional file 5). It is important to note here that we are considering the exoproteome as the entire set of proteins released by the
bacteria into the extracellular milieu. That means we are
looking to: (i) proteins possessing classical signals for
active exportation by the different known mechanisms,
which are directly secreted into the cell supernatant or
that remain exposed in the bacterial cell surface and are
eventually released in the growth medium [7]; and
(ii) proteins exported by non-classical pathways, without
recognizable signal peptides [29]. Besides, one might

Figure 2 Most of the identified C. pseudotuberculosis
exoproteins were predicted by the SurfG+ program as having
an extracytoplasmic localization. The proteins identified in the
exoproteomes of each C. pseudotuberculosis strain were analyzed by
SurfG+ and attributed a probable final sub-cellular localization.
Proteins classified as having a cytoplasmic localization were further
analyzed with the SecretomeP tool for prediction of non-classical
(leaderless) secretion. Besides, literature evidence for exportation by
non-classical pathways was also used to re-classify the cytoplasmic
proteins (see text for details). SE = secreted; PSE = potentially
surface exposed; C = cytoplasmic; M = membrane; NCS = nonclassically secreted.

Page 4 of 14

also expect to observe in the extracellular proteome
a small number of proteins primarily known to have
cytoplasmic localization; although some of these proteins
are believed to be originated from cell lysis or leakage,
like in the extreme situation reported by Mastronunzio et
al. [19], a growing body of evidence suggests that moonlighting proteins (in this case, cytoplasmic proteins that
assume diverse functions in the extracellular space) may
be commonly found in the bacterial exoproteomes
[29-32].
By using the recently developed tool SurfG+ we were
able to classify the identified C. pseudotuberculosis proteins into four different categories: (i) secreted,
(ii) potentially surface exposed (PSE), (iii) membrane and
(iv) cytoplasmic (Figure 2, additional files 2, 3 and 4).
Basically, this software brings together the predictions of
global protein localizations performed by a series of wellknown algorithms, and innovates by allowing for an
accurate prediction of PSE proteins [15]. This possibility
of classification provides us with valuable information on
the proteins identified, as bacterial surface exposed proteins are believed to play important roles in the hostpathogen interactions during infection and many of these
proteins have been shown to be highly protective when
used in vaccine preparations [33,34].
From a total of 93 different C. pseudotuberculosis proteins identified in this study, 75% (70) could be predicted as containing signals for active exportation
(secretion or surface exposition) following SurfG+ analysis (Figure 2). Taken together, these proteins represent
roughly 50% of all predicted secreted proteins in the
recently sequenced genome of C. pseudotuberculosis,
and around 15% of all predicted PSE proteins of this
bacterium (A.R. Santos, pers. comm.).
The concordance of our in vitro identification of exoproteins with the in silico predictions of protein exportation is higher than what has normally been observed
in recent exoproteome analyses of different bacteria
[17-19,35,36]. For comparison, Hansmeier et al. [17]
reported that exportation signals could be predicted in
only 42 (50%) out of 85 different proteins identified in
the extracellular and cell surface proteomes of Corynebacterium diphtheriae. The authors of this study are not
the only to speculate on a probably important contribution of cross-contamination of the protein sample during preparation procedures for the observation of high
numbers of proteins not predicted as having extracellular location in the bacterial exoproteomes [17,31]. We
believe that the proportionally higher identification of
proteins possessing exportation signals in the present
study could have happened due to a series of different
factors, including: (i) our methodology for isolation of
the bacterial extracellular proteins might have extracted
less “contaminant” cytoplasmic proteins than did other

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

methodologies reported in previous studies; (ii) the
combined strategy used by SurfG+ to predict protein
sub-cellular localization might have performed better in
the identification of exported proteins than happened
with other strategies, sometimes based in only one prediction tool; (iii) the fact that we have included in the
final exoproteome lists only proteins identified with high
confidence, in at least two experimental replicates,
reduced significantly the possibilities of false-positive
identifications that might account for some of the unexpected proteins; and finally (iv) the lower proportion of
proteins primarily regarded as cytoplasmic might be
actually a typical characteristic of the C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome.
Non-classically secreted proteins

Intriguingly, a much higher proportion (29.0%) of the exoproteome of the 1002 strain of C. pseudotuberculosis was
composed by proteins predicted by SurfG+ as not having
an extracytoplasmic location, when compared to only
4.5% in the exoproteome of the strain C231 (Figure 2).
The possibility of these proteins being non-classically
secreted has been evaluated using the SecretomeP algorithm [29]. We have also reviewed the literature for evidence of other bacterial exoproteomes that could support
the extracellular localization found for these proteins in
our study.
High SecP scores (above 0.5) could be predicted for 5
of the 19 proteins in the exoproteome of the 1002 strain
considered by SurfG+ as having a cytoplasmic location
(additional files 2 and 3); this could be an indicative that
they are actually being secreted by non-classical
mechanisms [29]. Nonetheless, 2 of these 5 proteins
([GenBank:ADL09626] and [GenBank:ADL20555]) were
also detected in the exoproteome of the C231 strain, in
which they were predicted by SurfG+ as possessing an
extracytoplasmic location (additional file 2). A comparative analysis of the sequences encoding these proteins in
the genomes of the two C. pseudotuberculosis strains
showed that the disparate results were generated due to
the existence of nonsense mutations in the genome
sequence of the 1002 strain, which impaired the identification of signal peptides for the two proteins at the time
of SurfG+ analysis (data not shown). We believe that it
is unlikely that these differences represent true polymorphisms, as the proteins were identified in the extracellular proteome, indicating the real existence of
exportation signals. This indeed demonstrates the
obvious vulnerability of the prediction tools to
the proper annotation of the bacterial genomes. On the
other hand, the assignment of high SecP scores to these
two proteins, even though they are not believed to be
secreted by non-classical mechanisms, would be totally
expected, as the SecretomeP is a predictor based on a

Page 5 of 14

neural network trained to identify general features of
extracellular proteins; this means the prediction tool will
attribute SecP scores higher than 0.5 to most of the
secreted proteins, regardless the route of export [29].
We have found reports in the literature that strongly
support the extracellular localization observed for 8 of
the 14 remaining proteins considered as non-secretory
by SurfG+ and SecretomeP in the exoproteome of the
1002 strain, and without any detectable signal peptide
(additional files 2 and 3, Figure 2). Among these proteins there are the elongation factors Tu and Ts [16,33,
35,37-39]; the glycolytic enzymes triosephosphate isomerase, phosphoglycerate kinase and phosphoglycerate
mutase [16-20,37-40]; the chaperonin GroES [16-18,
20,39]; a putative peptidyl prolyl cis trans isomerase
[17,18,35,37,41]; and a hydroperoxide reductase enzyme
[17,35,39].
Proteins primarily regarded as cytoplasmic have consistently been identified in the exoproteomes of different
bacterial species, and moonlighting roles in the extracellular environment have already been demonstrated for
some of them [31,32], including evasion of host’s
immune system [42], adhesion to host cells [43,44], folding of extracytoplasmic proteins [41,45], and interaction
between microorganisms [40,46]. Noteworthy, specific
evidences for active secretion of such cytoplasmic proteins have been demonstrated for only a few examples
to date, and demonstration of an extracellular function
is still missing for many of these proteins [30,31].
The variant exoproteome may account for differential
virulence of the two C. pseudotuberculosis strains

A considerable number (49/93) of the extracellular proteins identified in this work was observed in only one of
the two strains studied, then composing a variant
experimental C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome (additional files 3 and 4). Highly variant exoproteomes have
also been reported recently for other Gram+ bacterial
pathogens [20,36,39,47-49], and such a variation may be
considered an important factor leading to the observable
phenotypic dissimilarities and ultimately to differential
virulence of the various strains [50,51]. Hecker et al.
[36] reported on how the composition of the exoproteome can vary extremely within a single species, Staphylococcus aureus, being that only 7 out of 63
identified extracellular proteins were found in all the
twenty-five clinical isolates studied.
One of the most intriguing results in the present study
was the detection of the phospholipase D (PLD) protein
only in the extracellular proteome of the strain C231
(additional file 4). As the regulation of PLD expression
was demonstrated to be complex and highly affected
by multiple environmental factors [52], we sought to
detect this protein in the culture supernatant of the

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

C. pseudotuberculosis 1002 strain grown in a rich medium (brain-heart infusion broth) instead of only chemically-defined medium (CDM), but these attempts were
also unfruitful (data not shown). Besides, we were not
able to detect secretion of PLD following total exoproteome analysis of the 1002 strain grown under specific
stress generating conditions (Pacheco et al., unpublished). The results strongly indicate that this protein is
actually not being secreted by the 1002 strain in culture.
PLD is an exotoxin considered as the major virulence factor of C. pseudotuberculosis [5,52]. It possesses sphingomyelinase activity that contributes to
endothelial permeability and then to spreading of the
bacteria within the host [5]. Mutation of the pld gene
in C. pseudotuberculosis rendered strains no longer
capable of causing caseous lymphadenitis (CLA) in
sheep and goats; the potential of these strains to be
used as live attenuated vaccines was already evaluated
[53-55]. Similarly, the strain 1002 of C. pseudotuberculosis was already tested as a possible live attenuated
vaccine against CLA due to its natural low virulent
status, and administration of this bacterium to goats
did not cause lesions formation [23,56]. The molecular
mechanisms leading to the low virulence of the 1002
strain however remain undetermined so far. We
believe that non-secretion of PLD might be one of the
main factors responsible for the lowered virulence of
the strain. Importantly, we currently cannot affirm
that the 1002 strain does not produce this protein
while infecting a mammalian host. Besides, this strain
still retains the capability of causing localized
abscesses and disease in susceptible mice (Pacheco
et al., unpublished results).
Other proteins believed to be associated with the
virulence of C. pseudotuberculosis were also identified
exclusively in the exoproteome of the C231 strain,
namely FagD and Cp40 (Table 1). The former protein
is a component of an iron uptake system, whose coding sequences are clustered immediately downstream
of the pld gene in the C. pseudotuberculosis genome
[6]. The latter protein is a secreted serine protease
shown to be protective against CLA when used to
vaccinate sheep [57].
Strikingly, one variant protein of the C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome, a conserved hypothetical exported
protein with a cutinase domain [GenBank:ADL10384],
has its coding sequence present in the genome of the
C231 strain but absent from the genome of the 1002
strain (additional file 6). The genomic structure of the
gene’s surroundings is indicative of a region prone to
recombination events, such as horizontal gene transfer
[58]. In fact, it seems that gene gain and loss are frequent events leading to variations observed in the bacterial exoproteomes [39,59].

Page 6 of 14

Variation of the core exoproteome: differential expression
analysis of the common proteins by LC-MSE

In addition to identifying qualitative variations in the
exoproteomes of the two C. pseudotuberculosis strains,
we were also able to detect relative differences in
expression of the proteins common to the two proteomes through label-free protein quantification by the
LC-MSE method. Relative protein quantification by this
method can be obtained with basis on the accurate precursor ion mass and electrospray intensity data, acquired
during the low energy scan step of the alternating scan
mode of MS acquisition [14]. Importantly, this quantitative attribute of the technique opens up new possibilities
of utilization, as grows the interest on the so-called physiological proteomics [21].
Thirty-four out of 44 proteins commonly identified in
the exoproteomes of the strains 1002 and C231 of
C. pseudotuberculosis were considered by the PLGS
quantification algorithm as having significantly variable
expression (score > 250; 95% CI) (Figure 3, additional
files 2 and 7). If we further filter these results for the
proteins presenting differential expression higher than
2-fold between the strains, we end up with only four
proteins up-regulated in the 1002 strain and sixteen in
the C231 strain (Figure 3).
Among the group of proteins not presenting considerable variations in expression between the two C. pseudotuberculosis strains, proteins probably participating in
basic bacterial physiological processes could be easily
identified, as would be expected, including cell shape
maintenance and cell division (penicillin binding protein, transglycosylases, peptidases, PGRP amidase) [60];
and iron uptake and utilization (HmuT) [61] (Figure 3,
additional file 2). In this sense, one might also speculate
that the hypothetical proteins identified as non variant
in the two strains may have functions associated to the
general physiology of C. pseudotuberculosis, when grown
in minimal medium.
The most up-regulated proteins were observed in the
extracellular proteome of the C231 strain, including two
cell envelope-associated proteins [62], namely the major
secreted (mycoloyltransferase) protein PS1 (10-fold upregulated), and the S-layer protein A (8-fold up-regulation) (Figure 3). This may be indicative of differences on
cell envelope-related activities in the two C. pseudotuberculosis strains, such as nutrient acquisition, protein
export, adherence and interaction with the host [63].
Dumas et al. [49] compared the exoproteomes of Listeria monocytogenes strains of different virulence groups,
and found that altered expression (up- or down-regulation) of a protein related to the bacterial cell wall could
be a marker of specific virulence phenotypes. Additionally, surface associated proteins have been shown to
undergo phase and antigenic variation in some bacterial

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

Page 7 of 14

Table 1 Formerly and newly identified‡ exported proteins that may be associated with the virulence phenotype of
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis strains
Protein Descriptiona

GenBank Accession Identified in the
exoproteome of
the strainb:
1002

C231

Orhologs found in other
Corynebacteriac:

References

Pathogenic Non-pathogenic

Phospholipase D (PLD)

ADL09524.1

No

Yes

Yes

No

Iron siderophore binding protein (FagD)

ADL09528.1

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

[54]
[6]

Serine proteinase precursor (CP40)

ADL11339.1

No

Yes

No

No

[57]

Putative iron transport system binding (secreted) protein
Glycerophosphoryl diester phosphodiesterase

ADL10460.1
ADL11410.1

No
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
No

[12]
This work. [72]

Putative surface-anchored membrane protein

ADL20074.1

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

This work.

Putative hydrolase (lysozyme-like)

ADL20788.1

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

This work.

Putative secreted protein

ADL21714.1

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

This work.

Putative sugar-binding secreted protein

ADL09872.1

No

Yes

Yes

No

This work.

‡

The inclusion criteria followed three main requisites: (i) experimental detection of the proteins in the exoproteomes of the pathogenic C. diphtheriae and
C. jeikeium; (ii) non-detection of the proteins in the exoproteomes of the non-pathogenic C. glutamicum and C. efficiens; and (iii) in silico detection of ortholog
proteins in pathogenic, but not in non-pathogenic, corynebacteria through search of similarity against public protein repositories.
a
This protein list is not meant to be all-inclusive. Rather, it wants to give an overview of the exported proteins identified in this study for which it was possible
to speculate on a probable involvement in C. pseudotuberculosis virulence after comparative proteomic analyses.
b
Proteins identified in this study by TPP/LC-MSE.
c
Searches of similarity against publicly available protein databases using Blast-p.

pathogens, and ultimately affect the infectivity potential
of different strains [50].
Comparative analyses of corynebacterial exoproteomes

Recent studies attempted to characterize the extracellular proteomes of other pathogenic (C. diphtheriae and
C. jeikeium) and non-pathogenic (C. glutamicum and
C. efficiens) corynebacterial species [17,37,64,65]. All
these studies used 2D-PAGE to resolve the extracellular

Figure 3 Differential expression of the proteins composing the
core C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome, evaluated by labelfree relative quantification using LC-MSE. Results are shown as
natural log scale of the relative quantifications (1002:C231) for each
protein. Only proteins that were given a variation score higher than
250 by PLGS quantification algorithm are presented. Proteins
regulated more than 2-fold in each strain are indicated. Protein
identification numbers correspond to additional files 2 and 7: Tables
S1 and S4.

proteins of the different corynebacteria, and PMF by
MALDI-TOF-MS was the method of choice in most of
them for protein identification [17,37,64,65]. Figure 4
shows the numbers of proteins identified in the exoproteomes of all strains studied, in comparison to the
numbers obtained in the present study for C. pseudotuberculosis. Despite one study with the strain R of C. glutamicum, which reports identification of only two
secreted proteins [65], all the corynebacterial strains had
somehow similar numbers of extracellular proteins identified, ranging from forty-seven in C. jeikeium K411 to
seventy-four in C. diphtheriae C7s(-)tox-. Importantly,
the fact that we have identified in this study 93 different
exoproteins of C. pseudotuberculosis, through the analysis of two different strains, means that our dataset represents the most comprehensive exoproteome analysis of
a corynebacterial species so far.

Figure 4 Comparative analysis of corynebacterial exoproteomes.
Numbers of extracellular proteins identified in previous corynebacterial
exoproteome analyses [17,37,69,70] in comparison to those identified
in this study with the two strains of C. pseudotuberculosis.

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

Regardless the different methodologies employed to
characterize the exoproteomes of the various corynebacteria, we sought to identify extracellular proteins commonly identified in most of the studies, taking the
catalogue of C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteins generated
in this work as the comparison dataset. Besides corroborating our findings, the objective here was to identify
extracellular proteins that could be associated exclusively to pathogenic corynebacterial species.
In total, 34 proteins identified in the exoproteome of
the strain 1002 of C. pseudotuberculosis were found to
be present in the experimentally determined extracellular proteomes of other corynebacteria, whereas the
number of common corynebacterial exoproteins in the
C231 strain was 32 (Figure 5). Only 6 proteins were
consistently identified in all the corynebacterial exoproteomes, including pathogenic and non-pathogenic
species: (i) S-layer protein A [62]; (ii) resuscitation-promoting factor RpfB [66]; (iii) cytochrome c oxidase

Page 8 of 14

subunit II [67]; (iv) a putative esterase; (v) a NLP/P60
family protein (putative cell wall-associated hydrolase)
[68]; and (vi) a trehalose corynomycolyl transferase
(Figure 5, additional file 8). Interestingly, three of these
six proteins are predicted to be regulated by the same
transcription factor [GenBank:ADL09702], a member of
the cAMP receptor protein (Crp) family of transcription
regulators which are found controlling a diversity of
physiological functions in various bacteria [69].
Twelve proteins of the exoproteome of the 1002 strain
and fifteen of the C231 strain were also detected experimentally only in the exoproteomes of other pathogenic
corynebacteria, namely C. diphtheriae and C. jeikeium
(Figure 5). Altogether, this represents 19 different
C. pseudotuberculosis proteins (additional file 8). A
search of similarity using the sequences of these proteins
against publicly available databases, believed to contain
the predicted proteomes of all corynebacteria with completely sequenced genomes, showed that 6 of these

Figure 5 Distribution of orthologous proteins of the C. pseudotuberculosis experimental exoproteins throughout other experimentally
confirmed corynebacterial exoproteomes. Pathogenic species: C. diphtheriae C7s(-)tox- and C. jeikeium K411 [17,69]; non-pathogenic species:
C. glutamicum ATCC13032 and C. efficiens YS-314 [37,70]. Pie charts show Gene Ontology (GO) functional annotations for the 93 different
C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteins identified (24 commonly identified in pathogenic and non-pathogenic corynebacteria; 19 commonly identified
only in pathogenic corynebacteria; and 50 only identified in C. pseudotuberculosis). Annotations were obtained following analyses with the
Blast2GO tool [84], used through the web application available at http://www.blast2go.org/start_blast2go.

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

19 proteins are apparently absent from non-pathogenic
corynebacterial species (Table 1). Moreover, 5 of these
proteins are predicted to be part of regulatory networks
already shown to be involved in virulence functions,
including those regulated by the diphtheria toxin repressor (DtxR)-like protein [70] and the cAMP-binding transcription regulator GlxR [71].
Two proteins presented orthologs highly distributed in
various bacterial pathogens: (i) a putative iron transport
system binding (secreted) protein [GenBank:ADL10460];
and (ii) a putative glycerophosphoryl diester phosphodiesterase [GenBank:ADL11410]. Interestingly, an ortholog of this latter protein was included recently in a list of
seventeen proteins found to be very common in pathogenic bacteria and absent or very uncommon in nonpathogens, representing then probable virulence-associated factors [72]. In fact, reports in the literature can be
found that associate orthologs of the two aforementioned
proteins with virulence phenotypes [73,74]. Noteworthy,
both proteins were detected in this study only in the exoproteome of the C231 strain of C. pseudotuberculosis, the
more virulent one.

Conclusions
There seems to be a growing interest in profiling the
exoproteomes of bacterial pathogens, due to the distinguished roles played by exported proteins on hostpathogen interactions [10]. Classical proteomic profiling
strategies, normally involving two-dimensional (2D) gel
electrophoresis, have been extensively used for this purpose [16-20]. Nevertheless, the introduction of more
high-throughput proteomic technologies brings new
perspectives to the study of bacterial exoproteomes, as it
makes it easier to analyze multiple phenotypically distinct strains, yielding better subproteome coverage with
fewer concerns regarding technical sensitivity and reproducibility [75]. Besides, the currently available methods
for label-free quantification of proteins [76] allow us to
compare the “dynamic behavior” of the exoproteome
across different bacterial strains, and this in turn will
help us to better identify alterations of the exoproteome
that may contribute to the various virulence phenotypes.
By using a high-throughput proteomic strategy, based
on a recently introduced method of LC-MS acquisition
(LC-MSE) [14], we were able to perform a very comprehensive analysis of the exoproteome of an important
veterinary pathogen, Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis. Comparative exoproteome analysis of two strains
presenting different virulence status allowed us to detect
considerable variations of the core C. pseudotuberculosis
extracellular proteome, and thereby the number of exoproteins identified increased significantly. Most importantly, it was helpful to gain new insights into the
probable participation of C. pseudotuberculosis exported

Page 9 of 14

proteins, other than the well-known PLD and FagB, in
the virulence of this bacterium. Several novel targets for
future work on C. pseudotuberculosis molecular determinants of virulence can be identified from the catalogue of exoproteins generated in this study. Interestingly,
around 30% of the proteins identified were predicted by
the SurfG+ software [15] as being probably surface
exposed in C. pseudotuberculosis. Such proteins may
represent promising new candidates for composing
a CLA vaccine more effective than the ones currently
available [4], as has been demonstrated for a series of
other bacterial pathogens [33,34]. Therefore, it will be
critical to further study the role of this protein set in
virulence and vaccine design.

Methods
Bacterial strains and culture conditions

The strains 1002 and C231 of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis were used in this study. Strain 1002 was
isolated from an infected goat in Brazil and has been
shown to be naturally low virulent [23,56]; strain C231
was isolated from an infected sheep in Australia, and it
showed a more virulent phenotype [24]. Species confirmation was performed by biochemical and molecular
methods for both strains, as described [77]. Complete
genome sequences of the two strains were generated by
Genome Networks in Brazil and Australia (RGMG/
RPGP and CSIRO Livestock Industries), and made available for this study (unpublished results).
C. pseudotuberculosis strains were routinely maintained
in Brain Heart Infusion broth (BHI: Oxoid, Hampshire,
UK) or in BHI 1.5% bacteriological agar plates, at 37°C.
For proteomic studies, strains were grown in a chemically
defined medium (CDM) previously optimized for C.
pseudotuberculosis cultivation [78]. The composition of
the CDM was as follows: autoclaved 0.067 M phosphate
buffer [Na2HPO4·7H2O (12.93 g/L), KH2PO4 (2.55 g/L),
NH4Cl (1 g/L), MgSO4·7H2O (0.20 g/L), CaCl2 (0.02 g/
L), and 0.05% (v/v) Tween 80]; 4% (v/v) MEM Vitamins
Solution 100X (Invitrogen); 1% (v/v) MEM Amino Acids
Solution 50X (Invitrogen); 1% (v/v) MEM Non Essential
Amino Acids Solution 100X (Invitrogen); and 1.2% (w/v)
filter-sterilized glucose.
Three-phase partitioning

Extraction/concentration of the soluble supernatant proteins of C. pseudotuberculosis followed the TPP protocol
previously optimized by our group [11], with minor
modifications. Briefly, overnight cultures (ca. 24 hours)
of the different C. pseudotuberculosis strains were inoculated (1:100) separately into 500 mL of pre-warmed
fresh CDM and incubated at 37°C, with agitation at 100
rpm, until reach the mid-exponential growth phase
(OD 540 nm = 0.4; LabSystems iEMS Absorbance Plate

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

Reader). At this point, cultures were centrifuged at room
temperature (RT) for 20 min, 4000 rpm, and 400 mL of
each supernatant was transferred into new sterile flaks.
Following addition of 20 μL Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
P8465 (Sigma-Aldrich), supernatants were filtered
through 0.22 μm filters; ammonium sulphate was added
to the samples at 30% (w/v) and the pH of the mixtures
were set to 4.0. Then, n-butanol was added to each sample at an equal volume; samples were vigorously vortexed and left to rest for 1 h at RT, until the mixtures
separated into three phases. The interfacial precipitate
was collected in 1.5 mL microtubes, and re-suspended
in 1 mL Tris 20 mM + 10 μL protease inhibitor. Finally,
samples were submitted to diafiltration and buffer
exchange with NH4HCO3 (100 mM), using 5 kDa cutoff spin columns (Millipore).
In-solution tryptic digestion of TPP-extracted proteins

Protein samples were resuspended in 1 mL of 0.1%
Rapigest (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) and concentrated using a 5 kDa cut-off spin column. The solution was heated at 80°C for 15 minutes, reduced with
dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested
with 1:50 (w/w) sequencing grade trypsin for 16 hours.
RapiGest was hydrolysed by the addition of 2 μL of
13 M trifluoroacetic acid, filtered using a 0.22 μm spin
column and each sample was typically diluted to 1 μg/
μL prior to a 1:1 dilution with a 100 fmol/μL glycogen
phosphorylase B standard tryptic digest to give a final
protein concentration of 500 ng/μL per sample and
50 fmol/μL phosphorylase B.
LC-MS configurations for label-free analysis (LC-MSE)

Nanoscale LC separations of tryptic peptides for qualitative and quantitative multiplexed LC-MS analysis were
performed with a nanoACQUITY system (Waters Corporation) using a Symmetry C18 trapping column (180
μm × 20 mm 5 μm) and a BEH C18 analytical column
(75 μm × 250 mm 1.7 μm). The composition of solvent
A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B (0.1%
formic acid in acetonitrile). Each sample (total digested
protein 0.5 μg) was applied to the trapping column and
flushed with 0.1% solvent B for 2 minutes at a flow rate
of 15 μL/min. Sample elution was performed at a flow
rate of 250 nL/min by increasing the organic solvent
concentration from 3 to 40% B over 90 min. Three technical replicate injections of the TPP-extracted 1002 sample and four technical replicates of the TPP-extracted
C231 sample were used for subsequent data analysis in
this study. These were from two biological cultures of
each C. pseudotuberculosis stain.
The precursor ion masses and associated fragment ion
spectra of the tryptic peptides were mass measured with
a Q-ToF Ultima Global or Synapt HDMS mass

Page 10 of 14

spectrometer (Waters Corporation) directly coupled to
the chromatographic system. The time-of-flight analyzers of both mass spectrometers were externally calibrated using the MS/MS spectrum from [Glu 1 ]Fibrinopeptide B (human - Sigma Aldrich, UK) obtained
from the doubly charged peptide ion at m/z 785.8426.
The monoisotopic mass of the doubly charged species
in MS mode was also used for post-acquisition data correction. The latter was delivered at 500 fmol/μL to the
mass spectrometer via a NanoLockSpray interface using
the auxiliary pump of a nanoACQUITY system at a flow
rate of 500 nL/min, sampled every 60 seconds.
Accurate mass data were collected in data independent mode of acquisition by alternating the energy
applied to the collision cell/s between a low and elevated energy state (MSE). The spectral acquisition scan
rate was typically 0.9 s with a 0.1 s interscan delay. On
the Synapt HDMS instrument in the low energy MS
mode, data were collected at constant trap and transfer
collision energies (CE) of 3 eV and 1 eV respectively. In
elevated energy MS mode, the trap collision energy was
ramped from 15 eV to 30 eV with the transfer collision
energy at 10 eV. On the Ultima Global instrument a
low energy of 6 eV was applied to the collision cell,
increasing from 6 eV to 35 eV in elevated MS mode.
Data processing for label-free acquisitions (MSE)

The LC-MS E data were processed using ProteinLynx
Global Server v2.4 (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA)
(see additional file 9). In brief, lockmass-corrected spectra are centroided, deisotoped, and charge-state-reduced
to produce a single accurately mass measured monoisotopic mass for each peptide and the associated fragment
ion. The initial correlation of a precursor and a potential
fragment ion is achieved by means of time alignment.
The detection and correlation principles for data independent, alternate scanning LC-MS E data have been
described [14].
Database searches

All data were searched using PLGS v2.4 against a
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis database (NCBI
Genome Project ID: 40687 and 40875), released in
November 2009, to which the glycogen phosphorylase B
and trypsin sequences had been appended. The database
was randomised within PLGS generating a new concatenated database consisting of the original sequences plus
one additional sequence for each entry with identical
composition but randomly scrambled residues. This
database contained a total of 4314 entries. A fixed modification of carbamidomethyl-C was specified, and variable modifications included were acetyl N-terminus,
deamidation N, deamidation Q and oxidation M. One
missed trypsin cleavage site was permitted.

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

For the MSE data, the time-based correlation applied
in data processing is followed by a further correlation
process during the database search that is based on the
physicochemical properties of peptides when they
undergo collision induced fragmentation. The precursor
and fragment ion tolerances were determined automatically. The initial protein identification criteria used by
the IdentityE algorithm within PLGS for a single replicate data file, required the detection of at least three
fragment ions per peptide, seven fragment ions and
a minimum of one peptide per protein.
A process analogous to the Bayesian model described
by Nesvizhskii et al. [79] was used by PLGS to assign
probability values to scores of peptide and protein identifications. Two automated mechanisms determined
peptide and protein threshold identification criteria providing a 95% identification confidence interval. A background search is conducted by the search algorithm
creating a discriminating decoy identification distribution. The determined peptide cut-off score, typically a
log value of 6.25 for the expected 95% identification
probability is automatically applied to the results.
Further more stringent filtering was then applied to the
database search results from each sample to improve the
confidence in the protein observations and quantitative
measurements. The results from each of the individual
replicate analyses from each sample were combined and
proteins were removed that were observed in only one of
the replicates. Using this additional and rigorous filter
the false discovery rate was further reduced to 0.2% for
this study, with an average of 16.5 peptides/protein and
37.5% sequence coverage for the TPP-extracted 1002
sample and 15 peptides/protein with 35% sequence coverage for the respective C231 sample. Proteins were
observed on average in 2.81 technical replicates in the
1002 sample where 3 replicate analyses were used and
3.52 for the C231 sample in which 4 replicates were
included.
Protein quantification using label-free system (MSE)

Relative quantitative analysis between samples was performed by comparing normalized peak area/intensity of
each identified peptide [80]. For relative quantification,
automatic normalization was applied to the data set
within PLGS using the total peptide complement of
each sample. The redundant, proteotypic quantitative
measurements generated from the tryptic peptide identifications from each protein were used to determine an
average, relative protein fold-change, with a confidence
interval and a regulation probability. The confidently
identified peptides to protein ratios were automatically
weighted based on their identification probability. Binary
comparisons were conducted to generate an average
normalized intensity ratio for all matched proteins.

Page 11 of 14

The entire data set of differentially expressed proteins
was further filtered by considering only the identified
proteins that replicated in at least two technical replicates with a score > 250 and likelihood of regulation
value greater than 0.95 for upregulation and lower than
0.05 for downregulation as determined by the PLGS
quantification algorithm.
In silico predictions of protein sub-cellular localization

Prediction of sub-cellular localization was performed
initially for the identified proteins by using the SurfG+
program v1.0, run locally in a Linux environment, as
described [15] (see additional file 9). For prediction of
potentially surface exposed (PSE) proteins, a cut-off
value of 73 amino acids was calculated as the minimum
distance from the C. pseudotuberculosis outermost
membrane until the surface of the cell-wall, based on
electron microscopy of this bacterium’s cell envelope
(data not shown).
The programs TatP v1.0 and SecretomeP v2.0 were
used through the web applications available at http://
www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/, for prediction of twin-arginine
pathway-linked signal peptides and non-classical (leaderless) secretion, respectively [29,81].
Comparative analyses of multiple corynebacterial
exoproteomes

A list of experimentally observed extracellular proteins
of pathogenic (C. diphtheriae and C. jeikeium) and nonpathogenic (C. glutamicum and C. efficiens) corynebacteria was identified in previously published studies
[17,37,64,65]. The amino acid sequences of these proteins were retrieved from public repositories of protein
sequences to create a local database. This database was
used in similarity searches with the Blast-p algorithm
(E-value < 10-4) [26], taking the group of proteins identified in the C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteome as the
input sequences. Additionally, transitivity clustering [82]
was used to identify proteins (i) commonly detected in
the exoproteomes of pathogenic and non-pathogenic
corynebacteria, and proteins detected in exoproteomes
of (ii) only pathogenic corynebacteria or (iii) only
C. pseudotuberculosis. A more detailed description on
the transitivity clustering analysis can be found in the
supplementary material (additional file 9). The amino
acid sequences of the identified C. pseudotuberculosis
exoproteins were also used in similarity searches against
public databases, namely NCBI nr and Swissprot.
Transcriptional regulation of the identified exoproteins

The search for transcription factors that regulate expression of the identified corynebacterial exoproteins was
performed through the CoryneRegNet database, as
described previously [83].

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

Accession numbers

The sequences of all proteins identified in this work are
accessible through GenBank and correspond to the Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis Genome Projects
deposited in NCBI (IDs: 40687 and 40875).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Comparison between the experimental
(A) and virtual (B) 2-D gels of the exoproteome of the strain 1002
of C. pseudotuberculosis. (A) 2D-gel with 150 μg of TPP extracted
extracellular proteins of the 1002 strain. Proteins were separated in the
first dimension by isoelectric focusing using strips of 3.0-5.6 NL pI range
(GE Healthcare). Visualization was by Colloidal Coomassie staining. (B) The
virtual 2D-gel was generated with the theoretical pI and MW values of
the proteins identified by LC-MSE.

Page 12 of 14

Author details
Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Instituto de Ciências
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos, Belo
Horizonte, 31.270-901, Brazil. 2Department of General Biology, Instituto de
Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio
Carlos, Belo Horizonte, 31.270-901, Brazil. 3Institute of Health Sciences,
Universidade Federal da Bahia, Av. Reitor Miguel Calmon, Salvador, 40.110902, Brazil. 4School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road,
Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom. 5Department of Microbiology, Instituto
de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio
Carlos, Belo Horizonte, 31.270-901, Brazil. 6Genome and Proteome Network
of the State of Pará, Universidade Federal do Pará, R. Augusto Corrêa, Belém,
66.075-110, Brazil.
1

Additional file 2: Table S1. Proteins composing the core C.
pseudotuberculosis exoproteome, identified by LC-MSE.

Authors’ contributions
LGCP, SES, LMF, MARC, AMCP, RM, AS, JHS, SCO, AM, CGD, and VA
conceived the idea, participated in the design of the study, and critically
read the manuscript. LGCP, SES, NS, TLPC, WMS, AGV, and SGS performed
microbiological and/or proteomic experiments. LGCP, SES and ARS
performed bioinformatical analyses. LGCP and SES wrote the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Additional file 3: Table S2. Variant exoproteome of the strain 1002
of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Additional file 4: Table S3. Variant exoproteome of the strain C231
of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis.
Additional file 5: Figure S2. Predictions of LPXTG motif-containing
proteins, lipoproteins and Tat-pathway associated signal peptides
in the exoproteomes of the strains 1002 and C231 of C.
pseudotuberculosis.
Additional file 6: Figure S4. A conserved hypothetical exported
protein present in the Genome of the strain C231 but absent from
the strain 1002 of C. pseudotuberculosis. The two sequenced
Genomes were aligned using the Artemis Comparison Tool (ACT). The
arrows point to tRNA genes.
Additional file 7: Table S4. Relative expression analysis of the
extracellular proteins common to the strains 1002 and C231 of
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis.
Additional file 8: Figure S5. Distribution of orthologous proteins of
the C. pseudotuberculosis experimental exoproteins throughout
other experimentally confirmed exoproteomes of pathogenic
corynebacteria, as determined through transitivity clustering
analysis. The 19 C. pseudotuberculosis exoproteins only identified in the
exoproteomes of other pathogenic corynebacteria are presented in the
table. Cp = C. pseudotuberculosis; Cd = C. diphtheriae; Cj = C. jeikeium.
Additional file 9: Supplementary information on the bioinformatics
tools used in this study.

List of abbreviations
CDM: chemically defined medium; CLA: caseous lymphadenitis; LC-MS: liquid
chromatography - mass spectrometry; NCS: non-classically secreted; PLD:
phospholipase D; PLGS: ProteinLynx Global Server; PMF: peptide mass
fingerprinting; PSE: potentially surface exposed; RGMG: Minas Gerais Genome
Network; RPGP: Genome and Proteome Network of the State of Pará; TPP:
Three-Phase Partitioning.
Acknowledgements
We are thankful to the Minas Gerais Genome Network (RGMG) and to the
Genome and Proteome Network of the State of Pará (RPGP). We thank
Dr. Robert Moore (CSIRO Livestock Industries) for providing the C231 strain
of C. pseudotuberculosis.
This work was supported by grants from the Funding Agencies CNPq (grant
CNPq/MAPA/SDA) and FAPEMIG, in Brazil; and by The Medical Research
Fund and Advantage West Midlands, in the UK.

Received: 15 October 2010 Accepted: 17 January 2011
Published: 17 January 2011
References
1. Dorella FA, Pacheco LGC, Oliveira SC, Miyoshi A, Azevedo V:
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis: microbiology, biochemical
properties, pathogenesis and molecular studies of virulence. Vet Res
2006, 37:201-218.
2. Ventura M, Canchaya C, Tauch A, Chandra G, Fitzgerald GF, Chater KF, van
Sinderen D: Genomics of Actinobacteria: tracing the evolutionary history
of an ancient phylum. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2007, 71:495-548.
3. Baird GJ, Fontaine MC: Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis and its role in
ovine caseous lymphadenitis. J Comp Pathol 2007, 137:179-210.
4. Dorella FA, Pacheco LG, Seyffert N, Portela RW, Meyer R, Miyoshi A,
Azevedo V: Antigens of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis and
prospects for vaccine development. Expert Rev Vaccines 2009, 8:205-213.
5. Hodgson AL, Bird P, Nisbet IT: Cloning, nucleotide sequence, and
expression in Escherichia coli of the phospholipase D gene from
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis. J Bacteriol 1990, 172:1256-1261.
6. Billington SJ, Esmay PA, Songer JG, Jost BH: Identification and role in
virulence of putative iron acquisition genes from Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2002, 208:41-45.
7. Desvaux M, Hébraud M, Talon R, Henderson IR: Secretion and subcellular
localizations of bacterial proteins: a semantic awareness issue. Trends
Microbiol 2009, 17:139-145.
8. Bhavsar AP, Guttman JA, Finlay BB: Manipulation of host-cell pathways by
bacterial pathogens. Nature 2007, 449:827-834.
9. Stavrinides J, McCann HC, Guttman DS: Host-pathogen interplay and the
evolution of bacterial effectors. Cell Microbiol 2008, 10:285-292.
10. Sibbald MJJB, van Dij JML: Secretome Mapping in Gram-Positive
Pathogens. In Bacterial secreted protein: secretory mechanisms and role in
pathogenesis Edited by: Karl Wooldridge 2009, 193-225.
11. Paule BJA, Meyer R, Moura-Costa LF, Bahia RC, Carminati R, Regis LF,
Vale VLC, Freire SM, Nascimento I, Schaer R, Azevedo V: Three-phase
partitioning as an efficient method for extraction/concentration of
immunoreactive excreted-secreted proteins of Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis. Protein Expr Purif 2004, 34:311-316.
12. Dorella FA, Estevam EM, Pacheco LGC, Guimarães CT, Lana UGP, Gomes EA,
Barsante MM, Oliveira SC, Meyer R, Miyoshi A, Azevedo V: In vivo
insertional mutagenesis in Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis: an
efficient means to identify DNA sequences encoding exported proteins.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72:7368-7372.

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

13. Silva JC, Gorenstein MV, Li G, Vissers JPC, Geromanos SJ: Absolute
quantification of proteins by LCMSE a virtue of parallel MS acquisition.
Mol Cell Proteomics 2006, 5:144-156.
14. Geromanos SJ, Vissers JPC, Silva JC, Dorschel CA, Li G, Gorenstein MV,
Bateman RH, Langridge JI: The detection, correlation, and comparison of
peptide precursor and product ions from data independent LC-MS with
data dependant LC-MS/MS. Proteomics 2009, 9:1683-1695.
15. Barinov A, Loux V, Hammani A, Nicolas P, Langella P, Ehrlich D, Maguin E,
van de Guchte M: Prediction of surface exposed proteins in Streptococcus
pyogenes, with a potential application to other Gram-positive bacteria.
Proteomics 2009, 9:61-73.
16. Trost M, Wehmhöner D, Kärst U, Dieterich G, Wehland J, Jänsch L:
Comparative proteome analysis of secretory proteins from pathogenic
and nonpathogenic Listeria species. Proteomics 2005, 5:1544-1557.
17. Hansmeier N, Chao T, Kalinowski J, Pühler A, Tauch A: Mapping and
comprehensive analysis of the extracellular and cell surface proteome of
the human pathogen Corynebacterium diphtheriae. Proteomics 2006,
6:2465-2476.
18. Målen H, Berven FS, Fladmark KE, Wiker HG: Comprehensive analysis of
exported proteins from Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv. Proteomics
2007, 7:1702-1718.
19. Mastronunzio JE, Huang Y, Benson DR: Diminished exoproteome of
Frankia spp. in culture and symbiosis. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009,
75:6721-6728.
20. Dumas E, Desvaux M, Chambon C, Hébraud M: Insight into the core and
variant exoproteomes of Listeria monocytogenes species by comparative
subproteomic analysis. Proteomics 2009, 9:3136-3155.
21. Hecker M, Reder A, Fuchs S, Pagels M, Engelmann S: Physiological
proteomics and stress/starvation responses in Bacillus subtilis and
Staphylococcus aureus. Res Microbiol 2009, 160:245-258.
22. Becher D, Hempel K, Sievers S, Zühlke D, Pané-Farré J, Otto A, Fuchs S,
Albrecht D, Bernhardt J, Engelmann S, Völker U, van Dijl JM, Hecker M: A
proteomic view of an important human pathogen–towards the
quantification of the entire Staphylococcus aureus proteome. PLoS One
2009, 4:e8176.
23. Ribeiro OC, Silva JAH, Oliveira SC, Meyer R, Fernandes GB: Preliminary
results on a living vaccince against caseous lymphadenitis. Pesquisa
Agropecuaria Brasileira 1991, 26:461-465.
24. Simmons CP, Dunstan SJ, Tachedjian M, Krywult J, Hodgson AL, Strugnell RA:
Vaccine potential of attenuated mutants of Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis in sheep. Infect Immun 1998, 66:474-479.
25. Patel VJ, Thalassinos K, Slade SE, Connolly JB, Crombie A, Murrell JC,
Scrivens JH: A comparison of labeling and label-free mass spectrometrybased proteomics approaches. J Proteome Res 2009, 8:3752-3759.
26. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
27. Khamis A, Raoult D, La Scola B: rpoB gene sequencing for identification of
Corynebacterium species. J Clin Microbiol 2004, 42:3925-3931.
28. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
29. Bendtsen JD, Kiemer L, Fausbøll A, Brunak S: Non-classical protein
secretion in bacteria. BMC Microbiol 2005, 5:58.
30. Vanet A, Labigne A: Evidence for specific secretion rather than autolysis
in the release of some Helicobacter pylori proteins. Infect Immun 1998,
66:1023-1027.
31. Bendtsen JD, Wooldridge KG: Non-Classical Secretion. In Bacterial secreted
proteins: secretory mechanisms and role in pathogenesis Edited by: Karl
Wooldridge 2009, 225-239.
32. Jeffery CJ: Moonlighting proteins–an update. Mol Biosyst 2009, 5:345-350.
33. Rodríguez-Ortega MJ, Norais N, Bensi G, Liberatori S, Capo S, Mora M,
Scarselli M, Doro F, Ferrari G, Garaguso I, Maggi T, Neumann A, Covre A,
Telford JL, Grandi G: Characterization and identification of vaccine
candidate proteins through analysis of the group A Streptococcus
surface proteome. Nat Biotechnol 2006, 24:191-197.
34. Doro F, Liberatori S, Rodríguez-Ortega MJ, Rinaudo CD, Rosini R, Mora M,
Scarselli M, Altindis E, D’Aurizio R, Stella M, Margarit I, Maione D, Telford JL,
Norais N, Grandi G: Surfome analysis as a fast track to vaccine discovery:
identification of a novel protective antigen for Group B Streptococcus
hypervirulent strain COH1. Mol Cell Proteomics 2009, 8:1728-1737.

Page 13 of 14

35. Barbey C, Budin-Verneuil A, Cauchard S, Hartke A, Laugier C, Pichereau V,
Petry S: Proteomic analysis and immunogenicity of secreted proteins
from Rhodococcus equi ATCC 33701. Vet Microbiol 2009, 135:334-345.
36. Hecker M, Becher D, Fuchs S, Engelmann S: A proteomic view of cell
physiology and virulence of Staphylococcus aureus. Int J Med Microbiol
2010, 300:76-87.
37. Hansmeier N, Chao T, Pühler A, Tauch A, Kalinowski J: The cytosolic, cell
surface and extracellular proteomes of the biotechnologically important
soil bacterium Corynebacterium efficiens YS-314 in comparison to those
of Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032. Proteomics 2006, 6:233-250.
38. Schaumburg J, Diekmann O, Hagendorff P, Bergmann S, Rohde M,
Hammerschmidt S, Jänsch L, Wehland J, Kärst U: The cell wall
subproteome of Listeria monocytogenes. Proteomics 2004, 4:2991-3006.
39. Sibbald MJJB, Ziebandt AK, Engelmann S, Hecker M, de Jong A,
Harmsen HJM, Raangs GC, Stokroos I, Arends JP, Dubois JYF, van Dijl JM:
Mapping the pathways to staphylococcal pathogenesis by comparative
secretomics. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2006, 70:755-788.
40. Furuya H, Ikeda R: Interaction of triosephosphate isomerase from the cell
surface of Staphylococcus aureus and alpha-(1->3)mannooligosaccharides derived from glucuronoxylomannan of
Cryptococcus neoformans. Microbiology 2009, 155:2707-2713.
41. Söderberg MA, Cianciotto NP: A Legionella pneumophila peptidyl-prolyl
cis-trans isomerase present in culture supernatants is necessary for
optimal growth at low temperatures. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008,
74:1634-1638.
42. Kunert A, Losse J, Gruszin C, Hühn M, Kaendler K, Mikkat S, Volke D,
Hoffmann R, Jokiranta TS, Seeberger H, Moellmann U, Hellwage J, Zipfel PF:
Immune evasion of the human pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
elongation factor Tuf is a factor H and plasminogen binding protein. J
Immunol 2007, 179:2979-2988.
43. Tsugawa H, Ito H, Ohshima M, Okawa Y: Cell adherence-promoted activity
of Plesiomonas shigelloides groEL. J Med Microbiol 2007, 56:23-29.
44. Feng Y, Pan X, Sun W, Wang C, Zhang H, Li X, Ma Y, Shao Z, Ge J, Zheng F,
Gao GF, Tang J: Streptococcus suis enolase functions as a protective
antigen displayed on the bacterial cell surface. J Infect Dis 2009,
200:1583-1592.
45. Pissavin C, Hugouvieux-Cotte-Pattat N: Characterization of a periplasmic
peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase in Erwinia chrysanthemi. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 1997, 157:59-65.
46. Bergonzelli GE, Granato D, Pridmore RD, Marvin-Guy LF, Donnicola D,
Corthésy-Theulaz IE: GroEL of Lactobacillus johnsonii La1 (NCC 533) is cell
surface associated: potential role in interactions with the host and the
gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori. Infect Immun 2006, 74:425-434.
47. He X, Zhuang Y, Zhang X, Li G: Comparative proteome analysis of culture
supernatant proteins of Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv and H37Ra.
Microbes Infect 2003, 5:851-856.
48. Sumby P, Whitney AR, Graviss EA, DeLeo FR, Musser JM: Genome-wide
analysis of group a streptococci reveals a mutation that modulates
global phenotype and disease specificity. PLoS Pathog 2006, 2:e5.
49. Dumas E, Meunier B, Berdagué J, Chambon C, Desvaux M, Hébraud M:
Comparative analysis of extracellular and intracellular proteomes of
Listeria monocytogenes strains reveals a correlation between protein
expression and serovar. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74:7399-7409.
50. van der Woude MW, Bäumler AJ: Phase and antigenic variation in
bacteria. Clin Microbiol Rev 2004, 17:581-611, table of contents.
51. Behr MA, Sherman DR: Mycobacterial virulence and specialized secretion:
same story, different ending. Nat Med 2007, 13:286-287.
52. McKean SC, Davies JK, Moore RJ: Expression of phospholipase D the
major virulence factor of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis, is
regulated by multiple environmental factors and plays a role in
macrophage death. Microbiology 2007, 153:2203-2211.
53. Hodgson AL, Krywult J, Corner LA, Rothel JS, Radford AJ: Rational
attenuation of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis: potential cheesy
gland vaccine and live delivery vehicle. Infect Immun 1992, 60:2900-2905.
54. McNamara PJ, Bradley GA, Songer JG: Targeted mutagenesis of the
phospholipase D gene results in decreased virulence of Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis. Mol Microbiol 1994, 12:921-930.
55. Moore RJ, Rothel L, Krywult J, Radford AJ, Lund K, Hodgson AL: Foreign
gene expression in Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis: development of
a live vaccine vector. Vaccine 1999, 18:487-497.

Pacheco et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:12
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/12

56. Meyer R, Carminati R, Bahia R, Vale V, Viegas S, Martinez T, Nascimento I,
Schaer R, Silva J, Ribeiro M, Regis L, Paule B, Freire S: Evaluation of the
goats humoral immune response induced by the Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis lyophilized live vaccine. J Med Biol Sci 2002, 1:42-48.
57. Walker J, Jackson HJ, Eggleton DG, Meeusen EN, Wilson MJ, Brandon MR:
Identification of a novel antigen from Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis that protects sheep against caseous lymphadenitis.
Infect Immun 1994, 62:2562-2567.
58. Koonin EV, Makarova KS, Aravind L: Horizontal gene transfer in
prokaryotes: quantification and classification. Annu Rev Microbiol 2001,
55:709-742.
59. Nogueira T, Rankin DJ, Touchon M, Taddei F, Brown SP, Rocha EPC:
Horizontal gene transfer of the secretome drives the evolution of
bacterial cooperation and virulence. Curr Biol 2009, 19:1683-1691.
60. Hett EC, Rubin EJ: Bacterial growth and cell division: a mycobacterial
perspective. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2008, 72:126-56, table of contents.
61. Allen CE, Schmitt MP: HtaA is an iron-regulated hemin binding protein
involved in the utilization of heme iron in Corynebacterium diphtheriae. J
Bacteriol 2009, 191:2638-2648.
62. Puech V, Chami M, Lemassu A, Lanéelle MA, Schiffler B, Gounon P, Bayan N,
Benz R, Daffé M: Structure of the cell envelope of corynebacteria:
importance of the non-covalently bound lipids in the formation of the
cell wall permeability barrier and fracture plane. Microbiology 2001,
147:1365-1382.
63. Jordan S, Hutchings MI, Mascher T: Cell envelope stress response in
Gram-positive bacteria. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2008, 32:107-146.
64. Hansmeier N, Chao T, Daschkey S, Müsken M, Kalinowski J, Pühler A,
Tauch A: A comprehensive proteome map of the lipid-requiring
nosocomial pathogen Corynebacterium jeikeium K411. Proteomics 2007,
7:1076-1096.
65. Suzuki N, Watanabe K, Okibe N, Tsuchida Y, Inui M, Yukawa H:
Identification of new secreted proteins and secretion of heterologous
amylase by C. glutamicum. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2009, 82:491-500.
66. Hartmann M, Barsch A, Niehaus K, Pühler A, Tauch A, Kalinowski J: The
glycosylated cell surface protein Rpf2, containing a resuscitationpromoting factor motif, is involved in intercellular communication of
Corynebacterium glutamicum. Arch Microbiol 2004, 182:299-312.
67. Sakamoto J, Shibata T, Mine T, Miyahara R, Torigoe T, Noguchi S,
Matsushita K, Sone N: Cytochrome c oxidase contains an extra charged
amino acid cluster in a new type of respiratory chain in the amino-acidproducing Gram-positive bacterium Corynebacterium glutamicum.
Microbiology 2001, 147:2865-2871.
68. Tsuge Y, Ogino H, Teramoto H, Inui M, Yukawa H: Deletion of cgR_1596
and cgR_2070, encoding NlpC/P60 proteins, causes a defect in cell
separation in Corynebacterium glutamicum R. J Bacteriol 2008,
190:8204-8214.
69. Körner H, Sofia HJ, Zumft WG: Phylogeny of the bacterial superfamily of
Crp-Fnr transcription regulators: exploiting the metabolic spectrum by
controlling alternative gene programs. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2003,
27:559-592.
70. Oram D, Avdalovic A, Holmes R: Analysis of genes that encode DtxR-like
transcriptional regulators in pathogenic and saprophytic corynebacterial
species. Infect Immun 2004, 72:1885-1895.
71. Kohl T, Baumbach J, Jungwirth B, Puhler A, Tauch A: The GlxR regulon of
the amino acid producer Corynebacterium glutamicum: in silico and in
vitro detection of DNA binding sites of a global transcription regulator. J
Biotechnol 2008, 135:340-350.
72. Stubben CJ, Duffield ML, Cooper IA, Ford DC, Gans JD, Karlyshev AV,
Lingard B, Oyston PCF, de Rochefort A, Song J, Wren BW, Titball RW,
Wolinsky M: Steps toward broad-spectrum therapeutics: discovering
virulence-associated genes present in diverse human pathogens. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10:501.
73. Janson H, Melhus A, Hermansson A, Forsgren A: Protein D the
glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase from Haemophilus influenzae
with affinity for human immunoglobulin D influences virulence in a rat
otitis model. Infect Immun 1994, 62:4848-4854.
74. Braun V: Iron uptake mechanisms and their regulation in pathogenic
bacteria. Int J Med Microbiol 2001, 291:67-79.
75. Roe MR, Griffin TJ: Gel-free mass spectrometry-based high throughput
proteomics: tools for studying biological response of proteins and
proteomes. Proteomics 2006, 6:4678-4687.

Page 14 of 14

76. Panchaud A, Affolter M, Moreillon P, Kussmann M: Experimental and
computational approaches to quantitative proteomics: status quo and
outlook. J Proteomics 2008, 71:19-33.
77. Pacheco LGC, Pena RR, Castro TLP, Dorella FA, Bahia RC, Carminati R,
Frota MNL, Oliveira SC, Meyer R, Alves FSF, Miyoshi A, Azevedo V: Multiplex
PCR assay for identification of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis from
pure cultures and for rapid detection of this pathogen in clinical
samples. J Med Microbiol 2007, 56:480-486.
78. Moura-Costa LF, Paule BJA, Azevedo V, Freire SM, Nascimento I, Schaer R,
Regis LF, Vale VLC, Matos DP, Bahia RC, Carminati R, Meyer R: Chemically
defined synthetic medium for Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis
culture. Rev. Bras. Saúde e Produção Animal 2002, 3:1-9.
79. Nesvizhskii AI, Keller A, Kolker E, Aebersold R: A statistical model for
identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 2003,
75:4646-4658.
80. Silva JC, Denny R, Dorschel CA, Gorenstein M, Kass IJ, Li G, McKenna T,
Nold MJ, Richardson K, Young P, Geromanos S: Quantitative proteomic
analysis by accurate mass retention time pairs. Anal Chem 2005,
77:2187-2200.
81. Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, Widdick D, Palmer T, Brunak S: Prediction of twinarginine signal peptides. BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:167.
82. Wittkop T, Emig D, Lange S, Rahmann S, Albrecht M, Morris JH, Böcker S,
Stoye J, Baumbach J: Partitioning biological data with transitivity
clustering. Nat Methods 2010, 7:419-420.
83. Baumbach J, Wittkop T, Kleindt CK, Tauch A: Integrated analysis and
reconstruction of microbial transcriptional gene regulatory networks
using CoryneRegNet. Nat Protoc 2009, 4:992-1005.
84. Götz S, García-Gómez JM, Terol J, Williams TD, Nagaraj SH, Nueda MJ,
Robles M, Talón M, Dopazo J, Conesa A: High-throughput functional
annotation and data mining with the Blast2GO suite. Nucleic Acids Res
2008, 36:3420-3435.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-12
Cite this article as: Pacheco et al.: A combined approach for
comparative exoproteome analysis of Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis. BMC Microbiology 2011 11:12.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
