<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The integrative future of taxonomy</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16. doi: 10.1186/1742-9994-7-16"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jos_ M Padial, Aur_lien Miralles, Ignacio De la Riva, Miguel Vences"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

Open Access

REVIEW

The integrative future of taxonomy
Review

José M Padial*1, Aurélien Miralles2, Ignacio De la Riva3 and Miguel Vences*2

Abstract
Background: Taxonomy is the biological discipline that identifies, describes, classifies and names extant and extinct
species and other taxa. Nowadays, species taxonomy is confronted with the challenge to fully incorporate new theory,
methods and data from disciplines that study the origin, limits and evolution of species.
Results: Integrative taxonomy has been proposed as a framework to bring together these conceptual and
methodological developments. Here we review perspectives for an integrative taxonomy that directly bear on what
species are, how they can be discovered, and how much diversity is on Earth.
Conclusions: We conclude that taxonomy needs to be pluralistic to improve species discovery and description, and to
develop novel protocols to produce the much-needed inventory of life in a reasonable time. To cope with the large
number of candidate species revealed by molecular studies of eukaryotes, we propose a classification scheme for
those units that will facilitate the subsequent assembly of data sets for the formal description of new species under the
Linnaean system, and will ultimately integrate the activities of taxonomists and molecular biologists.
Review
Taxonomic renaissance

There is little doubt that the central unit for taxonomy is
the species, and that associating scientific names
unequivocally to species is pivotal for a reliable reference
system of biological information [1]. Since the advent of
Linnaean nomenclature in 1758, taxonomists have been
describing and naming thousands of species every year-currently around 15.000-20.000 among animals only
[2,3]--numbers that rapidly increase for many groups of
organisms due to the incorporation of new tools for discovery and the exploration of poorly known areas of the
planet [4-8]. Indeed, this progress is being made possible
despite important impediments [9] because species taxonomy is resurging as a solid scientific discipline [10] that
incorporates technological advances, such as virtual
access to museum collections [11], high-throughput
DNA sequencing [12], computer tomography [13], geographical information systems [14], and multiple functions of the internet [15]. Also, taxonomic information is
increasingly digitized and made available through several
global initiatives, such as Species2000, The Encyclopae* Correspondence: jose.m.padial@ebc.uu.se, m.vences@tu-bs.de
1

Department of Evolution Genomics and Systematics, Evolutionary Biology
Centre (EBC), Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18D, Uppsala 75236, Sweden
2 Department of Evolutionary Biology, Zoological Institute, Technical University
of Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 8, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

dia of Life (EOL), The Global Biodiversity Information
Facility (GBIF), or ZooBank. The future has been envisioned to be an interactive "cybertaxonomy" with
dynamic online description and publication of new species, and where updated taxonomic information would be
accessible for almost everybody from everywhere [16,17].
However, modern taxonomy still faces two major challenges. First, a qualitative challenge is to reach scientific
consensus about the basic category around which taxonomy is built --the species-- and thus improve species
delimitation. The second, a quantitative challenge, is the
sheer number of species on earth that require discovery
and description, estimated in at least 10 million, only
considering eukaryotes, and of which a small fraction of
less than 2 million have so far been named [18]. These
challenges are closely tied to two deliverables that the scientific community and society expects from taxonomy.
On one hand, to provide empirical rigor to species
hypotheses and stability to their names, which requires a
careful and often painstaking and time-consuming labor
of species delimitation. On the other hand, an acceleration in the pace of species description, with the peril of
erroneous species hypotheses and thus of unstable
names.
We here review recent proposals for the development
of taxonomy that have been launched to meet both challenges. We argue that recent conceptual advances will

© 2010 Padial et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

allow taxonomy to improve species delimitation through
the integration of theory and methods from disciplines
studying the origin and evolution of species. Also, we
emphasize the importance of applying existing integrative protocols and of developing novel ones for proceeding toward a complete inventory of life on Earth in a
reasonable time.
Integrative taxonomy

Most evolutionary biologists will now agree that species
are separately evolving lineages of populations or metapopulations [sensu [19]], with disagreements remaining
only about where along the divergence continuum separate lineages should be recognized as distinct species
[20,21]. This emerging consensus might appear as a
minor advance, but it has led to a renewed discussion
about species delimitation that is paramount for catalyzing the integration of new knowledge and methods of
population biology, phylogenetics, and other evolutionary disciplines into taxonomy [22-32]. Taxonomists are
realizing that what matters for the study of speciation
matters for taxonomy as well, and that species will be better delimited if we know what caused their origin and
determined their evolutionary trajectories. As illustrative
examples, the discovery and description of three Californian species of trapdoor spiders [33] required inferences
about the origin, genetic structure and degree of ecological interchangeability of divergent lineages; and a recent
taxonomic revision of cardinal birds [34] involved the
reconstruction of the populational, phylogenetic and biogeographic history of lineages.
One consequence of this trend is that after more than
250 years of predominance of comparative morphology
in species discovery, new methods and data--mainly
molecular--are conquering a great piece of the realm of
taxonomy. Although many taxonomists have received
with joy the prospects of this new taxonomy
[11,12,16,35,36], others are more skeptical [37,38]. Nonetheless, a general view has emerged that now is the time
to construct a more "integrative taxonomy" that would
accommodate new concepts and methods [36,37,39-41],
and a considerable number of studies have already
echoed the new term "integrative taxonomy" [28,31,4245]. A close look at this literature reveals, however, a lack
of consensus about what an integrative taxonomy should
be. For example, Dayrat [36] proposes to broadly integrate molecular methods and approaches of population
genetics at the expense of classical taxonomic procedures, while others hold just the opposite idea [37,38].
Also, major disagreements concern the degree of congruence that different characters must show to consider a
population or a group of populations as a separate species. For example, some taxonomists see congruence
among molecular and morphological characters as a nec-

Page 2 of 14

essary requisite [36,40,43] while, for others [23,41,46], the
strength of integration lies in avoiding any a priori selection of character combinations. We here dub these two
frameworks as "integration by congruence" and "integration by cumulation", respectively (Figure 1) and explain
their advantages and limitations.
Integration by congruence

Congruence approaches have a long tradition in systematics. In phylogenetics, hypotheses of character homology can be examined following the principle of reciprocal
illumination, in which each individual character hypothesis is evaluated by the extent to which it agrees with the
overall favored phylogenetic hypothesis [47]. In contrast,
the congruence approach for species discovery does not
examine character hypotheses but lineage divergence
hypotheses and can thus most convincingly be founded
on population genetics theory [but see [37,38]. In this
framework, phylogeographers introduced the genealogic
concordance method of phylogenetic species recognition,
GCPSR [48]. The GCPSR states that congruent identification of a population-level phylogenetic lineage by several unlinked genetic loci indicates that it is genetically
isolated from other such lineages, and thus qualifies as a
species, because only in such isolated lineages will the
coalescent histories of the different markers agree. Integration by congruence follows the same rationale under
the assumption that concordant patterns of divergence
among several taxonomic characters indicate full lineage
separation. Taxonomists also expect that species so discovered will more often correspond with distinct evolutionary units because it is highly improbable that a
coherent pattern of character concordance will emerge by
chance. As an example, DeSalle and collaborators [49]
illustrated in a work diagram that congruence between
two taxonomic characters is an important factor to reach
a conclusion about species status (Figure 2a-2c). Different
combinations of taxonomic characters may be deemed
necessary by different investigators to propose and support species (Figure 3a), such as the congruence of
molecular and morphological characters [36,43], or even
more restrictive combinations requiring evidence about
reproductive isolation [50,51].
The major advantage of the congruence approach is
that it promotes taxonomic stability: most taxonomists
will agree on the validity of a species supported by several
character sets, as long as it is clear that they are unlinked
and fixed (see below). The major limitation inherent in
demanding congruence among taxonomic characters is
the risk of underestimating species numbers (Figure 1)
because the process of speciation is not always accompanied by character change at all levels [e.g. [52], and the
relative rates of character change during lineage divergence are heterogeneous (Figure 4). Indeed, several

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

Full space for species
discovery provided by
three sources of evidence

Page 3 of 14

B
Ecological niche

A
mt DNA

C
morphology

Each dot
represents a "true" species

Two possible ways
of integration

Integration
by congruence
U U

Integration
by cumulation

A B C

AUBUC

3 lines of evidence

U

U

U

A B or B C or A C
2 lines of evidence

Some examples
of Alpha errors

Some examples
of Bêta errors

Alpha = over-estimation

Bêta = under-estimation

Lower confidence
in species names

Higher confidence
in species names

Figure 1 Schematic representation of two approaches of integrative taxonomy. Background yellow, red, and blue colors represent the spectrum of character variation, each dot being an independent evolutionary linage that requires identification and delimitation as separate species. Integration by cumulation (left) identifies species limits with divergence in one or more not necessarily overlapping taxonomic characters (e. g. mtDNA
or morphology), whereas the integration by congruence (right) identifies species limits with the intersection of evidence from two or more independent taxonomic characters (e. g. mtDNA plus morphology). Both methods of integration have relevant limitations. The integration by cumulation approach may over-estimate the number of species by identifying distinct species where there is intraspecific character variation only. As an example,
conspecific populations can be very distinct in terms of morphology but will be erroneously regarded as distinct species (alpha error or false positive).
On the contrary, integration by congruence is a highly stringent approach that might under-estimate the number of species by being unable to detect
cryptic or young species (beta error or false negative, represented here by three encircled species among all the undetected ones). Actually, there is
a trade-off between the lack of reliability of the species detected by integration by cumulation, and the lower taxonomic resolving power of the integration by congruence.

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

a

Page 4 of 14

DNA

geography

morphology

reproduction
ecology

c

b
geography

DNA

geography

morphology

morphology

Figure 2 The "taxonomic circle" representation of work protocol for species recognition. This protocol (redrawn from [49]) is a schematic representation of the congruence approach to taxonomy proposed by DeSalle and collaborators [49]. Dotted lines in (a) connect lines of evidence used
to discover species or support previous hypotheses. The recognition of a species is considered when congruence between a taxonomic character
and geography allows breaking out of the circle (arrows). For example, in classical taxonomy (b) the occurrence of morphologically distinct specimens
at different locations can be used to propose and support a species hypothesis. In the case of cryptic species (c), morphology fails to support the hypothesis but other characters (e.g. molecular) do provide support.

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

a

Page 5 of 14

Integrative taxonomy by congruence
two distinct species

two groups of
specimens with
differences in a
taxonomic
character (e.g.,
morphological)

b

congruent differences
in additional
taxonomic character
(e.g., ecological)

congruent differences
in additional
taxonomic character
(e.g., behavioural)

congruent differences
in additional
taxonomic character
(e.g., molecular)

no congruence

no congruence

no congruence

one
species

Integrative taxonomy by cumulation
possibly
two distinct
species

two groups of
specimens with
differences in a
taxonomic
character (e.g.,
morphological)

c

two distinct species

two distinct species

survey additional
characters if possible

possibly
two distinct
species

differences in additional
taxonomic character
(e.g., molecular)

survey additional
characters if possible

two distinct species
taxonomist considers
observed differences in
one or several characters
to be taxonomically relevant

differences in additional
taxonomic character
(e.g., ecological)
no differences

no differences

no taxonomically relevant differences

one
species

Candidate species approach
Confirmed candidate species (CCS)

two clusters of
specimens
identified
through
DNA barcoding

molecular divergence
above or below threshold
+ congruent differences
in any other character
+ syntopic occurrence

Unconfirmed
candidate
species (UCS)

no congruence

no further
data
available

UCS

congruent differences
in a character
known to be of
diagnostic value
in the study organisms

congruent differences
in any other
character

no congruence

congruent differences
in a character
mediating
reproductive isolation

no syntopy; molecular
divergence above threshold
molecular data above
threshold; no further
data available

UCS

no congruence
no further
data
available

no further
data
available

Deep
conspecific
lineage
(DCL)

UCS

UCS

d Consensus protocol for integrative taxonomy
two distinct species

two groups of
specimens with
differences in a
taxonomic
character (e.g.,
morphological)

congruent
differences in
another taxonomic
character
+ syntopy
no syntopy

probably
distinct species
congruent
differences
in a taxonomic
character
mediating
sexual isolation
no congruence

other explanations for
character congruence
can be excluded

two distinct species

congruent differences
in any other unlinked
taxonomic character
no congruence

difference in single character
+ other evidence
for separation of
evolutionary lineages
difference not relevant for species delimitation

one
species

Figure 3 Schematic representation of work protocols in taxonomy. Workflow in (a) integrative taxonomy by congruence and (b) by cumulation;
(c) work protocol to define Unconfirmed Candidate Species (UCS), Confirmed Candidate Species (CCS) and Deep Conspecific Lineages (DCL) in an
automated approach that starts with DNA barcoding [8]; and (d) a general work protocol for integrative taxonomy proposed here that combines advantages of cumulative and congruence approaches. Increasing black color intensity in a-d represents increasing uncertainty about species status
and the need of a more thorough evaluation of data.

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

Page 6 of 14

Allopatric speciation
n

n

n

n

n
s

n

a.

c.

b.

Sympatric and parapatric
speciation

Lineage divergence and character evolution
Character state fixation

n
s

s

s

n
n

Character divergence
under new selective
pressures

Fixation (reciprocal monophyly)
of neutral characters

s

s
Fixation (reciprocal monophyly)
of characters under selection

Lineage splitting

d.

Reproductive
isolation

Time

Figure 4 Schematic representation of character divergence and fixation in several speciation scenarios. Character divergence varies quantitatively during lineage evolution, with later stages being characterized by marked differentiation (character fixation) at multiple levels, reciprocal
monophyly of most gene genealogies, and reproductive isolation [21]. In situations of neutrality or when species are not subjected to novel selective
regimes (a, and left lineage of b)-- character fixation is stochastic, due to neutral processes as random genetic drift or because characters are not acquired and fixed in the same order under balancing selection-- a situation known as mutation-order speciation [94]. In cases of speciation along new
selective pressures (right lineage of b, c and d), characters subjected to selection are expected to become fixed at early stages of divergence [57,58].
This is especially evident in sympatry or parapatry (c) when disruptive selection causes fitness-dependent character fixation [57,95]. In most scenarios
the origin of reproductive incompatibilities will be the result of the epistatic effect of new mutations, under divergent or balancing selection [96]. Reproductive isolation is expected to proceed more rapidly if there is divergent selection, both in allopatry (b, c; [e.g. [97]]), and in sympatry or parapatry
(d; [reviewed by [57]]), or in those situations where a character mediating species recognition becomes fixed [77,78]. However, recent evidence indicates that reproductive incompatibilities do not necessarily need to have an adaptive origin, and that they can be the cause of lineage splitting in a
neutral or nearly neutral scenario. For example, when the accumulation of new mutations, gene movement, or gene duplication lead to hybrid dysfunction [55]. A textbook-example could be the recurrent cases of polyploidy speciation in plants [98].

empirical studies support the view that lack of character
congruence is a frequent situation [reviewed for arthropods by [41]] resulting from the different modes and circumstances of speciation [e.g. [24,53-55]. A further risk
of applying integration by congruence could be the bias
toward uncovering older species. Species that diverged in

the distant past will have an increased probability of
showing complete gene lineage sorting and reciprocal
monophyly for many loci [56]. The probability of new
mutations--and thus character differences--arising and
being fixed through adaptive or neutral processes also
increases (Figure 4). Furthermore, extinction of relatives

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

Page 7 of 14

creates larger gaps among old species, whereas recent
radiations may often be overlooked by a strict consensus
approach [53]. For example, in Darwin's finches or some
lineages of cichlid fishes, groups of closely related species
show striking morphological differences that originated
through fast divergent selection associated with ecological transitions, but show weak reproductive isolation, low
genotypic clustering, and little neutral genetic differentiation [reviewed by [55]].

cases of elevation of subspecies to species rank in several
groups of organisms [review by [4]], but especially in
birds and primates [61], have been criticized as an unjustified inflation of biodiversity with detrimental consequences for macroecology and conservation [61].
However, in many situations the steep increase of species
numbers reflects a genuine discovery of previously
unknown evolutionary lineages and thus valuable taxonomic progress [5-7].

Integration by cumulation

Taxonomic characters

The framework of integration by cumulation is based on
the assumption that divergences in any of the organismal
attributes that constitute taxonomic characters can provide evidence for the existence of a species [23]. This
approach defends the view that because all taxonomic
characters are contingent in existence, order of appearance, and magnitude of divergence during speciation, the
only way for true integration is allowing any source of evidence--even a single one--to form the basis for species
discovery. In this approach congruence is desired but not
considered necessary [23]. In practice, evidence from all
character sets is assembled cumulatively, concordances
and discordances are explained from the evolutionary
perspective of the populations under study, and a decision is made based on the available information, which
can lead to recognition of a species on the basis of a single
set of characters if these characters are considered good
indicators of lineage divergence (Figure 3b[41,46]).
A major advantage of this approach is that it does not
bind species delimitation to the identification of any particular biological property. Taxonomists can thus select
and focus on the most appropriate set of taxonomic characters for each group of organisms. Indeed, this has been
the traditional approach of morphological taxonomy
(Figure 3b) before the massive incorporation of other
characters. Also, cumulation is probably most suitable to
uncover recently diverged species in adaptive radiations
[53] due to the stepwise process of speciation along ecological gradients [57,58]. The main limitation of the
cumulative approach is that the uncritical use of a single
line of evidence (e.g. a single locus of mtDNA) can lead to
overestimation of species numbers (Figure 1). For example, because of genetic drift, small populations isolated
only for a very short period could already become reciprocally monophyletic with respect to some character and
be thus diagnosable. Such situations do not represent the
type of diversity of interest to most ecologists and evolutionary biologists [59] and the question remains if these
populations should be recognized and named as species
or not. As an example, Meiri and Mace [50] disagreed
with the recognition of Bornean and Sumatran populations of the clouded leopard Neofelis nebulosa diardi as a
full species [60] for exactly that reason. Indeed, other

Further discussion about the alternatives for integration
requires a closer look to what these approaches try to
integrate--the characters. Taxonomic characters are
organismal traits used as evidence for species discovery
[62]. Characters can (i) be classified by the level of biological organization of the attributes to which they refer: biochemical, molecular, morphological, behavioral or
ecological. They can (ii) be qualitative or quantitative, to
describe variation that is discrete or continuous. Characters can (iii) have fixed states (that is, for each of the compared species or population there is a unique state for all
individuals); or be polymorphic within species but with
states distributed in different frequencies across species.
Most important for taxonomy--and often-neglected--is
the classification of characters (iv) by the evolutionary
processes that shaped them (sexual or natural selection,
or genetic drift), and by the role they play in the speciation process (Figure 4).
Taxonomists need to resort to different taxonomic
characters to conform to the biological peculiarities of
particular taxa. For example, behavioral characters-especially those genetically fixed without ontogenetic
learning--such as call patterns of insects, bats and frogs,
are routinely used by taxonomists working on those
groups [e.g. [63]], and their use has led to the discovery of
many cryptic species in some groups of organisms [64].
Also, the ecology of organisms can be an important
source of evidence in some cases. For example, the degree
of ecological interchangeability may be a decisive taxonomic character to distinguish between closely related
species [26,33,65]. In bacteria, the lack of a conspicuous
morphology coupled with extensive gene transfer has
forced taxonomists to develop a model-based strategy
that combines data on ecology and on genetic diversity to
delimit species [66,67].
However, much of the discussion around integrative
taxonomy deals with the merits of morphological versus
molecular characters [36-39,41,49]. For practical and historical reasons most species have been primarily
described based on morphology, including color. As a
main advantage, morphological characters often serve to
allocate individuals to species immediately by visual
inspection, and are applicable to living as well as pre-

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

served specimens and fossils. Disadvantages are: (i) there
is always a subjective component when defining and
interpreting character states, (ii) demonstrating the fixation of a state requires large sample sizes [68], (iii) the
continuous rather than discrete nature of many characters on which taxonomists heavily rely, e.g., reptile scale
counts [69] or mollusk shell size and shape [70], and (iv)
their unsuitability for some groups of organisms, either
because speciation occurs without morphological change
[52], which leads to morphologically cryptic species [64],
or because morphological structures are labile or difficult
to study--e.g. as in prokaryotes [66,67].
Molecular characters used in taxonomy have historically been allozymic or chromosomal (number and structure of chromosomes), but today these are mostly
sequences of mitochondrial (or chloroplast) DNA and,
increasingly, of nuclear genes. While the analysis of
allozymes has the advantage of simultaneously screening
variation at several presumably unlinked nuclear loci,
DNA sequences provide many more characters (nucleotide sites), can be amplified from much smaller samples,
and can be obtained in unprecedented amounts through
high-throughput sequencing from fresh samples, preserved historical collection material, and even from Pleistocene fossils [71]. DNA sequences can be examined
using non-tree based methods to provide diagnostic differences among species [49], but most frequently they are
analyzed using tree-based methods to search for monophyletic groups that could represent species [22]. A limitation of tree-based methods is that it remains difficult to
choose which among the multiple strongly supported
clades detected represent species. Also, a growing body
of evidence shows that discordance between species trees
and gene trees is a common phenomenon caused by processes such as incomplete lineage sorting, hybridization,
gene duplication, reticulated evolution, or recombination
[54]. These situations greatly complicate the resolution of
taxonomic problems [72,73]. Most promising are treebased methods that rely on coalescent theory [54,74],
because they can identify signals of species divergence
even under complex circumstances of gene tree incongruence and non-monophyly [e.g. [26]]. A recent largescale study on insects of Madagascar [75] shows that single-locus coalescent models perform well for both testing
and discovering species from large sample sets even without prior hypotheses of population coherence, providing
thus a potential empirical substitute for traditional treebased methods for preliminary biodiversity screening and
species identification (e.g., DNA barcoding approaches).
The merits of taxonomic characters under the integrative
taxonomy framework

To be usable in an integrative taxonomy, characters
should be evaluated taking into account the evolutionary

Page 8 of 14

forces driving the speciation process (Figure 4). This new
perspective may help to overcome many of the longstanding discussions about characters in taxonomy. For
example, as long as characters have a genetic basis, are
unlinked and are not influenced by the same selective
pressures, any character should be considered as an independent, equivalent and combinable unit. In other words,
the potential of a character to clarify a taxonomic problem has to be carefully evaluated in every situation, and a
particular nucleotide or morphological character state
might be deemed more important than all other nucleotides and morphological characters, because it might be
particularly informative to understand the process of lineage splitting and divergence. For instance, in those cases
where the speciation process is driven by sexual and/or
by natural selection, characters known to be under the
influence of any of these forces in one species might be
directly indicative of lineage divergence in the whole taxonomic group to which this species belongs and, thus, be
more informative than those that are known to evolve
neutrally.
Such inferences need to be based on careful evaluations
to avoid circularity of arguments. As a very obvious
example, in a group of animals where speciation has been
demonstrated to be mainly driven by sexual selection of
male colouration, differences in colour will be given a
higher importance as taxonomic character than in a
group of subterraneous and blind species. If speciation in
a clade of phytophagous insects is known to be driven
mainly by the switch to new host plants, then the discovery that a new population belonging to this clade feeds on
a novel host plant might be a more relevant taxonomic
character than it would be in a clade of host plant generalists. And in a group of microendemic species where
specialization to narrow and distinct bioclimatic envelopes has been demonstrated to be the main force leading
to speciation, the specialization of a newly discovered
population to a bioclimatic niche distinct from all known
species in the group might be a suitable argument to
advocate its species status, while in groups where most
species are known to be tolerant of a variety of bioclimates such data would be less relevant.
In general, sexually selected characters might be more
likely to represent species-specific differences than naturally selected characters because they contribute to the
reproductive cohesion and isolation of species while, at
the same time, their rapid evolution contribute to create
larger gaps between closely related species. Thus, the
most important taxonomic characters would be those
indicative of reproductive isolation or limited gene flow,
such as crucial mutations in "speciation genes" [76] or any
trait that directly mediates a premating or postmating
reproductive barrier, such as wave form and frequency
differences in advertisement calls of insects or frogs, or

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

genital structures of arthropods and squamate reptiles.
For example, a single amino acid substitution can suffice
to produce striking plumage differences mediating species recognition and leading to speciation in birds [77].
Also, differences in a coding vision gene can affect female
mating preferences and initiate lineage divergence in fish
[78]. Some researchers further argue that molecular
markers prone to high intraspecific gene flow might be
less affected by interspecific gene flow, and be thus more
effective for delimiting species [27], because in cases of
gene introgression among sister species substantial
intraspecific gene flow will reduce the frequency of introgressed alleles. But, also, the first move in speciation can
result of the accumulation of multiple neutral mutations
in DNA sequences causing hybrid incompatibilities [55],
which make those mutations ideal diagnostic characters
to separate species.
In short, future discussions in taxonomy should not be
about morphology versus molecules but about how characters reflect lineage divergence or about the functional
relevance of some characters in the speciation process.
As a consequence, taxonomy will no longer be a science
restricted to the description of patterns but will be tightly
linked to the study of processes generating diversity.
Candidate species

In the practice of current (increasingly molecular) systematics, phylogeography and DNA barcoding studies of
eukaryotes are revealing units that might represent
potential new species at a faster pace than results can be
followed up by taxonomists. This situation suggests a
need for guidelines to order and classify this undescribed
diversity. The bacteriological concept of candidate species [79] has recently been explored and applied to vertebrates for such units [8,63,80,81]. A further developed
stepwise working protocol (Figure 2c) recognizes three
subcategories of candidate species [8]. Groups of individuals within nominal species showing large genetic distances, but without further information, are considered
unconfirmed candidate species (UCS) deserving further
study. When additional data indicate that these genealogical units are not differentiated at the species level, they
are flagged as deep conspecific lineages (DCL). The third
category, confirmed candidate species (CCS), applies to
those deep genealogical lineages that can be considered
good species following standards of divergence for the
group under study but that have not yet been formally
described and named. For example, confirmed candidate
species are sister lineages in syntopy showing no evidence
of interbreeding, or allopatric lineages with distinct morphological or bioacoustical character divergences.
A more standardized nomenclatural system might help
to communicate with precision about candidate species,
inventory them and track their changing status. Murray

Page 9 of 14

and Schleifer [79] proposed a formal naming system for
candidate prokaryotes that consists in placing the epithet
Candidatus before a preliminary species name, as for
example: "Candidatus Liberobater asiaticus". This system
has since been broadly accepted and implemented in the
Bacteriological Code. However, it is inapplicable for
eukaryotes because the zoological and the botanical
codes do not specify minimum scientific criteria for recognizing species names as valid. Thus, while "Candidatus
Liberobater asiaticus" can be kept as an informal name
until the species is proved to be valid by accepted standards of the discipline and becomes thus formally
described, any informal name given to a candidate species of animal could qualify as valid name under the Zoological Code if the proposal is accompanied by a voucher
and diagnostic differences (e.g. exclusive haplotypes).
For different groups of animals, naming schemes of
candidate species have been established. As one example,
catfishes of the family Loricariidae are provided with socalled L-numbers, a system of consecutive numbers
introduced in 1988 by R. Stawikowski, A. Werner and U.
Schliewen, in which each putative new species is referred
by a unique number combination after the letter "L"-from Loricariids. These numbers are designated upon
publication of photographs of unknown color variants of
Loricariids in the German journal "Die Aquarien und
Terrarien Zeitschrift" and are used beyond the realm of
aquariologists.
A standardization of such schemes across taxonomic
groups of eukaryotes would be clear progress for data
retrieval systems. A naming scheme for candidate species
should not be mistaken for a substitute or competition
with the established Linnaean system of nomenclature
but, rather, it is a mean to facilitate the assembly of data
sets that could eventually lead to the description of new
species under the Linnaean system. To avoid conflicts
with the Codes of nomenclature, we propose to designate
candidate species of eukaryotes through the combination
of the binomial species name of the most similar or
closely related nominal species, followed (in square
brackets) by the abbreviation "Ca" (for candidate) with an
attached numerical code referring to the particular candidate species (more than one candidate might be recognized under a valid species), and terminating with the
author name and year of publication of the article in
which the lineage was first discovered. The vouchers the
candidate species cfould be the GenBank accession numbers of the sequences used to propose the candidate status, or any equivalent information (e.g. MorphoBank
accession numbers for morphological candidate species,
or a voucher specimen number from a public collection).
As an example, Hirudo medicinalis [Ca3 Siddall et al.
2007], would be the exclusive name combination referring to a particular candidate species of European leech

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

(Ca3), as defined in the corresponding reference [82].
This system should be flexible enough to accommodate
situations in which no unambiguous candidate species
definition has been proposed in a study--in this case,
referring to a GenBank accession number should be possible: Hirudo medicinalis [Ca3 EF405599], where the
number refers to a highly divergent sequence of H. medicinalis. When not even a tentative assignment of a candidate species to a most similar nominal species is possible,
then it would be possible to assign a candidate species
just to a genus or family, i.e., Hirudo sp. [Ca3 EF405599]
or Hirudinidae sp. [Ca3 EF405599].
This system maintains the traditional structure of binomial species names and helps to list together both valid
and candidate species in hierarchical and alphabetically
ordered databases as GenBank, or repositories of morphological or geographical data. Adding a numerical code
helps to avoid repetitive proposal of candidates; and GenBank accession numbers provide a direct link to source
data. Candidate species should create a link between the
activities of molecular biologists (e.g. ongoing DNA
barcoding initiatives) and taxonomists to redirect taxonomic efforts and accelerate species descriptions.

Conclusions and future perspectives for an
integrative taxonomy
The past years have seen an important reduction of taxonomic impediments: conflicts about species concepts are
being replaced by a consensus on the view of species as
lineages [see [25]]; the access to crucial taxonomic information is facilitated by a growing body of cyber-infrastructures such as species names databases, digitized
original descriptions, and online imagery of type specimens and historical literature [83]; the enormously successful journal Zootaxa provides an example of a fast
platform for the publication of zoological taxonomic
studies [3]; widespread use of DNA sequence data has led
taxonomy to an enormous acceleration in the identification of cryptic species [review by [64]] and candidate species [8,80,81,84-88]. We hypothesize that those advances
have overall contributed species description rates to
remain roughly stable at 14,000-25,000 per year since
1970 [89] despite a decrease in the number of taxonomists [90]. However, if estimates of 10 million eukaryote
species on Earth were correct [18], we would need, at the
present pace, some 400 years of constant activity of taxonomic research to attain a "complete" inventory of life.
This is not a reasonable time given that human activity is
driving species to irremediable extinction at a rate never
experienced before [91]. We identify five major working
lines for the scientific development of integrative taxonomy that will accelerate species description without com-

Page 10 of 14

promising accuracy [cf. [92]] (Table 1). However, the
success will not exclusively depend on the development
of new concepts and approaches. Most importantly, more
taxonomists and more funding for taxonomy are urgently
needed [90]. A stronger focus on actually publishing systematic revisions and species descriptions should, too, be
part of a strategy to alleviate the taxonomic impediment
[93].
Although traditional procedures will remain useful in
many cases, taxonomy needs to be pluralistic and integrate new approaches for species delimitation if it is to
become a modern evolutionary discipline. Thus, for
example, the "Family Union"--in Joe Felsenstein's words-between the fields of population genetics and phylogeography with phylogenetics through coalescent theory,
which has been considered as one of the most exciting
recent developments in systematics [69] (see also http://
treethinkers.blogspot.com/), should also strongly benefit
taxonomy. Shadows of past conflicts between morphologists and molecular biologists should now fade and discussions will not be about simply integrating different
kinds of characters, but rather different concepts and
methods of population genetic, phylogeographic, and
phylogenetic analyses. There is probably no magic bullet
for species discovery and delimitation, but an integrative
and evolutionary framework provides taxonomists with a
larger arsenal to face the realities of inventorying the
actual--and woefully underestimated--biodiversity of the
planet.

Appendix
Glossary of selected terms used in the text

Allele: one of two or more alternative forms of a gene
that arise by mutation and are found at the same locus in
a chromosome.
Allopatry: the condition of species or populations
occurring in separate, non-overlapping geographical
areas.
Candidate species: a set of organisms identified as a
putative new species.
Coalescent theory: retrospective model of population
genetics that employs a sample of individuals from a population to trace all alleles to the most recent common
ancestor.
DNA barcoding: the use of short standardized DNA
sequences to identify species.
Ecological niche: environmental conditions under
which a species exist.
Gene lineage: ancestor-descendant series of alleles.
Locus (plural loci): a fixed position on a chromosome
that may be occupied by one or more alleles of a gene.

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

Page 11 of 14

Table 1: Work areas for the scientific and technical development of integrative taxonomy
Improving taxonomic work protocols

Development of pragmatic operational protocols to discovering and describing
species (Figure 2d). There is an inevitable trade-off between using complex
integrative approaches for delimiting species that may provide stable names,
and the need to accelerate the pace of taxonomic descriptions [92]. Indeed, of
the many empirical methods available for species delimitation [22,25], most
require extensive sampling, absence of missing data, and/or complete specieslevel molecular phylogenetic trees. Clearly, for most areas and groups of diverse
organisms of the world, data at hand will be insufficient for in-depth studies of
evolutionary separation of lineages.

Refinement of probabilistic procedures to evaluate
character congruence

New methods should be able to deal with the heterogeneity of the evolutionary
process, with situations of character incongruence, and to include fixed
characters states as well as states distributed in different frequencies across
populations. In this sense population geneticists have efficient tools to estimate
if combinations of alleles occur more frequently than expected randomly -a
situation termed linkage disequilibrium [99]- and this method can be applied to
discover cryptic sympatric species [e.g., [100]]. Also, phylogeneticists have
developed approaches as CONCATERPILLAR [101], which take into account
different evolutionary rates of different loci and allow identification of those
that should be analyzed independently or concatenated. Extending such
approaches to non-molecular characters could result in more rigorous protocols
of integrative taxonomy.

Development of modular software for species
delimitation, description and publishing.

Besides including phylogenetic and population genetics modules, as in
Mesquite [102], such software should include modules for statistical analysis of
morphological data, should be able to extract character information from biand tri-dimensional imagery [103] and from sequence data (such as pure and
private diagnostic nucleotide substitutions, e.g. [49]), and should also
incorporate packages for ecological and geographical modeling and mapping,
as well as for bioacoustics. It could also implement a package for building
standardized species descriptions that could be directly submitted for peerreview to major taxonomic journals at the same time that supporting data are
automatically sent to biodiversity databases (e.g. GBIF, Species2000, Zoobank,
GenBank, CBOL, MorphoBank); hyperlinked species descriptions represent an
advance in this sense [13].

Automated identification of candidate species

Development of methods for automatically identifying, naming, documenting
and cataloguing candidate species through the combination of DNA barcoding
and digital image processing [12,103]. These approaches could be especially
helpful for the preliminary screening of hyperdiverse groups such as small
arthropods and nematodes, or for geographical areas facing imminent habitat
destruction (and therefore in need of rapid inventories of species diversity and
conservation priorities).

Application of genomic analyses to taxonomy
(GenoTaxonomy).

Population genomics aims to identify regions of the genome with greater
differentiation than expected from the average across many loci affected by
reduced gene flow due to reproductive isolation or local adaptation [104]. The
automatic identification of those regions, to be used as diagnostic characters,
might be the key to substantially accelerate species discovery, especially if
applicable through modular taxonomic software. Given the enormous
expected increases of genomic data [105] such approaches will soon become
applicable.

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

Monophyletic group: a group consisting of an ancestor
and all its descendants.
Neutral character: observable or quantifiable organismal trait whose evolution and variation can be explained
by random processes.
Non-neutral character: observable or quantifiable
organismal trait whose evolution and variation can be
explained by natural or sexual selection.
Parapatry: the condition of species or populations
occurring in contiguous geographical areas.
Paraphyletic group: a group consisting of an ancestor
and some of its descendants.
Phylogenetics: biological discipline focused on reconstruction of the evolutionary relationships among organisms.
Phylogeography: study of historical processes responsible for intraspecific patterns (or patterns among closelyrelated species) of geographical distribution and diversity
of gene lineages.
Species hypothesis: the hypothesis that a group of
populations represents a separately evolving and divergent lineage.
Species lineage: ancestor-descendant series of metapopulations.
Speciation: the array of processes that result in the
origination of new species.
Subspecies: infraspecific Linnaean category sometimes used to classify allopatric or parapatric populations
showing some degree of divergence--traditionally in morphological traits--not considered large enough for the
species rank.
Sympatry: the condition of species occurring in the
same geographical area.
Syntopy: the condition of species occurring in the
same locality at the same time.
Systematics: biological discipline that studies evolutionary patterns of biological diversity, including the
fields of taxonomy and phylogenetics.
Taxonomy: biological discipline that identifies,
describes, classifies and names extant and extinct living
beings and deals with the theory of classification.
Taxonomic character: observable or quantifiable
organismal trait used to separate species.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
JMP and IDLR developed the concept of this review. JMP, AM and MV drafted
the manuscript and the figures. All authors intensively revised subsequent
drafts of the manuscript and read and approved its final version.
Acknowledgements
JMP was founded by the EU Marie Curie Mobility and Training Programme
(FP7, proposal 220714). AM was supported by a postdoctoral Research Fellowship from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. This work was partially
funded by project CGL2008-04164 of the Spanish Ministry of Science and Inno-

Page 12 of 14

vation (IDlR, Principal Investigator). We are grateful to S. Castroviejo-Fisher, C.
Vilà, and A. González-Voyer for constructive criticism on previous drafts of the
manuscript.
Author Details
1Department of Evolution Genomics and Systematics, Evolutionary Biology
Centre (EBC), Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18D, Uppsala 75236, Sweden,
2Department of Evolutionary Biology, Zoological Institute, Technical University
of Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 8, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany and
3Department of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Museo Nacional de
Ciencias Naturales, CSIC, C/José Gutiérrez Abascal 2, Madrid 28006, Spain
Received: 22 December 2009 Accepted: 25 May 2010
Published: 25 May 2010
© 2010 Padial et al; licensee http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16
This is anin is available from:BioMed Central Ltd.the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Frontiers Open Access article distributed under
article Zoology 2010, 7:16

References
1. Wheeler QD: Taxonomic triage and the poverty of phylogeny. Phil Trans
R Soc Lond B 2004, 359:571-583.
2. Polaszek A, Agosti D, Alonso-Zarazaga M, Beccaloni G, Place Bjørn Per de,
Bouchet P, Brothers DJ, Cranbrook G, Evenhuis N, Godfray HCJ, Johnson
NF, Krell F-T, Lipscomb D, Lyal CHC, Mace GM, Mawatari S, Miller SE, Minelli
A, Morris S, Ng PKL, Patterson DJ, Pyle RL, Robinson N, Rogo L, Taverne J,
Thompson FC, van Tol J, Wheeler QD, Wilson EO: A universal register for
animal names. Nature 2005, 437:477.
3. Zhang ZQ: Contributing to the progress of descriptive taxonomy.
Zootaxa 2008, 1968:65-68.
4. Agapow PM, Bininda-Emonds ORP, Crandall KA, Gittleman JL, Mace GM,
Marshall JC, Purvis A: The impact of species concept on biodiversity
studies. Quart Rev Biol 2004, 79:161-179.
5. Köhler J, Vieites DR, Bonett RM, García FH, Glaw F, Steinke D, Vences M:
Boost in species discoveries in a highly endangered vertebrate group:
new amphibians and global conservation. BioScience 2005, 55:693-696.
6. Padial JM, De la Riva I: Taxonomic inflation and the stability of species
lists: the perils of ostrich's behavior. Syst Biol 2006, 55:859-867.
7. Sangster G: Increasing numbers of bird species result from taxonomic
progress, not taxonomic inflation. Proc R Soc Lond B 2009,
276:3185-3191.
8. Vieites DR, Wollenberg KC, Andreone F, Köhler J, Glaw F, Vences M: Vast
underestimation of Madagascar's biodiversity evidenced by an
integrative amphibian inventory. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:8267-8272.
9. Agnarson I, Kuntner M: Taxonomy in a changing world: seeking
solutions for a science in crisis. Syst Biol 2007, 56:531-539.
10. Wheeler QD, Raven PH, Wilson EO: Taxonomy: Impediment or
expedient? Science 2004, 303:285.
11. Knapp S: Taxonomy as a team sport. In The New Taxonomy Edited by:
Wheeler QD. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group; 2008:33-53.
12. Vogler AP, Monaghan MT: Recent advances in DNA taxonomy. J Zool
Syst Evol Res 2007, 45:1-10.
13. Pyle RL, Earle JL, Greene BD: Five new species of the damselfish genus
Chromis (Perciformes: Labroidei: Pomacentridae) from deep coral reefs
in the tropical western Pacific. Zootaxa 2008, 1671:3-31.
14. Graham CH, Ferrier S, Huettman F, Moritz C, Peterson T: New
developments in museum-based informatics and applications in
biodiversity analysis. Trends Ecol Evol 2004, 19:497-503.
15. Godfray HCJ, Clark BR, Kitching IJ, Mayo SJ, Scoble MJ: The web and the
structure of taxonomy. Syst Biol 2007, 56:943-955.
16. Wilson EO: The encyclopedia of life. Trends Ecol Evol 2003, 18:77-80.
17. Schram F: The truly new systematics -- megascience in the information
age. Hydrobiologia 2004, 519:1-7.
18. May RR, Harvey PH: Species uncertainties. Science 2009, 323:687.
19. Wiley EO: The evolutionary species concept reconsidered. Syst Zool
1978, 27:17-26.
20. Hey J: On the failure of modern species concepts. Trends Ecol Evol 2006,
21:447-450.
21. Mallet J: Hybridization, ecological races and the nature of species:
empirical evidence for the ease of speciation. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B
2008, 363:2971-2986.
22. Sites JW Jr, Marshall JC: Operational criteria for delimiting species. Annu
Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2004, 35:199-227.

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

23. de Queiroz K: Species concepts and species delimitation. Syst Biol 2007,
56:879-886.
24. Roe AD, Sperling FAH: Population structure and species boundary
delimitation of cryptic Dioryctria moths: an integrative approach. Mol
Ecol 2007, 16:3617-3633.
25. Wiens JJ: Species delimitation: new approaches for discovering
diversity. Syst Biol 2007, 56:875-878.
26. Leaché AD, Koo MS, Spencer CL, Papenfuss TJ, Fisher RN, McGuire JA:
Quantifying ecological, morphological, and genetic variation to
delimit species in the coast horned lizard species complex
(Phrynosoma). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:12418-12423.
27. Petit RJ, Excoffier L: Gene flow and species delimitation. Trends Ecol Evol
2009, 24:386-393.
28. Glaw F, Köhler J, De la Riva I, Vieites DR, Vences M: Integrative taxonomy
of Malagasy treefrogs: combination of molecular genetics,
bioacoustics and comparative morphology reveals twelve additional
species of Boophis. Zootaxa 2010, 283:1-82.
29. Goodman SM, Maminirina CP, Weyneth N, Bradman HM, Christidis L,
Ruedi M, Appleton B: The use of molecular and morphological
characters to resolve the taxonomic identity of cryptic species: the
case of Miniopterus manavi (Chiroptera, Miniopteridae). Zool Scripta
2009, 38:339-363.
30. Miglietta MP, Schuchert P, Cunningham C: Reconciling genealogical and
morphological species in a worldwide study of the Family
Hydractiniidae (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa). Zool Scripta 2009, 38:403-430.
31. Lumley LM, Sperling FAH: Integrating morphology and mitochondrial
DNA for species delimitation within the spruce budworm
(Choristoneura fumiferana) cryptic species complex (Lepidoptera:
Tortricidae). Syst Entom 2010. (advance online publication) DOI: 10.1111/
j.1365-3113.2009.00514.x
32. Tan DSH, Ang Y, Lim GS, Ismail MRB, Meier R: From 'cryptic species' to
integrative taxonomy: an iterative process involving DNA sequences,
morphology, and behaviour leads to the resurrection of Sepsis
pyrrhosoma (Sepsidae: Diptera). Zool Scripta 2009, 39:51-61.
33. Bond JE, Stockman AK: An integrative method for delimiting cohesion
species: finding the population-species interface in a group of
Californian trapdoor spiders with extreme genetic divergence and
geographic structuring. Syst Biol 2008, 57:628-646.
34. Dávalos LM, Porzecanski AL: Accounting for molecular stochasticity in
systematic revisions: Species limits and phylogeny of Paroaria. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2009, 53:234-248.
35. Wilson EO: Taxonomy as a fundamental discipline. Phil Trans Roy Soc
Lond B 2004, 359:739.
36. Dayrat B: Toward integrative taxonomy. Biol J Linn Soc 2005, 85:407-415.
37. Valdecasas AG, Williams D, Wheeler QD: 'Integrative taxonomy' then and
now: a response to Dayrat (2005). Biol J Linn Soc 2008, 93:211-216.
38. Wheeler QD: Introductory: toward the new taxonomy. In The New
Taxonomy Edited by: Wheeler QD. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group;
2008:1-17.
39. Will KW, Mishler BD, Wheeler QD: The perils of DNA barcoding and the
need for integrative taxonomy. Syst Biol 2005, 54:844-851.
40. Meier R: DNA sequences in taxonomy: opportunities and challenges.
In The New Taxonomy Edited by: Wheeler QD. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis
Group; 2008:95-127.
41. Schlick-Steiner BC, Steiner FM, Seifert B, Stauffer C, Christian E, Crozier RH:
Integrative taxonomy: a multisource approach to exploring
Biodiversity. Annu Rev Entomol 2010, 55:421-438.
42. Fonseca G, Derycke S, Moens T: Integrative taxonomy in two free-living
nematode species complexes. Biol J Linn Soc 2008, 94:737-753.
43. Cardoso A, Serrano A, Vogler AP: Morphological and molecular variation
in tiger beetles of the Cicindela hybrida complex: is an 'integrative
taxonomy' possible? Mol Ecol 2009, 18:648-664.
44. Castroviejo-Fisher SJM, Guayasamín JM, Kok PJR: Species status of
Centrolene lema Duellman and Señaris, 2003 (Amphibia:
Centrolenidae) revealed by integrative taxonomy. Zootaxa 2009,
1980:16-28.
45. Gibbs J: Integrative taxonomy identifies new (and old) species in the
Lasioglossum (Dialictus) tegulare (Robertson) species group
(Hymenoptera, Halictidae). Zootaxa 2009, 2032:1-38.
46. Padial JM, Castroviejo-Fisher S, Köhler J, Vilà C, Chaparro JC, De la Riva I:
Deciphering the products of evolution at the species level: the need
for an integrative taxonomy. Zool Scripta 2009, 38:431-447.

Page 13 of 14

47. Lienau EK, DeSalle R, Rosenfeld JA, Planet PJ: Reciprocal illumination in
the gene content tree of life. Syst Biol 2006, 55:441-453.
48. Avise JC, Ball RM: Principles of genealogical concordance in species
concepts and biological taxonomy. In Surveys in Evolutionary Biology
Volume 7. Edited by: Futuyma D, Antonovics J. Oxford University Press;
1990:45-67.
49. DeSalle R, Egan MG, Siddal M: The unholy trinity: taxonomy, species
delimitation and DNA barcoding. Phil Trans R Soc B 2005, 360:1905-1916.
50. Meiri S, Mace GM: New taxonomy and the origin of species. PLoS Biol
2007, 5:e194. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050194 e194
51. Alström P, Rasmussen PC, Olsson U, Sundberg P: Species delimitation
based on multiple criteria: the Spotted Bush Warbler Bradypterus
thoracicus complex (Aves:Megaluridae). Zool J Linn Soc 2008,
154:291-307.
52. Adams DC, Chelsea M, Kozak KH, Wiens JJ: Are rates of species
diversification correlated with rates of morphological evolution? Proc R
Soc Lond 2009, 276:2729-2738.
53. Shaffer HB, Thomson RC: Delimiting species in recent radiations. Syst
Biol 2007, 56:896-906.
54. Degnan J, Rosenberg N: Gene tree discordance, phylogenetic inference
and the multispecies coalescent. Trends Ecol Evol 2009, 24:332-340.
55. Presgraves DC: The molecular basis of species formation. Nature Rev
Gen 2010. (advance online publication) doi:10.1038/nrg2718
56. Zink RM, Barrowclough GF: Mitochondrial DNA under siege in avian
phylogeography. Mol Ecol 2008, 17:2107-2121.
57. Nosil P, Harmon LJ, Seehausen O: Ecological explanations for
(incomplete) speciation. Trends Ecol Evol 2009, 24:145-156.
58. Streelman JT, Danley PD: The stages of vertebrate evolutionary
radiation. Trends Ecol Evol 2003, 18:126-131.
59. Moritz C, Patton JL, Schneider CJ, Smith TB: Diversification of rainforest
faunas: an integrated molecular approach. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 2000,
31:533-563.
60. Kitchener AC, Beaumont MA, Richardson D: Geographical variation in
the Clouded Leopard, Neofelis nebulosa, reveals two species. Curr Biol
2006, 16:2377-2383.
61. Isaac NJ, Mallet J, Mace GM: Taxonomic inflation: its influence on
macroecology and conservation. Trends Ecol Evol 2004, 19:464-469.
62. Mayr E: Principles of systematic zoology. McGraw-Hill; 1969.
63. Vences M, Wake D: Speciation, species boundaries and phylogeography
of amphibians. In Amphibian Biology Volume 7 Edited by: Heatwole H.
Chipping Norton, Surrey Beatty and Sons; 2007:2613-2671.
64. Bickford D, Lohman DJ, Navjot SS, Ng PKL, Meier R, Winker K, Ingram KK,
Das I: Cryptic species as a window on diversity and conservation.
Trends Ecol Evol 2007, 22:148-155.
65. Rissler LJ, Apodaca JJ: Adding more ecology into species delimitation:
ecological niche models and phylogeography help define cryptic
species in the Black Salamander (Aneides flavipunctatus). Syst Biol 2007,
56:924-942.
66. Cohan FM: Towards a conceptual and operational union of bacterial
systematics, ecology, and evolution. Phil Trans R Soc B 2006,
361:1985-1996.
67. Fraser C, Alm AE, Polz MF, Spratt BG, Hanage WP: The bacterial species
challenge: making sense of genetic and ecological diversity. Science
2009, 323:741-746.
68. Wiens JJ, Servedio MR: Species delimitation in systematics: inferring
diagnostic differences between species. Proc R Soc Lond B 2000,
267:631-636.
69. Wiens JJ: Systematics and herpetology in the age of genomics.
BioScience 2008, 58:297-307.
70. McLeod N: Understanding morphology in systematics contexts: threedimensional specimen ordination and recognition. In The New
Taxonomy Edited by: Wheeler QD. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group;
2008:143-209.
71. Orlando L, Darlu P, Toussaint M, Bonjean D, Otte M, Hanni C: Revisiting
Neandertal diversity with a 100,000 year old mtDNA sequence. Curr
Biol 2006, 16:R400-R402.
72. Shimada T, Matsui M, Yambun P, Lakim M, Mohamed M: Detection of two
cryptic taxa in Meristogenys amoropalmatus (Amphibia, Ranidae)
through nuclear and mitochondrial DNA analyses. Zootaxa 2008,
1843:24-34.

Padial et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:16
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/16

73. Brown JL, Twomey E: Complicated histories: three new species of
poison frogs of the genus Ameerega (Anura: Dendrobatidae) from
north-central Peru. Zootaxa 2009, 2049:1-38.
74. Knowles LL, Carstens BC: Delimiting species without monophyletic
gene trees. Syst Biol 2007, 56:887-895.
75. Monaghan MT, Wild R, Elliot M, Fujisawa T, Balke M, Inward DJG, Lees DC,
Ranaivosolo R, Eggleton P, Barraclough TG, Vogler AP: Accelerated
species inventory on Madagascar using coalescent-based models of
species delineation. Syst Biol 2009, 58:298-311.
76. Orr HL: Mapping and characterization of a 'speciation gene' in
Drosophila. Genetics Research 2009, 59:73-80.
77. Uy JA, Moyle RG, Filardi CE, Cheviron ZA: Difference in plumage color
used in species recognition between incipient species is linked to a
single amino acid substitution in the melanocortin-1 receptor. Am Nat
2009, 174:244-254.
78. Seehausen O, Terai Y, Magalhaes IS, Carleton KL, Mrosso HDJ, Miyagi R,
Sluijs I van der, Schneider MV, Maan ME, Tachida H, Imai H, Okada N:
Speciation through sensory drive in cichlid fish. Nature 2008,
455:620-626.
79. Murray RGE, Schleifer KH: Taxonomic notes: a proposal for recording the
properties of putative taxa of prokaryotes. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1994,
44:174-176.
80. Fouquet A, Gilles A, Vences M, Marty C, Blanc M, Gemmell NJ:
Underestimation of species richness in Neotropical frogs revealed by
mtDNA analyses. PLoS One 2007, 2:e1109.
81. Morando M, Ávila LJ, Sites JW: Sampling strategies for delimiting
species: genes, individuals, and populations in the Liolaemus
elongatus-kriegi complex (Squamata: Liolaemidae) in AndeanPatagonian South America. Syst Biol 2003, 52:159-185.
82. Siddall ME, Trontelj P, Utevsky SY, Nkamany M, Macdonald KS: Diverse
molecular data demonstrate that commercially available medicinal
leeches are not Hirudo medicinalis. Proc R Soc Lond B 2007,
274:1481-1487.
83. Knapp S, Polaszek A, Watson M: Spreading the word. Nature 2007,
446:261-262.
84. Torsvik V, Ovreas L, Thingstad TF: Prokaryotic diversity--magnitude,
dynamics, and controlling factors. Science 2002, 296:1064-1066.
85. Mayer F, Dietz C, Kiefer A: Molecular species identification boosts bat
diversity. Front Zool 2007, 4:4.
86. Lahaye R, Bank M van der, Bogarin D, Warner J, Pupulin F, Gigot G, Maurin
O, Duthoit S, Barraclough TG, Savolainen V: DNA barcoding the floras of
biodiversity hotspots. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:2923-2928.
87. Fontaneto D, Kaya M, Herniou EA, Barraclough TG: Extreme levels of
hidden diversity in microscopic animals (Rotifera) revealed by DNA
taxonomy. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2009, 53:182-189.
88. Janzen DH, Hallwachs W, Blandin P, Burns JM, Cadiou JM, Chacon I,
Dapkey T, Deans AR, Epstein ME, Espinoza B, Franclemont JG, Haber WA,
Hajibabaei M, Hall JPW, Hebert PDN, Gauld ID, Harvey DJ, Hausmann A,
Kitching IJ, Lafontaine D, Landry JF, Lemaire C, Miller JY, Miller JS, Miller L,
Miller SE, Montero J, Munroe E, Green SR, Ratnasingham S, Rawlins JE,
Robbins RK, Rodriguez JJ, Rougerie R, Sharkey MJ, Smith MA, Solis MA,
Sullivan JB, Thiaucourt P, Wahl DB, Weller SJ, Whitfield JB, Willmott KR,
Wood DM, Woodley NE, Wilson JJ: Integration of DNA barcoding into an
ongoing inventory of complex tropical biodiversity. Mol Ecol Resources
2009, 8(Suppl 1):1-26.
89. Index to Organism Names [http://www.organismnames.com].
Accessed 25 March 2010
90. The House of Lords, Science and Technology Committee: 5th Report of
Session 2007-08. Systematics and Taxonomy: Follow-up Report with
Evidence. The House of Lords, UK; 2008.
91. May RM: The future of biological diversity in a crowed world. Curr Sci
2002, 82:1325-1331.
92. de Carvalho MR, Bockmann FA, Amorim DS, Brandão CRF: Systematics
must embrace comparative biology and evolution, not speed and
automation. Evol Biol 2008, 35:150-157.
93. Evenhuis NL: Helping solve the "other" taxonomic impediment:
completing the eight steps to Total Enlightment and Taxonomic
Nirvana. Zootaxa 2007, 1407:3-12.
94. Mani GS, Clarke BC: Mutational order: a major stochastic process in
evolution. Proc R Soc Lond B 1990, 240:29-37.
95. Rueffler C, Van Dooren TJM, Leimar O, Abrams PA: Disruptive selection
and then what? Trends Ecol Evol 2006, 21:238-245.

Page 14 of 14

96. Schluter D: Evidence for ecological speciation and its alternative.
Science 2009, 323:737-741.
97. Fitzpatrick BM: Molecular correlates of reproductive isolation. Evolution
2002, 56:191-198.
98. Wood TE, Takebayashi N, Barker MS, Mayrose I, Greenspoon PB, Rieseberg
LH: The frequency of polyploid speciation in vascular plants. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:13875-13879.
99. Slatkin M: Linkage disequilibrium--understanding the evolutionary
past and mapping the medical future. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:477-485.
100. Lukhtanov VE, Shapoval NA: Detection of cryptic species in sympatry
using population analysis of unlinked genetic markers: a study of the
Agrodiaetus kendevani species complex. Doklady Biol Sci 2008,
423:432-436.
101. Leigh J, Susko E, Baumgartner M, Roger A: Testing congruence in
phylogenomic analysis. Syst Biol 2008, 57:104-115.
102. Maddison WP, Maddison DR: Mesquite: a modular system for
evolutionary analysis Version 2.6. 2009 [http://mesquiteproject.org].
103. La Salle J, Wheeler Q, Jackway P, Winterton S, Hobern D, Lovell D:
Accelerating taxonomic discovery through automated character
extraction. Zootaxa 2009, 2217:43-55.
104. Butlin RK: Population genomics and speciation. Genetica 2008,
138:409-418.
105. Haussler D, O'Brien SJ, Ryder OA, Barker FK, Clamp M, Crawford AJ, Hanner
R, Hanotte OH, Johnson W, McGuire J, Miller W, Murphy RW, Murphy WJ,
Sheldon FH, Sinervo B, Venkatesh B, Wiley EO, Allendorf FW, Baker S,
Bernardi G, Brenner S, Cracraft J, Diekhans M, Edwards S, Estes J, Gaubert P,
Graphodatsky A, Marshall Graves JA, Green ED, Hebert P, Helgen KM,
Kessing B, Kingsley DM, Lewin HA, Luikart G, Martelli P, Nguyen N, Orti G,
Pike BL, Rawson DM, Schuster SC, Seuánez HN, Shaffer HB, Springer MS,
Stuart JM, Teeling E, Vrijenhoek RC, Ward RD, Wayne R, Williams TM, Wolfe
ND, Zhang Y-P: A proposal to obtain whole-genome sequence for 10
000 vertebrate species. Journal of Heredity 2009, 100:659-674.
doi: 10.1186/1742-9994-7-16
Cite this article as: Padial et al., The integrative future of taxonomy Frontiers
in Zoology 2010, 7:16

</pre>
</body>
</html>
