<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-5-28.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Database

SUPFAM: A database of sequence superfamilies of protein domains
Shashi B Pandit1, Rana Bhadra1, VS Gowri1, S Balaji1, B Anand1,2,3 and
N Srinivasan*1
Address: 1Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, India, 2National Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute
of Fundamental Research, UAS-GKVK campus, Bangalore 560 065, India and 3Present address: Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering,
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Kanpur – 208 016, India
Email: Shashi B Pandit - shashi@mbu.iisc.ernet.in; Rana Bhadra - rana@mbu.iisc.ernet.in; VS Gowri - gowri@mbu.iisc.ernet.in;
S Balaji - sbalaji@mbu.iisc.ernet.in; B Anand - banand@iitk.ac.in; N Srinivasan* - ns@mbu.iisc.ernet.in
* Corresponding author

Published: 15 March 2004
BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:28

Received: 30 December 2003
Accepted: 15 March 2004

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/28
© 2004 Pandit et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: SUPFAM database is a compilation of superfamily relationships between protein
domain families of either known or unknown 3-D structure. In SUPFAM, sequence families from
Pfam and structural families from SCOP are associated, using profile matching, to result in sequence
superfamilies of known structure. Subsequently all-against-all family profile matches are made to
deduce a list of new potential superfamilies of yet unknown structure.
Description: The current version of SUPFAM (release 1.4) corresponds to significant
enhancements and major developments compared to the earlier and basic version. In the present
version we have used RPS-BLAST, which is robust and sensitive, for profile matching. The reliability
of connections between protein families is ensured better than before by use of benchmarked
criteria involving strict e-value cut-off and a minimal alignment length condition. An e-value based
indication of reliability of connections is now presented in the database. Web access to a RPSBLAST-based tool to associate a query sequence to one of the family profiles in SUPFAM is available
with the current release. In terms of the scientific content the present release of SUPFAM is
entirely reorganized with the use of 6190 Pfam families and 2317 structural families derived from
SCOP. Due to a steep increase in the number of sequence and structural families used in SUPFAM
the details of scientific content in the present release are almost entirely complementary to
previous basic version. Of the 2286 families, we could relate 245 Pfam families with apparently no
structural information to families of known 3-D structures, thus resulting in the identification of
new families in the existing superfamilies. Using the profiles of 3904 Pfam families of yet unknown
structure, an all-against-all comparison involving sequence-profile match resulted in clustering of 96
Pfam families into 39 new potential superfamilies.
Conclusion: SUPFAM presents many non-trivial superfamily relationships of sequence families
involved in a variety of functions and hence the information content is of interest to a wide scientific
community. The grouping of related proteins without a known structure in SUPFAM is useful in
identifying priority targets for structural genomics initiatives and in the assignment of putative
functions. Database URL: http://pauling.mbu.iisc.ernet.in/~supfam.

Page 1 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

Background
Divergent evolution of proteins gives rise to homologues
of similar three-dimensional (3-D) structure and, often,
similar biochemical function [1,2]. However, extent of
similarity in their amino acid sequences can be widely varying depending upon extent of divergent evolution [3]. A
group of homologous proteins with high sequence similarity (typically above about 30% of sequence identity) is
usually detectable easily from a large pool of sequences of
diverse proteins using common sequence search tools and
such proteins are suggested to form a family. However,
homologous proteins with poor sequence similarity (less
than about 25% of sequence identity), referred to as a
superfamily, are more difficult to identify from sequence
search methods [4]. Such remotely related homologues
are often detected after the 3-D structures of proteins concerned are determined using X-ray analysis or Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR).
Detection of remote homologues from sequence information alone, for the proteins without experimental structures, is a useful step in structural genomics initiatives.
Moreover, proposing a reliable relationship between two
proteins, one with known function and the other with
unknown function, may enable prediction of putative
function for the second protein if the functional residues
are conserved. If one of these two proteins has already an
experimental structure determined it could serve as a template for building 3-D structure of the remote homologue
of unknown experimental structure [5,6]. Clustering of
closely related and remotely related homologues with
none of the proteins in the cluster with a known structure
result in a new potential superfamily [7,8]. Such a collection of new potential superfamilies suggests priority targets for the structural genomics with a view to enhance the
coverage of structural knowledge of proteins and fold
space. Determination of experimental structure of at least
one member per new potential superfamily can be useful
in arriving at a framework structural model of all the
members in the superfamily.
The SUPFAM database [7], first set up a couple of years
ago, attempts to include sequence families of yet
unknown structure in a known superfamily of known
structures. It also groups sequence families, without a
detectable relationship with a family of known structure,
into new potential superfamilies. Both these steps are performed using sophisticated tools, which are capable of
matching a sequence with sequence profiles generated
from aligned sequences in protein families. An important
feature of SUPFAM is that every periodic revision of the
database results in many new non-trivial relationships
between protein families. This feature is particularly due
to the rapid growth in the sequence domain families apart
from increase in the number of known domain super-

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/28

families of known structure. Hence a visitor to SUPFAM
site would find every release of SUPFAM containing complementary and radically reorganised information compared to earlier releases.

Construction, content, enhancement and
improvements
Compared to the earlier basic release of SUPFAM [7] couple of years ago, SUPFAM 1.4 has been generated using
more improved sets of programs, more robust criteria for
identifying hits and using a much larger datasets of
sequence and structural families. A new web tool for profile matching is also introduced from SUPFAM 1.4. The
general steps and strategies employed in the development
of SUPFAM 1.4 are described in this section.
Databases
We have used the Pfam database [9,10] that consists of a
collection of large number of curated protein domain
families with sequences of homologues in each family
aligned accurately. In the current release of SUPFAM Pfam
version 10.0 consisting of 6190 sequence domain families
in the group of Pfam-A have been used. The protein
domain families of known structure have been used from
PALI database [11,12] that is derived largely from SCOP
[4]. Every family in PALI consists of homologues of
known X-ray or NMR structure and their amino acid
sequences are aligned on the basis of their 3-D structures.
The PALI release 2.2 used in the current version of SUPFAM contains 1029 multi-member protein domain families and 1288 orphans (single member families) with
more than 35000 structure-based alignments and more
than 1300 phylogenetic trees. The size of the sequence
and structural family databases used in the construction
of SUPFAM 1.4 is much higher than that used in the previous release.
Generation of position specific scoring matrices
RPS-BLAST searchable profiles or Position Specific Scoring Matrices (PSSMs) were generated using PSI-BLAST
[13] for every Pfam and PALI family. The Pfam family profiles were generated using PSI-BLAST by querying one of
the family members against its own family members, with
an additional input of multiple sequence alignment as
provided in Pfam. For PALI family profile generation, as a
first step PALI family sequences were integrated with
homologous sequences from corresponding Pfam families or Non-Redundant sequence Database (NRDB). In
the next step, profile is generated for every PALI family
using PSI-BLAST, by a querying reference sequence from
the PALI family against its own integrated structure
sequence database. A high quality of profile is ensured by
providing structure-based multiple sequence alignment as
an input to PSI-BLAST.

Page 2 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/28

Left: Approach to relating sequence-based families and structure-based families with grouping of sequence based families into
Figure 1
superfamilies
Left: Approach to relating sequence-based families and structure-based families with grouping of sequence based families into
superfamilies. Right: Grouping of sequence-based families of yet unknown structure into new potential superfamilies.

Relating protein families of unknown structure with
families of known structure
In the formation of SUPFAM database, the initial step
involves relating the sequence families from Pfam with
protein domain families of known structure from PALI
[14]. The sensitive profile matching method RPS-BLAST
available from NCBI has been used in querying for PALI
proteins in the Pfam PSSM database and in querying Pfam
proteins in the PALI PSSM database (see the left panel of
Figure 1). An e-value cutoff of 3 × 10-5 has been used to
relate families, on the basis of the information given in
the paper by Schaffer et al. [15] and using our benchmarking (B. Anand, N. Mhatre & N. Srinivasan, unpublished).
We have listed all the connections, which pass the e-value
cutoff of 10-4. Both these e-value cutoffs may be considered stringent although a few borderline cases of connections may exist with an e-value between 3 × 10-5 and 10-4.
We have imposed length of the alignment as a further constraint in order to increase the reliability of connections
made between protein families. The region of alignment
should be more than or equal to 40%, with respect to
query or profile lengths. The connections arrived at by the
slight relaxation of e-value cutoff are indicated by asterix
in the SUPFAM web site. We have also consulted the
curated information available in the Pfam flat files for the
connectivity with a protein of known structure. These
search conditions and criteria to detect hits are improved

enormously compared to the basic version of SUPFAM
released couple of years ago.
This exercise resulted in 2286 Pfam families with proposed relationship with a PALI/SCOP family. Interestingly 245 of these Pfam families, of yet unknown structure
according to curation available in Pfam files, could be
related to family of known structure. In an earlier version
of SUPFAM (release 1.2) there were 315 Pfam families
with no structural information documented in Pfam but
could be related to a PALI version. Subsequent to the
release of that version of SUPFAM, structures became
available for the members of 110 of these Pfam families.
Interestingly, the fold observed from the experimental
structures for the members in 106 of these Pfam families
matched with the predicted relationship derived earlier
with the PALI resulting in ~96% of prediction accuracy (S.
Namboori, N. Srinivasan, S.B. Pandit, manuscript communicated). The remaining 4 cases of wrong prediction
corresponded often to the short alignments between the
query and PSSM. In the current version of SUPFAM we
have made the domain definition more robust by basing
it more on structural domains in PALI rather than the
sequence domains. Thus, it is expected to further increase
the reliability of the associations between families.

Page 3 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

Clustering of related protein families of unknown structure
to form new potential superfamilies
The next step in setting up SUPFAM involves clustering of
protein families of yet unknown structure. There are 3904
Pfam families with no detectable relationship with a structural family in PALI. Sequences from each of these Pfam
families have been queried in a database of PSSMs of all
these Pfam families using RPS-BLAST (see the right panel
of Figure 1). The same e-value cutoff of 3 × 10-5 has been
used in this step in order to relate families as well. However additional hits obtained by using the e-value cut-off
of 10-4 are shown marked by an asterix.

This step clustered 96 of the 3904 Pfam families into 39
new potential superfamilies. It is expected that members
of all the families in each new potential superfamily
would share the same fold and might have gross similarity
in their functional properties.

Utility and discussion
The web interface of SUPFAM has search option for key
words in the database and also profile searching against
PALI and Pfam family profiles as described in Pandit et al
[7]. Links to pages which list related sequence and structural families and new potential superfamilies are also
provided. A separate link of Pfam families of yet unknown
structure that are related to structural family is provided.
From the current release of SUPFAM a new web-based
tool is provided, which employs RPS-BLAST, in associating a query sequence with one of the protein domain families in SUPFAM. In the future updates it is envisaged that
SUPFAM would integrate other sequence family databases, in addition to Pfam. The database of protein
domains is growing rapidly as a result of genome sequencing projects. The SUPFAM is updated regularly to keep
abreast with the growing number of known protein
sequences. However, every release of SUPFAM database is
complete reorganization of superfamilies, hence, the new
information present in each release has insignificant overlap with the previous release.
There are several putative relationships proposed in the
current release of SUPFAM between Pfam family, without
structural information, and a structural family in PALI.
For example, two Pfam domain families of unknown
function, DUF227 and DUF954 are related to eukaryotic
protein kinase-like superfamily in SCOP. Arabidopsis protein AIG1 which is suggested to be involved in plant resistance to bacteria in the Pfam database could be related to
the PALI family of G-proteins which contains a variety of
GTPases such as Ras, ARF and elongation factors.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/28

to HemS family which is a Haemin-degrading family.
Among the various proposed interesting relationships the
families of sarcosine oxidase, γ-subunit and aminomethyl
transferase are suggested to be related.
The clustering of protein families of unknown function
into new potential superfamilies would help in prioritizing the proteins for structural determination. The 96 families that are clustered into 39 new potential superfamilies
consist of 14,595 members. The experimental determination of the structure of one representative member in each
superfamily would result in 39 structures that can serve as
framework models for 14,595 protein members. Hence,
these new potential superfamily could form the priority
target for structural genomics.

Conclusion
The association of sequence families into superfamilies
using 3-D structures enriches the sequence information
within superfamilies. Such connections also enable the
prediction of structures and functions of less well studied
sequence families. Proposition of many new potential
superfamily of proteins enables arriving at clues for the
functions of constituent families within superfamilies.
Hint for the functions of domains of yet unknown function is expected to be particularly useful. Further more, the
list of new potential superfamilies suggest priority targets
for structural genomics projects. For example, determination of the structure of a representative from each of the
highly populated new potential superfamilies may be priority projects as these structures are expected to serve as
templates for a large numbers of proteins.
With growing numbers of known 3-D structures of proteins many sequence families are being moved, in a rapid
pace, to the category of structural families. Due to unprecedented growth in the sizes of the sequence databases, as
genome sequencing projects progress, the size of sequence
families are also growing rapidly. Due to rapid and constant enhancements in the size of structural and sequence
families every release of SUPFAM is a complete reorganization of data. The list of sequence families apparently
with no structural information, but could be related to
known structures, and the list of new potential superfamilies have very little in common with the earlier release
of SUPFAM.

Availability and requirements
SUPFAM is publicly accessible without any restriction at
the URL: http://pauling.mbu.iisc.ernet.in/~supfam.

List of abbreviations
The association of domain of unknown function (DUF)
with a family of known functional property suggests a clue
for the function of DUF. For example DUF1008 is related

SCOP– Structural Classification Of Proteins. PALI– Phylogeny and Alignment of homologous protein structures.
PSI-BLAST– Position Specific Iterative Basic Local Align-

Page 4 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

ment Search Tool. PSSM– Position Specific Scoring
Matrix. RPS-BLAST– Reversed Positions Specific BLAST.
NCBI– National center of Biotechnology and Information. NRDB– Non-redundant database.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/28

of PSI-BLAST-constructed position-specific score matrices.
Bioinformatics 1999, 15:1000-1011.

Authors' contributions
S.B.P was involved in database development with R.B.
who was involved in relating Pfam families. V.S.G, B.A
and S.B were involved in providing the structure-based
alignment of protein structures from PALI. NS conceived
the idea and design of the database.

Acknowledgements
S.B.P. is supported by a fellowship from Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR), New Delhi. R.B. is supported by the NMITLI project
sponsored by CSIR. S.B. is supported by CSIR and the Wellcome Trust,
London. B.A. is supported by the Wellcome Trust. This research is supported by the award of International Senior Fellowship in Biomedical Sciences to N.S from the Wellcome Trust, London, a computational genomics
project sponsored by the Department of Biotechnology, New Delhi and a
NMITLI project supported by CSIR.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

14.
15.

Chothia C, Lesk AM: The relation between the divergence of
sequence and structure in proteins. EMBO J 1986, 5:823-826.
Chothia C, Gerstein M: Protein evolution. How far can
sequences diverge? Nature 1997, 385:579-581.
Doolittle RF: Similar amino acid sequences: chance or common ancestry? Science 1981, 214:149-159.
Murzin AG, Brenner SE, Hubbard T, Chothia C: SCOP: a structural
classification of proteins database for the investigation of
sequences and structures. J Mol Biol 1995, 247:536-540.
Johnson MS, Srinivasan N, Sowdhamini R, Blundell TL: Knowledgebased protein modeling. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 1994, 29:1-68.
Sanchez R, Sali A: ModBase: a database of comparative protein
structure models. Bioinformatics 1999, 15:1060-1061.
Pandit SB, Gosar D, Abhiman S, Sujatha S, Dixit SS, Mhatre NS, Sowdhamini R, Srinivasan N: SUPFAM – a database of potential protein superfamily relationships derived by comparing
sequence-based and structure-based families: implications
for structural genomics and function annotation in genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:289-293.
Aloy P, Oliva B, Querol E, Aviles FX, Russell RB: Structural similarity to link sequence space: new potential superfamilies
and implications for structural genomics. Protein Sci 2002,
11:1101-1116.
Sonnhammer EL, Eddy SR, Durbin R: Pfam: a comprehensive
database of protein domain families based on seed
alignments. Proteins 1997, 28:405-420.
Bateman A, Birney E, Cerruti L, Durbin R, Etwiller L, Eddy SR, Griffiths-Jones S, Howe KL, Marshall M, Sonnhammer EL: The Pfam
protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:276-280.
Balaji S, Sujatha S, Kumar SSC, Srinivasan N: PALI: A database of
Phylogeny and ALIgnment of homologous protein
structures. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:61-65.
Gowri VS, Pandit SB, Karthik PS, Srinivasan N, Balaji S: Integration
of related sequences with protein three-dimensional structural families in an updated version of PALI database. Nucleic
Acids Res 2003, 31:486-488.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang JH, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation
of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:3389-3402.
Elofsson A, Sonnhammer ELL: A comparison of sequence and
structure of protein domain families as a basis for structural
genomics. Bioinformatics 1999, 15:480-500.
Schaffer AA, Wolf YI, Ponting CP, Koonin EV, Aravind L, Altschul SF:
IMPALA: matching a protein sequence against a collection

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 5 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
