<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Forced unbinding of GPR17 ligands from wild type and R255I mutant receptor models through a computational approach</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Structural Biology 2010 10:8. doi:10.1186/1472-6807-10-8"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Chiara Parravicini"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Forced unbinding of GPR17 ligands from wild
type and R255I mutant receptor models through
a computational approach
Chiara Parravicini1, Maria P Abbracchio1*, Piercarlo Fantucci2,3, Graziella Ranghino3

Abstract
Background: GPR17 is a hybrid G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) activated by two unrelated ligand families,
extracellular nucleotides and cysteinyl-leukotrienes (cysteinyl-LTs), and involved in brain damage and repair. Its
exploitment as a target for novel neuro-reparative strategies depends on the elucidation of the molecular
determinants driving binding of purinergic and leukotrienic ligands. Here, we applied docking and molecular
dynamics simulations (MD) to analyse the binding and the forced unbinding of two GPR17 ligands (the
endogenous purinergic agonist UDP and the leukotriene receptor antagonist pranlukast from both the wild-type
(WT) receptor and a mutant model, where a basic residue hypothesized to be crucial for nucleotide binding had
been mutated (R255I) to Ile.
Results: MD suggested that GPR17 nucleotide binding pocket is enclosed between the helical bundle and
extracellular loop (EL) 2. The driving interaction involves R255 and the UDP phosphate moiety. To support this
hypothesis, steered MD experiments showed that the energy required to unbind UDP is higher for the WT
receptor than for R255I. Three potential binding sites for pranlukast where instead found and analysed. In one of
its preferential docking conformations, pranlukast tetrazole group is close to R255 and phenyl rings are placed into
a subpocket highly conserved among GPCRs. Pulling forces developed to break polar and aromatic interactions of
pranlukast were comparable. No differences between the WT receptor and the R255I receptor were found for the
unbinding of pranlukast.
Conclusions: These data thus suggest that, in contrast to which has been hypothesized for nucleotides, the lack of
the R255 residue doesn’t affect the binding of pranlukast a crucial role for R255 in binding of nucleotides to
GPR17. Aromatic interactions are instead likely to play a predominant role in the recognition of pranlukast,
suggesting that two different binding subsites are present on GPR17.

Background
Extracellular adenine and uracil nucleotides (e.g., ATP,
ADP, UTP, UDP and sugar nucleotides) are signaling
molecules involved in several patho physiological phenomena, from short-term signaling (neurotransmission,
mechanosensory transduction, secretion and vasodilatation) to long-term functions (proliferation, differentiation, survival and death, development and post-injury
repair) [1]. Conversely, cysteinyl-leukotrienes (cysteinylLTs) are inflammatory lipid mediators derived from arachidonic acid through the 5-lypoxigenase (5-LO)
* Correspondence: mariapia.abbracchio@unimi.it
1
Department of Pharmacological Sciences, University of Milano, via Balzaretti
9, 20133, Milano, Italy

pathway, and are implicated in bronchial asthma, stroke
and cardiovascular diseases [2]. Despite the fact that
nucleotides and cysteinyl-LTs originate from totally
independent metabolic pathways, several data suggest
important functional interactions between two families
of signaling molecules and their receptors. To date,
eight distinct nucleotide G-protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs), the P2Y receptors have been identified
(P2Y1;2;4;6;11;12;13;14) and classified in two distinct phylogenetic subgroups: the first subgroup includes the
P2Y1;2;4;6;11 subtypes, whereas P2Y12, P2Y13 and P2Y14
belong to the second subgroup [3]. Only two cysteinylLTs responding GPCRs (the CysLT1 and CysLT2 receptors) are instead currently recognized. However, certain

© 2010 Parravicini et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

reported actions of cysteinyl-LTs are not readily
explained by interaction with either CysLT1 or CysLT2,
raising the possibility of the existence of additional
CysLT receptors [4-7]. There exists a functional crosstalk between the P2Y and CysLT receptor families, since
both nucleotides and cysteinyl-LTs massively accumulate at sites of inflammation and both types of receptors
are co-expressed in the same peripheral inflammatory
cells. This evidence shows a cross-regulated response
typical of the chemoattractant systems [8]. Along this
line, in rat brain microglial cells, both nucleotides and
cysteinyl-LTs, that are co-released as a consequence of
the activation of P2Y1 and CysLT receptors, contribute
to neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration [9].
Nucleotides can also regulate, via heterologous desensitization, CysLT1 receptor activity [8] and, in parallel,
the CysLT1 receptor antagonists pranlukast and montelukast can functionally influence P2Y receptor signaling
pathways in human monocyte/macrophage-like cells
[10]. In addition, P2Y12 was found to be promiscuously
activated by both nucleotides and LTE4 [11], further
underlying the close relationship between the two
families. Both P2Y and CysLT receptors share the typical seven-transmembrane spanning topology of GPCRs.
Besides their heterogeneity in function and tissue distribution, P2Y and CysLT receptors share a phylogenetic
relationship, given that both families, together with
GPR17 and other related receptors, belong to the so
called “purine receptor cluster” of GPCRs [12]. This
cluster also includes several “orphan” receptors responding to yet-unidentified endogenous ligands. Among
these, the orphan receptor GPR17 appeared to us as a
possible common ancestral progenitor that originated
the two above receptor families. On this basis, we
recently cloned the human, rat and mouse GPR17 and
demonstrated that they all respond to both nucleotides
and cysteinyl-LTs [13,14].
Thus, GPR17 is a hybrid receptor linking the P2Y and
the CysLT receptor families. Besides endogenous ligands,
synthetic compounds typical of the two above receptor
families are also active at GPR17. Specifically, it has been
shown that GPR17 can be activated in vitro by uracil
nucleotides (UDP and UDP-sugars) and by cysteinyl-LTs
(LTC 4 , LTD 4 and LTE 4 ). GPR17 activation can be
contrasted by treatment with two well known P2Y
antagonists, MRS2179 (2’-deoxy-N6-methyladenosine
3’,5’-biphosphate) and cangrelor (N(6)-(2-methylthioethyl)-2-(3,3,3-trifluoropropylthio)-b, g-dichloromethylene-ATP), and also by the already marketed
CysLT receptor antagonists pranlukast (N-[4-oxo-2-(2Htetrazol-5-yl)
chromen-7-yl]-4-(4-phenylbutoxy)
benzamide) and montelukast (2-[1-[[(1R)-1-[3-[2-(7chloroquinolin-2-yl) ethenyl] phenyl]-3-[2-(2-hydroxypropan-2-yl) phenyl] propyl] sulfanylmethyl]cyclopropyl]

Page 2 of 18

acetic acid). Furthermore, in a model of focal rodent
brain ischemia, its in vivo early knock down with either
pharmacological or specific antisense strategies, reduces
the progression of cerebral ischemic damage, highlighting
GPR17 as novel therapeutic target for ischemia [13].
Since at present this disease still remains without a specific pharmacological treatment, molecules active as
GPR17 inhibitors may represent a new class of promising
anti-ischemic agents. On the other hand, more recent
data has shown that GPR17 indeed has a dual and spatiotemporal-dependent role in the development and postinjury repair of damage in the brain and in spinal cord.
While at very early times after injury, GPR17 seems to
mediate cell death, at later stages, GPR17 may even participate to repair mechanisms [14,15]. Thus, GPR17 may
be proposed as a “sensor” of damage that is activated by
the specific signaling molecules (uracil nucleotides and
cysteinyl-LTs) that are released at high levels in the
lesioned area, and as a new target for amyelinating postinjury responses. These data further highlight the attractivity of this receptor as a new target for drug discovery.
Recently, results obtained in recombinant systems,
have been proposed GPR17 as a constitutive ligandindependent negative regulator of the CysLT1 receptor,
that modulates CysLT1-mediated functions at the cell
membrane [16]. Although this interesting hypothesis
will have to be confirmed in vivo, it may be hypothesized that GPR17 may function as both a ligand-dependent and independent receptor depending upon specific
patho-physiological conditions. Definitely, to fully
understand the therapeutic potential of GPR17, specific
ligands that do not interfere with the other P2Y or
CysLT receptors are needed.
Along this line, as a first step to the design of selective
ligands, we have recently provided a computational
study of GPR17, providing a macroscopic view of a
three-dimensional (3D) model of GPR17 complexed
with three representative purinergic compounds: the
endogenous agonist UDP and the synthetic antagonists
MRS2179 and cangrelor [17]. To do so, we used a raw
homology model of GPR17, based on the X-ray crystallographic 3D structure of bovine rhodopsin (bRh) 1U19,
deposited at RCSB Protein Data Bank http://www.pdb.
org, the best high-resolution 3D template for a mammalian GPCRs that was then available [18]. In fact, for
many years, the crystalline structure of the inactive
receptor form of bRh has been widely used as a template, even for significantly distant receptors, on the
basis of the commonly accepted assumption that, in
evolutionary related proteins, the 3D structure is more
conserved than the amino acid sequence. Fortunately,
within the GPCRs superfamily, one of the essential
determinant for GPCRs activity concerns the 7TM
architecture that is well conserved between all GPCRs.

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

Rhodopsin-based homology models of GPCRs and the
subsequent structure-based drug discovery approach are
widely accepted, since experimental data have indeed
confirmed computational predictions for many GPCR
models [19-21]. Recently, thanks to protein engineering,
the modified structures of two human GPCRs have been
solved, providing new templates suitable for homology
modeling: the adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR) bound to
the high-affinity antagonist ZM241385 (PDB code
3EML) [22]; the b2-adrenergic receptor-Fab (b2AR-Fab)
(PDB code 2R4R) [23] and the b2-adrenergic receptorT4 (b2AR-T4) (PDB code 2RH1) [24,25], both bound to
their inverse agonist carazolol; the mutated b2-adrenergic receptor-(E122W)-T4 (b2AR(E122W)-T4) (PDB code
3D4S) bound to cholesterol and its partial inverse agonist timolol [26]. In addition, the crystal structure of the
turkey b1-adrenergic receptor (b1AR, PDB code 2VT4),
in complex with the high-affinity antagonist cyanopindolol, has been also solved [27], raising the issue of how a
range of compounds with very different affinity values
can bind to such closely related receptor subtypes.
Finally, also the squid Rh (PDB code 2Z73) [28] has
been determined. Analysis of the newly published crystal
structures of the squid Rh, the human b2AR, the turkey
b1AR and the A2AR further confirm that the TM7 core
is conserved among the entire GPCR superfamily.
Nevertheless, structural differences have been found
even within the TM bundle. Comparison between bRh
and b2AR structures shows that the binding site of the
ligand carazolol on b2AR is very similar to that of retinal
on rhodopsin, despite the fact that carazolol is a diffusible ligand rather than a covalently-bound ligand like retinal. In contrast to the b-adrenergic ligands and retinal,
the A2AR antagonist ZM241385, exhibits a significantly
different orientation within the TM bundle. Interestingly, the bound A 2A R ligand, while interacting with
helices, gets in contact also with EL2 and EL3. The publication of such new structures allows a very detailed
assessment on the reliability of models based only on
ground state the bRh: this is a unique GPCR, because of
its light-induced activation mechanism driven by the
cis/trans isomerization of its covalently-bound ligand.
However, its structure has been solved with high resolution, in different crystallization environment, in different
states and both with different methodologies (NMR and
X-ray). In fact, a detailed analysis of the structure differences connected to crystal packing and binding states
reveals that, in spite of the close similarity to the bRh
general architecture, mutual rearrangement of the
helices involved in the activation mechanism are
observed. Recently, also the crystal structure of the
native retinal-free GPCR bovine opsin (bOps) has been
solved [29]: the breakage of the so-called ionic lock
restraints the helical pack in the resting structure and

Page 3 of 18

allows a rotation along the axes of the helical bundle
[30]. In our previous study, we utilized the rhodopsinbased model of GPR17, with or without ligands, and
embedded in fully hydrated phospholipid bilayer. This
model was then refined by means of docking combined
with molecular mechanics (MM) and molecular
dynamics techniques (MD). Our MD simulations on the
rhodopsin-based model of GPR17 suggested that the
primary nucleotide binding pocket in GPR17 is contained in an accessible crevice enclosed between transmembrane (TM) helices (mainly TM3, TM5, TM6 and
TM7) and extracellular loop (EL) 2, in general agreement with the binding site proposed for small molecules
to other class A rhodopsin-like GPCRs and for nucleotides to already known P2Y receptors [31-33]. Based on
our computational data, we also hypothesized that at
the extracellular interface of the receptor, the N-terminus (Nt) region and EL2 and EL3 form accessory binding surfaces that could address ligands to the deeper
main binding pocket. We finally proposed that the driving force for binding of nucleotides to GPR17 was the
electrostatic interaction between the phosphate groups
of incoming ligand and the basic arginine residue at
position 6.55 (See Ballesteros and Weinstein’s numbering system for residues index [34]) that was a recurrent
target for all the nucleotidic ligands docked in our
GPR17 model. This residue belongs to the conserved
motif H-X-X-R/K typical of all the related P2Y and
CysLT receptors; this motif is commonly believed to be
a key extracellular recognition for nucleotides since
1995, when the first hypothesis on nucleotides binding
mode on P2Y1 was formulated [35-40]. The overall configuration of the identified binding pocket shares common features with the ones described for the P2Y
receptors [33,41], albeit showing some interesting
differences.
For the P2Y receptors, it’s today commonly accepted
that the driving force attracting nucleotides is provided
by a triplet of conserved positively charged residues,
buried in the TM bundle of the receptors: these are
believed to interact with the negative charges of the
phosphate groups of nucleotides [35-37]. For the P2Y1subgroup, residues R3.29 (TM3), R/K6.55 (TM6) and
R7.39 (TM7) have been proposed to be critical for
nucleotide recognition. Between the three residues, only
6.55 is conserved as a basic one among all the P2Y
receptor family members, and belongs to H-X-X-R/K
motif cited above, whereas R3.29 and R7.39 are only
typical of the P2Y1-subgroup. The last residue belongs
to the Y-Q/K-X-X-R motif in TM7 and is shared by
P2Y1, P2Y2, P2Y4, P2Y6 and P2Y11 [3,42]. In the P2Y12subgroup, it was proposed that two lysines, one located
in EL2 (immediately before the cysteine residue involved
in the formation of the conserved disulphide bridge),

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

and the other one located in TM7 at position 7.35
(belonging to the K-E-X-X-L motif conserved among
P2Y12, P2Y13, and P2Y14), can account for cationic coordination of the phosphate moiety instead of residues
R3.29 and R7.39. Furthermore, the residue close to the
conserved cysteine in EL2 appears to be involved in
interactions with the phosphates also for the the P2Y1like receptors [33,41]. More recently, a variant of this
model has been proposed for P2Y14, where two of the
basic residues (6.55 and 7.35) are instead assumed to
bind the hexose moiety of sugar-nucleotides [43]. Interestingly, multiple sequence alignment of GPR17 with
P2Y family members showed that GPR17 lacks the basic
triplet and the residue 6.55 binding the phosphates is
the only one conserved in the putative pocket [17],
despite the many positively charged amino acids typical
of this peculiar receptor. We also found that the binding
pocket appears to be shared by both nucleotide agonists
and antagonists, even if the modality of binding differs
in some details, highlighting a heterogeneity in the binding pocket recently arisen also within the P2Y receptor
family.
Unfortunately, no definitive 3D model of any CysLT
receptors complexed with their ligands has been proposed yet; so, a convincing hypothesis on the basis of
recognition is currently unavailable, despite several antileukotriene agents are already available in the market
and others have already successfully started their track
in drug development trials. In this respect, the CysLT1
receptor antagonist zafirlukast (Accolate) was the first
CysLT receptor antagonist to be marketed in the USA;
montelukast (Singulair) has been introduced to market
since 1998 in the treatment of asthma and allergic rhinitis [44]; pranlukast is still waiting for a global extension
of its commercialization and it is currently available
only in Japan [7,45,46].
In the present paper, to get more insight into the role
of residues suggested to be crucial for the recognition
mechanism by our previous computational data, the
basic residue R6.55 of our GPR17 wild-type (WT) receptor model has been mutated to isoleucine, giving a
mutant (R255I) receptor model of GPR17. The effects of
this mutation on recognition nucleotides have been studied in silico, by simulating the “unbinding processes” of
two docked ligands (the endogenous purinergic agonist
the UDP and the leukotriene receptor antagonist pranlukast) from both the wild-type (WT) and the mutant
(R255I) receptor model of GPR17 using steered MD
(SMD) simulations. The comparison between the two
simulations clearly shows that the energy required to
force the unbinding of UDP from the WT receptor
model was significantly higher than the work spent for
the unbinding of the ligand from the R255I receptor.
These data suggest that the same target residue (R255)

Page 4 of 18

could play a different role in either the recognition of
distinct classes of ligands or in the modulation of receptor’s activity when activated by ligands. Although the in
silico hypothesis presented here still has to be confirmed
experimentally, it represents an interesting starting point
for in vitro validation. For example, according to our
computational hypothesis, the actual involvement of the
residue R6.55 in recognition of nucleotide phosphates
has been also confirmed by experimental data recently
produced by our group. Using a frontal affinity chromatographic-based method coupled to a mass spectrometry
detection (FAC-MS), we evaluated the elution time of
UDP and other nucleotide-derivative ligands on two
chromatographic columns where cell membrane expressing both the native and the mutated form of GPR17
were entrapped on the surface of the stationary phase.
For the natural agonist UDP, we found that the retention time on the WT receptor-containing column was
higher than for the mutate receptor-containing column,
suggesting that the lack of R255 may reduce the affinity
for this ligand (unpublished data). In the present paper,
we report the results obtained by applying the same
computational approach to simulate the forced unbinding of the leukotriene receptor antagonist pranlukast, in
order to investigate if the mutation affects the binding
of pranlukast and if the putative target R255 is shared
by the two molecules. At present, the study of the
unbinding processes at atomic scale is available with the
use of atomic force microscopy (AFM) [47], where
external forces are applied to molecules to probe their
mechanical resistance. The virtual mimics of such
experiments are provided by steered MD (SMD) and
constant force MD (CFMD), that mimic the so-called
force-ramp and the force-clamp methods used in AFM,
respectively. In the force-ramp method the mechanical
resistance of biomolecules is measured applying a timedependent force [48], while in the force-clamp methods
a constant force is used [49]. With the use of such
external forces, the MD path becomes irreversible and
gives access to processes involving non-covalent bonds
that cannot be achieved in the same time scale with the
conventional MD simulations [50]. Based on SMD/
CFMD, several reliable predictions of binding/unbinding
[51-58] and folding/unfolding [59-65] processes have
been obtained for various biological complexes. In
unbinding experiments, the analysis of the interactions
of dissociating ligands and the evolution of applied
forces and ligand positions provide qualitative information about the irreversible work spent in the unbinding
process: in this way, insights in structural features of
receptor-ligand complexes and possible binding pathways are gained. However, our propose here was not to
use SMD to define the exact ligand unbinding pathway/
mechanisms, an issue that would require a more

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

Page 5 of 18

accurate analysis, but, as already mentioned before, to
elucidate the role of R255 as possible target for GPR17
ligands. In fact, the simulations of the unbinding of
ligands, such as UDP and pranlukast, from GPR17
receptor models presented here can also provide some
attractive hypothesis on the unknown recognition
mechanism and could thus be helpful to the planning of
experimental mutagenesis studies and ligand affinity
measurements.

Results and Discussion
Comparison between GPR17 and new templates

Our MD simulations study was performed on a bRhbased homology model of GPR17 [17], for consistency
with our previous study on GPR17, starting from a
highly refined structure of the receptor. Nevertheless,
recently, new GPCR structures have been solved and
become available for comparative modeling (see Introduction). However, between the sequences of the currently available GPCR structures, for GPR17 the best
alignment score was obtained with bRh (19.3 for bRh;
15.7 for human b2AR, 15.3 for turkey b1AR and 14.3 for
human A 2A R, Moe’s alignment tool) that indeed still
results as a good compromise for modeling GPR17
despite the lack on structural information on this receptor. To assure that the topology that we found for
GPR17 was not an artefact due to the template, and also
to assess if it was still reliable in view of the new GPCR
structures, we compared our model with the structure
of the human A2AR, the three structures of the human
b 2 AR and the structure of the turkey b 1 AR. Both the
structures of human A 2A R, human b 2 AR and turkey
b1AR showed the a-helical 7TM domain typical of the
GPCR receptor family. Superimposition of the C-a
atoms of the A 2A R, the b 2 AR-Fab, the b 2 AR-T4, the
b2AR(E122W)-T4 and the b1-AR to GPR17 and to bRh
is reported in Table 1. RMSD values obtained by rigidly
superimposing the three structures to the GPR17 model
vary from 1.955 to 2.867 Å, a range which is not significantly different from that obtained by superimposition
of the same structures to bRh.
Globally, the helical pack was highly conserved among all
the structures, and also the alignment of the a-helical
domains to the GPR17 bundle yielded a good fit, as shown
in Figure 1. In spite of the overall good fit among structures, there were some differences in the helical
Table 1 Alignment among GPR17 model and X-ray
templates of GPCRs
RMSD (Å) after alignment of a-helical carbon
3EML

2R4R

2RH1

3D4S

2VT4

GPR17

2.867

2.458

2.688

2.738

2.413

bRh

1.955

2.210

2.362

2.277

2.862

Figure 1 Superimposition of a-helical domains of the b2 ARFab, b2 AR-T4, b2AR(E122W)-T4 b1 AR and A2A R structures to
GPR17 model. Ribbon representation of the b2AR-Fab (2R4R), b2ART4 (2RH1), b2AR(E122W)-T4 (3D4S), b1AR (2VT4) and A2AR structures
after alignment of the a-helical domains to GPR17 model (in gray)
are reported in cyan, orange, green, magenta and yellow
respectively.

rearrangement concerning mainly TM1. In both b2AR and
b1AR structures, this domain exhibited a kink corresponding to a hydrophobic motif (L-I-V-L-A-I-V) encompassing
two helical turns that caused a marked outlying exposure
of the N-terminus end of the helix: this hasn’t been found
either in our GPR17 model or in bRh. Interestingly, all the
available b-AR structures reveal the presence of an unexpected a-helix domain on the EL2, that is indeed significantly different from the b-hairpin organization that has
been found for the EL2 of bRh, suggesting that this feature
could be a requirement for the binding of reversible
ligands, and that a different accessibility to the binding
pocket could exist among GPCRs [27]. Moreover, the
A2AR structure reveals substantial differences in the architecture of the extracellular domains with respect to the
other solved GPCR structures, as the EL2 is spatially constrained by two extra disulphide bridges that link this loop
to EL1. At this time, we don’t have any structural informations about the macroscopic arrangement of EL2 and of
the other extracellular loops in GPCRs but, being the TM
bundle so well conserved during evolution, it is reasonable
to assume that at least some of the keys for selectivity
reside in the extracellular region. This feature can also
account for the exceptional plasticity of GPCRs and their
capability to bind such a heterogeneous spectrum of
molecules.

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

Molecular dynamics of pranlukast

MD simulations of the WT model of GPR17 complexed
with the receptor antagonist pranlukast have been performed, starting from the best docking configurations of
pranlukast in its presumptive pockets. Docking studies,
combined with MD simulations, unveiled three different
potential binding sites for the antagonist pranlukast. In
these pockets, pranlukast assumed three different configurations (CI, CII and CIII); all of them showed comparable docking energy and appeared realistic as
hypothetical binding configurations to GPR17. Globally,
these multiple binding modes are not surprising,
because they account for the many degrees of freedom
of pranlukast. The conformational analysis of the molecules give rise to many stable conformations which are
very close in internal energy; hence the molecule can
accommodate into the binding pocket with different features. These findings also suggest that the receptor can
assume slightly different conformations and that the
activation process may occur in a multi-step mechanism, where important conformational changes sequentially take place. The overall pictures of the antagonistreceptor complexes extracted from the 6 ns of MD runs
are showed in Figure 2. We then computed the total
energy of the system and the root mean square deviation (RMSD) for the MD trajectory of each of the three
pranlukast configurations. Figure 3 and Figure 4a show,

Page 6 of 18

respectively, the energetic profile and the RMSD of C-a
of the three pranlukast-GPR17 complexes, as a function
of time. Both the total energy and the RMSD values of
the C-a atoms of the protein are very close in value
among the three different MD runs; moreover, after the
initial relaxation, all of them keep a stable trend, at least
for the last 2 ns of MD simulations, indicating that a
relative stability has been reached. Figure 4b shows the
RMSD values computed for pranlukast atoms in the
three different MD trajectories. While the CI and CII
conformations show a similar constant trend during the
simulations, at the beginning of the MD run the CIII
shows RMSD values higher than CI and CII. These
values decrease to values similar to these of other two
conformations only in the last ns of the simulation. Figure 5 shows the relative free energy difference (ΔG
Binding) computed during MD simulations with the
algorithm provided by the Gromacs analysis tool (see
Methods for more details). Plots report an estimation of
the relative ΔG Binding for the whole system, i.e. solvent-receptor-ligand. As the ligand is the same for all
the three simulations, the reported values contain a constant additional factor, i.e. the energy corresponding to
the free ligand in the solvent. Indeed, in our case, the
subtraction of the energetic components of the runs of
the free ligand in the solvent would not have affected
the ΔG values and hence the interpretation of the data

Figure 2 Macroscopic view of three best configurations of pranlukast docked to GPR17. The picture shows the three potential binding
poses (CI, CII and CIII) obtained for the antagonist pranlukast (stick representation) on GPR17 (cartoon representation), by means of docking
studies and 6 ns of molecular dynamic simulations. The chance of pranlukast to assume different and energetically comparable configurations, as
for CI, CII and CIII, it is probably due to the high flexibility of the molecule yielding its high conformational freedom.

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

Page 7 of 18

Figure 3 Comparison of the energetic profile of the MD simulations of the three docking configurations pranlukast. The plot shows the
total energy profile as a function of time of the entire system membrane-receptor-ligand system during 6 ns of MD simulations, for the three
different pranlukast configurations, here indicated as CI (in black), CII (in red) and CIII (in green).

Figure 4 Comparison of the RMSD of C-a and ligand atoms of the MD simulations of the three docking configurations of pranlukast.
The plot a shows the RMSD of C-a atoms of the protein as a function of time obtained for the MD runs of CI (in black), CII (in red) and CIII (in
green). In panel b, the same colour are used to indicate the RMSD versus time of ligand atoms obtained for CI, CII and CIII simulations.

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

Page 8 of 18

Figure 5 Free energy estimate of the binding of pranlukast. The free energy estimate of the binding of pranlukast for the 6 ns of MD
simulations performed for the three different docking configurations is reported in black for CI, in red for CII and in green for CIII.

reported here. While apparently the most favourite
trend was observed for CIII (lower ΔG Binding values)
we wanted to focus our analysis on the conformation
globally giving the most effective docking. Standard
deviation for the three ΔG Binding profiles gave values
of 21.28, 10.09 and 22.12 kJ/mol, for CI, CII and CIII,
respectively. We noticed that, while displaying a higher
energetic profile, pranlukast CII conformation was characterized by a more conserved and constant ΔG Binding
with respect to CI and CIII. Moreover, it also displayed
a smaller standard deviation: this was one of the reasons
why we decided to perform our analysis on this pranlukast conformation. The binding energy computed by
means of docking tools, both before and after the MD
simulations varies from -13.21 to -14.93 kJ/mol for the
three conformations; thus a selection based merely on
the docking energy criteria is a bit risky, due to such a
subtle difference. The previous observations, together
with other evidence regarding the detail of the pose (see
below), suggest that the binding mode is optimal and
pranlukast is steadily docked into the pocket. A detailed
view of the principal polar or hydrophobic interactions
formed between pranlukast groups and residues within
the pocket for CI CII and CIII is briefly presented
below.
In CI, pranlukast assumes the more extended conformation with respect to CII and CIII, where, conversely,
the molecules tended to fold into a closed conformation.
In fact, in CI, pranlukast spanned the helical bundle,
directing its tetrazole group toward the extracellular
space close to TM6, TM7 and EL2, and extending its
aromatic tail toward the inside region, parallel to the
elongation axes of the protein. The main polar

interactions formed by the tetrazole group within this
conformation involved residues Thr175, Asn176 (EL2),
Tyr251 (TM6) and Asn279 (TM7). The benzopyran and
the 4-oxo oxygen atoms of the chromone region were
hydrogen-bond (H-bond) acceptors for Tyr185 (EL2)
and Arg255 respectively, whereas the oxygen of the phenylbutoxy-benzamide chain was H-bond acceptor for
Arg87 (TM2). The phenyl chromone ring was surrounded by Tyr112 (TM3) and Tyr251 (TM6) at opposite sides, suggesting a possible formation of π - π
interactions in both directions. Finally, the terminal phenyl established a few hydrophobic interactions with residues belonging to TM2 and TM5, such as Val81, Ile84
and Met115. In CII, the tetrazole ring lied close to R255
and H252, at a distance compatible with the formation
of H-bonds. At present, we don’t have any clear-cut
information about the local protonation environment,
but it is reasonable to believe that pH conditions could
influence the acid-base equilibrium of the tetrazole
function, that could indeed manifest its deprotonated
state and express its acidic potential to form electrostatic interactions with the basic arginine and/or a protonated histidine. Other polar interactions concern the
keto group of the chromone, that could act as H-bond
acceptor for the hydroxyl groups of Tyr112 (TM3),
Tyr251 (TM6) and Tyr185 (EL2). Phenyl portions of
Tyr112 and Tyr251 can instead wrap the aromatic chromone portion of pranlukast forming typical π - π interactions. Aromatic portions of the residues Tyr116,
Tyr120, Phe201, Phe205, Phe244, Phe248 enclosed both
the terminal phenyl ring and the phenylbutoxy-benzamide group, giving rise to a big aromatic cluster, to
which also hydrophobic residues such as Val249 and

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

Ile119 take part. Moreover, cluster analysis applied to
the MD trajectory, revealed that pranlukast within the
CII configuration, despite its stability, underwent conformational changes and two different conformations
were observed. In these two conformations the terminal
phenyl group can alternatively share the π-electron
cloud either with the phenyl ring of the phenylbutoxybenzamide group, or with the phenyl ring of the Phe201
residue, forming an intramolecular or an intermolecular
stacking interaction, respectively.
Also in CIII, pranlukast lied in a bent conformation, in
which the chromone portion held a position approximately perpendicular to the protein z axis rather than
parallel as in CII. Residues Gln183 (EL2), Tyr116 (TM3)
Ser196 (TM5) and His252 (TM6) are potential H-bond
donors/acceptors for tetrazole, whereas the benzamide
carboxyl could form H-bonds with the backbone atoms
of TM3 (Asn114-Tyr116). Within the presumptive
pocket, aromatic and hydrophobic interactions were
likely to be less defined than in CI and CII. An intramolecular stacking interaction between the terminal and
the butoxy-benzamide phenyl was instead favoured,
since the aromatic tail of pranlukast remained in a
region of the protein close to the extracellular side and
to TM1 and TM2, where hydrophilic amino acids are
predominant.
In this respect, following the dynamical behavior of a
few water molecules derived from the X-ray structure of
bRh and present in our GPR17 model, it has been previously proposed that TM3 can divide the helical bundle
in two well distinct regions, each characterized by a different hydrophilic or hydrophobic profile [17]. TM4,
TM5 and TM6 form a first hydrophobic region where
highly conserved aromatic residues are predominant,
with the exception of the region immediately below the
interfaces with the extracellular space. Conversely, TM1,
TM2 and TM7 determine a second hydrophilic region
where all crystal water molecules tend to segregate,
weaving a network of polar interactions with the surrounding residues that extends from the upper to the
lower side of the protein: in this way a sort of “polar
channel” is formed throughout the protein [17]. It
would be interesting to clarify if this polar channel is an
artefact of the model, or, alternatively takes part to signal transduction, as it has been demonstrated for the
proton pump in bacteriorhodopsin (bR) [66,67], thus
bridging extracellular events with the intracellular actors
of the transduction machinary.
Unfortunately, we couldn’t submit our results to a
convincing critical comparison with previous independent data on other leukotriene-responding receptors,
because only few models of such receptors and/or
ligands have been developed so far, and the discussion
on their reliability is still open. For example, several

Page 9 of 18

attempts for constructing a pharmacophoric model of
CysLT1 receptor antagonists based on structure-activity
relationships (SAR) studies have been reported, but they
are not fully convincing, since none of them is in full
accordance with the agreed features of the receptor.
One of the difficulties in the development of a reliable
3D pharmacophoric model for CysLT1 antagonists
resides in the flexibility of most antagonists. Furthermore, despite the fact that several antagonists share
identical structural elements with the agonists (and a
common binding site for agonists and antagonists has
been proposed), the existence of structural overlapping
between different classes of CysLT receptor antagonists
and/or agonists is still debatable [68]. Based on quantitative SAR studies (QSAR), an hypothetical computational
model of CysLT1 pocket has been built using almost
rigid leukotriene antagonists as template; an arginine
residue is incorporated into the preliminary model as an
interaction site for the acidic moieties of antagonists
[68]. This revealed additional interactions between the
guanidine group and the nitrogen atoms of quinolinecontaining CysLT1 antagonists. In some cases, the arginine residue could eventually interact also with π-clouds
of phenyl moieties of CysLT1 antagonists. These data
suggested that a pharmacophoric model based on structural similarity of agonists and antagonists may not be
valid, and that antagonists do not necessarily bind to the
same site or in the same manner as agonists. In the
same model, the different alignment between pranlukast
and montelukast suggested the presence of an additional
pocket in the binding site for CysLT1 antagonists.
Recently, a model of LTE4 complexed with P2Y12 receptors has been proposed, on the basis of in silico screening data, combined with intracellular calcium
concentration measurements in CHO cells stably
expressing a P2Y 12 -G16a fusion protein [11]. It
has been demonstrated that, in addition to adenine
nucleotides, the P2Y12 receptor, can respond to 5-phosphoribosyl 1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) and LTE4. For the
LTE4-P2Y12 complex, it has been hypothesized that the
1-carboxylic acid and the 5-hydroxyl group of LTE 4
interacted with Glu263 of TM6; the amino acid portion
of cysteinyl group interacted with Leu284 of TM7, and
the carboxylic acid with Ser101 of TM3. In conclusion,
it is evident that additional advances need to be done in
order to understand the cysteinyl-LTs binding modalities and to find a unifying theory that reconciles all the
findings reported so far.
On this basis, we focused our subsequent experiments
on CII, where the tetrazole group of pranlukast is close
to the H-X-X-R motif, and the phenyl rings are placed
into a hydrophobic subpocket, that is highly conserved
among GPCRs: this is in fact believed to be a common
ancestral recognition target for this receptor superfamily

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

Page 10 of 18

[69]. Here, aromatic residues such as Phe201, Phe205,
Phe244 and a triplet of embedded tyrosines belonging to
TM3 held the aromatic portions of pranlukast. A
detailed view of CII is showed in Figure 6. Several other
reasons have led us to focus on this configuration. The
first reason is that, according to this potential model,
nucleotidic ligands and pranlukast would target the
same arginine residue, providing an interesting issue to
investigate. As cited before, an arginine residue has also
been proposed as a partner for tetrazole or acidic functions of CysLT antagonists by Zwaagstra and coworkers,
because of the favourable electrostatic potential of the
guanidine group, of the ability to form multiple Hbonds in addition to the electrostatic ones, and finally
because of the wide delocalization of the electronicclouds of the guanidinium functional group. Figure 7
shows the superimposition of UDP with the three different poses of pranlukast within the putative GPR17 binding pockets identified by means of our docking and MD
studies. Among the three docking poses obtained for
pranlukast, only configuration CII (in green) is likely to
share the target residue R255 with UDP (in red). In fact,
while in the CII conformation pranlukast accommodates
the tetrazole ring in proximity to the R255 residue,
close to the phosphate chain of UDP (see dotted lines
identifying the potential interactions), in the CI and CIII
Figure 7 Superimposition of UDP and pranlukast within the
putative GPR17 binding pockets. The picture shows the
superimposition of UDP (in red) with the three docking poses of
pranlukast (CI, in blue; CII, in green; CIII, in gray). For each
simulation, the correspondent target residue R255, here highlighted
with arrows, is reported in the same colors of either UDP or
pranlukast. The hypothetical interactions between R255 and ligands
are represented by white dotted lines.

Figure 6 Model of the pranlukast conformation CII. Model of
the complex formed by pranlukast and GPR17 after 6 ns of
conventional MD simulation. Pranlukast is displayed in orange
within the detailed binding pocket.

conformations, pranlukast is not likely to form interactions with the same residue. Moreover, the tetrazole
group of pranlukast, that is directly connected to a rigid
electron-rich system, recalls some structural elements of
the 2-tetra-phenyl-containing subclass of the so called
“priviledged structures”. The latter are indeed selected
scaffolds that are able to provide high-affinity ligands for
more than one type of receptors, targeting common
conserved motifs of the GPCR superfamily. Such structural motifs have been successfully used by many pharmaceutical companies to design “universal”
pharmacophores and to synthesize combinatorial
libraries, which are subsequently tested against novel
GPCR targets, in an attempt to find lead compounds. In
particular, for the 2-tetrazol-phenyl-containing subclass,
it has been proposed that the phenyl moiety can be
accommodated in a conserved aromatic TM subpocket
formed by Phe6.44, Phe6.48 and Trp5.47 (TM5 and

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

TM6), whereas the tetrazole ring lies close to residues
positioned at positions 5.43, 6.52 and 5.42 or 6.55 [69].
In our GPR17-pranlukast CII complex model we
observed a strong similarity with the interaction pattern
predicted for priviledged structures: we therefore performed SMD study on this pranlukast configuration
rather that on the other two. Finally, it is know that the
key residue in the binding and/or activation mechanism
of several GPCRs is a basic residue, frequently an arginine [70-75]: on this basis, we focused our attention on
the Arg255 present on GPR17 that thus became an
attractive target for the present study.
Steered MD simulations

SMD experiments on GPR17-WT model, were set starting from the last minimized frame of the MD trajectory
of the ligands UDP and pranlukast (CII). The residue
Arg255 was then mutated to isoleucine, choosing the
energetically favoured isoleucine rotamer among the
ones proposed by the sequence mutation tool of the
software Moe http://www.chemcomp.com. The R255I
mutant model of GPR17 was thus obtained. Preliminary
SMD experiments were performed choosing various
pulling rates and pulling force entities, in order to validate the method on the two receptors. SMD experiments were then performed in parallel for both the WT
and the R255I mutant model complexed with the
ligands; then the mechanical resistance offered by the
ligands through different unbinding pathways was measured. During the outgoing pathway from its pocket, the
resistance yielded by the ligands was registered: both
sterical factors and non-bonded interactions contributed
to the observed peaks of force in the pulling steps. Here,
for the interpretation of results, force peaks risen from
SMD trajectory have been scaled to energetic values
(kcal/mol) (see Methods for details). All the trial simulations provided comparable energetic profiles, although
the elapsed time between similar events is different, as it
depended on the pulling force/rate combinations. The
analysis for the pulling experiments was focused on the
results obtained using the following parameters: pulling

rate v = 0.004 nm/ps and constant force k = 2000 kJ/
mol nm2 for a total duration of 1000 ps: this has proved
to be the more equilibrate choice. As mentioned before,
the SMD experiments were performed for both the WT
and the R255I model on the CII pranlukast configuration. Here, the tetrazole group of pranlukast was close
to position 6.55 on TM6, and the phenyl rings were
embedded into the highly conserved aromatic/hydrophobic pocket enclosed among Phe201, Phe205, Phe244
and a triplet of tyrosines belonging to TM3. In Figure 8,
the SMD unbinding trajectory of pranlukast from the
WT and R255I receptors are compared. Panel a shows
the pulling energy plot, computed for the WT (in red)

Page 11 of 18

and the R255I (in black) receptor models, respectively.
No significant differences in terms of maximum value of
energy were found comparing the two energetic profile
for the two models; moreover, both energy profiles had
values significantly lower than the ones observed for the
unbinding of UDP from the WT receptor. This first
observation on the energy involved in the unbinding
suggests that the mutation of Arg255 did not definitely
affect the binding of pranlukast to its binding pocket.
The comparison of the SMD for the WT and the R255I
receptor model (in panel a and b the WT and the R255I
simulations are reported in red and black, respectively),
shows only one relevant energetic peak in the case of
R255I: this happened in correspondence with the transition of the ligand through the plug. This is highlighted
also by the plot reported in panel b, where the displacement of pranlukast in the two simulations is reported.
The pattern of the main interactions, computed as distances, between atoms of the pair of functional group
involved in the bonds formation as a function of time,
was similar for both the WT (panel c) and the R255I
(panel b) receptor models. For the WT simulations, the
interaction between Arg255 (in black) and tetrazole
group persisted up to 440 ps, when also the interaction
His252-tetrazole was broken (in magenta). Only a small
peak corresponding to this event was found in the pulling energy plot for the WT simulation, as further confirmation that probably the mutation of Arg255 doesn’t
significantly influence the binding of pranlukast to
GPR17. This suggests that the aromatic residues play
instead a key role in the recognition of pranlukast. Several π - π interactions involving phenyl function of
pranlukast and aromatic residues within the pocket were
indeed observed for both the WT and the R255I receptor model, as shown in panel c and d, respectively.
Among these, residues Tyr112, Tyr116, Tyr120, Tyr251,
Phe201, Phe205, Phe244 and Phe244 are likely to
accommodate pranlukast, thus representing a potential
binding pocket for the antagonist. Moreover, analysis of
the SMD trajectory for both WT and R255I receptors
showed that, despite the constraints imposed by the
conserved disulphide bond Cys104-Cys181 linking EL2
to TM3, during the traction of the ligands out of the
receptor EL2 moved toward the extracellular space
showing an hinge movement allowing the opening of
the crevice on the top of the receptor. Measurement of
the distance between the C-a atoms of the outmost residues in both the open and closed forms of EL2 yielded
to a maximum span of 6.6 Å, as shown in Figure 9. For
other GPCRs, this hinge movement, that highlights the
very high flexibility of EL2, has been already associated
with the activation mechanism, among which the 5HT4A the complement factor 5a receptor C5a, the M3
and the related P2Y6 receptors [76-79].

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

Page 12 of 18

Figure 8 Forced unbinding profile of pranlukast. Panel a and b compare the unbinding simulations of pranlukast from the WT (in red) and
the R255I (in black) receptor models: panel a shows the work developed to unbind pranlukast; panel b shows the displacement of the COM of
the ligand from its starting position. Panel c and d show the distances between groups of atoms of the ligand that form polar or hydrophobic
interactions with atoms of the WT or the R255I models, respectively.

Conclusions
Here, we present a computational study of a bRh-based
homology model of the human GPR17 receptor, that
extends our previous MD analysis of the purinergic
component of this receptor and highlights some intriguing aspects of its dualistic nature. While this work
was already in progress, the crystal structures of the first
human GPCRs ad of additional receptors form other
species have been published [22-28]. It was therefore

critical to verify that the basic structural assumptions
previously made by modeling GPR17 on bRh were still
true at the light of the new published structures. To do
so, we superimposed the C-a atoms of the A2A R, the
b2AR-Fab, the b2AR-T4, the b2AR(E122W)-T4 and the
b1-AR to GPR17 and to bRh.
The obtained RMSD values varied from 1.955 to 2.867
Å, a range which is not significantly different from that
obtained by superimposition of the same structures to

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

Figure 9 EL2 dynamical behaviour. Representative frames of the
open and closed form of EL2, extracted from the SMD simulation,
are reported in green and red, respectively. The picture shows a
detailed view of the hinge movement of the loop that exhibits an
extension up to 6.6 Å.

bRh. On this basis, we conclude that the results presented here have general value and actually give information on the putative 3D structure of this new receptor.
To further support the validity of our approach, in a
recent publication, Costanzi was able to reproduce the
docking pose of the ligand carazolol in two bRh-based
homology models of the b 2 AR. Comparison of the
homology models with the X-ray structures of the b2AR
elegantly demonstrated that realistic GPCR structures
can be obtained through accurate modeling based on the
bRh structure [80]. Furthermore, bRh-based homology
models for other related receptors, i.e. the P2Y2 receptor,
are still being proposed to exploit the most favourable
sequence similarity with this template bRh with respect
to the sequence of the newly solved GPCRs [81]. This
confirms that, in spite of their low sequence identity/
similarity, all GPCRs share a common scaffold and supports the role of this approach as a powerful tool for the
drug discovery process. Our data are also in line with
some of the conclusions made for other GPCRs on the
basis of these recently published crystal structures. For
example, it has been reported that, in contrast to the badrenergic ligands and retinal, the A 2A R antagonist
ZM241385 exhibits a significantly different orientation
within the TM bundle. Interestingly, the bound A 2A R
ligand, while interacting with helices, gets also in contact
with EL2 and EL3. In a similar way, the involvement of
EL2 in ligand binding to GPR17 was consistently predicted also by our SMD study, thus suggesting that this
may represent a common characteristic of some specific
GPCRs subgroups. This peculiarity adds diversity to the
class A family of GPCRs and may play an important role
in driving receptor selectivity.
Our specific challenge in the present study has been
to use MD and SMD experiments as guide to the design

Page 13 of 18

of in silico site-directed mutagenesis experiments that,
combined with ligand affinity measurements and hopefully further structural informations, could contribute to
the design of new selective therapeutics for targeting
GPR17. We focused our attention on Arg255, that has
been proposed to play a crucial role in binding of other
P2Y receptors to their nucleotide ligands [35-40], and
substituted this Arg with Ile (R255I). Our SMD simulations, showing that the energy required to unbind pranlukast UDP was not significantly different between the
WT receptor model and the mutated R255I, highlights
the role of the basic residue Arg255 in the binding to
nucleotides. No significant differences between the WT
and the mutated receptor were instead found for the
unbinding of the leukotrienic ligand pranlukast from
GPR17; the magnitude of the forces used was also equal
to the one used to unbind UDP from the R255I mutant
receptor. Furthermore, pulling forces developed to break
polar and aromatic interactions of pranlukast were comparable, suggesting that aromatic interactions are likely
to play a predominant role in the recognition of pranlukast. Compared with our previous data obtained simulating the forced unbinding of UDP, the magnitude of
the energy used to dissociate pranlukast form both the
WT and the R255I receptor models was also near to the
one used to unbind UDP from the R255I mutant receptor [82]. MD simulations thus suggest that the mutation
of Arg255, while influences the binding of nucleotides
to GPR17, does not affect the binding of pranlukast,
indicating that two different subsites are present on
GPR17 and that the intermolecular interaction networks
with the ligands are different between UDP and
pranlukast.
The existence of two different binding sites on this
receptor, regardless of the agonist and antagonist nature
of the ligands, is also consistent with the intrinsic difference in the chemical structure of the two classes of
unrelated purinergic and leukotrienic ligands. Moreover,
this hypothesis is also supported by the peculiar organization of the TM crevice, that, in GPR17, identifies two
well defined areas with different hydrophilic/phobic surface profiles.
At present, the mechanism of activation and inactivation of the receptor is unknown, but some general
hypothesis about the most probable target residues can
be formulated, based on the present computational data.
Regarding the putative nucleotide binding site, in GPR17,
in agreement with the other members of the P2Y receptor family, the same binding cavity seems to be shared by
purinergic agonists and antagonists, at least for small
ligands. As described in our previous work [17], the
antagonist cangrelor, due to its long aliphatic branches
that depart from the nucleobase, can reach regions of the
protein that are unaccessible to other nucleotide-derived

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

ligands. Concerning the leukotrienic component of
GPR17, the characterization of the binding site is even
more uncertain, due to the flexible nature of the ligands
for which the identification of the docked conformation
to the CysLT1 and CysLT2 receptors has not been yet
successful. Nevertheless, our data highlight the importance of the conserved aromatic/hydrophobic cluster for
the recognition of pranlukast. Further investigations are
needed to unveil whether this feature is shared by both
agonist and antagonists. Finally, the hypothesis that two
distinct binding sites, one for nucleotides and the other
one leukotrienes, are present on GPR17 is in accordance
with our previous experimental cross-antagonism data. It
has been indeed demonstrated that, in 1321N1 cells heterologously expressing hGPR17, blockade of the cysteinyl-LT binding site with the CysLT antagonists
montelukast or pranlukast did not abolish the response
to uracil derivatives. In a similar way, blockade of the
nucleotide binding site with either cangrelor or MRS2179
still permitted the response to LTD4. The computational
approach presented here, with the support of other
experimental strategies designed to confirm our hypothesis and to improve our computational model, could aid
to elucidate, step by step, the molecular mechanisms at
the basis of ligands-mediated GPR17 activation/
inactivation.
With the present study, we also aimed at getting some
hints on the overall mechanism of ligand recognition, i.
e. not only on the role of the single amino acid residues,
but also on the role played by the conformational rearrangement and mobility of protein domains, such as
helices and loops. In fact, loop regions are currently
deemed to be involved in the binding of large molecular
weight ligands (i.e., peptides), while their role in the
recognition of small molecules-responding GPCRs
remains largely unresolved. It has been proposed that
EL2 does not only provide a docking surface for the
recognition mechanism, but could also act as a flexible
“gatekeeper” in the binding of both allosteric and
orthosteric GPCR ligands [83]. In agreement with this
hypothesis, our SMD simulations unmasked the flexibility of EL2, that was not evident with conventional MD
simulations run in the same time scale. Globally, these
data advance our knowledge on the structure of the new
hybrid receptor GPR17 and will eventually contribute to
the design of “dual” ligands for this new target of high
therapeutic relevance.

Methods
Preparation of the model of the membrane-GPR17-ligand
system

A previously published rhodopsin-based homology
model of the human GPR17 receptor embedded in a
hydrated dipalmitoyl-phosphatidyl-choline (DPPC)

Page 14 of 18

bilayer and refined by means of MD was used as starting
point for both the conventional MD and the SMD studies [17]. Docking studies and MD simulations of pranlukast were indeed performed on the same stable 3D
structure of GPR17 coming from the 10 ns MD simulations and already used for the previous docking studies
of GPR17 ligands. Locally minimized structure of the
ligands docked into the membrane-receptor complex
subjected to conventional MD simulations, were used as
starting points for SMD experiments. The structure of
the GPR17-UDP complex was taken form the already
published model [17].
Molecular dynamics simulations

The structure of GPR17 extracted from the 10 ns of MD
simulation was submitted to a binding-cavity search
using the Sitefinder tool included in the Delos package.
Pranlukast was then docked into the suggested cavity
using the docking tool included in the AutoDock 3.0
package [84], applying the genetic algorithm procedure
to semiflexible docking module. AutoDock tools (ADT)
were used to prepare the ligand and protein. A grid box
with the dimensions 68 × 76 × 70 points for the x, y
and z axis was constructed with grid points separated by
0.375 Å. The the population size was set to 50 and the
rest of the parameters were taken as default according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Among the docking
configurations of proposed for pranlukast by AutoDock
the three best energy scoring poses were chosen for
further investigations by means of MD simulations.
Pranlukast docked in the three configurations, together
with the sidechains of the residues within 4.5 Å distance, was locally minimized, before starting MD run.
Ligands topology for the MD runs were obtained from
the automatic server PRODRG [85], using the standard
Gromacs forcefield. The systems membrane-receptorligand was prepared for the MD simulations using a
stepwise protocol. First, the systems were gradually
minimized via the steepest descent allowing the various
components to move individually with the following
order: solvent and lipids, sidechains, the whole systems.
The conjugate gradient method was then applied to
improve the energy content of the system. The three
ligand-receptor-membrane complexes were heated to
the simulation temperature of 310 K in 300 ps and the
three MD runs of 6 ns each were performed using the
general conditions defined for this study and described
in the “Computational details” subsection. The free
energy calculations for the ligand-receptor complexes
during MD were performed using a linear interaction
energy (LIE)-based algorithm, as implemented in the
MD software Gromacs. Using this method, the free
energy is computed as an estimation of the difference in
Gibbs free energy between two thermodynamic states of

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

the system: the free energy of macromolecule with
bound ligand in solution minus the free energy of the
macromolecule in solution plus the free ligand in solution at standard concentrations, all at the same temperature and pressure [86]. In our case, for the comparison
of MD simulations of pranlukast bound to GPR17, considering that our MD runs share the same ligand (and
thus the same hypothetical simulation of the free ligand
solution), we only computed the relative ΔG Binding
between the three simulations of the complexes.
Steered molecular dynamics simulations

To induce the unbinding of ligands from the receptor,
an external force was applied to center of mass (COM)
of the ligand, simulating retracting cantilever directed
along an imposed vector (see below). Due to actionreaction principle, the spring acts as a sensor of all
interacting processes along the selected exit pathway.
The elastic force is proportional to the spring elongation
relative to its equilibrium position, and it is given by the





expression: F = k( v t - x ), where v t - x is the displacement of the restrained atom with respect to its original position; t is time elapsed from the beginning of the

simulation; v = 0.004 nm/ps corresponds to the velocity of the retracting cantilever and k = 2000 kJ/mol nm2
is its force constant. In order to have a zero extra force at
starting time, when the spring should be relaxed, displacement was set to 0 for time t = 0. For the interpretation
of the results we converted the registered pulling force in
energy values, by applying the following expression: E =
 

v ( v t - x ). For the comparison of the unbinding processes of the agonist and the antagonists the mentioned

combination for v and k was chosen among different
values used in a previous series of simulations performed

using combination of v values (0.001-0.01 nm/ps) and

k values (2000-5000 kJ/mol nm 2 ): the value of v was
chosen so that the complete unbinding of the ligands
occurs within 1 ns for each SMD simulation, that seemed
to us a good compromise between in saving computational time and register atomistic events. The value of
k was chosen to obtain a stiff spring in a drift regime.
The vector along which ligands were pulled apart was
imposed for both ligands parallel to the z axis of the protein, and also parallel to the principal axis of the membrane that, for a GPCR, is likely to correspond to the
only exit path possible for a bound ligand. To define the
exact values of the components (versors) of the pulling
vector, an hypothetical end point of the unbinding pathway for both ligands was chosen by superimposition of
the two ligands in the extracellular solvated environment.
Then, by means of a homemade script, we computed
the values of the three versors defining the direction
of the hypothetical vector along the z axis and connecting
the COM of each ligand in the starting position and the

Page 15 of 18

COM of the ligand in the final position. To ensure that
velocity kept a constant value for the whole simulation, a
combination of the x, y and z versors was then computed
in a such way that they would give a unit vector.
Computational details

All the simulations were run on a Linux cluster Blade
with Xeon processors. All the minimization steps, MD,
SMD simulations and concerning analysis were curried
out using the Gromacs 3.3 package [86,87]. All the MD
and SMD runs were performed using the Gromacs force
field, modified by all the parameters necessary for the
description of each component and their reciprocal
interactions, based on manifacturer’s instructions; the
periodic boundary conditions were applied in all three x,
y and z dimensions. The isothermal isobaric NPT
ensemble (constant number of particles, pressure and
temperature) was applied. Solvent (water molecules and
chloride ions) and non-solvent (lipids, protein and
ligands) component of the system was separately
coupled to a temperature bath at 310 K, with a coupling
constant τt of 0.1 ps. The pressure coupling was set as
independent in the x and y directions (semi isotropic
coupling), with a constant pressure of 1 bar and a coupling constant τp of 1 ps. A 2 fs time step was used for
the integration of the equations of motions and all bond
distances involving hydrogen atoms were constrained
using LINCS [88]. Configurations were saved for every
1 ps for analysis. The analysis of the trajectories were
computed with the specific Gromacs tools.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Italian Ministry of University and
Research, FIRB and COFIN PRIN to MPA. The authors thank the Delos S.r.l
group for the bioinformatic support.
Author details
1
Department of Pharmacological Sciences, University of Milano, via Balzaretti
9, 20133, Milano, Italy. 2Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences,
University of Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 2, 20126 Milano, Italy.
3
Delos S.r.l., via Lurani 12, 20091, Bresso, Italy.
Authors’ contributions
CP carried out the computational study, performed the analysis of the data
and drafted the manuscript, GR participated in the drafting and in the
design of the study, MPA conceived of the study, provided the biological
background for data interpretation and helped to draft, PF participated in its
design and coordination. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 30 July 2009 Accepted: 16 March 2010
Published: 16 March 2010
References
1. Burnstock G: Pathophysiology and therapeutic potential of purinergic
signaling. Pharmacol Rev 2006, 58:58-86.
2. Brink C, Dahlén SE, Drazen J, Evans JF, Hay DW, Nicosia S, Serhan CN,
Shimizu T, Yokomizo T: International Union of Pharmacology XXXVII.
Nomenclature for leukotriene and lipoxin receptors. Pharmacol Rev 2003,
55:195-227.

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

3.

4.

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Abbracchio MP, Burnstock G, Boeynaems J, Barnard EA, Boyer J, Kennedy C,
Knight GE, Fumagalli M, Gachet C, Jacobson KA, Weisman GA: International
Union of Pharmacology LVIII: update on the P2Y G protein-coupled
nucleotide receptors: from molecular mechanisms and pathophysiology
to therapy. Pharmacol Rev 2006, 58:281-341.
Mellor EA, Maekawa A, Austen KF, Boyce JA: Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor
1 is also a pyrimidinergic receptor and is expressed by human mast
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:7964-7969.
Walch L, Norel X, Bäck M, Gascard JP, Dahlén SE, Brink C: Pharmacological
evidence for a novel cysteinyl-leukotriene receptor subtype in human
pulmonary artery smooth muscle. Br J Pharmacol 2002, 137:1339-1345.
Steinke JW, Culp JA: Leukotriene synthesis inhibitors versus antagonists:
the pros and cons. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2007, 7:126-133.
Peters-Golden M, Henderson WR Jr: Leukotrienes. N Engl J Med 2008,
357:1841-1854.
Capra V, Ravasi S, Accomazzo MR, Citro S, Grimoldi M, Abbracchio MP,
Rovati GE: CysLT1 receptor is a target for extracellular nucleotideinduced heterologous desensitization: a possible feedback mechanism
in inflammation. J Cell Sci 2005, 118:5625-5636.
Ballerini P, Di Iorio P, Ciccarelli R, Caciagli F, Poli A, Beraudi A, Buccella S,
D’Alimonte I, D’Auro M, Nargi E, Patricelli P, Visini D, Traversa U: P2Y1 and
cysteinyl leukotriene receptors mediate purine and cysteinyl leukotriene
co-release in primary cultures of rat microglia. Int J Immunopathol
Pharmacol 2005, 18:255-268.
Mamedova L, Capra V, Accomazzo MR, Gao Z, Ferrario S, Fumagalli M,
Abbracchio MP, Rovati GE, Jacobson KA: CysLT1 leukotriene receptor
antagonists inhibit the effects of nucleotides acting at P2Y receptors.
Biochem Pharmacol 2005, 71:115-125.
Nonaka Y, Hiramoto T, Fujita N: Identification of endogenous surrogate
ligands for human P2Y12 receptors by in silico and in vitro methods.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005, 337:281-288.
Fredriksson R, Lagerström MC, Lundin LG, Schiöth HB: The G-proteincoupled receptors in the human genome form five main families.
Phylogenetic analysis, paralogon groups, and fingerprints. Mol Pharmacol
2003, 63:1256-1272.
Ciana P, Fumagalli M, Trincavelli ML, Verderio C, Rosa P, Lecca D, Ferrario S,
Parravicini C, Capra V, Gelosa P, Guerrini U, Belcredito S, Cimino M, Sironi L,
Tremoli E, Rovati GE, Martini C, Abbracchio MP: The orphan receptor
GPR17 identified as a new dual uracil nucleotides/cysteinyl-leukotrienes
receptor. EMBO J 2006, 25:4615-4627.
Lecca D, Trincavelli ML, Gelosa P, Sironi L, Ciana P, Fumagalli M, Villa G,
Verderio C, Grumelli C, Guerrini U, Tremoli E, Rosa P, Cuboni S, Martini C,
Buffo A, Cimino M, Abbracchio MP: The recently identified P2Y-like
receptor GPR17 is a sensor of brain damage and a new target for brain
repair. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:3579.
Ceruti S, Villa G, Genovese T, Mazzon E, Longhi R, Rosa P, Bramanti P,
Cuzzocrea S, Abbracchio MP: The P2Y-like receptor GPR17 as a sensor of
damage and a new potential target in spinal cord injury. Brain 2009,
132:2206-2218.
Maekawa A, Balestrieri B, Austen KF, Kanaoka Y: GPR17 is a negative
regulator of the cysteinyl leukotriene 1 receptor response to leukotriene
D4. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:11685-11690.
Parravicini C, Ranghino G, Abbracchio MP, Fantucci P: GPR17: molecular
modeling and dynamics studies of the 3-D structure and purinergic
ligand binding features in comparison with P2Y receptors. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:263.
Okada T, Sugihara M, Bondar AN, Elstner M, Entel P, Buss Va: The retinal
conformation and its environment in rhodopsin in light of a new 2.2 Å
crystal structure. J Mol Biol 2004, 342:571-583.
Ballesteros J, Palczewski K: G protein-coupled receptor drug discovery:
implications from the crystal structure of rhodopsin. Curr Opin Drug
Discov Devel 2001, 4:561-574.
Moro S, Deflorian F, Spalluto G, Pastorin G, Cacciari B, Kim SK, Jacobson KA:
Demystifying the three dimensional structure of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs) with the aid of molecular modeling. Chem Commun
(Camb) 2003, 24:2949-2956.
Evers A, Klebe G: Ligand-supported homology modeling of g-proteincoupled receptor sites: models sufficient for successful virtual screening.
Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2004, 43:248-251.
Jaakola VP, Griffth M, Hanson MA, Cherezov V, Chien EY, Lane JR,
Ijzerman AP, Stevens RC: The 2.6 angstrom crystal structure of a human

Page 16 of 18

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

A2A adenosine receptor bound to an antagonist. Science 2008,
322:1211-1217.
Rasmussen SG, Choi HJ, Rosenbaum DM, Kobilka TS, Thian FS, Edwards PC,
Burghammer M, Ratnala VR, Sanishvili R, Fischetti RF, Schertler GF, Weis WI,
Kobilka BK: Crystal structure of the human beta2 adrenergic G-proteincoupled receptor. Nature 2007, 450:383-387.
Cherezov V, Rosenbaum DM, Hanson MA, Rasmussen SG, Thian FS,
Kobilka TS, Choi HJ, Kuhn P, Weis WI, Kobilka BK, Stevens RC: Highresolution crystal structure of an engineered human beta2-adrenergic G
protein-coupled receptor. Science 2007, 318:1258-1265.
Rosenbaum DM, Cherezov V, Hanson MA, Rasmussen SG, Thian FS,
Kobilka TS, Choi HJ, Yao XJ, Weis WI, Stevens RC, Kobilka BK: GPCR
engineering yields high-resolution structural insights into beta2adrenergic receptor function. Science 2007, 318:1266-1273.
Hanson MA, Cherezov V, Griffth MT, Roth CB, Jaakola VP, Chien EY,
Velasquez J, Kuhn P, Stevens RC: A specific cholesterol binding site is
established by the 2.8 A structure of the human beta2-adrenergic
receptor. Structure 2008, 16:897-905.
Warne T, Serrano-Vega MJ, Baker JG, Moukhametzianov R, Edwards PC,
Henderson R, Leslie AG, Tate CG, Schertler GF: Structure of a beta1adrenergic G-protein-coupled receptor. Nature 2008, 454:486-491.
Murakami M, Kouyama T: Crystal structure of squid rhodopsin. Nature
2008, 453:363-367.
Park JH, Scheerer P, Hofmann KP, Choe HW, Ernst OP: Crystal structure of
the ligand-free G-protein-coupled receptor opsin. Nature 2008,
454:183-187.
Ballesteros JA, Jensen AD, Liapakis G, Rasmussen SG, Shi L, Gether U,
Javitch JA: Activation of the beta 2-adrenergic receptor involves
disruption of an ionic lock between the cytoplasmic ends of
transmembrane segments 3 and 6. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:29171-29177.
Kim HK: Building a bridge between G-protein-coupled receptor
modelling, protein crystallography and 3D QSAR studies for ligand
design. Perspectives in Drug Discovery and Design 1998, 12-14:233-255.
Shi L, Javitch JA: The second extracellular loop of the dopamine D2
receptor lines the binding-site crevice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004,
101:440-445.
Ivanov AA, Costanzi S, Jacobson KA: Defining the nucleotide binding sites
of P2Y receptors using rhodopsin-based homology modeling. J Comput
Aided Mol Des 2006, 20:417-426.
Ballesteros JA, Weinstein H: Integrated methods for the construction of
three dimensional models and computational probing of structurefunction relations in G-protein coupled receptors. Methods Neurosci 1995,
25:366-428.
Erb L, Garrad R, Wang Y, Quinn T, Turner JT, Weisman GA: Site-directed
mutagenesis of P2U purinoceptors. Positively charged amino acids in
transmembrane helices 6 and 7 affect agonist potency and specificity. J
Biol Chem 1995, 270:4185-4188.
Van Rhee AM, Fischer B, Van Galen PJ, Jacobson KA: Modelling the P2Y
purinoceptor using rhodopsin as template. Drug Des Discov 1995,
13:133-154.
Jiang Q, Guo D, Lee BX, Van Rhee AM, Kim YC, Nicholas RA, Schachter JB,
Harden TK, Jacobson KA: A mutational analysis of residues essential for
ligand recognition at the human P2Y1 receptor. Mol Pharmacol 1997,
52:499-507.
Moro S, Guo D, Camaioni E, Boyer JL, Harden TK, Jacobson KA: Human
P2Y1 receptor: molecular modeling and site-directed mutagenesis as
tools to identify agonist and antagonist recognition sites. J Med Chem
1998, 41:1456-1466.
Moro S, Hoffmann C, Jacobson KA: Role of the extracellular loops of G
protein-coupled receptors in ligand recognition: a molecular modeling
study of the human P2Y1 receptor. Biochemistry 1999, 38:3498-3507.
Hoffmann C, Moro S, Nicholas RA, Harden T, Jacobson KA: The role of
amino acids in extracellular loops of the human P2Y1 receptor in
surface expression and activation processes. J Biol Chem 1999,
274:14639-14647.
Costanzi S, Mamedova L, Gao ZG, Jacobson KA: Architecture of P2Y
nucleotide receptors: structural comparison based on sequence analysis,
mutagenesis, and homology modeling. J Med Chem 2004, 47:5393-5404.
Abbracchio MP, Boeynaems JM, Barnard EA, Boyer JL, Kennedy C, MirasPortugal MT, King BF, Gachet C, Jacobson KA, Weisman GA, Burnstock G:
Characterization of the UDP-glucose receptor (re-named here the P2Y14

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

43.

44.
45.
46.

47.
48.
49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

receptor) adds diversity to the P2Y receptor family. Trends Pharmacol Sci
2003, 24:52-55.
Ivanov AA, Fricks I, Harden TK, Jacobson KA: Molecular dynamics
simulation of the P2Y14 receptor. Ligand docking and identification of a
putative binding site of the distal hexose moiety. Bioorg Med Chem Lett
2007, 17:761-766.
Nayak A, Langdon RB: Montelukast in the treatment of allergic rhinitis: an
evidence-based review. Drugs 2007, 67:887-901.
Scow DT, Luttermoser GK, Dickerson KS: Leukotriene inhibitors in the
treatment of allergy and asthma. Am Fam Physician 2007, 75:65-70.
Joos S, Miksch A, Szecsenyi J, Wieseler B, Grouven U, Kaiser T, Schneider A:
Montelukast as add-on therapy to inhaled corticosteroids in the
treatment of mild to moderate asthma: a systematic review. Thorax 2008,
63:453-462.
Binnig G, Quate CF, Gerber C: Atomic force microscope. Phys Rev Lett 1986,
56:930-933.
Florin EL, Moy VT, Gaub HE: Adhesion forces between individual ligandreceptor pairs. Science 1994, 264:415-417.
Oberhauser AF, Hansma PK, Carrion-Vazquez M, Fernandez JM: Stepwise
unfolding of titin under force-clamp atomic force microscopy. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:468-472.
Curcio R, Caflisch A, Paci E: Change of the unbinding mechanism upon a
mutation: a molecular dynamics study of an antibody-hapten complex.
Protein Sci 2005, 14:2499-2514.
Kosztin D, Izrailev S, Schulten K: Unbinding of retinoic acid from its
receptor studied by steered molecular dynamics. Biophys J 1999,
76:188-197.
Martínez L, Sonoda MT, Webb P, Baxter JD, Skaf MS, Polikarpov I: Molecular
dynamics simulations reveal multiple pathways of ligand dissociation
from thyroid hormone receptors. Biophys J 2005, 89:2011-2023.
Martínez L, Webb P, Polikarpov I, Skaf M: Molecular dynamics simulations
of ligand dissociation from thyroid hormone receptors: evidence of the
likeliest escape pathway and its implications for the design of novel
ligands. J Med Chem 2006, 49:23-26.
Carlsson P, Burendahl S, Nilsson L: Unbinding of retinoic acid from the
retinoic acid receptor by random expulsion molecular dynamics. Biophys
J 2006, 91:3151-3161.
Sonoda MT, Martínez L, Webb P, Skaf MS, Polikarpov I: Ligand dissociation
from estrogen receptor is mediated by receptor dimerization: evidence
from molecular dynamics simulations. Mol Endocrinol 2008, 22:1565-1578.
Martínez L, Polikarpov I, Skaf MS: Only subtle protein conformational
adaptations are required for ligand binding to thyroid hormone
receptors: simulations using a novel multipoint steered molecular
dynamics approach. J Phys Chem B 2008, 112:10741-10751.
Genest D, Garnier N, Arrault A, Marot C, Morin-Allory L, Genest M: Ligandescape pathways from the ligand-binding domain of PPARgamma
receptor as probed by molecular dynamics simulations. Eur Biophys J
2008, 37:369-379.
Peräkylä M: Ligand unbinding pathways from the vitamin D receptor
studied by molecular dynamics simulations. Eur Biophys J 2009,
38:185-198.
Lu H, Isralewitz B, Krammer A, Vogel V, Schulten K: Unfolding of titin
immunoglobulin domains by steered molecular dynamics simulation.
Biophys J 1998, 75:662-671.
Krammer A, Lu H, Isralewitz B, Schulten K, Vogel V: Forced unfolding of the
fibronectin type III module reveals a tensile molecular recognition
switch. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:1351-1356.
Marszalek PE, Lu H, Li H, Carrion-Vazquez M, Oberhauser AF, Schulten K,
Fernandez JM: Mechanical unfolding intermediates in titin modules.
Nature 1999, 402:100-103.
Fowler SB, Best RB, Toca Herrera JL, Rutherford TJ, Steward A, Paci E,
Karplus M, Clarke J: Mechanical unfolding of a titin Ig domain: structure
of unfolding intermediate revealed by combining AFM, molecular
dynamics simulations, NMR and protein engineering. J Mol Biol 2002,
322:841-849.
Best RB, Fowler SB, Herrera JL, Steward A, Paci E, Clarke J: Mechanical
unfolding of a titin Ig domain: structure of transition state revealed by
combining atomic force microscopy, protein engineering and molecular
dynamics simulations. Mol Biol 2003, 330:867-877.

Page 17 of 18

64. Brockwell DJ, Paci E, Zinober RC, Beddard GS, Olmsted PD, Smith DA,
Perham RN, Radford SE: Pulling geometry defines the mechanical
resistance of a beta-sheet protein. Nat Struct Biol 2003, 10:731-737.
65. Carrion-Vazquez M, Li H, Lu H, Marszalek PE, Oberhauser AF, Fernandez JM:
The mechanical stability of ubiquitin is linkage dependent. Nat Struct Biol
2003, 10:738-743.
66. Grudinin S, Büldt G, Gordeliy V, Baumgaertner A: Water molecules and
hydrogen-bonded networks in bacteriorhodopsin-molecular dynamics
simulations of the ground state and the M-intermediate. Biophys J 2005,
88:3252-3261.
67. Kandt C, Gerwert K, Schlitter J: Water dynamics simulation as a tool for
probing proton transfer pathways in a heptahelical membrane protein.
Proteins 2005, 58:528-537.
68. Zwaagstra ME, Schoenmakers SH, Nederkoorn PH, Gelens E, Timmerman H,
Zhang MQ: Development of a three-dimensional CysLT1 (LTD4)
antagonist model with an incorporated amino acid residue from the
receptor. J Med Chem 1998, 41:1439-1445.
69. Bondensgaard K, Ankersen M, Thøgersen H, Hansen BS, Wulff BS,
Bywater RP: Recognition of privileged structures by G-protein coupled
receptors. J Med Chem 2004, 47:888-899.
70. Zhu SZ, Wang SZ, Hu J, el Fakahany EE: An arginine residue conserved in
most G protein-coupled receptors is essential for the function of the m1
muscarinic receptor. Mol Pharmacol 1994, 45:517-523.
71. Jones PG, Curtis CA, Hulme EC: The function of a highly-conserved
arginine residue in activation of the muscarinic M1 receptor. Eur J
Pharmacol 1995, 288:251-257.
72. DeMartino JA, Konteatis ZD, Siciliano SJ, Van Riper G, Underwood DJ,
Fischer PA, Springer MS: Arginine 206 of the C5a receptor is critical for
ligand recognition and receptor activation by C-terminal hexapeptide
analogs. J Biol Chem 1995, 270:15966-15699.
73. Perlman JH, Laakkonen L, Osman R, Gershengorn MC: Distinct roles for
arginines in transmembrane helices 6 and 7 of the thyrotropin-releasing
hormone receptor. Mol Pharmacol 1995, 47:480-484.
74. Souza SC, Frick GP, Wang X, Kopchick JJ, Lobo RB, Goodman HM: A single
arginine residue determines species specificity of the human growth
hormone receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:959-963.
75. Rajendra S, Lynch JW, Pierce KD, French CR, Barry PH, Schofield PR:
Mutation of an arginine residue in the human glycine receptor
transforms beta-alanine and taurine from agonists into competitive
antagonists. Neuron 1995, 14:169-175.
76. Banères JL, Mesnier D, Martin A, Joubert L, Dumuis A, Bockaert J: Molecular
characterization of a purified 5-HT4 receptor: a structural basis for drug
efficacy. Biol Chem 2005, 280:20253-20260.
77. Klco JM, Wiegand CB, Narzinski K, Baranski TJ: Essential role for the second
extracellular loop in C5a receptor activation. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2005,
12:320-326.
78. Scarselli M, Li B, Kim SK, Wess J: Multiple residues in the second
extracellular loop are critical for M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor
activation. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:7385-7396.
79. Costanzi S, Joshi BV, Maddileti S, Mamedova L, Gonzalez-Moa MJ,
Marquez VE, Harden TK, Jacobson KA: Human P2Y(6) receptor: molecular
modeling leads to the rational design of a novel agonist based on a
unique conformational preference. J Med Chem 2005, 48:8108-8011.
80. Costanzi S: On the applicability of GPCR homology models to computeraided drug discovery: a comparison between in silico and crystal
structures of the beta2-adrenergic receptor. J Med Chem 2008,
51:2907-2014.
81. Hillmann P, Ko GY, Spinrath A, Raulf A, von Kügelgen I, Wolff SC,
Nicholas RA, Kostenis E, Höoltje HD, Müller CE: Key determinants of
nucleotide-activated G protein-coupled P2Y(2) receptor function
revealed by chemical and pharmacological experiments, mutagenesis
and homology modeling. J Med Chem 2009, 52:2762-2775.
82. Parravicini C, Ranghino G, Abbracchio MP, Fantucci P: Forced unbinding of
GPR17 ligands from wild-type and R255I mutant receptor models
[abstract]. Purinergic Signalling 2008, 4:s205.
83. Avlani VA, Gregory KJ, Morton CJ, Parker MW, Sexton PM, Christopoulos A:
Critical role for the second extracellular loop in the binding of both
orthosteric and allosteric G protein-coupled receptor ligands. J Biol Chem
2007, 282:25677-25686.
84. Morris GM, Goodsell DS, Halliday RS, Huey R, Hart WE, Belew RK, Olson AJ:
Automated Docking Using a Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm and and

Parravicini et al. BMC Structural Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/10/8

85.

86.
87.
88.

Page 18 of 18

Empirical Binding Free Energy Function. J Comput Chem 1998,
19:1639-1662.
Schuettelkopf AW, van Aalten DMF: PRODRG - a tool for high-throughput
crystallography of protein-ligand complexes. Acta Cryst 2004,
D60:1355-1363.
Spoel Van Der D, Lindahl E, Hess B, Groenhof G, Mark AE, Berendsen HJ:
GROMACS: fast, flexible, and free. J Comput Chem 2005, 26:1701-1718.
Lindahl E, Hess B, Spoel Van Der D: GROMACS 3.0: A package for
molecular simulation and trajectory analysis. J Mol Mod 2001, 7:306-317.
Hess B, Bekker H, Berendsen HJC, Fraaije JGEM: LINCS: A linear constraint
solver for molecular simulations (p). J Comp Chem 1997, 18:1463-1472.

doi:10.1186/1472-6807-10-8
Cite this article as: Parravicini et al.: Forced unbinding of GPR17 ligands
from wild type and R255I mutant receptor models through a
computational approach. BMC Structural Biology 2010 10:8.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
