<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution of AANAT: expansion of the gene family in the cephalochordate amphioxus</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-154"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jiri Pavlicek, Sandrine Sauzet, Laurence Besseau, Steven L Coon, Joan L Weller, Gilles Boeuf, Pascaline Gaildrat, Marina V Omelchenko, Eugene V Koonin, Jack Falc_n, David C Klein"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolution of AANAT: expansion of the gene family
in the cephalochordate amphioxus
Research article

Jiri Pavlicek1, Sandrine Sauzet2, Laurence Besseau2, Steven L Coon1, Joan L Weller1, Gilles Boeuf2,3, Pascaline Gaildrat1,
Marina V Omelchenko4, Eugene V Koonin4, Jack Falcón2 and David C Klein*1

Abstract
Background: The arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT) family is divided into structurally distinct vertebrate and
non-vertebrate groups. Expression of vertebrate AANATs is limited primarily to the pineal gland and retina, where it
plays a role in controlling the circadian rhythm in melatonin synthesis. Based on the role melatonin plays in biological
timing, AANAT has been given the moniker "the Timezyme". Non-vertebrate AANATs, which occur in fungi and protists,
are thought to play a role in detoxification and are not known to be associated with a specific tissue.
Results: We have found that the amphioxus genome contains seven AANATs, all having non-vertebrate type features.
This and the absence of AANATs from the genomes of Hemichordates and Urochordates support the view that a major
transition in the evolution of the AANATs may have occurred at the onset of vertebrate evolution. Analysis of the
expression pattern of the two most structurally divergent AANATs in Branchiostoma lanceolatum (bl) revealed that they
are expressed early in development and also in the adult at low levels throughout the body, possibly associated with
the neural tube. Expression is clearly not exclusively associated with the proposed analogs of the pineal gland and
retina. blAANAT activity is influenced by environmental lighting, but light/dark differences do not persist under
constant light or constant dark conditions, indicating they are not circadian in nature. bfAANATα and bfAANATδ' have
unusually alkaline (> 9.0) optimal pH, more than two pH units higher than that of vertebrate AANATs.
Conclusions: The substrate selectivity profiles of bfAANATα and δ' are relatively broad, including alkylamines,
arylalkylamines and diamines, in contrast to vertebrate forms, which selectively acetylate serotonin and other
arylalkylamines. Based on these features, it appears that amphioxus AANATs could play several roles, including
detoxification and biogenic amine inactivation. The presence of seven AANATs in amphioxus genome supports the
view that arylalkylamine and polyamine acetylation is important to the biology of this organism and that these genes
evolved in response to specific pressures related to requirements for amine acetylation.
Background
The AANAT family is part of the large and diverse superfamily of GCN5-like acetyltransferases which use AcCoA
as the acetyl donor and share a common AcCoA binding
fold [1]. Members of the AANAT family share limited
sequence identity and are divided into two groups: vertebrate AANATs; and, the non-vertebrate AANATs. The
latter are found in fungi, protists, and bacteria and lack
defining physical characteristics of vertebrate AANAT [1* Correspondence: kleind@mail.nih.gov
1

Section on Neuroendocrinology, Program in Developmental Endocrinology
and Genetics, The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 20892, MD,
USA

3]. The biological role of vertebrate AANAT is to acetylate serotonin in the synthesis of melatonin (tryptophan
→ hydroxytryptophan → serotonin → N-acetylserotonin
→ melatonin) [4,5]. Vertebrate AANAT is associated with
biological timing: daily changes in the activity of this
enzyme regulate the daily rhythm in melatonin synthesis,
which is essential for optimal temporal coordination of
biological functions with night/day and seasonal changes
and for photic entrainment [6]. The central role of vertebrate AANAT in biological timing has earned it the moniker 'the Timezyme' [7]. Non-vertebrate AANATs are
thought to play a detoxifying role by neutralizing arylalkylamines [8] and a role in DNA biology by acetylating
polyamines [9].

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Pavlicek et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

Genomes of vertebrates contain a single copy of the
AANAT gene, except for teleost fish, some of which possess up to three paralogs [2], and cows which possess two
paralogs
(unpublished;
NCBI,
NIH,
http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Members of the AANAT family
are not in the available genomes of Hemichordates and
Urochordates, which leaves open the question of when
vertebrate AANAT first appeared in chordates. A striking
characteristic of vertebrate AANAT is that it is consistently expressed at significant levels in only two tissues,
both of which are photosensitive organs, the pineal gland
and retina. This fits with the evidence that pinealocytes
and retinal photoreceptors evolved from a common
ancestral photodetector [10-13]. The vertebrate AANAT
has a neutral pH optimum and exhibits high selectivity
for arylalkylamines [7].
Vertebrate AANATs encode proteins that have several
highly conserved structural characteristics [2,8], which
facilitate arylalkylamine acetylation and regulation. These
features include flanking regulatory regions, which mediate rapid changes in enzyme activity; a pair of histidines
which facilitate catalysis [14]; and, a proline-containing
tripeptide in a floppy loop, which confers a high catalytic
rate through an effect on substrate binding [15]. Vertebrate AANATs also have high selectivity for arylalkylamines conferred by the binding pocket.
Non-vertebrate type AANATs are found in the
genomes of most fungi, many unicellular eukaryotes, and
a variety of bacteria [16]. The proteins encoded by these
genes do not contain the characteristic structural features
of vertebrate AANATs. Genes similar to non-vertebrate
AANATs are not found in vertebrates.
Amphioxus AANATs are of interest in understanding
the evolution of vertebrate AANAT because cephalochordates and vertebrates form a clade [17]. Accordingly, the
study of the AANAT from this organism might provide
new insights into the transition from the non-vertebrate
members of the AANAT family to the vertebrate forms.
Sequence in the trace archives has indicated that a nonvertebrate type member of the AANAT family is present
in amphioxus [2]. The subsequent availability of the near
complete amphioxus genome [18] has allowed us to comprehensively analyze the AANAT family in amphioxus, as
presented here. The findings of this study indicate that
rapid expansion of non-vertebrate forms occurred in
amphioxus and that a vertebrate form is absent. The substrate preference profile of the encoded enzymes suggests
to us that they are likely to play a role in detoxification or
in biogenic amine inactivation, or both.

Methods
Animals

Branchiostoma floridae (B. floridae, bf ) and Branchiostoma lanceolatum (B. lanceolatum, bl) were used; the for-

Page 2 of 15

mer were obtained from Gulf Specimen Marine Lab
(Panacea, FL, USA) and the latter from the Bay of Banyuls
sur Mer (France) [17]. B. floridae heads were used to generate the cDNA used to clone full length bfAANATα and
bfAANATδ' that were used for enzyme characterization.
B. lanceolatum were used for in vivo studies of gene
expression and enzyme activity. They were cultured in
sand-filtered seawater under a natural lighting cycle and
temperature, as indicated elsewhere [17]. Intensity of the
light was 136 lux. For the experiment with constant conditions, animals were housed for 14 days in constant light
and/or darkness and then were used for the activity assay.
Identification of amphioxus AANATs

bfAANAT homologs were identified through a tBLASTn
search of genomic sequences available at: http://
genome.jgi-psf.org[18]. Seven genes for AANAT
homologs (α - η were identified in genome assembly v2.0.
A second allele for five of the genes was found in v1.0.
Based on these sequences, primers were designed (Additional file 1) for cloning of blAANAT cDNAs. qPCR primers for specific gene products were based on the B.
lanceolatum clones.
Sequence similarity search and phylogenetic analysis

The AANAT homologs were identified by searching the
non-redundant database of protein sequences (NCBI,
NIH, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) using the PSI BLAST
program [19] and by searching the genomes and proteomes available at JGI http://genome.jgi-psf.org/
euk_cur1.html using the tBLASTn and BLASTp programs, respectively. Additionally, AANAT homologs were
detected in the genomes of the red algae Gracilaria
changii, segmented worm Alvinella pompejana, Mediterranean mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis (NCBI, EST
database) and the basal fungus Rhizopus oryzae http://
www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/genome/rhizopus_
oryzae/MultiHome.html.
Representatives from different groups including bacteria, fungi, protists, and animals were selected for phylogenetic analysis, and a multiple alignment of the respective
protein sequences was constructed using the MUSCLE
program [20].
A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree was constructed using the TreeFinder program [21] by optimizing a default starting tree constructed using the
Neighbor-joining method with the Whelan and Goldman
(WAG) empirical model of substitutions [22] To select
the best substitution model, we compared the likelihoods
of trees constructed using 8 models: WAG (21), JTT [23],
VT [24], BLOSUM [25], Dayhoff [26], cpREV [27], rtREV
[28], PMB [29] by running the TreeFinder program [21];
this test showed the best fit with the data for the WAG
model. The reliability of the internal tree branches was

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

estimated using the LR-ELW bootstrap method [30]. A
constrained large scale tree topology was created using
the TreeView program [31]. Alternative tree topologies
were compared with the Approximately Unbiased test
[32] using the TreeFinder program.
Evolutionary distances were estimated using the distance matrix created by the PROTDIST program of
PHYLIP package [33] based on a truncated alignment of
AANATs and using the Jones-Taylor-Thornton (JTT)
substitution model [23]. The mean differences (p-distance) and identities between the major taxonomic
groups of AANATs were calculated using the MEGA program [34].
Prokaryotic expression of recombinant proteins

pGEX 4T-1 (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) was used for
the recombinant expression of full-length bfAANATα
and bfAANATδ'. The constructed plasmid was
sequenced to confirm identity. The construct, which produces a GST fusion protein, was transformed into E. coli
strain BL21Gold (DE3) pLysS (Novagen, Madison, WI).
The cells were grown at 37°C; when the OD600 = 0.6, the
cultures were cooled to 25°C and isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside was added (final concentration = 0.2
mM). The cells were harvested by centrifugation after 12
hours of culturing (5000 × g, 30 min, 4°C) and resuspended in 2× PBS, pH 7.5, containing 10 mM DTT (Buffer A) and a mixture of protease inhibitors (Complete®,
Roche, Indianapolis, IN). The cells were then lysed by
sonication and the resulting lysate was centrifuged (8500
× g, 25 min, 4°C). The supernatant was mixed with Glutathione-Sepharose 4B affinity matrix (GE Healthcare) preequilibrated with Buffer A. The suspension was agitated
for 1 h and then packed into a glass column. The column
was washed with 5 column volumes of Buffer A, followed
by 5 column volumes of buffer containing 50 mM TrisHCl, 0.1 M sodium citrate, 5 mM DTT and 10% glycerol,
pH 7.8 (Buffer B). GST fusion protein was then eluted
with 5 column volumes of Buffer B containing 10 mM
glutathione. Protein was concentrated and dialyzed
against buffer containing 0.1 M ammonium acetate, 25
mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP; the resulting preparation was
stored at -80°C. Where indicated, purified GST-free
bfAANATα was used; otherwise, the GST-bfAANATα or
GST-AANATδ' fusion product was used, consistent with
previous studies [15,35,36].
SDS-PAGE

Proteins were resolved on preformed 14% Tris-glycine (1
mm) gels, using the manufacturer's protocol (NOVEX,
Invitrogen) [37]. The molecular mass of the proteins was
estimated using Rainbow™ markers (GE Healthcare).

Page 3 of 15

Fluorescence-based protein studies

Fluorescence measurements were done on an ISS PC1
photon-counting spectrofluorimeter (ISS, Inc., Champaign, IL) at 22°C. To study binding properties of
bfAANATα protein, the interaction between bfAANATα
and
CoA-S-N-acetyl-7-hydroxynaphthylethylamine
(CoA-HNE), a fluorescent bisubstrate inhibitor of vertebrate AANAT, was analyzed [36]. This was done by measuring CoA-HNE (1 μM)-dependent quenching of
tryptophan fluorescence in 0.1 M ammonium acetate, 25
mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP, pH 6.8 (excitation = 290 nm;
emission = 310 nm). Off-rates of CoA-HNE were monitored as described [15] using protein preparations that
were 90% saturated with CoA-HNE. Following a control
incubation period, the probe was displaced with a 100fold excess of another bisubstrate inhibitor, CoA-S-Nacetyltryptamine (CoA-T), that is optically inactive in this
analysis [36]. The limiting value of koff was calculated by
non-linear fitting (SigmaPlot Version 10.0, Systat Software, Inc., Point Richmond, CA) using the equation:
A ( t ) = A ( ∞ ) + ( A ( 0 ) – A ( ∞ ) ) exp ( −k off × t ) ,

where A(t) is the observed fluorescence anisotropy at
time 't' after the initial addition of CoA-T and koff is the
rate constant.
Determination of N-acetyltransferase activity

Recombinant bfAANATα activity was measured
radiochemically by measuring [3H]acetyl product formed
from [3H]acetyl-coenzyme A ([3H]AcCoA; GE Healthcare, UK) and an amine substrate as described [15]; or,
colorimetrically by measuring CoASH formed by incubation with AcCoA and an amine substrate. CoASH is
detected as the colored product formed by reaction with
5,5'-dithio-bis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) [35]. In the
colorimetric assay, standard reactions were performed in
a total volume of 100 μL containing: the substrate at indicated concentrations, 0.5 mM AcCoA, 0.05 mg/ml bovine
serum albumin (BSA), and 2 mM ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). For analysis of GST-bfAANATα,
0.25 μg of protein was included in 0.1 M Tris buffer pH
9.5; the activity of ovine GST-AANAT, which was used as
a reference standard [15], was determined by incubating
10 ng of protein in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 6.8. Incubation conditions were either 80 min at 37°C for
amphioxus or 30 min at 37°C for ovine AANAT. Enzymes
were then inactivated by the addition of 150 μl stop solution (1 mM DTNB, 10 mM EDTA, and 3 M guanidine
hydrochloride); absorbance (405 nm) was measured after
5 min incubation at room temperature. The Vmax and Km

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

were calculated by non-linear fitting (Prism5 from
GraphPad) using the equation:
V = Vmax S / ( K m + S ) ,

where V is the observed enzyme velocity (activity), Vmax
is the maximum enzyme velocity, S is the substrate concentration, and Km is the Michaelis-Menten constant.
For the measurement of enzyme activity in amphioxus
head tissue, the colorimetric assay (see above) was used
with 10 mM β-phenylethylamine (PEA) as a substrate and
10 μg of protein from tissue homogenized in assay buffer.
For each measurement a corresponding assay was performed in the presence of 1 mM CoA-T [15], and another
in the absence of PEA. The controls used included an
assay without tissue homogenate and another with a
heat-inactivated (65°C, 5 min) homogenate. Samples were
collected at noon and midnight in the experiments studying the light/dark variations, and at noon in all other
experiments.
Quantitative measurement of B. lanceolatum AANAT
transcripts (qPCR)

Total RNA was extracted from head and from body using
a Trizol extraction kit (Invitrogen, Cergy Pontoise,
France). 1 μg was incubated with 1 unit of DNase I
(Roche; Meylan, France) for 20 min at 37°C. Following
DNase inactivation (65°C, 10 min), the sequence was
reverse-transcribed using Powerscript Reverse Transcriptase (Clontech, Mountain View, CA). qPCR of the
resulting cDNAs was performed with the primer sets
qAANAT (Additional file 1) using the 'Light Cycler Fast
Start DNA Master SYBR Green I kit' (Roche Molecular
Biochemicals, USA) in a total volume of 20 μl as follows:
95°C (10 min), followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at
95°C (10 sec), annealing at 60°C (15 sec) and extension at
72°C (15 sec). qPCR was done using a Light Cycler 1.5
(Roche Diagnostics, USA). Amplification efficiency was
measured using serial dilutions of plasmids containing a
fragment of the corresponding blAANAT gene. Data
were normalized to the average value obtained with three
housekeeping genes from B. lanceolatum: L17
(AY130354), L18 (AY130454) and actin (Y13663). The
PCR conditions for the housekeeping genes were as indicated above except that the annealing temperature was
66°C for actin. Primers for the housekeeping genes are
given in Additional file 1.
Tissue distribution of amphioxus AANATα studied by RTPCR

The tissue distribution of amphioxus AANATα was
determined by RT-PCR. Total RNA from different parts
of B. lanceolatum was extracted using the Trizol method
(Invitrogen); 1 μg was incubated with 1 unit of DNAse I

Page 4 of 15

(Roche) for 20 min at 37°C. Following DNAse inactivation (65°C, 10 min), the RNA was reverse-transcribed
using Powerscript Reverse Transcriptase (Clontech) PCR
amplifications of the resulting cDNAs using Advantage
cDNA Polymerase (Clontech) were performed with the
primers for blAANATα (Additional file 1), and the following conditions: 95°C (1 min) followed by 30 cycles of
denaturation at 94°C (20 sec), annealing at 66°C (1 min)
and extension at 68°C (30 sec). In the controls, the template cDNA was replaced by either water or RNA that
was not reverse-transcribed. The PCR products were
loaded in a 1% agarose gel, in the presence of DNA/Hinf I
marker (Promega, Madison, WI). Fragments of the
expected size were extracted, subcloned in pGEM-T Easy
(Promega) and sequenced.
Tissue distribution of amphioxus AANATα studied by in toto
hybridization

B. lanceolatum were collected at Argelès-sur-Mer
(France) in July 2009; gametes were obtained by heat
stimulation [17,38]. Eggs and embryos were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) in MOPS-EGTA buffer and processed for in toto hybridization as detailed elsewhere [39],
except that the chromogenic reaction was performed
using BM Purple (Roche) [40]. Two digoxigenin labeled
probes corresponding to the α or δζ subtypes were
designed. The former was obtained using the cloning
primers cAANATαF2 and cAANATαR2 (Additional file
1) and yielded a probe of 453 bp. The latter was obtained
using the cloning primers cAANATδζF2 and
cAANATδζR2 (Additional file 1) and yielded a probe of
308 bp. Hybridization treatments with the different sense
and antisense probes were performed simultaneously.

Results
Sequence analysis, phyletic distribution, and phylogeny of
the AANATs

Seven intronless AANAT genes were identified in the B.
floridae genome (Figure 1). A second allele was found for
5 of the 7 genes in version v1.0 of the B. floridae genome
assembly. The amino acid sequence identity among the
amphioxus AANATs ranged from 30 to 86% excluding
allele/allele comparisons (Additional file 2). The structural features which characterize vertebrate AANATs,
including the flanking regulatory regions, a pair of neighboring histidines in the active site, and a tripeptide in the
floppy loop, do not appear in the proteins encoded by the
amphioxus AANATs. The motifs A and B, which characterize members of the GCN5-like superfamily of acetyltransferases are conserved in both amphioxus and
vertebrate AANATs (Figure 1).
The relative locations of the bfAANATs on 3 assembly
scaffolds are shown schematically in Additional file 3.
The 7 genes comprise 4 groups based on sequence simi-

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

Figure 1 Multiple alignment of sequences. Alignment of AANAT sequences from human (h), ovine (o) and yeast (sc), compared with the
newly identified bfAANATs. Sequences have been aligned using
CLUSTALW [51], and then manually adjusted. Residues inversely highlighted in black are identical; residues highlighted in grey are similar
among compared sequences. Motifs conserved in vertebrate AANATs
and discussed in the text are identified with labeled red boxes. Individual residues discussed in the text are marked with red symbols. Red triangle: conserved lysine; red dots: three residues lacking in all nonvertebrate AANAT homologs; red asterisks: paired histidines involved
in catalysis. See Additional file 2 for amphioxus sequence coordinates
and Additional file 7 for alignment of AANAT sequences from more
species.

larity - group 1: αη group 2: β group 3: γε group 4: δζ.
Primers were prepared to amplify members of each of the
four groups in B. lanceolatum; low sequence conservation prevented amplification of all seven. The resulting
PCR products were sequenced and designated
blAANATα, blAANATα' blAANATγ, and blAANATγδ
(GenBank accession numbers FJ668653, FJ668656,
FJ668654, FJ668655, respectively; α' is used to identify the
α allele), according to the homology with individual
bfAANAT genes; representatives of the other genes were

Page 5 of 15

not obtained in this screen. The clone blAANATδζ was
designated this way because it could not be reliably
ascribed to either the δ or ζ gene based on similarity to
the B. floridae counterparts. The amino acid sequence
identity between the cloned PCR products for the B. lanceolatum α, α', γ and δζ isoforms and the corresponding
B. floridae genes was 94%, 86%, 76%, and 73%, respectively. Comparisons of the amino acid sequences of the
cloned blAANATα and blAANATδζ fragments to their B.
floridae counterparts are shown in Additional file 4.
Examination of the phyletic distribution of the detected
AANAT family members shows that the family is represented not only in chordates and cephalochordates but
also in some invertebrates such as the primitive metazoan
Trichoplax (four paralogs), the segmented worms Capitella and Alvinella, and the mollusk Mytilus. Among nonmetazoan eukaryotes, AANAT homologs were detected
in different fungal lineages including basidiomycetes,
ascomycetes, and the basal fungi Rhizopus oryzae and
Phycomyces blakesleeanus, and in many unicellular
eukaryotes (protists). The protists in which AANAT
homologs were detected include representatives from
three supergroups of eukaryotes, namely, plantae,
chromalveolates and excavates [41]. In plantae, AANAT
homologs were found in green and red algae; among
chromalveolates, members of the AANAT family were
present in diatoms, oomycetes, and a haptophyte Emiliania huxleyi; and, among excavates, an AANAT homolog
was identified in the heterolobosean Naegleria gruberi.
AANAT homologs are also present in a number of bacterial lineages including firmicutes, actinobacteria, proteobacteria and the bacteroidetes/chlorobi group (see
Additional files 5 and 6).
AANATs are relatively short proteins which complicates reliable phylogenetic analysis. Phylogenetic trees
were constructed based on an alignment of 65 amino acid
sequences (see Additional files 7, 8, 9 and 10). Eight
TreeFinder runs were performed for 8 substitution models (see Methods). The ML tree constructed with the
WAG matrix was associated with the highest likelihood
value. The topology of this tree is incompatible with the
species phylogeny (Figure 2). The monophyly of all 7
amphioxus AANATs was moderately supported and
these sequences formed an apparent clade with mollusk
and segmented worm that was even more strongly supported (Figure 2). However, beyond this invertebrate
branch, there were many anomalies in the tree. In particular, vertebrates clustered with ascomycetes and bacteria,
whereas the position of Trichoplax remained uncertain.
The monophyly of fungi was not recovered, and ostreococii were separated from another green alga represented
in the selected set of protists (Figure 2).
We tested the statistical compatibility of the AANAT
tree with the large-scale organismal phylogeny of eukary-

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

Figure 2 Unrooted maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of the
AANAT family. The scale bar shows the number of substitutions per
position; the numbers in parenthesis show the number of species in
the respective branches; and, the number at internal branches show
the bootstrap support (%). For the list of species, the sequences in FASTA format and the multiple alignment used for the tree construction,
see Additional files 5, 6 and 7.

otes using the constrained tree approach (see Methods
for details). A constrained tree was created (Additional
file 11) in which all species were combined into four
major clades in accord with the overall organismal phylogeny, namely, bacteria, protists, fungi and animals.
Inside the animal branch, with Trichoplax at the root, the
amphioxus branch was placed as the sister group of vertebrates, and the segmented worms and mussel were positioned between chordates and Trichoplax. The fungal
branch was placed as the sister group of animals. The
Approximately Unbiased test result (p-value 0.148) for
the tree generated with this approach (Additional files 12
and 13) shows that the "classical" constrained tree topology could not be rejected with confidence although the
likelihood of that topology is much lower than that of the
best tree shown in Figure 2.
The results of the phylogenetic analysis of the AANATs
emphasize the major distinction between the vertebrate
forms and those from other animals, presumably, owing
to a dramatic acceleration of evolution at the base of the
vertebrate branch. Beyond that conclusion, however, the
results were quite uncertain due to the low information
content of the alignment, between-branch differences in
the evolutionary rates, and uneven sampling of different
groups.
Expression and characterization of bfAANATα protein

A comparison of the predicted amino acid sequences
derived from the published genomic sequence and from

Page 6 of 15

our cloned bfAANATα (GenBank accession number
EU380676) revealed differences in five amino acid residues scattered throughout (Additional file 4). These differences, most likely, reflect the high degree of
polymorphism in B. floridae [18]. The effects of these differences are unknown.
To determine the molecular mass of expressed
bfAANATα, the GST-bfAANATα fusion protein was
cleaved and bfAANATα was purified as described in the
Methods. The final preparation contained a single major
band of protein which migrated at ~35 kDa on SDSPAGE (Figure 3). MALDI-TOF analysis revealed the mass
to be 28515, corresponding to the predicted mass based
on amino acid composition. Using the same procedure
we also expressed GST-bfAANATδ'.
To establish whether the expressed protein was correctly folded, we measured binding of a fluorescent
bisubstrate inhibitor of the expressed protein, CoA-HNE;
binding of the inhibitor to oAANAT quenches fluorescence [15]. Here we found that bfAANATα quenched

Figure 3 Characterization of the recombinant bfAANAT proteins.
SDS-PAGE analysis of purified GST-bfAANAT α (B) and GST-bfAANATδ'
(C), together with the Rainbow™ marker (A). Predicted relative molecular weights are 54,000 for GST-bfAANATα and 46,000 for GSTbfAANATδ'.

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

inhibitor fluorescence and that the expressed protein
bound the inhibitor stoichiometrically (1:1; Figure 4A).
Moreover, binding was totally disrupted by treatment
with 4 M guanidine. Accordingly, the purified preparation of bfAANATα is not denatured and possesses characteristics generally similar to those of oAANAT, as
regards binding of CoA-HNE.
To further characterize bfAANATα, off-rate analysis
was done using the displacement strategy described previously [15], in which bound CoA-HNE is displaced by
CoA-T, a non-fluorescent AANAT inhibitor [36] that
does not interfere with detection of CoA-HNE (Figure
4B). This result shows that the off-rate observed for the
CoA-HNE is > 0.05 s-1, similar to that of yeast AANAT;
these rates are much faster than that for oAANAT [15],

Figure 4 Determination of CoA-HNE binding and off-rate. A.
Quenching of tryptophan fluorescence as a function of the binding of
inhibitor CoA-HNE by recombinant GST-bfAANATα. Binding was not
observed in the presence of 4 M guanidine, which denatures the protein. B. Off-rate of CoA-HNE from the active site of the enzyme was
measured by displacement with another inhibitor. Fluorescence
anisotropy is shown as a function of time. Samples of proteins (2 μM)
were 90% saturated with CoA-HNE. After 5 min the fluorescence
anisotropy was measured. At t = 200 s, CoA-T was added to a final concentration of 170 μM and fluorescence anisotropy measurement was
resumed. oAANAT data from a previous study are included for comparison [15]. Data are presented as the mean ± S.E.M (N = 3). For further
details see Methods.

Page 7 of 15

consistent with the view that the proline-containing tripeptide in the floppy loop of vertebrate AANAT enhances
binding of substrate.
Biochemical characterization of bfAANATα and bfAANATδ'

Activity as a function of pH: GST-bfAANATα and GSTbfAANATδ' both exhibited a pH activity profile that differed from that of ovine AANAT and yeast AANAT as
examined using 10 mM tryptamine as a substrate (Figure
5A). The pH optimum for GST-bfAANATα was determined to be 9.0, which differs substantially from published data on fish, ovine and yeast AANAT (6.1, 6.5 and
8.5, respectively) [8,42]. The pH optimum for GSTbfAANATδ' seems to be even higher. Similar results were
obtained using butylamine as a substrate (data not
shown).
Effect of AANAT bisubstrate inhibitor: Enzyme activity
was inhibited by the bisubstrate inhibitor CoA-T [36]
(Figure 5B). The IC50 value (3 μM) was found to be ~10fold greater than that reported for ovine AANAT [15].
Temperature dependence: The temperature optimum
for bfAANATα was found to be 36°C (Figure 5C). This is
similar to that of ovine AANAT (37°C), yeast AANAT
(42°C) or pike AANAT-1 (37°C) [8,11].
Substrate preference: The relative capacities of
oAANAT, bfAANATα and bfAANATδ' to acetylate a
diamine (putrescine), alkylamines (butylamine and propylamine) and arylalkylamines (PEA and tryptamine)
were determined at pH 6.8 for oAANAT, and 9.0 for
bfAANATα and bfAANATδ' (Figure 6) using GST-fusion
proteins. The activity of bfAANATs towards the substrates tested (10 mM) was relatively similar and fell
within a 5-fold range of activity; the highest activity was
observed with PEA, however, bfAANATα and
bfAANATδ' seemed to show a slight preference for
hydrophobic or polar substrates, respectively. The Km and
Vmax values were determined for five biogenic arylalkylamines: octopamine, PEA, tyramine, tryptamine and
serotonin (Figure 7, Table 1).
In contrast to the relatively broad substrate preference
profiles of bfAANATs observed with the substrates
tested, oAANAT exhibited markedly higher activity
towards the two indolamines, tryptamine and serotonin,
and lower activity towards putrescine, propylamine and
butylamine. This points to a marked difference in substrate preference: bfAANATα and bfAANATδ' exhibit a
broad capacity to acetylate amines, including arylalkylamines and a diamine, whereas oAANAT exhibits a
distinct preference for arylalkylamines with an aromatic
group, including serotonin, PEA and tryptamine.
Control of the abundance of blAANAT transcripts

In some vertebrate species, the nocturnal increase in
AANAT activity is accompanied by a ~100- fold increase

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

Page 8 of 15

Figure 6 Comparison of acetylation activity of expressed vertebrate and amphioxus AANATs. Acetylation activity of GSTbfAANATα, GST-bfAANATδ' (both at pH 9.0) and GST-oAANAT (at pH
6.8) towards various substrates (10 mM) was determined. PUT: putrescine, PPA: propylamine, BTA: butylamine, PEA: phenylethylamine,
TRP: tryptamine. Data are presented as the mean ± S.E.M (N = 3). For
further details see Methods.

not appear that there are marked night/day differences in
expression of blAANATs, it is clear that small differences
do occur.
Analysis of tissue expression by RT-PCR
Figure 5 Enzyme activity of GST-bfAANATα and GST-bfAANATδ'.
A. pH optimum. Data are presented as the percent of maximal activity
for each protein. Data represent results of two independent experiments with the difference of means < 5%. For comparison, data for
ovine and yeast AANAT from a previous study are shown [8]. B. Inhibition of GST-bfAANATα by bisubstrate inhibitor CoA-T. C. Acetylation
activity of GST-bfAANATα towards tryptamine measured at different
temperatures to determine the optimum. Data represent results of
two independent experiments with the difference of means < 5%.
Data in B are presented as the mean ± S.E.M (N = 3). For further details
see Methods.

in the abundance of transcripts [7]. Here we used qPCR
to determine whether the abundance of blAANAT
mRNAs varied on a night/day basis (Additional file 14).
However statistically significant differences were only
observed for blAANATα. Accordingly, although it does

Investigation of tissue expression of blAANATα by RTPCR revealed the presence of mRNA along the whole
body (Figure 8). The identity of the product was confirmed by sequencing (GenBank accession number
EU635724; Additional file 4).
Daily changes in blAANAT activity

Homogenates of the heads of B. lanceolatum were used
for measurement of AANAT activity, using 10 mM PEA
as a substrate; CoA-T was added to determine the contribution from AANAT to total acetyltransferase activity. In
all conditions tested, activity was significantly higher in
heads sampled at midday than in those sampled at midnight (Table 2). Activity measured in the absence of
added substrate was more than 50% as high as that measured in the presence of exogenous substrate (PEA); in

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

Page 9 of 15

opposite seemed true at later stages. The first specific
hybridization signal was detected at the 8-cell embryo
and was stronger in 4 out of the 8 cells. At the blastula
stage most of the cells exhibited a diffuse labeling with
both probes; however, a group of cells exhibited a more
intense dark signal (Figure 9, left side). At the early neurula stage, the labeling appeared diffuse and weak with
the δζ probe, whereas some regionalization appeared
with the α probe. This tendency was even more apparent
at the late neurula stage where the α probe gave a specific
labeling in the antero-dorsal (head) and posterio-dorsal
parts of the embryo, as well as antero-ventrally in the
general area of the intestine. At the premouth stage, no
labeling with the α probe was detected, whereas the δζ
probe hybridized from head to tail in a dorsal band, corresponding to the neural tube.

Discussion
The publication of the near complete amphioxus genome
has marked a new era in understanding chordate evolution [18]. The studies presented in this report, which
were made possible by this advance, focus on one family
of genes and extends our understanding of this gene family in amphioxus and, potentially, in animals in general.
AANATs in the amphioxus genome and evolution of the
AANAT family

Figure 7 Enzyme activity of GST-bfAANATα and GST-bfAANATδ'
as a function of substrate concentration. The enzyme assay with
GST-bfAANATα and bfAANATδ' was measured at pH 9.0 and was performed as described in the Methods. Calculated values of Vmax and Km
are given in Table 1. Data are presented as the mean ± S.E.M (N = 3).

both cases, activity was nearly completely inhibited by
CoA-T, indicating that blAANAT acetylated endogenous
substrates during the assay. In other studies this rhythm
was confirmed, however a similar daily change was not
observed in animals housed in constant darkness or constant lighting (Table 3). A detailed graph describing the
inhibition of acetylation activity in homogenates by CoAT is shown in Additional file 15.
In toto hybridization

Expression of one or both blAANATs was detected by in
toto hybridization at all stages examined, in varying patterns. Although it is difficult to quantify the colorimetric
reactions, it seemed that the α form was more highly
expressed than the δζ form at early stages, whereas the

Analysis of the amphioxus genome indicates that it lacks
a vertebrate-like AANAT. In contrast, our analysis shows
that the amphioxus genome contains a set of closely
related AANAT homologs that are similar in their gene
and protein architectures to homologs from invertebrates, protists, fungi, and bacteria. None of these nonvertebrate homologs possesses the defining structural
features of vertebrate AANATs.
The discovery of the family of AANATs in amphioxus
sheds light on the timing of the emergence of the typical
vertebrate AANATs that, most likely, occurred subsequent to the radiation of the vertebrate lineage from the
common ancestor with cephalochordates. It appears that
the change in the AANAT gene architecture at the base of
the vertebrate tree was accompanied by a substantial
acceleration of the evolutionary rate which is the likely
reason why the amphioxus AANAT homologs are more
similar to those from fungi and protists than to those
from vertebrates. The results of phylogenetic analysis of
the AANAT family presented here were not entirely conclusive owing, in part, to the relatively small number of
phylogenetically informative positions in the multiple
sequence alignment of the AANAT family, and in part, to
the non-uniformity of evolutionary rates, and perhaps, to
a rapid divergence associated with evolutionary transitions. The best ML (maximum likelihood) tree showed
multiple deviations from the species tree but the topology

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

Page 10 of 15

Table 1: Kinetic characteristics of GST-bfAANAT and GST-bfAANAT ' for selected amines.
Substrate
Phenylethylamine

Tyramine

Serotonin

Tryptamine

bfAANAT

α

δ'

α

δ'

α

δ'

α

δ'

Vmax

17.8 ± 1.1

4.9 ± 3

2.06 ± 0.28

0.78 ± .06

1.60 ± 0.1

0.56 ± 0.06

4.7 ± 0.8

2.7 ± 0.25

Km

3 ± 0.6

45 ± 36

8.2 ± 2.70

0.80 ± 0.28

0.01 ± 0.01

<0.01

8.1 ± 3.6

2.5 ± 0.7

Substrate
Octopamine

Propylamine

Butylamine

Putrescine

bfAANAT

α

δ'

α

δ'

α

δ'

α

δ'

Vmax

2.1 ± 0.2

0.80 ± 0.05

>10

0.73 ± 0.07

32.5 ± 4.1

0.7 ± 0.05

1.34 ± 0.32

5.11 ± 0.11

Km

6.8 ± 1.9

0.05 ± 0.01

>20

0.90 ± 0.37

47.5 ± 8.0

0.37 ± 0.23

5.2 ± 4.0

3.68 ± 0.22

Activity was measured at pH 9.0. Values are calculated from data in Figure 7. Vmax values are nmol/h/pmol enzyme and are given as the mean ±
S.E.M. (N = 3 to 6). For further details see Methods.

corresponding to the species tree, including the cephalochordate-vertebrate clade, could not be rigorously
rejected. Thus, the phylogeny of AANATs might follow
the organismal phylogeny of animals, taking into account
the apparent multiple losses, e.g., in arthropods, nematodes, and echinodermata, as well as accelerations of evolution, particularly, in vertebrates. Previous analyses of
the phyletic patterns and phylogenies of the AANATs led
to the suggestion that horizontal gene transfer, perhaps,
even into the animal lineage or the animal-fungal ancestral lineage was a major contribution to the evolution of
this family [43]. That possibility still remains considering

Figure 8 RT-PCR localization of blAANATα expression. The PCR
conditions were as described in the Methods with the forward and reverse RT-PCR primers given in Additional file 1. Note that this PCR was
obtained with sexually active B. lanceolatum (i.e., parts 2 to 6 contained
eggs).

the patchy phyletic distribution of the AANATs and the
irregularities in the topologies of the phylogenetic trees,
such as the polyphyly of fungi and the unusual assortment of protists. However, given the lack of strong resolution in the trees, the major changes in evolutionary
rates like the one in vertebrates, and the extreme propensity of the AANAT family for gene loss, scenarios that
involve unusual routes of horizontal transfer should be
addressed with much caution.
Biochemical features of bfAANATα and bfAANATδ'

The biochemical characteristics of bfAANATα and
bfAANATδ' were analyzed in this study. Both appear to
have significantly lower intrinsic activity at pH 6.8 as
compared to oAANAT. The substrate preference spectrum of the bfAANATs is broader than that of oAANAT.
As with other non-vertebrate AANATs, these differences
are likely to reflect differences in the primary structure of
the enzyme, including the presence in vertebrate AANAT
of two histidines near the site of acetyl transfer. These are
thought to be part of a proton wire which accelerates
catalysis by facilitating the expulsion of protons generated during acetyl transfer, thereby preventing their accumulation and the resulting acidification of the active site
(7).
Another important difference in the primary structure
between vertebrate and amphioxus AANATs occurs in a
floppy loop which is critical for catalysis, apparently by

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

Page 11 of 15

Table 2: Acetylation activity measured in tissue homogenates from heads of B. lanceolatum
blAANAT activity
(nmol/h/μg of total protein)
Time of day

pH

Endogenous substrate

Exogenous + endogenous
substrates

Exogenous + endogenous
substrates
+ CoA-T

Midday

8.5

0.26 ± 0.15

0.68 ± 0.27

0.004 ± 0.002

0.08 ± 0.08

0.05 ± 0.05

0.001 ± 0.001

0.29 ± 0.08

0.47 ± 0.17

0.004 ± 0.001

Not detectable

Not detectable

Not detectable

Midnight
Midday

9.5

Midnight

Comparison of samples collected during day and night. The exogenous substrate is 10 mM PEA; 1 mM CoA-T has been used for inhibition.
Data are given as the mean ± S.E.M. (N = 3 to 6).

increasing the dwell time of amine stubstrates in the
binding pocket [15]. The floppy loop of the vertebrate
AANATs is three residues longer than that of known
AANAT homologs, including amphioxus. This addition
appears to enhance catalysis by directing the movement
of the floppy loop and preventing intramolecular interactions which inhibit binding. As a result, the off-rate of
substrate is substantially increased when these three residues are experimentally deleted [15]. During the course
of evolution these three residues were added and, as
shown here, this was associated with a decrease in the
off-rate relative to that of amphioxus and yeast AANATs
[15].
Regional expression of blAANAT

Our studies revealed that blAANATα is expressed
throughout the body (Figure 8), in contrast to the pattern
Table 3: Acetylation activity in different light/darkness
cycles
Lighting Conditions

blAANAT activity at pH 8.5
(nmol/h/μg of total protein)
Midday

Midnight

LD

0.299 ± 0.046

0.117 ± 0.046

LL

0.234 ± 0.063

0.256 ± 0.045

DD

0.271 ± 0.028

0. 354 ± 0.032

Acetylation activity under normal light/darkness changes (LD)
compared with constant light (LL) and constant darkness (DD)
conditions. The pH of the assay was 8.5; data are given as the
mean ± S.E.M. (N = 3 to 6).

of expression of vertebrate AANAT, which is primarily
limited to structures located in the head: pineal gland,
retina and in some cases the pituitary gland [44]. The
development of these structures is strongly dependent on
expression of the transcription factor Pax6. Pax6 expression in amphioxus is limited to the frontal organ and
lamellar organ; the latter has been identified as a possible
pineal precursor, based on its medial location and presence of photoreceptors in the tissue [45].
In toto hybridization

The in toto hybridization analyses revealed expression of
both α and δζ genes early in development in B. lanceolatum. It seems that the relative strength of expression
changes during development. blAANATδζ was found to
be expressed in a region close to the neural tube. This
observation and the finding that these bfAANATs acetylate the biogenic amines serotonin and octopamine
(Table 1, Figure 7), suggest to us that it is reasonable to
consider that these enzymes play a role in the metabolism
of these neurotransmitters.
The possible roles of amphioxus AANATs

The unexpected finding that several of the seven AANATs
in the amphioxus genome are expressed is in sharp contrast to the situation in vertebrates, most of which contain only a single AANAT. The existence of multiple
bfAANAT genes seems to be the product of several duplications of this gene because there is no evidence of
genome duplication events within the amphioxus line.
Thus, the AANATs of amphioxus represents a typical lineage-specific expansion of a paralogous gene family, a
phenomenon that is widely observed in eukaryotes and is
generally thought to reflect specific physiological adaptations [46]. The lineage-specific expansion of AANATs in

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

Page 12 of 15

Based on these findings, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that each of the bfAANAT paralogs plays a unique
biological role. This function is obviously not the time
keeping by melatonin synthesis as it is in vertebrates,
since there is no circadian rhythm in the blAANAT activity; moreover, no melatonin has been found in amphioxus
(our unpublished observation), and attempts to identify
melatonin receptors in amphioxus were unsuccessful
[47]. One likely function of bfAANATs is detoxification.
As discussed above, this possibility is supported by the
observation that bfAANATα and bfAANATδ' acetylate
diamines and alkylamines, in addition to arylalkylamines.
Amphioxus lives buried in sediment, and, under these
conditions, a wide range of AANAT substrates might be
generated as a result of biodegradation. These molecules
could be nonspecifically ingested or otherwise absorbed
by the organism and as a result might represent a challenge to amphioxus physiology. Under these circumstances, the presence of multiple copies of AANAT would
provide a critical survival advantage. Considering the
similarity between the life styles of amphioxus and
Trichoplax, it is tempting to speculate that these animals
experience similar pressures from toxic environmental
molecules, driving the fixation of gene duplications in the
AANAT family. It is also possible that the functions of one
or more bfAANATs evolved from detoxification and pH
regulation to a more specialized role in neurobiology.
This suggestion is based on the evidence that demonstrated substrates of bfAANATα and bfAANATδ', serotonin and octopamine, are thought to play a role in
neurotransmission in amphioxus [48,49]. The acetylation
of these compounds by bfAANATs is likely to inactivate
them, thereby contributing to the process of neurotransmission by termination of neural stimulation. Transmitter inactivation is essential for efficient neural signaling.
In closing, it should be emphasized that the study presented here characterized only two of the seven
bfAANAT proteins. Accordingly, it is possible that other
family members have distinctly different substrate preferences and unique biological roles.
Figure 9 In toto hybridization of B. lanceolatum. Eggs and embryos
were hybridized as indicated in the Methods section either with the α
subtype (left column) or the δζ subtype (right column) probes. The
central column in the image presents the result of a typical control obtained using a sense probe. In these studies, both α and δζ sense
probes were used; neither produced labeling. Bar = 50 μm. For further
details see Methods.

amphioxus is the most extensive so far detected for this
family but smaller expansions are seen in Trichoplax, as
demonstrated here, and in teleost fish. The finding that
the amino acid sequences of some of the paralogous
amphioxus AANATs are less than 40% identical suggests
distinctly different substrate preferences, stability and
kinetic characteristics.

The implications of day/night changes in AANAT activity

We found a daily rhythm in total AANAT activity, with
high values during the day. The finding that a daily
rhythm in head AANAT activity did not persist under
constant light or constant darkness conditions is consistent with the interpretation that the AANAT rhythm is
not driven by a circadian clock, such as that found to
operate in the amphioxus head [50].

Conclusions
The unexpected finding of multiple bfAANAT homolog
genes points to the importance of this gene family in
amphioxus. The function of these genes appears to be
detoxification of exogenous and endogenous amines, the

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

latter including neurotransmitters. It will be of interest to
determine the precise distribution of each gene, how
their expression is regulated and how each gene contributes to amphioxus biology.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Primers used for cloning PCR, RT-PCR localization of
blAANAT expression and qPCR experiments. Cloning primers were
based on B. floridae genomic sequence and used to amplify the indicated
blAANATs.
Additional file 2 Pairwise comparison scores of protein sequences.
Pairwise comparison scores based on CLUSTALW multiple sequence alignment of deduced peptide sequences of all 7 amphioxus AANAT homologs
and their known alleles. Shaded boxes designate comparisons between
alleles. The coordinates of each gene and allele (') in genomic assembly v1.0
are (scaffold number:sequence location): bfAANATα, 54:2,458,444-2,459,187;
bfAANATα', 56:737,209-736,466; bfAANATβ, 54:2,461,188-2,461,679;
bfAANATβ', 56:734,493-734,002; bfAANATγ, 54:2,488,683-2,489,174;
bfAANATγ', 56:702,576-702,085; bfAANATδ, 54:2,491,399-2,491,929;
bfAANATδ', 54:699,628-699,095; bfAANATε, 200:1,410,854-1,410,362 (includes
deletion of 1 of 6 consecutive A's at bp 133 to maintain reading frame);
bfAANATζ, 200:1,409,115-1,408,588; bfAANATη, 234:825,177-825,883
(includes insertion of 1 base [4th A] at position 442 to maintain reading
frame); bfAANATη', 81:2,115,130-2,115,834 (includes insertion of 1 base [4th
T] at position 106 to maintain reading frame; and deletion of 1 base [4th G]
at position 652 to maintain reading frame).
Additional file 3 Positioning of the 7 genes for bfAANAT on the assembly scaffolds as given in B. floridae genome assembly v2.0.
Additional file 4 Comparison of deduced amino acid sequences of
characterized AANATs to reference genomic sequences. A. AANATα. B.
AANATδ'. (g) denotes derived from the published B. floridae genomic
sequence. (c) denotes cloned from B. floridae head cDNA, and are the full
length recombinant proteins used for enzyme characterization. (f ) denotes
a partial fragment cloned from B. lanceolatum head cDNA and used as a
probe for in toto hybridization. Highlighted residues are those that differ
from the published B. floridae genomic sequence. "--", gap inserted to preserve alignment; "...", missing sequence.
Additional file 5 List of species used for construction of phylogenic
tree. List of species containing AANAT homologs used for the construction
of the phylogenetic tree shown in Figure 2. "gi" numbers precede the species name, where available; the source of the sequence is given in parentheses. Sequences for which "gi" numbers are not available are given in
Additional file 6.
Additional file 6 FASTA sequences of AANAT homologs. FASTA
sequences of those of AANAT homologs used for the construction of the
phylogenetic tree shown in Figure 2, but not having "gi" numbers, (as listed
in Additional file 5).
Additional file 7 Multiple alignment used for construction of the phylogenic tree. Multiple sequence alignment of the conserved regions of
selected AANAT sequences from various species used for the construction
of the phylogenetic tree in Figure 2. Species included in this alignment are
given in Additional file 5.
Additional file 8 Average evolutionary distance (substitution per
position) between major taxonomic groups for AANAT proteins based
on the truncated alignment shown in Additional file 7 (JTT substitution model, gamma distribution 1).
Additional file 9 Average differences (p-distance) between major taxonomic groups for AANAT proteins, based on the truncated alignment shown in Additional file7, calculated using the MEGA
program34[34].
Additional file 10 Average percent identity between major taxonomic groups for AANAT proteins based on the truncated alignment
shown in Additional file7, calculated from Additional file9.
Additional file 11 Model of constrained large-scale taxonomic topology tree of selected AANAT sequences.

Page 13 of 15

Additional file 12 Topology tree - normal view. Reconstructed constrained large-scale taxonomic topology tree of selected AANAT sequences
- normal view based on model shown on Additional file 11. The scale bar
represents the number of substitutions per position; numbers in parenthesis show number of species. The number at internal branches shows the
bootstrap support (%).
Additional file 13 Topology tree - radiation view. Reconstructed constrained large-scale taxonomic topology tree of selected AANAT sequences
- radiation view based on model shown on Additional file 11. The scale bar
represents the number of substitutions per position; numbers in parenthesis show number of species. The number at internal branches shows the
bootstrap support (%).
Additional file 14 Comparison of day/night expression of three
blAANATs detected by qPCR in the head and body of amphioxus. Primers used are given in Additional file 1. Asterisk indicates statistical significance of day/night differences. Data are presented as the mean ± S.E.M. (N
= 3). For further details see Methods.
Additional file 15 Inhibition of acetylation activity. Inhibition of acetylation activity in homogenate from amphioxus heads at pH 8.5 using 10
mM PEA and 0.5 mM AcCoA as a substrate and various concentrations of
CoA-T as an inhibitor. Data are presented as the mean ± S.E.M. (N = 3).
Abbreviations
AANAT: arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase; oAANAT: ovine AANAT; scAANAT:
Saccharomyces cerevisiae AANAT; bfAANAT: B. floridae AANAT; blAANAT: B. lanceolatum AANAT; AcCoA: acetyl coenzyme A; AU: arbitrary unit; CoA-HNE:
hydroxynaphthylethylamine coenzyme A; CoA-T: tryptamine coenzyme A;
DTT: dithiothreitol; GST: glutathione S-transferase; PBS: phosphate buffer saline;
PEA: phenylethylamine; TCEP: tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine.
Authors' contributions
JP performed biochemical, physico-chemical, molecular biological studies and
drafted the manuscript, SS participated in biochemical studies, LB participated
in biological studies, SLC participated in molecular genetic studies and helped
to draft the manuscript, JLW participated in biochemical studies, GB, PG and JF
participated in biochemical and biological studies, MVO and EVK performed
sequence and phylogenetic analysis and DCK conceived of the study, participated in its coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NIH Intramural Research Program through the
NICHD, National Institutes of Health. The costs of publication of this article
were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section
1734 solely to indicate this fact. Work was also supported by the CNRS, UPMC
and the French National Research Agency (project TEMPANAT, ANR-07-BLAN0097). We are grateful to Dr. Dan L. Sackett for help with fluorescence measurement and Drs. Howard Jaffe and Sam J. Clokie for help with the MALDI-TOF
analysis of protein samples.
Author Details
1Section on Neuroendocrinology, Program in Developmental Endocrinology
and Genetics, The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 20892, MD,
USA, 2Laboratoire Arago, UPMC-Paris 6 and CNRS, FRE 3247 & GDR 2821,
Facteurs du Milieu & Mécanismes Adaptatifs, Banyuls/Mer, 66651, France,
3Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle (MNHN), 43 rue Cuvier, Paris, 75005,
France and 4National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of
Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 20894, MD, USA
Received: 30 July 2009 Accepted: 25 May 2010
Published: 25 May 2010
© 2010 Pavlicek et al; licenseedistributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154
BMC article is available article BioMed Central Ltd.
Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154

References
1. Dyda F, Klein DC, Hickman AB: GCN5-related N-acetyltransferases: a
structural overview. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2000, 29:81-103.
2. Coon SL, Klein DC: Evolution of arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase:
emergence and divergenceMol Cell Endocrinol. Mol Cell Endocrinol
2006, 252:2-10.

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

3.

4.

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

Vetting MWS, de Carvalho LP, Yu M, Hegde SS, Magnet S, Roderick SL,
Blanchard JS: Structure and functions of the GNAT superfamily of
acetyltransferases. Arch Biochem Biophys 2005, 433:212-226.
Klein DC, Coon SL, Roseboom PH, Weller JL, Bernard M, Gastel JA, Zatz M,
Iuvone PM, Rodriguez IR, Begay V, Falcon J, Cahill GM, Cassone VM, Baler R:
The melatonin rhythm-generating enzyme: molecular regulation of
serotonin N-acetyltransferase in the pineal gland. Recent Prog Horm Res
1997, 52:307-357.
Coon SL, Roseboom PH, Baler R, Weller JL, Namboodiri MA, Koonin EV,
Klein DC: Pineal serotonin N-acetyltransferase: expression cloning and
molecular analysis. Science 1995, 270:1681-1683.
Arendt J: Melatonin and the Mammalian Pineal Gland. London:
Chapman and Hall; 1995.
Klein DC: Arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase: "the Timezyme". J Biol
Chem 2007, 282:4233-4237.
Ganguly S, Mummaneni P, Steinbach PJ, Klein DC, Coon SL:
Characterization of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae homolog of the
melatonin rhythm enzyme arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (EC
2.3.1.87). J Biol Chem 2001, 276:47239-47247.
Liu B, Sutton A, Sternglanz R: A yeast polyamine acetyltransferase. J Biol
Chem 2005, 280:16659-16664.
Begay V, Falcon J, Cahill GM, Klein DC, Coon SL: Transcripts encoding two
melatonin synthesis enzymes in the teleost pineal organ: circadian
regulation in pike and zebrafish, but not in trout. Endocrinology 1998,
139:905-912.
Coon SL, Begay V, Deurloo D, Falcon J, Klein DC: Two arylalkylamine Nacetyltransferase genes mediate melatonin synthesis in fish. J Biol
Chem 1999, 274:9076-9082.
Falcon J, Gothilf Y, Coon SL, Boeuf G, Klein DC: Genetic, temporal and
developmental differences between melatonin rhythm generating
systems in the teleost fish pineal organ and retina. J Neuroendocrinol
2003, 14:378-382.
Zilberman-Peled B, Benhar I, Coon SL, Ron B, Gothilf Y: Duality of
serotonin-N-acetyltransferase in the gilthead seabream (Sparus
aurata): molecular cloning and characterization of recombinant
enzymes. Gen Comp Endocrinol 2004, 138:139-147.
Scheibner KA, De Angelis AJ, Burley SK, Cole PA: Investigation of the roles
of catalytic residues in serotonin N-acetyltransferase. J Biol Chem 2002,
277:18118-18126.
Pavlicek J, Coon SL, Ganguly S, Weller JL, Hassan SA, Sackett DL, Klein DC:
Evidence that proline focuses movement of the floppy loop of
arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.87). J Biol Chem 2008,
283:14552-14558.
Iyer LM, Aravind L, Coon SL, Klein DC, Koonin EV: Evolution of cell-cell
signaling in animals: did late horizontal gene transfer from bacteria
have a role? Trends Genet 2004, 20:292-299.
Fuentes M, Schubert M, Dalfo D, Candiani S, Benito E, Gardenyes J, Godoy
L, Moret F, Illas M, Patten I, Permanyer J, Oliveri D, Boeuf G, Falcon J,
Pestarino M, Fernandez JG, Albalat R, Laudet V, Vernier P, Escriva H:
Preliminary observations on the spawning conditions of the European
amphioxus (Branchiostoma lanceolatum) in captivity. J Exp Zoolog B
Mol Dev Evol 2004, 302:384-391.
Putnam NH, Butts T, Ferrier DE, Furlong RF, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Robinson-Rechavi M, Shoguchi E, Terry A, Yu JK, Benito-Gutiérrez EL,
Dubchak I, Garcia-Fernàndez J, Gibson-Brown JJ, Grigoriev IV, Horton AC,
de Jong PJ, Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kohara Y, Kuroki Y, Lindquist E, Lucas S,
Osoegawa K, Pennacchio LA, Salamov AA, Satou Y, Sauka-Spengler T,
Schmutz J, Shin-I T, Toyoda A, Bronner-Fraser M, Fujiyama A, Holland LZ,
Holland PW, Satoh N, Rokhsar DS: The amphioxus genome and the
evolution of the chordate karyotype. Nature 2008, 453:1064-1071.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman
DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy
and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
Jobb G, von Haeseler A, Strimmer K: TREEFINDER: a powerful graphical
analysis environment for molecular phylogenetics. BMC Evol Biol 2004,
4:18.
Whelan S, Goldman N: A general empirical model of protein evolution
derived from multiple protein families using a maximum-likelihood
approach. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18:691-699.

Page 14 of 15

23. Jones DT, Taylor WR, Thornton JM: The rapid generation of mutation
data matrices from protein sequences. Comput Appl Biosci 1992,
8:275-282.
24. Müller T, Vingron M: Modeling amino acid replacement. J Comput Biol
2000, 7:761-776.
25. Henikoff S, Henikoff JG: Amino acid substitution matrices from protein
blocks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:10915-10919.
26. Kosiol C, Goldman N: Different versions of the Dayhoff rate matrix. Mol
Biol Evol 2005, 22:193-199.
27. Adachi J, Waddell PJ, Martin W, Hasegawa M: Plastid genome phylogeny
and a model of amino acid substitution for proteins encoded by
chloroplast DNA. J Mol Evol 2000, 50:348-358.
28. Dimmic MW, Rest JS, Mindell DP, Goldstein RA: rtREV: an amino acid
substitution matrix for inference of retrovirus and reverse transcriptase
phylogeny. J Mol Evol 2002, 55:65-73.
29. Veerassamy S, Smith A, Tillier ER: A transition probability model for
amino acid substitutions from blocks. J Comput Biol 2003, 10:997-1010.
30. Strimmer K, Rambaut A: Inferring confidence sets of possibly
misspecified trees. Proc Biol Sci 2002, 269:137-142.
31. Page RD: TreeView: an application to display phylogenetic trees on
personal computers. Comput Appl Biosci 1996, 12:357-358.
32. Shimodaira H: An approximately unbiased test of phylogenetic tree
selection. Syst Biol 2002, 51:492-508.
33. Felsenstein J: Inferring phylogenies from protein sequences by
parsimony, distance, and likelihood methods. Methods Enzymol 1996,
266:418-427.
34. Kumar S, Tamura K, Nei M: MEGA3: Integrated software for Molecular
Evolutionary Genetics Analysis and sequence alignment. Briefings in
Bioinformatics 2004, 2:150-163.
35. De Angelis J, Gastel J, Klein DC, Cole PA: Kinetic analysis of the catalytic
mechanism of serotonin N-acetyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.87). J Biol Chem
1998, 273:3045-3050.
36. Khalil EM, Cole PA: A potent inhibitor of the melatonin rhythm enzyme.
J Am Chem Soc 1998, 120:6195-6196.
37. Laemmli UK: Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the
head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 1970, 227:680-685.
38. Fuentès M, Benito E, Bertrand S, Paris M, Mignardot A, Godoy L, JimenezDelgad S, Oliveri D, Candiani S, Hirsinger E, D'Aniello S, Pascual-Anaya J,
Maeso J, Pestarino M, Vernier P, Nicolas JF, Schubert M, Laudet V,
Geneviere AM, Albalat R, Fernandez JG, Holland ND, Escriva H: Insights
into spawning behavior and development of the European amphioxus
(Branchiostoma lanceolatum). J Exp Zool B-Mol Dev Evol 2007,
308B:484-494.
39. Holland LZ, Holland PWH, Holland ND: Revealing homologies between
body parts of distantly related animals by in situ hybridization to
developmental genes: Amphioxus vs. vertebrates. In Molecular
Zoology: Advances, Strategies, and Protocols Edited by: Ferraris JD, Palumbi
SR. New York: Wiley-Liss; 1996:267-282.
40. Besseau L, Benyassi A, Moller M, Coon SL, Weller JL, Boeuf G, Klein DC,
Falcón J: Melatonin pathway: breaking the 'high-at-night' rule in trout
retina. Exp Eye Res 2006, 82:620-627.
41. Keeling PJ, Burger G, Durnford DG, Lang BF, Lee RW, Pearlman RE, Roger
AJ, Gray MW: The tree of eukaryotes. Trends Ecol Evol 2005, 20:670-676.
42. Benyassi A, Schwartz C, Coon SL, Klein DC, Falcon J: Melatonin synthesis:
arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferases in trout retina and pineal organ are
different. Neuroreport 2000, 11:255-258.
43. Iyer LM, Aravind L, Coon SL, Klein DC, Koonin EV: Evolution of cell-cell
signaling in animals: did late horizontal gene transfer from bacteria
have a role? Trends Genet 2004, 20:292-299.
44. Fleming JV, Barrett P, Coon SL, Klein DC, Morgan PJ: Ovine arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase in the pineal and pituitary glands: differences in
function and regulation. Endocrinology 1999, 140:972-978.
45. Glardon S, Holland LZ, Gehring WJ, Holland ND: Isolation and
developmental expression of the amphioxus Pax-6 gene (AmphiPax-6):
insights into eye and photoreceptor evolution. Development 1998,
125:2701-2710.
46. Lespinet O, Wolf YI, Koonin EV, Aravind L: The role of lineage-specific
gene family expansion in the evolution of eukaryotes. Genome Res
2002, 12:1048-1059.
47. Vernadakis AJ, Bemis WE, Bittman EL: Localization and partial
characterization of melatonin receptors in amphioxus, hagfish,
lamprey, and skate. Gen Comp Endocrinol 1998, 110:67-78.

Pavlicek et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:154
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/154

48. Moret F, Guilland JC, Coudouel S, Rochette L, Vernier P: Distribution of
tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine, and serotonin in the central nervous
system of amphioxus (Branchiostoma lanceolatum): implications for
the evolution of catecholamine systems in vertebrates. J Comp Neurol
2004, 468:135-150.
49. Burman C, Maqueira B, Coadwell J, Evans PD: Eleven new putative
aminergic G-protein coupled receptors from Amphioxus
(Branchiostoma floridae): identification, sequence analysis and
phylogenetic relationship. Invert Neurosci 2007, 7:87-98.
50. Schomerus C, Korf HW, Laedtke E, Moret F, Zhang Q, Wicht y: Nocturnal
behavior and rhythmic period gene expression in a lancelet,
Branchiostoma lanceolatum. J Biol Rhythms 2008, 23:170-181.
51. Chenna R, Sugawara H, Koike T, Lopez R, Gibson TJ, Higgins DG,
Thompson JD: Multiple sequence alignment with the Clustal series of
programs. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:3497-3500.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-154
Cite this article as: Pavlicek et al., Evolution of AANAT: expansion of the gene
family in the cephalochordate amphioxus BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010,
10:154

Page 15 of 15

</pre>
</body>
</html>
