<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Escherichia coli genome-wide promoter analysis: Identification of additional AtoC binding target elements</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-238"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Eleftherios Pilalis"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Escherichia coli genome-wide promoter analysis:
Identification of additional AtoC binding target
elements
Eleftherios Pilalis1, Aristotelis A Chatziioannou1*, Asterios I Grigoroudis2, Christos A Panagiotidis3,
Fragiskos N Kolisis1 and Dimitrios A Kyriakidis1,2*

Abstract
Background: Studies on bacterial signal transduction systems have revealed complex networks of functional
interactions, where the response regulators play a pivotal role. The AtoSC system of E. coli activates the expression
of atoDAEB operon genes, and the subsequent catabolism of short-chain fatty acids, upon acetoacetate induction.
Transcriptome and phenotypic analyses suggested that atoSC is also involved in several other cellular activities,
although we have recently reported a palindromic repeat within the atoDAEB promoter as the single, cis-regulatory
binding site of the AtoC response regulator. In this work, we used a computational approach to explore the
presence of yet unidentified AtoC binding sites within other parts of the E. coli genome.
Results: Through the implementation of a computational de novo motif detection workflow, a set of candidate
motifs was generated, representing putative AtoC binding targets within the E. coli genome. In order to assess the
biological relevance of the motifs and to select for experimental validation of those sequences related robustly
with distinct cellular functions, we implemented a novel approach that applies Gene Ontology Term Analysis to
the motif hits and selected those that were qualified through this procedure. The computational results were
validated using Chromatin Immunoprecipitation assays to assess the in vivo binding of AtoC to the predicted sites.
This process verified twenty-two additional AtoC binding sites, located not only within intergenic regions, but also
within gene-encoding sequences.
Conclusions: This study, by tracing a number of putative AtoC binding sites, has indicated an AtoC-related crossregulatory function. This highlights the significance of computational genome-wide approaches in elucidating
complex patterns of bacterial cell regulation.

Background
AtoSC is a two-component regulatory system that activates the transcription of the atoDAEB operon genes in
E. coli, the products of which are involved in the catabolism of short-chain fatty acids [1-3]. Acetoacetate has
been identified as the inducer of this system. Additionally, modulation of the poly-hydroxybutyrate (cPHB)
biosynthesis in E. coli by AtoC [1], and the effects of
spermidine [2] or histamine [3] on this process, suggest
a more critical metabolic role for this system.

* Correspondence: achatzi@eie.gr; kyr@chem.auth.gr
1
Institute of Biological Research and Biotechnology, National Hellenic
Research Foundation, 48 Vas. Constantinou Ave, GR-11635, Athens, Greece
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

The AtoC response regulator shares significant homology and characteristic properties with the NtrC-NifA
transcriptional factors that activate sigma-54 RNA polymerase [4]. The AtoC binding site was experimentally
verified as an inverted 40-bp palindrome (two identical
inverted 20-bp sites), located upstream of the transcription initiation site of the atoDAEB operon. These cis-elements were found to control both the promoter
inducibility by acetoacetate and AtoC binding. Moreover,
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments confirmed in vivo acetoacetate-inducible AtoC binding [5].
The role of AtoSC, however, appears not to be limited
to the regulation of the atoDAEB operon expression.
Transcriptomic and phenotypic analyses of all twocomponent systems (TCSs) in E. coli implied

© 2011 Pilalis et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

communication among several systems [6]. In particular,
deletion of atoSC genes resulted in a drastic alteration
of the mRNA profiles, reduced motility, salt sensitivity
and susceptibility to certain environmental agents.
Despite the documented in vitro cross-regulation
between the E. coli TCSs [7], the observation of such
phenotypes implies AtoSC specific effects. These data
suggest that other gene targets of the AtoSC TCS might
exist and their identification could shed further light
into the role(s) of this system.
Several approaches allow the prediction of transcription factor binding sites (TFBS). The most common of
these are based on already existing, experimentally verified gene targets of transcription factors, which contain
cis-regulatory elements in their promoter regions. The
DNA sequences upstream of the transcription start sites
(TSS) of these targets are used as input to various mathematical algorithms for the reconstruction of motif models, as for instance Gibbs Sampling [8] and overrepresentation of oligonucleotides [9]. Typically, these
motifs are mathematical representations of conserved
sub-sequences, emerging from a noisy background. The
idea is that conserved DNA patterns would be overrepresented in a group of transcriptionally related sequences
compared to a group of unrelated ones. Thus, conserved
DNA patterns of co-expressed genes are more likely to
be biologically relevant and hence to represent actual cisregulatory elements. While a common method to define
sets of co-expressed genes is transcriptomic analysis [10],
the incorporation of phylogenetic information in the
form of intergenic sequences upstream of orthologous
genes can further enhance the accuracy of the motif
detection. This is due to observations that regions playing
an important role in gene regulation are more likely to be
conserved even among different species [11-13]. Other
methodologies use pathway or gene function information
to assess co-regulation [14-16].
The common element in the aforementioned
approaches is the assumption of prior knowledge of an
adequate population of TFBS or the plethora of available
co-regulation data. Neither of these two approaches
could be used, however, for the prediction of the AtoC
binding sites, since only a single AtoC binding site has
been detected and the transcriptomic data are limited.
For these reasons we set out to predict and then to
detect AtoC binding sites through the setup of an iterative, genome-wide, ab initio detection method for the
specific transcription factor, without the requirement of
a population of target promoters or co-regulation data.
The aims were the in silico prediction of additional
binding sites, targeted by the AtoC response regulator
and the experimental validation of these sites in vivo,
using the ChIP technique.

Page 2 of 17

Results
Ab initio motif detection and evaluation procedure

In order to predict putative AtoC binding sites, we
implemented an ab initio motif detection procedure
(Figure 1). This procedure involved an iterative pairwise motif sampling process between the promoter of
the atoDAEB operon, which was used as the initial qualified sequence, and a pool of E. coli promoters (initial
promoter set). The promoter that showed the best
homology to the atoDAEB promoter sequences was
removed from the promoter pool and, together with the
initial qualified promoter sequence, formed the qualified
promoter set that was used for the next iteration of the
motif-sampling process, against an input promoter set.
In each iteration, the input promoter set is depleted by
the selected promoter, plus those promoter sequences
that scored below a predefined threshold (see Materials
and Methods). The goal of this procedure was to yield
motifs with maximized log-likelihood (ll) scores at the
specified positions, thereby revealing conserved intergenic sites corresponding to putative AtoC binding sites.
The ll-score represents an informative index of both the
level of motif conservation (information content) and
the number of its occurrences on a set of sequences.
Promoters containing sequences, which yield motifs
with high ll-scores, are pooled to form the final qualified
set of promoters, which is used for the derivation of a
best-scoring consensus motif.
Due to the fact that the MotifSampler program [17],
which was used in this analysis, implements a heuristic
algorithm, the sampling results are very sensitive to the
input parameters. In particular, different motifs are
obtained at the end of the procedure by slightly varying
the parameters, e.g. the motif length, the motif maximizing positions or the initial promoter set (see Material
and Methods). All these motifs represent different
instances of sequence conservation between promoters.
However, the sequence conservation among promoter
regions is relatively small and this implies that other factors, e.g. the chromatin context or the formation of
other transcription factor complexes, also contribute to
the effective AtoC binding. Thus, among different sets
of conserved sequences only a few would be biologically
relevant. To cope with this issue and capture the highest
possible number of biologically relevant motifs, the
computational pipeline was applied many times with
slight variations regarding the input parameters. Subsequently the biological relevance of the obtained motifs
was assessed by implementing a Gene Ontology Term
statistical analysis (see Materials and Methods).
Three executions of the procedure generated motifs
that successfully passed the GOT test and were correlated with gene functions (Table 1). The first execution

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

Page 3 of 17

Figure 1 Workflow chart of the ab initio motif detection procedure. A) The chart describes the algorithmic steps for the ab initio motif
detection process. The thick arrows correspond to algorithmic flows after decision points, the dashed arrows represent initialization steps which
are performed uniquely and the dotted arrows (Motif Searching part) concern independently implemented alternative data processing scenarios.
The details of the procedure are described in Materials and Methods. B) Description of the workflow symbols.

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

Page 4 of 17

Table 1 The three executions of the motif detection procedure
Executions Specified positions upstream
TSS

Initial promoter set

Qualified promoter set

1

from -184 to -165

All E. coli promoters

atoD, galU, yhjR-bcsE, narZ, puuP, mdlA, dmsA, crr

2

from -184 to -165

sigma-54 factor-related
promoters

atoD, rtcR, ibpB

3

from -184 to -165

Two-component target
promoters

atoD, dmsA, borD, csgD, pstS, glnH, dctA, yebE, nirB, torC, asr, tppB,
acrD,

The computational workflow was performed many times varying different parameters. Here are shown the three successful executions that corresponded to
three different initial promoter sets.

was initiated by pair-wise motif sampling the -184 to
-165 region of the atoDAEB promoter, strictly containing the half AtoC binding sequence, against all E. coli
promoters (initial promoter set, see Materials and Methods). The second execution also used the strict positions
of the AtoD binding site but with the initial promoter
set narrowed to only the sigma-54 dependent promoters
from the RegulonDB database [18] because the atoDAEB promoter is itself sigma-54-dependent. The third
execution was performed using another narrowed initial
promoter set, consisting of the 57 promoters which are
annotated in the E. coli K-12 EcoCyc database [19] as
targets of response regulators of other TCSs. The three
motifs derived from each execution are presented in
Table 2. Besides these three successful executions, other
attempts resulted to motifs that failed to yield GOT
over-representation and they were hence discarded (data
not shown), with the exception of motif 4 (see below).
All retained motifs are provided in Additional File 1.
Genome-wide motif searching using the motifs obtained
by the iterative procedure coupled to the
Hypergeometric Test for Gene Ontology Term
overrepresentation correlate motifs with gene functions

The biological relevance of the derived motifs was established by an algorithmic procedure, where each motif is
used as input for genome-wide screening (Motif Searching) and the genes found to contain matching sequences
within their promoter regions are tested through the
Hypergeometric Test for Gene Ontology Term overrepresentation. Thus, if overrepresentation of a particular
Table 2 The four different motifs matching the
palindromic AtoC binding site
Motif
No.

Log-likelihood
score

Consensus

Motif 1

117.6

GCkATrCrrnnATTTrCwCA

Motif 2

51.8

GnGnAAnTTyCTGCAwAGCC

Motif 3
Motif 4

168.6
66.3

Logo

wnnnwrsAwAwmrnknmAnr
nCknATnmGrnnnTnACGCm

Motifs 1-3 are the top scoring motifs derived of each of the three
aforementioned executions. Motif 4 is an intermediary motif of unexpectedly
high conservation among different intergenic regions.

GOT is observed among the genes to which the motif
hits were attributed, there is statistical evidence that this
gene set was not randomly generated. As the permutation-derived corrected p-values impose a significant
strictness into the statistical procedure, and since pvalue correction discards the majority of GOT, which
lack sufficient representation among the input genes,
larger (more permissive) hit populations were required
to ensure good statistical representation of all possible
outcomes. Thus, the results of the Motif Searching algorithm significantly enriched the hit population (Table 3),
since the qualified promoter sets were too small to yield
GOT overrepresentation. In this way, the three aforementioned motifs were correlated to gene functions
(Table 4) and they were selected for experimental validation. It is worth noting here, that not all these hits
can map effective, functional binding sites under all
experimental conditions; they rather represent putative
targets, based on their sequence content. The statistical
correlation with biological functions reveals slightly conserved sequences that are potentially inclined toward
interaction with particular transcription factors. The
GOT analysis, as implemented in this work, evaluates
whether the information content captured by a motif
implies random noise or is a biologically relevant one.
Evaluation of lower-scoring motifs and retention of Motif 4

In addition to the highest-scoring motifs, we also investigated motifs with intermediary correspondence to the
AtoC-binding site. These motifs were initially discarded
from the automatic procedure due to the stringent parameterization to retain only the highest-scoring motifs for
the specified position. In order to overcome this limitation
and test the discovery strengths of the proposed analytic
Table 3 Number of hits per motif at 0.7 prior probability
Motif

Hits (promoters)

Hits (ORFs

1

55

234

2

153

694

3

331

688

4

346

266

While motifs 1-3 matched more ORFs than intergenic sites, motif 4 matched
an uncommonly conserved intergenic region.

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

Page 5 of 17

Table 4 Results of the Gene Ontology Term Analysis
GO id

Term

Corrected
p-value

FDR
(%)

Enrichment
in hits

Percentage
in hits

Enrichment in
genome

Percentage in
genome

3/67

4.47

10/4339

0.23

Motif 1
GO:0016638

oxidoreductase activity, acting on the CHNH2 group of donors

0.066

12.00
Motif 2

GO:0015749

monosaccharide transport

0.045

10.00

4/154

2.59

891101

0.23

GO:0022891

substrate-specific transmembrane
transporter activity

0.006

0.00

22/154

14.28

254/4339

5.85

GO:0043169

cation binding

0.012

0.00

37/154

24.02

570/4339

13.13

GO:0008324

cation transmembrane transporter activity

0.076

2.33

13/154

8.44

128/4339

2.94

0.00

53/324

16.35

372/4339

8.57

Motif 3
GO:0045449

regulation of transcription

0.001

GO:0007155

cell adhesion

0.027

0.00

10/324

3.08

34/4339

0.78

GO:0001101

response to acid

0.042

0.12

4/324

1.23

5/4339

0.11

GO:0009289

fimbrium

0.032

0.00

8/324

2.46

28/4339

0.64

GO:0003700

transcription factor activity

0.01

0.00

32/324

9.87

208/4339

4.79

GO:0051234

establishment of localization

7.82E-04

0.00

40/110

36

800/4339

18

GO:0005215

transporter activity

3.91E-03

0.00

30/110

27

561/4339

13

Motif 4

Results of the GOT analysis of motifs 1, 2, 3 and 4, at prior probability set to 0.7 (corrected p-value cut-off set to 0.1).

pipeline in this work, we applied this to motifs that score
lower during the Motif Sampling phase (assuming that
they reveal weak matching with the atoDAEB promoter
binding site) and examined them separately regarding
their evaluation in the GOT analysis. In general, the hits
of intermediary motifs either overlapped those of the highest-scoring motifs or did not provide any overrepresented
GOT and so they were discarded (data not shown). Motif
4, however, is an exception. This intermediary motif was
retained (Table 2) because it matched an unexpectedly
highly conserved repeat. This particular repeat corresponds to an uncommonly conserved intergenic site present in many intergenic regions and yielded a significant
GOT overrepresentation, when submitted individually to
the motif evaluation sub-procedure.
The enrichment of motif 4 is particularly high within its
hits (at 0.7 prior probability motif 4 comprises 346 hits on
promoter regions; data provided in Additional File 2) due
to the very high sequence conservation, and despite its
restrictive character, which yields a lower log-likelihood
score (66.3). Therefore, motif 4 was strongly correlated to
the GOT Transporter Activity function (Table 4).
Motif 4 resides within a ~40-bp highly conserved repeat
found in many E. coli promoters

Motif 4 weakly matched the palindromic AtoC binding
site in the promoter of the atoDAEB operon [5] and at the
same time it strongly matches an unexpectedly conserved
~40-bp repeat present in a significant number of

promoters (motif 4 searching results, Additional File 2).
An additional motif, motif 5, was constructed in order to
represent this conserved region. The sequence of motif 5
at 0.7 prior probability is shown in Figure 2A. Motif 5 was
used for genome-wide screening and matched 85 intergenic sites, whereas it did not match any site within ORFs
(data provided in Additional File 2). The high degree of
conservation of this 40 bp repeat and its wide representation in the genome (Figure 2B) suggests a more pivotal
role in global E. coli regulatory mechanisms. The alignment of the first twenty hits shows unexpected sequence
conservation, for an intergenic region (Figure 3) where, for
example, there are 6 variants of the repeat with at least 38/
40 identity in various intergenic positions. The probability
of finding a 38-bp DNA sequence repeated by chance two
times is 1/0.2538 × 4 in the E. coli genome comprising 4.6
× 106 nucleotides. This result is even more pronounced if
we consider the absolute establishment of the repeat only
within intergenic regions and not within ORFs.
Interestingly, this highly conserved sequence was also
detected in many intergenic regions of other Enterobacteria such as Shigella flexneri, Salmonella enterica, Klebsiella pneumonia and Citrobacter coseri (data not shown).
Application of the computational procedure on the
transcription factor LexA as a demonstration of its
general effectiveness

In order to demonstrate that the computational procedure used here for the prediction of AtoC binding

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

Page 6 of 17

Figure 2 Motif 5. A) The sequence represents the highly conserved site of ~40 bp (based on 85 hits at 0.7 prior probability). B) The positions in
the E. coli genome of the 85 hits of motif 5. All hits are situated in intergenic regions. The gene names correspond to the genes downstream of
these intergenic regions. The arrow directions indicate the strand of each hit (to the right: strand +1; to the left: strand -1).

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

Figure 3 Alignment of 20 top hits of motif 5. The alignment of
20 top hits of motif 5 highlights the high sequence conservation of
a ~40 base pair-site located exclusively in intergenic regions (85 in
total) and may have a putative global regulatory role in E. coli and
other Enterobacteria.

elements can be applied to other transcription factors,
we analyzed its effectiveness using LexA, a well-characterized transcription factor. LexA, which regulates the
transcription of several genes involved in the cellular
response (SOS response) to DNA damage or inhibition
of DNA [20], has been extensively studied and the multitude of experimentally identified DNA binding sites
that predicted its consensus [21] were also used as a
benchmark to assess the predictive capacity of our computational framework. By initiating the computational
analysis with one LexA binding sequence and querying
the whole promoter set of Escherichia coli K12 (motif
length 20, same parameters as for AtoC), we identified a
number of putative DNA binding sites, including thirteen known LexA binding sites. Moreover, the highestscoring GOTs generated from this procedure were
GO:0006974, “response to DNA damage stimulus” and
GO:0009432, “SOS response”, a finding that is in total
agreement with the established biological function of
LexA (the findings are presented in Additional File 3).
Experimental validation of the in silico predicted
sequences by in vivo binding of recombinant AtoC

ChIP experiments are routinely used to define whether a
DNA-binding protein recognizes a particular gene regulatory region in vivo. Regarding the system under study,
the specificity of the results obtained with this method
has already been demonstrated by the lack of AtoC
binding to its defined site in the regulatory region of the
atoDAEB operon in the E. coli strain BW28878, an
atoSC deletion mutant [6]. In contrast, in the isogenic
atoSC + strain BW25113 AtoC was found to bind this
site in vivo and this binding was more pronounced in
the presence of inducing acetoacetate [5]. Having

Page 7 of 17

confirmed that AtoC binds in vivo to its a priori target,
ChIP experiments were used to define whether AtoC
binds to any of the putative targets that emerged from
the bioinformatics approach. Initially, we analyzed
potential AtoC binding to four such sequences, three
located within the dmsA, acr and fliA promoter regions,
and one located within the fliT gene-encoding region.
ChIP experiments indicated that AtoC binds to all four,
as well as in the control atoDAEB promoter (data not
shown). The specificity of the experimental approach
used was confirmed by the lack of any visible signal,
when the precipitations were performed either in the
absence of AtoC-specific antibody or in the atoSC¯
strain BW28878.
To further increase the probability that AtoC would
bind in vivo to even relatively low affinity targets predicted by the bioinformatic analysis, the experiments
were performed in E. coli BL21[DE3] transformed with
plasmid pHis10-AtoC [22] and overexpressing a recombinant His-tagged form of AtoC, recognised by an antiHis probe. Initially, we analyzed potential AtoC binding
to the hits of the qualified promoter sets and subsequently to additional hits of the motif derived from each
execution. Ten of the qualified promoters of Table 1
were tested and found positive for in vivo AtoC binding,
together with the already verified atoD: narZ [23], puuP
[24], dmsA [25], crr [26], rtcB-rtcR [27], borD [28] and
acrD [29]. ChIP analysis was also extended to accommodate targets derived from the Motif-Searching procedure while their cognate gene products suggested
biological relevance (presented in Table 5). Sequences
within six intergenic regions, i.e. metR-metE [30], trmAbtuB [31], ykgA-ykgQ [32], aegA-narQ [33,34], ymiA
[35], narZ [23], and cpxR-cpxP [36], which were
observed as hits by motif 1 searching (Table 2) were
selected for testing based both on their scores and their
putative functional relevance to the ato genes. The
results of the ChIP analysis for all intergenic regions
ascribed to motif 1 are included in Figure 4, which
clearly demonstrates the in vivo binding of recombinant
AtoC. Six additional promoters, i.e. borD [28], putAputP [37], acrD [29], adhP [38], rhaT-sodA [39,40] and
nirB [41], that are likely transcribed by sigma-54 polymerase and which matched motif 2, were similarly
tested for in vivo AtoC binding. Finally, both the borD
and acrD gene promoters, to which AtoC was found to
bind in vivo, share patterns with motif 3. Regarding the
top hits of motif 4 (Additional File 2), sseB and yjcH
were also among the positive targets. This result is
potentially significant since yjcH is cotranscribed with
acs and actP, which encode proteins involved in acetate
activation and transport, as part of the acs-yjcHG
operon [42-44]. All predicted targets matching motifs 2,
3 and 4 that gave a positive signal in genomic DNA

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

Page 8 of 17

Table 5 Sites experimentally tested for in vivo AtoC binding
Result

Site

Gene

Motif Strand

Site distance
from TSS
(Refseq)

Gene product

+

GCTATGCAGAAATTTGCACA

atoD

1,2,3,4

(+)

-184

-165

+

GCTATGCAGAAAATTGCGCA

atoD

1,2,4

(-)

-163

-144

acetyl-CoA: acetoacetyl-CoA transferase, subunit

+

GCTATAGAAATAATTACACA

dmsA

1,2

(-)

-69

-50

dimethyl sulfoxide reductase, anaerobic, subunit A [25]

acetyl-CoA: acetoacetyl-CoA transferase, subunit

+

GCCATGCGGGGATTTAATCA

puuP

1

(+)

-148

-129

putrescine importer [24]

+

GCCGTCCAGATGTTTACACA*

metRmetE

1

(-)

-87,
-170

-68,
-151

transcriptional activator [30]

+

GCGATTGTAGGGATTGCTCA*

trmAbtuB

1,(2)

(+)

-49,
-340

-30,
-321

tRNA (uracil-5-)-methyltransferase/ outer membrane transporter
[31]

+

ACTATACGGAAAATTCCACT*

ykgAykgQ

1,2

(-)

-235,
-55

-216,
-36

Putative transcriptional activator [32]

+

GTGATGGGATTATTTGATCT*

aegAnarQ

1

(-)

-147,
-79

-128,
-60

predicted fused oxidoreductase: FeS binding subunit and sensory
HK in TCS with NarP [33,34]

+

GCCTCGGAGGTATTTAAACA*

cpxRcpxP

1

(-)

-21,
-149

-2,
-130

response regulator in TCS with CpxA/ periplasmic protein;
combats stress [36]

+

GCGAGGCGGGTAATTAGACA

ymiA

1

(-)

-199

-180

small predicted membrane protein [35]

+

GGCCCAATTTACTGCTTAGG

crr

1,2

(+)

-28

-9

glucose-specific PTS component [26]

+

GCGGTGCAGGAGATTGCACA

fliT

1

(+)

127

146

predicted chaperone (flagellum) [46]

+

CCGGTCCAGGAATTTACTCA

narG

1

(-)

2

21

nitrate reductase 1, alpha subunit [23]

+

GCGAAACGATTAATTACACA

ycjM

1

(+)

94

113

glucosyltransferase predicted [64]

+

ACTGTACAGAAAGTTGCTCA

yeaM

1

(-)

668

687

transcription regulator (predicted) [65]

+

GCGGGTCAGGTAATTGCACA

gadA

1

(-)

959

978

glutamate decarboxylase A, PLP-dependent [66]

+

GACATGCAGTTGATTACACA

eutR

1

(+)

783

802

predicted transcription regulator [67]

+

GCGATCCAAAAGTTTACTCA

narZ

1

(+)

0

+ 19

nitrate reductase 2 alpha subunit [23]

+

CGGAGATTTCCCGCAAAGCC*

rtcBrtcR

2

(+)

-145,
-64

-126,
-45

sigma-54-dependent transcriptional regulator of rtcBA [27]

+

CGGCAAGTTTCGACATTGCC*

putAputP

2

(+)

-398,
-45

-379,
-26

fused transcriptional regulator/proline dehydrogenase/
carboxproline:sodium symporter [37]

-

GGGCATTTTCCTGCAAAACC*

rhaTsodA

3

(+)

-167,
-138

-148,
-119

L-rhamnose:proton symporter/superoxide dismutase [39,40]

-

GGATGATGTTCTGCATAGCA

adhP

3

(+)

-35

-16

ethanol-active dehydrogenase/acetaldehyde-active reductase [38]

-

TTTATAGAAATAGATGCACG

nirB

4

(-)

-205

-186

nitrite reductase, large subunit, NAD(P)H-binding [41]

+

TATGTGTAGAAAATTAAACA

borD

4,3

(+)

-59

-40

DLP12 prophage; predicted lipoprotein [28]
aminoglycoside/multidrug efflux system [29]

+

GTTCAGTATAAAAGGGCATG

acrD

2

(+)

-128

-109

-

GAAATAGAAATAGTTGAAAG

ykgE

4

(-)

-472

-453

predicted oxidoreductase [32]

+

CCGGATAAGGCGTTTACGCC

yjcH

4

(+),(-)

-114,
-122

-95,
-103

conserved inner membrane protein/ acetate transport [44]

-

CCGGATAAGACGTTTACGCC

yafJ

4

(+)

-193

-174

Unknown function, similarity to type II amidotransfease

+

CCGGATAAGGCGTTTACGCC

sseB

4

(+)

-125

-106

rhodanese-like enzyme [68]

Motif hits experimentally tested by ChIP analysis for in vivo AtoC binding. All annotations were provided by the Refseq database (Escherichia coli K12, Refseq id:
NC_000913). Underlined: hits in gene-encoding regions. *These hits represent a unique site per pair, which could be attributed as cis-regulatory element to both
flanking genes. As predicted by the GO Term analysis many of the targets are transcription factors, transporters and enzymes involved in oxidoreduction.

(Input Chromatins, see paragraph regarding specificity
of AtoC binding) were also analysed by ChIP and the
results are presented in Figure 5A. As becomes evident
in this figure, not all targets are recognised by AtoC
with the same intensity, even though the input chromatin signals share, as stated above, the same strong level
of intensity. This allows a certain prioritization of the

putative targets according to the strength of the AtoC
binding.
In vivo binding of AtoC to gene encoding regions

An interesting aspect of this bioinformatic analysis is the
detection of several potential AtoC binding sites, corresponding to the pattern of motif 1, within gene-

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

Figure 4 In vivo binding of recombinant AtoC to in silico
predicted potential targets of motif 1 in intergenic regions.
Results of a ChIP analysis by agarose gel electrophoresis (2% w/v) of
PCR amplification products generated by primers corresponding to
motif 1 hits and qualified promoters, included in Tables 1 and 5. All
ChIP preparations were carried out following acetoacetate
induction. Above each PCR product, generated by the specific
designated primers, the name of each gene or promoter region
comprising the motif sequence is denoted for each pair of lanes. All
AtoC additional binding targets are PCR tested (25 cycles) in two
ChIP preparations carried out without (-, left lanes) or with (+, right
lanes) AcAc induction (AA).

encoding regions. The hits of motif 1 screening within
ORFs are shown in Additional File 2. Seven of them
could have functional relevance to the ato system based
on their GOT analysis. ChIP experiments were performed to identify whether AtoC binds to them in vivo
and the results of this analysis were positive for six out
of the seven gene-encoding regions tested, i.e. fliT,
narG, ycjM, yeaM, gadA and eutR (Figure 6). Thus, it is
most likely that AtoC also binds within the gene-encoding regions predicted by the bioinformatic analysis,
although the functional relevance of this binding
remains unclear.
Specificity of AtoC binding to its predicted targets: the
effect of the acetoacetate inducer in vivo and in vitro
DNA-binding competition experiments

In order to assess the specificity of AtoC binding to the
predicted operators, we re-examined all ChIP analyses
by reducing the PCR cycles to twenty five, while ChIP
signals for both acetoacetate-induced and non-induced
cultures were analysed comparatively for each target.
AtoC was found to demonstrate increased affinity for
most of the predicted “atypical” sites only in the case
where acetoacetate, the inducer, was added to the cultures, while the abundant, over-expressed AtoC appears
able to bind the atoDAEB promoter with the same affinity, regardless of the presence of acetoacetate (Figures
4, 5 and 6). In an attempt to ensure consistency of the
results through the use of extra controls, chromatin

Page 9 of 17

input samples for all targets groups were also tested for
PCR positive signals in the absence of the His-probe
antibody precipitation. DNA signals of the chromatin
input for both induced and non-induced cultures, exhibited the same signal intensity (Figure 5B), which proves
that the signal intensity corresponding to each target
can be solely attributed to the AtoC binding, whereas
the absence of signal can be considered a sign of
absence or weak binding, rather than a mere coincidence caused by primer malfunction. Moreover, low
ChIP signals for the non-induced cultures provide negative controls, in the presence of both abundant AtoC
and the antibody, directly relating the presence of abundant positive signals to acetoacetate induced AtoC binding of the predicted targets, thus supporting our case.
To further address whether AtoC indeed binds to the
predicted targets, the aforementioned representative of
each of the three groups was also tested, together with
atoD, in gel retardation assays combining His10 -AtoC
with the PCR products that contain the predicted promoters or gene encoding regions. The specificity of the
DNA-AtoC interactions has already been verified by
competition experiments to evaluate the association of
AtoC with biotinylated atoD probe in the presence of
increasing concentrations of unlabeled specific (atoD) or
nonspecific DNA competitors [4,5]. As illustrated in Figure 7A, electrophoretic gel retardation assays showed
that all DNA targets exhibit binding to AtoC, following
incubation on ice for 25 min. However, this binding
appears to be less pronounced when compared with the
cognate, high-affinity AtoC binding site present in the
atoD promoter. The specificity of the results was further
verified by also performing DNA binding reactions on
ice for 30 min in the presence and absence of DNA
competitors as previously described [4,5]. Under these
conditions, His 10 -AtoC binding to the biotin-labelled
atoD probe was abolished either by the addition of
excess amounts of unlabelled cognate (atoD) competitor
or by unlabelled DNA competitors containing the novel,
atypical binding sites, i.e. metR-metE, acrD, narG (Figure
7B). The degree of specificity of the AtoC binding to
each of the predicted targets remains to be determined.

Discussion
The AtoSC two-component signal transduction system
is involved in the expression of the atoDAEB operon
encoding proteins required for the catabolism of shortchain fatty acids. Acetoacetate activates the AtoSC TCS,
and subsequently, the expression of the atoDAEB
operon genes. We have already shown that, upon acetoacetate activation, AtoC binds a 40-bp palindromic
sequence (two identical inverted 20-bp sites) located
upstream of the atoDAEB transcription start site and
activates the sigma-54-dependent expression of this

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

A

Page 10 of 17

B

Figure 5 Monitoring the AcAc effect on AtoC in vivo binding to its predicted “atypical” targets. A) All predicted targets matching motifs
2, 3 and 4 (Table 5), that gave a positive signal in genomic DNA, are ChIP analysed. All AtoC additional binding targets are PCR tested (25
cycles) in two ChIP preparations carried out without (-, left lanes) or with (+, right lanes) AcAc induction (AA). Input Chromatin samples are also
included representing positive genomic DNA signals for the sampled targets. B) Three selected targets representing each of the afore-mentioned
groups (metR-metE, narG and acrD) were also PCR tested together with atoD (25 cycles) using as templates input chromatin controls (Input
Chromatin) and immunoprecipitated preparations (ChIPs) from non-induced (-AA) or AcAc induced (+AA) cultures.

Figure 6 Detection of putative AtoC binding targets in gene
encoding regions. Selected motif 1 hits in gene encoding regions
(Table 5) were ChIP analyzed for in vivo AtoC binding by
electrophoresis of PCR products generated by primers specifically
designed to comprise the target motif sequence. The name of each
gene comprising the motif sequence is denoted above each lane.
The AcAc effect on the binding to each target is also denoted, as
stated in Figure 4.

operon [5]. A schematic representation of the atoSC and
atoDAEB region, as a well as the positions of the verified AtoC targets including the high-affinity binding site,
on the E. coli genomic map, is illustrated in Figure 8. In
addition to its role as a transcriptional activator, AtoC
has a second function as the posttranslational inhibitor
of ornithine decarboxylase, the key-enzyme in polyamine
biosynthesis [45]. These data underline the complexity
of the regulatory networks that are involved in maintaining the metabolic pathways and homeostasis in
bacteria.
Several lines of evidence indicate that the role of the
AtoSC TCS in the regulation of E. coli gene expression
might not be limited to the expression of the atoDAEB

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

B

Figure 7 Verification of AtoC in vitro binding to representative
“atypical” targets. A) Sample gel retardation experiments
illustrating His10-AtoC protein binding to DNA fragments atoD,
metR-metE, acrD (promoter) and narG (gene encoding) regions. As
described in Materials and Methods, following electrophoresis, gels
were first stained with Gel-Red dye and then with Coomassie blue,
and side-by-side photographs are shown. The lines above the GelRed stained lanes indicate the different probes combined with the
indicated His10-AtoC (AtoC) quantities. Arrows indicate bands that
were stained with both Gel-Red and Coomassie blue, corresponding
to band-shifting caused by the AtoC binding. Lines indicate free
proteins, not bound to corresponding DNA particles. B) Band shift
assay of His10-AtoC with a biotinylated fragment of the upstream
region of the atoDAEB operon. EMSAs were performed as described
in Materials and Methods with 10 ng of biotinylated atoD. The
addition of His10-AtoC (0.35 μM) and certain amounts of
competitive, non-biotinylated atoD, as well as metR-metE, acrD and
narG fragments is indicated. 2 μg of sonicated calf thymus
competitive, non-specific DNA were added in each reaction.

operon genes. Deletion of the atoSC locus results in the
inability of E. coli to catabolize short-chain fatty acids,
as well as in a number of other defects including downregulation of flagellar gene expression, defects in motility and chemotaxis, inability to use glucuronamide as
carbon source and sensitivity both to high osmotic pressure and to aminoglycoside antibiotics [6]. These pleiotropic effects could involve the phosphorylation of noncognate response regulators by the AtoS kinase and the
regulation of the expression of additional genes by
AtoC, as part of a cross-talk regulatory network. This
study exposed a number of promoters of related genes
that may serve as putative AtoC targets. These include
fliT that encodes a chaperone of the flagellar export system [46], and the neighboring fliA gene that encodes
the sigma-28 polymerase, which activates transcription
of both flagellar and chemotaxis genes, including tar, tsr
and the flaA operon [47-49]. Additional potential AtoC
targets include acrD, which encodes a component of the
AcrAD-TolC multidrug efflux transport system and is
involved in bacterial response to a variety of aminoglycosides [29], puuP encoding an importer for putrescine
[24], the enzymatic product of ornithine decarboxylase
and the precursor of the polyamines spermine and spermidine [19] as well as yjcH encoding a conserved inner
membrane protein involved in acetate transport [44].
A defined consensus sequence for the AtoC binding
site would greatly facilitate the identification of potential
AtoC binding elements. However, the lack of

Page 11 of 17

experimentally verified AtoC binding targets other than
that upstream of the atoDAEB promoter [5], necessitates
the utilization of bioinformatics methodologies for the
task of predicting potential AtoC binding motifs. Therefore, we implemented an ab initio computational prediction of additional targets, using half the verified
palindromic sequence of the AtoC binding site [5] as
the sole input. The process, executed many times with
slightly varying parameters, generated different motifs,
which were tested through statistical GOT enrichment
analysis for their biological relevance. The qualified
motifs defined a pool of putative AtoC binding sites present within either intergenic or gene-encoding regions
of the E. coli genome. The biological validation of the in
silico-obtained predictions was performed by ChIP
assays that demonstrate AtoC binding in vivo. These
experiments validated the computational approach, since
AtoC was found to bind in vivo in twenty-one of the
predicted target sequences. As predicted by the GOT
analysis, many of the targets are transcription factors,
transporters and enzymes effecting cellular redox state
(Table 5).
As no high homology is shared among the primary
sequences of the confirmed AtoC binding sites, the
extrapolation of a strict consensus sequence remains
elusive. Previous studies have shown that global bacterial transcription factors can recognize multiple noncanonical binding sites that do not conform to a consensus site [50,51]. Our computational workflow
bypassed this issue by revealing slightly conserved, yet
functionally effective, AtoC binding sites that do not
conform to a global consensus. Another interesting
aspect of this analysis is that AtoC binds in vivo not
only to intergenic sequences but also to a number of
gene-encoding regions. It is not clear whether this
binding has a regulatory (possibly enhancing) impact
on the expression of these genes or whether it serves
some other purpose, such as quenching the amounts
of available AtoC within the E. coli cell milieu. AtoC,
like other response regulators, could in theory affect
bacterial gene expression from a distance [52], in a
manner analogous to that of eukaryotic enhancer-binding transcription factors [53]. However, this is not
necessarily the case, since there is at least one report
of response regulator binding to gene-encoding regions
without obvious effects on gene expression [54]. The
presence of alternative transcriptional factor DNA targets of unknown function has been recently demonstrated [55], showing that CtrA, a bacterial response
regulator, binds a second category of weak DNA targets. Questions remain regarding the conditions governing the AtoC binding to these sites in vivo, i.e.
whether AtoC binds alone or in conjunction with
some other factor(s).

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

Page 12 of 17

ykgA-ykgQ
trmA-btuB
4600 kbp

cpxR-cpxP
yjcH

metR-metE

borD

4200 kbp

600 kbp
dmsA

rtcB-rtcR

gadA
3600 kbp

putA-putP
1200 kbp
puuP

narG
ymiA
ycjM
narZ

3000 kbp

sseB

eutR
2400 kbp

1800 kbp
yeaM

fliT
acrD
aegA-narQcrr

atoB

atoE

atoA

atoD

atoC

atoS

GCTATGCAGAAAATTGCGCA C TGTGCAAATTTCTGCATAGC
-106

-125 -127

-146

Figure 8 Location of atoS-atoC, atoDAEB operon genes relative to the positions of the verified AtoC targets on the E. coli genomic
map. The positions of the additional twenty-two experimentally verified AtoC binding sites, are shown on the circular E. coli genomic map, with
the arrows indicating the direction of transcription. The atoSC and atoDAEB regions are expanded and the sequence of the inverted palindromic
repeat, representing the AtoC original target, is shown in the boxes.

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

There is a high probability that existing public microarray data cannot reveal the full extent of the biological
relevance of the AtoSC system, since those data were
obtained from cells grown in very rich media. Our data
clearly indicate that conditions promoting the activation
of the AtoSC TCS, i.e. the presence of the acetoacetate
inducer, are required to promote AtoC binding to the
predicted sequences. In this sense, microarray experiments from cells exposed to AtoSC inducers, and the
subsequent correlation of these data with the novel
AtoC binding targets presented here, could provide significant information on the biological importance of the
AtoSC TCS.
Furthermore, the wealth of novel AtoC-binding sites,
some of which are present within gene-encoding
sequences, should be further analyzed for their functional significance in gene regulation. While this may
not be a trivial task, especially when taking into account
the large number of targets, it should provide insight
into the regulation of bacterial gene expression from a
distance.

Conclusions
The scope of this work was to employ an ab initio motif
detection approach, coupled with gene ontology analysis,
in order to define novel binding elements for the bacterial transcription factor AtoC. This approach identified a
number of sequences which, albeit their divergence,
were recognized by AtoC in vivo. Overall, this study
underlines the emergent complexity of a possible AtoCrelated regulatory network which may contribute to the
pleiotropic effects of AtoC.
Materials and methods
Computational Tools

All procedures were implemented on a Linux workstation using a combination of Perl scripts interacting with
the specified INCLUSIVE programs for motif analysis
(MotifSampler, MotifSearch, MotifRanking) [17]. All
sequences, annotations and intermediary results were
stored and queried in a Mysql database using the PerlMysql interface DBI library.
Selection of promoters

The promoters are defined here as the sequences from
-250 to +30 relative to each transcription start site
(TSS). The annotations of the TSS and the genomic
sequence of Escherichia coli K-12 were extracted from
the Refseq database [56] (refseq id:NC_000913) using
Perl and Bioperl scripts. No overlap between two promoters was allowed and all intergenic sequences shorter
than 500 base pairs and between two genes encoded
respectively in -1 and +1 strands were entirely included

Page 13 of 17

and considered as promoters of both flanking genes in
the GO Term analysis step.
Definition of promoter sets

The initial promoter set is defined as the promoter pool
that is subjected to motif sampling. The different initial
promoter sets used in the three executions of this analysis are presented in Table 1.
The promoters submitted to each reiteration of motif
sampling represent the input promoter set. During the
first iteration the input promoter set, which equals the
initial promoter set, is subjected to motif sampling
against atoDAEB promoter sequences representing the
initial qualified promoter set. The number of promoters
within the input promoter set decreases after each
reiteration, since both a qualified promoter, as well as
promoters scoring below a threshold value (see below),
are eliminated from the pool. The qualified promoter
set, ever increasing by one, is then used for the next
iteration of the motif sampling process and the procedure advances until no more qualified promoters can be
found.
Iterative procedure for de novo motif detection

The de novo motif detection was performed using a
Gibbs sampling algorithm (implemented in INCLUSIVE
MotifSampler program [17]) in a multi-step procedure.
The first step of the procedure was a pair-wise motif
sampling between the atoDAEB operon promoter and
each of the other E. coli promoters of the initial promoter set (3789 in total in the case of the full set of E. coli
promoters), using the following parameters: A hundred
runs (detection of one motif per run permitted); motif
length 20; both strands; background model of order 3
(downloaded from the INCLUSIVE [17] web site for E.
coli K-12), with prior probability value 0.5. The program
retained the highest scoring motif.
In each iteration:
- A log likelihood (ll) score is estimated for every
motif derived from the pair-wise motif sampling
between each remaining promoter in the input promoter set and the qualified promoter set derived from the
previous sampling iterations.
- The promoter of the input promoter set yielding a
motif with the maximum ll-score within the specified
position of the atoDAEB promoter is retained and
added to the qualified promoter dataset. Thus, the qualified promoter set is derived through iterative
agglomeration.
- The motif sampling performs independent rounds
(same parameters as above) and datasets composed of n
+1 sequences, where “n” the number of sequences in
the dataset of the previous step (started by 2).

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

- When the ll score of a particular motif derived is
lower than the 30th percentile of all scores, then this
promoter is immediately eliminated from the input promoter set.
- Additionally when the position-specific maximum llscore of a motif within a promoter is either equal or
lower than the score derived in the previous step, then
this promoter is also removed from the input promoter
set.
In order to reduce the number of motif sampling
rounds, the elimination of promoters that are less probable to maximize the ll-scores of the detected motifs is
predicated, otherwise the screening procedure becomes
time-exhaustive and possibly non converging to a final
qualified promoter set, with an increasing number of
sequences embedded in the qualified promoter dataset.
The procedure was successfully performed three times
using all the same parameters except the initial promoter set. The first execution comprised the full set of all
E. coli promoters. For the other two executions the
initial promoter set was either the set of sigma-54dependent promoters retrieved from the RegulonDB
database [18] (argT, astC, chaC, dcuD, ddpX, fdhF,
glmY, glnA, glnH, glnK, gltI, hycA, hydA, hyfA, hypA,
ibpB, kch, nac, norV, potF, prpB, pspA, pspG, puuP,
rpoH, rtcB, rtcR, rutA, yaiS, ybhK, yeaG, yfhK, ygjG,
yhdW, zraP, zraS) or the set of promoters that comprise
binding sites for other response regulators of two-component systems and are annotated in the E. coli K-12
database EcoCyc [19] as targets of response regulators
(dmsA, emrK, gadE, yca, spy, cydA, sucA, cpx, rdoA,
ppiA, yqjA, acrD, ompC, mdtA, ftnB, yebE, ydeH, ycfS,
efeU, yccA, aroG, ppiD, degP, ybaJ, cusR, dctA, frdA,
dcuB, astC, kdpF, nrfA, nirB, hcp, napF, tppB, ompF,
csgD, psiE, pstS, asr, phoH, phoB, phoA, phoE, mgtA,
yrbL, mgrB, rstA, nagA, borD, hemL, ftsA, osmC, tnaA,
torC, uhpT, zraS). For all three executions, the positions
from -184 to -165 upstream the atoDAEB operon were
used as input parameter.
Motif Ranking

The motifs generated by Motif Sampling were ranked
and separated by Kullback-Leiber distance (INCLUSIVE
MotifRanking program [17]). The threshold was set to
0.9 which means that if the Kullback-Leiber distance
between two motifs is smaller than this threshold these
motifs are considered as similar.
Motif Evaluation and correlation with biological function

The evaluation of the motifs was performed by coupling
Motif Searching with Gene Ontology Term Analysis.
The motif searching hits were attributed to genes and
these genes were submitted to the Hypergeometric Test
for GO Test over-representation, described below.

Page 14 of 17

• Motif Searching

The position-specific probability matrices (PSPM) representing these motifs, were used for two types of motif
screening (INCLUSIVE MotifScanner program [17]);
one including all individually cut intergenic sequences
and another including all individually cut gene-encoding
sequences. For both screenings the prior probability
value was set to 0.7. The motif sequences were constructed by the WebLogo program [57]. For the
sequence alignment we used the Seaview program [58].
• Gene Ontology Term Analysis of the promoters containing
the motifs

In order to assess whether these motifs correspond to a
cis-regulatory element, we performed the Hypergeometric Test for GO Test over-representation in the
genes having a promoter, where a hit was observed at
the Motif Searching step. For the implementation of the
test, we used the GO::TermFinder Perl module [59].
The GO Term gene annotation used was the EBI Gene
Ontology Annotation (GOA) [60] for E. coli K-12
(84.4% coverage). The p-value threshold of the Hypergeometric Test was set to 0.1 for the first test and to
0.05 for the second one (for corrected p-value, using
1000 simulation runs) and we considered as the total
gene population the 4339 E. coli K-12 genes annotated
with GO terms.
Construction of motif 5

The promoters which contained hits of motif 4 were
submitted to MotifSampler with the same parameters as
the initial motif samplings, except from the motif length,
which was set to 40. For the visualization of the genomic positions of the hits of motif 5 we used the CGview
Server [61].
Bacterial strains and growth conditions

Cells were grown to their mid-exponential phase at 37°C
in 10 ml of modified M9 mineral medium supplemented
with 0.1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgSO4, 0.4% (w/v) glucose,
1 μg of thiamine/ml and 80 μg of proline/ml [62], in the
absence or presence of 10 mM acetoacetate. E. coli
BL21[DE3] cells carrying pHis10-AtoC plasmid [22] were
grown at 37°C in minimal medium containing 100 μg/
ml ampicillin. Induction of recombinant AtoC expression was achieved by addition of IPTG (0.25 mM) to
the cultures when the OD600 reached 0.25 and it was
allowed to take place for 4 hours. Acetoacetate, the
known inducer of the AtoSC TCS, was also added during the induction phase of the culture at a concentration
of 10 mM.
ChIP assays

ChIP assays were performed using chromatin from E.
coli BL21 [DE3] over-expressing His-tagged AtoC,

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

grown in the absence or presence of acetoacetate. The
assays were performed using Magna ChIP™ A Millipore
kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, in
vivo cross-linking of the nucleoproteins took place by
the addition of formaldehyde (final concentration 1%),
directly to the E. coli (10 ml cultures) grown in modified
M9 mineral medium, when the OD 600 of the culture
reached 0.6. The cross-linking reactions were quenched
20 min later by the addition of glycine and the cells
were harvested by centrifugation and washed twice with
ice-cold PBS, supplemented with a protease inhibitor
cocktail. Cell lyses were performed as described in the
kit manual and the cellular DNA was sheared by sonication to an average size of 500 to 1,000 bps. Cell debris
was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was
used as the chromatin input for the immunoprecipitation reactions, after an initial stage of pre-incubation
with protein A magnetic beads, in the absence of antibodies, to remove the nonspecific binding proteins. The
ChIP reactions were then performed by adding the Hisprobe™ Santa Cruz rabbit polyclonal) and fresh protein
A magnetic beads, to the resulting supernatant and
allowing the reactions to take place overnight, with rotation at 4°C. DNA was then obtained from the immunoprecipitated protein/DNA complexes and the presence
of the target promoter sequences in the chromatin
immunoprecipitates, was detected by PCR amplification.
Parallel mock precipitations performed in the absence of
added antibody, were used as negative controls for each
reaction.
Primer design and PCR reactions

The primers used to monitor the chromatin immunoprecipitations (Additional file 4) were designed, using
the Oligo Explorer software, to generate a product of
approximately 300 base pairs. All oligonucleotides were
synthesized by VBC Genomics, Austria. The number of
PCR amplification cycles varied from 25 to 35 to achieve
the maximum sensitivity and specificity. The PCR products were analyzed by electrophoresis on 2% w/v agarose gels and stained using GelRed (Biotium). DNA
polymerase DyNAzyme™ EXT and reaction buffers
used in the PCR process were purchased from Finnzymes. MspI digest DNA ladder was purchased by New
England Biolabs.
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays

We used the electrophoretic mobility shift assay methods of Orchard and May [63], slightly modified, to
determine the formation of protein-DNA complexes.
The His10-AtoC protein was bound to double-stranded
oligonucleotides spanning the representative target sites
of the three promoters (atoD, metR-metE and acrD) and
the narG gene. Respective quantities of each of the four

Page 15 of 17

indicated particles were combined with elevated His10AtoC quantities (1, 1.25, 5 and 10 μg) in 25 μl of binding buffer, 10 mM Tris [pH 7.6], 10 mM MgCl2, 50 mM
NaCl, 5% (v/v) glycerol, and incubated on ice for 25
min, following a 5 min pre-incubation at room temperature, before the addition of protein. Non-protein containing samples were quickly mixed with 10× Gel
loading buffer (Takara) and all samples were applied to
a 100 V prerun polyacrylamide gel containing 0.5× TBE
buffer prepared with 6.0% (w/v) polyacrylamide (ratio of
acrylamide to bisacrylamide, 29:1. Following electrophoresis (120 V, 120 min), the gels were stained first
with Gel-Red dye (Biotium) and then with Coomassie
blue.
For the DNA-binding experiments 10 ng (3 nM) of
biotinylated atoD probe were used in binding buffer
consisting of 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 1
mM EDTA, 4 mM DTT and 5% (v/v) glycerol, as previously described [5]. Competitive non-biotinylated
atoD was added in the same concentration (up to 80
nM each) with metR-metE, acrD and narG. Each reaction took place in a final volume of 20 μl consisted of
0.2 mg/ml BSA and 2 μg sonicated calf thymus competitive DNA. All the ingredients were added and preincubated for 5 min at room temperature, before the
addition of 0.35 μM (2 μg) of the protein and transfer
to ice for 30 min. At the end of binding reactions, the
samples were loaded to 4% (w/v) acrylamide gel in
0.25× TBE buffer and ran at 120 V, with a 30 min prerun at 100 V. DNA was transferred from the gels to
Biodyne B membranes (Pall) and detected by Phototope-Star detection kit (New England Biolabs), as previously described [4,5].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Motif matrices. Text file with the position-specific
probability matrices of motifs 1-5 in the INCLUSIVE [17] format.
Additional file 2: Results of the genome-wide screenings using the
motifs 1-5. Excel file with the motif searching results of each motif 1-5
at prior probability set to 0.7, in both intergenic and gene-encoding
regions.
Additional file 3: Application of the computational procedure on
the LexA transcription factor. Excel file containing the results of the
application of the computational procedure used in this work on LexA, a
bacterial transcription factor that regulates many genes involved in SOS
response [20].
Additional file 4: Table including all primer sequences for binding
site detection. Text file with all the primers’ sequences.

Abbreviations
AcAc: Acetoacetate; ChIP: Chromatin Immunoprecipitation; GO: Gene
Ontology; GOT: Gene Ontology Term; LL: Log-Likelihood; ORF: Open Reading
Frame; PSPM: Position-Specific Probability Matrix; TCS: Two-Component
System; TFBS: Transcription Factor Binding Site; TSS: Transcription Start Site;
EMSA: Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays.

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Dr. Cynthia Humphreys Panagiotidis for critically
reading the manuscript. This work is funded by the Information Society
Technology program of the European Commission “e-Laboratory for
Interdisciplinary Collaborative Research in Data Mining and Data-Intensive
Sciences (e-LICO)” (IST-2007.4.4-231519). This work was also supported from
the core funds of the Departments of Chemistry (AIG and DAK) and
Pharmacy (CAP) of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. Materials essential
for the experimental validation in this study were purchased by funds of the
project 26515 “BIOPRODUCTION” of the 6th Framework Programme (FP6) of
the European Union. The funding bodies had no involvement in the design
of this study; in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the
writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to submit the manuscript for
publication.
Author details
1
Institute of Biological Research and Biotechnology, National Hellenic
Research Foundation, 48 Vas. Constantinou Ave, GR-11635, Athens, Greece.
2
Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, GR-54124, Greece. 3Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, GR-54124, Greece.
Authors’ contributions
EP co-designed and carried out the computational analysis for de novo motif
detection of putative AtoC binding targets within the E. coli genome
workflow, participated in the interpretation of the results of the
computational analysis, co-drafted and co-revised the manuscript, AC codesigned the computational analysis workflow for de novo motif detection
of putative AtoC binding targets within the E. coli genome, supervised the
computational analysis and interpretation of the results of the
computational analysis, contributed in the evaluation of the results, codrafted, co-revised and proofread the manuscript. AIG carried out the
experimental assays (ChIP assays, Primer design and PCR validations,
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays) co-drafted and co-revised the
manuscript, CAP supervised the experimental analysis and interpretation
part, contributed in the evaluation of the results, co-drafted and co-revised
the manuscript, FNK contributed in the supervision of the complete work, in
the interpretation and evaluation of the results and revised the manuscript.
DAK contributed in the supervision of the complete work, in the
interpretation and functional evaluation of the results, co-drafted, co-revised
and proofread the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 4 December 2010 Accepted: 13 May 2011
Published: 13 May 2011
References
1. Theodorou MC, Panagiotidis CA, Panagiotidis CH, Pantazaki AA,
Kyriakidis DA: Involvement of the AtoS-AtoC signal transduction system
in poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate biosynthesis in Escherichia coli. Biochim
Biophys Acta 2006, 1760(6):896-906.
2. Theodorou MC, Theodorou EC, Panagiotidis CA, Kyriakidis DA: Spermidine
triggering effect to the signal transduction through the AtoS-AtoC/Az
two-component system in Escherichia coli. Biochim Biophys Acta 2007,
1770(8):1104-1114.
3. Kyriakidis DA, Theodorou MC, Filippou PS, Kyriakidis KD, Tiligada E: Effect of
histamine on the signal transduction of the AtoS-AtoC two component
system and involvement in poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate biosynthesis in
Escherichia coli. Amino Acids 2008, 35(1):45-52.
4. Grigoroudis AI, Panagiotidis CA, Lioliou EE, Vlassi M, Kyriakidis DA:
Molecular modeling and functional analysis of the AtoS-AtoC twocomponent signal transduction system of Escherichia coli. Biochim
Biophys Acta 2007, 1770(8):1248-1258.
5. Matta MK, Lioliou EE, Panagiotidis CH, Kyriakidis DA, Panagiotidis CA:
Interactions of the antizyme AtoC with regulatory elements of the
Escherichia coli atoDAEB operon. J Bacteriol 2007, 189(17):6324-6332.
6. Oshima T, Aiba H, Masuda Y, Kanaya S, Sugiura M, Wanner BL, Mori H,
Mizuno T: Transcriptome analysis of all two-component regulatory
system mutants of Escherichia coli K-12. Mol Microbiol 2002,
46(1):281-291.

Page 16 of 17

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.
27.

Yamamoto K, Hirao K, Oshima T, Aiba H, Utsumi R, Ishihama A: Functional
characterization in vitro of all two-component signal transduction
systems from Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 2005, 280(2):1448-1456.
Thijs G, Marchal K, Lescot M, Rombauts S, De Moor B, Rouze P, Moreau Y: A
Gibbs sampling method to detect overrepresented motifs in the
upstream regions of coexpressed genes. J Comput Biol 2002, 9(2):447-464.
van Helden J, Andre B, Collado-Vides J: Extracting regulatory sites from
the upstream region of yeast genes by computational analysis of
oligonucleotide frequencies. J Mol Biol 1998, 281(5):827-842.
Roth FP, Hughes JD, Estep PW, Church GM: Finding DNA regulatory motifs
within unaligned noncoding sequences clustered by whole-genome
mRNA quantitation. Nat Biotechnol 1998, 16(10):939-945.
Marchal K, De Keersmaecker S, Monsieurs P, van Boxel N, Lemmens K,
Thijs G, Vanderleyden J, De Moor B: In silico identification and
experimental validation of PmrAB targets in Salmonella typhimurium by
regulatory motif detection. Genome Biol 2004, 5(2):R9.
Janky R, van Helden J: Evaluation of phylogenetic footprint discovery for
predicting bacterial cis-regulatory elements and revealing their
evolution. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:37.
Newberg LA, Thompson WA, Conlan S, Smith TM, McCue LA, Lawrence CE:
A phylogenetic Gibbs sampler that yields centroid solutions for cisregulatory site prediction. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(14):1718-1727.
McGuire AM, Hughes JD, Church GM: Conservation of DNA regulatory
motifs and discovery of new motifs in microbial genomes. Genome Res
2000, 10(6):744-757.
Hughes JD, Estep PW, Tavazoie S, Church GM: Computational
identification of cis-regulatory elements associated with groups of
functionally related genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Mol Biol 2000,
296(5):1205-1214.
Mullapudi N, Lancto CA, Abrahamsen MS, Kissinger JC: Identification of
putative cis-regulatory elements in Cryptosporidium parvum by de novo
pattern finding. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:13.
Thijs G, Lescot M, Marchal K, Rombauts S, De Moor B, Rouze P, Moreau Y: A
higher-order background model improves the detection of promoter
regulatory elements by Gibbs sampling. Bioinformatics 2001,
17(12):1113-1122.
Gama-Castro S, Jimenez-Jacinto V, Peralta-Gil M, Santos-Zavaleta A,
Penaloza-Spinola MI, Contreras-Moreira B, Segura-Salazar J, Muniz-Rascado L,
Martinez-Flores I, Salgado H, Bonavides-Martínez C, Abreu-Goodger C,
Rodríguez-Penagos C, Miranda-Ríos J, Morett E, Merino E, Huerta AM,
Treviño-Quintanilla L, Collado-Vides J: RegulonDB (version 6.0): gene
regulation model of Escherichia coli K-12 beyond transcription, active
(experimental) annotated promoters and Textpresso navigation. Nucleic
Acids Res 2008, 36(Database issue):D120-124.
Keseler IM, Collado-Vides J, Gama-Castro S, Ingraham J, Paley S, Paulsen IT,
Peralta-Gil M, Karp PD: EcoCyc: a comprehensive database resource for
Escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(Database issue):D334-337.
Kelley WL: Lex marks the spot: the virulent side of SOS and a closer look
at the LexA regulon. Mol Microbiol 2006, 62(5):1228-1238.
Fernandez De Henestrosa AR, Ogi T, Aoyagi S, Chafin D, Hayes JJ,
Ohmori H, Woodgate R: Identification of additional genes belonging to
the LexA regulon in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 2000, 35(6):1560-1572.
Lioliou EE, Mimitou EP, Grigoroudis AI, Panagiotidis CH, Panagiotidis CA,
Kyriakidis DA: Phosphorylation activity of the response regulator of the
two-component signal transduction system AtoS-AtoC in E. coli. Biochim
Biophys Acta 2005, 1725(3):257-268.
Blasco F, Iobbi C, Ratouchniak J, Bonnefoy V, Chippaux M: Nitrate
reductases of Escherichia coli: sequence of the second nitrate reductase
and comparison with that encoded by the narGHJI operon. Mol Gen
Genet 1990, 222(1):104-111.
Kurihara S, Tsuboi Y, Oda S, Kim HG, Kumagai H, Suzuki H: Putrescine
Importer PuuP of Escherichia coli K-12. J Bacteriol 2009.
Trieber CA, Rothery RA, Weiner JH: Multiple pathways of electron transfer
in dimethyl sulfoxide reductase of Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 1994,
269(10):7103-7109.
Buhr A, Erni B: Membrane topology of the glucose transporter of
Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 1993, 268(16):11599-11603.
Genschik P, Drabikowski K, Filipowicz W: Characterization of the
Escherichia coli RNA 3’-terminal phosphate cyclase and its sigma54regulated operon. J Biol Chem 1998, 273(39):25516-25526.

Pilalis et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:238
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/238

28. Minagawa S, Ogasawara H, Kato A, Yamamoto K, Eguchi Y, Oshima T,
Mori H, Ishihama A, Utsumi R: Identification and molecular
characterization of the Mg2+ stimulon of Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol
2003, 185(13):3696-3702.
29. Rosenberg EY, Ma D, Nikaido H: AcrD of Escherichia coli is an
aminoglycoside efflux pump. J Bacteriol 2000, 182(6):1754-1756.
30. Weissbach H, Brot N: Regulation of methionine synthesis in Escherichia
coli. Mol Microbiol 1991, 5(7):1593-1597.
31. Gustafsson C, Bjork GR: The tRNA-(m5U54)-methyltransferase of
Escherichia coli is present in two forms in vivo, one of which is present
as bound to tRNA and to a 3’-end fragment of 16 S rRNA. J Biol Chem
1993, 268(2):1326-1331.
32. Martin RG, Gillette WK, Rosner JL: The ykgA gene of Escherichia coli. Mol
Microbiol 2000, 37(4):978-979.
33. Cavicchioli R, Kolesnikow T, Chiang RC, Gunsalus RP: Characterization of
the aegA locus of Escherichia coli: control of gene expression in
response to anaerobiosis and nitrate. J Bacteriol 1996, 178(23):6968-6974.
34. Chiang RC, Cavicchioli R, Gunsalus RP: Identification and characterization
of narQ, a second nitrate sensor for nitrate-dependent gene regulation
in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 1992, 6(14):1913-1923.
35. Hemm MR, Paul BJ, Schneider TD, Storz G, Rudd KE: Small membrane
proteins found by comparative genomics and ribosome binding site
models. Mol Microbiol 2008, 70(6):1487-1501.
36. Danese PN, Snyder WB, Cosma CL, Davis LJ, Silhavy TJ: The Cpx twocomponent signal transduction pathway of Escherichia coli regulates
transcription of the gene specifying the stress-inducible periplasmic
protease, DegP. Genes Dev 1995, 9(4):387-398.
37. Reizer J, Reizer A, Saier MH Jr: A functional superfamily of sodium/solute
symporters. Biochim Biophys Acta 1994, 1197(2):133-166.
38. Shafqat J, Hoog JO, Hjelmqvist L, Oppermann UC, Ibanez C, Jornvall H: An
ethanol-inducible MDR ethanol dehydrogenase/acetaldehyde reductase
in Escherichia coli: structural and enzymatic relationships to the
eukaryotic protein forms. Eur J Biochem 1999, 263(2):305-311.
39. Tate CG, Muiry JA, Henderson PJ: Mapping, cloning, expression, and
sequencing of the rhaT gene, which encodes a novel L-rhamnose-H+
transport protein in Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli. J Biol
Chem 1992, 267(10):6923-6932.
40. Whittaker JW: The irony of manganese superoxide dismutase. Biochem
Soc Trans 2003, 31(Pt 6):1318-1321.
41. Wang H, Gunsalus RP: The nrfA and nirB nitrite reductase operons in
Escherichia coli are expressed differently in response to nitrate than to
nitrite. J Bacteriol 2000, 182(20):5813-5822.
42. Kumari S, Tishel R, Eisenbach M, Wolfe AJ: Cloning, characterization, and
functional expression of acs, the gene which encodes acetyl coenzyme
A synthetase in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1995, 177(10):2878-2886.
43. Kumari S, Beatty CM, Browning DF, Busby SJ, Simel EJ, Hovel-Miner G,
Wolfe AJ: Regulation of acetyl coenzyme A synthetase in Escherichia coli.
J Bacteriol 2000, 182(15):4173-4179.
44. Gimenez R, Nunez MF, Badia J, Aguilar J, Baldoma L: The gene yjcG,
cotranscribed with the gene acs, encodes an acetate permease in
Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2003, 185(21):6448-6455.
45. Canellakis ES, Paterakis AA, Huang SC, Panagiotidis CA, Kyriakidis DA:
Identification, cloning, and nucleotide sequencing of the ornithine
decarboxylase antizyme gene of Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1993, 90(15):7129-7133.
46. Fraser GM, Bennett JC, Hughes C: Substrate-specific binding of hookassociated proteins by FlgN and FliT, putative chaperones for flagellum
assembly. Mol Microbiol 1999, 32(3):569-580.
47. Komeda Y: Transcriptional control of flagellar genes in Escherichia coli K12. J Bacteriol 1986, 168(3):1315-1318.
48. Arnosti DN, Chamberlin MJ: Secondary sigma factor controls transcription
of flagellar and chemotaxis genes in Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1989, 86(3):830-834.
49. Liu X, Matsumura P: An alternative sigma factor controls transcription of
flagellar class-III operons in Escherichia coli: gene sequence,
overproduction, purification and characterization. Gene 1995,
164(1):81-84.
50. Laub MT, Chen SL, Shapiro L, McAdams HH: Genes directly controlled by
CtrA, a master regulator of the Caulobacter cell cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2002, 99(7):4632-4637.

Page 17 of 17

51. Wade JT, Reppas NB, Church GM, Struhl K: Genomic analysis of LexA
binding reveals the permissive nature of the Escherichia coli genome
and identifies unconventional target sites. Genes Dev 2005,
19(21):2619-2630.
52. Amouyal M: Gene regulation at-a-distance in E. coli: new insights. C R
Biol 2005, 328(1):1-9.
53. Bonifer C: Long-distance chromatin mechanisms controlling tissuespecific gene locus activation. Gene 1999, 238(2):277-289.
54. Shimada T, Ishihama A, Busby SJ, Grainger DC: The Escherichia coli RutR
transcription factor binds at targets within genes as well as intergenic
regions. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(12):3950-3955.
55. Spencer W, Siam R, Ouimet MC, Bastedo DP, Marczynski GT: CtrA, a global
response regulator, uses a distinct second category of weak DNA
binding sites for cell cycle transcription control in Caulobacter
crescentus. J Bacteriol 2009, 191(17):5458-5470.
56. Pruitt KD, Tatusova T, Maglott DR: NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq): a
curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and
proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35(Database issue):D61-65.
57. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14(6):1188-1190.
58. Galtier N, Gouy M, Gautier C: SEAVIEW and PHYLO_WIN: two graphic
tools for sequence alignment and molecular phylogeny. Comput Appl
Biosci 1996, 12(6):543-548.
59. Boyle EI, Weng S, Gollub J, Jin H, Botstein D, Cherry JM, Sherlock G: GO::
TermFinder–open source software for accessing Gene Ontology
information and finding significantly enriched Gene Ontology terms
associated with a list of genes. Bioinformatics 2004, 20(18):3710-3715.
60. Camon E, Magrane M, Barrell D, Binns D, Fleischmann W, Kersey P,
Mulder N, Oinn T, Maslen J, Cox A, Apweiler R: The Gene Ontology
Annotation (GOA) project: implementation of GO in SWISS-PROT,
TrEMBL, and InterPro. Genome Res 2003, 13(4):662-672.
61. Grant JR, Stothard P: The CGView Server: a comparative genomics tool
for circular genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(Web Server issue):
W181-184.
62. Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T: Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual.
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 1989.
63. Orchard K, May GE: An EMSA-based method for determining the
molecular weight of a protein–DNA complex. Nucleic Acids Res 1993,
21(14):3335-3336.
64. Riley M, Abe T, Arnaud MB, Berlyn MK, Blattner FR, Chaudhuri RR,
Glasner JD, Horiuchi T, Keseler IM, Kosuge T, Mori H, Perna NT, Plunkett G,
Rudd KE, Serres MH, Thomas GH, Thomson NR, Wishart D, Wanner BL:
Escherichia coli K-12: a cooperatively developed annotation snapshot–
2005. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34(1):1-9.
65. Perez-Rueda E, Collado-Vides J, Segovia L: Phylogenetic distribution of
DNA-binding transcription factors in bacteria and archaea. Comput Biol
Chem 2004, 28(5-6):341-350.
66. Moreau PL: The lysine decarboxylase CadA protects Escherichia coli
starved of phosphate against fermentation acids. J Bacteriol 2007,
189(6):2249-2261.
67. Salmon K, Hung SP, Mekjian K, Baldi P, Hatfield GW, Gunsalus RP: Global
gene expression profiling in Escherichia coli K12. The effects of oxygen
availability and FNR. J Biol Chem 2003, 278(32):29837-29855.
68. Hama H, Kayahara T, Ogawa W, Tsuda M, Tsuchiya T: Enhancement of
serine-sensitivity by a gene encoding rhodanese-like protein in
Escherichia coli. J Biochem 1994, 115(6):1135-1140.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-238
Cite this article as: Pilalis et al.: Escherichia coli genome-wide promoter
analysis: Identification of additional AtoC binding target elements. BMC
Genomics 2011 12:238.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
