<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Molecular profiling of fungal communities in moisture damaged buildings before and after remediation - a comparison of culture-dependent and culture-independent methods</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-235"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Miia Pitkäranta"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Molecular profiling of fungal communities in
moisture damaged buildings before and after
remediation - a comparison of culture-dependent
and culture-independent methods
Miia Pitkäranta1*, Teija Meklin2,3, Anne Hyvärinen2, Aino Nevalainen2, Lars Paulin1, Petri Auvinen1, Ulla Lignell2 and
Helena Rintala2,3

Abstract
Background: Indoor microbial contamination due to excess moisture is an important contributor to human illness
in both residential and occupational settings. However, the census of microorganisms in the indoor environment is
limited by the use of selective, culture-based detection techniques. By using clone library sequencing of full-length
internal transcribed spacer region combined with quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) for 69 fungal
species or assay groups and cultivation, we have been able to generate a more comprehensive description of the
total indoor mycoflora. Using this suite of methods, we assessed the impact of moisture damage on the fungal
community composition of settled dust and building material samples (n = 8 and 16, correspondingly). Waterdamaged buildings (n = 2) were examined pre- and post- remediation, and compared with undamaged reference
buildings (n = 2).
Results: Culture-dependent and independent methods were consistent in the dominant fungal taxa in dust, but
sequencing revealed a five to ten times higher diversity at the genus level than culture or qPCR. Previously
unknown, verified fungal phylotypes were detected in dust, accounting for 12% of all diversity. Fungal diversity,
especially within classes Dothideomycetes and Agaricomycetes tended to be higher in the water damaged
buildings. Fungal phylotypes detected in building materials were present in dust samples, but their proportion of
total fungi was similar for damaged and reference buildings. The quantitative correlation between clone library
phylotype frequencies and qPCR counts was moderate (r = 0.59, p < 0.01).
Conclusions: We examined a small number of target buildings and found indications of elevated fungal diversity
associated with water damage. Some of the fungi in dust were attributable to building growth, but more
information on the material-associated communities is needed in order to understand the dynamics of microbial
communities between building structures and dust. The sequencing-based method proved indispensable for
describing the true fungal diversity in indoor environments. However, making conclusions concerning the effect of
building conditions on building mycobiota using this methodology was complicated by the wide natural diversity
in the dust samples, the incomplete knowledge of material-associated fungi fungi and the semiquantitative nature
of sequencing based methods.

* Correspondence: miia.pitkaranta@helsinki.fi
1
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Viikinkaari 4, 00790 Helsinki,
Finland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Pitkäranta et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

Background
Dampness or mold in buildings are positively associated
with several allergic and respiratory effects [1]. Based on
a meta-analysis of relevant literature, a 30-50% increase
in variety of respiratory and asthma-related health outcomes was summarized by Fisk et al. [2]. It has also
been estimated that 21% (4.6 million cases) of total
asthma cases in the United States may be attributable to
residential dampness and mold [3].
Due to the strong epidemiological association between
observed dampness or mold and adverse health effects, it
is hypothesized that excessive microbial proliferation in
building materials manifests itself as increased or altered
levels of microbe-derived compounds in the indoor air,
which individually or in combination reach sufficient
levels to affect human health. The elimination of growth
by remediation is intended to normalize these levels,
usually resulting in decreased symptoms [4-10]. However,
alleviation is not always seen, especially if remediation
has been partial [5,11,12]. At present, the agents that
contribute to the development of the reported buildingrelated health effects are still only partially understood,
and no internationally accepted guidelines are available
for monitoring the success of mold remediation [13].
This is due largely to the complex and compound nature
of indoor exposures and the varying extent of population
susceptibility, further complicated by traditional methodological deficiencies in the identification and enumeration of biological agents.
Fungi are major colonizers and degraders of building
materials; they possess vast bioactive potential, and have
the capacity to spread spores and smaller fragments from
the site of proliferation to the surrounding air. The capacity to induce symptoms in the non-sensitized population
at concentrations typical of indoor environments depends
on species-specific traits, such as allergenicity, pathogenicity and mycotoxin production. Thus, the accurate identification of microbes is a prerequisite for the assessment of
their potential health effects [14,15].
The present knowledge of indoor fungi relies on a long
history of cultivation and direct microscopy, yet the use
of these methods is known to bias the qualitative and
quantitative community description [13,16,17]. Recently,
quantitative PCR (qPCR) has been used for studying the
levels of individual indoor mold species and assay groups
[18-20], but few studies have thus far explored the total
indoor mycobiota using DNA-based universal community characterization methods like ribosomal DNA amplicon sequencing or metagenome analysis [21-24]. Very
little is known about the effect of building characteristics
on the total fungal assemblages. A recent study by
Amend et al. [21] suggested that indoor fungal communities are not significantly shaped by building-specific
factors like building function, ventilation system or

Page 2 of 16

building materials, but instead global factors like
geographic location and climate are more important.
Unfortunately, the presence of water damage in buildings
was not included among the studied factors, even though
excess water is known to be the most significant individual factor associated with elevated viable fungal counts
indoors [25,26].
The aim of the present study was to assess the fungal
communities in moisture-damaged, renovated and nondamaged buildings using culture-based and culture-independent methods. Contaminated building materials collected from the subject buildings were analysed to
determine if contaminants originating from these materials were likely to contribute to the fungal communities in
the dust. In addition, we investigated the similarity of the
fungal community profile revealed by sequencing, culture
and a relatively large selection of targeted qPCR assays.

Results
Fungal diversity and comparison of methods
Fungi in dust samples

A total of 1081 full-length fungal Internal Transcribed
Spacer region of nuclear ribosomal DNA (nucITS)
sequences were obtained from the eight dust samples. Fungal sequences clustered in 305 OTUs, of which 180 were
singletons. The number of observed OTUs (corresponding
roughly to fungal species) varied from 21 to 98 per sample,
while the theoretical total OTU richness by ACE estimator
varied from 67 to 298 per sample (Table 1). Rarefaction
curves and ACE percentage coverage values indicated that
sampling coverage was partial (Additional file 1 Fig. S1 and
Table 1). Of the 305 OTUs, 33% were annotated to species,
25% to genus and 37% to class. We identified representatives of 94 genera among the OTUs that were annotated to
species or genus level. Ascomycetes accounted for the
majority of the total diversity in dust (52% of all OTUs, 3888% of clones in individual libraries), the most abundant
and prevalent OTUs being allied to the classes Dothideomycetes, Eurotiomycetes and Leotiomycetes. Basidiomycetes were also consistently present in the samples (44% of
OTUs, 11-54% of clones), with Agaricomycetes, Exobasidiomycetes and Tremellomycetes being the most common
class affiliations. The detected classes and their relative
abundances across samples are presented in Figure 1. The
average ratio between ascomycetous and basidiomycetous
clones (NAsc:NBas) was 3.03 for all samples, 3.47 (0.71-7.96)
for reference samples, 2.15 (1.88-2.41) for samples taken
from damaged buildings before renovation, and 1.84 (0.852.84) for samples taken from damaged buildings after renovation. The majority of fungi observed (73% of clones)
shared the highest similarity with filamentous taxa.
Sequences affiliated with yeast-like and lichen-forming
species were also present (24% and 2% of sequences,
correspondingly).

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

Page 3 of 16

Table 1 Fungal diversity and concentrations in house dust samples
Samplea

nucITS clone library analysisb
N

In1a

Sobs

%C

225

98

45

S

ACE

220

qPCRc

Culture

Ergd
ERMI value

μg/g

1.4·107

4.0

2.6

6

4.4 ·105

-0.7

0.4

H’

D

total cfu
g-1

SqPCR

4.06

0.027

9.6·104

12

3

-1

total CE g

In1b

100

62

44

142

3.94

0.014

5.7·10

Re1a

207

45

44

103

2.22

0.31

2.5·106

9

1.3 ·107

-5.2

5.5

Re1b

26

21

31

67

2.97

0.018

1.4·102

9

4.0·105

1.0

0.2

In2a

100

37

48

77

2.73

0.148

1.7·106

17

1.2·107

4.4

1.1

6

22

2.6·106

4.3

1.1

In2b

119

42

25

167

2.68

0.186

1.1·10

Re2a

167

48

52

93

2.95

0.108

1.4·105

10

3.2·107

-1.3

1.9

Re2b
Combined data

137
1081

75
305

25
45

298
675

3.88
4.63

0.030
0.028

2.7·105

24
33

4.1·106

4.6

2.6

a)

Sample name abbreviations: In: index building, Re: reference building, 1: Location-1, 2: Location-2, a: pre-remediation sample, b: post-remediation sample.
Abbreviations: N: number of clones; Sobs: number of observed OTUs; %C: percentage coverage (ACE); SACE: total no. of OTUs according to ACE richness
estimator; H’: Shannon diversity index; D: Simpson diversity index.
c)
Abbreviations: SqPCR: number of qPCR assays giving positive results; total CE: sum of cell equivalent counts for 69 common indoor fungi, ERMI: Environmental
Relative Moldiness Index.
d)
Concentration of ergosterol.
b)

Figure 1 Relative abundances of clones affiliated to fungal classes in the studied dust and building material samples. Sample name
abbreviations: In: index building Re: reference building, 1: Location-1, 2: Location-2, a: pre-remediation sample, b: post-remediation sample; Dust
comb: combined data from settled dust samples; BM-1: building material pool from Index-1 building. Construction of clone library from the
Index-2 building material pool failed.

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

Page 4 of 16

Of the 127 unknown OTUs (OTUs not annotated to
species or genus) 36 were found from several independent samples in the present material or shared a high
(> 98%) sequence similarity with environmental sequences
from previous studies (see Additional file 2 Table S1 for
details). The most abundant individual unknown OTUs
(OTU 409, 423, 446) were affiliated to class Dothideomycetes and shared low (82-88%) sequence similarities with
Colletogloeopsis blakelyi, Phaeotheca fissurella and Hortaea werneckii. In addition to the fungal sequences, the
libraries contained approximately 800 non-target
sequences mostly affiliated with plant taxa, including
deciduous trees (mainly Acer platanoides and Betula
alba), grasses (Poa trivialis), cultivated plants (Lycopersicon esculentum, Cucumis sativus) and house plants (Ficus
sp.). The number of chimeric sequences (three - 0.3%) in
dust libraries was low.
Despite the high diversity and low level of dominance in
clone libraries, a group of about 20 abundant genera was

distinguishable, which altogether accounted for approximately 50-80% of all clones in each library (Table 2). The
most dominant groups were of filamentous ascomycetes:
Penicillium spp. (consisting largely of the P. chrysogenum
group and P. commune group), Cladosporium spp.
(C. sphaerospermum group, C. cladosporioides group and
C. herbarum group), Aureobasidium and Hormonema
(A. pullulans, H. dematioides and Hormonema sp.),
Phoma (P. herbarum and P. macrostoma), Leptosphaerulina chartarum and Botrytis sp.; yeasts (Cryptococcus spp.,
Malassezia spp., Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida
spp.); and rusts (Thekopsora areolata and Melampsoridium betulinum). A full list of phylotypes along with information on their annotation and frequency of detection
across samples is given in Additional file 2, Table S1.
Fungi in building material samples

Full- or near full-length nucITS sequences were obtained
from 67 pure cultures and 148 clones. The clone library
constructed from Index-1 building material samples

Table 2 The percentage frequencies of the most abundant fungal genera in the dust clone libraries.
Genus

Location 1
In1a

Filamentous Ascomycetes
Penicillium

In1b

Location 2

Re1a

Re1b

In2a

In2b

Re2a

Re2b
4.4%

0.9%

1.0%

ND

ND

49.0%

46.2%

3.0%

Cladosporium

8.4%

10.0%

64.7%

ND

5.0%

8.4%

1.2%

5.8%

Aureobasidium

5.3%

3.0%

2.4%

7.7%

3.0%

0.8%

3.0%

15.3%

Hormonema

1.8%

ND

2.9%

15.4%

2.0%

0.8%

0.6%

0.7%

Phoma

1.3%

6.0%

1.4%

ND

ND

3.4%

1.8%

0.7%

Leptosphaerulina

4.4%

4.0%

2.9%

ND

2.0%

ND

ND

ND

Botrytis

1.8%

ND

ND

ND

4.0%

0.8%

0.6%

4.4%

Acremonium
Fusarium

ND
1.3%

ND
ND

1.0%
ND

ND
ND

ND
ND

ND
ND

ND
7.8%

9.5%
0.7%

Phaeosphaeria

ND

ND

ND

3.8%

ND

ND

ND

ND

Epicoccum

2.7%

ND

ND

ND

1.0%

ND

ND

ND

Cryptococcus

4.0%

12.0%

5.3%

3.8%

6.0%

5.9%

4.8%

12.4%

Malassezia

3.1%

12.0%

ND

19.2%

1.0%

1.7%

5.4%

7.3%

Saccharomyces

ND

1.0%

ND

ND

ND

ND

43.1%

1.5%

Candida
Rhodotorula

1.3%
ND

2.0%
1.0%

ND
1.0%

ND
ND

ND
ND

ND
1.7%

0.6%
3.6%

3.6%
ND

Yeasts

Mrakia

ND

ND

ND

ND

ND

0.8%

4.8%

0.7%

Cystofilobasidium

0.4%

1.0%

ND

3.8%

ND

ND

ND

0.7%

Thekopsora

11.1%

ND

ND

ND

2.0%

ND

ND

ND

Rhizoctonia

ND

ND

ND

7.7%

ND

ND

ND

ND

Clitocybe

ND

ND

ND

3.8%

3.0%

ND

ND

ND

Melampsoridium
Antrodia

4.0%
ND

2.0%
6.0%

ND
ND

ND
ND

1.0%
ND

ND
ND

ND
ND

ND
ND

48.0%

39.0%

18.4%

34.6%

21.0%

29.4%

19.8%

32.1%

Filamentous Basidiomycetes

Other (sum of rare and unknown genera)

The frequencies of clones affiliated with the 23 most abundant genera are shown individually. The abundant genera accounted altogether for 52-81.6% of the
clones in individual libraries.
ND: not detected

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

contained a considerable number of ambiguous sequences, essentially chimeras, ligated double-products and
putative artificial microheterogeneity, which were manually excluded from downstream analyses. The construction of the clone library from Index-2 building material
DNA failed due to a low-quality amplification product. A
total of 45 fungal phylotypes were identified, of which 39
were represented by cultured isolates, 11 by clones and 5
by both cultures and clones. Detailed information of the
phylotypes and their isolation sources is given in Additional file 3, Table S2.
The fungi detected from building materials via cloning
and sequencing of isolates were mainly filamentous species. The Index-1 building yielded solely filamentous species, most of which were xerophilic soil fungi (e.g.
Aspergillus conicus, Eurotium sp., Penicillium citreonigrum, P. corylophilum and Wallemia sp.), whereas species
favouring high water activity were identified from the
Index-2 building (e.g. Phoma sp., Trichoderma citrinoviride, T. atroviride, and yeasts like Cryptococcus spp., Sporidiobolus salmonicolor and Rhodotorula mucilaginosa).
Several morphologically unidentifiable (sterile) colonies
were readily identified to species level by nucITS sequence
analysis, including Hormonema dematioides, Phoma herbarum, Pithomyces (Leptosphaerulina) chartarum and
Rhinocladiella atrovirens. All colonies provisionally identified as Aureobasidium-like were found to represent other
taxa by nucITS-sequencing (see Additional file 3, Table S2
for details).
Comparison of molecular methods and culture

The fungi most abundant and prevalent by cultivation
(Additional file 4, Tables S3_S4) and qPCR (Additional file
4, Tables S3_S4) methods in dust samples were largely
overlapping with those observed to be abundant by clone
library analysis, yet their relative abundances in individual
samples did not correlate well between methods. Cladosporium, Aureobasidium, Penicillium, Sphaeropsidales,
yeasts and unidentifiable (sterile) isolates, i.e. the dominant
taxa based on clone analysis (Table 2), accounted for 89100% of total colony forming units (CFUs) in all but one
sample. A total of 13 genera were detected by cultivation,
while 33 qPCR assays representing 13 genera gave a positive result from one or more samples (Additional file 4,
Tables S3_S4). Of the 13 genera detected by cultivation,
nine were also detected by qPCR, three were not targeted,
and one (Alternaria) gave a negative result but was found

Page 5 of 16

to be represented by species (A. citri and A. arborescens)
other than the one targeted by the assay (A. alternata).
The analytical sensitivity of qPCR was clearly superior to
the clone library analysis: In 92% of cases when a qPCRdetectable phylotype occurred in a clone library, it was
correctly detected by qPCR from the same sample. At the
same time, only 40% of positive qPCR detections were
repeated by clone library analysis (Table 3). The quantitative correlation between the methods was assessed by calculating the Spearman rank correlation coefficient for
double positive detections (n = 35). The Spearman rank
correlation was moderate (0.59, p < 0.01). The median
concentration of species not detected by sequencing was
1.4 × 104 CE g-1 and 1.7 × 105 CE g-1 for species detected
by sequencing. The concentrations of species detected as
singletons in clone libraries varied from 1.4 × 103 CE to
5.9 × 105 CE g-1 (median 5.5 × 104 CE g-1; Additional file
5, Fig. S2).
Comparison of fungi in moisture-damaged and reference
buildings
Differences between fungal assemblages in moisturedamaged and reference buildings before renovation

The amount of fungal biomass, as determined by ergosterol
content of dust, concentrations of culturable fungi or the
summed total CE counts of common indoor molds as
determined by qPCR did not show a consistent trend in
relation to the presence of water damage (Table 1). In
Location-1, fungal diversity was higher in the damaged
building than in the reference; culturable diversity, the
number of positive qPCR assays, as well as molecular diversity in the clone libraries were higher for the index building
than the reference building (see Table 1 and Table 2 and
Additional file 4 Tables S3_S4 and Additional file 1 Fig. S1).
In Location-2, qPCR assayed diversity was somewhat higher
in the damaged building, while cultivated fungi and clone
library analysis indicated lower diversity for the index building than the reference (Table 1 Additional file 4 Tables
S3_S4). Dust culture plates and clone libraries from the
Index-2 building yielded notably high counts of Penicillium
(Penicillium chrysogenum group colonies and two OTUs
affiliated to P. chrysogenum and P. commune groups, correspondingly), which may have masked the presence of other
fungi (Additional file 4 Tables S3_S4).
b-diversity indices, the UniFrac program distance measurement and a PCoA analysis were used to determine

Table 3 Qualitative comparison of qPCR and clone library sequencing for detecting fungal species in dust samples
Result

No. of cases

Positive detection of a taxon in a sample by both qPCR and clone library sequencing

35

Negative result by both methods

443

Detection by qPCR only (clone library non-detect)

74

Detection by clone library sequencing only (qPCR non-detect)

4

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

the pairwise similarities of clone library compositions of
index and reference buildings. The proportions of
shared OTUs (i.e. species in common) were, in general,
low between buildings; the QS values varied between
0.09 and 0.21. The two index buildings shared the highest proportion of common OTUs, and the two reference
buildings the lowest. According to the UniFrac significance test, all sample pairs, except for the two index
buildings, differed from each other significantly at the
time of pre-remediation sampling (Additional file 6
Table S5). The first coordinate (P1) found in the UniFrac PCoA analysis separated samples by building,
explaining 23% of the variation. The second coordinate
(P2, 16% of the variation) separated the pre-remediation
samples from index buildings from post-remediation
index samples and most of the reference samples, suggesting that the presence of moisture damage may have
contributed to the altered phylogenetic composition of
the fungal communities in dust (Figure 2).
The UniFrac program was subsequently used to conduct
a tree-based analysis to determine which fungal clusters
occurred in individual samples at a significantly higher
frequency than expected (compared to random OTU
distribution). The results of this analysis are presented
in Figure 3; the detailed OTU composition of the clusters shown in the figure is given in Additional file 2
Table S1. Ten phylogenetic clusters (clusters # 1, 5,
12,17-19, 29, 46, 49 and 53) occurred in one or both

Page 6 of 16

index buildings at a higher than expected frequency.
The Index-2 building was heavily dominated by P. chrysogenum- and P. commune-related OTUs (cluster 12). In
contrast, several clusters (# 1, 5, 17-19) of diverse ascomycete OTUs were characteristic of the Index-1 building. These clusters were affiliated with the classes
Dothideomycetes and Eurotiomycetes, and included
known colonizers of indoor materials (e.g. Aureobasidium pullulans, Cladophialophora minutissima, Exophiala xenobiotica, Epicoccum nigrum, Leptosphaerulina
chartarum) as well as a variety of related, unknown
OTUs. Similarly, the basidiomycete clusters characteristic of index buildings (# 29, 46, 49) included potentially
building-associated species, e.g. Serpula lacrymans,
Gloeophyllum sepiarium and Trametes versicolor, yet
these phylotypes occurred at a low frequency. Other
lineages were associated with the reference buildings.
These contained Cladosporium- and Aureobasidiumrelated Dothideomycetes (# 18, 20) as well as Sordariomycetes (# 23, mainly Fusarium oxysporum) and various
yeasts including Cryptococcus spp., Mrakia spp. and
Rhodotorula spp. S. cerevisiae, (# 27, 38, 52 and 25, correspondingly). The within-class phylotype richness ratio
was elevated (S n(In) /S n(Re) = 1.7-13.8) among classes
Agaricomycetes, Dothideomycetes and Tremellomycetes
in both index buildings in relation to their references
(Figure 4).
Table 1 shows the ERMI values derived from the
qPCR data. These were higher for the index buildings
(4.0 and 4.4) and lower for the reference buildings (-5.2
and -1.3). The following group 1 ERMI assays were
responsible for elevated values in the index buildings:
Wsebi, PvarB, Tviri (Index-1) and PenGrp2 (Index-2).
Occurrence of material-associated fungi in dust

Figure 2 UniFrac PCoA of dust sample nucITS library clone
frequencies. The first and second principal coordinates (P1 and P2)
are shown. The first axis correlates with building (P1, red circles,
23% of variation). Apart from reference sample Re1a, the second
axis correlates with building conditions (P2, blue circles, 16% of
variation). The circles were drawn manually.

A total of 45 fungal phylotypes were detected from the
building material samples collected from the two index
buildings. An in silico analysis showed that 13 of the phylotypes (29%) had a matching sequence with the qPCR
targets (see Additional file 7 Table S6 for targeted species). Eight of the 45 phylotypes were detected in the
dust samples in corresponding buildings using clone
library analysis or qPCR. These were C. cladosporioides,
C. herbarum, Eurotium sp., P. chrysogenum, P. herbarum,
P. chartarum, T. atroviride and W. sebi. Most of these
were ubiquitous in both the index and reference buildings’ dust samples. The summed qPCR cell counts for
these fungi were similar in the index and reference building pairs; together, the species accounted for 3.8 × 105/
8.0 × 10 5 CE g -1 and 6.4 × 10 5 /6.7 × 10 5 CE g -1 in the
index/reference buildings in Location-1 and Location-2,
correspondingly. Three individual taxa, L. chartarum,
T. atroviride and W. sebi occurred exclusively, or in substantially higher numbers, in an index building than the
corresponding reference building (Additional file 2

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

Page 7 of 16

Figure 3 Phylogenetic representation of indoor dust fungal communities inferred from nucITS clone library data. Percentage frequency
representation of clusters in individual dust samples are given as a heat map table, also showing cluster numbers (#), class and main genera
included. A statistically significantly increased occurrence of a cluster in a sample is shown underlined (UniFrac analysis). Class abbreviations: Eur:
Eurotiomycetes; Dot: Dothideomycetes; Leo: Leotiomycetes; Lec: Lecanoromycetes; Sor: Sordariomycetes; Tap: Taphrinomycetes; Sac:
Saccharomycetes; Tre: Tremellomycetes; Mic: Microbotryomycetes; Aga: Agaricomycetes; BaIs: Basidiomycetes incertae sedis; Puc:
Pucciniomycetes; Wal: Wallemiomycetes; Zyg: Zygomycetes incertae sedis. For detailed cluster contents and OTU annotations, see Additional file
2 Table S1.

Table S1). Penicillium chrysogenum was abundant only in
the index building according to clone library analysis, but
qPCR reported equally high numbers of this species in
both the reference and the index buildings.
Changes in fungal assemblages in dust after renovation

We monitored the qualitative and quantitative pre- to
post-remediation changes in fungal community structures in dust samples collected from the index buildings

in relation to the changes occurring in corresponding
reference buildings. The results are reported separately
by location.
Location 1

In both the index and reference building at Location 1,
the levels of fungal biomass (as indicated by ergosterol
content in the dust), culturable fungi and concentrations
of common indoor fungi as enumerated by qPCR were
lower post- than pre-remediation (Table 1). Fungal

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

Page 8 of 16

Figure 4 Pair-wise comparison of fungal species richness in water-damaged and reference buildings pre- to post-remediation.
Phylotype diversities (Sn) were calculated from clone library data separately for each sample and for each fungal class. The diversity ratio
between the index and reference buildings (Sn(In):Sn(Re)) was calculated for each building pair pre- and post-remediation. The results for the two
locations are shown separately. The species richness of Agaricomycetes, Eurotiomycetes and Dothideomycetes was higher in the index buildings
in relation to reference buildings’ pre-remediation, but decreased post-remediation.

diversity as inferred from the number of positive qPCR
assays, as well as from the level of molecular diversity
(Table 1 and Additional file 1 Fig. S1), decreased after
remediation in the index building. In the reference
building, the number of positive qPCR assays was similar pre- and post-remediation, while the change in molecular diversity was not clear due to the small clone
library size. The phylotype richness ratio of the buildings (Sn(In)/Sn(Re)) was lower for all fungal classes postremediation (Figure 4). The ERMI value was lower postremediation in the index building (change from 4.0 to
-0.7) but higher (from -5.2 to 1.0) in the reference building (Table 1).
Most of the fungal lineages identified by the UniFrac
lineage analysis to be specific for the Index-1 building preremediation disappeared (clusters # 1, 5 and 19), or had
decreased in abundance (# 17, 18 and 53) following remediation. Concerning the occurrence of material-associated
fungi in dust, T. atroviride and W. sebi were not found in
the post-remediation sample by qPCR or clone library
sequencing. The proportion of the L. chartarum phylotype
instead remained unchanged in clone library pre- to postremediation. The PCoA analysis separated the pre- and
post-remediation samples taken from the Index-1 building, and suggested a small shift in community composition
towards the reference buildings’ composition along the
second coordinate (Figure 2).
Location 2

The pre- to post-remediation changes in the levels of
fungal biomass, culturable fungi and summed concentrations of qPCR-assayed indoor fungi in Location-2 were
similar in the index and reference building (Table 1).
Fungal diversity was higher post- than pre-remediation in
the reference building but not in the index building.
Diversification in the reference building was seen in the

elevated numbers of culturable genera, positive qPCR
assays (Additional file 4 Tables S3_S4) and ERMI values,
as well as in clone library-derived diversity indices and
rarefaction analysis (Table 1 and Additional file 1 Fig.
S1). UniFrac PCoA analysis and pairwise Sørensen similarity values indicated that, despite the diversity increase,
both the OTU-based and phylogenetic community structure remained very similar pre- to post-remediation in
the reference building. The species richness of prevalent
fungal classes was lower in the Index-2 building in relation to the reference; the within-class phylotype richness
ratios (Sn(In)/Sn(Re)) for Agaricomycetes, Dothideomycetes
and Tremellomycetes, which were elevated before remediation, were close to or below one after remediation
(Figure 4). Somewhat contrastingly, several fungi initially
isolated from the building materials but absent during
initial dust sampling were observed following remediation (e.g. Hormonema dematioides, Phoma sp., Rhodotorula mucilaginosa, Cryptococcus adeliensis). The
abundance of the dominant clade (# 12, P. chrysogenum
group) in the Index-2 building did not change following
remediation (Figure 3, Additional file 2 Table S1).

Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first time that the effect of
moisture and moisture damage remediation on indoor
fungal assemblages has been studied using a whole community approach and source tracking. It is also the first
study to compare fungal community composition using a
large selection of species-specific qPCR assays and clone
library sequencing in combination with culture. We
found increased fungal diversity in one of the studied
buildings with moisture damage, while in the second
damaged building, high numbers of Penicillium were present. In neither building did we find a concomitant

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

increase in culturable fungal concentrations or fungal
biomass in surface dust. A majority of the fungal species
isolated from contaminated building materials was not
prevalent in the pre-remediation dust samples collected
from those buildings. Methodological comparison indicated that cultivation in combination with a large qPCR
panel, failed to detect a majority of the fungi in indoor
samples; however, the most abundant species appeared
to be detected by all methods. Clone library sequencing,
to the extent used here, was found to be less sensitive
than qPCR for detecting individual species.
Fungal diversity in dust samples

Cloning and sequencing studies revealed an average of 54
observed and 146 estimated species-level phylotypes
(OTUs) per sample. This level of diversity is similar to
that observed previously using molecular methods in
floor dust and indoor air filter samples [21-23] and
higher than that detected in outdoor air filter samples
[27,28].
The dominant genera we observed in dust and material
samples were in agreement with previous studies using
cultivation [29-32]; Aureobasidium, Cladosporium and
Penicillium were the most prevalent genera in dust
according to molecular and culture-independent methods.
These and other common indoor mold genera, including
Aspergillus, Botrytis, Epicoccum, Eurotium, Fusarium,
Mucor, Rhizopus, Trichoderma, Ulocladium, Wallemia
and Phoma/Sphaeropsidales-group fungi accounted for
95-96% of total CFUs and qPCR CE counts and approximately 40% of clones in nucITS libraries. The remaining
60% of nucITS clones, however, accounted for almost 90%
of the total diversity in the sequence material, showing
that a vast diversity of indoor fungi remain uncharacterized by cultivation or targeted molecular methods. While
the proportion of individual sequence types representing
the uncultivable diversity was low in the material, it must
be remembered that the clone library sequencing method
does not accurately reflect the original proportions of species in the community and both under- and over-estimating bias may occur [33]. Our results from individual qPCR
assays indeed showed that the species occurring as singletons in nucITS libraries were in many cases abundant
taxa, commonly between 104-105 CE g-1 of dust. According to previous data from Finland and the US, the median
qPCR assayed concentrations of many common indoor
fungi, e.g. Aspergillus spp., Epicoccum nigrum, the Eurotium amstelodami group, Penicillium spp. and Trichoderma viride are between 104 and 105 CE g-1 of floor dust
[18,34]. No such data are available for settled dust collected from elevated surfaces, but the fungal concentrations in the latter sample type can be expected to be
similar or lower than those in floor dusts [22,35].

Page 9 of 16

Based on the number of described fungal species [36]
and estimates on total global fungal biodiversity [37]
nearly 90% of fungal biodiversity may as yet be unidentified. A large proportion of unidentifiable phylotypes was
observed in our sequence material also. In total, 42% of
OTUs could only be identified to the class or phylum
level, or remained of unknown affiliation. This is comparable to previous studies reporting 16-62% unidentified
fungal OTUs from diverse environments [27,38,39].
While artefactual sequence motifs, resulting from polymerase errors and chimera or heteroduplex formation
are known to occur in clone libraries [33,40], we are confident that the number of such sequences was low in our
material because of our prior efforts to optimize PCR
conditions [23]. 36 unknown OTUs occurred in several
samples in the present material or matched with
unknown environmental phylotypes from previous studies. At least, these 36 sequences most probably represent natural phylotypes, because the formation of a
unique artefactual PCR product from diverse template
pools independently more than once would be highly
unlikely. Interestingly, about one fifth of the unknown
OTUs were found in indoor samples collected from the
same geographic region in our previous study [23]. A
novel phylotype related to skin-associated lipophilic yeast
genus Malassezia (with 79% sequence similarity to
M. sympodiales) detected previously [23] was prevalent
in the present material. Moreover, several clusters of
unknown filamentous ascomycetes were found. Some
were affiliated with common indoor taxa capable of
growing on indoor materials. This suggests that it is possible that building materials may also harbour yet to be
identified fungal species.
Besides unknown ascomycetes, Basidiomycetes and
yeasts accounted for a substantial part of the unculturable
majority of nucITS sequence diversity. These are common
in culture-based studies as well, but cannot be routinely
identified by morphology [41-43]. While the significance
of building-associated filamentous basidiomycetes relates
to their wood-decomposing ability rather than human
health effects, these fungi may have an indicator value in
building investigations, and thus may be important targets
for designing molecular diagnostic tools [44]. In the present study, certain building-associated basidiomycetes
including Serpula lacrymans (the causative agent of timber
dry rot), Antrodia sitchensis, Trametes versicolor and
Gloeophyllum sepiarium [45,46], were found, mostly from
the water-damaged, wood-framed Index-1 building. These
species may have had an intramural source also in the present study. However, this connection could not be verified
by examination of the building materials.
Several opportunistically pathogenic taxa [47] were also
identified, including Candida zeylanoides, Cryptococcus

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

albidus, Exophiala xenobiotica, Mucor spp. and Trichosporon mucoides.
In addition to a wide diversity of fungi, we also found
DNA signatures of an impressively diverse array of
plants including cultivated crops (fruits, vegetable crops
and tobacco), deciduous trees, grasses, mosses and
weeds. The amplification of plant DNA was likely due
to a lack of specificity in our forward PCR primer [23].
Despite the fact that the inclusion of plant targets was
not our intent, their recovery further confirms the biological complexity of dust, and indicates that DNA-based
methods may be useful for the detection of dust-borne
plant particles. Like fungal particles, those originating
from plants may also have allergenic potential, and
obviously persist in indoor dust, long past the respective
pollen season.
The representativeness of different dust sample types
has been discussed in the context of airborne exposure
analysis; for example, the presence of heavy, non-resuspending particulate material in floor dusts, as well as
potential microbial proliferation in dusts collected from
locations with elevated relative humidity have been suspected to bias dustborne measurements [48-50]. A comparison of our above-floor surface samples with floor dust
samples collected earlier during the cold season from the
same geographic region [23] indicated differences in fungal community composition. Especially, lower frequencies
of basidiomycetous yeasts (mainly Malassezia and Cryptococcus) and rusts were found in dusts collected from elevated surfaces. This difference was also reflected in the
differential ratios of Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes
(NAsc:NBas) between the two sample types; the average
NAsc:NBas ratio was 3.03 for the elevated surface dust, but
lower (0.95) for floor dust. The differences may relate to
the aerodynamic properties of different fungal particles;
while the spores of the mentioned genera are not distinguishingly large, they are commonly carried along with larger particles (i.e. Malassezia cells on human skin scales
and Cryptococcus cells on plant debris), which makes
them more prone to deposit on floor surfaces. In contrast,
many ascomycetous particles are small, air-dispersed
microconidia that stay airborne for long periods, resuspend efficiently and deposit on elevated surfaces. This
finding fits into the hypothesis of differential size distribution of particles in the two sample types, and suggests that
the small particle fraction may be better represented in
elevated surface samples.
Local fungal amplification may have a significant biasing
effect on fungal measurements of the dust samples [48,49].
Our findings suggest that microbial proliferation in settled
dust itself had not been extensive in the studied conditions. This was supported by the high molecular diversity
coupled with the low dominance of individual OTUs, a
strong contribution of species unable to proliferate in

Page 10 of 16

indoor habitats and a generally low proportion of Aspergillus, Eurotium and Penicillium (genera known to proliferate efficiently in dust in elevated humidity; [47]). This dust
type seems to act as a sink for fungal propagules arising
from various sources, as previously suggested by Scott
et al. [49]. These observations may yet hold for temperate
regions only; differential observations were made by
Amend et al. [21] from dust samples collected from the
tropics with higher relative humidity; there Aspergillus,
Eurotium and Wallemia were prevalent, and the overall
molecular diversity was lower. The observations by
Amend et al. [21] from temperate regions were similar to
ours.
Fungal diversity in building material samples

The spectrum of fungi in building material samples was
very different from that observed in dust: Practically all
phylotypes were affiliated with filamentous ascomycetes
and only a few with basidiomycetes, all of which were
yeast-like species. The number of phylotypes observed in
material samples was low compared to dust samples.
This may have been partly caused by technical problems
in the clone library construction; it may also reflect the
profound differences of these substrata. While dust acts
as a repository of particles, wet building materials support a limited set of taxa, probably as a function of
restrictive nutritional characteristics of the substrata and
interference competition. The phylogenetic spectrum of
fungi observed by sequencing was similar to that
observed by cultivation; both methods showed a predominance of taxa affiliated with Dothideomycetes, Eurotiomycetes and Leotiomycetes.
The analyzed building material samples were collected
from two moisture-damaged buildings of different construction types. The community composition differed in
the two buildings: The Index-1 building was dominated
by filamentous xerophilic soil fungi, whereas plant and
wood-associated species favouring higher water activity,
including yeasts, predominated in samples from the
Index-2 building. While others have reported associations between fungal genera and building material types
[41], such separation was not obvious here. Instead, we
hypothesize that the predominance of different fungal
ecotypes was linked to the sampled building locations:
Soil-associated xerophiles tended to dominate the waterdamaged ground-level and below-grade sites sampled
from the Index-1 building, while phylloplane fungi
dominated in roof constructions sampled from the
Index-2 building. However, these observations were
made from a very limited number of samples, and thus
need further testing with larger sample numbers.
Nearly all clones and isolates from building materials
could be identified to species level by their nucITS
sequences. Most of the fungi detected had been isolated

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

from building materials before [41,51,52]. In addition,
we identified several species that have not previously
been reported as contaminants of building materials
(e.g. Penicillium canescens, Thielavia hyalocarpa, Cryptococcus adeliensis). Moreover, clones and isolates without close sequence relatives in DNA databases were also
found. This confirms that the present, largely cultivation-based view of building-associated fungal diversity is
incomplete and should be studied in detail using cultivation-independent methods. Advanced isolation techniques using minimal selectivity [53], as well as novel
massively parallel sequencing applications, may offer feasible alternatives to further elucidate this unexplored
biodiversity from large numbers of samples.
Effect of moisture damage and remediation on fungal
assemblages in dust

We found higher molecular diversity and ERMI scores in
dusts collected from damaged buildings than their
matched references. In contrast, elevated total concentrations of fungal biomass, total cell counts of common
indoor molds or culturable fungi were not seen. Visible
water damage and mold growth on surfaces is often associated with elevated concentrations of fungi in dust [25],
but low levels in dust are not uncommon when the
growth is located inside the building envelope [26], as
was the case in the present study.
The increased diversities in index buildings were associated with fungal classes that include building inhabiting
decomposers (Agaricomycetes) and saprotrophic molds
(Dothideomycetes and Eurotiomycetes); elevated ERMI
scores suggested an increase in water-associated fungi in
index buildings. Despite this, few of the fungi detected
from the water-damaged building materials were actually
found in the corresponding dust samples, even using the
combination of qPCR (a sensitive technique) and clone
library sequencing (a non-selective technique). This may
indicate that the transfer of DNA containing cell material
from the site of growth to the room space was not
remarkable compared to other fungal sources. On the
other hand, the low number of shared taxa between
materials and dust may have been a consequence of
undersampling of materials from contaminated building
sites and/or the failure to construct clone libraries from
individual material samples. We used 69 different qPCR
assays to study the fungi in dust, but this selection covered less than one third of the 45 phylotypes found in
materials. Thus, it is possible that a larger proportion of
the observed fungi in dust was attributable to building
material sources than could be verified here.
Remedial and cleaning efforts were associated with a
decrease in the diversity of dustborne fungi in one of the
buildings. This, as well as the disappearance of certain
material-associated species, supports the assumption that

Page 11 of 16

remediation was effective in the removal of the fungal
burden contributed by indoor mold growth sources. In
the second location, clear indications of an intervention
effect on the diversity were not seen. Due to a delay in
remediation schedules the interval between completion
of the remediation and post-remediation sampling was
short, which may explain the increase in the abundance
of material-associated fungi in post-remediation dust;
despite efforts to prevent the spread of contamination,
fungal particles aerosolized during remediation may have
spread, not being sufficiently removed by post-remedial
cleaning. In addition, there was an unexpected diversification in the reference building’s microbial profile, which
undermined the case-control comparison. The diversification may have been caused by an increase in the transfer of fungal material from outdoors. This hypothesis is
supported by the appearance of many probably outdoorrelated phylotypes in the clone libraries. Yet the diversification included many species that may proliferate
indoors, and thus the occurrence of water damage in the
reference building cannot be ruled out. In Location-2,
the considerable distance between the index and reference buildings also challenged the comparison. These
findings highlight the strong variation in indoor mycobiota within and between buildings, the uniqueness of
individual buildings’ microbial profiles and the complexity of potential sources. For these reasons, the choice and
matching of reference building for each study building is
crucial. In general, our findings are only suggestive due
to the deep normal variation between buildings and the
small building number, and should be further examined
with larger data sets.
Comparison of methods

Of all methods tested, clone library analysis provided
the most thorough inventory of fungal diversity in
settled dust. Nevertheless, a comparison of the sequencing results with qPCR results (a technique with higher
analytical sensitivity) showed that many species present
in the samples were not represented by the libraries.
The species only detected by qPCR tended to be those
of lower qPCR cell counts, whereas highly abundant
species were much better represented in the clone
libraries.
Taking into account the semiquantitative nature of
clone library results and the presently deficient specieslevel information of potential building-associated fungi,
the usefulness of clone library sequencing for assessment
of building sources remains uncertain. This uncertainty
also arises from the universal nature of the technique, i.e.
its sensitivity in detecting background diversity acting as
a dampening factor on the ability to detect shifts in indicator species. Novel highly parallel sequencing techniques like 454 pyrosequencing overcome the limitations

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

of sensitivity, but the quantitative representativeness
remains a problem [21]. In the present study, despite its
selectivity, plate cultivation was partly successful in
reflecting increased fungal diversity and/or detecting
major indicator fungi arising from building material
sources in settled dust samples. This was not, however,
consistent across all samples, as the masking effect of
certain species occurring in very high concentrations was
considerable.
ERMI is an index derived from a set of qPCR assays
used to describe the indoor fungal burden [20]. Here, the
ERMI values were below 5, i.e. relatively low compared
to US homes. Vesper et al. reported ERMI values greater
than 5 for the highest quartile of randomly selected US
homes, whereas over 75% of homes with asthmatic children were above this value [54]. However, no similar data
are available in Finland. In the present study, the ERMI
index was observed to reflect the overall level of diversity.
In our sample material, the group 1 members A. pullulans and Eurotium spp. occurred in significant concentrations in all studied dust samples and in similar
concentrations in the index and reference buildings. This
suggests that the placement of these species in the indicator group may not be appropriate.

Conclusions
The present study is the first to assess the effect of water
damage and its remediation on indoor mycobiota using
universal culture-independent community characterization methods, and also the first study to compare nucITS
sequencing results with an extensive panel of mold specific qPCR assays. Observations were made from a small
number of buildings, and thus the findings are descriptive
and need to be studied further with larger data sets. In
the studied buildings, we found indications of elevated
fungal diversity, as well as the presence of fungi attributable to building growth to be associated with water
damage. The community variation between buildings was
significant, and calls for the analysis of larger data sets in
order to understand the dynamics of microbial communities between building structures, surfaces and dust. Our
results demonstrate that culture-based methods used to
characterize indoor mycobiota provide an underestimate
of the total diversity, and that many unknown or unsequenced fungal species are present in dust. Despite this,
the majority of abundant phylotypes in nucITS clone
libraries were affiliated with previously recognized indoor
taxa, indicating that culture-dependent and independent
methods agree on the dominant indoor taxa. Clone
library sequencing was seen as an effective means to
characterize indoor communities, and proves extremely
useful when attempting to answer research questions on
‘real’ fungal diversity in a given environment. However,
this approach is not ideal if the specific detection of

Page 12 of 16

fungal taxa that are indicators of microbial indoor growth
is the aim, as the level of background diversity and its
variation are considerable, and this approach has limitations in sensitivity and quantitative presentation of
results. qPCR was found to be more sensitive than clone
library sequencing in detecting specific fungi in dust. We
found unknown and atypical fungi on moisture-damaged
building materials, which calls for more detailed investigation of the mycobiota capable of growing on building
materials.

Methods
Buildings

The study material consisted of two pairs of office buildings (n = 4) in two locations (Location 1 and Location 2).
Of each pair, one building (the Index-1 and Index-2 buildings) had a history of moisture and mold damage coupled
with health complaints from the building occupants; the
second building (the Reference-1 and Reference-2 buildings) lacked a similar history. Otherwise the buildings
were matched for age, construction type, usage, condition
and ventilation type. The buildings of Location 1 (Index-1
and Reference-1) were wooden frame structures located in
the same building complex outfitted with mechanical
exhaust ventilation systems. The main sources of water in
the index building had been roof leakages. The buildings
of Location 2 consisted of a slab-on-grade foundation with
one- or two-storey concrete formwork, and were outfitted
with balanced mechanical ventilation systems. The indexand reference buildings were located approx. 100 km apart
from each other. The Index-2 building was water-damaged
by roof leakage and capillary migration of ground water
through the basement floor slab. In the course of the
study, the damaged buildings underwent a thorough remediation during which damaged components of the building, including interior finishes, insulation and parts of the
framing were replaced. The sources of moisture were
identified and eliminated. No intervention or extra cleaning was performed in the reference buildings. Previous
work describes the mycobiota of outdoor air outside the
studied buildings, where the concentrations of 22 fungal
species or groups were assessed using qPCR in parallel
with the measurements described in the present study
[55].
Dust and material sampling

Dust samples (n = 8) were collected twice from each of the
four buildings, during consecutive winters. During the
intervening summer and autumn period the index buildings were remediated and a post-remediation cleaning of
the interior surfaces was performed. The interval between
remediation and follow-up sampling was approximately
six months in Location 1 and three months in Location 2.
Reference buildings were sampled at corresponding times.

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

Settled dust was collected and processed as described in
detail previously [23]. Briefly, a long term composite sample of accumulated fine dust was obtained by vacuuming
from above floor level surfaces (including the top of
shelves, tables and other surfaces) twice a week for 2-6
weeks into nylon dust sampling socks. The collected dust
was sieved using 1 mm mesh, homogenized and aliquoted
for analyses. During remediation, moisture-damaged
building material samples were collected from the two
index buildings. Samples were weighed, homogenized, and
microbial cells were eluted into sample buffer by sonication as described previously [41]. The material samples
from Index-1 building (n = 7), included timber, wood
board and mineral wool from ground floor constructions
and walls, while samples from Index-2 building (n = 9)
included wood and wood fibre board, concrete, mineral
wool and filler from floor and roof constructions. A summary of the samples analysed and methods used to compare fungal assemblages is given in Additional file 8
Table S7.
Determination of culturable fungi and ergosterol analysis

Culturable fungi from dust and material samples were
enumerated by dilution plate culture on 2% malt extract
agar (MEA) and dichloran-glycerol (DG18) agar followed
by microscopic examination, as described previously
[23,41]. The identification of representative isolates from
materials was confirmed by sequencing the full-length
nucITS region as described previously [23]. For ergosterol analysis, two replicate samples of 5 mg of dust were
assayed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
according to the method of Sebastian and Larsson [56]
with minor modifications [23], and the arithmetic mean
of the two replicates was calculated.
Molecular methods

The molecular methods to describe fungal community
composition, including DNA extraction from dust, optimized universal PCR amplification of full-length nucITS,
and construction and sequencing of clone libraries have
been described in detail previously [23]. All DNA extractions were done in duplicate. Negative PCR controls
were always used. For qPCR, an external amplification
control (Geotrichum candidum conidia) was spiked into
dust samples prior to DNA extraction. For clone library
construction, ten parallel PCR reactions were set up for
each sample and the resulting PCR products were pooled
prior to cloning. For the analysis of building materials,
amplification products from individual material samples
from each building were pooled prior to cloning to provide one composite product for each building. Due to
very low initial PCR product yields, these composite samples from materials were re-amplified by similar PCR to
yield sufficient DNA material for cloning.

Page 13 of 16

The concentrations of 69 fungal species or groups of
species were determined by qPCR, including assays
required for the calculation of the Environmental Relative
Moldiness Index (ERMI; [20]). The details of the DNA
extraction for qPCR, assay protocol and controls have
been described previously [23,57]. A full list of assays
performed along with detected taxa is given in Additional
file 7 Table S6, while the primer and probe sequences
used in the assays are available online at http://www.epa.
gov/nerlcwww/moldtech.htm. ERMI was calculated
according to Vesper et al. [20], essentially, by subtracting
the sum of logs of concentrations (CE mg-1 of dust) of a
set of common, non-indicator fungi from that of moisture-indicator taxa. Representative DNA sequences of
recovered fungi were submitted to the EMBL Nucleotide
Sequence Database [58] and assigned accession numbers
FR718449-718487 and FR682142-682466 for cultivated
strains and clone library phylotypes, respectively.
Phylogenetic and statistical data analyses

Sequence data were treated as described before [23]. Phylogenetic and statistical analyses were performed using
bioinformatics software freely available for academic
users. Program sources are listed at the end of the corresponding reference. Distance matrixes were constructed
for each sample and for the combined data from the
alignments by using the DNADIST program [59]. The
program package Mothur [60] was used to cluster
sequences with the average neighbor method into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) with 99% similarity.
Potentially chimeric sequences were identified using the
program Bellerophon [61] and investigated manually.
FigTree [62] was used to visualize and edit phylogenetic
trees. Full-length nucITS sequences were assigned to species- or genus level based on similarity values to closest
matching reference sequences in International Nucleotide Sequence Database (INSD) according to the scheme
described by Ciardo et al. [63]. For OTUs having ≥ 98%
similarity with an INSD reference, the annotation was
refined manually when applicable. Unknown OTUs (i.e.,
OTUs not assigned to species or genus) were provisionally assigned to class by BLAST result and rDNA gene
tree clustering. OTU richness and diversity estimates
were calculated using Mothur program; rarefaction
curves of the number of observed OTUs and end values
from the non-parametric ACE richness estimator were
used to describe theoretical OTU richness in samples.
Shannon (H’) and Simpson (D) indices were computed to
describe OTU diversity [60]. To assess species richness
within individual fungal classes, OTU richness normalized within-class (Sn) was calculated for each class and
sample by dividing the number of OTUs affiliated to certain class by the total number of clones in the library.
Subsequently, the ratio of the values between index- and

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

reference building samples (Sn(In)/Sn(Re)) was determined.
Classic incidence-based Sørensen (QS), and Chao’s abundance-based Sørensen indices for b-diversity were calculated using the EstimateS program [64] for pair-wise
comparison of the OTU composition of samples. Due to
variability in library size, a random selection of 100
sequences was re-sampled using R statistical environment [65] from each library apart from library Re1b from
which only 26 sequences were obtained and used.
The UniFrac program was used to compare the phylogenetic content of the clone libraries [66]. UniFrac estimates microbial community similarity by pair-wise
measurement of the phylogenetic distance separating the
taxa unique to each sample. For this, a second sequence
alignment was constructed that excluded ambiguously
aligning columns in ITS-1 and ITS-2 regions, and a
neighbor joining tree was created from this data set. The
length of the alignment was 214 characters and the tree
contained 202 unique branches. The tree was used to
perform the UniFrac distance analysis, the UniFrac significance test and the Principal Coordinates Analysis
(PCoA, unweighed). The UniFrac Lineage Specific Analysis option was then used to identify the fungal clades that
significantly contributed to the differences in community
composition between samples. The quantitative correlation between sequencing (clone library frequency) and
qPCR (CE g-1 of dust) results was studied by calculating
Spearman correlation coefficient for pairs of positive
detections. Clone library percentage frequencies were
first multiplied by the sample’s fungal biomass value
(ergosterol concentration) to better reflect the fungal
levels in the samples (Fc = F*c[erg]). The correlation was
calculated from log-transformed (X’ = log10(X+1)) data
in R statistical environment [65]. P-values were subsequently computed from a permutation test with 10000
random replicates.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Fig. S1: Rarefaction curves for the analysed nucITS
clone libraries.
Additional file 2: Table S1: Phylogenetic description, nearest
database relative and frequency of detection of fungal molecular
OTUs and isolated strains recovered from dust and water damaged
building material.
Additional file 3: Table S2: List of fungal phylotypes obtained from
building materials by cultivation and clone library analysis.
Additional file 4: Tables S3 and S4: Concentrations and diversity of
fungi determined by culture (S3) and quantitative PCR (S4) in dust.
Additional file 5: Fig. S2: Comparison of clone library frequencies
and qPCR cell counts for fungal phylotypes targeted by mold
specific qPCR.
Additional file 6: Table S5: Statistical pair-wise comparison of
nucITS clone libraries from settled dust samples.
Additional file 7: Table S6: List of performed qPCR assays and
targeted species.

Page 14 of 16

Additional file 8: Table S7: Summary of analysed samples and
applied methods.

List of abbreviations
CE: Cell Equivalent: the unit used to express qPCR results; 1 CE usually
corresponds to 1 fungal spore; ERMI: The Environmental Relative Moldiness
Index: a qPCR-based technique for describing the relative abundances of
moisture indicator and non-indicator species in indoor dust samples; nucITS:
Internal Transcribed Spacer region of nuclear ribosomal DNA: a molecular
clock like gene region that contains species specific regions; used here as a
“molecular species barcode” to detect and identify species based on their
DNA; OTU: Operational Taxonomic Unit: a cluster of homologous DNA
sequences that share certain level of sequence similarity; used here to
cluster fungal community nucITS sequences into species-level groups; PCoA:
Principal Coordinates Analysis: a multivariate statistical method for finding
and displaying major axes of variation among samples; used here to
describe the phylogenetic similarity/distance between fungal communities
in dust samples; qPCR: Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction: a method
for gene quantification; used here to quantify predetermined sets of
microbial species or higher groups based on the abundance of their species
specific gene regions (mainly nucITS) in dust samples.
Acknowledgements and funding
We want to thank Martin Romantschuk and Martin Täubel for critically
reviewing the manuscript, and Kirsi Lipponen, Heli Martikainen and Pirkko
Karakorpi for excellent technical assistance. The study was financially
supported by the Finnish Technology Agency (Grant 40035/04), the Finnish
Academy (Grant 111177) and the SYTYKE Graduate School in Environmental
Health.
Author details
1
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Viikinkaari 4, 00790 Helsinki,
Finland. 2Department of Environmental Health, National Institute for Health
and Welfare, Neulaniementie 4, 70701 Kuopio, Finland. 3Mikrobioni Inc., P.O.
Box 1188, 70211 Kuopio, Finland.
Authors’ contributions
MP did the cloning, sequencing and data-analyses and drafted the
manuscript, TM performed the qPCR assays and edited the manuscript, AH
did the ergosterol analyses and edited the manuscript, AN designed the
study and edited the manuscript, LP participated in study designing and
supervised the sequencing, PA edited the manuscript, UL did the culture
analyses and edited the manuscript, HR collected the samples, performed
the qPCR assays and edited the manuscript. All authors participated in the
study design and read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 1 July 2011 Accepted: 21 October 2011
Published: 21 October 2011
References
1. Mendell MJ, Mirer AG, Cheung K, Tong M, Douwes J: Respiratory and
allergic health effects of dampness, mold, and dampness-related agents:
a review of the epidemiologic evidence. J Environ Health Perspect 2011,
119:748-756.
2. Fisk WJ, Lei-Gomez Q, Mendell MJ: Meta-analyses of the associations of
respiratory health effects with dampness and mold in homes. Indoor Air
2007, 17:284-296.
3. Mudarri D, Fisk WJ: Public health and economic impact of dampness and
mold. Indoor Air 2007, 17:226-235.
4. Barnes CS, Dowling P, Van Osdol T, Portnoy J: Comparison of indoor
fungal spore levels before and after professional home remediation. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol 2007, 98:262-268.
5. Ebbehoj NE, Hansen MO, Sigsgaard T, Larsen L: Building-related symptoms
and molds: a two-step intervention study. Indoor Air 2002, 12:273-277.
6. Haverinen-Shaughnessy U, Pekkanen J, Nevalainen A, Moschandreas D,
Husman T: Estimating effects of moisture damage repairs on students’
health-a long-term intervention study. J Expo Anal Environ Epidemiol 2004,
14(Suppl 1):S58-64.

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.
26.

27.
28.

Kercsmar CM, Dearborn DG, Schluchter M, Xue L, Kirchner HL, Sobolewski J,
Greenberg SJ, Vesper SJ, Allan T: Reduction in asthma morbidity in
children as a result of home remediation aimed at moisture sources.
Environ Health Perspect 2006, 114:1574-1580.
Lignell U, Meklin T, Putus T, Rintala H, Vepsalainen A, Kalliokoski P,
Nevalainen A: Effects of moisture damage and renovation on microbial
conditions and pupils’ health in two schools–a longitudinal analysis of
five years. J Environ Monit 2007, 9:225-233.
Patovirta RL, Husman T, Haverinen U, Vahteristo M, Uitti JA, Tukiainen H,
Nevalainen A: The remediation of mold damaged school–a three-year
follow-up study on teachers’ health. Cent Eur J Public Health 2004,
12:36-42.
Savilahti R, Uitti J, Laippala P, Husman T, Roto P: Respiratory morbidity
among children following renovation of a water-damaged school. Arch
Environ Health 2000, 55:405-410.
Haverinen-Shaughnessy U, Hyvärinen A, Putus T, Nevalainen A: Monitoring
success of remediation: seven case studies of moisture and mold
damaged buildings. Sci Total Environ 2008, 399:19-27.
Meklin T, Putus T, Pekkanen J, Hyvärinen A, Hirvonen MR, Nevalainen A:
Effects of moisture-damage repairs on microbial exposure and
symptoms in schoolchildren. Indoor Air 2005, 15(Suppl 10):40-47.
World Health Organization: Dampness and mould. WHO guidelines for
indoor air quality. Copenhagen; 2009 [http://www.euro.who.int/__data/
assets/pdf_file/0017/43325/E92645.pdf].
Eduard W: Fungal spores: a critical review of the toxicological and
epidemiological evidence as a basis for occupational exposure limit
setting. Crit Rev Toxicol 2009, 39:799-864.
Husman T: Health effects of indoor-air microorganisms. Scand J Work
Environ Health 1996, 22:5-13.
Green BJ, Tovey ER, Beezhold DH, Perzanowski MS, Acosta LM, Divjan AI,
Chew GL: Surveillance of fungal allergic sensitization using the
fluorescent halogen immunoassay. J Med Mycol 2009, 19:253-261.
Miller JD: Chapter 4.1. Mycological investigations of indoor
environments. In Microorganisms in home and indoor work environments:
diversity, health impacts, investigation and control. Edited by: Flannigan B,
Samson RA, Miller JD. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2001:231-246.
Kaarakainen P, Rintala H, Vepsäläinen A, Hyvärinen A, Nevalainen A,
Meklin T: Microbial content of house dust samples determined with
qPCR. Sci Total Environ 2009, 407:4673-4680.
Meklin T, Haugland RA, Reponen T, Varma M, Lummus Z, Bernstein D,
Wymer LJ, Vesper SJ: Quantitative PCR analysis of house dust can reveal
abnormal mold conditions. J Environ Monit 2004, 6:615-620.
Vesper S, McKinstry C, Haugland R, Wymer L, Bradham K, Ashley P, Cox D,
Dewalt G, Friedman W: Development of an Environmental Relative
Moldiness index for US homes. J Occup Environ Med 2007, 49:829-833.
Amend AS, Seifert KA, Samson R, Bruns TD: Indoor fungal composition is
geographically patterned and more diverse in temperate zones than in
the tropics. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2010, 107:13748-13753.
Noris F, Siegel JA, Kinney KA: Evaluation of HVAC filters as sampling
mechanism for indoor microbial communities. Atmos Environ 2011,
45:338-346.
Pitkäranta M, Meklin T, Hyvärinen A, Paulin L, Auvinen P, Nevalainen A,
Rintala H: Analysis of fungal flora in indoor dust by ribosomal DNA
sequence analysis, quantitative PCR, and culture. Appl Environ Microbiol
2008, 74:233-244.
Tringe SG, Zhang T, Liu X, Yu Y, Lee WH, Yap J, Yao F, Suan ST, Ing SK,
Haynes M, Rohwer F, Wei CL, Tan P, Bristow J, Rubin EM, Ruan Y: The
airborne metagenome in an indoor urban environment. PLoS One 2008,
3:e1862.
Green CF, Scarpino PV, Gibbs SG: Assessment and modeling of indoor
fungal and bacterial concentrations. Aerobiologia 2003, 19:159-169.
Lawton MD, Dales RE, White J: The influence of house characteristics in a
Canadian community on microbiological contamination. Indoor Air 1998,
8:2-11.
Fröhlich-Nowoisky J, Pickersgill DA, Despres VR, Poschl U: High diversity of
fungi in air particulate matter. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2009, 106:12814-12819.
Lee SH, Lee HJ, Kim SJ, Lee HM, Kang H, Kim YP: Identification of airborne
bacterial and fungal community structures in an urban area by T-RFLP
analysis and quantitative real-time PCR. Sci Total Environ 2010,
408:1349-1357.

Page 15 of 16

29. Chao HJ, Milton DK, Schwartz J, Burge HA: Dustborne fungi in large office
buildings. Mycopathologia 2002, 154:93-106.
30. Chew GL, Rogers C, Burge HA, Muilenberg ML, Gold DR: Dustborne and
airborne fungal propagules represent a different spectrum of fungi with
differing relations to home characteristics. Allergy 2003, 58:13-20.
31. Horner WE, Worthan AG, Morey PR: Air-and Dustborne Mycoflora in
Houses Free of Water Damage and Fungal Growth. Appl Environ Microbiol
2004, 70:6394-6400.
32. Verhoeff AP, van Reenen-Hoekstra ES, Samson RA, Brunekreef B, van
Wijnen JH: Fungal propagules in house dust. I. Comparison of analytic
methods and their value as estimators of potential exposure. Allergy
1994, 49:533-539.
33. von Wintzingerode F, Gobel UB, Stackebrandt E: Determination of
microbial diversity in environmental samples: pitfalls of PCR-based rRNA
analysis. FEMS Microbiol Rev 1997, 21:213-229.
34. Vesper S, McKinstry C, Haugland R, Neas L, Hudgens E, Heidenfelder B,
Gallagher J: Higher Environmental Relative Moldiness Index (ERMIsm)
values measured in Detroit homes of severely asthmatic children. Sci
Total Environ 2008, 394:192-196.
35. Park JH, Cox-Ganser JM, Kreiss K, White SK, Rao CY: Hydrophilic fungi and
ergosterol associated with respiratory illness in a water-damaged
building. Environ Health Perspect 2008, 116:45-50.
36. Kirk P, Cannon P, Stalpers J: Dictionary of the fungi. 10 edition. Wallingford:
CABI; 2008.
37. Schmit JP, Mueller GM: An estimate of the lower limit of global fungal
diversity. Biodiversity and Conservation 2007, 16:99-111.
38. Jumpponen A, Johnson LC: Can rDNA analyses of diverse fungal
communities in soil and roots detect effects of environmental
manipulations – a case study from tallgrass prairie. Mycologia 2005,
97:1177-1194.
39. Neubert K, Mendgen K, Brinkmann H, Wirsel SG: Only a few fungal species
dominate highly diverse mycofloras associated with the common reed.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72:1118-1128.
40. Thompson JR, Marcelino LA, Polz MF: Heteroduplexes in mixed-template
amplifications: formation, consequence and elimination by
‘reconditioning PCR’. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:2083-2088.
41. Hyvärinen A, Meklin T, Vepsäläinen A, Nevalainen A: Fungi and
actinobacteria in moisture-damaged building materials – concentrations
and diversity. Int Biodeter Biodegr 2002, 49:27-37.
42. Flannigan B, Miller JD: Chapter 2.1 Microbial growth in indoor
environments. In Microorganisms in home and indoor work environments:
diversity, health impacts, investigation and control. Edited by: Flannigan B,
Samson RA, Miller JD. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2001:35-67.
43. Hyvärinen A, Reponen T, Husman T, Nevalainen A: Comparison of the
indoor air quality in mould damaged and reference buildings in a
subarctic climate. Cent Eur J Public Health 2001, 9:133-139.
44. Horisawa S, Sakuma Y, Doi S: Qualitative and quantitative PCR methods
using species-specific primer for detection and identification of wood
rot fungi. J Wood Sci 2009, 55:133-138.
45. Schmidt O: Indoor wood-decay basidiomycetes: damage, causal fungi,
physiology, identification and characterization. Mycol Progress 2007,
6:261-279.
46. Sundy M, Le Floch G, Le Bras-Quéré M, Barbier G: Improved molecular
methods to characterise Serpula lacrymans and other Basiodiomycetes
involved in wood decay. J Microbiol Methods 2011, 84:208-215.
47. de Hoog GS, Guarro J, Gené J, Figueras MJ: Atlas of clinical fungi; a pilot CDROM version of the 3rd edition Baarn: Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures;
2009.
48. Korpi A, Pasanen A-L, Pasanen P, Kalliokoski P: Microbial growth and
metabolism in house dust. Int Biodeter Biodegr 1997, 40:19-27.
49. Scott JA, Straus NA, Wong B: Heteroduplex DNA fingerprinting of
Penicillium brevicompactum from house dust. In Bioaerosols, fungi and
mycotoxins: Health effects, assessment, prevention and control. Edited by:
Johanning E. Albany: Eastern New York Occupational and Environmental
Health Clinic; 1999:335-342.
50. Noss I, Wouters IM, Visser M, Heederik DJ, Thorne PS, Brunekreef B,
Doekes G: Evaluation of a low-cost electrostatic dust fall collector for
indoor air endotoxin exposure assessment. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008,
74:5621-7.

Pitkäranta et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:235
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/235

Page 16 of 16

51. Pietarinen VM, Rintala H, Hyvärinen A, Lignell U, Kärkkäinen P, Nevalainen A:
Quantitative PCR analysis of fungi and bacteria in building materials and
comparison to culture-based analysis. J Environ Monit 2008, 10:655-663.
52. Samson RA, Houbraken JS, Summerbell RC, Flannigan B, Miller JD: Chapter
5: Common and important species of fungi and actinomycetes in indoor
environments. In Microorganisms in home and indoor work environments:
diversity, health impacts, investigation and control. Edited by: Flannigan B,
Samson RA, Miller JD. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2001:102-127.
53. Collado J, Platas G, Paulus B, Bills GF: High-throughput culturing of fungi
from plant litter by a dilution-to-extinction technique. FEMS Microbiol Ecol
2007, 60:521-533.
54. Vesper S, McKinstry C, Cox D, Dewalt G: Correlation between ERMI values
and other moisture and mold assessments of homes in the American
Healthy Homes Survey. J Urban Health 2009, 86:850-860.
55. Huttunen K, Rintala H, Hirvonen MR, Vepsalainen A, Hyvärinen A, Meklin T,
Toivola M, Nevalainen A: Indoor air particles and bioaerosols before and
after renovation of moisture-damaged buildings: the effect on biological
activity and microbial flora. Environ Res 2008, 107:291-298.
56. Sebastian A, Larsson L: Characterization of the microbial community in
indoor environments: a chemical-analytical approach. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2003, 69:3103-3109.
57. Haugland RA, Brinkman N, Vesper SJ: Evaluation of rapid DNA extraction
methods for the quantitative detection of fungi using real-time PCR
analysis. J Microbiol Methods 2002, 50:319-323.
58. EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database. [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/embl].
59. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version 3.6. Seattle:
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington; 2005 [http://
www.phylip.com/], Distributed by the author.
60. Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M, Hollister EB,
Lesniewski RA, Oakley BB, Parks DH, Robinson CJ, Sahl JW, Stres B,
Thallinger GG, Van Horn DJ, Weber CF: Introducing mothur: Open-source,
platform-independent, community-supported software for describing
and comparing microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009,
75:7537-41.
61. Huber T, Faulkner G, Hugenholtz P: Bellerophon: a program to detect
chimeric sequences in multiple sequence alignments. Bioinformatics 2004,
20:2317-2319[http://greengenes.lbl.gov/cgi-bin/nph-bel3_interface.cgi].
62. Rambaut A: FigTree.[http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software].
63. Ciardo DE, Schar G, Altwegg M, Bottger EC, Bosshard PP: Identification of
moulds in the diagnostic laboratory–an algorithm implementing
molecular and phenotypic methods. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2007,
59:49-60.
64. Colwell RK: EstimateS: Statistical estimation of species richness and
shared species from samples.[http://purl.oclc.org/estimates], User’s Guide
and application.
65. R Development Core Team: R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2008 [http://
www.R-project.org].
66. Lozupone C, Hamady M, Knight R: UniFrac–an online tool for comparing
microbial community diversity in a phylogenetic context. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:371[http://bmf.colorado.edu/unifrac/].
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-235
Cite this article as: Pitkäranta et al.: Molecular profiling of fungal
communities in moisture damaged buildings before and after
remediation - a comparison of culture-dependent and cultureindependent methods. BMC Microbiology 2011 11:235.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
