<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A de novo transcriptome of the Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus, to identify candidate transcripts for diapause preparation</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-619"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Monica F Poelchau"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A de novo transcriptome of the Asian tiger
mosquito, Aedes albopictus, to identify candidate
transcripts for diapause preparation
Monica F Poelchau1*, Julie A Reynolds2, David L Denlinger2, Christine G Elsik1 and Peter A Armbruster1

Abstract
Background: Many temperate insects survive the harsh conditions of winter by undergoing photoperiodic
diapause, a pre-programmed developmental arrest initiated by short day lengths. Despite the well-established
ecological significance of photoperiodic diapause, the molecular basis of this crucial adaptation remains largely
unresolved. The Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus (Skuse), represents an outstanding emerging model to
investigate the molecular basis of photoperiodic diapause in a well-defined ecological and evolutionary context. Ae.
albopictus is a medically significant vector and is currently considered the most invasive mosquito in the world.
Traits related to diapause appear to be important factors contributing to the rapid spread of this mosquito. To
generate novel sequence information for this species, as well as to discover transcripts involved in diapause
preparation, we sequenced the transcriptome of Ae. albopictus oocytes destined to become diapausing or nondiapausing pharate larvae.
Results: 454 GS-FLX transcriptome sequencing yielded >1.1 million quality-filtered reads, which we assembled into
69,474 contigs (N50 = 1,009 bp). Our contig filtering approach, where we took advantage of strong sequence
similarity to the fully sequenced genome of Aedes aegypti, as well as other reference organisms, resulted in 11,561
high-quality, conservative ESTs. Differential expression estimates based on normalized read counts revealed 57
genes with higher expression, and 257 with lower expression under diapause-inducing conditions. Analysis of
expression by qPCR for 47 of these genes indicated a high correlation of expression levels between 454 sequence
data and qPCR, but congruence of statistically significant differential expression was low. Seven genes identified as
differentially expressed based on qPCR have putative functions that are consistent with the insect diapause
syndrome; three genes have unknown function and represent novel candidates for the transcriptional basis of
diapause.
Conclusions: Our transcriptome database provides a rich resource for the comparative genomics and functional
genetics of Ae. albopictus, an invasive and medically important mosquito. Additionally, the identification of
differentially expressed transcripts related to diapause enriches the limited knowledge base for the molecular basis
of insect diapause, in particular for the preparatory stage. Finally, our analysis illustrates a useful approach that
draws from a closely related reference genome to generate high-confidence ESTs in a non-model organism.

Background
The annual arrival of winter in temperate habitats represents a fundamental challenge to the survival and reproduction of a wide variety of insects. Many temperate
insects surmount the harsh conditions of winter by
* Correspondence: mfp33@georgetown.edu
1
Department of Biology, Georgetown University, 37th and O Streets NW,
Washington, DC, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

undergoing photoperiodic diapause, a process in which
day length (photoperiod) provides a token cue that initiates a pre-programmed and hormonally controlled
developmental arrest in advance of the onset of unfavorable conditions [reviewed in [1]]. Photoperiodic diapause
is thus a crucial ecological adaptation enabling temperate insects to coordinate growth, development, reproduction and dormancy in a seasonal environment.
Processes related to regulation of development,

© 2011 Poelchau et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

metabolic depression, stress tolerance and nutrient storage appear to be particularly important physiological
components of the diapause response [2-8].
While many aspects of the physiological and ecological controls of diapause are known, research on the
molecular bases of diapause has been hampered by the
lack of genetic information from a suitable model organism [9]. Drosophila melanogaster has a weak diapause
response that is highly temperature-dependent [10], and
thus can give only limited insight into the mechanistic
basis of photoperiodic diapause [11]. Bombyx mori provides a rich source of information on gene expression
during diapause. However, diapause entry in B. mori is
controlled by diapause hormone, which is poorly conserved throughout insects [12], and is thus of limited
use for comparative analyses. Recently, the advent of
high-throughput sequencing methods has facilitated
genetic and genomic analyses of life-history traits in
non-model systems [5,13,14]. These new technologies
allow for de novo characterization of genome-wide
expression in non-model organisms, and have already
led to exciting recent progress on the transcriptional
bases of diapause in several insect taxa [3,5,15-17].
An additional factor that has limited progress on
understanding the molecular bases of diapause is the
wide diversity of diapause syndromes among different
insect species. The diapause program is characterized by
three eco-physiological phases: pre-diapause, diapause,
and post-diapause [18]. During the pre-diapause phase
the individual is sensitive to token environmental cue(s)
and in response to appropriate stimuli will initiate preparation for entry into diapause. During the diapause
phase metabolism is reduced and direct development is
arrested. Finally, during the post-diapause phase, the
individual emerges from diapause and post-diapause
direct development is resumed. All three eco-physiological phases can occur in every stage of the insect life
cycle, but an individual species is usually constrained to
the diapause phase (developmental arrest) during a single stage of the life-cycle [1]. The diversity of life-cycle
timing of eco-physiological phases among insects
implies a corresponding diversity of molecular and physiological pathways underlying diapause regulation in
different insect species. Most studies on the transcriptional bases of diapause have focused on gene expression during the phase of actual developmental arrest
(diapause). However, the pre-diapause phase can reveal
important insights into the regulation and physiological
trajectory of diapausing animals [19-21].
The Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus, is an outstanding emerging model organism for the study of diapause within a well-defined ecological and evolutionary
context. Currently considered the most invasive mosquito species in the world [22], in the last 30 years, Ae.

Page 2 of 19

albopictus has rapidly spread from its native Asian
range across the world and is currently found in at least
28 countries on every continent except Antarctica
[22,23]. Temperate populations of Ae. albopictus
undergo a maternally controlled egg diapause in which
exposure of the maternal pupa and adult to short day
lengths initiates diapause of the offspring as a pharate
larvae inside the chorion of the egg [24,25]. Increased
egg desiccation resistance during diapause [20,26] and
rapid evolution of both diapause incidence [[27]; Lounibos et al., in press; Urbanski et al., submitted] and diapause timing [Urbanski et al., submitted] during the
range expansion of Ae. albopictus in the US imply that
the diapause response has facilitated the rapid global
spread of this invasive mosquito. Furthermore, because
Ae. albopictus is a vector of dengue and Chikungunya
viruses, identifying the genetic basis of diapause could
potentially provide a platform for developing novel vector control methods [28]. Finally, the complete genome
sequence has been determined for Aedes aegypti [29], a
closely related mosquito in the same subgenus (Stegomyia) as Ae. albopictus. The Ae. aegypti genome
sequence thus provides a valuable “reference genome”
that can be used to annotate Ae. albopictus transcriptome sequences.
Here, we use a GS-FLX 454 platform to sequence and
assemble the transcriptome of Ae. albopictus oocytes
from females reared under diapause-inducing (DI) and
non-diapause-inducing (NDI) photoperiods. Our goals
were to 1) generate a transcriptome database for the
study of Ae. albopictus functional genetics because limited genetic information is currently available for this
species; and 2) to identify and verify candidate transcripts involved in the transcriptional bases of diapause
preparation. We leverage the close evolutionary relationship of Ae. albopictus to Ae. aegypti for the annotation
of the assembly. We use differential expression, based
on normalized read counts from the DI and NDI transcriptomes, to identify a series of candidate genes for
diapause preparation, and verify these candidates using
quantitative PCR (qPCR). We then discuss the putative
functional significance of verified differentially expressed
genes relative to the molecular physiology of pre-diapause and diapause in other insects. Our transcriptome
data enrich the limited sequence information for Ae.
albopictus, contribute to our knowledge of gene expression during the pre-diapause phase, and set the stage for
comparative analyses both amongst other taxa and relative to other diapause phases of Ae. albopictus.

Results and Discussion
Sequencing, read cleaning and de novo assembly

454 GS-FLX sequencing was performed on cDNA
libraries from mature (stage V) oocytes of Ae. albopictus

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 3 of 19

females reared under diapause-inducing (DI) or non-diapause-inducing (NDI) photoperiods (see Methods). We
merged reads from both libraries for assembly and
annotation. Our quality filtering procedure (Figure 1)
removed ~14% of the raw sequenced reads, leaving
1,111,941 reads remaining for further analysis. The average read length was 418 bp, with an N50 of 482 bp (Figure 2, Table 1, Table 2). These lengths are broadly
comparable with other 454 transcriptome sequencing
studies [30-33]. Raw reads and quality scores are
archived at NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under
Accession SRP007714.
Our de novo assembly using MIRA 3.2.0 [34] yielded
69,474 contigs, with an N50 of 1,009 bp (Figure 2, Table
2). These contigs are accessible at NCBI’’s transcript
shotgun archive (TSA) under accession numbers
JO845359-JO913491. Contig length is one of the many
benchmarks that can be used to assess assembly quality,
and our assembly shows a comparable mode of contig
length relative to similar studies [30-33]. Annotated
transcripts from the Ae. aegypti genome, the most suitable reference genome for Ae. albopictus, have an N50 of
1,980 bp (Figure 2). This result suggests that many of

Read cleaning
• quality and length
thresholds
• poly-A trimming
• rRNA/contaminant
removal

De novo
assembly
of reads
into contigs

the contigs in our assembly are shorter than the actual
transcripts from which they are derived. This disparity
in contig length distributions between de novo transcriptome assemblies and annotated transcripts from genome
assemblies is expected, because transcript predictions
from the genome assembly are based on both extensive
computational (automated and manual gene modeling)
and empirical (ESTs, cDNA sequences) evidence [29],
whereas the Ae. albopictus transcriptome is currently
limited to data from a single source.
De novo assemblies can seldom merge all reads into contigs [35-37], especially when the abundance of some transcripts is too low for representative reads to be assembled.
However, the “singleton” reads still represent useful
sequence information on low-coverage transcripts, and can
be included in subsequent analyses of the transcriptome. In
our assembly, 8% of the quality-filtered reads were not
assembled [similar to [31,38]], and these singletons were
merged with the contig set into a preliminary EST set.
Functional annotation

To functionally annotate the preliminary EST set, we
performed a series of BLAST searches [39] to several

Functional
annotation
• blast ESTs (contigs
and singletons)
against reference
databases

No match
meets final
filtering
criteria

Discard
EST

One or more
matches meet
filtering criteria

Verification of DE
ESTs
• use qPCR to
confirm a subset of
differentially
expressed genes

Differential expression
(DE) analysis – 454
sequence data
• Map individual reads
from DI and NDI
libraries to final EST
set
• determine
significantly DE genes
from each library
Discard all other ESTs

Figure 1 Flowchart of the main analysis steps outlined in this paper.

Homology-based
EST filtering and
trimming (‘final
ESTs’)
• For each
homolog, find
best EST –
homolog match
from BLAST
output
• Trim each EST
to its BLAST
alignment

• Assign functional
annotation/homolog
to EST based on
best match
• multiple ESTs can
be assigned to the
same homolog

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 4 of 19

Figure 2 Distribution of read and contig lengths from Ae. albopictus and Ae. aegypti. Reads lengths from the Ae. albopictus transcriptome
are show in red (N = 1,111,941), Ae. albopictus contig lengths in blue (N = 69,474), and Ae. aegypti transcript lengths (v1.2, http://www.
vectorbase.org) in green (N = 18,760).

reference organisms (Table 3). Our functional annotations drew heavily from two culicid genomes, Ae.
aegypti and Culex quinquefasciatus, due to their close
phylogenetic relationship with Ae. albopictus. Most
ESTs (66%) matched to Ae. aegypti transcripts and peptides (Table 4; Figure 3). Percent identities are frequently used as a measure of BLAST quality [35,40].
Here, percent identities between the ESTs and their
putative homologs declined with phylogenetic relatedness, with the highest percent identities found to putative homologs in Aedes spp., and the lowest to C.
elegans (Figure 3). 28% of ESTs (4% contigs, 24% singletons) had no significant similarity to any of the

databases that we searched, likely due to the conservative e-value cutoffs we used when assigning homology
(Table 3).
Homology-based EST filtering and trimming

The MIRA assembler tends to assemble contigs with
high redundancy [32,35,40], and our dataset is no exception: on average, more than eight ESTs matched the
same gene (min = 1; median = 4; mean = 8.86; max =
5,613; See additional file 1: Distribution of the number
of ESTs assigned to a reference gene). There are both
biological and technical reasons for this high redundancy. For example, alternatively spliced isoforms, or

Table 1 Summary statistics for reads from 454 GS-FLX sequencing
Total # of
reads

% reads
removed

# of reads remaining
after filtering

Average filtered
read length

Average
filtered %GC

% of reads mapped
to contig set

% of mapped,
discarded reads

DI

668,269

13.59

570,807

404.11

50.76

61.19

2.62

NDI

656,977

14.91

541,134

432.62

50.75

62.38

3.01

Combined

1,325,246

14.25

1,111,941

417.98

50.76

61.77

2.81

Summary statistics of reads from two cDNA libraries derived from oocytes from DI (diapause inducing) and NDI (non-diapause inducing) photoperiod treatments
are shown.

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 5 of 19

Table 2 N50 values, and mean and median lengths, for reads and EST sets
N50

Mean read length

Median read length

482

417.98

467

Trimmed reads
redundant EST set

Contigs only

1009

898.25

692

redundant EST set

Contigs and singletons

641

601.75

493

trimmed EST set

Contigs only

1120

801.25

647

trimmed EST set

Contigs and singletons

974

688.48

508

alleles of the same gene, could assemble into separate
contigs. Additionally, sequencing errors, incomplete
transcript coverage during sequencing, chimeric reads or
contigs, or paralogous genes from recently diverged gene
families could also contribute to the redundancy. Biologically valid transcript variants are difficult to distinguish
from sequencing and assembly errors, particularly in the
absence of a reference genome. To systematically reduce
our EST set to a non-redundant transcriptome, we took
advantage of the homology of the Ae. albopictus ESTs
to the closely related Ae. aegypti genome, as well as
homology to other, more distantly related genomes. For
each group of ESTs that matched a putative homolog,
we identified one ‘’representative’’ EST, and trimmed
this EST to its overlap with the putative homolog (see
Methods). This resulted in 11,561 non-redundant, ‘’conservative’’ ESTs with annotations to known genes. In the
subsequent text, we refer to this non-redundant,
trimmed EST set as the ‘’final’’ EST set. The N50 of the
final EST set improved over that of the redundant ESTs
(Table 2). While this conservative approach certainly
removed perfectly legitimate sequence data, it systematically avoided chimeric contigs that could occur due to
contig mis-assembly, thereby yielding a higher-confidence EST set. The advantage of this approach is that it
eliminated redundant ESTs, as well as annotations with
little support from other organisms. The disadvantages
are that genes novel to Ae. albopictus are eliminated,
and that some valid sequence information from ESTs

with homology information was discarded. A similar
approach was used by Crawford et al. [41] for a nonmodel mosquito species (Anopheles funestus). Here, the
authors utilized significant homology of their ESTs to
other reference genomes to validate contigs and eliminate redundancy, reflecting the fact that EST redundancy and uncertainty are common problems in
transcriptome assembly of organisms without a genome
sequence, and that unique, taxon-specific approaches
will often be necessary.
Trimmed ESTs covered an average of 43% of their
putative homologs (See additional file 2: Box plot of the
percent length of each reference gene matched by its
Ae. albopictus EST putative homolog), which indicates
that the majority of the final ESTs do not represent full
transcripts. This result is expected, given the incomplete
nature of de novo transcriptome assembly of non-model
organisms, as well as our rigorous trimming procedure.
Other de novo transcriptome assemblies of mosquito
species have also documented incomplete transcript
coverage based on comparisons to a closely related
reference genome [41,42]. Of the ESTs that remained in
the final contig set, 93% were annotated to Aedes spp.
(Table 4), with high percent identities (mean: 86.4%; See
additional file 3: Box-plot of percent identities from
BLAST alignments of final ESTs to each reference
organism). Not surprisingly, percent identities of BLAST
matches to other, less closely related organisms were
much lower (mean: 59.4%, See additional file 3: Box-plot

Table 3 Databases used for BLAST homology searches with relevant details for each search
Reference
organism

Sequence
type

BLAST
algorithm

Minimum evalue

Version

Source

Minimum % identity
used in final EST set
selection

Ae. albopictus

mRNA

BLASTN

Ae. aegypti

transcripts

BLASTN

1.00E-10

N/A

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

85

1.00E-10

AaegL1.2

http://www.vectorbase.org

Ae. aegypti

genomic

85

BLASTN

1.00E-10

AaegL1

http://www.vectorbase.org

Ae. aegypti

85

peptides

BLASTX

1.00E-10

AaegL1.2

http://www.vectorbase.org

70

Cx. quinquefasciatus
An. gambiae

peptides
peptides

BLASTX
BLASTX

1.00E-05
1.00E-05

CpipJ1.2
AgamP3.6

http://www.vectorbase.org
http://www.vectorbase.org

0
0

D. melanogaster

translation

BLASTX

1.00E-05

r5.29

http://www.flybase.org

0

Ca. elegans

peptides

BLASTX

1.00E-04

WS218

http://www.wormbase.org

0

Swiss-Prot

proteins

BLASTX

1.00E-03

2010_6

http://www.uniprot.org

0

The minimum e-value used for the initial EST set, and the minimum % identity used for the final EST set, varied based on phylogenetic distance of the organism/
database and Ae. albopictus.

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 6 of 19

Table 4 Number of ESTs assigned to each genomic database
Reference organism

Number of matches, initial EST set

Ae. albopictus

1,011

Number of matches, final EST set
52

Ae. aegypti transcripts

91,461

10,005

Ae. aegypti genome, annotated

1,422

142

Ae. aegypti genome, unannotated

10,736

N/A

Ae. aegypti peptides

2,993

556

Cx. quinquefasciatus.

1,167

550

An. gambiae

103

79

D. melanogaster
C. elegans

21
25

16
19

Swiss-Prot

4,331

86

total number of matches

113,270

11,505

no hit (contigs)

6,775

N/A

no hit (singletons)

37,077

N/A

total number of contigs

69,474

N/A

total number of singletons

87,648

N/A

Both the preliminary EST set and final, trimmed EST set are listed (see Methods).

of percent identities from BLAST alignments of final
ESTs to each reference organism). We provide fasta files
of the trimmed ESTs, as well as an Excel spreadsheet
with relevant annotation information at http://AlbopictusExpression.org.
To evaluate whether our sequencing efforts maximized
the number of transcripts captured, we generated a
bootstrapped gene accumulation curve [31], based on
BLASTN matches of individual reads to the Ae. aegypti
transcriptome. After an initial steep increase in the
number of Ae. aegypti transcripts discovered with
increasing read number, the slope of the curve rapidly
asymptotes, which implies that our sequencing depth
captured most of the Ae. aegypti transcript homologs
found in our cDNA libraries (See additional file 4: Gene
accumulation curve of Ae. albopictus ESTs). Paired with
other results indicating that our coverage of putative
homologs is incomplete (See additional file 2: Box plot
of the percent length of each reference gene matched by
its Ae. albopictus EST putative homolog), we conclude
that our assembly maximized the number of putative
homologs found in our libraries, but that the ESTs
representing these homologs are incomplete. Because of
this, our measures of expression under DI and NDI conditions will underestimate actual expression, although
we do not expect a bias in this estimate between DI and
NDI libraries. However, differentially expressed genes
with inherently low expression are more likely to go
undetected than genes with high expression, in particular when sequencing coverage is low [43].
Differential expression (DE) analysis- 454 sequence data

We estimated expression levels for each EST under DI
and NDI treatments by mapping reads from each

treatment to the final EST set. 62% and 61% of reads
from the NDI and DI libraries, respectively, uniquely
mapped to the final EST set (Table 1). 2.8% of all reads
were discarded because they did not map uniquely.
Almost all remaining unmapped reads corresponded to
the untrimmed EST set (data not shown); those that did
not had low complexity regions over the majority of the
read length, and thus were not assembled. Some viral
and bacterial genes (55) were discovered during the
annotation process. These genes were retained for read
mapping, but the genes were removed before measuring
differential expression, as measuring viral loads was outside the scope of this study. Using TMM-normalized
read counts [Trimmed Mean of M values, [44]] to initially determine differential expression of ESTs between
photoperiod treatments (see Methods), 257 ESTs had
significantly higher expression under NDI conditions,
and 57 ESTs were over-expressed under DI conditions
(Figure 4; See additional file 5: Characteristics of all differentially expressed genes from the 454 dataset). Additionally, the range of log fold-change tended to be
higher under NDI relative to DI conditions (Figure 4).
Verification of DE ESTs by qPCR

We evaluated differential expression of 48 candidate
genes using qPCR to validate expression patterns in the
454 dataset. Of these, 21 were predicted over-expressed
under NDI conditions, 10 under DI conditions, and 17
were of a priori interest. We first asked whether expression levels from the 454 dataset and qPCR experiments
were correlated, and whether the normalization method
of the 454 dataset affected these correlations. In addition
to the TMM method that we used to identify candidate
genes [44], we calculated RPKM (Reads Per Kilobase per

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 7 of 19

Figure 3 Box-plot of percent identities from EST BLAST alignments to each reference organism. The solid horizontal line represents the
median, the box encompasses the lower and upper quartiles, and the boxplot whiskers encompasses the data extremes.

Million, [45]), and asked whether these two measures
correlated with mean mRNA abundance from the qPCR
experiments for NDI and DI treatments. We removed
one gene with much higher qPCR than 454 expression
because it is extremely likely that paralogs were coamplified by qPCR but were undetected by the qPCR
melt-curve analysis. This gene, a histone 2A homolog
(Ae. aegypti ID AAEL000494), has 19 near-identical
paralogs in Ae. aegypti, of which eight are 100% identical at the peptide level (http://www.vectorbase.org). Subsequently, correlation coefficients of differential
expression for the remaining 47 candidate genes
assessed by 454 sequencing and qPCR were high and
resembled those found in previous comparisons of

qPCR and RNA-Seq data (Figure 5; Table 5; comparisons in [46]: r2 = 0.711-0.807). Correspondence between
454 and qPCR expression levels was notably higher
when 454 expression was measured as RPKM, suggesting that RPKM is a more accurate measure of gene
expression for our dataset.
While correlation coefficients between 454 expression
and mRNA abundance calculated within each photoperiod
treatment were very high for expression measures in the
DI treatment, correlation coefficients were lower for
expression measures from the NDI treatment for all analyses (Figure 5; Table 5). This raises the question whether
this difference is biological (genes are inherently more
variable under longer photoperiods) or technical

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 8 of 19

Figure 4 Log fold-change expression (M) versus log abundance (A) of TMM-normalized expression from the 454 dataset. The log foldchange and log abundance for genes that are unique to a treatment is undefined; therefore, these genes are shown at an arbitrarily low
abundance on the left of the plot in orange. Genes with higher expression under diapausing (DI) conditions have positive M values, and genes
with higher expression under non-diapausing (NDI) conditions have negative M values. Genes that qualified as significantly differentially
expressed (corrected p < 0.001) are in red.

(differences in library or material preparation, as well as
stochastic differences, could have resulted in lower correlations in the NDI dataset). To address this question, we
calculated coefficients of variation (CVs) of mRNA abundance from the five replicates of the qPCR data for each
gene and photoperiod treatment. If gene expression were
more variable in animals reared under NDI conditions, we
would expect higher CVs of mRNA abundance for NDI

vs. DI treatments. While the median CV was marginally
higher among NDI replicates (0.187 vs. 0.173), CVs were
not significantly different between photoperiod treatments
(paired Student’’s t-test, p = 0.38). This result suggests that
the lower correlation between qPCR and 454 data in the
NDI dataset is more likely due to technical artifacts, rather
than inherently higher variation in gene expression under
NDI conditions.

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 9 of 19

Figure 5 RPKM values (454 sequence data) versus mean qPCR mRNA abundance for NDI and DI treatments. NDI treatments are shown
in red, DI in blue. Lines from the linear regressions for each photoperiod treatment, after removal of the outlier histone2A, are plotted as solid
lines (r2(NDI)= 0.70; r2(DI)= 0.90).

Table 5 Correlation coefficients (r2) between qPCR mRNA
abundance and 454 gene expression
normalization method

NDI

DI

RPKM

0.722

0.911

TMM

0.548

0.727

Correlation coefficients are derived from linear regressions between qPCR
mRNA abundance and both TMM and RPKM gene expression measures from
454 read counts for each gene verified by qPCR.

Verification of DE ESTs - Significance comparisons

Perfect congruence between the levels of significance
detected using qPCR and 454 sequencing is not to be
expected, because 1) the 454 results were based only on
one biological replicate, thus increasing the possibility of
both type I and type II error, and 2) the datasets were
acquired using fundamentally different approaches,
necessitating alternative analyses to determine

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 10 of 19

significance of DE. While qPCR has some methodological
caveats [47], it is generally considered a benchmark for
gene expression analyses. To determine whether significant differential expression in the 454 dataset corresponds
to significant DE in the qPCR data, we calculated sensitivity (true positive rate) and specificity (true negative rate)
statistics of the 454 dataset. Because our correlation analyses between 454 and qPCR expression levels suggest that
RPKM performs better at predicting mRNA abundance
than the TMM normalization, we compared both expression measures’’ performance for predicting qPCR significance. Despite the better predictive ability of RPKM on
mRNA abundance, both expression measures of the 454
data were poor predictors of qPCR significance (Table 6).
This is perhaps not surprising, given the dramatically different methods used to determine significance between
454 and qPCR noted above. Despite lack of congruence
between 454 and qPCR results regarding genes predicted
as significantly DE, 10 of 10 genes from the DI category
had higher average expression under DI conditions based
on qPCR results, and as such were directionally consistent
between both methods (See additional file 6: Results of
qPCR validation). As expected based on the lower correlations in the NDI data noted above, directional consistency
was lower for NDI genes (9 of 21). These results indicate
that 454 sequencing as applied in this study can be useful
guide to de novo identification of transcriptional differences underlying complex phenotypes, but that replication, either by verification with qPCR, or by sequencing
replicated libraries, is essential for verification. Below, we
restrict our discussion of transcriptional elements of diapause response in Ae. albopictus to ESTs verified as DE by
qPCR.
Verification of DE ESTs - Functional categories of verified
genes

Several themes in the insect diapause program have
emerged from comparative analyses of diapausemediated developmental arrest, including DNA
Table 6 Sensitivity and specificity information calculated
from 48 candidate genes
Normalization method
RPKM

TMM

TP (true positives)

4

6

TN (true negatives)

19

12

FP (false positives)

19

26

FN (false negatives)
TPR (sensitivity)

5
0.44

3
0.67

TNR (specificity)

0.50

0.32

Values for both RPKM and TMM expression measures from the 454 data are
shown. Sensitivity is calculated as the number of true positives over the
number of all positives; Specificity is the number of true negatives divided by
all negatives.

replication and transcription, endocrine signaling, metabolism, and response to stress [3-5,8,9,21]. These processes can be important during diapause preparation,
but other pathways leading to preparatory functions,
such as growth regulation in advance of developmental
arrest, accumulation of metabolic reserves, and behavioral or morphological changes to protect against the
physiological stresses of the harsh environment [1], may
dominate the transcriptional profile during the preparatory phase. In Ae. albopictus, maternally provisioned
transcripts from females reared under short day lengths
dictate the development of diapause-destined oocytes; it
is not known in Ae. albopictus, nor in most other prediapause insects, which of these processes should be
transcriptionally dominant. From qPCR experiments, we
found differential expression of ESTs belonging to the
main categories of developmental arrest during diapause,
and identified additional ESTs from pathways that have
not yet received attention in previous studies on the
molecular bases of diapause (Table 7).
Developmental arrest is the definitive diapause phenotype. Studies of pre-diapause gene expression in other
insects suggest that precursors of developmental arrest
are initiated during the preparatory phase [17,21]. In
our study, two ESTs with homologs involved in DNA
replication and transcription were more abundant in DI
oocytes: inhibitor of growth protein (ing1, AAEL003650)
and bhlhzip transcription factor bigmax (AAEL011202)
(Table 7). In various systems, ING1 has shown involvement in oncogenesis, apoptosis, DNA repair and negative cell cycle regulation [reviewed in [48]]. In D.
melanogaster, ING1 is thought to interact with p53,
which is a transcription factor that can respond to stress
by affecting cell-cycle arrest, DNA repair, apoptosis, or
senescence [49]. Cell-cycle arrest is one of the unifying
themes of diapause [9], thus genes that may affect this
arrest are good candidates as developmental regulators.
Among its various functions, the transcription factor
Bhlhzip bigmax appears to be a target of FOXO and is
involved in regulating metabolism and energy sensing
[50,51]. The importance of FOXO in the diapause of
Culex pipiens, another mosquito [52], and the critical
role of energy sensing during diapause [8] suggests possible roles for these two ESTs in the preparatory phase
of diapause in Ae. albopictus.
The endocrine system plays a central role in regulating diapause [53]. Although our understanding of the
endocrine regulation of embryonic diapause is restricted
to just a few species, high levels of ecdysteroids are critical for the induction and maintenance of embryonic diapause in the gypsy moth, Lymantria dispar [54]. In prediapause Ae. albopictus oocytes, two homologs of genes
potentially involved in ecdysone signaling were differentially expressed. The first, rack1, encodes a receptor for

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 11 of 19

Table 7 Genes verified as DE from qPCR analyses
Ae. albopictus ID

Putative homolog

454
category

Foldchange

corrected pvalue

Functional category

Aalb_oocyte_rep_c42113_trimmed

phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(pepck)

DI

0.82

0.004

metabolism

Aalb_oocyte_rep_c2808_trimmed

Ecdysone inducible protein L2,
putative (eip)

NDI

-0.85

0.005

endocrine signaling

Aalb_oocyte_rep_c41764_trimmed

Inhibitor of growth protein (ing1)

a priori

1.05

0.002

DNA replication/
transcription

Aalb_oocyte_rep_c38864_trimmed

Conserved hypothetical protein
(AAEL004873)

NDI

0.48

0.004

unknown

Aalb_oocyte_rep_c36433_trimmed

Conserved hypothetical protein
(AAEL008645)

DI

1.33

0.000

unknown

Aalb_oocyte_GH79BIP01BENVH_trimmed

Bhlhzip transcription factor bigmax

DI

0.87

0.010

DNA replication/
transcription

Aalb_oocyte_rep_c3449_trimmed

GPCR Methuselah Family

a priori

0.88

0.004

stress response

Aalb_oocyte_rep_c40438_trimmed

Receptor for activated C kinase,
putative (rack1)

DI

0.86

0.003

endocrine signaling

Aalb_oocyte_rep_c18194_trimmed

Conserved hypothetical protein
(AAEL012019)

DI

0.92

0.010

unknown

Aalb_oocyte_rep_c431_trimmed

phosphatidylethanolamine-binding
protein (pebp)

a priori

0.88

0.000

morphogenesis

Information on each gene verified as differentially expressed is shown. Putative homologs were derived from BLAST searches (see Methods). “454 category” refers
to the differential expression status assigned to the EST based on read counts: DI or NDI, significantly over-expressed under DI or NDI conditions, respectively;
and a priori, not DE based on 454 read counts, but of a priori interest based on previous diapause research. Fold-change calculations are based on qPCR results,
and were calculated as log2(DI-NDI), where DI and NDI are the average mRNA abundance for DI and NDI treatments, respectively (see Methods). The corrected pvalue is derived from Student’’s t-test of mRNA abundances derived from qPCR reactions.

activated protein kinase C, and was more abundant
under DI conditions. RACK1 is known to bind to several different signaling molecules [55], including a moltassociated transcription factor that is linked to the
action of 20-hydroxyecdysone [56]. It is highly expressed
in ovary tissue and is thought to be required for oogenesis in D. melanogaster; female D. melanogaster homozygous for RACK1 null alleles show reduced ovary size
[55]. rack1 has also been implicated in diapause in other
insects. For example, in a study of gene expression in
pre-diapause and diapause cricket embryos (Allonemobius socius), rack1 expression was higher in pre-diapause
embryos, but subsequently decreased during diapause
[21]. Intriguingly, it has recently been shown that
RACK1 affects circadian rhythm function in mouse [57].
A classic hypothesis proposes that circadian rhythm
underlies the expression of photoperiodic diapause [58],
although evidence supporting this hypothesis is limited
[59,60] and highly debated [e.g. [61]]. However, these
findings suggest a possibly complex role for RACK1 in
diapause preparation. The second differentially
expressed transcript potentially related to endocrine signaling is ecdysone inducible protein L2 (eip), which was
less abundant in DI oocytes. The D. melanogaster
homolog of eip, imp-l2, has been implicated in ectoderm
and neural development [62], is essential for starvation
resistance [63], and may have a role in the regulation of
growth [64]. Loss-of-function alleles of imp-l2 in D. melanogaster result in female size increase, which appears

to be primarily driven by enlarged ovaries [63]. Interestingly, both rack1 and eip have phenotypes related to
ovary size in D. melanogaster [55,63]. Eggs from Ae.
albopictus reared under DI conditions are larger and
contain more lipids than eggs from females reared
under NDI conditions (PAA, unpublished data); we
speculate that decreased pre-diapause expression of the
Ae. albopictus imp-l2 homolog, and/or increased expression of the rack1 homolog, could affect ovary and subsequent egg size. Ongoing studies of the expression levels
of these genes during embryological development and
developmental arrest in pharate Ae. albopictus larvae
will provide further insight into the diapause-related
function of these transcripts, as well as important comparative results regarding the ecdysone signaling
pathway.
Diapause is often accompanied by a decrease in metabolism. One gene involved in metabolism was more
abundant in DI oocytes: phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (pepck). PEPCK is part of the gluconeogenesis
pathway, and has higher expression levels during diapause in Sarcophaga crassipalpis [5]. Diapausing insects
appear to enhance gluconeogenic pathways, in part due
to a shift towards anaerobic metabolism [8]. We
hypothesize that the over-expression of this transcript
during the pre-diapause phase in Ae. albopictus oocytes
may either represent a maternally provisioned regulatory
cue, or initiation of the gluconeogenic pathway in
advance of the onset of developmental arrest. The

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

transcription factor Bhlhzip bigmax, discussed above,
could also contribute to the down-regulation of metabolism [50,51] associated with diapause.
Increased longevity and stress resistance are also
important features of the diapause program. Potentially
relevant to these phenotypes, a gene encoding a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) from the Methuselah
family was more abundant in pre-diapause oocytes. In
D. melanogaster, the methuselah (mth) gene is associated with longevity and stress resistance [65]. Mth
haplotype distributions vary latitudinally in D. melanogaster [66], and studies of allelic variation in mth suggest that the gene contributes to differences in lifespan
among populations [67]. While down-regulation of mth,
rather than over-expression, should result in greater
stress resistance based on results from D. melanogaster,
other GPCRs are potentially up-regulated in response to
diapause-related stimuli in other organisms. Some
GPCRs in C. elegans show strong responses to dauer
formation [68], which is analogous to insect diapause. In
Bombyx, a GPCR shows high affinity to diapause hormone [69], suggesting it could be important in mediating developmental arrest.
Three other genes that did not fall into established
functional categories related to diapause had higher
expression in pre-diapause oocytes. The putative Ae.
aegypti homologs of all three genes are annotated as
“conserved hypothetical proteins”. These genes may be
particularly intriguing, as they could relate specifically to
diapause preparation in Ae. albopictus or other insects.
However, because their annotations are uncertain, the
genes’’ functions are highly speculative. We provide
brief descriptions of the genes’’ domains and gene ontology categories, if available, recognizing that much more
work is necessary to understand the function of these
genes in the context of Ae. albopictus diapause.
AAEL008645’’s gene ontology association is ‘’protein
binding’’. It contains evidence for a B30.2/SPRY domain,
a LisH motif, and a CRA domain. AAEL004873’’s gene
ontology associations are protein binding and cell adhesion. It contains a GILT motif (gamma-interferon-inducible lysosomal thiol reductase), which is thought to be
associated with disulphide bond reduction. While it was
predicted to be over-expressed in non-diapause destined
oocytes based on RPKM, qPCR experiments show that
it is actually more abundant in pre-diapause oocytes.
AAEL012019 has several motifs; a galactose-bindingdomain-like motif (sub-motif: coagulation factor 5/8
type, c-terminal; Muskelin, n-terminal; Kelch1); and a
LisH dimerization motif.
Previously, we investigated the expression patterns of
a putative phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein
(pebp) in diapause and non-diapause oocytes in multiple
populations of Ae. albopictus [19]. While our present

Page 12 of 19

data show significant up-regulation of pebp in a single
temperate population under DI conditions, the previous
study suggested a regional effect on pebp expression in
these populations, rather than a simple over-expression
of pebp under DI conditions. These results are not
necessarily contradictory, as the studies differ in their
experimental design and replication: while the previous
study utilized more populations, our analysis includes
more replicates per photoperiod treatment, and thus
may have more statistical power to capture subtle differences in expression levels. This could indicate that the
differential expression of pebp under different photoperiods is population-specific. There is little information
about the role of pebp in insects, but studies from plants
have documented differential expression of a pebp gene
family member FT (Flowering locus T) in response to
photoperiod [70], which shows differential expression to
photoperiod treatments in latitudinally disparate populations in Picea abies [71]. These results raise the intriguing possibility that genes from the pebp family may
have similar roles or be involved in photoperiodically
mediated life history transitions across both plant and
animal kingdoms.
Three additional genes (fatty acyl coA elongase, gi|
239997749|; heat shock protein 67B2, gi|254728755|;
and epithelial membrane protein, gi|270037306|) implicated in the diapause response of Ae. albopictus based
on differential abundance in oocyte tissue [19,20] exhibited non-significant up-regulation under DI conditions
in the current study. Because the experimental design of
the previous studies differed from the current experiments, exact comparison of results is not possible.
Nevertheless, the direction of differential expression is
the same, indicating that our current results are qualitatively consistent with these previous studies.

Conclusions
Our goals for this study were: 1) to generate a comprehensive oocyte transcriptome for Ae. albopictus, an
emerging model system for studying the evolutionary
and ecological genomics of diapause, and 2) to identify
candidate genes for diapause preparation in this species.
Our assembly of a high-quality, conservative transcriptome for Ae. albopictus oocytes highlights useful
approaches to utilizing a closely related reference genome to generating high-confidence ESTs in a nonmodel organism. Additionally, the assembly enabled us
to identify several candidate genes for diapause preparation that are consistent with established themes of the
insect diapause program as well as additional candidates
that are potentially unique to Ae. albopictus. In addition
to the potential relevance to diapause, many of these
ESTs are related to fundamental biological processes
such as metabolism, stress tolerance, and the endocrine

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

control of development and thus may ultimately provide
useful targets for developing novel forms of vector control in this medically significant vector of human disease. Finally, the comprehensive oocyte EST database
should provide a useful resource for comparative genomics and vector molecular physiology.

Methods
Tissue generation for 454 sequencing from Ae. albopictus
oocytes

We collected over 400 Ae. albopictus larvae and pupae
from approximately 20 tires located at a used tire yard
in Manassas, VA, in 2008. This strain was reared in the
laboratory on a non-diapause inducing (NDI) long-day
photoperiod (16 h light, 8 h dark) at 21°C and ca. 80%
relative humidity for five generations as described in
Armbruster and Hutchinson [72] and Armbruster and
Conn [73]. To produce tissue for transcriptome sequencing, in the laboratory F6 generation approximately 200
female pupae were placed into each of two cages, one of
which was maintained under an NDI photoperiod (16 h
light, 8 h dark) and the other of which was maintained
under a diapause-inducing (DI) unambiguous short-day
photoperiod (8 h light, 16 h dark). Both cages were
maintained at 21°C and ca. 80% relative humidity.
Females were bloodfed to repletion 7-18 days after eclosion on a human host. Although we included females
from an 11-day range of chronological age, this variation
is unlikely to have a large effect on the abundance of
mature oocyte transcripts since ovarian development is
more strongly influenced by time since blood meal than
chronological age [74]. Five days after bloodfeeding,
females were anaesthetized with CO2 and frozen at -80°
C. Mature (stage V) oocytes were identified based on a
visible exochorion pattern and dissected into RNAlater TM (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). 60 - 80 frozen
mosquitoes per photoperiod treatment were used.
Tissue generation for qPCR

Tissue for qPCR reactions was generated for 5 biological
replicates under each of NDI and DI photoperiod treatments using the same methods described above, but
from F 7 (2 replicates) and F8 (3 replicates) laboratory
generations. Briefly, ca. 50 female pupae for each biological replicate were placed in separate adult cages under
NDI and DI photoperiod treatments as described above.
Oocytes from 12 to 27 females were used for each biological replicate from each photoperiod treatment.
Diapause incidence measurements

We confirmed the diapause response for each generation and replicate of laboratory rearing. Adult cages
were established under DI and NDI photoperiod treatments as described above with ca. 50 male and 50

Page 13 of 19

female mosquitoes per cage. Females were blood fed to
repletion on a human host and a small black jar halffilled with ca. 20 ml of dI water and lined with an
unbleached paper towel was placed into each cage. We
collected the towels with oviposited eggs every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday. Two days after collection the
towels were slowly dried and stored at ca. 80% relative
humidity. The diapause response was measured by stimulating 10-20 day old eggs to hatch following Novak
and Shroyer [75]. Egg towels were re-dried and hatched
a second and third time after 1 and 2 weeks, respectively, to ensure hatching of all non-diapausing eggs.
Embryonated, unhatched pharate larvae (in diapause)
were identified by submerging eggs in a bleach solution
for 48-72 h [76] and percent diapause incidence was calculated as the number of embryonated but unhatched
larvae divided by the total number of viable pharate larvae in the sample (embryonated unhatched and hatched
larvae) [27,77].
RNA preparation and sequencing

We extracted total RNA using TRI ® Reagent (Sigma
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) followed by an isopropanol precipitation, according to manufacturer’’s instructions.
DNA was removed from each sample with Turbo-DNAfree (Applied Biosystems/Ambion, Austin, TX) and
RNA integrity assessment was performed for each sample on an RNA chip (Bioanalyzer 2100, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). For RNA used in 454
sequencing, we enriched for mRNA with Dynabeads
oligo(dT) probes (Dynal Biotech, Oslo, Norway). mRNA
was then sent to the University of Maryland Institute
for Genome Sciences for 454 GS-FLX Titanium sequencing using standard protocols (Roche, Inc.). Briefly,
mRNA was fragmented with a zinc chloride solution.
cDNA was synthesized from the fragmented mRNA
using random hexamer primers, and separate adaptors
were ligated to cDNA fragments from each cDNA
library (DI and NDI). Fragments were then sequenced
with GS FLX chemistry. Raw reads and quality scores
are archived at NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
under Accession SRP007714; trimmed EST sequences
are accessible at NCBI’’s transcript shotgun archive
(TSA) under accession numbers JO845359-JO913491.
We also provide the raw reads, trimmed ESTs,
untrimmed contigs, and an Excel spreadsheet with relevant annotation information at the Aedes albopictus
expression database [http://AlbopictusExpression.org].
De novo transcriptome assembly and annotation - read
cleaning

A flow chart describing our data analysis workflow is
presented in Figure 1. Reads were trimmed according to
pre-defined Roche settings prior to assembly. As

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

additional quality filters, we eliminated 1) reads that
contained at least one ambiguous base [78]; 2) duplicate
reads, which are known to occur as an artifact of 454
sequencing [79]; 3) reads with an average quality score
lower than 25 [following 78, as well as our own observations of read quality]; and 4) reads with significant
BLAST matches (e-value > 1e -25 ) to Ae. albopictus
rRNA and to Wolbachia (See additional file 7: Gene IDs
of Ae. albopictus rRNA and Wolbachia spp. used to
pre-screen reads). We used the program SnoWhite 1.1.4
[[80], unpublished] to trim poly-A/T tails and to remove
all reads shorter than 50 bp, and ssaha2 [81] to match
adaptor sequences to reads, which were then masked in
the assembly program MIRA [34].
De novo transcriptome assembly and annotation - De
novo assembly

We used MIRA 3.2.0 [34] to assemble pooled reads
from both libraries into a single contig set. Default
assembly parameters for ESTs generated by 454 sequencing technology were used with minor modifications to
permit the assembly of contigs with SNPs (See additional file 8: MIRA command line used for transcriptome assembly). These modifications were required
because we sequenced an outbred population of laboratory-reared mosquitoes, rather than an inbred line.
MIRA has recently been shown to be one of the more
reliable programs for de novo 454 transcriptome assembly [35]. To assess whether the amount of sequence
used affected contig length, we performed a test assembly in MIRA with one half of the 454 dataset. Additionally, we performed exploratory assemblies with Newbler
2.3 [82], which yielded qualitatively similar results (data
available on request from MFP). However, because more
gene models were captured with the MIRA assembly, as
assessed by BLAST matches, we used the MIRA assembly for further analyses.
De novo transcriptome assembly and annotation functional annotation

We performed a series of BLAST searches to establish
homology between contigs or singletons (both referred
to hereafter as “ESTs”) from Ae. albopictus and annotated genes from other organisms. Because of the limited EST information available on NCBI for Ae.
albopictus, we relied mainly on annotations and
sequence information from Ae. aegypti, a closely related
mosquito in the same sub-genus (Stegomyia). We performed BLASTN and BLASTX searches of our EST
dataset to several reference databases with increasing evalue cutoffs as taxonomic distance increased (Table 3).
The match with the lowest e-value was retained. If multiple matches with the same e-value were present, then
the match with the highest bitscore was retained. Our

Page 14 of 19

search against C. elegans proteins was inspired by Ragland et al. [5], who found limited evolutionary conservation in dormancy expression patterns between
Sarcophaga crassipalpis and the well characterized larval
dauer stage of C. elegans [68].
To evaluate whether we had recovered close to the
maximum number of genes contained in our sequencing
libraries, or whether greater sequencing depth of these
libraries would have led the recovery of more unique
genes, we generated a bootstrapped gene accumulation
curve [e.g. [31]]. We used BLASTN to determine
homology between individual reads and Ae. aegypti transcripts, using a minimum required e-value of 1e-10. We
randomized the BLAST output order 1,000 times, and
then calculated the mean number of Ae. aegypti transcripts captured by each additional read. We then
plotted the mean cumulative number of new Ae. aegypti
transcripts discovered with each new read; if sequencing
depth was sufficient, then this curve should reach an
asymptote with an increasing number of sampled reads.
De novo transcriptome assembly and annotation homology-based EST filtering and trimming

Our BLAST searches revealed high redundancy in the
ESTs, such that multiple ESTs had the closest similarity
to the same putative homolog, and often to the same
region of that homolog (mean/median number of ESTs
per gene: 8.6/4; See additional file 1: Distribution of the
number of ESTs assigned to a reference gene). This
redundancy is often observed with the MIRA program
[83], and could reflect biological variation among transcripts originating from a single gene, for example alternative splicing or allelic variation. However, this result
could also be due to sequencing errors, or spuriously
assembled sequence. Many of the redundant contigs
assigned to a reference gene were highly diverged in
their 5’’ and 3’’ ends. To determine whether these variable ends represent alternative isoforms of a gene or are
due to sequencing or assembly errors, we amplified
these alternative ends using qPCR. This confirmed the
presence of some alternative isoforms (amplified product
size was consistent with predicted product size from
contigs in 18 out of 22 cases, data not shown). However,
due to the high frequency of redundant ESTs, which
makes it impossible to confirm all isoforms comprehensively, we opted take a conservative approach and only
use the region of one, “representative” EST that aligned
with its homolog for further analyses (Figure 1). This
method will remove redundancy and uncertain annotations, but will also remove valid sequence (see below),
and sequences unique to Ae. albopictus.
To identify representative ESTs, for each group of
ESTs assigned to the same gene, we found the EST with
the best tradeoff between length and % identity. To do

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

this, we selected ESTs with a % identity above a set
value (Table 3; % identity cutoffs were chosen based on
visual inspection of the distribution of % identity values
from matches to each genome database). Within this
subset, we chose the EST with the longest BLAST
match. When the % identity of all ESTs assigned to a
gene was lower than the cutoff, the match with the
highest % identity was used. For EST groups with
matches in all other databases, the match with the highest % identity was used (Table 3), as % identity was generally lower in these groups; length was not included as
a selection criterion, other than a minimum length
requirement of 50 bp. Matches to the Ae. aegypti genome were only used in further analyses if the majority
(>50%) of the EST was contained within an annotated
mRNA (gff3 AaegL1.2). Once the best match for a reference gene was determined, we trimmed the aligned EST
to its start and stop coordinates from the BLAST output, to eliminate variable 5’’ and 3’’ ends that could
represent either alternative isoforms, or sequencing and
assembly error. On average, 464 bp were trimmed from
each EST (min: 1bp, max: 10,810 bp).
Differential expression (DE) analysis - 454 sequence data

To identify candidate DE genes from our 454 dataset,
we estimated expression for each EST based on counts
of mapped reads to the trimmed ESTs. We mapped
reads from each cDNA library (DI and NDI) to the filtered and trimmed EST set using the program ssaha2
[81] with 454 default settings, with the additional
requirement of a minimum of 95% identity. Reads that
mapped to multiple ESTs or locations (2.8%) were
discarded.
We used two different measures of differential expression (DE). First, we performed the TMM normalization
method (trimmed-mean of M values) as implemented in
the edgeR package [[44], http://www.bioconductor.org/].
This method calculates a normalization constant to
account for differences in library size. Additionally, it
corrects for biases in read count data that arise when
the total number of expressed genes are skewed towards
one library, a phenomenon that we had observed in our
read counts. We used this normalization method to
guide our choice of candidate genes for qPCR validation
(see below).
Factors in addition to library size and skew can influence read counts in RNA-Seq data. For example, transcript length is also known to affect read abundance
[45,84]. As a second evaluation of expression, we calculated RPKM [the number of reads per kilobase of exon
model per million mapped reads, [45]]. We used
trimmed EST length as transcript length.
To calculate the significance of differences in normalized read counts, we used the sage.test function from

Page 15 of 19

the statmod package in R (http://www.r-project.org),
which implements an exact binomial test to test for differential expression in individual genes. For the TMM
method, we used the normalization constant to adjust
library sizes in the sage.test function. We scaled RPKM
values for each gene and library by a constant, such that
the sum of all RPKM values equaled the original read
total from both libraries. This scaling was necessary to
compare significance values between the two read count
methods, as the magnitude of the binomial test statistic
is influenced by sample size. P-values from each method
were then subjected to Benjamini-Hochberg correction
for multiple testing [85] using the p.adjust function
from the same package. We scored candidate genes with
a corrected p-value < 0.001as DE.
Genes that are unique to a photoperiod treatment
have an undefined log fold-change and log abundance,
but these genes may be of particular biological importance. To include these genes in our calculations of
fold-change, we added a value of 0.1 to the read count
of all genes in each library. Fold-change values were calculated as log2(DI/N(DI)) - log2(NDI/N(NDI)), where N
(DI) and N(NDI) are the normalized library sizes of the
DI and NDI libraries, respectively.
Verification of DE ESTs by qPCR

We used quantitative RT-PCR to verify the expression
of candidate genes from two general categories: genes
classified as over-expressed in the NDI and DI treatments from the TMM-normalized 454 analysis, and
genes that were of a priori interest based on their role
in the diapause response in other insects (See additional
file 6: Results of qPCR validation). Previous studies on
the physiological and molecular changes during diapause
have revealed common themes of the diapause program
across insects such as DNA replication and transcription, endocrine signaling, metabolism, and response to
stress [5,8,9,21]. We used these categories to guide our
choice of genes to test for DE using qPCR, because we
were interested in determining whether diapause induction in Ae. albopictus showed commonalities of gene
expression in genes putatively involved in these categories. We selected several genes from these categories,
regardless whether they were significantly differentially
expressed in the 454 dataset (See additional file 6:
Results of qPCR validation).
Total RNA for qPCR was isolated from oocytes as
described above. RNA pellets were stored at -70°C in
75% ethanol until they were used for cDNA synthesis.
The concentration of resuspended RNA was measured
using a Nano Drop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington DE USA). cDNA was synthesized using
the iScript™ cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Inc. Hercules CA USA) according to the manufacturer’’s

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

instructions. One microgram of RNA was used in each
synthesis reaction. To reduce variation caused by differences in the efficiency of the reverse transcription reaction, duplicate reactions were performed for each
biological replicate and the products of the duplicate
reactions were pooled then diluted before being used in
qPCR reactions.
Relative mRNA abundance of selected genes of interest was measured using an iQ5™ Multicolor Real-Time
PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad) and iQ™ SYBR Green
Supermix (Bio-Rad). Each 20 μl reaction included 300 900 nM of the appropriate forward and reverse primers
and 2 μl of cDNA template. PrimerQuest software (IDT
DNA, Coralville, IA, USA) was used to design primer
sequences which conform to MIQE standards (primer
sequences available on request from JAR). Cycling parameters were 95°C for 3 min followed by 40-50 cycles of
95° for 10 s, 58° C for 30 s and 72° C for 30 s. Melt
curve analysis and 1% agarose gel electrophoresis of
PCR products verified that only one product was amplified in each reaction.
mRNA abundance was evaluated in 5 biological replicates for each group with three technical replicates for
each primer pair. A modified 2-ΔΔCt method [86] was
used to calculate mRNA abundance for each gene of
interest. Briefly, after averaging the threshold cycles (Ct
) of the technical replicates for each biological replicate,
the geometric mean Ct for three reference genes,
RpL34, Histone H3, and Nucleosome Assembly Protein
(NAP), was subtracted from the mean Ct for each gene
of interest (ΔCt). This value was then transformed to
give relative mRNA abundance (2-ΔCt). Fold-change was
calculated by dividing the mean relative abundance of
DI replicates by the mean relative abundance of NDI
replicates, and then taking the logarithm (log2) of this
ratio. Student’’s t-test was used to test for significant differences in relative mRNA abundance between groups,
with a false discovery rate analysis [85] applied to
reduce the probability of type I errors due to multiple
comparison testing.
Verification of DE ESTs - Significance comparisons

To determine whether expression levels from the 454
dataset and qPCR experiments were correlated, and
whether the normalization method of the 454 dataset
affected these correlations, we analyzed correlations in
expression levels between both the TMM and RPKM
normalization methods (454 EST set) and average
mRNA abundance (qPCR data, 2-ΔCt) using the lm function in the package stats in R (http://www.r-project.org).
To address why correlation coefficients between 454
expression and mRNA abundance differed by photoperiod treatment, we calculated coefficients of variation
(CVs) of mRNA abundance (2 -ΔCt ) from the five

Page 16 of 19

replicates of the qPCR data for each gene and photoperiod treatment. We then used a paired Student’’s t-test to
determine whether CVs were significantly different
between photoperiod treatments.
We evaluated the correspondence of significant
expression of each normalization method with significant expression of the qPCR data. First, for each normalization method, genes that were DE based on 454
expression levels were deemed “positive”, and those that
were not DE “negative”. True positives occurred when
the qPCR analysis confirmed significant over-expression
in the same direction, and false positives were called
when the qPCR result for a “positive” gene was not significant, or significant in the opposite direction. True
negatives were non-significant in both the 454 and
qPCR analysis, whereas false negatives actually demonstrated differential expression in the qPCR analysis. We
then calculated the sensitivity and specificity of each
method, where sensitivity is the number of true positives
divided by all positive calls, and specificity is the number
of true negatives divided by all negative calls.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Distribution of the number of ESTs assigned to a
reference gene. The x-axis is truncated at 100 EST matches per gene; 29
genes with 100-5,613 ESTs assigned to them are not included on the
graph.
Additional file 2: Box plot of the percent length of each putative
homolog matched by its Ae. albopictus EST. Only ESTs from the “final”
EST set are included. Reference length coverage values, which are
calculated as the alignment length from the BLAST match, divided by
the transcript length of the putative homolog. are displayed for each
reference organism. Ae. aegypti genomic matches are not shown, as they
encompass large stretches of non-coding sequence, and therefore the
percent of the reference matched is unclear. Box plot symbols as in
Figure 3.
Additional file 3: Box-plot of percent identities from BLAST
alignments of final ESTs to each reference organism. Box plot
symbols as in Figure 3.
Additional file 4: Gene accumulation curve of Ae. albopictus ESTs.
The average cumulative number of recovered Ae. aegypti transcripts,
plotted against the number of reads needed to obtain that number. All
reads were searched against Ae. aegypti transcripts via blastn. The BLAST
output order was randomized 1,000 times, and the average number of
transcripts discovered with each additional read was calculated.
Additional file 5: Characteristics of all differentially expressed genes
from the 454 dataset. Gene ontology assignment, BLAST alignment,
and expression statistics for the putative homolog of each differentially
expressed EST.
Additional file 6: Results of qPCR validation. Experimental details and
results of qPCR for genes chosen for qPCR validation based on 454
differential expression or a priori expectation from previous diapause
studies. Both putative functional information from the gene’s homolog,
as well as reaction conditions from the qPCR experiments, are shown.
Fold-change values for qPCR experiments are given as log2(DI-NDI),
where positive values indicate higher expression under DI conditions,
and negative values indicate higher expression under NDI conditions.
Additional file 7: Gene IDs of Ae. albopictus rRNA and Wolbachia
spp. used to pre-screen reads.

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Additional file 8: MIRA command line used for transcriptome
assembly. MIRA commands used to perform de novo transcriptome
assembly on Ae. albopictus oocyte cDNA libraries generated under
diapause-inducing and non-diapause-inducing photoperiods.

Page 17 of 19

13.
14.

15.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Armbruster, Elsik, and Denlinger labs, and R.
Scott Cornman, for helpful comments and suggestions on this work.
Christopher Childers was instrumental in setting up the website http://
AlbopictusExpression.org. Jessica Wooten performed lab work to confirm Ae.
albopictus isoforms. This research was funded by NIH grant number
5R21AI081041-02.

16.

17.
Author details
Department of Biology, Georgetown University, 37th and O Streets NW,
Washington, DC, USA. 2Department of Entomology, Ohio State University,
318 W 12th Ave., Columbus, Ohio, USA.

1

18.
19.

Authors’ contributions
MFP prepared insect tissues, generated the mRNA for sequencing libraries
and qPCR experiments, performed transcriptome assembly and sequence
analysis, and drafted the manuscript. JAR designed and performed all qPCR
experiments and helped to draft the manuscript. DLD participated in the
design and coordination of the study and helped to draft the manuscript.
CGE participated in the design and analysis of the study, contributed
computational resources, and helped to draft the manuscript. PAA
conceived of the study, participated in its design and coordination, and
helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

20.

21.

22.
Received: 13 August 2011 Accepted: 20 December 2011
Published: 20 December 2011
23.
References
1. Tauber MJ, Tauber CA, Masaki S: Seasonal adaptations of insects New York:
Oxford University Press; 1986.
2. Benoit J, Denlinger D: Suppression of water loss during adult diapause in
the northern house mosquito, Culex pipiens. Journal of Experimental
Biology 2007, 210:217-226.
3. Hahn D, Denlinger D: Meeting the energetic demands of insect diapause:
Nutrient storage and utilization. Journal of Insect Physiology 2007, 760-773.
4. Hahn D, Ragland G, Shoemaker D, Denlinger D: Gene discovery using
massively parallel pyrosequencing to develop ESTs for the flesh fly
Sarcophaga crassipalpis. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:234.
5. Ragland G, Denlinger D, Hahn D: Mechanisms of suspended animation
are revealed by transcript profiling of diapause in the flesh fly.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2010, 14909-14914.
6. Rinehart J, Li A, Yocum G, Robich R, Hayward S, Denlinger D: Up-regulation
of heat shock proteins is essentail for cold survival during insect
diapause. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2007, 104:11130-11137.
7. Yoder J, Denlinger D: Water-balance in flesh fly pupae and water-vapor
absorption associated with diapause. Journal of Experimental Biology 1991,
157:273-286.
8. Hahn D, Denlinger D: Energetics of Insect Diapause. Annual Review of
Entomology 2011, 56:103-121.
9. Denlinger DL: Regulation of diapause. Annual Review of Entomology 2002,
93-122.
10. Emerson K, Uyemura A, McDaniel K, Schmidt P, Bradshaw W, Holzapfel C:
Environmental control of ovarian dormancy in natural populations of
Drosophila melanogaster. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 2009,
195:825-829.
11. MacRae TH: Gene expression, metabolic regulation and stress tolerance
during diapause. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 2010, 67:2405-2424.
12. Xu WH, Sato Y, Ikeda M, Yamashita O: Molecular characterization of the
gene encoding the precursor protein of diapause hormone and
pheromone biosynthesis activating neuropeptide (DH-PBAN) of the

24.
25.

26.
27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

silkworm, Bombyx mori and its distribution in some insects. Biochimica
Biophysica Acta 1995, 1261:83-89.
Ekblom R, Galindo J: Applications of next generation sequencing in
molecular ecology of non-model organisms. Heredity 2011, 107:1-15.
Wheat CW, Fescemyer HW, Kvist J, Tas E, Vera JC, Frilander MJ, Hanski I,
Marden JH: Functional genomics of life history variation in a butterfly
metapopulation. Molecular Ecology 2011, 20:1813-1828.
Emerson K, Bradshaw W, Holzapfel C: Microarrays Reveal Early
Transcriptional Events during the Termination of Larval Diapause in
Natural Populations of the Mosquito, Wyeomyia smithii. PLoS One 2010, 5:
e9574.
Schwarz D, Robertson HM, Feder JL, Varala K, Hudson ME, Ragland GJ,
Hahn DA, Berlocher SH: Sympatric ecological speciation meets
pyrosequencing: sampling the transcriptome of the apple maggot
Rhagoletis pomonella. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:633.
Bao B, Xu W: Identification of gene expression changes associated with
the initiation of diapause in the brain of the cotton bollworm,
Helicoverpa armigera. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:224.
Kostal V: Eco-physiological phases of insect diapause. Journal of Insect
Physiology 2006, 52:113-127.
Urbanski J, Aruda A, Armbruster P: A transcriptional element of the
diapause program in the Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus,
identified by suppressive subtractive hybridization. Journal of Insect
Physiology 2010, 56:1147-1154.
Urbanski J, Benoit J, Michaud M, Denlinger D, Armbruster P: The molecular
physiology of increased egg desiccation resistance during diapause in
the invasive mosquito, Aedes albopictus. Proceedings of the Royal Society BBiological Sciences 2010, 277:2683-2692.
Reynolds J, Hand S: Embryonic diapause highlighted by differential
expression of mRNAs for ecdysteroidogenesis, transcription and lipid
sparing in the cricket Allonemobius socius. Journal of Experimental Biology
2009, 212:2074-2083.
Benedict M, Levine R, Hawley W, Lounibos L: Spread of the tiger: Global
risk of invasion by the mosquito Aedes albopictus. Vector-Borne and
Zoonotic Diseases 2007, 76-85.
Lounibos L: Invasions by insect vectors of human disease. Annual Review
of Entomology 2002, 233-266.
Mori A, Oda T, Wada Y: Studies on the egg diapause and overwintering
of Aedes albopictus in Nagasaki. Tropical Medicine 1981, 23:79-90.
Wang RL: Observations on the influence of photoperiod on egg
diapause in Aedes albopictus Skuse. Acta Entomologica Sinica 1966,
15:75-77.
Mogi M, Okazawa T, Sota T: Geographical pattern in autogeny and wing
length in (Diptera: Culicidae). Mosquito Systematics 1995, 27:155-166.
Lounibos L, Escher R, Lourenco-de-Oliveria R: Asymmetric evolution of
photoperiodic diapause in temperate and tropical invasive populations
of Aedes albopictus (Diptera: Culicidae). Annals of the Entomological Society
of America 2003, 96:512-518.
Denlinger DL: Why study diapause? Entomological Research 2008, 38:1-9.
Nene V, Wortman JR, Lawson D, Haas B, Kodira C, Tu Z, Loftus B, Xi Z,
Megy K, Grabherr M, et al: Genome Sequence of Aedes aegypti, a Major
Arbovirus Vector. Science 2007, 316:1718-1723.
Bettencourt R, Pinheiro M, Egas C, Gomes P, Afonso M, Shank T, Santos R:
High-throughput sequencing and analysis of the gill tissue
transcriptome from the deep-sea hydrothermal vent mussel
Bathymodiolus azoricus. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:559.
Der J, Barker M, Wickett N, dePamphilis C, Wolf P: De novo
characterization of the gametophyte transcriptome in bracken fern,
Pteridium aquilinum. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:99.
Coppe A, Pujolar J, Maes G, Larsen P, Hansen M, Bernatchez L, Zane L,
Bortoluzzi S: Sequencing, de novo annotation and analysis of the first
Anguilla anguilla transcriptome: EeelBase opens new perspectives for
the study of the critically endangered european eel. BMC Genomics 2010,
11:635.
Zagrobelny M, Scheibye-Alsing K, Jensen N, Moller B, Gorodkin J, Bak S: 454
pyrosequencing based transcriptome analysis of Zygaena filipendulae
with focus on genes involved in biosynthesis of cyanogenic glucosides.
BMC Genomics 2009, 10:574.
Chevreux B, Pfisterer T, Drescher B, Driesel A, Muller W, Wetter T, Suhai S:
Using the miraEST assembler for reliable and automated mRNA

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

35.
36.

37.

38.

39.
40.

41.

42.

43.
44.
45.

46.

47.
48.
49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

transcript assembly and SNP detection in sequenced ESTs. Genome
Research 2004, 14:1147-1159.
Kumar S, Blaxter M: Comparing de novo assemblers for 454 transcriptome
data. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:571.
Choi J, Kijimoto T, Snell-Rood E, Tae H, Yang Y, Moczek A, Andrews J: Gene
discovery in the horned beetle Onthophagus taurus. BMC Genomics 2010,
11:703.
Parchman T, Geist K, Grahnen J, Benkman C, Buerkle C: Transcriptome
sequencing in an ecologically important tree species: assembly,
annotation, and marker discovery. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:180.
Ferguson L, Lee S, Chamberlain N, Nadeau N, Joron M, Baxter S,
Wilkinson P, Papanicolaou A, Kumar S, Kee T, et al: Characterization of a
hotspot for mimicry: assembly of a butterfly wing transcriptome to
genomic sequence at the HmYb/Sb locus. Molecular Ecology 2010,
19:240-254.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. Journal of Molecular Biology 1990, 215:403-410.
Papanicolaou A, Stierli R, Ffrench-Constant R, Heckel D: Next generation
transcriptomes for next generation genomes using est2assembly. BMC
Bioinformatics 2009, 10:447.
Crawford J, Guelbeogo W, Sanou A, Traore A, Vernick K, Sagnon N,
Lazzaro B: De Novo Transcriptome Sequencing in Anopheles funestus
Using Illumina RNA-Seq Technology. PLoS ONE 2010, 5:e14202.
Gregory R, Darby A, Irving H, Coulibaly M, Hughes M, Koekemoer L,
Coetzee M, Ranson H, Hemingway J, Hall N, Wondji C: A De Novo
Expression Profiling of Anopheles funestus, Malaria Vector in Africa, Using
454 Pyrosequencing. PLoS ONE 2011, 6:e17418.
McIntyre L, Lopiano K, Morse A, Amin V, Oberg A, Young L, Nuzhdin S:
RNA-seq: technical variability and sampling. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:293.
Robinson M, Oshlack A: A scaling normalization method for differential
expression analysis of RNA-seq data. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R25.
Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L, Wold B: Mapping and
quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nature Methods
2008, 5:621-628.
Roberts A, Trapnell C, Donaghey J, Rinn JL, Pachter L: Improving RNA-Seq
expression estimates by correcting for fragment bias. Genome Biology
2011, 12.
Fleige S, Pfaffl M: RNA integrity and the effect on the real time qRT-PCR
performance. Molecular Aspects of Medicine 2006, 27:126-139.
Feng X, Hara Y, Riabowol K: Different HATS of the ING1 gene family.
Trends in Cell Biology 2002, 12:532-538.
Lunardia A, Di Minina G, Proveroc P, Dal Ferroa M, Carottia M, Del Sala G,
Collavina L: A genome-scale protein interaction profile of Drosophila p53
uncovers additional nodes of the human p53 network. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2010,
107:6322-6327.
Alic N, Hoddinott MP, Vinti G, Partridge L: Lifespan extension by increased
expression of the Drosophila homologue of the IGFBP7 tumour
suppressor. Aging Cell 2011, 10:137-147.
Sans C, Satterwhite D, Stoltzman C, Breen K, Ayer D: MondoA-Mlx
heterodimers are candidate sensors of cellular energy status:
Mitochondrial localization and direct regulation of glycolysis. Molecular
and Cellular Biology 2006, 26:4863-4871.
Sim C, Denlinger DL: Insulin signaling and FOXO regulate the
overwintering diapause of the mosquito Culex pipiens. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2008,
105:6777-6781.
Denlinger DL, Yocum GD, Rinehart JP: Hormonal control of diapause. In
Insect Endocrinology. Edited by: Gilbert LI. London, UK: Academic Press;
2012:430-463.
Lee K, Denlinger D: A role for ecdysteroids in the induction and
maintenance of the pharate first instar diapause of the gypsy moth,
Lymantria dispar. Journal of Insect Physiology 1997, 43:289-296.
Kadrmas JL, Smith MA, Pronovost SM, Beckerle MC: Characterization of
RACK1 function in Drosophila development. Developmental Dynamics
2007, 236:2207-2215.
Quan G, Krell P, Arif B, Feng Q: Receptor of activated C kinase 1 (RACK1)
is necessary for the 20-hydroxyecdysone-induced expression of the
transcription factor CHR3 in the spruce budworm Choristoneura
fumiferana. Insect Molecular Biology 2006, 15:79-87.

Page 18 of 19

57. Robles M, Boyault C, Knutti D, Padmanabhan K, Weitz C: Identification of
RACK1 and Protein Kinase C alpha as Integral Components of the
Mammalian Circadian Clock. Science 2010, 327:463-466.
58. Bunning E: Die endonome Tagesrhythmik als Grundlage der
photoperiodischen Reaktion. Bericht Deutscher Botanischen Gesellschaft
1936, 54:590-607.
59. Ikeno T, Tanaka SI, Numata H, Goto SG: Photoperiodic diapause under the
control of circadian clock genes in an insect. BMC Biology 2010, 8:116.
60. Tauber E, Zordan M, Sandrelli F, Pegoraro M, Osterwalder N, Breda C,
Daga A, Selmin A, Monger K, Benna C, et al: Natural selection favors a
newly derived timeless allele in Drosophila melanogaster. Science 2007,
316:1895-1898.
61. Bradshaw WE, Holzapfel CM: Circadian clock genes, ovarian development
and diapause. BMC Biology 2010, 8:115.
62. Garbe JC, Yang E, Fristrom JW: IMP-L2: an essential secreted
immunoglobulin family member implicated in neural and ectodermal
development in Drosophila. Development 1993, 119:1237-1250.
63. Honegger B, Galic M, Köhler K, Wittwer F, Brogiolo W, Hafen E, Stocker H:
Imp-L2, a putative homolog of vertebrate IGF-binding protein 7,
counteracts insulin signaling in Drosophila and is essential for starvation
resistance. Journal of Biology 2008, 7:10.
64. Tennessen J, Thummel C: Coordinating Growth and Maturation - Insights
from Drosophila. Current Biology 2011, 21:R750-R757.
65. Lin Y-J, Seroude L, Benzer S: Extended Life-Span and Stress Resistance in
the Drosophila Mutant methuselah. Science 1998, 282:943-946.
66. Schmidt PS, Duvernell DD, Eanes WF: Adaptive evolution of a candidate
gene for aging in Drosophila. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2000, 97:10861-10865.
67. Paaby AB, Schmidt PS: Functional Significance of Allelic Variation at
methuselah, an Aging Gene in Drosophila. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e1987.
68. Fielenbach N, Antebi A: C. elegans dauer formation and the molecular
basis of plasticity. Genes & Development 2008, 22:2149-2165.
69. Homma T, Watanabe K, Tsurumaru S, Kataoka H, Imai K, Kamba M, Niimi T,
Yamashita O, Yaginuma T: G protein-coupled receptor for diapause
hormone, an inducer of Bombyx embryonic diapause. Biochemical and
Biophysical Research Communications 2006, 344:386-393.
70. Kikuchi R, Kawahigashi H, Ando T, Tonooka T, Handa H: Molecular and
Functional Characterization of PEBP Genes in Barley Reveal the
Diversification of Their Roles in Flowering. Plant Physiology 2009,
149:1341-1353.
71. Gyllenstrand N, Clapham D, Källman T, Lagercrantz U: A Norway Spruce
FLOWERING LOCUS T Homolog Is Implicated in Control of Growth
Rhythm in Conifers. Plant Physiology 2007, 144:248-257.
72. Armbruster P, Hutchinson R: Pupal mass and wing length as indicators of
fecundity in Aedes albopictus and Aedes geniculatus (Diptera: Culicidae).
Journal of Medical Entomology 2002, 699-704.
73. Armbruster P, Conn J: Geographic variation of larval growth in North
American Aedes albopictus (Diptera: Culicidae). Annals of the
Entomological Society of America 2006, 1234-1243.
74. Clements AN: The Biology of Mosquitoes: Development, Nutrition and
Reproduction London, UK: Chapman and Hall; 1992.
75. Novak JN, Shroyer DA: Eggs of Aedes triseriatus and Aedes hendersoni: A
method to simulate optimal hatch. Mosquito News 1978, 38:515-521.
76. Trpis M: A new bleaching and decalcifying method for general use in
zoology. Canadian Journal of Zoology 1970, 48:892-893.
77. Hawley W, Pumpuni C, Brady R, Craig G: Overwintering survival of Aedes
albopictus (Diptera, Culicidae) eggs in Indiana. Journal of Medical
Entomology 1989, 26:122-129.
78. Huse SM, Huber JA, Morrison HG, Sogin ML, Welch DM: Accuracy and
quality of massively parallel DNA pyrosequencing. Genome Biology 2007,
8:R143.
79. Gomez-Alvarez V, Teal T, Schmidt T: Systematic artifacts in metagenomes
from complex microbial communities. Isme Journal 2009, 1314-1317.
80. Dlugosch KM, Rieseberg LH: SnoWhite: A pipeline for aggressive cleaning
of next-generation sequence reads [http://www.evopipes.net]..
81. Ning Z, Cox A, Mullikin J: SSAHA: A fast search method for large DNA
databases. Genome Research 2001, 1725-1729.
82. Margulies M, Egholm M, Altman WE, Attiya S, Bader JS, Bemben LA, Berka J,
Braverman MS, Chen YJ, Chen Z, et al: Genome sequencing in
microfabricated high-density picolitre reactors. Nature 2005, 437:376-380.

Poelchau et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:619
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/619

Page 19 of 19

83. Vera J, Wheat C, Fescemyer H, Frilander M, Crawford D, Hanski I, Marden J:
Rapid transcriptome characterization for a nonmodel organism using
454 pyrosequencing. Molecular Ecology 2008, 1636-1647.
84. Marioni JC, Mason CE, Mane SM, Stephens M, Gilad Y: RNA-seq: An
assessment of technical reproducibility and comparison with gene
expression arrays. Genome Research 2008, 18:1509-1517.
85. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical
and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society Series B (Methodological) 1995, 57:289-300.
86. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD: Analysis of relative gene expression data using
real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. In
Methods. Volume 25. United States: 2001 Elsevier Science (USA);
2001:402-408.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-619
Cite this article as: Poelchau et al.: A de novo transcriptome of the Asian
tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus, to identify candidate transcripts for
diapause preparation. BMC Genomics 2011 12:619.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
