<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>General and species-specific transcriptional responses to downy mildew infection in a susceptible (Vitis vinifera) and a resistant (V. riparia) grapevine species</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:117. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-117"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Marianna Polesani"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

General and species-specific transcriptional
responses to downy mildew infection in a
susceptible (Vitis vinifera) and a resistant
(V. riparia) grapevine species
Marianna Polesani1, Luisa Bortesi1, Alberto Ferrarini1, Anita Zamboni1, Marianna Fasoli1, Claudia Zadra2,
Arianna Lovato1, Mario Pezzotti1, Massimo Delledonne1, Annalisa Polverari1*

Abstract
Background: Downy mildew is a destructive grapevine disease caused by Plasmopara viticola (Berk. and Curt.) Berl.
and de Toni, which can only be controlled by intensive fungicide treatments. Natural sources of resistance from
wild grapevine (Vitis) species are used in conventional breeding approaches, but the signals and effectors involved
in resistance in this important crop species are not well understood.
Results: Early transcriptional changes associated with P. viticola infection in susceptible V. vinifera and resistant V.
riparia plants were analyzed using the Combimatrix microarray platform. Transcript levels were measured 12 and 24
h post-inoculation, reflecting the time points immediately preceding the onset of resistance in V. riparia, as
determined by microscopic analysis. Our data indicate that resistance in V. riparia is induced after infection, and is
not based on differences in basal gene expression between the two species. The strong and rapid transcriptional
reprogramming involves the induction of pathogenesis-related proteins and enzymes required for the synthesis of
phenylpropanoid-derived compounds, many of which are also induced, albeit to a lesser extent, in V. vinifera. More
interestingly, resistance in V. riparia also involves the specific modulation of numerous transcripts encoding
components of signal transduction cascades, hypersensitive reaction markers and genes involved in jasmonate
biosynthesis. The limited transcriptional modulation in V. vinifera represents a weak attempted defense response
rather than the activation of compatibility-specific pathways.
Conclusions: Several candidate resistance genes were identified that could be exploited in future biotechnological
approaches to increase disease resistance in susceptible grapevine species. Measurements of jasmonic acid and
methyl jasmonate in infected leaves suggest that this hormone may also be involved in V. riparia resistance to P.
viticola.

Background
Plasmopara viticola (Berk. and Curt.) Berl. and de Toni
is an oomycete pathogen that causes downy mildew in
grapevine. This devastating disease causes partial or
total crop losses and has a severe secondary environmental impact due to the repeated fungicide applications required as a control measure. P. viticola is an
obligate pathogen that obtains nutrients from infected
* Correspondence: annalisa.polverari@univr.it
1
Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada le Grazie 15,
37134 Verona, Italy

plant cells through specialized structures known as
haustoria, which also allow the exchange of signals
involved in the establishment of compatibility [1]. In
susceptible grapevine genotypes, compatibility is probably achieved through a lack of recognition. Some
oomycetes can secrete effectors that suppress host cell
defense responses but such effectors have yet to be
described in P. viticola [2,3].
Although European V. vinifera cultivars are highly
susceptible to P. viticola, Muscadinia species and several
American and Asian Vitis species exhibit varying levels
of resistance, allowing quantitative trait loci (QTLs) and

© 2010 Polesani et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

major resistance genes to be mapped [4-9]. Efforts to
introgress these traits into cultivated V. vinifera genotypes by conventional breeding have produced some
resistant interspecific hybrids, but further work is
needed to couple strong resistance with high quality
wine production [10]. This process will be greatly accelerated by the availability of the grapevine genome
sequence [11,12] and high density genetic maps [13,14].
Detailed resistance mechanisms have been described
in a few model species [15], and these often involve a
signal transduction cascade triggered by infection which
induces the resistance response. Plants can recognize
general elicitors (or pathogen-associated molecular patterns, PAMPs) and specific elicitors encoded by pathogen Avr genes, as well as byproducts of pathogen
activity (damage-associated molecular patterns,
DAMPs), through a wide repertoire of receptors, with
intriguing similarity to the innate immune system in
animals [16,17]. Defense responses include strengthening the cell walls [18], the synthesis of pathogenesisrelated (PR) proteins and antimicrobial compounds such
as phytoalexins [19], and the hypersensitive response
(HR), in which cells undergo programmed cell death in
the infected region to block further spreading of the
pathogen [20].
Wild American grapevine species may enjoy a higher
level of constitutive resistance to P. viticola because of
the higher basal level of certain antimicrobial compounds [21-25]. Post-infection resistance mechanisms
have also been described in wild Vitis species, including
the accumulation of reactive oxygen species, PR proteins, antimicrobial compounds, peroxidases and HR
activation [26-31]. Although V. vinifera is susceptible to
P. viticola, it can defend itself against other pathogens
indicating the defense components are in place but are
not activated in response to this pathogen [28]. The
early signaling events underlying defense responses in
grapevine have only recently been described [32-37] but
a systematic survey of the V. vinifera genome has identified more than 200 resistance gene analogs, many localized in genomic regions associated with P. viticola
resistance in wild Vitis spp. [12,38], as well as orthologs
of Arabidopsis genes that regulate defense pathways
[39,40].
In this paper we describe the early transcriptional
changes associated with P. viticola infection in both susceptible Vitis vinifera and resistant Vitis riparia plants,
performed on a Combimatrix Grapevine Microarray, the
broadest transcriptomics resource available for Vitis species http://www.combimatrix.com/tech_microarrays.htm.
Transcriptomic approaches have been used to analyze
plant-pathogen interactions in model species. Although
several grapevine diseases have been investigated using
Affymetrix [23,36,37] or Operon grapevine chips [33], P.

Page 2 of 16

viticola is not among them. Our study therefore provides the first broad overview of the molecular events
underlying the early response to P. viticola infection in
susceptible and resistant grapevine species and will provide valuable candidate genes that could be used to
develop mildew-resistant commercial grapevine plants.

Results
P. viticola developmental stages

After inoculating plants with P. viticola, we followed the
progress of the infection by looking at the developmental time-course of the pathogen. On that basis we chose
which RNA samples were most suitable for microarray
analysis. Leaf samples were collected at 12, 24, 48 and
96 hours post-inoculation (hpi) and stained with aniline
blue for microscopy (Figure 1). Zoospores were localized
over stomata by 12 hpi in both species, and germ tubes,
primary hyphae and the first haustoria could be identified. By 24 hpi, further mycelium development appeared
to be delayed in V. riparia. By 48 hpi, a mycelium network with many haustoria was observed in V. vinifera,
whereas branched hyphae with only a few haustoria
were observed in V. riparia. At 96 hpi, V. vinifera tissues were completely invaded by mycelia and heavy
sporulation followed, whereas only small patches of
mycelium were visible in V. riparia, and sporulation was
severely impaired or absent. This established that the
resistance response in V. riparia probably began within
the first 24 hpi, and we therefore chose 12 and 24 hpi
as the relevant time-points for microarray analysis.
Reliability of hybridization data

Both phylogenetic analysis [41,42] and previous crossspecies microarray analysis using Vitis species [22] suggested that a V. vinifera microarray should reliably
detect transcriptional changes in V. riparia. However, a
certain level of sequence divergence between the two
species could increase the random noise in the hybridization data and possibly result in a lower correlation
between V. riparia replicates compared to V. vinifera
replicates. We tested healthy samples collected at 12
and 24 hpi, which served as controls in the infection
experiments, and found no evidence for differences in
the correlation between replicates for each species. The
average Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (r)
between V. vinifera replicates was 0.9678 (range 0.95360.9782), which was comparable to the V. riparia replicates (r = 0.9349; range 0.9017-0.9680).
We also checked the intensity distribution of log2transformed data, the overall hybridization intensity and
the number of absent calls (i.e. transcripts with a fluorescence signal below a calculated threshold, see Materials and Methods) for the two species. The intensity
distributions of data derived from uninfected samples of

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Analysis of P. viticola infection steps. Infected leaf disks from V. vinifera (left panels) and V. riparia (right panels) were collected at 12,
24, 48 and 96 hpi, stained with 0.05% aniline blue and observed under an epifluorescence microscope. Panels A, B, C, D and F: magnification
200×; panels E, G and H: magnification 100×. Arrows indicate primary hyphae, arrowheads haustoria. Bars = 80 μm.

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

each species were normal-like and similar. The average
log2-transformed abundance values were 8.57 ± 2.07
and 7.40 ± 2.74 (across-replicate average ± SD) in V.
riparia and V. vinifera, respectively. The number of
probe sets assigned an absent call was 7,712 in V.
riparia, and 7,306 in V. vinifera. These observations
confirmed the reliability and comparability of the microarray results in the two grapevine species.
Interspecies differences in basal gene expression

Differences in basal gene expression between the two
grapevine species were determined by comparing
matched uninfected control samples for the steady-state
levels of all 24,571 transcripts represented on the microarray. However, because it has been suggested that resistance in V. riparia could in part reflect constitutive
physical or chemical barriers, we also focused on
defense-related transcripts (i.e. those functionally associated with disease resistance, stress, the cell wall and
secondary metabolism). Because the 12 hpi samples
were harvested in darkness and the 24 hpi samples in
daylight, data from the different time-points were normalized and compared separately to avoid the detection
of genes regulated by light. We identified 5550 and 6379
transcripts with statistically significant differential
expression at 12 and 24 hpi, respectively (Additional
files 1 and 2). At both time points, ~ 48% of the differentially expressed transcripts were more abundant in V.
riparia and ~ 52% were more abundant in V. vinifera.
Broadly similar results were obtained when restricting
the analysis to defense-related transcripts. Here ~ 45%
of the differentially expressed transcripts were more
abundant in V. riparia and ~ 55% were more abundant
in V. vinifera (Additional files 1, 2 and 3).
To exclude genes regulated by light in only one of the
species, we also retrieved the subset of 2176 transcripts
present at both time points (Additional file 4). In this
group, many transcripts were more abundant in one
species at one time point but more abundant in the
other species at the other time point, and there was a
trend showing that 74-78% of such transcripts were
more abundant in V. vinifera and 22-26% were more
abundant in V. riparia, depending on which time point
was examined. When restricting the analysis to defenserelated transcripts, the results were almost identical (7476% vs. 24-26%) (Additional files 4 and 5). Overall,
these data indicated that resistance in V. riparia does
not reflect differences in the basal expression of
defense-related genes.
Transcriptional changes in V. vinifera and V. riparia in
response to P. viticola infection

Figure 2 shows the total number of transcripts that are
differentially expressed (fold change ≥2) in the two

Page 4 of 16

species at 12 and 24 hpi (full list provided in Additional
file 6). In both species, the majority of modulated transcripts were upregulated.
V. riparia responded very quickly to infection, with
733 transcripts modulated at 12 hpi (707 induced, 26
repressed) whereas only 124 were modulated in V. vinifera (all induced) at the same time-point. At 24 hpi, 339
transcripts were modulated in V. riparia (283 induced,
56 repressed) whereas 135 were modulated in V. vinifera
(129 induced, 6 repressed). The transcripts were
assigned to functional categories on the basis of literature evaluation (Figure 3). Although the ‘unknown function’ category was predominant in both species, there
were important differences in other categories. In V.
riparia, signal transduction components accounted for
18% of the modulated transcripts at 12 hpi (almost
invariably induced by infection) falling to 9% at 24 dpi,
metabolic functions accounted for 18% of the modulated
transcripts at 12 hpi increasing to 27% at 24 hpi, and
defense-related functions accounted for 8% of the
modulated transcripts at 12 hpi increasing slightly to
11% at 24 hpi. In V. vinifera, defense-related functions
accounted for 22% of the modulated transcripts at 12
hpi increasing to 24% at 24 hpi, whereas metabolism
and signal transduction accounted for 10-15% of modulated transcripts at both time-points. Other functional
categories each accounted for up to 6% of modulated
transcripts in both species at both time-points. Considering that a significant proportion of the differentially
expressed genes are modulated at both time points,
there were 870 differentially expressed transcripts in V.
riparia and 187 in V. vinifera, with many modulated at
both time points. Transcripts showing the greatest
induction in response to infection (30-80-fold) tended to
be induced in both species, albeit to different levels.

Figure 2 Transcriptional changes associated with P. viticola
infection. Piled histograms represent the number of genes induced
(gray bars) or repressed (black bars) in V. vinifera (Vv) and V. riparia
(Vr), at 12 and 24 hpi with P. viticola.

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

Page 5 of 16

Figure 3 Functional categories of transcripts modulated in V riparia and V. vinifera following infection with P. viticola. Transcripts
modulated in V. riparia (A) and V. vinifera (B) after infection with P. viticola at 12 hpi (left panels) and 24 hpi (right panels) were manually
grouped in functional categories on the basis of literature evaluation. Induced genes are represented in light gray, while repressed ones are in
black. The total percentage of modulated transcripts within each category is shown next to each bar. The complete list of genes is available in
Additional file 6.

They were predominantly defense-related transcripts
and are discussed in more detail below.
Common transcriptional changes in response to infection

Figure 4 shows the proportion of genes whose induction/repression in response to infection was observed in
both species or was restricted to one or the other. This
can be represented by a repartition of modulated transcripts by species, either at each time point (Figure 4A)
or collectively (Figure 4B). We consider the second
approach more useful because it defines modulations
occurring in both species as common transcriptional
changes, even though they may not occur at the same
time. However, the first approach shows how specificity
evolves over time, in some cases with different profiles
in different functional categories.
The data show clearly that most of the transcriptional
modulation observed in V. riparia had no parallel in V.
vinifera, indicating that many of the changes in all

functional categories were restricted to V. riparia. In
contrast, most of the transcriptional modulation
observed in V. vinifera also occured in V. riparia (Figure
4A). However, when each species was considered separately at each time-point, it was clear that the number
of transcripts uniquely modulated in V. vinifera
increased from 12 to 24 hpi, possibly reflecting the
establishment of a compatible interaction. Interestingly,
the strength of modulation among the common genes
was invariably much higher in V. riparia, at both 12 hpi
(Figure 5A) and 24 hpi (data not shown).
When we considered as ‘common’ any gene that is
modulated in both species irrespective of the time-point,
we detected 147 common transcripts, always modulated
in the same direction in both species (Figure 5B and
Additional file 6). Moreover, because the timing of the
response is also relevant, it is notable that 30% of the
common transcripts were modulated earlier in V.
riparia (12 hpi) and later in V. vinifera (24 hpi),

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

Page 6 of 16

genes related to photosynthesis were modulated in both
species, and these were downregulated by infection
(Additional file 7).
Specific transcriptional changes in response to infection

Figure 4 Specificity of transcriptional changes in infected V.
vinifera and V. riparia within selected functional categories. A.
Proportion of transcripts modulated in V. vinifera (Vv) or V. riparia
(Vr) or in both species at either 12 (upper panel) or 24 hpi (lower
panel). B. Proportion of transcripts modulated in V. vinifera (Vv) or V.
riparia (Vr) or in both species considering either time point
collectively.

although there is no qualitative difference associated
with this delayed response (Additional file 6).
After discounting transcripts with no assigned function, the largest proportion of common transcripts were
related to disease resistance (22%, Figure 5B). Within
this category, about half of the transcripts modulated in
V. riparia were also modulated in V. vinifera, including
several encoding stilbene synthases and PR proteins
such as chitinases, b-1,3-glucanases and PR-10. The difference in expression between the species was especially
notable for these genes (Figure 5A). After resistance, the
next largest group of common transcripts was related to
signal transduction (15%, Figure 5B). This group
included many transcripts encoding WRKY transcription
factors, all strongly induced by infection at both time
points, but again much more strongly induced in V.
riparia (6-22-fold in V. riparia; 2-5-fold in V. vinifera).
Approximately 12% of the common transcripts had
metabolic functions, including a cell wall apoplastic
invertase and an alternative oxidase, both of which were
induced to a greater extent in V. riparia. Only a few

Many transcriptional changes occurred solely in V.
riparia, and the most prevalent functional categories
among the modulated transcripts were general metabolism and signal transduction, the latter especially at 12
h. In the general metabolism category (22%; Figure 4B)
most transcripts showed 2-3-fold induction, although a
few were induced strongly, such as those encoding
major enzymes in phenylalanine biosynthesis (up to 40fold induction). Genes encoding enzymes in the Calvin
cycle were repressed, in agreement with the decline in
photosynthesis-related transcripts, whereas those
involved in glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway were induced. Protein metabolism also appeared to
be strongly influenced by infection, as shown by the
large number of modulated transcripts related to ubiquitinylation, particularly those encoding different RINGH2 finger proteins, which are involved in proteolytic
degradation (induced up to 14-fold). Transcriptional
changes involving lipid metabolism included the upregulation of genes encoding biosynthetic and catabolic
enzymes, and enzymes involved in jasmonic acid synthesis (e.g. allene oxide synthase and cyclase, omega-3
fatty acid desaturase). Several signal transduction pathways were affected including calcium signaling, ethylene
signaling, MAP kinases, phosphatases, receptor-like proteins and numerous transcription factors. Overall, 68%
of the signal transduction genes induced in V. riparia
were never modulated in V. vinifera, and the vast majority were induced by 12 hpi (Figure 4; Additional file 6).
Particularly strong modulation was observed for certain
zinc-finger proteins (up to 16-fold induction) and
WRKY genes (transient 3-4-fold induction) (Additional
file 7).
We found that many resistance-related genes were
induced to a greater or lesser extent in both species but
those involved in the hypersensitive response were
mostly restricted to V. riparia. These included several
Avr9/Cf-9 rapidly elicited proteins [43] and a homolog
of the tobacco Hin1 gene (12-fold induction) which is
considered a HR marker [44]. Another HR marker, a
homolog of the tomato hsr203J gene [45,46], was
induced 40-fold in V. riparia and only 5-fold in V. vinifera at 12 hpi (Additional file 7).
There were few genes specifically induced in V. vinifera at 12 hpi, but the number increased substantially by
24 hpi. These genes represented several different functional categories and were not particularly informative
with regard to the establishment of compatible interactions (Figure 4). Resistance and stress-related genes

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

Page 7 of 16

Figure 5 Common transcriptional changes in V. vinifera and V. riparia following infection with P. viticola. A. Intensity of the
transcriptional changes of ‘common’ genes in V. riparia and V. vinifera at 12 hpi. Each functional category is shown in a different color. B.
Distribution of the 147 ‘common’ genes, modulated in both species at one or both time points, into functional categories.

were well represented but on the whole it appeared that
V. vinifera mounts a much less specific response to
infection, which may be considered as an unsuccessful
attempt to establish resistance.
Validation of microarray analysis by real-time RT-PCR

The microarray data for 10 differentially expressed transcripts, whose induction index varied from 0.1-fold to
34-fold at either 12 or 24 hpi, were validated by realtime RT-PCR analysis. As shown in Additional file 8,
the magnitude of change determined by the more sensitive real-time RT-PCR technique was in accordance
with the microarray data and in some cases revealed
even greater differential expression, suggesting that the
microarray results underestimated actual changes in
gene expression.
Determination of jasmonate levels in infected leaves

sporulation. The localization of zoospores over stomata
at 12 hpi in both V. riparia and V. vinifera confirmed
previous reports that zoospores can locate stomata with
equal efficiency in susceptible and resistant species
[27,30]. Restriction of pathogen growth in V. riparia is a
post-infection phenomenon that begins when the first
haustoria enter mesophyll cells, resulting in the thickening of cell walls, necrosis of guard cells, the accumulation of phenolics and peroxidases, and in some cases a
hypersensitive reaction depending on environmental
conditions [9,30,47]. This correlates well with the specific induction of genes related to hypersensitivity and
phenylpropanoid synthesis. Pathogen spread was
severely impaired between 24 and 48 hpi in comparison
to V. vinifera, suggesting that the resistance mechanism
is already in effect before this time point, consistent
with the strong transcriptional reprogramming observed
at 12 hpi, when the first haustoria form.

The microarray data indicated that genes encoding
enzymes involved in biosynthesis of jasmonic acid were
strongly induced in V. riparia shortly after infection.
We therefore measured the amount of jasmonic acid
(JA) and methyl jasmonate (MeJA) in the leaves of both
species before infection and at the four post-infection
time-points discussed above. The basal levels of MeJA
were higher in V. riparia than in V. vinifera. There was
a sharp increase in the levels of both jasmonic acid and
MeJA in V. riparia leaves 48 hpi, which was followed by
rapid decline to below pre-infection levels (Figure 6). In
V. vinifera, there was no change in the basal level of jasmonic acid after infection and only a limited increase in
MeJA levels at 24 and 48 hpi.

Discussion
Analysis of P. viticola developmental stages

Infected tissues were examined under a microscope at
12, 24, 48 and 96 hpi, to determine the most suitable
time-points for microarray analysis and to observe

Figure 6 Endogenous levels of jasmonic acid and MeJA in V.
riparia (Vr) and V. vinifera (Vv). Measurements were taken using
leaf samples collected at 12, 24, 28 and 96 hpi with P. viticola (Pv) or
on the mock-inoculated control samples (w) at the corresponding
time-points. Values are the average of three measurements, with
standard errors.

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

Reliability of hybridization data

Because we used a V. vinifera microarray to assess differential gene expression in V. vinifera and V. riparia
we performed experiments to confirm the reliability of
cross-species hybridization. The successful outcome was
not unexpected because V. vinifera arrays have previously been hybridized with RNA from other Vitis species [22,23,48]. Indeed, cross-species microarray
hybridization is widely used in animals and plants
[49-52], and although the data must be interpreted with
caution, it remains a valid approach when dealing with
groups of closely related species where sequence information is only available for one member [53]. The average signal intensity and the number of absent calls in
the hybridization data were similar in V. riparia and V.
vinifera, and comparison of replicates within each species suggested a similar level of variation. This probably
indicates that polymorphisms within each species provide nearly as much sequence variation as the differences between species, as previously shown by
singlenucleotide polymorphism analysis [54]. Moreover,
the only direct comparison between V. vinifera and V.
riparia was performed to assess differences in basal
gene expression, while most of the comparisons were
made between sampling time points in the same species,
preventing such misinterpretation of hybridization
results.
Interspecies differences in basal gene expression

The comparison of basal gene expression in healthy V.
vinifera and V. riparia plants 12 and 24 h after a mock
infection procedure revealed substantial variation in the
expression of thousands of genes, but no overall bias
towards either species.
V. riparia is a major source of resistance against P.
viticola [4,6,13,55,56] and although major resistance
genes have been identified [8] it has been suggested that
some resistance may be conferred by constitutive differences in defense-related gene expression. We therefore
focused on defense-related transcripts (resistance, stress,
cell wall and secondary metabolism categories) to see if
there were any broad trends. Although the levels of
individual transcripts varied widely, overall levels were
similar in the two species (Additional file 3).
The ‘cell wall’ category contained more transcripts
expressed preferentially in V. riparia and the average
signal intensity was also higher, but the differential
expression of various cell wall enzymes did not explain
how the modified cell wall might help to prevent pathogen spread. The ‘resistance’ and ‘stress’ categories, in
contrast, included more transcripts preferentially
expressed in V. vinifera. Many grapevine species accumulate stilbene derivatives, such as resveratrols and viniferines, in response to pathogens [57,58] and we found

Page 8 of 16

that one stilbene synthase was preferentially expressed
in V. riparia at 12 hpi, two were more abundant in V.
riparia at 24 hpi, whereas five were more abundant in
V. vinifera. Several PR protein genes were also more
strongly expressed in V. vinifera, which is perhaps surprising because the genes are strongly induced by infection in V. riparia but not in V. vinifera. These data
confirm that the response to P. viticola infection in V.
riparia is not mediated by higher constitutive expression
of defense genes and is essentially a post-infection process [26,28,30].
The absence of any significant differential expression
of ‘secondary metabolism’ transcripts in pre-infection
samples supports this conclusion, given that secondary
metabolism, especially the phenypropanoid pathway, is
often considered an important component of plant resistance [59]. In a previous microarray-based comparison
of a susceptible and a resistant V. vinifera cultivars, Figueiredo and co-workers [21] identified only 12 genes
preferentially expressed in the uninfected resistant cultivar, one of which encoded phenylalanine ammonia
lyase, whereas 17 genes were preferentially expressed in
the susceptible cultivar. Other authors have reported
that stilbene synthase and phenylalanine ammonia lyase
mRNA are not detected in healthy leaves but are
induced by infection or abiotic stresses, proportionally
to the resistance phenotype observed and are therefore
considered elicitor-induced responses [24,25].
In the subset of transcripts showing differential basal
expression at both time points, about 75% were more
strongly expressed in V. vinifera and about 25% were
more strongly expressed in V. riparia. When the analysis was restricted to defense-related transcripts the same
broad trend was observed. Taken together, these findings suggest there is a stronger diurnal fluctuation in
basal gene expression in V. riparia compared to V. vinifera, but provide no evidence that the resistance phenotype in V. riparia is caused by the constitutive
expression of resistance genes maintaining a constant
state of readiness.
Broad transcriptional changes associated with P. viticola
infection

The infection of both species with P. viticola results in the
rapid induction of many genes, although their number and
the magnitude of induction are much greater in V. riparia
(Figure 3). Transcript profiling in other grapevine diseases
[23,33,36,37] has focused on compatible interactions, for
which large transcriptional changes are observed. The only
incompatible interaction studied in this manner is that
between V. aestivalis and the powdery mildew agent Erysiphe necator [23]. This is another biotrophic, haustoriaforming grapevine pathogen, which might be expected to
adopt strategies similar to P. viticola with similar

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

consequences. In V. aestivalis only three genes were
shown to be modulated by infection by E. necator. The
same authors also investigated the compatible interaction
with V. vinifera, which responded with a broad remodeling
of the transcriptome. Our data show that both V. vinifera
and V. riparia respond to downy mildew infection with a
massive transcriptional change, which is much more pronounced in the resistant species as suggested by several
large scale analyses of incompatible interactions in other
species [60-63]. Many similarities can be identified
between the responses against powdery and downy mildew in V. vinifera based on the annotation of probes on
the chips, although a complete and detailed comparison
cannot be carried out because different array platforms
were used in each case.
Overlapping transcriptional responses to infection in V.
vinifera and V. riparia

As expected, there were overlaps in the transcriptional
changes in each species in response to infection, with
most of the genes induced in V. vinifera constituting a
weak subset of those induced in V. riparia at the same
time-points (Figures 4 and 5). The limited response in
V. vinifera appears to reflect an abortive attempt to
achieve resistance, since most of the common modulated transcripts fall into the ‘resistance’ category (Figure
5). The activation of genes encoding PR proteins and
enzymes in the phenylpropanoid pathway was anticipated based on data from model species [19,59]. Interestingly, many of the common modulated transcripts are
not only expressed at higher levels in V. riparia than V.
vinifera, but also at higher levels than the genes in the
same family that are uniquely expressed in V. riparia, e.
g. PR-10, stilbene synthases and WRKY transcription
factors. For example, the six WRKY genes whose induction is common to both species (TC59548, TC66456,
TC71038, TC57604, TC53734, TC68615) are induced 622-fold in V. riparia, whereas those solely expressed in
V. riparia are induced 2-5-fold (TC60897, TC51831,
TC51732, TC53072, TC55553, TC64282). It therefore
appears that V. vinifera can only weakly execute those
responses that are strongly induced in V. riparia.
It is interesting to highlight the induction of an apoplastic invertase (TC56057), a sink-specific enzyme that
catalyzes the irreversible cleavage of sucrose into
hexoses, both in V. vinifera and V. riparia (2-3-fold and
7-9-fold, respectively). The rapid induction of invertase
activity has also been observed in tomato roots resistant
to the necrotrophic fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum [64]. Likewise, in barley challenged with powdery mildew, an apoplastic invertase was induced more
strongly and rapidly in a resistant cultivar [65]. Hexoses
produced by the invertase could be seen as a nutrient
source for pathogens, but also as a supply of extra

Page 9 of 16

energy required for the activation of defense responses
[66,67] whose accumulation might suppress photosynthesis in line with our data on photosynthetic genes. Most
importantly, sugar can also be used to trigger defense
gene expression [68,69] hence the suggestion to consider
apoplastic invertase as a true PR protein [66].
All the common genes were modulated in the same
direction by both species, indicating they probably fulfill
the same functions in defense. Inverse regulation of the
same gene in genotypes with different infection outcomes could be interpreted as part of a pathogen
defense suppression strategy [70]. Indeed, susceptibility
to P. viticola is associated with broad downregulation of
gene expression at later time-points [71] but our data
show that such downregulation does not occur early in
the infection.
Quantitative and kinetic differences between compatible and incompatible interactions have been elegantly
described in Arabidopsis [61]. The incompatible interactions produced a more robust and intense transcriptional response and the proposed quantitative model
suggested that a high level input signal is generated in
resistant plants in response to infection, determining the
robustness of the system.
The specific transcriptional response in V. riparia

Although both species responded to infection with broad
changes in gene expression, the response was strongest
and fastest in V. riparia, with a peak of gene induction at
12 hpi. This response had transient and permanent components, since the expression of about half the genes fell
back by 24 hpi (Figure 2). The strong transcriptional
response of V. riparia together with its histological reactions to the pathogen is reminiscent of R-gene dependent
resistance in other species [16], although the molecular
determinants are unknown in this case.
When transcripts with unknown functions are
excluded, the genes induced specifically in V. riparia fall
into a number of functional categories whose expression
appears to be coordinated. At 12 hpi, many genes
encoding signal transduction components are induced,
and this is followed by a wave of metabolic genes that
are induced 24 hpi. This may indicate that an initial
burst of signaling activity reprograms metabolism to
provide a ‘defense mode’. Among the different signaling
pathways affected, calcium is known to be an important
second messenger in resistance [72] as shown by the
induction specifically in infected V. riparia, of calmodulins and calmodulin-binding proteins, calcium transporting ATPases, and proteins with similarity to calreticulin
and calcineurin B-like proteins, all known to contribute
to calcium homeostasis in the cell and to the definition
of specific calcium signatures [73]. Several different
ethylene response factors are also strongly induced

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

solely in V. riparia at 12 hpi, and this hormone has also
been implicated in resistance [74]. The possible involvement of ethylene in P. viticola resistance is further supported by the very strong induction of the ACC oxidase
gene TC64623 (20-fold in V. riparia compared to only
3-fold in V. vinifera) and the 5-fold induction of an
ACC synthase gene (TC60326) specifically in V. riparia.
Several genes with homology to known receptor-like
protein kinases and leucine-rich repeat receptor-like
proteins are specifically induced in V. riparia, especially
at 12 hpi. These genes are known to mediate pathogen
recognition and trigger defense responses in many species [75]. Although the ligands for these receptors are
unknown, hundreds of genes encoding receptor-like
proteins have been identified in V. vinifera [12,13], some
of which map in linkage groups associated with resistance. Two MAP kinase kinase genes (TC62930,
TC53469) were induced specifically in V. riparia at 12
hpi, consistent with the upregulation of three MAP
kinases, two specifically in V. riparia at 12 hpi
(TC66292, TC56256) and one also induced in V. vinifera
at 24 hpi (TC61436). Interestingly, the TC66292 and
TC56256 genes are related to Arabidopsis MAP kinase
3 (MPK3), the ortholog of tobacco wound-induced protein kinase (WIPK), which acts together with salicylic
acid-induced protein kinase (SIPK) in resistance
responses [76]. The absence of a SIPK homolog among
our induced genes is consistent with its predominantly
post-translational mode of regulation [77].
Several families of transcription factors are also specifically upregulated in V. riparia, especially WRKY factors and other zinc-finger proteins. WRKY factors are
regulated by interaction with MAP kinase in other species [78,79] which provides a link in the signaling network we have outlined above. WRKY factors bind to
DNA motifs known as W-boxes which are often found
in defense genes, so they are regarded as important regulators of resistance [80].
It is well established that primary metabolic reprogramming underlies defense in biotrophic interactions
and many genes in this category are specifically induced
in V. riparia. Further analysis of our data suggests that
specific pathways are involved: gycolysis (GADPH, enolase), the pentose phosphate pathway (glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase) and the Krebs cycle (pyruvate
dehydrogenase, citrate synthases, succinyl-CoA ligase)
are all induced, and could supply both energy and precursors for the biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids.
Indeed, we observed the strong and specific induction of
a group of genes controlling all the key steps in phenylalanine biosynthesis, including genes with homology to
3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthases
(6-30 fold at 12 hpi), chorismate synthase and mutase,
and prephenate dehydratase, correlating with the

Page 10 of 16

induction of PAL (GSVIVT00013936001) and other
genes involved in the hydroxycinnamic acid biosynthesis. Enzymes involved in lipid metabolism are also
induced specifically in V. riparia. These include
enzymes involved in lipid synthesis (e.g. acetyl-CoA carboxylase, b-ketoacyl-CoA synthase) and degradation (e.
g. 13-lipoxygenase, acyl-CoA oxidase, acetoacetyl-CoA
thiolase), and enzymes involved in the synthesis of jasmonates (omega-3 fatty acid desaturase, allene oxide
cyclase, allene oxide synthase).
Genes encoding anti-oxidant enzymes and genes
involved in protein degradation are also strongly and
specifically induced in V. riparia, e.g. many RING-H2
domain proteins involved in ubiquitinylation are
induced at 12 hpi. Interestingly, a rice RING-H2 protein
associated with incompatible (but not compatible) interactions with Magnaporthe grisea is induced following
treatment with different resistance-inducing chemicals,
and transgenic plants constitutively expressing this gene
are resistant to several pathogens, as well as drought
and oxidative stress [81]. This demonstrates how modulated transcripts identified in our experiments provide
promising candidates for biotechnology-based disease
resistance programs.
Surprisingly, ‘resistance’ as a functional category, is relatively poorly represented among genes expressed specifically in V. riparia, many of them instead being common
to both species. However, as already stated, many of the
common resistance genes are more strongly modulated in
V. riparia, and the V. riparia-specific group does include a
number of genes strictly related to hypersensitivity, such
as those encoding rapidly elicited Avr9/Cf-9 proteins (e.g.
TC63609, TC61603) [43], two hypersensitive-induced
response proteins (TC63023, TC63883) and two homologs
of known HR markers in other species - tobacco Hin1 [44]
and tomato hsr203J [45,46] - both of which are specifically
or preferentially induced in V. riparia at 12 hpi. The HR
has previously been implicated in resistance response to
downy mildew in V. riparia [27]. Several additional
defense genes are strongly induced in V. riparia, including
those encoding PR proteins (such PR-4 and PR-10) and
enzymes involved in the synthesis of antimicrobial compounds, as already reported in grapevine infected with
powdery and downy mildew [23,28].
The specific transcriptional response in V. vinifera

Although most modulated transcripts in V. vinifera are
also modulated in V. riparia, there is a small collection
of genes induced specifically in V. vinifera. The genes
involved in this specific response do not suggest any
coordinated and explicit mechanism related to the
establishment of compatibility in V. vinifera. It is possible that the analysis of early transcriptional changes provides more information on resistance than susceptibility

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

(the former involving a pro-active transcriptional
response by the plant) and transcriptional changes associated with compatibility are established later [71].
Jasmonate levels in healthy and infected plants

Resistance to biotrophic pathogens is often dependent
on salicylic acid-mediated defense responses [82]. Jasmonates were originally associated with defense against
herbivores and necrotrophic pathogens [83] but have
more recently been implicated in resistance against biotrophes, such as powdery and downy mildews in Arabidopsis and in grapevine [84-87] and in resistance
induced by BABA and by b-1,3-glucan sulfate against P.
viticola [88,89]. Jasmonates interact with other danger
signals such as salicylic acid and ethylene to determine
the ultimate outcome of an infection, in a manner
dependent on the specific plant-microbe interaction.
Our data support a role for jasmonates in establishing
or maintaining V. riparia resistance against P. viticola,
given the significant increase in the levels of both jasmonic acid and MeJA at 48 hpi only in this species, concomitant with the effective arrest of pathogen growth,
although much later in comparison to the transcriptional reprogramming described above. More experiments are needed to determine the precise timing of
this accumulation in relation to pathogen arrest and to
reveal how much of the response to P. viticola can be
considered jasmonate-dependent in grapevine.

Conclusions
We compared two grapevine species, V. riparia and V.
vinifera, the former resistant to the pathogen P. viticola
and the latter susceptible to infection. Comparative transcriptome analysis of healthy leaves and leaves representing two early infection stages allowed us to
characterize the molecular events involved in the establishment of resistance in Vitis riparia.
Our data strongly support the view that resistance in
Vitis riparia is a post-infection phenomenon, characterized by a rapid wave of signal transduction (12 hpi) followed by a shift in primary and secondary metabolism
(24 hpi) to implement a defense mode. In contrast, early
transcriptional changes in V. vinifera indicate a weak
and abortive defense response and do not provide information about the possible downregulation of resistance
mechanisms by pathogen effectors, which might occur
later on. Basal levels of defense gene expression in the
two species do not seem to be responsible for the different infection outcomes.
The upregulation of genes involved in jasmonic acid
biosynthesis and the increase in jasmonate levels indicate that this hormone may play a role in V. riparia
resistance against P. viticola, although signal transduction-related genes are already upregulated before a

Page 11 of 16

detectable increase of jasmonate accumulation. Our
broad comparative characterization of resistant and susceptible phenotypes has provided several candidate
genes that could be used for additional functional analysis and for the development of disease-resistant commercial grapevine varieties in the future.

Methods
Plant material and P. viticola infections

Vitis vinifera cv. Pinot Noir and Vitis riparia cv. Gloire
de Montpellier plants were grown in vitro at 27°C with
a 16-h photoperiod (50 μE/m2/s) as described by Blaich
[90]. The P. viticola isolate was harvested in experimental fields in 2007 and propagated axenically on surfacesterilized detached Pinot Noir leaves maintained in Petri
dishes. Five days after inoculation, sporangia were collected from freshly-sporulating leaves using a microtip
equipped with a nylon filter and connected to a vacuum
pump. In order to obtain uncontaminated sporangia, the
inoculum was repeatedly propagated under axenic conditions on plants growing in vitro.
Fully expanded leaves of 8-10-week-old in vitro plants
were infected by applying 50-μl drops containing 50,000
sporangia per ml on the adaxial leaf surface (or distilled
water as a control). The concentration of sporangia was
determined using a hemocytometer. For microscopy,
leaf disks were collected 12, 24, 48 and 96 hpi, stained
with 0.05% (w/v) aniline blue in 0.1% (w/v) Na2CO3 (pH
10), and observed under an epifluorescence microscope
(Leica DM/RB, excitation filter BP 340-380 nm; dichroic
mirror 400 nm; suppression filter LP > 430 nm). For
microarray analysis, leaf disks were collected 12 and 24
hpi, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at
-80°C. Three independent biological replicates of the
artificial infection were performed.
Combimatrix array conception

The analysis was performed on a Combimatrix Vitis
vinifera chip produced by the Plant Functional Genomics Center at the University of Verona. The chip contained 24,571 non-redundant probes in triplicate,
composed of 35-40-mer oligos. Probes were designed
using the program oligoarray 2.1 [91] and were based
on tentative consensus sequences (TCs) derived from
the TIGR Vitis vinifera Gene Index release 5.0 (19062
probes), singletons with a 3’ poly(A) tail (1904 probes),
expressed sequence tags (55 probes) and on genomic
sequences produced by the International Grape Genome
Project [11] that were not already represented by the
TCs (3490 probes). TC annotations were derived from
the TIGR Gene Index, release 5.0 and EST annotations
were obtained by aligning sequences against UniProtKB/
Swiss-Prot database with BLASTX. Nine bacterial oligonucleotide sequences provided by CombiMatrix, 40

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

probes designed on seven Ambion spikes and 11 additional negative probes based on Bacillus anthracis, Haemophilus ducreyi and Alteromonas phage sequences
were used as negative controls. Three or four replicates
of each probe were distributed randomly across the
array. Two technical and three biological replicates were
used for each hybridization experiment.
RNA preparation, hybridization and microarray analysis

RNA was isolated according to Reid et al. (2006) and
quantified by spectrophotometry (ATI Unicam) and
using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. Total RNA (1 μg)
was amplified using the SuperScript Indirect RNA
Amplification System (Invitrogen, USA), to incorporate
amino-allyl UTP molecules (aRNA) and a fluorescent
label (Alexa Fluor 647). The purified, labeled aRNA was
quantified by spectrophotometry and 4 μg was hybridized to the Combimatrix array according to the manufacturer’s directions. Pre-hybridization, hybridization,
washing and imaging were performed according to the
manufacturer’s protocols http://www.combimatrix.com/
support_docs.htm. The array was scanned with a ScanArray 4000XL (Perkin-Elmer, USA) and TIF images
were exported to Microarray Imager 5.8 (CombiMatrix,
USA) for densitometric analysis. Probe signals higher
than negative control values plus twice the standard
deviation were considered as ‘present’. Data were normalized by quantile normalization and differentially
expressed genes were identified using the Two Class
Unpaired Statistical Analysis of Microarrays method
[92] with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 5%. Expression
data are available from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) [GenBank: Gene Expression
Omnibus accession number GSE18596].
Real-Time RT-PCR

Real-Time RT-PCR experiments were carried out in biological triplicates with the same RNA samples taken for
microarray analysis, using the SYBR® Green PCR master
mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and the
Mx3000P Real-Time PCR System (Stratagene, La Jolla,
CA, USA). Complementary DNA was synthesized from
DNase-treated total RNA using the ImProm-II Reverse
Transcription System (Promega, Madison, WI, USA).
Gene-specific primers were designed for the 10 target
genes as well as the actin transcript TC81781 (see Additional file 9). Each 25-μl reaction comprised 300 nM
each primer and cDNA synthesized from 40 ng of total
RNA (three replicates for each reaction) and began with
a 50°C hold for 2 min and a 95°C hold for 10 min followed by 40 cycles at 95°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s, and
72°C for 20 s. Non-specific PCR products were identified by analyzing dissociation curves. The amplification
efficiency was calculated from raw data using

Page 12 of 16

LinRegPCR software [93]. The relative expression ratio
value was calculated for treated samples relative to the
corresponding untreated sample at the same time-point
according to the Pfaffl equation [94]. SE values were calculated according to Pfaffl et al. [95].
Analysis of endogenous jasmonic acid and methyl
jasmonate levels

Frozen plant material (500 mg fresh weight) was pulverized under liquid nitrogen, mixed with 4 ml methanol and
filtered into a vial. After repeating this procedure twice,
the extract was divided into two aliquots and the solvent
evaporated under nitrogen at room temperature. To estimate the jasmonic acid content, 2 ml of ethereal trimethylsilyldiazomethane (2M in diethyl ether, Sigma-Aldrich)
was added to the dried sample and incubated for 30 min
before stopping the reaction under a gentle stream of
nitrogen. The dried sample was mixed with 1 ml 30%
NaCl and methylated jasmonic acid was extracted by solid
phase micro-extraction (PDMS 100 μm film thickness,
Supelco) while stirring at 60°C for 30 min. Blank analyses
were carried using saline. Preliminary recovery studies
were performed by adding known amounts of jasmonic
acid (5, 10, 50, 100 and 200 ng) to grapevine leaf tissue
prior to extraction, with recovery in the range 85-93%.
To estimate the levels of endogenous MeJA, plant
material was extracted by solid phase micro-extraction
without the derivatization step. The amount of endogenous MeJA was then subtracted from the total methylated jasmonic acid level to calculate the concentration
of JA in the samples [96]. The limit of detection for jasmonic acid as MeJA was 2 ng/g.
GC-analysis was performed with a Varian CP-3800
(Varian Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) equipped with a 1177
split/splitless injector, a Factor-Four 5 capillary column
(Varian 30 m, ID 0.25 mm, F.t. 0.25 μm), a FID detector
and a Galaxie Workstation software (Varian Inc.) [96].
GC-MS analyses were also used to confirm the efficacy
of the methylation procedure with a Varian Saturn 2100
GC-MS operating in the electron impact mode (EI),
equipped with a multiple-ion detector and a Factor-Four
5 capillary column (Varian 30 m, ID 0.25 mm, F.t. 0.25
μm) as described [96].
Additional file 1: Differences in basal gene expression levels
between the two species at 12 h after mock-inoculation with
distilled water. The file contains a list of transcripts showing statistically
significant differential expression, with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) ≤5%.
The fold change of V. vinifera vs. V. riparia expression levels (Fold Change
Vv/Vr) is reported, along with the q-value (%) indicating the FDR. A
separate list reports the subset of defense-related genes, functionally
categorized as ‘resistance’, ‘stress’, ‘cell wall’ and ‘secondary metabolism’
considered in Additional file 3.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11117-S1.XLS ]

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

Additional file 2: Differences in basal gene expression levels
between the two species at 24 h after mock-inoculation with
distilled water. The file contains a list of transcripts showing statistically
significant differential expression, with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) ≤5%.
The fold change of V. vinifera vs. V. riparia expression levels (Fold Change
Vv/Vr) is reported, along with the q-value (%) indicating the FDR. A
separate list reports the subset of defense-related genes, functionally
categorized as ‘resistance’, ‘stress’, ‘cell wall’ and ‘secondary metabolism’
considered in Additional file 3.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11117-S2.XLS ]
Additional file 3: Comparison between defense-related genes in V.
vinifera and V. riparia at 12 and 24 h after mock-inoculation with
distilled water. Defense-related genes considered for the comparison
are those functionally categorized as ‘resistance’, ‘stress’, ‘cell wall’ and
‘secondary metabolism’ and are shown in the ‘defense-related’ lists in
Additional files 1 and 2. The tables on the left show the total numbers of
genes whose basal expression is higher in V. riparia (overexpressed in Vr)
or V. vinifera (overexpressed in Vv) within each category. The tables on
the right report mean logarithmic fluorescence values of transcripts
within each category (mean Vr and mean Vv), the ratio of the means
calculated for each genotype and the resulting fold change. Microarray
fluorescence data from the two time-points were normalized and
analyzed separately to avoid detecting basal differences based on the
response to illumination.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11117-S3.XLS ]
Additional file 4: Subset of transcripts showing a difference in basal
expression level between V. vinifera and V. riparia at both the 12
and 24 h time points after mock-inoculation with distilled water.
The file contains a list of transcripts showing statistically significant
differential expression, with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) ≤5%. The fold
change of V. vinifera vs. V. riparia expression levels (Fold Change Vv/Vr) is
reported, along with the q-value (%) indicating the FDR. A separate list
reports the subset of defense-related genes, functionally categorized as
‘resistance’, ‘stress’, ‘cell wall’ and ‘secondary metabolism’ considered in
Additional file 5.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11117-S4.XLS ]

Page 13 of 16

Additional file 7: Representative V. riparia and V. vinifera transcripts
modulated after infection with P. viticola. A selection of representative
transcripts modulated in both species (’common’) or specifically in V.
riparia (Vr) or V. vinifera (Vv) after infection with P. viticola. Target
descriptions are provided, corresponding to gene annotations in the
source databases, along with the corresponding functional category and
the microarray fold change (FC) value for each time point.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11117-S7.XLS ]
Additional file 8: Real-Time RT-PCR analysis of selected genes. The
figure reports the comparison of transcriptional changes of selected
genes as determined by microarray (white bars) and Real-Time RT-PCR
analysis (black bars). The black bars indicate the average fold change
obtained for the three independent biological replicates, and the error
bars indicate the standard deviations. Individual fold change values and
standard errors for each Real-Time experiment are available in Additional
file 9.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11117-S8.PDF ]
Additional file 9: Details of the Real-Time RT-PCR analysis. The file
contains: the sequence ID of each gene analyzed by Real-Time RT-PCR;
the corresponding primer pairs used for the amplification (FOR = forward
primer, REV = reverse primer); an indication of the region amplified by
each primer pair (3’ UTR = 3’untranslated region; CDS = coding
sequence; CDS-probe = region of the coding sequence covered by the
microarray probe; CDS-3’ UTR = region between the coding sequence
and the 3’untranslated region); the time point after treatment at which
the leaves were sampled; the Real-Time RT-PCR results, reported as fold
change (FC) relative to the untreated control sample and with the
standard error (SE), for each species (Vv = V. vinifera Vr = V. riparia) and
divided in biological replicates (1, 2 and 3); the mean values of the FC
for the three replicates for each genotype. The corresponding microarray
results for the same transcripts are also reported as fold change at the
end of the list.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11117-S9.XLS ]

Additional file 5: Comparison between defense-related genes in the
subset of transcripts differentially expressed in the two species
both at 12 and 24 h after mock-inoculation with distilled water.
Defense-related genes considered for the comparison are those
functionally categorized as ‘resistance’, ‘stress’, ‘cell wall’ and ‘secondary
metabolism’ and are shown in the ‘defense-related’ list in Additional file
4. The tables on the left show the total numbers of genes whose basal
expression is higher in V. riparia (overexpressed in Vr) or V. vinifera
(overexpressed in Vv) within each category. The tables on the right
report mean logarithmic fluorescence values of transcripts within each
category (mean Vr and mean Vv), the ratio of the means calculated for
each genotype and the resulting fold change.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11117-S5.XLS ]

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr. Andreas Kortekamp for helpful suggestion on in vitro
grapevine cultivation and for critical reading of the manuscript. This work
was supported by the project ‘Programma quadriennale per il
completamento e l’attività del Centro di Genomica Funzionale Vegetale
dell’Università degli Studi di Verona’ granted by the Cariverona Bank
Foundation and by the project ‘Structural and functional characterization of
the grapevine genome (VIGNA)’ granted by the Italian Ministry of
Agricultural and Forestry Policies (MIPAF).

Additional file 6: Differential gene expression in V. riparia and V.
vinifera following infection with P. viticola. The file lists transcripts
showing a statistically significant differential expression (fold change ≥2,
FDR ≤5%) in P. viticola infected samples of V. riparia (Vr) and V. vinifera
(Vv), in comparison to their respective mock-inoculated controls, at 12
and 24 hpi. Species-specific and ‘common’ transcriptional changes
associated with infection are also reported in separate lists for easier
access.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11117-S6.XLS ]

Authors’ contributions
MP performed grapevine infections, microscopic examinations, RNA
extractions and microarray hybridizations. LB helped writing the manuscript
and prepared all Figures and Additional files. AF collaborated in designing
the Combimatrix grapevine gene chip, in fluorescent data extraction, and
performed microarray statistical analysis. AZ collaborated in statistical analysis
of microarray and real time RT-PCR data. MF performed real time RT-PCR
experiments. CZ performed jasmonic acid and methyl jasmonate
measurements. AL was responsible for growing in vitro plants and for P.
viticola maintenance and collaborated to infection experiments. MPz and
MD hold the responsibility of the Plant Functional Genomic Centre that
produced the Combimatrix grapevine gene chip and collaborated to
experimental design. AP conceived the study, participated in all steps of the

Author details
1
Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada le Grazie 15,
37134 Verona, Italy. 2Department of Agricultural and Environmental Science,
University of Perugia, B.go XX Giugno 72, 06121 Perugia, Italy.

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

Page 14 of 16

analysis and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
22.
Received: 12 November 2009
Accepted: 18 February 2010 Published: 18 February 2010
23.
References
1. Grenville-Briggs LJ, van West P: The biotrophic stages of oomycete-plant
interactions. Adv Appl Microbiol 2005, 57:217-243.
2. Kamoun S: A Catalogue of the Effector Secretome of Plant Pathogenic
Oomycetes. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2006, 44:41-60.
3. Whisson SC, Boevink PC, Moleleki L, Avrova AO, Morales JG, Gilroy EM,
Armstrong MR, Grouffaud S, van West P, Chapman S, et al: A translocation
signal for delivery of oomycete effector proteins into host plant cells.
Nature 2007, 450:115-118.
4. Grando MS, Bellin D, Edwards KJ, Pozzi C, Stefanini M, Velasco R: Molecular
linkage maps of Vitis vinifera L. and Vitis riparia Mchx. Theor Appl Genet
2003, 106:1213-1224.
5. Merdinoglu D, Wiedeman-Merdinoglu S, Coste P, Dumas V, Haetty S,
Butterlin G, Greif C: Genetic analysis of downy mildew resistance derived
from Muscadinia rotundifolia. VIII International Conference on Grape
Genetics and Breeding; Kecskemet, Hungary 2003, 451-456.
6. Fischer BM, Salakhutdinov I, Akkurt M, Eibach R, Edwards KJ, Topfer R,
Zyprian EM: Quantitative trait locus analysis of fungal disease resistance
factors on a molecular map of grapevine. Theor Appl Genet 2004,
108:501-515.
7. Welter L, Gokturk-Baydar N, Akkurt M, Maul E, Eibach R, Topfer R, Zyprian E:
Genetic mapping and localization of quantitative trait loci affecting
fungal disease resistance and leaf morphology in grapevine (Vitis
Vinifera L.). Mol Breed 2007, 20:359-374.
8. Marguerit E, Boury C, Manicki A, Donnart M, Butterlin G, Nemorin A,
Wiedemann-Merdinoglu S, Merdinoglu D, Ollat N, Decroocq S: Genetic
dissection of sex determinism, inflorescence morphology and downy
mildew resistance in grapevine. Theor Appl Genet 2009, 118:1261-1278.
9. Bellin D, Peressotti E, Merdinoglu D, Wiedemann-Merdinoglu S, AdamBlondon AF, Cipriani G, Morgante M, Testolin R, Di Gaspero G: Resistance
to Plasmopara viticola in grapevine ‘Bianca’ is controlled by a major
dominant gene causing localised necrosis at the infection site. Theor
Appl Genet 2009, 120:163-176.
10. Burger P, Bouquet A, Striem M: Grape Breeding. Breeding Plantation Tree
Crops: Tropical Species Springer. New YorkJain, Priyadarshan 2009, 161-189.
11. Jaillon O, Aury JM, Noel B, Policriti A, Clepet C, Casagrande A, Choisne N,
Aubourg S, Vitulo N, Jubin C, et al: The grapevine genome sequence
suggests ancestral hexaploidization in major angiosperm phyla. Nature
2007, 449:463-467.
12. Velasco R, Zharkikh A, Troggio M, Cartwright DA, Cestaro A, Pruss D,
Pindo M, Fitzgerald LM, Vezzulli S, Reid J, et al: A high quality draft
consensus sequence of the genome of a heterozygous grapevine
variety. PLoS One 2007, 2:e1326.
13. Di Gaspero G, Cipriani G, Adam-Blondon AF, Testolin R: Linkage maps of
grapevine displaying the chromosomal locations of 420 microsatellite
markers and 82 markers for R-gene candidates. Theor Appl Genet 2007,
114:1249-1263.
14. Salmaso M, Malacarne G, Troggio M, Faes G, Stefanini M, Grando MS,
Velasco R: A grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.) genetic map integrating the
position of 139 expressed genes. Theor Appl Genet 2008, 116:1129-1243.
15. Pieterse CM, Dicke M: Plant interactions with microbes and insects: from
molecular mechanisms to ecology. Trends Plant Sci 2007, 12:564-569.
16. Jones JD, Dangl JL: The plant immune system. Nature 2006, 444:323-329.
17. Garcia-Brugger A, Lamotte O, Vandelle E, Bourque S, Lecourieux D,
Poinssot B, Wendehenne D, Pugin A: Early signaling events induced by
elicitors of plant defenses. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2006, 19:711-724.
18. Huckelhoven R: Cell wall-associated mechanisms of disease resistance
and susceptibility. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2007, 45:101-127.
19. van Loon LC, Rep M, Pieterse CM: Significance of inducible defenserelated proteins in infected plants. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2006, 44:135-162.
20. Greenberg JT, Yao N: The role and regulation of programmed cell death
in plant-pathogen interactions. Cell Microbiol 2004, 6:201-211.
21. Figueiredo A, Fortes AM, Ferreira S, Sebastiana M, Choi YH, Sousa L, AcioliSantos B, Pessoa F, Verpoorte R, Pais MS: Transcriptional and metabolic

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

profiling of grape (Vitis vinifera L.) leaves unravel possible innate
resistance against pathogenic fungi. J Exp Bot 2008, 59:3371-3381.
Fung RW, Wenping Q, Su Y, Schachtman DP, Huppert K, Fekete C,
Kovacs LG: Gene expression variation in grapevine species Vitis vinifera
L. and Vitis aestivalis Michx. Genet Resour Crop Evol 2007, 54:1541-1553.
Fung RW, Gonzalo M, Fekete C, Kovacs LG, He Y, Marsh E, McIntyre LM,
Schachtman DP, Qiu W: Powdery mildew induces defense-oriented
reprogramming of the transcriptome in a susceptible but not in a
resistant grapevine. Plant Physiol 2008, 146:236-249.
Melchior F, Kindl H: Coordinate- and elicitor-dependent expression of
stilbene synthase and phenylalanine ammonia-lyase genes in Vitis cv.
Optima. Arch Biochem Biophys 1991, 288:552-557.
Borie B, Jeandet P, Parize A, Bessis R, Adrian M: Resveratrol and stilbene
synthase mRNA production in grapevine leaves treated with biotic and
abiotic phytoalexin elicitors. Am J Enol Vitic 2004, 55:60-64.
Kortekamp A: Investigation of the interaction of Plasmopara viticola with
susceptible and resistant grapevine cultivars. J Plant Dis Prot 1998,
105:475-488.
Kortekamp A, Zyprian E: Characterization of Plasmopara-resistance in
grapevine using in vitro plants. J Plant Physiol 2003, 160:1393-1400.
Kortekamp A: Expression analysis of defence-related genes in grapevine
leaves after inoculation with a host and a non-host pathogen. Plant
Physiol Biochem 2006, 44:58-67.
Allegre M, Daire X, Heloir MC, Trouvelot S, Mercier L, Adrian M, Pugin A:
Stomatal deregulation in Plasmopara viticola-infected grapevine leaves.
New Phytol 2007, 173:832-840.
Diez-Navajas AM, Wiedemann-Merdinoglu S, Greif C, Merdinoglu D:
Nonhost versus host resistance to the grapevine downy mildew,
Plasmopara viticola, studied at the tissue level. Phytopathology 2008,
98:776-780.
Unger S, Buche C, Boso S, Kassemeyer HH: The Course of Colonization of
Two Different Vitis Genotypes by Plasmopara viticola Indicates
Compatible and Incompatible Host-Pathogen Interactions.
Phytopathology 2007, 97:780-786.
Gomès E, Coutos-Thévenot P: Molecular aspects of grapevine-pathogenic
fungi interactions. Grapevine molecular physiology and biotechnology
Springer Netherlands, 2 2009, 407-428.
Rotter A, Camps C, Lohse M, Kappel C, Pilati S, Hren M, Stitt M, CoutosThevenot P, Moser C, Usadel B, et al: Gene expression profiling in
susceptible interaction of grapevine with its fungal pathogen Eutypa
lata: extending MapMan ontology for grapevine. BMC Plant Biol 2009,
9:104.
Vandelle E, Poinssot B, Wendehenne D, Bentejac M, Alain P: Integrated
signaling network involving calcium, nitric oxide, and active oxygen
species but not mitogen-activated protein kinases in BcPG1-elicited
grapevine defenses. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2006, 19:429-440.
Repka V: Early defense responses induced by two distinct elicitors
derived from a Botrytis cinerea in grapevine leaves, cell suspensions. Biol
Plant 2006, 50:94-106.
Espinoza C, Vega A, Medina C, Schlauch K, Cramer G, Arce-Johnson P: Gene
expression associated with compatible viral diseases in grapevine
cultivars. Funct Integr Genomics 2007, 7:95-110.
Hren M, Nikolic P, Rotter A, Blejec A, Terrier N, Ravnikar M, Dermastia M,
Gruden K: ’Bois noir’ phytoplasma induces significant reprogramming of
the leaf transcriptome in the field grown grapevine. BMC Genomics 2009,
10:460.
Di Gaspero G, Cipriani G: Nucleotide binding site/leucine-rich repeats,
Pto-like and receptor-like kinases related to disease resistance in
grapevine. Mol Genet Genomics 2003, 269:612-623.
Chong J, Le Henanff G, Bertsch C, Walter B: Identification, expression
analysis and characterization of defense and signaling genes in Vitis
vinifera. Plant Physiol Biochem 2008, 46:469-481.
Moroldo M, Paillard S, Marconi R, Fabrice L, Canaguier A, Cruaud C, De
Berardinis V, Guichard C, Brunaud V, Le Clainche I, et al: A physical map of
the heterozygous grapevine ‘Cabernet Sauvignon’ allows mapping
candidate genes for disease resistance. BMC Plant Biol 2008, 8:66.
Pelsy F: Untranslated leader region polymorphism of Tvv1, a
retrotransposon family, is a novel marker useful for analyzing genetic
diversity and relatedness in the genus Vitis. Theor Appl Genet 2007,
116:15-27.

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

42. Di Gaspero G, Peterlunger E, Testolin R, Edwards KJ, Cipriani G:
Conservation of microsatellite loci within the genus Vitis. Theor Appl
Genet 2000, 101:301-308.
43. Rowland O, Ludwig AA, Merrick CJ, Baillieul F, Tracy FE, Durrant WE, FritzLaylin L, Nekrasov V, Sjolander K, Yoshioka H, Jones JD: Functional analysis
of Avr9/Cf-9 rapidly elicited genes identifies a protein kinase, ACIK1, that
is essential for full Cf-9-dependent disease resistance in tomato. Plant
Cell 2005, 17:295-310.
44. Gopalan S, Wei W, He SY: hrp gene-dependent induction of hin1: a plant
gene activated rapidly by both harpins and the avrPto gene-mediated
signal. Plant J 1996, 10:591-600.
45. Pontier D, Godiard L, Marco Y, Roby D: hsr203J, a tobacco gene whose
activation is rapid, highly localized and specific for incompatible plant/
pathogen interactions. Plant J 1994, 5:507-521.
46. Bezier A, Lambert B, Baillieul F: Cloning of a grapevine Botrytis-responsive
gene that has homology to the tobacco hypersensitivity-related hsr203J.
J Exp Bot 2002, 53:2279-2280.
47. Kortekamp A: Growth, occurrence and development of septa in
Plasmopara viticola and other members of the Peronosporaceae using
light- and epifluorescence-microscopy. Mycol Res 2005, 109:640-648.
48. Samuelian SK, Camps C, Kappel C, Simova EP, Delrot S, Colova VM:
Differential screening of overexpressed genes involved in flavonoid
biosynthesis in North American native grapes: [’]Noble’ muscadinia var.
and [’]Cynthiana’ aestivalis var. Plant Science 2009, 177:211-221.
49. Moore S, Payton P, Wright M, Tanksley S, Giovannoni J: Utilization of
tomato microarrays for comparative gene expression analysis in the
Solanaceae. J Exp Bot 2005, 56:2885-2895.
50. Nieto-Diaz M, Pita-Thomas W, Nieto-Sampedro M: Cross-species analysis of
gene expression in non-model mammals: reproducibility of
hybridization on high density oligonucleotide microarrays. BMC Genomics
2007, 8:89.
51. Bagnaresi P, Moschella A, Beretta O, Vitulli F, Ranalli P, Perata P:
Heterologous microarray experiments allow the identification of the
early events associated with potato tuber cold sweetening. BMC
Genomics 2008, 9:176.
52. Davey MW, Graham NS, Vanholme B, Swennen R, May ST, Keulemans J:
Heterologous oligonucleotide microarrays for transcriptomics in a nonmodel species; a proof-of-concept study of drought stress in Musa. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10:436.
53. Bar-Or C, Czosnek H, Koltai H: Cross-species microarray hybridizations: a
developing tool for studying species diversity. Trends Genet 2007,
23:200-207.
54. Salmaso M, Faes G, Segala C, Stefanini M, Salakhutdinov I, Zyprian E,
Topfer R, Grando MS, Velasco R: Genome diversity and gene haplotypes
in the grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.), as revealed by single nucleotide
polymorphisms. Mol Breed 2004, 14:385-395.
55. Marino R, Sevini F, Madini A, Vecchione A, Pertot I, Dalla Serra A, Versini G,
Velasco R, Grando M: QTL mapping for disease resistance and fruit
quality in grape. Acta Horticulturae Hajdu E, Borbas E 2003, 603:527-533.
56. Eibach R, Zyprian E, Welter L, Topfer R: The use of molecular markers for
pyramiding resistance genes in grapevine breeding. Vitis 2007,
46:120-124.
57. Gatto P, Vrhovsek U, Muth J, Segala C, Romualdi C, Fontana P, Pruefer D,
Stefanini M, Moser C, Mattivi F, Velasco R: Ripening and genotype control
stilbene accumulation in healthy grapes. J Agric Food Chem 2008,
56:11773-11785.
58. Pezet R, Gindro K, Viret O, Spring J: Glycosylation and oxidative
dimerization of resveratrol are respectively associated to sensitivity and
resistance of grapevine cultivars to downy mildew. Physiological and
Molecular Plant Pathology 2004, 65:297-303.
59. La Camera S, Gouzerh G, Dhondt S, Hoffmann L, Fritig B, Legrand M,
Heitz T: Metabolic reprogramming in plant innate immunity: the
contributions of phenylpropanoid and oxylipin pathways. Immunol Rev
2004, 198:267-284.
60. Maleck K, Levine A, Eulgem T, Morgan A, Schmid J, Lawton KA, Dangl JL,
Dietrich RA: The transcriptome of Arabidopsis thaliana during systemic
acquired resistance. Nat Genet 2000, 26:403-410.
61. Tao Y, Xie Z, Chen W, Glazebrook J, Chang HS, Han B, Zhu T, Zou G,
Katagiri F: Quantitative nature of Arabidopsis responses during
compatible and incompatible interactions with the bacterial pathogen
Pseudomonas syringae. Plant Cell 2003, 15:317-330.

Page 15 of 16

62. Mahalingam R, Gomez-Buitrago A, Eckardt N, Shah N, Guevara-Garcia A,
Day P, Raina R, Fedoroff NV: Characterizing the stress/defense
transcriptome of Arabidopsis. Genome Biol 2003, 4:R20.
63. van Esse HP, Van’t Klooster JW, Bolton MD, Yadeta KA, van Baarlen P,
Boeren S, Vervoort J, de Wit PJ, Thomma BP: The Cladosporium fulvum
virulence protein Avr2 inhibits host proteases required for basal
defense. Plant Cell 2008, 20:1948-1963.
64. Benhamou N, Grenier J, Chrispeels MJ: Accumulation of beta-Fructosidase
in the Cell Walls of Tomato Roots following Infection by a Fungal Wilt
Pathogen. Plant Physiol 1991, 97:739-750.
65. Swarbrick PJ, Schulze-Lefert P, Scholes JD: Metabolic consequences of
susceptibility and resistance (race-specific and broad-spectrum) in barley
leaves challenged with powdery mildew. Plant Cell Environ 2006,
29:1061-1076.
66. Roitsch T, Balibrea ME, Hofmann M, Proels R, Sinha AK: Extracellular
invertase: key metabolic enzyme and PR protein. J Exp Bot 2003,
54:513-524.
67. Essmann J, Schmitz-Thom I, Schon H, Sonnewald S, Weis E, Scharte J: RNA
interference-mediated repression of cell wall invertase impairs defense
in source leaves of tobacco. Plant Physiol 2008, 147:1288-1299.
68. Herbers K, Meuwly P, Frommer WB, Metraux JP, Sonnewald U: Systemic
Acquired Resistance Mediated by the Ectopic Expression of Invertase:
Possible Hexose Sensing in the Secretory Pathway. Plant Cell 1996,
8:793-803.
69. Koch KE: Carbohydrate-Modulated Gene Expression in Plants. Annu Rev
Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 1996, 47:509-540.
70. Soanes DM, Talbot NJ: Moving targets: rapid evolution of oomycete
effectors. Trends Microbiol 2008, 16:507-510.
71. Polesani M, Desario F, Ferrarini A, Zamboni A, Pezzotti M, Kortekamp A,
Polverari A: cDNA-AFLP analysis of plant and pathogen genes expressed
in grapevine infected with Plasmopara viticola. BMC Genomics 2008,
9:142.
72. Lecourieux D, Ranjeva R, Pugin A: Calcium in plant defence-signalling
pathways. New Phytol 2006, 171:249-269.
73. Ma W, Berkowitz GA: The grateful dead: calcium and cell death in plant
innate immunity. Cell Microbiol 2007, 9:2571-2585.
74. Broekaert WF, Delaure SL, De Bolle MF, Cammue BP: The role of ethylene
in host-pathogen interactions. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2006, 44:393-416.
75. Lukasik E, Takken FL: STANDing strong, resistance proteins instigators of
plant defence. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2009, 12:427-436.
76. Asai S, Ohta K, Yoshioka H: MAPK signaling regulates nitric oxide and
NADPH oxidase-dependent oxidative bursts in Nicotiana benthamiana.
Plant Cell 2008, 20:1390-1406.
77. Pedley KF, Martin GB: Role of mitogen-activated protein kinases in plant
immunity. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2005, 8:541-547.
78. Kim CY, Liu Y, Thorne ET, Yang H, Fukushige H, Gassmann W, Hildebrand D,
Sharp RE, Zhang S: Activation of a stress-responsive mitogen-activated
protein kinase cascade induces the biosynthesis of ethylene in plants.
Plant Cell 2003, 15:2707-2718.
79. Kim CY, Zhang S: Activation of a mitogen-activated protein kinase
cascade induces WRKY family of transcription factors and defense genes
in tobacco. Plant J 2004, 38:142-151.
80. Pandey SP, Somssich IE: The role of WRKY transcription factors in plant
immunity. Plant Physiol 2009, 150:1648-1655.
81. Liu H, Zhang H, Yang Y, Li G, Yang Y, Wang X, Basnayake BM, Li D, Song F:
Functional analysis reveals pleiotropic effects of rice RING-H2 finger
protein gene OsBIRF1 on regulation of growth and defense responses
against abiotic and biotic stresses. Plant Mol Biol 2008, 68:17-30.
82. Bari R, Jones JD: Role of plant hormones in plant defence responses.
Plant Mol Biol 2009, 69:473-488.
83. Pena-Cortes H, Barrios P, Dorta F, Polanco V, Sanchez C, Sanchez E,
Ramirez I: Involvement of jasmonic acid and derivatives in plant
responses of pathogen and insects and in fruit ripening. J Plant Growth
Regul 2005, 23:246-260.
84. Belhadj A, Saigne C, Telef N, Cluzet S, Bouscaut J, Corio-Costet MF,
Merillon JM: Methyl jasmonate induces defense responses in grapevine
and triggers protection against Erysiphe necator. J Agric Food Chem 2006,
54:9119-9125.
85. Ellis C, Karafyllidis I, Turner JG: Constitutive activation of jasmonate
signaling in an Arabidopsis mutant correlates with enhanced resistance

Polesani et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/117

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.
91.

92.

93.

94.
95.

96.

Page 16 of 16

to Erysiphe cichoracearum, Pseudomonas syringae, and Myzus persicae.
Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2002, 15:1025-1030.
Huitema E, Vleeshouwers V, Francis D, Kamoun S: Active defence
responses associated with non-host resistance of Arabidopsis thaliana to
the oomycete pathogen Phytophtora infestans. Mol Plant Pathol 2003,
4:487-500.
Belhadj A, Telef N, Saigne C, Cluzet S, Barrieu F, Hamdi S, Merillon JM: Effect
of methyl jasmonate in combination with carbohydrates on gene
expression of PR proteins, stilbene and anthocyanin accumulation in
grapevine cell cultures. Plant Physiol Biochem 2008, 46:493-499.
Hamiduzzaman MM, Jakab G, Barnavon L, Neuhaus JM, Mauch-Mani B:
beta-Aminobutyric acid-induced resistance against downy mildew in
grapevine acts through the potentiation of callose formation and
jasmonic acid signaling. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2005, 18:819-829.
Trouvelot S, Varnier AL, Allegre M, Mercier L, Baillieul F, Arnould C,
Gianinazzi-Pearson V, Klarzynski O, Joubert JM, Pugin A, Daire X: A beta-1,3
glucan sulfate induces resistance in grapevine against Plasmopara
viticola through priming of defense responses, including HR-like cell
death. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2008, 21:232-243.
Blaich R: Versuche zur kuenstlichen Mykorrhizabildung bei Vitis riparia.
Vitis 1977, 16:32-37.
Rouillard JM, Zuker M, Gulari E: OligoArray 2.0: design of oligonucleotide
probes for DNA microarrays using a thermodynamic approach. Nucleic
Acids Res 2003, 31:3057-3062.
Tusher VG, Tibshirani R, Chu G: Significance analysis of microarrays
applied to the ionizing radiation response. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98:5116-5121.
Ramakers C, Ruijter JM, Deprez RH, Moorman AF: Assumption-free analysis
of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) data. Neurosci
Lett 2003, 339:62-66.
Pfaffl MW: A new mathematical model for relative quantification in realtime RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:e45.
Pfaffl MW, Horgan GW, Dempfle L: Relative expression software tool
(REST) for group-wise comparison and statistical analysis of relative
expression results in real-time PCR. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:e36.
Zadra C, Borgogni A, Marucchini C: Quantification of jasmonic acid by
SPME in tomato plants stressed by ozone. J Agric Food Chem 2006,
54:9317-9321.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-117
Cite this article as: Polesani et al.: General and species-specific
transcriptional responses to downy mildew infection in a susceptible
(Vitis vinifera) and a resistant
(V. riparia) grapevine species. BMC Genomics 2010 11:117.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
