<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>RNA-seq in grain unveils fate of neo- and paleopolyploidization events in bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119. doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-12-r119"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Caroline Pont"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

RESEARCH

Open Access

RNA-seq in grain unveils fate of neo- and
paleopolyploidization events in bread wheat
(Triticum aestivum L.)
Caroline Pont1†, Florent Murat1†, Carole Confolent1, Sandrine Balzergue2 and Jérôme Salse1*

Abstract
Background: Whole genome duplication is a common evolutionary event in plants. Bread wheat (Triticum
aestivum L.) is a good model to investigate the impact of paleo- and neoduplications on the organization and
function of modern plant genomes.
Results: We performed an RNA sequencing-based inference of the grain filling gene network in bread wheat and
identified a set of 37,695 non-redundant sequence clusters, which is an unprecedented resolution corresponding
to an estimated half of the wheat genome unigene repertoire. Using the Brachypodium distachyon genome as a
reference for the Triticeae, we classified gene clusters into orthologous, paralogous, and homoeologous
relationships. Based on this wheat gene evolutionary classification, older duplicated copies (dating back 50 to 70
million years) exhibit more than 80% gene loss and expression divergence while recent duplicates (dating back 1.5
to 3 million years) show only 54% gene loss and 36 to 49% expression divergence.
Conclusions: We suggest that structural shuffling due to duplicated gene loss is a rapid process, whereas
functional shuffling due to neo- and/or subfunctionalization of duplicates is a longer process, and that both
shuffling mechanisms drive functional redundancy erosion. We conclude that, as a result of these mechanisms, half
the gene duplicates in plants are structurally and functionally altered within 10 million years of evolution, and the
diploidization process is completed after 45 to 50 million years following polyploidization.

Background
More than 40 years ago, based on a few protein
sequences from vertebrates, Susumu Ohno proposed
polyploidization as a major source of new biological
pathways created from duplicated gene copies [1]. The
vertebrate genomes can be considered as paleopolyploids that had become modern diploids by means of
ancestral chromosome fusions as well as sequence divergence between duplicated chromosomes. Recent paleogenomic analyses in plants have confirmed and refined
Ohno’s conclusions and led to the identification of polyploid common ancestors, showing that present-day species have been shaped through several rounds of whole
genome duplications (WGDs), small scale duplications
* Correspondence: jsalse@clermont.inra.fr
† Contributed equally
1
INRA, UMR 1095, Genetics, Diversity and Ecophysiology of Cereals, 234
avenue du Brézet, 63100 Clermont-Ferrand, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

(SSDs) as well as copy number variations (CNVs) of tandem duplicated genes followed by numerous chromosome fusion (CF) events leading to the their present-day
chromosome numbers [2-4]. Duplicate genes that persisted in multiple copies diverged by differentiation of
sequence and/or function. Overall, recurrent gene or
genome duplications generate functional redundancy
followed either by pseudogenization (that is, unexpressed or functionless paralogs), concerted evolution
(that is, maintained function of paralogs), subfunctionalization (that is, partitioned function of paralogs), or
neofunctionalization (that is, novel function of paralogs)
during the course of genome evolution. Functional
divergence either by subfunctionalization or neofunctionalization of duplicated genes has been proposed as one
of the most important sources of evolutionary innovation in living organisms [5]. As a consequence, polyploidy followed by diploidization is a major mechanism
that has shaped complex regulatory networks during the

© 2011 Pont et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

evolution of the plant genomes. However, the real
impact of genome duplication on gene network evolution, by comparing ancestral pre-WDG networks to
modern post-WGD networks, is not clear. Recent access
to numerous sequenced plant genomes [4] now offers
the opportunity to study, at an unprecedented resolution, the impact of WGD on gene and genome organization as well as regulation.
Recent paleogenomics studies in plants aiming at
comparing modern genome sequences to reconstruct
their common founder ancestors based on the characterization of shared duplication events allowed the characterization of seven genome paleoduplications for the
monocots and seven genome paleotriplications for the
eudicots. These data led to the construction of extinct
ancestors of seven protochromosomes (9,731 protogenes) and five protochromosomes (9,138 protogenes)
for the eudicots and monocots, respectively [4] (Figure
1a). These recent evolutionary studies in plants suggest
that most duplicated genes that are structurally retained
during evolution (referred to as ‘persistent duplicated
genes’) have at least partially diverged in their function
[6,7]. Microarray studies in eudicots and monocots
showed that the vast majority of duplicated genes have
diverged in their expression profiles, with 73% [8,9] and
88% [10] of gene pairs in Arabidopsis (eudicot reference
genome) and rice (monocot reference genome), respectively, associated with asymmetric expression profiles
after 50 to 100 million years of evolution. In maize,
where a recent WGD dating back to 5 million years ago
(MYA) occurred [11], more than 50% of the duplicated
genes have been deleted and are no longer detectable
within paralogous chromosomal blocks [12]. These
results clearly demonstrate that most of the genetic
redundancy originating from polyploidy events is erased
by a massive loss of duplicated genes by pseudogenization in one of the duplicated segments soon after the
polyploidization event.
Because many genes are part of more global regulatory
networks, a change in the expression pattern of a single
gene could induce changes for numerous genes involved
in the same functional pathway. Haberer et al. [13]
noted for example that tandem as well as segmental
duplicate gene pairs exhibiting high cis-element similarities within promoters had divergent expression in Arabidopsis, suggesting that changes to a small fraction of ciselements could be sufficient for neo- or subfunctionalization. We can argue that functional novelties derived
from neo- or subfunctionalization of orthologous and
paralogous copies may reduce the risk of extinction of
plant species [14,15], similar to what has been suggested
in mammals, where extinction events of vertebrate
lineages is higher prior to the known ancestral WGD
[16]. In this scenario, rapid genomic (that is, reciprocal

Page 2 of 19

gene loss) and functional changes (that is, neo- or subfunctionalization) following WGD might enable polyploids to better or quickly adapt to environmental
conditions with improved physiological and morphological traits and properties that were not present or sufficient in their diploid progenitors. For instance, it has
been suggested that neo- or paleopolyploidy may
increase vigor [17], favor tolerance to environmental
changes [15], and facilitate propagation through
increased self-fertilization species [18,19].
To gain insight into the impact of genome doubling
on gene structure and expression, we performed highthroughput RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)-based inference
of the grain filling gene network in bread wheat. We
focused our functional experiments on a grain developmental kinetic to be able to run comparable experiments in other cereals (for example, rice in the next
sections) based on the main conserved grain developmental phases: cell division, filling, and dehydration.
Bread wheat is a good plant model to study the impact
of distinct rounds of WGD on gene structure and function, as its genome comprises seven ancestral paleoduplications shared with all known cereal genomes and
two recent neopolyploidization events to form Triticum
aestivum, which originated from two hybridizations, one
between Triticum urartu (A genome) and an Aegilops
speltoides-related species (B genome) 1.5 to 3 MYA,
forming Triticum turgidum ssp. durum, and one
between T. turgidum (genomes A-B) and Aegilops
tauschii (D genome) 10,000 years ago [20,21]. Bread
wheat is thus a good genome model to study in the
same analysis the impact of ancient and recent WGD
on genome structure and function. The bread wheat
genome architecture offers us the opportunity to study
not only the structures and corresponding expression
patterns of paleoduplicated genes (50 to 70 million years
of evolution) but also neoduplicated genes (1.5 to 3 million years of evolution) by comparing expression profiles
of A, B and D homoeologous gene copies, that is, homoeoalleles (Figure 1a). As the complete assembled wheat
genome sequence is not yet available, we have used Brachypodium as reference genomes to investigate the grain
filling gene network modification in response to recent
and ancient evolutionary events, such as duplication,
polyploidization and speciation. The aim of this study
was not to perform a quantitative (that is, transcriptome) analysis of the genes expressed during grain
development but rather a robust qualitative identification (that is, large scale repertoire) of homoeologous/
orthologous/paralogous gene networks, allowing us to
provide new insights into the structural and functional
evolution of genes after a WGD event in plants. This
article provides relevant conclusions on how recent and
ancient duplicated genes in plants evolve in both

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

(a)

Page 3 of 19

Ancestral Genomes

Speciation Events
Ehrhartoideae

0 CF

0 CF

Genome Structure

Genome Features

n=12 Rice (O. sativa)

n=12, 372 Mb, 40577 genes

n=12
46
7 CF

Pooideae

n=5, 271 Mb, 25532 genes

5 CF

31

Avena
n=5 Brachypodium (B. distachyon)

n=7 Barley (H. vulgare)

n=7, ~5000 Mb, 3423 markers

12
Wheat (T. aestivum)

n=5

n=21, ~17000 Mb, 5003 markers

Genome A

n=12

Genome B
Genome D
Chloridoideae
Panicoideae

2 CF

n=10

17 CF

0 CF

n=10

Maize (Z. mays)

n=10, ~2365Mb, 32540 genes

n=10 Sorghum (S. bicolor)

n=10, ~659Mb, 34496 genes

Setaria

28
14
150

100

Eleusine

Pennisetum

50

0

Million Years

(b)

(c)

w1

BS R M

w2

BS R M

w3

BS R M

w4

BS R M

Wheat
37695 genes

2 3 1 38

w5

BS R M

BS R M
w6

w7

BS R M

3 4 2 54

S

R

M

Computed gene order

Wheat

B

Figure 1 Homolog gene conservation between wheat and cereal sequenced genomes. (a) Cereal genome paleohistory. Schematic
representation of the phylogenetic relationships between grass species adapted from [2,4]. Divergence times from a common ancestor are
indicated below the branches of the phylogenetic tree (in million years). Whole genome duplication events are illustrated with red circles on the
tree branches. The evolution of chromosome numbers of modern species from the ancestral genome structure is indicated with the number of
chromosome fusion (CF) events. Genome features (number of chromosomes, physical size, and the number of annotated unigenes) of the six
cereal genomes investigated are shown at the right-hand side. Modern genome architectures are illustrated using a color code that represents
the n = 5 and 12 extinct ancestors (left). (b) Homologous gene groups between wheat and rice, Brachypodium, sorghum, and maize genomes.
The Venn diagram illustrates the number of conserved protein domain-based homologs between wheat (RNA-seq gene clusters) and rice/
Brachypodium/sorghum/maize (annotated proteins). (c) Simulated synteny-based gene order model in bread wheat. The chromosomal location
of the RNA-seq gene clusters are shown on the seven bread wheat chromosome groups based on a consensus gene order derived from the
observed synteny between wheat and rice (’R’, in green), Brachypodium (’B’, in grey), sorghum (’S’, in blue), and maize (’M’, in pink) chromosomes
(numbers are shown at the bottom of the chromosomes). The bottom inset illustrates a micro-synteny example of 26 re-ordered genes in bread
wheat chromosome 1 (red dots) based on orthologous genes identified in Brachypodium (chromosome 2, 92 annotated genes, 0.9 Mb),
sorghum (chromosome 9, 108 annotated genes, 1.1 Mb), rice (chromosome 5, 112 annotated genes, 0.9 Mb), maize (chromosomes 6 to 8, 145
annotated genes, 12.6 Mb). Non-conserved genes are illustrated using dotted lines and conserved genes are linked with black lines.

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

structure and function at the whole genome level, the
gene family level, and the gene network level. The established divergence of structural and expression patterns
between duplicated genes might have accelerated the
erosion of colinearity between plant genomes as discussed in the article.

Results
Synteny-based gene repertoire and expression map in
wheat

We performed an RNA-seq analysis of samples collected
during the grain development in wheat. We used a 454
(Roche, see Materials and methods)sequencing platform
with five developmental stages, that is, 100 degree days
(DD), 200 DD, 250 DD, 300 DD, and 500 DD after pollination. The five developmental stages cover the cell
division (100, 200, 250 DD) and filling (300, 500 DD)
phases of grain development in wheat. RNA was
extracted, pooled, and sequenced and sequence reads
(934,928 in total) were clustered and checked for quality
as described in the Materials and methods section in
order to provide a qualitative and exhaustive view of the
grain development gene network in bread wheat (Table
S1 in Additional file 1). We obtained 37,695 sequence
clusters (20.1 Mb of assembled sequences with an average coverage of approximately 25× per cluster) based on
the assembly strategy protocol described in the Materials and methods section. Detailed information on the
37,695 sequence clusters (identity, sequence, and function) is available in Table S2 in Additional file 1 and
consists of the most complete gene network repertoire
of the grain development in wheat and probably in
grasses more generally.
We aligned the 37,695 sequence clusters to the proteomes of the four monocot sequenced genomes, that is,
rice, sorghum, Brachypodium, and maize (Figure 1b).
Homologous gene pairs based on protein sequence conservation (BLASTx) of functional domains allowed us to
establish that 17,881 (47%) wheat genes can be paired
with a single homolog counterpart (based on sequence
comparisons using 50% protein identity as a threshold
criterion) in at least one of the considered sequenced
genomes. The remaining 19,814 are putative wheat-specific unigenes (that is, not found in any of the four
sequenced cereal genomes available to date) based on
our BLAST alignment criteria, including 8,428 (43%)
associated with wheat public EST-unigenes and 11,386
short reads (that is, an average of 430 bases for wheatspecific versus 650 bases for non-wheat-specific clusters)
and/or low expressed/covered genes (that is, an average
of 15× for wheat-specific versus 36× for non-wheat-specific clusers). We cannot finally exclude that such
orphan clusters may correspond to sequenced poly-adenylated non nuclear sequences. As expected, the

Page 4 of 19

Brachypodium sequence genome appears to be the closest relative with the highest number of specific (not
shared with any of the three other sequenced cereal
genomes) protein-based homologs (1,165) identified in
comparison with the wheat unigene set. A four genomebased synteny approach was used for all seven wheat
chromosome groups by integrating wheat cytogenetic
map information [22] and public chromosome-to-chromosome relationships [2,4] to produce the most parsimonious simulated gene order in wheat based on gene
conservation observed among the four sequenced cereal
genomes as detailed in Murat et al. [23]. Based on the
known synteny relationship established between the
seven wheat chromosome groups and the rice, sorghum,
Brachypodium and maize genomes [23], we produced a
partial wheat gene-based physical map where RNA-seq
clusters were ordered within wheat chromosomes in
respect to the position of their orthologous counterparts
(following the ordering priority of rice >Brachypodium >
sorghum > maize; Figure 1b; Table S3 in Additional file
1). A comparable approach has also been used recently
in barley [24]. The gene content for chromosome 3B
has recently been estimated to include 8,400 unigenes
[25], of which 3,478 (41.4%) were available from the current analysis. We provide here the largest set of unigenes in wheat, covering almost half of the total
genome-wide gene set based on the previous 3B chromosome comparison. Our wheat unigene set originated
from a single tissue (grain), suggesting that only a few
additional complementary ones (such as from root and
leaf) would be sufficient to recover the vast majority of
all genes in wheat. Therefore, we were able to place
17,881 wheat genes in a so-called computed or simulated order along chromosomes (Figure 1b) and have
made the data available to users (Table S3 in Additional
file 1) for further marker development or candidate
gene identification. Figure 1c (bottom inset) illustrates
the strategy used to infer computed gene order in wheat
(chromosome group 1) based on the consensus gene
order derived from the synteny observed between Brachypodium (chromosome 2), rice (chromosome 5), sorghum (chromosome 9) and maize (chromosomes 6 to 8)
genomes. We therefore provide here for the first time
the most complete qualitative set of unigene sequences
expressed during the grain development in wheat associated with synteny-based physical locations on the
seven chromosome groups.
Using the Brachypodium genome (5 chromosomes,
271 Mb, 25,504 gene models) as a reference to produce
a heterologous wheat expression map, we could identify
one-to-one robust orthologous gene pairs between
wheat RNA-seq clusters and Brachypodium gene models
using two nucleic acid alignment (BLASTn) parameters
as described in Salse et al. [2,3] and the Materials and

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

methods section. Briefly, with the BLASTn alignment
based on default parameter (such as expect values),
homologous gene relationships are obtained, although
the analysis is polluted with background noise corresponding to high functional domain conservation, making it difficult to characterize which are the real
significant single orthologous relationships between two
considered genomes. The used parameters (CIP = 60%
and CALP = 70%) return statistically significant single
copy collinear relationships between two gene sets, and
the remaining homologous gene relationships are then
considered artifactual, that is, obtained at random [2].
Among the 37,695 RNA-seq clusters, 8,485 (23%, with
an average size of 761 bases) wheat sequences could be
aligned with 7,158 known orthologous genes in Brachypodium (Table S4 in Additional file 1) following this
strategy. Map positions in wheat were simulated from
syntenic relationships with Brachypodium as explained
in the previous section. The remaining 29,210 RNA-seq
clusters that could not be paired with Brachypodium
gene models corresponded to short reads (average size
of 468 bases) that were either considered as singletons
or rejected based on our stringent sequence alignment
criteria. These stringent alignment criteria were set to
establish a robust repertoire of homoeologous/paralogous (wheat), orthologous (wheat/Brachypodium) genes
in order to infer the consequence of evolutionary events
(duplication, speciation) on gene structure and expression patterns, as discussed in the next sections. The
objective of the current analysis was not to obtain the
largest set of wheat homologous counterparts in Brachypodium for the 37,695 wheat sequence clusters (as
described in the previous section and illustrated in Figure 1b) but rather precise and robust evolutionary relationships (conserved and duplicated genes) to
investigate structural and functional redundancy.
In summary, we produced 37,695 wheat gene clusters
(estimated to represent half of the total diploid wheat
gene content based on the wheat chromosome 3B-based
inference), of which 47% were associated with functional
domain-based homologs of the sequenced genome proteomes (Brachypodium, rice, sorghum and maize) and
23% were strict orthologs with Brachypodium, considered as the sequenced reference genome for the
Triticeae.
Evolutionary fate of duplicated genes at the whole
genome level

We produced a heterologous wheat expression map
where 8,485 genes that were expressed during wheat
grain filling were mapped strictly to the Brachypodium
genome and positioned within the wheat genome based
on the recently established Brachypodium /wheat genomes colinearity [4] (Figure 2a). This heterologous

Page 5 of 19

wheat expression map (Table S4 in Additional file 1)
has been used to study and discuss the evolutionary fate
of paralogous, homoeologous and orthologous gene
copies. Figure 2a depicts the five Brachypodium chromosomes as the inner circle (labeled ‘Bd’) and illustrates
the seven paleoduplications (in black) shared with other
cereals in the center [2,3]. The second circle (labeled
‘Ta’) illustrates the orthologous relationships identified
between Brachypodium and wheat using a seven color
code [4], illuminating the Triticeae chromosome group
origins. Black dots around the wheat circle illustrate the
454 RNA-seq reads from wheat (labeled ‘454Ta’).
Our data clearly show that 6,024, 941, and 193 gene
models matched with 1, 2, and 3 homoeologous gene
copies in wheat, respectively (Figure 2a, 454Ta circles).
Overall, only 193 of 7,158 orthologous gene pairs identified between Brachypodium and wheat matched the
three expected homoeologous counterparts in wheat.
Therefore, we can suggest that 2.7% of the homoeologous copies derived from two rounds of polyploidization
that took place less that 1.5 to 3 MYA [20,21] have
been structurally and functionally conserved in wheat.
We cannot exclude that the expression of some homoeologs may be too low to be detected by RNA-seq given
the coverage used in the current analysis, but we have
clearly established that, for 6,024 genes with detectable
expression signals, the three homoeologs do not have
perfectly redundant expression profiles in the considered
grain experiment. This clearly suggests that, for a large
majority of the homoeologs in wheat, at least one copy
has been lost (deleted or pseudogenized) or neo- and/or
subfunctionalized within 1.5 to 3 million years of evolution. Moreover, Figure 2a illustrates that the genes
expressed during the grain development were randomly
distributed on the Brachypodium genome. Because of
the average RNA-seq cluster length, however, we cannot
distinguish homoeologous copies that have SNPs (1 per
approximately 500 base-pairs in wheat) outside of the
aligned sequences, leading to an overestimated percentage of homoeologous gene rearrangement events
through homoeologous gene assemblage in the same
cluster. We can still hypothesize that such homoeologs
that do not harbor homoeoSNPs within the sequenced
regions have been clustered together, leading to
increased sequence coverage of the considered clusters.
Consequently, we can extrapolate the homoeologous
representation within a sequence assembly cluster based
on the sequence coverage. The assumption is that for a
sequence fraction of a gene that does not harbor homoeoSNPs, the three homologs are then clustered within
the same assembly, leading to an increase in the
sequence coverage of such a region. Monitoring putative
merged homoeologs in the same clusters based on the
sequence coverage of the initial 37,695 RNA-seq

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

Page 6 of 19

Wheat Chromosomes

(a)
1

2

3

4

5

6

(b)
7

Homoeolog

Ta
Ta

T d
TFBd

Bd
Bd

CNV

N2A

Group D Group B Group A

TFTa
4 Ta
454Ta

2A
N2B

2A 2B2D

DNA control

N2D

2A

RNA

2A 2B2D

N2A

100DD

200DD

Dp7
250DD

Dp3

N2B

300DD

Dp4
Dp2

Dp4

Dp6

RNA

N2D
Dp2

Dp5
Dp3

500DD

RNA

Dp4

Brachypodium (Ch 2) – wheat (Chr 3-1)

(c)

Telo. Sub-telomeric region

Peri-centromeric region

Sub-telomeric region Telo.

Cent.
CDS Brachypodium
Orthologs (RNA-seq) wheat
Paralogs Brachypodium
Paralogs (RNA-seq) wheat
TF

(d)

Synteny w4/b1

Synteny w1/b3

Brachypodium Chr3

S1

S1 S3

S4

S4

D
S5

S3

S8

C-S10

C-S3

C-L1

C-L6

C-L4
L4

L6

L1

L1

L12

L9

C-L1

C-L12

C-S1

C-S1

C-S4

C-L9
L13

S10

S1

S3 S1

B
S9

S2

Wheat Chr1
Consensus A

S1

A

Duplication #3

Brachypodium Chr1

S3

B

C-S1

D

Wheat Chr4
Consensus

L5

L2

L13

L2

L3

L4

L1

L12

L3

L5

Figure 2 Heterologous genome-wide wheat expression map. (a) The five Brachypodium chromosomes are illustrated in the inner circle
(labeled Bd) and the seven paleoduplications (in black) shared within cereals are displayed in the center (Dp1 to Dp7). The second circle
(labeled Ta) illustrates the orthologous relationships identified between Brachypodium and wheat using a seven color code. Dots around the two
circles illustrate the Brachypodium transcription factors (red; labeled TFTa), the 454 RNA-seq reads from bread wheat (black; labeled 454Ta) and
associated TFs (green; labeled TFBb). (b) CNVs and homoeologous gene localization in bread wheat is illustrated with a single COS marker
(CT753726) that has been located on chromosome 2A (CNV of 2), 2B and 2D using the adapted cytogenetic material illustrated in the top. The
arrows illustrate the observed amplification loss observed for the illustrated cytogenetic material (N2A, N2B, N2D respectively for the absence of
the 2A, 2B, 2D chromosomes). The COS marker (CT753726) expression (SSCP amplification) profiles observed in the five RNA samples from wheat
grain development, as well as in leaves (RNA and DNA amplifications) and roots (RNA) considered as negative control. Colored arrows highlight
the loss of expression of the considered CNV or homoeologous copies. (c) Wheat (chromsomes 1 to 3) and Brachypodium (chromosome 2) heat
maps for Brachydopium coding sequence (CDS; blue < 40, yellow approximately 41 to 50, red > 51 genes/500 kb), wheat RNA-seq ortholog
(blue < 9, yellow approximately 10 to 19, red > 20 genes/500 kb), Brachypodium paralog (blue = 0, yellow approximately 1 to 5, red > 6 genes/
500 kb), wheat RNA-seq paralog (blue = 0, yellow approximately 1 to 3, red > 4 genes/500 kb) distributions. The 44 RNA-seq TFs are illustrated
with their corresponding orthologous positions on the Brachypodium chromosome as black vertical bars. (d) Paralogous chromosomal regions
are shown in the center, involving Brachypodium chromosome 1 (2.1 Mb, 252 genes) and 3 (2.9 Mb, 181 genes), and annotated genes are
shown with horizontal bars. Orthologous wheat chromosomes are shown at the right (consensus group 1 and homoeologous chromosomes in
red) and left (consensus group 4 and homoeologous chromosomes in yellow). Orthologous genes identified between wheat and Brachypodium
are linked with black lines. Paralogous genes identified between Brachypodium chromosomes are linked with green lines. Expression data from
wheat RNA-seq cluster alignment against the considered Brachypodium chromosome sequences are shown with colored dots. Blue dots illustrate
paralogous gene pairs for which only one copy is associated with wheat RNA-seq clusters while red dots illustrate paralogous pairs for which
both duplicates are associated with wheat RNA-seq clusters.

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

unigenes, we were then able to identify 1,009 clusters
covered with more than 140 reads (that is, putatively
merged homoeologs) compared to 7,158 single copy
homologs reported previously and associated with an
average coverage of 38 to 42 reads. We confirm at the
whole gene repertoire level (37,695 non-redundant
sequence clusters), following a sequence coverage-based
approach for detecting homoeologous copies, what we
observed initially using a synteny-based approach (2.7%
of wheat homoeologs are associated with a Brachypodium orthologous gene), that 2.7% (1,009) of the homoeologous copies derived from two rounds of
polyploidization that took place less than 1.5 to 3 MYA
have been structurally and functionally conserved.
We designed an experiment using a subset of wheat
genes to confirm the in silico structural and functional
inference of homoeologous gene copies based on an in
omic complementary approach. It is possible that missing data (non-sequenced low expression genes) have led
to an overestimation of the structural and expression
differences between homoeoalleles. If we select a subset
of 100 genes, we should observe, based on the in silico
conclusions detailed in the previous sections, that a vast
majority of the homoeologs do not share the same
expression pattern during grain development. To do so,
from a set of 100 wheat genes randomly distributed
among the 7 chromosome groups, we were able to
design 91 primer pairs for further in omic structural
(that is, evidence of homoeolog deletion) and functional
(that is, evidence of homoeolog neo- and subfunctionnalization) inference of homoeologous gene copies in
bread wheat. The Single Strand Conformational Polymorphism (SSCP) detection allows identification of
homoeologous amplicons in a polyploidy background
through the exploitation, on a capillary sequencer, of
secondary DNA structure under non-denaturing conditions. The SSCP approach on a capillary sequencer [26]
offers two advantages, the ability to detect SNP and size
polymorphisms and to identify homoeologous or even
paralogous amplifications. Using the wheat cytogenetic
material available for the structural detection of putative
homoeologs based on the SSCP technique, we observed
that 43 (54%) out of 79 successfully assigned genes
exhibited loss of at least one homoeologous copy
beyond technical detection. Regarding expression patterns, 33 genes (36%) out of 91 showed a loss of expression when considering grain development, whereas 45
(49%) showed a loss of expression at the whole tissue
level when comparing the expression in grain, the leaf,
and the root (Figure 2b; Table S5 in Additional file 1).
Consequently, 49% of the wheat homoeologous gene
copies have been neo- and/or subfunctionalized when
considering the grain developmental kinetic. Finally,
only 27 (34%) genes out of 79 homoeoalleles detected

Page 7 of 19

on the three chromosome groups clearly show a conserved expression pattern in grain. The remaining 66%
have either been structurally lost and/or neo- and/or
subfunctionalized in their expression profiles. Figure 2b
(left) illustrates the chromosomal localization of a single
COS (conserved orthologous set [26]) gene (wheat
CT753726 with rice ortholog LOC-OS04g33150)
assigned to chromosome group 2 (homoeologous copies
A, B and D as well as a single CNV for the A homoeolog). The same COS gene used to amplify, through the
SSCP approach, the five RNA samples clearly shows
that either the homoeologs (A, B and D copies) or
CNVs do not present a perfect redundancy in their
expression patterns. Figure 2b (right) illustrates how
homoeoalleles and CNV expression signals were alternatively lost during grain development (colored arrows).
Therefore, if 66% of homoeologs in wheat were either
structurally lost (54%) or have diverged in their expression patterns (36% within tissues and 49% between tissues), earlier in silico assessments of homoeologous
gene shuffling (that is, only 2.4% of homoeoalleles show
conserved expression profiles) deduced from the alignment-based construction of homoeologous RNA-seq
clusters was indeed overestimated (by about 20 to 30%),
probably because of an average sequence read length of
761 bases as well as the possibility of missing low
expressed genes, limits associated with this sequencing
strategy.
Figure 1a illustrates a non-random distribution of
wheat/Brachypodium orthologous genes at the whole
genome level. As an example, Figure 2c shows Brachypodium chromosome 2, where the first heat map (coding sequence (’CDS’) track) illustrates the distribution of
annotated CDS with a clear enrichment of CDS in subtelomeric regions (that is, 107.2 genes/Mb) and a
reduced density in peri-centromeric regions (that is,
65.3 genes/Mb) due to transposable element (TE) invasion [27]. The second heat map illustrates the density of
Brachypodium genes associated with a wheat ortholog
(’Orthologs’ track) based on the data set of 8,485 RNAseq clusters (Table S6 in Additional file 1). The gene
conservation is higher in peri-centromeric regions
(31.1% of conserved genes) compared to telomeric
(23.8% of conserved genes) or sub-telomeric (28.1% of
conserved genes) regions. Finally, the paralogs (either
Brachypodium or wheat gene ‘paralogs’ tracks) are not
randomly and homogeneously distributed among chromosomes, that is, 47.4% versus 79.2% of duplicated
genes in telomeric versus sub-telomeric regions, respectively. The 862 duplicated genes in Brachypodium,
which arose from the seven ancestral duplications
shared by the Poaceae, are depicted in the center of Figure 2a (from 1 to 7). Therefore, 166 Brachypodium
paralogous pairs (19.3%) matched with their duplicated

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

counterpart in wheat. The remaining 696 paralogous
pairs (80.7%) matched with no or only one wheat
sequence derived from the RNA-seq repertoire. This
result is consistent with previous results [10] showing
that 87.4% of the paleoduplicated genes in rice have
been lost within a 50 to 70 million years of evolution.
Figure 2d provides a detailed view of the ancestral duplication referenced as ‘Dp3’ shared between Brachypodium chromosomes 1 to 3 and wheat chromosomes 1
to 4. Duplicated genes are connected with a green line
at the center of Figure 2d and wheat RNA-seq clusters
that are orthologs of Brachypodium duplicated genes are
illustrated with blue dots (wheat homoeologous genes
identified for only one of the Brachypodium duplicates)
or red dots (wheat homoeologous genes identified for
both of the Brachypodium duplicates). At a micro-scale
level for one (Dp3) of the seven ancestral duplications,
among 20 paralogous gene pairs (green lines), 4 (20%)
matched wheat homoeologous gene copies expressed
during grain development (Figure 2d, red dots). This
result further refines the conclusion that at either the
whole genome level (19.3% of duplicates with concerted
expression in the grain) or the micro-scale level (20% of
duplicates with concerted expression in the grain), most
of the paleoduplicated genes have been either lost or
neo- and/or subfunctionalized so that the expression
patterns at the tissue level are no longer redundant.
In summary, despite limitations of the RNA-seq
approach in detecting low expressed genes and differentiating homoeoalleles, we have clearly shown at the
whole genome level, using a heterologous wheat expression map, that almost 70% of recent duplicates (from
homoeologous copy evolutionary analysis) have diverged
during 1.5 to 3 million years of evolution (54% of homoeologous copies structurally lost and 36 to 49% of
homoeologous copies with different expression profiles),
and that more than 80% of ancient duplicates (from
paralogous evolutionary analysis) have diverged during
50 to 70 million years of evolution.
Evolutionary fate of duplicated genes at the gene family
level

Out of the 7,158 Brachypodium genes corresponding to
1, 2, or 3 wheat homoeologous gene copies derived
from the grain RNA-seq data described previously,
5,967 (corresponding to 7,112 wheat sequences) follow a
canonical Gene Ontology (GO) classification. Among
the 38 GO categories (from ‘molecular function’ classification) described at the whole genome level in Brachypodium, the distribution of three classes were shown to
be statistically (based on chi-square test using 1% as a
threshold) biased between grain development data (that
is, from wheat RNA-seq) and what is observed at the

Page 8 of 19

whole-genome level (that is, annotated genes in Brachypodium): protein binding, transcription factor activity,
and electron carrier activity (Table S7 in Additional file
1). The three previous GO classes are then good candidates to study the evolutionary fate of duplicated genes
at the gene family level.
We recently performed a transcriptome analysis of
rice grain filling based on an oligonucleotide array,
where among the 60,727 genes spotted on the array,
29,191 were expressed during grain development [10].
In particular, we conducted a detailed analysis of 32
transcription factors (TFs) that were expressed during
rice grain development. Across 100 to 600 gene physical
intervals covering the entire rice genome, no co-regulation was observed between the selected TFs and the
flanking genes [10]. In order to test this hypothesis, we
conducted a specific analysis of TF gene families in
wheat. Among the 666 TFs identified in the Brachypodium genome annotation (Figure 2a, TFBb red dots), 161
wheat homoeologs were extracted from the RNA-seq
clusters (Figure 2A, TFTa green dots). Of these 666 Brachypodium TFs, 140 (21%) matched with a wheat ortholog that was expressed during grain development. Figure
2c shows a classical heat map representation of Brachypodium chromosome 2, including the distribution of 44
TFs (Table S8 in Additional file 1) from the wheat
RNA-seq clusters that matched an orthologous counterpart of Brachypodium chromosome 2 (highlighted with
black bars). As can be observed, whereas the distribution of genes among Brachypodium chromosomes is
concentrated in the subtelomeric regions (see the previous section), the TFs are conserved in orthologous
positions along the entire chromosome (that is, 0.5 TF/
Mb in telomeric regions versus 0.6 TF/Mb in centromeric regions). These data complement and refine earlier conclusions about wheat diploidization-resistant
genes, that is, genes that are preferentially conserved
among cereal after WGD are TFs or TF-related gene
functions [3,28], leading to a random distribution of this
gene family in modern genomes.
In summary, we have established that, at the gene
family level and using the TF family as a reference, that
the GO ‘transcription factor activity’ class could be considered a diploidization-resistant gene function as it
might have provided a selective advantage during evolution and adaptation and then retained as functional after
WGD. Our data support preferential structural conservation of duplicated genes involved in signal transduction and more precisely transcription, which are
putatively involved in response to rapidly changing biotic and abiotic extrinsic factors compared with genes
encoding products involved in relatively more stable
processes.

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

Evolutionary fate of duplicated genes at the gene
network level

In order to compare the wheat grain filling gene network with the previously published rice transcriptome
analysis [10] described in the previous section, we conducted a similar analysis using the wheat Affymetrix
array (based on the design and methods described in
Wan et al. [29]). To avoid any bias due to different
expression analysis methods - that is, RNA-seq versus
Array technologies - we used the same RNA samples
from the five wheat grain stages for hybridization of the
wheat Affymetrix array (based on two independent biological replicates), see Materials and methods. Among
the 6,760 rice/wheat transcripts identified between the
rice (60,726 oligonucleotide probes) and wheat (61,115
oligonucleotide probes) arrays, 2,600 (38.4%) showed
concerted (that is, Presence versus Absence Variation,
referenced as PAVs) expression signals during grain
development (Table S9 in Additional file 1). When considering not only rice/wheat orthologs but also paralogs
that might have conserved the original or ancestral gene
function and expression in rice and wheat, the percentage of concerted expression between both species
would increase to 43.5% (that is, 2,944 genes).
Among the plant metabolic networks, the starch
synthesis pathway is well known because starch is considered a major key regulator of grain development. In
this network, 170 enzyme-coding genes can be represented with nodes and substrate-product metabolite flux
by directional edges [30]. Figure 3 illustrates the comparative gene network observed between rice (gene profiles from microarray data [10]) and wheat (expression
data from the current oligo-array and RNA-seq data) for
the starch biosynthesis pathway described in Zhu et al.
[31] (Table S10 in Additional file 1). Among the 170
genes involved in this network, 24 (14%) were identified
as differentially expressed in rice and wheat based on
the microarray experiments. However, based on the
wheat RNA-seq data, 84 (49%) of the 170 enzyme-coding genes could be matched with 1 (57 genes), 2 (21
genes) or even 3 (6 genes) homoeologous copies. We
also could show that among the 84 genes for which we
have identified RNA-seq clusters as proof of expression
in grain development, only 6 (7%) matched their three
homoeologous counterparts. This micro-scale analysis,
focused on a unique and specific well-known gene network, also agreed with the whole-genome level analysis
that revealed that, for a large majority of the homoeologs in wheat, at least one copy had been lost or neoand/or subfunctionalized during 1.5 to 3 million years of
evolution.
Figure 3b illustrates the impact of the paleoduplication
in grasses on the starch network. Based on the identification of 20 duplicated genes (black brackets in Figure

Page 9 of 19

3a, ‘Gene Acc’ column) within the 170 enzyme-coding
genes, we can suggest that 12% of the actual modern
post-WGD network has been enriched by the ancestral
shared tetraploidization event. We can then model the
ancestral pre-WGD network consisting of 150 nonredundant starch enzyme-coding genes (Figure 3b). The
observation that the post-WGD network is more abundant and enriched in TFs is also consistent with previously reported biases in gene functions after WGDs in
plants [32,33] as well as in fungi and mammals [7,34].
Previous results for cereal genomes [2-4,28] and for
eudicots [32] clearly showed that retained duplicated
gene families correspond to transcriptional regulators
that were preferentially conserved after WGD events.
However, our analysis, based on a single gene network,
did not confirm earlier reported conclusions in Arabidopsis that bottleneck enzymes in metabolic networks,
which tend to connect different modules, are preferentially retained as functional duplicates after WGD [35].
In our case, of the seven genes preferentially retained as
duplicated (highlighted in red in the post-publication
network representation), none correspond to enzymenode encoding genes.
In summary, we suggest that, at the gene network
level and using the starch biosynthesis pathway as a
reference, 14% of the rice-wheat orthologous copies
have the same expression pattern (compared to up to
44% at the whole-genome level), 7% of the wheat homoeologous triplicates share the same expression pattern
(consistent with what is observed at the whole-genome
level), and WGDs have enriched the starch gene network by up to 12% in gene content.
Evolutionary consequences of duplicates on genome
colinearity

Structural rearrangement and gene loss between duplicated regions results in the reduction of orthologous
relationships between cereal genomes. Duplicated gene
loss in maize (Figure 1b, bottom inset) accounts for the
major source of erosion of colinearity between maize
and the other grass genomes. Gene colinearity observed
between maize chromosome 8 (or 6) is reduced compared to the microsynteny observed between Brachypodium, rice, and sorghum at the same loci due to the
recent WGD that occurred specifically during maize
genome evolution. Only seven chromosome 8 (purple)
and eight chromosome 6 (purple) genes are conserved
between maize and the other three cereal genomes compared to the 26 orthologous relationships (grey, blue,
green in Figure 1b) identified when comparing the rice,
sorghum, and Brachypodium genomes.
Despite the diploidization process following WGD
associated with the loss of homoeolog and/or paralog
sister gene copies being the major source of genome

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

Page 10 of 19

Rice Array

(a)

Gene Acc

1

2

Stages
3
4

Wheat Array
5

1

2

Stages
3
4

Wheat RNA seq

5

Sucrose
Sucrose synthase

UDP
Fructose + UDP-Glucose
UTP
ATP
UDP
ADP
Glc-1-P

UDPG pyrophosphorylase
fructokinase
G6P isomerase
phosphoglucomutase
Hexose- P isomerase

Glc-6-P

Phosphofructokinase

Frc-6-P
ATP
ADP
PPi
Frc-1,6-BP

Or PPi-F6P
1-phosphotransferase
Adolase
Triose-P isomerase

GAI-3P + DHAP

PEP

1

2
3

PEP

1 Hexose-P/Pi Translocator
2 PEP/Pi Translocator
3 Triose-P/Pi Translocator

GAI-3P + DHAP Triose-P isomerase
Adolase

Frc-1,6-BP cp FBPase
Pi
Frc-6-P Hexose-P isomerase
Glc-1-P
ATP
PPi

Glc-6-P

phosphoglucomutase
ADPG pyrophosphorylase

ADP-Glc
ADP-Glc

Starch synthases
Branching enzymes

Amylose

Debranching enzyme

Amylopectin

Disproportionating enzyme
Isoamylase

Oligosaccharides

Amylase, alpha

Amylase-inhibitor
Amylase, beta

Glucose

Glucosidase, alpha

Pi
Glc-1-P

Starch phosphorylase

Starch

(b)

Expression

Ancestral pre-WGD Starch Gene Network

Starch
2

3

2

4

7

8
3

3

Sucrose

6

7

4

3
10
8
9

3
4

9

3

4 2 2 4

16

5

4

3 9 3

WGD
Duplication

0

Starch
Starch

Actual post-WGD Starch Gene Network

1 >1

2
4

2

6

7

10

Sucrose

7

3 12 4

4

4
10
10
9

3

3
3

7

6
4

11

3

4 2 2 4

18

6

Figure 3 Comparative evolution of the starch gene network between rice and wheat. (a) Twenty-nine enzyme-encoding genes involved
in the starch biosynthesis network are listed at the left and 170 genes (named according to their accession numbers) are shown. Expression
data from oligo-array experiments performed in rice and wheat are displayed using a classical colored scale in which yellow illustrates the
absence of expression and red the observed highest level of expression (6.5 for rice, 14.5 for wheat as normalized intensity). At the right are
illustrated orthologous RNA-seq clusters from one up to three homoeologous copies (black scares). (b) The starch gene network is schematically
represented with black dots representing synthesized substrate and the number of gene-encoding enzymes is shown in circles. The pre-WGD
(top) and post-WGD (bottom) networks illustrate the impact of paleoduplication where no impact (yellow), gain of an additional enzymeencoding gene (blue) and more than one additional enzyme-encoding gene (red) are shown.

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

colinearity erosion, CNV is also an important phenomenon that can contribute to the observed reduced synteny between grass genomes, as illustrated in the Figure
1b where a single-copy COS gene identified in rice, Brachypodium, maize and sorghum corresponds to a putative CNV in bread wheat chromosome 2A. Such
species-specific CNVs will not be associated with any
orthologous counterpart in the other genomes, thus
reducing the percentage of conserved and orthologous
genes in grasses. Figure 4 illustrates the difference
between the loss of synteny and the increased number
of tandem duplications, which were referred to as
CNVs. At the right-hand side of the figure, bread wheat
chromosome 3B is shown with 8 deletion bins, for
which the number of available ESTs (blue bars) as well
as the number of orthologous genes (red bars) with Brachypodium chromosome 2 is illustrated. The orthologous blocks observed between wheat chromosome 3B
and Brachypodium chromosome 2 are illustrated in

Page 11 of 19

different colors in the center of the figure. Finally, at the
left-hand side of the figure, Brachypodium chromosome
2 is split into orthologous blocks of bread wheat chromosome 3B. The number of RNA-seq clusters of Brachypodium genes is depicted as circles (black for
homoeologous copies and red for CNVs). A clear correlation between the loss of colinearity and increase of
CNV can be observed. The three 3B bin intervals displaying the highest loss of colinearity (3BS8, 3BL2,
3BL7; indicated by red stars) are associated with orthologous regions of Brachypodium chromosome 2 comprising CNVs (linked with dotted black lines).
Considering Brachypodium chromosome 2 as an example of a reference and model chromosomal structure,
CNVs in wheat were preferentially located within subtelomeric regions of modern chromosomes or paleoinserted chromosomes (that is, the ancestral fusion
event between W3 in green and W1 in red). We suggest
here that the loss of colinearity observed locally between

Brachypodium Chr2
(5789 annotated genes)

wheat Ch 3B
(571 mapped ESTs)
0

w3
3BS8

100

50

150

200

*
Conserved Orthologous Set (COS)

Copy Number Variation in 454 clusters

3BS9

w1

Wheat Chr1

3BS1

C-3BS1

C-3BL2

3BL2

*

3BL10

*

3BL7

w3
CNVs

Homeologs

Nb assigned EST

Nb orthologous EST

Figure 4 Correlation between CNV and synteny erosion between Brachypodium and wheat. At the right is illustrated the wheat
chromosome 3B subdivided into eight deletion bins surrounding the centromere. The number of available mapped ESTs per bin is illustrated
with blue bars whereas the number of conserved orthologous sets (COS) is shown with red bars. The three deletion bins associated with the
lowest percentage of COS regarding the number of available mapped ESTs are indicated by red stars. At the left is illustrated the Brachypodium
chromosome 2 subdivided into orthologous chromosomal relationships with wheat chromosomes 1 (in red) and 3 (in green). The wheat RNAseq clusters are shown according to their orthologous positions on Brachypodium chromosome 2 as homoeologs (black dots) or additional CNVs
(red dots). At the center are shown the Brachypodium/wheat orthologous genes linked with colored lines according to their position within the
wheat deletion bins.

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

Brachypodium and wheat is mainly due to tandem gene
duplications putatively favored by recent polyploidization events in bread wheat.
In summary, we have shown that, at the whole genome as well as the chromosome level, segmental duplications and gene duplications in tandem (CNVs)
comprise the main basis of colinearity loss between cereal genomes.

Discussion
Structural divergence between duplicated genes in plants

Our estimate of the frequency of chromosomal rearrangements (that is, duplicated gene loss) between homoeoalleles in wheat - 54% within less than 1.5 to 3
million years of evolution - needs to be viewed in the
context of published studies. Qi et al. [22], based on a
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) genotyping approach, mapped 7,104 EST unigenes onto
16,099 loci within the 21 bread wheat chromosomes.
Because 39% of the ESTs mapped to the three homoeologous groups, those studies might have suggested that
up to 61% of the homoeologs might have lost at least
one of the homoeoalleles even despite technological limits due to the RFLP mapping resolution. Overall, we
suggest here that, based on our and published data, 54
to 61% (depending on the genetic mapping or chromosome assignation procedures) of the wheat homoeoalleles have been entirely deleted or pseudogenized within
less than 3 million years of evolution.
Re-analysis of the paleoduplication within the rice genome, consisting of ten major duplications as part of a
WGD event 50 to 70 MYA, has shown that 87.4% of the
duplicated genes have lost their orthologous counterparts
[10]. Diverged polyploids, such as maize, are likely to have
evolved from ancient polyploids by a process of pseudogene formation followed by sequence loss. In a study of
the fate of duplicated genes in the maize genome, Lai et
al. [36] and Messing et al. [12] have suggested that, within
5 million years of evolution, about 50% of duplicated
genes have been lost through deletion. Nonetheless, gene
duplication in maize, per se, via (auto)polyploidization may
be associated with detectable increases in expression level,
as demonstrated by Guo et al. [37]. Blanc et al. [9]
reported similar findings from the Arabidopsis genome,
where also only 20% of paralogs were retained within
duplicated segments. More precisely, the authors stated
that 28% and 13.5% of duplicated genes are retained in
recent (date back to the Arabidopsis/Brassicacae divergence, 24 to 40 MYA) and old (date back to the monocot/
dicot divergence, approximately 150 to 200 MYA) duplication blocks, respectively. Considering the recent data
obtained in dicots (Arabidopsis) and monocots (rice,
wheat, maize), our results provide additional support that
most of the genetic redundancy originating from

Page 12 of 19

polyploidy is erased by a massive loss of duplicated genes
by pseudogenization in one of the duplicated segments
soon after the polyploidization event.
The structural loss of duplicated genes between paralogous segments as well as gene duplication in tandem
(CNVs) accounted for a large part of the erosion of colinearity between cereal genomes. It became clear that
using synteny-based approaches to establish a virtual
gene order in non-sequenced genomes might mimic up
to 77% of the gene order and content [4]. The remaining consists of lineage-specific duplicates loss and CNVs
that will not be known until the genome is fully
sequenced [4]. However, we can estimate that a large
majority of the gene content can be modeled based on
synteny, especially to support the development of genebased markers such as COS [26].
Expression divergence between duplicated genes in
plants

As for chromosomal rearrangements, we also need to
place our estimate of the frequency of change in expression patterns between homoeoalleles in wheat - 36 to 49%
(depending on the considered tissues) within less than 1.5
to 3 million years of evolution - in the context of published studies. Using a similar cDNA-SSCP approach to
that reported in this study, Bottley et al. [38] demonstrated
that for 27% (in leaf) and 26% (in roots) of the considered
genes, one homoeologous copy was not detectable within
the cDNA samples. Our estimate of functional partitioning
between homoeoalleles includes not only a presence/
absence variation at the tissue level (49%) but also takes
into account the difference in the expression profiles
based on a developmental kinetic within a specific organ
(36% in wheat grain). Using a cDNA-amplified fragment
length polymorphism (AFLP) assay, Kashkush et al. [39]
estimated that about 5% of the genes are silenced in a
newly synthesized allohexaploid, a figure comparable with
the study of He et al. [40] using a similar approach. This
level is substantially lower than our estimates, but not surprising given the time gene silencing could continue over
many generations. It certainly confirms that the diploidization process immediately follows the polyploidization
event. Exploiting large collections of EST data, Mochida et
al. [41,42] concluded that silencing affected 11 out of 90
sets of homoeoalleles (12%). Overall, based on our and
published data, we suggest that 12 to 49% (depending on
the tissues and approaches considered) of the wheat
homoeoalleles have been neo- and/or subfunctionalized
within less than 3 million years of evolution.
A similar difference between synthetic and ancient
hybrids has been demonstrated in cotton, where Adams
et al. [43,44] used a cDNA-AFLP assay to show that
about 5% of all genes are silenced in a newly synthesized
allotetraploid, but that about 25% of genes were affected

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

in natural tetraploid cotton (within 1 to 2 million years
of divergence). However, in newly synthesized A. thaliana × A. arenosa hybrids described by Comai et al.
[45], only 0.4% of genes are silenced as a direct result of
polyploidization, a figure substantially lower than that
described in wheat and cotton. On the other hand, a
survey on gene expression variation of A. thaliana and
A. arenosa, which split from a common ancestor
approximately 1.5 MYA, showed a higher number of
approximately 2.5% of gene expression differences. The
reason(s) for these disparities remain unclear, but might
be a consequence of lower levels of homoeology
between the two contributing genomes, and therefore
the induction of a lower level of interference in their
independent expression. Still, gene silencing certainly
appears to be a common phenomenon in established
polyploids, and the frequency of silencing seems to
increase over time. Using detailed analysis of expression
divergence between rice paleoduplicates, Throude et al.
[10] have shown that 88%, 89%, and 96% diverged in
their expression pattern in grain, leaf and root within 50
to 70 million years of evolution, respectively. Blanc et al.
[9] showed that 57% (for young duplications) to 73%
(for old duplications) of paralogs have diverged in
expression based on a computational analysis involving
62 Affymetrix microarray experiments in Arabidopsis.
However, Blanc et al. [9] cautioned that the 73% of gene
pairs that have diverged in expression in the context of
old duplications is an underestimate as cross-hybridization occurred at a high rate in this type of array-based
experiment. Finally, expression of maize duplicates has
been investigated through EST and cDNA mapping
(EST-overgos by Gardiner et al. [46] and cDNA-RFLP
by Helentjaris et al. [47]), suggesting that 20% and 29%,
respectively, of the considered probes identified two distinct contigs or loci. These data suggest that 71 to 80%
of the maize paralogs have diverged in their expression
profiles from both EST and cDNA-based mapping
experiments. However, gene silencing of duplicated
copies rather than deletion is probably more a genedosage effect than just a strict diploidization response.
Paralogous copies of prolamin genes (a medium size
multigene family) in maize also showed that less than
50% of the duplicated copies remained intact [48]. Interestingly, at the same level, differential gene amplification
(such as CNVs) also resulted in subfunctionalization of
additional gene copies by divergent transcriptional regulation, mimicking the same events that happen in the
same period of evolution between homoeologs [49].
Temporal modeling of structural and expression gene
shuffling after duplications in plants

We established clearly in this study that around 70% of
homoeoalleles in the hexaploid wheat genomes have

Page 13 of 19

been lost (54 to 61%) or have diverged in gene expression (12 to 49%) since 1.5 to 3 MYA. These data confirm and complement the conclusion of Mochida et al.
[41,42] that, considering 79 genes with scored expression in 10 tissues, 15 (19%) were expressed equally for
the three homoeologs whereas the remaining 64 (81%)
showed preferential homoeologous gene expression in at
least one of the considered tissues. Based on the collective data from wheat detailed in the current article and
from other plant species available in the literature, we
tried to model the structural and functional consequences of gene set amplification after genome doubling
for the last 100 million years of evolution. Figure 5a
illustrates plant phylogeny, where speciation events are
dated in MYA and known WGDs are marked with red
dots. Based on our and other studies from the literature
referenced in Table S11 in Additional file 1, we propose
that structural rearrangements (from pseudogenization
up to deletion) have been suggested to affect 54 to 61%
of wheat homoeoalleles (Figure 5b, data point 1), 71 to
80% of maize neoparalogs (Figure 5b, data point 2), 72%
of Arabidopsis neoparalogs (Figure 5b, data point 3),
87% of rice paleoparalogs (Figure 5b, data point 4), and
86% of Arabidopsis paleoparalogs (Figure 5b, data point
5) after 1.5 to 3, 5, 24 to 40, 70 to 100, and 150 to 200
million years of evolution, respectively. Regarding the
impact of polyploidy on functional differentiation
between duplicated gene copies, our and published data
have suggested that 12 to 49% of wheat homoeoalleles
(Figure 5b, data point 6), 50% of maize neoparalogs (Figure 5b, data point 7), 57% of Arabidopsis neoparalogs
(Figure 5b, data point 8), 88% of rice paleoparalogs (Figure 5b, data point 9), and 73% of Arabidopsis paleoparalogs (Figure 5b, data point 10) do not exhibit any
concerted and redundant expression after 1.5 to 3, 5, 24
to 40, 70 to 100, and 150 to 200 million years of evolution, respectively.
Given the prevalence of gene and genome duplication
in the paleohistory of plant, species and lineage development in angiosperms might differ from organisms where
genome duplication was rare and where extensive
expression divergence following duplication would have
a profound impact on the pattern of developmental and
regulatory networks. Our data support the idea that
after 50 to 70 million years of evolution since grass genomes experienced a shared paleotetraploidization event,
the vast majority of the homoeologous genes have been
lost within a sister block and that the expression profiles
of the remaining gene copies have largely diverged (Figure 5b). Changes in gene expression may have occurred
immediately after polyploidy or might need a few generations to reach a new expression status. This trend
towards silencing (or gene loss via pseudogenization) or
expression shift (via neo- or subfunctionalization) of a

(a)

Jurassic

Page 14 of 19

Cretaceaous

Quat.

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

Tertiary

Nicotinia
Solanum
Apicales

Euasterids
150

Eurosids

Vitis (grape)
Eucaliptus

Flowering plants

48

120

Medicago
Glycine (soybean)
Populus (poplar)

50
90

Arabidopsis (cress)

70

Carica (papaya)

Ehrhartoideae

Oryza (rice)
46

Avena
Brachypodium (brome)

Pooideae 31

Hordeum (barley)
A
B
D

12
65

Chloridoideae

Triticum (wheat)
Eleusine

Panicoideae

Zea (maize)
Sorghum (millet)
Setaria

28
14

Pennisetum

(b)
Gene %
[5]
[10]

100

[9]

90

[4]

80
[2]

Functional shuffling
[y = 11.189 x ln(x) + 26.651]

70

[3]
[1]
[8]
[7]

60
50

Structural shuffling
[y = 6.092 x ln(x) + 57.604]

40
30
[6]

Total shuffling
[y = 1.919 x ln(x) + 91.93]

20
10

Million Years
Figure 5 Temporal model of structural and functional gene shuffling in plants. (a) Schematic representation of the phylogenetic
relationships between angiosperm species. Divergence times from a common ancestor are indicated on the branches of the phylogenetic tree
(in million years). Sequenced genomes are indicated in red. WGD events are illustrated with red circles on the tree branches. (b) The percentage
of total and structural (gene loss) or functional (neo-subfunctionalization) gene shuffling discussed in the article (referred to as data point ‘X’ in
the text) and observed during the last 100 million years of evolution are plotted as dotted red, black and grey logarithmic curves.

particular locus soon after a polyploid event could be
advantageous for adaptation and the establishment of a
successful polyploid genome compared to its diploid
founder progenitor. Figure 5b shows the evolution of
gene function (grey dotted curve) and structure (black
dotted curve). It follows that loss of duplicated genes
due to mutation and deletion appeared to be a rapid

and exponential process arising immediately after polyploidy because there is sufficient time for point mutations to accumulate. Moreover, expression modification
and silencing of duplicated genes appear to take longer
and are probably epigenetically induced (that is, the
putative causal factor). Strikingly, based on the deduced
total duplicated gene shuffling inference (dotted curves

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

in Figure 5b) within approximately 10 million years of
evolution after a polyploidization event, approximately
50% of the homoeologs have either been lost or sub- or
neofunctionalized in plants. The superimposition on
these immediate or short-term (putatively mutationbased changes) and longer-term (putatively epigeneticbased changes) responses to genome doubling might
explain the observed structural and functional partitioning among gene pairs originating from a duplication
event. We can hypothesize that the diploidization that
takes place immediately after a WGD is completed for
100% of the duplicated genes after 45 to 50 million
years of evolution, the evolutionary timescale necessary
to observe that none of the sister duplicated gene copies
exhibit any structural or expressional or functional
redundancy (pink dotted lines in Figure 5b).
Gene dosage relations, which play a huge role in genome reorganization, are unbalanced after a WGD due to
function redundancy between duplicated copies. Structural and functional shuffling occurs relatively soon
(within less than a few million years of evolution) after
polyploidy in plants that are still cytogenetically polyploidy (such as in the case of bread wheat in the current
study), but is still active several million years latter, during or after cytological diploidization (such as in the
case of rice, Arabidopsis and maize in the current
study). We may hypothesize that epigenetic differences
between duplicates or even sub-genomes deriving from
WGD might have contributed to a gene or genome
dominance through the rapid differentiation of expression toward gene dosage balance recovery soon after
polyploidy. Wang et al. [50] observed silencing of polyploidy-derived duplicates due to hypermethylation in
Arabidopsis polyploids. Epigenetic mechanisms as well
as interaction networks might be the origin of an extremely rapid divergence of expression between duplicated
genes soon after polyploidization. It has even been
reported that polyploidization-derived modulation of
expression between gene pairs was due to epigenetic
mechanisms (sensu lato) in higher plants (reviewed in
[45,51]). Based on our data set and derived conclusions,
the bread wheat genome could be considered as a pertinent model for studying the molecular basis of the
interaction between homoeologous gene pairs, especially
the epigenetic basis of such observed modification in
expression between duplicates in response to polyploidizations. The spectrum of phenomena discussed here
illustrates the immediate impact of polyploidy on genome structure and its profound implication for evolution. For example, some of the observed genomic
changes are known to affect phenotypes in ways that are
highly visible to natural selection. A case in point concerns genomics rearrangements that affect the flowering-time locus/network in synthetic Brassica polyploids.

Page 15 of 19

These polyploidy-induced structural and functional rearrangements may impact traits as relevant as floweringtime divergence in modern plant species.

Conclusions
Even if our estimates of divergence of expression
between gene pairs might represent an underestimation
of the true values in wheat because the data set is (i)
centered on a grain developmental kinetic and then only
a sampling of possible environmental conditions or tissues where the duplicated genes may be expressed, and
(ii) based on RNA-seq, which may bias low expressed
gene and homoeoallele identification, one cannot escape
the theme that a large majority of the polyploidy-derived
duplicated genes in plants have acquired divergent
expression patterns and with them probably functions.
Overall, duplication-mediated structural and functional
gene shuffling promote a powerful acceleration of evolution in plants.
Materials and methods
Plant material and RNA extraction
Plant material

Two hundred seeds of hexaploid wheat, Triticum aestivum (cv. Récital), were sown with 4/5 Neuhaus compost
and 1/5 Pouzzolane. After 8 weeks of vernalization,
plants were transferred to a greenhouse with normalized
temperature (approximately 18.5°C), light and hygrometry conditions (60%). The main stem heads were tagged
at anthesis and grain samples (endosperm and embryo)
were collected at 100, 200, 250, 300 and 500 DD after
pollination. Two biological replications of samples were
done in 2004 and 2006. Leaves were sampled at different growing stages and pooled, and roots were sampled
on 12-day-old seedlings grown in sand.
RNA extraction

Grain wheat (100, 200, 250, 300, 500 DD), root and leaf
samples (approximately 1 g of tissue) were ground in
liquid nitrogen and extracted with 4.5 ml of buffer (10
mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 M NaCI, 1%
SDS) and 3 ml of phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol
mixture 25:24:1. The supernatant was extracted one
more time with the same phenol solution in order to
eliminate proteins and starch residues. The nucleic acids
were precipitated by addition of 0.1 vol of 3M AcNA
pH5.2 and 2 vol of 100% ethanol. After precipitation,
RNA was rinsed once with 70% ethanol and the pellets
dissolved in RNase-free water. Purification was made
with a DNAse treatment RNase-Free DNase Set (Qiagen, [52]) and then an RNeasy MinElute Cleanup Kit
(Qiagen). The integrity of RNA was checked with an
Agilent 2100 Bioanalyser microfluidics-based platform
using a RNA 6000 Nano Chip kit and reagents (Agilent
Technologies, [53]).

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

454 sequencing and cluster assembly
Normalized cDNA library construction

mRNA was purified from 5 μg total RNA by exonuclease digestion followed by LiCl precipitation (mRNAOnly Eucaryotic mRNA Isolation Kit, Epicenter, [54]).
mRNA (1 μg) was used for first-strand cDNA synthesis.
cDNA synthesis and amplification were done according
to the Mint-Universal cDNA Synthesis Kit user manual
(Evrogen, [55]). Amplified cDNA (800 ng) was used as
starting material in the normalization reaction using the
Trimmer Kit (Evrogen), and normalized material was reamplified for 18 cycles. Normalized cDNA (2 μg) was
digested with 10 units SfiI for 2 hours at 48°C. Fragments larger than 800 bp were isolated from a LMP
Agarose Gel and purified using the MinElute Gel
Extraction Kit (Qiagen). Purified cDNA fragments (200
ng) were ligated to 100 ng using SfiI and dephosphorylated usin pDNR-lib Vector (Clontech, [56]) in 10 μl
using a Fast Ligation Kit (NEB, [57]). Ligations were
desalted by ethanol precipitation, and re-dissolved in 10
μl water. Three-fold 1.5-μl desalted ligation was used to
transform NEB10b competent cells (NEB), and 96
clones were randomly selected for sequencing to verify
successful normalization. Roughly a million clones were
plated on LB-Cm plates, scraped off the plates and
stored as glycerol stocks at -70°C. One half of the cells
were used to inoculate a 300-ml Terrific Broth/Cm culture, which was grown for 5 hours at 30°C. Plasmid
DNA was prepared using standard methods (Qiagen).
Purified plasmid DNA (200 μg) was digested with 100
units SfiI for 2 hours at 48°C. cDNA inserts were gelpurified (LMP-Agarose/MinElute Gel Extraction Kit)
and ligated to high-molecular-weight DNA using a proprietary SfiI linker.
Roche 454 FLX library preparation and sequencing of the
cDNA concatenates

The five grain samples (100, 200, 250, 300, 500 DD)
were equally mixed for sequencing library construction
and sequencing with an approximately 30× gene coverage (based on 1 million reads per run and approximately
30,000 expressed genes obtained from the Affymetrix
experiment on the same samples discussed in the
Results section). Library generation for the 454 FLX
sequencing was carried out according to the manufacturer’s standard protocols (Roche, [58]). In short, the
concatenated inserts were sheared randomly by nebulization to fragments ranging in size from 400 to 900 bp.
These fragments were end-polished and the 454 A and
B adaptors that are required for the emulsion PCR and
sequencing were added to the ends of the fragments by
ligation. The resulting fragment library was sequenced
on 1 picotiterplate (PTP) on the GS FLX using Roche/
454 Titanium chemistry.

Page 16 of 19

Assembly of the sequence reads to transcripts

Prior to assembly the sequence reads were screened for
the SfiI linker used for concatenation, the linker
sequences were clipped out of the reads and the clipped
reads assembled to individual transcripts using the
Roche/454 Newbler software (454 Life Sciences Corporation, software release 2.0.01.14) at the following
parameter settings: seed step = 12; seed length = 16,
minimum overlap length = 40, minimum overlap identity = 90%, alignment identity score = 2, alignment different score = -3. As a consequence, sequence reads
were obtained using 454 (Roche) experimental procedures and materials, then sequence clusters were constructed using Newbler Assembler software (release
2.0.01.14) based on a sequence overlap threshold of 40
bases and an identity percentage of a least 90% within
overlaps. Sequence clusters were aligned against reference databases for vectors [59], bacterial genomes [60],
and mitochondria and chloroplast [61] as well as ribosomal [62] sequences. The 454 sequence data are publicly
available at the National Center for Biotechnology Information [63] under accession numbers [JP206682] to
[JP238633].
Affymetrix array hybridization and analysis
Hybridization

The Affymetrix [64] wheat GeneChip® oligonucleotide
array, which have probes for 55,052 transcripts, was
hybridized according to the following procedure. Total
RNA (2 μg) from the five grain samples harvested in
2004 (109, 204, 247, 295, 501 DD) and 2006 (125, 186,
231, 292, 489 DD) were used to synthesize biotinlabeled cRNAs with the one-cycle cDNA synthesis kit
(Affymetrix). SuperScript II reverse transcriptase and
T7-oligo(dT) primers were used to synthesize singlestranded cDNA at 42°C for 1 hour, followed by synthesis of double-stranded cDNA using DNA ligase, DNA
polymeraseI, and RNaseH for 2 h at 16°C. After cleaning
of the double-stranded cDNA with the Sample Cleanup
Module (Affymetrix), in vitro transcription was performed in the presence of biotin-labeled UTP using the
GeneChip® IVT labeling kit (Affymetrix). The labeled
cDNA was purified with the Sample Cleanup Module
(Affymetrix) and quantified with RiboGreen RNA quantification reagent (Turner Biosystems, [65]). Fragmentation of 15 μg of labeled cDNA was carried out for 35
minutes at 94°C, followed by hybridization for 16 hours
at 45°C to Affymetrix wheat GeneChip® oligonucleotide
arrays. After hybridization, the arrays were washed with
two different buffers (stringent: 6 SSPE, 0.01% Tween
20; and non-stringent: 100 mm MES, 0.1 M Na+, 0.01%
Tween 20) and stained with a complex solution including Streptavidin R-Phycoerythrin conjugate (Molecular

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

Probes, [66]) and anti-streptavidin biotinylated antibody
(Vector Laboratories, [67]). The washing and staining
steps were performed in a GeneChip® Fluidics Station
450 (Affymetrix). The Affymetrix wheat GeneChip® oligonucleotide arrays were finally scanned with the GeneChip ® Scanner 3000 7G piloted by GeneChip ®
Operating software. All these steps were performed on
an Affymetrix platform at INRA-URGV in Evry (France).
Statistical data analysis

The raw CEL files were imported in the Bioconductor
software package in R for data analysis [68]. The data
were normalized with the gcrma algorithm [69] available
in the Bioconductor package. To determine differentially
expressed genes, we performed a standard two-group ttest that assumes equal variance between groups. The
variance of the gene expression per group is a homoscedastic variance, where genes displaying extremes of variance (too small or too large) were excluded. The raw Pvalues were adjusted by the Bonferroni method, which
controls the familywise error rate [70]. A gene is
declared as differentially expressed if the Bonferroni Pvalue is < 0.05. The raw data are available through the
CATdb database (reference AFFY_seed_kinetic_Wheat)
[71] and from the Gene Expression Omnibus [72] at the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI),
accession number GSE 16457.
cDNA-SSCP primer design and profile analysis
Primer design

Affymetrix wheat GeneChip® sequences were download
from the Affymetrix online database [73] and used to
design primers pairs. Wheat sequence exons structures
were identified through rice/Brachypodium/sorghum/
maize and wheat sequence alignments and provided to
the Primer 3 package to select primer only on one exon
using default parameters.
cDNA-SSCP protocol

The absence of contaminating genomic DNA in RNA
samples was tested directly by PCR. cDNA was synthesized using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis
Kit (Roche) and diluted 50 times. PCR products were
generated and analyzed with the SSCP protocol according to Quraishi et al. [26]. Briefly, cDNA-PCR fragments
were produced in two steps. In a total volume of 15 μl,
genomic DNA (30 ng) was first amplified with the following PCR mix: 10 mM Tris-HCL, 3.1 mM MgCl2, 50
mM KCl, 0.001% gelatine pH 8.3, 5% glycerol, 400 μM
dNTP, 0.4 μM forward and reverse primers, 0.2 U Taq
polymerase (Qiagen). This PCR product was diluted (1/
10) and re-amplified with the same PCR mix, including
0.2 μM of each labeled primer (6-FAM and NED,
Applied Biosystems [74]) in a final volume of 15 μl. The
PCR product (2 μl) was then diluted (1/10) and pooled
with 0.2 μl of 900 bp MegaBace ET900-R Size Standard

Page 17 of 19

(GE Healthcare, [75]), 0.2 μl of 0.3 N NaOH and 9 μl
HI-Di Formamide (Applied Biosystems). Fragments were
separated by capillary electrophoresis on an ABI3100
(Applied Biosystems) in 50 minutes with a 36 cm capillary. The running polymer consisted of 1× running buffer, 5% Genscan Polymer (Applied Biosystems), 10%
glycerol. Samples were denatured for 2 minutes at 95°C
and then 10 minutes in ice. The sample buffer consisted
of 1× running buffer and 10% glycerol. After denaturation, the samples were injected at 2.5 kV over 50 seconds and separated at 18, 25, and 35°C and 15 kV. Data
were analyzed using GeneMapper 3.7 software.
Identification of homeologs, orthologs and paralogs in
wheat genomes

The methodology used to reassess the synteny between
wheat/rice/Brachypodium/sorghum/maize genomes as
well as the identification of intra-chromosomal duplications in wheat is described in detail in Salse et al. [2,76],
Bolot et al. [77], and Abrouk et al. [4]. Wheat (5,003
mapped unigene set), rice (41,046 genes), Brachypodium
(25,504 genes), sorghum (34,008 genes) and maize
(32,540 genes) genomes were aligned to identify orthologs and co-linear regions [2,3]. Three parameters were
used to increase the stringency and significance of
BLAST sequence alignment by parsing BLASTn results
and rebuilding high scoring pairs (HSPs) or pairwise
sequence alignments. The first parameter, aligned length
(AL), corresponds to the sum of all HSP lengths. The
second, cumulative identity percentage (CIP) corresponds to the cumulative percent of sequence identity
obtained for all the HSPs (CIP = ∑ nb ID by HSP/AL) ×
100). The third parameter is the cumulative alignment
length percentage (CALP). It represents the sum of the
HSP lengths (AL) for all the HSPs divided by the length
of the query sequence (CALP = AL/Query length). The
CIP and CALP parameters allow the identification of
the best alignment, that is, the highest cumulative percentage of identity in the longest cumulative length, taking into account all HSPs obtained for any pairwise
alignment. These parameters were applied to all the
BLAST alignments that were performed in the present
study. Based on the genome-wide synteny analysis, gene
relationships between species are then referenced as
COS (for conserved gene pairs), CNV (for tandem
duplicated genes), PAV (for non-conserved genes).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplemenraty tables. To support the use of the
provided RNA-seq data, we provide eleven supplementary tables. Table
S1: RNA-sequence quality and coverage features. Table S2: information
on the 37,695 wheat sequence clusters. Table S3: the 17,881 homologs
between wheat and Brachypodium/rice/sorghum/maize genomes. Table
S4: the heterologous bread wheat expression map. Table S5: the SSCP

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

analysis. Table S6: Brachypodium heat maps. Table S7: GO classification.
Table S8: transcription factor data. Table S9: wheat Affymetrix experiment
data. Table S10: the starch pathway analysis. Table S11: the structural/
functional shuffling model. The provided supplementary tables provide
access to the raw data (gene name, sequence, position, function,
expression and statistical data) of the results detailed in the article.

Page 18 of 19

9.
10.

11.

12.
Abbreviations
AFLP: amplified fragment length polymorphism; bp: base pair; CALP:
cumulative alignment length percentage; CNV: copy number variation; CDS:
coding sequence; CIP: cumulative identity percentage; COS: conserved
orthologous set; DD: degree day; EST: expressed sequence tag; GO: Gene
Ontology; HSPs: high scoring pairs; MYA: million years ago; RFLP: restriction
fragment length polymorphism; RNA-seq: RNA sequencing; SNP: single
nucleotide polymorphism; SSCP: Single Strand Conformational
Polymorphism; TF: transcription factor; WGD: whole genome duplication.

13.

14.

15.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge Joachim Messing (Rutgers, The State University
of New Jersey, USA) and Thierry Langin (INRA, Clermont-Ferrand, France) for
fruitful discussions in preparing the current article. The authors would also
like to thank Isabelle Nadeau, Christine Girousse (INRA Clermont-Ferrand,
France) and Biogemma (route d’Ennezat 63720 Chappes, France) for
technical support and advice during the plant material preparation. This
work has been supported by grants from INRA (’Génétique et Amélioration
des Plantes’, reference ‘Appel d’Offre Transcriptome’) and from the ‘Agence
Nationale de la Recherche’ (Program ANRjc-PaleoCereal, reference ANR-09JCJC-0058-01; program ANR Blanc-PAGE, reference ANR-2011-BSV6-00801).

16.
17.

18.
19.
20.

Author details
1
INRA, UMR 1095, Genetics, Diversity and Ecophysiology of Cereals, 234
avenue du Brézet, 63100 Clermont-Ferrand, France. 2INRA, Unité de
Recherches en Génomique Végétale, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, CP 5708, F91057 Evry Cedex, France.
Authors’ contributions
CP designed the experiment, performed the analysis and participated in
manuscript preparation. FM performed the bioinfomatic analysis and
participated in manuscript preparation. Carole Confolent performed the
molecular biology experiments. SB performed the transcriptome (Affymetrix)
analysis. JS designed the research program, managed the research group
and wrote the article.

21.

22.

Received: 20 May 2011 Revised: 25 August 2011
Accepted: 2 December 2011 Published: 2 December 2011
23.
References
1. Ohno S: Evolution by Gene Duplication Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1970, 160.
2. Salse J, Abrouk M, Murat F, Quraishi UM, Feuillet C: Improved standards
and new comparative genomics tools provide new insights into grasses
paleogenomics. Brief Bioinf 2009, 10:619-630.
3. Salse J, Abrouk M, Bolot S, Guilhot N, Courcelle E, Faraut T, Waugh R,
Close TJ, Messing J, Feuillet C: Reconstruction of monocotelydoneous
proto-chromosomes reveals faster evolution in plants than in animals.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:14908-14913.
4. Abrouk M, Murat F, Pont C, Messing J, Jackson S, Faraut T, Tannier E,
Plomion C, Cooke R, Feuillet C, Salse J: Palaeogenomics of plants: syntenybased modelling of extinct ancestors. Trends Plant Sci 2010, 15:479-487.
5. Doyle JJ, Flagel LE, Paterson AH, Rapp RA, Soltis DE, Soltis PS, Wendel JF:
Evolutionary genetics of genome merger and doubling in plants. Annu
Rev Genet 2008, 42:443-461.
6. Paterson AH, Bowers JE, Chapman BA: Ancient polyploidization predating
divergence of the cereals, and its consequences for comparative
genomics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:9903-9908.
7. Davis JC, Petrov DA: Do disparate mechanisms of duplication add similar
genes to the genome. Trends Genet 2005, 21:548-551.
8. Ganko EW, Meyers BC, Vision TJ: Divergence in expression between
duplicated genes in Arabidopsis. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:2298-2309.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Blanc G, Wolfe KH: Functional divergence of duplicated genes formed by
polyploidy during Arabidopsis evolution. Plant Cell 2004, 16:1679-1691.
Throude M, Bolot S, Bosio M, Pont C, Sarda X, Quraishi UM, Bourgis F,
Lessard P, Rogowsky P, Ghesquiere A, Murigneux A, Charmet G, Perez P,
Salse J: Structure and expression analysis of rice paleo duplications.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:1248-1259.
Swigonova Z, Lai J, Ma J, Ramakrishna W, Llaca V, Bennetzen JL, Messing J:
On the tetraploid origin of the maize genome. Comp Funct Genomics
2004, 5:281-284.
Messing J, Bharti AK, Karlowski WM, Gundlach H, Kim HR, Yu Y, Wei F,
Fuks G, Soderlund CA, Mayer KF, Wing RA: Sequence composition and
genome organization of maize. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004,
101:14349-14354.
Haberer G, Hindemitt T, Meyers BC, Mayer KF: Transcriptional similarities,
dissimilarities, and conservation of cis-elements in duplicated genes of
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2004, 136:3009-3022.
Fawcett JA, Maere S, Van de Peer Y: Plants with double genomes might
have had a better chance to survive the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction
event. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:5737-5742.
Van de Peer Y, Maere S, Meyer A: The evolutionary significance of ancient
genome duplications. Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10:725-732.
Donoghue PC, Purnell MA: Genome duplication, extinction and
vertebrate evolution. Trends Ecol Evol 2005, 20:312-319.
Rieseberg LH, Raymond O, Rosenthal DM, Lai Z, Livingstone K, Nakazato T,
Durphy JL, Schwarzbach AE, Donovan LA, Lexer C: Major ecological
transitions in wild sunflowers acilitated by hybridization. Science 2003,
301:1211-1216.
Hegarty M, Hiscock S: Polyploidy: doubling up for evolutionary success.
Curr Biol 2007, 17:927-929.
Bicknell RA, Koltunow AM: Understanding apomixis: recent advances and
remaining conundrums. Plant Cell 2004, 16:228-245.
Feldman M, Lupton FGH, Miller TE: Wheats. In Evolution of Crops.. 2 edition.
Edited by: Smartt J, Simmonds NW. London: Longman Scientific;
1995:184-192.
Nesbitt M, Samuel D: From staple crop to extinction? The archaeology
and history of the hulled wheats. In Proceedings of the First International
Workshop on Hulled Wheats: 21-22 July 1995; Castelvecchio Pascoli, Tuscany,
Italy. Volume 4. Edited by: Padulosi S, Hammer K, Heller J. Biodiverstiy
International; 1996:41-100, Promoting the Conservation and Use of
Underutilized and Neglected Crops.
Qi LL, Echalier B, Chao S, Lazo GR, Butler GE, Anderson OD, Akhunov ED,
Dvorák J, Linkiewicz AM, Ratnasiri A, Dubcovsky J, Bermudez-Kandianis CE,
Greene RA, Kantety R, La Rota CM, Munkvold JD, Sorrells SF, Sorrells ME,
Dilbirligi M, Sidhu D, Erayman M, Randhawa HS, Sandhu D, Bondareva SN,
Gill KS, Mahmoud AA, Ma XF, Miftahudin , Gustafson JP, Conley EJ, et al: A
chromosome bin map of 16,000 expressed sequence tag loci and
distribution of genes among the three genomes of polyploid wheat.
Genetics 2004, 168:701-712.
Murat F, Xu JH, Tannier E, Abrouk M, Guilhot N, Pont C, Messing J, Salse J:
Ancestral grass karyotype reconstruction unravels new mechanisms of
genome shuffling as a source of plant evolution. Genome Res 2010,
20:1545-1557.
Mayer KF, Martis M, Hedley PE, Simková H, Liu H, Morris JA, Steuernagel B,
Taudien S, Roessner S, Gundlach H, Kubaláková M, Suchánková P, Murat F,
Felder M, Nussbaumer T, Graner A, Salse J, Endo T, Sakai H, Tanaka T, Itoh T,
Sato K, Platzer M, Matsumoto T, Scholz U, Dolezel J, Waugh R, Stein N:
Unlocking the barley genome by chromosomal and comparative
genomics. Plant Cell 2011, 23:1249-1263.
Choulet F, Wicker T, Rustenholz C, Paux E, Salse J, Leroy P, Schlub S, Le
Paslier MC, Magdelenat G, Gonthier C, Couloux A, Budak H, Breen J,
Pumphrey M, Liu S, Kong X, Jia J, Gut M, Brunel D, Anderson JA, Gill BS,
Appels R, Keller B, Feuillet C: Megabase level sequencing reveals
contrasted organization and evolution patterns of the wheat gene and
transposable element spaces. Plant Cell 2010, 22:1686-1701.
Quraishi UM, Abrouk M, Bolot S, Pont C, Throude M, Guilhot N, Confolent C,
Bortolini F, Praud S, Murigneux A, Charmet G, Salse J: Genomics in cereals:
From genome-wide conserved orthologous set (cos) sequences to
candidate genes for trait dissection. Funct Integr Genomics 2009,
9:473-484.
International Brachypodium Initiative: Genome sequencing and analysis of
the model grass Brachypodium distachyon. Nature 2010, 463:763-768.

Pont et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R119
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/12/R119

28. Xu JH, Messing J: Diverged copies of the seed regulatory Opaque-2 gene
by a segmental duplication in the progenitor genome of rice, sorghum,
and maize. Mol Plant 2008, 1:760-769.
29. Wan Y, Poole RL, Huttly AK, Toscano-Underwood C, Feeney K, Welham S,
Gooding MJ, Mills C, Edwards KJ, Shewry PR, Mitchell RA: Transcriptome
analysis of grain development in hexaploid wheat. BMC Genomics 2008,
9:121.
30. Sulpice R, Pyl ET, Ishihara H, Trenkamp S, Steinfath M, Witucka-Wall H,
Gibon Y, Usadel B, Poree F, Piques MC, Von Korff M, Steinhauser MC,
Keurentjes JJ, Guenther M, Hoehne M, Selbig J, Fernie AR, Altmann T,
Stitt M: Starch as a major integrator in the regulation of plant growth.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:10348-10353.
31. Zhu T, Budworth P, Chen W, Provart N, Chang HS, Guimil S, Su W, Estes B,
Zou G, Wang X: Transcriptional control of nutrient partitioning during
rice grain filling. Plant Biotechnol J 2003, 1:59-70.
32. Tang H, Wang X, Bowers JE, Ming R, Alam M, Paterson AH: Unraveling
ancient hexaploidy through multiply aligned angiosperm gene maps.
Genome Res 2008, 18:1944-1954.
33. Seoighe C, Gehring C: Genome duplication led to highly selective
expansion of the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome. Trends Genet 2004,
20:461-464.
34. Blomme T, Vandepoele K, De Bodt S, Simillion C, Maere S, Van de Peer Y:
The gain and loss of genes during 600 million years of vertebrate
evolution. Genome Biol 2006, 7:R43.
35. Wu X, Qi X: Genes encoding hub and bottleneck enzymes of the
Arabidopsis metabolic network preferentially retain homeologs through
whole genome duplication. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:145.
36. Lai J, Ma J, Swigonová Z, Ramakrishna W, Linton E, Llaca V, Tanyolac B,
Park YJ, Jeong OY, Bennetzen JL, Messing J: Gene loss and movement in
the maize genome. Genome Res 2004, 14:1924-1931.
37. Guo M, Davis D, Birchler JA: Dosage effects on gene expression in a
maize ploidy series. Genetics 1996, 142:1349-1355.
38. Bottley A, Xia GM, Koebner RMD: Homoeologous gene silencing in
hexaploid wheat. Plant J 2006, 47:897-906.
39. Kashkush K, Feldman M, Levy AA: Gene loss, silencing and activation in a
newly synthesized wheat allotetraploid. Genetics 2002, 160:1651-1659.
40. He P, Friebe BR, Gill BS, Zhou JM: Allopolyploidy alters gene expression in
the highly stable hexaploid wheat. Plant Mol Biol 2003, 52:401-414.
41. Mochida K, Yamazaki Y, Ogihara Y: Discrimination of homoeologous gene
expression in hexaploid wheat by SNP analysis of contigs grouped from
a large number of expressed sequence tags. Mol Genet Genomics 2003,
270:371-377.
42. Mochida K, Kawaura K, Shimosaka E, Kawakami N, Shin-I T, Kohara Y,
Yamazaki Y, Ogihara Y: Tissue expression map of a large number of
expressed sequence tags and its application to in silico screening of
stress response genes in common wheat. Mol Genet Genomics 2006,
276:304-312.
43. Adams KL, Cronn R, Percifield R, Wendel JF: Genes duplicated by
polyploidy show unequal contributions to the transcriptome and organspecific reciprocal silencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:4649-4654.
44. Adams KL, Percifield R, Wendel JF: Organ-specific silencing of duplicated
genes in a newly synthesized cotton allotetraploid. Genetics 2004,
168:2217-2226.
45. Comai L, Tyagi AP, Winter K, Holmes-Davis R, Reynolds SH, Stevens Y,
Byers B: Phenotypic instability and rapid gene silencing in newly formed
arabidopsis allotetraploids. Plant Cell 2000, 12:1551-1568.
46. Gardiner J, Schroeder S, Polacco ML, Sanchez-Villeda H, Fang Z,
Morgante M, Landewe T, Fengler K, Useche F, Hanafey M, Tingey S,
Chou H, Wing R, Soderlund C, Coe EH Jr: Anchoring 9,371 maize
expressed sequence tagged unigenes to the bacterial artificial
chromosome contig map by two-dimensional overgo hybridization.
Plant Physiol 2004, 134:1317-1326.
47. Helentjaris T, Weber D, Wright S: Identification of the genomic location of
duplicate nucleotide sequences in maize by the analysis of restriction
fragment length polymorphisms. Genetics 1998, 118:353-363.
48. Song R, Messing J: Contiguous genomic DNA sequence comprising the
19-kD zein gene family from maize. Plant Physiol 2002, 130:1626-1635.
49. Song R, Llaca V, Linton E, Messing J: Sequence, regulation, and evolution
of the maize 22-kD alpha zein gene family. Genome Res 2001,
11:1817-1825.

Page 19 of 19

50. Wang X, Shi X, Hao B, Ge S, Luo J: Duplication and DNA segmental loss in
the rice genome: implications for diploidization. New Phytol 2005,
165:937-946.
51. Chen ZJ, Ni Z: Mechanisms of genomic rearrangements and gene
expression changes in plant polyploids. Bioessays 2006, 28:240-252.
52. Qiagen Company.. [http://www.qiagen.com].
53. Agilent Company.. [http://www.home.agilent.com].
54. Epicenter Company.. [http://www.epibio.com].
55. Evrogen Company.. [http://www.evrogen.com].
56. Clontech Company.. [http://www.lablife.org].
57. NEB Company.. [http://www.neb.com].
58. Roche Company.. [http://www.roche.com].
59. VECTOR DB.. [ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/UniVec/UniVec].
60. Sanger Institute: Escherichia coli.. [http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/
downloads/bacteria/escherichia-coli.html].
61. ORGANELLE DB.. [http://organelledb.lsi.umich.edu].
62. Silva.. [http://www.arb-silva.de].
63. National Center for Biotechnology Information.. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov].
64. Affymetrix Company.. [http://www.affymetrix.com].
65. Turner Biosystems Company.. [http://www.topac.com].
66. Molecular Probes Company.. [http://www.invitrogen.com].
67. Vector Laboratories Company.. [http://www.vectorlabs.com].
68. Gentleman RC, Carey VJ, Bates DM, Bolstad B, Dettling M, Dudoit S, Ellis B,
Gautier L, Ge Y, Gentry J, Hornik K, Hothorn T, Huber W, Iacus S, Irizarry R,
Leisch F, Li C, Maechler M, Rossini AJ, Sawitzki G, Smith C, Smyth G,
Tierney L, Yang JY, Zhang J: Bioconductor: open software development
for computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R80.
69. Irizarry RA, Ooi SL, Wu Z, Boeke JD: Use of mixture models in a
microarray-based screening procedure for detecting differentially
represented yeast mutants. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol 2003, 2, Article1.
70. Dudoit S, Gentleman RC, Quackenbush J: Open source software for the
analysis of microarray data. Biotechniques 2003, , Suppl: 45-51.
71. Gagnot S, Tamby JP, Martin-Magniette ML, Bitton F, Taconnat L,
Balzergue S, Aubourg S, Renou JP, Lecharny A, Brunaud V: CATdb: a public
access to Arabidopsis transcriptome data from the URGV-CATMA
platform. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D986-990.
72. Barrett T, Troup DB, Wilhite SE, Ledoux P, Evangelista C, Kim IF,
Tomashevsky M, Marshall KA, Phillippy KH, Sherman PM, Muertter RN,
Holko M, Ayanbule O, Yefanov A, Soboleva A: NCBI GEO: archive for
functional genomics data sets - 10 years on. Nucleic Acids Res 2011,
39:1005-1010.
73. Affymetrix: Wheat.. [http://www.affymetrix.com/Auth/analysis/downloads/
data/wheat.consensus.zip].
74. Applied Biosystems Company.. [http://www.appliedbiosystems.com].
75. GE healthcare Company.. [http://www.gehealthcare.com].
76. Salse J, Bolot S, Throude M, Jouffe V, Piegu B, Quraishi UM, Calcagno T,
Cooke R, Delseny M, Feuillet C: Identification and characterization of
conserved duplications between rice and wheat provide new insight
into grass genome evolution. Plant Cell 2008, 20:11-24.
77. Bolot S, Abrouk M, Masood-Quraishi U, Stein N, Messing J, Feuillet C, Salse J:
The ‘inner circle’ of the cereal genomes. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2009,
12:119-125.
doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-12-r119
Cite this article as: Pont et al.: RNA-seq in grain unveils fate of neo- and
paleopolyploidization events in bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.).
Genome Biology 2011 12:R119.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
