<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Ecological and genetic divergence between two lineages of Middle American túngara frogs Physalaemus (= Engystomops) pustulosus</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-146"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Heike Pr_hl, Santiago R Ron, Michael J Ryan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Ecological and genetic divergence between two
lineages of Middle American túngara frogs
Physalaemus (= Engystomops) pustulosus
Research article

Heike Pröhl*1,3,4, Santiago R Ron2 and Michael J Ryan3,4

Abstract
Background: Uncovering how populations of a species differ genetically and ecologically is important for
understanding evolutionary processes. Here we combine population genetic methods (microsatellites) with
phylogenetic information (mtDNA) to define genetic population clusters of the wide-spread Neotropical túngara frog
(Physalaemus pustulosus). We measure gene flow and migration within and between population clusters and compare
genetic diversity between population clusters. By applying ecological niche modeling we determine whether the two
most divergent genetic groups of the túngara frog (1) inhabit different habitats, and (2) are separated geographically
by unsuitable habitat across a gap in the distribution.
Results: Most population structure is captured by dividing all sample localities into two allopatric genetic lineages. The
Northern genetic lineage (NW Costa Rica) is genetically homogenous while the Southern lineage (SW Costa Rica and
Panama) is sub-divided into three population clusters by both microsatellite and mtDNA analyses. Gene flow is higher
within the Northern lineage than within the Southern lineage, perhaps due to increased landscape heterogeneity in
the South. Niche modeling reveals differences in suitable habitat between the Northern and Southern lineages: the
Northern lineage inhabits dry/pine-oak forests, while the Southern lineage is confined to tropical moist forests. Both
lineages seem to have had little movement across the distribution gap, which persisted during the last glacial
maximum. The lack of movement was more pronounced for the Southern lineage than for the Northern lineage.
Conclusions: This study confirms the finding of previous studies that túngara frogs diverged into two allopatric
genetic lineages north and south of the gap in the distribution in central Costa Rica several million years ago. The
allopatric distribution is attributed to unsuitable habitat and probably other unknown ecological factors present across
the distribution gap. Niche conservatism possibly contributes to preventing movements across the gap and gene flow
between both groups. Genetic and ecological data indicate that there is the potential for ecological divergence in
allopatry between lineages. In this context we discuss whether the Northern and Southern lineages should be
recognized as separate species, and we conclude that further studies of pre- and post-zygotic isolation are needed for
a final assessment. Identified population clusters should motivate future behavioral and ecological research regarding
within-species biodiversity and speciation mechanisms.
Background
A central goal of evolutionary ecology is to understand
processes that determine the distribution of genetic
diversity and population connectivity through gene flow.
The current population genetic structure of a taxon is the
result of many factors such as the dispersal capacity of the
* Correspondence: heike.proehl@tiho-hannover.de
1

Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Bünteweg 17, 30559
Hannover, Germany

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

organism, the degree to which individuals of different
populations recognize each other as potential mates, the
connectivity of suitable habitats, historical events that
impose geographical isolation (e.g. glaciations or elevation of mountains) and interactions with ecologically
similar species or predators [1-4].
Isolation by distance [5] occurs when gene flow
declines with increasing distance between pairs of populations, and is characteristic of the overall genetic population structure of many amphibians species [2,3,6-9].

© 2010 Pröhl et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

Amphibians often exhibit strong site fidelity (philopatry,
reviewed in [10]), have patchy geographical distributions
due to specific and complex habitat requirements and
low dispersal capacity [11]. Most studies of genetic population structure of amphibian show little or no genetic
differentiation with moderate to high gene flow and dispersal rates at the local scale (<5-10 km), but stronger
genetic differentiation at larger geographical scales (>1520 km) [8,12,13]. Less common are pattern of panmixia
among distant localities (Bufo marinus, [14]) or strong
genetic differentiation across very small geographic distances (Bufo calamita, [9]).
Gene flow among populations is fundamentally related
to genetic variability within populations. In areas where
gene flow among populations is high, genetic diversity
within populations is likely to be higher (but see [4]) than
in areas with reduced gene flow (e.g. peripheral populations [15]). The most likely explanation for this phenomenon is reduced genetic drift and introduction of rare or
new alleles in less isolated populations. Also, colonization
events and bottlenecks are expected to have impacts on
genetic diversity: generally older lineages are genetically
more diverse than populations that have been founded by
more recent colonization [2,16].
Multiple landscape features have recently been shown
to be important for the magnitude of gene flow and thus
for explaining population genetic structure in amphibians. Roads, mountain ridges and open or dry habitats
apparently reduce gene flow between populations
[7,8,17,18] while forests, wetlands and rivers are associated with increased gene flow [7,19]. For example, in two
neotropical species of the genus Craugastor, mountains
and dry forests present ecologically unsuitable habitat
and act as barriers to gene flow resulting in diverged
genetic lineages [18].
Both genetic and ecological divergence can lead to
reproductive isolation and speciation. Ecological speciation is the evolution of reproductive isolation as a result
of divergent natural selection in different environments
and can proceed in the presence or absence of gene flow
[20]. Several general scenarios for speciation have been
identified including genetic differentiation, geographic
distribution and shift in ecological niches [21]. These scenarios associate speciation processes occurring in sympatry, parapatry or allopatry with presence or absence of
ecological divergence. A combination of environmental
niche models with phylogeographic analyses offers the
possibility to explore the role of geographic and ecological separation for speciation between diverging lineages.
Although phylogenetic and phylogeographic information has been increasing recently, few studies have been
conducted simultaneously on both fine and large scale
population genetics in tropical anurans [13,22,23]. In the
Neotropics, phylo-geographic studies have been mainly

Page 2 of 18

limited to craugastorid [13,18], strabomantid [24,25] and
dendrobatid frogs [26-30]. These studies often revealed
genetic lineages within species [23,26,27,30], rectified the
taxonomic relationship between species or species
groups [28], or uncovered previously unknown species
diversity [24]. Examining ecological divergence in a phylogenetic context has been applied to only a very limited
number of Neotropical frogs. These studies demonstrated climatic specialization along temperature and seasonality axes and identified important speciation
mechanism for some clades [21,31]. For most Neotropical
frogs, however, there is no information about their
genetic population structure, genetic diversity within the
species, presence of genetic lineages, or even species status and variability in ecological requirements. Still less is
known about the relationship between genetic divergence, reproductive isolation and ecological divergence,
and the relative importance of all these aspects for speciation.
To our knowledge the spatial genetic organization [3235] and reproductive behavior (review in [36,37]) of the
túngara frog Physalaemus (= Engystomops) pustulosus is
more thoroughly documented than any other Neotropical frog species. The distribution of the túngara frog
ranges from northern Mexico to the Caribbean coast of
northern South America where these frogs are abundant
in dry and wet lowland forests. Allozymes analysis by
Ryan et al. (1996) [32] found two genetic lineages of túngara frogs: a Northern lineage containing populations
from Mexico to northern Costa Rica and a Southern lineage ranging from western Panama to northern South
America (Venezuela, Columbia, Trinidad). This was confirmed by Weigt et al. (2005) [35] who added an analysis
of mtDNA (COI) to the previous data set. The time of the
separation between both lineages (~6-9 Myr, [35]) was
estimated to have occurred prior to the final closing of
the Panamanian land bridge (3.1-2.8 Myr, [38]). These
results were further confirmed by a fine-scaled molecular
study in an area of Costa Rica and Panama that encompassed both genetic lineages [34] and a phylogenetic
study of the P. pustulosus species group [39]. The Northern and Southern lineages are separated by a distribution
gap of about 200 km in Central Costa Rica [40].
The aim of this study was threefold: (1) to analyze the
potential for ecological divergence between the Northern
and Southern lineages, (2) to test the persistence of the
geographic barrier between the Northern and Southern
lineages during the last glaciation and explore the
hypothesis of allopatric divergence, and (3) to provide a
more detailed population genetic analysis across 25 localities for the aforementioned area (Figure 1 in [34]) and
compare the population genetic structure to that of other
amphibian species.

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

Page 3 of 18

Figure 1 Map of study area. Map with sampling localities with genetic clusters identified by STRUCTURE (Figure 2, this study). Blue = North, Red =
South_1, Orange = South_2, Yellow = South 3. The figure was modified from Figure 1 published in Ref. [34].

We first conduct a Bayesian analysis to detect population subdivision and zones of admixture based on highly
polymorphic nuclear markers. We further calculate population differentiation (FST and RST) between inferred
populations and assign individuals to their most probable
population of origin for estimating migration between
populations. Our analyses include calculation of genetic
diversity across the investigated area. We also estimate
divergence time between the Northern and Southern lineage and between population clusters based on sequence
divergence in the mitochondrial Cyt B gene. Then we
integrate our parameter estimates obtained from classical
population differentiation analyses (F-Statistics) and
recently developed Bayesian statistics. Thus we link classical measures of population structure (FST & RST) to population structure inferred from the clustering method,
migration patterns deduced from assignment tests and
divergence time estimates. Furthermore we conduct environmental niche modeling based on climatic and altitude
parameters to estimate the potential for ecological niche
divergence between genetic lineages, to measure ecological landscape connectivity across the distribution gap and
to predict the distribution of past and current suitable
habitat. The allopatric distribution of the Northern and
the Southern lineage suggests that genetic divergence is a
result of geographic isolation. This evidence, however, is

insufficient to support an allopatric model of divergence
because distribution ranges could have been in contact in
the past. To explore this possibility, we project niche
models to the last glacial maximum. A result showing
equal or higher habitat unsuitability across the distribution gap during the last glacial would provide further support for the scenario of allopatric divergence. We discuss
the possibility that speciation has occurred between the
Northern and Southern lineage based on the combined
evidence of genetic and ecological data together with previously collected behavioral data.
Moreover, this thorough population genetic and ecological analysis on a species for which the communication
system, mating system and mate choice strategies are well
studied will offer the opportunity to detect important
areas (such as hybrid zones, areas of low or high genetic
diversity and areas that differ ecologically) for studying
new aspects of behavior in relation to the ecology and
genetic composition of the population.

Results
Microsatellites

Population structure: Most population structure was captured by dividing all sample localities in two genetic lineages (Figure 1, Figure 2a) The southern lineage, however,
was further subdivided in two or three sub-clusters (Fig-

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

Page 4 of 18

Figure 2 Population structure of Middle American túngara frogs. Results of the Bayesian analysis for identifying population structure for K = 2, K
= 3, K = 4 and K = 5. The first and most significant separation is between the Northern and Southern lineage (K = 2). However the Southern lineage
can be further subdivided in several genetically distinct population clusters.

ure 2b, c), while the Northern lineage remained undivided even by increasing K to 10. We decided that the
most probable population structure is given for K = 4. We
base our decision on the following arguments: The likelihood of the data increased considerable when raising K =
2 to K = 3 and K = 4 (Figure 3a). Afterwards Pr (X|K)
increased only insignificantly. On the other hand, there
was still a substantial ΔK for K = 4, but for higher K values ΔK remained close to zero (Figure 3b). Also, the
assignment of individuals to a population cluster became
less clear for K = 5 (Figure 2d), and this was increasingly
the case for higher values of K (data not shown). Con-

ducting the analysis separately for the Northern and
Southern lineage resulted in the same geographic-genetic
pattern, i.e. by analyzing the Southern lineage alone
ΔKsouth was highest for Ksouth = 3. In the following we
name the identified population clusters North (blue),
South_1 (red), South_2 (orange) and South_3 (yellow
areas; Figure 1, Figure 2c).
The Northern lineage (or cluster) was located in North
Costa Rica, i.e. in the north of the gap. Within the Southern lineage STRUCTURE found an admixture zone
(South_Admix, red-orange) in Piedras Blancas which was
evident for K = 3 and K = 4 (Figure 2b, c). All individuals

Figure 3 Posterior probability for population cluster. a) The log likelihood [Pr(X I K)] for a given number of population clusters (K) in Middle American túngara frogs. The graph shows that most of the population structure is captured by setting K = 3 or K = 4. For higher Ks the likelihood is not or
only very slightly increasing. b) ΔK in relation to the number of clusters (K) [59]. The graph shows that ΔK is highest for K = 2, which relates to the
geographic division of túngara frogs by the gap in a Northern and Southern lineage. However there is still a relevant change in the Pr(X I K) by increasing K to 3 and 4, which relates to a further subdivision of the Southern lineage in several population clusters.

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

Page 5 of 18

in this population possessed genetic material from the
two (for K = 3) or three (for K = 4) southern clusters. The
cluster adjacent in the north-west of the admixture zone
ranged from the southern edge of the gap (Ojochal)
through the lowland areas along the coast and the lowland areas in the Valle de General (Buenos Aires) and
Valle de Cotobrus (Potrero Grande). The cluster adjacent
towards the south of the admixture zone ranged until El
Forastero in Western Panama. The sample locality on the
Peninsula Osa was included in this cluster. Sixty kilometers to the east, the third sub-cluster of the southern
genetic group ranged from Galique to Gamboa, the eastern most locality (Figure 1).
In order to determine the degree of genetic differentiation among clusters we calculated FST und RST values
between each pair of clusters and the admixture zone in
Piedras Blancas (Table 1). All pairs of clusters were significantly different in estimates of both FST or RST. As
expected, the Northern lineage was most diverged from
all other clusters. Comparing the northern cluster with
the three southern clusters it is notable that the FST was
highest between North and South_1 (the geographically
closest cluster) while the highest RST values were found
between North and the admixture zone. RST values
between the admixture zone and both adjacent clusters
were non-significant. The proportion of membership
inferred by STRUCTURE for each sample locality to the
four clusters was for Piedras Blancas 37% to South_1, 48%
to South_2, 13% to South_3 and 2% to North. This was
not in full accordance with the FST and RST values: FST values between Piedras Blancas and South_2 or South_3
were nearly equal and the RST value was smallest for
South_1. For pairwise RST values see [Additional file 1].
Gene flow and migration: In the population cluster
North between 17% and 77% of individuals reached the
highest assignment score for their home population
(mean = 48%). 52% of individuals were assigned to
another sample locality within the same population cluster (range 23-83% for each population) [Additional file 2].
In general, in the southern clusters a higher percentage of

individuals was assigned to their home population: In
South_1 60-95% (mean 75.4%) of individuals, in South_2
41-100% of individuals (mean 73.9%), in South_2 58-90%
of individuals (mean 75.5%) per population [Additional
file 2]. Only in the cluster South_3 for several individuals
(range 10-26% per population, mean = 16.75%) the highest assignment score was for a sample locality in another
population cluster (South_2: 11 individuals; South_1: 2
individuals). Overall, the results point to higher gene flow
among populations in the cluster North than in the
southern clusters. In the admixture zone (Piedras Blancas) the highest score in 17 individuals was for the home
population, in 2 individuals for population Palmar Norte
(South_1), and in one individual for Bugaba (South_2).
Classical migration rates based on FST and RST values
were small between North and the southern clusters and
much higher among the southern clusters (Table 2).
At the sample locality level the software GENECLASS2
detected 24 individuals for which the probability that the
individual is a resident was <0.01 [Additional file 3].
These individuals are assumed first generation migrants.
No migrants were detected between the Northern and
Southern lineages. Most migrants (N = 6) were found in
the northern cluster. Here several individuals from Liberia (N = 4) seem to have migrated to other sample localities. Within the cluster South_1 five individuals seemed
to have migrated between populations. For South_2 this
was true for four individuals. In the cluster South_3 five
individuals were recognized as migrants from very distant source populations either in South_1 or South_2.
Genetic diversity: Mean allelic richness was higher in
the population clusters south of the gap than in the cluster north of the gap (North: mean = 4.287; South_1: mean
= 5.526; South_2: mean = 5.530; South_3: mean = 6.274)
[Additional file 4]. Allelic richness differed significantly
among population clusters (permutation test: two-sided
P < 0.001). In general, allelic richness per population or
cluster increased from the northern most localities
towards South America. One fact that needs to be
emphasized is that populations located somewhat aside
from the main route along the Pan American Highway

Table 1: F and R-Statistics
North

South_1

South_Admix

South_2

South_3

North

-------------

0.7173

0.8580

0.7810

0.7841

South_1

0.2246

--------------

0.0021*

0.0300

0.0758

South_Admix

0.2145

0.0814

----------------

0.0043᭺

0.0268

South_2

0.2109

0.1234

0.0441

--------------

0.0854

South_3

0.1893

0.1154

0.0437

0.0530

-------------

FST (below) and RST (above diagonal) values between population clusters previously identified by STRUCTURE. For each comparison P <
0.0001, except *P = 0.25, ᭺P = 0.29, and P = 0.041

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

Page 6 of 18

Table 2: Migration rates among population clusters
0
North
South_1

North

South_1

South_Admix

South_2

South_3

-------------

0.1001

0.0413

0.0701

0.0688

0.8660

--------------

118.79

8.0833

3.0394

South_Admix

0.9182

2.8364

----------------

57.889

9.3654

South_2

0.8915

1.7825

5.4318

--------------

2.6911

South_3

1.0727

1.9239

5.4318

4.4669

-------------

Migration rates per generation Nm [5] among population clusters previously identified by STRUCTURE, based on FST (below) and RST (above
diagonal) values.

[Filadelfia (3), Nicoya (5), Peñas Blancas (7), Buenos Aires
(10), Osa (15), Golfito (16)], possessed lower allelic richness than their neighbor populations. Also the two populations flanking the gap [La Junta (8) and Ojochal (9)]
retained lower allelic richness.
Isolation by distance: For the total range, genetic distance (RST) and geographic distance were highly correlated (r = 0.79, P < 0.000001). 62% of the variation in
genetic differences were explained by geography (R2 =
0.62). For the Northern and Southern lineages separately
the correlation coefficients were lower but still significant
(North: r = 0.59, P < 0.0053, R2 = 0.34; South: r = 0.66, P <
0.0036, R2 = 0.44). Figure 4 shows the correlation between
geographic and genetic distance within the Northern and
Southern lineage. Inspection of the graph also reveals the
effect of geographic and temporal separation between the
northern and southern túngara frogs: genetic distances
between pairs of localities from both the Northern and
the Southern lineages were considerable higher in com-

Figure 4 Isolation by distance. Genetic distance (RST values) versus
geographic distance (in km) as population pairwise comparisons in
Middle American túngara frogs. Grey squares represent distances between one population from the North and one population from the
South; White triangles represent distances between two populations
from the North, and black diamonds represent distances between two
populations from the South.

parison with localities within the same lineage separated
by a similar geographic distance.
Cytochrome B

Genetic distance and time of divergence: The mean p distance (uncorrected nucleotide difference) between the
Northern and Southern lineage was 0.074 ± 0.001 (overall
mean ± SE = 0.045 ± 0.005), while the TN distance was
calculated to be 0.081 ± 0.012 (overall: 0.049 ± 0.006).
Distances (uncorrected p distances, TN distances)
between genetic clusters are presented in Table 3.
Whereas all distances between the Northern and the
Southern lineages were between 0.065 and 0.087, the distances among groups of the Southern lineage were substantially lower. Interestingly the distance of the
Northern lineage was lowest to South_2. Estimated divergence times between North and South were between 4.6
to 5.6 Myrs (Table 3, comparison between population
clusters), while southern clusters diverged ~1.4 to 3.9
Myrs ago. Within-cluster divergence was lowest for
North and increased towards the south (Table 4).
The haplotype network (Figure 5) reveals three main
genetic clades, one with two subclades, which correspond
nearly perfectly with the population cluster detected by
the Bayesian analysis based on microsatellites: 1. North
(haplotype 1), 2. South_1 (haplotypes 9-14) and South_2
(haplotypes 2-8) as two subclades, and 3. South_3 (haplotypes 17-22). The two sequences from Piedras Blancas
(Admixture zone) fall into South_1 (haplotype 9) and
South_2 (haplotype 4). One sequence from the group
South_2 (El Forastero 2, haplotype 15) clustered together
with one sequence from South_3 (Galique 1, haplotype
16). The geographical divide between these two clusters
was somewhere between El Forastero and Galique which
are ~60 km apart (Figure 2c). The haplotype network
confirms the closer relationship between North and
South_2 than between North and South_1.
Diversity indices: Molecular diversity as measured by
number of haplotypes (relative to number of individual
sequences), polymorphic sites and nucleotide diversity
was lowest in the Northern lineage (Table 5). In fact, only

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

Page 7 of 18

Table 3: Evolutionary distances between population clusters
North

South_1

South_Admix

South_2

South_3

North

------

South_1

5.57

0.078/0.086

0.071/0.077

0.065/0.071

0.079/0.087

--------

0.011/0.011

0.020/0.021

0.054/0.057

South_Admix

5.07

0.071

--------

0.013/0.014

0.052/0.054

South_2

4.64

1.43

0.928

--------

0.047/0.049

South_3

5.64

3.86

0.037

3.36

----------

Uncorrected p distances/TN distances (above) and estimated divergence times (below) based on uncorrected p distances in MYR assuming
a pair-wise mutation rate of 1.4% per Myr.

one haplotype was found in the North. All diversity indices increased from North towards the southern populations and were highest in population cluster South_3.
Ecological Niches

The niche models generated with Maxent predicted the
occurrence of suitable habitat better than random models
(P < 0.001 in all 100 tests for the Southern lineage; P <
0.001 in all 10 tests for the Northern lineage). High model
performance was also demonstrated by high values of the
area under the curve (AUC) for the ROC analysis (AUC ≥
0.981 for both models) indicating better than random
predictions (0.5 = random, 1 = maximum). The models
generated by Maxent (logistic output) consisted of maps
with logistic values (LV) ranging from 0 (unsuitable habitat) to 1 (maximum suitability). The model for the Northern lineage predicted regions with high suitability in the
dry forests and pine-oak forests of the Pacific basin from
northern Costa Rica to southern Mexico (Figure 6). The
model for the Southern lineage predicted regions with
high suitability in the Pacific moist forests of Provincia
Puntarenas (Costa Rica) and western Panama. High suitability was also present in the Atlantic moist forest of central Panama (Figure 6). Suitable habitat of the Northern
lineage showed a lower annual precipitation than for the
Southern lineage (North: mean ± SD = 1941.9 ± 409.4
mm; South: mean ± SD = 3078.7 ± 778.8 mm); also the
mean annual temperate was on average colder in the
North than in the South (North: mean ± SD = 25.52 ±
1.94°C; South: mean ± SD = 26.0 ± 0.84°C). There were
significant differences in precipitation between the localities for the Northern lineage and the Southern lineage
(Student's t = 5.21, P < 0.001). Differences were not signif-

icant for mean annual temperature (t = 0.681, P = 0.512).
The paleoclimate models suggested significant changes in
the location of suitable habitat with opposing trends in
range size between both genetic groups (Figure 6). Under
a logistic value (LV) threshold of 0.1 for presenceabsence, the suitable range for the Southern lineage in
Middle America, east from the gap, increased from
26,433 (last glacial maximum) to 66,569 km2 (current).
For the Northern lineage, the suitable range in Middle
America, west from the gap, decreased from 1,234,558
km2 (last glacial maximum) to 421,603 km2 (current).
Connectivity and suitability across the distribution gap
in Costa Rica: The analyses of suitability and connectivity
suggested that the distribution gap in Costa Rica persisted during the last glacial maximum. Suitability for the
Northern lineage across the gap was not significantly different between the present and the last glacial maximum
(Mean LV current = 0.496, SD = 0.228; Mean LV last glacial = 0.489, SD = 0.195; paired t = 0.868, P = 0.387). For
the Southern lineage, however, conditions deteriorated
significantly (Mean LV current = 0.278, SD = 0.279; Mean
LV last glacial = 0.052, SD = 0.086; paired t = 8.659, P <
0.001). The analysis of habitat connectivity suggested
similar trends. For the Northern lineage, habitat resistance to reach the southern range was almost equal for
current conditions and the last glacial maximum (leastcost distance path was 6.79 and 6.78, respectively). For
the Southern lineage, resistance was much higher during
the last glacial (14.94) than under current conditions
(8.08). Taken together, these results suggest that geographic separation between genetic lineages persisted
during glacial events.

Table 4: Evolutionary distances within population clusters
North

South_1

South_Admix

South_2

South_3

RST

0.060 ± 0.054

0.019 ± 0.054

----

0.078 ± 0.085

0.167 ± 0.107

TN

0.000 ± 0.000

0.004 ± 0.001

0.019 ± 0.006

0.011 ± 0.003

0.027 ± 0.005

RST (mean ± SE, based on microsatellites) and TN distances (based on Cyt B sequences) between sample localities within population clusters.

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

Page 8 of 18

Figure 5 Haplotype network. Haplotype network of Cyt B sequences for Middle American túngara frogs. Blue haplotypes have been found in the
northern genetic group (North), red, orange and yellow haplotypes belong to South_1, South_2 and South_3 respectively. One sequence of haplotype 4 (orange) and one sequence of haplotype 9 (red) are from Piedras Blancas, the admixture zone in South Costa Rica as identified by STRUCTURE.

Discussion
Our analyses show that the two genetic lineages of túngara frogs in Middle America differ genetically and reside in
ecologically different habitats. The Northern lineage is
genetically homogenous while the Southern lineage consists of several population clusters: one in South Costa
Rica close to the distribution gap between the lineages
(South_1), one ranging from South Costa Rica to Western
Panama (South_2), and the last one ranging from Western Panama towards East Panama (South_3). One sample
locality in South Costa Rica (Piedras Blancas) was identified as a contact or admixture zone between South_1 and
South_2. In general, the genetic pattern revealed by microsatellites is confirmed by sequences of the mitochondrial gene Cyt B. Genetic diversity is lowest in the

Northern lineage and increased from South Costa Rica
towards East Panama. In contrast, gene flow between
sample localities is higher in northern Costa Rican than
in the southern population clusters. Isolation by distance
explains a large amount of the genetic variation in both
lineages; however, time of divergence between population
clusters also plays a significant role for genetic differentiation.
Environmental niche modeling revealed that the
Northern and the Southern lineage differ significantly in
habitat type. Suitable habitat for the Northern lineage is
drier and occurs in pine-oak forests, while the Southern
lineage is associated with moist forests. Annual precipitation is significantly higher for the habitat of the Southern
lineage. Since the last glacial maximum suitable habitat

Table 5: Cyt B diversities at different levels of population structure
N
All

h

s

Hd

π

37

21

73

0.913 ± 0.035

0.0452 ± 0.00315

North

10

1

0

0.000 ± 0.000

0.0000 ± 0.0000

South

27

20

57

0.963 ± 0.025

0.0291 ± 0.0037

South_1

9

5

7

0.806 ± 0.120

0.0036 ± 0.0013

Admix

2

2

9

1.000 ± 0.500

0.0185 ± 0.0093

South_2

9

8

21

0.972 ± 0.064

0.0101 ± 0.0047

South_3

7

7

35

1.000 ± 0.076

0.0263 ± 0.0055

Cyt B diversities over all populations, the Northern and Southern lineage and population clusters. Number of individual sequenced (N),
number of haplotypes (h), number of polymorphic sites (s), haplotype diversity (Hd, mean ± SD) and nucleotide diversity (π, mean ± SD).

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

Page 9 of 18

Figure 6 Niche modeling. Results for ecological niche modeling depicting predicted habitat suitability for túngara frogs in Middle America. Higher
values indicate higher habitat suitability. "LGM" models are predictions for the Last Glacial Maximum (~21,000 years ago) based on paleoclimate models. See text for details.

decreased for the Northern lineage but increased for the
Southern lineage. The habitat connectivity across the distribution gap in central Costa Rica was lower during the
last glacial maximum, suggesting that ecological factors
have prevented secondary contact from at least the Pleistocene to the present. This result is consistent with the
large divergence time and the absence of migration
between lineages recovered by two independent analyses
(see below).
Comparison of microsatellite and Cyt B analyses

Despite two different types of molecular markers (nuclear
and mitochondrial) and different statistical methods
(Bayesian cluster analysis versus haplotype network),
both molecular approaches resulted in the same genetic

population structure of Costa Rican and Panamanian
túngara frogs. This indicates that the revealed population
structure is fairly static given that mtDNA indicates
ancient, historical events while microsatellites indicate
more recent processes. Moreover, the different genetic
distance measurements between population clusters
(excluding the zone of admixture) are highly correlated
(FST-RST: r = 0.89 P = 0.02; FST-uncorrected p distance: r
= 0.69, P = 0.13; RST-uncorrected p distance: r = 0.88, P =
0.02, N = 6).
Pattern of population structure in amphibians and isolation
by distance

In general, amphibian populations display a high level of
spatial genetic structure, mainly when interpopulation

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

distances exceed several kilometers [12]. Túngara frogs
also show this pattern as populations are genetically distinguishable at a very local level. Lampert et al. (2003)
[33] found significant FST values (>0.014) between populations that were on average three to four km apart (see
Figure 2, [33]), a similar pattern was found in comparing
island populations [41]. All studies, including this one,
found a significant effect of isolation by distance, i.e. local
migration takes place between neighboring populations,
but over longer distances gene flow decreases. Our
Bayesian Structure analysis did not further subdivide the
Northern lineage into subpopulations and the assignment
and migration analyses points to high levels of gene flow
between sample localities. Pairwise RST values ranged
from 0.00 to 0.17 in the Northern lineage and 11 of the 28
population comparisons are significant, i.e. although RST
values ≥ 0.05 - 0.17 indicate significant genetic differences STRUCTURE still assigns them to the same genetic
cluster. Our results suggest that genetic drift causes
genetic differentiation while subpopulations are genetically connected by migrating animals.
Marsh et al. (2000) [42] showed that túngara frogs have
a breeding neighborhood of less than 10 m; that is, at
smaller distances males tend to move among breeding
sites but not so at distances of 10 m or more. On the other
hand, Marsh et al. (1999) [43] showed that these frogs did
routinely move among ponds of distances of 200 m. This
pair of studies suggests that túngara frogs are relatively
philopatric but do possess significant dispersal abilities.
Nevertheless, we seriously doubt that an individual túngara frog is able to cross distances of 20 km or more without the aid of human transport as the analysis of first
migrant detection might suggest. Instead, we suggest that
túngara frog subpopulations are well connected through
ponds and puddles available for breeding during the rainy
season as suggested by continuous suitable habitat
between Liberia and Santa Rosa (Figure 6). As the túngara frog is well known to breed in areas of human disturbance, habitat disruption might not hinder and might
even facilitate dispersion rather than impede it. Since the
distance between our sample localities is on average 30
km, the apparent gene flow at such distances is probably
established by substantial movements among breeding
ponds that are much closer to each other. Our data indicate that the túngara frog is ecologically similar to the
natterjack toad (Bufo calamita) that is known as a pioneering species with a high dispersal capacity, quickly
colonizes early-successional habitats and displays low
population structure at the local level, increasing population structure at larger distances and exhibits significant
isolation by distance [9].
In the North, the assignment of individuals to their
population was lower than it was in southern populations

Page 10 of 18

[Additional file 2], where more individuals were assigned
to their true locality. This indicates either higher gene
flow in the North than among southern populations, or a
population bottleneck followed by population expansion.
The habitat topography of South Costa Rica is more complex than North Costa Rica. In North Costa Rica no
mountains separate different sample localities. In South
Costa Rica, Buenos Aires (10) and Potrero Grande (12)
are isolated from other sample localities by the Fila
Costeña mountain range which parallels the coast. Nevertheless, gene flow between Palmar Norte, Cortez and
Potrero Grande seems to be high while Buenos Aires
appears to be more isolated. It is possible that gene flow
between these three sample localities is conveyed by rivers. The Rio Coto Brus passes Potrero Grande, downriver
it joins the river Rio General to form the Rio Terraba
which connects to Palmar Norte and Cortez. Also, Osa
(15) and Golfito (16) seem to be genetically more isolated
within the southern populations then are the rest of the
southern populations. Osa is more remote from other
sample localities on the Peninsula Osa, while Golfito is
located close to the coast and is separated from the lowland areas with the other sample localities by smaller
mountains. Genetic assignment to the other sample
localities is also lower in populations close to the distribution gap between La Junta (8) and Ojochal (9) indicating that gene flow and genetic diversity are reduced in
peripheral populations. There is gene flow across the
admixture zone of Piedras Blancas, especially towards
South_1, but the high assignment to the home population
indicates that gene flow is reduced as compared to genetically more homogenous areas. Another lowland area of
high gene flow is between Gloria (18), Gariché (19) and
Bugaba (20). Six individuals found in Gloria were genetically assigned with the highest probability to Gariché and
eight individuals from Gariché were assigned with the
highest probability to Gloria. In the third southern population cluster some individuals are assigned to South_2
[Additional file 2] and some "first generation migrants"
stem from very distant home populations [Additional file
3: in Gamboa: 2 individuals have been assigned to Cortez
and Caracol, ≥400 km distant] an observation that suggests ancient and current migration between both clusters.
Divergences times

Our data are consistent with the proposition that túngara
frogs invaded Middle America from South America at
least twice [35]. The calculation of divergence times
based on COI and a mitochondrial mutation rate of
0.69% per Myr between northern and southern túngara
frogs in the study of Weigt et al. (2005) [35] resulted in an
estimated divergence time of 6.35 MYA (5.04-7.66) while
the parametric Bayesian MCMC method calibrated by

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

the rise of the Ecuadorian Andes estimated the time of
divergence as 8.61 MYA (95% confidence intervals: 4.0713.3). Our calculations resulted in a divergence time of
approximately 5 Myr between the Northern and Southern lineage which falls into the lower end of the confidence intervals calculated by Weigt et al. (2005). The
difference between both studies in average divergence
time estimates very likely rests upon the different geographical dimensions, i.e. in this study sampled populations next to the gap are geographically closer to each
other (232 km versus 384 km [32,34]) and the sampled
area covers a smaller geographic range.
Ecological niches

Besides being genetically diverged, the Northern and
Southern lineages of túngara frogs reside in different habitats in Panama and Costa Rica. While the Northern lineage occupies dry forests, the Southern lineage occurs in
moist forests with higher annual precipitation. The actual
distribution of northern and southern túngara frogs in
Middle America [44] generally corresponds to the predicted suitable habitat of niche models in Costa Rica and
Panama. The low predicted suitability for the Southern
lineage across the distribution gap in Costa Rica is consistent with the known species distribution. Suitability
across the gap for the Northern lineage, however, was
intermediate and within the range of known localities.
Thus, the model suggests that conditions in a portion of
the gap might be suitable for the Northern lineage. This
incorrect prediction of the model could be the result of
(1) the exclusion of an environmental variable that limits
the species distribution range, (2) ecological interactions
with other species across the gap (e.g., competitive exclusion or predation), or (3) an unknown dispersal barrier.
Because there are not conspicuous dispersal barriers in
the region, we suspect that explanations (1) or (2) are the
most likely. Niche modeling suggests that the absence of
each lineage in the distribution gap correlates with ecological variables and therefore suggests that not only do
the two lineages inhabit different habitats but there might
be ecological divergence between the lineages. Niche
conservatism is the tendency of species to retain aspects
of their fundamental niche over longer time periods and
limits the adaptation to ecological conditions at geographic barriers [45]. Our results show that the Northern
and Southern lineages occupy different environmental
envelopes and this suggests that their niches have been
evolutionarily labile. There are two possibilities to explain
genetic and ecological divergence in túngara frogs. The
first possibility is that túngara frogs were split in two
groups by a vicariance event. The geographic separation
was then maintained by niche conservatism and followed
by niche specialization. Otherwise the genetic divergence
between lineages in túngara frogs in allopatry could be

Page 11 of 18

the result from a combination of niche specialization followed by niche conservatism at the edges of distribution
ranges in Costa Rica. The absence of the Southern lineage
in the gap suggests that niche conservatism can promote
allopatric speciation as proposed by Wiens and Graham
(2005) [45]. At the moment our data cannot discriminate
between both possibilities for lineage separation.
In comparison with the present, suitable habitat during
the last glacial maximum covered larger areas for the
Northern lineage while it was more restricted in the
Southern lineage. We assume that climatic changes from
colder and drier climate to warmer and moister climate
are responsible for this development. Drier climate during the last glacial maximum also seems to explain the
higher habitat resistance of the distribution gap for the
Southern lineage. Since habitat resistance persists today
it seems improbable that both groups will come into contact in the near future unless the current climate change
will result in more favorable conditions across the gap.
Speciation in túngara frogs

This and several preceding molecular studies revealed
that the túngara frog Physalaemus pustulosus consists of
two genetically different lineages [34,35,39]. In this study
we found that the lineages inhabit different habitats and
thus suggests the possibility that they might be ecologically divergent. The geographic separation and the large
genetic divergence and ecological dissimilarity between
lineages suggest vicariance events together with ecologically mediated divergent selection as potential speciation
mechanisms in túngara frogs. For Ecuadorian frogs of the
genus Epipedobates, sister species with allopatric or parapatric distribution replace each other altitudinally or latitudinally emphasizing the role of environmental niche
shift in speciation in neotropical frogs [21]. The ecological separation principally occurs along a temperature/elevational or a seasonality axis. For divergence between
túngara frog lineages a shift in seasonality and precipitation might be more important than differences in temperature. Ecological prezygotic isolation could arise as a
result of adaptation to contrasting habitats or temporal
isolation [46]. Adaptation to different habitats could
entail behavioral reproductive isolation because signals
involved in mate choice could be under ecologically
based divergent selection. Examples include sexual preferences for ecologically selected body size and color pattern in fish or beak size in birds [20]. This possibility
needs further exploration in our study species.
Ron et al. (2006) [39] suggested that each lineage of
túngara frogs might deserve species status based on the
large molecular divergence (comparable to the divergence
observed between closely related, uncontroversial species
pairs), size differences, and large divergence time (6-10
My, estimates in [35]). The observed habitat differences

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

are consistent with the recognition of each lineage as a
separate species. Species level divergence is also suggested by some evidence of prezygotic isolation. Pröhl et
al. (2006) [34] conducted experiments showing that captive P. pustulosus females from the South did not produce
nests with males from the Northern lineage. However
this was not true for northern females which produced
nests and tadpoles with males from both lineages. The
pattern of call divergence in the gap region in Costa Rica
shows that several call variables tend to be more divergent near the gap. This pattern is consistent with ancient
reproductive character displacement (Figure 3 in Ref.
[34]), however, as discussed below, these differences in
calls have no influence on female species recognition.
The results of phonotactic mate choice experiments
with female túngara frogs, on the other hand, do not suggest the two lineages should each be given species status.
Pröhl et al. (2006) [34] showed that calls differ between
lineages and populations, and that in about two thirds of
the comparisons females showed a significant preference
for the local mating call over the foreign call. This preference for the local call was stronger than that found in
females from Gamboa, which is well within the southern
group [47]. Neither study, however, suggested that
females exhibited stronger preferences for calls of their
own lineage versus the other lineage (P = 0.32, [34]; P =
0.80, [47]). At this point we feel that the data are not conclusive in determining whether the two lineages of túngara frogs represent distinct species and we propose to
collect more data on pre- or post-zygotic reproductive
isolation [48].
Population genetics, ecology and behavior

The results of this study offer the opportunity for new
insights on the complex relationship between genetic distance, ecological divergence, call divergence and mate
preferences. The areas between two genetic population
clusters and areas adjacent to admixture zones are especially interesting for further behavioral observations.
Such studies might determine whether there are abrupt
changes in certain call parameters across genetically different populations, or how the female preference pattern
varies across admixture zones. Therefore it would be necessary to conduct geographically fine scaled genetic and
behavioral analyses in several localities, for example
between Palmar Norte and Caracol in South Costa Rica
or between Galique and El Forastero in Western Panama
(Figure 1). Also, in the context of reproductive character
displacement and reinforcement [49,50] coupled with
measurement of gene flow, such areas provide exciting
possibilities for future research prospects. The pattern of
call divergence in the gap region in Costa Rica mentioned
above indicates the opportunity for the evolution of character displacement in túngara frogs. Moreover the

Page 12 of 18

detected differences in ecology between the two main lineages should influence behavior. The northern frogs
inhabit drier forests than the southern frogs. We would
assume that temperature and precipitation pattern influence the time of the breeding period and the reproductive
behavior. In addition the question whether there is ecological divergence and if it has caused reproductive isolation needs to be examined. Finally more intensive
population sampling in the southern genetic clusters
could reveal ecological differences between them and
help to discover local adaptations that might be involved
in divergence between lineages.

Conclusions
In this study we found population genetic structure and
unexpected ecological diversity between lineages of a
Neotropical frog species, the túngara frog Physalaemus
pustulosus. Population genetic analyses of Middle American populations (Costa Rica and Panama) revealed two
allopatric divergent lineages (North and South) and a further sub-division of the Southern lineage into three population clusters. The genetic divergence into two main
lineages goes along with ecological differences in habitat
type. These results highlight the importance of intensive
population sampling across large ranges of a species distribution. Overall genetic diversity within populations is
high across the sampled range but diversity is higher in
the South than in the North. The diversity within populations is maintained by high gene flow between neighbor
sample localities. Altogether the genetic data support the
idea that the túngara frog is an abundant species whose
populations within population clusters are well connected via gene flow and little affected by habitat fragmentation. The allopatric distribution north and south of
the gap in Costa Rica seems to be maintained by unsuitable climatic conditions across the gap which likely persisted during the last glaciation and probably during
previous glacial and interglacial cycles. Since the Northern and Southern lineages are geographically separated,
genetically divergent, and inhabit different habitats there
is potential for speciation by ecological divergence in allopatry. We discuss the possibility that both lineages
should receive species status and conclude that additional
pre- and postzygotic isolation experiments are needed. In
addition, further ecological and behavioral analyses
among and across southern population clusters could
shed light on evolutionary divergence and speciation.
Methods
Studied species and population sampling

The studied species is the Leiuperid frog, Physalaemus
pustulosus. It occurs in wet and dry regions, and can be
abundant in disturbed and undisturbed habitats. During
the last few years there has been controversy on its

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

generic assignment under either Physalaemus or Engystomops. Because neither alternative creates paraphyly
[51,52] the choice between alternatives is a matter of
preference between nomenclatural stability (favored by
MJR) and nomenclatural informativeness (favored by
SRR).
Field collection, DNA extraction, the genetic analysis
and genotyping of microsatellites were described in detail
in [34]. To summarize, from July to October 2000 we collected tissues from 18 Costa Rican and 6 Panamanian
túngara frog populations from Santa Rosa National Park
in the northwest (Costa Rica) to Santiago in the southeast
(Panama), a straight line distance of 565 km (Figure 1). In
addition we collected tissues from Gamboa in central
Panama which is 188 km northeast from Santiago. The
sampled area included eight population in the Northern
lineage and 17 populations in the Southern lineage as
defined by Ryan et al. (1996) [32] and Pröhl et al. (2006)
[34]. We removed one toe tip from an average of 19 frogs
per population and stored the tissue in NaCl-saturated
20% DMSO/0.25M EDTA buffer at room temperature.
We also documented longitude and latitude of each sample and calculated geographic distances between sample
sites using a 12 channel GPS (Garmin, Taipei, Taiwan).
Laboratory Methodology
Microsatellites

We extracted DNA with the DNeasy Tissue Kit (Qiagen,
Valencia, CA) and subsequently amplified six highly polymorphic microsatellites loci (C30.11, ATG159, CA298,
A3.11, A19.11, ATG263) for all sampled frogs (N = 457)
with primers and respective amplification methods for
PCR previously developed for túngara frogs [53]. PCR
products were analyzed on the ABI (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA) 3100 Genetic Analyzer and then scored
using Gene Scan Analysis Version 3.5 (ABI) and Genotyper version 3.6 NT (ABI) software. We include all six
loci in our analysis because we did not uncover linkage
disequilibrium for any loci pair in any population and
observed heterozygosity deviated from expected
heterozygosity in only one locus in few populations [34].
In total, 199 alleles were found at the six loci, ranging
from one to eight (ATG 263) to as many as six to 20 alleles
(A19.11) in a single population. Although the number of
microsatellite loci is relatively small, they are highly polymorphic and the large number of alleles allows substantial resolution at the population level as simulation
studies have shown that the number of independent
alleles, rather than the number of loci, is critical for estimating genetic distances [54]).
Cytochrome B

To verify population structure based on microsatellite we
also sequenced mitochondrial Cyt B of a limited number
of individuals. Sequences were obtained from one to two

Page 13 of 18

individuals per sample locality (total N = 37). A 487-basepair (bp) segment was amplified using the primers
MVZ15-L (5'-GGACTAATGGC CCAC ACWWTACGNAA-3'; [55]) and CytbAR-H (5'-TAWAAGG GTCTTCTACTAC TGGTTG-3'; [56]). Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) amplifications were carried out in a total volume of
25 μL using approximately 10 ng of frog DNA, 0.8 mM of
each dNTP, 2.5 μL 10 X advanced PCR Buffer containing
self-adjusting MgCl2 (Eppendorf Deutschland, Hamburg), 1.25 U Taq-Polymerase (THH Pyrophosphatase,
Invitek, Berlin) and 10 pmol of both forward and reverse
primers. Amplification was performed in the Eppendorf
Mastercycler epgradient (Eppendorf Deutschland, Hamburg) under the following conditions: 94°C for 3 min, followed by 35 cycles of 94°C for 45 s, 50°C for 45 s, 65°C for
60 sec. PCR products were sequenced in both directions
by the Macrogen Sequencing Team (Macrogen Inc.,
Seoul, Korea). Cyt B sequences were assembled and
edited using the SeqMan module of the Lasergene program (DNASTAR Inc., Madison, Wis.) and aligned in
Clustal X version 1.8 [57] using default settings.
Sequences were deposited in GenBank (accession numbers GU086726-GU086762) [Additional file 5].
Statistical analysis
Microsatellites

Population structure: A fundamental requirement of any
inference about the genetic structure of populations is the
definition of populations themselves. Pritchard et al.
(2000) [58] developed a method which is implemented in
the software STRUCTURE. This method aims to define
clusters of individuals on the basis of their genotypes at
multiple loci using a Bayesian approach. The method
attempts to find population clusters by minimizing linkage disequilibrium and deviations from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium within inferred clusters. The user
defines the number of population clusters (K) and estimates the log likelihood of the hypothesis given by each
value of K: Pr (X|K) [Estimated Ln Prob of data = Ln P I D
gives the value for Pr (X|K) in the software result output].
The authors of the STRUCTURE software point out that
it is not always possible to know the true value of K; they
recommend that one may aim for the smallest value of K
that captures the major genetic structure in the data. This
can be achieved by selecting the lowest K when several
values of K give similar estimates of Pr (X|K). For example in case that Pr (X|K) plateaus for higher values of K
one would choose the K instead of K+1 when the difference in Pr (X|K) to Pr (X|K + 1) is small.
The problem to detect the true number of clusters was
addressed by Evanno et al. (2005) [59]. They found that in
many cases Pr (X|K) does not provide a correct estimation of the number of clusters, K. They propose to use the
statistic delta K (= ΔK) which relates to the second order

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

rate of change of the log likelihood of the data Pr (X|K)
with respect to K. By testing different scenarios (different
types of genetic markers, different number of loci, different number of individuals and populations scored) they
found that ΔK is a good predictor of the real number of
clusters. For our study we estimated Pr (X|K) along with
ΔK for K = 1 to K = 10. For the analysis we used the
default values of most parameters as proposed in the user
manual of STRUCTURE[60]. We applied the admixture
model and the option of correlated allele frequencies
between populations as recommended by Falush et al.
(2003) [61] for situations with slight population structure.
We selected the length of burn-in and the number of
MCMC (Markov Chain Monte Carlo) replications after
burn-in both to be 50,000. Since different runs can results
in different Pr (X|K) values, 20 runs were carried out for
each K and mean values of Pr (X|K) were calculated. To
estimate genetic differentiation between the resulting
population clusters of the STRUCTURE analysis we calculated FST [62] and RST values [63] with the software Arlequin 2.0 [64].
Migration and assignment of individuals to populations: We used the Program GENECLASS2 to assign
individuals to one or more sample localities based on
their allele frequencies. The method we used to assign
individuals probabilistically to sample localities was the
partial Bayesian method [65]. As a result, for each individual the five most likely populations of origin and their
relative assignment scores are given in decreasing order.
The assignment threshold of scores was 0.05. We distinguish between individuals that were assigned with the
highest score to their sample locality, individuals that
were assigned with the highest score to another sample
locality from the same population cluster and individuals
that were assigned to a sample locality from another population cluster as initially identified by STRUCTURE.
The same program was also used to detect first generation migrants (F0): We used the test statistic Λ =
L_home/L_max, which is the ratio of the likelihood computed from the population where the individual was sampled (L_home) over the highest likelihood value among
all population samples including the population where
the individual was sampled (L_max; i.e. the likelihood for
the population to which the individual would be assigned
in the assignment test; see [66]) to detect first generation
migrants (F0). We selected the frequency based method
as the criterion for the likelihood computation [66]. We
calculated the probability that an individual is a resident
by running a Monte Carlo resampling algorithm recommended for first generation migrant detection [66]. The
number of simulated individuals was 1000 while the type
I error (a) was set at 0.01.
For comparison we also applied the classical method
from Wright (1943) [5] for indirectly estimating gene flow

Page 14 of 18

among population by means of FST and RST values. The
number of migrants per generation is estimated as follows: Nm = (1-FST)/(4 FST). Although some assumptions
of population structure (infinite island model of population structure and gene flow) might be violated in most
real situations this estimate is still considered a useful
instrument for comparative purposes (e.g. [67]). The generation duration in túngara frogs is approximately one
year [68].
Genetic diversity: We used the Program FSTAT to calculate allelic richness as a measure of genetic diversity of
each population. Allelic richness measures the number of
alleles per locus and is highly dependent on effective population size. Allelic richness must be standardized to cope
with uneven samples sizes. This is achieved by applying a
rarefaction technique [69] which was first introduced
into ecological studies. The OSx-Statistic implemented in
FSTAT was used to test for differences in allelic richness
among population clusters. One thousand permutations
were run to test the significance of the results.
Isolation by distance: To investigate the effect of gene
flow over distance we used Mantel tests [70] implemented in Arlequin 2.0 [64] to examine the correlation
between geographic distance and genetic distance. We
included three models for analyzing this relationship: (1)
straight line geographic distance versus RST estimates for
pairs of subpopulations; (2) natural logarithm of geographic distance versus RST values; and (3) natural logarithm of geographic distance versus RST/(1-RST). The last
two approaches have been proposed [71] for the FST statistic to linearize the relationship between FST and distance; (the 2nd. and 3rd. approach have been suggested
for larger and smaller distances between populations,
respectively). The first approach, however, yielded the
best results (highest correlation coefficient and coefficient of determination) in our study and only these data
are presented here. We used RST instead of FST because
FST tends to underestimate genetic differentiation when
applied to microsatellite data [63] and this seems to be
also true for túngara frogs [34].
Cytochrome B

To estimate genetic differentiation based on nucleotide
differences we used MEGA 4.0 [72] to calculate uncorrected p-distances and TN distances [73]. We also present TN distance here because it presents a general case of
the HKY model, and takes into account differences in
substitutions rates between transitions and transversions.
The HKY+G model [74] was identified in MODELTEST
as the most likely substitution model by the hierarchical
likelihood ratio test (hLRT) for the Cytochrome B (Cyt B)
sequences. We estimated time of divergence between
genetic clusters by uncorrected p-distance divided by the
pairwise evolutionary rate/MYR.

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

We used Cyt B to determine the divergence time
between the Northern and Southern lineage and the population clusters of túngara frogs, because this gene has
been proven useful for intraspecific and genus level relationships in several amphibian species [2,75-77]. Evolutionary rates of mitochondrial genes have been found to
be relatively constant across diverse poikilothermic vertebrate species [78,79]. Rates of mtDNA evolution were
estimated to be 0.69% sequence divergence per million
years per lineage in the Bufo bufo species group [78]),
0.64% in hynobiid salamanders [79]), and 0.7-0.8% in
north American salamandrids [80]). Taken together these
studies suggest a pairwise rate of change of approximately
1.3-1.4% sequence divergence per million years in
amphibian mitochondrial genes (but see [2,81]). Similar
evolutionary rates have therefore been applied for divergence times for other amphibian species [13,75,82].
Therefore for our analysis we assumed an evolutionary
rate of 0.7%/MYR per lineage which is the same as 0.7
substitutions/site/100 MYR. We estimated divergence
time between population clusters by only applying a standard molecular clock since Weigt et al. (2005) [35] found
a reasonable correspondence in dates and rates between
the "frog clock" and parametric Bayesian methods in P.
pustulosus.
We used TCS vs. 1.21 [83] to construct a haplotype network of Cyt B sequences. The program calculates the frequencies of each haplotype and the number of mutational
steps between two haplotypes associated with the 95%
limit for the probability of parsimony ('parsimony' criterion [84]). Finally we calculated indices of molecular
diversity (number of haplotypes, number of polymorphic
sites, haplotype (= gene) diversity and nucleotide diversity) of the Cyt B sequences applying DnaSP vs. 4.50.3
[85] for the total population, for genetic lineages and for
all population clusters.
Niche Modeling

We employed environmental niche modeling to: (1) predict the current and past distribution of suitable habitat
for túngara frogs, (2) to compare the connectivity across
the distribution gap in Costa Rica between present and
glacial conditions, and (3) to assess the level of ecological
divergence between the Northern and Southern lineage.
Niche models are based on environmental values at localities of known occurrence of the target taxa, which then
are used to identify geographic regions that have similar
combinations of values. The input for model building
consists of (1) a set of localities of known occurrence of
the target species, and (2) environmental data from digital maps (e.g., annual temperature, annual precipitation,
altitude) for the target region. Niche models were
obtained with Maxent, a maximum entropy algorithm
that generates a probability distribution of habitat suit-

Page 15 of 18

ability across the target region [86]. We chose Maxent
among several modeling options because of its high efficiency and predictive performance [86-89]. Maxent operates under the maximum-entropy principle, which seeks
to generate a probability distribution of habitat suitability
that is closest to uniform (i.e., with equal probabilities of
occurrence in all map grid cells) but subject to the constraints imposed by sets of environmental values at localities of known occurrence of the species. The probability
distribution assigns a habitat suitability value to each grid
in the map (see for a description of its mathematical definition and its use in environmental niche modeling). We
ran the analyses using Maxent version 3.2.1 [90] under
the default modeling parameters: convergence threshold
= 10-5, maximum iterations = 500, regularization multiplier = 1.0. The logistic output from Maxent is a raster
map with grid cell values ranging from 0 to 1, which can
be interpreted as the probability of presence of suitable
habitat for the species [89].
Túngara frog localities were obtained from [34,35],
fieldwork by HP and MJR and records from natural history collections: Museum of Vertebrate Zoology at the
University of California Berkeley, Natural History
Museum at the University of Kansas, and Royal Ontario
Museum. Museum records were accessed through the
HerpNET data portal [91]. Localities without coordinates
were georeferenced using the gazetteers from the Alexandria Digital Library Project [92]. To reduce spatial autocorrelation, we only included localities separated by at
least 10 km.
The environmental data for niche modeling consisted
of 12 raster maps (11 bioclimatic variables and altitude;
resolution = 10 km × 10 km per cell) obtained from
WorldClim [88]). The bioclimatic rasters are: (1) annual
mean temperature, (2) mean temperature diurnal range,
(3) isothermality, (4) temperature seasonality, (5) maximum temperature of warmest month, (6) mean temperature of driest quarter, (7) mean temperature of coldest
quarter, (8) annual precipitation, (9) precipitation of wettest month, (10) precipitation seasonality, and (11) precipitation of driest quarter.
To estimate the past distribution of suitable habitat for
túngara frogs, we projected the environmental niche
model to climate conditions for the last glacial maximum
(LGM; ~21,000 BP). The LGM climate raster maps are
based on the palaeoclimate ECHAM3 model and were
assembled as described by Hijmans and Graham (2006)
[88] and Ruegg et al. (2006) [93].
Niche models were built independently for the Northern and the Southern lineages. Models were based on all
available localities (i.e. 9 in western Costa Rica for the
northern group; 21 in eastern Costa Rica and Panama for
the southern group) except in tests of model performance. To tests model performance, the southern locali-

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

ties were partitioned into two halves with random
assignment: a training and a testing set. The training set
was used for model building and the testing set for model
evaluation. By setting an arbitrary threshold, the logistic
output of the model was transformed into a binary map
(suitable vs. unsuitable conditions). Then, we applied a
binomial test to compare the proportion of localities
from the testing set correctly predicted within the suitable habitat vs. the expected proportion for a random
model with the same amount of suitable habitat (e.g., a
random model with suitable habitat on 50% of the total
area is expected to include 50% of the localities just by
chance). This procedure was repeated 10 times, each for a
random partition of localities. In each replicate, the binomial test was applied to 10 commonly used logistic
thresholds. Because the northern group was built with
only 9 localities, we used as testing set the localities of
known presence of túngara frogs outside the study region
(Nicaragua to Mexico). Model performance was also
evaluated with the receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) analysis, which consists of a sensitivity analysis of
the presence and absence points predicted by the model
[86].
Connectivity and suitability across the distribution gap
in Costa Rica: The two most divergent genetic lineages
(North-South) are separated by a ~200 km distribution
gap in Costa Rica. This suggests that genetic divergence is
a result of geographic isolation. Because distribution
ranges change with changing environmental conditions,
we do not know whether both ranges were also unconnected during glacial times. To explore this question, we
developed a new measure of landscape connectivity
based on ecological niche modeling. Landscape connectivity is the degree to which the landscape allows movement across the distribution gap. We assumed that the
resistance to movement across habitat is an inverse function of habitat suitability, as defined by the niche models.
We obtained a raster map of habitat resistance by subtracting one minus the niche suitability values from the
logistic output (ranging from 0 to 1). Based on this raster,
we estimated the least-cost distance path [94] between
the distribution borders of both genetic lineages in Costa
Rica. A high value of this metric will indicate that habitat
resistance to movement is high and thus genetic flux
more difficult. If the analyses show that the gap currently
separating both ranges was more resistant to dispersal
during the last glaciation, we will have much greater confidence in the role of geographic isolation as the main
cause for genetic divergence. The least-cost distance path
was calculated with the Connectivity Tool (version 2) for
ESRI ArcGIS(r) [95]. To test for differences in habitat
suitability between the last glacial maximum and current
conditions on the distribution gap, we compared, with a

Page 16 of 18

Student's paired t-test, the LVs for the present model vs.
the LVs for the glacial model contrasting overlapping pixels in the gap (hence the paired test).

Additional material
Additional file 1 Pairwise RST values among Middle American populations of túngara frogs (Physalaemus pustulosus). Matrix of pairwise RST
values based on microsatellites between all sampled populations of túngara frogs.
Additional file 2 Assignment of individuals to sample localities. All
individuals were genetically assigned to sample localities by the program
GENECLASS2. The figures present the % of individuals in every sampled (=
"home") population for those the most likely "source" population is the
"home" population (black bars), the most likely "source" population is
another population from the same population cluster (grey bars), the most
likely "source" population is from another population cluster (light grey
bars); A) Population cluster North, B) Population cluster South_1, C) Population cluster South_2, D) Population cluster South_3.
Additional file 3 First generation migrants. List of first generation
migrants detected by GENECLASS2: the table contains all individual frogs
which probably migrated from a "source" population to their "home" population (= sample locality).
Additional file 4 Genetic diversity in population clusters. Genetic
diversity as measured by allelic richness with FSTAT in all populations organized by population clusters.
Additional file 5 GenBank accession numbers for Cyt B sequences.
Sampling localities, genetic clusters and GenBank accession numbers of all
Cyt B sequences from túngara frogs analyzed in this study.
Authors' contributions
HP designed the study, collected samples, carried out the molecular studies,
performed statistical analyses, and drafted the manuscript. SRR performed
niche-modeling analysis, interpreted data and helped writing the manuscript.
MJR participated in the design of the study, interpreted data and helped draft
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Costa Rican (MINAE) and Panamanian (ANAM) authorities for
research permits (232-2000-OFAU, 160-2001-OFAU, 259-2002-OFAU, 169-2003OFAU, DNAPVS-01-2000, DNPN-001-2002), the Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute for logistical help, C. Salaz, I. Meuche and C. Ávila for help during field
work and R. A. Koshy for help in the lab. R. Brüning prepared Figure 1 and Figure 5. HP was funded by a research grant from the German Science Foundation
(PR 626/2-1), MJR by NSF IBN-981654, and SRR by SENACYT (PI-C08-0000470).
Author Details
1Institute of Zoology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Bünteweg 17, 30559
Hannover, Germany, 2Museo de Zoología, Centro de Biodiversidad y Ambiente,
Escuela de Biología, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador, Av. 12 de
Octubre 1076 y Roca, Aptdo. 17-01-2184, Quito Ecuador, 3Section of
Integrative Biology, 1 University Station C09300, The University of Texas,
TX78712, USA and 4Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, P.O. Box 094303092 Balboa Ancón, Republic of Panamá
Received: 11 May 2009 Accepted: 18 May 2010
Published: 18 May 2010
© 2010 Pröhl available article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146
BMC article is et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146

References
1. Slatkin M: Gene flow in natural populations. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 1985,
16:393-430.
2. Palo JU, Schmeller DS, Laurila A, Primmer CR, Kuzmin SL, Merila J: High
degree of population subdivision in a widespread amphibian. Mol Ecol
2004, 13(9):2631-2644.
3. Funk WC, Blouin MS, Corn PS, Maxell BA, Pilliod DS, Amish S, Allendorf FW:
Population structure of Columbia spotted frogs (Rana luteiventris) is
strongly affected by the landscape. Mol Ecol 2005, 14(2):483-496.

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Kraaijeveld-Smit FJL, Beebee TJC, Griffiths RA, Moore RD, Schley L: Low
gene flow but high genetic diversity in the threatened Mallorcan
midwife toad Alytes muletensis. Mol Ecol 2005, 14(11):3307-3315.
Wright S: Isolation by distance. Genetics 1943, 28:139-156.
Hitchings SP, Beebee TJC: Genetic substructuring as a result of barriers
to gene flow in urban Rana temporaria (common frog) populations:
implications for biodiversity conservation. Heredity 1997, 79:117-127.
Spear SF, Peterson CR, Matocq MD, Storfer A: Landscape genetics of the
blotched tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum melanostictum). Mol
Ecol 2005, 14(8):2553-2564.
Monsen KJ, Blouin MS: Extreme isolation by distance in a montane frog
Rana cascadae. Conserv Genet 2004, 5(6):827-835.
Rowe G, Beebee TJC, Burke T: A microsatellite analysis of natterjack toad,
Bufo calamita, metapopulations. Oikos 2000, 88(3):641-651.
Waldmann B, McKinnon JS: Inbreeding and outbreeding in fishes,
amphibians and reptiles. In The natural history of Inbreeding and
Outbreeding: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives Edited by: Thornhill NW.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1993:251-282.
Stebbins RC, Cohen NW: A Natural History of Amphibians. New Jersey:
Princeton University Press; 1995.
Newman RA, Squire T: Microsatellite variation and fine-scale population
structure in the wood frog (Rana sylvatica). Mol Ecol 2001,
10(5):1087-1100.
Crawford AJ: Huge populations and old species of Costa Rican and
Panamanian dirt frogs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear gene
sequences. Mol Ecol 2003, 12(10):2525-2540.
Leblois R, Rousset F, Tikel D, Moritz C, Estoup A: Absence of evidence for
isolation by distance in an expanding cane toad (Bufo marinus)
population: an individual-based analysis of microsatellite genotypes.
Mol Ecol 2000, 9(11):1905-1909.
Edenhamn P, Hoggren M, Carlson A: Genetic diversity and fitness in
peripheral and central populations of the European tree frog Hyla
arborea. Hereditas 2000, 133(2):115-122.
Eales J, Thorpe RS, Malhotra A: Weak founder effect signal in a recent
introduction of Caribbean Anolis. Mol Ecol 2008, 17(6):1416-1426.
Lougheed SC, Gascon C, Jones DA, Bogart JP, Boag PT: Ridges and rivers:
a test of competing hypotheses of Amazonian diversification using a
dart-poison frog (Epipedobates femoralis). Proc R Soc B-Biol Sci 1999,
266(1431):1829-1835.
Crawford AJ, Bermingham E, Polania C: The role of tropical dry forest as a
long-term barrier to dispersal: a comparative phylogeographical
analysis of dry forest tolerant and intolerant frogs. Mol Ecol 2007,
16(22):4789-4807.
deMaynadier PG, Hunter ML: Forest canopy closure and juvenile
emigration by pool-breeding amphibians in Maine. J Wildl Manage
1999, 63(2):441-450.
Schluter D: Evidence for Ecological Speciation and Its Alternative.
Science 2009, 323(5915):737-741.
Graham CH, Ron SR, Santos JC, Schneider CJ, Moritz C: Integrating
phylogenetics and environmental niche models to explore speciation
mechanisms in dendrobatid frogs. Evolution 2004, 58(8):1781-1793.
Gascon C, Lougheed SC, Bogart JP: Patterns of genetic population
differentiation in four species of Amazonian frogs: A test of the riverine
barrier hypothesis. Biotropica 1998, 30(1):104-119.
Robertson JM, Duryea MC, Zamudio KR: Discordant patterns of
evolutionary differentiation in two Neotropical treefrogs. Mol Ecol
2009, 18(7):1375-1395.
Elmer KR, Davila JA, Lougheed SC: Cryptic diversity and deep divergence
in an upper Amazonian leaflitter frog, Eleutherodactylus ockendeni.
Bmc Evolutionary Biology 2007, 7:.
Wang IJ, Crawford AJ, Bermingham E: Phylogeography of the Pygmy
Rain Frog (Pristimantis ridens) across the lowland wet forests of
isthmian Central America. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2008,
47(3):992-1004.
Roberts JL, Brown JL, Schulte R, Arizabal W, Summers K: Rapid
diversification of colouration among populations of a poison frog
isolated on sky peninsulas in the central cordilleras of Peru. Journal of
Biogeography 2007, 34(3):417-426.
Noonan BP, Gaucher P: Refugial isolation and secondary contact in the
dyeing poison frog Dendrobates tinctorius. Mol Ecol 2006,
15(14):4425-4435.

Page 17 of 18

28. Noonan BP, Wray KP: Neotropical diversification: the effects of a
complex history on diversity within the poison frog genus
Dendrobates. Journal of Biogeography 2006, 33(6):1007-1020.
29. Roberts JL, Brown JL, von May R, Arizabal W, Schulte R, Summers K:
Genetic divergence and speciation in lowland and montane peruvian
poison frogs. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2006, 41(1):149-164.
30. Hagemann S, Pröhl H: Mitochondrial paraphyly in a polymorphic poison
frog species (Dendrobatidae; D-pumilio). Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 2007, 45(2):740-747.
31. Wiens JJ, Graham CH, Moen DS, Smith SA, Reeder TW: Evolutionary and
ecological causes of the latitudinal diversity gradient in hylid frogs:
Treefrog trees unearth the roots of high tropical diversity. American
Naturalist 2006, 168(5):579-596.
32. Ryan MJ, Rand AS, Weigt LA: Allozyme and advertisement call variation
in the tungara frog, Physalaemus pustulosus. Evolution 1996,
50(6):2435-2453.
33. Lampert KP, Rand AS, Mueller UG, Ryan MJ: Fine-scale genetic pattern
and evidence for sex-biased dispersal in the tungara frog, Physalaemus
pustulosus. Mol Ecol 2003, 12(12):3325-3334.
34. Pröhl H, Koshy RA, Mueller U, Rand AS, Ryan MJ: Geographic variation of
genetic and behavioral traits in northern and southern Tungara frogs.
Evolution 2006, 60(8):1669-1679.
35. Weigt LA, Crawford AJ, Rand AS, Ryan MJ: Biogeography of the tungara
frog, Physalaemus pustulosus: a molecular perspective. Mol Ecol 2005,
14(12):3857-3876.
36. Ryan MJ: Sexual selection, receiver biases, and the evolution of sex
differences. Science 1998, 281(5385):1999-2003.
37. Ryan MJ, Rand AS: Sexual selection in female perceptual space: How
female tungara frogs perceive and respond to complex population
variation in acoustic mating signals. Evolution 2003, 57(11):2608-2618.
38. Coates AG, Obando JA: The geologic evolution of the Central American
Istmus. In Evolution and Environment in Tropical America Edited by:
Jackson JBC, Budd AF, Coates AG. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago
Press; 1996:21-56.
39. Ron SR, Santos JC, Cannatella DC: Phylogeny of the tungara frog genus
Engystomops (= Physalaemus pustulosus species group; Anura:
Leptodactylidae). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2006, 39(2):392-403.
40. Savage JM: The amphibians and reptiles of Costa Rica - A herpetofauna
between two continents between two seas. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press; 2002.
41. Lampert KP, Bernal XE, Rand AS, Mueller UG, Ryan MJ: Island populations
of Physalaemus pustulosus: History influences genetic diversity and
morphology. Herpetologica 2007, 63(3):311-319.
42. Marsh DM, Rand AS, Ryan MJ: Effects of inter-pond distance on the
breeding ecology of tungara frogs. Oecologia 2000, 122(4):505-513.
43. Marsh DM, Fegraus EH, Harrison S: Effects of breeding pond isolation on
the spatial and temporal dynamics of pond use by the tungara frog,
Physalaemus pustulosus. J Anim Ecol 1999, 68(4):804-814.
44. The IUCN Red list of threatended species [http://www.iucnredlist.org]
45. Wiens JJ, Graham CH: Niche conservatism: Integrating evolution,
ecology, and conservation biology. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2005,
36:519-539.
46. Coyne J, Orr H: Speciation. Sunderland: Sinauer Associates; 2004.
47. Ryan MJ, Bernal XE, Rand AS: Patterns of mating call preferences in
tungara frogs, Physalaemus pustulosus. J Evol Biol 2007, 20(6):2235-2247.
48. Coyne JA, Orr HA: Speciation. Sunderland: Sinauer Associates; 2004.
49. Höbel G, Gerhardt HC: Reproductive character displacement in the
acoustic communication system of green tree frogs (Hyla cinerea).
Evolution 2003, 57(4):894-904.
50. Wells KD: The ecology and behaviour of amphibians. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press; 2007.
51. Tárano Z, Ryan MJ: No pre-existing biases for heterospecific call traits in
the frog Physalaemus enesefae. Anim Behav 2002, 64:599-607.
52. Ron SR, Santos JC, Cannatella DC: Phylogeny of the túngara frog genus
Engystomops (= Physalaemus pustulosus species group; Anura;
Leptodactylidae). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2006, 39:392-403.
53. Pröhl H, Adams RMM, Mueller U, Rand S, Ryan MJ: Polymerase chain
reaction primers for polymorphic microsatellite loci from the tungara
frog Physalaemus pustulosus. Mol Ecol Notes 2002, 2(3):341-343.
54. Kalinowski ST: How many alleles per locus should be used to estimate
genetic distances? Heredity 2002, 88:62-65.

Pröhl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/146

55. Moritz C, Schneider CJ, Wake DB: Evolutionary relationships within the
Ensatina-eschscholtzii complex confirn the ring species interpretation.
Syst Biol 1992, 41(3):273-291.
56. Goebel AM, Donnelly JM, Atz ME: PCR primers and amplification
methods for 125 ribosomal DNA, the control region, cytochrome
oxidase I, and cytochrome b in bufonids and other frogs, and an
overview of PCR primers which have amplified DNA in amphibians
successfully. Mol Phylogenet Evol 1999, 11(1):163-199.
57. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple
sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res
1997, 25(24):4876-4882.
58. Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data. Genetics 2000, 155(2):945-959.
59. Evanno G, Regnaut S, Goudet J: Detecting the number of clusters of
individuals using the software STRUCTURE: a simulation study. Mol
Ecol 2005, 14(8):2611-2620.
60. Documentation for STRUCTURE software: Version 2 [http://
pritch.bsd.uchicago.edu]
61. Falush D, Stephens M, Pritchard JK: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data: Linked loci and correlated allele
frequencies. Genetics 2003, 164(4):1567-1587.
62. Weir BS, Cockerham CC: Estimating F-Statistics for the analysis of
population structure. Evolution 1984, 38(6):1358-1370.
63. Slatkin M: A measure of population subdivision based on microsatellite
allele fequencies. Genetics 1995, 139(1):457-462.
64. Schneider S, Roessli D, Excoffier L: Software for Population Genetic Data
Analysis. Genetics and Biomatry Laboratory, Univ. of Geneva, Geneva;
2000.
65. Rannala B, Mountain JL: Detecting immigration by using multilocus
genotypes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94(17):9197-9201.
66. Paetkau D, Slade R, Burden M, Estoup A: Genetic assignment methods
for the direct, real-time estimation of migration rate: a simulationbased exploration of accuracy and power. Mol Ecol 2004, 13(1):55-65.
67. Canestrelli D, Verardi A, Nascetti G: Genetic differentiation and history of
populations of the Italian treefrog Hyla intermedia: lack of concordance
between mitochondrial and nuclear markers. Genetica 2007,
130(3):241-255.
68. Ryan MJ: The túngara frog, a study in sexual selection and
communication. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1985.
69. Petit RJ, ElMousadik A, Pons O: Identifying populations for conservation
on the basis of genetic markers. Conserv Biol 1998, 12(4):844-855.
70. Smouse PE, Long JC, Sokal RR: Multiple regression and correlation
extensions of the Mantel test of matrix correspondence. Systematic
Zoology 1986, 35(4):627-632.
71. Rousset F: Genetic differentiation and estimation of gene flow from Fstatistics under isolation by distance. Genetics 1997, 145(4):1219-1228.
72. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular evolutionary
genetics analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(8):1596-1599.
73. Tamura K, Nei M: Estimation of the number of nucleotide substitutions
in the control region of mitochondrial DNA in humans and
chimpanzees. Mol Biol Evol 1993, 10(3):512-526.
74. Hasegawa M, Kishino H, Yano TA: Dating of the human ape splitting by a
molecular clock of mitochondrial. J Mol Evol 1985, 22(2):160-174.
75. Austin JD, Lougheed SC, Moler PE, Boag PT: Phylogenetics,
zoogeography, and the role of dispersal and vicariance in the
evolution of the Rana catesbeiana (Anura: Ranidae) species group. Biol
J Linnean Soc 2003, 80(4):601-624.
76. Hagemann S, Pröhl H: Mitochondrial paraphyly in a polymorphic poison
frog species (Dendrobatidae; D.pumilio). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007,
45(2):740-747.
77. Mueller RL: Evolutionary rates, divergence dates, and the performance
of mitochondrial genes in Bayesian phylogenetic analysis. Syst Biol
2006, 55(2):289-300.
78. Macey JR, Schulte JA, Larson A, Fang ZL, Wang YZ, Tuniyev BS, Papenfuss
TJ: Phylogenetic relationships of toads in the Bufo bufo species group
from the eastern escarpment of the Tibetan Plateau: A case of
vicariance and dispersal. Mol Phylogenet Evol 1998, 9(1):80-87.
79. Macey JR, Strasburg JL, Brisson JA, Vredenburg VT, Jennings M, Larson A:
Molecular phylogenetics of western North American frogs of the Rana
boylii species group. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2001, 19(1):131-143.

Page 18 of 18

80. Tan AM, Wake DB: MtDNA phylogeography of the California newt,
Taricha torosa (Caudata, salamandridae). Mol Phylogenet Evol 1995,
4(4):383-394.
81. Veith M, Kosuch J, Vences M: Climatic oscillations triggered postMessinian speciation of Western Palearctic brown frogs (Amphibia,
Ranidae). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 26(2):310-327.
82. Elmer KR, Davila JA, Lougheed SC: Cryptic diversity and deep divergence
in an upper Amazonian leaflitter frog, Eleutherodactylus ockendeni.
BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:14.
83. Clement M, Posada D, Crandall KA: TCS: a computer program to estimate
gene genealogies. Mol Ecol 2000, 9(10):1657-1659.
84. Templeton AR, Crandall KA, Sing CF: Al cladistic analysis of phenotypic
associations with haplotypes inferred from restriction endonuclease
mapping and DNA sequence data. 3. Cladogram estimation. Genetics
1992, 132(2):619-633.
85. Rozas J, Sanchez-DelBarrio JC, Messeguer X, Rozas R: DnaSP, DNA
polymorphism analyses by the coalescent and other methods.
Bioinformatics 2003, 19(18):2496-2497.
86. Phillips SJ, Anderson RP, Schapire RE: Maximum entropy modeling of
species geographic distributions. Ecol Model 2006, 190(3-4):231-259.
87. Elith J, Graham CH, Anderson RP, Dudik M, Ferrier S, Guisan A, Hijmans RJ,
Huettmann F, Leathwick JR, Lehmann A, et al.: Novel methods improve
prediction of species' distributions from occurrence data. Ecography
2006, 29(2):129-151.
88. Hijmans RJ, Graham CH: The ability of climate envelope models to
predict the effect of climate change on species distributions. Glob
Change Biol 2006, 12(12):2272-2281.
89. Phillips SJ, Dudik M: Modeling of species distributions with Maxent: new
extensions and a comprehensive evaluation. Ecography 2008,
31(2):161-175.
90. Maxtent software for species habitat modeling [http://
www.cs.princeton.edu/~schapire/maxent/]
91. HerpNet [http://www.herpnet.org/]
92. Alexandria Digital Library Project [http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu]
93. Ruegg KC, Hijmans RJ, Moritz C: Climate change and the origin of
migratory pathways in the Swainson's thrush, Catharus ustulatus. J
Biogeogr 2006, 33(7):1172-1182.
94. Drielsma M, Manion G, Ferrier S: The spatial links tool: Automated
mapping of habitat linkages in variegated landscapes. Ecol Model 2007,
200(3-4):403-411.
95. Lin JP: A metric and GIS tool for measuring connectivity among habitat
patches using least-cost distances. Vicksburg: US Army Engineer
Research and Development Center; 2008.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-146
Cite this article as: Pröhl et al., Ecological and genetic divergence between
two lineages of Middle American túngara frogs Physalaemus (= Engystomops) pustulosus BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:146

</pre>
</body>
</html>
