<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary and functional insights into Leishmania META1: evidence for lateral gene transfer and a role for META1 in secretion</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-334"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Vidhi Puri"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Evolutionary and functional insights into
Leishmania META1: evidence for lateral gene
transfer and a role for META1 in secretion
Puri et al.
Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334 (17 November 2011)

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolutionary and functional insights into
Leishmania META1: evidence for lateral gene
transfer and a role for META1 in secretion
Vidhi Puri1, Aneesh Goyal1,3, Rajan Sankaranarayanan1, Anton J Enright2 and Tushar Vaidya1*

Abstract
Background: Leishmania META1 has for long been a candidate molecule for involvement in virulence: META1
transcript and protein are up-regulated in metacyclic Leishmania. Yet, how META1 contributes to virulence remains
unclear. We sought insights into the possible functions of META1 by studying its evolutionary origins.
Results: Using multiple criteria including sequence similarity, nucleotide composition, phylogenetic analysis and
selection pressure on gene sequence, we present evidence that META1 originated in trypanosomatids as a result of
a lateral gene transfer of a bacterial heat-inducible protein, HslJ. Furthermore, within the Leishmania genome,
META1 sequence is under negative selection pressure against change/substitution. Using homology modeling of
Leishmania META1 based on solved NMR structure of HslJ, we show that META1 and HslJ share a similar structural
fold. The best hit for other proteins with similar fold is MxiM, a protein involved in the type III secretion system in
Shigella. The striking structural similarity shared by META1, HslJ and MxiM suggests a possibility of shared functions.
Upon structural superposition with MxiM, we have observed a putative hydrophobic cavity in META1. Mutagenesis
of select hydrophobic residues in this cavity affects the secretion of the secreted acid phosphatase (SAP), indicating
META1’s involvement in secretory processes in Leishmania.
Conclusions: Overall, this work uses an evolutionary biology approach, 3D-modeling and site-directed mutagenesis
to arrive at new insights into functions of Leishmania META1.

Background
Leishmaniasis is a spectrum of parasitic disease caused by
Leishmania spp. protozoa, transmitted to its mammalian
host by bite of an infected female sand fly vector. The
clinical manifestations of the disease range from the
potentially fatal visceral disease caused by L. donovani
complex (L. donovani and L. infantum) to disfiguring,
but self curing cutaneous form caused by L. major in the
Old World and L. amazonensis and L. mexicana in the
New World. Within the sand fly, Leishmania exists as an
extracellular, flagellated form and gets transformed into
an intracellular, sessile amastigote in phagolysosome of
the macrophages. The role of many molecules like GP63
[1-5], lipophosphoglycan [6-12], cysteine proteases
[13-15] etc. that are differentially expressed in the two
* Correspondence: tvaidya@ccmb.res.in
1
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, Uppal Road, Hyderabad - 500 007, Andhra Pradesh, India
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

developmental stages of the parasite have been studied
for their involvement in adaptation of the parasite in
such disparate environments and enhancing virulence of
the parasite. A lot more remains to be learnt, including
the functions, of many such virulence factors. Understanding the mechanistic details of function of virulence
factors will help us develop novel intervention strategies
against the parasite and the disease.
META1 was one such gene identified in L. major,
found to be conserved across the Leishmania genus.
Both transcript and protein was found to be up-regulated
in the metacyclic stage of promastigotes. The META1
protein was found to localize surrounding the flagellar
pocket in L. major stationary phase promastigotes [16].
On META1 overexpression in L. amazonensis, parasites
were found to be more virulent than wild-type [17].
Another gene in Leishmania, also up-regulated in metacyclic promastigotes is named META2, and contains
three META domains and a calpain-like domain at the

© 2011 Puri et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

carboxy terminus [18]. META (PF03724) is currently
described as a small domain family of unknown function
in Leishmania META1 and in bacterial proteins,
hypothetically secreted/implicated in motility. However,
apart from some of its developmental expression and its
suggested role in virulence, the precise functions of
META1 in the parasite remain unknown.
In order to understand META1’s function, we investigated its relationship with its near homologs in other
organisms. Based on several criteria, we have been able
to establish in this study that META1 of Leishmania is a
homolog of a bacterial gene for a heat shock inducible
protein, hslJ that has been transferred by an ancient lateral gene transfer event between bacteria and a trypanosomatid ancestor. We have highlighted similarities in
various characteristics of the two proteins like their
relatedness to pathogenicity/virulence, heat inducible
expression and also shown by homology modeling that
they are not only evolutionarily linked but structurally
similar as well. Furthermore, our homology modeling
identified yet another structural homolog MxiM, a
secretin pilot protein of Shigella flexneri, which is
involved in that pathogen’s type III secretion system.
Based on structural homology between META1 &
MxiM and subsequent mutagenesis, we have identified a
putative hydrophobic cavity in Leishmania META1 that
seems to be important for function of META1 and indicates a role for META1 in Leishmania secretory
processes.

Results
Sequence similarity searches

The META1 sequence is highly conserved across the
Leishmania genus [16]. Based on this high degree of conservation and the convenient accessibility of L. major genome sequence and other related resources over those for
other Leishmania species, all of our bioinformatics analyses have used L. major META1 as the representative species. We began our study by using BLASTP to search for
homologs of META1 protein against the NCBI NRDB.
Homologs of META1 were found in all other Leishmania
species and Trypanosomes (Additional file 1).
Since BLASTP search failed to detect any functionally
characterized homolog within or outside the Trypanosomatidae family, a PSI-BLAST search was performed
against NCBI NRDB. This search yielded hits beyond the
trypanosomatids as early as the second iteration. Interestingly, these significant hits were all homologs of the heat
shock inducible protein HslJ from bacteria. Table 1 lists
representative hits after 3 iterations. All sequence homologs of META1 (trypanosomatid as well as bacterial) are
characterized by the presence of at least one META
domain. Although there is a low direct pairwise sequence
identity of 25% between META1 and HslJ (Figure 1),

Page 2 of 16

bacterial HslJ is currently the closest relative of Leishmania META1 outside the family Trypanosomatidae. The
most likely explanation for this unusual phyletic relationship is that META1 in trypanosomatids originated as a
result of a lateral gene transfer (LGT) event from
bacteria.
Anomalous nucleotide composition

Most genomes have distinct overall GC content and the
genes in their genome are fairly similar in base composition and patterns of codon usage. A laterally transferred
gene continues to carry imprints of its origin and ancestry
whilst residing in its current recipient genome. Such ‘foreign genes’ can be identified by their unusual sequence
characteristics vis a vis the recipient genome [19-21]. GC
content at first and third codon positions and synonymous
codon usage are generally used for such analysis. ORFs are
identified as atypical if their GC contents at first and third
codon positions (GC 1 & GC 3 respectively) are two or
more standard deviations (SDs) higher or lower than the
respective means for all genes in that genome. Our analysis revealed that the total GC content of L. major META1
is 54%, which is 6.3 SD lower than the average of the total
GC content of all genes in L. major genome. In addition,
LmjMETA1 has a GC1 content of 48.67% (15.8 SD lower
than GC1 of all genes in L. major genome) and a GC3 content of 77% (within the range of SD for GC3 of L. major
genome), as summarized in Figure 2A. GC content anomaly results establish that META1 nucleotide composition
is distinct from the overall Leishmania genome and therefore, is possibly of foreign origin.
Codon adaptation index (CAI), on the other hand, gives
an account of similarity of synonymous codon usage to
that of a standard set of highly expressed genes for that
organism. Thus, for a native gene CAI is high and for a
gene of exogenous origin CAI value is low. As part of
CAI determination, we analyzed a set of other genes for
reference along with META1 (Additional file 2). The
genes that were included: Amastin & GP63 (specific to
trypanosomatids), Hexokinase & Ribosomal Protein S8
(present in all taxa), a-Tubulin (a pan-eukaryotic structural protein) and PTR-1 & Coproporphyrinogen, previously predicted to be laterally transferred in L. major
from bacteria [22]. META1, PTR-1 and Coproporphyrinogen all have low CAI values when compared to
the other reference genes (Figure 2B), suggesting again,
that META1 is of exogenous origin. We also carried
out a similar analysis on META1 homologs in T. cruzi
(Additional file 3); where once again the CAI of the
META homologs is lower than that of other Trypanosoma genes (RP S8 and a-Tubulin). These analyses, and
the striking frequency of bacterial HslJ hits, point to bacterial hslJ being the exogenous source of META1 into
trypanosomatids.

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Page 3 of 16

Table 1 List of bacterial HslJ hits obtained from PSI-BLAST search after 3 iterations for LmjMETA1 against nonredundant NCBI database
Species Name

Description

Accession

E-value

Cyanothece sp. PCC 7822

Protein of unknown function,
DUF306 Meta and HslJ

ZP_03153678.1

7e-23

Beutenbergia cavernae DSM 12333

Protein of unknown function,
DUF306 Meta and HslJ

YP_002881157.1

2e-16

Tolumonas auensis
DSM 9187

Protein of unknown function,
DUF306 Meta and HslJ

YP_002892522.1

2e-7

gamma proteobacterium HTCC5015

Conserved
hypothetical protein

ZP_05061049.1

2e-6

Roseobacter sp. AzwK-3b

Hypothetical protein RAZWK3B_01740

ZP_01901204.1

5e-6

Sphingopyxis alaskensis RB2256

Protein of unknown function,
DUF306 Meta and HslJ

YP_617096.1

1e-5

Alcanivorax sp. DG881

Conserved domain protein

ZP_05041611.1

2e-5

Vibrionales bacterium SWAT-3

Hypothetical protein VSWAT3_19198

XP_844891.1

2e-5

Roseovarius sp. TM1035

Probable secreted protein
containing HslJ-like protein

XP_844900.1

2e-5

Colwellia psychrerythraea 34H

Putative lipoprotein

XP_001464756.1

3e-5

Beijerinckia indica subsp. indica ATCC 9039

Protein of unknown function,
DUF306 Meta and HslJ

YP_001832384.1

3e-5

Bacteroides vulgatus
ATCC 8482

Hypothetical protein
BVU_2381

YP_001299662.1

5e-5

Hyphomonas neptunium ATCC 15444

hypothetical protein HNE_0979

YP_759703.1

6e-5

Opitutaceae bacterium TAV2

Heat shock protein-like protein

ZP_03723590.1

9e-5

In order to study the phylogenetic linkage between
META1 and HslJ, we generated a phylogenetic tree based
on the protein sequences of META1 homologs in trypanosomatids and HslJ homologs in bacteria. A multiple
sequence alignment containing 30 sequences (16 trypanosomatid and 14 bacterial) was used to create a phylogenetic tree using PhyML. Topology of the phylogenetic tree
and the bootstrap values of the branch points (Figure 3),
again indicate the occurrence of a LGT event of META/
hslJ from bacteria to a trypanosomatid.

non-synonymous to synonymous rate of substitution
(Ka /K s ) reflects the selection pressure on a gene [23].
We observed that META1 and the META domain in
bacterial hslJ homologs are under strong purifying selection as indicated by the Ka/Ks values < 1 in a pairwise
comparison of LmjMETA1 and META domain of 14
bacterial hslJ homologs (Figure 4). Therefore, lower substitution rates for META1 emphasizes the selection
pressure on it, a constraint on the Leishmania genome
not to change it rapidly and thus, the importance of
conservation of this gene.

Synonymous and non-synonymous rate estimates

META1 expression in Leishmania

Estimation of synonymous (K s ) and non-synonymous
substitution (Ka) rates is an important tool for understanding molecular sequence evolution and the ratio of

hslJ transcript is up-regulated in more pathogenic
strains of E. coli [24] and the protein is heat inducible
[25]. To delineate similarities between META1 and hslJ,

Phylogenetic relationship between META1 and HslJ

Figure 1 Sequence similarity between Leishmania META1 (1-112 aa) and E. coli HslJ (25-140 aa). Amino acid sequence of L. major META1
(LmjMETA1) is globally aligned to E. coli HslJ devoid of the N-terminal signal sequence using EMBOSS. Residues shaded in black are identical and
residues shaded in grey are conservative substitutions. The numbers on the right indicate amino acid positions.

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Atypical nucleotide composition. (A) GC content anomaly. GC content anomaly. Percentage of total GC content and GC content at
codon positions of all L. major ORFs and L. major META1. The vertical error bars represent the mean value +/- 2 S.D. for L. major genome. Total,
total GC content; GC1, GC content at first codon position; GC2, GC content at second codon position and GC3, GC content at third codon position.
(B) Codon usage bias. Codon Adaptation Index (CAI) of 7 reference genes (Amastin, GP63, Hexokinase, Ribosomal Protein (RP) S8, a-Tubulin, PTR-1,
Coproporphyrinogen (Coprogen)) and META1. The accession numbers of the protein sequences used are given in Additional file 2.

we investigated the expression pattern of META1.
META1 transcript levels were determined by QRT-PCR
at different developmental stages of virulent and attenuated lines of L. donovani. META1 transcript is up-regulated from log to stationary phase promastigotes as well
as from promastigote to amastigote stage (Figure 5A).

META1 protein in L. donovani is maximally expressed
in amastigotes (Figure 5B) even though META1 transcript levels in amastigotes are lower than stationary
phase promastigotes. META1 protein is induced within
24 hours of shift to amastigote culture conditions,
increases further upto 48 hours and its expression

Figure 3 Phylogenetic relationship between META1 and HslJ. Phylogenetic analysis was done using PhyML [68]. The phylogram represented
is a consensus of a 100 bootstrap replicates and is rooted at the basal node. The numbers at the node represent the percentage of trees with
the same node among all of the bootstraps. Only bootstrap values ≥ 40% have been mentioned. A horizontal bar marked with 0.1 above the
tree represents scale of the generated tree.

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Page 5 of 16

Figure 4 Synonymous (Ks ) and non-synonymous (K a ) substitution rates of LmjMETA1 and META domain of all bacterial HslJs.
Substitution rates were estimated using Yang and Nielson method [23] as implemented in yn00 in the PAML package. All bacterial HslJ
homologs from PSI-BLAST with a representative sequence from each genus were used, with an e-value threshold ≤ 1x10-5.

decreases within 24 hours of reversal back to promastigote conditions (Figure 5C). The most striking observation is that attenuated Leishmania have reduced
META1 expression under all conditions, as compared to
virulent cells (Figure 5).
Acidic pH and increased temperature (shift from 26°C to
37°C) are very important cues for the in vivo as well as in
vitro conversion of promastigotes to amastigotes [26-28].
Since we found that META1 is up-regulated in amastigotes stage, we investigated the role of these two parameters individually. We found that while both acidic pH
and increased temperature induce META1 expression,
increased temperature has a greater effect (Figure 5D).
Levels of META1 on western blots have been quantified
as shown in Additional file 4.

presence of the a-helix. We also generated a structural
model by homology modeling using MODELLER 9v2 [30]
for Leishmania META1 using E. coli HslJ (PDB code 2kts)
as the template. The final model (Figure 6A) comprises of
complete META1 sequence (1-112) threaded on known
NMR structure of E. coli HslJ (PDB code 2kts) for residues
25-140 (Figure 6B). The two proteins share a similar structural fold given that 107 Ca atoms of total 116 Ca atoms
across the length of the proteins could be superposed with
a root mean square deviation (RMSD) value of 1.2 Å and a
sequence identity of ~ 28%. The striking structural similarity underscores that despite low sequence identity,
META1 and HslJ have been under evolutionary constraints to retain a similar fold.

Structural homology between META1 and HslJ

Comparison to proteins with similar folds of known
function

In the absence of a solved structure of Leishmania
META1 protein, we used 3D-JURY [29] structure prediction to look for structural homologs of META1. Consistent with our earlier searches, we found the top scoring
model for META1 was based on E. coli HslJ. HslJ structure has 10 b-strands, which resembles a b-barrel structure except of the discontinuity caused due to the

Since little is known about E.coli HslJ’s function with
respect to its structure, we decided to look for additional
proteins with similar fold. In DALI server [31], we found a
structural homolog of HslJ: the Shigella flexneri protein
MxiM (Figure 6A and Additional file 5). Despite a low
sequence identity between HslJ and MxiM of only ~13%,
94 C a atoms of the total 116 C a atoms could be

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Page 6 of 16

Figure 5 META1 expression in Leishmania donovani. (A) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of META1 transcript in virulent and attenuated lines. The
relative expression of META1 gene in various stages is presented as fold difference over expression in V3. The average of 3 biological replicates is
presented. Bar represents standard deviation. V3 and A3: virulent and attenuated log phase promastigotes respectively; V7 and A7: virulent and
attenuated stationary phase promastigotes respectively; VA and AA: virulent and attenuated amastigotes respectively. (B) META1 protein
expression in virulent and attenuated lines. Total cell lysates from various stages of L. donovani were obtained at the indicated growth stages.
The samples were assessed by western blotting with META1 (upper panel) and BiP (lower panel) antibodies. Leishmania BiP is a chaperone
protein in the endoplasmic reticulum and was used as a loading control. (C) Time-course kinetics of META1 expression in promastigotes and
amastigotes. Total cell lysates at various time intervals after switch to amastigote culture conditions from promastigotes of L. donovani were
obtained at the indicated time points. Lysates were probed with META1 (upper panel) and BiP (lower panel) antibodies. Left panel represents
virulent and right panel represents attenuated L. donovani respectively. D3: log phase promastigotes; A24 and A48: 24 hours and 48 hours after
shift to amastigote culture conditions respectively; A48/P24, A48/P48 and A48/P72: 48 hours amastigotes shifted to promastigote conditions for
24 hours, 48 hours and 72 hours respectively. (D) Heat inducible expression of META1. Total cell lysates after individual or concomitant shift to
pH 5.5 or 37°C for 48 hours of L. donovani promastigotes at pH 7.4 and 26°C were obtained for both virulent (lanes 1-4) and attenuated (lanes 58) L. donovani. Lysates were probed with META1 (upper panel) and BiP (lower panel) antibodies. D3, pH7.4, 26°C: log phase promastigotes; D3,
pH7.4, 37°C and D3, pH5.5, 26°C: log phase promastigotes at pH 7.4 shifted to either 37°C or pH 5.5 at 26°C for 48 hours respectively; VA and AA:
virulent and attenuated amastigotes respectively.

superposed with an RMSD value of 2.5 Å, as determined
by DALI pairwise comparison [32]. Similarly, META1 and
MxiM share a sequence identity of ~9%; yet, 94 Ca atoms
out of the total 115 Ca atoms could be superposed with
an RMSD of 2.6 Å. MxiM is a type III secretion apparatus
(TTSS) pilot protein, which is a 142-residue lipoprotein,
essential for the assembly and membrane association of
the Shigella secretin, MxiD [33]. A deficiency in MxiM

leads to complete loss of TTSS function and virulence
[34]. The structure of MxiM contains a ‘cracked barrel’
motif that creates a striking cleft in the centre of the protein. The cavity is entirely hydrophobic in nature and
binds to lipid moieties of outer membrane (OM) of the
bacteria [35]. Likewise, we observed that META1 and HslJ
also have a similar hydrophobic cavity upon their superposition to MxiM (Figure 6C). However, unlike in MxiM, the

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Page 7 of 16

Figure 6 Structural similarities between META1, HslJ and MxiM. (A) Superposition of META1 (green), HslJ (magenta; PDB code 2kts) and
MxiM (yellow; PDB code 1y9t) in stereoscopic view. The arrowheads mark the N-terminus and the C-terminus of the proteins. The figure was
prepared using the software PyMol [73]. (B) META1 and HslJ sequence alignment based on MxiM structural superposition. Regions marked by
horizontal grey bars below the alignment indicate helices and its corresponding amino acids are also shaded in grey. Beta strands are marked
by black bold arrows below the alignment and the corresponding amino acid residues are shaded in black. Conserved residues are marked by
(*) above the alignment. Amino acid residues lining the core of the hydrophobic cavity deduced based on structural superposition of META1
and HslJ with already described pocket of MxiM, are marked by (#). The alignment was generated by PROMALS3D [63]. (C) Molecular surface
representation of MxiM (1y9t, left panel) and Leishmania META1 (right panel) highlighting their respective hydrophobic cavities. This
representation was generated by superposing Leishmania META1 (right panel) onto MxiM (left panel, 1y9t) with its ligand in the proposed
hydrophobic cavity. The surface is colored according to atom type: carbon atoms in grey, sulphur atoms in yellow, nitrogen atoms in blue and
oxygen atoms in red. A zoom in view of the putative hydrophobic cavity of Leishmania META1 is represented as inset. Hydrophobic cavities of
the both proteins have been indicated by an arrow. First 4 amino acids from the N-terminus from Leishmania META1 have been removed for
clarity. The figure was prepared using the software PyMol [73].

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Page 8 of 16

putative hydrophobic cavity in META1 has at least one
charged residue in its core (Figure 6B). Overall, structural
comparisons between META1, HslJ and MxiM further
reinforce their fold similarity. This pattern of structural
and not sequence conservation signifies selection pressure
on the structure of these proteins, probably for maintaining similar functions.
META1 is involved in secretory processes in Leishmania

In L. major, META1 is reported to localize around the
flagellar pocket [16], the site for exo- and endocytosis in
Leishmania [36]. MxiM, in addition to its known participation in Shigella TTSS, is also known to be structurally similar to the bacterial lipocalin [35]. Lipocalins are
known extracellular transporters that bind small hydrophobic molecules [37]. Against this background of information, the striking structural similarity between
META1 and MxiM prompted us to examine whether
Leishmania META1 had a role in Leishmania secretory
processes. Secreted acid phosphatase (SAP) is the most
abundant secreted glycoprotein of L. donovani [38-40]
and estimation of extracellular SAP activity is routinely
used as an indicator of the status of secretory processes
in the parasite [41-43]. Therefore, SAP activity was
assayed in culture supernatants in the context of different levels of META1. Extracellular SAP activity was
found to be lower at both log and stationary phase in L.
donovani virulent promastigotes that have more META1
protein, when compared to attenuated promastigotes
(Figure 7). In order to determine whether extracellular
SAP activity is directly related with levels of META1
expression, we ectopically expressed META1 in both
virulent and attenuated L. donovani promastigotes. The
ectopic copy of L. donovani META1 protein was tagged
with GFP at the C-terminus to distinguish from the
endogenous protein. On META1 overexpression, extracellular SAP activity further reduced in both virulent
and attenuated overexpression lines in comparison to
their respective wild-types (Figure 7). Overexpression of
META1 at protein level and its effect on growth kinetics
is shown in Additional file 6. This suggests that cells
having higher amounts of META1 protein have lower
extracellular SAP activity, indicating a role for META1
in secretory processes in Leishmania.
Mutations in putative hydrophobic cavity of META1 alter
secretion in Leishmania

To examine whether the predicted hydrophobic cavity
has any role in META1’s function, we decided to mutate
smaller hydrophobic residues in the cavity to bulkier
ones, wherein we replaced leucines at 58 th and 80 th
position with a phenylalanine individually and both
simultaneously (L58F or/and L80F). L58 is located at
the entry of the cavity and is conserved across

Figure 7 META1 is involved in secretion in Leishmania.
Extracellular SAP activity at log (black bars) and stationary phase
(grey bars) of wild-type (Ld Vir & Ld Att) and META1 overexpressing
(Ld Vir/Ld-WT &Ld Att/Ld-WT) L. donovani virulent & attenuated
promastigotes lines respectively. SAP activity is represented in
nmoles of pNPP hydrolyzed per min per 0.2 ml. The average of at
least 5 biological replicates is presented. Bar represents the standard
deviation. Means of the respective values at stationary phase were
compared for statistical significance using a paired Student’s t-test.
*P < 0.005, **P ≤ 0.0002 and ***P ≤ 0.005.

trypanosomatids and bacterial HslJ. On the other hand,
L80 is inside the hydrophobic cavity and is conserved in
trypanosomatids, with the exception of L. braziliensis
and T. cruzi as shown in Additional file 7. Mutant proteins were C-terminally tagged with GFP, in order to
distinguish from endogenous protein and were ectopically expressed in L. donovani promastigotes.
Extracellular SAP activity increased by 40% in L. donovani overexpressing L58F mutant META1 protein, as
compared to cells overexpressing the wild-type (WT)
META1 (Figure 8A). However, L80F mutation in
META1 decreased the extracellular SAP activity with
respect to WT overexpression. Moreover, extracellular
SAP activity of the double mutant L58,80F was found to
be similar to that of L80F mutant in L. donovani (Figure
8A). We also determined the intracellular SAP activity
in all of these Leishmania lines. Consistent with the
changes in extracellular activity, the percentage of intracellular v/s total SAP activity is higher in cells overexpressing WT, L80F and L58,80F META1, but lower in
the L58F mutant, as compared to GFP control (Figure
8B). These results suggest that the 58th and 80th position
are critical for the function of META1 in L. donovani.
Similar results were obtained when L58F and L80F
mutations were introduced into L. major META1, either
individually or simultaneously (Additional file 8), reiterating that the L. donovani and L. major META1 proteins have a conserved function. We also observed a
growth defect only in the double mutant in both L.
donovani and L. major, which have higher multiplication
rate at late logarithmic phase and start declining sooner
than WT overexpression cells (Figure 8C and Additional
file 8 respectively). The difference in SAP activity

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Page 9 of 16

between cells overexpressing WT versus META1
mutant forms was not due to different amounts of
META1 protein being expressed, as shown by western
blots (Additional files 6 and 8). In order to eliminate the
possibility of misreporting extracellular SAP activity due
to cell lysis, a western blot on culture supernatants was
done with GP63 and BiP antibodies, along with whole
cell lysates as control. The culture supernatants that we
used for the experiment did have extracellular GP63 but
lacked ER chaperone BiP, as shown in Additional file 9.
Overall, alteration in extracellular SAP activity in cells
expressing META1 mutants points to a role for META1
in Leishmania secretory processes and highlights the
importance of the putative hydrophobic pocket to
META1’s function.

Figure 8 Mutagenesis in putative hydrophobic cavity of META1
alters secretion in Leishmania. (A) Mutations in putative
hydrophobic cavity of META1 alter extracellular SAP activity.
Extracellular SAP activity in L. donovani at stationary phase of vector
control (Ld GFP), wild-type META1 overexpression line (Ld/Ld-WT),
mutant META1 overexpression lines: L58F (Ld/Ld-L58F); L80F (Ld/LdL80F) and L58,50F (Ld/Ld-L58,80F) respectively. SAP activity is
represented as nmol/min/107 cells. Means of the respective values
were compared for statistical significance using a paired Student’s
t-test. *P < 0.0001 and ** P < 0.0003. (B) Fraction of intracellular v/s
total SAP activity. Results are expressed as percentage of intracellular
SAP activity of total SAP activity (intracellular and extracellular)
measured in nmol/min/107 cells in all the transfectants at stationary
phase. Means of the respective values were compared for statistical
significance using a paired Student’s t-test. *P < 0.004 and ** P <
0.0001. (C) Growth kinetics of L. donovani on META1 overexpression.
Growth curves of L. donovani overexpressing either the wild-type
META1, Ld/Ld-WT or mutant META1 L58F, L80F and L58,80F were
compared to that of Leishmania with control vector, Ld GFP. Cell
density (x 106 cells/ml) of each culture was determined at 24 hour
time intervals after 48 hours of initial inoculation for up to 7 days. The
cell densities plotted are average of at least 3 biological replicates.

Discussion
Despite Leishmania META1’s well known association
with virulence, its functions have remained poorly understood. We have attempted to elucidate the functions of
META1 by identifying and examining its known homologs in other organisms. We have observed an unusual
phyletic relationship between bacterial HslJ and trypanosomatid META1 which highlights LGT as the most
rational explanation for the origin of META1 sequences
in trypanosomatids.
Analyses of several pathogen genomes suggest a widespread occurrence of LGT [20,22,44-49]. These studies
have relied on combinations of aberrant nucleotide composition or sequence similarity searches and phylogenetic
analyses. In our study we have included all of these
approaches: sequence similarity, overall GC content bias,
GC content bias at 1st and 3rd codon positions and codon
usage bias of META1 over whole genome of L. major and
phylogenetic distribution pattern. All of the individual
analyses are consistent with the notion of META1 being
laterally transferred from bacteria into trypanosomatids
(Figures 2 and 3). In the analyses of such LGT events it is
crucial to factor in multiple lines of evidence [50]. By
itself, the phylogenetic tree may be open to additional
interpretations such as a “reverse” LGT flow from trypanosomatids into bacteria or a retention of META1 in trypanosomatids, from a common ancestor (with bacteria)
with a loss from other species. However, the consistent
topology of the phylogenetic tree, rooted in multiple
manners (Figure 3 and Additional file 10) taken together
with the striking anomalous nucleotide composition of
META1 in Leishmania make it unlikely that the LGT
flow of META1 was from trypanosomatids into bacteria.
Or, that META1 was retained within Leishmania from a
common ancestor: if META was persisting from an
ancient common ancestor, its GC composition would
have been assimilated into the trypanosomatid genomes.
However, we cannot exclude a possibility that META1

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

was present in an ancient common ancestor, was lost
during the evolutionary emergence of eukaryotes and at
some point, regained by trypanosomatids through a LGT
from bacteria. Clearly, more definitive answers to such
events will emerge as the genome sequence information
coverage of various taxa expands.
Analyses of anomalous nucleotide composition is quite
effective in the detection of recent LGT events but
becomes handicapped as the time scale of the event in
question increases typically because the gene in question
has more time to adjust to the host genome [50]. Given
the diversity of bacterial species that have the META
domain and the limited occurrence of META only in trypanosomatid eukaryotes, it is most likely that the transfer
of META1 into trypanosomatids was an ancient event. In
this regard, it is striking that the anomalous nucleotide
composition of Leishmania META1 continues to be
easily discernible.
Maintenance of the foreignness of a laterally transferred gene in the context of its recipient genome could
reflect either a recent transfer event or a selective pressure to maintain certain features. Given the occurrence
and conservation of META1 sequence throughout trypansomatids, it is most likely the transfer of META1
from bacteria was an early event into a trypanosomatid
ancestor. An organism always maintains certain evolutionary constraints on its essential genes, in order to prevent loss of function caused due to mutations. Thus, a
gene under purifying selection will evolve at a slower rate
than a gene under positive selection. Upon comparison
of META1 with its bacterial homologs, we found that
META1 is under strong purifying selection, therefore,
highlighting the importance of function of this gene for
the organism (Figure 4).
Selection constraints on the META1/HslJ pair also
underline the possibility of having similar properties. Our
results have highlighted some of the properties shared by
HslJ and META1. hslJ transcript up-regulation was found
to be associated with pathogenicity in E. coli [24] and
recovery of heat injured Salmonella enteritidis [51]. In
comparison, we observed that META1 expression too is
regulated in developmental stages in L. donovani, consistent with earlier reports [17]. We have also shown that
attenuated Leishmania have lower META1 expression
than virulent cells, consistent with a role for META1 in
Leishmania virulence. In Leishmania, META1 expression
is inducible by both temperature and acidification, with
the temperature-mediated change being more significant
(Figure 5). This observation underscores the heat-inducible property of META1, like its bacterial homolog HslJ
[25].
HslJ has been associated with increased resistance
against a gyrase inhibitor novobiocin [52]. We examined
in Leishmania if META1 expression is associated with

Page 10 of 16

novobiocin resistance in virulent & attenuated lines of
Leishmania as well as in META1 overexpressing lines.
In the above mentioned conditions, we found no such
correlation (data not shown). Clearly, not all functions
are common between META1 and HslJ. Recently,
L. amazonensis META2 that has 3 META domains and
a C-terminal calpain-like domain was reported to be
implicated in novobiocin resistance [53]. This raises the
possibility that our observations may be explained by
META2 complementing for novobiocin resistance independent of META1 expression levels.
The 3D-modeling studies of META1 allowed us to identify an additional structural homolog of META1, the
secretin pilot protein of Shigella flexneri, MxiM (Figure
6A). These three proteins: META1, HslJ and MxiM share
a strikingly similar fold, in spite of a very low sequence
identity. The essential features about the structural similarity of these proteins highlighted upon superposition are:
a common cracked barrel motif and a set of conserved
hydrophobic residues in the central pocket of the protein
(Figure 6B). Such a structural homology between META1,
HslJ and MxiM suggests a possibility of similar function of
these proteins. Many proteins with similar function have
been known to retain similar structural folds despite very
low sequence identity and ambiguous secondary structure
prediction [54,55]. The hydrophobic cavity in MxiM is
known to bind lipid moieties of bacterial membranes.
However, unlike MxiM, the putative cavity of META1 has
at least one charged amino acid suggesting that the ligand
of this putative pocket may be different from MxiM (Figure 6B). It is possible that these proteins participate in
similar activities, with certain residues in the cavity defining specificity of the ligand.
Changes in levels and predicted structure of META1
affect the quantum of extracellular activity of the well
characterized marker for Leishmania secretory processes,
SAP (Figures 7 and 8). A comparison of proportion of
intracellular v/s total SAP activity shows that overexpression of either WT or mutant META1 changes the extracellular SAP secretion (Figure 8B). However, while
ectopic expression of L80F mutant and WT reduces
extracellular SAP activity, the L58F mutant META1
caused an increase in extracellular SAP activity. The
L58F mutation appears to act as a loss of function event:
there is more META1 protein but with a reduced negative effect on SAP activity. The proximity of this 58 th
position to the entrance of the putative hydrophobic cavity (Additional file 7) suggests impairment in interactions
with the probable ligand of the putative cavity that may
interfere with META1’s function, in turn interfering with
META1’s ability to suppress SAP secretion. Additionally,
in L. donovani, L58 epitopic region seems to be highly
antigenic: when lysates of cells overexpressing the different forms of META1 were probed with polyclonal

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

META1 antisera on a western blot, the L58F reactivity
was extremely low compared to WT overexpression control. However, when the same proteins, all of which have
GFP tagged to their C-termini, were probed with polyclonal GFP antibody, cell lysates exhibited equivalent
amounts of GFP-tagged proteins (Additional file 6).
The L80F mutation dominates over L58F mutation in
case of the double mutant (L58,80F), as seen by its overall
effect on SAP activity (Figures 8A and 8B). Contrary to
the L58 position, L80 lies in the core of the cavity: this
change in position may also explain the altered consequences of the two mutations. Overall, our results on
META1 mutagenesis in its putative hydrophobic cavity
are consistent with a role for META1 in secretory processes in Leishmania and that this cavity is important for
META1’s function. However, the double mutant has an
altered growth (Figure 8C), suggesting that META1 may
also be participating in events other than secretion.
Overall, the consequences of META1 mutations on
extracellular SAP activity are consistent in both L. donovani and L. major: L58F overexpression leads to increased
SAP activity; L80F has an equivalent effect on SAP activity
to WT META1 and L80F dominates over L58F in the
double mutants (Additional file 8). Additionally, the
L58F,80F double mutant has growth effects in both species
(Figure 8C and Additional file 8). However, we did observe
some differences between the two Leishmania species.
One, the extent of effect on SAP activity is greater in
L. donovani. Second, L80F has distinct effects in L. major.
In L. major, L80F and L58,80F mutant META1 protein
expression was not seen while L58F mutant protein is
equivalent in expression as the overexpressed WT (Additional file 8). In spite of the presence of META1-GFP
fusion transcripts in both L80F and L58,80F (Additional
file 8), there is barely any detectable amount of mutant
protein suggesting that the mutant protein is possibly getting degraded. These observations reiterate the fact that
L80F mutation is dominant in L58,80F mutation. Since
L80 lies in the core of the cavity which might be important
for ligand binding (Additional file 7), it is possible that
mutation at this site has disrupted ligand binding resulting
in an unstable META1 conformation, leading to its
degradation.
It is increasingly clear that LGT is an important
mechanism in the evolution of eukaryotes [50,56]. An
interesting finding has been the observed transfer of gene
sets for metabolic pathways [22,57]. This is particularly of
importance in the case of unicellular eukaryotes: LGT
from bacteria allows the acquisition of new abilities such
as exploitation of ecological niches, infective abilities and
metabolic capabilities. A practical advantage of such
knowledge is that such LGT acquired genes are more
likely to be conducive targets for drug development since
the host eukaryote typically lacks these genes [50,57].

Page 11 of 16

Furthermore, over time, LGT event has played a significant role in the subsequent evolution of the META1 gene
family in trypanosomatids, as can be seen from the occurrence of a number of paralogs in Trypanosomes and a
separate gene in Leishmania, META2, which has three
META domains.
It is conceivable that, for Leishmania, at least one of the
advantages of the LGT mediated acquisition of META1
was additional modulation of secretory processes. Secretion can be an important process for a pathogen seeking
to modulate its host’s responses via the export of effector
molecules/virulence factors. Leishmania secrete various
bioactive molecules that are involved in pathogenesis [58].
Recently, a novel exosome-based pathway was identified
as a general mechanism of protein secretion by Leishmania that is involved in pathogen-to-host communication
and export of exosomal cargo into host macrophages [59].
Furthermore, the exosomal cargo influences myeloid cells
and is immunosuppressive [60]. Our data is consistent
with the correlation of META1 levels associated with
Leishmania virulence. This work adds new information on
functional role for META1 in secretory processes in Leishmania. Additionally, it identifies a domain within META1
that may be critical for its functions.

Conclusions
META1 has long been associated with virulence but its
activity and the processes it influences to modulate virulence have remained unknown. In order to identify the
function of this enigmatic yet essential protein, we have
used an evolutionary biology approach to first identify the
origins of META1. Having provided several lines of evidence that META1 arose in Leishmania as the result of a
LGT event of hslJ from bacteria, we leveraged this information to get clues about META1 function by comparing
it to its bacterial homologs. We utilized 3D-modeling to
show that META1 shares a structural scaffold with HslJ
and MxiM. The striking structural similarity between
these proteins despite a limited sequence homology points
to evolutionary constraint on retaining structural folds in
proteins and the retention of related functions. The
sequence divergence most likely allows for specificity of
interacting molecules. The conserved scaffold between
META1/HslJ/MxiM identified a shared cavity in these
proteins. We have extended the known involvement of
MxiM in secretion and the possibility of a role for such a
cavity with regards to META1 function. Using molecular
biology approaches, we demonstrate that ectopic expression of META1 and site-directed mutagenesis of selected
residues in the predicted META1 cavity do affect secretory
processes in Leishmania, thus establishing a function for
this poorly characterized protein as well as identifying a
functional domain within the molecule. Overall, our study
demonstrates the utility of a multidisciplinary approach

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Page 12 of 16

that combines insights from evolutionary origins of a
molecule with bioinformatics analyses and computational
approaches, leading to a predicted structure and activity,
both of which are testable at a molecular level.

Adobe Photoshop CS4 for publication. Re-rooting of the
tree was also done using iTOL. The accession numbers
of the protein sequences used are given in Additional file
11.

Methods

Estimation of substitution rates

Sequences, sequence similarity searches and sequence
alignment

Synonymous (Ks) and non-synonymous (Ka) substitution
rates were estimated using the methods as described
earlier [23] as implemented in yn00 in the PAML software [71].

BLASTP and PSI-BLAST searches [61] were performed
against the NRDB using the NCBI server http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/BLAST. Pfam search [62] was performed
using HMMer via the Pfam server at http://pfam.sanger.
ac.uk/. All the sequences (DNA/protein) used in the study
for codon bias, phylogenetic analysis and synonymous &
non-synonymous rate estimation were obtained from
NCBI. For E. coli HslJ, sequence information was used
from accession number NP_4158971.1. Sequence alignment was done with CLUSTALW available at http://www.
ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/ or EMBOSS http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
Tools/emboss/align/index.html. Sequence to structure
alignment was done with PROMALS3D software available
at http://prodata.swmed.edu/promals3d/promals3d.php
[63].

Molecular modeling of Leishmania META1

Consensus structure prediction for META1 was performed using 3D-Jury http://bioinfo.pl/meta; [29]).
MODELLER 9v2 [30] software was used to obtain the
final model of META1 based on the NMR structure of
an E. coli HslJ (PDB code 2kts). The model was viewed
using the program O [72] and was compared with that
of the template and related structures. The program O
was also used for superposition of META1 and HslJ
structures on that of S. flexneri secretin pilot protein,
MxiM (PDB code 1y9t) for comparison. The figures
were made using PyMol [73].

GC content

Leishmania strains and growth condition

Total GC content and GC content at codon positions for
all L. major ORFs and META1 was obtained using Integrated Genomic Island Prediction Tool (IGIPT) software
available at http://ccnsb.iiit.ac.in/nita/IGIPT/srk/index.php
[64]. FASTA files for all L. major ORFs was obtained from
the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute at ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.
uk/pub/databases/L.major_sequences/.

L. donovani MHOM/IN/1983/AG83 and L. major
MHOM/Su73/5ASKH were used for all the experiments.
The conditions for promastigotes Leishmania cultures
are as described earlier [74]. For all experiments, cell
numbers were estimated by direct counting in a hemocytometer under a light microscope. The promastigotes
were routinely inoculated at a starting density of
106cells/ml; typically, logarithmic growth was observed
between day 2-4 and stationary phase between day 5
and 7. Hence, in all experiments, 3 days and 7 days old
cultures were used as representative of log phase and
stationary phase respectively. For axenic amastigotes, log
phase promastigotes were pelleted down by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 10 min, washed with PBS and
resuspended in amastigote media (Complete HOMEM,
20% FCS, pH 5.5) and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2
for 48 hrs . Promastigotes convert into amastigotes
within 48 hrs. For generating attenuated parasite line,
virulent promastigotes were passaged in HOMEM medium once a week until 30 passages and thereafter, infectivity of the parasites were checked in BALB/c mice
after 4 weeks of inoculation.

Codon usage bias

For calculating Codon Adaptation Index (CAI), the
Relative Synonymous Codon Usage (RSCU) values of
the highly expressed genes of L. major were obtained
from [65]. CAI values of reference genes from Additional file 2 and META1 were calculated manually as
described earlier [66].
Phylogenetic analysis

The sequences were aligned using MUSCLE [67] on
default settings. Gaps were removed from the alignment
manually. Phylogenetic tree was generated by PhyML
[68] using the evolutionary model WAG, the gamma-distribution model, four rate categories and invariant position. The WAG model was found to be the best-fitting
model using PROTTEST [69]. The gamma parameter
and the fraction of invariant positions were estimated
from the data. The trees were optimized for topology,
branch length and rate parameters. Each tree was subjected to 100 bootstrap replicates. iTOL [70] was used for
viewing the phylogenetic tree and later on modified in

RNA isolation, reverse transcription and quantitative real
time (QRT) PCR analysis

Total RNA was isolated using the acid guanidinium isothiocyanate method [75]. 1 μg of total RNA from
L. donovani was treated with DNAse I (Ambion Inc.).
Synthesis of cDNA was performed by using First Strand

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Synthesis kit and the Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. All real-time PCR experiments were performed in ABI prism 7900 HT sequence detection system (ABI) as described earlier [76]. The PCR conditions
were as follows: 95°C for 10 min, 95°C for 15 sec, 58°C
for 30 sec and 72°C for 30 sec for 40 cycles. Following
primers were used in QRT-PCR analysis; for LdMETA1:
TV359 & TV360, for LmjMETA1: TV672 & TV758, for
neomycin: TV 397 & TV398, for GFP: TV276 & TV396
and for GAPDH: TV366 & TV367. Sequences of all the
primers are mentioned in Additional file 12. All the
reactions were analyzed using the software (SDS 2.3)
provided with the instrument. The relative expression of
the genes was calculated by using 2-ΔΔCt formula using
GAPDH as a normalizer. The values reported are the
mean of at least three biological replicates. The standard
deviation from the mean is shown as error bars in each
group.
Expression and purification of recombinant LdMETA1
protein and generation of antibodies

The LdMETA1 coding region was PCR amplified from
L. donovani genomic DNA, using primers TV213 &
TV215 and cloned in EcoRI-HindIII site of pET28a+
vector (Novagen). Primer sequences are listed in Additional file 12. The recombinant constructs were transformed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) strain and protein
expression was induced at A600 of 0.6 with 1 mM of isopropyl-1-b-D-galactopyranoside at 37 °C for 3 hours.
Recombinant 6X-His-META1 protein was purified from
bacterial cells in native conditions using the Ni2+-nitrilo
triacetic acid agarose resin (Qiagen), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.
For raising polyclonal antibodies against recombinant
6X-His-META1 protein in the mouse, 50 μg/animal of
protein was mixed with an equal volume of Freund’s complete adjuvant. The mixture was made into an emulsion
by passing through a 2 ml syringe (1.5 inch 19G needle)
and intermittently keeping it at 4°C. This emulsion was
injected into the mouse subcutaneously. After 14 days, the
first booster dose was given in a similar manner, except
that Freund’s complete adjuvant was replaced with
Freund’s incomplete adjuvant. Subsequent booster doses
were given after a 14-day interval and the antibody titer
was checked using dot blot. For determination of antibody
titer 20 ng of purified protein was spotted in a row, airdried and incubated with different concentrations of
immune serum (1:1,000 to 1:5,000). Western blot experiments were carried out when the appropriate titer
(1:5,000) was obtained following booster doses. Mice were
sacrificed and blood collected from the inferior vena cava
using a 23G needle and a 2 ml syringe. The blood was

Page 13 of 16

allowed to stand at room temperature for a couple of
hours and then kept at 4°C for overnight to allow formation of a firm clot. Red blood cells were removed by centrifugation, the sera were collected in a fresh tube, 0.2%
NaN3 was added and stored at 4°C. All experiments involving animals were performed in compliance with recommendations and permission of the CCMB Institutional
Animal Ethics Committee.
Generation of pX63-META1::GFP constructs

The META1 gene of both L. donovani and L. major
were cloned in frame with GFP at the C-terminus and
further this META1-GFP cassette was ligated into
BamHI-XbaI site of pX63-NEO vector. The L. donovani
and L. major META1 genes were amplified from genomic DNA by using the primer combinations TV494 &
TV757 and TV494 & TV758 respectively and GFP was
amplified using TV276 & TV277 from pX63-EGFP vector. PCR amplicons of META1 gene of both L. donovani
&L. major and GFP were first cloned using pMOS blunt
end cloning vector kit (GE Healthcare) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Inserts were released from pMOS
by using restriction enzymes inserted in the primer
sequences. Extra sequences were added in the primers
to maintain the reading frame and/or to add restriction
sites for cloning: for META1, TV494 with a BamHI and
TV757 & TV758 with NcoI site respectively and for
GFP, TV276 & TV277 with an NcoI and XbaI site
respectively. Primer sequences are listed in Additional
file 12.
Transfection of plasmids into Leishmania promastigotes

Leishmania promastigotes were grown to late log phase
(~2 × 107cells/ml). Transfection protocol is the same as
described earlier [77]. Briefly, cells were washed and
resuspended in ice cold electroporation buffer (137 mM
NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 0.7 mM Na2HPO4, 6 mM glucose, 21
mM HEPES pH 7.5) at a density of 108 cells/ml. 400 μl
of cells and 100 μg of plasmid DNA were mixed well
into 0.2 mm cuvettes (Biorad) then electroporated in
Genepulser II apparatus (Bio-Rad Laboratories) with the
pulse of 450 volts (2.25 V/cm) and capacitance 500 μF.
Cuvettes were immediately placed on ice for 10 minutes.
Cells were transferred to 5 ml of complete HOMEM
media. After 48 hours, transformants were selected in
HOMEM containing G418 until the control, untransfected cells died completely in the presence of the antibiotic. Concentrations of G418 used were: 40 μg/ml for
virulent L. donovani &L. major promastigotes and 200
μg/ml for attenuated L. donovani promastigotes. For
further experiments, pool populations were maintained
in liquid media containing G418 in above mentioned
concentrations for the respective cell types.

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

Site-directed mutagenesis

For generating constructs with point mutations in
META1, site-directed mutagenesis (SDM) was carried
out using QuickChange-XL kit from Stratagene as per
manufacturer’s instructions. pX63-LdMETA1::GFP (Ld/
Ld-WT) and pX63-LmjMETA1::GFP (Lmj/Lmj-WT)
were used as templates for SDM of L. donovani and
L. major META1 mutagenesis. Details of the primers
used are given in Additional file 12.
Western blot analysis

Leishmania promastigotes or amastigotes at different
stages of growth were harvested, washed in PBS and then
resuspended in 1X-PBS with 1X-protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and then sonicated using VibraCell (Sonics &
Materials Inc.) with 50% amplitude and three pulses for
30 sec each. 30 μg of protein lysate from each sample were
separated on 15% SDS-PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose Hybond ECL membranes (Amersham Biosciences). Membranes were blocked with 5% non-fat dried
milk in 1X-TBS-T (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM
NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20). The following antibodies were
used: mouse anti-LdMETA1 (1:5,000) was raised against
recombinant N-terminally 6X-His tagged LdMETA1 protein, rabbit polyclonal BiP antisera (1:15,000), rabbit polyclonal GFP antibody (Abcam; 1:4000), sheep polyclonal
GP63 antisera (1:10,000), anti-mouse or anti rabbit biotinylated antibodies (1:5,000, Amersham), avidin conjugated
with horseradish peroxidase (1:10,000, Amersham Biosciences) and anti-sheep conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (1:5,000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). After
incubation, membranes were washed three times with 1XTBS-T. Immunodetection was carried out using the ECL
western blotting detection system (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and images were
obtained using BIOMAX™-XBT X-ray film (Kodak).
Images of western blots were quantified by ImageJ software available at http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/[78].
For western blots on the culture supernatants, media
from cultures were passed through a 0.22 μm membrane
and concentrated 50-fold using Millipore Amicon 5 kDa
cut-off and loaded onto SDS-PAGE gel along with
whole cell lysates as control.
Secreted acid phosphatase (SAP) assay

SAP activity was determined in culture supernatants as
previously described [41]. After seeding cells at a density
of 106cells/ml, aliquots of culture medium were removed
at log and stationary phase, filtered through 0.22 μm
pores membrane to remove cells and debris. 138 μl
supernatant was then incubated in a final volume of
200 μl with 50 mM para-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP),
50 mM sodium acetate pH 4 and 0.1% b-mercaptoethanol (v/v) for 30 minutes at 37 °C. The reaction was

Page 14 of 16

stopped with 800 μl of 2M sodium hydroxide and the
absorbance of the released para-nitrophenol was determined at 410 nm. For intracellular SAP activity, cell pellets were washed with PBS and were lysed on ice for
30 min at 108 cells/ml in 50 mM acetate buffer and 1%
Triton X-100. 100 μl of lysate was then used for SAP
assay with 50 mM pNPP.

Additional material
Additional file 1: List of protein sequences obtained from BLASTP
sequence similarity search for LmjMETA1 against non-redundant
NCBI database. Table S1. Description of BLASTP hits with their e-value.
Additional file 2: List of reference genes for CAI determination.
Table S2. Description of reference genes used for CAI determination.
Additional file 3: Codon Adaptation Index (CAI) of META1 homologs
in T. cruzi. Figure S1. CAI of 2 META1 homologs in T. cruzi compared
with RP S8 and a-Tubulin.
Additional file 4: Quantitation of signal in western blots in Figure 5.
Figure S2. Images of western blots in Figure 5B, C and 5D were
quantitated by ImageJ software.
Additional file 5: Movie of superposed structures of HslJ (magenta),
MxiM (yellow) and META1 model (green). Figure S3.
Additional file 6: Overexpression of META1 in L. donovani. Figure S4.
Western blots (S4A and S4B) of L. donovani virulent and attenuated
META1 transfectants with META1, BiP and GFP antibodies. S4C represents
effect of META1 overexpression on growth kinetics of virulent and
attenuated L. donovani compared to their respective wild-types.
Additional file 7: Mutagenesis of META1. Figure S5. Sequence
alignment of META1 homologs and stereoscopic representation of
META1 model highlighting the leucine 58 and leucine 80.
Additional file 8: Effect of META1 overexpression in L. major. Figure
S6. Effect of WT and mutant META1 overexpression in L. major on
extracellular SAP activity (S6A) and growth kinetics (S6B). S6C and S6D
represents western blot and QRT-PCR of L. major META1 transfectants
respectively.
Additional file 9: Western blot of L. donovani whole cell lysates v/s
culture supernatants. Figure S7. Western blot with GP63 and BiP on
whole cell lysates and culture supernatants of L. donovani META1
transfectants.
Additional file 10: Phylogenetic tree re-rooted at two different
roots. Figure S8. Phylogenetic tree representation generated in Figure 3
was re-rooted at Tolumonas (S8A) and T. cruzi Hypoth3 (S8B).
Additional file 11: List of protein sequences used in phylogenetic
analysis. Table S3. Accession numbers of protein sequences.
Additional file 12: Primers used in the study. Table S4. List of
sequences of all the primers used in this study.

Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Vaidya lab for useful discussions and suggestions.
We thank Dr Steven M. Beverley for the pX63 plasmids, Dr Mary E. Wilson
for GP63 antibody and Dr Jay Bangs for BiP antibody. We are grateful to Dr
Nita Parekh and Ms Ruchi Jain from IIIT, Hyderabad, India for helping us with
IGIPT software. We are thankful to Dr Harpreet K. Saini from EMBL-EBI for
technical support and valuable suggestions. We thank Mr Aridaman Pandit
from CCMB, India for helping us with phylogenetic tree construction. VP and
AG were supported by senior research fellowships from CSIR, Government of
India. VP was a recipient of 2007 Sanger Institute Prize and is grateful to the
Wellcome Trust Sanger Centre Prize Fund (Grant number 079643/Z/06/Z) for
financial support provided for research carried out at the Sanger Centre in
AJE’s lab and for supporting the cost of publication. This research was
supported by the CSIR, Government of India to TV. Funding agencies have

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

no role in study design, data collection, analysis and writing of the
manuscript.
Author details
1
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, Uppal Road, Hyderabad - 500 007, Andhra Pradesh, India.
2
EMBL-EBI, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD,
UK. 3Syngene International Limited, Biocon Park, Plot No. 2 & 3,
Bommasandra Industrial Area-IV Phase, Bommasandra-Jigani Link Road,
Bengaluru- 560099, Karnataka, India.
Authors’ contributions
VP participated in design of the study, carried out bioinformatics analysis,
laboratory experiments, analyzed the data and drafted the manuscript. AG
and RS constructed the homology model and analyzed the structures. AJE
helped design the analysis of evolutionary origin of META1, participated in
data analysis and critically read the manuscript. TV participated in design of
the study, supervised the work, analyzed the data and drafted the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 19 September 2011 Accepted: 17 November 2011
Published: 17 November 2011
References
1. Brittingham A, Morrison CJ, McMaster WR, McGwire BS, Chang KP,
Mosser DM: Role of the Leishmania surface protease gp63 in
complement fixation, cell adhesion, and resistance to complementmediated lysis. J Immunol 1995, 155:3102-3111.
2. Chakrabarty R, Mukherjee S, Lu HG, McGwire BS, Chang KP, Basu MK:
Kinetics of entry of virulent and avirulent strains of Leishmania donovani
into macrophages: a possible role of virulence molecules (gp63 and
LPG). J Parasitol 1996, 82:632-635.
3. Joshi PB, Kelly BL, Kamhawi S, Sacks DL, McMaster WR: Targeted gene
deletion in Leishmania major identifies leishmanolysin (GP63) as a
virulence factor. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2002, 120:33-40.
4. McGwire BS, O’Connell WA, Chang KP, Engman DM: Extracellular release of
the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked Leishmania surface
metalloprotease, gp63, is independent of GPI phospholipolysis:
implications for parasite virulence. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:8802-8809.
5. Yao C, Donelson JE, Wilson ME: The major surface protease (MSP or
GP63) of Leishmania sp. Biosynthesis, regulation of expression, and
function. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2003, 132:1-16.
6. Descoteaux A, Turco SJ: The lipophosphoglycan of Leishmania and
macrophage protein kinase C. Parasitol Today 1993, 9:468-471.
7. Beverley SM, Turco SJ: Lipophosphoglycan (LPG) and the identification of
virulence genes in the protozoan parasite Leishmania. Trends Microbiol
1998, 6:35-40.
8. Spath GF, Epstein L, Leader B, Singer SM, Avila HA, Turco SJ, et al:
Lipophosphoglycan is a virulence factor distinct from related
glycoconjugates in the protozoan parasite Leishmania major. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:9258-9263.
9. Garami A, Mehlert A, Ilg T: Glycosylation defects and virulence
phenotypes of Leishmania mexicana phosphomannomutase and
dolicholphosphate-mannose synthase gene deletion mutants. Mol Cell
Biol 2001, 21:8168-8183.
10. Descoteaux A, Avila HA, Zhang K, Turco SJ, Beverley SM: Leishmania LPG3
encodes a GRP94 homolog required for phosphoglycan synthesis
implicated in parasite virulence but not viability. EMBO J 2002,
21:4458-4469.
11. Spath GF, Garraway LA, Turco SJ, Beverley SM: The role(s) of
lipophosphoglycan (LPG) in the establishment of Leishmania major
infections in mammalian hosts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:9536-9541.
12. Gaur U, Showalter M, Hickerson S, Dalvi R, Turco SJ, Wilson ME, et al:
Leishmania donovani lacking the Golgi GDP-Man transporter LPG2
exhibit attenuated virulence in mammalian hosts. Exp Parasitol 2009,
122:182-191.

Page 15 of 16

13. Pollock KG, McNeil KS, Mottram JC, Lyons RE, Brewer JM, Scott P, et al: The
Leishmania mexicana cysteine protease, CPB2.8, induces potent Th2
responses. J Immunol 2003, 170:1746-1753.
14. Buxbaum LU, Denise H, Coombs GH, Alexander J, Mottram JC, Scott P:
Cysteine protease B of Leishmania mexicana inhibits host Th1 responses
and protective immunity. J Immunol 2003, 171:3711-3717.
15. Mahmoudzadeh-Niknam H, McKerrow JH: Leishmania tropica: cysteine
proteases are essential for growth and pathogenicity. Exp Parasitol 2004,
106:158-163.
16. Nourbakhsh F, Uliana SR, Smith DF: Characterisation and expression of a
stage-regulated gene of Leishmania major. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1996,
76:201-213.
17. Uliana SR, Goyal N, Freymuller E, Smith DF: Leishmania: overexpression
and comparative structural analysis of the stage-regulated meta 1 gene.
Exp Parasitol 1999, 92:183-191.
18. Ramos CS, Franco FA, Smith DF, Uliana SR: Characterisation of a new
Leishmania META gene and genomic analysis of the META cluster. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 2004, 238:213-219.
19. Lawrence JG, Ochman H: Amelioration of bacterial genomes: rates of
change and exchange. J Mol Evol 1997, 44:383-397.
20. Lawrence JG, Ochman H: Molecular archaeology of the Escherichia coli
genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:9413-9417.
21. Mrazek J, Karlin S: Detecting alien genes in bacterial genomes. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1999, 870:314-329.
22. Opperdoes FR, Michels PA: Horizontal gene transfer in trypanosomatids.
Trends Parasitol 2007, 23:470-476.
23. Yang Z, Nielsen R: Estimating synonymous and nonsynonymous
substitution rates under realistic evolutionary models. Mol Biol Evol 2000,
17:32-43.
24. Dowd SE, Ishizaki H: Microarray based comparison of two Escherichia coli
O157:H7 lineages. BMC Microbiol 2006, 6:30.
25. Chuang SE, Blattner FR: Characterization of twenty-six new heat shock
genes of Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1993, 175:5242-5252.
26. Saar Y, Ransford A, Waldman E, Mazareb S, min-Spector S, Plumblee J, et al:
Characterization of developmentally-regulated activities in axenic
amastigotes of Leishmania donovani. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1998, 95:9-20.
27. Debrabant A, Joshi MB, Pimenta PF, Dwyer DM: Generation of Leishmania
donovani axenic amastigotes: their growth and biological characteristics.
Int J Parasitol 2004, 34:205-217.
28. Alcolea PJ, Alonso A, Gomez MJ, Sanchez-Gorostiaga A, Moreno-Paz M,
Gonzalez-Pastor E, et al: Temperature increase prevails over acidification
in gene expression modulation of amastigote differentiation in
Leishmania infantum. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:31.
29. Ginalski K, Rychlewski L: Protein structure prediction of CASP5
comparative modeling and fold recognition targets using consensus
alignment approach and 3D assessment. Proteins 2003, 53(Suppl
6):410-417.
30. Sali A, Blundell TL: Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of
spatial restraints. J Mol Biol 1993, 234:779-815.
31. Holm L, Rosenström P: Dali server: conservation mapping in 3D. Nucl
Acids Res 2010, 38:545-549.
32. Hasegawa H, Holm L: Advances and pitfalls of protein structural
alignment. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2009, 19:341-348.
33. Schuch R, Maurelli AT: MxiM and MxiJ, base elements of the Mxi-Spa
type III secretion system of Shigella, interact with and stabilize the MxiD
secretin in the cell envelope. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:6991-6998.
34. Schuch R, Maurelli AT: The mxi-Spa type III secretory pathway of Shigella
flexneri requires an outer membrane lipoprotein, MxiM, for invasin
translocation. Infect Immun 1999, 67:1982-1991.
35. Lario PI, Pfuetzner RA, Frey EA, Creagh L, Haynes C, Maurelli AT, et al:
Structure and biochemical analysis of a secretin pilot protein. EMBO J
2005, 24:1111-1121.
36. Overath P, Stierhof YD, Wiese M: Endocytosis and secretion in
trypanosomatid parasites - Tumultuous traffic in a pocket. Trends Cell Biol
1997, , 7: 27-33.
37. Grzyb J, Latowski D, Strzalka K: Lipocalins - a family portrait. J Plant Physiol
2006, , 163: 895-915.
38. Bates PA, Dwyer DM: Biosynthesis and secretion of acid phosphatase by
Leishmania donovani promastigotes. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1987,
26:289-296.

Puri et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:334
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/334

39. Bates PA, Hermes I, Dwyer DM: Leishmania donovani: immunochemical
localization and secretory mechanism of soluble acid phosphatase. Exp
Parasitol 1989, 68:335-346.
40. Bates PA, Hermes I, Dwyer DM: Golgi-mediated post-translational
processing of secretory acid phosphatase by Leishmania donovani
promastigotes. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1990, 39:247-255.
41. Cuvillier A, Redon F, Antoine JC, Chardin P, DeVos T, Merlin G, et al: LdARL3A, a Leishmania promastigote-specific ADP-ribosylation factor-like
protein, is essential for flagellum integrity. J Cell Sci 2000, 113(Pt
11):2065-2074.
42. Parodi-Talice A, Araújo JM, Torres C, Pérez-Victoria JM, Gamarro F,
Castanys S, et al: The overexpression of a new ABC transporter in
Leishmania is related to phospholipid trafficking and reduced infectivity.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2003, 1612:195-207.
43. Sahin A, Espiau B, Tetaud E, Cuvillier A, Lartigue L, Ambit A, Robinson DR,
Merlin G, et al: The Leishmania ARL-1 and Golgi traffic. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:
e1620.
44. Nara T, Hshimoto T, Aoki T: Evolutionary implications of the mosaic
pyrimidine-biosynthetic pathway in eukaryotes. Gene 2000, 257:209-222.
45. Molinas SM, Altabe SG, Opperdoes FR, Rider MH, Michels PA, Uttaro AD:
The multifunctionalisopropyl alcohol dehydrogenase of Phytomonas sp.
could be the result of a horizontal gene transfer from a bacterium to
the trypanosomatid lineage. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:36169-36175.
46. Cazalet C, Rusniok C, Bruggemann H, Zidane N, Magnier A, Ma L, et al:
Evidence in the Legionella pneumophila genome for exploitation of host
cell functions and high genome plasticity. Nat Genet 2004, 36:1165-1173.
47. Chien M, Morozova I, Shi S, Sheng H, Chen J, Gomez SM, et al: The
genomic sequence of the accidental pathogen Legionella pneumophila.
Science 2004, 305:1966-1968.
48. de Felipe KS, Pampou S, Jovanovic OS, Pericone CD, Ye SF, Kalachikov S,
et al: Evidence for acquisition of Legionella type IV secretion substrates
via interdomain horizontal gene transfer. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:7716-7726.
49. Annoura T, Nara T, Makiuchi T, Hashimoto T, Aoki T: The origin of
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase genes of kinetoplastids, with special
reference to their biological significance and adaptation to anaerobic,
parasitic conditions. J Mol Evol 2005, 60:113-127.
50. Whitaker JW, McConkey GA, Westhead DR: Prediction of horizontal gene
transfers in eukaryotes: approaches and challenges. Biochem Soc Trans
2009, 37:792-5.
51. Kobayashi H, Miyamoto T, Hashimoto Y, Kiriki M, Motomatsu A, Honjoh K,
et al: Identification of factors involved in recovery of heat-injured
Salmonella Enteritidis. J Food Prot 2005, 68:932-941.
52. Lilic M, Jovanovic M, Jovanovic G, Savic DJ: Identification of the CysBregulated gene, hslJ, related to the Escherichia coli novobiocin resistance
phenotype. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2003, 224:239-246.
53. Ramos CS, Yokoyama-Yasunaka JK, Guerra-Giraldez C, Price HP, Mortara RA,
Smith DF, et al: Leishmania amazonensis META2 protein confers
protection against heat shock and oxidative stress. Exp Parasitol 2011,
127:228-37.
54. Luo Y, Bertero MG, Frey EA, Pfuetzner RA, Wenk MR, Creagh L, et al:
Structural and biochemical characterization of the type III secretion
chaperones CesT and SigE. Nat Struct Biol 2001, 8:1031-1036.
55. Birtalan SC, Phillips RM, Ghosh P: Three-dimensional secretion signals in
chaperone-effector complexes of bacterial pathogens. Mol Cell 2002,
9:971-980.
56. Keeling PJ, Palmer JD: Horizontal gene transfer in eukaryotic evolution.
Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:605.
57. Whitaker JW, McConkey GA, Westhead DR: The transferome of metabolic
genes explored: analysis of the horizontal transfer of enzyme encoding
genes in unicellular eukaryotes. Genome Biol 2009, 10:R36.
58. Wilson ME, Jeronimo SM, Pearson RD: Immunopathogenesis of infection
with the visceralizing Leishmania species. Microb Pathog 2005, 38:147-160.
59. Silverman JM, Clos J, de’Oliveira CC, Shirvani O, Fang Y, Wang C, et al: An
exosome-based secretion pathway is responsible for protein export
from Leishmania and communication with macrophages. J Cell Sci 2010,
123:842-852.
60. Silverman JM, Clos J, Horakova E, Wang AY, Wiesgigl M, Kelly I, et al:
Leishmania exosomes modulate innate and adaptive immune responses
through effects on monocytes and dendritic cells. J Immunol 2010,
185:5011-5022.

Page 16 of 16

61. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, et al:
Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database
search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
62. Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, et al: The Pfam
protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D211-D222.
63. Pei J, Kim BH, Grishin NV: PROMALS3D: a tool for multiple protein
sequence and structure alignments. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:2295-2300.
64. Jain R, Ramineni S, Parekh N: Integrated Genomic Island Prediction Tool
(IGIPT). IEEE Proceedings of International Conference on Information
Technology (ICIT2008), icit 2008, 131-132.
65. Chanda I, Pan A, Saha SK, Dutta C: Comparative codon and amino acid
composition analysis of Tritryps-conspicuous features of Leishmania
major. FEBS Lett 2007, 581:5751-5758.
66. Sharp PM, Li WH: The Codon Adaptation Index–a measure of directional
synonymous codon usage bias, and its potential applications. Nucleic
Acids Res 1987, 15:1281-1295.
67. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
68. Guindon S, Dufayard JF, Lefort V, Anisimova M, Hordijk W, Gascuel O: New
Algorithms and Methods to Estimate Maximum-Likelihood Phylogenies:
Assessing the Performance of PhyML 3.0. Systematic Biology 2010,
59:307-21.
69. Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: Selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2104-2105.
70. Letunic I, Bork P: Interactive Tree Of Life v2: online annotation and
display of phylogenetic trees made easy. Nucleic Acids Res 2011.
71. Yang Z: PAML: a program package for phylogenetic analysis by
maximum likelihood. Comput Appl Biosci 1997, 13:555-556.
72. Jones TA, Zou JY, Cowan SW, Kjeldgaard M: Improved methods for
building protein models in electron density maps and the location of
errors in these models. Acta Crystallogr A 1991, 47(Pt 2):110-119.
73. DeLano WL: The PyMol molecular graphics system San Carlos, CA: DeLano
Scientific LLC; 2004.
74. Bera A, Singh S, Nagaraj R, Vaidya T: Induction of autophagic cell death in
Leishmania donovani by antimicrobial peptides. Mol Biochem Parasitol
2003, 127:23-35.
75. Chomczynski P, Sacchi N: The single-step method of RNA isolation by
acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction: twentysomething years on. Nat Protoc 2006, 1:581-585.
76. Tupperwar N, Vineeth V, Rath S, Vaidya T: Development of a real-time
polymerase chain reaction assay for the quantification of Leishmania
species and the monitoring of systemic distribution of the pathogen.
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2008, 61:23-30.
77. Kapler GM, Coburn CM, Beverley SM: Stable transfection of the human
parasite Leishmania major delineates a 30-kilobase region sufficient for
extrachromosomal replication and expression. Mol Cell Biol 1990,
10:1084-1094.
78. Rasband WS: ImageJ. US National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
USA; 1997 [http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/].
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-334
Cite this article as: Puri et al.: Evolutionary and functional insights into
Leishmania META1: evidence for lateral gene transfer and a role for
META1 in secretion. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:334.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
