<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genomic organization and evolution of the Atlantic salmon hemoglobin repertoire</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:539. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-539"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Nicole L Quinn"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Genomic organization and evolution of the
Atlantic salmon hemoglobin repertoire
Nicole L Quinn1, Keith A Boroevich1, Krzysztof P Lubieniecki1, William Chow1, Evelyn A Davidson1, Ruth B Phillips2,
Ben F Koop3, William S Davidson1*

Abstract
Background: The genomes of salmonids are considered pseudo-tetraploid undergoing reversion to a stable diploid
state. Given the genome duplication and extensive biological data available for salmonids, they are excellent model
organisms for studying comparative genomics, evolutionary processes, fates of duplicated genes and the genetic
and physiological processes associated with complex behavioral phenotypes. The evolution of the tetrapod
hemoglobin genes is well studied; however, little is known about the genomic organization and evolution of teleost
hemoglobin genes, particularly those of salmonids. The Atlantic salmon serves as a representative salmonid species
for genomics studies. Given the well documented role of hemoglobin in adaptation to varied environmental
conditions as well as its use as a model protein for evolutionary analyses, an understanding of the genomic structure
and organization of the Atlantic salmon a and b hemoglobin genes is of great interest.
Results: We identified four bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) comprising two hemoglobin gene clusters
spanning the entire a and b hemoglobin gene repertoire of the Atlantic salmon genome. Their chromosomal
locations were established using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis and linkage mapping,
demonstrating that the two clusters are located on separate chromosomes. The BACs were sequenced and
assembled into scaffolds, which were annotated for putatively functional and pseudogenized hemoglobin-like
genes. This revealed that the tail-to-tail organization and alternating pattern of the a and b hemoglobin genes are
well conserved in both clusters, as well as that the Atlantic salmon genome houses substantially more hemoglobin
genes, including non-Bohr b globin genes, than the genomes of other teleosts that have been sequenced.
Conclusions: We suggest that the most parsimonious evolutionary path leading to the present organization of the
Atlantic salmon hemoglobin genes involves the loss of a single hemoglobin gene cluster after the whole genome
duplication (WGD) at the base of the teleost radiation but prior to the salmonid-specific WGD, which then
produced the duplicated copies seen today. We also propose that the relatively high number of hemoglobin
genes as well as the presence of non-Bohr b hemoglobin genes may be due to the dynamic life history of salmon
and the diverse environmental conditions that the species encounters.
Data deposition: BACs S0155C07 and S0079J05 (fps135): GenBank GQ898924; BACs S0055H05 and S0014B03
(fps1046): GenBank GQ898925

Background
Hemoglobin, one of the most well-studied proteins to
date, is responsible for oxygen transport from the lungs
or gills to the tissues of vertebrates. The hemoglobin
molecule is comprised of two a and two b subunits that
non-covalently bond to form a tetramer [1,2]. The genes
* Correspondence: wdavidso@sfu.ca
1
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

encoding the hemoglobin subunits are abundantly present and show relatively high similarity in structure (i.e.,
consisting of three exons and two introns) throughout
the vertebrate lineage [3]. These characteristics, combined with the relative ease of isolating and studying
hemoglobin proteins and their suspected role in adaptation to variable environmental conditions, have made
the hemoglobin genes major targets for evolutionary
studies [1-4].

© 2010 Quinn et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

Examinations of the genomic organization of chromosomal hemoglobin gene regions suggest that all hemoglobin genes evolved from a single monomeric form
when gnathostome fish evolved from the more primitive
agnathan fish approximately 500-700 million years ago
[5,6]. The entire hemoglobin gene region then appears
to have undergone a series of tandem duplications and
divergence, giving rise to the modern a and b hemoglobin genes. Initially the a and b genes were adjacent on
the same chromosome, and expansion of this region,
including lineage-specific gene gain and loss, produced
the multiple copies of a and b genes seen in Gnathostomata today [4,5,7,8].
The current genomic organization seen in mammals
and birds is such that a and b hemoglobin gene clusters
are located on different chromosomes and transcribed
from the same strand in order of temporal expression
[8,9]. The most parsimonious explanation of this
arrangement involves a disruption in the a-b linkage by
translocation of part of the hemoglobin gene cluster
and subsequent gene silencing of a and b hemoglobins
on respective chromosomes prior to the lineage leading
to birds and mammals approximately 300-350 million
years ago [9,10]. Studies of the genomic organization of
hemoglobin genes in the mammalian and avian lines
examined this hypothesis by looking for evolutionary
“footprints” of silenced hemoglobin genes as well as
conservation and divergence patterns of genes surrounding the a and b gene clusters along the mammalian line [9,11].
The disruption in the a and b hemoglobin gene linkage in mammals and birds appears to have occurred
after their divergence from the poikilothermic jawed
vertebrate taxa. Rather, with the exception of some
extreme cold-adapted Antarctic icefish that retain only
remnants of a hemoglobin genes and have completely
lost the b hemoglobin genes, and thus do not express
hemoglobin [12,13], the fish and amphibians studied to
date exhibit intermixed a and b hemoglobin genes on
the same chromosome. For example, within the amphibian line, the genomes of both Xenopus laevis and X.
tropicalis exhibit linked a and b hemoglobin genes [10].
The teleosts, or the ray-finned fish, are a diverse group
that comprises most living species of fish, including
more than 20,000 extant species covering more than 40
orders [14]. Despite significant differences in the number of hemoglobin genes and within-chromosome
arrangements, model teleosts whose genomes have been
studied to date, including the Japanese pufferfish (Fugu
rubripes) [15], the zebrafish (Danio rerio) [16] and
medaka (Orzias latipes) [17] are reported to exhibit two
hemoglobin gene clusters located on distinct chromosomes. These observations support the hypothesis that
the teleost lineage experienced a whole genome

Page 2 of 17

duplication (WGD) event subsequent to the divergence
from tetrapods [18].
The Salmonidae, a family of teleosts that includes the
salmon, trout, charr, grayling and whitefish, are of considerable environmental, economic and social importance. Indeed, more is known about the biology of
salmonids than any other fish group [19]. The common
ancestor of salmonids underwent a WGD event between
20 and 120 million years ago [20,21]. Thus, the extant
salmonid species are considered pseudo-tetraploids
whose genomes are in the process of reverting to a
stable diploid state. The Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar)
has been chosen as a representative salmonid for genomics studies, and an international collaboration to
sequence the Atlantic salmon genome has been established [22].
Wolff and Gannon [23] provided the first sequence of
an Atlantic salmon a hemoglobin from a kidney cDNA
library. Subsequently, reports of the organization of the
Atlantic salmon hemoglobin gene cluster described six
lambda phage genomic clones comprising two sets of a
and b hemoglobin genes oriented 3’ to 3’ on opposite
strands [24-26]. This was the first evidence of this type
of hemoglobin gene arrangement for any vertebrate species. The six clones comprised four unique a hemoglobin gene sequences and six unique b hemoglobin genes,
including a b hemoglobin containing the characteristic
amino acid changes that eliminate the Bohr effect, as
well as one partial b hemoglobin gene (GenBank accession numbers X97284-X97289) [26]. It remained
unknown, however, whether these represented all hemoglobin-like genes within the Atlantic salmon genome. In
addition, it was not known whether the clusters were on
separate chromosomes, or whether, as would be predicted by the salmonid-specific 4R WGD hypothesis
[27], there were actually four hemoglobin gene clusters
in salmon. Furthermore, the relative locations and
orders of the clones to one another were not established, and the sequences of intergenic regions as well
as the genes surrounding the hemoglobins were not
determined. Finally, these investigations were not able
to identify putative pseudogenes, incomplete hemoglobin genes or footprints of historical hemoglobin genes
within the hemoglobin gene clusters or elsewhere in the
genome. Thus, a full characterization of the Atlantic salmon hemoglobin gene repertoire is needed to provide
insight to the evolution of the organization and function
of the Atlantic salmon hemoglobins, particularly in light
of the teleost and salmonid-specific WGD events.
We used oligonucleotide probes specific for Atlantic
salmon a, b and non-Bohr b hemoglobin genes as well
as probes designed from rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) embryonic hemoglobin cDNAs [28] to locate
these genes within the Atlantic salmon bacterial artificial

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

chromosome (BAC) library, CHORI-214 [29]. Four
BACs, representing two genomic locations on different
chromosomes and comprising the entire Altantic salmon hemoglobin gene repertoire were sequenced and
annotated. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and
linkage analyses were performed to assign these BACs
to chromosomal locations within the Atlantic salmon
genome. Here we present the first description of an
entire salmonid a and b hemoglobin gene repertoire.
We also discuss our results in terms of the fate of the
hemoglobin genes during and after the salmonid WGD
event, and how this fits into the evolution of the hemoglobin gene family in teleosts.

Results
Identification and tiling paths of Atlantic salmon
hemoglobin-containing BACs

All 32P-labelled 40-mer probes for a, b, non-Bohr b and
embryonic hemoglobins (probe and primer sequences
are provided in Additional file 1, Table S1) hybridized
to Atlantic salmon BACs belonging to two fingerprint
scaffolds (fps), within the Atlantic salmon physical map
[30,31]. Fps1046 contains 21 BACs and spans an estimated 458.8 kb; fps135 is comprised of 391 BACs spanning approximately 3.473 Mb. PCR was used to confirm
the hybridization results and narrow down the regions
within the fps that contained hemoglobin genes by
screening all BACs surrounding the hybridizationpositive BACs for the presence of hemoglobin genes.
PCR primers were designed for sequence tag sites (STS)
within the BAC-end sequences (SP6 and T7 ends) of
suspected overlapping BACs spanning the hemoglobin
gene region, and overlaps were checked by PCR amplification of the STS within the putative overlapping BACs.
The overlapping BACs S0014B03 and S0055H05 were
determined to span the hemoglobin gene region of
fps1046, while S0155C07 and S0079J05 spanned that of
fps135, thus creating BAC tiling paths for the hemoglobin regions of these fps. Individual shotgun libraries
were generated for all four BACs and sequenced.
Sequence assemblies and annotation

The CHORI-214 BAC library was made from a diploid
male Atlantic salmon individual, meaning that BAC
inserts originated from either maternal or paternal chromosomes and therefore, overlapping BACs could exhibit
allelic differences. This appeared to be the case for
BACs S0014B03 and S0055H05, for which the overlapping region covered the hemoglobin genes within
fps1046. Thus, although this overlapping section
assembled into one contiguous section, reads containing
allelic differences assembled into independent contigs
that aligned to homologous regions along the solid contig. Nevertheless, the full BACs assembled very well, and

Page 3 of 17

only three contigs > 1000 bp and two gaps remained
after hand finishing. These gaps presumably span repetitive regions in the Atlantic salmon genome [32].
Furthermore, given that the entire hemoglobin gene
region was assembled with no gaps, it can be assumed
that the six putatively functional a and six putatively
functional b hemoglobin genes, two of which were
defined as non-Bohr b hemoglobins, along with the two
putative a hemoglobin pseudogenes and three putative
b hemoglobin pseudogenes that were annotated within
fps1046 represent all hemoglobin genes within that cluster (note that the solid contig was used for sequence
annotation; Figure 1A). The total size of the assembly
for the two BACs, not including allelic contigs (i.e., the
non-redundant sequence), was 242,883 bp, with approximately 49,000 bp of overlap between them and the
hemoglobin genes spanning approximately 87,000 bp.
Sequence reads from the overlapping region between the
BACs S0155C07 and S0079J05 of fps135 assembled into
one sequence contig with no apparent allelic differences.
However, the remainder of the fps135 BACs proved much
more difficult to assemble, and unfortunately, the repetitive nature of the sequences made it impossible to further
improve the assembly by sequencing PCR products to fill
gaps because we were unable to design specific PCR primers that would amplify a single product (i.e., numerous
bands, or smears on agarose gels were obtained). Thus, a
total of 23 sequence contigs > 1000 bp remained after
hand-finishing of the assembly. The relative orders of
some of the sequence contigs of fps135 were determined
by matching paired-ends of sequence shotgun clones. Six
sequence contigs contained hemoglobin genes, and the
relative order of these fps135 contigs with respect to one
another was estimated by aligning the contigs against the
completed assembly of the two BACs from fps1046. This
was based on the assumption, given the highly similar nature of the non-coding regions, as well as that of the genes
flanking the globins, that there has not been a major disruption in the form of an inversion to either of the hemoglobin regions (i.e., that of fps135 or fps1046). Our
sequence annotation identified seven putatively functional
a hemoglobin genes and one putative a hemoglobin pseudogene, as well as eight putatively functional b hemoglobin
genes, four of which were defined as non-Bohr b hemoglobins, and three putative b hemoglobin pseudogenes within
the fps135 hemoglobin BACs (Figure 1B). This, however,
must be considered a minimum estimate of hemoglobin
genes within this region given the possibility that gaps
between sequence contigs could contain additional hemoglobin genes. The total size of the assembled sequence
contigs for the two BACs was 421,907 bp, with approximately 33,000 bp of overlap. The hemoglobin genes
spanned approximately 130,000 bp not including gaps
between contigs.

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

Page 4 of 17

Figure 1 Genomic organization of the Atlantic salmon hemoglobin gene clusters. A) Schematic representation of the region of Atlantic
salmon chromosome 6 containing the hemoglobin genes. Sequence reads for this region assembled into one solid sequence contig (ctg 41). B)
Schematic representation of the region of Atlantic salmon chromosome 3 containing the hemoglobin genes. Sequence contigs are indicated by
horizontal green lines. b hemoglobin genes are indicated in blue; a hemoglobin genes are indicated in red. Arrows indicate strand of
transcription. All hemoglobin gene names begin with SsaChr6 or SsaChr3 for chromosome 6 and chromosome 3, respectively, followed by a or
b and a number indicating the order of the genes. SP6 and T7 ends of overlapping BACs are indicated by grey arrows. Thus, the regions
between the arrows indicate BAC overlapping regions. bN: Non-Bohr b hemoglobins.

All sequences were deposited in the NCBI GenBank
database with the assembled sequence contigs for BACs
S0155C07 and S0079J05 (fps135) under the accession
number GQ898924 and those for BACs S0055H05 and
S0014B03 (fps1046) under the accession number
GQ898925.
All previously published Atlantic salmon hemoglobin
sequences [25] were identified within the annotated
hemoglobin clusters; however, there were two examples
of possible allelic differences. Specifically, Clone 3 a
hemoglobin (GenBank accession number X97286.1)
exhibited 99% similarity at the nucleotide level to SsaChr6a6, which resulted in one amino acid change from
a methionine to a leucine at amino acid 32, and the
Clone 5 and Clone 6 b hemoglobins (Bohr; X97288 and
X97289) showed 99% similarity at the nucleotide level
with SsaChr6b3, which resulted in one amino acid
change from valine to leucine at amino acid 143. However, as both of these changes were caused by single
nucleotide substitutions, each resulting in a single
amino acid change, and given the depth of sequencing
coverage of the Atlantic salmon BACs (i.e., > 18× coverage in both cases), it is more probable that they reflect
sequencing errors in the published clones rather than
allelic differences.
To provide further evidence that the two Atlantic salmon hemoglobin gene clusters encompassed all previously identified Atlantic salmon a and b hemoglobin
genes, we compared all identified putatively functional
Atlantic salmon hemoglobin genes against all full-length
Atlantic salmon cDNA clones [33]. Indeed, all unique

full-length cDNA clones annotated as b hemoglobins
were accounted for within the identified putatively functional b hemoglobin genes. This was also true for the a
hemoglobins, with the exception of the cDNA clones
with accession numbers BT046755.1 and BT046550.1,
which are highly similar to one another but not to the
identified hemoglobins. An alignment of these clones
using BLASTn [34] against the nr/nt database revealed
similarity to hemoglobin subunit a-D, a distinct type of
hemoglobin present in birds, mammals and reptiles that
is predicted to have arisen via duplication from a gene
that had larval/embryonic function [35]. This gene is
apparently found in Atlantic salmon given the presence
of the ESTs, but is not in the regions of the a and b
hemoglobin genes.
Additional file 2, Table S2 lists all annotated a hemoglobin genes (Table S2A) and b hemoglobin genes
(Table S2B) with the source chromosome, strand of
transcription, start location, whether the entire hemoglobin gene matches one of the Atlantic salmon hemoglobin clones published by McMorrow et al. [25] at the
amino acid level. It also identifies which genes are nonBohr b hemoglobins, and lists the top hemoglobin EST
cluster hit, if any, with the percent identity from the salmonid EST database [33,36] and whether the hemoglobin matches one of the full-length cDNA clones with
the corresponding NCBI accession number. Table S2C
(Additional file 2) lists all putative pseudogenes with the
chromosome name, strand of transcription, start location and a description of each exon, with explanations
of why the gene was classified as a pseudogene.

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

The identified putatively functional a hemoglobin
genes SsaChr6a2 SsaChr3a2 as well as the b genes
SsaChr6b1, SsaChr6b2, SsaChr6b3, SsaChr6b6,
SsaChr3b1, SsaChr3b2 and SsaChr3b8 did not have
matching EST clones. This could mean that these represent newly identified hemoglobin genes, or that these
genes are rarely or never transcribed and thus are not
represented in the Atlantic salmon cDNA libraries.
Interestingly, several of these genes lie in regions where
the tail-to-tail alternating order of the hemoglobin genes
is disrupted and they would be transcribed on opposite
strands than expected (see below for more details).
Future studies using expression profiling of the Atlantic
salmon transcriptome at various time points throughout
the species’ life cycle will provide further insight to this.
Conservation of gene order and strand of transcription

Wagner et al. [24] first reported the tail-to-tail orientation and alternating order of the Atlantic salmon a and
b hemoglobin genes. We found that this orientation was
fairly well conserved, with the a hemoglobins transcribed on the negative strand and b hemoglobins transcribed on the positive strand, and the alternating a-b
order was mostly maintained in both chromosomes with
some notable exceptions. On chromosome 6 (fps1046),
the alternating a-b pattern is conserved throughout
(including putative pseudogenes), but there are some
apparent disruptions to the strand of transcription at
the 5’ end of the cluster. Specifically, SsaChr6b2 as well
as all putative b hemoglobin pseudogenes, including
SsaChr6bψ1, SsaChr6bψ2, SsaChr6bψ3, were predicted
as being transcribed from the negative strand, whereas
all putative a hemoglobin pseudogenes (SsaChr6aψ1,
SsaChr6aψ2) as well as SsaChr6a2 would be transcribed
on the positive strand (Figure 1A). On chromosome 3
(fps135), the b hemoglobin pseudogene SsaChr3bψ1 as
well as the putatively functional genes SsaChr3b1 and
SsaChr3b2 were predicted to be transcribed from the
negative strand, and SsaChr3bψ2 and SsaChr3bψ3 disrupt the otherwise conserved alternating a-b order and
orientation of the genes, SsaChr3b2 and SsaChr3b3
being adjacent (Figure 1B). In terms of a hemoglobin
genes on chromosome 3, SsaChr3aψ1 and SsaChr3a2
were predicted as transcribed in the positive direction,
whereas all others are transcribed on the negative
strand. Note again that, for chromosome 3, the order
and orientation of the sequence contigs was predicted
based on homology with that of chromosome 6 (see dot
plot in Additional file 3, Figure S1). Thus, it is possible
that inversions or rearrangements may have taken place,
and that the resulting predicted order and orientation of
the hemoglobin genes is incorrect.
As indicated above, it is interesting to note that all of
the putatively functional a hemoglobin genes predicted

Page 5 of 17

to be transcribed from the positive strand and all b
hemoglobin genes predicted to be transcribed from the
negative strand are lacking a corresponding EST at this
time. It is possible that the apparent rearrangements
have contributed to a global shutdown of transcription
in these regions of the genome, allowing several of the
hemoglobin genes to degenerate into obvious pseudogenes and silencing the remainder. This should be
further explored using expression profiling by qPCR
across all life stages of Atlantic salmon.
Linkage analysis and karyotyping

Microsatellite marker Ssa10067BSFU, representing
fps1046 was informative in both the Atlantic salmon
SALMAP families (Br5 and Br6) [37,38] and was
mapped to linkage group 4. Microsatellite Ssa0516BSFU
was informative in the Br6 family and mapped to linkage group 11 (Figure 2). FISH analysis revealed that
fps1046 is found within Atlantic chromosome 6 and
fps135 is within chromosome 3 (see [38] for chromosome nomenclature). The FISH and linkage mapping of
chromosomes 6 and 3 to linkage groups 4 and 11,
respectively, contributed to the integration of the Atlantic salmon karyotype and linkage map [38]. Primer
sequences for the microsatellite markers used for linkage analysis are provided in Additional File 1, Table S1
and within ASalbase, the Atlantic salmon genomic database [31].
Comparative genomic analysis of hemoglobin gene
regions in other teleosts

We examined the regions surrounding the hemoglobin
gene clusters in the available teleost genomes and compared them against one another as well as to those predicted to surround the Atlantic salmon hemoglobin
gene clusters to gain insight to the nature of the teleostean hemoglobin gene containing chromosomes. We
found that the genes surrounding the hemoglobin gene
clusters are well conserved. Figure 3 shows a schematic
diagram of the hemoglobin gene regions and the predicted surrounding named genes in medaka, zebrafish,
stickleback and tetraodon compared to those of Atlantic
salmon. Note that, for the hemoglobin gene containing
BACs within Atlantic salmon chromosome 3, only the
order and orientation of the sequence contigs that
aligned with those from the BACs within chromosome 6
could be predicted. That is, given the extensive overlap
between the two BACs that cover fps1046 (chromosome
6), the total sequenced region is much shorter than that
of fps135 (chromosome 3); therefore, any sequence contigs from fps135 that did not fall within the coverage of
fps1046 could not be ordered or oriented. Thus, for any
sequence contigs that fell outside of this region, we
were only able to establish their relative location

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

Page 6 of 17

Figure 2 Merged female linkage maps for Atlantic salmon SALMAP families Br5 and Br6 showing linkage groups 4 and 11.
Microsatellite marker Ssa10067BSFU (underlined), representing fps1046 was informative in both the Altantic salmon SALMAP families (Br5 and Br6)
and mapped to linkage group 4. Microsatellite Ssa0516BSFU (underlined) was informative in the Br6 family and mapped to linkage group 11.

compared to those that aligned with chromosome 3
based on their source BAC. Within Figure 3, solid lines
between predicted genes indicate that the order and
orientation of the predicted gene relative to those neighboring it is known, whereas a single black dot between
predicted genes indicates that the relative location of
the predicted genes compared to those joined by solid
lines is known, but their order and orientation (i.e., that
of the sequence contigs on which they reside) relative to
one another is not. Arrows in Figure 3 indicate the
direction of transcription of the gene relative to the
location of the hemoglobin gene cluster; lack of an
arrow indicates that the relative direction of transcription cannot be determined.
Briefly, medaka, zebrafish and tetraodon and Atlantic
salmon exhibit two distinct hemoglobin gene clusters on
separate chromosomes or linkage groups, whereas

stickleback has only one. Although there are some rearrangements in terms of the positioning of genes relative
to the hemoglobin genes and direction of transcription as
well as some apparent gains, losses and duplications of
genes, all of the organisms possess one similar cluster
(hereafter Cluster 1) that contains, among others, the
shared genes UPF0171 protein C16orf35, Rhomboid
family member 1, Dedicator of cytokinesis protein 6,
ELAV-like protein 3 and DNA-3-methyladenine glycosylase (MPG; see Figure 3). Note these results are consistent with those of Patel et al. [11], who report that MPG
and C16orf35 surround the a hemoglobin gene cluster in
frog, chicken and human, and one of the a and b hemoglobin clusters in platypus and opposum. However,
whereas this cluster appears twice in Atlantic salmon, the
second cluster in zebrafish, tetraodon and medaka (hereafter Cluster 2) is characterized by a different set of

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

Page 7 of 17

Figure 3 Comparative synteny of hemoglobin gene clusters among sequenced teleost species. Schematic representation of annotated
genes within the regions surrounding the hemoglobin gene clusters for Atlantic salmon and four annotated teleost genomes (O. latipes, D. rerio,
G. aculeatus, T. nigroviridis). Colored blocks indicate shared or common genes as specified in the Figure legend. Black blocks indicate genes that
are not shared within the indicated regions of any other species. Distances between genes vary (i.e., figure is not to scale); the start and end of
the chromsome/group region is shown in base pairs (bp) for each of the annotated teleost genomes. Solid lines between predicted genes
indicate that the order and orientation of the predicted gene relative to those neighboring it is known, whereas for Atlantic salmon fps 135
(chromosome 3), a single black dot between predicted genes indicates that the relative location of the predicted genes compared to those
joined by solid lines is known, but their order and orientation (i.e., that of the sequence contigs on which they reside) relative to one another is
not. Arrows indicate the direction of transcription of the gene relative to the location of the hemoglobin gene cluster; lack of an arrow indicates
that the relative direction of transcription cannot be determined. For D. rerio chromsome 3, the gene for ELAV-like protein was found distantly
downstream of the nearest common gene (Arylakylamine N-acetyltransferase 2), as indicated by the distance shown, with numerous predicted
genes in between.

shared genes; specifically, the presence of Aquaporin-8
and Rho-GTPase-activating protein, although tetraodon
is lacking the former and zebrafish is lacking the latter.
In addition, tetraodon exhibits a copy of Rhomboid
family member 1 on Cluster 2 as well as Cluster 1. Stickleback and Atlantic salmon, however, appear to have lost
Cluster 2 entirely. Instead, the stickleback genome only
has one hemoglobin cluster (Cluster 1), whereas that of
Altantic salmon shows two copies of Cluster 1.
A dot plot generated using the JDotter software [39]
comparing the sequenced BACs from Atlantic salmon

chromosomes 3 and 6 showed that the regions surrounding the hemoglobin genes are > 95% similar between the
two chromosomes, with variations only within the hemoglobin gene regions (Additional file 3, Figure S1). This
further suggests that the two Atlantic salmon hemoglobin
gene containing chromosomes or regions are homeologous (i.e., represent duplicated copies of the same cluster
as the result of a WGD event). Thus, we hypothesize that
the WGD at the base of the teleost lineage produced Cluster 1 and Cluster 2, which remain in the zebrafish, medaka
and tetraodon lineages, that Cluster 2 was lost in the

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

stickleback lineage, and that Cluster 2 was lost within the
salmonid lineage prior to the WGD, which yielded two
copies of Cluster 1. This hypothesis is also supported by
the fact that the Atlantic salmon chromosome arms 3q
and 6q (where the hemoglobin gene clusters are located)
share nine duplicated genetic markers [38].
Phylogenetic analysis of teleostean hemoglobin genes

The results of the phylogentic analysis (Figures 4 and 5
for a and b genes, respectively) suggest that the hemoglobin genes cluster according to functional similarity,

Page 8 of 17

which corresponds to sequence similarity. This is
expected given the high sequence similarity and short
nature of the hemoglobin genes. Specifically, in Figure 5,
all of the non-Bohr a hemoglobin genes (SsaChr3b3,
SsaChr3b5, SsaChr3b6, SsaChr3b8, SsaChr6b4 and
SsaChr6b6) form a distinct clade with no other hemoglobin genes, further supporting that there are no b globin genes lacking the Bohr effect in the other fish
species examined (see Discussion). Additionally, many
genes that were annotated as embryonic within Ensembl
(identified with “emb” following the species name)

Figure 4 Phylogenetic tree of teleost and Xenopus tropicalis a hemoglobins. The a hemoglobin cDNAs (exclusive of untranslated regions)
annotated within the Ensembl 54 database for medaka, zebrafish, tetraodon, stickleback and X. tropicalis, as well as those identified in Atlantic
salmon here and the hemoglobin genes identified as embryonic within rainbow trout [28] were independently aligned using EBioX [70].
Phylogenetic trees were constructed using the a Bayesian approach with (5 runs, 100,000 generations, 40% burn-in period) within the TOPALi V.2
software package [71] running the MrBayes program [72] under the best selected model (SYM). For simplicity, as well as to clearly indicate the
source chromosome of the gene, the teleostean hemoglobin genes were named using the same system used to name those of Atlantic salmon.
That is, an abbreviated three letter (genus species) name followed by chromosome/linkage group name followed by a or b followed by a
number indicating the sequential order of the genes from 5’ to 3’ as defined by Ensembl (Additional file 4, Table S3). Hemoglobin genes that
were previously identified via expression analysis as being expressed exclusively during embryogenesis, and that are identified as embryonic
within the Ensembl 54 database are denoted with “emb” following the assigned gene name. Branch numbers indicate posterior probabilities.

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

Page 9 of 17

Figure 5 Phylogenetic tree of teleost and Xenopus tropicalis b hemoglobins. The b hemoglobin cDNAs (exclusive of untranslated regions)
annotated within the Ensembl 54 database for medaka, zebrafish, tetraodon, stickleback and X. tropicalis, as well as those identified in Atlantic
salmon here and the hemoglobin genes identified as embryonic within rainbow trout [28] were independently aligned using EBioX [70].
Phylogenetic trees were constructed using the a Bayesian approach with (5 runs, 100,000 generations, 40% burn-in period) within the TOPALi V.2
software package [71] running the MrBayes program [72] under the best selected model (SYM). For simplicity, as well as to clearly indicate the
source chromosome of the gene, the teleostean hemoglobin genes were named using the same system used to name those of Atlantic salmon.
That is, an abbreviated three letter (genus species) name followed by chromosome/linkage group name followed by a or b followed by a
number indicating the sequential order of the genes from 5’ to 3’ as defined by Ensembl (Additional file 4, Table S3). Hemoglobin genes that
were previously identified via expression analysis as being expressed exclusively during embryogenesis, and that are identified as embryonic
within the Ensembl 54 database are denoted with “emb” following the assigned gene name. Branch numbers indicate posterior probabilities.

clustered closely, which provides some suggestion as to
candidate Atlantic salmon embryonic hemoglobin genes
(see Discussion).
In both trees, the X. tropicalis hemoglobin genes formed
their own clade, although they did not form distinct outgroups, which again, may be a function of the high similarity between the hemoglobin genes across species. All
annotated medaka, zebrafish, stickleback and tetraodon a
and b hemoglobin genes that were used to generate the
phylogenetic trees (i.e., all that were identified within the
Ensembl 54 database) are provided in Additional file 4,
Table S3 by species with the corresponding name assigned

by us for comparison purposes (see Methods), as well as
the Ensembl gene ID, chromosome/linkage group, start
and stop location and strand of transcription.

Discussion
Number of hemoglobin gene clusters and whole genome
duplications

Notably, there are not four clusters of hemoglobin genes
in Atlantic salmon even though the hemoglobin clusters
were already duplicated within the teleost lineage prior
to the salmonid-specific WGD event that took place
between 20 and 120 million years ago [20,21].

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

Furthermore, our comparative genomic analysis, as well
as the high similarity in the non-coding regions of the
two fps, suggests that Atlantic salmon exhibit a duplicated copy of one cluster (Cluster 1), and are missing the
second cluster (Cluster 2), which is still seen in medaka,
zebrafish and tetraodon (see Figures 3 and 6). Figure 3
shows a schematic diagram of the predicted genes surrounding the hemoglobin genes in Atlantic salmon as
well as four annotated teleost genomes, while Figure 6
depicts the phylogenetic relationships of the studied teleost fishes (adapted from [40]), and illustrates our hypothesis of the evolutionary events that took place to produce
the observed chromosomal arrangements of the teleost
hemoglobin genes. With respect to the other teleosts studied, subsequent to the teleost WGD, which produced
Clusters 1 and 2, zebrafish and medaka and tetraodon
appear to have maintained both hemoglobin gene clusters, whereas stickleback and Atlantic salmon have lost
Cluster 2. In addition, zebrafish exhibits an apparent
inversion in Cluster 1 such that ELAV-like protein 3 is
located on the opposite side of the hemoglobin genes, far
downstream from Rhomboid family member 1 with several unshared genes between them. Within the tetraodon
genome, Cluster 2 also exhibits some shuffling compared
to those of the other genomes, and, interestingly, contains Rhomboid family member 1, which is also found on
Cluster 1. These relationships will be clarified by further
analysis and in-depth annotation of the full-length

Page 10 of 17

hemoglobin gene repertoires of other teleost species as
more of them undergo full genome sequencing.
With respect to the salmonid lineage, we propose that
Atlantic salmon lost Cluster 2 prior to the salmonidspecific WGD, which duplicated Cluster 1, thus producing the two copies of Cluster 1 and lack of Cluster 2
seen within the Atlantic salmon genome today. We also
recognize the possibility of an alternative pathway,
which involves tetraploidization of hemoglobin gene
Clusters 1 and 2 as predicted by the salmonid-specific
WGD (i.e., producing two copies of each cluster), followed by subsequent loss of both copies of Cluster 2
within the salmonid lineage. However, this involves two
separate excision events subsequent to the salmonid
WGD, whereas the former hypothesis only involves one
such event prior to the salmonid WGD, and is thus the
more parsimonious route. Note that the loss of the two
clusters must have taken place by excision of the entire
regions or chromosome loss as opposed to gradual
degradation of the hemoglobin genes or gene silencing,
or we would have expected our hemoglobin probes to
hybridize to footprints of old hemoglobin clusters in
other regions of the genome.
Conservation of order and orientation of a and b
hemoglobin genes

The tail-to-tail orientation and alternating order of the
a and b hemoglobin genes were fairly well conserved

Figure 6 Schematic representation of the evolution of teleostean hemoglobin gene clusters. Whole genome duplication (WGD) events
are indicated by grey diamonds. The two hemoglobin gene clusters resulting from the teleost WGD are represented as (1) and (2) for Cluster 1
and Cluster 2, respectively (see text). Loss of a hemoglobin gene cluster by excision is indicated by a diagonal slash across that cluster. Although
the genome sequence is available for the pufferfish, T. rubripes, the fugu genome was not included in this analysis because the published
hemoglobin arrangement of two hemoglobin gene clusters, one containing only a hemoglobin genes and one containing both a and b
hemoglobin genes [15] did not agree with the annotation results of the latest fugu genome assembly reported within the Ensembl database.

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

throughout both hemoglobin gene clusters, although
both hemoglobin gene clusters exhibited some apparent
disruptions to these patterns (see Results). However,
given that no hemoglobin gene footprints or ghost
genes could be found within these regions, we predict
that these changes took place via gradual shuffling, gene
loss via excision and pseudogenization over time. Such
lineage-specific gains and loses of hemoglobin genes
have also been reported throughout the mammalian
lineage [8,35]
Number of hemoglobin genes in Atlantic salmon

Our results revealed that the Atlantic salmon genome
contains substantially more paralogous a and b hemoglobin gene copies than previously published [24-26].
Furthermore, there are more copies of the a and b
hemoglobin genes within the Atlantic salmon genome
than in other teleosts whose genomes have been
sequenced. Specifically, of the teleost genomes examined, that of zebrafish contains the most hemoglobin
genes, with six b hemoglobin genes and seven a hemoglobin genes, compared to 13 and 14 putatively functional a and b hemoglobin genes, respectively, in
Atlantic salmon. Note, however, that some of the putatively functional hemoglobin genes do not have an EST
associated with them, perhaps suggesting that the actual
number of functional genes should be reduced accordingly. However, this would still leave the Atlantic salmon with more a and b hemoglobin genes than any of
the other teleosts examined to date.
Numerous reports suggest that mammalian hemoglobin levels are implicated in the increased oxygen affinity
of blood in situations of adaptation to altitude-induced
hypoxia (reviewed by [41]), thus suggesting that hemoglobin levels contribute to survival in low oxygen environments. Further, Hoffman et al. [35] suggest that
variation in hemoglobin gene copy number may be a
source of regulatory variation affecting physiological differences in blood oxygen transport and aerobic energy
metabolism in mammals. Indeed, it has been proposed
that the capacity of fish to colonize a wide range of
habitats is directly related to their hemoglobin systems
[42]. In addition, a study using real-time quantitative
PCR demonstrated that hypoxic conditions induce complex responses in hemoglobin gene expression in zebrafish [43]. Thus, the extensive array of hemoglobins in
Atlantic salmon may reflect the diverse range of environmental conditions that an individual salmon must
endure throughout its lifecycle as it migrates from freshwater streams to open ocean and back.
Identification of b hemoglobins lacking the Bohr effect

The Bohr effect is the phenomenon that the affinity of
hemoglobin for O 2 is affected by pH. Specifically, an

Page 11 of 17

increase in the blood pCO2 shifts the oxygen dissociation curve to the right, resulting in the release of O 2
and thereby enabling more efficient gas exchange
between blood and tissues. This is the result of the oxydeoxy conformational change and allosteric interactions
between O2 and H+/CO2 binding sites of the hemoglobin molecule. Hemoglobin molecules lacking the Bohr
effect are able to retain O2 under conditions of elevated
acidity caused by increased oxygen consumption [44].
Therefore, the non-Bohr hemoglobin may function as
an emergency oxygen supplier when an organism is
exercising vigorously, such as when a fish is escaping a
predator, catching prey, or swimming against a current.
The Bohr effect depends on the intricate arrangement
and interactions of all cation and anion binding sites in
the hemoglobin molecule and involves a number of contributing amino acid groups that have not yet been fully
elucidated [45]. Indeed, a comparison of mammalian,
avian and teleost fish hemoglobins suggested that several
different histidine and non-histidine sites contribute to
the Bohr effect in different species to varying degrees
[45]. It is widely accepted, however, that a greater overall histidine content in the hemoglobin molecule correlates with an increased Bohr effect [46], with the
C-terminal histidine residue accounting for up to 50% of
the effect [45,47,48]. In Atlantic salmon, the non-Bohr b
hemoglobin exhibits phenylalanine at this position [25].
In addition, in Atlantic salmon, the non-Bohr b hemoglobin has 147 amino acids (vs. 148 in the Bohr molecule), including the initiator methoinine, and the amino
acid at position 93 is alanine [26,49]. We used these
three characteristics to identify a total of six putatively
functional non-Bohr b hemoglobin genes within the
Atlantic salmon genome (Figure 1; Additional file 2,
Table S2B). Conversely, no b hemoglobin genes identified within the medaka, zebrafish, stickleback or tetraodon genomes exhibited all three of these hallmarks of
the non-Bohr b hemoglobin. In addition, a recent PCRbased exploration of the Atlantic cod genome found no
b hemoglobin genes exhibiting these characteristics [50],
implying an absence of the non-Bohr hemoglobins in
this species. All of the Atlantic salmon non-Bohr b
hemoglobins formed a distinct clade in the phylogenetic
analysis, which reflects their common structural elements and therefore highly similar sequences, and lends
further support to the finding that no other fish
species examined possesses non-Bohr hemoglobin genes
[Figure 5].
This apparently high number of non-Bohr b hemoglobin gene copies within the Atlantic salmon genome may
be attributable to the Atlantic salmon life history, with
its extensive migratory range and the need to swim
upstream into fresh water habitats to spawn. In contrast,
all of the model teleosts studied so far inhabit relatively

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

consistent environments with little variation in depth,
temperature or salinity. Additionally, although Atlantic
cod, a non-model teleost that does not appear to possess
non-Bohr b hemoglobin genes, inhabit depths from the
surface up to 600 m and undertake seasonal migration,
at no point in their lifecycle do they inhabit freshwater
[50]. Thus, future studies of the hemoglobin gene repertoires of other migratory salmonids, such as the Pacific
salmon species, as well as land-locked freshwater salmonids, in addition to expression profiling of hemoglobin
genes at different life stages will provide further insight
to this phenomenon.
Embryonic hemoglobin genes

To date, there has been no published study examining
temporal expression of hemoglobin genes in Atlantic
salmon. Indeed, the most closely related species for
which this has been done is rainbow trout [28], for
which there is no published genome sequence as well as
no comprehensive examination of the rainbow trout
hemoglobin repertoire such as this one. Given the complex life history of salmon and the lack of available
expression data, we could not confidently assign the title
of embryonic to any Atlantic salmon hemoglobins at
this time. However, it is noteworthy that SsaChr3a1 and
SsaChr6a1 form a clade with Omya2emb, as well as
Omya1emb and an embryonic Danio rerio a globin,
DreChr3a5emb (Figure 4), and that SsaChr3a2 and SsaChr6a2 cluster closely with this clade. Figure 5 shows
that SsaChr3b1, SsaChr6b1, SsaChr3b2 and SsaChr6b2
form a clade with Omyb1emb. These phylogenetic relationships suggest that these Atlantic salmon hemoglobin
genes may be embryonic. Also worth noting is that all
of these are the first genes in the 5’-3’ direction on their
respective chromosomes. In mammals, temporal expression of hemoglobin genes correlates with spatial location
on the chromosome, with the first upstream hemoglobin
gene being the first expressed [3]. This further suggests
that these genes (i.e., SsaChr3a1 and SsaChr3a2, SsaChr6a1, SsaChr6a2, SsaChr3b1 SsaChr3b2, SsaChr6b1
and SsaChr6b2) encode candidate embryonic hemoglobins. However, further analysis, in particular, detailed
expression profiling of hemoglobin genes during all life
stages, is required to examine these hypotheses.

Conclusions
We found that, despite the Atlantic salmon genome
having gone through at least two WGD events relative
to tetrapods, which would result in four predicted
hemoglobin gene clusters, only two such clusters were
present. Furthermore, the Atlantic salmon genome
appears to exhibit two copies of one of the duplicated
ancestral teleost hemoglobin gene clusters, and has presumably lost the other cluster. We also found that the

Page 12 of 17

Atlantic salmon genome harbors substantially more
hemoglobin genes than the other teleosts for which the
hemoglobin gene repertoires have been identified, and
that they possess several hemoglobin genes that appear
to encode non- Bohr b hemoglobins. We suggest that
these characteristics of the Atlantic salmon hemoglobin
genes reflect the dynamic life history of Atlantic salmon.

Methods
Identification of Atlantic salmon hemoglobin BACs

As part of the Genomic Research on All Salmonids Project (GRASP), an Atlantic salmon BAC library was produced from a partial EcoRI restriction enzyme digest of
DNA from a Norwegian aquaculture strain male fish
(CHORI-214 segments 1-3). There are 312,000 BAC
clones in the library with an average insert size of
190,000 bp, which have been arrayed onto nylon membranes, thus representing an 18.8-fold coverage of the
Atlantic salmon genome [29]. BACs were fingerprinted
using HindIII and arranged into contigs to create the
first physical map of a salmonid genome [30]. Approximately 210,000 BAC end-sequences have been determined, corresponding to approximately 3.5% of the
Atlantic salmon genome. Information on the Atlantic
salmon BACs and physical map can be found at [31].
To identify the Atlantic salmon BACs containing the
hemoglobin genes, oligonucleotide probes (~40-mers)
were designed from the published Atlantic salmon
Clone 6 (GenBank accession number X97289) for a, b
and non-Bohr b hemoglobins. PCR primers sets were
also designed to span intron 1 of all three hemoglobin
types. In addition, primer sets were designed to span
intron 1 of the embryonic a and b hemoglobins of rainbow trout, with a ~40-mer forward primer that was
used for hybridization probing (GenBank accession
numbers: a: AB015448; b: AB015450). All primers and
probes were designed using Primer3 ver. 0.4.0 [51] and
are provided in Additional file 1, Table S1. The oligonucleotide probes were end-labeled with 32 PgATP using
T4 polynucleotide kinase and hybridized to six BAC filters at a time as described by Johnstone et al. [52].
Briefly, prehybridization was carried out in 5× salinesodium citrate buffer (SSC), 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS), and 5 × Denhardt’s solution at 65°C. The filters
were washed three times for 1 hr at 50°C, in 1 × SSC
and 0.1% SDS. Filters were exposed to phosphor screens
that were scanned using the Typhoon Imaging System
and visualized using ImageQuant software, giving an
image of the 32 P-labeled hybridization-positive BACs
containing the hemoglobin markers. The hybridizationpositive BAC clones were picked from the library, cultured in 5 mL LB media containing chloramphenicol
(50 μg/mL) overnight at 37°C shaking at 250 rpm and
made into glycerol stocks for subsequent PCR

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

verification that they indeed contained hemoglobin
genes. Hybridization and PCR-positive BACs for the
hemoglobin genes were matched to two fingerprint scaffolds (fps) within the Altantic salmon physical map
(fps135 and fps1046; [30,31]).
BAC shotgun library generation and sequencing

Using a combination of hybridization probing and PCR
(see above) to screen all BACs within the suspected
hemoglobin gene containing regions, we identified two
overlapping BACs from each of fps1046 (BACs
S0055H05 and S0014B03) and fps135 (BACs S0155C07
and S0079J05) spanning the entire Atlantic salmon
hemoglobin gene repertoire. That is, all primers amplified hemoglobin gene products within these BACs, and
no additional BACs that were not contained within the
four BACs as determined by the Atlantic salmon physical
map yielded PCR products using the hemoglobin gene
primers. The four BACs were sequenced using standard
Sanger sequencing of a shotgun library as previously
described [53]. Briefly, BAC DNA was isolated from each
of the hemoglobin-containing BACs using Qiagen’s Large
Construct kit as per the manufacturer’s directions (Qiagen, Mississauga, Ont. Canada). The kit includes an exonuclease digestion step to eliminate E. coli genomic
DNA. The purified BAC DNA was sheared by sonication
and blunt-end repaired. The sonicated DNA was size
fractioned by agarose gel electrophoresis and 2-5 kb fragments were purified using the QIAquick Gel Extraction
Kit (Qiagen, Mississauga, Ont. Canada). DNA fragments
were ligated into pUC19 plasmid that had been digested
with SmaI and treated with shrimp-alkaline phosphatase
to produce de-phosphorylated blunt ends. The ligation
mixture was used to transform supercompetent E. coli
cells (XL1-Blue; Stratagene, La Jolla, CA. USA). Transformed cells were cultured overnight at 37°C on LB/agar
plates supplemented with ampicillin (200 μg/mL) and
1,920 (5 × 384 well plates) clones were sent to the
Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, Vancouver, BC
Canada, for sequencing. The sequences were analyzed for
quality using PHRED [54], assembled using PHRAP [55],
and viewed using Consed version 15.0 [56]. BAC assemblies were complicated by the repetitive nature of the
Atlantic salmon genome [32]. Assemblies were hand-finished to fill gaps (i.e., join sequence contigs) as best as
possible using primer walking; however, primers could
not be designed to join some sequence contigs that
ended in repetitive sequence, or often primers amplified
multiple products (i.e., showed a multiple bands or a
smear on an agarose gel).
Linkage analysis and chromosome assignment

The sequences of BACs S0055H05 and S0155C07
(representing fps 1046 and 135, respectively) were

Page 13 of 17

screened for microsatellite markers that were variable (i.
e., informative) within the two Atlantic salmon SALMAP mapping families, Br5 and Br6, each of which contains two parents and 46 offspring [37]. Markers
Ssa10067BSFU and Ssa10051BSFU were identified
within S0055H05 and S0155C07, respectively. PCR primers were designed to amplify the region containing the
microsatellite. The forward primer for each pair contained an M13 sequence tag that was used for genotyping analysis. Genotyping results were analyzed with
LINKMFEX ver. 2.3 [57].
A single end-sequenced BAC containing the a, b and
non-Bohr b hemoglobin genes was chosen from each of
fps135 and fps1046 (S0155C07 and S0055H05, respectively) to be used for chromosome assignment. Approximately 1 μg of BAC DNA was purified (Qiagen miniprep kit; Qiagen, Mississauga, Ont., Canada) and used
for FISH analysis to identify the Atlantic salmon chromosomes containing the hemoglobins. Comparison of
the results of the linkage and FISH analysis of the
Atlantic salmon hemoglobin BACs contributed to the
recent integration of the Atlantic salmon linkage map
and karyotype [38].
BAC sequence annotation and identification of putatively
functional and pseudogenized hemoglobin genes

All sequence contigs > 1,000 bp within the assembled
sequences were analyzed using a variety of sequence
similarity searches and gene prediction algorithms that
have been incorporated into an in-house computational
pipeline and database [58] described previously [53].
Briefly, sequences entering this pipeline were screened
(masked) for repetitive elements using RepeatMasker
3.2.6 [59] and were searched against the NCBI nr (nonredundant) and Atlantic salmon EST [33] databases
using BLAST [34]. A GENSCAN gene model prediction
algorithm [60] was used to predict introns and exons,
and the resulting predictions were searched against the
Uniref50 (clustered sets of sequences from UniProt
Knowledgebase) database [61]. Finally, a rps-BLAST
search against the NCBI CDD [62] was conducted to
provide additional information with respect to the predicted genes. Any sequence contigs that were identified
as containing hemoglobin-like genes by this pipeline
were put through an additional series of annotation
steps to ensure consistent calling of predicted open
reading frames (ORFs) and that we did not miss any
putatively functional or dysfunctional hemoglobin-like
genes. Specifically, the masked and unmasked sequences
were analysed using the ab initio gene prediction programs GENSCAN [60], GeneMark [63], FGENESH [64]
and HMMGene [65], and the results of each prediction
program were compared. In an attempt to identify putative psuedogenes or hemoglobin gene remnants,

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

HMMer (v1.8.5) [66] was used to scan the sequence
with hemoglobin exon-specific HMMs. Hemoglobin
genes were labeled as putatively functional if they were
predicted to be intact hemoglobins by our annotation
procedures, and met all of the following criteria:
1) The genes were predicted to contain three exons
and two introns.
2) The predicted exons were of the appropriate sizes,
meaning that predicted splice junction sites aligned
with those of known functional hemoglobins and
start and stop codons were present in the appropriate places.
3) The final predicted protein included 147 or 148
amino acids for b hemoglobins and 143 amino acids
for a hemoglobins.
The sequences of any predicted ORFs that aligned to
hemoglobins but failed to meet any one of the above
criteria were examined by eye for potential miss-calling
by our annotation procedures. Specifically, we looked
for historical footprints of missing exons that were not
recognized by the pipeline, interruptions to splice sites
as well as insertions and deletions of stop and start
codons, potential sequencing errors and frame-shift
mutations caused by insertions or deletions. We also
examined by eye any putative three-exon ORFs identified by our pipeline that were not recognized by a
BLAST search as encoding hemoglobins to determine
whether they may be remnant hemoglobin genes or previously undefined hemoglobin-like genes. If, after this
hands-on annotation, predicted proteins still did not
meet the above criteria, the sequences were defined as
putative pseudogenes. Furthermore, any regions for
which the predicted orientation (i.e., a hemoglobin
genes transcribed on the negative strand and b hemoglobin genes on the positive) and alternating order of
the a and b hemoglobin genes was disrupted were
examined by eye for putative remnant hemoglobin
exons and introns. All such regions were aligned against
intact hemoglobin genes using ClustalW2 [67], and predictions were made as to whether these regions represented footprints of historical hemoglobin genes.
All annotated hemoglobin genes were assigned an Ssa
(Salmo salar) name followed by Chr3 for fps135 and
Chr6 for fps1046 to denote its chromosomal location,
then a or b to identify the gene encoded, and finally a
number corresponding to its order relative to the other
a or b genes on that chromosome from 5’ to 3’.
Identification of b hemoglobins lacking the Bohr effect

We defined b hemoglobin genes exhibiting three hallmarks of a lack of the Bohr effect were defined as putative non-Bohr b hemoglobin genes. These hallmarks

Page 14 of 17

include: 1) the non-Bohr b hemoglobin has 147 amino
acids, including the initiator methionine; 2) the
C-terminal amino acid is phenylalanine; 3) the amino
acid at position 93 is alanine [48,27].
Identification of genes surrounding hemoglobin gene
clusters in Atlantic salmon and other teleosts

Atlantic salmon BAC sequences surrounding the hemoglobin gene clusters were annotated using our in-house
annotation pipeline described above. This provided a
preliminary prediction of the genes lying within the
sequenced regions. However, note that different components of the pipeline can differ in their gene predictions,
and that a full, comprehensive annotation of these
regions as well as the rest of the Atlantic salmon genome will be completed with sequencing of the whole
genome.
The genes surrounding the hemoglobin clusters in
four annotated teleost genomes, medaka, zebrafish, tetraodon (Tetraodon nigroviridis) and stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus), were identified using the Pfam ID for
the hemoglobin protein family (PF00042) [68] available
within Biomart [69]. Specifically, the Ensembl 54 Genes
database was searched using the appropriate genomespecific dataset for hemoglobins. Once the genomic
locations of the hemoglobin genes were determined, the
region surrounding the hemoglobin gene clusters was
expanded until at least five predicted genes were identified on either side of the hemoglobin gene cluster, or
until no additional common or shared genes could be
identified. This allowed us to examine the synteny of
the regions surrounding the hemoglobin genes, and
thereby generate hypotheses of hemoglobin gene evolution in teleost fishes. Note that the fugu genome was
not included in this analysis because the published
hemoglobin arrangement of two hemoglobin gene clusters, one containing only a hemoglobin genes and one
containing both a and b hemoglobins [15] did not agree
with the annotation results of the latest fugu genome
assembly reported within the Ensembl database. Instead,
only one apparent hemoglobin cluster containing both a
and b hemoglobin genes could be identified on fugu
scaffold 3, and when the genes surrounding this cluster
were compared to those of the other genomes examined, no shared genes (i.e., no conserved synteny) could
be found.
Phylogenetic analyses

The a and b hemoglobin cDNAs (exclusive of untranslated regions) annotated within the Ensembl 54 database
for medaka, zebrafish, tetraodon and stickleback, as well
as those identified in Atlantic salmon here and the
hemoglobin genes identified as embryonic within rainbow trout [28] were independently aligned using EBioX

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

[70]. We examined the relationships among the gene
products by constructing phylogenetic trees using the a
Bayesian approach with (5 runs, 100,000 generations,
40% burn-in period) within the TOPALi V.2 software
package [71] running the MrBayes program [72] under
the best selected model (SYM). For simplicity, as well as
to clearly indicate the source chromosome of the gene,
the teleostean hemoglobin genes were named using the
same system used to name those of Atlantic salmon.
That is, an abbreviated three letter (genus species) name
followed by chromosome/linkage group name followed
by a or b followed by a number indicating the sequential order of the genes from 5’ to 3’ as defined by
Ensembl (Additional file 4, Table S3). Note that hemoglobin genes of medaka [73], zebrafish [16] and rainbow
trout [28] that were previously identified via expression
analysis as being expressed exclusively during embryogenesis, and that are identified as embryonic within the
Ensembl 54 database are identified within the phylogenetic trees (denoted with “emb” following the assigned
gene name) as well as within Additional file 4, Table S3.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1: Primer and probe sequences. a ~40-mer
forward primers were also used as hybridization probes.
Additional file 2: Table S2A-C: Identified Atlantic salmon putatively
functional and pseudogenized hemoglobin genes. S2A) Identified
putatively functional Atlantic salmon a hemoglobin genes with
chromosome, sequence contig number and approximate location (kb),
strand of transcription, most highly similar Atlantic salmon EST cluster (if
any), whether the gene has a corresponding full-length EST, whether the
gene matches any of the previously published Atlantic salmon
hemoglobin genes at the amino acid level and whether the gene is
identical to any of those identified on the other Atlantic salmon
chromosome. S2B) Identified putatively functional Atlantic salmon b
hemoglobin genes with chromosome, sequence contig number and
approximate location (kb), strand of transcription, most highly similar
Atlantic salmon EST cluster (if any), whether the gene has a
corresponding full-length EST, whether the gene matches any of the
previously identified Atlantic salmon hemoglobin genes at the amino
acid level, whether the gene is identical to any of those identified on the
other Atlantic salmon chromosome, and whether the b hemoglobin
gene possesses the hallmarks of lacking the Bohr effect. S2C) Putatively
identified Atlantic salmon hemoglobin pseudogenes with chromosome,
sequence contig, location (kb), direction and descriptions of each exon.
Additional file 3: Figure S1: Dot plot comparing the sequenced
BACs from Atlantic salmon chromosomes 3 and 6. Regions
surrounding the hemoglobin genes are > 95% similar. The dot plot was
generated using the software JDotter [39]. The shared non-hemoglobin
genes [Dedicator of cytokinesis 6 (DOCK6), Dedicator of cytokinesis 7
(DOCK7) and Rhomboid 5 homolog 1] within these regions are indicated.
For chromosome 3, seven parts (P1-P7) are shown (bottom axis),
representing seven sequence contigs, the first of which (sequence contig
49) does not contain any hemoglobin genes and is therefore not shown
in Figure 1.
Additional file 4: Table S3: Putative a and b hemoglobin genes
from other teleosts and Xenopus tropicalis used to generate
phylogenetic trees. The table lists all predicted intact a and b
hemoglobin genes indentified within Biomart [69] for teleost genomes
that have been sequenced and annotated (medaka, zebrafish, tetraodon,
danio) and Xenopus tropicalis, which was used as an outgroup. For each

Page 15 of 17

hemoglobin gene identified, the table lists the species, chromosome or
scaffold, start and stop positions, strand of transcription, Ensembl gene
ID and our assigned gene name used in the phylogenetic trees.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre for
sequencing the BAC shotgun libraries. This work was supported by funding
from Genome Canada, Genome BC, and the Province of British Columbia
(WSD and BFK) and the United States Department of Agriculture Grant #
2006-04814 (to RBP) as well as graduate scholarships from Weyerhaeuser
Corporation (Weyerhaeuser Molecular Biology Scholarship) and Simon Fraser
University (Molecular Biology Graduate Fellowship and President’s Research
Stipend; NLQ).
Author details
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada. 2Department of Biological Sciences,
Washington State University, Vancouver, WA, USA. 3Department of Biology,
University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.

1

Authors’ contributions
NLQ contributed to the study design, identification and isolation of BACs,
sequence assembly and hand-finishing, sequence annotation, data analysis
and manuscript preparation. KAB and WC conducted the bioinformatics and
contributed to sequence annotation and data analysis. KPL assisted with
sequence assembly and data analysis. EAD performed the linkage analysis
and RBP conducted the FISH analysis. BFK and WSD contributed to the
study design, data analysis and manuscript preparation. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 19 March 2010 Accepted: 5 October 2010
Published: 5 October 2010
References
1. Hardison R: Hemoglobins from bacteria to man: Evolution of different
patterns of gene expression. J Exp Biol 1998, 201:1099-1117.
2. Strandberg B: Chapter 1: Building the ground for the first two protein
structures: Myoglobin and Haemoglobin. J Mol Biol 2009, 932:2-10.
3. Fromm G, Bulger M: A spectrum of gene regulatory phenomena at
mammalian b globin gene loci. Biochem Cell Biol 2009, 87:781-790.
4. Goodman M, Moore W: Darwinian evolution in the genealogy of
haemoglobin. Nature 1975, 253:603-608.
5. Czelusniak J, Goodman M, Hewett-Emmett D, Weiss ML, Venta PJ,
Tashian RE: Phylogenetic origins and adaptive evolution of avian and
mammalian haemoglobin genes. Nature 1982, 298:297-300.
6. Lanfranchi G, Pallavicini A, Laveder P, Valle G: Ancestral hemoglobin
switching in lampreys. Dev Biol 1994, 164:402-408.
7. Hoffman FG, Opazo JC, Storz JF: Rapid rates of lieage-specific gene
duplication and deletion in the α hemoglobin gene family. Mol Biol Evol
2008, 25:591-602.
8. Opazo JC, Hoffman FG, Storz JF: Differential loss of embryonic
hemoglobin genes during the radiation of placental mammals. Proc Nat
Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:12950-12955.
9. Wheeler D, Hope R, Cooper JB, Gooley AA, Holland RAB: Linkage of the βlike, ω-like gene to the α-like hemoglobin genes in an Australian
marsupial supports the chromosome duplication model for separation
of hemoglobin gene clusters. J Mol Evol 2004, 58:642-652.
10. Jeffreys AJ, Wilson V, Wood D, Simons PJ: Linkage of adult α and βhemoglobin genes in X. laevis and gene duplication by tetraploidization.
Cell 1980, 21:555-564.
11. Patel VS, Cooper SJB, Deakin JE, Fulton B, Graves T, Warren WC, Wilson RK,
Graves JAM: Platypus hemoglobin genes and flanking loci suggest a new
insertional model for β-hemoglobin evolution in birds and mammals.
BMC Biol 2008, 6, 34 July 25.
12. Near TJ, Parker SK, Detrich HW: A genomic fossil reveals key steps in
hemoglobin loss by the antarctic icefishes. Mol Biol Evol 2006,
23:2008-2016.

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

13. Giordano D, Russo R, Coppola D, di Prisco G, Verde C: Molecular
adaptations in haemoglobins of notothenioid fishes. J Fish Biol 2010,
76:301-318.
14. Nelson JS: Fishes of the World New York: John Wiley and Son, 4 2006.
15. Gillemans N, McMorrow T, Tewari R, Wai AW, Burgtorf C, Drabek D,
Ventress N, Langeveld A, Higgs D, Tan-Un K, Grosveld F, Philipsen S:
Functional and comparative analysis of hemoglobin loci in pufferfish
and humans. Blood 2003, 101:2842-2849.
16. Brownlie A, Hersey C, Oates AC, Paw BH, Falick AM, Witkowska HE, Flint J,
Higgs D, Jessen J, Bahary N, Zhu H, Lin S, Zon L: Characterization of
embryonic hemoglobin genes of the zebrafish. Dev Biol 2003, 255:48-61.
17. Maruyama K, Shigeki Y, Iuchi I: Evolution of hemoglobin genes of the
medaka Orzias latipes (Euteleostei; Beloniformes; Oryziinae). Mech
Develop 2004, 121:753-769.
18. Taylor JS, Van de Peer Y, Braasch I, Meyer A: Comparative genomics
provides evidence for an ancient genome duplication event in fish. Phil
Trans R Soc Lond 2001, 356:1661-1679.
19. Thorgaard GH, Bailey GS, Williams D, Buhler DR, Kaattari SL, Ristow SS,
Hansen JD, Winton JR, Bartholomew JL, Nagler JJ, Walsh PJ, Vijayan MM,
Devlin RH, Hardy RW, Overturf KE, Young WP, Robison BD, Rexroad C,
Palti Y: Status and opportunities for genomics research with rainbow
trout. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol 2002, 133:609-646.
20. Ohno S: Evolution by Gene Duplication New York: Springer-Verlag 1970.
21. Allendorf FW, Thorgaard GH: Tetraploidy and the evolution of salmonid
fishes. In Evolutionary Genetics of Fishes. Edited by: Turner BJ. New York:
Plenum Press; 1984:55-93.
22. Davidson WS, Koop BF, Jones SJM, Iturra P, Vidal R, Maass A, Jonassen I,
Lien S, Omholt SW: Sequencing the genome of the Atlantic salmon
(Salmo salar). Genome Biol 2010.
23. Wolff JP, Gannon F: cDNA and deduced amino acid sequence of the
Salmo salar (Atlantic salmon) adult hemoglobin α chain. Nucleic Acids Res
1989, 17:4369.
24. Wagner A, Deryckere F, McMorrow T, Gannon F: Tail-to-tail orientiation of
the Atlantic salmon α- and β-hemoglobin genes. J Mol Evol 1994,
38:28-35.
25. McMorrow T, Wagner A, Deryckere F, Gannon F: Structural organization
and sequence analysis of the hemoglobin locus in Atlantic salmon. DNA
Cell Biol 1996, 15:407-414.
26. McMorrow T, Wagner A, Harte T, Gannon F: Sequence analysis and tissue
expression of a non-Bohr β-hemoglobin cDNA from Atlantic salmon.
Gene 1997, 189:183-188.
27. Moghadam HK, Ferguson MM, Danzmann RG: Evidence for Hox gene
duplication in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss): a tetraploid model
species. J Mol Evol 2005, 61:804-818.
28. Maruyama K, Shigeki Y, Iuchi I: Characterization and expression of
embryonic hemoglobin in the rainbow trout, Onchorhynchus mykiss:
Intra-embryonic initiation of erythropoiesis. Develop Growth Differ 1999,
41:589-599.
29. Thorsen J, Zhu B, Frengen E, Osoegawa K, de Jong PJ, Koop BF,
Davidson WS, Høyheim B: A highly redundant BAC library of Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar): an important tool for salmon projects. BMC
Genomics 2005, 6:50.
30. Ng SH, Artieri CG, Bosdet IE, Chiu R, Danzmann RG, Davidson WS,
Ferguson MM, Fjell CD, Hoyheim B, Jones SJ, de Jong PJ, Koop BF,
Krzywinski MI, Lubieniecki K, Marra MA, Mitchell LA, Mathewson C,
Osoegawa K, Parisotto SE, Phillips RB, Rise ML, von Schalburg KR, Schein JE,
Shin H, Siddiqui A, Thorsen J, Wye N, Yang G, Zhu B: A physical map of
the genome of Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar. Genomics 2005, 86:396-404.
31. Asalbase: Atlantic salmon genomics database. [http://www.asalbase.org].
32. de Boer JG, Yazawa R, Davidson WS, Koop BF: Bursts and horizontal
evolution of DNA transposons in the speciation of pseudotetraploid
salmonids. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:422.
33. Leong JS, Jantzen SG, von Schalburg KR, Cooper GA, Messmer AM, Liao NY,
Munro S, Moore R, Holt RA, Jones SJM, Davidson WS, Koop BF: Salmo salar
and Esox lucius full-length cDNA sequences reveal changes in evolutionary
pressures on a post-tetraploidiztion genome. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:279.
34. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-10.
35. Hoffmann FG, Storz JF: The αD-hemoglobin gene originated via
duplication of an embryonic α-like hemoglobin gene in the ancestor of
tetrapod vertebrates. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:1982-90.

Page 16 of 17

36. Koop BF, von Schalburg KR, Leong J, Walker N, Lieph R, Cooper GA,
Robb A, Beetz-Sargent M, Holt RA, Moore R, Brahmbhatt S, Rosner J,
Rexroad CE, McGowan CR, Davidson WS: A salmonid EST genomic study:
genes, duplications, phylogeny and microarrays. BMC Genomics 2008,
9:545.
37. Danzmann RG, Davidson EA, Ferguson MM, Gharbi K, Koop BF, Hoyheim B,
Lien S, Lubieniecki KP, Moghadam HK, Park J, Phillips RB, Davidson WS:
Distribution of ancestral proto-Actinopterygian chromosome arms within
the genomes of 4R-derivative salmonid fishes (Rainbow trout and
Atlantic salmon). BMC Genomics 2008, 9:557.
38. Phillips RB, Keatley KA, Morasch MR, Ventura AB, Lubieniecki KP, Koop BF,
Danzmann RG, Davidson WS: Assignment of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar)
linkage groups to specific chromosomes: Conservation of large syntenic
blocks corresponding to whole chromosome arms in rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus mykiss). BMC Genetics 2009, 10:46.
39. Brodie R, Roper RL, Upton C: JDotter: a Java interface to multiple dotplots
generated by dotter. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:279-81.
40. Steinke D, Salzburger W, Meyer A: Novel relationships among ten fish
model species revealed based on phylogenomic analysis using ESTs. J
Mol Evol 2006, 62:772-784.
41. Samaja M, Crespi T, Guazzi M, Vandegriff KD: Oxygen transport in blood at
high altitude: role of the hemoglobin-oxygen affinity and impact of the
phenomena related to hemoglobin allosterism and red cell function. Eur
J Appl Physiol 2003, 90:351-359.
42. Verde C, Parisi E, di Prisco G: The evolution of thermal adaptation in polar
fish. Gene 2006, 385:137-145.
43. Roesner A, Hankeln T, Burmester T: Hypoxia induces a complex response
of hemoglobin expression in zebrafish (Danio rerio). J Exp Biol 2006,
209:2129-2137.
44. Jensen FB: Red blood cell pH, the Bohr effect, and other oxygenationlinked phenomena in blood O2 and CO2 transport. Acta Physiol Scand
2004, 182:215-227.
45. Berenbrink M: Evolution of vertebrate haemoglobins: Histidine side
chains, specific buffer value and Bohr effect. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2006,
154:165-184.
46. Jensen FB: Hydrogen ion equilibria in fish haemglobins. J Exp Biol 1989,
143:225-234.
47. Riggs A: The Bohr effect. Annu Rev Physiol 1988, 50:181-204.
48. Lukin JA, Ho C: The structure-function relationship of hemoglobin in
solution at atomic resolution. Chem Rev 2004, 104:1219-1230.
49. Brunori M: Molecular adaptation to physiological requirements: The
hemoglobin system of trout. Curr Topics Cell Regul 1975, 9:1-39.
50. Halldórsdóttir K, Árnason E: Multiple linked β and α hemoglobin genes in
Atlantic cod: A PCR based strategy of genomic exploration. Mar
Genomics 2009, 2:169-181.
51. Rozen S, Skaletsky HJ: Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for
biologist programmers. In Bioinformatics Methods and Protocols: Methods in
Molecular Biology. Edited by: Krawetz S, Misener S. New Jersey: Humana
Press; 2000:365-386.
52. Johnstone KA, Ciborowski KL, Lubieniecki KP, Chow W, Phillips RB, Koop BF,
Jordan WC, Davidson WS: Genomic organization and evolution of the
vomeronasal type 2 receptor-like (OlfC) gene clusters in Atlantic salmon,
Salmo salar. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:1117-1125.
53. Quinn NL, Levenkova N, Chow W, Bouffard P, Boroevich KA, Knight JR,
Jarvie TP, Lubieniecki KP, Desany BA, Koop BF, Davidson WS: Assessing the
feasibility of GS FLX Pyrosequencing for sequencing the Atlantic salmon
genome. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:404.
54. Ewing B, Hillier L, Wendl MC, Green P: Base-calling of automated
sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res 1998,
8:175-185.
55. Ewing B, Green P: Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using
phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res 1998, 8:186-194.
56. Gordon D, Abajian C, Green P: Consed: a graphical tool for sequence
finishing. Genome Res 1998, 8:195-202.
57. Danzmann RG, Gharbi K: Gene mapping in fishes: a means to an end.
Genetica 2001, 111:3-23.
58. GRASP: Genomic Research on Atlantic Salmon Project. [http://grasp.mbb.
sfu.ca].
59. Repeat Masker. [http://www.repeatmasker.org].
60. Burge CB, Karlin S: Finding the genes in genomic DNA. Curr Opin Struct
Biol 1998, 8:346-354.

Quinn et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:539
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/539

Page 17 of 17

61. UniProt Knowledgebase. [http://www.uniprot.org].
62. NCBI CDD (Conserved Domain Database). [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Structure/cdd/cdd].
63. Lomsadze A, Ter-Hovhannisyan V, Chernoff Y, Borodovsky M: Gene
identification in novel eukaryotic genomes by self-training algorithm.
Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:6494-6506.
64. Salamov A, Solovyev V: Ab initio gene finding in Drosophila genomic
DNA. Genome Res 2000, 10:516-522.
65. Krogh A: Two methods for improving performance of an HMM and their
application for gene finding. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 1997,
5:179-186.
66. HMMer. [http://hmmer.janelia.org].
67. ClustalW2. [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw2/].
68. Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Pfam database. [http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/
].
69. Biomart. [http://www.biomart.org/index.html].
70. EbioX. [http://www.ebioinformatics.org/index.html].
71. Milne L, Linder D, Bayer M, Husmeier D, McGuire G: TOPALi v2: a rich
graphical interface for evolutionary analyses of multiple alignments on
HPC clusters and multi-core desktops. Phylogenetics 2009, 25:126-127.
72. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
73. Maruyama K, Yasumasu S, Iuchi I: Characterization and expression of
embryonic and adult globins of the teleost Oryzias latipes (medaka). J
Biochem 2002, 132:581-589.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-539
Cite this article as: Quinn et al.: Genomic organization and evolution of
the Atlantic salmon hemoglobin repertoire. BMC Genomics 2010 11:539.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
