<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The blue lizard spandrel and the island syndrome</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:289. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-289"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Pasquale Raia"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The blue lizard spandrel and the island syndrome
Pasquale Raia1, Fabio M Guarino2, Mimmo Turano2, Gianluca Polese2, Daniela Rippa2, Francesco Carotenuto1,
Daria M Monti2, Manuela Cardi2, Domenico Fulgione2*

Abstract
Background: Many small vertebrates on islands grow larger, mature later, lay smaller clutches/litters, and are less
sexually dimorphic and aggressive than their mainland relatives. This set of observations is referred to as the ‘Island
Syndrome’. The syndrome is linked to high population density on islands. We predicted that when population
density is low and/or fluctuating insular vertebrates may evolve correlated trait shifts running opposite to the
Island Syndrome, which we collectively refer to as the ‘reversed island syndrome’ (RIS) hypothesis. On the
proximate level, we hypothesized that RIS is caused by increased activity levels in melanocortin receptors.
Melanocortins are postranslational products of the proopiomelanocortin gene, which controls pleiotropically
pigmentation, aggressiveness, sexual activity, and food intake in vertebrates.
Results: We tested the RIS hypothesis performing a number of behavioral, genetic, and ontogenetic tests on a
blue colored insular variant of the Italian Wall lizard Podarcis sicula, living on a small island off the Southern Italian
coast. The population density of this blue-colored variant was generally low and highly fluctuating from one year
to the next.
In keeping with our predictions, insular lizards were more aggressive and sexually dimorphic than their mainland
relatives. Insular males had wide, peramorphic heads. The growth rate of insular females was slower than growth
rates of mainland individuals of both sexes, and of insular males. Consequently, size and shape dimorphism are
higher on the Island. As predicted, melanocortin receptors were much more active in individuals of the insular
population. Insular lizards have a higher food intake rate than mainland individuals, which is consistent with the
increased activity of melanocortin receptors. This may be adaptive in an unpredictable environment such as Licosa
Island. Insular lizards of both sexes spent less time basking than their mainland relatives. We suspect this is a
by-product (spandrel) of the positive selection for increased activity of melanocortins receptors.
Conclusions: We contend that when population density is either low or fluctuating annually as a result of
environmental unpredictability, it may be advantageous to individuals to behave more aggressively, to raise their
rate of food intake, and allocate more energy into reproduction.

Background
Populations of organisms confined to islands often
evolve extensive morphological and behavioral changes
often over a short time [1]. The best known of these
changes are gigantism in small vertebrates and dwarfism
in larger species, the so-called Island Rule [2]. In addition there are changes in body shape. Insular mammals
often have reduced limb lengths and enlarged cheek
teeth [3]. Many insular birds evolve flightlessness [4,5],
dull plumage coloration [[6-8], but see [9,10]], and
* Correspondence: fulgione@unina.it
2
Department of Structural and Functional Biology, University of Naples
Federico II. Via Cinthia MSA, Naples, Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

larger bills [11,12]. Insular rodents exhibit an “Island
Syndrome” [13] involving the co-occurrence of most
(and often all) of these traits: reduced aggressiveness,
gigantism, reduced litter size, greater life expectancy,
and delayed sexual maturity. McNab [14] further noted
that organisms affected by the syndrome have a reduced
basal metabolic rate, and a propensity to enter torpor,
which entails reduced energy expenditure [14]. Adler
and Levins [13] linked the emergence of the island syndrome to the reduced interspecific competition and predation pressure that, they claimed, are typical of islands,
and to the size and degree of isolation of the island
itself. When predation pressure is low insular population
size increases rapidly (= density compensation and

© 2010 Raia et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

overcompensation). This makes it adaptive to invest
more in somatic growth and less in reproduction, laying
smaller litters/clutches of larger offspring [15-19]. In
crowded conditions larger adults and larger offspring
usually have higher fitness and better survival [20-24].
Since Adler and Levins’s seminal work, it has been
suggested that a similar “syndrome” occurs in insular
passerine birds (reviewed in [25]). According to this theory these birds tend to evolve larger body size, grow larger bills, are less sexually dimorphic and less aggressive
towards conspecifics, reach sexual maturity later in life,
lay smaller clutches of larger offspring, live at higher
density, and have higher habitat fidelity than their mainland relatives. It is apparent that when living at high
and stable population density, many insular vertebrates
show a number of correlated trait shifts including, at
least, decreased sexual dimorphism, decreased energy
allocation to reproduction, and decreased aggressiveness
toward conspecifics. Here we refer to these trait shifts
as the “Island Syndrome” expanding upon the original
definition given for rodents [13].
Similar observations have been made for reptiles. For
instance, lizards on islands show a host of trait changes
including melanism, modified limb lengths and head
shapes, size change (i.e. dwarfism or gigantism), smaller
clutch size, frequent shifts to herbivorous diets, and
reduced aggressiveness [22,26-37]. Buckley and Jetz [38]
reported that insular lizards often live at very high densities (ca. 1900 individuals per Ha-1) hence density compensation probably takes place in many insular lizard
populations.
Under the Island Syndrome fecundity, aggressiveness
and sexual dimorphism decrease because the population
density is high and stable, and the environment is predictable. Here we hypothesize that when the environment is highly unpredictable and there are strong
fluctuations in population size, investment of more
resources into reproduction, aggressive behavior, and
sexual competition are favored [28]. Sexual dimorphism
is expected to increase because of the greater emphasis
on sexual selection [24]. The same set of trait shifts
should theoretically occur when predators are present
and keep the population density low. We name this
hypothesis the “Reversed Island Syndrome” (RIS, see
Table 1).
In mammals, clutch size generally decreases with
increasing body size [21], thus gigantism is likely to be
associated with lower reproductive effort/fewer offspring. In reptiles, on the other hand, large size is
associated with larger clutch and litter sizes [39].
Moreover, large insular reptiles may have simply lived
for longer [40]. Consequently, we predict RIS applies
may apply to dwarf insular mammals and to large
insular reptiles.

Page 2 of 16

We provide explicit tests of the RIS-predicted phenotypic and behavioral trait shifts (Table 1), by using the
Licosa Island Wall lizard Podarcis sicula klemmeri as a
model. This is a large-sized, melanistic variant of the
Italian Wall lizard P. sicula from mainland Italy [41,42].
P. s. klemmeri population size fluctuates yearly by up to
40% (Tables 2 and Additional file 1: Table S11).
Individuals of both sexes from the insular population
are bright blue and no normal colored lizard (with a
green back and pale undersides) has ever been observed
on Licosa (Figure 1). We predicted that P. s. klemmeri
would be more aggressive, more sexually dimorphic, and
develop faster than mainland P. sicula.
We investigated the genetic basis of P. s. klemmeri
body coloration. The blue color is a form of melanism
in reptiles [43]. In vertebrates, melanistic coloration is
often associated with increased aggressiveness and sexual activity [44-46]. In a recent review Ducrest et al.
[46] suggest the existence of a behavioral syndrome
resulting from the pleiotropic effects of the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, the products of which
regulate genes for melanocortin receptors, MCRs.
POMC produces the melanocortins a-, b- and g-MSH
and ACTH, which bind to five melanocortin receptors
(MC1-5R). In vertebrates, POMC and the five MCR
genes are highly conserved and their tissue distribution
and functions are similar across species [47]. MCRs
are involved in the regulation of pigmentation, aggressiveness, food intake, energy expenditure, sexual activity, and immunological responses to stress factors.
Since these coordinated traits partly overlap with the
trait-shifts we predicted to occur under RIS (Table 1),
we predicted that increased MCR expression levels
could be the proximal, physiological causes of the RIS.
We tested this hypothesis by comparing levels of
expression of three different melanocortin receptors:
MC1R, 3R, and 4R; which directly influence skin pigmentation (MC1R), food intake rate, body size, and
energy expenditure (MC3R and MC4R), and sexual
activity (MC4R) (see [46]).
These predictions hold only if there are no mutations
in MCR genes [46]. Therefore, we sequenced and compared the MC1R locus in the two populations in order
to rule out the possibility that the striking difference in
pigmentation in our lizards populations is due to
mutation in MC1R in the island population. We predict that activity for all of these MCRs is higher in the
insular lizards. Increased aggressiveness and sexual
activity are expected to occur if an over-expression of
the melanocortin system is the molecular basis of the
RIS, whereas changes in food intake rate and darker
pigmentation are expected to occur irrespective of RIS,
as a consequence of the pleiotropy in the melanocortin
system (Table 1).

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

Page 3 of 16

Table 1 Phenotypic traits shifts expected to occur in insular populations as compared to their mainland relatives
according to the Island Syndrome and to the RIS
trait
Population
density
Aggressiveness

Island
syndrome

Reversed Island syndrome (RIS)

Trait changes mediated by increased POMC activity (the involved
MCR is indicated)

high

Low or inconstant

-

low

high

high, MC5R

usually large

small in endotherms, either small or large
in ectotherms

small, MC3-4Rs

Energy
expenditure

low

high

high, MC3,4R

Sexual
dimorphism

small

high

-

Body size

Development
Voracity*
Pigmentation*

-

faster, or anticipated

-

low

high

Either low or high, depending on the balance between MC3R and 4R

irrelevant

darker, but may occur in non-melanistic
species as well

darker, MC1R

Shifts in food intake rate and pigmentation (indicated with an asterisk) are not directly predicted by the RIS hypothesis and are only true if RIS is triggered by
changes in melanocortin receptors activity, and these are not polymorphic. In the last column we report the trait shifts mediated by increase in POMC expression
and their relationship with RIS.

Finally, we investigated head shape ontogeny in Licosa
and mainland P. sicula to test for differences in developmental and growth rates. Ontogeny is particularly relevant here because life history theory predicts a tradeoff
between growth and reproduction [21]. Changes in
ontogeny may be reflected in adult shape differences
because individuals that mature earlier may appear paedomorphic [48]. Paedomorphosis is linked to increased
reproductive investment in ephemeral habitats in
amphibians [49], and was proposed to drive gigantism
in Canary Island lizards Gallotia stehlini and G. simonyi
[50] and dwarfism in sauropod dinosaurs [51] and dwarf
elephants [52]. On the other hand, positive selection for
sexually-selected traits may produce peramorphosis,
since sexually selected traits usually appear later in
ontogeny [53]. Under RIS, we predicted that the insular
lizard (1) develops faster in order to mature early, (2) is
more sexually dimorphic as a consequence of strong
sexual selection, and (3) has slower growth rate as a
consequence of re-allocation of resources from growth
into reproduction [21].
Table 2 Lizards’ density estimates on both the Licosa
Island and on the facing mainland strip of Punta Licosa,
over a 5-years survey (see Additional file 1: Table S11 for
further details)
Estimated population density
Year
Licosa (island)

Punta Licosa (mainland)

2004

148.1

355.3

2005

246.2

341.1

2006

231.2

360.9

2007

241.7

388.0

2008

159.4

350.9

Results
Behavioral traits shifts

Insular lizards were much more aggressive, spent less
time basking and had higher food intake rate (Figure 2).
In the field (Figure 2a), we observed island lizards either
threatening or attacking other individuals, on average,
1.95 times per hour, compared to 1.05 times on the
mainland. A randomization test indicates this difference
in attack rate (0.90) is highly significant (random sets,
mean difference of the means = 0.385, p = 0.004). In the
lab (Figures 2b and 2c), insular males were nearly four
times as likely to attack other males as mainland males
(randomization test: mean difference = 0.210, p <
0.001). Attacks towards the same sex were significantly
more common for insular than for mainland females
(1.2 versus 0.4 attacks per hour; randomization test:
mean difference = 0.80, p = 0.010).
Sexual interactions in the lab were quite rare (Figure
2d). We counted just three interactions in mainland
lizards and five in insular lizards. The difference is not
significant (p = 0.208). Plainly, though, the power of the
test is very low given the small numbers.
Lab experiments revealed that insular lizards had
higher food intake rate than mainland lizards. Mainland
lizards ate wax worms, on average, at 7′45” minute
intervals, insular lizards at 3′ 2” intervals. On average,
insular lizards attacked their first prey after 4′ 6′′ on
average (range 3′15′′ to 7′01”), whereas mainland lizards
did not begin feeding until, on average, 12′ 26′′ (range 9′
34” to 21′00”). All insular lizards consumed all the wax
worms they were given within 12 to 20 minutes while
none of the mainland lizards consumed all the wax
worms, and the 4th wax worm was consumed after 28 to
43 minutes (Figures 2f and 2g). Regressing time

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

Page 4 of 16

Figure 1 Study site location and lizards color morphs. Location (a) and picture (b) of the Licosa Islet taken from a foothill on the facing
mainland strip of Punta Licosa. Comparison of island and mainland skin color phenotypes (c and d, blue morphs are insular).

(minutes) to prey consumption versus the number of
prey consumed gives a slope of 0.39 for insular lizards
(n = 20) and 0.11 for mainland lizards (n = 20). The
two slopes are statistically different (t = 2.85, p = 0.007).
In the field, the difference between the two population
in the time spent basking is not significant (means:
mainland 28′22′′, island 28′30′′; t = -0.040, p = 0.96).
Yet, in the lab mainland individuals of both sexes spent
about twice as much time close to a heat source (a light
bulb) than insular ones (Figure 2e). Insular lizards spent
about equal amounts of time under different levels of
radiation while mainland lizards spent 68% of the time
directly under the light bulb. The difference between the
two populations is highly significant (chi-squared =
1104, df = 2, p < 0.001).
MC1R gene polymorphism and selection test

Unlike all other vertebrates studied, we discovered that
the MC1R gene in P. sicula consists of two exones. The
first codes for the entire protein (314 aa), and the

second includes the stop codon and 3′ UTR (see Additional file 1, the sequences were deposited in Genbank
under the accession number GU225767).
Three nucleotide polymorphic sites occur in the two
populations. One of them (T-110-I) results in a chargechanging amino acid variant in the first extracellular
loop of MC1R. The extracellular regions of the MC1Rencoded receptor are important for ligand binding and
regulation of MC1R reactivity. This amino acid variant
creates two different alleles, but we did not find statistical association between the T-110-I polymorphism and
pigmentation (Fisher’s Exact Test, p = 0.23, nisland = 20,
nmainland = 20). Thus, the absence of association between
MC1R polymorphism and skin color rules out the possibility that mutations in MC1R caused the differences in
pigmentation we observed between our study
populations.
Fifty-five percent of the sequences (= 11) were associated with isoleucine at amino acid site 110 in the
Licosa island blue lizard, whereas 45% of sequences

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

Page 5 of 16

Figure 2 Behavioral trait differences between mainland and insular lizards. Mean number of aggressive interactions in the field (a), and in
the lab (partitioned per sex, b, c). Mean number of sexual interactions per hour (d) percent differences in exposure to heat between the two
populations (e). Mean time to prey consumption is reported in (f) Licosa and (g) Punta Licosa, over one hour of observation. Grey shades refer
to the insular populations; black shades refer to mainland populations. Bars in histogram plots indicate 1st and 3rd quartile.

were associated with threonine at this position. The corresponding figures in the mainland population were 25%
and 75%, respectively (see Additional file 1: Table S12).
Patterns of nucleotide variation within lizard populations were consistent with a neutral model of molecular
evolution: the distribution of allele frequencies at MC1R
as reflected in Tajima’s D is generally consistent with
neutral expectations for mainland and island populations. For the island population we found Tajima D =
0.70, number of segregating sites S = 2, nucleotide
diversity π = 0.00082; for mainland Tajima D = 1.05,
number of segregating sites S = 2, nucleotide diversity π
= 0.00091.
Differences in MCRs expression

MC1R expression varied between the populations with
the insular population showing a roughly four-fold

greater gene expression compared to the mainland
population (Figure 3a) (t-test one-tailed , t = 3.51, p =
0.0012, df = 19), suggesting that Podarcis MC1R gene
expression could be involved in skin pigmentation.
Western blot analyses showed significant differences
in the expression of MC3R and MC4R in the lizards’
brain and testes, using actin as an internal standard
(Figures 3b and 3c). MC3R protein expression in the
brain of insular lizards was about three times higher
than in mainland lizards’ brains (range: 1.5-5.3, n = 5; ttest: t = 4.506, p = 0.001). No appreciable difference in
MC3R density was noted in male testes between the
two populations (t-test: t = 0.355, p = 0.730).
We found that MC4R expression in testes of insular
male lizards was almost twice that observed in mainland
lizards (range: 1.4-3, t-test: t = 2.445, p = 0.037). Brain
expression of MC4R was not significantly different

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

Page 6 of 16

Figure 3 The melanocortin system. Top, the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene produces the melanocortins (a-, b- and g-MSH and ACTH)
which bind to melanocortin receptors. Amino acid sequences of the melanocortin peptide and core heptapeptide aminoacids are highlighted
(a). The tissues were we have localized three MCRs receptors are shown, along with the functions they control; upward arrow means “increased
function”. Total RNA screened for MC1R mRNA transcripts by real-time RT-PCR, much increased expression of MC1R transcripts is evident in the
skin of island lizards (b). Brain and testis expression of the melanocortins receptors as evidenced by western blotting with anti-MC3R and antiMC4R antibodies: c and d respectively. T, lizard testis; B, lizard brain; SH, human neuronal cells. Actin and SH were used as controls.

between the two populations (Figure. 3c, t-test: t =
0.402, p = 0.697).
Growth and development
Age, size, and growth

Insular lizards had larger maximum SVL (island
SVLmean = 71.84, n = 80; mainland SVLmean = 65.54, n
= 92; t = 2.644, p = 0.009). All three lizards > 80 mm

SVL belonged to the insular population, and they were
also the only lizards in our sample bearing 4 lines of
arrested growth (LAGs, we assumed 1 LAG = 1 year of
age) in their long bones. Island lizards were a little
older, on average (Licosa: mean number of LAGs =
2.21; median = 3; Punta Licosa mean number of LAGs
= 1.52, median = 1, Wilkoxon test, p = 0.001). In addition, the sex ratio was different, being nearly 1:1 on the

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

Page 7 of 16

Table 3 Growth rates (in mg * day-1). Lic = Licosa
(island); Plic = Punta Licosa (mainland)
Growth Rate

95% CI

n

238

224-255

36

Lic Female
Lic Male

316

291-351

25

Plic Female

291

255-342

37

Plic Male

303

269-348

43

CI = confidence intervals.

mainland, but about 1:2 (males:females) on the island
(Punta Licosa 47M-45F; Licosa 31M-59F, Fisher exact
test: p = 0.04). We are unaware of a sampling bias that
might have increased the likelihood of capturing females
on the island.
Growth rates did not differ between the two populations (Table 3). When sexes were analyzed separately,
however, females grew significantly slower on the island.
In fact, insular males grew faster than insular females.
This accounts for the significant body size dimorphism
on the island (Table 3).
Changes in ontogeny

A standardized major axis regression of procrustes distances calculated from a common reference (the consensus shape of the five shortest individuals) indicated that
the slope (rate) of somatic development did not differ
between populations [Licosa Island: n = 61, slope =
0.0183 (95% CI: 0.0147-0.0220), R2 = 0.560, p < 0.001;
Punta Licosa: n = 80, slope = 0.0222 (95% CI = 0.01820.0272), R2 = 0.465, p < 0.001; test for common slope: p
= 0.205].
The multivariate angle between regression vectors (of
shape versus age) of the two populations was 59.8, the
angle within Licosa Island population was 14.8, and
within Punta Licosa was 64.6. This means that although
the between-populations angle was rather large, the
ontogenetic trajectories of the two populations were the
same (see Additional file 1: Figure S6).
Table 4 Shape distances between groups of individuals
per population
Island

mainland

juveniles
island

adults

juveniles

adults

0

< 0.001

< 0.001

< 0.001

0.057
(0.051-0.068)

0

< 0.001

< 0.001

j

0.034
(0.028-0.050)

0.067
(0.055-0.083)

0

< 0.001

a

mainland

j
a

0.046
(0.039-0.058)

0.035
(0.031-0.045)

0.055
(0.046-0.067)

0

The metric of shape distance is the Procrustes distance (see text for
explanation). Juveniles are assumed to be all the individuals of age 0-1 LAGs.
Individuals with n > 1 LAG are considered adults. P values are reported in the
upper-right triangle, Procrutes distances (with 95% confidence intervals) are in
the lower triangle. j = juveniles; a = adults.

Procrustes distances between age groups confirm this
notion (Table 4). The distances between juvenile individuals of the two populations, and between adults of the
two populations are similar, implying the ontogenetic
trajectories are parallel (Table 4). Importantly, the distance between the two groups of juveniles is significantly > 0, indicating that consistent difference in
development between the two populations occurs early
in morphogenesis [100]. The largest distance (0.067)
was between Licosa adults and Punta Licosa juveniles.
This distance was much larger than between Licosa
juveniles and Punta Licosa adults (Table 4). Finally, the
lengths of ontogenetic vectors were 0.057 and 0.055 on
Licosa and Punta Licosa, respectively.
Taken together, these results indicate that although
the rate and trajectory of somatic development is similar
between populations, insular juveniles head shapes
appear more adult-like, and insular adult head shapes
develop “beyond” mainland adults, in keeping with the
notion of peramorphosis. The shift occurs early in morphogenesis (see Additional file 1: Figures S6-9).
Sexual dimorphism

In two-factor ANOVA, residuals of OLS regression of
log SVL against log head width revealed significant differences between populations (F = 7.097, p < 0.001, df =
1) and sexes (F = 28.382, p < 0.001, df = 1). The interaction term is significant (F = 13.258, p < 0.001, df = 1).
Insular male heads are much larger than insular female
heads. Insular male lizard heads are also larger than
mainland lizard heads in both sexes (see Additional file
1: Figure S5 for further information).
Sexual size dimorphism (SSD) is not particularly pronounced in Podarcis lizards [54]. We found significant
SSD only in three year old insular lizards. Males’ mean
SVL at three years was 78.3 mm on Licosa, whereas
females’ mean SVL was 69.3 mm. The SVL difference
was statistically significant (p < 0.001; see Table 5 for
comparisons of all age groups).
Sexual head shape dimorphism was large. The procrustes (shape) distance between insular adult male and
female individuals was 0.382 (p << 0.001, Table 5). On
the mainland, this distance was smaller and only marginally significant (0.302, p = 0.05, Table 5).

Discussion
Despite the fact that the two populations analyzed here
diverged a short time ago, and that there is sizeable
genetic introgression between them [42], we found striking evolutionary change in the Licosa lizards. Compared
to their mainland relatives, these blue lizards were much
more aggressive, voracious and dimorphic, as predicted
by the RIS hypothesis (Table 1). At first glance the
increased activity in both MC3R and 4R is expected to

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

Page 8 of 16

Table 5 Sexual shape and size (SSD) dimorphisms.
sexual shape dimorphism
island
d

p

0.0382 (0.0347-0.0504)

< 0.001

sexual size dimorphism

mainland
0.0309 (0.0278-0.0513)

p
0.05

Mean SVL: Females/Males (# of individuals)

Years (LAGs)

island

mainland

1

42.02(6)/40.19(5)

47.40(14)/45.36(7)

2

57.85(6)/62.02(5)

59.95(9)/59.85(13)

3

69.71(11)/78.28(8)*

72.55(7)/76.90(6)

d = Procrustes distances. Number of individuals is reported in parentheses. For SSD we report the mean SVL of females (left) and the mean SVL of males (right).
*t = 4.26, p < 0.001.

decrease food intake. Yet, MC3R is believed to function
as an inhibitory autoreceptor on POMC neurons:
experimental injections of MC3R-specific agonists stimulate feeding in mice [55]. Moreover, food deprivation
increases MC4R expression in the liver of barfin flounder Verasper moseri [56]. In our insular lizards, the
complex pathways that regulate food intake via modification of MC3R and 4R activity deserve further investigation. However this is beyond the scope of the present
study.
The Island syndrome predicts that sexual selection
should be less intense in insular vertebrates living at
high and stable population density, because mates are a
non-limited resource in this condition [24]. Conversely,
with either low or strongly fluctuating population size,
as with the RIS hypothesis, higher investment in (early)
reproduction should favor positive selection of sexuallyselected traits, due to an unpredictable mortality schedule [21,24]. In keeping with this, insular males had larger heads, and sexual size and shape dimorphism were
increased on the island (Table 4, Additional file 1: Figures S5, S7, and S8). Moreover, in insular females body
size growth rate was low (Table 3), which is expected
when energy allocation toward reproduction is
increased. As predicted, somatic development proceeded
at a faster rate early in insular lizards’ ontogeny, as indicated by head morphogenesis (Additional file 1: Figure
S9).
The notion that the Licosa lizard is a large-sized variant of mainland Podarcis sicula [41,42] was confirmed
by our data. However, insular lizards were, on average,
older, and the higher mean SVL on the island could be
a result of different age structure (perhaps related to
lower predation) rather than the result of direct selection on size.
The increased density of MCR receptors in insular
lizard tissues provides a proximate explanation for the
phenotypic trait shifts we observed in these organisms
(Figure 3). It is remarkable that we found neutral selection on the MC1R gene both in insular and mainland

individuals. This suggests that selection for color per se
probably does not occur. Although we found some evidence that the darker coloration of insular lizards
decrease the time spent basking the blue color may simply be a by-product of concerted increase in MCR activity levels. Consequently, we argue the blue coloration
may have been recruited adaptively for better thermoregulatory activity, as a ‘spandrel’ [57].
We argue that increased aggressiveness and food
intake rates are the likely targets of natural selection in
our insular lizards. Aggressive individuals are very often
the most successful (in terms of fitness) in natural populations, although they incur a greater risk of injury and
greater exposure to predators. However, the risk of
becoming prey is very low on Licosa. Behaving aggressively and increasing food intake rate should be very
advantageous in a restricted habitat with limited and
probably inconstant access to both resources and mates,
as is the case with Licosa.
In lizards, color morphs are quite common [58-60]
and often underlie differences in life history traits and
reproductive strategies even in the same population
[60-67]. In insular lizards, black and blue morphs are
frequent (e.g. the Sombrero black lizard Ameiva corvina,
the Brusnik black lizard Podarcis melisellensis pomoensis, dark Podarcis lilfordi on Isla del Rey, and a number
of blue-colored Podarcis distributed in many Mediterranean islands), and evolutionary mechanisms similar to
what we describe for P. s. klemmeri may have been
working in many of them. Bauwens and Castilla [68]
noted that all the largest Podarcis lilfordi males on Cabrera island have black or deep blue skin, and indicated
that this change in coloration is ontogenetic, occurring
at SVL of 64 mm. Furthermore, they noted that the largest adults of all of the 18 islets surrounding Cabrera
are black.
Males of Bonaire island whiptail Cnemidophorus murinus occur in two color morphs, brown and blue. Baird
et al. [69] found that blue males are far more aggressive
than browns. Their sexual activity is much increased,

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

and their testes are larger. Of all the courtship encounters they observed 85.7% were initiated by blue males,
vs. 7.1% initiated by brown males and 7.2% initiated by
females. Individuals of a translocated population of St.
Lucia whiptail Cnemidophorus vanzoi on Praslin Island
[70] evolved increased growth rates, and high intensity
of intraspecific competition (see also [37,71,72] on
Balearic Podarcis lilfordi and on Skyros archipelago
Podarcis gaigeae). Praslin whiptails also have increased
sexual size dimorphism and sexual dichromatism. Moreover, very surprisingly, Praslin whiptails are territorial
although Cnemidophorus belongs to a family (Teiidae)
of typically non-territorial lizards [70]. Some adult males
also maintain juvenile colors [70].
In practice, these studies suggest that the occurrence
of the ‘reversed island syndrome’ in insular lizards may
well extend to other melanistic forms. However, we
emphasize, that the link between RIS and melanism is
not necessary (see Table 1). The mechanism behind the
emergence of RIS is the reallocation of energy from
growth to reproduction. This reallocation is expected to
take place when resource supply and/or mortality risk
are unpredictable, thereby favoring aggressiveness and
voracity to secure resources and mates in the short term
[21].
For example, the Okada broad-headed skink Plestiodon okadae occurs in a number of islands of the Izu
Archipelago, Japan. Hasegawa [28,73,74] noted that
some P. okadae populations have: “a suite of traits
including small body size, early maturity, production of
small and many eggs, low frequency of failure in follicle
development, annual reproduction, high relative clutch
mass and low post-reproductive mass of females.
Whereas others have a suite of the opposite character
states”. Fast life histories occur on the island with the
largest predator fauna (Ohshima), whereas slow life histories characterize islands with higher density and the
lowest mortality of hatchlings (Miyakejima and Aogashima). Still, fast-living Ohshima skinks are the smallest
and the most dimorphic, with males having disproportionately large heads with a distinctive color pattern
[73].
Hasegawa manipulated lizard density in Miyakejima
[74], removing adults in order to simulate increased
mortality. As expected, after the experiment, both males
and females started reproducing at a younger age, and
females laid larger clutches, whereas egg size and body
size at first reproduction went almost unaltered. This
experiment demonstrates how decreasing survival rates
ignited RIS-like changes in life history traits. Plestiodon
okadae from different islands may well represent both
the Island Syndrome and RIS. A similar pattern of variation has been shown for Canary Islands Gallotia
[75-78].

Page 9 of 16

Island Syndrome and RIS describe a number of phenotypic traits that often, but by no means always,
change together in insular species. We think one should
not expect that all these traits co-occur. For instance,
the most obvious trait shift linked to the Island Syndrome (and we argue, to RIS as well) is change in body
size. Taking into account possible changes in ontogeny
(in the insular species), the relationship between body
size and the Island Syndrome may in fact appear weak.
Ontogenetic shifts may produce early-maturing, fastgrowing small individuals via paedomorphosis. This is
suggested to occur in the extinct dwarf elephant Elephas
falconeri [52] and in dwarf dinosaurs (e.g. Europasaurus
holgeri [79]). Slow growth was found to occur in New
Zealand’s gigantic moas [80,81], extinct giant lemurs of
Madagascar [82], females of the Licosa Island lizard
(this study), and extinct dwarf Balearic goats [[83], but
see ref. [84]]. Bunce et al. [85], however, showed that
Dinornis Moas were exceptionally dimorphic, and suggested that these birds invested a great deal of energy
into egg production. This goes against the Island Syndrome predictions, despite Dinornis being huge even by
moa standards.
Lancaster et al. [86] correctly noted that resource allocation trade-offs are best understood at multiple levels,
and pointed out that “the more resources are available,
the less trade-offs will be observed on any level. This
occurs over an individual’s lifespan for plastic resource
allocation traits (e.g. [87]) and over evolutionary time
for those mediated by antagonistic pleiotropy or other
genetic mechanisms”. This means that looking at one
aspect alone (e.g. body size, population density, clutch
size, etc.) when comparing an insular species to its
mainland relative may be misleading.
Spencer et al. [88] emphasized that although growth is
expected to be slow when population density is high,
rapid growth beyond a critical size reduces predation
risk and could be favored (see [22] on Sauromalus).
Roth [89,90] argued that density compensation might
explain dwarfism in insular pigmy elephants. Bonaire
whiptails live at huge population density, yet the blue
morph males allocate a great deal of resources to reproduction, which is consistent with RIS hypothesis [69].
Bonaire whiptails are herbivorous, and so food is not a
limiting factor on Bonaire [91]. We remark once more
that it is not density (or body size) per se, but the set of
ecological conditions favoring either small or large allocation of available resources toward reproduction that
produces the Island Syndrome or the RIS, respectively.
RIS is most likely to occur on small islets where environmental variation (in terms of resource supply and the
impact of natural accidents) from one year to the next
can be high. The possible instances of RIS described
above all relate to species living alone or almost alone

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

on islets and cliffs such as Licosa, Brusnik, Praslin, Isla
de la Reya, the islets off the main island in the Cabrera
Archipelago, Sombrero, the Faraglioni cliffs off the
island of Capri and Vetara islet (the two latter cases are
also blue-colored Podarcis sicula off the Western coast
of Southern Italy).
We showed that the RIS is linked to increased activity
of melanocortin receptors in our insular study population. Melanocortins pleiotropically regulate a number of
processes including pigmentation, sexual activity, aggressiveness, bodily growth, and food intake. We find it
highly likely that the same pattern of change in MCR
activity occurs in other melanistic insular organisms.
We believe that shifts in growth rate, body size, age
and size at maturity, and clutch size will depend on how
these traits trade off with each other [86]. Furthermore,
an insular species may well express the RIS without
being melanistic.
Despite all of the evidence we present in favor of RIS,
there are drawbacks to two-taxon comparative studies
[92]. In these studies, it is possible to interpret as adaptation what really is the phenotypic difference between
taxa due to other factors or even to genetic drift. In this
study, we did not demonstrate that RIS applies to other
insular populations/species. However, blue Podarcis
sicula are common on other islands, and it would be
very surprising if the basis for this coloration changed
from one island to another. Roulin and Salamin [93]
recently demonstrated that insular barn owls Tyto alba
of the world have lighter pheomelanic coloration and
are less sexually dimorphic than continental barn owls.
They interpreted this observation as a component of the
Island Syndrome, mediated by changes in melanocortin
expression. This suggests that, exactly as we predict in
our study, POMC involvement in the Island Syndrome
and its opposite, the RIS, is common in insular
vertebrates.

Conclusions
We predicted that insular vertebrates facing unpredictable resource supply and mortality schedules should
evolve aggressive behavior, high food intake rate, and
increased energy allocation to reproduction as a mean
to increase fitness. We refer to these predictions as the
Reversed Island Syndrome (RIS) hypothesis, in contrast
to the Island Syndrome [13]. On the proximate level, we
demonstrated that the increased activity of melanocortin
receptors underlies RIS in our study organism, the insular wall lizard Podarcis sicula klemmeri.
Although much study is needed to fully understand
patterns of trait evolution and covariation in insular vertebrates, we hope to have shed some light on this complex issue, by showing how disparate factors must be

Page 10 of 16

taken into account in order to gain a meaningful depiction of the evolution of life on islands [94].

Methods
Study site and organism

The study population of the Italian Wall Lizard Podarcis
sicula klemmeri is confined to the small islet of Licosa
(ca. 0.8 ha in surface area, geographical coordinates: 40°
15′04.23"N, 14°54′01.64"E) [95]. This islet is 400 meters
away from the mainland. The island’s vegetation is
dominated by Pistacia lentiscus. Vegetation is nearly
absent along the coast.
The Licosa lizard population lives at low (for an
island) and fluctuating density. We estimated a maximum population size of only 250 individuals (see Additional file 1: Table S11), that is lizard density is some
300 lizards per Ha (one-sixth of the average for lizard in
islands around the world [38]). In five years of field censuses (2001-2006) we noted the number of individuals
may change by up to 40% from one year to the next
(range: 148.1-246.7, mean: 205.3, see also [42]). Since no
freshwater source is present on the islet, mortality can
be intense in drought years. Summer drought in one
year is significantly correlated to population crash in the
next year on Licosa, but not on the mainland (Additional file 1: Table S11).
There are no resident predatory mammals, reptiles or
birds on Licosa. Gulls (Larus michahellis and Larus ridibundus) may be present, principally during the winter.
We noted that lizards supplement their diet with gulls’
regurgitates even in the presence of gulls. Individuals of
migratory herons (Ardea purpurea, Ardea cinerea and
Egretta garzetta) occasionally visit the islet during late
summer, before their winter migration. Kestrels, Falco
tinnunculus, were very rarely observed on Licosa during
our field surveys.
These observations suggest that although some predation on Licosa lizards is possible, it was minimal during
our 5-year census. In contrast, mainland lizards are
intensively preyed upon by kestrels, grass snakes (Natrix
natrix), western whip snakes (Hierophis viridiflavus),
and feral cats.
Podarcis sicula klemmeri is bright blue (Figure 1c and
1d). Melanism is common in Mediterranean island
lizards [95]. Our mainland populations, just opposite the
island on Punta Licosa (40°15′06.15"N 14°54′19.68"E) are
invariably normally-colored with the usual green back
with white undersides and little blue dots running along
the trunk sides that appear brighter during the breeding
season. We sampled lizards from Punta Licosa as the
reference (mainland) population to compare with the
insular population (Figure 1). All experiments described
below were performed in accordance with local and

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

national guidelines governing animal experiments (86/
609/CEE and its modifications).
Behavioral shifts in Podarcis sicula klemmeri

We predicted that Licosa island lizards should be more
aggressive, sexually dimorphic, and voracious than their
mainland counterparts. Change in voracity (food intake
rate) is not directly predicted by RIS, but we expected it
to occur if increased MCR expression triggers RIS, as
we hypothesize.
To test these predictions we conducted both field
observations and lab experiments. Field observations
were performed during the warmer months, from February until November, when Podarcis sicula lizards are
active in Southern Italy [96]. During 2006 we performed
two sets of observations, in the field and in the laboratory, under controlled conditions. In the field, observations were arranged as follows: we observed, for 1 hour,
all individuals from a fixed position, surveying some 10
square meters, in 40 different and non adjacent plots
chosen as to maximize inter-plot distance in order to
reduce the potential for pseudoreplication. Each plot
was visited once. A total of 5 days of observations were
performed over a 9 month period. During each observation trial we counted i) instances of intraspecific aggression, including both fights and aggressive displays, and
ii) breeding attempts and copulations.
In the field we recorded the total time individuals
spent either in full sun or in the shade. Observations of
individual lizards were included in the analyses if they
lasted for no less than 20 minutes (> 40 hours of observations in total). The mean percentage of time lizards
spent in the shade or in the sun, for each observation,
was our index of exposure to heat.
Our field observations may be severely affected by
incomplete data due to the difficulty of monitoring individual lizards over a sufficiently long time span. We
therefore conducted a lab experiment in terraria (measuring 1000 × 1000 × 500 mm) under controlled conditions. Forty adult individuals per population (20 males
and 20 females) were kept in laboratory at 25°C temperature. To avoid pseudoreplication, these individuals
were collected before field observations began.
We artificially created habitat decorations including
wood branches and rocks at the center of the terraria,
to allow the lizards either to move close to a heat source
or to hide under the rock shelters. The heat source was
a 150 watt light bulb hanging 5 cm from the roof of the
terrarium and above the branches. We considered three
ordinal heating regimes: “low”, when the lizard hid
under the rocks; “medium”, when the lizard stood on
the ground exposed to radiation; and “high”, when the
lizard perched on the branch, close to the heat source.
Individual lizards were observed for one hour: we

Page 11 of 16

recorded the time spent in each distance class. Then, we
computed the average percentage of time spent at each
irradiation level and performed a chi-square test to see
if the two populations differed.
The experiments on intraspecific interactions and
exposure to heat were conducted in June 2006 for both
populations. The experiments started 15 days later for
Punta Licosa (mainland) lizards because mating occurs
2 weeks later on Punta Licosa than on the island. Both
experiments were repeated in June 2007 on a smaller
sample to test if differences in population density over
years affect the results. Because no significant difference
was detected, only the results of the 2006 experiments
are reported here.
To study food intake rate in the lab we placed twenty
captive individuals (10 males and 10 females) from each
population alone in terraria (measuring 500 × 500 × 500
mm) and fed them ad libitum for 5 days. After this period, these individuals were held for 5 days on empty stomach and then presented with 5 prey items
simultaneously (caterpillars of Honeycomb Moth Galleria mellonella). We video recorded each trial for one
hour (the experimenter left the room immediately after
the beginning of video recording). We recorded the
time elapsed from the beginning of the experiment to
the moment each prey item was consumed).
To study intrasexual behavior we held, 10 individuals
of each population together in two separate terrariums
(5 individuals per 1000 × 1000 × 500 mm terrarium,
either all males or all females) fed ad libitum, and video
recorded them (in the absence of the experimenter) for
one hour them between h8.00 and h18.00 each day, for
20 consecutive days. From each recording session we
retrieved the number of intrasexual contests. Threatening displays of the head (e.g. head bobs) were considered
signs of aggressiveness toward conspecifics, as were full
contests that escalated to fights.
Finally, we studied intersexual activity in two additional terraria (one for each population), by placing 10
individuals per population (5 males and 5 females)
together. Individuals in these terraria were videorecorded and observed for one-hour as described above.
Instances of intersexual interactions were then counted
by examining the films. Chasing of females by males
and mating attempts were considered intersexual interactions (regardless of whether they ended up in copulation). Total number of interactions per population and
per sex was then computed.
To test for differences between populations in intraspecific activities we performed a randomization test,
shuffling data between populations. For number of sexual interactions and aggressive interactions: i) the data
were portioned by sex, ii) the number of interactions
per individual was shuffled (without replacement) 1000

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

times at random between populations, iii) for each random set the difference in mean number of interactions
per population was computed and iv) real mean difference was compared to the random distribution. Randomization tests were performed both for field and lab
observations, although in the field the sex of individual
lizards was not discernible by eye; hence field data on
aggressive interactions were not partitioned per sex. The
use of the randomization test is advisable here since the
low number of observations per experiment (see below)
makes parametric tests inappropriate.
To test for difference in voracity we first computed
the least squares regressions of the (consumed) prey
number against the total time since the beginning of the
experiment for insular and mainland populations. We
then tested for differences in slope between the two
regressions lines using a t-test.
All lizard individuals tested in the lab belong to the
same size class: 55-65 mm in SVL for females and 60-70
mm SVL for males. These size classes include most
adult individuals. A few very large individuals and juveniles were excluded to avoid possible biases introduced
by age- and size-specific behavioral and/or physiological
differences.
MC1R polymorphism

We examined the contribution of the melanocortin-1
receptor gene (MC1R) to the skin color pattern in P.
sicula. In the literature, all known mutations in the
MC1R locus, many of which are adaptive, occur in the
coding region, either as amino-acid changes or small
deletions [97]. However, it is important to note that little is known about the regulatory mechanisms that govern the expression of MC1R at the intracellular level.
The complete MC1R locus was sequenced in seven
phylogenetically diverse squamate species with melanistic or normally-colored forms finding that patterns of
amino acid substitution across different regions of the
receptor are similar, suggesting a conserved function for
MC1R in reptiles [97]. Here we cloned the Podarcis
sicula MC1R gene. We amplified its most conserved
region developing the primers by alignment analysis of
Homo sapiens (AF514787) and Sceloporus undulatus
(AY586162) sequences. The entire sequence of the gene
was then obtained by 3′ and 5′ RACE experiments.
Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends (RACE) is a procedure for amplification of nucleic acid sequences from a
messenger RNA template between a defined internal
site and unknown sequences at either the 3′ or the 5′
-end of the mRNA.
We amplified and sequenced the codogenic MC1R
from 20 individuals of each color morph in each population to look for associations between genotype and color
phenotype. In a previous study we demonstrated

Page 12 of 16

selection was operating on a mtDNA gene sequence of
Licosa lizard [42].
We performed Tajima tests for selection on the coding region of the nuclear gene for MC1R. Tajima’s D is
the difference between two estimates of the expected
amount of genetic variation per nucleotide, based on the
number of segregating sites S, and on average number
of pairwise differences ∏, respectively [98]. Under neutral selection, the two estimates of θ should be the
same. Therefore, the expected value of Tajima’s D for
both populations conforming to a standard neutral
model of selection is zero. Significant deviations from
zero indicate a skew in the allele frequency distribution
relative to neutral expectations. Positive values of Tajima’s D occur with an excess of intermediate frequency
alleles and can result from population bottlenecks, and/
or balancing selection. Negative values of Tajima’s D
indicate an excess of low frequency alleles and can
result from population expansions or directional selection. We estimated Tajima’s D using DNASP [99].
One way to determine the effect of genetic variation
on pigmentation is to analyze the genetic polymorphism
affecting receptor function. There are also many complex regulatory mechanisms that govern the expression
of MC1R at the intra-cellular level, from gene transcription in response to an external stimulus to the expression of the mature receptor on the melanocyte surface.
To examine whether differences in expression level of
MC1R influence color patterning, we conducted gene
expression assays (reverse transcriptase PCR [RT-PCR]
and quantitative-PCR [q-PCR]) on adult skin samples
taken from abdominal and neck areas. Specifically, we
performed parallel expression analyses for MC1R
mRNAs in the two lizard population (n = 5 males and 5
females for each population, see Additional files for full
details).
Western blotting

We tested differential expression of MC3R and MC4R
between island and mainland populations by western
blotting of testis and brain lysates (n = 10 males per
population) and used lysates from human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) as a control. Protein concentrations were determined chromometrically with the
Bradford assay (Sigma). Samples of equal amounts of
protein (100 μg) were subject to SDS/PAGE and then
transferred onto PVDF membranes and tested with the
appropriate antibody. Mouse polyclonal antibodies antiMC3R (Sigma™) and human polyclonal antibodies antiMC4R (Santa Cruz) were used at a 1/2,000 dilution.
Rabbit anti-actin polyclonal antibody (Sigma) was used
at a 1/1,000 dilution. Secondary antibodies were from
Pierce and used at a 1/20,000 dilution. Detection was
performed with the peroxidase-based Super Signal

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

West-Pico procedure (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Growth and development
Age determination

Age data are of fundamental importance for the study of
ontogenetic trajectories, because the correlation between
size and age is rarely linear [21,100]. We obtained age
data by applying skeletochronologic standard protocols
for other reptiles [101,102]. Skeletochronology was performed both on phalanges and femora of euthanized
animals. Bones were decalcified with 3% nitric acid for a
time ranging between 1h30′ and 3 h depending on their
size, rinsed in tap water and cross sectioned using a
cryostat. Diaphyseal cross sections (12 μm thick) were
stained with Ehrlich’s haematoxylin (20′) and mounted
in aqueous resin. Periosteal lines of arrested growth
(LAGs) were then counted by using a light microscope
equipped with an image analyzer. As with other reptiles
living in temperate regions, we assumed that each LAG
corresponds to an annual arrest of individual growth. As
a consequence, a lizard’s age in years equals the number
of visible LAGs. We caution, though, that it is possible
to underestimate LAG number because of endosteal
resorption (see Additional file 1: Figure S1).
Growth rate

Growth rate (in mg/day) was estimated for each sex and
population using least squares regression of body
weights of individuals versus the number of LAGs transformed into days by assuming each LAG represents a
365 day interval. Individuals with shed tails and gravid
or suspected-to-be gravid females (only for the body
weight-based growth rate calculation), and individuals in
evidently poor conditions (either badly wounded or
loaded with parasites) were excluded from the analysis.
Geometric morphometrics

Head pictures of sacrificed specimens of known age (=
number of LAGs) from post-hatchlings to full adults
were analyzed by means of geometric morphometrics.
Fifteen landmarks were placed on all head pictures at
scale joints, in keeping with the protocol used in
Kaliontzopoulou et al. [54] (see Additional file 1: Figure
S2 and Table S3). We did not use bilateral landmarks to
avoid inclusion of shape variability due to asymmetry.
We assessed measurement error by replicating digitations of landmarks on a single specimen ten times.
Then, we performed single group analysis of variance
with 100 bootstraps. This way we calculated the proportion of variance contributed by measurement error to
the variance obtained by using all individuals. This test
indicates that only 5.56% of total variance may be due
to measurement error (95% CI 4.02-6.91).
Landmark configurations for all individuals were
rotated, translated and scaled to unit size via the

Page 13 of 16

Generalized Procrustes Analysis (GPA, [103]). Residual
shape differences (partial warps) were analyzed via relative warp analysis and thin plate spline (TPS) visualization. Landmark digitation was carried out with the
software tpsDig2 [104]. GPA was performed with the
software tpsRelw [105]. All the remaining shape analyses
were performed with the IMP software suite [106].
The shape data matrix (partial warp scores plus uniform components) of each population was regressed
against age (number of LAGs) of each individual to
assess head shape ontogeny, taking a single common
reference configuration for both populations (the consensus shape between the two smallest individual per
population, which were all hatchlings) and then calculating the procrustes distance (the square root of the sum
of squared differences in the positions of the landmarks)
between each individual and the reference. The two
resulting ontogenetic shape vectors (whose length represents the total amount of shape change through ontogeny [100]) were then compared to each other by
testing for differences in slopes. The slope represents
the rate of somatic development. Data were fitted by
reduced major axis regression in the Smatr software
[107]. The angle between the two ontogenetic shape
vectors (the dot product the regression coefficients of
each partial warp component on age) represents the
between-vector correlation. When the angle is 0° the
vector correlation between them is 1, when the angle is
90° the correlation between them is 0. To test for the
statistical significance of the angle, shape residuals were
resampled (by means of bootstrap) 999 times within
each population to generate 95% confidence intervals
for each population (see [98] for details). If the betweenpopulations angle is smaller than the within population
range the two ontogenetic trajectories do not differ in
direction, but might still differ in length (a case for heterochrony). Otherwise, the two ontogenies are not parallel (a case for ontogenetic allometry, see [100]).
We inspected the length of the ontogenetic vector to
quantify the extent of shape change during ontogeny. If
this length is shorter in insular lizards and the two
ontogenies do not differ in direction (angle) we conclude that insular lizards are paedomorphic. Otherwise,
a longer ontogenetic vector would indicate adult shapes
grow beyond the shape of mainland adults, indicating
peramorphosis. Finally, we computed shape distances
(the procrustes distance between group means) for each
population. The groups being compared were juveniles
(individuals with 0 to 1 LAG), and adults (individuals
with >1 LAG) of both populations.
Sexual selection and dimorphism

We predicted stronger sexual selection on the island. In
lizards, sexual selection is deemed to increase head

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

width in males. This trait is correlated with male performance in male-male contests over mates, since males
with wider heads have more muscle mass in the head
and a higher associated bite force [[54,108-110] on
Podarcis). We measured head widths of adults during
the 2006-2008 period (Licosa Island: n = 80, Punta
Licosa, n = 92). Then, we regressed log head widths
against log SVL to factor out potential allometric effects,
and compared residuals between the two populations
(further partitioned by sex) by means of two-factor
ANOVA taking sex, population, and the interaction of
these two variables in the model.
Sexual size dimorphism was investigated as well by
taking SVL ratio of males/females. We used SVL of individuals of known age and then compared size dimorphism between the two populations. SVL is a very good
proxy for body size in lizards [111]. In addition, sexual
shape dimorphism was investigated by using head width
data. We repeated the tests using year of collection as a
factor. No significant differences between years were
found, and we therefore present an analysis of pooled
data here.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary materials. The additional data file
contains illustrative material, methodological details about field work,
shape analysis, LAG analysis, and genetic analyses.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Shai Meiri for discussing and commenting with us most
of the ideas presented here. Louise Roth, and Panayotis Pafilis provided very
valuable comments on a draft version of this manuscript that greatly
improved its quality. Rachael Black and one anonymous reviewer patiently
helped us edit the English of the manuscript. We are grateful to Costabile
Montone who uncomplainingly carried us on the Licosa islet with his boat
for years. Valeria Maselli, Giuliana Russo, Daniele Mennella, and Giuseppe
Pavarese shared some of the field work with us. Francesco Angelini,
Salvatore Cozzolino and Rakesh Rastogi gave us precious advice both on the
study organism and data treatment. We are grateful to the personnel of
Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park for their kind assistance during our
study period.
Author details
1
Department of Earth Science, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, L.go
San Marcellino 10, 80138 Naples, Italy. 2Department of Structural and
Functional Biology, University of Naples Federico II. Via Cinthia MSA, Naples,
Italy.
Authors’ contributions
PR and DF conceived the experiments. PR and FC performed shape analyses.
FMG performed LAG analyses. MT, DF, DMM, GP, and CM performed MCRs
sequencing, polymorphism and quantitative assay analyses. DF, DR, GP and
FC performed lab and field work. All authors participated in writing, reading
and approving the manuscript.
Received: 14 December 2009 Accepted: 20 September 2010
Published: 20 September 2010

Page 14 of 16

References
1. Lister AM: Rapid dwarfing of red deer on Jersey in the Last Interglacial.
Nature 1989, 342:539-542.
2. Van Valen LM: A new evolutionary law. Evol Theory 1973, 1:1-30.
3. Gould SJ: Allometry in primates, with emphasis on scaling and the
evolution of the brain. In Approaches to Primate Paleobiology Contributions
to Primatology. Edited by: Szalay F. Basel, Krager; 1975:5:244-292.
4. Roff DA: The evolution of flightlessness: is history important? Evol Ecol
1994, 8:639-657.
5. McNab BK: Energy conservation and the evolution of flightlessness in
birds. Am Nat 1994, 144:628-642.
6. Grant PR: Plumage and the evolution of birds on islands. Syst Zool 1965,
14:47-52.
7. Butcher GS, Rohwer S: The evolution of conspicuous and distinctive
coloration for communication in birds. Curr Ornithology 1989, 6:51-108.
8. Omland KE: Examining two standard assumptions of ancestral
reconstructions: repeated loss of dichromatism in dabbling ducks
(Anatini). Evolution 1997, 51:1636-1646.
9. Peterson AT: Geographic variation in sexual dichromatism in birds. Bull Br
Ornithol Club 1996, 116:156-172.
10. Bennett PM, Owens IPF: Evolutionary ecology of birds: life histories, mating
systems and extinction New York: Oxford University Press 2002.
11. Grant PR: Ecology and evolution of Darwin’s finches Princeton: Princeton
University Press 1999.
12. Grant PR: Reconstructing the evolution of birds on islands: 100 years of
research. Oikos 2001, 92:385-403.
13. Adler GH, Levins R: The Island Syndrome in Rodent Populations. Quart
Rev Biol 1994, 69:473-490.
14. McNab BK: Minimizing energy expenditure facilitates vertebrate
persistence on oceanic islands. Ecol Lett 2002, 5:693-704.
15. MacArthur RH, Diamond JM, Karr JR: Density compensation in island
faunas. Ecology 1975, 53:330-342.
16. Tamarin RH: Dispersal, population regulation and K-selection in field
mice. Am Nat 1978, 112:545-555.
17. Olsson M, Shine R: The seasonal timing of oviposition in sand lizards
(Lacerta agilis): Why early clutches are better. J Evol Biol 1997, 10:369-381.
18. Pianka ER: Evolutionary Ecology San Francisco: Addison-Wesley-Longman
2000.
19. Sinervo B, Svensson E, Comendant T: Density cycles and an offspring
quantity and quality game driven by natural selection. Nature 2000,
406:985-988.
20. Sinervo B, Doughty P, Huey RB, Zamudio K: Allometric engineering: a
causal analysis of natural selection on offspring size. Science 1992,
285:1927-1930.
21. Roff DA: Life History Evolution Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates 2002.
22. Case TJ: On the evolution and adaptive significance of postnatal growth
rates in the terrestrial vertebrates. Quart Rev Biol 1978, 53:243-282.
23. Stamps JA, Buechner M: The territorial defence hypothesis and the
ecology of insular vertebrates. Quart Rev Biol 1985, 60:155-181.
24. Shuster SM, Wade MJ: Mating systems and strategies Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press 2003.
25. Blondel J: Evolution and ecology of birds on islands: trends and
perspectives. Vie Et Milieu 2000, 50:205-220.
26. Vanzolini PE, Rebouças-Spieker R: Distribution and differentiation of
animals along the coast and in continental islands of the state of São
Paulo, Brazil 3 Reproductive differences between Mabuya caissara and
Mabuya macrorhyncha (Sauria, Scincidae). Pap Avul Zool 1973, 29:95-109.
27. Schall JJ: Small clutch size in a tropical whiptail lizard (Cnemidophorus
arubensis). J Herpet 1983, 17:406-408.
28. Hasegawa M: Density effects on life history traits of an island lizard
population. Ecol Res 1997, 12:111-118.
29. Delibes M, Blázquez MC: Tameness of insular lizards and loss of biological
diversity. Cons Biol 1998, 12(5):1142-1143.
30. Van Damme R: Evolution of herbivory in lacertid lizards: effects of
insularity and body size. J Herpet 1999, 33:663-674.
31. Schoener TW, Losos JB, Spiller DA: Island Biogeography of Populations:
An Introduced Species Transforms Survival Patterns. Science 2005,
310(5755):1807-1809.
32. Nicholson KE, Harmon LJ, Losos JB: Evolution of Anolis Lizard Dewlap
Diversity. PLoSONE 2007, 2(3):e274.

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

33. Vervust B, Grbac I, VanDamme R: Differences in morphology, performance
and behaviour between recently diverged populations of Podarcis sicula
mirror differences in predation pressure. Oikos 2007, 116:1343-1352.
34. Herrel A, Huyghe K, Vanhooydonck B, Backeljau T, Breugelmans K, Grbac I,
Van Damme R, Irschick DJ: Rapid large-scale evolutionary divergence in
morphology and performance associated with exploitation of a different
dietary resource. PNAS 2008, 105:4792-4795.
35. Meiri S, Dayan T, Simberloff D: The generality of the island rule reexamined. J Biogeog 2006, 33:1571-1577.
36. Cooper WE Jr, Hawlena D, Pérez-Mellado V: Islet tameness: escape
behavior and refuge use in populations of the Balearic lizard (Podarcis
lilfordi) exposed to differing predation pressure. Can J Zool 2009,
87(10):912-919.
37. Meiri S, Foufopoulos J, Valakos E: Intraspecific competition and high food
availability are associated with insular gigantism in a lizard.
Naturwissenschaften 2009, 96:1107-1113.
38. Buckley LB, Jetz W: Insularity and the determinants of lizard population
density. Ecol Lett 2007, 10:481-489.
39. Bauwens D, Díaz-Uriarte R: Covariation of life-history traits in lacertid
lizards: a comparative study. Am Nat 1997, 149:91-111.
40. Meiri S: Size evolution in island lizards. Glob Ecol Biogeog 2007, 16:702-708.
41. Lanza B, Capolongo D: Die blaue Ruineneidechseder tyrrhenischen Insel
Licosa (Salerno). Salamandra 1972, 8:21-26.
42. Fulgione D, Guglielmi S, Odierna G, Rippa D, Caliendo MF, Rastogi RK:
Morphological differentiation and genetic structure in island lizard
populations. Zool Sci 2008, 25:465-474.
43. Bagnara JT, Fernandez PJ, Fujii R: On the blue coloration of vertebrates.
Pigment Cell Res 2007, 20:14-26.
44. West PM, Packer C: Sexual selection, temperature, and the lion’s mane.
Science 2002, 297:1339-1343.
45. Roulin A: The evolution, maintenance and adaptive function of genetic
colour polymorphism in birds. Biol Rev 2004, 79:815-848.
46. Ducrest AL, Keller L, Roulin A: Pleiotropy in the melanocortin system,
coloration and behavioural syndromes. TREE 2008, 23:502-510.
47. Schiöth HB, Haitina T, Ling MK, Ringholm A, Fredriksson R, CerdaReverter JM, Klovins J: Evolutionary conservation of the structural,
pharmacological, and genomic characteristics of the melanocortin
receptor subtypes. Peptides 2005, 26:1886-1900.
48. Gould SJ: Ontogeny and Phylogeny Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
1977.
49. Ryan TJ, Semlitsch RD: Intraspecific heterochrony and life history
evolution: decoupling somatic and sexual development in a facultatively
paedomorphic salamander. PNAS 1998, 95:5643-5648.
50. Barahona F, Evans SE, Mateo JA, Garcia-Marquez M, Lopez-Jurado LF:
Endemism, gigantism and extinction in island lizards: the genus Gallotia
on the Canary Islands. J Zool 2000, 250:373-388.
51. Benton MJ, Minter NJ, Posmosanu E: Dwarfing in ornithopod dinosaurs
from the Early Cretaceous of Romania. In Mesozoic and Cenozoic
vertebrates and paleoenvironments; tributes to the career of Prof Dan
Grigorescu, Ars Docendi, Bucharest Edited by: Csiki Z 2006, 79-87.
52. Raia P, Barbera C, Conte M: The fast life of a dwarfed giant. Evol Ecol 2003,
17:293-312.
53. Bonduriansky RT, Day T: The evolution of static allometry in sexually
selected traits. Evolution 2003, 57:2450-2458.
54. Kaliontzopoulou A, Carretero MA, Llorente GA: Multivariate and geometric
morphometrics in the analysis of sexual dimorphism variation in
Podarcis lizards. J Morph 2007, 268:152-165.
55. Marks DL, Hruby V, Brookhart G, Cone RD: The regulation of food intake
by selective stimulation of the type 3 melanocortin receptor (MC3R).
Peptides 2006, 27:259-264.
56. Kobayashi Y, Tsuchiya K, Yamanome T, Schiöth HB, Kawauchi H,
Takahashi A: Food deprivation increases the expression of melanocortin4 receptor in the liver of barfin flounder, Veraspermoseri. Gen Comp
Endocrin 2008, 155:280-287.
57. Gould SJ, Lewontin RC: The spandrels of San Marco and the and the
Panglossian paradigm: a critique of the adaptationist programme. Proc R
Soc B 1979, 205:581-598.
58. Sinervo B, Lively CM: The rock-paper-scissors game and the evolution of
alternative male strategies. Nature 1996, 380:240-243.

Page 15 of 16

59. Sacchi R, Scali S, Pupin F, Gentilli A, Galeotti P, Fasola M: Microgeographic
variation of colour morph frequency and biometry of common wall
lizards. J Zool 2007, 273:389-396.
60. Vercken E, Massot M, Sinervo B, Clobert J: Colour variation and alternative
reproductive strategies in females of the common lizard Lacerta
vivipara. J Evol Biol 2007, 20:221-232.
61. Calsbeek R, Alonzo SH, Zamudio K, Sinervo B: Sexual selection and
alternative mating behaviours generate demographic stochasticity in
small populations. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 2001, 269:157-164, 61 Svensson E,
Sinervo B, Comendant T: Condition, genotype-by-environment interaction
and correlational selection in lizard life-history morphs. Evolution 2001,
55:2053-2069..
62. Svensson EI, Sinervo B, Comendant T: Mechanistic and experimental
analysis of condition and reproduction in a polymorphic lizard. J Evol
Biol 2002, 15:1034-1047.
63. Svensson E, Abbott J, Hardling R: Female polymorphism, frequency
dependence, and rapid evolutionary dynamics in natural populations.
Am Nat 2005, 165:567-576.
64. Sinervo B, Miles DB, Frankino WA, Klukowski M, DeNardo DF: Testosterone,
endurance, and darwinian fitness: Natural and sexual selection on the
physiological bases of alternative male behaviours in side-blotched
lizards. Horm Behav 2000, 38:222-233.
65. Sinervo B, Bleay C, Adamopoulou C: Social causes of correlational
selection and the resolution of a heritable throat colour polymorphism
in a lizard. Evolution 2001, 55:2040-2052.
66. Sinervo B, Heulin B, Surget-Groba Y, Clobert J, Miles DB, Corl A, Chaine A,
Davis A: Models of density-dependent genic selection and a new rockpaper-scissors social system. Am Nat 2007, 170:663-680.
67. Sinervo B, Clobert J: Morphs, dispersal behaviour, genetic similarity, and
the evolution of cooperation. Science 2003, 300:1949-1951.
68. Bauwens D, Castilla AM: Ontogenetic, sexual, and microgeographic
variation in colour pattern within a population of the lizard Podarcis
lilfordi. J Herpetol 1998, 32(4):581-586.
69. Baird TA, DK Timanus, Sloan CL: Intra- and intersexual variation in social
behaviour: effects of ontogeny, phenotype, resources, and season in
Lizard social behaviour.Edited by: Fox SF, McCoy JK, Baird TA. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore (MD); 2003:7-46.
70. Dickinson HC, Fa JE: Abundance, demographics and body condition of a
translocated population of St Lucia whiptail lizards (Cnemidophorus
vanzoi). J Zool 2000, 251:187-197.
71. Pafilis P, Pérez-Mellado V, Valakos ED: Post autotomy tail activity in
Balearic wall lizard, Podarcis lilfordi. Naturwissenschaften 2008, 95:217-221.
72. Pafilis P, Foufopoulos J, Poulakakis N, Lymberakis P, Valakos ED: Tail
shedding in island lizards (Lacertidae, Reptilia): Decline of antipredator
defenses in relaxed predation environments. Evolution 2009,
63:1262-1278.
73. Hasegawa M: Ecological diversification of insular terrestrial reptiles: a
review of the studies on the lizard and snakes of the Izu Islands. Glob
Environ Res 2003, 7:59-67.
74. Hasegawa M: Demography of an island population of the lizard, Eumeces
okadae, on Miyake-jima, Izu Islands. Res Pop Ecol 1990, 32:119-133.
75. Castanet J, Baez M: Adaptation and evolution in Gallotia lizards from the
Canary Islands: age, growth, maturity and longevity. Amphibia-Reptilia
1991, 12:81-102.
76. Thorpe RS, Brown RP: Testing hypothesized causes of within-island
geographic variation in the colour of lizards. Experientia 1989, 45:397-400.
77. Herrel A, O’Reilly JC, Richmond AM: Evolution of bite performance in
turtles. J Evol Biol 2002, 15:1083-1094.
78. Molina Borja M, Rodríguez-Domínguez MA: Evolution of biometric and
life-history traits in lizards (Gallotia) from the Canary Islands. J Zool Syst
Evol Res 2004, 42:44-53.
79. Sander PM, Mateus O, Laven T, Knótschke N: Bone histology indicates
insular dwarfism in a new Late Jurassic sauropod dinosaur. Nature 2006,
441:739-741.
80. Turvey ST, Green OR, Holdaway RN: Cortical growth marks reveal
extended juvenile development in New Zealand moa. Nature 2005,
435:940-943.
81. Turvey ST, Holdaway RN: Postnatal ontogeny, population structure, and
extinction of the giant moa Dinornis. J Morph 2005, 265:70-86.

Raia et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:289
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/289

82. Schwartz GT, Karen E, Samonds LRG, William LJ, Simons EL: Dental
microstructure and life history in subfossil Malagasy lemurs. PNAS 2002,
99:6124-6129.
83. Köhler M, Moyà-Solà S: Physiological and life history strategies of a fossil
large mammal in a resource-limited environment. PNAS 2010,
106:20354-20358.
84. Meiri S, Raia P: Reptilian all the way? PNAS 2010, 107:E27.
85. Bunce M, Worthy TH, Ford T, Hoppitt W, Willerslev E, Drummond A,
Cooper A: Extreme reversed sexual size dimorphism in the extinct New
Zealand moa Dinornis. Nature 2003, 425:172-175.
86. Lancaster LT, Hazard LC, Clobert J, Sinervo BR: Corticosterone
manipulation reveals differences in hierarchical organization of
multidimensional reproductive trade-offs in r-strategist and K-strategist
females. J Evol Biol 2008, 21:556-565.
87. Tatar M, Carey CR: Genetics of mortality in the bean beetle,
Callosobruchus maculates. Evolution 1994, 48:1371-1376.
88. Spencer RJ, Fredric JJ, Thompson MB: Counterintuitive density-dependent
growth in a long-lived vertebrate after removal of nest predators.
Ecology 2006, 87:3109-3118.
89. Roth VL: Insular dwarf elephants: A case study in body mass estimation
and ecological inference. In Body size in mammalian paleobiology:
Estimation and biological implications. Edited by: Damuth J, MacFadden BJ.
Cambridge, Cambridge University; 1990:151-179.
90. Roth VL: Inferences from allometry and fossils: dwarfing of elephants on
islands. In Oxford surveys in Evolutionary Biology. Edited by: Futuyma D,
Antonovics J. New York: Oxford University Press; 1992:8:259-288.
91. Dearing MD: An alimentary specialization for herbivory in the tropical
whiptail lizard, Cnemidophorus murinus. J Herpethol 1993, 27:111-114.
92. Garland T Jr, Adolph SC: Why Not to Do Two-Species Comparative
Studies: Limitations on Inferring Adaptation. Physiol Zool 1994, 67:797-828.
93. Roulin A, Salamin N: Insularity and the evolution of melanism, sexual
dichromatism and body size in the worldwide-distributed barn owl. J
Evol Biol 2010, 23:925-934.
94. Raia P, Meiri S: The island rule in large mammals: Paleontology meets
Ecology. Evolution 2006, 60:1731-1742.
95. Corti C, Lo Cascio P, Razzetti E: Erpetofauna delle isole italiane. In Atlante
degli Anfibi e dei Rettili d’Italia. Edited by: Sindaco R, Doria G, Razzetti E,
Bernini F. Societas Herpetologica Italica/Edizioni Polistampa; 2006:612-643.
96. Foà A, Monteforti G, Minutini L, Innocenti A, Quaglieri C, Flamini M:
Seasonal changes of locomotor activity patterns in ruin lizards Podarcis
sicula I Endogenous control by the circadian system. Behav Ecol Sociobiol
1994, 34:267-274.
97. Rosenblum EB, Hoekstra HE, Nachman MW: Adaptive reptile colour
variation and the evolution of the Mc1r gene. Evolution 2004,
58:1794-1808.
98. Tajima F: Statistical methods to test for nucleotide mutation hypothesis
by DNA polymorphism. Genetics 1989, 123:585-595.
99. Rozas J, Rozas R: DnaSP version 3: an integrated program for molecular
population genetics and molecular evolution analysis. Bioinformatics
1999, 15:174-175.
100. Zelditch ML, Swiderski D, Sheets DH, Fink W: Geometric Morphometrics for
Biologists New York, Elsevier Academic Press 2004.
101. Andreone F, Guarino FM: Giant and long-lived: age structure in
Macroscincus coctei, an extinct skink from Cape Verde. Amphibia-Reptilia
2003, 24:459-470.
102. Guarino FM, Lunardi S, Carlomagno M, Mazzotti S: A skeletochronological
study of growth, longevity, and age at sexual maturity in a population
of Rana latastei (Amphibia, Anura). J Biosci 2003, 28:775-782.
103. Rohlf FJ, Slice DE: Extensions of the Procrustes method for the optimal
superimposition. Syst Biol 1990, 39:40-59.
104. Rohlf FJ: TpsDigVer 2.10. digitalized landmarks and outlines Dept of Ecology
and Evolution, State Univ of New York at Stony Brook 2006.
105. Rohlf FJ: tps series softwares. 2004 [http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/].
106. Sheets HD: IMP Software Series, New York. 2006 [http://www3.canisius.
edu/~sheets/morphsoft.html].
107. Falster DS, Warton DI, Wright IJ: User’s guide to SMATR: standardized
major axis tests and routines, version 20. 2006 [http://www.bio.mq.edu.
au/ecology/SMATR/].
108. Stamps JA, Losos JB, Andrews RM: A comparative study of population
density and sexual size dimorphism in lizards. Am Nat 1997, 149:64-90.

Page 16 of 16

109. Olsson M, Wapstra E, Olofsson C: Offspring size-number strategies:
experimental manipulation of offspring size in a viviparous lizard
(Lacerta vivipara). Funct Ecol 2002, 16:135-140.
110. Cox RM, Skelly SL, John-Alder HB: A comparative test of adaptive
hypotheses for sexual size dimorphism in lizards. Evolution 2003,
57:1653-1669.
111. Meiri S: Length-weight allometries in lizards. J Zool 2010, 281:218-226.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-289
Cite this article as: Raia et al.: The blue lizard spandrel and the island
syndrome. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:289.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
