<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Variable structure motifs for transcription factor binding sites</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:30. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-30"/>
<meta name="Author" content="John E Reid"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Variable structure motifs for transcription factor
binding sites
John E Reid1*, Kenneth J Evans2, Nigel Dyer3, Lorenz Wernisch1, Sascha Ott4

Abstract
Background: Classically, models of DNA-transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) have been based on relatively
few known instances and have treated them as sites of fixed length using position weight matrices (PWMs).
Various extensions to this model have been proposed, most of which take account of dependencies between the
bases in the binding sites. However, some transcription factors are known to exhibit some flexibility and bind to
DNA in more than one possible physical configuration. In some cases this variation is known to affect the function
of binding sites. With the increasing volume of ChIP-seq data available it is now possible to investigate models
that incorporate this flexibility. Previous work on variable length models has been constrained by: a focus on
specific zinc finger proteins in yeast using restrictive models; a reliance on hand-crafted models for just one
transcription factor at a time; and a lack of evaluation on realistically sized data sets.
Results: We re-analysed binding sites from the TRANSFAC database and found motivating examples where our
new variable length model provides a better fit. We analysed several ChIP-seq data sets with a novel motif search
algorithm and compared the results to one of the best standard PWM finders and a recently developed alternative
method for finding motifs of variable structure. All the methods performed comparably in held-out cross validation
tests. Known motifs of variable structure were recovered for p53, Stat5a and Stat5b. In addition our method
recovered a novel generalised version of an existing PWM for Sp1 that allows for variable length binding. This
motif improved classification performance.
Conclusions: We have presented a new gapped PWM model for variable length DNA binding sites that is not too
restrictive nor over-parameterised. Our comparison with existing tools shows that on average it does not have
better predictive accuracy than existing methods. However, it does provide more interpretable models of motifs of
variable structure that are suitable for follow-up structural studies. To our knowledge, we are the first to apply
variable length motif models to eukaryotic ChIP-seq data sets and consequently the first to show their value in this
domain. The results include a novel motif for the ubiquitous transcription factor Sp1.

Background
This paper examines the problem of modelling and discovering sequence motifs for transcription factors that
exhibit flexible DNA binding preferences.
Modelling binding sites

Transcriptional regulation is an important part of regulatory control in eukaryotes. Experimental techniques to
determine which transcription factors bind which loci in
particular cell types under specific conditions are
improving at a rapid rate. However, we are a long way
from determining the binding sites of all transcription
* Correspondence: john.reid@mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk
1
MRC Biostatistics Unit, Institute of Public Health, Forvie Site, Robinson Way,
Cambridge, CB2 0SR, UK

factors in all conditions. Until we have this experimental
data, mathematical models of binding sites will help us
predict TFBSs and in turn help us infer regulatory
effects. These models may reveal combined binding sites
of a transcription factor and its co-factors [1] and can
be used to identify binding sites in species for which
experimental binding data is not available. Furthermore,
such models can explain variation in binding affinities
[2,3] that can have a functional effect. Therefore, building such models is a crucial task in current bioinformatics research.
Traditionally models of TFBSs have been of fixed
width. These PWMs model each position of a binding
site independently. By using motifs of fixed length, these

© 2010 Reid et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

methods implicitly assume proteins bind to different
sites in the same structural configuration. However,
some protein-DNA interactions exhibit more flexibility
and bind their target regions in different configurations
resulting in binding sites of different widths. For example, the Pit-1 homodimer is known to accommodate
flexible spacing between its half-sites [4]. The function
of the two binding configurations differs through the
interaction of co-factors: one acts as a repressor; the
other as an activator. Other transcription factors are
known to accommodate variable length binding sites for
their DNA interactions, for example, p53 [5] and the
Stat family of proteins [6,7]. Variable spacers in p53
binding sites have been shown to increase the binding
affinity 6.6-fold [8]. Publicly available ChIP-seq data providing thousands of experimentally verified binding
regions make it possible to search for other examples of
variable width binding preferences. Transcription factors
that have such binding preferences may be in the
minority.
Until recently the data upon which models of binding
sites have been either obtained from rather artificial in
vitro experiments, for example, SELEX [9], or from
painstakingly collected single in vivo binding sites. Such
binding sites and models of transcription factor binding
preferences have been compiled in databases such as
TRANSFAC [10] and JASPAR [11]. In the Results section we present an examination of the binding sites in
TRANSFAC that suggests variable length binding site
models may be useful. However, the number of binding
sites for most transcription factors modelled in TRANSFAC is fairly low and this limits the conclusions that
can be drawn from this analysis. The increasing availability of data from high-throughput ChIP assays enables
us to investigate more complex models of transcription
factor binding preferences.
Motif search

New techniques such as ChIP-chip, ChIP-PET, or ChIPseq are providing large volumes of genome-wide data on
regions of transcription factor binding [1,12-17]. While
the identification of genomic target regions from these
data is straightforward, motif search techniques are still
required to identify the exact binding positions and to
learn mathematical models of transcription factor binding. Motif search is a notoriously difficult problem: Harbison et al. [18] found that significant results were
reported in randomly generated data sets.
A host of motif finding techniques are available. A
large subset of motif-finders such as MEME [19],
NMica [20], AlignACE [21] or MDscan [22] fit PWMs
to the sequence data. Reviews of the sensitivity and specificity of these methods include [23] and [24]. Discriminative techniques that explain the ranking of fold
changes have recently made an impact [25,26]. Methods

Page 2 of 18

that make use of 3D structures of transcription factors
binding DNA oligos to inform prior probability distributions have been proposed [27]. Existing variations of the
weight matrix model include specialisations such as consensus sequences [28] or palindromic weight matrices
[29], and also generalisations such as models that allow
for dependencies between non-neighbouring bases [30]
or models of dimers binding to two half-sites that feature certain spacing rules [31,32]. These extensions are
placed in a formal framework by Brazma et al. [33].
Variable length models and search

van Helden et al. consider a model of spaced dyads,
where two words of length three are separated by a
spacer of a fixed length [31]. The spacer has no preference for particular nucleotides and typically has a length
between 0 and 16 bases. No degeneracy is allowed in the
words. The reported dyads (motifs) incorporate no variability in their spacer lengths but a range of values are
tested during the search for the best dyads. The approach
is designed to detect binding sites for C 6Zn2 binuclear
cluster proteins in yeast. The authors discuss that other
organisms typically have a higher degree of degeneracy in
the binding sites for their transcription factors and that
perhaps their method is best suited for yeast.
Carvalho et al. [32] present an exact method, RISO, to
detect structured motifs. A structured motif is a set of
words with user specified spacing rules. RISO can be
seen as an extension of the work of van Helden et al. in
two directions: whilst the motif model contains no
degeneracy itself, mismatches are allowed in the sites
during search; also, the resulting binding sites are
allowed flexible spacing to accommodate variable length
motifs. RISO uses a truncated generalised suffix tree for
efficient enumeration during its search for motifs. The
application and results focus on zinc cluster transcription factors in yeast.
Frith et al. have developed a method, GLAM2 [4], to
find motifs with arbitrary insertions and deletions. They
mainly apply it to protein sequences although one application to short (31 base pair) DNA sequences is presented. Allowing arbitrary insertions and deletions
increases the number of parameters of the model considerably. To the best of our knowledge it has not been used
to find variable length motifs in data sets of the size that
ChIP-seq generates.
A recent review of transcriptional control by p53 in
humans [5] highlights the ability of the p53 protein to
bind sites of variable length. In another work [35], a
profile hidden Markov Model is hand-crafted to model
insertions and deletions in a set of known binding sites.
The task of learning a motif from ChIP-seq data is not
addressed.
Previous work on the Stat family of proteins [6,7] has
highlighted their ability to bind to variable length

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 3 of 18

binding sites. In particular, Soldaini et al. [6] examine
the spacing between two Stat5a homodimers when
bound as a tetramer. They hypothesise that the variable
spacing may influence the degree of Stat-mediated DNA
bending and hence have an important functional effect
of the transcriptional activation of Stat5a target genes.
They also suggest the variable spacing may be a
mechanism to control which co-factors interact with
Stat5a. Ehret et al. [7] examine spacing rules in Stat1,
Stat5 and Stat6 homodimer binding sites. They use a
hand-crafted hidden Markov model (HMM) to learn
variable length motifs for these proteins using data from
in vitro binding site selection experiments.
Finally, Badis et al. have used protein binding arrays
[36] to challenge common preconceptions about how
transcription factors interact with their DNA binding
sites. Their work shows that the sequence binding preferences of many proteins exhibit “secondary motifs”,
“position interdependence” or “variable spacer lengths”.
In particular, they highlight the binding preferences of
Jundm2, a protein which seems well suited to a variable
length model.
Our model

In this work we develop a general model of transcription factor binding that incorporates such variability.
Our model extends the PWM model by introducing an
optional character (or gap-character) to model variablelength motifs. The gap-character may appear at a certain
position inside the motif with a certain frequency and it
has its own nucleotide frequencies. An example of our
model is shown in Figure 1. We call motifs of this form
gapped PWMs.
A popular statistic for the information content and
significance of standard PWMs is the relative entropy
[37], Iseq, measured against a genomic background distribution. Calculating the relative entropy is straightforward for binding site motifs that treat their positions
independently. Unfortunately, the position independence
assumption does not hold when gaps are introduced. It
is still possible to calculate Iseq for gapped PWMs but it
involves an enumeration over all possible words under
the motif. Thus an exact calculation is prohibitive for
long motifs. We describe the calculation and show some
examples highlighting the issues in the Methods section.
In the Results section we present an analysis of the
binding sites in the TRANSFAC database and a comparison of our method to several others: MEME, one of the
most successful and popular standard motif finders;
GLAM2, the best variable length motif finder known to
us; and our own method but with the possibility of a
gap switched off. We compare the motifs each method
finds on several data sets and perform a cross-validation
test with held-out test data to analyse the predictive
abilities of the methods. We show two novel motifs, one

Figure 1 Example gapped PWM logo. An example to
demonstrate the gapped PWM model and logo format: A gapped
PWM, A, and 2 standard PWMs, B and C, are shown. All three define
distributions over 5-mers: note that the last base of C is non-specific
and not represented in the logo as it has no information content.
The gapped PWM, A, can be viewed as a 70/30 mixture of B and C.
That is, 70% of its binding sites look like sites from B and 30% look
like sites from C. Put another way: 70% of its sites have a T/C
inserted in the centre. The probability of the optional base being
inserted in any given binding site is represented in 2 ways: firstly as
a percentage written directly onto the logo; secondly, the base is
also faded to represent how often it is present.

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

discovered by GLAM2 and one discovered by our
method that may bear further investigation. The discussion section reviews the results and compares the merits
and shortcomings of each of the methods. Further discussion points include the difficulty of selecting negative
control sequences for testing motif finders, the possible
structural reasons for variations in binding site widths,
and how far allowing just one optional gap character is
a limitation. We also relate the relevance of the work to
databases of binding preferences determined by protein
binding microarrays.

Methods
For motif discovery our model is restricted to motifs
that vary in length by one base at most. We target
gapped PWMs that have a optional base near their centres. We did not allow more than one optional base as
inference becomes increasingly difficult as the hypothesis space grows. In a similar spirit to the popular motif
finder MDscan [22], we combine a maximum likelihood
approach with enumerative methods to initialise the
model’s parameters. Using the Baum-Welch algorithm
[38] we learn the parameters of a hidden HMM that
models the background sequence and binding sites on
both strands of the DNA. We use the Baum-Welch
algorithm as it is the most popular technique for learning the parameters of HMMs and is guaranteed to converge to a local maximum. Viterbi training [38] and
Gibbs sampling [39] are possible alternative inference
techniques. Viterbi training is less popular than the
Baum-Welch algorithm and is not guaranteed to converge. Gibbs sampling has been successful in several
other TFBS search algorithms [40-46] but is not normally used in conjunction with HMMs. The BaumWelch algorithm is an expectation-maximisation (EM)
algorithm. EM methods have been successful in this
field [22,47]. Hence we had no compelling reason to use
Gibbs sampling over the Baum-Welch algorithm.
Our method comprises the following stages (see Figure 2):
• Build a suffix tree representing the sequences.
• Find over-represented words in the sequences.
• Test over-represented words together with possible
gap positions as candidate seeds for the HMM.
• Train HMM using the most promising seeds.
• Score, rank and filter learnt gapped PWMs.
Finding over-represented words

Unfortunately, in the context of our problem the BaumWelch algorithm is extremely sensitive to initial conditions. Therefore, we devote some effort to finding several good candidate initial conditions or seeds for the
HMM’s emission parameters.

Page 4 of 18

We use a suffix tree [48] to enumerate all the L-mers
in the sequences allowing for reverse complements (L is
a user-specified parameter which defaults to 8). For
each L-mer, we count how many sequences it occurs in
and the number of times it occurs across all the
sequences. The L-mers are sorted to determine which
are over-represented. The primary sort key is the number of sequences the L-mer occurs in and the secondary
sort key is the total number of occurrences across all
the sequences.
Seeds that are close in edit distance to each other are
likely to converge to the same gapped PWM when the
Baum-Welch algorithm is applied. Therefore, we filter
the L-mers using their edit distance from higher ranked
L-mers. Our edit distance allows for reverse complements and shifts in the L-mers. Any L-mers that are less
than a user-specified edit distance from a previously
evaluated L-mer are discarded. The remaining L-mers
become our candidate seeds. It should be emphasised
that finding over-represented words is a heuristic for
seeding the HMM only and has no influence on the
final scoring by the HMM.
In addition to the L-mer we need to choose where to
place the optional base in the PWM in order to seed
the HMM. For each candidate L-mer we examine each
possible gap position in turn. We do not allow gap positions close to the end of the motif. The first gap is
allowed after the base at position L/5 + 1 and the last
gap is positioned symmetrically at the end of the motif.
Each (L-mer, gap position) pair is scored as follows:
• We generate 2 standard PWMs from the L-mer:
one represents binding sites which include the
optional base at the given gap position, the other
represents sites without the optional base. The
PWM without the optional base is given an extra
base at the end so both have the same length, L + 1.
The user specifies a pseudo-count to smooth both
PWMs’ distributions and the gap position is given a
uniform distribution as is the extra padding base.
• We calculate the log likelihood of each L + 1-mer
in every sequence under a background model.
• We score each L + 1-mer with both PWMs, calculating the log likelihood for both strands.
• For each L + 1-mer we calculate the log likelihood
ratio between the better PWM (in either orientation)
and the background model.
• Each sequence is scored as the maximum of its L +
1-mers’ log likelihood ratios. That is, we are looking
for the single best binding site on either strand of
each sequence explained either by the gapped or
ungapped PWM.
• The overall score for the given (L-mer, gap position) pair is the sum of the scores for each sequence.

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 5 of 18

Figure 2 Search method overview. Overview of search method. The input sequences are converted into a suffix tree which is used to
efficiently enumerate over-represented words. These words are tested as possible seeds for a HMM. For each seed we consider a number of
different placements of the gap character. Highly scoring seeds are used to initialise HMMs which are trained using the Baum-Welch algorithm.
Each trained HMM defines a gapped PWM and these are scored and ranked. The best gapped PWMs are reported as the output of the method.

For each sequence we take the maximum ratio over
all positions, both strands and both PWMs. The
score for the seed is the sum of these maxima over
all sequences.
Our scheme is motivated by a desire not to use seeds
that are easily explained by a background model and to
find seeds that explain sites in as many sequences as
possible.
In the above scheme the background is modelled by a
HMM with 4 states and Markov order 3. That is, its
emissions are conditioned on the previous three observations which gives each state 256 emission parameters.
The parameters for transitions out of any given state are
tied. The HMM is trained on the input sequences.
Initialisation and training of the HMM

A HMM is a Markov process with unobserved states.
These states can be regarded as an underlying process
that generates the data. We model background genomic
sequence by one set of states and binding sites by
another set. Binding sites on the positive strand are generated by a distinct set of states to those on the negative

strand. The HMM is parameterised by the transition
probabilities between the states and the token emission
probabilities for each state. We use the transition probabilities to model the relative scarcity of binding sites. In
our context, the output tokens of the HMM are the
nucleotide bases of the sequences. Each base in our
input sequences is associated with an unobserved state.
An example state transition diagram is shown in Figure
3.
For each of the highest scoring seeds (L-mer, gap
position pairs) we create a HMM and train it. The number of seeds used for this purpose is a tunable parameter. Our experience showed the algorithm was robust
to changes in this parameter as the best seeds were
invariably amongst the highest scoring. In our tests we
used a value of 60. The emission parameters of the
states for the positive strand are initialised by the L-mer
(with the addition of pseudo-counts). The emission
parameters of the states for the negative strand are tied
to the emission parameters of the states for the positive
strand so that the motif is the same irrespective of the
strand the binding site is on. The state transitions are

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 6 of 18

transition that effectively fixes it and encourages the
Baum-Welch algorithm to learn motifs of higher information content.
The Baum-Welch algorithm terminates when the
increase in log likelihood is smaller than some threshold. We use a threshold of .0004 per sequence. If the
motif becomes vague during training, we stop training
and discard the model. We measure the vagueness by
the entropy per base.
Scoring the gapped PWMs

Each seed we use to initialise the HMM results in one
gapped PWM. However, we are most interested in
PWMs that satisfy the following criteria:
• The PWM has high information content.
• The PWM found a binding site in a high proportion of the sequences in the data set.
• The PWM does not just model lower order features in the sequences.

Figure 3 HMM state transitions. An example of a typical HMM
state transition diagram. This HMM jointly models background
sequence and binding sites from a gapped PWM of length 7. State
0 is the background state. The two arms leading out from state 0
generate binding sites on the positive and negative strands. States
1 and 14 are the first states for binding sites generated in the
positive and negative direction respectively. Similarly states 5 and 12
represent the optional base for binding sites generated in the
positive and negative direction respectively. When training the
HMM various parameters are tied so that they are always equal. For
example, the transition parameter from state 0 to state 1 is tied to
the parameter for the equivalent transition to state 14. This ensures
binding sites are equally likely on both strands of DNA. Similarly
emission parameters are tied to ensure binding sites on the
negative strand have a distribution that is the reverse complement
of the distribution of the binding sites on the positive strand.

initialised to reflect the gap position. We estimate the
initial probability of leaving the background state by the
number of occurrences of the initialising L-mer divided
by the number of bases in the sequences. This estimate
can be scaled by a user-specified parameter. It can be
reduced to encourage sharper motifs with fewer binding
sites or increased for more prevalent vaguer motifs. The
transition probability to the gap base is initialised to 0.5.
We train the HMM using the Baum-Welch algorithm.
Without a prior on the transitions out of the background state, this invariably results in an extremely
vague motif: that is, the model prefers a motif of high
entropy with many binding sites over a motif of low
entropy with a smaller but more plausible number of
occurrences. We place a very strong prior on this

For each of these properties we score each PWM
between 0 and 1. The score for the information content,
Sic, is the ratio of the PWM’s information content to the
maximum possible. Here we calculate the information
content in a naïve position-independent sense as we
cannot afford the full enumeration over all possible
words as described elsewhere in the Methods section.
We use an approximation where each position is treated
independently but the information content of the
optional base is weighted by the frequency with which it
occurs. The score for the number of binding sites, Sbs, is
simply the fraction of sequences for which the PWM
finds at least one binding site. In order to discount
PWMs that appear to model lower-order features in the
sequences (for example GC rich regions), we calculate
the entropy of the first-order distribution defined by the
PWM. That is, we take consecutive bases in the PWM
and look at their joint distribution. We take the average
of these distributions over all consecutive pairs of bases
and calculate its entropy. We are looking for PWMs
where this first order entropy is high (for example a
PWM that represents “GCGCGCGC” would have a very
low entropy). Our score, Slo, to discount PWMs representing these lower order features is simply the ratio of
the PWM’s first order entropy to the maximum possible
entropy.
In order to take account of the three criteria above,
we score each PWM by the geometric mean of the
scores. This mean is biased using weights to make the
scales of the different scores comparable. Heuristically,
we found suitable weights to be 1.5, 1 and 1 for Slo, Sic
and Sbs respectively. For the data sets used in this paper,
the top motifs from both methods were clearly the best.

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 7 of 18

In the results presented only the top motif was used for
discrimination and we only report one motif per data
set in the results. This is certainly an ad hoc scoring
scheme, however we found it important to integrate our
prior beliefs about motifs into the scoring scheme. It
was not easy to encode all these beliefs into a probabilistic model or likelihood function that we could fit or
optimise. In particular, the beliefs about the lower-order
features were difficult to incorporate in this way. Our ad
hoc scoring scheme does capture our beliefs in a
straightforward manner and was found to be effective.
We found the results were robust to minor variations in
the values of these parameters.
Gapped PWMs as distributions over words

We describe the details of the distribution a gapped
PWM induces over words in order to make the example
in Figure 1 concrete. Suppose we have a gapped PWM
of length K (including the optional character). We treat
the gapped PWM as a model of binding sites on both
the positive and negative strand of DNA. In other
words, we model it as a 50/50 mixture of itself and its
reverse complement. Suppose that the optional character occurs in a proportion r of the binding sites and that
the base frequencies of the equivalent standard PWM
with and without the optional character are given by
f k,b and f k,b respectively. Note that, as in the example,
the frequencies for the case where the optional character
is omitted are augmented by an ‘N’ in the last position.
Suppose furthermore that b is the complement of base
b and that k is the kth position in the reversed PWM,
so that 1 = K, 2 = K - 1,... Then the distribution the
gapped PWM induces over words is given by
1
p( x)   r
f k, x k  (1  r )
f k, x k  r
2
k 1
 k 1
K



K



K


k 1

f k, x
k

K



 (1  r )

k 1

f k, x
k






where x = x1 ... xK is a word.
Information content

Probabilistic models for transcription factor binding
sites such as PWMs and gapped PWMs define distributions over words of a certain length, K. The information
content (or information gain or Kullback-Leibler divergence, D KL ) of such a distribution, p(x), relative to a
background distribution over words, q(x), is defined as
I seq  D KL (p || q) 

 p(x) log q(x)
p( x)

xX

where X is the set of all such words. I seq measures
how different the PWM, p(x), is from the background, q
(x). In information theory terminology, Iseq is the average message length required to transmit a binding site

of the PWM using a code optimised for the background
distribution.
In the position independent case when using a 0-order
background model and ignoring reverse complements
(see below), the sum decomposes into sums over the
probabilities of bases at each position.
This leads to the well-known formula for the information content of a standard PWM to be
I seq 

 

p
p kb log kb
qb
1 k  K b{A ,C ,G ,T }

where pkb is the probability of seeing base b at the k’th
position of the PWM and qb is the probability of base b
in the background distribution. This decomposition
ignores the fact that a PWM is almost always applied to
the positive and negative strand of DNA. In light of this
and continuing to view a PWM as a distribution over
words, the PWM can be seen as a mixture model over
two components. In one component it is applied in the
positive direction. In the other component it is applied
in the negative direction as a reverse complement. Put
another way, which words would we score highly under
the consensus sequence AACCTT? AACCTT itself of
course but also its reverse complement, AAGGTT. As a
PWM is almost always used in this mixture model
sense, position independencies do not hold. When position independencies do not hold, the decomposition in
the above sum does not hold either and in general the
calculation of information content requires a sum over
all words. This also applies to gapped PWMs and we
show an example in Figure 4.
Evaluation

Each method was evaluated by constructing an HMM
from a single background class, (defined by single
nucleotide frequencies), the motif from the method and
a parameter for the transition probability from the background to the motif. For each sequence, s, we calculated
the expected number of bases, ns, that have been generated by the motif under this model. For several thresholds, t, we calculated the proportion, p, of sequences (in
the held out sequences from the original data set) which
had ns >t, and the corresponding proportion, q, for a set
of negative sequences. The Receiver-Operator-Characteristic (ROC) curve is the plot of p against q. The perfect ROC is the one that goes through the point (0,1),
and random guessing gives the diagonal line between
points (0, 0) and (1, 1). In our analyses, we used three
separate negative reference sets: a) shuffled versions of
the original positive sequences, b) a set of sequences
taken at random from the human genome, assembly
NCBI36 and c) sequences from promoter regions of

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 8 of 18

AUC50 is the area under the ROC curve generated by
discarding all but the 50 highest scoring negative examples. It is a measure of how good the method is at classifying sequences relative to the highest scoring negative
examples. It is a useful metric when the user of a
method can only afford to follow-up a few of the examples that they test. The details of the calculation are
given in Additional file 1.
The parameters used for MEME and GLAM2 and the
details of the processing of the data sets are given in
Additional file 1. We should note that we used the same
data sets to tune the ad hoc parameters of our method,
MEME and GLAM2. This may mean that these parameters are slightly overfitted with respect to our data
sets but we believe this effect is negligible. In general,
we found all the methods robust to minor changes in
the parameters.
Investigation of TRANSFAC binding sites

Figure 4 Information content of gapped motifs. Examples
showing how position dependencies induced by gap characters
can affect the information content of motifs. Compare the gapped
PWM C with the standard PWM D. Here the introduction of a gap
has decreased the information content as the distribution over 7mers is more vague. In contrast, PWM B has a higher information
content than PWM D. Whether the gap is present or not, the bases
around it remain Ts. Hence PWM B has a much sharper distribution
over 7-mers. Note the difference in information content between
gapped PWMs A and B. The reason is that A is very close to its own
reverse complement whereas B is not. Hence A has a sharper
distribution than B. All the information contents were calculated
relative to a uniform 0-order Markov model.

randomly chosen genes starting 1000 bases upstream of
the transcription start site. In each case, the sequences
of the negative data set were matched in number and
length to those of the positive data set. Evaluation of the
motif-finders used a five-fold cross validation. The
ROCs shown in the text are the accumulation of the
ROCs for each of the five folds. For each ROC we calculated the area-under-the-curve (AUC) and AUC50 [49]
statistics. The AUC statistic reflects the performance of
the method overall and the AUC50 statistic reflects the
performance of the method at high specificity. The

ClustalW2 [50] release 2.0.10 was used to realign the
sequences used with TRANSFAC, version 2008.3, [10]
to determine the PWMs. The gap extension penalty was
reduced to 7 from the default of 15, the gap extension
to 3 from 6.66 and the transitions weighting to 0 from
0.5. Minor manual adjustments were made to the results
to reduce the number of locations with optional gaps.
The 10 PWMs where TRANSFAC had introduced gaps
in order to produce their published PWMs were I
$DL_01, V$MYOGNF1_01, IRF-1, V$IRF2_01, V
$BRN2_01, V$ARP1_01, P$EMBP1_Q2, V$RSRFC4_Q2,
V$LUN1_01, V$DEAF1_02. In all, 510 PWMs were processed through ClustalW2. Of these there were 70
PWMs where ClustalW2 introduced gaps in order to
obtain alignment of one or two base-pairs on the edge.
These added no significant information and were
ignored. There were 58 cases where ClustalW2 introduced a gap for one site (or all but one site) in the centre of the binding region. These cases could be
significant but given the small sample size, these were
also ignored. There were 26 examples similar to the
above where there was more than one gap that was
introduced, but still there was only a single instance of
each type, so these were ignored as well. There were
159 examples where ClustalW2 introduced one or more
gaps involving more than one site. The significance of
these examples varies in a continuous spectrum from
many probably being of no significance through to the
examples given in the Results, which were the two best.
Logos and information content were calculated for the
core of the sequence where base types were available for
more than 50% of the binding sites. Information content
for PWMs resulting from the gapped alignments and
the standard alignments were calculated as described
above.

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Results
Investigation of TRANSFAC binding sites

An examination of the binding sites used to create the
PWMs in the TRANSFAC database suggested that
introducing gaps into the middle of binding sites could
achieve a better alignment for the whole length of the
motif. ClustalW2 [50] was used to identify the PWMs
where the alignment could be improved by introducing
gaps. Figure 5 shows two cases where gaps improve the
alignment of well conserved L-mers on either side of
the gaps. The improvement in the definition of the
binding motif is also visible in the logos for the two
transcription factors.
These are in addition to the 10 PWMs where gaps
had already been introduced in the sequences to define
the PWMs published in TRANSFAC. No recognition is
made of this when the PWMs are used in motif scanning applications such as MATCH [51].
ClustalW2 also identified instances, such as V
$AP4_Q6_01 where at least one of the binding sites
within TRANSFAC had been misaligned with respect to
the others.
Motif finder comparison

We analysed six ChIP-seq data sets (see Table 1) with
MEME, GLAM2, our novel gapped PWM method and a
variant of our method in which the introduction of a
gap is disabled. We also attempted to use the RISOTTO
method but found it unsuitable for this task (for discussion see Additional file 1). For each data set we performed a cross-validation using held-out data (see
Methods section for the details) and also ran the motif
finders on the entire data sets to compare the motifs
they found by hand. We present some of the results
here, the full set of ROC curves and motifs are in Additional file 1.
We chose MEME as a representative of currently popular motif finders. Extensive comparisons have been
made between motif finders for standard PWMs [23] so
we decided to evaluate our method’s performance relative to just one of the best performing and most popular. In our personal experience, MEME has
outperformed other popular motif finders. GLAM2 and
RISOTTO were selected because they appeared to be
the best candidate competitors for the task of finding
motifs of variable structure. Finally, we compared our
method to itself but with gaps disabled.
The comparison was based on a five-fold cross-validation. We discriminated between held-out sequences
from the data sets and a set of negative control
sequences. It is notoriously difficult to choose representative negative sequence sets for evaluating motif search
algorithms. We chose three different negative sets: a
random selection of sequences from the genome, a

Page 9 of 18

randomly selected set of promoters, and shuffled versions of the held-out sequences. Other authors (for
example, [20,23,25,52-55]) use both artificial or shuffled
sequences and genomic sequences to evaluate their
methods. We found some disagreement between which
methods performed well when different negative data
sets were used. In general, the randomly selected promoters were more difficult to discriminate against than
the random genomic regions. One reason could be that
promoter regions contain potential binding sites for the
factor in question which for a variety of reasons are not
represented in the ChIP data.
Motif search results
Validation of Wei et al.’s refined p53 motif

Wei et al. [13] recover a refined version of the TRANSFAC p53 motif from their ChIP-seq experiments which
consists of two p53 half-sites. Our method also recovers
the refined motif (see Figure 6). One base pair of the
variable inter-half-site spacing [5] is explicitly modelled
by our motif. The ROC curves for MEME and our
method are similar. This could be due to the low frequency of the extra base in the spacer (3%). GLAM2
discovered a very long vague motif in the data. Alu
repeats can mutate into p53 binding sites [56]. This is
the probable cause of the high level of unknown bases
(~30%) in the p53 data set after repeat masking.
An improved Stat5 motif

Existing motifs for Stat5 in TRANSFAC do not incorporate any variable spacing between the 2 half-sites of the
homodimer. Our method (and GLAM2) discovered that
an extra base is present in 5% of the binding sites for
Stat5a and Stat5b (see Figure 7). Furthermore, in the
Stat5b case, the extra bases are almost exclusively adenines. These results agree with previously established
hand-crafted HMM models of Stat binding [6]. Surprisingly, in cross-validation tests this extra base did not
appear to improve the model. This could be due to multiple binding sites per sequence both with and without
the extra base.
Recovery of GABP motif

All of the methods recovered a GABP motif extremely
similar to the known TRANSFAC motif. Different methods performed differently in the cross-validation tests
depending on the choice of negative control sequences.
Neither our method nor GLAM2 found any evidence of
significant variation in the spacing within the GABP motif.
GLAM2 discovers a variable motif for NRSF

All of the methods recovered motifs very similar to the
known NRSF binding motif. The GLAM2 motif makes
many of the positions optional, albeit with probabilities
close to 0 or 1 (see Figure 8). We might have dismissed
this as an artifact of the GLAM2 algorithm if the crossvalidation had not shown that this motif was clearly

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 10 of 18

Figure 5 Analysis of TRANSFAC binding sites. Realignment of sequences used within TRANSFAC to define PWMs which incorporate optional
gaps. Left: An alignment, a standard PWM and a gapped PWM for the monomer transcription factor MEF-2. Additional gaps improve the
alignment right across the motif, especially the well conserved TA motif that is not apparent in the ungapped alignment. Right: An alignment, a
standard PWM and a gapped PWM for the homodimer transcription factor POU. Additional gaps improve the alignment of the conserved ATA
and TTA motifs. The realignments show a significant proportion of sites both with and without gaps. The upper logos show the original
TRANSFAC motifs and their information content in bits (see Methods for the details of the calculation). The lower logos show the motifs after
the addition of gaps, indicated by the percentage of sequences where a nucleotide is present.

superior. NRSF is a zinc finger repressor that binds to a
long (21 bp) DNA sequence motif known as the repressor element 1 (RE1) [57]. Bruce et al. [58] have established that variations in RE1 sites are associated with
cell-type specific activity of NRSF. The variable structure
that GLAM2 found may be associated with these effects.
A novel gapped Sp1 motif

Sp1 is a ubiquitous transcription factor that forms a part
of the eukaryotic cellular transcriptional machinery and
Table 1 The data sets
TF # Sequences

# bases Publications

Sp1

296

207,325 Cawley et al. [60]

p53

524

480,238 Cawley et al. [60] and Wei et al. [13]

GABP

2,275

500,203 Valouev et al. [73]

NRSF
STAT5a

1,687
737

225,265 Johnson et al. [17]
94,250 Liao et al. [74]

STAT5b

144

19,379 Liao et al. [74]

The data sets we analysed with the motif finders.

regulates many genes with GC-rich promoters [59].
Cawley et al. [60] note that the motif finding algorithm
MDscan [22] recovers the known Sp1 binding motif
from their data. Our method also recovers a similar
motif but with an optional base that provides a more
accurate model of the sites (see Figure 9). The information content of our motif is 13.14 bits compared to 9.64
bits for the TRANSFAC motif (see Methods section for
details of calculation). Neither MEME nor GLAM2
recovered a motif similar to the known TRANSFAC
motif. It is difficult to interpret the motif that GLAM2
found as the binding preferences of Sp1. It is possible
that GLAM2 has found a long low-order feature in the
data set which nevertheless has good predictive ability.
Sp1 binding sites are common in the genome, especially
in promoters [61]. Hence, we would expect to find Sp1
binding sites in many of the randomly selected negative
examples. This is a probable cause of the poor crossvalidation performance of the methods when random

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 11 of 18

Figure 6 p53 results. Top: ROC curves for cross-validation on p53 data set using random genomic sequences as counter-examples. Bottom: A
known TRANSFAC motif for p53 and the motifs our gapped method and MEME found. Using our method, 3% of the sites discovered had an
optional spacer between the 2 half-sites. This is a close fit to Wei et al.’s analysis. They found 236 sites without a spacer and 27 that had a 1
base pair spacer.

genomic regions or promoters were used as negative
controls.
In order to assess whether the gapped motif was a
better predictor of Sp1 binding than the known Sp1
motif, we took 125,063 Sp1 binding sequences comprising a total of 114,895,425 bases from a separate ChIPchip data set in the TRANSFAC database [62] and
tested how well the known TRANSFAC motif and the
motifs discovered by the motif finders could distinguish
these sequences from shuffled versions of the sequences,
random genomic regions and randomly selected promoters. The results for the shuffled tests are shown in Figure 9 and the remainder are given in Additional file 1.

The GLAM2 motif performed well in this test despite
not resembling a motif for TFBSs. As mentioned, the
GLAM2 motif might pick up a sequence signal beyond
binding sites that characterises these regions: a repetitive
GCAGG element, for example, is just discernible in the
GLAM2 motif. Nevertheless, the gapped Sp1 motif
found by our method out-performed the known
TRANSFAC motif, the motif that MEME found and the
motif found by the ungapped version of our algorithm
when tested against shuffled sequences. When tested
against promoters, none of the methods performed well,
suggesting the promoters were not suitable as negative
controls. The performance of the gapped motif against

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 12 of 18

of the methods at high specificity, shows the comparability of the methods.

Discussion
Our gapped method

Figure 7 Stat5 results. A known TRANSFAC motif (M00459) for
Stat5 and the motifs our method found in the Stat5a and Stat5b
data sets.

the random genomic regions was not as good as the
TRANSFAC motif.
Overall results

Figure 10 shows ROC curves and AUC/AUC50 statistics
that summarise the performance of the methods averaged over all the data sets. The methods have very similar AUC statistics although the choice of negative
background sequences does affect which method perform best. The summaries shown here obscure significant differences between the methods on individual
datasets. A complete set of AUC and AUC50 statistics is
given in Additional file 1. Detailed examination of the
individual AUC50 results, which give the performance

Figure 8 NRSF results. ROC curves for cross-validation on NRSF
data set using random promoter sequences as counter-examples.

Our tests demonstrate that our method performs comparably to MEME in cross-validation. In general, MEME
performed better when tested against promoter
sequences and our method was more successful against
shuffled control sequences. However, the difference was
not great in either case. Notably, our method retrieved a
known Sp1 motif which MEME did not.
Compared to previous work on variable length motifs
for p53 [5] and Stat5a [7], our method does not rely on
prior knowledge of the structure of these sites. In general, we would not have prior knowledge about the
structure of the binding sites. Methods that rely on it
can only be used in the context of specific transcription
factors.
We noticed little difference between the performance
of our gapped method and the ungapped version of it.
Despite this, we believe that the ability of the gapped
method to recover the known variable Stat5 binding
motifs and a novel gapped Sp1 motif is an important
quality. We hope that discovery of novel gapped motifs
of this type will lead to further structural studies to confirm or refute their validity.
GLAM2

When GLAM2 found the correct motif it performed
well. Even when it found long vague motifs with many
gaps that seem biologically improbable (for p53 and
Sp1), the cross-validated tests suggested it found some
signal in the data. However, these motifs are difficult to
interpret as models of TFBSs. Although the authors of
GLAM2 mention motif finding as a possible application,
they do not show an example in their paper. We believe
our application of GLAM2 is the first to show its utility
on realistically sized data sets in this context. We would
also like to note (data not shown) that our experience
with GLAM2 when no gaps or insertions are allowed
shows it is a capable motif finder for standard PWMs.
Despite the overall ROC curves, we do not believe
GLAM2 is inferior to our method or MEME in a predictive sense. When GLAM2 found a motif, it performed very well. It is disadvantaged in the overall
results by its inability to recover a good p53 motif.
GLAM2 was successful on those data sets which have a
much shorter average sequence length. That is, those
with a higher signal to noise ratio. It is perhaps best suited to data sets of this size.
The variable motif that GLAM2 found for NRSF bears
further study, especially in light of the work done by
Bruce et al. [58] relating variation in NRSF binding sites
to lineage specific NRSF function.

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 13 of 18

Figure 9 Sp1 results. Top left: ROC curves for cross-validation on Sp1 data set using shuffled versions of the held-out test sequences as
counter-examples. Top right: ROC curves for the motifs found on the small data set when applied to a large Sp1 binding data set from
TRANSFAC. The AUC statistics are given in the legend. Bottom: A known TRANSFAC motif for Sp1 (the reverse complement of M00196) and the
motifs found by the methods we tested. In our model, 32% of the binding sites will have a T inserted after the fifth base. Note that modelling
this optional base allows our method to avoid some ambiguity which is present in the Cs preceding the central G in the TRANSFAC motif.

Negative controls

Our results for individual data sets varied according to
which set of counter-examples was used for the ROC
test. One reason we used three distinct sets of counterexamples was that there is no consensus in the literature
about which classes of negative sequences to test
against. Synthetically generated sequences are only an
approximation to genomic sequences. They have the
advantage that they control the expected number of
false positives, however they can introduce a bias that
favours one method over another [23]. On the other
hand genomic sequences, either randomly selected or
promoter regions, are similar to those sequences that
the methods will be applied to in earnest. Unfortunately,
they can frequently contain binding sites for the

transcription factor of interest. This can also introduce
biases or render the test insensitive.
Many factors influence transcription factor binding
apart from the sequence. Perhaps a negative test set that
took account of features associated with regulatory
regions such as open chromatin regions and DNase
hypersensitivity would be ideal. However, it would be
difficult to construct such a test set without introducing
other sources of bias as these features are dynamic and
can vary between conditions.
Structural basis for flexible spacing

Some classes of transcription factors are well known to
allow flexible spacing in the recognised sequence. In
particular, transcription factors forming multimers are
able to accommodate variable distances between

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Page 14 of 18

Figure 10 Overall results. Top left: ROC curves for cross-validation across all the data sets using shufflled versions of the held-out test
sequences as counter-examples. Top right: ROC curves for cross-validation across all the data sets using randomly selected genomic sequences
as counter-examples. Middle: ROC curves for cross-validation across all the data sets using randomly selected promoters as counter-examples.
Bottom: AUC and AUC50 statistics for the methods.

sequences recognised by each unit by readjusting the
relative positions of the units. For example, leucine zippers consist of two a helices forming a fork. Recognition
of variable spacing between the parts of the sequence
motif recognised by each helix is possible by widening
or narrowing the helices [63]. A possible example is
shown in Figure 11 in an alignment of a selection of
sequences of TRANSFAC motif M00912 bound by the
mammalian transcription factor C/EBP, which forms a
leucine zipper homodimer. The TRANSFAC consensus
motif M00912 is approximated by TTNC{N}NNAANN,
with curly brackets indicating an optional base.
In contrast, transcription factors of the basic HLH
structure consist of four helices forming a rigid four
helix bundle which prohibits any movement of its

subunits and no variable spacing in the recognised
sequence motif would be expected [63].
Presumably there is quite some difference in the binding energy between spacing variants, due to the need of
rearranging contacts between multimer units. If such
variants occur at all, most are expected to be relatively
rare compared to the major spacing as seen in the C/
EBP example.
An example where variants of spacing between units of a
homodimer seem relatively common is seen in the alignment of sequences of TRANSFAC motif M00941 for
MEF2 (see Figure 5). MEF2 belongs to the family of
MADS-box proteins containing a common conserved 58amino acid DNA-binding domain, the MADS-box [64].
An approximate consensus sequence is (C/t)TAT{T/a}

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

(T/a)(A/t)TA(G/a) with a spacing of two base pairs
between the (C/t)TAT and the (A/t)TA(G/a) palindromic
binding motif of each unit of the homodimer. As our
sequence examples show, it seems a reduced space of only
one base pair between these units can be accommodated
as well, as indicated by the curly bracket in the consensus
sequence. It has to be said that structurally the dimer
interface looks quite rigid, with two b sheets, one from
each unit, aligned and two a helices, one from each unit
stacked perpendicularly on top of the sheet, with the two
a helices, which recognise the motif, below the sheet.
Binding of MEF2 bends the DNA. Possibly, alternative
spacings induce different bending angles in the DNA
instead of inducing rearrangements in the dimer interface.
The p53 transcription factor is an anti-parallel b barrel
with loop regions and a recognition a helix at the Cterminal side interacting with DNA [63]. It often seems
to bind in tandem [5], that is with two adjacent recognition sites with approximate consensus CATGTC separated by variable spacing (see Figure 6). If two p53
proteins are bound at the same time they are close
enough to make interaction likely.
Sp1 is an example of the family of C2 H2 zinc finger
transcription factors, with two cysteines and two histidines in coordination with a zinc atom providing structural stability. The loop region between the histidine
and the cysteine residue binds the DNA. Zinc fingers
are seen in tandem, proteins with several dozens of fingers exist [63]. Sp1 contains three zinc fingers binding
consecutive base pair triplets with approximate consensus CCC, CGC, and CCC [65]. Zinc finger binding sites
are known for their flexibility in base composition as
well as in the length of the recognised motif, with three
to five base pairs per finger. Our example shows that
the middle zinc finger of Sp1 is possibly able to bind a
three base pair motif CGC as well as one with four base
pairs, CTGC. This flexibility would have to come from
side chain rearrangements within the middle finger.
Rearrangements between zinc fingers are unlikely.
Stat5a and Stat5b are members of the large family of
Stat proteins. These more complex proteins form homodimers. A unit consists of an a helix bundle, a b barrel,
an a helix connector region as well as an SH2 domain
that forms the dimer interface. The b barrel and parts
of the a helices interact with the DNA. It has been
observed before that the Stat transcription factor is able
to bind with different spacing between the motifs recognised by each unit of the dimer [66]. Presumably variations in spacing can be comparatively easily
accommodated by rearrangements of the SH2 interfaces.
The POU region is part of several eukaryotic transcription factors. It consists of two DNA binding
domains, a homeodomain and a POU specific domain.
Both domains show no protein-protein contact and are

Page 15 of 18

linked by a 24 residue linker which is unordered and
not visible in the crystal structure by Klemm et al. [67].
Due to this unordered connection between the domains,
one might expect some flexibility in the spacing of the
motifs recognised by each one: the POU specific domain
binds the motif ATGC, whose reverse is seen in Figure
5, the homeodomain binds an A/T tetrad. There is a
hint of flexible spacing between these motifs in Figure 5.
The two domains would also have to bind in reverse
order to the one in Klemm et al. [67] to explain this
motif.
It has to be emphasised again that unless structures of
the same DNA binding transcription factor under similar conditions but with different spacings between submotifs are available, the structural considerations above
remain hypothetical. One of the aims of our study is to
encourage further structural research of variable spacing.
UniProbe

Berger and Bulyk have described a protocol [68] using
universal protein binding microarrays to precisely determine the sequence binding preferences of transcription
factors in vitro. Data for many transcription factors are
available in their UniProbe database [69]. In light of
this, motif search may become less relevant for those
transcription factors assayed using this protocol. Nevertheless, we do not expect a comprehensive database of
transcription factor binding preferences for all organisms to be available in the near future. Also the protocol
has some limitations: it does not cater for transcription
factors with long binding sites; neither can it accurately
reproduce features of the in vivo system such as posttranslational modifications and interactions with co-

Figure 11 C/EBP binding sites. Binding sites for C/EBP.

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

factors, both of which are known to affect binding preferences [70,71].
Model limited to one gap

A natural extension to our model would be to allow the
optional characters to span more than one base. For
example, Pit1 is known to bind to sites that vary by two
bases [4]. When we started work on this problem we
investigated several models of this type. Our experience
was that the numbers of parameters associated with
these models quickly become too large. In other words,
these models were too general and it was too easy to fit
noise in the data, making inference difficult. Identifiability and interpretability were also issues: it was possible
for different motifs under these models to produce
almost identical distributions over words. These same
issues were evident in our evaluation of GLAM2 for this
problem. However, we believe extending the model
slightly further in this direction is worthwhile. We have
to leave a systematic evaluation of the performance of
such variants for future work.
It is also possible to extend gapped PWMs to incorporate other generalisations of the PWM model such as
position dependencies. However, we did not investigate
position dependencies in this work.

Conclusions
We have investigated the hypothesis that some transcription factors may exhibit a flexibility in their DNA
interaction domains that allows for the recognition of
variable length motifs. Whilst transcription factors that
have variable length binding sites may not be the norm,
we found evidence of them in several of the ChIP-seq
data sets we tested. Furthermore we re-investigated
known binding sites listed in TRANSFAC and found
that allowing for gaps in binding sites can sharpen some
existing motifs and improve their predictive power.
When we started this work, we were not aware of the
previous hand-crafted variable length models for Stat5
and p53 binding sites. Our results have shown that our
method is capable of finding and modelling these sites
without any prior knowledge of their structure. The
only other tool known to us that can find such motifs is
GLAM2. GLAM2 has a more flexible model of TFBSs
which allows it to find gapped motifs in some data sets.
However, it appears to be too flexible to allow it to find
plausible p53 and Sp1 motifs. In addition to recovering
known motifs for Stat5 and p53 proteins, we discovered
a variable length variation of the motif for Sp1 that
models binding sites in ChIP-chip data more accurately.
Our gapped motif finder did not significantly outperform other methods in our cross-validation tests. Our
results show its predictive ability is at least comparable
to MEME. However, prediction is not the sole aim of
motif search. Improving our models of transcription

Page 16 of 18

factor binding preferences is worthwhile in itself. In
light of the evidence that regulatory function can
depend on variations in the structure of binding sites
[4], we believe further work in this relatively unexplored
area should be performed.
When evaluated against other methods to search for
motifs of variable structure, our method discovered previously known or interesting motifs in all the data sets
we used. RISOTTO was not successful at all and
GLAM2 achieved good results on four of the six data
sets.
We have proposed a generalised model for transcription factor binding and provided an inference algorithm
for efficient model fitting. We have evaluated our generalised binding model and found it to perform comparably to classical restricted motifs as found by MEME.
Our new model makes an enhancement to PWMs and
is complementary to other generalised models that take
into account neighbourhood dependencies. We believe
it will prove useful for incorporating information of variable binding sites into systems biology models of gene
regulation.
Our motif search method and most other motif search
methods only utilise sequence data. There is evidence
[72] that other sources of data can help significantly in
learning models of transcription factor binding preferences. Examples of such data sources include phylogenetic comparisons, epigenetic data, protein-protein
interaction data, and binding site clustering analyses.
The increasing availability of such data is likely to make
methods that can utilise it more prevalent.
Variable length models may be able to better explain
binding affinity fold-changes than nucleotide substitution models and this is an area for more research.

Software availability
The data sets used in the analysis and the source code
for the algorithm are provided in Additional files 2 and
3.
Additional file 1: Supplementary materials. This document contains a
full set of results, the technical details of the evaluations and a discussion
of the motif finder RISOTTO.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1130-S1.PDF ]
Additional file 2: Data sets. A bzipped archive of the processed data
sets used in the evaluations.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1130-S2.BZ2 ]
Additional file 3: Application source code. The source code of the
implementation of our method.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1130-S3.BZ2 ]

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

Acknowledgements
KJE is grateful to Birkbeck College for the use of its facilities as an honorary
Research Fellow. ND was funded by an Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council studentship. SO acknowledges funding from the Research
Councils United Kingdom (RCUK) with whom he holds an Academic
Fellowship. We would like to thank David Wild whose questions provided an
inspiration for this project. We are grateful for encouraging discussions of
our poster with participants of the Systems Biology conference at Cold
Spring Harbor in March 2007. We received valuable feedback when
presenting a preliminary draft to the research groups of Georgy Koentges
and Keith Vance. We are indebted to the anonymous reviewers for their
constructive feedback.
Author details
1
MRC Biostatistics Unit, Institute of Public Health, Forvie Site, Robinson Way,
Cambridge, CB2 0SR, UK. 2School of Crystallography, Birkbeck College, Malet
Street, London, WC1E 7HX, UK. 3MOAC Doctoral Training Centre, Coventry
House, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK. 4Systems Biology
Centre, Coventry House, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK.
Authors’ contributions
SO conceived the study and participated in the design of the variable
length motif models. KE prepared the data sets, performed the MEME,
GLAM2 and RISOTTO comparisons and participated in the design of the
variable length motif models. JR participated in the design of the variable
length motif models, developed the variable length motif search algorithm,
performed the GLAM2 cross-validation tests, built the evaluation framework
and wrote the majority of the paper. ND analysed the TRANSFAC binding
sites and prepared the data sets. LW participated in the design of the
variable length motif models and wrote the structural discussion. All authors
contributed to, read and approved the final manuscript. JR and KE would
like to be considered as having contributed equally to this work.
Received: 11 August 2009
Accepted: 14 January 2010 Published: 14 January 2010
References
1. Loh YH, Wu Q, Chew JL, Vega VB, Zhang W, Chen X, Bourque G, George J,
Leong B, Liu J, Wong KY, Sung KW, Lee CW, Zhao XD, Chiu KP, Lipovich L,
Kuznetsov VA, Robson P, Stanton LW, Wei CL, Ruan Y, Lim B, Ng HH: The
Oct4 and Nanog transcription network regulates pluripotency in mouse
embryonic stem cells. Nat Genet 2006, 38(4):431-40.
2. Tanay A: Extensive low-affinity transcriptional interactions in the yeast
genome. Genome Res 2006, 16(8):962-72.
3. Foat BC, Morozov AV, Bussemaker HJ: Statistical mechanical modeling of
genome-wide transcription factor occupancy data by MatrixREDUCE.
Bioinformatics 2006, 22(14):e141-9.
4. Scully KM, Jacobson EM, Jepsen K, Lunyak V, Viadiu H, Carrière C, Rose DW,
Hooshmand F, Aggarwal AK, Rosenfeld MG: Allosteric effects of Pit-1 DNA
sites on long-term repression in cell type specification. Science 2000,
290(5494):1127-1131.
5. Riley T, Sontag E, Chen P, Levine A: Transcriptional control of human p53regulated genes. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008, 9(5):402-412.
6. Soldaini E, John S, Moro S, Bollenbacher J, Schindler U, Leonard WJ: DNA
binding site selection of dimeric and tetrameric Stat5 proteins reveals a
large repertoire of divergent tetrameric Stat5a binding sites. Mol Cell Biol
2000, 20:389-401.
7. Ehret GB, Reichenbach P, Schindler U, Horvath CM, Fritz S, Nabholz M,
Bucher P: DNA binding specificity of different STAT proteins. Comparison
of in vitro specificity with natural target sites. J Biol Chem 2001,
276(9):6675-6688.
8. Tan T, Chu G: p53 Binds and activates the xeroderma pigmentosum
DDB2 gene in humans but not mice. Mol Cell Biol 2002, 22(10):3247-3254.
9. Tuerk C, Gold L: Systematic evolution of ligands by exponential
enrichment: RNA ligands to bacteriophage T4 DNA polymerase. Science
1990, 249(4968):505-510.
10. Matys V, Kel-Margoulis OV, Fricke E, Liebich I, Land S, Barre-Dirrie A, Reuter I,
Chekmenev D, Krull M, Hornischer K, Voss N, Stegmaier P, LewickiPotapov B, Saxel H, Kel AE, Wingender E: TRANSFAC and its module
TRANSCompel: transcriptional gene regulation in eukaryotes. Nucleic
Acids Res 2006, , 34 Database: D108-D110.

Page 17 of 18

11. Sandelin A, Alkema W, Engstrom P, Wasserman WW, Lenhard B: JASPAR: an
open-access database for eukaryotic transcription factor binding profiles.
Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D91-D94.
12. Lee TI, Jenner RG, Boyer LA, Guenther MG, Levine SS, Kumar RM,
Chevalier B, Johnstone SE, Cole MF, ichi Isono K, Koseki H, Fuchikami T,
Abe K, Murray HL, Zucker JP, Yuan B, Bell GW, Herbolsheimer E,
Hannett NM, Sun K, Odom DT, Otte AP, Volkert TL, Bartel DP, Melton DA,
Gifford DK, Jaenisch R, Young RA: Control of developmental regulators by
Polycomb in human embryonic stem cells. Cell 2006, 125(2):301-313.
13. Wei CL, Wu Q, Vega VB, Chiu KP, Ng P, Zhang T, Shahab A, Yong HC, Fu Y,
Weng Z, Liu J, Zhao XD, Chew JL, Lee YL, Kuznetsov VA, Sung WK,
Miller LD, Lim B, Liu ET, Yu Q, Ng HH, Ruan Y: A global map of p53
transcription-factor binding sites in the human genome. Cell 2006,
124:207-219.
14. Kim TH, Abdullaev ZK, Smith AD, Ching KA, Loukinov DI, Green RD,
Zhang MQ, Lobanenkov VV, Ren B: Analysis of the vertebrate insulator
protein CTCF-binding sites in the human genome. Cell 2007, 128(6):12311245.
15. Boyer LA, Lee TI, Cole MF, Johnstone SE, Levine SS, Zucker JP,
Guenther MG, Kumar RM, Murray HL, Jenner RG, Gifford DK, Melton DA,
Jaenisch R, Young RA: Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human
embryonic stem cells. Cell 2005, 122(6):947-956.
16. Robertson G, Hirst M, Bainbridge M, Bilenky M, Zhao Y, Zeng T,
Euskirchen G, Bernier B, Varhol R, Delaney A, Thiessen N, Griffith OL, He A,
Marra M, Snyder M, Jones S: Genome-wide profiles of STAT1 DNA
association using chromatin immunoprecipitation and massively parallel
sequencing. Nat Methods 2007, 4(8):651-657.
17. Johnson DS, Mortazavi A, Myers RM, Wold B: Genome-wide mapping of in
vivo protein-DNA interactions. Science 2007, 316(5830):1497-1502.
18. Harbison CT, Gordon BD, Lee TI, Rinaldi NJ, Macisaac KD, Danford TW,
Hannett NM, Tagne JB, Reynolds DB, Yoo J, Jennings EG, Zeitlinger J,
Pokholok DK, Kellis M, Rolfe AP, Takusagawa KT, Lander ES, Gifford DK,
Fraenkel E, Young RA: Transcriptional regulatory code of a eukaryotic
genome. Nature 2004, 431(7004):99-104.
19. Bailey TL, Williams N, Misleh C, Li WW: MEME: discovering and analyzing
DNA and protein sequence motifs. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34 Web
Server: W369-W373.
20. Down TA, Hubbard TJP: NestedMICA: sensitive inference of overrepresented motifs in nucleic acid sequence. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33(5):1445-1453.
21. Roth FP, Hughes JD, Estep PW, Church GM: Finding DNA regulatory motifs
within unaligned noncoding sequences clustered by whole-genome
mRNA quantitation. Nat Biotechnol 1998, 16(10):939-945.
22. Liu XS, Brutlag DL, Liu JS: An algorithm for finding protein-DNA binding
sites with applications to chromatin-immunoprecipitation microarray
experiments. Nat Biotechnol 2002, 20(8):835-839.
23. Tompa M, Li N, Bailey TL, Church GM, De Moor B, Eskin E, Favorov AV,
Frith MC, Fu Y, Kent WJ, Makeev VJ, Mironov AA, Noble WS, Pavesi G,
Pesole G, Regnier M, Simonis N, Sinha S, Thijs G, van Helden J,
Vandenbogaert M, Weng Z, Workman C, Ye C, Zhu Z: Assessing
computational tools for the discovery of transcription factor binding
sites. Nat Biotechnol 2005, 23:137-44.
24. Sandve GK, Abul O, Walseng V, Drabløs F: Improved benchmarks for
computational motif discovery. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:193.
25. Eden E, Lipson D, Yogev S, Yakhini Z: Discovering motifs in ranked lists of
DNA sequences. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3(3):e39.
26. Redhead E, Bailey TL: Discriminative motif discovery in DNA and protein
sequences using the DEME algorithm. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:385.
27. Morozov AV, Siggia ED: Connecting protein structure with predictions of
regulatory sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104(17):7068-73.
28. Day WH, McMorris FR: Critical comparison of consensus methods for
molecular sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1992, 20(5):1093-1099.
29. Waterman: Introduction to Computational Biology Chapman and Hall,
London 1995, chap. 2.
30. Sharon E, Lubliner S, Segal E: A feature-based approach to modeling
protein-DNA interactions. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4(8):e1000154.
31. van Helden J, Rios AF, Collado-Vides J: Discovering regulatory elements in
non-coding sequences by analysis of spaced dyads. Nucleic Acids Res
2000, 28(8):1808-1818.

Reid et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:30
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/30

32. Carvalho AM, Freitas AT, Oliveira AL, Sagot MF: An efficient algorithm for
the identification of structured motifs in DNA promoter sequences. IEEE/
ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform 2006, 3(2):126-140.
33. Brazma A, Jonassen I, Eidhammer I, Gilbert D: Approaches to the
automatic discovery of patterns in biosequences. J Comput Biol 1998,
5(2):279-305.
34. Frith MC, Saunders NFW, Kobe B, Bailey TL: Discovering sequence motifs
with arbitrary insertions and deletions. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4(4):
e1000071.
35. Riley T, Yu X, Sontag E, Levine A: The p53HMM algorithm: using profile
hidden markov models to detect p53-responsive genes. BMC
Bioinformatics 2009, 10:111.
36. Badis G, Berger MF, Philippakis AA, Talukder S, Gehrke AR, Jaeger SA,
Chan ET, Metzler G, Vedenko A, Chen X, Kuznetsov H, Wang CF, Coburn D,
Newburger DE, Morris Q, Hughes TR, Bulyk ML: Diversity and Complexity
in DNA Recognition by Transcription Factors. Science 2009, 324:1720-1723.
37. Stormo GD: DNA binding sites: representation and discovery.
Bioinformatics 2000, 16:16-23.
38. Rabiner LR: A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected
applications in speech recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE 1989, 77(2):257286.
39. Casella G, George EI: Explaining the Gibbs Sampler. The American
Statistician 1992, 46(3):167-174.
40. Lawrence CE, Altschul SF, Boguski MS, Liu JS, Neuwald AF, Wootton JC:
Detecting subtle sequence signals: a Gibbs sampling strategy for
multiple alignment. Science 1993, 262(5131):208-214.
41. Hughes JD, Estep PW, Tavazoie S, Church GM: Computational
identification of cis-regulatory elements associated with groups of
functionally related genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Mol Biol 2000,
296(5):1205-1214.
42. Workman CT, Stormo GD: ANN-Spec: a method for discovering
transcription factor binding sites with improved specificity. Pac Symp
Biocomput 2000, 467-478.
43. Thijs G, Marchal K, Lescot M, Rombauts S, Moor BD, Rouzé P, Moreau Y: A
Gibbs sampling method to detect overrepresented motifs in the
upstream regions of coexpressed genes. J Comput Biol 2002, 9(2):447-464.
44. Frith MC, Hansen U, Spouge JL, Weng Z: Finding functional sequence
elements by multiple local alignment. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:189-200.
45. Favorov AV, Gelfand MS, Gerasimova AV, Ravcheev DA, Mironov AA,
Makeev VJ: A Gibbs sampler for identification of symmetrically
structured, spaced DNA motifs with improved estimation of the signal
length. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(10):2240-2245.
46. Chen X, Guo L, Fan Z, Jiang T: W-AlignACE: an improved Gibbs sampling
algorithm based on more accurate position weight matrices learned
from sequence and gene expression/ChIP-chip data. Bioinformatics 2008,
24(9):1121-1128.
47. Bailey TL, Elkan C: Fitting a mixture model by expectation maximization
to discover motifs in biopolymers. Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology AAAI Press 1994, 2836.
48. Gusfield D: Algorithms on strings, trees, and sequences: computer science and
computational biology Cambridge Univ. Press 2007.
49. Gribskov M, Veretnik S: Identification of sequence pattern with profile
analysis. Methods Enzymol 1996, 266:198-212.
50. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23(21):2947-2948.
51. Kel AE, Gössling E, Reuter I, Cheremushkin E, Kel-Margoulis OV,
Wingender E: MATCH: A tool for searching transcription factor binding
sites in DNA sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(13):3576-3579.
52. Shida K: GibbsST: a Gibbs sampling method for motif discovery with
enhanced resistance to local optima. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:486.
53. Wang T, Stormo GD: Combining phylogenetic data with co-regulated
genes to identify regulatory motifs. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(18):2369-2380.
54. Siddharthan R, Siggia ED, van Nimwegen E: PhyloGibbs: a Gibbs sampling
motif finder that incorporates phylogeny. PLoS Comput Biol 2005, 1(7):e67.
55. Sinha S, Blanchette M, Tompa M: PhyME: a probabilistic algorithm for
finding motifs in sets of orthologous sequences. BMC Bioinformatics 2004,
5:170.

Page 18 of 18

56. Zemojtel T, Kielbasa SM, Arndt PF, Chung HR, Vingron M: Methylation and
deamination of CpGs generate p53-binding sites on a genomic scale.
Trends Genet 2009, 25(2):63-66.
57. Chong JA, Tapia-Ramírez J, Kim S, Toledo-Aral JJ, Zheng Y, Boutros MC,
Altshuller YM, Frohman MA, Kraner SD, Mandel G: REST: a mammalian
silencer protein that restricts sodium channel gene expression to
neurons. Cell 1995, 80(6):949-957.
58. Bruce AW, López-Contreras AJ, Flicek P, Down TA, Dhami P, Dillon SC,
Koch CM, Langford CF, Dunham I, Andrews RM, Vetrie D: Functional
diversity for REST (NRSF) is defined by in vivo binding affinity
hierarchies at the DNA sequence level. Genome Res 2009, 19(6):994-1005.
59. Kaczynski J, Cook T, Urrutia R: Sp1- and Krüppel-like transcription factors.
Genome Biol 2003, 4(2):206.
60. Cawley S, Bekiranov S, Ng HH, Kapranov P, Sekinger EA, Kampa D,
Piccolboni A, Sementchenko V, Cheng J, Williams AJ, Wheeler R, Wong B,
Drenkow J, Yamanaka M, Patel S, Brubaker S, Tammana H, Helt G, Struhl K,
Gingeras TR: Unbiased mapping of transcription factor binding sites
along human chromosomes 21 and 22 points to widespread regulation
of noncoding RNAs. Cell 2004, 116(4):499-509.
61. Wierstra I: Sp1: Emerging roles-Beyond constitutive activation of TATAless housekeeping genes. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications 2008, 372:1-13.
62. TRANSFAC: New ChIP-on-chip data. Rel121 2008.
63. Brändén C, Tooze J: Introduction to protein structure Garland Publishing,
New York 1991.
64. Santelli E, Richmond TJ: Crystal structure of MEF2A core bound to DNA at
1.5 A resolution. J Mol Biol 2000, 297(2):437-449.
65. Oka S, Shiraishi Y, Yoshida T, Ohkubo T, Sugiura Y, Kobayashi Y: NMR
structure of transcription factor Sp1 DNA binding domain. Biochemistry
2004, 43(51):16027-16035.
66. Seidel HM, Milocco LH, Lamb P, Darnell JE, Stein RB, Rosen J: Spacing of
palindromic half sites as a determinant of selective STAT (signal
transducers and activators of transcription) DNA binding and
transcriptional activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92(7):3041-3045.
67. Klemm JD, Rould MA, Aurora R, Herr W, Pabo CO: Crystal structure of the
Oct-1 POU domain bound to an octamer site: DNA recognition with
tethered DNA-binding modules. Cell 1994, 77:21-32.
68. Berger MF, Bulyk ML: Universal protein-binding microarrays for the
comprehensive characterization of the DNA-binding specificities of
transcription factors. Nat Protoc 2009, 4(3):393-411.
69. Newburger DE, Bulyk ML: UniPROBE: an online database of protein
binding microarray data on protein-DNA interactions. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, , 37 Database: D77-D82.
70. Wilson DS, Desplan C: Structural basis of Hox specificity. Nat Struct Biol
1999, 6(4):297-300.
71. Joshi R, Passner JM, Rohs R, Jain R, Sosinsky A, Crickmore MA, Jacob V,
Aggarwal AK, Honig B, Mann RS: Functional specificity of a Hox protein
mediated by the recognition of minor groove structure. Cell 2007,
131(3):530-543.
72. Hannenhalli S: Eukaryotic transcription factor binding sites-modeling and
integrative search methods. Bioinformatics 2008, 24(11):1325-1331.
73. Valouev A, Johnson DS, Sundquist A, Medina C, Anton E, Batzoglou S,
Myers RM, Sidow A: Genome-wide analysis of transcription factor binding
sites based on ChIP-Seq data. Nat Methods 2008, 5(9):829-834.
74. Liao W, Schones DE, Oh J, Cui Y, Cui K, Roh TY, Zhao K, Leonard WJ:
Priming for T helper type 2 differentiation by interleukin 2-mediated
induction of interleukin 4 receptor alpha-chain expression. Nat Immunol
2008, 9(11):1288-1296.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-30
Cite this article as: Reid et al.: Variable structure motifs for transcription
factor binding sites. BMC Genomics 2010 11:30.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
