<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2148-3-4.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Evolutionary Biology

BioMed Central

Open Access

Research article

The evolution of Runx genes I. A comparative study of sequences
from phylogenetically diverse model organisms
Jessica Rennert1,2, James A Coffman1, Arcady R Mushegian1 and
Anthony J Robertson*1
Address: 1Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E. 50th Street, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA and 2Computational Biosciences Program,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
Email: Jessica Rennert - jessrennert@msn.com; James A Coffman - jac@stowers-institute.org; Arcady R Mushegian - arm@stowers-institute.org;
Anthony J Robertson* - ajr@stowers-institute.org
* Corresponding author

Published: 24 March 2003
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3:4

Received: 16 October 2002
Accepted: 24 March 2003

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4
© 2003 Rennert et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: Runx genes encode proteins defined by the highly conserved Runt DNA-binding
domain. Studies of Runx genes and proteins in model organisms indicate that they are key
transcriptional regulators of animal development. However, little is known about Runx gene
evolution.
Results: A phylogenetically broad sampling of publicly available Runx gene sequences was
collected. In addition to the published sequences from mouse, sea urchin, Drosophila melanogaster
and Caenorhabditis elegans, we collected several previously uncharacterised Runx sequences from
public genome sequence databases. Among deuterostomes, mouse and pufferfish each contain
three Runx genes, while the tunicate Ciona intestinalis and the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus were each found to have only one Runx gene. Among protostomes, C. elegans has a
single Runx gene, while Anopheles gambiae has three and D. melanogaster has four, including two
genes that have not been previously described. Comparative sequence analysis reveals two highly
conserved introns, one within and one just downstream of the Runt domain. All vertebrate Runx
genes utilize two alternative promoters.
Conclusions: In the current public sequence database, the Runt domain is found only in
bilaterians, suggesting that it may be a metazoan invention. Bilaterians appear to ancestrally contain
a single Runx gene, suggesting that the multiple Runx genes in vertebrates and insects arose by
independent duplication events within those respective lineages. At least two introns were present
in the primordial bilaterian Runx gene. Alternative promoter usage arose prior to the duplication
events that gave rise to three Runx genes in vertebrates.

Background
Runx genes encode the sequence-specific DNA binding
subunit of a heterodimeric transcription factor, the defining feature of which is the Runt domain, a highly conserved 128 amino acid sequence involved in DNA
binding, heterodimerization, nucleotide binding, and nu-

clear localization [1,2]. The Runt domain is named after
the first member of the family to be discovered, the regulatory gene runt from Drosophila melanogaster. Runx genes
have also been discovered and functionally characterized
in mammals, sea urchins and nematodes, and in general
are involved in the transcriptional control of
Page 1 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

developmental processes [3,4]. In humans, mutations in
each of the three Runx genes are associated with disease
caused by defective control of cell proliferation and/or differentiation [4,5]. Most studies of Runx gene function and
regulation have been carried out in mammals and in D.
melanogaster, each of which has multiple Runx genes. It is
not currently known how the Runx gene family evolved,
nor is it known how many Runx genes the first animal
possessed. Answering these questions will facilitate identification of primitive (general) and derived (specialized)
aspects of Runx gene structure, function and regulation.

Results and discussion
The collection of Runx gene sequences from phylogenetically diverse model organisms
Sequence similarity searches of public databases using the
BLAST program [6] were used to collect a set of currently
available Runx gene sequences (listed in Supplemental
Table 1) from phylogenetically diverse species with complete or nearly complete genome sequences. Previously
undescribed Runx genes collected in our BLAST searches
include two genes from the puffer fish (Takifugu rubripes)
genome, a single gene from the sea squirt (Cionia intestinalis) genome, three genes from the mosquito (Anopheles
gambiae) genome, and two new Runx genes from the fruit
fly (Drosophila melanogaster)genome. Also collected in the
set for comparison were the previously-described Runx
genes from D. melanogaster (runt and lozenge [7]),
Caenorhabditis elegans (run [8]), sea urchin (SpRunt
[9,10]), T. rubripes (TrRunx2 [11]), and mouse (Runx1,
Runx2, and Runx3; the three human RUNX genes, which
have been extensively characterized previously, are highly
similar to their mouse orthologues [12,13] and hence
were not included in the collected set). The collected set of
sequences thus contains representatives of several major
bilaterian phyla within both deuterostomes (Chordata
and Echinodermata) and protostomes (Nematoda and
Arthropoda). Runx sequences from lophotrochozoans
and from basal (non-bilaterian) metazoans (e.g., Cnidaria
and Porifera) are not found in the database, and it is not
yet known whether non-bilaterian Runx genes exist. Extensive BLAST and PSI-BLAST searches of the public databases failed to recover any sequences with significant
similarity to the Runt domain from non-metazoan organisms with completed or nearly completed genomes, suggesting that Runx genes may be a metazoan invention.
The closest amino acid sequence similarity of any part of
the Runt domain to sequences outside of metazoa is
found in the motif GRSGRGKSF [2] (see Fig. 2), which
matches the nucleotide binding P-loop sequence in various bacterial and archaeal ATP-binding proteins with diverse functions. This Runx sequence is functionally
involved in minor groove interactions and DNA bending
by the Runt domain [14]. An important difference between it and bona fide P-loops is that the latter are invari-

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

ably followed by an α-helix, whereas the structure of the
Runt domain is all beta (see below). Thus, although the
Runx P-loop-like motif is capable of binding ATP [2], it is
unclear whether this local sequence similarity is indicative
of homology to the prokaryotic P-loop.
Runx gene copy number
Two of the invertebrates in our collection with completely
sequenced genomes, the protostome C. elegans and the
deuterostome C. intestinalis, each were found to contain a
single Runx gene. Screens of genomic libraries using the
Runt domain sequence as probe indicate that the same is
also apparently true of the sea urchin S. purpuratus [10], although final verification of this awaits the completion of
the sea urchin genome. In contrast, the model organisms
in which most functional studies of Runx genes have been
performed (i.e. D. melanogaster and mouse) each contain
multiple Runx genes. Both of the vertebrate species surveyed (mouse and T. rubripes) were each found to contain
three Runx genes, as was the mosquito A. gambiae, whereas D. melanogaster contains four.

The simplest explanation of such a gene distribution is
that possession of a single Runx gene is the primitive condition for bilaterians, i.e., that the multiplicity of Runx
genes in the vertebrate and arthropod lineages resulted
from independent gene duplications within those respective lineages. The results of a phylogenetic analysis of Runt
domain sequences are consistent with this hypothesis (see
below). Since fruit flies and mice each contain multiple
Runx genes, it is probable that each of those genes has acquired specialized (e.g., region- or tissue-specific) functions that were derived subsequent to the duplications,
and hence peculiar to the taxonomic group to which each
of those model organisms belong. Experimental studies of
invertebrates that contain only a single Runx gene (sea urchin, tunicate, and nematode) are therefore likely to highlight primitive (general) functions of this family of
transcription factors in the control of cell fate, proliferation, and differentiation during metazoan development.
Exon and intron positions among Runx genes
The gross structural features of the collected Runx genes,
including positions of exons and introns (excepting those
upstream of the proximal promoter of the vertebrate Runx
genes – see below), are depicted schematically in Figure 1
(see also Supplemental Table 2 and 3). To locate exon-intron positions in previously uncharacterised genes (or
predicted genes) that have not yet been associated with
cDNAs, we performed spliced alignment, maintaining
maximum similarity between homologues, as described
in Methods. As can be seen in Figure 1, all of the Runx
genes contain a central, highly conserved exon, which encodes the C-terminal third of the Runt domain (black box
in Fig. 1). The N-terminal end of this exon is bounded by

Page 2 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

Mm1

Vertebrates

Chordates

Deuterostomes

1

Tr1
Mm2

2

Tr2
Mm3

3

Tr3
Ci
Sp

AgR

Dipteran Insects

Protostomes

R

DmR
AgL

L

A

DmL

???

AgA
DmA
DmB
Ce

=

150 bases (Exons)
30 kb (Introns)

Figure 1
Comparative structure of Runx genes collected from genome sequences of phylogenetically diverse model
organisms. Diagram of Runx genes from selected species. Boxes indicate exons and curved lines indicate introns, which are
scaled approximately to the scale bar as indicated. Absolute exon and intron sizes are listed in Supplemental Table 2 and 3. The
Runt domain is represented as filled boxes ranging from light grey (N-terminus) to black (C-terminus) in order to facilitate
comparison to the chordate Runt domain, which is encoded by three different exons. The black bar at the end of all the genes
represents the VWRPY (or IWRPF in the case of CeRun) Groucho recruitment motif that is at the C-terminus of proteins
encoded by all Runx genes, which facilitated mapping of the previously uncharacterised genes. Exon sequences representing 5'
and 3' untranslated regions are not depicted in the diagram. For the vertebrate Runx genes, only exons downstream of the
proximal promoters (P2) are shown. Human RUNX1 contains 3 additional alternatively spliced exons between those encoding
the Runt domain and the C-terminal VWRPY motif [12], which may or may not be present in the mouse orthologue (Mm1)
and are not shown here. Because of sequence gaps in the genomic sequence of the Anopheles gambiae RunxA gene (AgA), the
exon structure 3' to the Runt domain of this gene is not known, as indicated by question marks. Abbreviations: Mm1, M. musculus Runx1, etc.; Tr1, T. rubripes Runx1, etc.; Ci, C. intestinalis; Sp, S. purpuratus; AgA, A. gambiae RunxA; DmA, D. melanogaster
RunxA; DmB, D. melanogaster RunxB; AgL, A. gambiae Lozenge; DmL, D. melanogaster Lozenge; AgR, A. gambiae Runt; DmR, D. melanogaster Runt; Ce, C. elegans.

an intron whose position is absolutely conserved among
all Runx genes except DmRunt and AgRunt (which have
apparently lost the intron), while the C-terminal end is
bounded by an intron that is conserved among all deuterostome species in our collection, and shifted but a few nucleotides downstream in the insect genes and upstream in
the C. elegans gene. The existence and locations of all of
the other introns are variable, but some of them are characteristic of specific clades.

All of the chordate Runx genes (including CiRunt) contain
an intron within the N-terminal half of the Runt domain,
the position of which is invariant with respect to nucleotide sequence. This intron is missing in the other Runx
genes, including the sea urchin representative (SpRunt),
and is therefore likely to be a chordate-specific feature of
Runx genes that arose prior to the Runx gene duplications
in the vertebrate lineage. Upstream of the Runt domain,
TrRunx1 is predicted to have two short introns that are not
found in its mouse orthologue (MmRunx1) or in any of
the other chordate Runx genes. The mammalian Runx

Page 3 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

N-terminus,
α1, β3, β5-L5

Mm1
Tr1
Mm2
Tr2
Mm3
Tr3
Ci
Sp
DmL
AgL
DmA
AgA
DmB
DmR
AgR
Pl
Cs1
Cs2
Ce
Mh

Major groove

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

L2-β3 β1-L1
β

minor groove

N-terminus,
α1, β3, β5-L5

Major groove

L0 β1
L1 β2
L2 β3
L3
L4
L5
L9
L10
L12
α1
β4
β5
β6 L6 β7 L7 β8 L8 β9
β10
β11 L11 β12
1
* *
**
** * * 1 33
SGD RSMVEV LADHPG ELVRTD SPNFL CSVL PTHWRCNK TLPIAF KVVALG DVPDGT LVTVM AGND ENYSAELR NATAAM KNQVAR FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITVF TNPPQV ATYHRA IKITVD GPREP RRHR QK
MAD RSMMEV ISDHPG ELVKTD SPNFL CSVL PTHWRCNK TLPIAF KVVALG DIPDGT LVTVM AGND ENYSAELR NATAAI KNQVAR FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITVF TSPPQV ATYQRA IKITVD GPREP RRHR QK
HDN RTMVEI IADHPA ELVRTD SPNFL CSVL PSHWRCNK TLPVAF KVVALG EVPDGT VVTVM AGND ENYSAELR NASAVM KNQVAR FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITVF TNPPQV ATYHRA IKVTVD GPREP RRHR QK
HEN RSMAEI IADHPA ELVRTD SPNFL CSVL PSHWRCNK TLPVAF KVVALG DIPDGT VVTVM AGND ENYSAELR NASGVM KNQVAR FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITVF TNPPQV ATYHRA IKVTVD GPREP RRHR QK
PEV RSMVDV LADHAG ELVRTD SPNFL CSVL PSHWRCNK TLPVAF KVVALG DVPDGT VVTVM AGND ENYSAELR NASAVM KNQVAR FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITVF TNPTQV ATYHRA IKVTVD GPREP RRHR QK
PDT RNMVDV LADHAG ELVRTD SPNFL CSVL PSHWRCNK TLPVAF KVVALG DVPDGT LVTVM AGND ENYSAELR NASAVM KNQVAR FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITVF TGPPQV ATYHRA IKVTVD GPREP RRHR VK
TSG RHVVDI LSDHQG ELIKTD SPNFL CTPL PQHWRVNK SLQTPF KVVALS DIPDGT TVTVM AGND ENYSAELR NASATM KGCVAR FNDLRF LGRSG RGKS FNLTITIF SSPPQV ATYQRA IKITVD GPREP RRHR QK
GGE RSIVDA LSEYPG ELVKTE SPNFA CSVL PNHWRCNK SLPVAF KVVSLG ETKDGT MVTIA AGND ENYCAELK NNTAVM KNQVAR FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLSIFIY TNPPQI ATYNRA IKVTVD GPREP RRPK PK
WME RLVQKR QQEHPG ELVRTS NPYFL CSAL PAHWRSNK TLPMAF KVVALA EVGDGT YVTIR AGND ENCCAELR NFTTQM KNDVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITVA TSPPQV ATYAKA IKVTVD GPREP RSKT SP
WME RMVMEA EQQYPG ELVRTD SPYFL CSAL PNHWRSNK TLPSAF KVISLG DVSDGT MVTIR AGND ENFCAELR NCTAVM RNQVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITIC TTMPQV TTYCKA IKVTVD GPREP RSKT S
LAE RTLGDF LTEHPG ELIRTS SPLFV CTVL PPHWRSNK TLPVAF KVVSLG DIMDGT MVTVR AGND ENYCAELR NCTAVM KNQVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITVS TNPPHI ATYNKA IKVTVD GPREP RSKT ML
LAE RTLGDF LSEHPG ELIRTG SPLFV CTVL PPHWRSNK TLPVAF KVVALG DVGDGT MVTVR AGND ENYCAELR NCTAVM KNQVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITVS TSPPQV ATYNKA IKVTVD GPREP RSKT SK
LIE RTVDVL LAEHPG ELVKTG SPHVV CTTL PTHWRSNK TLPIAF KVLALG EVMDGT IVTIR AGND ENFCGELR NCTAVM KNQVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTIVIS TNPIQI ATYTKA IKVTVD GPREP RSKG DP
DMF ASLHEM LQEYHG ELAQTG SPSIL CSAL PNHWRSNK SLPGAF KVIALD DVPDGT LVSIK CGND ENYCGELR NCTTTM KNQVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FTLTITIA TYPVQI ASYSKA IKVTVD GPREP RSKQ SY
DMF ANLHEM LQEYHG ELVQTG SPAVL CSAL PTHWRSNK SLPCAF KVIALD DIQDGT LVTIK AGND ENFHAELR NATAVM KNQVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FSITITIS SYPCQI ATYTKA IKVTVD GPREP RSKQ NF
WSE RALTEL LGEHPG ELVRTG SPNFV CTIL PPHWRSNK TLPVAF KVIALG EVGDGT LVTVR AGND ENFCAELR NNLALM KNQIAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGES FNLTITIS TSPPQV TTYCKA IKVTVD GPREP RSKA HA
AHE RLFTDV IDNLPS ELVKTG SPCFV CSVL PGHWRSNK TLPLPF KVICLG EVADGT MVTIR AGND ENFCGELR NASAVM KNQVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FSLTISIS TSPPHV VTYNEA IKVTVD GPREP RRQQ QQ
PYE RTITEV LNEHPG ELVKTG SPNVV CSAL PTHWRSNK TLPVAF RVVSLG EVLDGT VVTIK AGND DNYCAELR NATAVM KNQVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGKS FSLTITLS TSPPQx xxxxxx xxxxxx xxxxx xxxx xx
HHV RNFIEQ QPAPAK TLEKSS SPNIL YTAL PKHWRSNK SFQEPF YVVLLT PVPDNT EVSIW AGND EKPCEEVR NEKAKV HRQVAK FNDLRF VGRSG RGRK FHLTIVIH SAPMMV ATVKNV IKVTVD GPRDA RIPK PQ
xxx xxxxxx xxxxxx xxxxxx xxxVF CSRI PAHWRSNK SLPTPF IILALC PIPDGT RVCVS AGND ENFCADVK NNTAEF IGQMAR FSDLRF VGKSG RGKN FNLSITIF TIPlQM ARFSDL xxxxxx xxxxx xxxx xx

Figure 2
Multiple sequence alignment of the Runt domain from collected sequences. Alignment of Runx amino acid
sequences created using Clustal W [16]. The number 1 denotes the conventional beginning of the Runt domain, which is 128
amino acids long. The shading highlights areas of amino acid conservation, with yellow indicating absolute conservation among
all members, and blue or green indicating high conservation of a residue among several members. The domain structure (alpha
helix and beta sheet elements) determined for MmRunx1 [14,17], is shown as arrows above the alignment, and the surfaces
involved in DNA contact (major and minor groove, shown in green) or interaction with specific structural motifs within the
beta subunit (shown in pink) are denoted by lines above the structural motifs [14]. In cases where it is known, amino acid pairs
split by introns in the primary transcripts are underlined and in boldface (i.e., all but the two spider sequences, the crayfish, and
the nematode Meloidogyne hapla, for which only cDNAs are available). The arrow indicates a highly conserved intron that falls
within sequence that encodes the purine nucleotide-binding consensus. Note that the Runt domains from the spider gene Cs2
and the nematode gene Mh are partial, as indicated by the x's; these partial sequences were not used in the alignment used to
generate trees (Table 1 and Figure 3). Abbreviations are as in Figure 1, with the addition of Pl, Pacifastacus leniusculus; Cs1, Cupiennius salei Run-1, etc.; Mh, Meloidogyne hapla.

genes have longer introns than their counterparts in Takifugu, as might be expected based on relative genome sizes. With the exception of DmRunt, all of the Drosophila
Runx genes contain one (DmLozenge and DmRunxB) or
two (DmRunxA) introns separating exons N-terminal to
the Runt domain, but all of these have different positions,
and were thus likely to have been incorporated subsequent to the divergence of these genes. The position of the
first intron in DmLozenge is conserved in one of the mosquito genes (AgLozenge), indicating that these two genes
are orthologues, which is confirmed by a phylogenetic
analysis of sequences (see below). CeRun contains an intron within the N-terminal half of the Runt domain that
is not found in any other Runx gene, and contains the
largest number of exons of any of the genes in our collection. In general, the structure of the C. elegans gene is the
most divergent of all of the Runx genes.
A variable number of exons are found 3' of the Runt domain among different species, and these reveal group-specific patterns. Except for the lozenge orthologues, which
contain two such exons, all of the insect genes for which

complete sequences are available contain only a single
exon downstream of the Runt domain. The same is apparently true for the single sea urchin gene (although this is
provisionally based on the fragmentary evidence of a single small BAC clone [10]), suggesting that a single exon
downstream of the Runt domain may be the primitive
condition for bilaterians. In vertebrates (from the proximal promoter), the Runx3 orthologues each contain 2 exons downstream of the Runt domain, while the Runx2
orthologues contain 4 and the Runx1 orthologues contain
3. CiRunt contains 5 exons downstream of the Runt domain, while CeRun contains 4. In vertebrates at least, the
multiplicity of downstream exons is reflected in a large variety of alternatively spliced transcripts that give rise to
multiple protein isoforms that differ in the C-terminal sequences appended to the Runt domain [12,13]. It is important to note that the C-terminal exon of all Runx genes
identified to date encodes the amino acid sequence
VWRPY (or the functionally equivalent IWRPF in the case
of C. elegans), which acts as a recruitment motif for the corepressor Groucho/TLE [3]. This motif is at the C-terminus
within the 3'-most exon of all of the genes, possibly with

Page 4 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

the exception of CiRunt (where the open reading frame
apparently continues beyond the VWRPY in the genome
sequence), and was used in our analysis to identify the Cterminal exons of previously uncharacterised Runx genes.
Runt domain sequences across phylogeny
The amino acid sequences of the Runt domains of all each
of the collected genes, together with two previously described sequences from the spider Cupiennius salei [15], a
sequence from the crayfish Pacifastacus leniusculus, and
one from the nematode Meloidogyne hapla, were aligned
using Clustal W [16], as shown in Figure 2. Functionally,
the Runt domain is required both for DNA binding and
for interaction with its heterodimeric partner (the beta
subunit), which serves to allosterically enhance the DNA
binding of the Runt domain [1,14]. Superposition of the
alignment and the known crystal structure of mouse
Runx1 [14,17] reveals that residues that make either direct
or indirect contact with DNA are invariant (marked by asterisks in Fig. 2). Sequence motifs that interact with the
beta subunit are also highly conserved.

The alignment of Runt domain amino acid sequences was
used to construct unrooted trees by several complementary approaches (neighbour-joining, maximum-likelihood,
and maximum-parsimony, described in Methods). We
also employed Bayesian inference of phylogeny [18]. This
analysis was performed using 137 aligned amino acids
with no gaps (Fig. 2), and included all of the sequences
shown in Figure 2 except for the incomplete sequences
from a spider (C. salei run-2) and from the root-knot nematode (M. hapla). The consensus topology produced by
each method was largely consistent with accepted phylogenies for all nodes with significant bootstrap values (Fig.
3); the main observations derived from each method are
summarized in Table 1. The consensus of phylogenetic
approaches strongly indicates the monophyly of the deuterostome Runx genes in the collection, with the expected
relationships (echinoderms(urochordates(vertebrates))).
The trees also suggest that the gene duplications that produced the three vertebrate Runx genes occurred early in
the chordate lineage leading to vertebrates, but subsequent to its divergence from urochordates. All of the trees
place Runx1 basal to Runx3 and Runx2 (Fig. 3 and Table
1), arguing against an earlier proposal for the basal position of Runx3 [8,13] among the vertebrate genes, which
was inferred from relative gene size, exon-intron structure,
and pattern of expression.
While the consensus of trees summarized in Table 1 is for
the most part consistent with the expected monophyly of
the protostome genes in our collection (nematodes, arthropods), the branching order is ambiguous. Among the
insect representatives, each of the mosquito genes can be
confidently assigned orthologues from Drosophila (Fig. 3),

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

as was also suggested by intron positions (Fig. 1). Beyond
that, low bootstrap values prohibit a confident assessment
of evolutionary branching order of the arthropod Runx
paralogues, and it is not clear whether they are monophyletic (although the position of the crayfish gene suggests a deep duplication event within in the insect/
crustacean clade at least). Resolution of the evolutionary
relationships among the protostome Runx genes will require a broader sampling of Runx genes from Arthropods
as well as from protostomes in general.
The occurrence of three Runx genes in vertebrates, each on
a different chromosome, is consistent with a scenario of
multiple gene duplications, or two successive rounds of
genome duplications that may have occurred near the
base of the vertebrate branch of chordates [19]. In contrast, the multiple Runx genes in Drosophila are all physically linked to runt on the X chromosome, and were
almost certainly generated by local gene duplication
events (for the location of the Drosophila genes, see FlyBase Genome Browser: http://www.bdgp.org/cgi-bin/annot/gbrowse). The two newly discovered Drosophila Runx
genes both contain a complete open reading frame encoding the Runt domain (Fig. 2) and conserved exon-intron
structure (Fig. 1 and 3), suggesting that they are probably
not pseudogenes. This is further supported by our finding
that each of the three mosquito Runx genes has an orthologue in Drosophila (Figs. 1, 2, and 3).
Alternative promoter usage among vertebrate runx genes
All of the vertebrate Runx genes are transcribed from two
alternative promoters, P1 (distal) and P2 (proximal). We
found no evidence (as would be indicated by cDNA
clones or ESTs) in the database for alternative promoter
usage among any of the invertebrate Runx genes examined, suggesting that alternative promoters may have
evolved in the chordate lineage leading to vertebrates,
subsequent to its divergence from urochordates. All
known invertebrate Runx gene products begin with long
5'UTRs and N-terminal amino acid sequences that are
more like those of the products from the proximal promoter (P2) of the vertebrate genes, suggesting that P2 is
the primitive promoter. Definitive resolution of these issues awaits a more comprehensive database of genomes
and expressed sequences in appropriate invertebrate systems. Figure 4A depicts the transcript structures generated
by alternative promoter usage and splicing in the vertebrate Runx genes, and Figure 4B shows the N-terminal
amino acid sequences derived from each promoter. It is
clear from these data that the usage of alternative promoters evolved prior to the gene duplication events in the vertebrate lineage, since all three genes in both mouse and
Takifugu utilize alternative promoters that give rise to similar alternative N-termini within the respective
orthologues.

Page 5 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

Deuterostomes
MmRunx3
TrRunx3

TrRunx2

CiRunt

MmRunx2

60, 82, 51

93, 96, 93

TrRunx1
71, 92, 67

SpRunt
MmRunx1
44, 98, 53
63, 69, 74

DmLozenge

-, 66, 54, 71, 36

CeRun

38, 54, 20
56, 59, 57

61, 76,41

AgLozenge
CsRun-1

98, 100, 100

DmRunt
84, 99, 93

PlRun

AgRunt
DmRunxA

AgRunxA

DmRunxB

Protostomes

Figure 3
Phylogenetic tree of the Runx protein family. Maximum likelihood tree calculated with the assumption of a molecular
clock from the multiple amino acid sequence alignment shown in Figure 2. The numbers at each node are the bootstrap support values obtained by maximum likelihood (no molecular clock assumed), neighbour joining, and maximum parsimony, in that
order. The dashes (-) by the branch leading to the Ciona gene (CiRunt) indicate that the maximum likelihood and maximum parsimony methods did not support that node (these methods each place CiRunt on a branch with TrRunx1, with support values of
50 and 52, respectively). Branches with unresolved topology were collapsed. Coloured branches are used to highlight the vertebrate lineage (green) and the insect lineage (red). The shading highlights the deuterostome (blue) and protostome (pink) representatives in the sample. Abbreviations for species names are the same as in Figures 1 and 2.

Page 6 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

Table 1: Inferences from phylogenetic analysis of Runt domain sequences*
NEIGHBOR

PROML

PROTPARS

MRBAYES

Monophyly of deuterostome
homologues?

Yes (71 % bootstrap support
for the deepest branch)

Yes

Yes (93 % posterior
probability)

Runx3 basal in vertebrates?
Deepest deuterostome branch is a single-copy gene?
Deepest protostome branch is a singlecopy gene?

No
Yes

No
Yes

Yes for vertebrates and urochordates (74%), ambiguous for
echinoderms
No
Yes

Unclear (unresolved topology
of the nematode and spider
paralogues)

Unclear (unresolved topology
of the nematode and spider
paralogues)

Unclear (unresolved topology of the
nematode and spider paralogues)

No
Yes
Unclear (unresolved
topology of the nematode
and spider paralogues)

*Inferences from trees constructed using neighbour-joining (NEIGHBOR), maximum likelihood (PROML), maximum parsimony (PROTPARS), and
Bayesian inference of phylogeny (MRBAYES) algorithms, as described in Methods. The PROML and PROMLK programs produced identical results.

Conclusions
(1) In the public databases, the Runt domain is currently
found only in sequences from bilaterians. This suggests
that it may be a metazoan (and possibly a bilaterian) invention, and that the genomic regulatory networks
through which Runx genes control the fate, proliferation
and differentiation of cells are unique to animals.
(2) The primitive condition in bilaterians is most likely a
single Runx gene, represented in the deuterostomes of our
collection by the sea urchin S. purpuratus and the tunicate
C. intestinalis, and in the protostomes of our collection by
C. elegans. Runx gene duplications appear to have
occurred independently in the lineages leading to vertebrates (which have at least three Runx genes) and insects
(which have three or four Runx genes), suggesting that
Runx genes in these latter organisms have probably acquired a number of specialized, taxon-specific regulatory
functions (e.g., segmentation in arthropods [15], bone development in vertebrates [20], etc.). Thus, studies of Runx
genes in sea urchins, tunicates, and nematodes are likely
to highlight primitive, pan-bilaterian regulatory functions
of this family of genes in the cell biology of animal
development.
(3) The ancestral bilaterian Runx gene was apparently assembled from three exons and contained two introns, one
within the sequence that encodes the Runt domain, and a
second that borders the sequence encoding the C-terminal
end of the Runt domain.
(4) The ancestor of all three vertebrate Runx genes utilized
two alternative promoters that generate alternative N-terminal sequences.

Methods
Collection and assembly of previously uncharacterised
runx genes
The Ciona intestinalis Runx gene was assembled with sequence files obtained from the Trace Archive database. A

"seed" sequence was found in C. intestinalis gDNA, Ti
119616831 (Supplemental Table 1), by a MegaBLAST
search using nucleotide sequence encoding exon 3 of
SpRunt in the NCBI Trace server site http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/mmtrace.html. A translation of the
seed sequence also showed significant similarity to the
Runt domain. The seed sequence showing Runx homology was in turn used as the query to obtain overlapping sequence and those obtained replaced the query. This
repetitive BLAST process was continued such that the seed
sequence was extended 25 kb in both the 5' and 3' direction relative to the coding orientation of the seed. The intron position assignments were aided by an alignment of
the acquired C. intestinalis Runx gene with partial cDNA
sequences obtained from a TBLASTN search using the S.
purpuratus SpRunt-1 protein sequence to query the C. intestinalis cDNA project site at http://ghost.zool.kyotou.ac.jp/indexr1.html. Introns in those regions of the gene
upstream of the Runt domain, not found in any cDNA,
were manually assigned by spliced alignment, maintaining maximum homologue similarity. Specifically, putative introns were located by searching for the termini of
open reading frames, and then positioned in such a way
that the resulting open reading frame had maximum similarity to that of a homologous gene while the intron-exon
junctions had the expected consensus 5'GT/-AG-3' sequence. A known intron in a similar position in an orthologous gene was considered a validation of correct position
assignment. Highly conserved sequence blocks or residues, such as the Runt domain or the C-terminal Groucho-binding site VWRPY, served as anchoring reference
points. Multiple overlapping sequences in the C.
intestinalis contig provided a confidence in the final sequence assembly. Close inspection of the sequence alignments showed no variation among high confidence
regions of the sequence where high confidence regions
means at least 40–50 nucleotides from the end of the read
or with few unassigned base calls near the region. The
complete absence of sequence variation, the multiple sequence coverage, and the high sequence quality all indi-

Page 7 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

MmRunx1

TrRunx1

P1
P1

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

…aaggaaacg
121bp

56bp

222bp

…tcttatttc

MASDS…FMR

MASNS…LRK

g..gt-

(19aa)

MmRunx2

TrRunx2

P1
P1

…ggagggact
595bp

165bp

…gaggcagct

P2

g..gt-

(19aa)

66bp

MASNS…FFW

P2

MASNS…FFW

g..gt-

P2

1573bp

…gaggcacca

g..gt-

(19aa)

…cttgttgtg

P2

MVFLWDAKY

…gctgttgtg
1015bp

…gctgttgtg

MRIPV

MRIPV

DAST…

-ag..at

g..gt-

- ag..ac

MRIPV

DPAP…

-ag..at

DVSV…

DPSA…

-ag..at

(19aa)

MmRunx3

P1

…gcgtgcgac

MASNS…FIR

g..gt-

227bp

P2

…ggccgcggc
276bp

MRIPV

-ag..ac

DPST…

(19aa)
TrRunx3

A

P1

…ttccgtgtc

MASNS…LLR

g..gt-

P2

…actgttgtg

MHIPV

-ag..ag

EPPT…

(19aa)

MmRunx1

Distal (19aa)
MASDSIFESFPSYPQCFMR^[g..gt-ag..at]^
Proximal
MRIPV^DASTSRRFTPPSTALSPGKMSEALPLGAPDGGAALASKLRSGDRSMVEVLADHP…

TrRunx1

Distal (19aa)
MASNSIFETVLSCHSALRK^[g..gt-ag..ac]^
Proximal
MVFLWDAKY^[g..gt-ag..ac]^DPAPGRRYTPPSTTLGSGGKMAEALPLGAQEAGGGGALMGKLRMADRSMME^[gt-ag]^

MmRunx2

Distal (19aa)
MASNSLFSAVTPCQQSFFW^[g..gt-ag..at]^
Proximal
MRIPV^DVSPVVAAQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQEAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAVPRLRPPHDNRTMVEIIADHP…

TrRunx2

Distal (19aa)
MASNSLFSTVGPCQQNFFW^[g..gt-ag..at]^
Proximal
MRIPV^DPSATRRFSPPSSSLQPVPGKMNDVSSPTGQPDAAAAVPRLRPHENRSMAEIIADHP…

MmRunx3

Distal (19aa)
MASNSIFDSFPNYTPTFIR^[g..gt-ag..ac]^
Proximal
MRIPV^DPSTSRRFTPPSTAFPCGGGGGGKMGENSGALSAQATAGPGGRTRPEVRSMVDVLADHA…

TrRunx3

B

Distal (19aa)
MASNSIFDSLSSYSNSLLR^[g..gt-ag..ag]^
Proximal
MHIPV^EPPTTRRFTPPSTSFPCSKIGDSNGAMATPGPLRSRPDTRNMVDVLADHA…

Figure 4
Alternative transcripts and N-termini produced by transcription from proximal and distal promoters of vertebrate runx genes. (A) Diagram of alternative transcripts from distal (P1) and proximal (P2) promoters in vertebrate Runx
genes. Solid lines represent untranslated regions of exons, while dashed lines represent introns. TrRunx1 distal transcript is theoretical and based on its similarities to other distal transcripts (i.e., its open reading frame begins with a sequence encoding
MASNS), location (~14 kb from proximal transcript) and size (19 aa). TrRunx2 and TrRunx3 transcripts from P1 were derived
from similarities to MmRunx2 and Danio rerio runtb, respectively. TrRunx2 was recently published [11]. M. musculus distal transcripts were gathered from Genebank entries and verified with publications (see Supplemental Table 1). Note: Unlike all of the
other vertebrate Runx genes in our collection, TrRunx1 transcript from P2 has a small exon (encoding 9 amino acids) followed
by a 1 kb intron (see also B, below, and 3). This small exon splices into the same location within the downstream coding
sequence as does the exon from the distal transcript. (B) Alternative N-terminal amino acid sequences of various vertebrate
Runx genes analysed in our survey. N-termini from the distal promoters are shown in green, while the N-termini from the
proximal promoters are shown in red. The aspartate or glutamate to which the N-terminal sequences from the distal promoter are joined are highlighted in yellow. The positions and nucleotides at the termini of introns are indicated in lower case.

Page 8 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

cate that no additional Runx genes are present in the C.
intestinalis genome, which was confirmed by inspection of
the recently completed genome at http://genome.jgipsf.org/ciona4/ciona4.home.html.
Three Runt domain genes in the A. gambiae genome and
two previously unidentified Runt domain genes in the D.
melanogaster genome were found by TBLASTN search using the S. purpuratus Runt protein sequence as the query.
The newly identified Drosophila Runx gene sequences
(CG1379 and CG15455) are present in a single sequence
file (see Supplemental Table 1) and with opposite coding
orientation and were named for this study RunxA
(CG1379) and RunxB (CG15455). No cDNAs specific for
the mosquito Runx genes or for the Drosophila RunxA or
RunxB genes was found despite an extensive search, so putative intron positions were manually located in these
genes by spliced alignment as described above. Unlike all
of the deuterostome genes, the positions of introns
among the insect genes were not conserved to the nucleotide, and were thus assigned with less confidence and
should hence be considered provisional.
Three Runx genes were identified in the recently completed T. rubripes genome sequence by a TBLASTN search using the S. purpuratus Runt protein sequence as the query
sequence at the Fugu BLAST Server of the UK Human Genome Mapping Project Resource Centre http://
fugu.hgmp.mrc.ac.uk/blast/. cDNA sequences from the
zebrafish (D. rerio) were used to place the start of the coding region in the distal promoter of TrRunx1 and TrRunx3,
and cDNA sequences from the teleost O. laptipes were used
to place the start of the coding region in the distal promoter of TrRunx2 (Supplemental Table 1). The promoter
structure of TrRunx2 published by Eggers et al. [11] during
the course of our study, was in agreement with our results.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

ics, University of Washington, Seattle] or by the MrBayes
program [18]. Specifically, 100 bootstrap replicates of the
alignment were constructed using the SEQBOOT program, and the distances between sequences were computed by the PROTDIST program using the PAM substitution
model. Neighbour joining trees were built using the
NEIGHBOR program, and the consensus tree was derived
using the CONSENSE program. For the maximum-likelihood trees, the experimental versions of the programs
PROML (no assumption of molecular clock) and PROMLK (molecular clock assumed) from PHYLIP version 3.6a3
were used with the JTT evolutionary model and with the
assumption of constant change rate between sites. The
maximum parsimony trees were constructed using the
PROTPARS program.

Authors' contributions
J.R. performed most of the sequence analysis and drafted
early versions of the Figures under the direction of A.J.R.
J.A.C. assisted with the interpretation of the data and
drafted the manuscript and final Figures. A.R.M performed statistical evaluation of the phylogenetic trees and
wrote the relevant sections of the manuscript. A.J.R. conceived and designed the project, assisted with the bioinformatics, and developed the protocol for locating introns
without cDNA sequence information.

In addition to the gene sequences, two published partial
cDNA sequences from a spider (Cupiennius salei) and an
EST from a nematode (Meloidogyne hapla) were obtained
from the NCBI database and used in the multiple sequence alignment. Since the nematode sequence and one
of the spider sequences (run-2) only contain part of the
runt domain, these were not used in the phylogenetic
analysis.
Multiple sequence alignments and phylogenetic tree
construction
The alignment of the amino acid sequences of all Runt domains used in this study was performed using the modified Clustal W [16] program in the AlignX® module of
Vector NTI (InforMax, Inc.). The trees were calculated using programs from the PHYLIP package [Felsenstein, J.
1993–2002. PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version 3.6a3. Distributed by the author. Department of Genet-

Page 9 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

Additional material
Supplemental Table 1
The collection of Runx genes used in this study. This table indicates the
sources of Runx gene sequences from selected species, and additional references that were used in the analysis. The C. intestinalis Runx gene
(CiRunt) was derived from a contig assembled using shot-gun sequence
segments queried from NCBI's trace archive. The accession number given
can be used as a seed for querying the database start the retrieval of necessary sequence. Vector NTI ContigXpress was used to assemble the sequence. Verification of CiRunt was performed by comparing the gDNA to
cDNA available on-line at the Nori Satoh Laboratory web page. Only the
first cDNA sequence accession number is given and can be used as a seed
to extract the remaining sequences. There was 2 × coverage of the cDNA.
A special note needs to be made about the sequence upstream from the
start of the Runt domain. The sequence from the start of the runt gene to
the start of the Runt domain is theoretical. No cDNA could be found to
verify this segment. The T. rubripes Runx genes were derived from scaffolds available on-line at the MRC HGMP-RC site. M. musculus Runx2
and D. rerio runtb were used to identify T. rubripes Runx2 and Runx3,
respectively. T. rubripes Runx2 was verified by a published report [11].
D. rerio runta was used to identify T. rubripes Runx1. The sea urchin
gene SpRunt has not yet been completely sequenced, and sequence is currently available only for the SpRunt-1 cDNA [9] and for the termini of
the exons and introns [10]. ND, not determined.
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/14712148-3-4-S1.doc]

Supplemental Table 2
Sequence length of Runx genes from selected species. This table indicates
the total and intron length in nucleotides of the sequences of each of the
collected Runx genes from the proximal promoters. Exon lengths (bold
numbers) are given in amino acids. Note that the nucleotide lengths of the
S. purpuratus gene and introns are approximate (based on the lengths estimated for PCR products by gel electrophoresis), as these have not yet
been completely sequenced.
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/14712148-3-4-S2.doc]

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

Acknowledgements
This research was made possible by a Stowers Institute Functional Genomics Fellowship awarded to J.R., and was funded entirely by the Stowers Institute for Medical Research. We thank Dr. Galina Glazko (Pennsylvania
State University) for assistance with the phylogenetic analysis, and anonymous reviewers for providing a number of constructive criticisms that improved the manuscript.

References
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

10.
11.
12.

Supplemental Figure 1
Comparison of relative exon-intron positions and splice sites among Runx
genes. Details of exon-intron structure of genes analysed in this study. Exons are represented as boxes, and the number in the box indicates the
number of amino acids. The central bold boxes represent the C-terminus
of the Runt domain, which are contained in a single compact exon in all
of the genes except for DmRunt and AgRunt, which lack the intron that
borders the N-terminal end of this exon that is found in all of the other
genes. The nucleotide sequences of the splice site termini are indicated: the
junctions between exon and intron are represented by two dots (..), while
the intervening intron sequence is indicated by a dash (-). The lengths of
the introns in nucleotide number are indicated in parentheses. For the vertebrate Runx genes, only exons downstream of the proximal promoters are
shown. The gene and intron lengths for the sea urchin gene SpRunt are
approximate and based on PCR products obtained from a BAC clone [10]
that has not yet been completely sequenced.
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/14712148-3-4-S3.doc]

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

Kagoshima H, Shigesada K, Satake M, Ito Y, Miyoshi H, Ohki M,
Pepling M and Gergen P The Runt domain identifies a new family of heteromeric transcriptional regulators Trends Genet
1993, 9:338-341
Crute BE, Lewis AF, Wu Z, Bushweller JH and Speck NA Biochemical and biophysical properties of the core-binding factor
alpha2 (AML1) DNA-binding domain J Biol Chem 1996,
271:26251-26260
Wheeler JC, Shigesada K, Gergen JP and Ito Y Mechanisms of transcriptional regulation by Runt domain proteins Semin Cell Dev
Biol 2000, 11:369-375
Coffman JA Runx transcription factors and the developmental
balance between cell proliferation and differentiation Cell Biology International 2003, In Press:
Lund AH and van Lohuizen M RUNX: a trilogy of cancer genes
Cancer Cell 2002, 1:213-215
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW and Lipman DJ Basic local
alignment search tool J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410
Canon J and Banerjee U Runt and Lozenge function in Drosophila development Semin Cell Dev Biol 2000, 11:327-336
Nam S, Jin YH, Li QL, Lee KY, Jeong GB, Ito Y, Lee J and Bae SC Expression pattern, regulation, and biological role of runt domain transcription factor, run, in Caenorhabditis elegans Mol
Cell Biol 2002, 22:547-554
Coffman JA, Kirchhamer CV, Harrington MG and Davidson EH
SpRunt-1, a new member of the runt domain family of transcription factors, is a positive regulator of the aboral ectoderm-specific CyIIIA gene in sea urchin embryos Dev Biol 1996,
174:43-54
Robertson AJ, Dickey CE, McCarthy JM and Coffman JA The expression of SpRunt during sea urchin embryogenesis Mech
Dev 2002, 117:327-330
Eggers JH, Stock M, Fliegauf M, Vonderstrass B and Otto F Genomic
characterization of the RUNX2 gene of Fugu rubripes Gene
2002, 291:159-167
Levanon D, Glusman G, Bangsow T, Ben-Asher E, Male DA, Avidan
N, Bangsow C, Hattori M, Taylor TD, Taudien S, Blechschmidt K,
Shimizu N, Rosenthal A, Sakaki Y, Lancet D and Groner Y Architecture and anatomy of the genomic locus encoding the human
leukemia-associated transcription factor RUNX1/AML1 Gene
2001, 262:23-33
Bangsow C, Rubins N, Glusman G, Bernstein Y, Negreanu V, Goldenberg D, Lotem J, Ben-Asher E, Lancet D, Levanon D and Groner Y
The RUNX3 gene--sequence, structure and regulated
expression Gene 2001, 279:221-232
Tahirov TH, Inoue-Bungo T, Morii H, Fujikawa A, Sasaki M, Kimura K,
Shiina M, Sato K, Kumasaka T, Yamamoto M, Ishii S and Ogata K
Structural analyses of DNA recognition by the AML1/Runx1 Runt domain and its allosteric control by CBFbeta Cell 2001,
104:755-767
Damen WG, Weller M and Tautz D Expression patterns of hairy,
even-skipped, and runt in the spider Cupiennius salei imply
that these genes were segmentation genes in a basal
arthropod Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000, 97:4515-4519
Thompson JD, Higgins DG and Gibson TJ CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific gap
penalties and weight matrix choice Nucleic Acids Res 1994,
22:4673-4680
Backstrom S, Wolf-Watz M, Grundstrom C, Hard T, Grundstrom T
and Sauer U The RUNX1 Runt Domain at 1.25A Resolution: A
Structural Switch and Specifically Bound Chloride Ions Modulate DNA Binding J Mol Biol 2002, 322:259
Huelsenbeck JP and Ronquist F MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of
phylogenetic trees Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755

Page 10 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Evolutionary Biology 2003, 3

19.
20.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/3/4

Holland PW, Garcia-Fernandez J, Williams NA and Sidow A Gene
duplications and the origins of vertebrate development Dev
Suppl 1994, 125-133
Komori T, Yagi H, Nomura S, Yamaguchi A, Sasaki K, Deguchi K,
Shimizu Y, Bronson RT, Gao YH, Inada M, Sato M, Okamoto R, Kitamura Y, Yoshiki S and Kishimoto T Targeted disruption of Cbfa1
results in a complete lack of bone formation owing to maturational arrest of osteoblasts Cell 1997, 89:755-764

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 11 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
