<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Emergence and migration of trunk neural crest cells in a snake, the California Kingsnake (Lampropeltis getula californiae)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-52"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Michelle Reyes, Katrina Zandberg, Iska Desmawati, Maria E de Bellard"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Emergence and migration of trunk neural crest
cells in a snake, the California Kingsnake
(Lampropeltis getula californiae)
Research article

Michelle Reyes†1, Katrina Zandberg†1, Iska Desmawati2 and Maria E de Bellard*1

Abstract
Background: The neural crest is a group of multipotent cells that emerges after an epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition from the dorsal neural tube early during development. These cells then migrate throughout the embryo,
giving rise to a wide variety derivatives including the peripheral nervous system, craniofacial skeleton, pigment cells,
and endocrine organs. While much is known about neural crest cells in mammals, birds, amphibians and fish, relatively
little is known about their development in non-avian reptiles like snakes and lizards.
Results: In this study, we show for the first time ever trunk neural crest migration in a snake by labeling it with DiI and
immunofluorescence. As in birds and mammals, we find that early migrating trunk neural crest cells use both a
ventromedial pathway and an inter-somitic pathway in the snake. However, unlike birds and mammals, we also
observed large numbers of late migrating neural crest cells utilizing the inter-somitic pathway in snake.
Conclusions: We found that while trunk neural crest migration in snakes is very similar to that of other amniotes, the
inter-somitic pathway is used more extensively by late-migrating trunk neural crest cells in snake.
Background
The neural crest is a group of multipotent cells that
emerge after an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
from the dorsal neural tube early after neural tube closure. These cells give rise to a wide variety of neuronal
and glial derivatives in the peripheral nervous system, as
well as parts of the head skeleton and endocrine organs
[1,2]. In jawed, anamniote vertebrates like sharks and
teleosts, neural crest cells also give rise to electrosensory
organs [3] and fin mesenchyme [4]. The neural crest in
the trunk portion of an embryo has been found to follow
different migratory pathways in different organisms. In
amniotes trunk neural crest cells will follow two main
courses: a ventromedial pathway through the rostral part
of somites, and a dorsolateral pathway between somites
and ectoderm [5]. In amphibians, trunk neural crest follows a dorsal pathway into the fin and a ventral pathway
between the neural tube and the caudal portion of the
* Correspondence: maria.debellard@csun.edu
1

California State University Northridge, Biology Dept., MC 8303. 18111
Nordhoff Street., Northridge, CA 91330, USA
† Contributed equally

somite [6]. In zebrafish, trunk neural crest predominantly
migrates between the neural tube and somites as in
amphibians [7,8].
The origin of the neural crest was an important event in
vertebrate given that it forms most of the craniofacial
skeleton [9]. Agnathans (like lampreys) [10,11], teleosts
(bony fish) and amphibians clearly possess identifiable
cranial neural crest streams that are similar to those
observed in amniotes [8,12]. However, the trunk neural
crest is less prominent in anamniotes [13,14], which
appear to have fewer trunk neural crest cells than
amniotes [15-17].
Recent molecular phylogenies have placed lepidosaurs
(tuataras, snakes and lizards) as the most basal nonmammalian (reptilian) amniotes [18]. This contradicts
the classical view of anapsids (turtles) as basal reptiles,
[19,20] (Fig. 1), instead grouping them with archosaurs
(birds and crocodilians). The affinity of turtles and archosaurs has also been supported by recent work showing
that neural crest migration in turtles and alligators is very
similar to that of birds [21-24]. In either case, lepidosaurs
are a critical group for comparisons between amniotes, as

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Reyes et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Page 2 of 14

Snake Phylogeny
Anamniotes

Amniotes
Lepidosaurus

Ray-fin fish

Amphibians

Lizards

Archosaurus

Snakes

Crocodiles

Turtles

Aves

Mammals

?

Common Reptilian
Ancestor
Common Amniote
Ancestor
Tetrapod
Ancestor

Osteichthyans
Figure 1 Phylogeny of Snake. We describe the phylogenetic position of snakes and other reptilians according to the most recent consensus [18].
The box with question marks refers to organisms for which neural crest migration has not been reported. The figure was drawn by the author, based
upon Shedlock's (2007) recent phylogenetic analysis

they represent one of the three extant groups' non-mammalian amniotes.
Among lepidosaurs, snakes provide an especially interesting case for evolutionary developmental studies as
they display a mix of basal and derived amniote features.
For example, the development of somites in snakes goes
through a similar pattern as in other amniotes, albeit
more rapid [25] generating in excess of 300 somites. It is
unknown how the basal and derived features of snakes
are reflected in the neural crest as neural crest development and migration is poorly described in lepidosaurs.
To better understand the evolution of neural crest
migratory patterning in amniotes, we examined the neural crest in the trunk of snake embryos using vital dye

labeling and fluorescent immunohistochemistry. We
found that trunk neural crest migration in snakes closely
follows the patterns observed in turtle, birds, and mammals, with most early-migrating trunk neural crest cells
traveling through the anterior portion of the somites and
a few migrating between somites. However, we also
observed a large number of late-migrating trunk neural
crest cells moving between the somites in snake, suggesting the prominence of this pathway may have been accentuated in snakes or reduced in other amniotes. Finally, we
observed differences in the structure of a major trunk
neural crest derivative, the dorsal root ganglia (DRGs)
between non-avian reptiles, birds and mammals.

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Results
DiI labeling of neural crest

We tested two strategies to guarantee that embryos will
survive after labeling with DiI. A total of 2/4 embryos cultured with the first strategy at either 37°C or 25°C in a
combination of DMEM/FBS and snake yolk, survived
after 12 hrs of incubation, by the time of fixation (Additional file 1 and Fig. 2). The second strategy (keeping the
embryos in DMEM/FBS plus much of their surrounding
membranes intact) worked much better; in this case all
embryos were alive up to 24 hrs later (Fig. 2). Of this second batch 2/4 embryos survived and presented a thoroughly DiI-labeled neural tube and migrated neural crest
cells along its rostro-caudal axis. All the embryos were
injected either on the second or third day after oviposition and were at approximately st.19-20 [26]. However,
we found difficult to correlate the development of cranial
features in our Lampropeltis with the Thamnophis used
by Zehr to accurately define stages of our embryos. See
Additional file 1 for more details on each embryo.
Neural crest migration in vertebrate embryos progresses in a rostro-caudal manner, in other words, at a
given stage of development, the cells emigrating caudally
are the early-migrating cells while the cells emigrating
rostrally correspond to later-emigrating cells. The first
observation from the DiI labeled embryos was that snake
neural crest migration followed this same pattern. At the
caudal level, where neural crest cells are starting to
emerge from the dorsal neural tube, neural crest cells
were migrating as streams of cells avoiding the caudal
third of the somite (Fig. 2E-F, H-I and 2L). At more rostral
levels, usually by the 2nd coil, neural crest cells migrated
as a small group of cells on what seemed to be the most
rostral portion of the somites and the inter-somitic space
(Fig. 2D, H-I, K, L).
Embryo No.1 had abundant delaminated DiI-labeled
cells, although these cells did not enter the ventromedial
pathway (Fig. 2A-C). Sections of these embryo showed
that very few cells migrated into regions usually populated by neural crest cells, i.e. dorsal aorta, mesonephroi,
sensory ganglia, heart (data not shown). Embryo No.2
presented extensive delaminated cells along the rostral
somites, especially at the tail level (Fig. 2E, F), while at the
level of first coil the migrated cells on the rostral third of
the somites (Fig. 2D). Embryo No.4 showed the best
labeling of all (Fig. 2G-I) followed by Embryo No.5. Both
embryos showed extensive streams of cells along the rostro-caudal axis on the dorsal portion of the somites and
by the mesonephroi (Fig. 2H, K). Higher power pictures
showed that these DiI streams had punctuated labeling,
suggestive of individual migrating cells (Fig. 2I, L).
Thick sections through Embryo 2 (12 hrs incubation)
showed that the rostral migratory stream in snakes follows a ventromedial pathway similar to that of birds and

Page 3 of 14

mammals (Fig. 3A). Delaminated neural crest cells were
distributed in classic regions: ventromedial path between
the neural tube and dermomyotome, circumventing the
notochord and reaching the dorsal aorta region where
they gathered in large numbers (Fig. 3B). A dorsal view of
this Embryo 2 highlighted the rostral streams of DiI
labeled cells (Fig. 3C, D) while insert shows a higher magnification where individual migrating cells (not motor
axons) can be distinguished.
Serial sections of three of DiI injected embryos confirmed that the neural crest migrates in large numbers at
the tail end region and in smaller numbers at the midtrunk (Fig. 4). In these almost longitudinal sections, the
DiI-positive cells form rostral streams of cells reaching all
the way to the dorsal aorta where sympathetic cells will
develop (Fig. 4A-D) and the mesonephroi (MN in Fig.
4F). We observed that in snake neural crest cells reach the
aorta epithelium as found in chicken [27]. However, when
the longitudinal sections were at the mid-trunk region,
the migrating cells locate in few numbers between the
somites, still following a ventromedial path (Fig. 4E is of a
separate embryo, No.4). A transverse section close to the
tail end shows robust number of cells migrating along the
ventromedial pathway from the neural tube as has been
observed for other vertebrates (Fig. 4F, G). This pattern of
neural crest streams is very similar to what has been
found in for chicken and mice. We also observed epidermis/ectoderm DiI labeling in some embryos, although,
we could not determine if it was mislabeling during injection or true DiI-migrating cells that reached those areas
in the ectoderm. However, in one embryo we observed
cells apparently turning around the dermomyotome as if
beginning to enter the area between the ectoderm and
mesoderm (Fig. 4H) as has been reported in DiI labeling
of Xenopus embryo neural crest [6].
HNK1 labeling of neural crest

In order to look in greater detail at migrating neural crest
cells in snake embryos, we turned to the HNK1 antibody,
known to label neural crest cells in non-mammalian
amniotes like birds and crocodilians as well as turtles
[17,22,23,28,29]. The wholemount staining pattern of
snake embryo neural crest with HNK1 was remarkably
similar to the one we observed with live DiI labeling: neural crest cells migrated in large numbers throughout the
somite at the most caudal levels (last coil or tail end) and
as a small number of cells at the mid-trunk regions (Fig.
5A, B and 5H). Suggesting that these HNK1 labeled cells
might well be migrating neural crest cells.
The embryo pictured in Fig. 5 had three coils (st.20)
and in each of these regions, it was possible to observe a
different stage in the development of the neural crest. In
coil 1, the first one posterior to the hindbrain, HNK1
labeled what are likely condensing dorsal root ganglia

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Page 4 of 14

Figure 2 Snake DiI injection. Snake embryos (1,2,4 and 5) were removed from the egg and the neural tube injected with DiI. After 12 hrs (A-F) or 24
hrs (G-L) of incubation embryos were fixed and photographed for migrating DiI-positive neural crest cells. Each embryo is shown in sequential higher
magnifications. Embryo 1 show delaminated neural crest cells (arrowheads A-C), although it did not have substantial number of crest cells migrating
in streams (higher magnification in panels B, C). Embryo 2 had clear robust migrating neural crest cells in streams (arrowhead in D for first coil). At the
tail level the cells migrated on the rostral portion of the somites, further magnified in panel F. Embryos 4 and 5 showed a wider range of DiI labeling
since it was incubated for 24 hrs and DiI labeling reached the tail end (G-L). Embryo 4 neural crest cells migrated as well as streams on the rostral side
of somites (arrowheads in H and I) both in 2nd and 3rd coils as well as into the mesonephroi (arrows in H). Embryo 5 showed the rostrally migrating
cells, in the 2nd coil we observe that cells were migrating between the somites (arrowhead in K) as well as cells along what is the presumptive aorta
(arrow in K), also as for Embryo 4, DiI cells reached the mesonephroi (yellow arrows in J, K). L showed higher magnification of 3rd more caudal coil with
individual cells migrating on the rostral portion of the somites (arrowheads in L). R is for rostral; C is for caudal orientation in the embryo coils.

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Figure 3 Migrating cells travel same pathways as neural crest
cells. A and B: Thick section of a DiI (red) and DAPI (blue) labeled snake
embryo (Embryo 2 incubated for 12 hrs) on the second coil showed
cells that migrated along the ventromedial pathway and settled by the
dorsal aorta (D, A). Insert in B shows cells in more detail by the aorta.
There was also a single DiI cell migrating sub-ectodermally (arrow in A,
B). C and D show DiI (red) and DAPI (blue) labeled cells migrating on
the most rostral portion of the somite (arrows in D point to area of the
insert in D at higher magnification). This embryo (3 days POP) was labeled with DiI and incubated for 12 hrs at 37°C. N: notochord, DM: dermomyotome, NT: neural tube. R is for rostral; C is for caudal orientation
in the embryo coils.

(DRG, Fig. 5C and 5D). In addition, there is a line of
HNK1 positive cells along the same region where the
sympathetic chain will form, and at the most ventral portion of the coil, a group of HNK1 positive cells that correspond to where mesonephroi will develop (Fig. 5D). At
mid-trunk levels we observed HNK1 labeling by the sympathetic ganglia and mesonephroi areas as well (Fig. 5F).
At the tail end of this embryo (still growing) we observed
a similar pattern of HNK1 staining as when using DiI
(Fig. 5E, G, H): neural crest cells migrating as a rostral
stream through the somites towards the mesonephroi
region.
When we double labeled one DiI-injected embryo
(No.4) with HNK1 we observed one major distinction
between DiI and HNK1 labeling alone: strong staining
with HNK1 of the mesonephroi, suggesting that HNK1
stains cells in the mesonephroi that are not neural crest
cells (Fig. 6). Overlap of HNK1 and DiI in the first coil
was not observed (Fig. 6A-C); probably DiI injection in
this region was too late to catch delaminating neural crest
cells. Similarly, at the rostral portion of the second coil
(Fig. 6D-F) HNK1 staining was not only marking what
looked like condensing sensory ganglia but also stained
very strongly the mesonephroi. Overlap with DiI was
minimal in this region, found mostly in the most ventral

Page 5 of 14

portion of the DiI stream (see Fig. 7A for details), likely
due to late DiI labeling of the neural crest. At the most
caudal part of the second coil, double labeling showed
robust HNK1 staining in the mesonephroi and strong DiI
staining of cells surrounding these structures (arrowhead
in Fig. 6G-I) as well as streams of cells positive for HNK1
and DiI along the neural crest pathways (arrows in Fig.
6G). The third coil had very strong double labeling of
mesonephroi for DiI and HNK1, while the DiI/HNK1
(yellow arrow in Fig. 6J), double labeled streams along the
dorso-ventral pathway was not as robust as in Fig. 6G-I
(white arrow in Fig. 6J). DiI however, labeled a population
of cells that must have just delaminated from the neural
tube as in Fig. 2A but had not time to migrate ventrally
(black arrows in Fig. 6J). DiI also continued to mark a
stream of cells just above the mesonephroi and beneath
another stream of HNK1 cells (arrowhead in Fig. 6J).
A higher magnification of DiI labeled embryo No.5
showed that in some areas (in this instance second coil)
there was robust overlap of DiI and HNK1 along the ventromedial pathway (Fig. 7A-C). Interestingly, there were
two areas of condensing cells: one strongly labeled with
HNK1 (white arrow in Fig. 7A, C) and another strongly
labeled with DiI corresponding to the developing mesonephroi (red arrow in Fig. 7A, B). Transverse section at
mid-trunk (second coil) level showed that both DiI and
HNK1 double-labeled cells in the DRG (Fig. 7D-F). DiI
also labeled presumptive sympathetic cells beneath the
notochord (red arrow in Fig. 6D-E) and HNK1 cells
above/around the aorta probably corresponding to developing mesonephric tubules/adrenal gland (white arrow in
Fig. 7D-F). We only observed a small percentage of cells
by the dorsal aorta, Longitudinal sections by the third coil
showed that HNK1 labeled DiI-positive cells as well as
other cells that judging from their segmented pattern
could be neural crest (Fig. 7G-I). Interestingly, we
observed that the ectoderm was strongly positive for
HNK1 (Fig. 7G, I) as has been found for turtles [24]. We
also observed in this embryo the inter-somitic path of
DiI-positive cells while HNK1-positive neural crest cells
were observed migrating through the rostral somite in a
classic segmented fashion (Fig. 7J). Finally, at the mesonephroi level we found both DiI and HNK1 positive cells
in same locations, as cells surrounding the mesonephroi
(Fig. 7K) in this embryo, as well as in the other two that
we sectioned.
Peripheral Nervous system development

Because peripheral neurons are all neural crest derived,
we performed double labeling with the anti-beta-III tubulin neuron-specific antibody, Tuj1, in snake embryo at
st.19 (three coils) in order to distinguish between neural
crest and differentiating neurons. Wholemount with Tuj1
revealed that the development of dorsal root ganglia

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Page 6 of 14

Figure 4 Sections through DiI labeled snake embryo. Snake embryos (Embryo 3 and 4) were cryo-sectioned. A-E shows sections starting at the
most caudal portion and ending at the most rostral portion of st.20 Embryo 3. Neural crest cells showed robust migration in the tail region (arrowheads in A-C) and at more rostral levels the numbers were fewer and cells were found along the inter-somitic space (arrow in E). F-H show a transverse
section close to the tail, showing thick streams of neural crest migrating ventromedially (F, G) or distally as if beginning to enter the sub-ectodermal
space (arrow in H). I Cartoon depicting the axial location and orientation of these sections. DA: dorsal aorta. MN: mesonephroi. R is for rostral; C is for
caudal orientation in the embryo coils.

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Page 7 of 14

Figure 5 Wholemount immuno-staining with HNK1. Snake embryo at st.21 (4POV) was wholemounted with HNK1 antibody (red) and DAPI (blue).
A and B show head and trunk coils respectively. C and D show sensory ganglia positive for HNK1 at the vagal level. Arrows point spinal nerves positive
for HNK1. E and F show HNK1 cells migrating along ventromedial pathway (arrows in E) at tail portion and crest cells at the sympathetic/aorta level
or mesonephroi (arrowheads in F) at the midtrunk portion. G corresponds to the tail-most end, where the first neural crest cells are migrating (arrows).
H shows the tail end providing a lower magnification of E and G areas. MN: mesonephroi. Symp: sympathetic. R corresponds to rostral and C to caudal.

(DRG) in snakes progresses in a rostral to caudal manner
as in birds and mammals (Fig. 8A-D). We observed that
DRGs were strongly labeled with Tuj1 in the first coil at
the level of vagal and first trunk somites (Fig. 8C-D);
some Tuj1 positive cells in the second coil; and finally
(Fig. 8G-H), no Tuj1 signal at the third/tail end coil,
although there was HNK1 staining present (Fig. 8D and
8E). Snake DRGs exhibit a different morphology: narrower than what is commonly observed in mouse or
chicken. Double labeled embryo for Tuj1 and HNK1
showed that only at the most rostral portions of the
embryo do we observe clear overlap for both antibodies
(Fig. 8F, I). However, as the trunk progresses caudally
after the first coil, the Tuj1 positive cells are inside the
neural tube (Fig. 8G and higher magnification in H).
Something analogous has been observed for chicken at
HH19-21: although HNK1 robustly labels peripheral nervous cells and neural tube as well, Tuj1 I observed in just
few of the DRG cells compared with neural tube [30].

In order to highlight possible taxonomic differences/
similarities we performed wholemount staining with Tuj1
in lizard (Banded gecko, Coleonyx variegatus, Baird,
1859) (Fig. 9B), turtle (Red-eared slider Trachemys scripta
elegans, Wied-Neuwied, 1839) (Fig. 9C) and chicken
(HH21) (Fig. 9D), embryos at somewhat comparable
stages of development as much as possible, since these
organisms differ in their embryogenesis and it was difficult to obtain the proper samples. The stages of development were determined by the development of branchial
arches, nasal pit and the eye. Comparison between these
four phylogenetically related organisms highlighted that
snake peripheral ganglia have different shape from birds
and mammals. We found that the shape of peripheral
ganglia in these three reptilian species was more similar
among themselves than to birds (Fig. 9D) or rodents (data
not shown). We found that the reptilian peripheral ganglia had an elongated fusiform shape (Fig. 9A-C), rather
than the inverted triangles typically observed in birds and

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Page 8 of 14

Figure 6 DiI and HNK1 labels neural crest cells. DiI (red) labeled st.21 snake embryo No.5 was double stained with HNK1 (green). A-C shows 1st coil;
D-I 2nd coil, with D_F more rostral versus the G-I more caudal portion; and J-L the 3rd coil. Each column shows either double channel, or just DiI or
HNK1 staining. A-C DiI labeling of migrating crest was minimal, HNK1 faintly labeled some cells on the ventral portion of the trunk (white arrow). D-F
shows strong DiI staining just above (white arrowhead) and in the mesonephroi, the point of injection in this embryo is marked as a large DiI spot.
HNK1 staining labeled condensing peripheral ganglia, (white arrow), sympathetic ganglia (yellow arrow) and mesonephroi. G-H shows cells along the
ventromedial pathway that are positive for both DiI and HNK1 (white arrows). DiI labeling also marked cells that now reached mesonephroi and are
populating this tissue around (white arrowhead). J-L shows DiI-labeled cells that just delaminated from the neural tube but have not migrated (black
arrows) as well as a small group of cells above the mesonephroi (white arrowhead). HNK1 labeled cells moving along the ventromedial pathway (white
arrow) as well as the developing mesonephroi (yellow arrow). (The tail-most end of this embryo did not have DiI positive neural tube or migrating
cells). R is for rostral; C is for caudal orientation in the embryo coils.

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Page 9 of 14

Figure 7 DiI and HNK1 labels neural crest cells. DiI (red) and HNK1 (green) st.21 stained snake embryo No.5 sections labels a variety of migrating
neural crest. A-C show wholemount at the level of second coil, which label DiI migrating cells co-localizing with HNK1 around aorta/ventral portion
of trunk (white arrows). There were many DiI cells around the mesonephroi (red arrows). D-F show a section on the caudal portion of 1st coil. The only
DiI cells were localized in the DRG, which also was strongly stained with HNK1. Other cells were only DiI (red arrows) or only HNK1 (white arrows). GI shows a longitudinal section on the second coil where DiI and HNK1 co-localized, especially in the condensing DRG. Not all DiI were HNK1 positive
and vice-versa. J shows a higher magnification of one longitudinal section of DiI positive neural crest migrating between the somites (arrows) while
HNK1 cells are found in the rostral portion of the somite. K corresponds to a section on the 2nd coil showing DiI co-localizing with HNK1 around the
mesonephroi/kidneys (re.Fig. 5G-I). L is a cartoon depicting the axial levels of the sections shown in this figure. R is for rostral; C is for caudal orientation
in the embryo coils.

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Page 10 of 14

Figure 8 Peripheral ganglia development in snake embryos. Wholemount staining of snake embryo with Tuj1 (green in A and B) or double
stained with Tuj1 (green) and HNK1 (red) (C-I). DRG development progresses in a rostral to caudal manner: cervical DRGs are clearly mature (arrowheads in B) while those in the second coil and tail are not positive for Tuj1 (arrows in A and E). Only at more rostral levels we observe Tuj1 and HNK1
overlap (red and green arrowheads in F). G shows second coil where Tuj1 exhibited a spotted pattern, while HNK1 labeled the cells around the aorta
as in other figures (arrowheads). H shows a higher magnification of G. I show a higher magnification of first coil. Blue stain corresponds to DAPI labeled
nuclei. R is for rostral; C is for caudal orientation in the embryo coils.

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

Page 11 of 14

Figure 9 Peripheral ganglia comparison among archosaurs. Snake st.21 (A), lizard (B), turtle (C) and chicken HH20 (D) and were wholemount
stained for Tuj1. Cervical sensory ganglia in snake, lizard and turtle are spindle shaped, while chicken ganglia are triangular (arrowheads). Dotted lines
outline the shape of the sensory ganglia. R is for rostral; C is for caudal orientation in the embryo coils.

mammals (Fig. 9D and data not shown for mouse). From
all these species, snake showed the smallest ganglia compared with a lizard or turtle (Fig. 9A).

Discussion
In the present study we examined the migration of snake
trunk neural crest during development by using live cell
labeling and neural crest markers. We found that neural
crest cells in the king snake (Lampropeltis getula California) follow what seem to be highly conserved migratory
patterns among amniotes as shown by HNK1 staining in
turtles and birds [17,24].
It is known that neural crest cells move rapidly, and
within 8 hrs after delamination from the neural tube they
have reached their destinations in avian and mouse
embryos [31,32]. In our study we incubated the embryos
after labeling the neural tube with DiI for 12 and 24 hrs,
and found that after this period of time, large number of
cells has reached the same locations as in other vertebrates including the dorsal aorta, mesonephros, and
developing gut. We did not observe a large number of DiI
neural crest cells in the developing gut, presumably
because the labeling was done too late to mark the delaminating vagal neural crest [33].
Neural crest migration has been studied by using
HNK1 in non-avian reptiles, including crocodile and turtle [23,24]. Hou and Takeuchi found that the migratory
pattern of cranial and trunk neural crest in turtles followed that of birds [34]. In our present study we found
that snake trunk neural crest followed the essentially
same migratory pathways as described for turtles and and
other non-avian reptiles [24,35,36] suggesting conservation of these core pathways among all reptiles and
amniotes.
Despite conservation of the main trunk neural crest
migratory pathways, we did observe some differences in
how these pathways were utilized. Snakes have the ability

to grow their tail extensively (up to 350 somites length)
allowing the simultaneous observation of the newly
delaminated neural crest cells at the tail end [25] as well
as the beginning of differentiating neural crest in the first
coils. Our DiI labeling in a colubridae snake showed cell
streams in what we term a 'dual pathway' of migration.
The first group of delaminating neural crest cells followed
very much the migratory pathways observed in avian and
mammalian embryos; cells avoiding the caudal portion of
the somites and moving along the ventromedial path
towards the dorsal aorta region [5,37]. However, at more
rostral axial levels, a second large group of late-migrating
trunk neural crest cells was observed moving as narrow
streams between the somites. Such intersomitic migration has been observed for chicken as an early event in
the first delaminating cells [5,38], but not in late migrating neural crest cells. Interestingly, no intersomitic
migration has been observed in non-avian reptiles [24].
These findings suggest heavy utilization of the intersomitic pathway by late-migrating neural crest cells may
be a derived feature of snakes, or an aspect of development lost in birds and mammals. More detailed studies of
trunk neural crest migration in other non-avian reptiles
will be needed to determine which scenario is more likely.
Recently, it was shown that mice neural crest cells will
migrate along the intersomitic space when both Sema3A,
F and their receptors (Neuropilin 1 and 2) are absent [39].
This finding reinforces the importance of such inhibitory
molecules (somite environment) in controlling neural
crest migration and suggests they may play important
roles in altering migratory patterns during evolution.
In addition to differences in the migration of lateemerging neural crest cells, between snake and other
amniotes, HNK1 staining revealing a difference in the
shape of dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) between non-avian
reptiles, mouse, and chick. Whereas mouse and chick
DRGs are triangular, those of snake, gecko and turtle are

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

smaller and spindle-shaped. This likely reflects some
level of convergence between the structure of bird and
mammalian DRGs related to the evolution of a more
active lifestyle in these two warm-blooded groups. Such
convergence has been reported in evolution of the bird
and mammalian hearts [40].
Another unexpected result from this study was the
large proportion of trunk neural crest cells found in the
mesonephric region by using DiI and HNK1 labeling. We
found a considerable number of neural crest cells that
migrated beyond the sympathetic ganglia region towards
the mesonephroi. These cells do not correspond to the
ones reported previously around the aorta [5]. The mesonephroi in birds are derived from mesodermal tissues.
The adrenal cortex primordia in snakes align as a strand
between the mesonephroi and the dorsal aorta, although
later it will lose contact with the kidneys [41]. It is
assumed that snake neural crest cells migrate towards the
mesonephroi region and give rise to the chromaffin adrenal cells and even that snake mesonephroi could be partly
crest derived [41,42]. The present study supports a crest
derived origin for the chromaffin cells, though not so for
mesonephroi itself. Our results show DiI and HNK1
labeled cells around developing tubules, not as part of the
tubules themselves. Therefore, snake trunk neural crest
likely gives rise to the adrenal chromaffin cells, although
we could not determine the ultimate fate of all those cells
migrating towards the developing kidney. Future studies
looking more closely, and after longer labeling period,
will address this issue.

Conclusions
In summary, our study is the first description of trunk
neural crest cell migration in snakes, using both vital dye
labeling, and immunofluorescence. The pattern of migration in this organism initially follows the rostral ventromedial pathway typical of model amniotes and then
switches to a late inter-somitic pathway. This late dependence on the intersomitic pathway appears may be
unique to snakes, or may have been lost in other
amniotes. Our results highlight both conserved and
divergent features of snake trunk neural crest migration.
Methods
Collection and Staging of Embryos

Eggs of Lampropeltis getula californiae (Blainville, 1835),
the common California king snake, were gathered from
the herpetarium collection at CSUN two to three days
after oviposition and embryos were collected within the
next three days. Animal use and up keeping was according to approved protocols by the IACUC board of CSUN
(Protocol #0506-012c). The embryos were staged according to Zehr's normal table [26].

Page 12 of 14

Embryos were removed from egg cases by incision on
one of the top edges (embryos are usually located in the
midsection of the soft eggshell), the contents were emptied onto a Petri dish and after locating the embryo the
shell was fully opened. Embryos were fixed in Carnoy's
(70% ethanol, 20% formaldehyde and 10% glacial acetic
acid) overnight for 24 hrs at 4°C, and then stored in 100%
methanol at -20°C until histology preparation. Embryos
went through prolonged (several hours each) dehydration
steps in alcohol series and then placed in histosol for
clearing. The tissues were then immersed in hot paraffin
(McCormick Scientific Paraplast Plus) in a vacuum oven
for two days before preparing the blocks and sectioning.
Embryos were sectioned (10-12 μm) with a microtome,
placed on Super-Frost slides and dried overnight at 37°C
on a slide warmer.
Lizard embryos (Banded gecko, Coleonyx variegatus,
Baird, 1859) were collected from three eggs from the herpetarium collection at CSUN after oviposition. Turtle
embryos (Red-eared slider Trachemys scripta elegans,
Wied-Neuwied, 1839) were collected from a freshly laid
clutch in a California pond and embryos were fixed two
weeks after oviposition. Chicken embryos were obtained
from a Los Angeles purveyor of fertilized farm after incubating them to HH17 [43].
Immunohistochemistry

Snake tissue sections were re-hydrated in histosol and a
graded series of ethanol washes (histosol, 100, 90, 70, 50
and 25% ethanol washes in water) and then equilibrated
in PBS (Dulbecco's) before blocking in PBS containing
10% expired FBS and 1% Triton X-100 for 12 hrs. Primary
antibodies were added in a 1:100 (or 1:1 for hybridoma
supernatants) dilution in PBS and slides were incubated
for two days at 4°C. After washing the sections in PBS for
at least 20 minutes, secondary antibodies (Alexa fluoroprobes conjugated to anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG,
Invitrogen) were added for 30 min and washed in PBS for
immuno-fluorescence visualization and cover-slipped
with Permount. Pictures of sections were taken using
Axiovision LE software (Zeiss™) with an AxioCam black
and white camera attached to a Zeiss AxioimagerA1
upright fluorescent microscope and assembled into figures using Adobe Photoshop 7. Primary antibodies were:
HNK1 hybridoma collected at Caltech from a supernatant prepared following ATCC (Cat. No. TIB-200)
instructions for HNK1, Tuj1 from Sigma and GFP antibody from Molecular Probes (Invitrogen).
Wholemount Immunofluorescence

Embryos were blocked overnight in blocking buffer
(Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) containing 10% expired
FBS and 1% Triton X-100 for 12 hrs, and then incubated
with primary antibodies in PBS overnight at 4°C. The

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

next day, embryos were extensively washed with PBS and
incubated with secondary antibodies (anti-mouse or antirabbit-Alexa 488/594, Invitrogen, Molecular Probes). The
following day the embryos were washed extensively for at
least 4 hrs in PBS and photographed with either a Zeiss
A-1 AxioImager or a LUMAR.
DiI labeling

We tested two strategies at the beginning of these experiments: in the first, three snake embryos at st.18-19 [26]
were collected and while still alive injected with DiI (cell
tracker CM-DiI, C-7001, Invitrogen/Molecular Probes)
(diluted 1:10 in ethanol in 10% sucrose) inside the neural
tube along its length and hindbrain regions (Additional
file 2). The first embryo was then placed on a Petri dish
after rinsing in Ringer solution and incubated with 5 ml
of DMEM, 10% FBS, penicillin and streptomycin at 37°C
for 24 hrs. The second and third embryos were cultured
in 3 ml of a 1:1:1 mix of: a) DMEM/10%FBS, b) equal
amounts of snake egg white and yolk, and c) 100% FBS at
25°C and 37°C for 12 hrs. In the second strategy, we cut
the embryos leaving as much as possible its surrounding
membranes and cultured them in DMEM, 20% FBS, penicillin and streptomycin at 25°C for 24 hrs. All embryos
survived after DiI injection. At the end of incubation, the
surviving cultured embryos were fixed for 1 hr to keep
morphology, then placed in a vial for overnight fixing at
4°C and kept there until analysis. In both strategies we
injected DiI with a mouth pipette after the hindbrain
blowing gently to fill the neural tube all the way until the
tail. In embryos that were st.20 we needed to inject
around the beginning of second coil to make the DiI
reach until the tail, thus these embryos had two points of
injection (see Additional file 2).

Additional material
Additional file 1 DiI injection of Snake embryos. Table describes the
incubation conditions for each of the 5 DiI injected snake embryos
described in this paper.
Additional file 2 DiI injection sites in Snake embryos. Snake cartoon of
stages 19 and 21 indicating with arrows the entry point of DiI injection
between the two neural tube folds.
Abbreviations
HNK1: human natural killer-1 cell antibody, obtained from ATCC cell culture
(Cat.
No.
TIB-200);
DiI:
3H-Indolium,
5-[[4-(chloromethyl)benzoyl]amino]methyl]-2-[3-(1,3-dihydro-3,3-dimethyl-1-octadecyl-2H-indol-2ylidene)-1-propenyl]-3,3-dimethyl-1-octadecyl-, chloride; GFP: green fluorescent protein; DRG: dorsal root ganglion; PBS: phosphate buffer saline, Dulbecco's recipe; DMEM: Dulbecco minimal essential medium; FBS: fetal bovine
serum; POP: post-oviposition.
Authors' contributions
All the authors read and approved the manuscript. MR (undergraduate student): performed DiI injections, immunostaining. KZ (high school student): performed immunostaining of snake embryos. ID (undergraduate student): snake
cartoon. MEdB: PI, immunofluorescence pictures, manuscript writing.

Page 13 of 14

Acknowledgements
We thank Daniel Meulemans Medeiros for invaluable help in writing this manuscript. David Arce for helping with tissue sectioning, Bobby Espinoza for kindly
allowing us to collect the snake eggs from his reptilian collection, Chris Waldheim for technical assistance, Tony Milanes for help with the tissue preparation.
Clare Baker and Vivian Lee provided valuable comments during all phases of
the work and Scott Gilbert, Jack Sechrist, and Jerry Springer critically reviewed
the manuscript. We would like to express our thanks to an anonymous
reviewer that provided valuable insights and comments that significantly
improved this paper. This work was partly supported by an NIH/NINDS AREA
grant 1R15-NS060099-01 and NIH-MBRS SCORE-5S06GM048680-13 to MEdB.
Author Details
1California State University Northridge, Biology Dept., MC 8303. 18111 Nordhoff
Street., Northridge, CA 91330, USA and 2Institute Technology Sepuluh
Nopember, Biology Department, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Science,
Surabaya, Indonesia
Received: 21 July 2009 Accepted: 18 May 2010
Published: 18 May 2010
© 2010 Reyes etAccess article distributed under
This article is available from:BioMed Central Ltd.the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC is an Open al; licensee 2010, 10:52
Developmental Biology http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

References
1. Hall BK: The Neural Crest and Neural Crest Cells in Vertebrate
Development and Evolution. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2009.
2. Baker CV: Neural Crest and Cranial Ectodermal Placodes. 4th edition.
New York: Springer, New York; 2005.
3. Freitas R, Zhang G, Albert JS, Evans DH, Cohn MJ: Developmental origin
of shark electrosensory organs. Evol Dev 2006, 8:74-80.
4. Smith M, Hickman A, Amanzee D, Lumsden A, Thorogood P: Trunk neural
crest origin of caudal fin mesenchyme in the zebrafish Danio rerio. Proc
R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1994, 256:137-145.
5. Serbedzija GN, Bronner-Fraser M, Fraser SE: A vital dye analysis of the
timing and pathways of avian trunk neural crest cell migration.
Development 1989, 106:809-16.
6. Collazo A, Bronner-Fraser M, Fraser SE: Vital dye labelling of Xenopus
laevis trunk neural crest reveals multipotency and novel pathways of
migration. Development 1993, 118:363-76.
7. Eisen JS, Weston JA: Development of the neural crest in the zebrafish.
Dev Biol 1993, 159:50-9.
8. Sadaghiani B, Vielkind JR: Distribution and migration pathways of HNK1-immunoreactive neural crest cells in teleost fish embryos.
Development 1990, 110:197-209.
9. Sauka-Spengler T, Bronner-Fraser M: Evolution of the neural crest viewed
from a gene regulatory perspective. Genesis 2008, 46:673-682.
10. Sauka-Spengler T, Bronner-Fraser M: Insights from a sea lamprey into the
evolution of neural crest gene regulatory network. Biol Bull 2008,
214:303-14.
11. Horigome N, Myojin M, Ueki T, Hirano S, Aizawa S, Kuratani S:
Development of cephalic neural crest cells in embryos of Lampetra
japonica, with special reference to the evolution of the jaw. Dev Biol
1999, 207:287-308.
12. Aoki Y, Saint-Germain N, Gyda M, Magner-Fink E, Lee YH, Credidio C, SaintJeannet JP: Sox10 regulates the development of neural crest-derived
melanocytes in Xenopus. Dev Biol 2003, 259:19-33.
13. Kulesa P, Ellies DL, Trainor PA: Comparative analysis of neural crest cell
death, migration, and function during vertebrate embryogenesis. Dev
Dyn 2004, 229:14-29.
14. Nakao T, Ishizawa A: Development of the spinal nerves in the lamprey:
III. Spinal ganglia and dorsal roots in 26-day (13 mm) larvae. J Comp
Neurol 1987, 256:369-85.
15. Teillet MA, Kalcheim C, Le Douarin NM: Formation of the dorsal root
ganglia in the avian embryo: segmental origin and migratory behavior
of neural crest progenitor cells. Dev Biol 1987, 120:329-47.
16. Serbedzija GN, Fraser SE, Bronner-Fraser M: Pathways of trunk neural
crest cell migration in the mouse embryo as revealed by vital dye
labelling. Development 1990, 108:605-12.
17. Bronner-Fraser M: Analysis of the early stages of trunk neural crest
migration in avian embryos using monoclonal antibody HNK-1. Dev
Biol 1986, 115:44-55.
18. Shedlock AM, Botka CW, Zhao S, Shetty J, Zhang T, Liu JS, Deschavanne PJ,
Edwards SV: Phylogenomics of nonavian reptiles and the structure of

Reyes et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/52

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

the ancestral amniote genome. Natl Acad ProcSci USA 2007,
104:2767-72.
Meyer A, Zardoya R: Recent advances in the (molecular) phylogeny of
vertebrates. Annual Review of Ecology Evolution and Systematics 2003,
34:311-338.
Rest JS, Ast JC, Austin CC, Waddell PJ, Tibbetts EA, Hay JM, Mindell DP:
Molecular systematics of primary reptilian lineages and the tuatara
mitochondrial genome. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2003,
29:289-297.
Kundrat M: Heterochronic shift between early organogenesis and
migration of cephalic neural crest cells in two divergent evolutionary
phenotypes of archosaurs: crocodile and ostrich. Evolution &
Development 2009, 11:535-546.
Clark K, Bender G, Murray BP, Panfilio K, Cook S, Davis R, Murnen K, Tuan RS,
Gilbert SF: Evidence for the neural crest origin of turtle plastron bones.
Genesis 2001, 31:111-7.
Kundrat M: HNK-1 immunoreactivity during early morphogenesis of
the head region in a nonmodel vertebrate, crocodile embryo.
Naturwissenschaften 2008, 95:1063-72.
Hou L, Takeuchi T: Neural crest development in reptilian embryos,
studied with monoclonal antibody, HNK-1. Zoolog Sci 1994, 11:423-431.
Gomez C, Ozbudak EM, Wunderlich J, Baumann D, Lewis J, Pourquie O:
Control of segment number in vertebrate embryos. Nature 2008,
454:335-9.
Zehr DR: Stages in the Normal Development of the Common Garter
Snake, Thamnophis sirtalis sirtalis. Copeia 1962, 1962:322-329.
Thiery JP, Duband JL, Delouvee A: Pathways and mechanisms of avian
trunk neural crest cell migration and localization. Dev Biol 1982,
93:324-43.
Tucker GC, Aoyama H, Lipinski M, Tursz T, Thiery JP: Identical reactivity of
monoclonal antibodies HNK-1 and NC-1: conservation in vertebrates
on cells derived from the neural primordium and on some leukocytes.
Cell Differ 1984, 14:223-30.
Kalcheim C, Le Douarin NM: Requirement of a neural tube signal for the
differentiation of neural crest cells into dorsal root ganglia. Dev Biol
1986, 116:451-66.
De Bellard ME, Barembaum M, Arman O, Bronner-Fraser M: Lunatic fringe
causes expansion and increased neurogenesis of trunk neural tube
and neural crest populations. Neuron Glia Biol 2007, 3:93-103.
Kasemeier-Kulesa JC, Kulesa PM, Lefcort F: Imaging neural crest cell
dynamics during formation of dorsal root ganglia and sympathetic
ganglia. Development 2005, 132:235-45.
Kulesa PM, Fraser SE: In ovo time-lapse analysis of chick hindbrain
neural crest cell migration shows cell interactions during migration to
the branchial arches. Development 2000, 127:1161-72.
Le Douarin NM, Teillet MA: The migration of neural crest cells to the wall
of the digestive tract in avian embryo. J Embryol Exp Morphol 1973,
30:31-48.
Sadaghiani B, Crawford BJ, Vielkind JR: Generation of poly- and monoclonal antibodies against trout fibronectin (FN) and their use in FN
immunodetection in teleost fishes. Biochem Cell Biol 1994, 72:343-8.
Dupin E, Ziller C, Le Douarin NM: The avian embryo as a model in
developmental studies: chimeras and in vitro clonal analysis. Curr Top
Dev Biol 1998, 36:1-35.
Trainor PA: Specification of neural crest cell formation and migration in
mouse embryos. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2005, 16:683-93.
Bronner-Fraser M: Neural crest cell formation and migration in the
developing embryo. Faseb J 1994, 8:699-706.
Serbedzija GN, Bronner-Fraser M, Fraser SE: Vital dye analysis of cranial
neural crest cell migration in the mouse embryo. Development 1992,
116:297-307.
Schwarz Q, Maden CH, Davidson K, Ruhrberg C: Neuropilin-mediated
neural crest cell guidance is essential to organise sensory neurons into
segmented dorsal root ganglia. Development 2009, 136:1785-1789.
Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Mori AD, Kaynak BL, Cebra-Thomas J, Sukonnik T,
Georges RO, Latham S, Beck L, Henkelman RM, Black BL, et al.: Reptilian
heart development and the molecular basis of cardiac chamber
evolution. Nature 2009, 461:95-8.
Rupik W: Early development of the adrenal glands in the grass snake
Natrix natrix L. (Lepidosauria, Serpentes). Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol
2002, 164:I-XI. 1-102.

Page 14 of 14

42. Gabe M: [Histologic data on the endocrine pancreas of Lepidosaurians
(reptiles)]. Ergeb Anat Entwicklungsgesch 1970, 42:3-61.
43. Hamburger V, Hamilton HL: A series of normal stages in the
development of the chicken embryo. J Morph 1951, 88:49-52.
doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-52
Cite this article as: Reyes et al., Emergence and migration of trunk neural
crest cells in a snake, the California Kingsnake (Lampropeltis getula californiae) BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:52

</pre>
</body>
</html>
