<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A comparison of experience-dependent locomotory behaviors and biogenic amine neurons in nematode relatives of Caenorhabditis elegans</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Neuroscience 2010 11:22. doi:10.1186/1471-2202-11-22"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Laura Rivard; Jagan Srinivasan; Allison Stone; Stacy Ochoa; Paul W Sternberg; Curtis M Loer"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A comparison of experience-dependent
locomotory behaviors and biogenic amine
neurons in nematode relatives of
Caenorhabditis elegans
Laura Rivard1†, Jagan Srinivasan2†, Allison Stone1, Stacy Ochoa1, Paul W Sternberg2*, Curtis M Loer1*

Abstract
Background: Survival of an animal depends on its ability to match its responses to environmental conditions. To
generate an optimal behavioral output, the nervous system must process sensory information and generate a
directed motor output in response to stimuli. The nervous system should also store information about experiences
to use in the future. The diverse group of free-living nematodes provides an excellent system to study macro- and
microevolution of molecular, morphological and behavioral character states associated with such nervous system
function. We asked whether an adaptive behavior would vary among bacterivorous nematodes and whether
differences in the neurotransmitter systems known to regulate the behavior in one species would reflect
differences seen in the adaptive behavior among those species. Caenorhabditis elegans worms slow in the presence
of food; this ‘basal’ slowing is triggered by dopaminergic mechanosensory neurons that detect bacteria. Starved
worms slow more dramatically; this ‘enhanced’ slowing is regulated by serotonin.
Results: We examined seven nematode species with known phylogenetic relationship to C. elegans for locomotory
behaviors modulated by food (E. coli), and by the worm’s recent history of feeding (being well-fed or starved). We
found that locomotory behavior in some species was modulated by food and recent feeding experience in a
manner similar to C. elegans, but not all the species tested exhibited these food-modulated behaviors. We also
found that some worms had different responses to bacteria other than E. coli. Using histochemical and
immunological staining, we found that dopaminergic neurons were very similar among all species. For instance,
we saw likely homologs of four bilateral pairs of dopaminergic cephalic and deirid neurons known from C. elegans
in all seven species examined. In contrast, there was greater variation in the patterns of serotonergic neurons. The
presence of presumptive homologs of dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons in a given species did not correlate
with the observed differences in locomotory behaviors.
Conclusions: This study demonstrates that behaviors can differ significantly between species that appear
morphologically very similar, and therefore it is important to consider factors, such as ecology of a species in the
wild, when formulating hypotheses about the adaptive significance of a behavior. Our results suggest that
evolutionary changes in locomotory behaviors are less likely to be caused by changes in neurotransmitter
expression of neurons. Such changes could be caused either by subtle changes in neural circuitry or in the
function of the signal transduction pathways mediating these behaviors.

* Correspondence: pws@caltech.edu; cloer@sandiego.edu
† Contributed equally
1
Dept of Biology, University of San Diego, 5998 Alcala Park, San Diego, CA
92110, USA
2
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Biology, California Institute of
Technology, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena CA 91125, USA
© 2010 Rivard et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Background
Animals use their nervous systems to sense and respond
dynamically to changing environments. Nematodes constitute one of the most diverse and populous phyla in
the animal kingdom, with estimates of up to 1 million
extant species [1]. Although all nematodes share a similar basic body plan, they have distinct morphological
adaptations and can differ in length by four orders of
magnitude. They have a wide geographical distribution,
exploit diverse ecological niches, and can survive
extreme environments like the Antarctic [2]. Nematodes
are both parasitic and free-living and can obtain nutrients from a wide variety of materials. Additionally,
nematodes have evolved several different reproductive
strategies, exhibiting gonochorism (male-female), hermaphroditism, heterogony, and parthenogenesis [3]. The
phylum Nematoda also exhibits genomic diversity. An
analysis of expressed-sequence tags from 30 different
species revealed that 30-50% of the sequences studied
were unique to individual species [4,5].
The detailed molecular genetic and neuronal bases of
many nematode behaviors such as egg laying [6,7],
mechanosensation [8], pharyngeal-pumping [9], and
male-mating [10] have been described in detail from C.
elegans. Intraspecific variation in behaviors has also
been examined in C. elegans and other nematode species, as well as differences between related species. For
example, some wild isolates of C. elegans aggregate and
feed socially whereas other strains disperse and forage
independently [11]. Species from two clades of entomopathogenic nematodes, Steinernematidae and Heterorhabditidae, exhibit different behaviors associated with
infection of host insects [12]. Four closely related species of Pristionchus have unique chemoattraction profiles to 11 compounds classified as insect pheromones
or plant volatiles [13]. Finally, males of two gonochoristic Caenorhabditis species, C. remanei and C. brenneri,
are more efficient at spicule insertion during mating
than males of the hermaphroditic species C. briggsae
and C. elegans [14].
Few studies, however, have attempted to address the
neural control of behavior across different species of
nematodes [15,16]. Such a study first requires the identification of a behavior that is at least partially conserved
in multiple species. Then, the neural circuitry of the
selected species can be examined.
We undertook an interspecific comparison of a locomotory behavior modulated by feeding. Sawin and colleagues
[17] showed that the presence or absence of food (bacteria) as well as feeding status (well-fed or starved) affects
the rate of locomotion of C. elegans. Well-fed C. elegans
worms have the fastest rate of locomotion in the absence
of food, and their locomotion slows when food is present.

Page 2 of 17

This behavior is known as the “basal slowing response”
(BSR). Worms recently deprived of food move even more
slowly in food, exhibiting a behavior known as the
“enhanced slowing response” (ESR). The neural circuits
that control the basal and enhanced slowing responses are
distinct [17]. The BSR is mediated by the dopaminergic
CEP, ADE, and PDE neurons, which have sensory endings
in the cuticle and likely detect the presence of bacteria by
a mechanical stimulus. The ESR is mediated by serotonin.
Mutant strains lacking serotonin have a defective ESR that
can be rescued by the addition of exogenous serotonin
[17]. Fluoxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor,
potentiates the ESR, while serotonin antagonists prevent
the behavior [17]. Ablation experiments have failed, however, to unambiguously identify the serotonergic neurons
required for the ESR [17].
We scored several species of nematodes whose phylogenetic relationships to C. elegans are known for the
presence of the basal and enhanced slowing responses.
We examined the patterns of dopamine-containing neurons in these species, and then also investigated whether
the ESR was modulated by serotonin and what serotonergic neurons are present. We found that only some of
the species examined had slowing responses under the
conditions tested, and there was no stereotypical array
of serotonergic neurons present that might be required
for the ESR. Dopamine-containing neurons were highly
conserved although the BSR under the conditions tested
was not. We propose the evolutionary source of the
slowing behaviors based on a nematode phylogeny.

Results
Phylogenetic relationships of the nematode species
tested for food-modulated behaviors

We chose seven representative free-living species from
different groups of rhabditids with a range of phylogenetic distances to C. elegans for our comparative analysis.
All species selected exhibited a sinusoidal pattern of body
bends similar to C. elegans. The species tested were
C. elegans (N2), C. briggsae (AF16), Caenorhabditis sp. 3
(PS1010), Oscheius myriophila (DF5020), Pellioditis
typica (DF5025), Rhabditella axei (DF5006), Pristionchus
pacificus (PS312), and Panagrellus redivivus (PS2298)
(Figure 1). Based on current molecular data, rhabditids
can be divided into two major clades: Eurhabditis and
Pleiorhabditis [3]. The species include both gonochoristic
and hermaphroditic life histories, so hermaphrodites or
females were used. C. elegans, along with other members
of the Caenorhabditis genus, belongs to the Eurhabditis
clade [3]. From the genus Caenorhabditis, we chose
C. elegans (N2), Caenorhabditis briggsae (AF16) and the
less closely related Caenorhabditis sp. 3 (PS1010) [3,18].
C. elegans and C. briggsae were isolated from compost,

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Page 3 of 17

Figure 1 Phylogenetic tree of rhabditid nematodes used in our comparative study of modulated behaviors. The tree is congruent with
trees from Kiontke and Fitch [3], based on SSU and LSU rRNA genes and RNAPII large subunit gene sequences. Species shown in red were
analysed in this study for food-modulated behaviors and patterns of dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons.

and Caenorhabditis sp. 3 (PS1010) was isolated from galleries of palm and sugarcane weevils [19]. Oscheius myriophila (DF5020), Pellioditis typica (DF5025) and
Rhabditella axei (DF5006), also belong to the Eurhabditis
clade, but belong to a different branch than Caenorhabditis [3]. From the group of diplogastrids, we chose the
satellite model system Pristionchus pacificus (PS312)
[20,21], which belongs to a genus that associates with
beetles [22]. Panagrellus redivivus (PS2298) was chosen
as an outgroup. This nematode species has been isolated
from sugar-rich environments such as sap of rubber trees
and brewery mash [23] (Figure 1).
Some nematode species do not exhibit basal and
enhanced slowing responses

We used both manual and automated methods to determine the locomotory behavior of eight species of nematodes chosen in our analysis (see Materials and Methods
for details, and Additional file 1, Figure S1). If the basal
and enhanced slowing responses (BSR and ESR) present
in C. elegans are adaptive, it is reasonable to predict

that other species will also exhibit the behaviors. To
explore the conservation of the slowing behaviors, we
first determine a baseline locomotory rate for each species using well-fed animals on an agar plate with no
bacteria (Figure 2A-H). Rates of locomotion varied considerably between species. Caenorhabditissp. 3 had the
highest average locomotory rate at 1.14 ± 0.02 Hz (body
bends per second, mean ± SEM). Pristionchus pacificus
had the lowest locomotory rate at 0.13 ± 0.01 Hz. As
previously reported [17], well-fed C. elegans slowed significantly (basal slowing/BSR) in the presence of
bacteria, and starved animals slowed even more dramatically (enhanced slowing/ESR) following reintroduction
to bacteria (Figure 2A). Four other species, C. briggsae,
Caenorhabditis sp. 3, O. myriophila and Pellioditis
typica, exhibited both a BSR and ESR similar to that
seen in C. elegans (Figure 2B-E). For well-fed R. axei no
BSR was detectable (Figure 2F). Similarly, the locomotory rate of starved R. axei on bacteria did not differ significantly from the baseline locomotory rate (Figure 2F).
Both Pristionchus pacificus and Panagrellus redivivus

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Page 4 of 17

Figure 2 Locomotory rates of well-fed and food deprived animals both on and off bacteria. In all species, the baseline locomotory rate or
frequency (mean ± SEM) is represented by the first column and was calculated for well-fed worms transferred to an empty agar plate (no
bacteria). Second column - locomotory rate for well-fed worms transferred to a bacterial lawn. Third column - locomotory rate for previously
food-deprived worms transferred to a bacterial lawn. (A-E) C. elegans, C. briggsae, Caenorhabditis sp. 3, O. myriophila, and Pellioditis typica all
exhibited basal and enhanced slowing responses. For all these species, there were statistically significant differences among the groups by 1factor ANOVA (P << 0.001). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in planned pairwise comparisons between ‘no food’ and
‘+bacteria (well-fed)’ [asterisks over this column] or ‘no food’ and ‘+bacteria (food-deprived)’ *P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001. (F-H) R. axei,
Pristionchus pacificus and Panagrellus redivivus did not exhibit either basal slowing or enhanced slowing responses. There were no statistically
significant differences among the groups (1-factor ANOVA, P > 0.05) for R. axei. Panagrellus and Pristionchus moved significantly faster on bacteria
than off bacteria, but there was no significant difference between well-fed or food-deprived worms (P > 0.05). (A-F) Manual counting of body
bends was used [17]. The numbers of worms tested varied in each column: C. elegans (n = 60-72); C. briggsae (n = 87-109), C. sp. 3 (n = 54-80),
O. myriophila (n = 139-146), P. typica (n = 101-145), R. axei (n = 62-89) (G, H) Automated tracker scoring of locomotory rate was used. Number of
worms scored per column: P. pacificus (n = 14-17), P. redivivus (n = 21). Both manual and automated tracker methods were used to quantify
locomotory rate for all species other than Pristionchus pacificus and Panagrellus redivivus (automated only) and Pellioditis typica (manual only);
results were comparable and yielded the same statistical significance.

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

lacked a BSR or ESR; the locomotory rate was significantly higher in the presence of bacteria in both wellfed and starved animals (Figure 2G,H). This observation
is exactly opposite to the locomotory behavior of C. elegans, wherein the worm’s locomotory rate slows in the
presence of food.
It is possible that in species lacking a BSR or ESR in
our assays, the food presented (E. coli) was not adequate
to elicit a response. Therefore, we tested two of the species - Pristionchus pacificus and Panagrellus redivivus for their basal locomotion on other potential food
sources (Figure 3). We chose some bacteria that were
gram-positive and some gram-negative (see Materials
and Methods). We also tested C. elegans with the same
set of bacteria. C. elegans slowed significantly on either
E. coli strain tested, but not on the other three strains
(Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Serratia
marcescens); in fact, worms moved significantly faster on
B. subtilis (Figure 3A). Pristionchus pacificus showed a
significant increase in locomotory rate on the E. coli

Page 5 of 17

strains OP50 and HB101, but did not change significantly on the other bacteria (Figure 3B). Panagrellus
redivivus moved significantly faster on all the bacterial
strains tested (Figure 3C).
Dopaminergic neurons are similar across nematode
species

Dopamine has been implicated in the control of the BSR
in C. elegans. Unlike wild-type animals, worms with highly
reduced dopamine levels such as cat-2 mutants [24,25],
fail to slow in bacteria [17]. Elimination of a specific dopamine receptor, dop-3, expressed in ventral cord motoneurons, also eliminates the BSR [26]. To determine whether
the correlation between dopamine production and the
BSR is conserved across species, we examined the pattern
of dopamine-containing neurons in the same nematode
species used in our behavioral studies. We used formaldehyde-induced fluorescence (FIF) and 5HTP-induced serotonin immunoreactivity in DA neurons to corroborate
FIF staining and to observe neuronal morphology (see

Figure 3 Locomotory rates of worms on different bacterial strains. Well-fed C. elegans (A), Pristionchus pacificus (B) and Panagrellus redivivus
(C) were tested for locomotion on five different bacterial strains vs. no bacteria. Histograms show mean ± SEM locomotion frequency measured
using an automated tracker. Locomotion frequencies for each nematode species were compared using 1-factor ANOVA followed by planned
pairwise comparisons. For each species, there were statistically significant differences among the groups (P << 0.001). We performed planned
pairwise comparisons of ‘no bacteria’ vs. each other bacterial strain. Statistically significant differences in pairwise comparisons with ‘no food’ are
indicated over the each column compared [* - P < 0.05, ** - P < 0.01, *** - P < 0.001]. Number of worms scored per column: C. elegans (n = 2850), P. pacificus (n = 13-16), P. redivivus (n = 11-21).

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Figure 4 legend and below for explanation). C. elegans hermaphrodites have 4 bilateral pairs of dopaminergic neurons located in cephalic, deirid and postdeirid sensilla: 4
CEPs, 2 ADEs, and 2 PDEs (Figure 4A-D, [25]). All of
these neurons are probably mechanosensory, as they
extend ciliated dendrites with endings embedded in the
cuticle, and do not contact the external environment [27].
CEP endings are at the tip of the ‘nose,’ and ablation of all
4 CEP neurons results in a moderately reduced BSR [17].
ADE and PDE have endings in the cuticle in the anterior
and posterior body, respectively, and ablation of either cell
type alone does not affect the BSR [17]. Combined ablation of all 8 dopaminergic neurons completely eliminates
the BSR, indicating that the CEPs, ADEs, and PDEs all
contribute to the behavior [17]. The BSR can be induced
with 20-50 μm particles (Sephadex G-200 beads), supporting the mechanosensory vs. chemosensory nature of the
cells’ function [17].
We observed that all seven species had FIF-positive
somata that are plausible homologs of the bilaterally
symmetric head cephalic sensory neuron CEPs, the anterior deirid neuron ADEs and postdeirid PDEs (Figure
4E-J). In all the species examined, presumptive ventral
CEPs (CEPV) were slightly more anterior than dorsal
CEPs (CEPD), just as in C. elegans. The putative CEP
neurons were more strongly and reliably stained by FIF;
in some species, we saw putative ADE neurons less
often and PDE neurons infrequently. This may partly be
due to the very high background fluorescence in the
body, especially from the intestine. There is typically
much less background in the head and tail. Putative
ADEs were located in the posterior head around the
posterior bulb of the pharynx, although in some species
these cells were further anterior than typically found in
C. elegans. Along the dorsoventral axis, ADE somata
were located laterally to sublaterally. Putative PDE
homologs were located subdorsally, and mid-posterior
along the anteroposterior axis of the body.
For the species examined, we saw that FIF staining
worked better in larvae than adults. We consistently
observed 3 pairs of cell bodies in the head of the larvae,
indicating little or no change in DA cells postembryonically other than the appearance of the PDE. The PDE
neurons are born postembryonically in mid-late L2
stage in both C. elegans and Panagrellus redivivus
[28,29], and hence are seen only in older larvae and
adults. In a few species, we occasionally found an additional FIF-positive cell in adults in the head and/or
body, but these were less reliable. In Pristionchus, we
saw what appeared to be a ventral unpaired neuron in
few adult heads; in O. myriophila we saw a few worms
with a pair of FIF-positive cells in the tail.
In our studies we found that FIF stained neuronal cell
bodies, but only rarely processes. To obtain a better

Page 6 of 17

picture of the neuronal processes, we used serotonin antibody staining after treating worms with 5-hydroxytryptophan (5HTP), the immediate precursor to serotonin.
5HTP is taken up by both serotonergic and dopaminergic
neurons and converted into serotonin by their shared
AADC enzyme [30,31]. Therefore, dopaminergic neurons
are stained among a background of known serotonergic
neurons. With this technique, neuronal processes are
often well-stained, revealing the morphology of the neurons. In stained worms where we had previously seen FIFpositive somata, we observed serotonin immunoreactive
cells that were not seen without 5HTP treatment. [5HTPstained cells must be matched with FIF-positive cells since
5HTP can also strengthen staining in weakly or variably
staining serotonergic cells.] Deirid neurons (ADEs and
PDEs), which are relatively isolated from other neurons
(including other known serotonergic neurons), were wellstained by this technique, showing bipolar cell bodies with
sensory dendrites extending toward the outer surface of
the worm. The morphology of putative ADE and PDE
neurons in every species was very similar to that known
from C. elegans, with minor differences in some species
(Figure 4, Columns 2 and 4 ‘+5HTP’). For example, the
putative PDE homolog in Pristionchus pacificus had a
longer dendrite that extended anteriorly rather than
dorsally.
The heads in 5HTP-treated worms were more difficult
to assess, especially in species that have numerous serotonergic neurons in the same region of the head as putative
CEP neurons (see descriptions of serotonergic head neurons below). Nevertheless, we were frequently able to see
4 additional somata in the same location of FIF positive
cells in the head. We also often saw 4 additional processes
extending anteriorly into the ‘nose’ of the worms, consistent with the morphology known for C. elegans CEP neurons. Overall, the patterns of dopaminergic neurons in all
the species we examined were nearly identical, suggesting
strong conservation of this portion of the nervous system.
Serotonergic neurons in the head differ dramatically
across nematode species

Serotonin has been implicated in the control of the ESR in
C. elegans. Animals with mutations in genes required for
serotonin biosynthesis, such as bas-1, cat-4 and tph-1,
move faster than wild-type animals when starved and
placed on bacteria [17,32]. Serotonin probably controls the
ESR via a chloride-selective ion channel serotonin receptor
(MOD-1); mutants in the mod-1 gene are defective in the
ESR[33]. Serotonin-immunoreactive (serotonin-IR) head
neurons found in the C. elegans hermaphrodite have been
previously characterized. The first neurons identified were
the NSMs or “neurosecretory motor neurons” [34], a bilaterally symmetric pair of neurons with somata located
within the anterior bulb of the pharynx and bifurcating

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Page 7 of 17

Figure 4 Dopaminergic neurons in free-living Rhabditid nematodes. A. Schematic of C. elegans head showing dopaminergic (DA) neurons
on one side; each neuron has a bilaterally symmetric partner. CEPD: dorsal cephalic neuron; CEPV: ventral cephalic neuron; ADE: anterior deirid
neuron. In all images, anterior is to the left, and dorsal up (except as noted). B. FIF-treated C. elegans larval head showing DA neurons
(dorsoventral view) on right and left sides. C. PDE (posterior deirid neuron) neuron in lateral, mid-posterior body wall of C. elegans treated with
5HTP and stained with anti-serotonin (TRITC-conjugated secondary antibody). A dorsally directed dendrite arises from the soma: an axon extends
ventrally and projects within the ventral nerve cord. D. Schematic of C. elegans body showing locations of DA neurons, including the PDE. Only
the somata are shown for the head DA neurons. E-J. Dopaminergic neurons in species we examined, revealed by FIF and immunofluoresence.
The pattern of DA cells in C. briggsae is identical to that of C. elegans (data not shown). Column 1 (FIF Head): FIF-treated worm heads. Slenderheaded arrows indicate presumptive CEPD and CEPV homologs (in F-J, abbreviated D or V). Broad arrowheads indicate presumptive ADE
homologs. In some panels both right and left cells can be seen (more than one arrow). Column 2 (+5HTP ADE): Putative ADE homologs
visualized with anti-serotonin in 5HTP-treated worms (somata indicated with arrow). Soma locations and processes are quite similar to those in
C. elegans, although many ADE posterior-directed neurites leading to commissures are longer than illustrated for C. elegans. Some panels are
montages of nearby planes of focus to better show the cell morphology. Column 3 (FIF PDE): Lateral, mid-posterior body wall of FIF-treated
worms showing somata of likely PDE homologs (arrow); in some panels both right and left cells can be seen (more than one arrow). Strong gut
fluorescence often makes PDEs difficult or impossible to see by FIF. Column 4 (+5HTP PDE): PDE homologs in body wall visualized with antiserotonin in 5HTP-treated worms (soma indicated by arrow); in some panels both right and left cells can be seen (more than one arrow),
although sometimes the soma is out of the plane of focus. E. Caenorhabditis sp. 3 (PS1010). F. Oschieus myriophila (DF52020). G. Pellioditis typica
(DF5025). Panel G3 (FIF PDE) is a ventral view showing both left and right PDE somata. H. Rhabditella axei (DF5006). Panel H4 (+5HTP PDE) is a
ventral view in which both left and right cells can be seen. I. Pristionchus pacificus (PS312). In panel I4 (+5HTP PDE), note the long anteriorly
directed PDE dendrite. J. Panagrellus redivivus (PS1163).

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

processes that extend into the pharyngeal isthmus [35];
recently the structure of the NSM has been revised to
include an additional fine neurite extending posteriorly
into the terminal bulb of the pharynx [36]. Ventral and lateral to the isthmus of the pharynx are the ADFs, a bilaterally symmetric pair of serotonin-IR sensory neurons
(Figure 5A). ADF neurons extend processes to the nerve
ring and amphid [37]. RIH is an unpaired serotonin-IR
interneuron found ventral to the isthmus of the pharynx
(Figure 5A) that extends processes to the nerve ring and
other pharyngeal ganglia [37]. Finally, the AIMs are a
bilaterally symmetric pair of interneurons with somata
located near the midline just ventral to the posterior bulb
of the pharynx (Figure 5A). AIM interneurons extend a
single process to the nerve ring (White et al. 1986). The
ADF, RIH and AIM processes are rarely detected by
immunohistochemistry in C. elegans. It is unclear, however, which serotonin-IR head neurons mediate the ESR.
Ablation of the NSMs, the most reliably and intensely
staining serotonin-IR head neurons, only modestly affects
the ESR, and the additional ablation of other serotonin-IR
head neurons with the NSMs does not further affect the
locomotion rate [17]. In serotonin-deficient tph-1 mutants,
expression of wild type tph-1 in NSMs partially restores
the ESR; expression in ADF neurons does not [32].
To explore which neurons might be associated with
the ESR, we examined serotonin immunoreactivity in
the heads of the seven nematode species used in our
behavioral studies. Neurons required for the ESR may
be conserved in species that also exhibit the behavior.
We observed clearly identifiable NSMs with cell bodies
located ventrally in the anterior bulb of the pharynx in
all species studied (Figure 5A-H arrows). The NSMs
had bifurcating neurites projecting through the isthmus
just to the posterior bulb of the pharynx, as observed in
C. elegans. All the species tested in our analysis showed
strong serotonin immunoreactivity in putative NSM
neurons. [The presence of putative NSM homologs in
these species has been described previously (Loer & Rivard, 2007).] We also examined other serotonin-IR head
neurons compared to those found in C. elegans. We
observed ADF-like neurons in all species except R. axei
(Figure 5B-H, F and 5H insets). These neurons were
categorized as ADF-like based on the position of their
somata and occasionally a visible projection that is likely
part of the amphid (Figure 5C, D, F and 5H insets
closed arrowheads). Again, there was no correlation
between the presence of an ADF-like neuron and the
ESR. Some species contained possible AIM and RIH
homologs, however, such identification would be highly
tentative based on soma position alone in the absence of
stained projections. Other serotonin-IR neurons that can
be identified as likely homologs across species include a
faintly staining bilaterally symmetric pair located within

Page 8 of 17

the pharynx just anterior to the NSMs, seen in Oscheius
myriophila, Pristionchus pacificus, and Panagrellus redivivus (Figure 5D, F, H). These cells are not seen in
C. elegans, and, as before, there was no correlation
between the presence of these neurons and the ESR.
The number of serotonin-IR head neurons varied dramatically in the species examined. O. myriophila had up
to thirteen serotonin-IR head neurons (Figure 5D),
which was the most observed; Caenorhabditis sp. 3 and
R. axei had the fewest, with four each (Figure 5C, E). It
is possible, however, that the cells in Caenorhabditis sp.
3 match those of C. elegans and C. briggsae. We noted
that the axons of the NSMs in Caenorhabditis sp. 3
have numerous brightly staining varicosities, which
could be obscuring a faint second pair of serotonin-IR
neurons. Caenorhabditis sp. 3 also rarely appear to have
a faint unpaired cell. Among all the species, the number
of serotonin-IR neurons in the head does not appear to
correlate with the presence of the ESR. Caenorhabditis
sp. 3 and R. axei both have only four serotonin-IR head
neurons (Figure 5C, D) but Caenorhabditis sp. 3 exhibited an ESR, and R. axei did not. The staining patterns
of Pristionchus pacificus and Panagrellus redivivus
appear very similar to that of C. elegans, with the addition of the faintly staining pair of neurons anterior to
the NSMs (Figure 5A, F and 5H); C. elegans exhibits
an ESR whereas Pristionchus pacificus and Panagrellus
redivivus does not. Finally, there was no correlation
between the number of serotonin-IR head neurons and
the overall rate of locomotion under well-fed or starved
conditions. Overall, we conclude that the pattern of serotonin-IR neurons in the species studied cannot be used
as an indicator of locomotory behavior.
The enhanced slowing response is blocked by a serotonin
antagonist in some, but not all species

We used a serotonin antagonist (mianserin), to test
whether enhanced slowing is mediated by serotonin in the
species in which we observed the response. Although in
mammals mianserin is classically an antagonist of 5-HT2
serotonin receptors [38], in C. elegans it blocks both
5-HT2-like receptors [39] and the MOD-1 5-HT receptor
shown to mediate the ESR [33]. Animals were preincubated for 30 minutes on seeded or unseeded agar plates
supplemented with 20 μM mianserin prior to locomotion
assays. As previously reported [17], we also found that
mianserin treatment decreased or eliminated the ESR in
C. elegans (Figure 6A, well-fed worms on bacteria vs.
food-deprived worms on bacteria, both mianserin-treated,
P > 0.05; see Figure legend for details of statistics). Similarly, in our experiments, mianserin did not significantly
affect locomotion either on or off bacteria (Figure 6A). We
saw the same results with mianserin in O. myriophila mianserin eliminated the ESR (Figure 6D), well-fed worms

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Page 9 of 17

Figure 5 Serotonergic head neurons in free-living Rhabditid nematodes. All panels show serotonin immunoreactivity in whole-mount
heads of adult nematodes. Anterior is to the left, ventral view. Calibration bars in each panel are 20 μm. In B-H, arrows indicate NSMs, open
arrowheads indicate other serotonin immunoreactive somata, and closed arrowheads indicate serotonin immunoreactive processes. (A) C. elegans
(N2) with labeled neurons. (B) C. briggsae (AF16). (C) Caenorhabditis sp. 3 (PS1010). The two large bright spots in the posterior bulb of the
pharynx are large NSM-associated varicosities, and not somas. [Double-labeling with DAPI staining shows no nuclei are associated with these
blobs.] The filled arrowhead indicates a neurite extending to the amphid associated with a putative ADF homolog. (D) Oscheius myriophila
(DF5020). (E) Rhabditella axei (DF 5006). Inset: two serotonin-immunoreactive neurons posterior to the NSMs in a different R. axei animal. (F)
Pristionchus pacificus (PS312). The asterisk represents the position of serotonin immunoreactive processes occasionally visible extending from a
pair of neurons immediately anterior to the NSMs. Inset: a serotonin immunoreactive process extending from a paired neuron located posterior
and lateral to the NSM in a different Pristionchus pacificus animal. (G) Pellioditis typica (DF5025). (H) Panagrellus redivivus (PS1163). Inset: a
serotonin immunoreactive process extending from a paired neuron located posterior and lateral to the NSM in a different Panagrellus redivivus
worm.

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Page 10 of 17

Figure 6 Effect of serotonin antagonist mianserin on modulation of locomotion. Histograms show mean ± SEM locomotion frequency
from manual observations. Worms from species showing enhanced slowing responses were incubated for 30 minutes in 20 μM mianserin
hydrochloride prior to testing (see Materials & Methods). Worms not treated with mianserin are the same as shown in Figure 2. (A) C. elegans (B)
C. briggsae (C) C. sp. 3 (D) O. myriophila. For all these species, there were statistically significant differences among the groups by 1-factor ANOVA
(P << 0.001). Selected pairwise comparisons are indicated by lines connecting columns with significance as indicated [n.s. - not significant
(P > 0.05), * - P < 0.05, ** - P < 0.01, *** - P < 0.001] Mianserin significantly attenuated the enhanced slowing response in A & D, but did not
affect the locomotory rate with or without bacteria. Mianserin did not affect enhanced slowing in Caenorhabditis sp. 3 but reduced the
locomotory rate on or off bacteria. Not indicated in the figure (but presented in text) are pairwise comparisons of untreated vs. treated with
mianserin, well-fed worms on bacteria (C. elegans, n.s.; C. briggsae, n.s.; C. sp. 3, P < 0.001; O. myriophila, n.s.) Numbers of worms tested in
mianserin treatments: C. elegans (n = 58-77), C. briggsae (n = 34-49), C. sp. 3 (n = 61-68), O. myriophila (n = 60-85).

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

on bacteria vs. food-deprived worms on bacteria, both
mianserin-treated, P > 0.05). Results with C. briggsae were
less clear: although treatment with mianserin eliminated a
significant difference between well-fed worms on bacteria
vs. food-deprived worms on bacteria (Figure 6B, two rightmost columns, P > 0.05), there was also no significant difference between food-deprived worms on bacteria
untreated vs. treated with mianserin (Figure 6B, blue columns). For both O. myriophila and C. briggsae, mianserin
affected neither baseline locomotion in the absence of bacteria (P > 0.05), nor the BSR in the presence of bacteria (P
> 0.05, Figure 6B and 6D).
In contrast, mianserin had a very different effect in
Caenorhabditis sp. 3 (Figure 6C). Mianserin significantly
reduced the locomotory rate both off and on bacteria
(with a BSR still apparent in the presence of mianserin,
P < 0.001, comparison not shown on graph), but had
no effect on the locomotion of food-deprived worms on
bacteria (Figure 6C, food-deprived worms on bacteria,
untreated or treated with mianserin, P > 0.05). In the
presence of mianserin, an ESR is also still apparent (Figure 6C, well-fed worms on bacteria vs. food-deprived
worms on bacteria, both mianserin-treated, P < 0.05).
One possibility is that mianserin in C. sp. 3 is acting
more like a 5HT agonist than an antagonist, reducing
the rate of locomotion overall; this could make it more
difficult to detect an effect on the ESR. Clearly the

Page 11 of 17

effect of mianserin is altered in Caenorhabditis sp. 3
relative to the other species tested, and the expression
patterns or specificity of 5HT receptors in Caenorhabditis sp. 3 seems likely to be quite different. Whatever the
change, the same results were obtained in locomotory
assays of Caenorhabditis sp. 3 preincubated in 44 μM
methiothepin mesylate (data not shown); methiothepin
is a serotonin antagonist that in C. elegans has broader
specificity and also inhibits MOD-1 [33]. These preliminary pharmacology experiments are suggestive of a
similar function of serotonin in mediating the ESR in C.
briggsae and O. myriophila, although they must be
viewed with caution given our currently limited information about drug responses and specificity in these
other species.

Discussion
Basal and enhanced slowing responses in the
Eurhabditids vs. outgroups

Most species we tested in the Eurhabditis clade exhibited
both basal and enhanced slowing behaviors, with the
exception of Rhabditella axei. The nematode species outside of the Eurhabditis clade, Pristionchus pacificus and
Panagrellus redivivus, exhibited neither a basal nor
enhanced slowing response under the conditions we
tested (Figure 7). We must consider possible reasons for
the absence of these behaviors in some species, and in

Figure 7 Mapping behavioral data and neuronal characters on the current nematode phylogeny. To understand the possible evolution of
modulated behaviors and biogenic amine neurons, we overlaid our data on a current phylogenetic tree. We observe that most of the
Eurhabditids exhibit both basal slowing and enhanced slowing responses with the exception of R. axei. Outside of the Eurhabditids, neither of
the other species tested exhibited a basal or enhanced slowing response in our experiments. The number of dopaminergic neurons was
essentially unchanged among the different species examined. For the serotonin-immunoreactive neurons, the NSM neurons are conserved across
all species; conservation of other cells is less certain. A presumptive ADF neuron is found in several species; overall, the number of serotonergic
neurons varies considerably among the nematode species tested.

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

the strains we tested. Slowing presumably increases the
likelihood of the worms remaining in a location with a
desirable food source. Worms that do not slow may not
find E. coli a desirable food, despite each of these laboratory wild type strains having been raised for many generations on E. coli as food. It is unlikely that any of these
worms normally feed on E. coli in the wild, so it is possible that another bacterium would elicit a BSR. (Or some
other edible microbe - Pristionchus has been called an
‘algivore-omnivore-predator’ [18]). Our test of other
bacteria with C. elegans, Pristionchus and Panagrellus
(Figure 3) suggests there can be considerable variability
in responses to different bacteria. No bacterial strain
tested elicited a BSR in Pristionchus and Panagrellus both tended to increase their locomotory rate in bacteria.
C. elegans also failed to slow on the unfamiliar nonE. coli strains presented - there was no difference in rate
on two pathogenic bacteria (P. aeruginosa and S. marcescens), and worms sped up on what should be an adequate
food source (B. subtilis). It is possible that responses
would be different if worms were accustomed to the bacteria. C. elegans is known to alter its chemotaxis behavior
following exposure to pathogenic bacteria [32].
We should note that a purely mechanosensory effect
of bacteria on modulating locomotion in well-fed worms
- the model proposed by Sawin and colleages [17] - is
called into question by our observations of locomotory
rates on various bacteria in C. elegans. Although both
E. coli strains elicited slowing, the other bacterial species
either had no effect, or caused worms to speed up. All
these bacteria are of similar size and shape, and it is difficult to imagine that their mechanical properties are
more different from E. coli than similar-sized Sephadex
beads (which can elicit a BSR [17]). Therefore it
seems likely that bacteria elicit more than just a
mechanosensory effect, even in well-fed worms. Perhaps
in C. elegans and other species, chemosensation can
override mechanosensory input to prevent slowing in
less desirable or unfamiliar food sources.
For the enhanced slowing response, we must ask, how
long a period of food-deprivation is sufficient to ‘motivate’ worms to slow in food? Perhaps we would see a
BSR and ESR in the presence of a desirable edible
microbe, and an ESR given an adequate period of starvation. What about the normal ecology of the species
examined? The laboratory environment may not sufficiently mimic the natural ecology of some species to
induce slowing behaviors. In general, the ecology of
free-living nematodes and how their natural history
influences their behavior is poorly understood (see
Kiontke and Sudhaus, 2006 for review [19]). Other
environmental conditions that are known to strongly
affect behavior include oxygen concentration; thick bacterial lawns can have significantly lower levels of oxygen

Page 12 of 17

[40]. The use of very thin lawns in our experiments
should reduce the possibility of such a separate influence of bacteria on behavior. But a different oxygen
concentration environment, for example, might reveal a
BSR and ESR in the other species. Some or all of these
worms likely prefer lower oxygen levels; C. elegans
seems to prefer ~5-12% O2 [40].
Our studies suggest that particular forms of BSR and
ESR are present in the species in question, and are missing in the others. Therefore, the available molecular
phylogeny [3] can suggest that the BSR and ESR we
observed may have evolved in the Eurhabditis clade and
were perhaps lost in R. axei (Figure 7). Perhaps some
aspect of behavioral and/or trophic ecology of R. axei is
different from the other Eurhaditids - despite R. axei
having been isolated from compost like many of the
other species. Worm species lacking a BSR or ESR
might have evolved alternate behaviors, such as
increased pharyngeal pumping, that optimize foraging
without slowing locomotion. We must also consider
whether laboratory strains may have lost behaviors that
are found in the wild, due to genetic drift and selection
in laboratory culture. While considering such a possibility we note that the C. elegans laboratory wildtype
strain N2 - which has the BSR and ESR - has been
raised in the laboratory much longer than any of the
other strains we tested, being isolated from the wild in
1956 [41,42].
It is interesting to note that distinct, non-overlapping
circuits mediate the BSR and ESR in C. elegans. This is
seen most strikingly in C. elegans mutants lacking dopamine: although there is a complete loss of the BSR, after
food-deprivation, the ESR is undiminished [17]. Therefore, under conditions evoking an ESR, there is no contribution in slowing by a BSR. A plausible explanation
for this observation is that the separation in the pathways mediating basal slowing versus enhanced slowing
behaviors might have evolved at different times. Given
such a justification, however, it is interesting to note
that among the species we examined, either both
responses are seen or neither is seen.
Evolution of biogenic amine neurons mediating slowing
responses in Rhabditids

The basal slowing response in C. elegans, presumably
present to slow worms in food to increase feeding, is
triggered by the mechanical sensation of bacteria by sensory neurons that release dopamine. These four bilaterally paired ciliated neurons appear to be highly
conserved in nematodes[43]. Cephalic sensilla were
likely present in the nematode stem species, deirids in
the stem species of Secernentea and Plectida; postdeirids
perhaps only in the stem species of Secernentea
(K. Kiontke, personal communication), which includes

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

all the species we examined. Expression of dopamine in
likely homologs may also be highly conserved. Trichinella spiralis, traditionally considered a ‘basal’ nematode,
has four catecholamine-positive cells with neurites in
the cephalic sensilla [43]. The distantly-related plant
parasitic nematode Xiphinema americanum, also has
four FIF-positive cephalic sensilla neurons and 2 possible deirid neurons in locations very similar to those
described here [44]. A similar pattern of dopamine-containing neurons to what we report here, but via dopamine immunoreactivity, has also previously been
described for Panagrellus redivivus [45].
In our study, the presumptive CEP, ADE and PDE
homologs all appear to contain dopamine as they do in C.
elegans (Figure 7). The positions of FIF-positive somata in
the head and body were very similar in all worms, and the
morphology of processes seen by 5HTP-induced serotonin
immunoreactivity was also mostly like that seen in C. elegans DA neurons. The most parsimonious explanation is
that these are all homologous neurons. The alternative
explanation - that different, non-homologous neurons
express dopamine in some of the species we examined requires two events: loss of expression in one cell type,
and new expression in another.
It seems likely that the mechanosensory function of
cephalic and deirid sensilla neurons is also conserved,
despite the lack of conservation of the BSR in all the
species we examined. As suggested above, perhaps the
type of microbe matters: the mechanical properties of
some bacteria (such as E. coli) could be insufficient to
activate the cells appropriately in some species. Or, the
neural circuitry could be different - either by altered
connections, or distribution and number of receptors so that the role of dopamine is changed. In C. elegans,
dopamine actually plays a complex (and extrasynaptic)
role in regulating the BSR: whereas knockout of the
dop-3 dopamine receptor causes loss of the BSR, in a
double knockout mutant for both dop-1 and dop-3
dopamine receptors, the BSR is partially restored [26].
This indicates that dopamine also inhibits the BSR (promotes locomotion), and that a balance of these antagonistic influences likely fine-tunes the locomotory rate.
Therefore, it is easy to imagine the system being biased
toward a different effect of dopamine release. Such a
shift in the balance of positive and negative influences
of dopamine could underlie the increased locomotion of
Pristionchus on bacteria. In addition, other environmental conditions or the behavioral state of the worm that
affects dopamine or its receptors could mean that a BSR
will not be seen under the conditions we tested.
The role of serotonin and specific serotonergic neurons in experience-dependent modulation of locomotion
in C. elegans is less clear-cut than the role of dopamine.
Loss of serotonin causes partial loss of the ESR, and

Page 13 of 17

ablation of the NSMs only slightly reduces the ESR.
Ablation of many other serotonergic neurons along with
NSMs does not reduce the ESR more than NSM ablation alone [17]. The clearest effect of serotonin in the
ESR is demonstrated by the role of the inhibitory
MOD-1 serotonin receptor [26]. It is likely that both
serotonin and the neurons that use serotonin have both
positive and negative effects on regulation of locomotion, similar to what is seen with dopamine. Serotonin
has been demonstrated to both promote and inhibit egg
laying in C. elegans [46,47]. It is possible that the
ESR in C. elegans is primarily triggered by serotonin
(and perhaps other neurotransmitters) released from the
NSM. As with our examination of BSR and dopaminergic neurons, the presence of a given neuron in other
species does not correlate with the presence of
the behavior. NSMs are clearly recognizable, and highly
conserved among these nematodes (and many other
free-living species, as reported elsewhere [48]). It is
certainly possible that the serotonergic NSMs are
required, but not sufficient, for generating an ESR in
the species in which we observed it. Other neurons are
less well conserved, and difficult to identify definitively
as homologous neurons. Although likely ADF homologs
are found in many of the species in question, their presence does not correlate with the ESR, and evidence in
C. elegans suggests they do not play a role in the ESR
[32].
Our experiments with the serotonin antagonist mianserin suggest that the ESR, like in C. elegans, is serotonin-dependent in Oschieus myriophila, although this is
less clear in C. briggsae. It should be noted, however, that
we do not know the specificity of this antagonist with all
the biogenic amine receptors in C. elegans, let alone in
the other species. Furthermore, more recent experiments
have shown that mianserin can also affect identified tyramine receptors in C. elegans [49,50], although there is no
evidence of tyramine or octopamine involvement in slowing behaviors [51]. The role of serotonin in regulating
locomotion may have changed in Caenorhabditis sp. 3 the serotonin antagonists mianserin and methiothepin
depress the rate of locomotion with or without bacteria,
and do not appear to block the ESR. If these agents still
work as antagonists (another possibility is that the pharmacology of the receptors has changed so that both these
agents act more like agonists), the balance has shifted in
Caenorhabditis sp. 3 wherein serotonin’s normal predominant role may be to increase rather than inhibit locomotion. We may also conclude that evolutionary changes
in behavior are less likely to be caused by obvious, gross
changes in neurotransmitter expression of neurons, but
by more subtle changes in neural circuitry or changes in
gene expression in the different species. It has been
shown that in certain conserved behaviors, the sensory

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

architecture mediating these behaviors shows marked
flexibility during nematode evolution [15,52].

Conclusions
Therefore, in conclusion the changes we observe in our
modulated locomotion studies suggest that some of
these changes could occur at the level of the neural circuitry mediating these behaviors. Further understanding
of the neural circuitry and the signaling pathways mediating these behaviors could shed light onto how these
behaviors evolved.
Methods
We cultured free-living nematode strains using standard
methods for C. elegans [53]. Worms were raised at 20°C
on NGM plates seeded with the OP50 or HB101 E. coli
strain (see below). Nomenclature used here conforms to
the conventions for C. elegans genetics set forth by
R. Horvitz and others (1979). Conventions for naming
wild-type non-C. elegans nematode strains are similar,
with each unique isolate receiving a unique strain
designation.
Strains

We used the following worm strains: Caenorhabditis
elegans (N2) [53], Caenorhabditis briggsae (AF16) [54],
Caenorhabditis sp. 3 (PS1010), Oscheius myriophila
(DF5020), Pellioditis typica (DF5025), Rhabditella axei
(DF5006) (NYU Rhabditid collection), Pristionchus pacificus (PS312) [20], and Panagrellus redivivus (PS2298;
PS1163) [55]. For Panagrellus redivivus, PS1163 was
used for studies of dopamine-containing neurons, but
PS2298 was used in all locomotory behavior assays.
There are no apparent differences in neurons of the two
strains [48]. For testing locomotory behavior on other
bacterial strains, we chose E. coli HB101, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA15) and Serratia marcescens. All the bacterial strains tested are gram negative
except for B. subtilis, which is gram positive. Both Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Serratia marcescens strains are
pathogenic for C. elegans [56,57]
Manual counting of body bends

10-12 L4 hermaphrodites or females were picked onto 6
cm NGM plates seeded with HB101 E. coli and stored in
an incubator at 20°C 16-20 hours prior to the assay; these
worms had been continuously cultured on HB101 [17].
Ring plates were also prepared 16-20 hours prior to the
assay by spreading 80 μl of HB101 bacteria on 6 cm NGM
plates, leaving a circle approximately 1.5 cm in diameter in
the center and the edge of the agar unseeded. The plates
were incubated overnight at 37°C. For the assay, worms
were removed from their overnight cultures using M9.

Page 14 of 17

They were rinsed and briefly centrifuged at 6000 rpm to
facilitate the transfer of the worms to an assay plate. For
‘normal/baseline locomotion’, worms were transferred to
unseeded 6 cm NGM plates. To test the basal slowing
response, worms were transferred to seeded 6 cm ring
plates. For ‘enhanced slowing’, the worms that were used
for the ‘normal/baseline locomotion’ assay were allowed to
remain on the unseeded plate for 30 minutes before they
were transferred to a ring plate. Worms were allowed to
acclimate to the assay plates for 5 minutes, and then the
number of body bends/20 seconds was determined for
each worm.
Automated worm tracking and data extraction

Worms tested by automated tracking were continuously
cultured on E. coli OP50, and tested on OP50. For assaying ‘normal/baseline locomotion’, 10 cm non-seeded
NGM plates were used. To test the ‘basal slowing’
response, worms were placed on assay plates with a thin
lawn of an overnight culture of E. coli OP50 [58]. For
‘enhanced slowing’ studies, worms grown overnight at
20°C on seeded plates with food, were placed on a standard 10 cm NGM plate without food for 30 minutes as
described in Sawin et al. [17]. Care was taken to avoid
transferring any food from the seeded plates to the assay
plates. After 30 minutes, each individual worm was tested
for 5 minutes on assay plates containing food.
As previously described [58], 10 cm NGM plates used
for recordings were equilibrated to 20°C for 18-20
hours. Approximately one hour before beginning
recordings, 600 μl of fresh OP50 overnight culture was
spread on each plate to achieve a thin, featureless lawn
of food across the entire surface. Excess solution was
drawn from the edge with a Pipetman. Food was
allowed to dry on the agar surface of a tissue-covered
plate until the surface exhibited a matte finish (about
45 minutes), at which time, tissues were replaced by
Petri dish lids and plates were ready for use. L4 hermaphrodites or females of each species were picked to
fresh seeded plates 16-20 hours prior to recording. Individual worms were transferred to assay plates and the
plate placed in a holder on the microscope stage. After
two minutes recovery, the worm was located and
recording begun using an automated worm tracker and
image recorder specially designed for studying worm
locomotion [7,58]. Each worm was recorded for five
minutes. Data extraction, processing and analysis was
done using image processing and analysis software as
previously described [7,58]. From each video recording
of 5 minutes, we used the middle 4 minutes, and used
the software to derive values for frequency of undulations. All incubations and recordings were done in a
constant temperature room at 20°C.

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Statistical Analyses

For all behavioral studies, we performed 1-factor
ANOVA followed by planned pairwise comparisons
made with Scheffè’s F-test [59]; all statistical analyses
were performed using Excel.
Serotonin antagonist studies

Behavioral studies were performed as described with the
following modification. Approximately 1 hour prior to
the assay, mianserin hydrochloride or methiothepin
mesylate was added to unseeded and seeded 60 mm
NGM plates for a final concentration of 20 μM mianserin hydrochloride or 44 μM methiothepin mesylate
(both from Sigma-Aldrich). Worms were transferred to
the plates and incubated for 30 minutes at 20°C prior to
the start of the behavioral assays.
Formaldehyde induced fluorescence (FIF)

A simplified version of the FIF technique has been
described ([60] and R. Lints, personal communication). A
small number of worms were picked directly into a 5 μl
drop of 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.1 M sodium/
potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) on a microscope
slide. The PFA solution was wicked away with filter
paper leaving dry worms by 5 min of exposure; the slide
was then heated to 98°C for 10 min on a metal block.
The slide was briefly cooled to room temp, a drop of
100% glycerol added to the worms, and a coverslip was
placed over the prep. Worms were viewed with a Chroma
11003v2 Blue/Violet filter set; DA fluorescence had a
characteristic blue-green color whereas most background
fluorescence was more yellow-green. In all species, the
best staining was in young larvae; older larvae and adults
more rarely had good FIF staining, and had higher background. For reliable FIF in Panagrellus, worms had to be
cut open in the 4% PFA solution, suggesting that access
in larger intact worms is the key problem.
5HTP treatment

Worms were incubated at 20°C for 8-12 hr on 60 mm
NGM agar plates containing 5 mM 5-hydroxytryptophan (5HTP, Sigma-Aldrich) and seeded with bacteria.
Worms were removed from the plate by washing with
M9 buffer, and subsequently processed with the standard anti-serotonin protocol (below). Overall background staining was typically increased in 5HTP-treated
preparations.
Serotonin immunohistochemistry

Rabbit anti-serotonin antibody (antigen: serotonin paraformaldehyde-conjugated to bovine serum albumin)
was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO; catalog
S4454, lot 091K4831). We have previously tested the
specificity of staining with this antiserum in 14 different

Page 15 of 17

species of free-living nematode, including all those
tested here [48]. Staining is blocked by the antigen, and
partially by free serotonin, but not other agents. We
have similarly shown no staining in controls with secondary antibody alone [48]. A previously described fixation and staining procedure was used [61], with some
modification [31]. Briefly, worms in a mixed-stage
population were washed from 60-mm culture plates
with M9 buffer, rinsed three times to remove bacteria,
and then fixed overnight (ON) at 4°C in 4% PFA in PBS.
The worms were rinsed in 0.5% Triton X-100/PBS
(TPBS), incubated ON at 37°C in 5% 2-mercaptoethanol/1% TX-100/0.1 M Tris (pH 7.4), rinsed in TPBS,
and then incubated for 30 minutes to 4 hours at 37°C in
2000 U/ml collagenase type IV (Sigma) in 1 mM
CaCl2/1% TX-100/0.1 M Tris, pH 7.4. Following TPBS
rinses, the worms were “blocked” for ≥ 1 hour in 1%
BSA/TPBS at RT, then incubated ON at RT in 1:100
antiserotonin serum in 1% BSA/TPBS. The worms were
rinsed 2× in TPBS, then for 1 hour in 0.1% BSA/TPBS,
incubated for 2-4 hours at 37°C with 1:100 TRITC- conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG, and rinsed briefly several
times in 0.1% BSA/TPBS. About 5-10 μl worms from
the final preparation were pipetted onto an agarose pad,
coverslipped, and viewed with epifluorescence. Worms
were also often stained with DAPI to mark nuclei.
In some cases this was necessary to determine whether
a stained structure was a neuronal cell body (with a
DAPI-stained nucleus) or not.
Additional file 1: Locomotory rates can be determined manually or
by automated tracking. Two different techniques were used to
determine the locomotory behavior of eight species of nematodes:
C. elegans (N2), C. briggsae (AF16), Caenorhabditis sp. 3 (PS1010), Oscheius
myriophila (DF5020), Pellioditis typica (DF5025), Rhabditella axei (DF5006),
Pristionchus pacificus (PS312), and Panagrellus redivivus (PS2298). The
species selected exhibit a sinusoidal pattern of body bends similar to
C. elegans and are a diverse group of taxa in the rhabditid phylogeny.
The species include both gonochoristic and hermaphroditic life histories,
so hermaphrodites or females were used. In the first technique,
locomotory rates were determined as previously described [17], by
manually counting body bends in a 20 second period. In the second
technique, an automated worm tracker was used to analyze the different
locomotory parameters such as frequency of body bending (Hz) etc. (See
Materials and Methods, Additional File 1). For both techniques, animals
were cultured on E. coli, washed, and then transferred to assay plates. A
baseline locomotory rate was determined by placing well-fed animals on
assay plates lacking a bacterial lawn. The basal and enhanced slowing
responses were measured by transferring well-fed or food-deprived
animals, respectively, onto assay plates with a ring-shaped bacterial lawn.
Locomotory rates were determined manually for C. elegans, C. briggsae,
Caenorhabditis sp. 3, O. myriophila, P. typica (DF5025) and R. axei. The
automated tracker was used for all species. Worm velocity determined
using the automated tracker was converted to locomotion frequency
(body bends/sec or Hz) for comparison purposes. The same slowing
trends were observed regardless of the assay method used (Additional
File 1), although the manually counted rate of body bends does not
directly match the frequency (a distribution) determined by the tracker.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2202-1122-S1.PDF ]

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Acknowledgements
We thank David Fitch for strains and advice, and Karin Kiontke for discussions
about nematode sensilla evolution. Some strains were obtained from the
Caenorhabditis Genetics Center, an NIH Research Resource. We thank Kris
Carter and Jason Kehrer (USD) who also contributed to the project. CL is
supported by an endowment from the Fletcher Jones Foundation; some of
this work was also supported by NIGMS Grant R15GM60203 (to CL). We also
thank Christopher Cronin for assistance in worm locomotion scripts and
members of the Sternberg lab for comments and discussions on the
manuscript. JS is an Associate and PWS is an Investigator of the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, which supported this research.
Author details
1
Dept of Biology, University of San Diego, 5998 Alcala Park, San Diego, CA
92110, USA. 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Biology, California
Institute of Technology, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena CA 91125,
USA.
Authors’ contributions
LR, AS, and SO performed manual locomotion studies, LR, AS and CL
performed anti-serotonin staining studies, CL performed FIF and 5HTP/antiserotonin studies, JS and PWS designed tracker experiments and JS
performed automated tracker locomotion experiments, and LR, JS, CL and
PWS wrote the paper. All the authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 19 August 2009
Accepted: 19 February 2010 Published: 19 February 2010
References
1. Lambshead P: Recent developments in marine benthic biodiversity
research. Oceanis 1993, 19:5-24.
2. Wharton DA: The environmental physiology of Antarctic terrestrial
nematodes: a review. J Comp Physiol [B] 2003, 173(8):621-628.
3. Kiontke K, Fitch DH: The phylogenetic relationships of Caenorhabditis and
other rhabditids. WormBook 2005, 1-11.
4. Parkinson J, Mitreva M, Hall N, Blaxter M, McCarter JP: 400000 nematode
ESTs on the Net. Trends Parasitol 2003, 19(7):283-286.
5. Parkinson J, Mitreva M, Whitton C, Thomson M, Daub J, Martin J, Schmid R,
Hall N, Barrell B, Waterston RH, et al: A transcriptomic analysis of the
phylum Nematoda. Nat Genet 2004, 36(12):1259-1267.
6. Schafer WR: Egg-laying. WormBook 2005, 1-7.
7. Cronin CJ, Feng Z, Schafer WR: Automated imaging of C. elegans
behavior. Methods Mol Biol 2006, 351:241-251.
8. Goodman MB: Mechanosensation. WormBook 2006, 1-14.
9. Chase DL, Koelle MR: Biogenic amine neurotransmitters in C. elegans.
WormBook 2007, 1-15.
10. Barr MM, Garcia LR: Male mating behavior. WormBook 2006, 1-11.
11. de Bono M, Bargmann CI: Natural variation in a neuropeptide Y receptor
homolog modifies social behavior and food response in C. elegans. Cell
1998, 94(5):679-689.
12. Campbell JF, Lewis EE, Stock SP, Nadler S, Kaya HK: Evolution of host
search strategies in entomopathogenic nematodes. J Nematol 2003,
35(2):142-145.
13. Hong RL, Sommer RJ: Chemoattraction in Pristionchus nematodes and
implications for insect recognition. Curr Biol 2006, 16(23):2359-2365.
14. Garcia LR, LeBoeuf B, Koo P: Diversity in mating behavior of
hermaphroditic and male-female Caenorhabditis nematodes. Genetics
2007, 175(4):1761-1771.
15. Srinivasan J, Durak O, Sternberg PW: Evolution of a polymodal sensory
response network. BMC Biol 2008, 6:52.
16. Chiang JT, Steciuk M, Shtonda B, Avery L: Evolution of pharyngeal
behaviors and neuronal functions in free-living soil nematodes. J Exp Biol
2006, 209(Pt 10):1859-1873.
17. Sawin ER, Ranganathan R, Horvitz HR: C. elegans locomotory rate is
modulated by the environment through a dopaminergic pathway and
by experience through a serotonergic pathway. Neuron 2000,
26(3):619-631.

Page 16 of 17

18. Blaxter ML, De Ley P, Garey JR, Liu LX, Scheldeman P, Vierstraete A,
Vanfleteren JR, Mackey LY, Dorris M, Frisse LM, et al: A molecular
evolutionary framework for the phylum Nematoda. Nature 1998,
392(6671):71-75.
19. Kiontke K, Sudhaus W: Ecology of Caenorhabditis species. WormBook 2006,
1-14.
20. Sommer RJ, Carta LK, Kim SY, Sternberg PW: Morphological, genetic and
molecular description of Pristionchus pacificus sp. n. (Nematoda:
Neodiplogastridae. Fundamental and Applied Nematology 1996,
19(6):511-521.
21. Dieterich C, Clifton SW, Schuster LN, Chinwalla A, Delehaunty K,
Dinkelacker I, Fulton L, Fulton R, Godfrey J, Minx P, et al: The Pristionchus
pacificus genome provides a unique perspective on nematode lifestyle
and parasitism. Nat Genet 2008, 40(10):1193-1198.
22. Herrmann M, Mayer WE, Sommer RJ: Nematodes of the genus Pristionchus
are closely associated with scarab beetles and the Colorado potato
beetle in Western Europe. Zoology (Jena) 2006, 109(2):96-108.
23. Goodey T: Soil and freshwater nematodes London: Methuen, Second 1963.
24. Sanyal S, Wintle RF, Kindt KS, Nuttley WM, Arvan R, Fitzmaurice P, Bigras E,
Merz DC, Hebert TE, Kooy van der D, et al: Dopamine modulates the
plasticity of mechanosensory responses in Caenorhabditis elegans. EMBO
J 2004, 23(2):473-482.
25. Sulston J, Dew M, Brenner S: Dopaminergic neurons in the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. J Comp Neurol 1975, 163(2):215-226.
26. Chase DL, Pepper JS, Koelle MR: Mechanism of extrasynaptic dopamine
signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Neurosci 2004, 7(10):1096-1103.
27. Ward S: Chemotaxis by the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans :
identification of attractants and analysis of the response by use of
mutants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1973, 70(3):817-821.
28. Sternberg PW, Horvitz HR: Postembryonic nongonadal cell lineages of the
nematode Panagrellus redivivus : description and comparison with those
of Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev Biol 1982, 93(1):181-205.
29. Sulston JE, Horvitz HR: Post-embryonic cell lineages of the nematode,
Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev Biol 1977, 56(1):110-156.
30. Hare EE, Loer CM: Function and evolution of the serotonin-synthetic bas1 gene and other aromatic amino acid decarboxylase genes in
Caenorhabditis. BMC Evol Biol 2004, 4:24.
31. Loer CM, Kenyon CJ: Serotonin-deficient mutants and male mating
behavior in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. J Neurosci 1993,
13(12):5407-5417.
32. Zhang Y, Lu H, Bargmann CI: Pathogenic bacteria induce aversive
olfactory learning in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 2005,
438(7065):179-184.
33. Ranganathan R, Cannon SC, Horvitz HR: MOD-1 is a serotonin-gated
chloride channel that modulates locomotory behaviour in C. elegans.
Nature 2000, 408(6811):470-475.
34. Horvitz HR, Chalfie M, Trent C, Sulston JE, Evans PD: Serotonin and
octopamine in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 1982,
216(4549):1012-1014.
35. Albertson DG, Thomson JN: The pharynx of Caenorhabditis elegans. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1976, 275(938):299-325.
36. Axang C, Rauthan M, Hall DH, Pilon M: Developmental genetics of the C.
elegans pharyngeal neurons NSML and NSMR. BMC Dev Biol 2008, 8:38.
37. White JG: The structure of the nervous system of the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1986,
314(1165):1-340.
38. Glennon RA: Central serotonin receptors as targets for drug research.
J Med Chem 1987, 30(1):1-12.
39. Carre-Pierrat M, Baillie D, Johnsen R, Hyde R, Hart A, Granger L, Segalat L:
Characterization of the Caenorhabditis elegans G protein-coupled
serotonin receptors. Invert Neurosci 2006, 6(4):189-205.
40. Gray JM, Karow DS, Lu H, Chang AJ, Chang JS, Ellis RE, Marletta MA,
Bargmann CI: Oxygen sensation and social feeding mediated by a C.
elegans guanylate cyclase homologue. Nature 2004, 430(6997):317-322.
41. Hansen LE, Yarwood EA, Nicholas WL, Francis WS: Differential Nutritional
Requirements for Reproduction of Two Strains of Caenorhabditis elegans
in Axenic Culture. Nematologica 1960, 5(1):27-31.
42. McGrath PT, Rockman MV, Zimmer M, Jang H, Macosko EZ, Kruglyak L,
Bargmann CI: Quantitative mapping of a digenic behavioral trait
implicates globin variation in C. elegans sensory behaviors. Neuron 2009,
61(5):692-699.

Rivard et al. BMC Neuroscience 2010, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/11/22

Page 17 of 17

43. Lee DL, Ko RC: Catecholaminergic neurons in Trichinella spiralis
(Nematoda). Parasitol Res 1991, 77(3):269-270.
44. Hogger C, Estey RH, Croll NA: Xiphinema americanum : cholinesterase and
biogenic amines in the nervous system. Exp Parasitol 1978, 45(1):139-149.
45. Stewart GR, Perry RN, Wright DJ: Occurrence of dopamine in Panagrellus
redivivus and Meloidogyne incognita. Nematology 2001, 3(8):843-848.
46. Carnell L, Illi J, Hong SW, McIntire SL: The G-protein-coupled serotonin
receptor SER-1 regulates egg laying and male mating behaviors in
Caenorhabditis elegans. J Neurosci 2005, 25(46):10671-10681.
47. Shyn SI, Kerr R, Schafer WR: Serotonin and Go modulate functional states
of neurons and muscles controlling C. elegans egg-laying behavior. Curr
Biol 2003, 13(21):1910-1915.
48. Loer CM, Rivard L: Evolution of neuronal patterning in free-living
rhabditid nematodes I: Sex-specific serotonin-containing neurons. J
Comp Neurol 2007, 502(5):736-767.
49. Rex E, Hapiak V, Hobson R, Smith K, Xiao H, Komuniecki R: TYRA-2
(F01E11.5): a Caenorhabditis elegans tyramine receptor expressed in the
MC and NSM pharyngeal neurons. J Neurochem 2005, 94(1):181-191.
50. Rex E, Komuniecki RW: Characterization of a tyramine receptor from
Caenorhabditis elegans. J Neurochem 2002, 82(6):1352-1359.
51. Alkema MJ, Hunter-Ensor M, Ringstad N, Horvitz HR: Tyramine Functions
independently of octopamine in the Caenorhabditis elegans nervous
system. Neuron 2005, 46(2):247-260.
52. Shtonda BB, Avery L: Dietary choice behavior in Caenorhabditis elegans.
J Exp Biol 2006, 209(Pt 1):89-102.
53. Brenner S: The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 1974,
77(1):71-94.
54. Fodor A, Riddle DL, Kenneth Nelson F, Golden JW: Comparison of a new
wild-type Caenorhabditis briggsae with laboratory strains of C. briggsae
and C. elegans. Nematologica 1983, 29:203-217.
55. Sternberg PW, Horvitz HR: Gonadal cell lineages of the nematode
Panagrellus redivivus and implications for evolution by the modification
of cell lineage. Dev Biol 1981, 88(1):147-166.
56. Pujol N, Link EM, Liu LX, Kurz CL, Alloing G, Tan MW, Ray KP, Solari R,
Johnson CD, Ewbank JJ: A reverse genetic analysis of components of the
Toll signaling pathway in Caenorhabditis elegans. Curr Biol 2001,
11(11):809-821.
57. Tan MW, Rahme LG, Sternberg JA, Tompkins RG, Ausubel FM: Pseudomonas
aeruginosa killing of Caenorhabditis elegans used to identify P.
aeruginosa virulence factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96(5):2408-2413.
58. Cronin CJ, Mendel JE, Mukhtar S, Kim YM, Stirbl RC, Bruck J, Sternberg PW:
An automated system for measuring parameters of nematode sinusoidal
movement. BMC Genet 2005, 6(1):5.
59. Sokal RR, Rohlf FJ: Biometry: the principles and practice of statistics in
biological research San Francisco: W H Freeman, 2 1981.
60. Lints R, Jia L, Kim K, Li C, Emmons SW: Axial patterning of C. elegans male
sensilla identities by selector genes. Dev Biol 2004, 269(1):137-151.
61. Desai C, Garriga G, McIntire SL, Horvitz HR: A genetic pathway for the
development of the Caenorhabditis elegans HSN motor neurons. Nature
1988, 336(6200):638-646.
doi:10.1186/1471-2202-11-22
Cite this article as: Rivard et al.: A comparison of experience-dependent
locomotory behaviors and biogenic amine neurons in nematode
relatives of Caenorhabditis elegans. BMC Neuroscience 2010 11:22.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
