<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>RNA interference in marine and freshwater sponges: actin knockdown in Tethya wilhelma and Ephydatia muelleri by ingested dsRNA expressing bacteria</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67. doi:10.1186/1472-6750-11-67"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ajna S Rivera"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

METHODOLOGY ARTICLE

Open Access

RNA interference in marine and freshwater
sponges: actin knockdown in Tethya wilhelma
and Ephydatia muelleri by ingested dsRNA
expressing bacteria
Ajna S Rivera1,5†, Jörg U Hammel2†, Karri M Haen3, Elizabeth S Danka1,6, Brandon Cieniewicz1,7, Ian P Winters1,
Dora Posfai1, Gert Wörheide4, Dennis V Lavrov3, Scott W Knight1,8, Malcolm S Hill1, April L Hill1* and Michael Nickel2*

Abstract
Background: The marine sponge Tethya wilhelma and the freshwater sponge Ephydatia muelleri are emerging
model organisms to study evolution, gene regulation, development, and physiology in non-bilaterian animal
systems. Thus far, functional methods (i.e., loss or gain of function) for these organisms have not been available.
Results: We show that soaking developing freshwater sponges in double-stranded RNA and/or feeding marine
and freshwater sponges bacteria expressing double-stranded RNA can lead to RNA interference and reduction of
targeted transcript levels. These methods, first utilized in C. elegans, have been adapted for the development and
feeding style of easily cultured marine and freshwater poriferans. We demonstrate phenotypic changes result from
‘knocking down’ expression of the actin gene.
Conclusion: This technique provides an easy, efficient loss-of-function manipulation for developmental and gene
regulatory studies in these important non-bilaterian animals.

Background
The ability to reconstruct the evolution of animals relies
heavily on the availability of comparative data to facilitate
understanding of evolutionary trends from the molecular
to the organismal level. Among the non-bilaterian animals, recent utilization of phylogenomics has increased
our understanding of metazoan relationships [1-5]. Comparative genomic approaches were used to reconstruct
ancestral genomes like the putative genome of the last
common ancestor of the Metazoa (LCAM) [6-8]. Moreover, the same genomic data is used to evaluate hypotheses regarding the evolution of metazoan-specific
pathways like those involved in development [9-11] or
cell signaling [12-15]. For example, the genome of the
demosponge Amphimedon queenslandica is playing a key
* Correspondence: ahill2@richmond.edu; m.nickel@uni-jena.de
† Contributed equally
1
Department of Biology, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA, USA
2
Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie mit Phyletischem
Museum, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität, Jena, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

role in deciphering evolutionary trends in Metazoan specific gene networks and pathways [e.g. [8,16]]. Nevertheless, evolutionary biology relies on more than genomic
data. Functional studies based on reverse genetics techniques are needed to test the hypotheses provided by genomic analyses. However, the availability of genomic
resources and reverse genetic techniques in the nonbilaterian animals is limited compared to the other animals (Figure 1, tree after [2,17]). For the Cnidaria, the
Placozoa, and the Ctenophora genomic data and reverse
genetic techniques are available [e.g. [18-22]]. However,
thus far, only some genomic data is available for the Porifera, and the sister group of Metazoa, the Choanoflagellata. Reverse genetic techniques for these animal groups
is of high priority for a comprehensive analysis of evolution and development of the non-bilaterian Metazoa.
Apart from permanent knockout and/or transgenic
lines [e.g. [23]], RNA interference (RNAi) is a powerful
tool to alter the expression of genes [24-26]. RNAi can be
mediated in a variety of ways, for example soaking animals in double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) or morpholinos

© 2011 Rivera et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

Figure 1 Genomic resources and reverse genetics methods
presently available for representative model species of nonbilaterian Metazoa. Available methods for each group plotted on a
cladogram (tree after [2,17]). While EST and/or genomic data are
available for many representatives of each clade, functional
(transgenic and silencing) techniques have only been adapted to a
few non-bilaterian groups. The present study provides the first RNAi
silencing protocols for a part of the Porifera, i.e. the two cultivatable
Demospongiae G4 species Ephydatia muelleri and Tethya wilhelma
(asterisk). There are no species currently maintainable in laboratory
cultures among the demosponge clades G1 to G3, which would be
an important prerequisite for future extensive RNAi studies.

[18,19,27], injecting dsRNA or morpholinos [28,29], or
feeding dsRNA expressing bacteria [24,25,30]. Among
these techniques, certain limitations have to be considered: (1) Soaking animals in dsRNA appears to be most
problematic in seawater due to issues of RNA stability.
This might be one of the reasons why functional genomic
studies in marine non-Bilateria are scarce. So far, soaking
techniques have only been adapted to Eleutheria dichotoma, Aiptasia pallida and Trichoplax adhaerens
[18,19,27]. In some studies, the salinity has been altered
[18,19], which cannot be tolerated by most marine organisms. (2) The injection of dsRNA or morpholinos is only
efficient if early embryos can be investigated. (3) Feeding
of dsRNA-expressing bacteria requires efficient uptake of
bacteria either naturally or by mimicking other food
sources [30].
Because sponges represent a key group for our understanding of Metazoan evolution including the changes
in gene regulation that took place leading to multicellularity and complex body plans in this lineage, our aim

Page 2 of 15

was to test and establish RNAi protocols in one freshwater and one marine sponge species. By addressing
both living modes we intended to provide a broad basis
for future adaptations of this method to other sponge
species.
The marine species Tethya wilhelma Sarà, Sarà, Nickel
& Brümmer, 2001 (Demospongiae, Hadromerida, Tethyidae) and the freshwater species Ephydatia muelleri
(Lieberkühn, 1856) (Demospongiae, Haplosclerida, Spongillidae) are emerging basal animal model organisms.
Ephydatia is an abundant and common sponge found on
all major land masses in the world [31]. Recent research
has lead to a better understanding of Ephydatia biology
including cellular physiology and function as well as the
role of conserved signaling pathways [e.g., [32-35]]. One of
the most important aspects is that during winter Ephydatia forms thousands of gemmules which are cysts containing totipotent stem cells (archeocytes). These gemmules
can be collected, stored at 4°C for up to one year, and
easily induced to hatch into fully differentiated adults on
the laboratory bench. This cultivation routine provides a
system to study stem cell differentiation and animal body
plan development in these animals [32,36]. A genome and
a transcriptome are currently in the process of being
sequenced for this species. Tethya wilhelma is one of the
few marine sponges that can currently be permanently
maintained in the laboratory based on its capability to
reproduce asexually through buds [37-39]. In addition,
this species has been studied on a broad scale including
functional anatomy [40-42], contractile and movement
behavior [13,37,43], physiology of integration [13,44,45]
and bud development [39]. A transcriptome has been
sequenced recently and is currently being annotated, and
sequencing of the genome is in the planning stage.
To enable functional studies in sponges we developed
a protocol for bacterial mediated RNAi-induced silencing based on gene silencing techniques developed for
Caenorhabditis elegans [24,25]. The protocol has been
adapted to the marine and freshwater environments and
tested by knocking down cytoplasmic actin mRNA levels
in juvenile specimens of T. wilhelma and E. muelleri.
Our results indicate that this pathway is able to function
in both marine and freshwater sponge species.

Results and Discussion
Actin sequences used for knockdown experiments

From a Tethya cDNA library, we identified a 707 bp
fragment of T. wilhelma as a putative beta-actin ortholog (Tw-actb; Additional File 1, Figure S1). The Tw-actb
fragment contains a putative 5’UTR (nt 1-126) and the
5’ part of the putative coding sequence (CDS) (nt 127705). This sequence is quite similar to the Homo sapiens
b-actin sequence (NM_001101 [46]) with 73.4% pairwise
identities overall. A motif search in the translated

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

putative CDS region of Tw-actb revealed PROSITE [47]
Actin signature 1 (PS0046) and 3 (PS01132) at residues
54-64 and 105-117 respectively. Actin signature 2
(PS00432) has not been identified; it may reside in the
uncloned 3’ terminus. Using beta-actin degenerate PCR
primers, we isolated a 338 bp fragment of E. muelleri as
a putative beta-actin ortholog (Em-actb; Additional File
1, Figure S1). The Em-actb fragment is 100% identical
to the putative Tethya beta-actin ortholog at the amino
acid level. Our Em-actb fragment also contains PROSITE actin signature 3. Both fragments were cloned into
the L4440 plasmid (Additional File 1, Figure S2) and
transformed into Escherichia coli HT115(DE3), which
was induced to produce dsRNA.
In silico evaluation of the actin sequences used for
knockdown experiments

In order to ensure that we are targeting cytoplasmic actin
and not another actin isoform or actin-related protein, we
performed an in silico analysis. Using species specific
BLAST searches [48] we translated both E. muelleri and
T. wilhelma actin coding sequences and aligned them to
other actins. These actin sequences were obtained from a
protein sequence alignment used in a previous study [49]
as well as contig translations (see Additional File 1, Figure
S1, Additional File 1, Figure S2) based on tblastn searches
using H. sapiens b-actin (AAH16045) against the following
transcriptomes housed at NCBI dbEST [50]: Monosiga
ovata (Choanoflagellata), Amphimedon queenslandica
(Porifera, Demospongiae), Leucetta chagosensis (Porifera,
Calcarea), Oscarella carmella (Porifera, Homoscleromorpha), Nematostella vectensis (Cnidaria, Anthozoa), Hydra
vulgaris (Cnidaria, Hydrozoa), Mnemiopsis leidyi (Ctenophora), and Trichoplax adhaerens (Placozoa). The RaxML
tree we generated from these data showed that both
T. wilhelma and E. muelleri sequences clearly group within
all other metazoan putative cytoplasmic Actins and are
clearly separated from other Actins or Actin-related proteins (Additional File 1, Figure S3). An alignment of the
partial coding sequences of Tw-actb and Em-actb used for
RNAi with 9 additional holozoan orthologs produced pairwise identity of 82.4% on the nucleotide level (Additional
File 1, Figure S4) and 97.2% on the amino acid level (Additional File 1, Figure S5). RaxML tree and alignment analyses confirm that cytoplasmic actin was targeted in our
RNAi knockdown experiments and thus we expect cytoplasmic actin specific phenotypic effects.
Evaluation of a soaking method for dsRNA delivery

We first attempted a soaking method for dsRNA delivery in E. muelleri. As negative controls, we used dsRNA
for green fluorescent protein (GFP) since sponges do
not express GFP. We also used double-stranded DNA
(dsDNA) generated by PCR amplifying the E. muelleri

Page 3 of 15

beta-actin gene since dsDNA should not be processed
through the RNAi pathway.
Soaking sponges in high concentrations (> 50 μg/mL)
of any nucleic acid (GFP dsRNA, actin dsRNA, actin
dsDNA) leads to potentially cytotoxic effects to the
sponges. Freshwater sponges are sensitive to changes in
osmolarity [51], which could be the cause of the observed
cytotoxicity. When exposed to high nucleic acid concentrations, the tissues regressed, choanocyte chambers
seemed to collapse, and sponges ceased pumping. Thus,
in titration experiments we tested for concentrations at
which dsDNA and GFP dsRNA would not have an observable effect on sponge morphology, while actin dsRNA
would. A concentration of 1-10 μg/mL of beta-actin
dsRNA led to distinct observable morphologies; including
loss of contact of the growing edge of tissue with the culture plate, loss of definition in the canal structure of the
sponge, and poorly defined choanocyte chambers (Additional File 1, Figure S6A,B,C). Longer exposures to betaactin dsRNA resulted in more pronounced phenotypes
(Additional File 1, Figure S6D,E,F). Control experiments
with exposure to GFP dsRNA or beta-actin dsDNA at
similar concentrations, did not exhibit phenotype
changes (data not shown). Interestingly, removal of the
dsRNA beta-actin solution and replacement with normal
culture media lead to full recovery of the sponge tissue
after one to two days including canals, distinct connections to the culture plate and a developed osculum
(Additional File 1, Figure S6G,H,I,J).
Our data indicate that a soaking method is viable for
induction of the RNAi pathway in E. muelleri. However,
the tight range in the amount of dsRNA that seemed to
be effective to produce an expected phenotype will
require titration experiments for each gene addressed in
future RNAi studies. We did not attempt a soaking
method for T. wilhelma since it is necessary to alter the
salinity (by a decrease of ~50%) of the culturing media in
order to ensure RNA stability. We know that T. wilhelma
and most other marine sponges do not tolerate salinity
changes in this range without experiencing changes in
contractile behavior and most likely phenotypic changes
(JH & MN, unpublished observations). Thus, a soaking
method would likely not be viable for marine species.
Feeding method for the freshwater sponge Ephydatia
muelleri

Since sponges naturally feed on bacteria, a feeding
method for dsRNA delivery might be more universally
applicable in marine and freshwater sponge systems. In
E. muelleri, we fed sponges HT115(DE3)/L4440 E. coli
expressing Em-actin dsRNA, for 24 hours. Afterwards,
sponges were washed several times in culture media to
remove bacteria and tissue was harvested within one to
two hours (Figure 2A). Sponges were also fed HT115

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

Page 4 of 15

Figure 2 Experimental feeding scheme and quantitation of actin expression levels after RNAi treatment in Ephydatia muelleri. A. After
feeding for 24 hours with induced HT115(DE3)/L4440-Em-actb or non-induced controls, sponges were washed several times in 1X Strekal’s
medium, photographed, and harvested for RNA preparation or fixation within 1-2 hour. B. qRT-PCR assay for gene expression levels of Em-actin
(purple bar) and two control genes. (Em-six and Em-annexin, green bars) after dsRNA treatment with induced HT115(DE3)/L4440-Em-actb. Levels
were normalized to Ef1a and gene expression levels are given as relative levels of RNAi treated sponges against control sponges. Combined
data with NEm-actin = 11, NEm-Six = 3, NEm-Annexin = 3; bars represent standard deviations.

(DE3) or bacteria expressing GFP to monitor feeding
behavior and to test for a response to induced bacteria.
GFP-fed sponges did not show any response that differed from sponges fed bacteria lacking expression vector (data not shown).
To test the ability of actin dsRNA to reduce actin
expression, we performed quantitative-RT-PCR (qRTPCR) assays. For qRT-PCR analysis, we fed sponges either
dsRNA-expressing bacteria, untransformed bacteria, or
GFP-expressing bacteria for 24 hours. Sponge tissue was
harvested and we utilzed qRT-PCR to access actin expression levels. A relative quantification procedure was used to
calculate a ratio of treatment to control expression levels,
either for the gene of interest (i.e., Em-actb) or for the
non-target genes (i.e., Em-six and Em-annexin). If the target gene was not affected by actin RNAi we would expect
a ratio of 1. The ratio of paired treatment and control
expression levels were averaged and are shown in Figure
2B. We performed eleven total qRT-PCR experiments
with L4440-Em-actb (abbreviated dsEm-actb)-fed sponges
and controls. In ten of these experiments, Em-actb levels
were lower in dsRNA-fed sponges than controls, when
normalized to the housekeeping gene EF1-alpha expression levels. These results were significant (p < 0.05) as the
relative Em-actb mRNA expression levels dropped down
to 75% of the control values (thus, average knockdown in
RNAi-fed sponges was near 25%, with a maximum knockdown value of ~55%). Longer treatments (48 hours) with

the same bacteria did not lead to a greater effect (data not
shown).
To test for nonspecific effects, we repeated the qRT-PCR
experiment using sponges fed bacteria expressing dsEmactb and then assayed expression levels for Em-annexin
and Em-six1/2. Em-Annexin is a structural protein
expressed in the archaeocytes, and in developing and
mature choanocyte chambers [36] while Em-Six is a transcription factor expressed in multiple cell types including
archaeocytes and choanocytes throughout development
(AH, unpublished data). Of three separate experiments
totaling about 15 sponges per condition, Em-annexin and
Em-six mRNA levels were not significantly different in
dsEm-actb-treated sponges compared to HT115(DE3)-fed
control sponges (Figure 2B). Any differences were small
and non-directional, suggesting that dsEm-actb did not
affect Em-annexin or Em-six expression.
To further demonstrate, on the molecular level, that it is
possible to knockdown genes other than actin, we present
RT-PCR, qRT-PCR and Western blot data for experiments
conducted where sponges were either fed bacteria or
soaked with dsRNA directed to Em-annexin and Em-six
genes. We used RT-PCR and gel-based analysis to evaluate
dsEm-annexin-treated sponges using both the soaking
(sponges soaked in 10 μg/mL Em-annexin dsRNA) and
feeding-based methods (described above). In both cases,
reduced expression of Em-annexin is apparent when compared with control-treated sponges (Additional File 1,

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

Figure S7A). We used qRT-PCR to demonstrate that
sponges fed HT115(DE3)/L4440 Em-six dsRNA constructs
showed reduced Em-six expression when compared to
control-treated tissues. These results were significant and
the relative Em-Six mRNA expression levels dropped
down to ~69% of the control values (thus, average knockdown in RNAi-fed sponges was ~31%; with a maximum
knockdown value of ~70%) (Additional File 1, Figure S7B).
It is clear that several parameters will need to be optimized to consistently achieve > 50% knockdown. These
include time and length of exposure to dsRNA, age of
sponges and ability to consistently induce bacteria and
control for amount of bacteria fed to sponges.
To demonstrate that knockdown is also evident at the
protein level, we performed Western blot analysis for
both Actin and Six proteins after treatment with either
dsEm-actb or dsEm-six RNAi (Additional File 1, Figure
S8). The variation in knockdown levels for Actin protein
found in Western analysis was consistent with the variation in gene expression levels found by qRT-PCR after
dsEm-actb treatment. Two different representative Western blots showing dsEm-actb-treated tissue compared
to control-treated tissue are shown and illustrate that
Actin protein levels are lower after dsEm-actb treatment
(Additional File 1, Figure S8A). In response to dsEm-six
treatment, protein levels for Six were also reduced while
the same blot showed that Actin protein levels remain
relatively constant (Additional File 1, Figure S8B).
Feeding method for the marine sponge Tethya wilhelma

Using the same bacteria and a similar expression vector
construct as described above, but a different feeding profile (Figure 3A) we fed T. wilhelma specimens Tw-actb
dsRNA expressing HT115(DE3). Larger specimens of T.
wilhelma were cultured over a period of 33 and 57 hours,
respectively, and pulse-fed with dsTw-actb expressing bacteria or a control strain for 4.5 hours each day. This
resulted in actin knockdown in RNAi-treated sponges
(Figure 3B). After 33 hours of cultivation, including two
pulse-feeding cycles, relative Tw-actb expression levels
dropped down to 67.5% in relation to control animals,
representing an average knockdown by 32.5%. After an
additional dsRNA feeding pulse within a total cultivation
time of 57 hours, the relative actin mRNA levels remained
within a reduced range of 76.9% in relation to control animals. Thus, all dsTw-actb-treated specimens (N = 6)
showed significant reductions compared to endogenous
mRNA levels (dependent t-test, p < 0.05). In contrast,
pulse feeding of dsTw-actb expressing bacteria for a
reduced time of 20 minutes did not reveal any knockdown
effect within 33 or 57 hours (data not shown) for this
species.
To determine if greater knockdown is observed in
T. wilhelma after longer-term exposure to dsTw-actb,

Page 5 of 15

we repeated the experiment over a period of eight days.
Between 81 and 201 hours after initial feeding, single
specimens were tested for relative Tw-actb expression
levels, which were between 87.6% (at 81 h) to 50.4% (at
105 h) to the level of Tw-actb in control sponges. While
this is a wide range, the average (68.7% ± 23%; N = 5),
is close to the total average of the short-term experiment (72.2% ± 24%; N = 6), which represents significant
reductions in expression levels (dependent t-test,
p < 0.05).
To determine viability of sponges affected by longterm actin knockdown, all specimens that were used for
quantification in the long-term experiment were timelapse imaged during the 24-hour period preceding sampling and preparation for RNA quantification. All specimens displayed typical contractile behavior (Additional
File 1, Figure S9, Additional File 2) demonstrating the
general viability of the RNAi-treated specimens. Thus,
our results demonstrate that daily pulse feeding for 4.5
hours does not result in lethal effects as it has been
observed by direct dsRNA incubation in a dose-dependent manner [27].
Evaluation of morphological changes in response to actin
‘knockdown’ in Ephydatia muelleri

To examine morphological changes due to actin knockdown in E. muelleri, we stained dsEm-actb-treated
sponges and control sponges with Bodipy-558/568 conjugated phalloidin. We examined three major regions of the
sponge tissue by confocal laser scanning microscopy
(cLSM): 1) the outer edge of sponge growth, 2) the regions
containing newly developed choanocyte chambers, and 3)
the endopinacocyte-lined canals surrounded by choanocyte chambers. An extensive Actin network was present at
the edge of sponge growth. The outer surface of the
sponge that forms attachments to the substrate is composed of exopinacoderm and basopinacoderm and is made
of continuous epithelium where some connective and
migratory (amoebocytes) cells are observed. The region
also contains filopodia of multipolar cells leading from the
mesohyl to the exopinacoderm. Small foci represent the
edge of two abutting cells when viewed from above, and
larger foci likely represent focal adhesion points where
Actin bundles highlight filopodia of mesohyl cells. Sponges
fed dsEm-actb have a less extensive Actin network at the
growing edge of the sponge. Many fibers do not run continuously through the sponge tissue and the continuous
fibers often lack the network organization seen in control
sponges. These data likely indicate that there is a reduced
cellular mobility in the mesohyl (Figure 4 A & D).
The sponge region containing newly developed choanocyte chambers (choanosome) was chosen as it is a
relatively thin region but allows us to see the overall
pattern of developed sponge tissue. In this region the
Actin-rich choanocytes themselves look very similar in

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Experimental feeding scheme and quantitation of actin expression levels after RNAi treatment in Tethya wilhelma. A. After
pulse feeding with induced HT115(DE3)/L4440-Tw-actb or non-induced controls for 4.5 hours and subsequent wash out by fresh ASW, sponges
were cultivated in ASW for 19.5 hours. Every day, after the pulse feed, some of the sponges were separated out, cultivated for 5 hours, and
washed in seawater until they were harvested for RNA preparation and fixation. B - C. qRT-PCR assay for gene expression levels of Tw-actb
(purple) after dsRNA treatment with induced HT115(DE3)/L4440-Tw-actb. Levels were normalized to RPS5 and gene expression levels are given
as relative levels of RNAi-treated sponges against control sponges [69]. B. Short-term actin knockdown: relative actin-mRNA levels in T. wilhelma
specimens sampled at 33 hours (N = 3) and 57 hours (N = 3) after initial pulse-feeding. Bars represent standard deviation (N = 3). C.
Independent long-term actin knockdown experiment: actin expression in single T. wilhelma specimens after daily 4.5 hour pulse-feeding with
dsRNA-expressing HT115(DE3)/L4440-Tw-ctb E. Coli over 8 days. Levels of single specimens were normalized as above (purple; each bar
represents a single specimen); average relative actin expression (green; with N = 5).

treated and control sponges. To further investigate, we
performed transmission electron microscopy on a control and a dsEm-actb-treated sponge to see whether
ultrastructural aspects of choanocytes were affected after
RNAi treatment. While a more thorough sampling strategy is required, we found one trait in the microvillar
collar that may differ between treatment and control
sponges. Actin RNAi-treated choanocytes had a greater
percentage of cells with misshapen/folded collars

(Additional File 1, Figure S10). The control sponges, on
the other hand, contained numerous perfectly round
collars, which were not observed in the Actin RNAitreated sponges (Additional File 1, Figure S10). However, the pattern of endopinacocytes connecting the
choanocytes differed markedly. Control sponges have
canals that are clearly lined by Actin-rich endopinacocytes. dsEm-actb-fed sponge canals are far less clearly
lined (Figure 4 B & E). In dsEm-actb-treated sponges,

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

Page 7 of 15

Figure 4 Phalloidin-stained tissue in control vs. actin RNAi-treated Ephydatia muelleri. Confocal laser scanning microscopy images of
BODIPY 558/568 phalloidin conjugate-stained whole-mount preparations of E. muelleri. A - C. Actin RNAi-treated sponge tissues. D - F. Controltreated sponges. A and D. Arrow shows Actin filament connections to substrate. These connections are generally missing in RNAi-treated tissues.
B and E. Arrows show choanocyte chambers while arrowheads point to Actin connections (in endopinacocytes) between chambers, which are
largely missing in treated sponges. C and F. Arrowheads show extensive Actin connections between and around choanocyte chambers. These
connections are missing or not as extensive in treated tissues.

the endopinacocytes that span the spaces between choanocytes are thin and display a weaker Actin signal.
The Actin cytoskeletal network is thus reduced in dsEmactb-fed pinacocytes, but the choanocytes appear to be
unaffected at the level observed with light microscopy. In
the canals lined by Actin-containing pinacocytes, the
Actin fibers run continuously around the canals, over the
span of many cells. Control sponges have clearly outlined
canals in most focal planes. dsEm-actb-fed sponges, however, have canals that are not as well-defined and are lacking clear phalloidin-stained pinacocytes in many planes
(Figure 4 C&F). Overall, our observations suggest a general
knockdown of the Actin cytoskeleton with a less prominent Actin network.
Evaluation of morphological changes in response to actin
‘knockdown’ in Tethya wilhelma

To examine morphological changes due to actin knockdown in T. wilhelma, we fixed sponges that had been
pulse-fed induced HT115(DE3)/Tw-actb bacteria expressing dsRNA and control HT115(DE3) bacteria daily

(Figure 3) after 33 and 57 hours. Using whole-mount preparations we examined two major regions of the sponge
by cLSM that were stained using Alexa-488-conjugated
phalloidin: 1) the exopinacocyte, and 2) the cortical
mesohyl.
Phalloidin staining revealed an extensive Actin network
in the exopinacocytes with Actin-rich ripple-like structures on the surface of the exopinacocytes (Figure 5A),
structures typical in T. wilhelma and resembling lamellipodia extensions of fibroblasts (see Additional File 1, Figure S11). In the dsTw-actb-treated specimens, after 33
hours the exopinacocytes showed fewer Actin-rich ripples (Figure 5B) than in the control, while after 57 hours,
ripples were almost absent (Figure 5C). In addition, the
Actin network was overall less prominent in the treated
sponges than in the control specimens.
The largest effect was observed in the cortical mesohyl.
The control sponges showed a large number of extremely
long spindle-shaped bipolar cells (Figure 5D), which are
typical morphotypes of highly mobile cells [52] ‘frozen’ in

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

movement by fixation. In contrast, the dsTw-actb-treated
sponges were characterized by atypical, extremely large
atrophic multipolar cells (Figure 5E) and only few bipolar
cells. In comparison, multipolar cells in the control
sponges were much smaller (Figure 5F).
The changes in the pinacocytes with the reduced
Actin-rich lammellae and atypical mesohyle with the
atrophic multipolar cells and the lack of bipolar cells
can be explained by decreased actin expression. While
the Actin turnover rate is not high enough to produce
lethal effects or cessastion of contractility, processes
based on Actin dynamics like cell mobility or lamellipodia formation seem to be strongly affected. Since the
atrophic multipolar cells correlate with a lack of mobile
bipolar cells, it seemed that both forms actually represent extreme morphotypes of a single archeocyte-like
cell type.

Conclusions
For the first time, we report successful RNAi techniques
for gene knockdown in the sponges E. muelleri (freshwater) and T. wilhelma (marine). We used dsRNA soaking methodology for E. muelleri and a bacterial feeding
method adapted to freshwater and marine culture media
for both species. Our experiments demonstrate a significant reduction of endogenous mRNA levels in both species after feeding and represent the successful proof-ofprinciple for bacteria-mediated feeding induced RNA
interference in marine and freshwater demosponges. We
tested dsRNA methodology using cytoplasmic actin
orthologs, a ubiquitously expressed gene involved in cell
shape and motility.
In E. muelleri, qRT-PCR analysis showed a modest
(~25%) but significant (p <0.05) knockdown of Em-actb
after feeding sponges bacteria expressing dsRNA against
Em-actb for 24 hours compared to controls, with a maximum knockdown of about 55%. T. wilhelma sponges
treated for 33 or 57 hours showed similarly modest but
significant (p < 0.05) reductions. T. wilhema treated for
up to 8 days showed actin mRNA reductions throughout
the entire period of the experiment. The maximum
knockdown caused by dsTw-actb-expressing bacteria was
almost 50% compared to the control-group mRNA level.
We also demonstrated in E. muelleri, at both the mRNA
and protein level, that it is possible to knock down additional genes (Em-annexin and Em-six), thus illustrating
this method should be applicable for other target genes.
The reduction in expression for actin demonstrates an
efficient silencing for a highly expressed gene that may
account for about 5% of the total protein content of a
cell [53]. Furthermore, in order to increase the level of
reduction, longer periods of treatment with dsRNA
might be required for highly expressed genes or stable
proteins like Actin. Hints of this were seen in the long-

Page 8 of 15

term T. wilhelma feeding and E. muelleri soaking
experiments (Figure 3C, Figure S6, Additional File 1). It
is possible that the RNAi effect may be greater than
measured, because the knockdown effect may only be
measured in surviving cells. Sponges are known to have
high proliferation activity, a short cell cycle duration
and cell shedding that is predominantly confined to the
choanocytes [e.g. [54]]. This high cell turnover rate may
be part of the reason that actin (or probably any gene)
will not be knocked down at great levels. Due to the
biology of these organisms and the method used, feeding sponges dsRNA will likely be a technique that can
be utilized to knockdown, but not knockout gene
expression. However, the overall significantly reduced
mRNA levels during the entire period of the experiment
clearly demonstrated the potential of bacterial-mediated
RNAi-induced silencing for functional gene knock down
studies in poriferans.
After feeding Em-actin dsRNA, E. muelleri did not
display a macroscopic phenotype that could be clearly
described at the cellular level. However, the primary
Actin knockdown phenotype shown by phalloidin staining was a less extensive Actin network that was manifested in a “crumpled” edge, where tissues should be
adhering to the substrate and migrating outwards. Additionally, a reduction of cellular connections in the choanocyte-rich regions and canals due to loss of Actin in
endopinacocytes was observed. T. wilhelma showed
neither a reduced survival rate nor alterations of rhythm
or kinetics of body contractions. Like in E. muelleri,
RNAi treated specimens of T. wilhelma displayed no
distinct macroscopic phenotype. However, we found
strong effects on mesohyle and pinacoderm cell anatomy of T. wilhelma. Apart from reduced Actin content
and altered Actin network appearance in pinacocytes,
the most prominent effects were hypertrophic mesohyle
cells and the lack of mobile bipolar cells, indicating a
reduced mobility and cell shape dynamics in dsRNAtreated specimens.
RNAi methods allow us to begin to study sponge gene
function in a directed manner, including questions
regarding evolution of gene regulatory networks, nervous
system and muscle evolution, and also functional studies
concerning biomineralization and other metabolic processes. Our results also suggest that RNAi might be a
valuable tool to investigate cell-type functionality in
sponges, as has been shown for other organisms, like
Hydra [e.g. [30]]. This would facilitate studies on the evolution of cell differentiation in sponges. Additionally, it
might help us to differentiate variable morphotypes of
one single cell type versus other cell types. Thus, RNAi
would help solve a long-standing problem for sponge
biologists and evolutionary biologists interested in cell
type evolution [e.g. [55]] by allowing unique studies to

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

A

Page 9 of 15

B

C

10 μm

10 μm

10 μm

25 μm

25 μm

25 μm

D

E

10 μm

F

25 μm

10 μm

Figure 5 Phalloidin-stained tissue in control vs. actin RNAi-treated Tethya wilhelma. Confocal laser scanning microscopy images of Alexa
488 phalloidin conjugate-stained whole mount preparations of T. wilhelma. A, D and F. Control treated sponges. B and E. Actin RNAi treated
sponges 33 hours after initial feeding (see feeding scheme in Figure 3). C. Actin RNAi treated sponge tissues 57 hours after initial feeding. A - C.
Exopinacoderm layers showing pinacocytes. Insets display details of the main image. Arrowheads show Actin ripples at the cell surface as parts
of the pinacocyte Actin network. Note: due to slight hypoosmotic fixative in order to avoid cell shrinking, the sponges are slightly inflated during
fixation, forming small artifactual gaps between pinacocytes due to their extremely thin contact zones between the pinacocytes. This slight
artifact is systemic in all samples and does not interfere with the characters important in the context (see Additional File 1, Figure S11 for more
details). D. Three detail images of bipolar (moving) mesohyle cells (arrowheads) in control sponges. E - F. Multipolar cells (arrowheads):
hypertrophic, large cells in RNAi-treated sponges (E) and normal multipolar cells in control sponges (F).

clearly define and distinguish sponge cell types, most
likely in conjunction with in situ hybridization. We
assume that our protocol will be readily applicable to
other marine sponge species like the homoscleromorph
Oscarella lobularis [56,57] or the calcareous Sycon ciliatum and S. raphanus [58-60]. It will also be adaptable to
the freshwater species E. fluviatilis and Spongilla lacustris, which are also commonly used to study sponge biology [36,61-63]. In conclusion, our present study closed
an existing gap for a functional genomics protocol for the
Porifera and will thus stimulate a number of comparative
functional studies, which will deepen our understanding
of metazoan evolution.

Methods
Sponges

E. muelleri gemmules were harvested from sponges collected from a dam outflow near Griswold, Connecticut,
USA (41°35’4"N, 71°55’15"W). Gemmules were washed

in 3% hydrogen peroxide, and re-washed several times
in sterile, cold, 1X Strekal’s [64] medium and stored at
4°C in the dark until use. Washed gemmules from the
freshwater sponge E. muelleri are placed in 12-well
plates containing 2 mL of 1x Strekal’s medium and kept
in the dark at ~25°C for hatching. After hatching (2-3
days after plating) the 1x Strekal’s was replaced daily.
Gemmules were allowed to develop to stage 5 before
they were treated with either dsRNA or fed bacteria to
ensure that feeding structures had fully developed.
T. wilhelma originated from its type locality, the aquarium of the Zoologisch-Botanischer Garten Wilhelma
Stuttgart (Germany) [38]. Due to its asexual reproduction
by budding T. wilhelma was permanently cultured in the
laboratory in Jena in tropical seawater aquaria under constant moderate flow conditions at a temperature of 24°C
and a light regime of 12 h day and night. Artificial
seawater (ASW; Tropic Marine, Wartenberg, Germany;
dissolved in demineralized water) was partly renewed

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

every few weeks. During cultivation, sponges were fed on
a daily basis using finely dispersed commercial aquarium
invertebrate food (’Artificial Plankton’ Aquakultur
Genzel, Freiberg am Neckar, Germany). For experiments,
we used fully grown sponges (’adults’) and stage-4 buds
around 1 mm diameter, which were released shortly
before the experiment, as well as juvenile sponges of up
to 3 mm [for details on bud developments see ref. [39]].
EST library construction and sequencing

Several specimens of T. wilhelma were sampled from the
aquarium of the Zoologisch-Botanischer Garten Wilhelma Stuttgart (Germany) and immediately frozen in
liquid nitrogen. They were stored at -80°C and shipped
on dry ice to Iowa State University (Ames, Iowa, USA).
Immediately after arrival, the samples were stored at
-80°C until they could be re-immersed in liquid nitrogen
and ground with an RNase-free mortar and pestle. The
following protocols for RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis used reagents from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA):
1 mL of TRIzol Reagent was added for every 50 mg of
ground tissue, and total RNA extraction was carried out
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Resultant
RNA pellets were dissolved in 25 μL of DEPC-treated
water, with the addition of 1 μL RNasin RNA protectant,
and checked for RNA integrity on an agarose gel. mRNA
was isolated from total RNA aliquots using the FastTrack
MAG mRNA Isolation Kit with a Magna-Sep magnetic
particle separator. mRNAs were treated with Calf Intestinal Phosphatase (CIP) to dephosphorylate uncapped 5’
ends and processed with the GeneRacer kit for firststrand synthesis of full-length cDNAs using SuperScript
III reverse transcriptase (RT). Second-strand synthesis
was carried out using standard kit primers and Platinum
Taq HiFi DNA polymerase. Size fractionation of cDNAs
was achieved by gel-extracting cDNA pools of successive
sizes with the PureLink kit. cDNA pools were then treated for blunt-end ligation and cloned with the Zero Blunt
TOPO PCR Cloning Kit for sequencing. Random clone
libraries were grown overnight in 96-well culture plates
and submitted to the Iowa State University DNA Sequencing Facility for automated plasmid extraction and
sequencing of cDNA inserts. Resulting sequence data
was queried against the NCBI GenBank for identification
of cDNA sequences with known function.
Maximum likelihood gene tree analysis

Using the cloned Tw-actb and Em-actb sequences, blastn
searches were performed in a recently constructed EST
database (T. wilhelma) and in Genbank (E. muelleri,
organism-specific search). The dataset was complemented by organism-specific tblastn searches using H. sapiens
b-actin (AAH16045). Contigs were created using Geneious Pro 4.74 (Biomatters, Auckland, NZ) using the
assembly function; assemblies were visually inspected

Page 10 of 15

and corrected manually for errors caused by the automatic assembly. The contig sequence was analyzed for
the actin open reading frame (ORF) starting with the
amino acid sequence MDDXVAALV. The translated
ORF was added to a previously published actin and
actin-related protein amino acid sequence alignment
[49]. Sequences were submitted to Genbank (T. wilhelma: HQ693078, E. muelleri HQ677599).
Additional cytoplasmic actin contigs and amino acid
translations (see Additional File 3, Additional File 4)
were created in the same way by organism-specific
tblastn searches using H. sapiens b-actin (AAH16045)
for the following early-branching Metazoa or Holozoa,
included in the alignment: Amphimedon queenslandica;
Hydra vulgaris; Leucetta chagosensis; Mnemiopsis leidyi;
Monosiga ovata; Nematostella vectensis; Oscarella carmela; Oopsacas minuta; Trichoplax adhaerens.
The existing amino acid alignment was expanded using
the Muscle algorithm of Geneious Pro. A rapid bootstrap
analysis [65] on 100 replicates followed by search for the
maximum likelihood tree was performed using RAxML
7.2.6 (PTHREADS) with the GTR (General Time Reversible) amino acid substitution model with site-specific evolutionary rates (4 discrete GAMMA categories). RAxML
was called as follows: ./raxmlHPC-PTHREADS-SSE3 -T 4
-f a -x 12345 -p 12345 -# 100 -m PROTGAMMAGTR -o
At-arp4. The unrooted gene tree was visualized using
Geneious Pro.
RNAi constructs

PCR primers for producing dsRNA for E. muelleri betaactin to use with a soaking method were designed with T3
or T7 RNA polymerase sequences on either end. Primer
sequence for the forward primer included a T3 site (AATTAACCCTCACTAAAGG) on the 5’ end followed by a
beta-actin sequence of 5’-GCCCCCGAGGAGCACCCAGTCTT-3’ and for the reverse primer a T7 site (TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG) with a beta-actin primer
sequence of 5’-TCGGCAGTGGTGGTGAAAGAGTA-3’.
PCR amplification yielded a 326-bp band, which was concentrated with a sodium acetate and ethanol precipitation.
The PCR product was used as a template in RNA transcription reactions using T3 and T7 polymerase. The
resulting single-stranded RNA transcripts were purified by
phenol:chloroform extraction and quantified (Nanodrop).
Equal amounts of T3 and T7 reactions were annealed to
create double-stranded fragments by boiling for 3 minutes
and then cooling slowly. dsRNA was precipitated and
resuspended in 1X Strekal’s before use, and dsRNA was
confirmed on a 5% PAGE gel.
To produce constructs for bacterial feeding-mediated
RNA interference in E. muelleri and T. wilhelma we used a
protocol available from the Fire lab (http://firelab.stanford.
edu/links.html) [24]. For E. muelleri a 290-nt product of
the Ephydatia beta-actin gene, Em-actb (forward primer:

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

5’-GGCCCCCACTCAACCCAAAGG-3’; reverse primer:
5’CCACGCTCGGTCAGGATCTT3’) was placed in the
L4440 Plasmid (FireLab Vector Kit, Addgene Plasmid
1654). The L4440 (pPD129.36) vector contains two convergent T7 polymerase promoters in opposite orientation
separated by a multiple cloning site [25]. In order to grow
cells for expression of dsRNA and feeding experiments the
expression vector was transformed into HT115(DE3)
E. coli (which is unable to degrade dsRNA). This line was
named L4440-Em-actb (abbreviated here as dsEm-actb).
For bacterial feeding-mediated RNA interference in T. wilhelma a 703-bp fragment of T. wilhelma actin gene was
placed in the L4440 plasmid. As a control, HB101 E. coli
transformed with the pLR71 GFP constructs were fed to
E. muelleri (results not shown). T. wilhelma were fed noninduced HT115(DE3)/L4440-actb E. coli cells as a control.
Primers and constructs used for control experiments with
Em-annexin and Em-six are available on request.
RNAi-induced silencing

E. muelleri sponges treated with dsRNA for the soaking
method were used 5-6 days after plating when the
sponges have fully developed oscula (indicating that they
will efficiently pump water through their tissues and
feed on ingested bacteria). Strekal’s culture medium was
removed and replaced with dsRNA resuspended in 1X
Strekal’s and diluted appropriately. A range of dsRNA
concentrations were used as described in the results
section.
For feeding E. muelleri bacteria expressing dsRNA, 5 mL
overnight cultures in LB broth were inoculated with L440Em-actb one day prior to the sponge feeding stage. The
next day, each overnight culture was inoculated in 100 mL
LB broth with ampicillin and maintained at 37°C with shaking. Bacterial cultures were induced with 19 mg/100 mL of
Isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) at OD595 0.4
(~3 hrs after scale up) to begin bacterial production of
dsRNA. Cells were induced for 1.5 hours. 50 mL of cells
from each overnight culture were centrifuged in conical
tubes for 8 minutes at 4000 rpm at 4°C. The supernatant
was discarded and the bacterial pellet was resuspended in
50 mL 1x Strekal’s media. This constituted the feeding
stock. From this stock dilutions were made for each treatment to a concentration of ~1 × 108 cells/mL. The 1x Strekal’s culture medium was removed from each sponge and 1
mL of the appropriate dilution of bacteria producing
dsRNA was added. Sponges were cultured for 24 hours
with bacteria producing dsRNA. After 24 hours, sponges
were washed several times in 1X Strekal’s medium, photographed on a stereomicroscope and then harvested for
RNA after 1-2 hours.
For dsRNA-feeding experiments in T. wilhelma, a 10 ml
2xYT culture containing appropriate antibiotics was

Page 11 of 15

inoculated with a single colony of HT115(DE3)/L4440actb and cultured overnight at 37°C. The culture was
diluted 160-fold and allowed to grow to OD 600 = 0.4
before IPTG was added to a final concentration of 0.4 mM
in order to induce actin dsRNA expression. Incubation of
the culture continued for additional 5 hours at 37°C. Cells
were harvested by centrifugation and transferred to ASW
immediately prior to application on T. wilhelma. Stage-4
buds [39] and larger specimens of T. wilhelma were
cultured in sterile ASW containing standard 24-well cell
culture plates at 24°C. On a daily basis, sponges were
pulse-fed for 4.5 hours with freshly harvested induced,
actin dsRNA-expressing HT115(DE3)/L4440-actb bacteria.
A control group was pulse-fed with non-induced HT115
(DE3)/L4440-actb bacteria. Subsequently, in order to wash
out the bacteria, the total volume was exchanged twice by
aerated sterile ASW on a daily basis. Sponges were
sampled for actin mRNA quantification 5 hours after bacteria wash-out every 24 hours for a period of 8 days (longterm experiment) and for a period of 2 days (short-term
experiment). Samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and
stored at -80°C until further batch processing. At the same
time, samples were fixed for actin labeling and microscopy
using 1.8% fomaldehyde and 0.2% glutaraldehyde in ASW
at 4°C over night. After three washing steps (ASW), samples were dehydrated in an increasing Ethylalcohol (EtOH)
series (30%, 50%, 70%) and stored in 70% EtOH until processed for microscopy.
Time-lapse imaging

Juvenile sponges of T. wilhelma in the long-term silencing experiment were time-lapse imaged for 22-24
hours prior to RNA extraction. One specimen of the
RNAi treatment group and one specimen of the control
group were imaged simultaneously. Images were taken
every minute through the bottom of the 24-well plates.
Standard web cameras (Logitech, QuickCam Pro for
Notebooks) attached to a Laptop were used. Cameras
were controlled by the video surveillance software
Active WebCam Pro (Pysoft). Analysis of body contractions was performed in ImageJ [66] using custom made
macros (available upon request) as previously described
[37,45].
QRT-PCR validation of knock down

E. muelleri sponges were collected after RNAi treatment
and mRNA was isolated using the Qiagen RNeasy® Mini
Kit and treated on columns with DNase I to limit contaminating genomic DNA. Equal amounts of cDNA (125-200
ng/μl) were synthesized from experimental and control
sponge mRNA using Superscript III reverse transcriptase
(Invitrogen) and oligodT primer. SYBR Green (Invitrogen)
chemistry and the Chromo4 (BioRad) were used for qRTPCR using cycling conditions of 94°C for 3 min followed

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

by 30s at 94°C, 30s at 55-61°C, 1 min at 72°C for 35 cycles
with gene-specific primers (F: 5’-CGCTCTTCCCCACGCCATC-3’; R: 5’-TCGCTCGGCAGTGGTGGT-3’), which
resulted in amplification of a 112 bp fragment. Control
experiments using Annexin utilized primer sequences F:
5’-TCTCGTTTTGCAATCTTGGCGTAT-3’; R: 5’-GG
GTGCACGTGATGAGTCTCTT-3’ and for Six1/2 F: 5’GCTTCAAGGAGAAGTCGCGTGT-3’; R: 5’-TGCCT
CCGATTTTTGAACCAGT-3’. actin, Six1/2, and Annexin
levels were normalized to Ef1a, a ‘housekeeping’ gene in
E. muelleri that is consistently expressed at high levels
throughout development. For all qRT-PCR experiments,
duplicates were performed from master mixes. Threshold
values for Ct calculation were selected by hand to optimize
efficiency for all samples. Standard curves using plasmid
dilutions as templates were made for each gene in each
qPCR experiment and efficiency-corrected Ct values were
compared to these curves to calculate relative concentrations using Opticon Monitor software. The relative concentration values of duplicates were averaged and
experimental averages were normalized to Ef1a values.
T. wilhelma sponges were collected after RNAi treatment and homogenized with a potter. Total RNA was isolated by the RNA XS Kit (Macherey-Nagel) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was synthesized
from experimental and control sponge mRNA with the
First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions utilizing oligo(dt)18 primers. SYBR Green (KAPA SYBR Fast qPCR Mastermix)
chemistry and the Smart Cycler System (Cepheid/PeqLab)
were used for qRT-PCR using cycling conditions of 94°C
for 3 minutes followed by 45 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 60°C
for 30 seconds, 72°C for 45 seconds with gene specific primers Act-6_U_L (5’-GCTTGAAATCCTTCCCCTTC-3’)
and Act-6_U_R (5’-TCTACAACCAACGCAGCAAC-3’)
to amplify a 92-bp fragment of the T. wilhelma actin gene
and TW12B02-RPS5-L (5’-ACTCCACTCGTATCGGT
CGT-3’) and TW12B02-RPS5-R (5’-AGAGGGGACACA
TCAACAGC-3’) to amplify a 61-bp fragment of the 40S
ribosomal protein S5-related cluster (RPS5) as an internal
reference for relative quantification of actin mRNA levels.
For all qRT-PCR experiments, triplicates were performed
from master mixes. We calculated amplification efficiencies for each replicon group and Cq values applying LinReg software (Version 12.5, http://LinRegPCR.nl) [67,68].
Efficiency-corrected relative quantification was conducted
using the “efficiency-calibrated mathematical method for
the relative expression ratio in real-time PCR” as used by
the Roche LightCycler® software [69,70].
Western Blot validation of knock down

Fifteen stage-five sponges were collected for each of the
conditions: dsEm-actb, dsEm-six, and control-treated tissues. Lysis buffer (5% 1 M Tris pH 7.5, 6% 5 M NaCl,
0.4% 0.5 M EDTA, 0.5% Triton-X, 0.2% protease

Page 12 of 15

inhibitor) was added to each of the samples. The
sponges were mechanically ground using an RNAse-free
pestle. Protein concentrations were calculated using a
BioRad assay and 15 μg of the protein were run on 12%
Tris-HCl gels at 200 V at room temperature. Proteins
were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and were
blocked overnight at 4°C to saturate unused protein
binding sites. Blocking solution consisted of 5% nonfat
dry milk in Tris Buffered Saline (TBS) buffer (pH of 7.4
and 0.01 M Tris Base, 153 mM NaCl). Membranes were
washed in TBS and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies diluted to 100 μg/μl in TBST (TBS with
1% Tween 20 and 2% nonfat dry milk): Actin (h-300)
rabbit polyclonal lgG or Six 1/2/4 (N-19) goat polyclonal
lgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The following day,
nitrocellulose membranes were washed in TBST. Membranes were then incubated for 2 hours with gentle
shaking at room temperature in corresponding secondary antibody: goat anti-rabbit lgG - 1:10000 FITC
mouse/human absorbed or 1:10000 bovine anti-goat
HRP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Membranes were
washed in TBST and subsequently soaked in TBS for 5
minutes. Nitrocellulose membranes were detected with
CDP star chemiluminescent substrate (Roche) for one
minute, exposed to X-ray film and developed with an
automatic film processor.
Phalloidin staining and evaluation of actin phenotypes

In E. muelleri, a protocol based on ref. [34] was utilized.
E. muelleri gemmules were cultured and fed as above. At
22-26 hours post-feeding, sponges were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at 4°C overnight. Fixed sponges
were washed in PBS at room temperature for 10 minutes
with gentle shaking in the dark. Autofluorescence was
quenched by treating with 0.1 M ammonium chloride for
5 minutes at room temperature. Tissue was permeabilized in 0.2% Triton in PBS for 10 minutes, followed by
washing in cold PBS for 5 minutes. Coverslips with their
attached sponges were inverted over Fastwell slides with
rubber gaskets (Research Products International Corp.)
containing 200 μL of BODIPY 558/568 phalloidin (Invitrogen) at a concentration of 10 U/mL. These were incubated at 3 hours in the dark at room temperature and
then rinsed up to three times in PBS and mounted in
fluoromount (Sigma). Fluorescence was visualized on a
Leica SP2 LSCM scanning confocal microscope. Careful
consideration was given to maintain settings across
treatments.
In T. wilhelma, fixed and dehydrated samples were
stepped through a decreasing series of EtOH in PBS (70%,
50%, 30%). After three washing steps in PBS, samples were
incubated in 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 minutes, followed by three washing steps in PBS. Samples were preincubated for 30 minutes in BSA-PBS (PBS containing 1%
BSA) at 4°C followed by Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

staining in BSA-PBS. After washing for three times in PBS,
samples were mounted in ProLong Gold antifading solution. Confocal imaging was performed on a Zeiss 510
cLSM, using an Argon laser for excitation at 488 nm and
a 515 nm long pass emission filter at equal settings for
RNAi-treated and control specimens.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary Figures. Figure S1. Ephydatia muelleri
and Tethya wilhelma actin sequences. Figure S2. Ephydatia muelleri and
Tethya wilhelma dsRNA expression vector. Figure S3. Maximum likelihood
(RAxML) actin gene family analysis including Ephydatia muelleri and
Tethya wilhelma actin genes used for RNAi knockdown. Figure S4.
Nucleotide alignment of Tethya wilhelma and Ephydatia muelleri partial
actin sequences in comparison to actin of other organisms. Figure S5.
Translated amino acid alignment of Tethya wilhelma and Ephydatia
muelleri partial actin sequences in comparison to actin of other
organisms. Figure S6. Actin dsRNA treatment by soaking method and
recovery of sponge tissue after removal of actin dsRNA. Figure S7. RTPCR and qRT-PCR analysis of dsEm-Annexin and dsEm-Six treatments.
Figure S8. Western blot analysis of RNAi- and control-treated tissues.
Figure S9. Viability check of RNAi-treated specimens of T. wilhelma. Figure
S10. Cross-section of choanocyte chambers from treatment and control
sponges. Figure S11. Exopinacocyte morphology of T. wilhelma and
possible fixation artifacts demonstrated by scanning electron microscopy.
Additional File 2: Viability check of RNAi-treated T. wilhelma
specimens. Time-lapse imaging and image analysis was used to address
contractility as a viability marker. Time-lapse image movie of the
specimen representing the knockdown value at 201 hours in the longterm study (Figure 3C and Figure 4). The specimen is dislocated at the
time of RNAi feeding due to liquid handling (time: 12:24 hh:mm; see
Figure 4; culture dish had to be temporarily removed from the imaging
station for feeding and was moved back afterwards).
Additional File 3: Nucleotide sequence alignment of contig
assemblies of cytoplasmic actin complete CDS from selected
Holozoa/Metazoa (fasta format).
Additional File 4: Translated amino acid sequence alignment of the
complete actin CDS shown in Additional File 3(fasta format).

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Martin S. Fischer (Jena) for supporting our work and
providing infrastructure, Erika Kothe (Jena), Michael Friedrich and Peqlab
Biotechnologie GmbH (Erlangen) for providing access to qPCR machines,
Jürgen Bolz, Michael Richter & André Steinecke (Jena) for access to and
assistance at the cLSM, Isabel Koch and Alex Mendosa (both Stuttgart) for
access to sponge material supplementing our own culture, and Mareike
Klinger, Katja Felbel and Benjamin Weiss (all Jena) for excellent technical
support. JUH received funding from Studienstiftung des Deutschen Volkes.
MN was supported through FSU Jena DRM program. GW acknowledges
funding from the German Science Foundation (DFG). We are also grateful to
Carolyn Marks for help with confocal and electron microscopy (Richmond).
We thank Heather Babka (ISU) and Martin Dohrmann (Smithsonian
Institution) for comments on a previous version of the manuscript. ALH was
supported by a grant from the Thomas F. and Kate Miller Jeffress Memorial
Trust and ALH, MSH and DVL acknowledge funding from the National
Science Foundation (AToL).
Author details
Department of Biology, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA, USA.
2
Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie mit Phyletischem
Museum, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität, Jena, Germany. 3Iowa State University,
Ames, IA, USA. 4Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences & GeoBioCenterLMU, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany. 5Biology
Department, College of the Pacific, Stockton, CA, USA. 6Molecular Cell
1

Page 13 of 15

Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA. 7Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA. 8Sigma-Aldrich
Biotechnology, St. Louis, MO, USA.
Authors’ contributions
E. muelleri experiments: AR adapted the feeding method, carried out
molecular analyses, performed confocal microscopy analysis of phalloidin
staining and co-drafted the manuscript. ED participated in the design of the
study, developed the dsRNA soaking method and performed all control
experiments for soaking methodology. BC made the dsRNA constructs for
the feeding method, piloted feeding protocols and developed standards for
qPCR. IW conducted molecular analyses and worked on optimization of
feeding methods, as well as confocal microscopy analysis of phalloidin
staining. DP conducted Western blot analysis for Actin and Six proteins,
assayed annexin expression after RNAi, and worked extensively on
manuscript revisions. SK participated in the design of both the soaking and
feeding methods (including appropriate controls), provided vectors,
protocols, and GFP constructs, and aided with data interpretation. MH
collected Ephydatia tissue, conducted TEM analysis, evaluated statistical
methods, and revised the manuscript. AH conceived of the study, obtained
funding for the study, participated in the design and implementation of all
experiments and co-drafted the manuscript. T. wilhelma experiments: JH
adapted the feeding method, carried out molecular analyses, performed
confocal microscopy analysis of phalloidin staining, prepared figure drafts
and co-drafted the manuscript. KMH carried out molecular analyses and
constructed the feeding vector. DVL conceived parts of the study, provided
cDNA data and co-drafted the manuscript. GW provided EST data,
performed the gene analysis and contributed to the manuscript. MN
conceived of the study, obtained funding for the study, participated in
design and implementation, performed confocal microscopy analysis,
prepared final figures and co-drafted the manuscript. All authors have read
and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 9 December 2010 Accepted: 16 June 2011
Published: 16 June 2011
References
1. Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, et al: Broad phylogenomic sampling
improves resolution of the animal tree of life. Nature 2008, 452:745-749.
2. Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P, Pick K, Borchiellini C, Boury-Esnault N,
Vacelet J, Renard E, Houiliston E, Quéinnec E, et al: Phylogenomics Revives
Traditional Views on Deep Animal Relationships. Current Biology 2009,
19:1-7.
3. Pick KS, Philippe H, Schreiber F, Erpenbeck D, Jackson DJ, Wrede P,
Wiens M, Alié A, Morgenstern B, Manuel M, Wörheide G: Improved
Phylogenomic Taxon Sampling Noticeably Affects Nonbilaterian
Relationships. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2010, 27:1983-1987.
4. Schierwater B, Eitel M, Jakob W, Osigus HJ, Hadrys H, Dellaporta SL,
Kolokotronis SO, DeSalle R: Concatenated Analysis Sheds Light on Early
Metazoan Evolution and Fuels a Modern “Urmetazoon” Hypothesis. PLoS
Biology 2009, 7(1):e1000020 [http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi
%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1000020].
5. Sperling EA, Peterson KJ, Pisani D: Phylogenetic-Signal Dissection of
Nuclear Housekeeping Genes Supports the Paraphyly of Sponges and
the Monophyly of Eumetazoa. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2009,
26:2261-2274.
6. King N, Westbrook MJ, Young SL, Kuo A, Abedin M, Chapman J,
Fairclough S, Hellsten U, Isogai Y, Letunic I, et al: The genome of the
choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis and the origin of metazoans.
Nature 2008, 451:783-788.
7. Srivastava M, Begovic E, Chapman J, Putnam NH, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Kuo A, Mitros T, Salamov A, Carpenter ML, et al: The Trichoplax genome
and the nature of placozoans. Nature 2008, 454:955-960.
8. Srivastava M, Simakov O, Chapman J, Fahey B, Gauthier MEA, Mitros T,
Richards GS, Conaco C, Dacre M, Hellsten U, et al: The Amphimedon
queenslandica genome and the evolution of animal complexity. Nature
2010, 466:720-726.
9. Adamska M, Larroux C, Adamski M, Green K, Lovas E, Koop D, Richards GS,
Zwafink C, Degnan BM: Structure and expression of conserved Wnt

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.

pathway components in the demosponge Amphimedon queenslandica.
Evolution & Development 2010, 12:494-518.
Adamska M, Matus DQ, Adamski M, Green K, Rokhsar DS, Martindale MQ,
Degnan BM: The evolutionary origin of hedgehog proteins. Current
Biology 2007, 17:R836-R837.
Gauthier MEA, Du Pasquier L, Degnan BM: The genome of the sponge
Amphimedon queenslandica provides new perspectives into the origin of
Toll-like and interleukin 1 receptor pathways. Evolution & Development
2010, 12:519-533.
Kosik KS: Exploring the early origins of the synapse by comparative
genomics. Biology Letters 2009, 5:108-111.
Nickel M: Evolutionary emergence of synaptic nervous systems: what can
we learn from the non-synaptic, nerveless Porifera? Invertebrate Biology
2010, 129:1-16.
Richards GS, Simionato E, Perron M, Adamska M, Vervoort M, Degnan BM:
Sponge Genes Provide New Insight into the Evolutionary Origin of the
Neurogenic Circuit. Current Biology 2008, 18:1156-1161.
Sakarya O, Armstrong KA, Adamska M, Adamski M, Wang IF, Tidor B,
Degnan BM, Oakley TH, Kosik KS: A Post-Synaptic Scaffold at the Origin of
the Animal Kingdom. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e506.
Jackson DJ, Macis L, Reitner J, Degnan BM, Worheide G: Sponge
paleogenomics reveals an ancient role for carbonic anhydrase in
skeletogenesis. Science 2007, 316:1893-1895.
Lavrov DV, Wang X, Kelly M: Reconstructing ordinal relationships in the
Demospongiae using mitochondrial genomic data. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 2008, 49:111-124.
Jakob W, Sagasser S, Dellaporta S, Holland P, Kuhn K, Schierwater B: The
Trox-2 Hox/ParaHox gene of Trichoplax (Placozoa) marks an epithelial
boundary. Development Genes and Evolution 2004, 214:170-175.
Jakob W, Schierwater B: Changing Hydrozoan Bauplans by Silencing HoxLike Genes. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e694.
Lohmann JU, Endl I, Bosch TCG: Silencing of Developmental Genes in
Hydra. Developmental Biology 1999, 214:211-214.
Pankow S, Bamberger C: The p53 Tumor Suppressor-Like Protein nvp63
Mediates Selective Germ Cell Death in the Sea Anemone Nematostella
vectensis. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e782.
Yamada A, Martindale MQ, Fukui A, Tochinai S: Highly conserved functions
of the Brachyury gene on morphogenetic movements: Insight from the
early-diverging phylum Ctenophora. Developmental Biology 2010,
339:212-222.
Gee L, Hartig J, Law L, Wittlieb J, Khalturin K, Bosch TCG, Bode HR: [beta]catenin plays a central role in setting up the head organizer in hydra.
Developmental Biology 2010, 340:116-124.
Timmons L, Court DL, Fire A: Ingestion of bacterially expressed dsRNAs
can produce specific and potent genetic interference in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Gene 2001, 263:103-112.
Timmons L, Fire A: Specific interference by ingested dsRNA. Nature 1998,
395:854-854.
Fire A, Xu S, Montgomery MK, Kostas SA, Driver SE, Mello CC: Potent and
specific genetic interference by double-stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Nature 1998, 391:806-811.
Dunn SR, Phillips WS, Green DR, Weis VM: Knockdown of Actin and
Caspase Gene Expression by RNA Interference in the Symbiotic
Anemone Aiptasia pallida. Biological Bulletin 2007, 212:250-258.
Lee H, Kimelman D: A Dominant-Negative Form of p63 Is Required for
Epidermal Proliferation in Zebrafish. Developmental Cell 2002, 2:607-616.
Lekven AC, Thorpe CJ, Waxman JS, Moon RT: Zebrafish wnt8 Encodes Two
Wnt8 Proteins on a Bicistronic Transcript and Is Required for Mesoderm
and Neurectoderm Patterning. Developmental Cell 2001, 1:103-114.
Chera S, de Rosa R, Miljkovic-Licina M, Dobretz K, Ghila L, Kaloulis K,
Galliot B: Silencing of the hydra serine protease inhibitor Kazal1 gene
mimics the human SPINK1 pancreatic phenotype. J Cell Sci 2006,
119:846-857.
Manconi R, Pronzato R: Suborder Spongillina subord. nov.: Freshwater
Sponges. In Systema Porifera: A Guide to the Classification of Sponges.
Volume 1. Edited by: Hooper JNA, Van Soest RWM. New York: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishers New York; 2002:921-1001.
Funayama N: The stem cell system in demosponges: Insights into the
origin of somatic stem cells. Development, Growth & Differentiation 2010,
52:1-14.

Page 14 of 15

33. Adams ED, Goss GG, Leys SP: Freshwater sponges have functional, sealing
epithelia with high transepithelial resistance and negative transepithelial
potential. PLoS One 2010, 5:e15040.
34. Elliott GRD, Leys SP: Coordinated contractions effectively expel water
from the aquiferous system of a freshwater sponge. J Exp Biol 2007,
210:3736-3748.
35. Windsor PJ, Leys SP: Wnt signaling and induction in the sponge
aquiferous system: evidence for an ancient origin of the organizer. Evol
Dev 2010, 12:484-493.
36. Funayama N, Nakatsukasa M, Hayashi T, Agata K: Isolation of the
choanocyte in the fresh water sponge, Ephydatia fluviatilis and its
lineage marker, Ef annexin. Development, Growth & Differentiation 2005,
47:243-253.
37. Nickel M: Kinetics and rhythm of body contractions in the sponge Tethya
wilhelma (Porifera: Demospongiae). Journal of Experimental Biology 2004,
207:4515-4524.
38. Sarà M, Sarà A, Nickel M, Brümmer F: Three new species of Tethya
(Porifera: Demospongiae) from German aquaria. Stuttgarter Beiträge zur
Naturkunde Serie A 2001, 631:1-15.
39. Hammel JU, Herzen J, Beckmann F, Nickel M: Sponge budding is a
spatiotemporal morphological patterning process: Insights from
synchrotron radiation-based x-ray microtomography into the asexual
reproduction of Tethya wilhelma. Frontiers in Zoology 2009, 6:19.
40. Hammel JU, Filativ MV, Herzen J, Beckmann F, Kaandorp J, Nickel M: Acta
Zoologica 2011, 92: [http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.14636395.2010.00492.x/full].
41. Nickel M, Donath T, Schweikert M, Beckmann F: Functional morphology of
Tethya species (Porifera): 1. quantitative 3D-analysis of T. wilhelma by
synchrotron radiation based x-ray microtomography. Zoomorphology
2006, 125(4):209-223.
42. Nickel M, Scheer C, Hammel JU, Herzen J, Beckmann F: The contractile
sponge epithelium sensu lato - body contraction of the demosponge
Tethya wilhelma is mediated by the pinacoderm. The Journal of
Experimental Biology 2011, 214:1692-1698.
43. Nickel M: Like a ‘rolling stone’: quantitative analysis of the body
movement and skeletal dynamics of the sponge Tethya wilhelma.
Journal of Experimental Biology 2006, 209:2839-2846.
44. Ellwanger K, Eich A, Nickel M: GABA and Glutamate specifically induce
contractions in the sponge Tethya wilhelma. Journal of Comparative
Physiology A, Sensory, Neural, and Behavioral Physiology 2007, 193(1):1-11.
45. Ellwanger K, Nickel M: Neuroactive substances specifically modulate
rhythmic body contractions in the nerveless metazoon Tethya wilhelma
(Demospongiae, Porifera). Frontiers in Zoology 2006, 3:7.
46. Nakajima-Iijima S, Hamada H, Reddy P, Kakunaga T: Molecular structure of
the human cytoplasmic beta-actin gene: interspecies homology of
sequences in the introns. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 1985, 82:6133-6137.
47. Bairoch A, Bucher P, Hofmann K: The PROSITE database, its status in 1997.
Nucleic Acids Research 1997, 25:217-221.
48. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Research 1997, 25:3389-3402.
49. Sehring I, Mansfeld J, Reiner C, Wagner E, Plattner H, Kissmehl R: The actin
multigene family of Paramecium tetraurelia. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:82.
50. Boguski MS, Lowe TMJ, Tolstoshev CM: dbEST [mdash] database for
[ldquo]expressed sequence tags[rdquo]. Nat Genet 1993, 4:332-333.
51. Hill M, Stabile C, Steffen LK, Hill A: Toxic effects of endocrine disrupters on
freshwater sponges: common developmental abnormalities.
Environmental Pollution 2002, 117:295-300.
52. Nickel M, Brümmer F: Body extension types of Tethya wilhelma: cellular
organisation and their function in movement. Bollettino dei musei e degli
istituti biologici dell’ Universita di Genova 2004, 68:483-489.
53. Kabsch W, Vandekerckhove J: Structure and Function of Actin. Annual
Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure 2003, 21:49-76.
54. De Goeij JM, De Kluijver A, Van Duyl FC, Vacelet J, Wijffels RH, De
Goeij AFPM, Cleutjens JPM, Schutte B: Cell kinetics of the marine sponge
Halisarca caerulea reveal rapid cell turnover and shedding. Journal of
Experimental Biology 2009, 212:3892-3900.
55. Arendt D: The evolution of cell types in animals: emerging principles
from molecular studies. Nature Reviews Genetics 2008, 9:868-882.

Rivera et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:67
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/67

Page 15 of 15

56. Ereskovsky A, Tokina D: Asexual reproduction in homoscleromorph
sponges (Porifera; Homoscleromorpha). Marine Biology 2007, 151:425-434.
57. Ereskovsky AV, Borchiellini C, Gazave E, Ivanisevic J, Lapébie P, Perez T,
Renard E, Vacelet J: The Homoscleromorph sponge Oscarella lobularis, a
promising sponge model in evolutionary and developmental biology.
BioEssays 2009, 31:89-97.
58. Manuel M, Le Parco Y: Homeobox Gene Diversification in the Calcareous
Sponge, Sycon raphanus. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2000,
17:97-107.
59. Manuel M, Borchiellini C, Alivon E, Le PY, Vacelet J, Boury-Esnault N:
Phylogeny and evolution of calcareous sponges: Monophyly of Calcinea
and Calcaronea, high level of morphological homoplasy, and the
primitive nature of axial symmetry. Systematic Biology 2003, 52:311-333.
60. Adamska M, Degnan B, Green K, Zwafink C: What sponges can tell us
about the evolution of developmental processes. Zoology 2011, 114:1-10.
61. Agata K, Nakajima E, Funayama N, Shibata N, Saito Y, Umesono Y: Two
different evolutionary origins of stem cell systems and their molecular
basis. Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 2006, 17:503-509.
62. Funayama N, Nakatsukasa M, Kuraku S, Takechi K, Dohi M, Iwabe N,
Miyata T, Agata K: Isolation of Ef silicatein and Ef lectin as Molecular
Markers Sclerocytes and Cells Involved in Innate Immunity in the
Freshwater Sponge Ephydatia fluviatilis. Zoological Science 2005,
22:1113-1122.
63. Funayama N, Nakatsukasa M, Mohri K, Masuda Y, Agata K: Piwi expression
in archeocytes and choanocytes in demosponges: insights into the stem
cell system in demosponges. Evolution & Development 2010, 12:275-287.
64. Strekal TA, McDiffett WF: Factors affecting germination, growth, and
distribution of the freshwater sponge, Spongilla fragilis Leidy (Porifera).
Biol Bull 1974, 146:267-278.
65. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
66. Rasband WS: ImageJ Bethesda, Maryland, USA: U. S. National Institutes of
Health; 1997 [http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/].
67. Ramakers C, Ruijter JM, Deprez RHL, Moorman AFM: Assumption-free
analysis of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) data.
Neuroscience Letters 2003, 339:62-66.
68. Ruijter JM, Ramakers C, Hoogaars WMH, Karlen Y, Bakker O, van den
Hoff MJB, Moorman AFM: Amplification efficiency: linking baseline and
bias in the analysis of quantitative PCR data. Nucleic Acids Research 2009,
37:e45-e45.
69. Pfaffl MW: A new mathematical model for relative quantification in realtime RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Research 2001, 29:e45-e45.
70. Soong R, Ruschoff J, Tabiti K: Detection of colorectal micrometastasis by
quantitative RT-PCR of cytokeratin 20 mRNA. Roche Molecular
Biochemicals Internal Publication 2000.
doi:10.1186/1472-6750-11-67
Cite this article as: Rivera et al.: RNA interference in marine and
freshwater sponges: actin knockdown in Tethya wilhelma and Ephydatia
muelleri by ingested dsRNA expressing bacteria. BMC Biotechnology 2011
11:67.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
