<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A tandem sequence motif acts as a distance-dependent enhancer in a set of genes involved in translation by binding the proteins NonO and SFPQ</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-624"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Stefan Roepcke"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1221/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A tandem sequence motif acts as a distancedependent enhancer in a set of genes involved
in translation by binding the proteins NonO and
SFPQ
Stefan Roepcke1,4†, Silke Stahlberg2,3†, Holger Klein1, Marcel H Schulz1, Lars Theobald2, Sabrina Gohlke2,
Martin Vingron1 and Diego J Walther2*

Abstract
Background: Bioinformatic analyses of expression control sequences in promoters of co-expressed or functionally
related genes enable the discovery of common regulatory sequence motifs that might be involved in co-ordinated
gene expression. By studying promoter sequences of the human ribosomal protein genes we recently identified a
novel highly specific Localized Tandem Sequence Motif (LTSM). In this work we sought to identify additional genes
and LTSM-binding proteins to elucidate potential regulatory mechanisms.
Results: Genome-wide analyses allowed finding a considerable number of additional LTSM-positive genes, the
products of which are involved in translation, among them, translation initiation and elongation factors, and 5S
rRNA. Electromobility shift assays then showed specific signals demonstrating the binding of protein complexes to
LTSM in ribosomal protein gene promoters. Pull-down assays with LTSM-containing oligonucleotides and
subsequent mass spectrometric analysis identified the related multifunctional nucleotide binding proteins NonO
and SFPQ in the binding complex. Functional characterization then revealed that LTSM enhances the
transcriptional activity of the promoters in dependency of the distance from the transcription start site.
Conclusions: Our data demonstrate the power of bioinformatic analyses for the identification of biologically
relevant sequence motifs. LTSM and the here found LTSM-binding proteins NonO and SFPQ were discovered
through a synergistic combination of bioinformatic and biochemical methods and are regulators of the expression
of a set of genes of the translational apparatus in a distance-dependent manner.

Background
During the human genome project it was recognized
that the mere number of protein-coding genes is much
smaller than expected. In contrast, entirely new molecular mechanisms have been revealed that add to the complexity of gene regulation. In general, gene expression is
regulated by protein complexes that assemble on the
DNA at transcription factor binding sites, which then
interact with the transcriptional apparatus. With the
sequencing of the human and other mammalian
* Correspondence: dwalther@molgen.mpg.de
† Contributed equally
2
Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

genomes, diverse projects were started to identify and
characterize the transcribed genomic regions including
their transcription start sites (TSS) and proximal regulatory sequence regions (promoter).
Bioinformatic analyses of promoter DNA sequences of
groups of coexpressed or functionally related genes
enable the discovery of gene regulatory mechanisms. In
a prior study we investigated the well-characterized promoter sequence set of the essential and highly expressed
human ribosomal protein (RP) genes and succeeded in
the identification of a novel specific sequence motif [1].
The major characteristics of the motif are the tandem
ATC flanks with a seven base pair (bp) spacer, its strict
orientation and its localization at approximately 62 bp
downstream of the TSS. Therefore, we named it LTSM,

© 2011 Roepcke et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

for Localized Tandem Sequence Motif. The LTSM is
situated in the first intron, except for RPL12 that contains such an element in its 5’-UTR. Moreover, we
found occurrences of the motif to be evolutionarily conserved between orthologous human and mouse RP
promoters.
The human ribosome consists of four rRNAs and 79
proteins, which are encoded by 80 genes [2-4]. RP genes
are highly and co-ordinately expressed and their TSS is
rigidly controlled maintaining the 5’-terminal oligo-pyrimidine tract (5’-TOP) [4]. 5’-TOPs are mRNA sequence
elements that have been intensively studied for their
role in regulation of RP translation [5]. Investigations of
the regulation of transcription of this large but relatively
homogeneous and essential group of genes established
the transcription factors YY1, GABP, hDREF, and SP1
as RP gene expression regulators [6-8].
The first main goal of the present study was the identification of further genes that might be regulated by a
LTSM. By studying mouse and zebrafish RP promoters
bioinformatically we first refined the definition of the
LTSM sequence motif. Finally, we performed a genomewide search for genes with LTSM-bearing promoters.
Interestingly, the additional LTSM-positive genes mostly
encode for products, which are involved in translation.
The second main goal of the study was the identification of proteins that bind LTSMs and the functional
characterization of the motif. Here we show that the
two related nucleotide binding proteins NonO (nonPOU domain-containing, octamer-binding) and SFPQ
(splicing factor proline/glutamine-rich) [9] bind directly
to LTSM sites. Furthermore, we reveal that in this context NonO and SFPQ are not classical transcriptional
regulators of RP gene expression, but rather determine
the positioning of the transcriptional machinery on RP
gene promoters. Therewith LTSMs and its binding proteins seem to contribute to the maintenance of the
exact TSS and to the expression level in genes involved
in translation.

Results
Refined definition of LTSM

Since evolutionary conservation of sequence features
provides strong evidence for functional importance, we
studied the proximal RP promoters in zebrafish [10].
Although in zebrafish the genomic background was
much more AT-rich, key features of RP gene promoters,
such as the TATA box and the 5’-TOP signal were
comparable between fish and mammals (Additional file
1). In the RP promoters of zebrafish we identified a tandem motif that exhibits similar features to the mammalian LTSM: it consists of two ATC flanks with a seven
bp spacer, was strictly oriented and located approximately 62 bp downstream of the TSS. The major

Page 2 of 15

difference between the mammalian and the fish motifs
was the GC-content of the middle part, which was significantly higher in the mammalian motif. These observations led us to a refined definition of the LTSM: 1.
ATC-ATC tandem motif with a spacer of seven bp, 2.
located between +52 and +82 bp relative to the TSS, 3.
strictly oriented. The base distribution of the middle
part is not considered functionally constrained but
rather governed by the genomic background of the
actual promoter. Searching the human RP promoters
(-500 to +500) with the refined motif definition revealed
50 hits in total, 35 at the preferred location and in the
right orientation, two at different locations but in the
right orientation and 13 on the reverse-complement
strand at no preferred location (Additional file 2).
We considered the distance of 10 bp from the first to
the second T of the ATC-ATC tandem, which corresponds to approximately one turn of the DNA double
helix, an important structural feature of the motif.
Further, we speculated that LTSM binding complexes
could allow some flexibility in the spacing of the two
flanks. Therefore, we searched the human RP promoters
for ATC-ATC tandem motifs with a spacing of one bp
less and one bp more than the original motif, which
contains seven bp between the ATC flanks (Additional
file 2). To our surprise, we found the tripartite tandem
motif (ATC-8-ATC-6-ATC) in the four genes RPS15a,
RPL17, RPL3 and RPS24 in the same orientation and at
the typical location relative to the TSS. Each is composed of three ATC submotifs; the first two are separated by eight base pairs and the second and third are
separated by six base pairs.
Identification of additional LTSM-positive genes

We set out to screen the human genome for LTSMpositive genes to generate hypotheses about the motif’s
function. An important characteristic of LTSM in RP
promoters was its location relative to the TSS. Therefore, we decided to scan EnsEMBL human genome database version 55 (EnsEMBL55) because it contains
detailed information about transcripts including TSS
and exon-intron structure [11]. The promoter regions,
-500 to +500 relative to the annotated TSS, were
extracted and, subsequently, the LTSM was searched on
these regions in both orientations. Without repeat
masking there was an enrichment between positions
+21 and +40 bp (Figure 1A), although we did not find
genome-wide positional enrichment in the repeatmasked promoter set (Figure 1B). Moreover, we scanned
the databases DBTSS and CAGE because they were built
on sequence tags from 5’-ends of capped mRNAs
[12,13]. Similarly, no genome-wide positional enrichment of LTSMs was found in DBTSS or CAGE derived
promoter sets after repeat masking (data not shown).

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Genome-wide analysis of LTSM. (A, B) Human transcripts from EnsEMBL55 were searched for LTSM in their promoters (-500 to +500
relative to TSS) on both strands. Histograms of the LTSM - TSS distances in the promoter set (bin width: 20 bp): (A) without prior repeat
masking and (B) with prior repeat masking. (C) Number of LTSM-positive genes (LTSM between +21 to +100 bp relative to TSS of human
transcripts in EnsEMBL55) without prior repeat masking subdivided into different structural classes (grey bar: forward strand, black bar: reversecomplement strand).

We tested the TSS predictions in the gene and transcript collections of EnsEMBL55, CAGE and DBTSS
based on our experimentally verified human RP promoter set (Additional file 3). Choosing the transcripts with
the closest TSS from EnsEMBL55 for each RP gene
yielded the best result: an average distance of seven bp
to the verified TSS.
We decided to focus our search on genes where
LTSMs appeared in a similar location relative to the
TSS. For each transcript in EnsEMBL55 we scanned the
promoter region from +21 to +100 bp relative to the

TSS. This resulted in 1460 genes associated to 2078
transcripts that carry LTSM elements (Additional file 4).
Note that the larger number of transcripts compared to
the number of genes arose mostly through alternative
transcripts that contained the same LTSM.
Interestingly, a considerable portion of LTSM-positive
genes encode functional RNAs (Figure 1C). Among
those were 271 out of the 429 5S ribosomal RNA genes,
which are transcribed by RNA polymerase III (Pol-III).
These instances were surprising in several aspects.
Firstly, the distance to the TSS with about 31 bp was

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

considerably smaller than for the typical LTSM in RNA
polymerase II (Pol-II) transcribed genes (62 bp downstream of the TSS). Secondly, the motif was found in
both orientations, 158 on the forward strand, 92 on the
reverse-complement strand, and 21 5S-rRNA promoters
contained LTSM on both strands. There were no LTSM
in other rRNA genes in EnsEMBL. The second multicopy RNA gene with many LTSM-positive promoters
was U2 spliceosomal RNA. 38 of 68 U2 RNA promoters
contained LTSM, exclusively on the forward strand and
most of them at position +37 bp. Moreover, five out of
six occurrences of the tripartite LTSM elements in the
RNA genes of EnsEMBL55 belonged to U2 promoters
(Additional file 5).
LTSM-positive genes encode products belonging to the
translational apparatus

A Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the
LTSM-positive protein-coding genes using the Ontologizer software and the Parent-Child method revealed that
only categories related to translation were enriched
among LTSM-positive genes, except for three of six
genes in the Purkinje cell GO category (Additional file
6)[14,15]. Apart from the above-mentioned RP genes we
identified the translation initiation factors 3 subunit D
and 4 Gamma 3 (EIF3D, EIF4G3) and the translation
elongation factors 1-Gamma and 2 (EEF1G, EEF2) to
carry LTSMs in their promoters. Mapping all genes with
5’-TOP elements of a recent study in the human genome to our list of LTSM-positive genes resulted in a
minor overlap of 52 between the 1399 LTSM-positive
and the 1114 TOP-positive genes including 17 RP genes
[16].
The LTSM is bound by nuclear proteins

We performed electromobility shift assays (EMSA) with
nuclear extracts of SHP77, COS7 and HEK293 cells to
show that LTSM are bound sequence-specifically by
nuclear proteins. Radiolabelled double stranded DNA
oligonucleotides harbouring the LTSM (LTSM-positive
probes) derived from several RP promoters and unlabeled dsDNA competitor probes were incubated with
nuclear extracts. The sequences of LTSM-negative competitor probes were chosen from the typical LTSM location of the promoters of RPS6 and RPL13a that are
devoid of LTSMs. In several experiments, we tested
LTSM-positive probes from the eight RP genes RPL36,
RPL32, RPL18, RPL12, RPL11, RPL7a, RPS15 and
RPS4X in the presence of LTSM-negative competitor
probes. We found specific signals for the five genes
RPL36, RPL32, RPL18, RPS15 and RPS4X using
HEK293 cell nuclear extract (Figure 2, Additional file 7).
When repeating the experiments with extracts from
SHP77 and COS7 cells the patterns of signal intensities

Page 4 of 15

were comparable to those from HEK293 cells (data not
shown). Although the signals of the different LTSMpositive probes were specific and of the same molecular
size, the intensities varied considerably and for three
probes the EMSA never showed a specific signal.
NonO and SFPQ bind to the LTSM

The probe derived from RPL36 showed consistently the
strongest specific signals in EMSA experiments. In order
to identify specifically binding proteins, we generated
biotinylated LTSM-positive probes from RPL36 and performed a protein pull-down from nuclear extracts in the
presence of the unlabeled LTSM-negative RPS6 25mer
competitor. Running a protein gel resulted in three prominent bands (Additional file 8). Repeating this experiment with the unlabeled LTSM-negative RPL13a
competitor resulted in three prominent bands of similar
molecular weight plus an additional band at 35 kDa.
Mass spectrometric analyses of the isolated protein
probes revealed three predominant proteins independent
of the competitor being used: the two related nucleotide
binding proteins NonO and SFPQ and the poly(ADPribose)-polymerase PARP1 (Additional file 9). All the
other identified proteins achieved relatively low scores
and occurred in only one of the two experiments.
PARP1 is known to bind DNA ends in cellular DNA
repair events and to stabilize numerous transcription
factors at their target DNA sequences by ribosylation.
Thus, we focused on NonO and SFPQ in this work,
since we considered them as more likely candidates for
sequence-specific LTSM binders.
We verified the binding of NonO and SFPQ by pulldown assays using biotinylated LTSM-positive dsDNA
probes of the five genes RPL36, RPL18, RPL12, RPS15
and RPS4X, and subsequent Western blotting analyses
with NonO and SFPQ specific antibodies (anti-NonO
and anti-SFPQ). It should be noted that the LTSM-positive probes of all tested RP genes, including RPL12 and
RPL18 that never showed specific signals in EMSA
experiments led to the pull-down of NonO and SFPQ
(Figure 3), presumably for the much higher sensitivity of
Western blotting compared with EMSA. Importantly,
anti-NonO also binds SFPQ and anti-SFPQ binds NonO
with low affinity (Figure 3A, B). The antibodies recognize epitopes of both proteins that are located in their
C-terminal homologous domains, which may explain
this cross-specificity [9].
The surprising finding of the tripartite tandem motif
(ATC-8-ATC-6-ATC) with the spacers of +1 and -1 in
respect to the most common spacer of 7 bp motivated
us to test their affinities for NonO and SFPQ binding.
Pull-down assays with nuclear extracts from HEK293
cells confirmed that NonO and SFPQ bind to all three
tested sequences RPS15a, RPL17 and RPS24 (Additional

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Electromobility Shift Assays (EMSAs) with LTSM-positive probes. EMSAs with LTSM-positive probes derived from eight different RP
genes. The first lane contains nuclear extracts from HEK293 in the presence of labelled LTSM-positive probes. In the second lane unlabeled
specific competitor (SC) probes were added to block specific protein binding. In the last three lanes unspecific competitor (UC) probes of LTSMnegative RPS6 was added. Black arrowheads indicate specific signals in five of the eight EMSAs.

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Pull-down assays with subsequent Western blotting analysis. Biotinylated LTSM-positive probes of five RP genes were applied to
nuclear extracts of HEK293 cells (lane 1 of each probe). Unspecific competitor (UC) probes derived from LTSM-negative RPS6 were applied to
block unspecific competitive protein binding that often quenches the signal of the specific binding (lane 2 of each probe). In the lanes indicated
with Control the procedure was performed in the absence of LTSM-positive probes. (A, B) Filled arrowheads indicate specific signals for the
antibodies anti-NonO (A) and anti-SFPQ (B). Open arrowheads indicate unspecific binding of anti-NonO antibody to SFPQ (A) and anti-SFPQ
antibody to NonO (B). (C) Both specific antibodies were applied in conjunction.

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

file 10). Other than these, the list contains one additional ATC tandem motif with an 8 bp spacer at the
preferred location in RPL15 and one tri-partite tandem
motif with the first spacer of 7 bp and a second one of
6 bp in RPS10. Whether these latter sequence elements
are binding sites for NonO and/or SFPQ was not investigated, but it is highly probable.
Further, we characterized the binding by performing
EMSA experiments with nuclear extracts of HEK293
cells incubated with RPL36 derived probes as bait, as
described above, in the presence of NonO and SFPQ
specific antibodies in various concentrations. We found
that a gradual increase in concentration for each antibody led to a gradual decrease in the intensity of the
specific signals, suggesting that the antibodies interfere
with the DNA-binding ability of NonO and SFPQ (Figure 4). The effect appeared even stronger when adding
both antibodies in equal molar amounts to the binding
reaction. In the EMSA experiment there appeared a second lower band in each lane, which we considered to be
an unspecific signal because, firstly, it was located at
exactly the same position as the strong signal in the
lane without competitor and, secondly, it could not be
out-competed by a specific unlabeled LTSM-positive
probe.
NonO and SFPQ regulate the transcriptional activity in
dependence of the LTSM-TSS distance

To elucidate the functional role of NonO and SFPQ in
RP gene expression we first tested whether an over
expression of NonO or SFPQ would lead to an
enhanced promoter activity in dual luciferase assays. We
generated expression constructs of NonO and SFPQ,
and a gene expression reporter construct of the promoter of RPL12, which is the only RP gene that contains a
LTSM element on its 5’-UTR and the ATG start codon
on its first exon (Additional file 11). The introduction of
the reporter construct into HEK293 cells without NonO
or SFPQ over expression verified that the RPL12 gene
promoter is highly active (> 400% of psiCHECK positive
control SV40 promoter). However, the single or combined co-transfection of NonO and SFPQ expression
constructs together with the RPL12 reporter construct
did not lead to a further increase of the reporter signal.
By titrating the reporter construct we checked that the
reporter signal itself was not in the saturation region
(data not shown).
Next, we tested the impact of the extension of the distance between TSS and LTSM. We selected the typical
LTSM-positive gene RPL18. Exon 1 of RPL18 contains
the 5’-TOP signal and the ATG start codon right before
the splice site and intron 1 contains a LTSM at position
+68 bp. The promoter region of RPL18 (-1000, +90 bp)
was inserted into the gene trap vector pT1b-geo (Figure

Page 7 of 15

5A). The introduction of an additional Xho I restriction
site between the splice donor and the LTSM facilitated
the insertion of an intronic linker sequence and thus an
increase of the distance between TSS and LTSM. Linker
sequences of length 29 and 117 bp led to reduced reporter signals (X-Gal staining), whereas the insertion of
four bp and 53 bp produced similar or even stronger
signals (Figure 5C, D). The patterns of the mRNA and
protein expression of b-Galactosidase showed a slightly
increased signal for the construct with the four bp fill-in
and a diminished signal for the longer linker sequences.
Please note that the location of the ATG start codon on
the first exon ensured that the primary transcripts were
correctly spliced and translated. In particular, we
observed the same length for all mature mRNAs of the
constructs with the various insertions (Figure 5B, Additional file 12). Furthermore, when we inhibited nonsense-mediated decay, the signals seen before in
Northern blotting analyses persisted (data not shown).
Thus, the gradual diminishing of the reporter signal
could not be explained by nonsense-mediated decay.
Finally, we also tested the inserted sequences for the
presence of potential binding sites of transcriptional
repressors but did not find any.

Discussion
The comparison of human, mouse and zebrafish RP
promoters affirmed the functional importance of the
LTSM by the rationale of phylogenetical foot printing
[10]. This analysis provided a refined definition of
LTSM, consisting of ATC-flanks separated by about a
full DNA turn. Studying LTSM elements in human and
zebrafish promoters led us to the conclusion that the
base distributions around the ATC tandem are governed
by the specific genomic backgrounds of the promoter
sequences. Furthermore, a detailed analysis of the base
distribution in the spacer between the ATC-flanks did
not yet reveal characteristic patterns that could explain
the highly variable signal strength in our EMSAs experiments (data not shown). Such refined experimental permutation analyses are clearly a subject for follow-up
studies that, in combination with a bioinformatic scoring, could lead to a precise prediction of the affinity of
LTSM variants for NonO and SFPQ, and the respective
contribution of a LTSM in regulating the level of coordinated expression of a LTSM-positive gene of the
translational apparatus.
The genome-wide analysis did not support a global
preference for location or orientation of the LTSM relative to the TSS. However, in the RP promoters of
humans, mice and zebrafish LTSM elements were
strictly oriented and located. And the insertion of intronic sequences between TSS and LTSM into the pT1bgeo reporter construct led to decreased expression

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

Page 8 of 15

Figure 4 EMSA with anti-NonO and anti-SFPQ antibodies. (A) EMSA experiment using the LTSM-positive RPL36 probes and different molar
excesses of specific anti-NonO and anti-SFPQ antibodies alone or in conjunction (AB). The first lane contained the labelled probe; in the
following lanes nuclear extracts (NE) were added. SC indicates unlabeled specific competitor probes and UC unspecific LTSM-negative RPL13A
competitor probes. Specific binding is indicated by a black arrowhead. (B) Quantitative analysis of the specific binding in EMSA experiments.
Statistical relevance refers to the specific RPL36 signal (* p ≤ 0.1/** p ≤ 0.05 in two-sided t-test, n = 6).

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

Page 9 of 15

Figure 5 Expression constructs with various LTSM - TSS distances. (A) Schema of the vector construct pRPL18: the promoter region of
RPL18 containing an internal start codon (ATG) was cloned into the gene trap vector pT1b-geo in frame with the b-geo gene lacking its start
codon. An Xho I restriction site was added to facilitate the insertion of linker sequences of different lengths. (B, C, D) The cells were transfected
with a GFP control construct (pGFP) and the five b-geo constructs, one with the endogenous RPL18 promoter including the Xho I site (pRPL18Xho) and four with additional linkers of the lengths 4 bp, 29 bp, 53 bp and 117 bp. (B) Northern and Western blotting analyses of b-geo mRNA
and protein using a b-geo specific DNA probe and an anti-b-Galactosidase antibody in the respective experiment. (C) One representative X-Gal
staining of cells transfected with the different constructs. (D) Overlay of the results of three measures of expression of the construct: mRNA,
protein, and enzymatic activity (see B, C). The images were scanned and the signals quantified using ImageQuant. Northern blotting signals were
normalized to the rRNA fluorescence intensities of the agarose gels (not shown) and Western blotting signals by reprobing the membranes with
an anti-b-actin antibody (not shown). For each experiment the signal of pRPL18-Xho was assigned 100% and the other signals were quantified
relative to it.

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

levels. The most likely explanation for our results was
that the LTSM binding complex functions as transcriptional activator or enhancer with varying strength
depending on its positioning relative to the transcription
initiation complex or the TSS. The distance between
TSS and LTSM could be one way to fine-tune the transcription levels of RP genes. This concept would also fit
our finding that the relatively small insert of four bp led
to an enhanced activity of the RP promoter construct.
With regard to possible biological functions of the
motif it is intriguing that although RP genes are highly
and co-ordinately expressed and the sequence motif is
evolutionarily conserved, less than half (35 out of 81) of
the RP genes are LTSM-positive. Even a search for
degenerate motifs in the RP promoters, allowing one of
the six ATC-ATC base pairs to deviate, did not reveal
instances that cover the entire RP gene set at the preferred position, but led to a high number of questionable matches with no preferred orientation or location
instead (data not shown). In summary, gene annotation,
scanning the literature, and sequence analysis provided
no hint for what separates LTSM-positive and LTSMnegative RP genes [17]. For example, LTSM-positive RP
genes encode parts of both the large and the small ribosomal subunits. Although there was some enrichment of
proteins of the large subunit to be LTSM-positive (26
out of 47), it was not statistically significant (Fisher’s
exact test, p-value = 0.143).
The central discovery during this work was the identification of the related nucleotide binding proteins NonO
and SFPQ as specific LTSM element binders. Although
the EMSA experiments showed specific signals of widely
varying strength and even no specific signal for three
LTSM-positive probes, the pull-down of NonO and
SFPQ with each of the tested probes establishes the specificity of our discovery. NonO is highly homologous
with the C-terminal part of SFPQ, and NonO has been
shown to bind RNA and single stranded DNA through
its N-terminus, and double stranded DNA through its
C-terminus [9]. The two proteins are parts of several
complexes that are involved in a remarkable variety of
nuclear processes, including regulation of transcription,
splicing, nuclear retention of mRNAs, double strand
break rejoining, and DNA relaxation; however, their
exact function is still elusive in most cases [9,18-23].
NonO and SFPQ were reported to form homo- and heterodimers and the tandem repeat structure of the LTSM
located on one side of the helix indicates that NonO
and SFPQ bind DNA as dimeric complexes at LTSM
elements [18]. Moreover, the discovery of the tripartite
motif suggests that these proteins can even form oligomeric or at least trimeric complexes. The result of the
intensity of EMSA signals being dose-dependently
diminished in the presence of NonO and SFPQ

Page 10 of 15

antibodies could be explained by the fact that the recognized epitopes are located in the C-terminal parts of the
proteins, which are considered to contain the DNA
binding domain [9]. A second possible explanation
could be that the antibodies impaired protein-protein
interactions that are important for the DNA-binding
complex to form.
In terms of transcriptional regulation, NonO and
SFPQ have been studied intensively as cofactors of hormone receptors, especially androgen receptor, progesterone receptor, and steroidogenic factor 1 [19,24-26].
There are conflicting reports about the functional role
of NonO in androgen receptor-dependent transcriptional regulation, be it coactivating or repressing [19,25].
Originally, NonO was identified to bind to the octamer
ATTTGCAT in immunoglobulin gene promoters [27].
In addition, NonO and SFPQ regulate transcription
indirectly by influencing histone modification and topoisomerase activity [9]. In particular, the two proteins
were shown to mediate the binding of histone deacetylases through mSin3A to nuclear receptors and inhibit
transcription [19,28].
The results of our reporter assays favour an activating
or enhancing function of NonO and SFPQ on RP gene
transcription by binding LTSM elements. However, the
co-transfection of NonO and SFPQ expressing constructs and the RPL12 reporter construct did not lead to
an increased reporter signal. A likely explanation of this
result is that the extraordinarily active RPL12 promoter
and the transcription factor levels are already optimized
such that it is hardly possible to achieve a further
increase with manipulations of any nature. Another
explanation could be that the LTSM helps to recruit
and orient the RNA polymerase complex, but is not a
rate-limiting step in transcription. This explanation is
consistent with the strong position-dependent requirements of LTSM to the TSS (as shown in Figure 5) and
may explain why no further signal increase was observed
following over expression of NonO and SFPQ in the
reporter gene assay (Additional file 11).
The genome-wide investigation of LTSM-positive
genes extended the target scope of the proposed transcriptional mechanism. Apart from RP genes, the GO
analysis revealed LTSM-positive genes that encode other
components of the translational machinery such as
EIF3D. Most puzzling was the incidence of LTSM elements in 5S rRNA promoters. Firstly, in contrast to the
RP genes, LTSMs occurred closer to the TSS at approximately +31 bp and on both strands. Secondly, in contrast to all other LTSM-positive genes 5S rRNA is
transcribed by Pol-III. Classical investigations had
shown that the transcription of 5S rRNA genes in Xenopus laevis is primarily controlled by the internal control
region at +50 to +90 bps, which is essential for the

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

determination of the correct positioning of Pol-III [29].
The presence of LTSM elements in the core promoter
of more than half of the 5S rRNA genes gave rise to the
hypothesis that LTSM is involved in the coordination of
transcription of parts of the translational apparatus. It
should be noted that we found no more LTSM elements
in promoters of other rRNA genes or other Pol-III targets in EnsEMBL55.
Additionally, our genome-wide analysis revealed a
number of LTSM-positive genes that encode proteins
involved in transcription, splicing, mRNA processing
and apparently unrelated processes. Like U2 snRNP and
other splicing factors NonO and SFPQ bind the C-terminal domain of RNA Pol-II and can interact directly
with the 5’-splice site [21]. If confirmed, the transcriptional regulation of splicing factors, including U2 spliceosomal RNA, by NonO and SFPQ would add another
level of regulation to the well-documented direct involvement of NonO and SFPQ in splicing reactions [9,21].

Conclusions
Bioinformatic analyses of genomic sequences are a
powerful tool in predicting sequence elements with
potential biological importance. However, a mere data
mining with bioinformatic methods is often considered
as a theoretical exercise by experimental geneticists. The
here exploited synergistic application of bioinformatic
and experimental techniques adds another example for
the validity of in silico methods for the identification of
players involved in the regulation of biological processes.
The previously described LTSM was refined and verified
experimentally in this study, and the here found LTSMbinding proteins NonO and SFPQ were only discovered
as regulators of the expression of a set of genes of the
translational apparatus by the predictive power of a conspicuous sequence element. The finding that these two
transcription factors play a role in a TSS-LTSM distance-dependent manner opens an entry for further
investigative approaches to fully disclose the role of
LTSM and its binders, NonO and SFPQ, in how the
translational apparatus is co-ordinately expressed.
Methods
Sequence set preparation and analyses

We extracted the regions of -500 to +500 bp relative to
the 5’-TSS of all annotated human genes in EnsEMBL
version 55 (EnsEMBL55) [11]. Apart from the raw
sequence set, we generated a repeat masked sequence
set using the EnsEMBL repeats. Due to the widespread
existence of alternative TSSs for a given gene and the
expected preferred distance of LTSM relative to the
TSS, we created a transcript-based sequence set from
EnsEMBL55, spanning from the TSS to +200 bp
downstream.

Page 11 of 15

Apart from EnsEMBL we examined two other databases CAGE and DBTSS. The Fantom 3 CAGE dataset
[12] contained 663,278 CAGE tag clusters in total, a
fraction of which fell into the categories BR (broad,
1517 clusters), MU (multimodal, 1277 clusters), PB
(broad with sharp peak, 1185 clusters), and SP (sharp
peak, 1553 clusters). The median tag cluster size was 19
bp for the complete set and 112 bp for the tag clusters
from the above mentioned categories. We decided to
use the most 5’-sequence tag of each cluster to define
the representative TSS for promoter sequence extraction. We mapped the CAGE coordinates to human genome build hg18 using UCSC LiftOver and generated
two sequence set, one containing sequences relative to
all CAGE tag clusters, the second one only relative to
CAGE tag clusters falling into one of the four above
mentioned categories. DBTSS 6.0 [13] contained TSSs
derived from full-length cDNAs in combination with
massively parallel sequencing. A number of the 101,436
detected TSSs co-located at the same genomic locus.
Therefore, we generated a less redundant set of TSSs by
removing arbitrarily one of the overlapping TSSs, leaving 100,677 unique TSSs. We extracted genomic
sequence (-500 to +500 bp) relative to the 5’-end of the
annotated TSSs.
Gene Ontology information and annotation created by
the consortium at 1/9/2009 was downloaded from the
Gene Ontology website [30]. We used the Ontologizer
2.0 software and the Parent-Child-Union method to
compute enrichments of gene ontology terms in our
gene set. Subsequently, all p-values where corrected for
multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure and values smaller than 0.05 were considered significant (same references as in the text).
Cell culture

HEK293, COS7, and SHP77 cells were cultivated as
described previously [31,32].
Preparation of nuclear extracts

Collected cells were washed once in cold PBS. The cell
pellet was resuspended in 4 times the volume of the pellet in NE buffer A (10 mM HEPES pH 7.9; 10 mM KCl;
1.5 mM MgCl2) and incubated on ice for 1 h. The sample was transferred to ice cold douncer and homogenized with 25 strokes. The homogenized cells were
centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C and the resulting pellet was washed once in 1 ml of NE buffer A. The
pellet was resuspended in 2 times its volume of NE buffer B (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9; 10% (v/v) glycerol; 420
mM NaCl; 1.5 mM MgCl 2; 0.2 mM EDTA) and incubated on ice for 30 min. Afterwards the sample was centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. The
supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.7 ml Eppendorf

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

tube and an equal volume of NE buffer C (20 mM
HEPES pH 7.9; 30% (v/v) glycerol; 1.5 mM MgCl2; 0.2
mM EDTA) was added. Nuclear extracts were aliquoted
into small volumes (100-200 μl), snap freezed in dry ice
and stored at -80°C.
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay

EMSAs were made using [ 32 P]-dCTP-labeled double
stranded DNA oligonucleotides, basically as described
previously [33]. Annealing was performed by adding
equal volumes of single stranded oligonucleotides (50
μM) and 4.55 mM MgCl2 with subsequent heating to
95°C for 2 min and successive cooling to 70°C, 65°C, 60°
C, and 55°C for 30 min at a time. The labelling took
place with 0.15 U of exo- Klenow Fragment (NEB), 2.75
pmol [32P]-dCTP and 2 μmol of each remaining dNTP
per 100 ng DNA for 15 min at 25°C. The labelling reaction was stopped using STE buffer (100 mM NaCl; 10
mM Tris; 1 mM EDTA; pH 7.5) in an amount equivalent to half of the reaction volume. 8 ng of labelled
dsDNA oligonucleotide were mixed with 4 × binding
buffer (80 mM HEPES pH 7.5; 0.04% (v/v) NP40, 20%
(v/v) glycerol, 10 mM MgCl2), 40 mM KCl, 5-10 μg of
total protein of HEK293 nuclear extracts and, if applicable, 700 fold molar excess of cold competitor probe
and 2.5-20 fold molar excess of specific antibody (for
antibodies see fishing experiment) in relation to the
labelled oligonucleotide were added. The binding reaction took place at 37°C for 60 min. The probes were
loaded into a 4% native acrylamide gel (4% (v/v) AA/
0.1% (v/v) BA; 5% (v/v) glycerol; 1 x TBE) using 6 x glycerol loading dye and run with 1 × TBE at 250 V. The
gel was exposed to a phosphor imager plate (Molecular
Dynamics) overnight. The sequences of all DNA probes
that were deployed in the EMSA experiments are presented in Additional file 13.
Pull-down assay

200 ng of double stranded, biotinylated DNA oligonucleotides were mixed with 4 x binding buffer (80 mM
HEPES pH 7.5; 0.04% (v/v) NP40; 20% (v/v) glycerol; 10
mM MgCl 2 ), 40 mM KCl, 100 μg of total protein of
HEK293/SHP77 nuclear extracts and, if applicable, 1000
fold molar excess of non-labelled competitor probe in
relation to the labelled oligonucleotide in a final volume
of 1 ml. The binding reaction took place at 37°C for 60
min. After binding the probes were given to 25 μl of
streptavidin beads (Dynabeads, M-280, Dynal Biotech)
and inverted at 4°C overnight. The beads were washed
three times with binding buffer, whereas a vial exchange
took place at every washing step, mixed with Laemmli
loading dye and incubated for 5 min at 95°C. The samples were loaded into a 10-14% SDS gel. Subsequently
the gel was stained with Coomassie Blue (Fermentas),

Page 12 of 15

the bands of interest were cut out and analyzed through
MALDI-TOF. Alternatively the proteins were blotted
and analyzed using specific antibodies (NonO: ap54nrb, mouse IgG1, BD Biosciences/SFPQ: a-PSF (H80), sc-28730, Santa Cruz). The sequences of all DNA
probes that were deployed in pull-down experiments are
presented in Additional file 14. For sequences of the
non-labelled competitor probes see Additional file 13.
Luciferase assay

For the luciferase assay the dual-luciferase reporter psiCHECK-2 (Promega) was used. The SV 40 promotor
was replaced with the promotor sequence of RPL12
including part of exon 1 that contained the LTSM element but not the ATG start codon (- 500 bp to +88 bp
relative to the TSS, primers RPL12BglII-fw, RPL12StuIrev in Additional file 15). HEK293 cells were and transfected using Dreamfect (OZ Biosciences), 10 ng of luciferase vector and a total of 200 ng of protein expression
vector were used per 96 well. If no cotransfection of
NonO/SFPQ was required, one or both of the mentioned vectors were replaced by a GFP expression construct (pGFP-C1). The medium was exchanged after 24
h, lysis of cells and assay took place 48 h after transfection. The lysis and assay was performed using the DualLuciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) and appropriate 96-well plates (Corning). NonO and SFPQ expression vectors were generated performing a PCR reaction
from human cDNA (Sequences of used primers are presented in Additional file 15). After PCR, A-tailing and
ligation into pTargeT vector (Promega) was performed.
Generation of TSS vector

To examine whether the LTSM determines the TSS of
ribosomal protein genes, the gene trap vector pT1b-geo
was used. The vector construct contained a translation
start site (ATG) separated from the b-geo (b-galactosidase and neomycin) fusion gene, a splicing acceptor site
(enSA) and a polyadenylation signal (pA). The promoter
region of RPL18 was inserted, including the TSS, the
ATG, the splicing donor site and the LTSM of the gene,
in detail: - 1000 bp to +90 bp (primers RPL18_HD,
RPL18_XH2 in Additional file 15). Additionally an Xho I
restriction site between the SDS and LTSM was
included, through which linker oligonucleotides of different lengths could be added. First, the vector pT1bgeo was corrected with an additional nucleotide to
maintain the open reading frame of the b-geo gene
(GEO1-GEO4 in Additional file 15). Three oligonucleotides linkers were generated with using the primer pairs
Geo-link 25-fw/rev, Geo-link 50-fw/rev and Geo-link
75-fw/rev (Additional file 15) and a fill-in of the Xho I
site took place (T4 DNA polymerase, NEB) resulting in
a relocation of the LTSM to position +4, +29, +53 and

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

+117 related to the original position of +68 of the
RPL18 LTSM. The constructs were checked by sequencing (Additional file 16).
HEK293 cells were transfected with the different
pT1b-geo constructs (pRPL18) and a GFP control
(pGFP-C1). After 24 h medium was exchanged and harvesting took place after 48 h. The expression of b-galactosidase was assessed using three different readouts,
namely X-Gal staining, Western and Northern blot analysis. The pT1b-geo constructs comprised one vector
containing the unmodified RPL18 promoter just containing the Xho I restriction site and the four vectors
with the relocated LTSM. The plasmids were purified
using CsCl purification twice before transfection.
X-Gal staining

The growth medium was removed; the cells were
washed with cold PBS and fixed on ice for 5 min with
fixing solution (2% (v/v) formaldehyde; 0.8% (v/v) gluteraldehyde in PBS; pH 7.3). Afterwards the cells were
washed three times with PBS and staining solution (20
mM K 3 Fe(CN) 6 ; 20 mM K 4 Fe(CN) 6 ; 2 mM MgCl 2 ; 1
mg/ml X-Gal in PBS) was added to the cells. The samples were incubated at 37°C until colour reaction
occurred (1-4 hours).
Western blotting analysis

Cells were harvested using 1 mM PMSF in cold PBS.
Cell lysis took place using RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris/
HCl, pH 8.0; 150 mM NaCl; 1% (v/v) NP-40; 0.5% (v/v)
deoxycholic acid; 0.1% (w/v) SDS and 1 x protease inhibitor (Complete; Roche). Proteins were blotted for 75
min at 16 V and analyzed using a specific antibody
against b-Galactosidase (Promega, Catalog # Z3781).
Northern blotting analysis

Cells were harvested using cold PBS. RNA was isolated
using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen). Northern blotting was
carried out following steps 13 to 32 of the protocol of
Streit S et al. [34]. The 490 bp DNA probe was made by
cutting the pT1b-geo vector with the restriction enzymes
Aat II and EcoR I. The DNA probe matched the 5’-end of
the b-geo sequence. Labeling of the probe took place with
the Prime-It RmT Random Primer Labeling Kit (STRATAGENE) with subsequent purification from unincorporated nucleotides using MicroSpin G-50 Columns
(Amersham Biosciences). The membrane was exposed to
a phosphor imager plate overnight and scanned using a
phosphorimager storm 820 (molecular dynamics).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary Figure S1. Proximal promoters of
51 zebrafish ribosomal protein genes Annotations of the promoter

Page 13 of 15

sequences (range: -80 to +100 around the TSS) with sequence motifs:
LTSM (cyan underlined), CT-stretch (red box), YY1 (blue box), and TATA
(orange box). Exons are marked by a grey background and the ATG
translation start codon by an orange background. All sequences are
aligned to their predicted TSS. Pink, yellow and green boxes mark G/Trich, A/G-rich and A/T-rich sequence motifs of low specificity, respectively
(identified automatically by motif search).
Additional file 2: Supplementary Table S1. LTSM hits in human RP
gene promoters The sequence set was generated by extraction of the
genomic sequence from -500 to +500 relative to the TSS of each RP
gene. 1 in the strand column indicates that the sequence element has
the same orientation as the transcription start, -1 is the
reversecomplement. The positions are given relative to the scanned
sequence. The TSS is annotated at position 500. Bona fide LTSMs are
marked light blue.
Additional file 3: Supplementary Table S2. Comparison of TSS
annotations in various databases To exclude the possibility that
inaccuracies in the TSS or the transcript annotations led to the blurring
of the positional enrichment of the motif we utilized our wellcharacterized RP promoter set. We found that for DBTSS and CAGE
databases only about half of the RP genes could be correctly assigned.
The EnsEMBL database contains gene annotations and transcript
annotations. The gene annotations defined the 5-end of a gene as the
most 5’-TSS of all its annotated transcripts. For many genes this led to
the annotation of a TSS far upstream from the TSS of the most abundant
transcript. For the RP gene set this resulted in an average distance
between the EnsEMBL annotated TSS and the experimentally verified TSS
of 18 or 21 bp depending on the version of the database. EnsEMBL55
contained on average 2.34 transcripts per RP gene. Choosing the
transcripts with the closest TSS from EnsEMBL for each RP gene resulted
in an average distance of seven bp relative to the TSSs of our set.
Additional file 4: Supplementary Table S3. LTSM-positive genes
from a genome-wide search
Additional file 5: Supplementary Table S4. Tripartite LTSM-positive
genes from a genome-wide search
Additional file 6: Supplementary Table S5. Result of the Gene
Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis The table shows the results of the
Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis using Otologizer. The first two
columns denote the GO ID and GO name. The third column denotes the
absolute number of GO terms as annotated in GO. The fourth and fifth
column denote the enrichment p-value, without and with adjustments
for multiple testing, respectively.
Additional file 7: Supplementary Figure S2. EMSA experiment with
LTSM-positive probes of three genes - complete picture The first
lane of each probe contains the labelled doublestranded DNA, in the
second lane nuclear extract (NE) was added. Unlabelled specific
competitors (SC) were added to block specific protein binding in the
third lane. In the last three lanes unspecific competitor (UC) sequence of
LTSM-negative RPS6 was added. Specific binding is indicated by black
arrows.
Additional file 8: Supplementary Figure S3. Identification of LTSMspecific binding proteins Pull-down experiment using biotinylated
LTSM-positive probes of RPL36, nuclear extract (NE) of SHP77 cells and
1000-fold molar excess of unspecific competitor (UC) sequence of LTSMnegative RPS6. The three dominant bands detected by Coomassie
staining (indicated by black arrows) were analyzed using mass
spectrometry (n = 2). For identified proteins compare Additional file 9.
Additional file 9: Supplementary Table S6. List of proteins in LTSM
pull-down samples Mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF) analysis of proteins
pulled by biotinylated LTSM-positive probes of RPL36 (compare
Additional file 8) and two different unspecific, LTSM-negative
competitors (RPS6 and RPL13A). The unspecific competitors (UC) were of
the same position as LTSM. H.s: Homo sapiens.
Additional file 10: Supplementary Figure S6. NonO and SFPQ bind
to tripartite LTSMs Pull-down assays with subsequent Western blotting
analysis using biotinylated DNA oligonucleotides containing the tripartite
LTSMs of the three RP genes RPS15A, RPL17 and RPL24. Unspecific
competitor (UC) sequence of LTSM-negative derived from RPS6 was

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

applied in 1000-fold molecular excess. Non-biotinylated LTSM-positive
RPL36 probes were used as control. Specific protein signals are indicated
by black arrowheads. Proteins were detected using both specific
antibodies in conjunction.
Additional file 11: Supplementary Figure S4. Influence of NonO and
SFPQ on RPL12 promotor activity using luciferase assays (A)
Schematic view of a part of the human RPL12 gene indicating the
amplified region. (B,C) Dual Luciferase vector psiCHECK2 with the original
SV40 promotor and vector psiRPL12 with the original promotor replaced
by the proximal promoter region and part of exon 1 of RPL12. (D)
Cotransfection of psiRPL12 and eukaryotic expression vectors containing
the genes of NonO and SFPQ (pTarget-NonO and pTarget-SFPQ) did not
result in a significantly enhanced promoter activity. GFP expression
vector alone served as a control.
Additional file 12: Supplementary Figure S5. Distance of LTSM to
TSS determines the efficiency of transcription Complete picture of
Northern blotting experiment detecting b- Galactosidase transcripts via
b-Galactosidase specific DNA probe at 5’-end of the transcript (Refer to
Figure 5B).
Additional file 13: Supplementary Table S7. Sequences of single
stranded DNA oligonucleotides used in EMSA experiments The
LTSMs are highlighted in grey on the forward strand.
Additional file 14: Supplementary Table S8. Sequences of
biotinylated DNA oligonucleotides used in pull down experiments
The LTSMs are highlighted in grey on the forward strand.
Additional file 15: Supplementary Table S9. Sequences of employed
PCR primers and DNA linker oligonucleotides
Additional file 16: Supplementary Figure S7. Sequence verification
of inserted linkers Sequences obtained by sequencing the described
RPL18 region in pGEM-T Easy vector using primer M13 rev (-49). Please,
refer to Figure 5 in the main text. Translation start (ATG) is shown in
bold letters, inserted Xho I restriction site with insertion of linkers of
different lengths (bold letters) is highlighted in dark grey and the LTSM
is highlighted in light grey.

List of abbreviations
5’-TOP, 5’: terminal oligo-pyrimidine tract; EMSA: electromobility shift assay;
GO: Gene Ontology; LTSM: localized tandem sequence motif; NonO: nonPOU domain-containing, octamer-binding protein; SFPQ: splicing factor
proline/glutamine-rich; TSS: transcription start site
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants of the Max Planck Society. MHS was
funded by the International Max Planck Research School for Computational
Biology and Scientific Computing. We thank the team of Prof. Dr. J. Klose
(Charité CCM, Berlin) for the protein identification using mass spectrometry,
Tutu Said Mzee for the preparation of the zebrafish RP promoter set, and
Joane Quiggin-Hirn for proof reading the manuscript.
Author details
Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. 2Department of Human Molecular
Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
3
Department of Biology, Chemistry, and Pharmacy, Free University Berlin,
14195 Berlin, Germany. 4Nycomed GmbH, Konstanz, Germany.
1

Authors’ contributions
SR, SS, LT, SG, and DJW carried out the molecular genetic studies,
participated in the sequence alignment and drafted the manuscript. HK and
MHC participated in the sequence analyses. SR, MV, and DJW participated in
the design of the study and performed the statistical analysis. SR, MV, and
DJW conceived of the study, and participated in its design and coordination.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Page 14 of 15

Received: 28 June 2011 Accepted: 20 December 2011
Published: 20 December 2011
References
1. Roepcke S, Zhi D, Vingron M, Arndt PF: Identification of highly specific
localized sequence motifs in human ribosomal protein gene promoters.
Gene 2006, 365:48-56.
2. Coyle SM, Gilbert WV, Doudna JA: Direct link between RACK1 function
and localization at the ribosome in vivo. Mol Cell Biol 2009, 29:1626-1634.
3. Gerbasi VR, Weaver CM, Hill S, Friedman DB, Link AJ: Yeast Asc1p and
mammalian RACK1 are functionally orthologous core 40S ribosomal
proteins that repress gene expression. Mol Cell Biol 2004, 24:8276-8287.
4. Yoshihama M, Uechi T, Asakawa S, Kawasaki K, Kato S, Higa S, Maeda N,
Minoshima S, Tanaka T, Shimizu N, Kenmochi N: The human ribosomal
protein genes: sequencing and comparative analysis of 73 genes.
Genome Res 2002, 12:379-390.
5. Meyuhas O: Synthesis of the translational apparatus is regulated at the
translational level. Eur J Biochem 2000, 267:6321-6330.
6. Perry RP: The architecture of mammalian ribosomal protein promoters.
BMC Evol Biol 2005, 5:15.
7. Safrany G, Perry RP: The relative contributions of various transcription
factors to the overall promoter strength of the mouse ribosomal protein
L30 gene. Eur J Biochem 1995, 230:1066-1072.
8. Yamashita D, Sano Y, Adachi Y, Okamoto Y, Osada H, Takahashi T,
Yamaguchi T, Osumi T, Hirose F: hDREF regulates cell proliferation and
expression of ribosomal protein genes. Mol Cell Biol 2007, 27:2003-2013.
9. Shav-Tal Y, Zipori D: PSF and p54(nrb)/NonO–multi-functional nuclear
proteins. FEBS Lett 2002, 531:109-114.
10. Zhang Z, Gerstein M: Of mice and men: phylogenetic footprinting aids
the discovery of regulatory elements. J Biol 2003, 2:11.
11. Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Ayling S, Ballester B, Beal K, Bragin E, Brent S, Chen Y,
Clapham P, Clarke L, et al: Ensembl 2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:
D690-697.
12. Carninci P, Kasukawa T, Katayama S, Gough J, Frith MC, Maeda N, Oyama R,
Ravasi T, Lenhard B, Wells C, et al: The transcriptional landscape of the
mammalian genome. Science 2005, 309:1559-1563.
13. Tsuchihara K, Suzuki Y, Wakaguri H, Irie T, Tanimoto K, Hashimoto S,
Matsushima K, Mizushima-Sugano J, Yamashita R, Nakai K, et al: Massive
transcriptional start site analysis of human genes in hypoxia cells. Nucleic
Acids Res 2009, 37:2249-2263.
14. Bauer S, Grossmann S, Vingron M, Robinson PN: Ontologizer 2.0–a
multifunctional tool for GO term enrichment analysis and data
exploration. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:1650-1651.
15. Grossmann S, Bauer S, Robinson PN, Vingron M: Improved detection of
overrepresentation of Gene-Ontology annotations with parent child
analysis. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:3024-3031.
16. Yamashita R, Suzuki Y, Takeuchi N, Wakaguri H, Ueda T, Sugano S, Nakai K:
Comprehensive detection of human terminal oligo-pyrimidine (TOP)
genes and analysis of their characteristics. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:3707-3715.
17. Warner JR, McIntosh KB: How common are extraribosomal functions of
ribosomal proteins? Mol Cell 2009, 34:3-11.
18. Bladen CL, Udayakumar D, Takeda Y, Dynan WS: Identification of the
polypyrimidine tract binding protein-associated splicing factor.p54(nrb)
complex as a candidate DNA double-strand break rejoining factor. J Biol
Chem 2005, 280:5205-5210.
19. Dong X, Sweet J, Challis JR, Brown T, Lye SJ: Transcriptional activity of
androgen receptor is modulated by two RNA splicing factors, PSF and
p54nrb. Mol Cell Biol 2007, 27:4863-4875.
20. Gozani O, Patton JG, Reed R: A novel set of spliceosome-associated
proteins and the essential splicing factor PSF bind stably to pre-mRNA
prior to catalytic step II of the splicing reaction. EMBO J 1994,
13:3356-3367.
21. Kameoka S, Duque P, Konarska MM: p54(nrb) associates with the 5’ splice
site within large transcription/splicing complexes. EMBO J 2004,
23:1782-1791.
22. Kaneko S, Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Meyerson M, Manley JL: The multifunctional
protein p54nrb/PSF recruits the exonuclease XRN2 to facilitate premRNA 3’ processing and transcription termination. Genes Dev 2007,
21:1779-1789.

Roepcke et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:624
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/624

Page 15 of 15

23. Shav-Tal Y, Blechman J, Darzacq X, Montagna C, Dye BT, Patton JG,
Singer RH, Zipori D: Dynamic sorting of nuclear components into distinct
nucleolar caps during transcriptional inhibition. Mol Biol Cell 2005,
16:2395-2413.
24. Dong X, Shylnova O, Challis JR, Lye SJ: Identification and characterization
of the protein-associated splicing factor as a negative co-regulator of
the progesterone receptor. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:13329-13340.
25. Ishitani K, Yoshida T, Kitagawa H, Ohta H, Nozawa S, Kato S: p54nrb acts as
a transcriptional coactivator for activation function 1 of the human
androgen receptor. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003, 306:660-665.
26. Sewer MB, Nguyen VQ, Huang CJ, Tucker PW, Kagawa N, Waterman MR:
Transcriptional activation of human CYP17 in H295R adrenocortical cells
depends on complex formation among p54(nrb)/NonO, proteinassociated splicing factor, and SF-1, a complex that also participates in
repression of transcription. Endocrinology 2002, 143:1280-1290.
27. Yang YS, Hanke JH, Carayannopoulos L, Craft CM, Capra JD, Tucker PW:
NonO, a non-POU-domain-containing, octamer-binding protein, is the
mammalian homolog of Drosophila nonAdiss. Mol Cell Biol 1993,
13:5593-5603.
28. Zhang C, Zhang MX, Shen YH, Burks JK, Li XN, Lemaire SA, Yoshimura K,
Aoki H, Matsuzaki M, An FS, et al: Role of NonO-histone interaction in
TNFalpha-suppressed Prolyl-4-hydroxylase alpha1. Biochim Biophys Acta
2008, 1783:1517-1528.
29. Schramm L, Hernandez N: Recruitment of RNA polymerase III to its target
promoters. Genes Dev 2002, 16:2593-2620.
30. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al: Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25:25-29.
31. Grohmann M, Paulmann N, Fleischhauer S, Vowinckel J, Priller J, Walther DJ:
A mammalianized synthetic nitroreductase gene for high-level
expression. BMC Cancer 2009, 9:301.
32. Walther DJ, Peter JU, Bader M: 7-Hydroxytryptophan, a novel, specific,
cytotoxic agent for carcinoids and other serotonin-producing tumors.
Cancer 2002, 94:3135-3140.
33. Scheuch K, Lautenschlager M, Grohmann M, Stahlberg S, Kirchheiner J,
Zill P, Heinz A, Walther DJ, Priller J: Characterization of a functional
promoter polymorphism of the human tryptophan hydroxylase 2 gene
in serotonergic raphe neurons. Biol Psychiatry 2007, 62:1288-1294.
34. Streit S, Michalski CW, Erkan M, Kleeff J, Friess H: Northern blot analysis for
detection and quantification of RNA in pancreatic cancer cells and
tissues. Nat Protoc 2009, 4:37-43.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-624
Cite this article as: Roepcke et al.: A tandem sequence motif acts as a
distance-dependent enhancer in a set of genes involved in translation
by binding the proteins NonO and SFPQ. BMC Genomics 2011 12:624.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
