<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Lafora disease E3-ubiquitin ligase malin is related to TRIM32 at both the phylogenetic and functional level</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-225"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Carlos Romá-Mateo"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Lafora disease E3-ubiquitin ligase malin is related
to TRIM32 at both the phylogenetic and
functional level
Carlos Romá-Mateo1, Daniel Moreno1, Santiago Vernia1, Teresa Rubio1, Travis M Bridges2, Matthew S Gentry2† and
Pascual Sanz1*†

Abstract
Background: Malin is an E3-ubiquitin ligase that is mutated in Lafora disease, a fatal form of progressive
myoclonus epilepsy. In order to perform its function, malin forms a functional complex with laforin, a glucan
phosphatase that facilitates targeting of malin to its corresponding substrates. While laforin phylogeny has been
studied, there are no data on the evolutionary lineage of malin.
Results: After an extensive search for malin orthologs, we found that malin is present in all vertebrate species and
a cephalochordate, in contrast with the broader species distribution previously reported for laforin. These data
suggest that in addition to forming a functional complex, laforin and perhaps malin may also have independent
functions. In addition, we found that malin shares significant identity with the E3-ubiquitin ligase TRIM32, which
belongs to the tripartite-motif containing family of proteins. We present experimental evidence that both malin
and TRIM32 share some substrates for ubiquitination, although they produce ubiquitin chains with different
topologies. However, TRIM32-specific substrates were not reciprocally ubiquitinated by the laforin-malin complex.
Conclusions: We found that malin and laforin are not conserved in the same genomes. In addition, we found that
malin shares significant identity with the E3-ubiquitin ligase TRIM32. The latter result suggests a common origin for
malin and TRIM32 and provides insights into possible functional relationships between both proteins.
Keywords: AMPK, malin, TRIM32, E3 ubiquitin ligase, phylogeny, Lafora disease

Background
Protein regulation by ubiquitination is a highly conserved process in eukaryotic organisms. Ubiquitin and
ubiquitin-like molecules label proteins for either protein
degradation or signalling purposes, and deficiency in the
ubiquitination machinery leads to severe pathologies [1].
Ubiquitination takes place by means of the coordinated
action of three different kinds of enzymes: E1s (ubiquitin-activating enzymes), E2s (ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes) and E3s (ubiquitin ligases). Among all these
proteins, the most diverse are the E3-ubiquitin ligases,
which are counted by hundreds in humans and confer
* Correspondence: sanz@ibv.csic.es
† Contributed equally
1
Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, CSIC and Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Jaime Roig 11, 46010Valencia, Spain
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

high specificity to the process [1]. This group is further
divided into three subfamilies, HECT-type, RING-type
E3-ubiquitin ligases, and U-box ligases. The RING-type
family of E3-ubiquitin ligases constitutes a diverse group
of enzymes, and in vertebrate organisms, combination of
accessory domains following the RING domain leads to
highly specific variants that facilitate protein-protein
interactions [2]. An example of the functional diversity
accomplished by combination of RING and other
domains can be found in the large family of enzymes
known as TRIM proteins. TRIM (TRIpartite Motif-containing) proteins are characterized by a common core
structure (a RING domain, one or two B-box domains,
and a coiled-coil region) and accessory domains that
make this family diverse at both structural and functional levels [3]. TRIM proteins have so far been
involved in processes that include cell proliferation,

© 2011 Romá-Mateo et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

differentiation, development, oncogenesis and apoptosis,
and some of them have also been shown to display antiviral properties ([4-6]).
Malin is a RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligase with six
NHL domains [a protein domain present in Ncl-1,
HT2A (TRIM32) and Lin-41 proteins] [7] located in its
C-terminus [8]. NHL domains are usually involved in
protein-protein interactions. Malin forms a functional
complex with the glucan phosphatase laforin, and this
interaction is dependent on the NHL domains in malin.
In this complex, laforin directs malin towards physiological substrates ([9-11]). Thus, laforin is a targeting subunit for malin or a scaffold that brings together
substrate and E3 ligase. Mutations in the genes encoding
malin (EPM2B) or laforin (EPM2A) lead to the development of Lafora progressive myoclonus epilepsy
([12-14]), and patients with mutations in either one of
these genes show similar pathological presentations.
Malin depends on laforin interaction to perform its physiological function as an E3-ubiquitin ligase, ubiquitinating substrates involved in glycogen metabolism such as
glycogen synthase and PP1 regulatory subunit R5/PTG.
While multiple groups have corroborated these findings
using different systems, deletion of the malin gene in a
mouse model does not result in increased accumulation
of these proteins [15]. Therefore, these incompatible
results are currently under investigation.
Impairment of the laforin-malin functional complex
results in deregulation of glycogen metabolism and formation of insoluble glucans [10]. The interaction
between malin and laforin is modulated by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) [10], and conversely, we
have recently described the ubiquitination of AMPK
subunits by the laforin-malin complex [16]. Since
AMPK also phosphorylates R5/PTG and this phosphorylation increases the ubiquitination and further degradation of this protein by the laforin-malin complex [17],
there must exist a functional link between laforin, malin,
AMPK and R5/PTG that results in the control and regulation of glycogen synthesis.
Laforin and malin belong to structurally and functionally different protein families, yet they function, in mammals, as a tightly linked functional complex. This
concept gives rise to the question whether laforin and
malin could have additional independent cellular functions. If these independent functions exist, it should be
possible to find organisms with laforin or malin and
without the second component of the complex. We
recently defined the evolutionary lineage of the laforin
gene [18-20]. Although it was previously assumed that
the gene encoding laforin (EPM2A) was a vertebratespecific gene, we identified several laforin orthologs in
distant organisms, including invertebrates and protists.
In addition, we identified a laforin-like protein in all

Page 2 of 15

organisms of green algal descent. However, no data on
malin or similar proteins have been reported in non-vertebrate organisms, thus, the physiological functions of
malin independent of those coordinated with laforin
remain unclear.
In this work, we performed a phylogenetic study of
malin that indicates malin is present in all vertebrate
species and a cephalochordate. Importantly, this pattern
of species distribution does not correlate with the species distribution of laforin, which suggests that laforin
and/or malin may have additional independent functions. In addition, we found that malin shares significant
identity with the E3-ubiquitin ligase TRIM32, and it is
phylogenetically related to the TRIM family of proteins.
The commonalities between malin and TRIM32 are not
reserved to just phylogenetic relationships. We demonstrate that TRIM32 can ubiquitinate malin targets in tissue culture cells, although the type of ubiquitin chain
that TRIM32 incorporates into these substrates is different than malin. On the contrary, malin cannot ubiquitinate TRIM32 substrates. Cumulatively, these data define
the evolutionary lineage of malin, provide evidence that
laforin likely possesses malin-independent functions, and
uncovers structural and functional similarities between
malin and TRIM32.

Results
1. Malin is conserved in all classes of vertebrates

We recently defined the evolutionary lineage of the
laforin gene [18-20]. The laforin gene is conserved in all
vertebrate genomes, but it is absent in genomes of most
non-vertebrate organisms including the standard model
organisms yeast, flies, or worms. Surprisingly, we found
that laforin is conserved in the cephalochordate Branchiostoma floridae and in the Cnidarian Nematostella
vectensis as well as in the following five protozoans Cyanidioschyzon merolae, Toxoplasma gondii, Eimeria
tenella, Tetrahymena thermophila, and Plasmodium tetraurelia [18,19]. Thus, laforin possesses an ancient and
unique evolutionary lineage. Given that the function of
laforin and malin has been linked in vertebrates, we
sought to determine if this was true in all organisms. If
they are not conserved in the same species, then these
data would argue for malin- and/or laforin-independent
functions.
Malin is a RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligase and contains
six NHL domains (Figure 1A). NHL domains form a
six-bladed b-propeller and direct protein-protein interactions, similar to WD40 domains [7,21]. In order to
define the evolutionary lineage of malin, we first
searched vertebrate databases using the criteria that a
malin ortholog must contain a RING domain and six
NHL domains, in any orientation (i.e. amino- versus carboxy-terminal), and that it cannot contain any other

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

Page 3 of 15

these two domains. Each malin ortholog identified had
an E value < 1e-90, contained a RING domain and six
NHL domains with similar boundaries as human malin,
and possessed similar predicted secondary structure. We
searched each of the malin orthologs for additional
domains, but did not identify other putative domain in
the malin orthologs. To ensure that we had identified
malin orthologs, we generated a MAFFT [26] alignment
of the 28 proteins to determine their percent identity
and similarity to H. sapiens malin (Hs-malin) as well as
compared predicted secondary structure. The similarities
ranged from 40% for Actinopterygii (fish) versions of
malin to 100% for other primate versions of malin (Figure 1B). Of note, we identified a malin ortholog in at
least one member of each class of vertebrates. Thus,
malin is conserved in all five classes of vertebrates, and
it is the only protein in vertebrate genomes that contains only a RING and six NHL domains.
2. Malin is conserved in all vertebrate genomes and one
cephalochordata genome

Figure 1 Conservation of malin in vertebrate genomes. A)
Schematic depicting the domains present in malin. B) Protein
sequences from all vertebrate malin orthologs were utilized to
generate an alignment (additional file 1, Figure S1). This alignment
was used to compare the percent similarity and identity of each
malin ortholog to human malin.

domains. We utilized the NCBI non-redundant (nr) protein database, organism-specific databases, and the
SUPERFAMILY database [22,23]. We performed
BLASTp and PSI-BLAST searches of these databases
and considered any protein with an E value < 1e-90 a
probable malin ortholog and proteins with < 1e-50 a
possible ortholog. We analyzed each of these sequences
using PROSITE, PFAM, JPRED3, and CDD [24,25] to
define predicted secondary structure as well as determine if additional domains were present and excluded
proteins with any additional domains.
We identified 28 vertebrate genomes containing a protein with a RING domain and six NHL domains (Figure
1B and additional file 1, Figure S1). For each genome
that contains a malin ortholog, we found that malin was
the only protein in the genome that contained only

In addition to vertebrate genomes, we also probed the
NCBI databases (BLASTP) for a malin ortholog in invertebrate and protozoan genomes. We did not uncover a
malin ortholog in any non-vertebrate genome NCBI
database. Given the lack of non-vertebrate sequences
obtained in our BLASTP searches, we wondered
whether the malin gene was absent in other taxa or not
observed due to incomplete sequencing data.
To answer these questions, the same queries were
used to perform BLASTP, TBLASTN, PSI-BLAST, PHIBLAST, and domain searches against species-specific
databases. We probed 215 species-specific databases
from Bilateria, Cnidaria, Ctenophora, Placozoa, Porifera,
Choanoflagellate, as well as single-celled protozoan genomes, and 1,408 bacterial genomes (additional file 2,
Table S1). Only sequences including similarity at both
RING and NHL domains were considered as positive
hits. To increase the breadth of our search, data from
ENSEMBL gene database [27] were also investigated.
These efforts identified a malin ortholog in one taxon
outside of vertebrates. We identified a malin ortholog in
the cephalochordate Branchiostoma floridae (Figure 2A).
Although we closely examined the genomes of all
metazoans, protists, plants and bacteria, we did not
identify a malin ortholog in any of these other genomes.
We did identify proteins with either a RING domain or
NHL domains in genomes as ancient as archae (additional file 3, Figure S2 and additional file 4, Figure S3).
However, these proteins only contain a RING or NHL
domains, and none of them contain both domains.
Thus, RING and NHL domains are found independently
in the most basal genomes, but they are not observed
within the same protein until the emergence of malin.

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

Page 4 of 15

Figure 2 Malin and laforin orthologs. A) H. sapiens and B. floridae malin were aligned using MAFFT and displayed in MacVector. Predicted
secondary structure is displayed over the sequences with ovals representing a-helices and arrows representing b-sheets. Grey structural
elements are shared by H. sapiens and B. floridae malin, black domains are specific to B. floridae malin, and tan domains are specific to H. sapiens
malin. The RING domain is highlighted in light red and the NHL domains are highlighted in light green. B) Unrooted phylogeny of the small
subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) sequences was generated as described in Methods. Organisms containing laforin are boxed in yellow.
Alveolates are shaded with a gray background and vertebrates with a brown background. Bootstrap values are indicated by color-coding
according to the insert. C) Unrooted phylogeny of SSU rRNA as in B), but organisms containing malin are boxed in green.

One of the reasons for performing these analyses was to
determine if malin shared a similar evolutionary lineage
with laforin. Laforin is a glucan phosphatase that contains a carbohydrate binding module (CBM) and dualspecificity phosphatase (DSP) domain, and physically
interacts with malin to form a functional complex. When
we compared the species distribution of malin with that
previously described for laforin [18,19], we observed that
laforin and malin do not correlate in species distribution
(Figure 2B &2C). Since laforin is present in the genome
of more evolutionarily basal organisms than malin, these
results suggest that laforin may perform additional functions independent of malin. It is possible that these functions are conserved from red algae to humans, but our
results indicate that at least in lower eukaryotes laforin
must posses malin-independent functions.
3. Malin is phylogenetically related to the TRIM family of
proteins

While malin is the only protein that we found in vertebrate genomes containing only a RING and six NHL
domains, our bioinformatic analyses did recover other

proteins with RING and NHL domains. The protein
with the highest identity to malin that we recovered corresponds to TRIM32, a E3-ubiquitin ligase that belongs
to the tripartite-motif containing family of proteins [3].
TRIM32 is characterized by the presence of the conserved TRIM core domains (a RING, B-box, and coiled
coil) and also by the presence of several NHL domains,
which resemble the NHL domains of malin.
Given the similarity between malin and TRIM32 we
decided to further investigate the phylogenetic relations
between malin and TRIM proteins so there would be no
confusion between TRIM and malin orthologs. Sardiello
et al [28] recently defined the TRIM protein family, and
classified them into Group 1 and Group 2 based on
relatedness and their rates of evolution. Malin is more
similar to the 34 TRIM proteins in Group 1, some of
which contain NHL domains. We chose four members
from Group 1 to further analyze and compare/contrast
with malin. TRIM2 and TRIM32 each contain a RING,
B-box, coiled-coil, and six NHL domains, and TRIM2
also contains a Filamin domain (Figure 3A). TRIM 56
and TRIM71 each contains different combinations of

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

Page 5 of 15

Figure 3 Similarities between malin and the TRIM family of proteins. A) Schematic depicting the domains present in malin, TRIM2, TRIM32,
TRIM56, and TRIM71. All domains and domain placement are to scale, and based on analyses using PROSITE and PFAM. B) The RING domain of
malin, TRIM2, TRIM32, and TRIM56 were aligned and analysed for percent similarity and identity. C) CLUSTALX alignment of the RING domains of
malin, TRIM2, TRIM32, and TRIM56. D) Phylogenetic relationships between malin and TRIM proteins in mammals. Sequences of rat (R. norvegicus),
mouse (M. musculus), human (H. sapiens) and chimp (P. troglodytes) orthologs for malin and related TRIM proteins, obtained after BLASTP
searches, were aligned using MAFFT (additional file 5, Figure S4) and used for the construction of a maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree as
described in Material and Methods.

these five domains (Figure 3A). First, we analyzed the
RING domains of TRIM2, TRIM32, and TRIM56, and
found that the TRIM32 RING shares the highest degree
of similarity and identity with the malin RING (Figure
3B and 3C). In fact, when we performed a BLASTP
search with the human malin RING domain in the
NCBI H. sapiens nr database, the RING domain from
TRIM32 is the first non-malin hit.

Next, we performed BLASTP searches with human
TRIM2, TRIM32, TRIM56, and TRIM71, with the aim
of unveiling the phylogenetic relations between malin
and this group of TRIM proteins. We verified orthologs
of each protein by analyzing their domain boundaries
and domain arrangement, and generated an alignment
from the sequences of malin, TRIM2, TRIM32,
TRIM56, and TRIM71 from H. sapiens, P. troglodytes, R.

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

norvegicus, and M. musculus (additional file 5, Figure
S4). Using the alignment, we generated a phylogenetic
maximum-likelihood tree of mouse, rat, chimp and
human orthologs (Figure 3D). The tree confirms that
malin and TRIM32 orthologs are the closest homologs
with TRIM71, TRIM56, and TRIM2 orthologs as more
divergent from malin.
To gain insight into the evolution of the malin and
TRIM orthologs, we analyzed the gene structure and
intron-exon boundaries of each. The gene encoding
malin (EPM2B) is a single exon in all mammalian, bird,
fish, and amphibian genomes (27 genomes in total), but
the malin gene contains two exons in reptile genome
(additional file 6, Figure S5). The B. floridae malin
ortholog is also a single exon. The genes encoding
TRIM2 and TRIM71 both contain multiple exons (3-11
exons) in all genomes investigated, including: mammals,
bird, fish, amphibian, reptiles, B. floridae, C. elegans, C.
intestinalis, D. melanogaster, and N. vectensis (additional
file 6, Figure S5). Therefore, it seems unlikely that the
malin gene is most closely related to either TRIM2 or
TRIM71. Alternatively, TRIM32 and TRIM56 are both
single exon genes in all mammalian genomes. We were
only able to identify TRIM56 in mammalian genomes,
but it is a single exon gene in all twelve genomes where
we identified it. Similarly, TRIM32 is a single exon gene
in all fourteen mammalian genomes where it was identified, and in the two amphibian genomes. However the
TRIM32 gene contains two exons in bird, fish, and reptile genomes (additional file 6, Figure S5). Due to the
limited sequence data available for TRIM56, it is difficult to definitively determine if malin is more similar at
the gene structural level to TRIM32 or TRIM56. However, TRIM56 does not contain NHL repeats in its
sequence while TRIM32 does contain NHL domains
and malin and TRIM32 share many similarities even at
the gene level. Thus it seems likely that malin is more
similar to TRIM32 at both the protein and gene level.
Regarding species representation of TRIM proteins, our
analyses confirm previous reports on TRIM family conservation [28]. Although all TRIM proteins have several
mammalian orthologs (Figure 4), there are some exceptions that are likely due to incomplete genome sequencing or gene loss: TRIM32 is absent in Gallus gallus and
Xenopus laevis (a TRIM32 bird ortholog annotated in
ENSEMBL is more similar to TRIM2). TRIM56, present
in all mammalian genomes, is absent in monotremes,
aves, amphibians and fish. TRIM71 and TRIM2 are
clearly the most extended proteins from the analysed
group. However, sequence divergence makes it difficult
to define the correct orthology between Nematostella
vectensis sequences similar to TRIM2 and TRIM71. In
addition, TRIM71 is uniquely conserved in nematodes
and insects. However, no significant identity with malin

Page 6 of 15

or any of these four TRIM proteins was found in protozoan (Figure 4) or fungal genomes (not shown). Cumulatively, these data define the differences between the
TRIM family and the RING-NHL protein malin.
4. Malin and TRIM32 share sequence and structural
features

Given the similarities between malin and TRIM32, we
decided to further investigate these two proteins. An
alignment of human TRIM32 and malin illustrates a high
degree of identity at both the N-terminus (corresponding
with the RING domain in both proteins) and the C-terminus (corresponding to the NHL repeats) (Figure 5A).
Malin and TRIM32 are 27% similar overall, and 52% and
38% similar between their RING and NHL domains,
respectively. However, TRIM32 possesses a portion that
spans from amino acids 198 to 285 (between the B-box
domain and the first NHL domain) that is absent in
malin. We then mapped mutations in the malin gene
found in Lafora disease patients onto the protein alignment (Figure 5A, highlighted in blue). Twenty-one of the
thirty-seven Lafora disease missense mutations in malin
contained a conserved amino acid in TRIM32. One of
those conserved residues (D233 in malin, highlighted in
red) aligns with D487 in TRIM32. Interestingly, this
amino acid is mutated to malin-D233A in Lafora disease
patients [29] and TRIM32-D487N in Limb-Girdle muscular dystrophy patients [30].
To further asses these observations, we generated
structural models for the NHL domains of both proteins
using the crystallised NHL domain of M. tuberculosis
PknD (PDB:1rwl [31]) as a template, which has an identity of 23.5% with malin and 22% with TRIM32. An
alignment of the predicted structures (Figure 5B) shows
that both the malin and TRIM32 models contain six
repeats of the characteristic three/four b-sheet found in
NHL domains [21]. Malin mutations analysed in Figure
5A locate mainly in segments of the structure corresponding to b-sheets (Figure 5C). Given their location,
it seems probable that deleterious mutations confer
structural issues in the NHL domains and likely result
in non-functional protein-protein interaction modules.
It was especially interesting that residues D233 in malin
and D487 in TRIM32 are located in equivalent positions
not only at primary structure (Figure 5A), but also at
predicted three-dimensional structure level (Figure 5C
and 5D). The similarity of these two E3 ubiquitin ligases
and their overall conservation for pathologically relevant
amino acids prompted us to compare both proteins at a
functional level.
5. Malin and TRIM32 are related at functional level

In order to determine whether malin and TRIM32
could have redundant functions, we first studied a

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

Page 7 of 15

Figure 4 Malin and TRIM32 are present in vertebrate species. Summary of the results obtained by BLASTP searches and phylogenetic tree
constructions. Analyzed species are shown in the left column (in some cases, a whole genus was submitted to BLASTP searches, i.e. Drosophila
and Trypanosoma). Species are ordered by kingdoms and taxonomic groups following classification as in [43]. Proteins found in those organisms
are marked by a (+) sign (dark grey); undetected proteins are marked as (-) (light grey). Malin and TRIM32 were found in vertebrate species and
malin is also present in one cephalochordata genome. Neither of the TRIM proteins analyzed, nor malin, were present in organisms belonging to
kingdoms protozoa or chromista, in contrast with the species distribution found for laforin (right column). For a detailed list of protein entries,
see additional file 7, Table S2.

physiological substrate of malin that is related to
alterations found in Lafora disease. The PP1 regulatory
subunit R5/PTG is ubiquitinated by the laforin-malin
complex and labelled for degradation [9,17]. Thus, we
analysed whether TRIM32 was able to ubiquitinate R5/
PTG. With this aim, we transfected HEK293 cells with
His-tagged ubiquitin constructs, myc-R5/PTG and pCINEO-TRIM32 and purified ubiquitinated proteins by
metal-affinity column purification [16,32]. R5/PTG was
only ubiquitinated in cells transfected with TRIM32
(Figure 6A). In order to analyze the specificity of the

reaction, the same assay was conducted with a catalytically inactive form of TRIM32 with a H42A mutation
in the RING domain (TRIM32 H42A). In this case no
ubiquitination of R5/PTG was observed (Figure 6A). In
order to discard the possibility that the action of
TRIM32 on R5/PTG was mediated by endogenous
malin, we repeated the ubiquitination experiments in
mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells from a mouse
model lacking malin (epm2b-/- mouse). As observed in
Figure 6B, the expression of TRIM32 in these cells still
promoted the ubiquitination of R5/PTG. All these

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

Page 8 of 15

Figure 5 Domain organization and sequence alignment of malin and TRIM32. A) Malin shares sequence features with TRIM32. Human
sequences were aligned using MAFFT and displayed in MacVector. Predicted secondary structure is displayed over the sequences with ovals
representing a-helices and arrows representing b-sheets. Grey structural elements are shared by malin and TRIM32, black domains are specific to
TRIM32, and tan domains are specific to malin. The RING domain is highlighted in light red and the NHL domains are highlighted in light green.
Malin-specific Lafora disease missense mutations are highlighted in blue and when conserved the similar amino acid in TRIM32 is highlighted in
blue. The position of D233 in malin and D487 in TRIM32 is highlighted in red. B) Alignment of malin and TRIM32 structural models. NHLcontaining fragments of both sequences (amino acids 113-396 in malin; 358-646 in TRIM32) were submitted to the ESypred3D server and
modeled using structure of M. tuberculosis PknD (PDB:1rwl) as a template. Both structural models (green for malin, red for TRIM32) were
displayed and aligned using PyMOL, showing a repetition of six NHL domains in both cases. C) Mapping of mutations found in patients in
structural models of malin. Amino acids reported to cause disease are shown in blue. D) Mapping of Limb-Girdle muscular dystrophy mutations
in TRIM32. The position of D487N is highlighted and is structurally analogous to malin-D233A Lafora disease mutation.

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

Figure 6 TRIM32 ubiquitinates recognized malin substrates
such as R5/PTG. A) HEK293 cells were co-transfected with 6xHistagged ubiquitin constructs, myc-R5/PTG, and either pCINEOTRIM32, pCINEO-TRIM32 (H42A) (encoding a catalytically inactive
form of TRIM32) or empty vector. Cell extracts were obtained as
described in Materials and Methods, and samples from crude
extracts (CE, 30 μg) and material bound to the metal affinity column
(Bound) were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting using
anti-myc antibodies, as described in Materials and Methods. B) MEF
cells from epm2b-/- mice lacking malin were co-transfected with
6xHis-tagged ubiquitin constructs, myc-R5/PTG and pFLAG-TRIM32
or empty plasmids. Cell extracts were analyzed as in part A.

results provided the first functional linkage between
malin and TRIM32.
To determine the extent of this functional link, we
decided to study the effect of TRIM32 on another known
substrate of the laforin-malin complex, namely the AMPactivated protein kinase (AMPK). AMPK is composed of
three subunits (a, b and g) and we previously demonstrated the specific ubiquitination of all subunits by the
laforin-malin complex [16]. Using the same methodology
described above, we observed that Flag-TRIM32 produced a robust ubiquitination of both AMPKa and
AMPKb subunits, but not AMPKg (Figure 7A).
In addition, we focused on the topology of ubiquitin
chains produced by TRIM32 in the AMPK subunits. We
used different ubiquitin constructs mutated in either
Lys48 (K48R) or Lys63 (K63R), unable to oligomerize at
those residues. We recently described that the laforinmalin complex promotes the acquisition of K63-linked
polyubiquitin chains onto AMPK [16]. Conversely,
TRIM32 produced a different polyubiquitin chain topology since it was able to generate ubiquitination in the
presence of either K48R- or K63R-ubiquitins (Figure
7B). These results suggest a diversification in the activities of these two E3-ubiquitin ligases, despite sharing
common substrates.
Since TRIM32 can ubiquitinate malin substrates, we
decided to investigate whether malin could ubiquitinate
TRIM32 substrates. It has been described that TRIM32
ubiquitinates, among other substrates, dysbindin (a

Page 9 of 15

protein involved in endosomal-lysosomal trafficking and
the genetic aetiology of schizophrenia) [33], and PIASy
[Protein Inhibitor of Activated STAT (Signal Transducer
and Activator of Transcription) isoform y, an E3-SUMO
ligase] [34]. Following a similar approach as described
above but using myc-dysbindin and myc-PIASy as substrates, we observed that only wild type TRIM32 but
not the laforin-malin complex was able to ubiquitinate
myc-dysbindin (Figure 8A) and myc-PIASy (Figure 8B).
We also tested another unrelated E3-ubiquitin ligase
named Mdm2, an E3 ligase for p53, but we found that
it could not ubiquitinate PIASy either, under these conditions (Figure 8B). These results indicate that the functional link between malin and TRIM32 is not
completely reciprocal.

Discussion
Malin is an E3-ubiquitin ligase mutated in Lafora progressive myoclonus epilepsy and interacts with the dual
specificity phosphatase laforin. We sought to define the
species distribution of malin in order to compare it with
the species distribution observed in laforin. We utilized
a bioinformatics approach and found that laforin and
malin do not correlate in species distribution. Laforin
has a broader distribution and is conserved in all vertebrates as well as a select group of protists and invertebrates. Alternatively, malin is only present in vertebrate
species and the cephalochordate B. floridae, although
the ubiquitin system is present in both invertebrates and
protists [1]. In addition, these studies revealed that
TRIM32, another E3-ubiquitin ligase belonging to the
tripartite-motif containing family, is closely related to
malin. By means of sequence analyses, we defined the
phylogenetic relationship between malin and other
members of the TRIM family, and found that TRIM32
is the closest homolog to malin.
Although the evolutionary history of large protein
families is complex and difficult to asses, recent studies
have established a well defined phylogeny for TRIM
proteins [28]. They are divided into Group 1 and Group
2, with Group 2 being more divergent and having
evolved more rapidly. Our analyses found that malin is
more similar to Group 1 TRIM family members. Comparison of malin with Group 1 members of the TRIM
family demonstrate that malin is most similar to
TRIM32, and they are more distantly related to
TRIM71, TRIM2, and TRIM56. Our results concerning
TRIM proteins correlate with the orthology groups of
TRIM proteins previously defined by Sardiello et al.
[28], although they did not present any data on malin.
Furthermore, our analyses demonstrate that TRIM32
and malin appear latter in the evolutionary time-line,
since only vertebrate species show orthologs for both
proteins. Conversely, TRIM2 and especially TRIM71 are

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

Page 10 of 15

Figure 7 TRIM32 ubiquitinates another malin substrate such as AMPK subunits. A) HEK293 cells were co-transfected as in part A of Figure
6 using myc-AMPK subunits a2, b2 or g1 as a substrate, and either Flag-TRIM32 or empty vector (Flag). Samples were processed and analyzed
as in Figure 6. Only in the case of AMPKa2 (left panel) and AMPKb2 (middle panel), Flag-TRIM32 produced poly-ubiquitinated forms. B) Chain
topology of ubiquitinated AMPK subunits. HEK293 cells were co-transfected with myc-AMPKa2 (left panel) or b2 subunit (right panel), 6xHistagged ubiquitin constructs (WT, K48R or K63R), and either empty vector (Flag) or Flag-TRIM32. Cell extracts were analyzed as in Figure 6 using
anti-myc antibodies.

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

Figure 8 The laforin-malin complex does not ubiquitinate
TRIM32-related substrates such as dysbindin and PIASy. A)
Ubiquitination of dysbindin. HEK293 cells were transfected with
6xHis-tagged ubiquitin construct, pmyc-dysbindin and plasmids
encoding TRIM32 [wild type or a catalytically inactive form (H42A)]
or plasmids encoding laforin and malin (pCMV-HA-laforin and
pCDNA3-HA-malin). Samples were processed and analyzed as in
Figure 6. Crude extracts were also analyzed for the presence of
laforin and malin using an anti-HA antibody. B) Ubiquitination of
PIASy. Similar experiments as those performed in part A) were
conducted in cells expressing myc-PIASy. In addition we probed the
action of Mdm2, another E3-ubiquitin ligase. Crude extracts were
analyzed for the presence of laforin and malin using an anti-HA
antibody, and with an anti-Mdm2.

present in species of eukaryotic taxa evolutionarily situated closer to the probable root of the eukaryotic tree.
The absence of orthologs in specific vertebrate organisms belonging to the same taxon (for instance, there is
a Takifugu rubripes ortholog for malin but not a Danio
rerio one) is probably due to incomplete sequencing of
these organisms and not due to gene loss. In addition,
the analyses of gene structure and intron-exon boundaries clearly indicate a close relationship between malin
and TRIM32.
Despite sequence similarities, malin and TRIM32 have
been characterized as E3-ubiquitin ligases involved in
different diseases. Both proteins display E3-ubiquitin
ligase activity and share the presence of NHL domains
at their tertiary structure. The physiological ubiquitination process performed by malin depends strictly on the
interaction with laforin, and no oligomerization has
been proved to date on malin. On the contrary,
TRIM32 requires self-oligomerization in order to perform ubiquitination [35]. Although the conserved
domains shared by both proteins show a high degree of
identity, the absence of the B-box and coiled-coil
domains in malin constitutes an important difference
that may reflect different substrate specificities. In order
to assess the functional similarities of both proteins, we

Page 11 of 15

analysed the capability of TRIM32 to ubiquitinate
laforin/malin specific substrates. A first evidence of a
functional link between TRIM32 and malin was found
in the ubiquitination of R5/PTG: we observed that
TRIM32 is able to ubiquitinate this substrate. Next, we
tested the action of TRIM32 on AMPK subunits, which
are also substrates of the laforin-malin complex. In this
case, TRIM32 ubiquitinated only the AMPKa and
AMPKb subunits, whereas malin also ubiquitinates the
AMPKg subunit. These modifications are specific of the
action of laforin/malin or TRIM32, since we previously
described that another unrelated E3-ubiquitin ligase
such as Mdm2 could not ubiquitinated any of these substrates [16]. Analysis of the topology of the ubiquitin
chains showed that ubiquitination of AMPKa and
AMPKb by TRIM32 is not dependent on either Lys48
or Lys63 ubiquitin residues, suggesting a different topology to the one produced by malin (K63 ubiquitin-linked
chains [16]). Therefore, while there are similarities in
substrate preference, there are also differences in both
substrate preference and in the types of ubiquitin chains
they promote. Further studies are required to fully
assess the functional consequences of this novel
TRIM32 modification on AMPK activity. We also found
that laforin could be ubiquitinated by TRIM32 action
(data not shown). However, as we were unable to detect
any physical interaction between TRIM32 and any of
the malin substrates (R5/PTG, AMPK subunits and
laforin), either by yeast two-hybrid analysis or by coimmunoprecipitation methods in mammalian cells, we
favour the idea that TRIM32 is a promiscuous E3-ubiquitin ligase that might be using a “hit and run”
mechanism to ubiquitinate these substrates. Although
our data strongly suggest that TRIM32 can directly ubiquitinate malin substrates, this has not been definitively
proved as we did not recapitulate the ubiquitination
reaction in vitro using purified components; therefore, it
might be possible that the activity that we are assigning
to TRIM32 could be exerted by a TRIM32-dependent
activation of a third E3-ligase.
TRIM32 also ubiquitinates muscular actin [30], dysbindin [33], and the E3-SUMO ligase PIASy [34].
TRIM32 has been related to neuronal differentiation in
mice [36] and its deficiency (TRIM32 D487N mutation)
is involved in Limb-Girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H
(OMIM 254110) [30,35]. It has been postulated that the
milder phenotype of patients having this disease may be
explained by redundant functions of other E3-ubiquitin
ligases performing compensatory TRIM32 functions
[34]. Since our structural models of malin and TRIM32
NHL domains show a similar three-dimensional organization, it is possible that malin or other related E3-ubiquitin ligases are capable of compensating the loss of
TRIM32 and interact and/or ubiquitinate TRIM32-

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

related substrates. However, no ubiquitination of the
TRIM32-specific substrates dysbindin and PIASy by
malin was found in our studies. Therefore, further studies will be required to fully assess the capability of
malin to compensate TRIM32 loss. Conversely, it has
been recently described that malin deficient mice do not
present differences in the levels of R5/PTG [15]. Perhaps
TRIM32 or another E3-ubiquitin ligase could compensate malin deficiency in terms of ubiquitinating this substrate. In any case, although TRIM32 and malin share
some substrates, the pathological outcomes of the deficiency of TRIM32 and malin are very distinct, which
indicates that some other factors affect the function of
these two E3-ligases in their particular target tissues.
Other mutations in the TRIM32 gene are related to
the Bardet-Biedl syndrome type 11 (BBS11, OMIM
209900) [35], whose symptoms include obesity, retinophaty, kidney and heart abnormalities and cognitive
deficiency. The mutation responsible for this disease
(P130S) is located in the B-box region of the protein.
Since this region is absent in malin, comparison of
TRIM32 and malin mutants and their abilities to bind
putative common interactors like E2-ubiquitin conjugating enzymes would constitute an approach to further
asses the functional divergence of both proteins and
their linkage to disease. In addition, the study of the E2conjugating enzymes that coordinate ubiquitin chain
elongation in malin- and TRIM32-regulated processes,
may lead to a better understanding of the cross-talking
of their ubiquitin pathways and its pathological
consequences.

Conclusions
In summary, our results show that malin is an E3-ubiquitin ligase only present in all vertebrate species and a
cephalochordate. Malin is related to the TRIM family of
proteins, and they likely share a common evolutionary
origin. Moreover, malin shares functional features with
TRIM32 in that they are both capable of ubiquitinating
similar substrates. However, differences at ubiquitin
chain topology promoted by each of these proteins
point to divergent roles. In addition, malin shows a pattern of species distribution that does not correlate with
the species distribution of laforin, which suggest that
laforin and malin, in addition to forming a functional
complex, may have independent functions.
Methods

Page 12 of 15

N. vectensis, B. floridae, C. intestinalis and M. brevicollis
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mapview/). In addition, we
analyzed multiple organism-specific databases (additional file 2, Table S1). The BLAST results were analyzed for domain structure and domain boundaries.
Structural and domain searches were also performed
using SUPERFAMILY [37], PROSITE, and Conserved
Domain Database (CDD). Multiple sequence alignments
were created using MAFFT [26] and CLUSTALW.
Although they gave similar results, we utilized the
MAFFT alignments due to recent reviews stating CLUSTALW inferiority [38]. Mid-point rooted maximum likelihood trees were generated from MAFFT generated
multiple sequence alignments using PROML from the
PHYLIP 3.65 software package and displayed utilizing
HYPERTREE [39]. The most appropriated model for
these data was assessed using Akaike Information Criterion in ProtTest [40] and the most appropriate model
was JTT+G+F. Structural models were created with EsyPred3D [41] and images displayed with PyMOL (http://
www.pymol.org). Accession numbers for the protein
sequences used in phylogenetic trees and species distribution are included as additional file 7, Table S2.
Plasmids

Plasmids used in this study were pCMVmyc-AMPKa2,
pCMVmyc-AMPKb2 and pCMVmyc-AMPKg1 [42];
pCDNA3-HA-malin, pFLAG-laforin, and pCMV-mycR5/PTG [10]. TRIM32 gene was PCR-amplified from
human cDNA using specific primers and PCR, and
cloned into pFLAG-CMV6c. When indicated, plasmids
pCINEO-TRIM32 and pCINEO-TRIM32 (H42A),
expressing respectively wild type and a catalytically inactive form of TRIM32 with a H42A mutation in the
RING domain [33] (a generous gift from Dr. Derek J.
Blake, Dept. Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University,
UK), were also used in the assays. Other plasmids used
in this study were: pCMV-mycPIASy (subcloned from
plasmid pACT2-PIASy, a gift from Dr. Santiago Rodriguez de Cordoba, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas,
Madrid, Spain); pmyc-dysbindin [33] (from Dr. Derek J.
Blake, Dept. Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University,
UK), pCMV-6xHisUbiq (from Dr. Manuel Rodriguez,
Proteomics Unit, CIC-BioGUNE, Vizcaya, Spain),
pCMV-6xHisUbiq K48R and pCMV-6xHisUbiq K63R
(from Dr. Christine Blattner, Institute of Toxicology and
Genetics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany)
and pCMV-Mdm2 [9].

Bioinformatics analysis

Malin and TRIM orthologs were obtained by performing
BLASTP, PHI-BLAST, and PSI-BLAST searches on
NCBI non-redundant protein databases. To further
refine the searches, they were limited to metazoan and
protozoan taxa, and TBLASTN searches in the case of

Cell models and culture conditions

Human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells and mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from epm2b-/- mice lacking malin were grown in DMEM (Lonza, Barcelona,
Spain) supplemented with 100 units/ml penicillin, 100

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

μg/ml streptomycin, 2 mM glutamine, 10% inactivated
fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen, Madrid, Spain). 1.5 × 106
cells were plated onto 60 mm-diameter culture dishes
the day before transfection. Cells were transfected with
1 μg of each plasmid using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Madrid, Spain).
Analysis of in vivo ubiquitination

To study ubiquitination in intact cells, HEK293 cells
were transfected with plasmids pCMV-6xHisUbiq
(encoding a modified ubiquitin, tagged with 6xHis residues), pCMVmyc plasmids encoding the protein of
interest and plasmids encoding different E3-ubiquitin
ligases, using the Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen, Madrid, Spain), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. After 36 hours of transfection, cells were
lysed in buffer A (6 M guanidinium-HCl, 0.1 M sodium
phosphate, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Four mg of protein
of a clarified extract (CE; 12,000 × g, 15 min) were incubated in 100 μl TALON column (Clontech, Barcelona,
Spain) in the presence of 10 mM imidazole, for 3 hours
at room temperature on a rocking platform, to purify
His-tagged proteins. The column was then successively
washed with 2 ml each of buffer B (buffer A plus 10
mM imidazole), buffer C (buffer B, but with 8 M urea
instead of 6 M guanidinium-HCl) and four more times
with buffer C adjusted to pH 6.0. Bound proteins
(Bound) were eluted with 50 μl of 2× Laemmli’s sample
buffer and analyzed by Western blotting using appropriated antibodies. When indicated, plasmids pCMV6xHisUbiq K48R and pCMV-6xHisUbiq K63R were
used in the assay instead of plasmid pCMV-6xHisUbiq.
Immunodetection

HEK293 and epm2b-/- MEF cells were transfected with
the corresponding plasmids. Twenty-four hours after
transfection, cells were scraped on ice in lysis buffer [10
mM TrisHCl pH 8; 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM EDTA; 0.6
M sucrose, 0.5% nonidet P-40 (NP-40), complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Biotech, Barcelona,
Spain), 1 mM PMSF, 50 mM NaF and 5 mM Na2P2O7].
Cells were lysed by repeated passage through a 25-gauge
needle. Twenty-five μg of total protein from the soluble
fraction of cell lysates were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and
western blotting using appropriate antibodies: anti-myc,
anti-FLAG and anti-HA (Sigma, Madrid, Spain), and
anti-Mdm2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Madrid, Spain).

=255>Additional material
Additional file 1: Alignment of malin orthologs. Protein sequences
from all vertebrate malin orthologs were utilized to generate an
alignment in MAFFT. This alignment was utilized for further analyses.

Page 13 of 15

Additional file 2: Genomes investigated for presence of malin.
Additional file 3: Proteins from Archea genomes containing a RING
domain. Putative proteins with a RING domain in eukaryotic, bacterial,
and archea genomes were identified using the SUPERFAMILY database.
Hundreds of proteins in eukaryotic and bacterial genomes were
identified and were not further analyzed. Three positive archea hits were
subsequently analyzed using PFAM, InterProScan, and SMART for
confirmation. In addition, predicted secondary structure was analyzed
using JPRED and PSIPRED. Predicted consensus secondary structure is
displayed over the sequences with arrows representing b-sheets and
ovals representing a-helices. The conserved cysteine residues are
highlighted in red. Protein identification numbers are: Nitrosopumilus
maritimus-YP_001581408.1, Methanosarcina acetivorans-NP_617583.1, and
Methanosarcina barkeri-YP_306007.1.
Additional file 4: Proteins from Archea genomes containing NHL
domains. Description: Putative proteins with NHL domains in eukaryotic,
bacterial, and archea genomes were identified using the SUPERFAMILY
database. Hundreds of proteins in eukaryotic and bacterial genomes
were identified and were not further analyzed. Three positive archea hits
were subsequently analyzed using PFAM, InterProScan, and SMART for
confirmation. In addition, predicted secondary structure was analyzed
using JPRED and PSIPRED. Predicted consensus secondary structure is
displayed over the sequences with arrows representing b-sheets. The
predicted NHL domains are highlighted with green boxes. Protein
identification numbers are: Halalkallcoccus-YP_685176.1, HalomicrobiumYP_003178756.1, and archaeon RC-I-YP_003736383.1.
Additional file 5: Alignment of malin and TRIM orthologs. Protein
sequences of malin and TRIM sequences were utilized to generate an
alignment in MAFFT. This alignment was utilized for further analyses.
Additional file 6: Known and predicted intron-exon boundaries for
malin, TRIM2, TRIM32, TRIM56, and TRIM71 genes were determined
using the UC-Santa Cruz genome browser. A vertebrate class or
genus species name is given for each gene. Each grey box represents a
single exon. The length of each exon is depicted to scale.
Additional file 7: Accession numbers for the sequences used for the
generation of Figures 2, 3 and 4.

List of Abbreviations
AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase; NHL: a protein domain present in Ncl-1:
HT2A and Lin-41 proteins; PIASy: protein inhibitor of activated STAT (signal
transducer and activator of transcription); R5/PTG: protein targeting to
glycogen; RING: really interesting new gene; TRIM: Tripartite motif-containing
protein.
Acknowledgements and Funding
We want to thank Dr. Santiago Rodriguez de Cordoba, Dr. Christine Blattner,
Dr. Derek Blake and Dr. Manuel Rodriguez, for providing us the described
plasmids and Dr. Ignacio Marin (IBV-CSIC, Valencia, Spain) for helpful
discussions. This work was supported by a grant from the Spanish Ministry
of Education and Science (SAF2008-01907) to PS; and by National Institutes
of Health grants 5R00NS061803, 5P20RR0202171, 1R01NS070899 and
University of Kentucky College of Medicine startup funds to M.S.G.
Author details
1
Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, CSIC and Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Jaime Roig 11, 46010Valencia, Spain. 2Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and
Center for Structural Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 405360509, USA.
Authors’ contributions
CR-M carried out the molecular genetic studies, participated in the sequence
alignment and drafted the manuscript; D.M. performed the ubiquitination
experiments of AMPK using TRIM32; SV. and TR. performed the
ubiquitination of PIASy using TRIM32; TMB. carried out molecular genetic
studies and participated in the sequence alignment; MSG. and PS.

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

participated in the design of the study, analyzed the data and helped to
draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 1 June 2011 Accepted: 28 July 2011 Published: 28 July 2011
References
1. Schwartz AL, Ciechanover A: Targeting proteins for destruction by the
ubiquitin system: implications for human pathobiology. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol 2009, 49:73-96.
2. Deshaies RJ, Joazeiro CA: RING domain E3 ubiquitin ligases. Annu Rev
Biochem 2009, 78:399-434.
3. Nisole S, Stoye JP, Saib A: TRIM family proteins: retroviral restriction and
antiviral defence. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3:799-808.
4. Ozato K, Shin DM, Chang TH, Morse HC: TRIM family proteins and their
emerging roles in innate immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 2008, 8:849-860.
5. Reymond A, Meroni G, Fantozzi A, Merla G, Cairo S, Luzi L, Riganelli D,
Zanaria E, Messali S, Cainarca S, Guffanti A, Minucci S, Pelicci PG, Ballabio A:
The tripartite motif family identifies cell compartments. The EMBO Journal
2001, 20:2140-2151.
6. Short KM, Cox TC: Subclassification of the RBCC/TRIM superfamily reveals
a novel motif necessary for microtubule binding. J Biol Chem 2006,
281:8970-8980.
7. Slack FJ, Ruvkun G: A novel repeat domain that is often associated with
RING finger and B-box motifs. Trends Biochem Sci 1998, 23:474-475.
8. Gentry MS, Worby CA, Dixon JE: Insights into Lafora disease: malin is an
E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates and promotes the degradation of
laforin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:8501-8506.
9. Worby CA, Gentry MS, Dixon JE: Malin decreases glycogen accumulation
by promoting the degradation of protein targeting to glycogen (PTG). J
Biol Chem 2008, 283:4069-4076.
10. Solaz-Fuster MC, Gimeno-Alcaniz JV, Ros S, Fernandez-Sanchez ME, GarciaFojeda B, Criado Garcia O, Vilchez D, Dominguez J, Garcia-Rocha M,
Sanchez-Piris M, Aguado C, Knecht E, Serratosa J, Guinovart JJ, Sanz P,
Rodriguez de Cordoba S: Regulation of glycogen synthesis by the laforinmalin complex is modulated by the AMP-activated protein kinase
pathway. Human Mol Genet 2008, 17:667-678.
11. Vilchez D, Ros S, Cifuentes D, Pujadas L, Valles J, Garcia-Fojeda B, CriadoGarcia O, Fernandez-Sanchez E, Medrano-Fernandez I, Dominguez J, GarciaRocha M, Soriano E, Rodriguez de Cordoba S, Guinovart JJ: Mechanism
suppressing glycogen synthesis in neurons and its demise in
progressive myoclonus epilepsy. Nat Neurosci 2007, 10:1407-1413.
12. Minassian BA, Lee JR, Herbrick JA, Huizenga J, Soder S, Mungall AJ,
Dunham I, Gardner R, Fong CY, Carpenter S, Jardim L, Satishchandra P,
Andermann E, Snead OC, Lopes-Cendes I, Tsui LC, Delgado-Escueta AV,
Rouleau GA, Scherer SW: Mutations in a gene encoding a novel protein
tyrosine phosphatase cause progressive myoclonus epilepsy. Nature
Genetics 1998, 20:171-174.
13. Serratosa JM, Gomez-Garre P, Gallardo ME, Anta B, de Bernabe DB,
Lindhout D, Augustijn PB, Tassinari CA, Malafosse RM, Topcu M, Grid D,
Dravet C, Berkovic SF, de Cordoba SR: A novel protein tyrosine
phosphatase gene is mutated in progressive myoclonus epilepsy of the
Lafora type (EPM2). Human Mol Genet 1999, 8:345-352.
14. Chan EM, Young EJ, Ianzano L, Munteanu I, Zhao X, Christopoulos CC,
Avanzini G, Elia M, Ackerley CA, Jovic NJ, Bohlega S, Andermann E,
Rouleau GA, Delgado-Escueta AV, Minassian BA, Scherer SW: Mutations in
NHLRC1 cause progressive myoclonus epilepsy. Nature Genetics 2003,
35:125-127.
15. DePaoli-Roach AA, Tagliabracci VS, Segvich DM, Meyer CM, Irimia JM,
Roach PJ: Genetic depletion of the malin E3 ubiquitin ligase in mice
leads to lafora bodies and the accumulation of insoluble laforin. J Biol
Chem 2010, 285:25372-25381.
16. Moreno D, Towler MC, Hardie DG, Knecht E, Sanz P: The laforin-malin
complex, involved in Lafora disease, promotes the incorporation of K63linked ubiquitin chains into AMP-activated protein kinase beta subunits.
Mol Biol Cell 2010, 21:2578-2588.
17. Vernia S, Solaz-Fuster MC, Gimeno-Alcaniz JV, Rubio T, Garcia-Haro L,
Foretz M, de Cordoba SR, Sanz P: AMP-activated protein kinase
phosphorylates R5/PTG, the glycogen targeting subunit of the R5/PTGprotein phosphatase 1 holoenzyme, and accelerates its downregulation by the laforin-malin complex. J Biol Chem 2009,
284:8247-8255.

Page 14 of 15

18. Gentry MS, Pace RM: Conservation of the glucan phosphatase laforin is
linked to rates of molecular evolution and the glucan metabolism of the
organism. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:138.
19. Gentry MS, Dowen RH, Worby CA, Mattoo S, Ecker JR, Dixon JE: The
phosphatase laforin crosses evolutionary boundaries and links
carbohydrate metabolism to neuronal disease. J Cell Biol 2007,
178:477-488.
20. Gentry MS, Dixon JE, Worby CA: Lafora disease: insights into
neurodegeneration from plant metabolism. Trends Biochem Sci 2009,
34:628-639.
21. Edwards TA, Wilkinson BD, Wharton RP, Aggarwal AK: Model of the brain
tumor-Pumilio translation repressor complex. Genes Dev 2003,
17:2508-2513.
22. Wilson D, Pethica R, Zhou Y, Talbot C, Vogel C, Madera M, Chothia C,
Gough J: SUPERFAMILY–sophisticated comparative genomics, data
mining, visualization and phylogeny. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D380-386.
23. Wilson D, Madera M, Vogel C, Chothia C, Gough J: The SUPERFAMILY
database in 2007: families and functions. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:
D308-313.
24. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Cherukuri PF, DeWeese-Scott C, Geer LY,
Gwadz M, He S, Hurwitz DI, Jackson JD, Ke Z, Lanczycki CJ, Liebert CA,
Liu C, Lu F, Marchler GH, Mullokandov M, Shoemaker BA, Simonyan V,
Song JS, Thiessen PA, Yamashita RA, Yin JJ, Zhang D, Bryant SH: CDD: a
Conserved Domain Database for protein classification. Nucleic Acids Res
2005, 33:D192-196.
25. Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, Holm L, Sonnhammer EL, Eddy SR,
Bateman A: The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2010,
38:D211-222.
26. Katoh K, Misawa K, Kuma K, Miyata T: MAFFT: a novel method for rapid
multiple sequence alignment based on fast Fourier transform. Nucleic
Acids Res 2002, 30:3059-3066.
27. Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Beal K, Ballester B, Caccamo M, Chen Y, Clarke L,
Coates G, Cunningham F, Cutts T, Down T, Dyer SC, Fitzgerald S,
Fernandez-Banet J, Graf S, Haider S, Hammond M, Herrero J, Holland R,
Howe K, Johnson N, Kahari A, Keefe D, Kokocinski F, Kulesha E, Lawson D,
Longden I, Melsopp C, Megy K, Meidl P, et al: Ensembl 2007. Nucleic Acids
Res 2007, 35:D610-617.
28. Sardiello M, Cairo S, Fontanella B, Ballabio A, Meroni G: Genomic analysis
of the TRIM family reveals two groups of genes with distinct
evolutionary properties. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:225.
29. Singh S, Ganesh S: Lafora progressive myoclonus epilepsy: a metaanalysis of reported mutations in the first decade following the
discovery of the EPM2A and NHLRC1 genes. Hum Mutat 2009, 30:715-723.
30. Kudryashova E, Kudryashov D, Kramerova I, Spencer MJ: Trim32 is a
ubiquitin ligase mutated in limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H that
binds to skeletal muscle myosin and ubiquitinates actin. J Mol Biol 2005,
354:413-424.
31. Good MC, Greenstein AE, Young TA, Ng HL, Alber T: Sensor domain of the
Mycobacterium tuberculosis receptor Ser/Thr protein kinase, PknD,
forms a highly symmetric beta propeller. J Mol Biol 2004, 339:459-469.
32. Kaiser P, Tagwerker C: Is this protein ubiquitinated? Methods Enzymol 2005,
399:243-248.
33. Locke M, Tinsley CL, Benson MA, Blake DJ: TRIM32 is an E3 ubiquitin
ligase for dysbindin. Human Mol Genet 2009, 18:2344-2358.
34. Albor A, El-Hizawi S, Horn EJ, Laederich M, Frosk P, Wrogemann K, KuleszMartin M: The interaction of Piasy with Trim32, an E3-ubiquitin ligase
mutated in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H, promotes Piasy
degradation and regulates UVB-induced keratinocyte apoptosis through
NFkappaB. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:25850-25866.
35. Saccone V, Palmieri M, Passamano L, Piluso G, Meroni G, Politano L, Nigro V:
Mutations that impair interaction properties of TRIM32 associated with
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 2H. Hum Mutat 2008, 29:240-247.
36. Schwamborn JC, Berezikov E, Knoblich JA: The TRIM-NHL protein TRIM32
activates microRNAs and prevents self-renewal in mouse neural
progenitors. Cell 2009, 136:913-925.
37. Gough J, Karplus K, Hughey R, Chothia C: Assignment of homology to
genome sequences using a library of hidden Markov models that
represent all proteins of known structure. J Mol Biol 2001, 313:903-919.

Romá-Mateo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:225
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/225

Page 15 of 15

38. Anisimova M, Cannarozzi G, Liberles DA: Finding the balance between the
mathematical and biological optima in multiple sequence alignment.
Trends Evol Biol 2010, 2:e7.
39. Bingham J, Sudarsanam S: Visualizing large hierarchical clusters in
hyperbolic space. Bioinformatics 2000, 16:660-661.
40. Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2104-2105.
41. Lambert C, Leonard N, De Bolle X, Depiereux E: ESyPred3D: Prediction of
proteins 3D structures. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:1250-1256.
42. Solaz-Fuster MC, Gimeno-Alcaniz JV, Casado M, Sanz P: TRIP6
transcriptional co-activator is a novel substrate of AMP-activated protein
kinase. Cell Signal 2006, 18:1702-1712.
43. Cavalier-Smith T: Only six kingdoms of life. Proc Biol Sci 2004,
271:1251-1262.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-225
Cite this article as: Romá-Mateo et al.: Lafora disease E3-ubiquitin ligase
malin is related to TRIM32 at both the phylogenetic and functional
level. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:225.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
