<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>An expanded phylogeny of social amoebas (Dictyostelia) shows increasing diversity and new morphological patterns</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-84"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Maria Romeralo"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

An expanded phylogeny of social amoebas
(Dictyostelia) shows increasing diversity and new
morphological patterns
Maria Romeralo1*, James C Cavender2, John C Landolt3, Steven L Stephenson4 and Sandra L Baldauf1

Abstract
Background: Social Amoebae or Dictyostelia are eukaryotic microbes with a unique life cycle consisting of both
uni- and multicellular stages. They have long fascinated molecular, developmental and evolutionary biologists, and
Dictyostelium discoideum is now one of the most widely studied eukaryotic microbial models. The first molecular
phylogeny of Dictyostelia included most of the species known at the time and suggested an extremely deep taxon
with a molecular depth roughly equivalent to Metazoa. The group was also shown to consist of four major clades,
none of which correspond to traditional genera. Potential morphological justification was identified for three of the
four major groups, on the basis of which tentative names were assigned.
Results: Over the past four years, the Mycetozoan Global Biodiversity Survey has identified many new isolates that
appear to be new species of Dictyostelia, along with numerous isolates of previously described species. We have
determined 18S ribosomal RNA gene sequences for all of these new isolates. Phylogenetic analyses of these data
show at least 50 new species, and these arise from throughout the dictyostelid tree breaking up many previously
isolated long branches. The resulting tree now shows eight well-supported major groups instead of the original
four. The new species also expand the known morphological diversity of the previously established four major
groups, violating nearly all previously suggested deep morphological patterns.
Conclusions: A greatly expanded phylogeny of Dictyostelia now shows even greater morphological plasticity at
deep taxonomic levels. In fact, there now seem to be no obvious deep evolutionary trends across the group.
However at a finer level, patterns in morphological character evolution are beginning to emerge. These results also
suggest that there is a far greater diversity of Dictyostelia yet to be discovered, including novel morphologies.

Background
The Dictyostelia (social amoebae) are common soil
dwelling amoeba most often isolated from the leaf litter
decomposition zone of forest soils [1]. The first known
dictyostelid was isolated by Brefeld [2], but by 1940 still
only ten species were recognized. Now, largely due to
the work of a handful of people, this number exceeds
100 [3]. Dictyostelia are perhaps best known for the
model organism Dictyostelium discoideum, and the fact
that their home clade, the Amoebozoa is the sister
group to the Opisthokonts (holozoa + holofungi) [4].

* Correspondence: maria.romeralo@gmail.com
1
Department of Systematic Biology, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Norbyvägen
18D, University of Uppsala, SE-75236 Uppsala, Sweden
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

The dictyostelids possess an unusual life cycle, known
almost exclusively from laboratory observations [1].
Throughout most of the asexual cycle individual dictyostelid amoebae feed upon bacteria and multiply by
binary fission. When food becomes scarce, amoebae
aggregate by the tens of thousands gradually forming a
multicellular entity with differentiated cell types. The
aggregate then develops into a slug or pseudoplasmodium, a true multicellular polarized unit. The slug
moves as a more or less coherent unit, with a head
region seeking environmental conditions suitable for the
formation of fruiting bodies [5]. Fruiting bodies vary
widely in morphology but essentially consist of one or
more stalks, in most cases composed of dead cells supporting one or more distinct spore masses (sori) in a
variety of arrangements [1]. The entire process is

© 2011 Romeralo et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

coordinated by the production of chemo-attractants, a
process that is well characterized in the model organism
D. discoideum but mostly unknown in other species
[3,5,6]. Thus, in the dictyostelid life cycle growth and
development are completely separate; growth occurs
only in the unicellular amoebae, and once aggregation
starts, cell division ceases and differentiation and morphogenesis can begin [5,7].
Less is known about the sexual cycle of dictyostelids,
which culminates in the formation of a macrocyst. This
cycle can be between both homothallic (self-fertile) and
heterothallic forms [1]. A recent study identified the
mating-type locus for the model species Dictyostelium
discoideum [8]. As with fruiting bodies, macrocyst formation begins with an aggregative process. However,
instead of forming a slug, two of the aggregating amoebae fuse, consume the remaining cells and then encyst.
Macrocysts were only recognized as the sexual stage of
Dictyostelia in the l960s [9,10], and although they were
probably present in the last common ancestor of the
taxon [11], there are many species for which this stage
has yet to be observed. Macrocysts also serve as a resistant stage for surviving sub-optimal growth conditions
[3]. Thus, dictyostelids have three ways of dealing with
unfavourable conditions: (a) encystment of individual
amoebae (microcysts), (b) formation of sexual macrocysts and (c) formation of multicellular fruiting bodies
containing spores.
Traditionally, classification of dictyostelids has been
based on morphology [1,12]. The characters used range
from aspects of the initial aggregation stage including
the overall pattern (mound, radiate) and type of aggregative signalling molecule (acrasin: cAMP, glorin, folate,
etc), to structural features of the final fruiting body. The
latter include features such as the type of growth (clustered, gregarious, coremiform or solitary) and branching
pattern, characteristics of the spores such as their overall shape (round or elliptical) and the presence or
absence of polar granules inside them, etc [1,12]. Based
on these characters, the three traditional genera of Dictyostelia were defined–Acytostelium [13] with acellular
stalks, Dictyostelium [2] with cellular stalks and mostly
unbranched or sparsely branched fruiting bodies and
Polysphondylium [1] with regularly spaced whorls of lateral branches on cellular stalks.
However, a cladistic study of dictyostelia morphology
first suggested [14] and molecular phylogeny later confirmed [11,15] that this traditional morphology based
taxonomy is deeply flawed. Instead, molecular phylogeny
grouped nearly all of the species known at the time into
four major clades. None of these major clades correspond to traditional genera indicating that there is far
less pattern in dictyostelia morphological evolution at
the deepest taxonomic levels than initially thought [11].

Page 2 of 10

SSU rDNA analyses also depicted a very deep phylogeny
with many large gaps (long unbroken branches), suggesting large numbers of missing species and/or highly
uneven SSU rDNA evolutionary rates [11]. Meanwhile
finer level studies including multiple isolates of several
“species” showed that these are not always molecularly
similar. Such morphologically similar but phylogenetically distinct taxa are referred to individually as cryptic
species [16,17] and together as species complexes. Species complexes are scattered throughout the dictyostelid
tree, and are found in all four major groups [16,17]. The
combination of a deep taxon littered with cryptic species
suggests that much dictyostelid diversity remains to be
described. Filling in these gaps should help us to
develop a better understanding of evolutionary trends
across the group.
During the period of 2000 to 2009, the number of
described species of Dictyostelia essentially doubled. This
was primarily the result of the “Global Biodiversity Survey
of Eumycetozoans” project (PBI), mandated to investigate
the diversity of dictyostelids and other eumycetozoans
throughout the world. Soil samples were collected at various localities, emphasizing (a) regions of the Southern
Hemisphere where there were few or no previous records
and (b) areas of the Northern Hemisphere that have
received relatively little study. Together these include Australia (the mainland and Tasmania), New Zealand, South
Africa, Patagonia, northern Thailand, Laos and East Africa.
Additional samples were obtained from localities in Central America, Alaska and several islands (Ascension Island,
Cocos Island, Puerto Rico and Madagascar). The range of
vegetation types sampled included grassland, savanna,
shrubland, southern beech forest, Eucalyptus forest, lowland tropical rain forest, montane tropical forest and tropical monsoon forest.
We have determined complete SSU rDNA sequences
from all new species isolated from PBI project samples,
as well as additional isolates of previously described species. The new species and isolates are dispersed across
the tree, filling in many gaps and indicating that there
are eight major divisions of Dictyostelia rather than the
previously recognized four. Most importantly, the new
species expand the known morphological diversity of all
four previously recognized major clades, indicating that
morphology in Dictyostelia is even more plastic than
previously realized. At the same time, some patterns at
higher taxonomic levels are beginning to emerge.

Results
Fifty-four new isolates of dictyostelia were identified and
subjected to morphological and molecular characterization. New isolates were collected from New Zealand
[18], Australia [19], Argentina [20], Laos, northern Thailand, different localities in the USA (including Alaska),

Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

Europe (Portugal and Sweden), Africa and the Caribbean. In all, more than 500 samples were collected in
more than 10 countries on 5 continents (see Additional
file 1). All isolates were identified from laboratory incubated soil samples using traditional culture techniques
[1] and re-cultured from single sporophores before
DNA extraction.
Complete nuclear small subunit ribosomal RNA gene
(SSU rDNA) sequences were determined for all new isolates and added to an existing alignment [11] including all
available unique dictyostelia SSU rDNA sequences. A conservative core of 1676 universal and 324 group-specific
alignment positions were used to construct phylogenetic
trees. The remaining more rapidly evolving segments of
SSU rDNA that are often used to delineate species in
other taxa, are unalignable across the Dictyostelia and
often difficult to align even within major groups [17].
Phylogenetic analysis of dictyostelia SSU rDNA
sequences produces a single well-resolved tree (Figure 1),
with strong support for nearly all branches (Figure 2).

Page 3 of 10

The strong resolution even at fine levels appears to be
due to new species filling out the tree, obviating the need
to use more rapidly evolving markers such as the internal
transcribed spacer (ITS) to resolve terminal clades [17].
The new phylogeny continues to show the four previously identified major groups with strong support [11].
In addition, three previously isolated and inconsistently
resolved branches [11] are now seen to form major divisions in their own right (Figure 1). We refer to these new
groups here as the “polycarpum”, “polycephalum” and
“violaceum” complexes in order to retain the original
group numbering scheme [11] until formal names can be
assigned. In addition the new species further emphasize
the deep split in Group 2, which is now very strongly
supported (80-100% mlBP, 1.0 biPP, Figure 1). Therefore,
we now recognize these as two separate major groups,
Group 2A and Group 2B (Figure 1, Figure 2B).
Thus, in total we now recognize eight major divisions
of Dictyostelia, none of which correspond to traditional
genera. The closest to a traditional genus is Group 2A,

Figure 1 Phylogeny of the Dictyostelia based on SSU rDNA sequences. The tree shown is the optimal topology obtained by both Bayesian
inference and maximum likelihood searches. The tree identifies eight major taxonomic divisions, which are indicated by separate colors. The tree
includes all known described and undescribed species of Dictyostelium (D), Polysphondylium (P) and Acytostelium (A). Branch lengths are the
average of all trees recovered during the BI search after discarding a burn-in of 20% and are drawn to scale as indicated by the scale bar at the
lower left. Support from BI posterior probabilities and 100 ML bootstrap replicates are respectively indicated to the left and right of slashes (/) on
the relevant branches for values above 0.7 biPP and 50% mlBP. Values of 100% mlBP and 1.00 biPP are indicated as *. The tree is rooted
according to [11].

Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2 Detailed Subtrees for Dictyostelid Major Groups 1-4. The large 18S rDNA subtrees from the Figure 1 are shown in detail for
dictyostelid major groups 1-4 (parts A-D). The names in bold correspond to the new species sequenced for this study. Major clades are
indicated to the right of the figures with brackets and numerical clade designations as defined in [17]. For Group 1 (A) note that the branch to
D. multistipes has been reduced in length for this figure. The actual length of the branch can be seen in Figure 1. For B) note that the species
listed originally as P. nandutensis was finally published as P. arachnoideum.

which consists entirely of most of the known acytostelids. However, a single acytostelid, A. ellipticum, is
found in Group 2B, thus making the traditional Actyostelium paraphyletic (Figure 2B). Similarly, Group 2B
includes most of the known polysphondylids, but some
polysphondylids, including the original “type” species P.
violaceum, are found a substantial distance away in the
“violaceum” complex, which appears as the sister lineage
to Group 4 (Figure 1). Thus, the traditional Polysphondylium is both paraphyletic and polyphyletic.
Most importantly, the new isolates also substantially
expand the morphological diversity of the original four
major groups. These groups are described below following the terminology of Raper [1].
Group I

Group I includes ten new isolates, all of which exhibit
the traditional general dictyostelid morphology (Figure

2). That is, they have cellular stalks and lack regular
whorls of side (lateral) branches. Nonetheless, these
species vary widely in sporophore size and morphology, ranging from solitary to clustered sorocarps, with
or without irregular lateral branches, which, when
present vary in form (Additional file 1). All of the
new isolates can be recognized as new species on the
basis of their morphology (Additional file 1), and this
is supported in all cases by SSU rDNA phylogeny
(Figure 2).
Many of the new isolates cluster with species that
have been previously isolated but from very different
localities. For example, the only new Group 1 species
from Tasmania (TAS30A) clusters with Dictyostelium
antarcticum as a sister group to three new species from
Thailand (subclade 1B, Figure 2A). Four new species
from Argentina (D. macrocarpum, D. fasciculoideum)
cluster together with new species from the USA

Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

(D. amphisporum) and Australia (D. boomerasporum),
nearly doubling the size of subclade 1C (Figure 2A).
A number of the new Group 1 species fall along previously unbroken long branches (Figure 2) supporting
the idea that we may be able to fill in more of the
remaining large gaps in this part of the tree with extant
missing species. The fact that the new Group 1 species
tend to have small delicate sorocarps (e.g., D. deminutivum, D. stellatum) and may be more abundant in the
nutrient-poor habitats that are especially poorly sampled
[21], further suggests that broader sampling could
potentially yield considerably more new Group 1
species.
Group 2

Group 2 as a whole includes 19 new isolates, of which
at least 12 appear to be new species (Figure 2B). The
group remains the most morphologically diverse, including examples of all three traditional genera (Figure 2B).
Nonetheless, subclade 2A by itself is extremely homogeneous consisting of all but one of the acytostelids. Subclade 2B, on the other hand, is extremely heterogeneous
including one acytostelid (Acytostelium ellipticum), all
small non-pigmented polysphondylids and six dictyostelids. This makes these two subclades highly distinct
from each other, and, with the additional new isolates,
their separation is strongly supported by phylogenetic
analysis (1.00 biPP, 100% mlBP, Figure 1). Therefore, we
suggest that they should be treated as two separate
major groups.
Four of the subclade 2B dictyostelids are new, including a new deep branch, D. boreale, while the other previously solo deep branch, D. gloeosporum (from Japan),
is now joined by three new species from Australia
(Additional file 1). This makes three separate dictyostelid clades branching with or among the pale polysphondylids. Since the D. boreale and D. oculare sequences
form separate sister lineages to the pale polysphondylids,
this suggests that the latter evolved from a dictyostelidtype ancestor. Meanwhile, since a clade of dictyostelids
is nested within a clade of pale polysphondylids (subclade 2B1, 1.00 biPP, 95% mlBP, Figure 2B), this indicates that there has been at least one reversion from the
polysphondylid to dictyostelid type. Among the new
polysphondylids, P. stolonicoideum is particularly interesting in having a strong tendency to become decumbent, prostrate and then stoloniferous [19]. Thus, the
initial sporophore falls over, and when the spore head
contacts the substrate, the spores germinate and immediately re-initiate sporophore formation. This ability of
spores to differentiate into stalk and spore cells immediately after germination is also seen in the Group 4 species D. mucoroides variety stoloniferum [22] and, less
often, D. implicatum.

Page 5 of 10

Subclade 2A includes three new species of Acytostelids and additional isolates of A. leptosomum and A.
amazonicum (Figure 2B, Additional file 1). Neither new
isolate group with the corresponding previously
sequenced isolate, which is the first indication of cryptic
species in this group. It is not too surprising that there
should be cryptic species here as these species are tiny
and delicate with few morphological characters to distinguish them. These are also among the slowest growing species of Dictyostelia, they tend to be restricted in
distribution, and many are rare to very rare. Thus, while
some of the gaps in subclade 2A may be due to extinction, it is also very likely that there is major under-sampling of what appears from the phylogeny to be a very
deep lineage within Dictyostelia (Figure 1).
Group 3

Group 3 consists of twenty dictyostelium isolates,
including five new species (Figure 2C, Additional file 1).
With the addition of these new species, the group is
now completely resolved phylogenetically with good
support for all branches. The new species are from
Thailand (TH8C and TH14B), southern Portugal (D.
ibericum), the USA (D. ohioense), and Australia (D. radiculatum) (Additional file 1). Dictyostelium radiculatum
has a sporophore with a crampon base (Additional file
1) and groups with all the other crampon-based species,
forming the molecularly and morphologically very distinct subclade 3B (1.00 biPP, 100% mlBP, Figure 2C).
Group 4

Group 4 continues to be the most species-rich group,
including 12 new isolates, of which nine appear to be
new species (Additional file 1, Figure 2D). Some of the
new species such as D. valdivianum, D. austroandinum
and D. ammophilum have clustered and coremiform
sorocarps, presence of branches and polar granules
inside their spores, changing previous morphological
patterns for the group. The new species D. chordatum
groups together with D. implicatum (100% mlBP, 1.0
biPP, Figure 2D), both of which frequently form tangled
sorocarps resulting in a rope-like appearance. This tangling indicates the loss of proximity inhibition, normally
the result of NH4 sensing [21]. The new Group 4 species, D. gargantuum, is the single largest dictyostelid
described thus far, with huge (by microbial standards)
solitary sorocarps (3-8 mm or more tall if erect and 2030+ mm or more if prone; Additional file 1) [23].
Additional major lineages

The previous global SSU rDNA phylogeny of Dictyostelia also showed three lineages without clear affinity to
any major group - D. polycarpum (2 isolates), D. polycephalum (one isolate) and D. laterosorum + P. violaceum

Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

(2 isolates) [11]. Since these “lineages” consisted of only
one or two sequences in the original phylogeny, it was
not clear if they represent additional major groups or
simply a few unusual SSU rDNA sequences [11]. With
the new isolates there are now three additional
sequences in the polycephalum lineage and four in the
violaceum lineage, with the result that all three lineages
now show considerable molecular depth and are
strongly supported as distinct (Figure 1). This indicates
that they correspond to major groups in their own right,
provisionally referred to here as the “polycarpum”,
“polycephalum” and “violaceum” complexes (Figure 1).
All three complexes have strong morphological identities and large sequence depths. The polycarpum “isolates” both form small delicate clustered sporophores,
but their SSU rDNA sequences are as different from
each other as nearly any two species in Group 4 [11]. A
similar level of sequence difference is seen among the
four isolates of polycarpum, all of which form relatively
large robust sporophores with a single stalk surmounted
by a small cluster of spore heads (Additional file 1). The
violaceum complex, on the other hand, shows a similar
level of sequence divergence but five very distinct
morphologies (Additional file 1). It should be noted that
although this violaceum complex appears as the sister
group to Group 4 in the SSU rDNA tree, it is clearly
distinct from it and the SSU ITS sequences of the two
groups are unalignable [17].

Discussion
Largely due to the efforts of the Global Survey of Eumycetozoa, the number of known species in Dictyostelia
has nearly doubled since 2006, and SSU rDNA phylogeny now shows eight major divisions. Three of these
correspond to lineages that consisted of only one or two
sequences in the original phylogeny (11), and two
groups arise from a strongly supported deep split in
Group 2 (Figure 2B). Many of the long branches in the
initial SSU rDNA phylogeny [11] are also now broken
with new species and/or additional isolates of previously
described species. Taken together, this confirms previous suggestions that the diversity of Dictyostelia is seriously under-sampled and thus many of the remaining
long unbroken branches may also represent extant missing taxa. This is consistent with the still small number
of described species and the apparent antiquity of the
taxon, estimated at 400 myr for Group 4 alone [24].
Hidden diversity

This missing diversity of Dictyostelia seems to result
from a combination of factors. There is a high level of
cryptic diversity; of the 17 “species” for which multiple
isolates are examined here only eight are monophyletic

Page 6 of 10

(Figure 1, Figure 2) [17]. Even when isolates of the same
species group together, they can show tremendous
sequence difference, for example the isolates of P. candidum and P. asymetricum in Group 2B (Figure 2B), of D.
purpureum in Group 4 (Figure 2D) [16] and of course
the isolates of D. polycephalum and of D. polycarpum
(Figure 1). Another factor is the heterogeneous nature
of the soil substrate, which is nearly impossible to sample exhaustively [25,26]. Some of the missing diversity
may also be due to a previously unrecognized ecological
diversity. Forest soils have long been considered the primary habitat of Dictyostelia [1]. However, many of the
newly discovered species were found in nutrient poor
habitats, for example higher forest elevations, bogs, etc.,
where there has been little previous sampling. Thus
there are whole classes of substrates that have not been
examined at all for these species.
Morphological traits

Molecular phylogeny has disproved long-standing theories for deep evolutionary trends in Dictyostelia, particularly the evolution from simple (acytostelid) to
relatively complex (polysphondylid) morphologies [11].
The high level of cryptic species also shows that morphological characters are often unreliable for distinguishing species (16, 17, Figure 2). Nonetheless, all the
newly proposed species were first identified based on
morphology and roughly half (8 out of 17) of the species
for which multiple isolates have been examined form
monophyletic groups (Figure 1, Figure 2). Thus, patterns
at deeper taxonomic level may also exist. A mapping of
morphological characters onto the initial dictyostelid
phylogeny suggested some deep evolution trends for the
four major groups [11,27]. Although the new species
invalidate some of these, particularly for Groups 1 and
4, some patterns are now suggested at finer taxonomic
levels.
Group I

The 2006 analysis identified small spores as the main
morphological character for Group 1 [11]. However, the
newly described and distantly related Group 1 species
D. boomeransporum and D. myxobasis have some of the
largest spores yet seen in the Dictyostelia (Additional
file 1). On the other hand, it appears that nearly all species in Group 1 have sporophores with irregular
branches. The exceptions to this are some of the isolates
from Thailand, which tend to be generally unbranched.
However, these species form a single tight clade nested
well within Group 1 (Figure 2), so only a single loss is
required to explain the distribution of this character in
Group 1. All Group 1 species examined thus far also
have consolidated polar granules inside their spores.

Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

Groups 2A and 2B

Group 2 showed a deep split in the original SSU rDNA
phylogeny, but this received only moderate support
(0.89 biPP, 66% mlBP, [11]). With the addition of new
species, the split is now well supported (1.0 biPP, 80%
mlBP, Figure 2), defining two very distinct major divisions. Group 2A is very homogeneous, consisting of all
examined acytostelids except A. ellipticum. These species have the distinct combined morphological characters of unbranched acellular stalks and spherical spores.
Although A. ellipticum (Group 2B) also has a simple
acellular stalk, its spores are elliptical.
In contrast, Group 2B is the most heterogenous of all
the major groups, more so in the new phylogeny with
four additional species of Dictyostelids. With the additional species and strong internal resolution, this is one
group in which it is now possible to reconstruct some
of the major events in its evolution. The early branching
position of A. ellipticum and its strong similarity to the
Group 2A Acytostelids suggests that the last common
ancestor of Group 2B had an acytostelid morphology.
That is, it was probably a small delicate species with a
non-cellular sorocarp stalk. Since all other Group 2B
species have sorocarps with cellular stalks and lateral
branches, these traits must have evolved soon after the
A. ellipticum lineage split off. This irregularly branched
Dictyostelids morphology then existed for some time,
during which the D. gloeosporum and D. boreale lineages
split off, eventually giving rise to the regularly spaced
symmetrical whorls of the Polysphondylids. This polysphondylid morphology appears to have diversified
rapidly. However, there is evidence of only a single
reversion of the polysphondylid morphology to irregular
branching, in a common ancestor to the D. gloeosporum,
D. granulosum, D. rotatum, D. flexuosum clade of Group
2B1 (1.00 biPP, 100% mlBP, Figure 2B).
Group 2B species also show a trend toward having
unconsolidated granules in their spores and of having a
filose sorophore tip (Additional file 1). However in some
cases the polar granules are consolidated polar and have
different refractivity (e.g., D. oculare), or they may be
distributed across the spore (e.g. D. flexuosum), or, in
the case of D. gloeosporum, they can be irregular or
sometimes lacking altogether. Group 2B could possibly
also share the use of glorin as an acrasin, although acrasin identity is so far known only for the Polysphondylids
[28,29]. More chemical studies would be needed to pin
down these groups.
Group 3

Group 3 is the most species poor of the original four
major groups, and only four new species are added here
(Figure 2C). Nonetheless, the species in this group vary
widely in size and sorocarp morphology, ranging from

Page 7 of 10

the tiny D. minutum to the larger and structurally relatively complex crampon-based species. One common
feature of the Group is the presence of consolidated
polar granules inside the spores, which is found in all
species except D. minutum. In addition, none of the
sporophores in this group are as robust as most of the
sporophores in Group 4. The crampon-based species of
Group 3 with digitated basal structures to support their
sorocarps, form the molecular very distinct subclade 3B
(1.00 biPP, 100% mlBP, Figure 2C) [17]. The length of
the branch leading to subclade 3B suggests that intermediate branches in the evolution of this relatively complex morphology might yet be found.
Group 4

Group 4 is the most speciose and intensively studied
major group of Dictyostelia, especially the model organism D. discoideum. The group was previously characterized for three main common characters: 1) large
sorocarps; 2) solitary and unbranched fruiting bodies; 3)
spores that lack polar granules [11]. However, some of
the new species added to the group include exceptions to
all three traits. In terms of size, the group now includes
D. valdivianum, one of the smaller described species of
dictyostelids. In terms of sorocarp morphology, D. austroandinum and D. valdivianum have clustered and coremiform sorocarps, respectively, and D. ammophilum with
a characteristic pattern of irregular lateral branches
formed by “blebbing” of the myxamoebae (Additional file
1) [30]. The latter pattern of branching is similar to that
of the Group 1 species, D. aureostipes. Finally three new
Group 4 species, D. ammophilum, D. austroandinum,
and D. valdivianum not only have polar granules in their
spores, but D. ammophilum spores have both consolidated and unconsolidated granules [30,20].
Three complexes

The polycephalum and polycarpum “complexes” have
very few taxa, and as a result they are morphologically
extremely homogenous. However, they both also appear
to represent very deep and ancient lineages so there are
probably many additional species to be found. The
“polycarpum“ complex is especially intriguing as it
appears to be a very ancient lineage, being sister group
to a large portion of the tree (Figure 1). These species
have clustered sorocarps that adhere near the base, multiple sorogens arising from a single aggregation and
polar granules. The “polycephalum“ complex also
appears to be fairly ancient and is now strongly supported as the sister group to Groups 3+4 and the “violaceum“ complex (0.95 biPP, 99% mlBP, Figure 1). This
taxon is characterized by small coremiform fruiting
bodies, very long thin slugs and spore granules that are
sometimes polar.

Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

The “violaceum complex” on the other hand is very
morphologically diverse, including as it does both Polysphondyliums and a Dictyostelid (Figure 1). Nonetheless,
these species have two strong common traits, which are
violet or purple-pigmented sorocarps and consolidated
polar granules inside their spores. While the one Dictyostelid in this group, D. laterosorum, lacks the whorled
branching pattern of the polysphondylids, it does have
multiple sori that are sessile along the stalk, which is
similar to D. rosarium in Group 4C5. The initial development of the fruiting body is similar in both P. violaceum
and D. laterosoum. However, in the polysphondylids
there is a subsequent subdivision of labor in the lateral
whorls, with both spore and stalk cells developing, while
in D. laterosoum (and D. rosarium) all laterally distributed amoebae become only spore cells [31,32].
The root

There are currently two proposed positions for the root
of Dictyostelia, either placing Group 1 as the earliest
diverging lineage (root 1, Figure 1, [11]) or splitting the
taxon roughly equally along the branch connecting
Groups 1 + 2 and Groups 3 + 4 (root 2). Analyses of
SSU rDNA and alpha-tubulin give either alternative
without definitive statistical support and depending on
the outgroup used [11]. Although phylogenetic analysis
of mitochondrial genes showed strong support for root
2, this analysis included only four taxa, an extremely distant outgroup and a large proportion of neutral codon
positions that are likely to be saturated at this evolutionary depth (>400 myr) [33]. Figure 1 is rooted consistent
with the initial phylogeny [11] and is used here simply
to maintain continuity until a more robust answer can
be found. This will probably require multiple gene
sequences from a broad taxonomic sampling of both
ingroup and outgroup taxa.

Conclusions
The initial Dictyostelia phylogeny showed many long
unbroken branches and large distances between the
major lineages. Four years later, with nearly double the
number of species in the tree, many of the long
branches have been broken and additional major
lineages are apparent (Figure 1). This suggests that a
large diversity of species remain to be discovered. While
many of these may exhibit new unique morphologies,
many others may be morphologically indistinguishable
from currently known species. Nonetheless these species
can be molecularly quite distinct, and probably differ in
many traits that are not associated with morphology or
not apparent at the level of morphology currently
examined.
The 50 new species added here show that the few patterns tentatively identified at that time are mostly

Page 8 of 10

invalidated. There is also a high level of cryptic species
found throughout the taxon, with the majority of species
still not examined for multiple isolates. Nonetheless all
the new species reported here were initially identified
based on morphology alone, and their uniqueness is confirmed by phylogeny. In addition, morphological consistencies can be found at finer levels. Prominent examples
of this are species with crampon-based sporophores in
Group 3 (clade 3B, Figure 2C), the “gigantic” species in
Group 4 (clade 4A, Figure 2D), robust pigmented species
with side branches in the violaceum complex (Figure 1),
species with clustered fruiting bodies in group 1, species
with twisted stalks (clade 4C3, Figure 2D), the pale polysphondylids (clade 2B, Figure 2B), and most of the acytostelids (clade 2A, Figure 2B) (Additional file 1).
Since morphological patterns can be identified for
more limited subgroups, morphological evolution seems
to be at least moderately conservative in Dictyostelia.
The lack of deeper morphological patterns should perhaps not be entirely unexpected given the small numbers of characters, the essentially simple nature of many
of them, and the apparent antiquity of the group [24].
Nonetheless, the future discovery of additional species,
together with extensive genome sequencing, should lead
to a better understanding of the mechanisms and evolutionary forces shaping them.

Methods
Samples were collected primarily from the soil/humus
zone at the surface of the ground, plus a few samples
from “canopy soil” [sensu 34] often found at the bases of
epiphytes in moist temperate and tropical forests. All
samples were stored in sterile containers for transport. In
the laboratory, samples were processed following standard procedures [35]. In brief, sample material was dispersed in sterile distilled water (1/50 dilution factor), and
small aliquots (0.5 ml) plated on hay infusion agar [1],
with a bacterial suspension (0.4 ml Escherichia coli or
Klebsiella aerogenes). Soil suspensions prepared in this
manner contain viable dictyostelid propagules in the
form of spores, active amoebae or encysted resting amoebae (microcysts), and all of which can yield viable fruiting
colonies [1]. Isolates of potential interest were subcultured from spores obtained directly from newly formed
fruiting bodies. All types have been deposited in the
Dicty Stock Center Home (http://www.dictybase.com).
Cell culture and genomic DNA extraction

DNA was extracted from colonies grown on SM plates
(Standard Medium - 20 g/L peptone; 2 g/L yeast extract;
20 g/L glucose; 2 g/L MgSO4; 3.8 g/L KH2PO4; 1.2 g/L
K2HPO4; 2% agar). Cells were collected from the edges
of plaques with a sterile tip, mixed with DNA Extraction
solution (Epicentre) and heated 30 min at 60°C, followed

Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

by 8 min at 98°C. Cell lysates were used directly for
PCR amplification.
PCR amplification and DNA sequencing

A ~2000 base pair (bp) fragment of SSU rDNA was
amplified using the same primers as in [11]. The PCR
program consisted of 5 minutes at 95°C, followed by 30
cycles of 30 seconds at 95°C, 1 minute at 56°C, and 2
minutes at 72°C, with a final elongation step of 10 minutes at 72°C. Following amplification, PCR products
were separated on 1% agarose gels and DNA purified
with MultiScreenHTS Vacuum Manifold and MultiScreen-PCR96 Filter Plate from Millipore (http://www.
millipore.com). The extracted DNA was then directly
sequenced using the same primers used for amplification by Macrogen (Korea) on an ABI 373 sequencer.
Sequences were edited with the program Sequencher
version 3.0 (Gene Codes Corporation Inc.). Edited
sequences were manually added to an existing alignment
[17]. Only unambiguously aligned regions were used for
phylogenetic analysis.
Phylogenetic analysis

Phylogenetic analyses were carried out using Bayesian
inference with MrBayes version 3.1.2 [36] and maximum
likelihood using RaxML version 7.0.4 [37,38]. MrBayes
analyses utilized the MC3 search algorithm and the
GTR+I+G model [17], with parameters determined
through the course of the run. Searches were conducted
with two independent sets of four chains for 1-10 million generations, with results saved every 10 generations.
At the end of the run (split frequency less than 0.01), a
20% burnin was discarded before determining the optimal topology and posterior probabilities (biPP) of clades.
Maximum likelihood analyses consisted of 1000 bootstrap replicates (mlBP) using the GTR+I+G model with
parameters determined from a BioNJ starting tree.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Information about the new species and isolates
included in this phylogeny. Morphological traits, geographical origins,
GeneBank acession numbers and references for new species and isolates
included in this phylogeny [39-43].

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Nahid Heidari for helping with the lab work and Joseph
Aubee for assisting with morphological measurements of the Thailand
isolates. This research was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the
Ministry of Science of Spain (0027-2007) and a Marie Curie Intra European
Fellowship within the 7th European Community Framework Programme to
MR (PIEF-GA-2009-236501), a Leverhulme grant to SLB and a Shepherd
University Faculty Development grant to JL. The surveys that yielded many
of the new species were supported by several grants from the National
Science Foundation (to SLS), primarily by DEB-0316284.

Page 9 of 10

Author details
Department of Systematic Biology, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Norbyvägen
18D, University of Uppsala, SE-75236 Uppsala, Sweden. 2Department of
Environmental and Plant Biology, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA.
3
Department of Biology, Shepherd University, Shepherdstown, WV 25443,
USA. 4Department of Biological Sciences, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville,
AR 72701, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
MR and SLB designed the study. MR, SLS, JCL and JCC collected the
samples. MR, JCC and JCL studied the morphological traits. MR did the
molecular lab work and performed the phylogenetic analyses. MR and SLB
drafted the manuscript. JCC, JCL and SLS revised the manuscript. All authors
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 7 October 2010 Accepted: 31 March 2011
Published: 31 March 2011
References
1. Raper KB: The dictyostelids Princeton University Press, Princeton; 1984.
2. Brefeld JO: Dictyostelium mucoroides. Ein neuer organismus aus der
Verwandschaft der Myxomiceten. Abh Senckenb Naturf Ges 1869, 7:85-107.
3. Bonner JT: The Social Amoebae: The Biology of Cellular Slime Molds Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J; 2009.
4. Burki F, Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Pawlowski J: Phylogenomics reveals a new
‘megagroup’ including most photosynthetic eukaryotes. Biol Lett 2008,
4:366-369.
5. Kessin RH: Dictyostelium: evolution, cell biology, and the development of
multicellularity Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; 2001.
6. Alvarez-Curto E, Rozen D, Ritchie A, Fouquet C, Baldauf SL, Schaap P:
Evolutionary origin of cAMP-based chemoattraction in the social
amoebae. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:6385-6390.
7. Depraitere C, Darmon M: Croissance de l’amibe sociale Dictyostelium
discoideum sur differentes especes bacteriennes. Ann Microbiol Inst
Pasteur 1978, 129B:451-461.
8. Bloomfield G, Skelton J, Ivens A, tanaka Y, Kay RR: Sex determination in the
social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. Science 2010, 330:1533-1536.
9. Hirschy BA, Raper KB: Light control of macrocyst formation in
Dictyostelium [abstract]. Bacteriological Proceedings 1964, 27.
10. Weinkauff AM, Filosa MF: Factors involved in the formation of macrocysts
by the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium mucoroides. Canadian Journal of
Microbiology 1965, 11:385-387.
11. Schaap P, Winckler T, Nelson M, Álvarez-Curto E, Elgie B, Hagiwara H,
Cavender JC, Milano-Curto A, Rozen DE, Dingermann T, Mutzel R,
Baldauf SL: Molecular phylogeny and evolution of morphology in the
social amoebas. Science 2006, 314:661-663.
12. Hagiwara H: The Taxonomic Study of Japanese Dictyostelid Cellular Slime
Molds National Science Museum, Tokyo; 1989.
13. Raper KB: Factors affecting growth and differentiation in simple slime
molds. Mycologia 1956, 48:169-205.
14. Swanson AR, Spiegel FW, Cavender JC: Taxonomy, slime molds, and the
questions we ask. Mycologia 2002, 94:968-979.
15. Romeralo M, Escalante R, Sastre L, Lado C: Molecular systematics of
dictyostelids: 5.8S ribosomal DNA and internal transcribed spacer region
analyses. Eukaryotic Cell 2007, 6(1):110-116.
16. Mehdiabadi NJ, Kronforst MR, Queller DC, Strassmann JE: Phylogeny,
reproductive isolation and kin recognition in the social amoeba,
Dictyostelium purpureum. Evolution 2009, 63(2):542-548.
17. Romeralo M, Spiegel FW, Baldauf S: A Fully Resolved Phylogeny of the
Social Amoebas (Dictyostelia) Based on Combined SSU and ITS rDNA
Sequences. Protist 2010, 161:539-548.
18. Cavender JC, Stephenson SL, Landolt JC, Vadell EM: Dictyostelid cellular
slime moulds in the forests of New Zealand. New Zealand J Bot 2002,
40:235-264.
19. Landolt JC, Stephenson SL, Cavender JC, Vadell EM: Dictyostelid cellular
slime moulds from Australia. Australian Syst Bot 2008, 21:50-66.
20. Vadell EM, Cavender JC, Romeralo M, Edwards SM, Stephenson SL,
Baldauf SL: New species of dictyostelids from Patagonia and Tierra del
Fuego, Argentina. Mycologia 2011, 103:101-117.
21. Landolt JC, Stephenson SL, Slay ME: Dictyostelid cellular slime molds from
caves. J Cave Karst Stud 2006, 68:22-26.

Romeralo et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:84
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/84

Page 10 of 10

22. Cavender JC, Raper KB: The occurrence and distribution of Acrasieae in
forests of subtropical and tropical America. Amer J Bot 1968, 5(5):504-513.
23. Bonner JT: Proteolysis and orientation in Dictyostelium slugs. Journal of
General Microbiology 1993, 139:2319-2322.
24. Parikh A, Miranda ER, Katoh-Kurasawa M, Fuller D, Rot G, Zagar L, Curk T,
Sucgang R, Chen R, Zupan B, Loomis WF, Kuspa A, Shaulsky G: Conserved
developmental transcriptomes in evolutionarily divergent species.
Genome Biology 2010, 11:R35.
25. Jeon S, Bunge J, Leslin C, Stoeck T, Hong S, Epstein SS: Environmental
rRNA inventories miss over half of protistan diversity. BMC Microbiology
2008, 8:222.
26. Mocali S, Benedetti A: Exploring research frontiers in microbiology: the
challenge of metagenomics in soil microbiology. Res Microbiol 2010,
161:497-505.
27. Schaap P: Evolution of size and pattern in the social amoebas. Bioessays
2007, 29:635-644.
28. Shimomura O, Suthers HLB, Bonner JT: Chemical identity of the acrasin of
the cellular slime mold Polysphondylium violaceum. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1982, 79:7376-7379.
29. Strassmann JE: In Dictyostelium, the social amoeba. Volume 1. Edited by:
Breed MD, Moore J. Oxford: Academic Press; 2010:13-519, Encyclopedia of
Animal behavior.
30. Romeralo M, Landolt JC, Cavender JC, Laursen GA, Baldauf SL: Two species
of dictyostelid cellular slime molds from Alaska. Mycologia 2010,
102:588-595.
31. Raper KB, Cavender JC: Dictyostelium rosarium: a new cellular slime mold
with beaded sorocarps. J Elisha Mitchell Sci Soc 1968, 84:31-47.
32. Cavender JC: Dictyostelium dimigraformum, Dictyostelium laterosorum and
Acytostelium ellipticum: new Acrasieae from the American tropics. J Gen
Microbiol 1970, 62:113-123.
33. Heidel AJ, Glöckner G: Mitochondrial genome evolution in the social
amoebae. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(7):1440-50.
34. Stephenson SL, Landolt JC: Dictyostelid cellular slime molds in canopy
soils of tropical forests. Biotropica 1998, 30:657-661.
35. Cavender JC, Raper KB: The Acrasieae in nature I. Isolation. Am J Bot 1965,
52:294-296.
36. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
37. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: Maximum Likelihood-based Phylogenetic
Analyses with Thousands of Taxa and Mixed Models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(21):2688-2690.
38. Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont J: A Rapid Bootstrap Algorithm for
the RAxML Web-Servers. Systematic Biology 2008, 75(5):758-771.
39. Vadell E, Cavender JC: Dictyostelids living in the soils of the Atlantic
Forest. Iguazú region, Misiones, Argentina. Description of new species.
Mycologia 2007, 99:112-124.
40. Cavender JC, Vadell EM, Landolt JC, Stephenson SL: New species of small
dictyostelids from the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. Mycologia
2005, 97:493-512.
41. Kawakami SI, Hagiwara H: Polysphondylium multicystogenum sp. nov., a
new dictyostelid species from Sierra Leone, West Africa. Mycologia 2008,
100:347-351.
42. Romeralo M, Cavender JC, Baldauf S: A new species of Cellular Slime
Molds from southern Portugal based on morphology, ITS and SSU
sequences. Mycologia 2009, 101(2):269-274.
43. Cavender JC, Vadell EM: Cellular Slime Molds of Ohio. Ohio Biological
Survey Bulletin News Series 2006, 16, vi+ 55.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-84
Cite this article as: Romeralo et al.: An expanded phylogeny of social
amoebas (Dictyostelia) shows increasing diversity and new
morphological patterns. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:84.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
