<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>An iterative workflow for mining the human intestinal metaproteome</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-6"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Koos Rooijers"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

An iterative workflow for mining the human
intestinal metaproteome
Koos Rooijers1†, Carolin Kolmeder2†, Catherine Juste3, Joël Doré3, Mark de Been2, Sjef Boeren4, Pilar Galan5,
Christian Beauvallet6, Willem M de Vos2,7, Peter J Schaap1*

Abstract
Background: Peptide spectrum matching (PSM) is the standard method in shotgun proteomics data analysis. It
relies on the availability of an accurate and complete sample proteome that is used to make interpretation of the
spectra feasible. Although this procedure has proven to be effective in many proteomics studies, the approach has
limitations when applied on complex samples of microbial communities, such as those found in the human
intestinal tract. Metagenome studies have indicated that the human intestinal microbiome contains over 100 times
more genes than the human genome and it has been estimated that this ecosystem contains over 5000 bacterial
species. The genomes of the vast majority of these species have not yet been sequenced and hence their
proteomes remain unknown. To enable data analysis of shotgun proteomics data using PSM, and circumvent the
lack of a defined matched metaproteome, an iterative workflow was developed that is based on a synthetic
metaproteome and the developing metagenomic databases that are both representative for but not necessarily
originating from the sample of interest.
Results: Two human fecal samples for which metagenomic data had been collected, were analyzed for their
metaproteome using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and used to benchmark the developed iterative
workflow to other methods. The results show that the developed method is able to detect over 3,000 peptides per
fecal sample from the spectral data by circumventing the lack of a defined proteome without naive translation of
matched metagenomes and cross-species peptide identification.
Conclusions: The developed iterative workflow achieved an approximate two-fold increase in the amount of
identified spectra at a false discovery rate of 1% and can be applied in metaproteomic studies of the human
intestinal tract or other complex ecosystems.

Background
The human intestinal tract is colonized since birth by a
large number of microbes, together making a complex
ecosystem, even considered an organ by itself [1]. Many
studies indicate a pivotal role for the intestinal microbes
in carbohydrate metabolism, production of vitamins,
inflammatory response regulation, fat metabolism and
other biological processes of the human host [2,3]. In
adults, the community consists of around 10 14 cells
[4-6], with a complexity that is predicted to include over
5000 microbial species [3]. While recent progress has
* Correspondence: peter.schaap@wur.nl
† Contributed equally
1
Laboratory of Systems and Synthetic Biology, Wageningen University,
Dreijenplein10, 6703 HB Wageningen, The Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

been made in characterizing the genomes of around 200
intestinal species in the Human Microbiome Project
(HMP) [7], the vast majority has not yet been cultured.
Hence, these are known as phylotypes as their presence
can be deduced from molecular markers such as 16S
rRNA and other nucleotide sequences. This approach
has shown that most of the intestinal phylotypes belong
to a limited set of phyla, including the Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria and Verrucomicrobia [5]. In healthy adults the intestinal microbiota
fluctuates around a stable individual core of phylotypes
that are affected by host genetics, environmental and
stochastic factors [3]. High throughput metagenomics
studies, such as that of the recently reported MetaHIT
project, have indicated that the human gut microbiome
contains a gene repository that is estimated to be over

© 2011 Rooijers et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

100 times the number of genes encoded by the human
genome [8].
The current developments in high-throughput omics
techniques allow for unique insight in the functions of
this community that can be predicted via metagenomics
and established at the biochemical level. Proteomics of
isolated microbes is an established and powerful method
to determine global expression profiles [9]. However,
metaproteomics i.e studying the proteome of a complex
environmental system like the human intestinal microbiota is an emerging field within the area of proteomics
that is characterized by a high level of complexity
[10,11]. Common high-throughput spectral interpretation algorithms use peptide spectrum matching to link
the raw data obtained from a mass spectrometer to
large listings of peptides that are possibly represented in
the data. Generation of theoretical spectra from these
peptides present in the database and matching them
with the obtained data forms the basis of these algorithms [12]. Thus, in order to properly identify the spectra, one needs to know very accurately which peptides
one can expect. The complex gut microbial proteome is,
however, far from defined, as the HMP is still advancing
[7,8]. Moreover, the distribution of species is dynamic
and it differs between individuals [3,13]. A common
method to circumvent the lack of a defined proteome is
to use proteomes from closely related species in socalled cross-species protein identification. This is
reported to lead to relatively high false discovery rates
however, and should be considered a sub-optimal solution [14]. Another approach is to exploit the metagenomics developments but this approach suffers from the
limited coverage of the present databases. An ideal case
is the use of available sequence data of the sample that
is to be analyzed by metaproteomics. This matched
metagenome could serve as a basis for the predicted
metaproteome by naive six-frame translation and basic
filtering of the obtained hypothetical proteins for the
presence of trypsinated peptides of sufficient size. Since
most of the predictions will be incorrect as it fills the
search space with noise, this approach may also either
suffer from a high false discovery rate or results in a low
proteomics identification efficiency.
Since both approaches suffer from unacceptable highfalse positive rates, which lead to low accuracy in the identification of proteins, we aimed to develop an iterative
workflow based on a synthetic metagenome from over 200
intestinal species that would increase the sensitivity of
peptide identification by peptide spectrum matching of the
metaproteomics data. Synthetic metagenomes have already
been successfully applied in the analysis of less complex
microbial proteomes, [15] and biofilms, reviewed in [16]
and recently in the analysis of biostimulated microbial
communities from field experiments [17]. For the complex

Page 2 of 11

microbial proteome of fecal samples VerBerkmoes et al.,
[18] successfully used a mixture of gut microbial metagenome sequence data supplemented with a synthetic metagenome constructed from known gut inhabitants
representatives. The human gut microbial gene catalogue
[8] is however increasing exponentially and thus there is
need for alternative approaches that keep the false discovery rate within limits while still maintaining high proteomics identification efficiency.
In this study a synthetic metagenome setup is used as
a starting point in an iterative approach. This approach
combines the power of sequence diversity contained in
metagenomic diversity while keeping the reliability of
predicted proteins high and hence the search space
small, which limits false discovery rates. To provide
proof of concept for this approach, we determined the
metaproteomes of two fecal samples from healthy adults
that had also been characterized by metagenomic
sequence analysis.

Results and Discussion
To develop the iterative workflow for identifying mass
spectrometric data from the intestinal metaproteome,
we first assembled a synthetic metagenome. This was
done by selecting a set of genomes from 216 known gut
inhabitants that were available, fully sequenced, and
annotated [19] (for a listing see additional file 1). Subsequently, we collected a metaproteomics dataset from
fecal samples from two French healthy subjects, termed
NO1 and NO3, which had been analyzed by metagenome sequencing. Finally, we benchmarked the developed
iterative workflow by comparing the predictions
obtained with other search strategies.
Phylogenetic Analysis of Two Human Metagenomic
Datasets

The two matched metagenomes from the subjects NO1
and NO3 were determined by high fidelity Sanger
sequence analysis and contained 128,441 and 120,415
sequence trace files respectively, giving in total
169,762,767 and 162,162,286 nucleotides per metagenome. The phylogenetic diversity of these samples was
determined by 16S rRNA sequence analysis of the metagenomic data sets (Figure 1A and 1B). This was compared to an abundance analysis of the metagenomic
sequences using the synthetic metagenome as reference
set (Figure 1C and 1D, see Materials and Methods section for details). The results indicate the presence of
Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, Verrucomicrobia and Proteobacteria as the dominant phylotypes in
these gut samples (Figure 1). Moreover, the high congruency between the different approaches testifies for
the representativeness of the synthetic metagenome
used in this study.

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

Page 3 of 11

Figure 1 16S rDNA and Meta-mining analysis of matched metagenomes NO1 and NO3. A and B: 16S rDNA abundance analysis of the two
metagenomes. The analysis shows the presence of Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes and Actinobacteria as dominant phylotypes in the gut samples. C
and D: Meta-mining of the traces, using a set of 216 annotated high quality genomes from known gut inhabitants using a sequence similarity
threshold of >90% over >300 nucleotides. 46.2% of the NO1 traces and 41.8% of the NO3 traces were matched in this approach. The analysis
confirms the distribution over the phyla measured using 16S rDNA analysis. E: Color code key

Both phylogenetic analysis methods (Figure 1)
revealed significant difference between the two samples
in abundance of Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria and
Verrucomicrobia and both methods suggest that the
Verrucomicrobia are more present in the NO3 sample.
Remarkably, based on the abundance analysis of the
metagenomic sequence trace files the Verrucomicrobia
were highly prominent in the NO3 sample (representing approximately 12% of the total community). The
metagenomic sequence trace files from this group all
seem to originate from Akkermansia muciniphila-like
species. A. muciniphila is a common bacterial component of the human intestinal tract and is reported to
reach densities up to approximately 3% in the human
colon [20]. It is unlikely that the discrepancy between
the direct diversity analysis and the metagenome
mining results derived from inappropriate annotation
of the metagenome information, as A. muciniphila
belongs to the Verrucomicrobia, which is a deeply
rooted phylum, and changing the cut-off values for the
average nucleotide identity from 90 to 95% still

predicted 6% abundance of A. muciniphila-like bacteria
(data not shown). Hence we assumed that this discrepancy is a result of a cloning bias of the 16S rRNA
versus genomic fragments of the A. muciniphila-like
bacteria. Such cloning biases have recently been
reported in a model study comparing different metagenomic sequencing approaches [21].
Metaproteomics Data Collection and its Analysis Using
Naive Translations of the Matched Metagenomes

Proteins extracted from the microbial fractions isolated
from the fecal samples of subjects NO1 and NO3 were
separated by 1-D SDS-PAGE followed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of
trypsin-treated gel fractions. This resulted in the collection of a set of 41845 and 45042 MS/MS spectra in the
NO1 and NO3 samples respectively. Six-frame naive
translations were made from the matched NO1 and NO3
metagenomes, filtering out small peptides. Peptide Spectral Matching (PSM) was performed on the MS/MS data
using the NO1 and NO3 naively translated metagenomes

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

as single search spaces. False positives were determined
using reversed versions of each database [22] and the
results of all PSM analyses are reported at a fixed peptide
False Discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The peptide search
against the matched metagenomes resulted in 2,331
peptide hits for NO1 and 1,870 peptide hits for NO3
(Figure 2). Moreover, the search against the un-matched
metagenomes resulted in only 1,120 and 922 peptide hits

Page 4 of 11

for the NO1 and NO3 metaproteomes, respectively
(Figure 2). Remarkably, the use of the matched metagenome resulted in a more than two fold increased number
of identified MS/MS spectra compared to the unmatched metagenome, demonstrating the importance of
using a search database where the listed sequences precisely match the peptides present in the sample. However, the number of peptides present might be even

Figure 2 The effect of using matched metagenome in peptide spectrum matching. Total number of Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM) with
matched microbial genome sequences obtained from stool samples of human volunteers NO1 and NO3. The spectra from the two samples
were identified using a naive translation of their respective matched metagenomes (black bars) and cross-validated with the naive translation of
the non-matching metagenome (grey bars).

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

under-estimated when using the naive translations as
search space as these have the drawback that the pseudogenes vastly outnumber true genes. This results in a large
number of false positives that only can be eliminated by
increasing the threshold and hence limiting the discovery
success. Therefore, an alternative approach was developed based on an iterative analysis of the metaproteome
data using a synthetic metagenome database as described
below.
Development of an Iterated Search Method Using a
Synthetic Metagenomic Data Set

As indicated above, a representative synthetic metagenome data set was constructed and used for developing
an improved method for metaproteomics data analysis.
The sequence variability present in the predicted synthetic proteome cannot be fully covered, as the species
diversity of the intestinal microbiota is enormous. Moreover, in the analysis of shotgun proteomics data with PSM
algorithms, an exact match between the experimental data
and a theoretical spectrum from a theoretical peptide from
the database is necessary. Peptides containing a single
amino acid polymorphism are not detected if they are not
contained in the database. To circumvent this limitation, it
is necessary to cover the sequence variability of the proteins in the sample. With the release of sequence repositories from the high throughput metagenomic studies,
such as the MetaHIT project, an enormous amount of gut
metagenome data is available [8]. These repositories are
increasing in size and hence difficult to use directly in a
naive translation approach as their complexity is increasing
exponentially. Furthermore, faithful annotation of the data
is hampered by the inability to efficiently transform
sequence data completely into contigs of sufficient length
that capture complete protein encoding genes [8,23].
Moreover, there is no way to deal with the inevitable
occurring sequencing errors associated with the new generation technology sequencing approaches [24]. Furthermore, standard methods of FDR calculation using decoy
databases derived from search databases of this size are
increasingly impractical, notably as the computing time is
limiting. The iterative workflow we propose here is based
on a combination of the synthetic metagenome described
above and a metagenome repository without any form of
assembly, annotation or a priori translation (see Figure 3).
We selected the MetaHIT dataset as a basis as this is by
far the most comprehensive analysis to date [8]. It is evident that the synthetic metagenome selected here may be
increased in size as the HMP is continuously progressing.
PSM analysis of the MS/MS data is performed in a
first step using the synthetic metaproteome. Since these
genomes are reliably annotated, we are able to use the
DNA gene-sequences coding for the peptides identified
in the first PSM run to retrieve homologous sequence

Page 5 of 11

trace files from the MetaHIT repository. To reduce the
computational load this enrichment procedure is done
in two steps (Figure 3). The first step using discontiguous megablast with coding spaced seeds [25] performs a
first selection of these sequence trace files at DNA level.
The second step using blastx performs a comparison of
this selection on amino-acid level, thus ensuring homology between the protein sequence from the synthetic
metagenome selected by the initial peptide spectrum
match and the MetaHIT sequence trace file on peptide
level. Next the selected sequence trace file is translated
and recorded in a new peptide database. These new
peptide databases are created for each individual MS
data sample. The databases are then used for a next
round of PSM analysis.
Application of this iterative search workflow showed
an increase in spectral identifications when compared to
that obtained with the synthetic metagenome and the
earlier described matched metagenome searches. The
iterative method resulted in 5,010 and 3,542 identified
peptides in the NO1 and NO3 samples, respectively.
Compared to each of the two other methods, this represents an approximately 2-fold increase (Figure 4). An
important factor contributing to the increased number
of identifications is the increase in sensitivity of the
iterative method compared to a direct synthetic metaproteome approach. The sequence trace files enable the
PSM algorithms to search the data using a broad
sequence variability. (Figure 3). Another factor is the
increase in specificity of the enrichment procedure with
respect to a naive translation approach. As the number
of incorrectly predicted proteins is drastically reduced
by the method of sequence trace file selection before
they are translated, the FDR is also drastically reduced.
The Open Mass Spectrometry Search Algorithm
(OMSSA) search against the matched metagenomes
resulted in 840 and 584 identified peptides for NO1 and
NO3 respectively which could not be identified by the
iterative search approach. These hits are peptides, which
do not have an apparent homolog in the synthetic metagenome. However, this loss of information can be taken
into account as in a standard experiment a matched
metagenome is not available.
The enrichment procedure also minimizes the impact
of an initial false discovery. Sequence trace files selected
by a true peptide match will in turn produce additional
PSMs (Figure 3) and thus increase the relative weight
of the presence of particular molecular function in
a matched gut metaproteome. Trace sequence files
selected by a random hit generally will not produce
additional PSMs for the same molecular function. These
concepts together contribute to the accuracy of the
method and the increased number of identified spectra.
Moreover, as the size of protein sequence databases is

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

Page 6 of 11

Figure 3 The bioinformatics workflow of the proposed method. A: Peptide spectral matching with the ‘synthetic metaproteome’ leads to
peptide hits. The ORFs underlying the hitting peptide sequences are used to select a subset of the metagenomic pool of sequence data (in this
case MetaHIT sequence repository). The two-step selection of megablast and blastx reduces the computational load and allows the
metagenomic pool to be large. The selected subset is naively translated and is used as a search space for a next round of peptide spectral
matching, generating set 2 of peptide hits. Note that many elements of the workflow can be altered to fit other metaproteomics studies. B:
Alignment of naive translations of selected traces with a synthetic metagenome starting sequence assigned to COG074. Underlined: domains of
the synthetic metagenome starting sequence; Red: peptides spectrum matches using the synthetic metagenome peptide database; Blue: variant
peptides detected in selected naively translated MetaHit sequence trace files. Leucine (L) and isoleucine (I) are isobaric and can therefore not be
detected separately.

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

Page 7 of 11

COGs over all spectral counts and grouping COGs into
COG families (see Materials and Methods section for
details). The iterative search method resulted in a similar distribution over the COG families as that obtained
with the synthetic metaproteome-search method, reflecting the approach taken (Figure 5). Remarkably, the distribution over the COG families between the NO1 and
NO3 samples is highly similar. The COG categories
Translation, Energy production and conversion and Carbohydrate transport and metabolism count for over 50%
of the spectra in each sample. Furthermore, COG categories Amino acid transport and metabolism, Nucleotide
transport and metabolism and Lipid transport and
metabolism are abundantly present. A similar distribution of COG families based on metaproteomes was
recently reported for a Swedish adult twin pair [18]. It
reassures the role of the gut microbiota in carbohydrate
metabolism and harvesting and conversion of other
nutrients. Moreover, the elucidation of the full range of
microbial functions allows studies to gain insight in the
relation between gut microbial community and obesity
or other inflammatory disorders.
Metaproteomic Mining Points to a Specific Role of A.
muciniphila-like Bacteria in the Intestinal Tract
Figure 4 Results from three different approaches to peptide
spectrum matching of shotgun meta proteomics data. Spectra
from NO1 (A) and NO3 (B) were identified in separate OMSSA runs
using the ‘synthetic metaproteome’ (green), naive translation of the
matched metagenome (blue) and a translated metagenomic subset
(red) as search space. Combining the search results from the
synthetic metagenome search and the results from the search
against the translated metagenomic subset, the proposed method
(Figure 3) yields the highest spectrum identification rate. As
expected, most of the spectra identified using the ‘synthetic
metaproteome’ are also identified using the translated subset.

constantly growing, the success of the identifications is
expected to increase accordingly using the described
iterative method that accommodates the dynamics in
database development.
Molecular Function Prediction of the Metaproteomics
Data

To illustrate the power of the described metaproteomic
approach in combination with the iterative search
method, we predicted the functions of the intestinal
microbiota isolated from the subjects NO1 and NO3.
For this purpose we performed a blast search of the
trace hit sequences against the COG Clusters of Orthologous Proteins of Comparable Molecular Function [26]
database (Figure 5 and additional file 2) and assigned a
COG to each identified spectrum. Molecular function
abundance estimates were determined by summing the

The identified metaproteome can also be used to focus
on the proteome of phylogenetically deeply rooted
microbial taxa as these stand out in the blast analyses.
An example is A. muciniphila-like bacteria that is a single intestinal representantative of the deeply rooted Verrucomicrobia and has recently been characterized at the
genome level (van Passel et al. submitted). The traces
from the MetaHIT pool selected by a PSM were phylogenetically analyzed by a meta-mining approach for the
relative presence of proteins derived from A. municiphilia-like bacteria. This resulted in the detection of a total
of 9 such proteins in the NO1 metaproteome while
close to 200 of such proteins were found in the NO3
metaproteome (see additional file 2). This reflects accurately the observed abundance of A. muciniphila-like
bacteria in the different metagenome datasets (see
Figure 1). Close inspection of the large dataset from the
NO3 subject shows a specific COG distribution of the
peptides derived from A. muciniphila-like bacteria
(Figure 6). Apart from the obvious housekeeping functions, the largest COG groups included proteins predicted to be involved in carbohydrate transport and
metabolism as well as amino acid transport and metabolism. This is compatible with the observation that
A. muciniphila is capable of using mucin as carbon and
nitrogen source [20].
Moreover, as these proteins include various mucinases, it testifies for predicted activity and function of
A. muciniphila-like bacteria in the intestinal tract.

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

Page 8 of 11

Figure 5 The distribution of the spectra over the COG categories. Left three bars represent spectra counts per COG category for the NO1
sample right three bars show spectra counts per COG category for NO3 sample. Blue: Peptide database is derived from direct naïve translation
of traces; green: Peptide database is derived from the non-redundant synthetic metagenome; red: Iterative Peptide database

Conclusions
The wealth of information contained in the intestinal
metaproteomes becomes increasingly accessible as technical and analytical methods for its analysis mature.
Although there are still limitations in peptide identification, we describe here a novel approach that increases
the accuracy of peptide identification from shotgun proteomics data significantly. The setup of the iterative
workflow is highly dynamic, which allows capitalizing
on the developing databases. Moreover, it is sufficiently
general to make it applicable to study metaproteomes of
other ecosystems. The developed iterative workflow was
benchmarked to other approaches using data from two
human intestinal metaproteomes, showing superior
identifcation power and its applicability in defining functions of intestinal bacteria.
Materials and methods
Study Material
Figure 6 COG functional category distribution of A. muciniphilalike bacteria in subject NO3. Apart from the obvious housekeeping
functions, the largest COG groups include proteins predicted to be
involved in carbohydrate transport and metabolism (G) as well as
amino transport and metabolism (E).

Fecal material was obtained from subjects NO1 and NO3
from the Micro-Obes - Human Intestinal Tract Metagenomes. NO1 and NO3 were two healthy lean male volunteers aged 63 and 61 respectively, without symptoms of
gastrointestinal disease, family history of gastrointestinal

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

disease, or medication use. They were recruited from the
SU.VI.MAX2 cohort, in which they had been followed
over 8 years for their healthy nutritional and lifestyle
habits [27]. The SU.VI.MAX 2 study was conducted
according to the guidelines laid down in the Declaration
of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethical Committee
for Studies with Human Subjects of Paris-Cochin Hospital (CCPPRB n° 2364) and the Comité National Informatique et Liberté (CNIL n° 907094). Written informed
consent was obtained from all subjects.
Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometric
analysis

Bacteria were separated from fresh fecal material from
subjects NO1 and NO3 by flotation in a preformed
Nycodenz continuous gradient adapted from [28] and
stored at -80°C. Proteins were extracted from bacterial
pellets by chemical lysis. Freshly prepared buffer containing 8.75 M urea (Pharmacia), 2.5 M thiourea
(Sigma), 5% (w/v) CHAPS (Sigma), 75 mM DTT
(Sigma) and 31.25 mM dihydrate spermine base (Fluka)
was added to each frozen bacterial pellet. The pellets
were dispersed by vigorous vortexing and incubated at
room temperature for 1 h with periodic vortexing. The
lysates were centrifuged at 45,000 rpm for 1 h at 18°C.
Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using the GE Healthcare 2-D Quant Kit. After
neutralizing with concentrated HCl, the protein solutions were stored at -80°C.
Protein solutions were buffer exchanged and per sample
50 μg of proteins were fractionated on a 4-12% gradient
gel and lanes fractionated into 20 pieces. Proteins were
reduced with 50 mM (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH 4 HCO 3 ) for 1 h at 60°C, alkylated with
100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for
1 h at room temperature and digested with 0.2 μg trypsin
per gel piece at room temperature over night. Peptide
solutions were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2
and centrifuged. 18 μl of supernatant were loaded on a
0.1×30 mm reversed phase column and peptides were
eluted to an 0.1×300 mm analytical reversed phase column
with an acetonitrile gradient from 9 to 34% and a fixed
concentration of formic acid in 50 minutes (Proxeon
nLC). The eluent was subjected to an electrospray potential via a coupled platinum electrode. MS spectra were
measured on an Orbitrap (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA,
USA) and MSMS scans of four most abundant peaks were
recorded in data-dependent mode in coupled LTQ.

Page 9 of 11

NCBI FTP server (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/Bacteria/)
for which both genomic information and annotated proteome information was available and (nearly) complete.
Selected microbial proteomes are listed in additional file 1.
Synthetic metaproteome redundancy minimization

All protein sequence databases have been made nonredundant (in the case of the synthetic proteome at the
level of subspecies, e.g., when Lactobacillus reuteri
MM4-1 and Lactobacillus reuteri SD2112 share a protein sequence exactly, the sequence is only in the database once, however redundancy with other Lactobacilli
is ignored. This eliminated most of the redundancy in
the synthetic metaproteome), leading to lower (better)
e-values in PSM runs and shorter computational times.
Abundance analysis of the metagenomic sequences

Metagenomic sequence data was compared to the synthetic metagenome using ‘megablast’ [29], with default
settings. Reported hits are above a 95% average nucleotide identity threshold. The synthetic metagenome
allowed extraction of species to determine lineage of the
metagenomic data (Figure 1).
Metagenomic data

The pool of metagenomic traces consisted of the MetaHIT traces found at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/TraceDB/
human_gut_metagenome/ (latest archive 13th of November 2009, in total 3,148,461,906 basepairs in 2,415,707
traces).
Naive translations of trace sequence data (i.e. of subset of
MetaHIT and NO 1 (NCBI genome project 33305) & NO3
(NCBI genome project 33307) matched metagenomes)

Naive translation was done in six-frames, and naive
translations shorter than 25 amino acids or having no
fully tryptic peptide of length > 5 amino acids were filtered out (Python regular expression “[KR](?!P)([^K^R]|
([KR](? = P))){5,}[KR](?!P)”).
Decoy databases

Decoy databases for FDR estimation were created by
reversing each individual protein sequence according to
[22] and tagging the deflines to aid further analysis.
Peptide spectral matching

Peptide spectral matching was performed for the MSMS
spectra of each gel piece using stand-alone version 2.1.7
of OMSSA [30] with fixed modification “carbamidomethyl C” (option “-mf 3”), variable modifications “oxidation of M” and “carboxymethyl C” (option “-mv 1,2”),
product mass tolerance 0.4 Da (option “-to”), precursor
mass tolerance 0.03 (option “-te”) and maximum
allowed E-value in hit list of 0.1 (option “-he”).
FDR estimation

Bioinformatics
Synthetic metagenome/metaproteome assembly

The synthetic metaproteome and synthetic metagenome
were assembled by taking the known gut inhabitants
described in [19] and the gut microbiota listed on the

FDR estimation was done per sample/search database
combination according to [22]. FDR estimation for
which too few hits were generated used the score of the
best False Positive as threshold with upper bound
OMSSA e-value of 0.01 for subsequent data analysis.

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

Iterated search method

Iterated searching was done by (i) taking all PSM hits
for all respective MSMS data sets searched against the
synthetic metagenome search with e-value < 0.01
(excluding reversed hits from the decoy peptide database), (ii) megablasting the genomic sequences from
those hits against the metagenomic pool with option
“coding spaced seeds” of length 12 (option “-N 0 -W 12
-t 21”) for optimal results [25,31] and maximum
reported e-value 0.01 (option “-e”). Megablast output
was parsed and only sequence trace files giving 50%
identity over 150 nucleotides or better were retained
for the next filtering round. (iii) The retained trace
files were compared using blastx against the protein
sequences from the PSM hits in (i). Output was parsed
and only trace files having 80% identity over 50 amino
acids or better with a subject sequence were used. (iv)
The sequence trace files remaining were three-frame
translated. The correct strand could be inferred from
the blastx search and three-frame translation mitigates
the problem of frame shifts in low-quality sequencing
data. Translation was followed by basic ORF filtering
described earlier at “naive translations”. The translations
were combined into a new search database used for the
second PSM round again using an e-value < 0.01.
COG assignment

Sequences were searched using blastp against the COG
database (NCBI, ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/COG/COG/)
and assigned the COG of the best hit if the hit had an
e-value better than 10-10.
Computational details

All processing was done by in-house python (version
2.6) software except where usage of other software is
stated. Data warehousing was done using MySQL (version 5.0.75). Machines used were an AMD Sempron
3000+ (1.8 GHz, 1 GB) for development and an Intel
Xeon E5320 (8× 1.86 GHz, 8 GB) as deploy server, both
running Linux 2.6 kernels.

Additional material
Additional file 1: List of selected microbes used for construction of
the synthetic metagenome.
Additional file 2: COG annotation of matching mass spectra found.
File is in comma-separated value

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Prof. Airi Palva and Dr. Anne Salonen for generous help in
conducting this study. This work was supported by TEKES, the Finnish Funding
Agency for Technology and Innovation and in part by the French Agence
Nationale de la Recherche, under project MicroObes ANR-07-GMGE-002-01.
Author details
Laboratory of Systems and Synthetic Biology, Wageningen University,
Dreijenplein10, 6703 HB Wageningen, The Netherlands. 2Department of
1

Page 10 of 11

Veterinary Biosciences, Division of Microbiology and Epidemiology, University
of Helsinki, P.O. Box 66, FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland. 3INRA, UMR 1319, Micalis,
78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France. 4Laboratory of Biochemistry, Wageningen
University, Dreijenlaan 10, 6703 HB Wageningen, The Netherlands. 5UMR
U557 INSERM, U1125 INRA, CNAM, Université Paris 13, F-93017 Bobigny,
France. 6INRA, IsoCellExpress (ICE), UMR 1313 GABI, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas,
France. 7Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Dreijenplein 10,
6703 HB Wageningen, the Netherlands.
Authors’ contributions
PG recruited the subjects. CK, JD, CJ, and WMdeV planned and PD, CK and
SB performed the study. KR and PJS developed and performed the
bioinformatics analysis. MdeB helped with the biological interpretation of
the data. KR, PJS, CK and WMdeV wrote the paper with contributions from
all authors. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 3 September 2010 Accepted: 5 January 2011
Published: 5 January 2011
References
1. O’Hara AM, Shanahan F: The gut flora as a forgotten organ. EMBO reports
2006, 7:688-693.
2. Hooper LV, Gordon JI: Commensal Host-Bacterial Relationships in the
Gut. Science 2001, 292:1115-1118.
3. Zoetendal EG, RajiliÄ-StojanoviÄ M, de Vos WM: High-throughput diversity
and functionality analysis of the gastrointestinal tract microbiota. Gut
2008, 57:1605-1615.
4. Steinhoff U: Who controls the crowd? New findings and old questions
about the intestinal microflora. Immunology Letters 2005, 99:12-16.
5. Guarner F, Malagelada J-R: Gut flora in health and disease. The Lancet
2003, 361:512-519.
6. Sears CL: A dynamic partnership: Celebrating our gut flora. Anaerobe
2005, 11:247-251.
7. The Human Microbiome Jumpstart Reference Strains C: A Catalog of
Reference Genomes from the Human Microbiome. Science 2010,
328:994-999.
8. Qin J, Li R, Raes J, Arumugam M, Burgdorf KS, Manichanh C, Nielsen T,
Pons N, Levenez F, Yamada T, et al: A human gut microbial gene
catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 2010,
464:59-65.
9. Aebersold R, Mann M: Mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Nature 2003,
422:198-207.
10. Ansong C, Purvine SO, Adkins JN, Lipton MS, Smith RD: Proteogenomics:
needs and roles to be filled by proteomics in genome annotation. Brief
Funct Genomic Proteomic 2008, 7:50-62.
11. Lacerda CMR, Reardon KF: Environmental proteomics: applications
of proteome profiling in environmental microbiology and
biotechnology. Briefings in Functional Genomics and Proteomics 2009,
8:75-87.
12. Marcotte EM: How do shotgun proteomics algorithms identify proteins?
Nat Biotech 2007, 25:755-757.
13. Shanahan F: The host-microbe interface within the gut. Best Practice &
Research Clinical Gastroenterology 2002, 16:915-931.
14. Habermann B, Oegema J, Sunyaev S, Shevchenko A: The Power and the
Limitations of Cross-Species Protein Identification by Mass
Spectrometry-driven Sequence Similarity Searches. Molecular & Cellular
Proteomics 2004, 3:238-249.
15. Wilkins MJ, VerBerkmoes NC, Williams KH, Callister SJ, Mouser PJ, Elifantz H,
N’Guessan AL, Thomas BC, Nicora CD, Shah MB, et al: Proteogenomic
Monitoring of Geobacter Physiology during Stimulated Uranium
Bioremediation. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009, 75:6591-6599.
16. VerBerkmoes NC, Denef VJ, Hettich RL, Banfield JF: Systems Biology:
Functional analysis of natural microbial consortia using community
proteomics. Nat Rev Micro 2009, 7:196-205.
17. Callister SJ, Wilkins MJ, Nicora CD, Williams KH, Banfield JF, VerBerkmoes NC,
Hettich RL, N’Guessan L, Mouser PJ, Elifantz H, et al: Analysis of
Biostimulated Microbial Communities from Two Field Experiments
Reveals Temporal and Spatial Differences in Proteome Profiles.
Environmental Science & Technology 2010.
18. Verberkmoes NC, Russell AL, Hettich RL, Jansson JK, Shah M, Godzik A,
Rosenquist M, Halfvarson J, Lefsrud MG, Apajalahti J, Tysk C: Shotgun

Rooijers et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/6

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Page 11 of 11

metaproteomics of the human distal gut microbiota. ISME Journal 2009,
3:179-189.
Rajilić-Stojanović M, Heilig HGHJ, Molenaar D, Kajander K, Surakka A,
Smidt H, de Vos WM: Development and application of the human
intestinal tract chip, a phylogenetic microarray: analysis of universally
conserved phylotypes in the abundant microbiota of young and elderly
adults. Environmental Microbiology 2009, 11:1736-1751.
Derrien M, Collado MC, Ben-Amor K, Salminen S, de Vos WM: The Mucin
Degrader Akkermansia muciniphila Is an Abundant Resident of the
Human Intestinal Tract. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74:1646-1648.
Morgan JL, Darling AE, Eisen JA: Metagenomic Sequencing of an In VitroSimulated Microbial Community. PLoS ONE 2010, 5:e10209.
Elias JE, Gygi SP: Target-decoy search strategy for increased confidence
in large-scale protein identifications by mass spectrometry. Nat Meth
2007, 4:207-214.
Mavromatis K, Land M, Lapidus A, Grigoriev I, Richardson P, Hugenholtz P,
Kyrpides NC, Ivanova N, Barry K, Shapiro H, et al: Use of simulated data
sets to evaluate the fidelity of metagenomic processing methods. Nat
Meth 2007, 4:495-500.
Hoff K: The effect of sequencing errors on metagenomic gene
prediction. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:520-520.
Gotea V, Veeramachaneni V, Makalowski W: Mastering seeds for genomic
size nucleotide BLAST searches. Nucl Acids Res 2003, 31:6935-6941.
Tatusov RL, Natale DA, Garkavtsev IV, Tatusova TA, Shankavaram UT, Rao BS,
Kiryutin B, Galperin MY, Fedorova ND, Koonin EV: The COG database: new
developments in phylogenetic classification of proteins from complete
genomes. Nucl Acids Res 2001, 29:22-28.
Hercberg S, Galan P, Preziosi P, Bertrais S, Mennen L, Malvy D, Roussel A-M,
Favier A, Briancon S: The SU.VI.MAX Study: A Randomized, PlaceboControlled Trial of the Health Effects of Antioxidant Vitamins and
Minerals. Arch Intern Med 2004, 164:2335-2342.
Kimie M, Tsutomu F, Masataka M, Noriko S: One-step subcellular
fractionation of rat liver tissue using a Nycodenz density gradient
prepared by freezing-thawing and two-dimensional sodium dodecyl
sulfate electrophoresis profiles of the main fraction of organelles.
ELECTROPHORESIS 2001, 22:2872-2880.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucl Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
Geer LY, Markey SP, Kowalak JA, Wagner L, Xu M, Maynard DM, Yang X,
Shi W, Bryant SH: Open Mass Spectrometry Search Algorithm. Journal of
Proteome Research 2004, 3:958-964.
Ma B, Tromp J, Li M: PatternHunter: faster and more sensitive homology
search. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:440-445.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-6
Cite this article as: Rooijers et al.: An iterative workflow for mining the
human intestinal metaproteome. BMC Genomics 2011 12:6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
