<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Island biology and morphological divergence of the Skyros wall lizard Podarcis gaigeae: a combined role for local selection and genetic drift on color morph frequency divergence?</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:269. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-269"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Anna Runemark"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Island biology and morphological divergence of
the Skyros wall lizard Podarcis gaigeae: a
combined role for local selection and genetic
drift on color morph frequency divergence?
Anna Runemark1*, Bengt Hansson1, Panayiotis Pafilis2,3, Efstratios D Valakos4, Erik I Svensson1

Abstract
Background: Patterns of spatial variation in discrete phenotypic traits can be used to draw inferences about the
adaptive significance of traits and evolutionary processes, especially when compared to patterns of neutral genetic
variation. Population divergence in adaptive traits such as color morphs can be influenced by both local ecology
and stochastic factors such as genetic drift or founder events. Here, we use quantitative color measurements of
males and females of Skyros wall lizard, Podarcis gaigeae, to demonstrate that this species is polymorphic with
respect to throat color, and the morphs form discrete phenotypic clusters with limited overlap between categories.
We use divergence in throat color morph frequencies and compare that to neutral genetic variation to infer the
evolutionary processes acting on islet- and mainland populations.
Results: Geographically close islet- and mainland populations of the Skyros wall lizard exhibit strong divergence in
throat color morph frequencies. Population variation in throat color morph frequencies between islets was higher
than that between mainland populations, and the effective population sizes on the islets were small (Ne:s < 100).
Population divergence (FST) for throat color morph frequencies fell within the neutral FST-distribution estimated
from microsatellite markers, and genetic drift could thus not be rejected as an explanation for the pattern.
Moreover, for both comparisons among mainland-mainland population pairs and between mainland-islet
population pairs, morph frequency divergence was significantly correlated with neutral divergence, further pointing
to some role for genetic drift in divergence also at the phenotypic level of throat color morphs.
Conclusions: Genetic drift could not be rejected as an explanation for the pattern of population divergence in
morph frequencies. In spite of an expected stabilising selection, throat color frequencies diverged in the islet
populations. These results suggest that there is an interaction between selection and genetic drift causing
divergence even at a phenotypic level in these small, subdivided populations.

Background
The role of genetic drift in population divergence and
speciation has been a much debated topic in evolutionary biology [1-5]. Early theoretical models of speciation,
so-called “peak-shift models”, suggested that genetic
drift must be a strong force if a population was to move
from one adaptive peak to another, and hence cross a
valley with lower fitness [5,6]. These early models
* Correspondence: Anna.Runemark@zooekol.lu.se
1
Section for Animal Ecology, Ecology Building, Lund University, SE-223 62
Lund, Sweden
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

generated much controversy and it was later argued that
these proposed scenarios were unlikely to be important
in population divergence and speciation [1,2]. More
recent theoretical models have generated renewed interest for the possibility of genetic drift in speciation.
These new models suggest that genetic drift can operate
when there exist neutral adaptive ridges in multivariate
“holey adaptive landscapes” [3]. Several recent empirical
and theoretical studies suggest possible interactions
between stochastic factors and selection during evolutionary divergence. For instance, genetic drift can influence population divergence in adaptive phenotypic traits

© 2010 Runemark et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

during a short and transient period if selection is temporally relaxed [7-10]. Genetic drift has also been suggested to promote speciation, especially when drift
interacts with sexual selection [11]. However, empirical
evidence for these scenarios is still rather limited, especially the possible interactions between genetic drift and
selection. More generally, various forms of stochasticity
have been ignored in most evolutionary studies, and it
has been pointed out that genetic drift can also take
place in large populations [12].
It is an empirical challenge to argue for a role for
genetic drift at the level of phenotypes, since most
biologists, for good reasons, believe that phenotypic
evolution is mainly influenced by the deterministic
forces of natural or sexual selection [13,14]. One possible approach might be to study whether the population
distribution of a heritable phenotypic character differs
from the neutral expectation or not [7,15,16]. Neutral
genetic markers can be used to estimate the effective
population sizes (N e ), and from such data, the
expected probability of fixation of neutral and selected
alleles can be calculated. The strength of genetic drift
is inversely proportional to N e and hence drift is a
more important force in small populations [17]. If it
can be demonstrated that Ne is small, the potential for
genetic drift would increase, both at the phenotypic
and at the molecular levels. It is important to emphasize that stochastic factors such as drift, historical
contingencies and the initial genetic makeup of populations, could interact with deterministic factors like
selection [18-20]. Thus, the critical issue here is not
whether genetic drift and stochastic factors solely influence population divergence of phenotypic traits, but
rather if, and to what extent, stochastic factors might
interact with deterministic factors such as selection
during evolutionary diversification [21].
Discrete and visible color polymorphisms are excellent
phenotypic model systems for the study of evolutionary
processes in natural settings [22-24]. Past studies of
such polymorphisms have addressed some central issues
in population genetics and evolutionary biology, ranging
from the question of how genetic variation is maintained in natural populations to speciation processes
[23-25]. Color is often also genetically and phenotypically correlated to suites of other morphological, physiological and behavioral traits, e.g. testosterone levels,
aggression and disease resistance [26-29]. When the
genetic basis of such color polymorphisms is known, the
theoretical and analytical framework of population
genetics can be used to infer the selective causes behind
the spatial variation and the temporal dynamics of
morph frequencies [22,25]. Moreover, such studies of
the morphs can be used in combination with population
estimates of neutral or nearly neutral molecular genetic

Page 2 of 15

markers [7,15]. Such color polymorphisms sometimes
seem to have a relatively simple genetic basis (one or a
few loci) [22]; as appears to be the case for the sideblotched lizard (Uta stansburiana) where throat color
segregates as a single locus (Mendelian) character
[30-32] and the Australian Painted dragon (Ctenophorus
pictus) where a similar simple inheritance pattern might
operate [33]. In the brown Anoline lizard (Anolis sagrei),
a two-locus inheritance system with epistatic interactions seems to be involved in the determination of back
pattern morphs [34].
Although a genetic background for the throat color
polymorphism in lizards is often assumed [30-34], no
cross-breeding studies have been done to investigate
whether it would be governed by a single locus or multiple loci (but see [33]), and the gene(s) involved has not
been mapped at the molecular level. It has also been
argued that throat color in Lacerta vivipara [35] is a
continuous character, although [36] argues that it is a
discrete, mendelian trait. An additional role for phenotypic plasticity, where the same genetic background has
different outcomes in different environments [37], can
not be excluded. The high heritabilities estimated from
some studies [31] indicate that the role of phenotypic
plasticity is small in comparison to the genetic component. Although one can certainly raise caveats for some
of these previous studies, and a simple genetic basis can
be questioned in some cases, it is quite clear that color
polymorphisms in lizards are often heritable, making
such traits useful model systems in studies of the relative role of genetic drift vs. selection.
Mechanisms that might contribute to maintain color
polymorphisms in populations include negative frequency-dependent male-male competition [26,38], negative frequency-dependent male mating harassment [25],
female preferences for unfamiliar mates [39-41], selection in spatially and temporally heterogeneous habitats
[42] and sexual selection in combination with microhabitat-specific selection [43]. If a selection pressure connected to a well-defined environmental factor operates
on such color morphs, the morph frequencies are
expected to change in a parallel fashion across similar
ecological environments. In contrast, if genetic drift or
other stochastic factors are the predominant evolutionary forces acting on the color morphs, then no such
parallelism between morph frequencies and environments are expected. On the other hand, if the color
morphs are maintained by negative frequency-dependent
selection of a similar kind and magnitude across all
populations, then at evolutionary equilibrium, morph
frequency divergence should be significantly lower than
neutral genetic divergence [15]. In contrast, if directional
selection acts on the color morphs in a heterogeneous
ecological environment, one would expect more

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

pronounced population divergence in morph frequencies
than expected for the neutral genetic variation [44,45].
Finally, under temporally varying selection, genetic drift
might partly influence morph frequencies during periods
of relaxed selection [7,9,23], which could result in a pattern of morph frequency divergence that would not be
discernible from the neutral expectation.
Polymorphic taxa can also shed light on speciation
processes; such morphs can serve as starting material
for the formation of new species, a process that might
be caused by social selection in sympatry [46,47]. Two
or more morphs can diverge in different directions
already in sympatry, and accelerated evolutionary divergence might subsequently follow if one of these initial
morphs later becomes fixed by selection or by stochastic
factors in a population [23,43,47].
In many lizard species, including the European
Podarcis-clade, color polymorphisms are widespread
and multiple throat color morphs coexist within
populations [27,48,49] (Fig. 1). Here we present the
results of a study of the endemic Skyros wall lizard
(Podarcis gaigeae) where we study the frequency

Page 3 of 15

distribution of throat color morphs in different populations to infer the nature of the selective processes
that are acting on the throat color morphs in mainland- and islet populations of this species. This lizard
occurs on the island of Skyros in Greece and also on
many of the small islets located along the coast of
Skyros [48]. The lizard populations on these islets
also exhibit substantial morphological inter-islet differentiation, and there are some examples of island
gigantism [50]. This biogeographical setting of a large
“mainland” area (Skyros) surrounded by smaller islets
isolated from the mainland by a few hundred meters
of sea is an ideal and classic setting to address issues
about the role of stochasticity versus local selection in
the divergence of phenotypic traits. In this study, we
used molecular (microsatellite) markers to estimate
neutral divergence in islet- and mainland populations,
and compared the neutral genetic divergence to the
divergence in throat color morph frequency. Based on
these comparisons we discuss the relative role of
genetic drift on morph frequencies in these different
geographical settings.

Figure 1 Throat color variation in the Balkan Podarcis-clade. Examples of some of the intra- and interspecific variation in throat color which
is found in the Balkan Peninsula group of Podarcis shown on a pruned phylogenetic tree, whose topology was obtained from recent molecular
studies [51,90]. Note especially the presence of intraspecific throat color polymorphisms in at least two species (P. gaigeae and P. mellisilensis)
and the entire black throat of the island endemic P. milensis on Milos.

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

Page 4 of 15

Methods

Quantitative color analysis of morphs

Study species, geographical setting and natural history of
islands

The lizards were visually classified to one of six clearly
discernible throat color categories (“morphs”: orange
(O), yellow-orange (YO), orange-white (OW), yellow
(Y), yellow-white (YW) or white (W)). All these six phenotypes exhibited either one or a combination of any
two of the three colors (orange, yellow and white) present in the system, from inspection of the photographic
images. No instances of all three colors on the throat of
the same lizard were found. To evaluate the reliability of
this discrete visual classification system, another observer (E. I. Svensson) independently re-classified a total of
40 lizards that had previously been classified by
A. Runemark. In all but two cases (38 out of 40), the
independent classifications were identical. This suggests
that these color morphs are easily distinguishable with
little ambiguity between different observers, possibly
reflecting the discrete nature of these morphs.
To further quantify the discreteness of these color
morphs, we analyzed the throat area from the images of
the individual lizards and used the data in a more quantitative analysis. A total of 351 lizard throats, 320 P. g.
gaigeae and 31 P. g. weigandi, were photographed and
visually classified to different color morphs from the
images. Due to the variance in intensity, which was
related to the imaged scenario geometry (flash distances
and surface orientation) rather than the intrinsic optical
properties of the lizard, the analysis was pursued with
only the relative unit less quantities (S. Svanberg, personal communication). The intensity of the throat images
was removed by a transformation of the colorspace
from Cartesian to spherical which decreases dimensionality through removing the intensity dimension. Since
the aim of the study was to quantify the red green blue
(RGB) composition rather than the intensity of the
throat colors the subsequent analysis was facilitated by
the discarding of the intensity. To preserve the discrete
patchy colors of the throat, the chromaticities of individual pixels were summarized in 2 D histogram planes
for each sample [56]. The histograms were decomposed
using a principal component analysis [57], and the number of principal component planes included in the subsequent analysis was determined by the break point
where the difference in the drop between successive
eigenvalues is markedly smaller and evens out. Matlab®
(MathWorks™) was used for all image analyses.
We subsequently used a discriminant function analysis
(DFA) to assess if the visually classified color morphs
could be distinguished from each other using the principal component data that we extracted from the images.
The software STATISTICA [58] was used for all analyses based on the principal component loadings for
each lizard that were extracted from Matlab. We used
Spearman rank order correlation to investigate if

The Skyros wall lizard P. gaigeae is a small bodied
insectivorous lacertiid lizard. It is endemic to the
Greek island Skyros and its surrounding archipelago
[51] with the exception of the subspecies, P. g. weigandi which is found on the island of Piperi [48]. For
comparative reasons, this subspecies was also included
in this study to compare morph frequencies within
P. g. gaigeae between populations on Skyros, the islets
surrounding Skyros and the geographically isolated
P. g. weigandi. The fragmentation of the landmass
which led to the formation of the archipelago of Skyros, and hence the separation from Piperi, had
occurred by the early Eemian period [52,53]. Today
Piperi is situated 40 kilometers north of Skyros (Fig.
2A). Populations of P. g. gaigeae on small islets close
to the coast of Skyros show pronounced morphological differentiation, including at least two cases of
island gigantism (A. Runemark and E. I. Svensson,
unpublished data). Predation rates on islands are
often reduced [54] which is also the case for the islets
in the Skyros archipelago [50]. The islets close to the
coast of Skyros are known for their highly differentiated floral composition and substantial inter-islet
variation, and the patterns show some signals of community drift [55].
Field work and sample collection

Lizards were caught at eight different geographic localities, hereafter referred to as “populations”. P. g. gaigeae was caught at four different “mainland” localities
on the island of Skyros and on three islets close to the
coast of Skyros. Lizards of the subspecies P. g. weigandi were caught on the island of Piperi (Fig. 2A).
Two of the mainland populations and two islet populations were sampled during two consecutive years to
ensure that there were no large fluctuations in throat
color morph frequency between years. A small part of
the tail was collected and immediately preserved it in
99% ethanol for subsequent DNA extraction. All captured animals were photographed with a DMC FX01
Panasonic color camera in an optical isolated box
using the built-in xenon flash. Constant illumination
was verified with a white background reference. Specular reflections were avoided with two crossed polarization filters. The sex of the lizards was determined
through inspection of the femoral pores which are
more developed in males than in females [48]. All animals were released after measurement and samples
had been taken and sampling was approved by the
Hellenic Herpetological Society and the National Sea
Park of Alonissos North Sporades.

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Distribution of P. gaigeae and frequencies of the different throat color morphs in the populations. (A) Field sampling localities
for P. gaigeae individuals. Map A shows Greece. The boxes, which are enlarged in map B and C, outline the island of Piperi and the island of
Skyros, respectively. Field sampling sites are numbered from one to eight (1: Palamari, 2: Atsitsa, 3: Agios Fokas, 4: Lakonissi, 5: Nyfi, 6: Mesa
Diavates, 7: Exo Diavates, 8: the island of Piperi). (B) Throat color morph frequencies among the seven populations of P. g. gaigeae and P. g.
weigandi on Piperi. The upper row refers to populations from the main island of Skyros and the lower to islets close to Skyros and to the island
of Piperi.

proportion of orange females was correlated to proportion orange males in each of the populations. We used
c2 -tests to investigate if the frequencies of the throat
color morphs differed among populations and between
the habitat groups ("mainland” vs. “islets”). Our starting

assumption was a simple (Mendelian) inheritance system: we thus assume that the throat color morph is governed by a single locus with three color alleles,
codominant inheritance and hence six visible phenotypes. Based on this assumption, we also tested if the

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

populations deviated from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium
with respect to the throat color morph frequencies,
using c2-tests.
Although we have no experimental data (e.g. breeding
experiments) on the possible inheritance of throat color
in this system, our assumption of a simple genetic basis
of color is well-supported by several recent previous studies on color polymorphisms in both lizards and many
other animal species (see references in Introduction).
We do certainly not claim that there are no environmental effects on color and no role for phenotypic plasticity in these morphs. However, the discrete nature of
these color morphs in combination with previous studies on animal coloration makes it highly likely that
there is some genetic influence on coloration, perhaps
through some major effect gene. Previous studies on
color polymorphisms, including studies on birds, fish,
lizards and many insect species indicate that variation in
color is often heritable, and it is certainly not unusual
that color polymorphisms are governed by simple systems of inheritance, e.g. single locus systems with several alternate alleles (see [22] for a recent review). In
addition, our analyses do not rely on whether one- or
two loci are involved in determining the throat color,
but are based on the frequencies of the different alleles,
and our results will thus not depend critically on the
number of involved loci.
DNA extraction and microsatellite typing

DNA from all lizard samples was extracted with an
ammonium acetate extraction protocol [59]. The DNA
was quantified and diluted to 10 ng/μl and used as template in PCR reactions using 18 primers: Lv 319, Pb10,
B4, C9, Lv 472, Pod 1B, B6, Pb73, Lv 4a Pod 2, Po47,
Po56, Po55, Po22, Po11, Po43, Po51 and Po18 [60,61].
PCR reactions were carried out in a GeneAmp PCR system 9700 (Applied Biosystems Inc., Foster City, CA,
USA) and the conditions used are specified in [61] and
[60] respectively. The PCR products were separated and
alleles were detected in an ABI PRISM 3730 capillary
sequencer (Applied Biosystems). GeneMapper (Applied
Biosystems) was used to determine the genotypes of the
individuals.
Molecular population genetic analyses

We obtained genetic data from 289 individuals from the
eight study populations (see Additional file 1 for breakdown of sample sizes for the different populations) and
each of these individuals was scored at the 18 microsatellite loci. Departure from Hardy-Weinberg expectations and the genetic differentiation (F ST ) between
populations was estimated with FSTAT [62]. F ST for
throat color morph was also calculated in FSTAT; the
three colors were coded as alternative alleles at one

Page 6 of 15

locus. This analysis thus assumes that throat color is a
heritable trait with Mendelian inheritance and codominant expression. We assumed that single color and combinations of two colors correspond to homo- and
heterozygous stages, respectively. The program Structure
version 2.2 [63] was run on individual multilocus genotypes for a number of clusters K ranging from 1 to 12
using a burn-in length of 50,000 and a run length of
100,000 iterations. The likelihood for the data given
each of K clusters was recorded, but since the main aim
of the analysis was to illustrate the degree of genetic differentiation between populations rather than to find the
number of genetic clusters for which the likelihood is
highest, the additional method [64] for determining K
was not applied. Effective population size Ne was estimated with LDNE [65]. AMOVAs were performed in
Arlequin version 3.3 [66] to evaluate the within- and
among group genetic variance. Isolation-by-distance was
tested using Mantel’s test implemented in the ISOLDE
application in the program GENEPOP [67]. We used a
general linear model (GLM) with color morph FST as
dependent variable and neutral FST and category (mainland-mainland, mainland-island and island-island) as
main effects and used a design including all the two-way
combinations as well as the three-way combination, to
test both for dependence on the two main effects and
interactions between them. Since each population is
involved in more than one comparison the data points
are not independent, so we used a resampling approach
[68] to confirm these results. We also used regressions
to test for a correlation within the individual categories
mentioned above, and used resampling statistics [68] to
confirm our results since the data points are interdependent. The resampling procedure confirmed the results
from the GLM, and hence we only present the results
from the latter in this study. We thus compared the
FST-values calculated from the color morphs (“morph
divergence”) and the FST-values based on the 18 microsatellite loci (“neutral divergence”).
Selection can be inferred from the genetic signature of
different molecular markers; markers that have been
under directional selection are expected to be more
diverged than neutral markers and markers that have
been subjected to stabilizing selection should be less
diverged [44,45]. Recently, it has been argued that comparisons of population divergence between putatively
adaptive traits (often referred to as “QST”) and neutral
population divergence (F ST), should utilize the whole
neutral FST-distribution to see if the adaptive traits fall
within this distribution, before the null hypothesis of
genetic drift can be safely rejected [16,44]. We follow
these recommendations and visualized the entire neutral
FST-distribution and its relationship to our adaptive trait
(color morph divergence). We used a paired t-test to

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

investigate if FST for throat color morph differed from
the F ST for the microsatellite loci. This procedure
assumes that the pair-wise population comparisons are
statistically independent, which is questionable, since
each population is involved in several different comparisons. We therefore confirmed the results from the
paired t-test using the re-sampling procedure described
above [68], but our conclusions remained the same (see
Results). To investigate if the morph frequencies on the
islets have evolved in parallel, we performed a logistic
regression with a binomial distribution and a logit link,
where orange allele or not orange allele is the dependent
variable and habitat (islet or mainland) the main effect.
The subspecies P. g. weigandi was not included in this
analysis since the habitat of Piperi is expected to differ
from that of Skyros and its’ surrounding islets and thus
not reflect an islet- or mainland habitat effect.

Results
Color morphs: visual classification and spectral analysis

A discriminant function analysis based on the seven first
principle components extracted from the throat images
revealed that the six visually classified throat color
morph groups were highly statistically different from
each other (F = 31.81, df = 7, 318, P < 0.001) (Fig. 3).
14 out of 15 post-hoc tests between the different groups
were highly significant (P < 0.001), with the only exception for the yellow-orange morph that did not differ
from the orange (P = 0.11). The results from these analyses, showing variation from the first two canonical
roots is depicted in Fig. 3. Of the six phenotypes that
were clearly separated from each other, the confidence
ellipses of the three “pure” morphs (putative homozygotes) are also shown (Fig. 3).
Geographic variation in color morph frequencies

Color morph frequencies differed significantly between
all eight populations (c² = 1168, df = 35, P < 0.001).
The frequencies also differed significantly between the
mainland group and islet group within the subspecies P.
g. gaigeae (c² = 336, df = 5, P < 0.001) (Fig. 2B). All
main colors (O, Y, W) - although not all six throat color
morphs - were found in all mainland populations and in
two of the three islet populations of P. g. gaigeae (Fig.
2B). On the third islet, only 16 individuals were
sampled, and we only found Y and W. In the other subspecies (P. g. weigandi), only O and W were found (N =
31). We found a significant positive relationship (b =
0.88; P < 0.05) between the proportion of females in the
populations with partly or fully orange throats (e. g. O,
YO, OW individuals) and the proportion of males with
partly or fully orange throats (Fig. 4). This suggests that
the color polymorphism in this species is present in
both males and females and that it is not sex-limited in

Page 7 of 15

its expression. None of the eight populations differed
significantly from Hardy-Weinberg expectations with
respect to local throat color morph frequencies (Additional file 2).
Genetic population differentiation

Pair-wise population comparisons of neutral genetic variation (F ST -values between populations) ranged from
0.0057 to 0.52 when P. g. weigandi was included and
between 0.0057 and 0.36 within P. g. gaigeae only (Table
1). All between-population comparisons of neutral
divergence were highly significant (P < 0.001). F ST values estimated from the color morph frequency data
ranged from 0.0025 to 0.45 when all populations and
P. g. weigandi were included, and between 0.0025 and
0.24 within P. g. gaigeae only (Table 1).
We used the microsatellite data and STRUCTURE
[63] to illustrate the degree of genetic population structure and to infer the number of genetically independent
populations (or “clusters"; K) that we could find support
for in our data set (Fig. 5). The likelihood of data LnP
(D) stabilized within 20,000 iterations for all tested
values of K, and thus a run length of 100,000 was
deemed as sufficient. The clusters defined by STRUCTURE correspond to a sampling locality or a group of
sampling localities up to K = 6 (Fig. 5A) and the loglikelihood-values reached a plateau at K = 6 (Fig. 5B).
At K = 7 all sampling localities were well defined, with
the exception of the two most northern mainland populations that included a majority of individuals assigned
to two different genetic clusters (populations 1 and 2 on
the map). At K = 2, two of the island populations form
a separate cluster and at K = 3 the P. g weigandi population form a third cluster. The next two clusters to form
are the remaining island populations, and at K = 6 the
southern mainland population separates from the three
northern mainland populations (Fig. 5 A).
Estimates of effective population sizes (Ne) based on
all allele frequencies > 0.01 varied between 39.4 and
97.7 for the islet populations of P. g. gaigeae and
between 315.3 and 375.0 for the mainland (Skyros)
populations (Table 2). The Ne of P. g. weigandi and two
of the northern mainland populations of P. g. gaigeae
could not be accurately estimated due to either a too
high noise-to-signal ratio or a very large population size.
Using 0.02 or 0.05 as lowest frequency of alleles
included in the analysis yielded similar results (data not
shown).
Most of the genetic variance was found within populations (more than 75%; Table 3). The variance was low
among groups (2.6%) but higher among populations
(14.9%) when the populations were divided into an
island and a mainland group (Table 3). When the mainland populations were grouped in two populations

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

Page 8 of 15

Figure 3 Discreteness of throat color morphs. Canonical roots (CV) of throat color morphs. Lizards were classified to one out of six possible
morphs visually (symbols) and the canonical roots (CV1 and CV2) were calculated from the spectral information that we obtained from RGB
photographs. Shown are 95% confidence ellipses for the three “pure” or putatively ‘homozygous’ throat color morphs (O, W and Y).

(north and south), both the between-group (1.6%) and
the among-population variance (2.3%) were low (Table
3). When the islets were divided into two groups (northern and southern), the between-group variance was still
rather low (6.8%), but among-population variance
(23.3%) was nevertheless an order of magnitude higher
than the among-population variance when only the
mainland populations were included in the analysis
(Table 3). This pattern of within- and among-population
variation is consistent with a scenario where the islet
populations have lost different components of the
genetic variance, presumably a result of their lower
effective population sizes (Table 2). The mainland populations of P. g. gaigeae showed a pattern of differentiation consistent with isolation-by-distance (Mantel’s test;
y = -0.27 + 0.033×ln(distance), P = 0.04). There was no
such trend when the islet populations of P. g. gaigeae, or
when P. g. weigandi and the islet populations, were
included in the analysis, however (Table 4).
Color morph divergence was significantly correlated
with neutral genetic divergence across all populations

(F = 6.37; df = 1, 26; P = 0.02). When we separated
these comparisons into three different geographic categories (mainland-mainland, mainland-island and islandisland), we found a significant positive relationship
within two of these categories (Fig. 6A). The mainlandmainland and mainland-island comparisons were both
positive and significant, whereas the island-island comparison was non-significant (Fig. 6A). The interaction
term between geographic category and neutral divergence was significant (F = 7.5; df = 4, 48; P = 0.003),
indicating that the correlation between color morph
divergence and neutral divergence differed between the
geographic settings (Fig. 6A).
Mean FST-values of color morph frequencies clearly
fell within the range of the mean FST-values based on
each one of the 18 microsatellite loci (Fig. 6B). No difference was found between FST based on color morph
frequencies and FST based on neutral genetic divergence
(Paired t-test: t = 0.91; df = 27; P = 0.37; results
remained the same after resampling). Hence these data
do not allow us to firmly exclude that population

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

Page 9 of 15

Figure 4 Correlation between male and female throat color.
Positive relationship between the local proportions of orange
females and orange males in each of the eight study populations.
The regression line y = 0.06 + 0.96*x is statistically significant (see
text).

divergence in color morph frequencies have been
affected solely by genetic drift. This conclusion remains
the same if the categories are analyzed separately (all Pvalues > 0.05). Islet populations had a significantly
higher proportion of orange throat color alleles than
mainland populations (logistic regression: c2 = 112.91;
df = 1; P < 0.001), although no orange throat color
alleles were found on one of the three islets.

Discussion
What is the role of genetic drift in phenotypic evolution,
if any? Even if most evolutionary biologists have strong
reasons to believe that genetic drift is a weak force in
phenotypic evolution, in comparison to selection
[69,70], genetic drift can still influence trait variation
that later becomes visible to selection [23]. For example,

Figure 5 Genetical clustering of populations. (A) Genetical
clustering when the eight sampled populations of P. gaigeae are
grouped into K = 2-9 clusters using the STRUCTURE algorithm [63].
(B) Log-likelihood of the microsatellite data given K clusters.

the loss of a particular color morph might change the
social selective environment, particularly when color is
used in intra- or intersexual signaling [46,71]. Genetic
drift in sexually selected traits in isolated populations
might lead to profound consequences upon secondary
contact. Since sexually selected characters can diverge
along a neutral line of equilibrium [72], genetic drift in

Table 1 FST for neutral genetic variation and throat color morph
Population

Agios Fokas

Mesa Diavates

Exo Diavates

Lakonissi

Nyfi

Palomares

Piperi

0.0165

Agios Fokas (M)

Atsitsa

0.1530

0.1002

0.2249

0.0261

0.0286

0.2941

0.1908

0.1096

0.2587

0.0486

0.0057

0.3399

0.2196

0.3641

0.1486

0.1970

0.4206

0.3300

0.0726
0.2515

0.1287
0.2561

0.3632
0.5200

Atsitsa (M)

0.0025

Mesa Diavates (I)

0.0727

0.0821

Exo Diavates (I)
Lakonissi (I)

0.0850
0.1990

0.1655
0.2404

0.2030
0.0830

0.2205

Nyfi (M)

0.1178

0.1930

0.2353

0.0088

0.2417

Palomares (M)

0.0234

0.0031

0.0493

0.2181

0.2191

0.2452

0.0488

Piperi (I)

0.3376

0.3859

0.1383

0.4501

0.0711

0.4510

0.2729
0.3365

0.3333

FST-values based on 18 microsatellite loci (upper right half) and FST-values based on throat color phenotype frequency in the population (lower left half).
Mainland localities are abbreviated with a M and island locals with an I.

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

Page 10 of 15

Table 2 Effective population sizes
Population
Mainland 1 (AF)

Table 4 Isolation by distance

Ne

Lower 95%CI

Upper 95%CI

315.3

202.7

669.9

Group

a

P. g. gaigeae and P. g. weigandi

b

P

-0.98

0.13

0.11

-

-

∞

P. g. gaigeae

0.53

-0.04

0.65

Island 2 (D)

97.7

66.3

170.0

P. g. gaigeae mainland

-0.27

0.03

0.04

Island 3 (DII)

39.6

27.1

66.7

Island 1 (L)

39.4

29.7

54.6

Isolation by distance, where population differentiation (FST) = a + b*ln
(geographical distance (km)). P-values are from Mantel’s tests.

Mainland 2 (N)

375.0

240.8

802.9

Mainland 4 (P)

-

177.0

∞

P. g. weigandi

-

288.2

∞

Mainland 3 (AT)

Estimated effective population size (Ne) for the studied populations. Alleles
with frequencies above 0.01 were included in the analysis.

sexually selected characters can result in sexual isolation
between populations as a by-product of sexual selection
within populations [11]. An interaction between sexual
selection and genetic drift is of particular interest in the
present study as well as in other lizard species, since
throat color in lizards has been found to be correlated
with immunological condition and color could thus
function as a sexually selected honest signal both within
and between the sexes [73].
Comparisons of phenotypes from island and mainland
populations played a central role in Ernst Mayr’s theory
of founder effect speciation [1,74] and continues to
inspire contemporary evolutionary biologists today [75].
For instance, island biology studies of enigmatic color
morphs in Dendrobates frogs have shown an impressive
color morph diversity in the archipelago of Bocas del
Toro, outside Panama, compared to mainland Central
America [76]. The discrete throat color phenotypes in P.
gaigeae and the natural geographical replicates (i.e., different islet populations), as well as the variation in
throat color throughout the Balkan clade of Podarcis
where the sister species P. milensis does not exhibit
throat color morphs whereas for example P. melisellensis
has retained it, make this an excellent study system to
address how selective processes operate in subdivided
islet populations.
A role for phenotypic plasticity in determining the
throat color morphs in P. gaigeae can not be excluded.
If throat color morph would be entirely plastic with no
heritable basis, the significant correlations between neutral genetic variation and the throat color morph

frequencies for mainland-mainland and islet-mainland
population pairs (Fig. 6A) would still need an explanation. One possibility might be that these correlations
could reflect habitat differences between populations
that have diverged to different degrees and at a rate that
is proportional to molecular divergence. One could possibly argue for this possibility on the main island if
there would be a clinal change in habitat. However,
such a correlation would not necessarily be expected
between the islet-mainland population pairs since the
similarity in habitat between the islets and mainland
locals is unlikely to be proportional to the time since
the islets were isolated from the mainland. Rather, the
environments on the islets depend more on local factors
such as soil type and anthropogenic impact such as
grazing pressure from goats (A. Runemark and E. Svensson, unpublished observations). Although we do not
exclude the existence of genotype-by-environment interactions, a scenario with no heritable basis at all for the
throat color polymorphism seems quite unlikely. With
the caveat that we have no data from breeding experiments on the genetic basis of this throat color polymorphism, the discrete nature of these color morphs
(Fig. 3), the strong correlation in throat color between
the sexes (Fig. 4), our findings that none of the populations deviate from Hardy-Weinberg proportions with
respect to the throat color morphs (Additional file 2),
and the significant relationship between population
divergence of the throat color morphs and neutral
genetic divergence (Fig. 6A), is consistent with a heritable basis of throat color. Previous studies on several
other lizard species have often found indications of a
relatively simple genetic architecture of color morphs
[30-34]. Although we do not know the exact number of
loci involved in determining the throat color, the results
are based on allele frequencies, and even if more than

Table 3 Partitioning of genetic variance
Grouping

Among groups

Among populations

Within populations

Mainland (1, 2, 3, 5), Islets (4, 6, 7), P. g. W (8)

10.31

13.91

75.78

Mainland (1, 2, 3, 5), Islets (4, 6, 7)

2.61

14.89

82.50

North mainland (1, 2, 3), South mainland (5)

1.63

2.37

96.0

North islet (4), South islets (6, 7)

6.82

23.32

69.86

AMOVA for genetic variance for different groupings of the studied populations. Variance is partitioned into among group variation, among population variation
and within population variation.

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

Figure 6 Relationship between neutral divergence and morph
divergence. (A) Relationship between the pair wise population
comparisons (FST) calculated from color morph frequencies
(assuming a single locus character) and neutral genetic divergence
(FST obtained from 18 microsatellite loci). The relationship is positive
and statistically significant when data from all categories are
included: y = 0.09 + 0.44*x; r2 = 0.20; F = 6.37; df = 1, 26; P = 0.02.
There is also a significant relationship when only the mainland
populations are included (squares; full line; y = -0.07 + 5.59*x; r2 =
0.83; F = 19.41; df = 1, 4; P = 0.01) and when only mainland-island
comparisons are included (triangles; dashed line; y = -0.04 + 1.19*x;
r2 = 0.60; F = 21.01; df = 1, 14; P = 0.0004). There is no significant
relationship between color morph divergence and neutral
divergence when only island populations are compared (dots). (B)
Distribution of mean pair wise FST-values for the 18 microsatellite
loci (black) and the mean pair wise FST-values that were calculated
from the throat color morph frequencies (assuming a single locus
character; (in white)).

one locus would determine the throat color, it would
not qualitatively change our conclusions, as long as
there is some genetic basis to the polymorphism (e. g. a
major-effect-gene). Based on the evidence above we tentatively assumed a simple genetic basis, and investigated

Page 11 of 15

if the data on the spatial distribution of these color
morphs is consistent with the neutral expectation, and
that stochastic factors alone might responsible for the
population differentiation.
In the genus Podarcis several, if not most, species
exhibit throat color polymorphism which indicates that
these polymorphisms might have survived several lineage splitting and speciation events [48], (Fig. 1). When a
polymorphism has been retained from a common ancestor it is highly unlikely to be entirely selectively neutral
because strong overdominance or negative frequencydependent selection is required to maintain all morphs
in such systems [77-79], and selection on traits, including color polymorphisms, is usually a strong force [14].
Thus, it is probable that there is long-term balancing
selection that maintains the throat color morphs in P.
gaigeae and other Podarcis-species. In addition, if throat
color morph was selectively neutral it would be highly
unlikely that all three alleles would be present on all
mainland locations and two out of three islets. Consistent with such a scenario where selection acts in a stabilizing fashion, the frequencies of the throat color
morphs were quite similar across all the mainland populations on Skyros (Fig. 2B). Interestingly, the orange
throat color morphs were overrepresented on the islets
compared to the mainland populations (Fig. 2B). These
differences between mainland and islet populations
could potentially be a result of different local selective
environments on the islets or islet specific genotype by
environment interactions if such exist, although we have
no direct ecological data in support of this. Subdivided
populations with limited effective population size are,
however, also affected by genetic drift [80]. Thus, the
differences in throat color morph frequencies between
the geographically close islet populations with similar
habitats (Figs. 2A-B) could potentially partly be a result
of stochastic processes.
Random fluctuations due to genetic drift can result in
a form of environmental noise that can in turn fuel
selection. For instance, when negative frequency-dependent selection operates in a system with environmental
noise, perturbations in one direction can generate strong
backlashes, which in turn can fuel selection and cause
rapid evolutionary dynamics [25]. When the selective
signal is weak and environmental noise is high, stochastic factors might partly and temporarily overcome the
selective signal (see for example [80]). Stochastic effects
such as genetic drift have a larger impact when population size is small [17], as each stochastic death implies a
larger change in the allele frequency distribution. Moreover, when one of the alleles is maintained at a low frequency at stable evolutionary equilibrium, selection may
accelerate the loss of the rarest allele by random genetic
drift [17]. In several other color polymorphic systems,

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

including species with continuous distributions and
large population sizes, the frequency of the different
color morphs sometimes shows patterns which are not
distinguishable from the expectations under a scenario
of genetic drift [7,9,23]. In addition to genetic drift,
other forms of stochasticity can also operate and affect
allele frequencies, even in large populations [12]. These
forms of stochasticity include demographic stochasticity
and stochasticity generated by life-history variation
among genotypes [12].
Three different lines of evidence suggest that genetic
drift might partly be responsible for the divergence in
throat color morph frequencies between the islets given
that the throat color polymorphism is heritable (Fig.
2B). First, the effective population sizes on the islets are
very low (Table 2; All Ne:s < 100). In such small populations, stochastic frequency fluctuations in selected alleles
might under some periods temporarily override the
effects of selection [80]. With an effective population
size of approximately 40 individuals, as is the case for
one of the islets, there are only 80 throat color alleles
present and random loss of only a few individuals could
potentially have large effects on the overall population
allele frequency. Second, the FST -values of traits subjected to directional selection are expected to differ significantly from the F ST -values for neutral genetic
variation [44,45]. The FST for throat color morph frequency fell in the lower range of the distribution of the
FST-values for neutral genetic variation (Fig. 6B). Comparisons of population divergence for different sets of
loci are useful for identifying loci under directional
selection [44], although the large confidence intervals
which sometimes overlap zero can make it difficult to
infer stabilizing selection with this approach [81]. The
overall high neutral F ST -value for this lizard species
(0.208) should, however, increase our statistical power
to detect stabilizing selection in this system that might
have favored a certain stable morph frequency equilibrium in all populations. Third, we found a significant
positive correlation between the population differentiation in throat color and neutral genetic divergence (Fig.
6A). If selection would mainly explain the population
morph frequency differences, we would not necessarily
expect a change in genome-wide neutral genetic variation. Selection pressures to maintain a stable morph frequency across all populations might be the appropriate
null expectation of population divergence for polymorphisms that transcend species boundaries, and when
alleles are maintained by negative frequency-dependent
selection [77-79]. If this is the case also for a trait like
this color polymorphism, we would expect a pattern of
population divergence for color morphs that would be
significantly less than the neutral expectation at evolutionary equilibrium [15].

Page 12 of 15

We do certainly not claim, based on these results, that
genetic drift is the only evolutionary force operating on
this color polymorphism. An additional role for selection and possibly for phenotypic plasticity can certainly
not be excluded. Although indirect inferences about the
action of selection are useful and have been used successfully by many workers in the past [15,82-84], such
indirect approaches suffer from several limitations,
among them low statistical power [45,81]. Failure to
reject the drift-expectation for color morph divergence
in this study (Fig. 6B) does thus not justify any strong
claim that selection does not operate at all on these
color morphs. Rather, we suggest that selection on these
morphs, at least on the small islets, is not strong enough
to result in a significant adaptive signal when we compared adaptive divergence and neutral divergence.
Although genetic drift is usually considered by many
population geneticists to be a weak force compared to
selection [69,70], we tentatively suggest that an interaction between genetic drift and local natural or sexual
selection is most likely explanation for the spatial patterns in our data. Genetic drift could change trait frequencies when selection is temporally relaxed, an
ecological scenario that is likely to be quite common
and which might exist in this system, for instance, when
lizard populations invade novel island environments
with fewer predators. We can not disentangle the relative contributions of genetic drift and founder effects
based on our findings in this study. Since the sea level
in the Aegean Sea has been rising and sinking [52,53] a
scenario where lizards populations were isolated when
land bridges were submerged and subsequently lost
genetic variation due to low effective population sizes is
probably more plausible than a pure founder event scenario, though.
The physical and biotic environments differ substantially among these small islets, which could generate
novel selection pressures compared to the mainland. For
instance, the predator faunas (birds and snakes) are
more depauperate on the islets, and the seabird colonies
on the islets might alter the nutrient cycles considerably,
which in turn might affect the quantity and quality of
the food sources of the lizards [50]. It is possible that
the islet populations have adapted locally to meet the
requirements of these island specific environments, or
that genotype-by-environment-interactions result in certain colour morphs becoming expressed more often in
certain environments. The vegetation on the islands in
the Skyros archipelago differs substantially even among
nearby islets, which might partly reflect stochastic factors and reveal some degree of community drift [75].
For instance, some common plant taxa are lacking
entirely on some of the islets, whereas the abundance of
other plant taxa is much higher on some of the islets

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

than on the mainland [55]. Although these different
habitat features might potentially favor different throat
color morphs on different islets, the mainland populations also differ in many environmental variables, such
as type of substrate, grazing pressure, vegetation cover
and predator faunas (A. Runemark & E. I. Svensson,
unpublished observations).
After the geographic isolation of P. g. weigandi from
P. g. gaigeae, the orange morph increased in frequency
on Piperi (Figs. 2A-B), perhaps as a result of founder
events, genetic drift, or because of local selection favoring that morph in this novel island environment. If the
different throat color phenotypes are genetically correlated to other physiological, morphological or behavioral
traits, which is the case in U. stansburiana [26,28,32,85]
or in immune response as is the case for P. muralis
[27], one or several of the throat color morphs in the
ancestral population could initially and due to chance
alone, have been better adapted to the novel environments. Such “pre-adapted” morphs might then subsequently rise in frequency through phenotype sorting
[86,87], either by selection alone or due to an interaction between selection and genetic drift. The loss of one
or more color morphs has occurred several times in different populations of U. stansburiana [46,71], and it
might also operate in the Balkan clade of Podarcis (see
e. g. P. milensis in Fig. 1; [48]).
If genetic drift can affect phenotypic divergence in
characters such as throat color which are often genetically correlated with other traits (see discussion above),
genetic drift could potentially indirectly also change the
optimal strategies for the remaining morphs since the
selective environment will change if one morph and its
strategy is removed. For instance, populations of U.
stansburiana, which have lost morphs and become
monomorphic, differ from the polymorphic populations
with respect to sexual size dimorphism and potentially
sexual selection [70]. Thus, the loss of one or several
morphs might cause rapid divergence following a
change in social selective environment in lizards. Polymorphic types within a population can thus potentially
serve as starting material for new species [47,88,89] and
the potential loss of the yellow throat color morph in
the subspecies P. g. weigandi is interesting from this
point of view.

Conclusions
The color morph frequency in P. gaigeae differs among
populations, with more pronounced frequency differences among islet populations. This might indicate a
role for local genetic drift on color morph frequency
divergence, although it is likely that these color morphs
are maintained by long-term balancing selection, given
the trans-species nature of these polymorphisms.

Page 13 of 15

Comparisons of neutral and morph frequency divergence did not reveal any evidence for either directional
or stabilizing selection, which might partly be explained
by the low statistical power and weak selection, rather
than color morphs being entirely neutral. We therefore
suggest that an interaction between selection and
genetic drift explains the patterns of divergence in
throat color morphs. In isolated populations with small
effective population size, genetic drift is particularly
likely to operate and to interact with selection which
might cause divergence even in phenotypic characters.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Number of photographed males and females per
population. Contains breakdown sample sizes for number of individuals
per population and sex for which throat color morph was determined.
Additional file 2: Tests for deviation from Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium per population. Contains tests for deviations from HardyWeinberg equilibrium for all populations and the breakdown sample
sizes for number of genotyped individuals per population.

Acknowledgements
We thank Kostas Sagonas and Steffi Weinhold for assistance in the field,
Mikkel Brydegaard for assistance with optical measurement techniques, and
Tobias Uller and the Svensson Lab for constructive comments on the
manuscript. We are also very grateful to our helpful captains on Skyros for
transportation to islands in the Skyros archipelago, and to the National Sea
Park of Alonissos North Sporades for the permission to work in the national
park and for the transportation to the island of Piperi.
Funding was provided from Kungliga Fysiografiska Sällskapet (AR), Helge Ax:
son Johnsons Stiftelse (AR), Stiftelsen Lars Hiertas Minne (AR),
Naturvetenskapliga Fakultetens Rese- och Forskningsstipendier (AR) and the
Swedish Research Council (EIS).
Author details
1
Section for Animal Ecology, Ecology Building, Lund University, SE-223 62
Lund, Sweden. 2School of Natural Resources and Environment, University of
Michigan, Dana Building, 430 East University, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1115,
USA. 3Modern Greek Program, Department of Classical Studies, 2160 Angell
Hall, University of Michigan, 435 S. State, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1115, USA.
4
Section of Animal and Human Physiology, Department of Biology,
University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, 157 84 Athens, Greece.
Authors’ contributions
AR participated in the design of the study, carried out the field work, the
color measurements and spectral analysis, the genetic analysis and drafted
the manuscript. BH planned the genetic labwork and helped out with the
design and conduction of the genetic analysis. PP and EDV helped out with
the field work. EIS conceived of the study, and participated in its design and
and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 10 December 2009 Accepted: 2 September 2010
Published: 2 September 2010
References
1. Barton NH, Charlesworth B: Genetic Revolutions, Founder Effects, and
Speciation. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 1984, 15:133-164.
2. Barton N: Natural selection and random genetic drift as causes of
evolution on islands. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B Biological Sciences 1996, 351:785-795.

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

3.
4.
5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

Gavrilets S: Fitness landscapes and the origin of species Princeton, NJ.:
Princeton University Press 2004.
Nei M, Maruyama T, Wu C-I: Models of Evolution of Reproductive
Isolation. Genetics 1983, 103:557-579.
Templeton AR: Mechanisms of Speciation A Population Genetic Approach
1981.
Carson HL, Templeton AR: Genetic Revolutions in Relation to Speciation
Phenomena the Founding of New Populations. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics 1984, 15:97-132.
Hoffman EA, Schueler FW, Jones AG, Blouin MS: An analysis of selection
on a colour polymorphism in the northern leopard frog. Molecular
Ecology 2006, 15:2627-2641.
OHara RB: Comparing the effects of genetic drift and fluctuating
selection on genotype frequency changes in the scarlet tiger moth.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 2006, 272:211-217.
Oxford G: Genetic drift within a protected polymorphism: Enigmatic
variation in color-morph frequencies in the candy-stripe spider,
Enoplognatha ovata. Evolution 2005, 59:2170-2184.
Armbruster P, Bradshaw WE, Holzapfel CM: Effects of postglacial range
expansion on allozyme and quantitative genetic variation of the pitcherplant mosquito, Wyeomyia smithii. Evolution 1998, 52:1697-1704.
Uyeda JC, Arnold SJ, Hohenlohe PA, Mead LS: Drift Promotes Speciation
by Sexual Selection. Evolution 2009, 63:583-594.
Lenormand T, Roze D, Rousset F: Stochasticity in evolution. Trends in
Ecology & Evolution 2009, 24:157-165.
Schluter D: The Ecology of Adaptive Radiation Oxford: Oxford University
Press 2000.
Kingsolver JG, Hoekstra HE, Hoekstra JM, Berrigan D, Vignieri SN, Hill CE,
et al: The strength of phenotypic selection in natural populations.
American Naturalist 2001, 157:245-261.
Abbott J, Bensch S, Gosden T, Svensson EI: Patterns of differentiation in a
colour polymorphism and in neutral markers reveal rapid genetic
changes in natural damselfly populations. Molecular Ecology 2008,
17:1597-1604.
Eroukhmanoff F, Hargeby A, Svensson EI: Rapid adaptive divergence
between ecotypes of an aquatic isopod inferred from F-ST-Q(ST)
analysis. Molecular Ecology 2009, 18:4912-4923.
Christensen FB: Theories of Population Variation in Genes and Genomes
Princeton: Princeton University Press 2008.
Losos JB, Jackman TR, Larson A, De Queiroz K, Rodriguez-Schettino L:
Contingency and determinism in replicated adaptive radiations of island
lizards. Science (Washington D C) 1998, 279:2115-2118.
Huey RB, Gilchrist GW, Carlson ML, Berrigan D, Serra L: Rapid evolution of a
geographic cline in size in an introduced fly. Science (Washington D C)
2000, 287:308-309.
Langerhans R, Knouft JH, Losos JB: Shared and unique features of
diversification in greater Antillean Anolis ecomorphs. Evolution 2006,
60:362-369.
Eroukhmanoff F, Hargeby A, Arnberg N, Hellgren O, Bensch S, Svensson EI:
Parallelism and historical contingency during rapid ecotype divergence
in an isopod. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 2009, 22:1098-1110.
Svensson E, Abbott J, Gosden TP, Coreau A: Female polymorphisms,
sexual conflict and limits to speciation processes in animals. Evolutionary
Ecology 2009, 23:93-108.
Gray SM, McKinnon JS: Linking color polymorphism maintenance and
speciation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 2007, 22:71-79.
Roulin A: The evolution, maintenance and adaptive function of genetic
colour polymorphism in birds. Biological Reviews (Cambridge) 2004,
79:815-848.
Svensson EI, Abbott J, Hardling R: Female polymorphism, frequency
dependence, and rapid evolutionary dynamics in natural populations.
American Naturalist 2005, 165:567-576.
Sinervo B, Lively CM: The rock-paper-scissors game and the evolution of
alternative male strategies. Nature 1996, 380:240-243.
Sacchi R, Rubolini D, Gentilli A, Pupin F, Razzetti E, Scali S, et al: Morphspecific immunity in male Podarcis muralis. Amphibia-Reptilia 2007,
28:408-412.
Svensson E, Sinervo B, Comendant T: Density-dependent competition and
selection on immune function in genetic lizard morphs. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2001,
98:12561-12565.

Page 14 of 15

29. Sinervo B, Svensson E: Correlational selection and the evolution of
genomic architecture. Heredity 2002, 89:329-338.
30. Sinervo B, Svensson E, Comendant T: Density cycles and an offspring
quantity and quality game driven by natural selection. Nature 2000,
406:985-988.
31. Sinervo B, Chaine A, Clobertt J, Calsbeek R, Hazard L, Lancaster L, et al: Selfrecognition, color signals, and cycles of greenbeard mutualism and
altruism. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2006, 103:7372-7377.
32. Sinervo B, Bleay C, Adamopoulou C: Social causes of correlational
selection and the resolution of a heritable throat color polymorphism in
a lizard. Evolution 2001, 55:2040-2052.
33. Olsson M, Healey M, Wapstra E, Schwartz T, Lebas N, Uller T: Mating system
variation and morph fluctuations in a polymorphic lizard. Molecular
Ecology 2007, 16:5307-5315.
34. Calsbeek R, Bonvini LA, Cox RM: Geographic variation, frequencydependent selection, and the maintenance of a female-limited
polymorphism. Evolution 2009, 64:116-125.
35. Cote J, Le Galliard J, Rossi J, Fitze P: Environmentally induced changes in
carotenoid-based coloration of female lizards: a comment on Vercken et
al. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 2008, 21:1165-1172.
36. Vercken E, Sinervo B, Clobert J: Colour variation in female common
lizards: why we should speak of morphs, a reply to Cote et al. Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 2008, 21:1160-1164.
37. Pigliucci M: Phenotypic plasticity: beyond nature and nurture Baltimore, MD:
John Hopkins University Press 2001.
38. Seehausen O, Schluter D: Male-male competition and nuptial-colour
displacement as a diversifying force in Lake Victoria cichlid fishes.
Proceedings of the Royal Society Biological Sciences Series B 2004,
271:1345-1353.
39. Hughes KA, Du L, Rodd F, Reznick DN: Familiarity leads to female mate
preference for novel males in the guppy, Poecilia reticulata. Animal
Behaviour 1999, 58:907-916.
40. Eakley AL, Houde AE: Possible role of female discrimination against
‘redundant’ males in the evolution of colour pattern polymorphism in
guppies. Proceedings of the Royal Society Biological Sciences Series B 2004,
271:S299-S301.
41. Kokko H, Jennions MD, Houde A: Evolution of frequency-dependent mate
choice: keeping up with fashion trends. Proceedings of the Royal Society
Biological Sciences Series B 2007, 274:1317-1324.
42. Schaeffer SW: Selection in Heterogeneous Environments Maintains the
Gene Arrangement Polymorphism of Drosophila Pseudoobscura. Evolution
2008, 62:3082-3099.
43. Chunco AJ, McKinnon JS, Servedio MR: Microhabitat variation and sexual
selection can maintain male color polymorphisms. Evolution 2007,
61:2504-2515.
44. Beaumont MA, Nichols RA: Evaluating loci for use in the genetic analysis
of population structure. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B
Biological Sciences 1996, 263:1619-1626.
45. Whitlock MC: Evolutionary inference from Q(ST). Molecular Ecology 2008,
17:1885-1896.
46. Corl A, Davis A, Kuchta SR, Sinervo B: Selective loss of polymorphic
mating types is associated with rapid phenotypic evolution during
morphic speciation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 2009.
47. West-Eberhard MJ: Alternative Adaptations Speciation and Phylogeny A
Review. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 1986, 83:1388-1392.
48. Arnold NE, Ovenden DW: A field guide to the reptiles and amphibians of
Britain and Europe London: HarperCollins Publishers, 2 2002.
49. Cheylan M: Phenotypic Variation in Insular Populations of the Wall Lizard
Podarcis muralis Off the French Mediterranean Coast. Revue d’Ecologie la
Terre et la Vie 1988, 43:287-322.
50. Pafilis P, Meiri S, Fofopoulos J, Valakos E: Intraspecific competition and
high food availability are associated with insular gigantism in a lizard.
Naturwissenschaften 2009, 96:1107-1113.
51. Poulakakis N, Lymberakis P, Valakos E, Zouros E, Mylonas M: Phylogenetic
relationships and biogeography of Podarcis species from the Balkan
Peninsula, by Bayesian and maximum likelihood analyses of
mitochondrial DNA sequences. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2005,
37:845-857.

Runemark et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:269
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/269

52. Perissoratis C, Conispoliatis N: The impacts of sea-level changes during
latest Pleistocene and Holocene times on the morphology of the Ionian
and Aegean seas (SE Alpine Europe). Marine Geology 2003, 196:145-156.
53. Dermitzakis MD, Papanikolaou DJ: Paleogeography and geodynamics of
the Aegean region during the neogene. Annales geologiques des pays
helleniques 1981, 4:245-266.
54. Perez-Mellado V, Corti C, Cascio P: Tail autotomy and extinction in
Mediterranean lizards. A preliminary study of continental and insular
populations. Journal of Zoology (London) 1997, 243:533-541.
55. Snogerup S, Snogerup B: Changes in the flora of some Aegean islets
1968-2000. Plant Systematics and Evolution 2004, 245:169-213.
56. Reichardt TA, Bisson SE, Crocker RW, Kulp TJ: Analysis of flow-cytometer
scattering and fluorescence data to identify particle mixtures.
Proceedings of SPIE 2008, 6945, 69450R-69450R-8.
57. Bro R: Multi-way Analysis in the Food Industry Models, Algorithms and
Applications. PhD Universiteit van Amsterdam 1998.
58. Statsoft Inc: STATISTICA (data analysis software system) Vers. 7 Tulsa, OK, USA:
Statsoft Inc 2004.
59. Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T: Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 2 1989.
60. Wellenreuther M, Runemark A, Svensson E, Hansson B: Isolation and
characterization of polymorphic microsatellite loci for the Skyros wall
lizard Podarcis gaigeae (Squamata: Lacertidae). Molecular Ecology
Resources 2009, 9:1005-1008.
61. Runemark A, Gabirot M, Bensch S, Svensson EI, Martin J, Pafilis P, et al:
Cross-species testing of 27 pre-existing microsatellites in Podarcis
gaigeae and Podarcis hispanica (Squamata: Lacertidae). Molecular Ecology
Resources 2008, 8:1367-1370.
62. Goudet J: FSTAT, A Program to Estimate and Test Gene Diversities and
Fixation Indices. Version 2.9.3 2001 [http://www.unil.ch/popgen/softwares/
fstat.htm].
63. Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data. Genetics 2000, 155:945-959.
64. Evanno G, Regnaut S, Goudet J: Detecting the number of clusters of
individuals using the software STRUCTURE: a simulation study. Molecular
Ecology 2005, 14:2611-2620.
65. Waples RS, Do C: LDNE: a program for estimating effective population
size from data on linkage disequilibrium. Molecular Ecology Resources
2008, 8:753-756.
66. Excoffier L, Laval G, Schneider S: Arlequin ver. 3.0:An integrated software
package for population genetics data analysis. Evolutionary Bioinformatics
Online 2005, 1:47-50.
67. Raymond M, Rousset F: GENEPOP (Version 1.2): Population genetics
software for exact tests and ecumenicism. Journal of Heredity 1995,
86:248-249.
68. Simon JL: RESAMPLING STATS Arlington, Virginia: Resampling Stats Inc 2000.
69. Coyne JA, Barton NH, Turelli M: Perspective: A critique of Sewall Wright’s
shifting balance theory of evaluation. Evolution 1997, 51:643-671.
70. Gillespie JH: Oxford Series In Ecology and Evolution The Causes of Molecular
Evolution New York: Oxford University Press Inc 1991.
71. Corl A, Davis AR, Kuchta SR, Comendant T, Sinervo B: Alternative mating
strategies and the evolution of sexual size dimorphism in the side
blotched lizard Uta stansburiana: a population-level comparative
analysis. Evolution 2009, 64:79-86.
72. Lande R: Models of Speciation by Sexual Selection on Polygenic Traits.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America-Biological Sciences 1981, 78:3721-3725.
73. Svensson E, McAdam AG, Sinervo B: Intralocus sexual conflict over
immune defense, gender load, and sex specific signaling in a natural
lizard population. Evolution 2009, 63:3124-3135.
74. Mayr E: Change of genetic environment and evolution. In Evolution as a
Process. Edited by: Huxley J. London: Allen and Unwin; 1954:157-180.
75. Price T: Speciation in birds Greenwood Village, Colorado: Roberts&Company
Publishers 2007.
76. Wang IJ, Shaffer HB: Rapid color evolution in an aposematic species: a
phylogenetic analysis of color variation in the strikingly polymorphic
strawberry poison-dart frog. Evolution 2008, 62:2742-2759.
77. Golding B: The Prospects for Polymorphisms Shared Between Species.
Heredity 1992, 68:263-276.
78. Richman A: Evolution of balanced genetic polymorphism. Molecular
Ecology 2000, 9:1953-1963.

Page 15 of 15

79. Nei M, Li W-H: Probability of Identical Monomorphism in Related Species.
Genetical Research 1975, 26:31-43.
80. Husband BC, Barrett SC: Effective population size and genetic drift in
tristylous Eichhornia paniculata (Pontederiaceae). Evolution 1992,
46:1875-1890.
81. Beaumont MA, Balding DJ: Identifying adaptive genetic divergence
among populations from genome scans. Molecular Ecology 2004,
13:969-980.
82. Manier M, Seyler C, Arnold S: Adaptive divergence within and between
ecotypes of the terrestrial garter snake, Thamnophis elegans, assessed
with F-ST-Q(ST) comparisons. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 2007,
20:1705-1719.
83. Wong A, Smith ML, Forbes MR: Differentiation between subpopulations
of a polychromatic damselfly with respect to morph frequencies, but
not neutral genetic markers. Molecular Ecology 2003, 12:3505-3513.
84. Merila J, Crnokrak P: Comparison of genetic differentiation at marker loci
and quantitative traits. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 2001, 14:892-903.
85. Sinervo B, Miles DB, Frankino WA, Klukowski M, DeNardo DF: Testosterone,
endurance, and darwinian fitness: Natural and sexual selection on the
physiological bases of alternative male behaviors in side-blotched
lizards. Hormones and Behavior 2000, 38:222-233.
86. Barrett RD, Schluter D: Adaptation from standing genetic variation. Trends
in Ecology & Evolution 2008, 23:38-44.
87. Rice A, Pfennig D: Character displacement: in situ evolution of novel
phenotypes or sorting of pre-existing variation? Journal of Evolutionary
Biology 2007, 20:448-459.
88. Seehausen O, Witte F, van Alphen J, Bouton N: Direct mate choice
maintains diversity among sympatric cichlids in Lake Victoria. Journal of
Fish Biology 1998, 53:37-55.
89. Savolainen R, Vepsalainen K: Sympatric speciation through intraspecific
social parasitism. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 2003, 100:7169-7174.
90. Lymberakis P, Poulakakis N, Kaliontzopotilou A, Valakos E, Mylonas M: Two
new species of Podarcis (Squamata; Lacertidae) from Greece. Systematics
and Biodiversity 2008, 6:307-318.
91. McKay JK, Latta RG: Adaptive population divergence: Markers, QTL and
traits. Trends Ecol Evol 2002, 17:285-291.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-269
Cite this article as: Runemark et al.: Island biology and morphological
divergence of the Skyros wall lizard Podarcis gaigeae: a combined role
for local selection and genetic drift on color morph frequency
divergence?. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:269.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
