<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Molecular and phylogenetic characterization of the sieve element occlusion gene family in Fabaceae and non-Fabaceae plants</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010 10:219. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-219"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Boris Rüping; Antonia M Ernst; Stephan B Jekat; Steffen Nordzieke; Anna R Reineke; Boje Müller; Erich Bornberg-Bauer; Dirk Prüfer; Gundula A Noll"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Molecular and phylogenetic characterization of
the sieve element occlusion gene family in
Fabaceae and non-Fabaceae plants
Boris Rüping1,2†, Antonia M Ernst1,2†, Stephan B Jekat1,2, Steffen Nordzieke1, Anna R Reineke3, Boje Müller1,2,
Erich Bornberg-Bauer3, Dirk Prüfer1,2*, Gundula A Noll1

Abstract
Background: The phloem of dicotyledonous plants contains specialized P-proteins (phloem proteins) that
accumulate during sieve element differentiation and remain parietally associated with the cisternae of the
endoplasmic reticulum in mature sieve elements. Wounding causes P-protein filaments to accumulate at the sieve
plates and block the translocation of photosynthate. Specialized, spindle-shaped P-proteins known as forisomes
that undergo reversible calcium-dependent conformational changes have evolved exclusively in the Fabaceae.
Recently, the molecular characterization of three genes encoding forisome components in the model legume
Medicago truncatula (MtSEO1, MtSEO2 and MtSEO3; SEO = sieve element occlusion) was reported, but little is
known about the molecular characteristics of P-proteins in non-Fabaceae.
Results: We performed a comprehensive genome-wide comparative analysis by screening the M. truncatula,
Glycine max, Arabidopsis thaliana, Vitis vinifera and Solanum phureja genomes, and a Malus domestica EST library for
homologs of MtSEO1, MtSEO2 and MtSEO3 and identified numerous novel SEO genes in Fabaceae and even nonFabaceae plants, which do not possess forisomes. Even in Fabaceae some SEO genes appear to not encode
forisome components. All SEO genes have a similar exon-intron structure and are expressed predominantly in the
phloem. Phylogenetic analysis revealed the presence of several subgroups with Fabaceae-specific subgroups
containing all of the known as well as newly identified forisome component proteins. We constructed Hidden
Markov Models that identified three conserved protein domains, which characterize SEO proteins when present in
combination. In addition, one common and three subgroup specific protein motifs were found in the amino acid
sequences of SEO proteins. SEO genes are organized in genomic clusters and the conserved synteny allowed us to
identify several M. truncatula vs G. max orthologs as well as paralogs within the G. max genome.
Conclusions: The unexpected occurrence of forisome-like genes in non-Fabaceae plants may indicate that these
proteins encode species-specific P-proteins, which is backed up by the phloem-specific expression profiles. The
conservation of gene structure, the presence of specific motifs and domains and the genomic synteny argue for a
common phylogenetic origin of forisomes and other P-proteins.

Background
In vascular plants, photoassimilates are transported
through differentiated sieve elements (SEs) in the
phloem forming a network of sieve tubes throughout
the plant [1]. The pressure-driven mass flow [2] requires
* Correspondence: dpruefer@uni-muenster.de
† Contributed equally
1
Institut für Biochemie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen, Westfälische WilhelmsUniversität Münster, Hindenburgplatz 55, D-48143 Münster, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

a high degree of functional specialization of the phloem
during development. In order to enable efficient translocation of photoassimilates, SEs loose most of their organelles and thus the ability to perform protein
biosynthesis [3]. Mature SEs are therefore dependent on
adjacent, metabolically-active companion cells, which
are connected to SEs by so-called pore-plasmodesm
units [4]. The pressure within the sieve tubes can reach
30 bar [5], so rapid and efficient protection against
wounding is essential and favoured the evolution of a

© 2010 Rüping et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

plugging mechanism based on specialized phloem proteins (P-proteins) [6]. These structural proteins accumulate in the cytoplasm of metabolically-active,
undifferentiated SEs, but are anchored to the plasma
membrane when SEs mature [7]. After wounding, they
detach from their parietal location and plug downstream
sieve plates by forming a gel-like mass, thereby preventing the loss of photoassimilates [8]. This occurs in all
the dicotyledonous plant families that have been studied,
and P-proteins have also been identified in certain
monocotyledonous plants [9]. There is currently no
standardized classification for P-proteins although different types were often distinguished by their tubular,
fibrillar, granular or crystalline ultrastructure, which
may represent different developmental or conformational states of the same protein subunits rather than
evolutionarily-distinct families [10]. Nevertheless, Fabaceae plants possess a special type of elongated crystalline
P-protein bodies [11], which show a unique type of
reactivity. The spindle shaped protein bodies, also
known as forisomes ("gate bodies”) [12], are able to
undergo a reversible, calcium-induced conformational
change and can consequently plug and open the sieve
elements after wounding and regeneration. Three SEO
(sieve element occlusion) proteins named MtSEO1,
MtSEO2 and MtSEO3 have been identified in the model
legume Medicago truncatula, and their role in forisome
structure and assembly has been confirmed by immunological and GFP-fusion studies [13-15]. Comprehensive
promoter analyses in M. truncatula roots and Nicotiana
tabacum plants demonstrated a restricted expression of
the corresponding MtSEO genes in immature sieve elements [14,16], indicating a highly conserved regulation
of promoter activities among diverse plant species,
including non-Fabaceae lacking forisomes.
Although genes encoding forisome components of
Fabaceae have recently been isolated and characterized,
little is known about the genetic basis of structural Pproteins in other plant families. The only P-protein to
be characterized thus far is phloem protein 1 (PP1)
from Cucurbita maxima [17]. Immunological studies
identified this filamentous protein in SE slime plugs and
P-protein bodies, although the corresponding mRNA
was shown to accumulate in companion cells [18].
In this study, we report the identification of several
new SEO genes in Fabaceae and, most interestingly, also
in non-Fabaceae plants (which do not possess forisomes). The unexpected occurrence of SEO genes in
plant families lacking forisomes may argue that these
genes encode other structural P-proteins, which implies
a common phylogenetic origin. To further characterize
the newly-identified SEO genes, we analyzed their gene
structure and genomic synteny using bioinformatics and
studied their expression by RT-PCR. Selected SEO genes

Page 2 of 14

were also studied by promoter analysis in transgenic
plants.

Results
The SEO gene family in Fabaceae

BLAST searches were carried out using the nucleotide
sequences (and derived amino acid sequences) of the
three known M. truncatula SEO genes [14,15], identifying six further candidate SEO genes in the M. truncatula genome and 26 in Glycine max. In order to
determine whether or not these genes are expressed, we
amplified a 1-kbp cDNA fragment from each gene by
RT-PCR using total seedling RNA as the template. This
generated products for five of the six newly-identified
M. truncatula genes and 21 of the 26 G. max genes, the
remaining six genes being identified as potential pseudogenes (’pot. ψ’ in Figure 1; Additional file 1). Full-length
cDNAs were produced for the expressed genes by PCR
using gene-specific primers. The potential pseudogenes
were tested by RT-PCR using a collection of different
primer combinations and total RNA from young and
old leaves, shoots, roots, buds and flowers, with no
expression detected (data not shown). Two of the
expressed genes from G. max were reclassified as potential expressed pseudogenes (’pot. ψe’ in Figure 1)
because sequencing revealed the presence of frameshift
mutations in their open reading frames, causing premature termination of protein synthesis. In order to
include all pseudogenes in subsequent phylogenetic analyses, full-length cDNA sequences were generated in
silico using the procedures described in the Methods
section.
Next, we set out to establish whether any of the
newly-identified SEO proteins were present in the forisomes of either M. truncatula or G. max. Purified forisomes from each species were separated by SDS-PAGE
and peptide sequences were generated for the 75-kDa
protein band by ESI-MS/MS following established protocols [12-14]. Peptide sequences derived from the M.
truncatula forisomes (Additional file 2) indicated the
presence of one further SEO protein in addition to the
known components MtSEO1-3 [13-15]. Similarly, four
of the 26 G. max SEO proteins were identified in G.
max forisomes, where no components had been previously identified (Additional file 2). These results suggest that many of the SEO genes do not encode
forisome component proteins, although it is possible
that they are present but at levels below our detection
threshold. In order to distinguish SEO proteins known
to encode forisome components from other SEO proteins, we propose that MtSEO1-3 should be renamed
MtSEO-F1, MtSEO-F2 and MtSEO-F3, and that the
newly identified component should be named MtSEOF4 (SEO-F, Sieve Element Occlusion by Forisomes).

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

Page 3 of 14

Figure 1 Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of SEO proteins from different plants. The phylogenetic tree was constructed with RAxML
from a T-Coffee protein sequence alignment and with a bootstrap support of 1000 replicates. Bootstrap percentages are shown on the nodes.
Branch lengths are proportional to the number of amino acid substitutions. The shaded parts of the tree represent the subgroups identified with
OrthoMCL. Mt = Medicago truncatula, Gm = Glycine max, Vf = Vicia faba, Cg = Canavalia gladiata, Ps = Pisum sativum, Md = Malus domestica, At
= Arabidopsis thaliana, Vv = Vitis vinifera, Sp = Solanum phureja, pot. ψ = potential pseudogene, pot. ψe = expressed potential pseudogene.

The four SEO proteins found in purified G. max forisomes should similarly be designated GmSEO-F1-F4.
For all other Fabaceae SEO proteins (and SEO proteins
from other plant families, see below) whose function is
currently unknown, we recommend the temporary
assignment of a lower case letter (SEOa, SEOb, etc)
until their presence in the forisome can be confirmed
(in which case they will be assigned an SEO-F number)
or another function is determined (in which case additional functional categories can be introduced).

The SEO gene family in non-Fabaceae

Using the Fabaceae SEO sequences described above, we
screened the genomes of several dicotyledonous nonFabaceae plants, i.e. Arabidopsis thaliana (Brassicaceae),
Vitis vinifera (Vitaceae) and Solanum phureja (Solanaceae) as well as an EST collection for Malus domestica
(Rosaceae). This identified three A. thaliana genes
(designated AtSEOa-c), 13 V. vinifera genes (designated
VvSEOa-m) and three S. phureja genes (designated
SpSEOa-c) (Additional file 1). Two full-length SEO

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

genes, designated MdSEOa and b (Additional file 1), and
further partial fragments were found in the M. domestica EST collection. Potential SEO gene fragments of
several other angiosperm plants could also be identified
by BLAST search in NCBI GenBank (data not shown).
In contrast, no SEO genes were identified in the yet
sequenced genomes of the monocotyledons Oryza
sativa, Brachypodium distachyon, Zea mays and Sorghum bicolor nor in the moss Physcomitrella patens.
RT-PCR confirmed that all the A. thaliana, S. phureja
and M. domestica genes were expressed with the exception of AtSEOc, which appears to be a pseudogene. The
expression profiles of VvSEOa-m were not determined
due to the lack of the sequenced genotype in our
laboratories.
Phylogenetic relationships among SEO genes from
Fabaceae and non-Fabaceae plants

The phylogenetic relationships among the SEO genes
were calculated by creating a maximum likelihood tree
from an alignment of all SEO protein sequences. To
provide further support for the tree topology we clustered the proteins into subgroups with OrthoMCL
(Figure 1). The recently reported forisome protein
VfSEO-F1 (formerly known as VfFOR1) from Vicia faba
[14] and the potential forisome proteins CgSEOa (formerly known as CgFOR1) from Canavalia gladiata [14]
and PsSEOa (formerly known as PsSEO1) from Pisum
sativum [19] were also included in the phylogenetic
tree. With the exception of MtSEO-F3, all SEO-F proteins clustered in subgroup 1. In addition, several potential pseudogenes as well as one GmSEO protein
(GmSEOu) clustered within this group. It should be
noted that GmSEOu and GmSEO-F2 share several identical forisome-specific peptide sequences, so GmSEOu is
likely to be involved in the formation of forisomes. Subgroups 2 and 3, found on the same branch of the tree,
contain predominantly G. max SEO proteins of yet
unknown function (the only exception is MtSEO-F3).
Thus, subgroups 1-3 appear to be Fabaceae-specific.
Subgroup 4 contains nine Fabaceae SEO proteins and
both SEO proteins (MdSEOa and b) from the closely
related Rosaceae, whereas subgroup 5 contains SEO proteins from all plant families included in the study that
have sequenced genomes. AtSEOa is the only member
of subgroup 6, which is closely related to subgroup 5.
Subgroup 7 contains SEO proteins from G. max, V. vinifera and A. thaliana.
In addition to their high degree of amino acid similarity (>30%), most SEO genes have a conserved exonintron structure as shown in Figure 2, the exceptions
being GmSEOa and GmSEOf (one intron missing) and
MtSEO-F2, AtSEOb, SpSEOb and SpSEOc (additional
introns).

Page 4 of 14

Expression profiles and promoter activities of the SEO
genes

The expression of MtSEO-F1-3 was recently shown to
be restricted to immature sieve elements [14,16]. To
gain an initial impression of whether the MtSEO,
GmSEO, AtSEO and SpSEO genes were also expressed
in the phloem we performed RT-PCRs using total RNA
from phloem-enriched and phloem-deficient tissue (see
Methods). With the exception of gene GmSEOs, mRNA
levels for all the SEO genes were significantly higher in
the phloem-enriched tissues (Figure 3). As expected, no
mRNA was detected for the potential pseudogenes
MtSEOd, AtSEOc, GmSEOb, GmSEOk, GmSEOn,
GmSEOq and GmSEOt. Transcripts for the potential
expressed pseudogenes GmSEOh and GmSEOv harboring frameshift mutations were also detected, although it
should be noted that GmSEOh mRNA was only found
in roots (data not shown). The constitutively expressed
ACT2 (for A. thaliana), GAPDH (for M. truncatula and
S. phureja) and F-box (for G. max) genes served as positive controls, as they have been found to be the most
appropriate control genes for the plant species included
in this study (see Methods).
The preliminary analysis above provided evidence for
phloem-specific expression, but for conclusive proof we
set out to analyze the activity of two SEO promoters in
transgenic plants. We chose promoters from the forisome gene GmSEO-F1 and the none forisome gene
AtSEOa. A green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene tagged
for retention of the product in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) was placed under the control of each promoter, producing constructs PAtSEOa-GFP ER and
PGmSEO-F1-GFP ER . Ten independent transgenic A.
thaliana plants expressing PAtSEOa-GFPER were regenerated and analyzed by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). In stem sections, GFP ER fluorescence
was detected in the phloem of the vascular bundle
(Figure 4A, B), which appears to be restricted to a ‘pipeline-like’ assembly of cells within the phloem. These
cells display the typical end-to-end connection of sieve
elements and the presence of sieve plates was verified
by aniline-blue staining (Figure 4C). Within the cytoplasm, one or more vacuoles were clearly visible indicating an immature nature of these cells (Figure 4D).
Detailed CLSM analysis of five independent transgenic
G. max roots expressing PGmSEO-F1-GFPER also indicated spatially-restricted promoter activity in sieve elements of the vascular cylinder (Figure 4E) showing the
same morphology and characteristics (Figure 4F) as
described for PAtSEOa-GFPER (Figure 4C, D).
Domain analysis of SEO proteins

The SEO protein sequences were analyzed to identify
any conserved protein domains and gain insights into

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

Page 5 of 14

Figure 2 Schematic overview of SEO gene exon-intron structure. Exons are represented as colored boxes, introns as dashed lines. Introns
are not drawn to scale, but the length of the individual introns is indicated in base pairs. Mt = Medicago truncatula, Gm = Glycine max, Md =
Malus domestica, At = Arabidopsis thaliana, Sp = Solanum phureja.

their relationship with known protein functions, such as
the ability of forisomes to respond to calcium. The
deduced amino acid sequences of all SEO proteins were
screened against the PfamA and Conserved Domain
databases [20,21]. No significant hits were found in the
PfamA database, but the Conserved Domain database
identified “thioredoxin-like” domains in MtSEO-F2,
MtSEOa, GmSEOi, GmSEOl and MdSEOa, which cover
several subgroups of the SEO family. Based on this
result we constructed a specific Hidden Markov Model
by aligning all the identified thioredoxin-like domains,
and using this to screen the remaining SEO proteins for
similar domains. We obtained significant hits for all the
SEO proteins and designated the resulting domain as
‘potential thioredoxin fold’. Further analysis of the M.
truncatula and A. thaliana ’potential thioredoxin fold’
domains with the protein structure prediction server ITASSER, and alignment with known structures in the
Protein Data Bank (PDB) with TM-align, revealed that
SEO proteins are structurally related to tryparedoxin II

(Figure 5), a thioredoxin-like protein [22]. Complete
results from I-TASSER and TM-align are provided in
Additional file 3. Scanning against predicted proteins
from all the plants included in our analysis, the ‘potential thioredoxin fold’ was also present in several further
proteins, including some from monocotyledonous
plants, but was not found in P. patens. All of these
non-SEO proteins contain a PfamA domain belonging
to the Pfam-Clan “Thioredoxin-like” indicating that our
Hidden Markov Model indeed predicts thioredoxin
folds.
We also searched for predicted domains using the
PfamB database [20], revealing three domains in all SEO
proteins. One domain (PB104124) was non-specific and
overlapped the two other predicted PfamB domains, and
was therefore rejected from further analysis. The second
PfamB domain (PB013523) was predicted in the Nterminal part of the proteins and was therefore named
SEO-NTD (SEO N-Terminal Domain), whereas the
third (PB006891) spanned the C-terminus. Because

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

Page 6 of 14

Figure 3 RT-PCR analysis of SEO gene expression in M. truncatula, G. max, A. thaliana and S. phureja. SEO genes were amplified from
cDNA prepared from total RNA isolated from phloem-enriched (PE) and phloem-deficient (PD) tissue. The constitutively expressed ACT2 (for A.
thaliana), GAPDH (for M. truncatula, S. phureja) and F-box (for G. max) genes served as positive controls. The integrity of all PCR products was
verified by sequencing.

PB006891 partially overlaps with the ‘potential thioredoxin fold’ we adjusted the domain by building a new
Hidden Markov Model that did not interfere with the
fold and subsequently renamed it SEO-CTD (SEO CTerminal Domain). The domain arrangement of the
SEO proteins is shown in Figure 6A. It should be noted
that the combination of the two PfamB domains together
with the ‘potential thioredoxin fold’ in a single protein
could not be identified in any predicted non-SEO proteins from the analyzed plants and appears unique to the
SEO family. However, none of these domains alone is
specific for SEO proteins - all three domains are present
individually in other proteins, although the PfamB
domains were identified in only a few proteins from M.
truncatula and G. max (Additional file 4) and in no proteins from A. thaliana, V. vinifera, the monocotyledonous plants we analyzed or in P. patens. S. phureja and
M. domestica were excluded from this search because
gene models were not available.

Motif search in SEO proteins

Next, we set out to identify motifs (shorter in length
than the domains described above) that are specific for
the SEO protein family. Therefore, highly-conserved
regions were chosen from an alignment of SEO proteins
and were used to construct Hidden Markov Model profiles which characterize the motifs. We identified
numerous motifs that appeared to be unique to SEO
proteins (Figure 6B) as they could not be detected in
any other proteins from any of the other plants included
in the analysis. The C-terminal M1 motif, containing
several conserved cysteine residues, was representative
of the entire SEO family, whereas M2 and M3 appeared
to be specific for SEO subgroups, perhaps indicating
structural and/or functional specialization. The M4
motif, which was 20-35 amino acids in length and
matched an in-house database of disordered regions,
was found in the N-terminal portion of SEO proteins in
subgroups 5 and 6 (Figure 6B) and could reflect intrinsic

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

Page 7 of 14

Figure 4 Analysis of the AtSEOa and GmSEO-F1 promoter in transgenic plant tissue. CLSM detection of GFPER activity in PAtSEOa-GFPER
transgenic A. thaliana plants (A to D) and PGmSEO-F1-GFPER transgenic G. max roots (E, F). (A) Transverse sections through an A. thaliana stem
showing GFPER restricted to the phloem. (B) Overlay of fluorescent and transmitted light images of a longitudinal A. thaliana stem section
showing GFPER fluorescence in sieve elements (arrows). Non-fluorescent companion cells are marked with an asterisk. (C) Sieve plate of two endto-end connected fluorescent sieve elements stained with aniline-blue. (D) Sieve element containing large vacuoles, indicated by the white
arrow. (E) Longitudinal section through the vascular cylinder of a transgenic G. max root. (F) Sieve element with aniline-blue stained sieve plate.
Scale bar = 100 μm in A and E, and 5 μm in B-D and F.

disorder within this part of the protein. The individual
position of the motifs is indicated in Figure 6A.
Genomic synteny

Finally, we investigated the organization of SEO genes in
the M. truncatula, G. max, A. thaliana and V. vinifera
genomes (M. domestica and S. phureja were excluded
due to the lack of annotated genomic data). As shown
in Additional file 5, most SEO genes appear to be organized in clusters. Seven of nine M. truncatula SEO
genes (MtSEO-F1, 2, 4 and MtSEOa-d) are clustered in
a 150-kbp segment of chromosome 1, in G. max, five
SEO genes are found in a 50-kbp cluster on chromosome 10, while another six are found in a 55-kbp cluster
on chromosome 20. Eight grapevine SEO genes are clustered in a 170-kbp segment of chromosome 14 and two
of the three A. thaliana SEO genes are adjacent on
chromosome 3.
The organization of the G. max genes is worthy of
special attention. GmSEO-F1, 2 and 4 - the orthologs of
the M. truncatula forisome-encoding genes MtSEO-F1,
2 and 4 - are clustered together on a 20-kbp segment of
chromosome 10 (Figure 7), but chromosome 20 contains a similarly-arranged cluster comprising the

expressed and non-expressed paralogs GmSEOv(potψe),
GmSEOu and GmSEOt (potψ) . This similar genomic
arrangement could also be verified by analyzing the
neighboring non-SEO related genes. Out of the 26
GmSEO genes 11 paralog pairs could be identified (Figure 7 and Additional file 5). Although we isolated
MtSEO-F3 from cDNA and genomic DNA, we could
not identify the sequence in the published M. truncatula
genome, suggesting a gap in genome coverage. For five
out of nine MtSEO genes we could identify orthologs in
G. max (Figure 7 and Additional file 5).

Discussion
Forisomes are specialized P-proteins found solely in the
Fabaceae. Genes encoding forisome components were
recently identified in M. truncatula, and are the founder
members of the sieve element occlusion (SEO) gene
family [13-16]. In this study, we identified many additional SEO genes in the genomes of two Fabaceae and,
interestingly, also in several non-Fabaceae plant families
(which do not possess forisomes). Even within the Fabaceae, it appears that only some of the newly-identified
SEO genes encode forisome components. Phylogenetic
analysis showed that all the known and novel SEO genes

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

Figure 5 Predicted thioredoxin fold of MtSEO-F1 and AtSEOa.
Three-dimensional structure of the potential thioredoxin fold in (A)
MtSEO-F1 and (B) AtSEOa predicted with I-TASSER. a-helices are
coloured in red, b-sheets in blue and turns in yellow. Comparison of
the predicted three-dimensional structures of (C) MtSEO-F1 and (D)
AtSEOa (both coloured in red) with tryparedoxin II, aligned with TMalign. The structure of tryparedoxin II is coloured in blue, cysteine
residues are highlighted in green.

can be clustered in seven subgroups (Figure 1) and they
have a similar exon-intron structure (Figure 2). Their
expression is likely to be phloem-specific (Figure 3)
most probably restricted to immature sieve elements
(SEs) as shown for one Fabaceae and one non-Fabaceae
SEO gene (Figure 4) and the proteins contain highly
conserved domains and motifs (Figures 5 and 6).
Forisomes have been described as a special type of Pprotein mainly based on their morphological characteristics. Like forisomes, P-proteins of various species were
reported to accumulate in immature sieve elements [23]
and in their differentiated state both types of P-protein
share the same function of blocking sieve elements after
phloem injury [8]. Furthermore, forisomes and Pproteins show very similar ultrastructural characteristics
in both the condensed and dispersed states [24,25]. A
calcium-induced reactivity, as known for forisomes, is
also discussed for P-proteins [26,27]. Although the dispersion process is similar in each case, the complete
reversibility of the conformational switch is unique to
forisomes [12]. It therefore seems likely that the nonforisome SEO genes in the Fabaceae, and all the SEO
genes in non-Fabaceae plant families, encode other
(non-forisome) P-proteins. It should be noted that the
Cucurbita maxima PP1 protein, which is the only nonforisome P-protein to be characterized thus far, shares

Page 8 of 14

neither significant sequence similarities nor any conserved domains with the SEO proteins described herein.
For this reason, PP1 should not be assigned to the SEO
gene family, despite its potential functional similarity.
Additionally, we and others [18] have not identified any
PP1 orthologs in the genomes of non-Cucurbitaceae
plants, suggesting PP1 may play a unique role in the
phloem of the Cucurbitaceae family.
We used a number of bioinformatics approaches to
identify functional motifs and domains conserved in all
SEO proteins or in particular phylogenetic clades. We
identified a ‘potential thioredoxin fold’ domain common
to all SEO proteins, which is also found in enzymes that
catalyze disulfide bond formation [28]. However, the
canonical thioredoxin fold contains two central cysteine
residues that are not present in the SEO proteins, indicating some functional divergence. Interestingly, thioredoxin folds lacking cysteines have also been found in
other calcium-binding proteins such as calsequestrin
[29]. Calsequestrin has three such domains that condense to form an acidic platform for high-capacity but
low-affinity calcium adsorption that is most likely nonspecific [30]. Calcium binding in forisomes is also weak
and probably non-specific given that other divalent
cations can also induce the typical conformational
change [31,12]. The core of the calsequestrin thioredoxin fold domain is a five-strand b-sheet sandwiched
by four a-helices [29]. A similar arrangement of ahelices and b-sheets is predicted within the thioredoxin
domain of all SEO proteins analyzed with I-TASSER,
which suggests that the modified thioredoxin fold could
also be involved in calcium binding and the subsequent
dispersion of forisomes and other P-proteins. Although
thioredoxin folds are found in many different proteins,
the presence of this domain together with the two
PfamB domains we identified seems to be a unique
characteristic of SEO proteins. Single PfamB domains
were also identified in Fabaceae non-SEO proteins, but
not in non-Fabaceae plants, which suggests the transfer
of these domains from SEO to non-SEO genes by
domain rearrangement [32,33].
All the SEO proteins contain the conserved Cterminal motif M1, which is characterized by four spatially conserved cysteine residues (Figure 6B). Although
these residues could form disulfide bridges, this requires
an oxidizing environment and disulfide bridges are generally not present in cytosolic proteins [34]. However,
given the unique function of P-proteins and forisomes,
it is possible disulfide bridges could form when the
redox state of the cytosol is disrupted by cellular
damage, stabilizing the dispersed state of SEO proteins
and allowing them to seal off the injured sieve element.
Indeed, forisome reactivity declines significantly in the
presence of oxygen [30]. We identified several other

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

Page 9 of 14

Figure 6 Domain arrangement of the expressed SEO proteins. (A) The phylogenetic tree was calculated with RaxML from a T-Coffee protein
alignment. Identified protein domains are drawn to scale. The positions of the SEO-NTD and SEO-CTD domains and the potential thioredoxin
fold are indicated. (B) Sequence logos: M1 = sequence logo specific for all SEO proteins; M2 = sequence logo specific for SEO subgroups 1-3; M3
= sequence logo specific for SEO subgroups 5, 6 and 7; and M4 = sequence logo specific for SEO subgroups 5 and 6, with potential intrinsic
disorder. The position of the individual sequence logos is also indicated in (A).

motifs that were representative of SEO protein subgroups, e.g. motif M4 with potential intrinsic disorder,
found at the N-terminus of subgroups 5 and 6 (Figure
6B). Disordered regions do not have a fixed threedimensional structure, but can be involved in a variety
of different molecular processes such as DNA/RNA or
protein binding [35]. However, their precise role(s) in
SEO proteins remains unclear.
To investigate the evolution of the SEO gene family,
we studied the distribution and organization of SEO

genes in Fabaceae and non-Fabaceae genomes (Figure 7
and Additional file 5) and their phylogenetic division
into seven subgroups (Figures 1 and 8). Because subgroup 5 contains SEO genes from all the dicotyledonous
plants with sequenced genomes included in our investigation, it is likely a similar ancestral SEO gene pre-dated
the split between the rosids and asterids. Subgroup 4
contains only SEO genes from the closely-related plant
families Fabaceae and Rosaceae, which suggests the subgroup 4 genes evolved by duplication and mutation

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

Page 10 of 14

Figure 7 Genomic synteny of several SEO genes from M. truncatula and G. max. Schematic overview of the genomic synteny of SEO
clusters on M. truncatula chromosome 1 and G. max chromosomes 2, 10, 13 and 20. SEO genes are shown as red arrows. Other gene models
are shown as black arrows. Orthologs between the two Fabaceae and paralogs within G. max are connected by dark grey shading. Orthologs
and paralogs for non-SEO genes are indicated by light grey shading.

prior to the divergence of the two plant families. With
the exception of MtSEO-F3, all SEO-F genes cluster in
the Fabaceae-specific subgroup 1 indicating they are
unique within the plant kingdom. The function of the
GmSEO genes clustering in subgroups 2 and 3 remains
unclear. Although showing significant similarity to SEOF genes, the corresponding proteins were not detected
in forisomes. However, their detection might be affected
by a low abundance in forisomes.
The distribution and organization of SEO genes in M.
truncatula and G. max genomes indicates that several

Figure 8 Phylogenetic tree of the plants included in this
investigation. Phylogenetic tree of the plants included in this
investigation according to the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group [75].
Clades and families are shown within the tree, and the numbers of
known SEO genes are indicated.

gene duplication events have occurred during the evolution of the Fabaceae SEO-F genes. With one known
exception, M. truncatula SEO genes are clustered on
chromosome 1 (the location of MtSEO-F3 is unknown),
suggesting proliferation through tandem duplication.
There is evidence that most Fabaceae share a common
whole genome duplication event, which occurred
approximately 50-60 million years ago, before G. max
and M. truncatula diverged from a common ancestor
[36,37]. Although this event cannot be verified by analyzing the position of SEO genes in the M. truncatula
genome, it is possible that the evidence has been
obscured by incidental gene loss events, since orthologs
of several of the SEO genes present in G. max and other
plants are missing in M. truncatula. For G. max, an
additional whole genome duplication event is thought to
have occurred ~15 million years ago [38,39]. This is
supported by the observed synteny in the SEO gene
clusters on M. truncatula chromosome 1, G. max chromosome 10, and the paralogs on G. max chromosome
20 (Figure 7). Definitive G. max orthologs could be
identified for five of the nine M. truncatula SEO genes,
and most of them exist as paralogs in G. max, leading
to the conclusion that they were present prior to the
split of the two Fabaceae and therefore the duplication
event in G. max. No equivalent to the SEO gene cluster
in A. thaliana or the arrangement of SEO genes in V.
vinifera could be identified in G. max or M. truncatula,
as their orthologs are not organized in clusters in both
Fabaceae. Therefore it seems likely that additional and
independent gene duplication and reorganization events
affected the SEO genes in A. thaliana and V. vinifera.
We also identified a number of potential SEO

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

Page 11 of 14

pseudogenes, five of which are found in G. max, which
probably could be maintained because of the functional
redundancy created by gene duplication. Nevertheless,
we cannot exclude the possibility that at least the
expressed pseudogenes (’pot. ψe’) have evolved to take
on novel functions, such as the regulation of gene
expression [40,41]. SEO genes appear to be widespread
in dicotyledonous plants and may therefore provide a
powerful new tool to study the evolution of gene
families in dicotyledons.

analysis”) were used for full-length amplification of the
corresponding SEO genes using the oligonucleotides
listed in Additional file 6. Sequence-verified SEO genes
were deposited in GenBank (accession numbers are
listed in Additional file 1). The exon-intron structure of
the SEO genes was identified by comparing genomic
and cDNA sequences. For MtSEO-F3, and the MdSEO
and SpSEO genes, for which no or only preliminary
genomic sequence data were available, genomic clones
were amplified de novo by PCR.

Conclusions
We provide evidence that SEO genes are widely distributed in non-Fabaceae species and most probably encode
P-proteins. The strong conservation of the gene structure, protein motifs and domains, the phylogenetic profile and the genomic synteny indicate a common
phylogenetic origin for all SEO genes. Numerous tandem gene and whole genome duplication events appear
to have contributed to the evolution of forisome genes
in Fabaceae. We identified a fourth M. truncatula gene
encoding a forisome component and presented the first
analysis of forisome genes in G. max.

Forisome isolation and peptide sequencing

Forisomes were isolated from purified M. truncatula
and G. max phloem tissue (see next section) by density
gradient centrifugation according to established protocols [12]. After fractionation by SDS-PAGE the major
75-kDa protein band was excised from the gel matrix,
purified and subsequently characterized by ESI-MS/MS
as described [13,14]. The resulting peptide masses were
screened against a database containing the SEO proteins
and only those peptides unique for a single SEO protein
were considered for further analysis.
Expression analysis

Methods
Identification of gene family members

Protein models were obtained from the sequenced genomes of Medicago truncatula [42], Glycine max [43],
Arabidopsis thaliana [44], Vitis vinifera [45], Oryza
sativa [46], Sorghum bicolor [47], Zea mays [48], Brachypodium distachyon [49] and Physcomitrella patens
[50]. In addition, we used a Malus domestica EST collection from the “National Center for Biotechnology
Information” and the not yet annotated genome
sequence from Solanum phureja [51]. With the previously published forisome proteins MtSEO1, MtSEO2
and MtSEO3 [14,15] a BLASTP search was carried out
against the protein annotations. Hits with significant
similarities (E values lower than 1e-10) were analyzed
for global similarity by aligning with the MtSEO proteins. Proteins with only local sequence similarities were
not added to the SEO family. To identify further members the BLASTP search was repeated with the newly
identified proteins. In addition and in case of missing
protein annotations (EST data, non-annotated genomes),
the full-length cDNA sequences of all identified SEO
genes were used in a BLASTN search (threshold E
< 0.001). Falsely-annotated SEO genes indicated e.g. by
the presence of shortened open reading frames were reannotated from genomic sequences with FGENESH or
by aligning the genomic sequence with cDNA sequences
of other SEO genes. For the identification of correctly
spliced cDNA sequences, three independent cDNAs
from total seedling RNA (see subheading “Expression

Phloem-enriched tissue was prepared from S. phureja
and G. max cv. Williams 82 by scraping the inner side
of peeled stem rinds with a scalpel. The remaining stem
rind was used as phloem-deficient material. M. truncatula cv. Jemalong A17 phloem was enriched by cutting
stems in half longitudinally, removing the pith and
scraping off the cortex with a scalpel. The cortex of the
stem was used as phloem-deficient material. For A.
thaliana cv. Col-0 phloem-enriched tissue was obtained
by cutting out midribs from young leaves. For control
experiments with phloem-deficient material we used
parts of leaves lacking visible veins.
Total RNA was isolated from tissues ground to powder under liquid nitrogen using the NucleoSpin RNA®
Plant Kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany). Total
RNA was reverse transcribed with SuperScript II (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. For all PCRs, partial but intronspanning parts of the SEO genes were amplified using
the oligonucleotides listed in Additional file 6. The
integrity of all PCR products was verified by sequence
analysis. If no products were generated, additional PCRs
were performed using different combinations of primers
on cDNA derived from young and old leaves, shoots,
roots, buds and flowers. Only if no product was detected
in this additional experiment were the corresponding
SEO genes designated as potential pseudogenes.
Expressed SEO genes containing frameshift mutations
were designated as potential expressed pseudogenes.
The expression of M. truncatula GAPDH [52], A.

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

thaliana ACT2 [53], S. phureja GAPDH [54] and the G.
max F-box gene [55] were used as positive controls.
Promoter analysis

The PAtSEOa-GFPER construct was generated by amplifying a 997-bp AtSEOa promoter-specific fragment
(PAtSEOa) from A. thaliana genomic DNA, while the
PGmSEO-F1-GFPER construct was generated by amplifying a 2500-bp GmSEO-F1 promoter-specific fragment
(PGmSEO-F1) from G. max genomic DNA (oligonucleotides listed in Additional file 6). Both PCR products
were digested with KpnI and XhoI and inserted into the
corresponding restriction sites of pBSGFPER, containing
the downstream ER-targeted GFP coding region [14].
The promoter-GFPER constructs were then excised and
transferred into the KpnI/HindIII sites of the binary vector pBIN19 [56] to obtain pBPAtSEOa-GFP ER and
pBPGmSEO-F1-GFPER, respectively. The binary vector
pBPAtSEOa-GFPER was introduced into Agrobacterium
tumefaciens LBA4404 [57] and transformation of A.
thaliana was carried out by floral dip [58]. Seeds were
sterilized and germinated on Murashige and Skoog medium [59] supplemented with 50 μg/ml kanamycin for
the selection of transgenic plants. GFPER expression was
monitored in transverse and longitudinal stem sections
by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM; Leica
TCS SP5 X, Wetzlar, Germany; excitation 488 nm,
emission 500-600 nm). Sieve plates were stained with a
0.01% aniline-blue solution according to established protocols [60] and visualized by CLSM (excitation 364 nm,
emission 470-530 nm). The binary vector pBPGmSEOF1-GFP ER was introduced into A. rhizogenes strain
NCPPB2659 and transgenic G. max roots were obtained
following established protocols [61]. Longitudinal sections of the roots were analyzed as above.

Page 12 of 14

Domain arrangements were visualized using Jangstd
[68]. HMMER 3.0 beta 2 was used to construct Hidden
Markov Models (HMMs) and carry out searches [69].
Unique motifs in the SEO family were identified by
extracting partial alignments to construct HMMs. Three
dimensional protein structure prediction was carried out
with I-TASSER [70]. The resulting protein structures
were compared to structures in the Protein Data Bank
(PDB) using the program TM-align [71]. Sequence logos
of alignments were generated with WebLogo [72]. To
identify regions of disorder, an in-house database was
created by scanning protein sequences from annotated
plant genomes with VSL2B [73]. Disordered sequences
with a length of at least 20 amino acids were clustered
with cd-hit [74], aligned and used to build HMMs. Disordered regions in the SEO family were predicted with
this set of HMMs. All models were tested against SEO
proteins as well as all available protein predictions for
the plants included in our investigation.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table of all SEO genes included in this
investigation. Summary of all known SEO genes identified in Medicago
truncatula (Mt), Glycine max (Gm), Malus domestica (Md), Arabidopsis
thaliana (At), Vitis vinifera (Vv), Solanum phureja (Sp), Vicia faba (Vf), Pisum
sativum (Ps) and Canavalia gladiata (Cg). The E values for the different
protein products result from a BLASTp search with MtSEO-F1 against a
protein database containing all identified SEO proteins.
Additional file 2: Table of peptide sequences obtained from
forisomes. Assigned peptide sequences generated by ESI-MS/MS from
purified forisomes from Medicago truncatula (Mt) and Glycine max (Gm).
Additional file 3: Table with results for structure prediction of the
potential thioredoxin fold with I-TASSER and TM-align. Accuracy of
the predicted thioredoxin fold structure of MtSEO and AtSEO proteins
with I-TASSER, and of the TM-alignment with tryparedoxin II.
Additional file 4: Table of non-SEO proteins containing SEO
domains. List of predicted non-SEO proteins from Medicago truncatula
(Medtr) and Glycine max (Glyma) carrying the SEO N-terminal domain
(NTD) or SEO C-terminal domain (CTD).

Phylogenetic analysis

The OrthoMCL program [62] was used to cluster SEO
proteins into subgroups, with an inflation parameter of
3. The protein sequences were aligned with T-Coffee
[63] and the alignment was end trimmed to start and
end with the domains predicted for all SEO proteins
(SEO-NTD and SEO-CTD). The optimal evolutionary
model for the family was calculated from this alignment
with ProtTest [64]. RAxML [65] was used for tree building with the evolutionary model parameter JTT+F+I+G
and a bootstrap of 1000. The best tree was visualized
with FigTree [66].
Domain analysis

Domain annotation was achieved by screening the NCBI
Conserved Domain Database (v2.17) [21] in combination
with CD-Search [67] and the PfamA and PfamB databases v23.0 [20], using a significance threshold of 1e-05.

Additional file 5: Chromosomal organization of the SEO genes.
Schematic overview of SEO chromosomal loci in the plants included in
this investigation. Orthologs between MtSEO and GmSEO genes as well
as SEO paralogs in G. max are marked with matching symbols.
Chromosomes and genes are not drawn to scale.
Additional file 6: List of oligonucleotides.

Acknowledgements
The technical assistance of Ann-Christin Müller and the help of Sarah Weiss
is gratefully acknowledged. This work was supported by grants from the
VolkswagenStiftung (contract no. I/82 075) and the Fraunhofer Society. EBB
and ARR acknowledge support from the Human Frontier Science Program.
Author details
Institut für Biochemie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen, Westfälische WilhelmsUniversität Münster, Hindenburgplatz 55, D-48143 Münster, Germany.
2
Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology (IME),
Forckenbeckstraße 6, D-52074 Aachen, Germany. 3Institut für Evolution und
Biodiversität, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Hüfferstraße 1, D-48149
Münster, Germany.
1

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

Authors’ contributions
BR identified the SEO gene family members, cloned the MtSEO and SpSEO
genes, performed the computational and domain analyses and drafted the
manuscript. AME identified and cloned the GmSEO genes, isolated forisomes
from G. max and M. truncatula, performed the PGmSEO-F1 promoter studies
and participated in drafting the manuscript. SBJ cloned the AtSEO genes and
performed the PAtSEOa promoter studies. SN participated in cloning the
GmSEO genes. ARR supported the computational analyses and built the
disordered region database. BM participated in analyzing the potential
thioredoxin fold. EBB conceived the computational analyses and helped
drafting the manuscript. DP participated in conceiving, design and
coordination of this study and revised the manuscript. GAN conceived the
study, participated in its design and helped to draft the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 15 January 2010 Accepted: 8 October 2010
Published: 8 October 2010
References
1. Esau K: The Phloem Stuttgart: Borntraeger 1969.
2. Münch E: Die Stoffbewegungen in der Pflanze Jena: Fischer Verlag 1930.
3. Sjolund RD: The phloem sieve element: a river runs through it. Plant Cell
1997, 9:1137-1146.
4. van Bel A, Kempers R: The pore/plasmodesm unit: key element in the
interplay between sieve element and companion cell. Progress in Botany
1996, 58:278-291.
5. Geiger DR, Giaquinta RT, Sovonick SA, Fellows RJ: Solute Distribution in
Sugar Beet Leaves in Relation to Phloem Loading and Translocation.
Plant Physiol 1973, 52:585-589.
6. Esau K, Cronshaw J: Tubular components in cells of healthy and tobacco
mosaic virus-infected Nicotiana. Virology 1967, 33:26-35.
7. Ehlers K, Knoblauch M, van Bel A: Ultrastructural features of wellpreserved and injured sieve elements: Minute clamps keep the phloem
transport conduits free for mass flow. Protoplasma 2000, 214:80-92.
8. Knoblauch M, van Bel AJE: Sieve Tubes in Action. Plant Cell 1998, 10:35-50.
9. Cronshaw J: Phloem structure and function. Annu Rev Plant Physiol 1981,
32:465-484.
10. Wergin WP, Palevitz BA, Newcomb EH: Structure and development of Pprotein in phloem parenchyma and companion cells of legumes. Tissue
Cell 1975, 7:227-242.
11. Behnke H: Nondispersive protein bodies in sieve elements: a survey and
review of their origin, distribution and taxonomic significance. IAWA Bull
1991, 12:143-175.
12. Knoblauch M, Noll GA, Müller T, Prüfer D, Schneider-Hüther I, Scharner D,
van Bel AJE, Peters WS: ATP-independent contractile proteins from plants.
Nat Mater 2003, 2:600-603.
13. Noll GA: Molekularbiologische Charakterisierung der Forisome. PhD thesis
Justus-Liebig Universität Gießen 2005.
14. Noll G, Fontanellaz M, Rüping B, Ashoub A, van Bel AJE, Fischer R,
Knoblauch M, Prüfer D: Spatial and temporal regulation of the forisome
gene for1 in the phloem during plant development. Plant Mol Biol 2007,
65:285-294.
15. Pélissier HC, Peters WS, Collier R, van Bel AJE, Knoblauch M: GFP Tagging
of Sieve Element Occlusion (SEO) Proteins Results in Green Fluorescent
Forisomes. Plant Cell Physiol 2008, 49:1699-1710.
16. Noll G, Rüping B, Ernst A, Bucsenez M, Twyman R, Fischer R, Prüfer D: The
Promoters of Forisome Genes MtSEO2 and MtSEO3 Direct Gene
Expression to Immature Sieve Elements in Medicago truncatula and
Nicotiana tabacum. Plant Mol Biol Rep 2009, 27:526-533.
17. Beyenbach J, Weber C, Kleinig H: Sieve-Tube Proteins from Cucurbita
maxima. Planta 1974, 119:113-124.
18. Clark AM, Jacobsen KR, Bostwick DE, Dannenhoffer JM, Skaggs MI,
Thompson GA: Molecular characterization of a phloem-specific gene
encoding the filament protein, Phloem Protein 1 (PP1), from Cucurbita
maxima. Plant J 1997, 12:49-61.
19. Tuteja N, Umate P, van Bel AJE: Forisomes: calcium-powered protein
complexes with potential as ‘smart’ biomaterials. Trend Biotechnol 2010,
28:102-110.
20. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz H, Ceric G, Forslund K,
Eddy SR, Sonnhammer ELL, Bateman A: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucl Acids Res 2008, 36:D281-288.

Page 13 of 14

21. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Chitsaz F, Derbyshire MK, DeWeese-Scott C,
Fong JH, Geer LY, Geer RC, Gonzales NR, Gwadz M, He S, Hurwitz DI,
Jackson JD, Ke Z, Lanczycki CJ, Liebert CA, Liu C, Lu F, Lu S, Marchler GH,
Mullokandov M, Song JS, Tasneem A, Thanki N, Yamashita RA, Zhang D,
Zhang N, Bryant SH: CDD: specific functional annotation with the
Conserved Domain Database. Nucl Acids Res 2009, 37:D205-210.
22. Hofmann B, Budde H, Bruns K, Guerrero SA, Kalisz HM, Menge U,
Montemartini M, Nogoceke E, Steinert P, Wissing JB, Flohé L, Hecht HJ:
Structures of tryparedoxins revealing interaction with trypanothione. Biol
Chem 2001, 382:459-471.
23. Cronshaw J, Esau K: Tubular and fibrillar components of mature and
differentiating sieve elements. J Cell Biol 1967, 34:801-815.
24. Wu J, Hao B: Ultrastructure of P-protein in Hevea brasiliensis during sievetube development and after wounding. Protoplasma 1990, 153:186-192.
25. Knoblauch M, Peters WS: Forisomes, a novel type of Ca2+-dependent
contractile protein motor. Cell Mot Cyto 2004, 58:137-142.
26. Knoblauch M, Peters WS, Ehlers K, van Bel AJE: Reversible calciumregulated stopcocks in legume sieve tubes. Plant Cell 2001, 13:1221-1230.
27. King RW, Zeevaart JAD: Enhancement of phloem exudation from cut
petioles by chelating agents. Plant Physiol 1974, 53:96-103.
28. Atkinson HJ, Babbitt PC: An Atlas of the Thioredoxin Fold Class Reveals
the Complexity of Function-Enabling Adaptations. PLoS Comput Biol 2009,
5:e1000541.
29. Wang S, Trumble WR, Liao H, Wesson CR, Dunker AK, Kang C: Crystal
structure of calsequestrin from rabbit skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic
reticulum. Nat Struct Mol Biol 1998, 5:476-483.
30. MacLennan DH, Reithmeier RAF: Ion tamers. Nat Struct Mol Biol 1998,
5:409-411.
31. Schwan S, Fritzsche M, Cismak A, Heilmann A, Spohn U: In vitro
investigation of the geometric contraction behavior of chemomechanical P-protein aggregates (forisomes). Biophys Chem 2007,
125:444-452.
32. Moore AD, Björklund ÅK, Ekman D, Bornberg-Bauer E, Elofsson A:
Arrangements in the modular evolution of proteins. Trends Biochem Sci
2008, 33:444-451.
33. Weiner J, Beaussart F, Bornberg-Bauer E: Domain deletions and
substitutions in the modular protein evolution. FEBS J 2006,
273:2037-2047.
34. Freedman RB: The formation of protein disulphide bonds. Curr Opin Struct
Biol 1995, 5:85-91.
35. Chen JW, Romero P, Uversky VN, Dunker AK: Conservation of Intrinsic
Disorder in Protein Domains and Families: II. Functions of Conserved
Disorder. J Proteome Res 2006, 5:888-898.
36. Pfeil BE, Schlueter JA, Shoemaker RC, Doyle JJ: Placing Paleopolyploidy in
Relation to Taxon Divergence: A Phylogenetic Analysis in Legumes
Using 39 Gene Families. Syst Biol 2005, 54:441-454.
37. Cronk Q, Ojeda I, Pennington RT: Legume comparative genomics:
progress in phylogenetics and phylogenomics. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2006,
9:99-103.
38. Zhu H, Choi HK, Cook DR, Shoemaker RC: Bridging model and crop
legumes through comparative genomics. Plant Physiol 2005,
137:1189-1196.
39. Van de Peer Y, Fawcett JA, Proost S, Sterck L, Vandepoele K: The flowering
world: a tale of duplications. Trends Plant Sci 2009, 14:680-688.
40. Balakirev ES, Ayala FJ: Pseudogenes: Are They “Junk” or Functional DNA?
Annu Rev Genet 2003, 37:123-151.
41. Raes J, Van de Peer Y: Functional divergence of proteins through
frameshift mutations. Trends Genet 2005, 21:428-431.
42. US/EU Medicago truncatula genome sequencing project - release 3.0.
[http://www.medicago.org/genome/downloads/Mt3/].
43. Soybean Genome Project, DoE Joint Genome Institute - gene set
“Glyma1.0”. [ftp://ftp.jgi-psf.org/pub/JGI_data/phytozome/v4.1/Gmax/].
44. The Arabidopsis Information Resource Genome Release 8. [ftp://ftp.
arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Genes/TAIR8_genome_release/].
45. Jaillon O, Aury JM, Noel B, Policriti A, Clepet C, Casagrande A, Choisne N,
Aubourg S, Vitulo N, Jubin C, Vezzi A, Legeai F, Hugueney P, Dasilva C,
Horner D, Mica E, Jublot D, Poulain J, Bruyère C, Billault A, Segurens B,
Gouyvenoux M, Ugarte E, Cattonaro F, Anthouard V, Vico V, Del Fabbro C,
Alaux M, Di Gaspero G, Dumas V, Felice N, Paillard S, Juman I, Moroldo M,
Scalabrin S, Canaguier A, Le Clainche I, Malacrida G, Durand E, Pesole G,
Laucou V, Chatelet P, Merdinoglu D, Delledonne M, Pezzotti M, Lecharny A,

Rüping et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:219
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/219

46.

47.

48.

49.
50.

51.
52.

53.

54.

55.

Scarpelli C, Artiguenave F, Pè ME, Valle G, Morgante M, Caboche M, AdamBlondon AF, Weissenbach J, Quètier F, Wincker P: The grapevine genome
sequence suggests ancestral hexaploidization in major angiosperm
phyla. Nature 2007, 449:463-467.
Ouyang S, Zhu W, Hamilton J, Lin H, Campbell M, Childs K, ThibaudNissen F, Malek RL, Lee Y, Zheng L, Orvis J, Haas B, Wortman J, Buell CR:
The TIGR Rice Genome Annotation Resource: improvements and new
features. Nucl Acids Res 2007, 35:D883-887.
Paterson AH, Bowers JE, Bruggmann R, Dubchak I, Grimwood J,
Gundlach H, Haberer G, Hellsten U, Mitros T, Poliakov A, Schmutz J,
Spannagl M, Tang H, Wang X, Wicker T, Bharti AK, Chapman J, Feltus FA,
Gowik U, Grigoriev IV, Lyons E, Maher CA, Martis M, Narechania A, Otillar RP,
Penning BW, Salamov AA, Wang Y, Zhang L, Carpita NC, Freeling M,
Gingle AR, Hash CT, Keller B, Klein P, Kresovich S, McCann MC, Ming R,
Peterson DG, Mehboob-ur-Rahman , Ware D, Westhoff P, Mayer KFX,
Messing J, Rokhsar DS: The Sorghum bicolor genome and the
diversification of grasses. Nature 2009, 457:551-556.
Schnable PS, Ware D, Fulton RS, Stein JC, Wei F, Pasternak S, Liang C,
Zhang J, Fulton L, Graves TA, Minx P, Reily AD, Courtney L, Kruchowski SS,
Tomlinson C, Strong C, Delehaunty K, Fronick C, Courtney B, Rock S,
Belter E, Du F, Kim K, Abbott RM, Cotton M, Levy A, Marchetto P, Ochoa K,
Jackson SM, Gillam B, Chen W, Yan L, Higginbotham J, Cardenas M,
Waligorski J, Applebaum E, Phelps L, Falcone J, Kanchi K, Thane T,
Scimone A, Thane N, Henke J, Wang T, Ruppert J, Shah N, Rotter K,
Hodges J, Ingenthron E, Cordes M, Kohlberg S, Sgro J, Delgado B, Mead K,
Chinwalla A, Leonard S, Crouse K, Collura K, Kudrna D, Currie J, He R,
Angelova A, Rajasekar S, Mueller T, Lomeli T, Scara G, Ko A, Delaney K,
Wissotski M, Lopez G, Campos D, Braidotti M, Ashley E, Golser W, Kim H,
Lee S, Lin J, Dujmic Z, Kim W, Talag J, Zuccolo A, Fan C, Sebastian A,
Kramer M, Spiegel L, Nascimento L, Zutavern T, Miller B, Ambroise C,
Muller S, Spooner W, Narechania A, Ren L, Wei S, Kumari S, Faga B, Levy MJ,
McMahan L, Van Buren P, Vaughn MW, Ying K, Yeh CT, Emrich SJ, Jia Y,
Kalyanaraman A, Hsia AP, Barbazuk WB, Baucom RS, Brutnell TP, Carpita NC,
Chaparro C, Chia JM, Deragon JM, Estill JC, Fu Y, Jeddeloh JA, Han Y, Lee H,
Li P, Lisch DR, Liu S, Liu Z, Nagel DH, McCann MC, SanMiguel P, Myers AM,
Nettleton D, Nguyen J, Penning BW, Ponnala L, Schneider KL, Schwartz DC,
Sharma A, Soderlund C, Springer NM, Sun Q, Wang H, Waterman M,
Westerman R, Wolfgruber TK, Yang L, Yu Y, Zhang L, Zhou S, Zhu Q,
Bennetzen JL, Dawe RK, Jiang J, Jiang N, Presting GG, Wessler SR, Aluru S,
Martienssen RA, Clifton SW, McCombie WR, Wing RA, Wilson RK: The B73
Maize Genome: Complexity, Diversity, and Dynamics. Science 2009,
326:1112-1115.
The Brachypodium distachyon Information Resource. [http://www.
brachypodium.org/].
Rensing SA, Lang D, Zimmer AD, Terry A, Salamov A, Shapiro H,
Nishiyama T, Perroud P, Lindquist EA, Kamisugi Y, Tanahashi T, Sakakibara K,
Fujita T, Oishi K, Shin-I T, Kuroki Y, Toyoda A, Suzuki Y, Hashimoto S,
Yamaguchi K, Sugano S, Kohara Y, Fujiyama A, Anterola A, Aoki S, Ashton N,
Barbazuk WB, Barker E, Bennetzen JL, Blankenship R, Cho SH, Dutcher SK,
Estelle M, Fawcett JA, Gundlach H, Hanada K, Heyl A, Hicks KA, Hughes J,
Lohr M, Mayer K, Melkozernov A, Murata T, Nelson DR, Pils B, Prigge M,
Reiss B, Renner T, Rombauts S, Rushton PJ, Sanderfoot A, Schween G,
Shiu SH, Stueber K, Theodoulou FL, Tu H, Van de Peer Y, Verrier PJ,
Waters E, Wood A, Yang L, Cove D, Cuming AC, Hasebe M, Lucas S,
Mishler BD, Reski R, Grigoriev IV, Quatrano RS, Boore JL: The Physcomitrella
Genome Reveals Evolutionary Insights into the Conquest of Land by
Plants. Science 2008, 319:64-69.
Potato Genome Sequencing Consortium - whole genome assembly
scaffolds V1. [http://potatogenomics.plantbiology.msu.edu/].
Schiene K, Donath S, Brecht M, Pühler A, Niehaus K: A Rab-related small
GTP binding protein is predominantly expressed in root nodules of
Medicago sativa. Mol Genet Genomics 2004, 272:57-66.
An YQ, McDowell JM, Huang S, McKinney EC, Chambliss S, Meagher RB:
Strong, constitutive expression of the Arabidopsis ACT2/ACT8 actin
subclass in vegetative tissues. Plant J 1996, 10:107-121.
Guo J, Yang Q, Liang F, Xing Y, Wang Z: Molecular cloning and expression
analysis of a novel CONSTANS-like gene from potato. Biochemistry Mosc
2007, 72:1241-1246.
Libault M, Thibivilliers S, Bilgin DD, Radwan O, Benitez M, Clough SJ,
Stacey G: Identification of Four Soybean Reference Genes for Gene
Expression Normalization. Plant Genome 2008, 1:44-54.

Page 14 of 14

56. Bevan M: Binary Agrobacterium vectors for plant transformation. Nucl
Acids Res 1984, 12:8711-8721.
57. Hoekema A, Hirsch PR, Hooykaas PJJ, Schilperoort RA: A binary plant
vector strategy based on separation of vir- and T-region of the
Agrobacterium tumefaciens Ti-plasmid. Nature 1983, 303:179-180.
58. Clough SJ, Bent AF: Floral dip: a simplified method for Agrobacteriummediated transformation of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 1998, 16:735-743.
59. Murashige T, Skoog F: A revised medium for rapid growth and bioassays
with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiol plant 1962, 15:473-97.
60. Thompson MV, Wolniak SM: A Plasma Membrane-Anchored Fluorescent
Protein Fusion Illuminates Sieve Element Plasma Membranes in
Arabidopsis and Tobacco. Plant Physiol 2008, 146:1599-1610.
61. Collier R, Fuchs B, Walter N, Lutke WK, Taylor CG: Ex vitro composite
plants: an inexpensive, rapid method for root biology. Plant J 2005,
43:449-457.
62. Li L, Stoeckert CJ, Roos DS: OrthoMCL: Identification of Ortholog Groups
for Eukaryotic Genomes. Genome Res 2003, 13:2178-2189.
63. Notredame C, Higgins DG, Heringa J: T-coffee: a novel method for fast
and accurate multiple sequence alignment. J Mol Biol 2000, 302:205-217.
64. Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2104-2105.
65. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
66. FigTree. [http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/].
67. Marchler-Bauer A, Bryant SH: CD-Search: protein domain annotations on
the fly. Nucl Acids Res 2004, 32:W327-331.
68. Jangstd. [http://iebservices.uni-muenster.de/angstd/download/].
69. HMMER. [http://hmmer.janelia.org/].
70. Zhang Y: I-TASSER server for protein 3D structure prediction. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:40.
71. Zhang Y, Skolnick J: TM-align: a protein structure alignment algorithm
based on the TM-score. Nucl Acids Res 2005, 33:2302-2309.
72. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia J, Brenner SE: WebLogo: A Sequence Logo
Generator. Genome Res 2004, 14:1188-1190.
73. Peng K, Radivojac P, Vucetic S, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z: Length-dependent
prediction of protein intrinsic disorder. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:208.
74. Li W, Godzik A: Cd-hit: a fast program for clustering and comparing large
sets of protein or nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:1658-1659.
75. APG III: An update of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification for
the orders and families of flowering plants: APG III. Bot J Linn Soc 2009,
161:105-121.
doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-219
Cite this article as: Rüping et al.: Molecular and phylogenetic
characterization of the sieve element occlusion gene family in Fabaceae
and non-Fabaceae plants. BMC Plant Biology 2010 10:219.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
