<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genomic organization and splicing evolution of the doublesex gene, a Drosophila regulator of sexual differentiation, in the dengue and yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-41"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Marco Salvemini"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Genomic organization and splicing evolution of
the doublesex gene, a Drosophila regulator of
sexual differentiation, in the dengue and yellow
fever mosquito Aedes aegypti
Marco Salvemini1†, Umberto Mauro1,2†, Fabrizio Lombardo3, Andreina Milano1, Vincenzo Zazzaro1, Bruno Arcà3,4,
Lino C Polito1,5, Giuseppe Saccone1*

Abstract
Background: In the model system Drosophila melanogaster, doublesex (dsx) is the double-switch gene at the
bottom of the somatic sex determination cascade that determines the differentiation of sexually dimorphic traits.
Homologues of dsx are functionally conserved in various dipteran species, including the malaria vector Anopheles
gambiae. They show a striking conservation of sex-specific regulation, based on alternative splicing, and of the
encoded sex-specific proteins, which are transcriptional regulators of downstream terminal genes that influence
sexual differentiation of cells, tissues and organs.
Results: In this work, we report on the molecular characterization of the dsx homologue in the dengue and yellow
fever vector Aedes aegypti (Aeadsx). Aeadsx produces sex-specific transcripts by alternative splicing, which encode
isoforms with a high degree of identity to Anopheles gambiae and Drosophila melanogaster homologues.
Interestingly, Aeadsx produces an additional novel female-specific splicing variant. Genomic comparative analyses
between the Aedes and Anopheles dsx genes revealed a partial conservation of the exon organization and extensive
divergence in the intron lengths. An expression analysis showed that Aeadsx transcripts were present from early
stages of development and that sex-specific regulation starts at least from late larval stages. The analysis of the
female-specific untranslated region (UTR) led to the identification of putative regulatory cis-elements potentially
involved in the sex-specific splicing regulation. The Aedes dsx sex-specific splicing regulation seems to be more
complex with the respect of other dipteran species, suggesting slightly novel evolutionary trajectories for its
regulation and hence for the recruitment of upstream splicing regulators.
Conclusions: This study led to uncover the molecular evolution of Aedes aegypti dsx splicing regulation with the
respect of the more closely related Culicidae Anopheles gambiae orthologue. In Aedes aegypti, the dsx gene is sexspecifically regulated and encodes two female-specific and one male-specific isoforms, all sharing a doublesex/mab3 (DM) domain-containing N-terminus and different C-termini. The sex-specific regulation is based on a
combination of exon skipping, 5’ alternative splice site choice and, most likely, alternative polyadenylation.
Interestingly, when the Aeadsx gene is compared to the Anopheles dsx ortholog, there are differences in the in
silico predicted default and regulated sex-specific splicing events, which suggests that the upstream regulators
either are different or act in a slightly different manner. Furthermore, this study is a premise for the future
development of transgenic sexing strains in mosquitoes useful for sterile insect technique (SIT) programs.

* Correspondence: giuseppe.saccone@unina.it
† Contributed equally
1
Department of Biological Sciences - Section of Genetics and Molecular
Biology. University of Naples “Federico II” - Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Salvemini et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Background
DSX proteins are part of the Dmrt (doublesex and mab3-related transcription factor) family, a structurally and
functionally conserved group of zinc-finger proteins
with relevant roles in sex determination and sexual differentiation throughout the animal kingdom [1,2].
In Drosophila melanogaster and many other dipteran
species, dsx orthologues produce sex-specific transcripts
through alternative splicing, which encode two highly
conserved isoforms that share a common N-terminus
containing a zinc-finger domain (named DM domain)
[3]. The DSX sex-specific isoforms are responsible for
the proper sexual differentiation of somatic tissues and
the gonads [4-7]. The female-specific splicing of the dsx
pre-mRNA is under the control of the conserved Transformer (which is female-specifically expressed) and
Transformer-2 (a non-sex-specific auxiliary factor) splicing regulators in Drosophila and other dipteran species,
such as Ceratitis capitata [8,9] and other Tephritidae
species [10,11], Musca domestica (Muscidae) [12,13] and
Lucilia cuprina (Calliphoridae) [14]. Sequence comparisons led to the identification of key splicing regulatory
elements, the so-called TRA/TRA-2 binding sites,
conserved in different Drosophila species and in the
female-specific exon of these dsx orthologous genes
from non-Drosophilidae families. In addition to the sexspecific regulation, the functions exerted during sexual
development by the two DSX isoforms are evolutionarily
conserved. For example, ectopic expression of either the
male-specific or the female-specific isoform of Musca
domestica (MdDSXM and MdDSXF) [15], Ceratitis capitata (CcDSXM) [16] and Anastrepha obliqua (AoDSXM
and AoDSX M ) [17] into Drosophila transgenic flies
caused a partial masculinization of XX and a partial
feminization of XY individuals, respectively.
In the mosquito Anopheles gambiae (Diptera, Culicidae), a dsx ortholog was previously isolated, and it
maintains sex-specific regulation by alternative splicing
and putative TRA/TRA-2 binding sites in the femalespecific exon [18,19]. However, despite the availability of
a genome sequence, it is still unclear whether dsx is also
under the control of the TRA-related and TRA-2 orthologous proteins in this species, as in the Drosophila,
Tephritidae, Muscidae and Calliphoridae species.
Outside the order Diptera, dsx orthologues have been
isolated in the lepidopteran Bombyx mori (Bmdsx) [20]
and in the hymenopteran honeybee Apis mellifera
(Amdsx) [21,22] and the parasitic wasp Nasonia vitripennis (Nvdsx) [23]. In these species, only a partial conservation of dipteran dsx features was reported, with
sex-specific alternative splicing conserved, and different
cis-acting elements identified. In Bombyx mori, dsx plays
an essential role in silkworm sexual development and,
when compared to Drosophila, interestingly shows a

Page 2 of 19

reversed pattern of default versus regulated sex-specific
splicing [24] (for a reviews see [3]). Sex-specific splicing
of the honeybee Apis mellifera doublesex gene revealed
300 million years of conservation at the bottom of the
insect sex-determination pathway, confirming its key
role in sexual differentiation [21,22]. Finally, in the other
hymenopteran, Nasonia vitripennis, the availability of a
gynandromorphic line led to the first demonstration of
a direct functional association of the dsx orthologue
with somatic sex differentiation in Hymenoptera [23].
The mosquito Aedes aegypti is the most important, global arthropod vector for the yellow fever and dengue
viruses. Ae. aegypti is considered one of the best mosquito
species for laboratory culture and has been used for
detailed laboratory studies in various fields [25]. Furthermore, the Aedes genome and transcriptome sequences
have been partially determined [26]. However, the genetic
control of the Aedes sex determination is still to be clarified. In this species, the primary signal is different from
that in D. melanogaster, where the X-chromosome dosage
controls sex differentiation [27], and An. gambiae, where
an heteromorphic Y chromosome contains a male-determining factor(s) that dominantly induces male development by its presence in an XX/XY system [28]. In Aedes,
as observed for other culicine mosquitoes, heteromorphic
sex chromosomes are absent, and sex is controlled by an
autosomal locus that carries a male-determining gene, M,
acting as a dominant male determiner [29].
An Aedes aegypti orthologue for Drosophila doublesex
was previously identified by an in silico analysis of the
genome, in addition to orthologues of other Drosophila
genes potentially involved in sex determination and sexual differentiation, such as transformer-2, fruitless, dissatisfaction and intersex [26].
Here we present the genetic and genomic characterization of the Aedes aegypti dsx ortholog, its sex-specific
expression analysis during development and a comparative evolutionary analysis. We show that Aedes DSX
sex-specific isoforms are produced by sex-specific alternative splicing mechanisms with slight differences compared to other species. The Aedes dsx gene encodes
indeed a novel second female-specific DSX isoform, by
an exon skipping mechanism. Interestingly different
putative splicing regulatory sequences have been found
within the sex-specifically regulated Aedes dsx region,
suggesting a possible model of its splicing regulation by
upstream factors. Furthermore, our study opens the possibilities to identify the downstream targets of DSX in
Aedes, which are still not well defined even in the model
system Drosophila melanogaster, and to identify
upstream splicing regulators of the Aedes sex determination cascade, which have not yet been isolated possibly
conserved also in the other mosquitoes An. gambiae,
vector of malaria disease.

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Results and Discussion
Isolation and molecular characterization of the Aeadsx
gene

The molecular cloning of the Aedes aegypti dsx gene
(Aeadsx) was performed by combining a classical PCRbased approach with the available bioinformatic and
genomic tools. The later used the non-sex-specific
region of the Anopheles gambiae DSX protein (236 aa)
as a virtual probe for a BLASTP search of the Ensembl
Ae. aegypti AaegL1 genomic database (http://www.
ensembl.org/) (see Methods for further strategy details).
A putative male-specific cDNA sequence was then
obtained by EST analysis, using An. gambiae dsx malespecific nucleotide sequences (kindly provided by Pannuti A. and Lucchesi J., Emory University - USA, prior
publication). Using specific primer pairs for the putative
male-specific EST and common genomic sequences, we
performed an RT-PCR analysis on RNA samples
extracted from adult sexed Ae. aegypti mosquitoes. With
this approach, we successfully amplified sex-specific products of the Aeadsx gene, with two female-specific products of 1.5 kb and 2.0 kb and a male-specific product
of 1.0 kb (Figure 1B). cDNA products were cloned and
sequenced, and their conceptual translation of incomplete ORFs and comparison with DSX isoforms revealed
striking conservation of the DSX DM domain and the
female-specific carboxy domain encoded by the 2.0 kb
product. Through 5’-3’ RACE PCR, we next obtained
longer cDNAs containing fully open reading frames.
The 3 cDNA clones were named as AeadsxF1 (2846 bp),
Aeadsx F2 (2384 bp) and Aeadsx M1 (1918 bp), which
encoded three Aedes aegypti DSX isoforms, DSXF1 (278
aa), DSXF2 (267 aa) and DSXM1 (548 aa), respectively.
The alignment of the Aeadsx cDNA sequences with the
Aedes corresponding genomic sequence was used to
define the exon/intron organization and the alternative
splicing events leading to distinct sex-specific mRNAs
(Figure 1A).
These data confirmed the identification of the Ae.
aegypti dsx gene, which produced sex-specific transcripts by alternative splicing.
Aeadsx genomic organization and evolution

The Aeadsx gene spans a very large 450 kb long genomic region, located in supercontig 1.370, and consists of
at least eight exons with seven introns that vary markedly in length from 208 to 274,879 bp.
The first four Aeadsx exons (2-3a-3b-4) are nonsex-specific and encode the 248 amino acid common
N-terminus region of AeaDSX proteins. The four exons
are followed by two alternatively spliced female-specific
exons (5a-5b), encoding 30 and 19 amino acid sequences,
respectively, and two male-specific exons (6-7), the first
one encoding the male-specific protein domain of 300 aa

Page 3 of 19

and the second one constituting the 3’ UTR sequence
(Figure 1A).
The first four Aeadsx exons correspond by homology
to the second, third and fourth exons of the Angdsx,
suggesting that we missed the real first Aeadsx exon
(Figure 2). Interestingly, some of the Aedes dsx cDNAs
exhibit in this second exon the presence of a nonsex-specific alternative splicing event by intron retention
of a short coding 63-nt region. The corresponding
encoded 21-amino acid tract is highly conserved in
AngDSX isoforms (Figure 1 and 3A) but lacks any conservation with DSX isoforms from other dipteran species (data not shown). This finding suggests that this
short region is used in vivo and should play a functional
role that seems to be under positive natural selection.
Because the N-termini of the encoded Anopheles and
Aedes DSX proteins are highly conserved, starting from
the first putative methionine, this selective constraint
suggests that the dsx translation start site is conserved
in both species. As in the 5’ UTR of the isolated cDNA
there is lack of sequence corresponding to the Angdsx
exon 1, and additional upstream genomic sequences of
Aeadsx are likely still to be identified, including the promoter region.
The Aedes exon 3a and 3b exhibit a low level of
amino acid conservation. In particular, exon 3a seems to
correspond to the unique Anopheles exon 3 (see alignment in Figure 3). The short exon 3b encodes 16 amino
acids with no homology to DSX or other known proteins and it constitute an event of exon gain. Exon 5 in
Aedes is separated into two exons (5a and 5b). These
exons (461 bp and 465 bp, respectively) maintain the
female-specific alternative splicing regulation (Figure 2).
Interestingly, it seems that dsx underwent to either
intron gain in the Aedes or intron loss in the Anopheles
lineages.
Finally, Aedes exons 6 and 7 (1.1 kb and 0.5 kb) correspond to the Anopheles male-specific exons 6 and 7.
The exon 6 encodes in both species the male-specific
DSX portion and includes part of the 3’ UTR. The exon
7 corresponds to the remaining 3’ UTR.
The Aedes dsx exons show variable sequence similarity,
conserved exon-intron junctions, an exon gain (3b exon)
and an intron gain (intron between 5a and 5b exons)
events and hence partial structural correspondence to the
Anopheles dsx exons. In particular, with respect to the
Anopheles homologue, Aeadsx common exons 2 and 4
are largely conserved in size and content, while sexspecifically regulated exons as well as exons 3a and 3b
share a lower level of sequence identity. On the contrary,
an extensive divergence in intron structure (intron position and length) was observed that reflects overall genomic
differences between the species (Figure 2). The dsx gene in
An. gambiae is contained within an 85-kb genomic region;

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Page 4 of 19

Figure 1 Aeadsx gene. (A) Genomic organization, splicing variants and protein isoforms of dsx in Aedes aegypti. Male-specific and femalespecific exons/protein regions are marked in blue and red, respectively. Exons and introns are not shown to scale. Translational start and stop
sites and the poly(A) addition sites are marked. Rectangular striped box within exon 2 represents a 63-bp intronic sequence alternatively
removed in Aeadsx transcripts of both sexes (see Figure 5B.3 for further details). All transcripts shown in this picture retain the 63-bp intronic
sequence, which encodes an in-frame non-conserved 21-aa sequence. Transcripts without the 63-bp are not shown in this picture and in
subsequent paper figures. (B) RT-PCR amplification of Aeadsx sex-specific transcripts. Primers used in this amplification are indicated as short red
arrows in Figure 1A.

therefore, the corresponding Ae. aegypti genomic
sequence is approximately 5.3-fold larger. This difference
is due to the presence of very large introns in the
Ae. aegypti homologue, with an average intron size of 64
kb in contrast to the observed average intron size for
Angdsx (15 kb). This is undoubtedly reflective of the overall differences in genome organization of the two species
because the An. gambiae genome size is about 243 Mb,
while Ae. aegypti is about five-fold larger at about 1.31 Gb.
Most of this difference is due to the high frequency of
repetitive sequences in the Ae. aegypti genome [26].
An analysis of Aeadsx introns with CENSOR software
(http://www.girinst.org/censor/index.php) [30] revealed

the presence of multiple copies of repetitive elements,
the most abundant of which are the NON-LTR/Jockey
LINE-1_AA elements [31], detected in 34 copies, and the
NON-LTR/SINE Feilai element [32], detected in 30
copies (Additional file 1, Table S1). Interestingly, the
comparative analysis of CENSOR outputs of Aeadsx
introns revealed that two out of three sex-specifically
regulated introns, the short intron 5 (208 bp long) and
intron 6 (10392 bp long), significantly deviate in the
number of repetitive elements per kb (indicated as
NoRE/kb) and in the percentage of nucleotides of repetitive elements relative to intron nucleotides (indicated as
REbp). Aeadsx intron 5 contains no repetitive element at

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Page 5 of 19

Figure 2 Comparative genomic structure of the D. melanogaster, Ae. aegypti and An. gambiae dsx genes. Comparative genomic structure
of the D. melanogaster, Ae. aegypti and An. gambiae dsx genes. Green boxes represent the OD1 and OD2 domain-encoding exons. Black boxes
represent exons encoding protein regions conserved in mosquitoes but not in fruit flies. Alternative male-specific and female-specific exons are
represented as blue boxes and pink boxes, respectively. Green dots represent canonical acceptor/donor splicing sites. Red dots represent weak
acceptor/donor splicing sites. White and green rectangles represent, respectively, TRA/TRA-2 binding sites and Nasonia dsxRE. In Drosophila, the
Dmdsx gene is located in a 45-kb region on chromosome 3R and is organized into six exons and five introns, with three common exons
followed by a female-specific and two male-specific exons. DmdsxF translation initiates at the AUG within exon 2 and terminates within the
female-specific exon 4, while in the case of DmdsxM, translation begins at the same AUG and terminates within the first male-specific exon 5.

all, while Aeadsx intron 6 presents a NoRE/kb value of
0.6 and a REbp value of 7% with respect to the mean
NoRE/kb and REbp values of non-sex-specific introns,
which were 1.13 and 18%, respectively (Additional file 2,
Figure S1). This finding suggests that there may have
been positive selective pressure on these two intronic
regions against repetitive elements to preserve sex-specific alternative splicing regulation.
We used the entire supercontig 1.370 dsx-containing
region of Ae. aegypti to analyze the presence and nature
of genomic microsynteny between Ae. aegypti and An.
gambiae. We compared the amino acid sequences of all
putative genes in Aedes supercontig 1.370 with putative
genes of the syntenic region in An. gambiae obtained
from the Ensembl precomputed tBLAT DNA-DNA
comparison for the two insect species.
Gene density in these regions was apparently higher
(twice) in An. gambiae relative to Ae. aegypti. The relative synteny quality, expressed as a percentage and calculated by dividing the number of conserved genes in
both syntenic regions by the total number of genes in
both regions [33], was 62%. Out of a total of 16 genes
in these regions, 10 homologues were found including
dsx. Interestingly, microsynteny of the prospero gene
with the dsx gene, previously described also for Anopheles gambiae, Apis mellifera and Tribolium castaneum

[23], was not conserved in the Aedes aegypti dsxcontaining region (Additional file 3, Figure S2). This
finding suggests that a chromosomal rearrangement
may have occurred after the split between the two species, bringing the Aedes prospero gene into a different
genomic position outside of supercontig 1.370 that is
not yet mapped on any Aedes chromosome. A putative
Aedes prospero gene (AAEL002769) is located in supercontig 1.67, and a mapped chromosome position is not
yet available for this supercontig.
In Aedes aegypti, a putative gene (AAEL009111)
encoding a phosphodiesterase is located in Aeadsx
intron 2 (position 918233-980385 of supercontig 1.370)
in the opposite direction of transcription with respect to
Aeadsx. The Anopheles homologue of this gene
(AGAP004054) is located downstream of the prospero
gene in the Angdsx-containing microsyntenic region, in
the opposite direction of transcription with respect to
the Aedes counterpart. In this case a rearrangement,
occurred during evolution, moved the gene from one
position nearby the dsx gene into the gene itself or vice
versa.
Comparison of AeaDSX isoforms

The alignment of AeaDSX isoforms with the DSX isoforms of D. melanogaster and An. gambiae is presented

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Page 6 of 19

Figure 3 Multiple sequence alignment of DSX homologues. Protein sequence alignment of DSX isoforms in Drosophila melanogaster,
Anopheles gambiae and Aedes aegypti. The sequences are divided into a region that is common to males and females (A), a first female-specific
region (B), a second female-specific region (C) and a male-specific region (D). The amino-terminal DNA binding (OD1) and oligomerization
domains (OD2) are boxed in grey. The asterisk (*) indicates six amino acids whose replacements has been shown to abolish DNA-binding activity
in D. melanogaster; (**) double asterisks indicate the three amino acids specific for the DSX DM domain. Intron positions are indicated by solid
triangles. The amino acid stretch marked in rectangular box corresponds to the 63-bp sequence removed in some but not all Aeadsx transcripts.
This event leads to the in-frame deletion of the indicated 21-amino acid tract (see Figure 5B.3 for further details). Also the conserved removed
amino acid stretch of An. gambiae is marked in rectangular box. Bold letters indicate amino acid identity in the homologous proteins. Gaps were
introduced in the alignments to maximize similarity. The comparison of protein sequences was performed using Clustal-W (1.82).

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

in Figure 3. Drosophila DSX proteins essentially contain
two domains, OD1 and OD2, which serve as interfaces
for protein and DNA interactions [4,34]. The nonsex-specific OD1 is composed of an atypical zinc-finger
domain (DM), which directly binds to target sequences
on the DNA. OD2 is an oligomerization domain that
has a common region and a female-specific portion.
A sequence alignment of Aeadsx isoforms shows a high
degree of sequence conservation in the N-terminus up
to the unique OD1 domain and the common part of the
OD2 domain. Furthermore, within the OD1 domain, we
have found full conservation of the six residues (C, H,
H, C, C, R) essential for DNA-binding activity in D. melanogaster [35] and the three residues (E, T, Q) recently
identified to be specific to the insect DSX DM domain
[23]. These nine residues were also conserved in
An. gambiae DSXs [19].
The region that links OD1 and OD2 is less conserved
in Aedes and Anopheles and lacks the low complexity
region from Drosophila that contains a large number of
histidine, glycine and alanine residues (Figure 3A).
The C-terminal region of DSXF proteins shows a very high
degree of sequence conservation among different insects,
and this region in Aedes aegypti, encoded by the AeadsxF1
transcript, is also very highly conserved (Figure 3B).
The predicted protein encoded by the AeadsxF2 transcript differs from the AeaDSXF1 protein due to a short
19-aa alternative female-specific C-terminus with no
obvious similarity to other DSX isoforms. However, the
corresponding nucleotide sequence encoding the short
AeaDSXF2 C-terminal region is highly conserved in the
untranslated region of the Anopheles gambiae femalespecific dsx exon 5 (Figure 3C). This strong sequence
conservation of an untranslated region of the An.
gambiae dsx gene could be related to either the use of
this region for alternative splicing events (still to be
identified in Anopheles) leading to a coding frame in
Anopheles, as in Aedes, or to the involvement of this
region in the splicing mechanism underlying sex-specific
regulation of this region (see below).
The predicted male-specific protein encoded by
Aeadsx M1 is remarkably poorly conserved, displaying
only very short stretches of similarity, as observed for
Drosophila (Figure 3D) and others dipteran species (data
not shown).
Finally, paralog search in the Aedes aegypti genome
via the BLASTP matching function, using the three
AeaDSX isoforms as virtual probes, revealed a single
putative paralog gene (AAEL004696). However, this
gene encodes a protein which shares with AeaDSX
isoforms only a very well-conserved DM domain. This
DM domain exhibits conservation of only one out of
three DSX-DM domain-specific amino acids identified
by Oliveira et al., [23].

Page 7 of 19

Phylogenetic relationship and molecular evolution of the
Aedes aegypti dsx gene

As remarked above, the dipteran DSX protein is essentially characterized by the two OD1 and OD2 domains,
which constitute the most conserved portion of the dsx
gene across species. The high degree of conservation of
these two domains is expected according with their regulative role in protein-protein and protein-DNA
interactions.
To determine the phylogenetic position of AeaDSXF1,
we defined a combined Aedes aegypti dsx nucleotide
sequence, containing regions encoding respectively the
non-sex-specific OD1 domain and the complete OD2
domain (non-sex-specific portion and the female-specific
portion; nucleotides 94 to 288 joined with nucleotides 607
to 837 of GenBank DQ440532 CDS), and we aligned it
with the corresponding homologous regions of dsx
sequences from fourteen other dipteran species: Drosophila melanogaster, Ceratitis capitata, Bactrocera tryoni,
B. correcta, B. dorsalis, B. oleae, Anastrepha bistrigata,
A. serpentina, A. amita, A. fraterculus, Anopheles gambiae,
Musca domestica, Lucilia cuprina and Megaselia scalaris.
Figure 4A shows the maximum parsimony and neighborjoining trees for this alignment. We used the lepidopteran
Bombyx mori and Danaus plexippus dsx sequences to root
both trees. The resulting topologies agreed well with the
taxonomy of the order Diptera and showed high confidence levels in the groups defined. As expected, based on
phylogenetic relationships, both dendrograms for the combined dsx nucleotide sequence grouped Aedes aegypti with
Anopheles gambiae, and all the remaining dipteran species
formed another group, while the lepidopteran Bombyx
and Danaus representatives clustered in a basal clade.
Our analysis, performed with combined OD1/OD2
sequences, confirms the topologies obtained for insects
dsx genes by using the whole DSX F or DSX common
portions encoding sequence [36,37] the combined OD1/
non-sex-specific OD2 portion sequences [23].
We utilized the same dipteran dsx OD1-OD2 combined nucleotide sequences to perform an analysis of
the nucleotide variation across corresponding coding
regions to examine whether the sequences evolve under
purifying constraint or positive selection for amino acid
changes. These analyses were conducted on the OD1
and OD2 coding sequences separately and on the OD2
coding sequence partitioned into the common region
and the female-specific region (Figure 4B).
Even though diffuse purifying selection was detected
in both OD1 and OD2 domains, the OD2 domain
showed a relaxation of selective constraints compared to
the OD1 domain. The difference between the dN/dS
values was due to the non-synonymous substitution
rate, in particular in the female-specific region where
dN was significantly higher than the dN values of the

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Page 8 of 19

Figure 4 Phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary analyses. (A) A phylogenetic tree based on the combined dsx nucleotide sequences
encoding OD1 and OD2 domains in six dipteran families and two lepidopteran species. The consensus of six equally parsimonious trees (tree
length = 757 and parsimony-informative characters = 206) and the neighbor-joining tree (417 total characters) obtained using the combined
nucleotide sequences are shown with bootstrap support above branches (shown only when greater than 50%). Taxonomic relationships are
indicated in the right margin of the trees. The topology was rooted with the dsx corresponding sequences from the lepidopteran B. mori and
Danaus plexippus. (B) Comparison of dipteran female-specific dsx coding sequences and localization of OD1 and OD2 domains. Pairwise
synonymous (dS) and non-synonymous (dN) substitution rates and the mean pairwise ratio (dN/dS) values are placed above the corresponding
coding sequence.

OD1 domain and the common part of OD2 domain.
These findings suggest that OD1-OD2 domains of the
DSXF protein have stringent structure/function relationships leading to a constrained evolution. However, the
female-specific region of the OD2 domain exhibits a
lower level of constraint. Amino acid changes in the
female-specific portion of the DSX protein that affect

dimerization dynamics might induce changes in the
transcriptional regulation of dsx target genes (possibly
including heterochronic, heterotopic, heterometric or
heterotypic variations, as well as recruitment/loss of specific target genes).
Hence, it is conceivable that even though DSX belongs
to a highly conserved transcription factor protein family,

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

it could be involved in the adaptive process and respond
to the key force in insect evolution, sexual selection, by
changing those protein regions involved in the control
of expression of genes affecting dimorphic phenotypic
traits in the two sexes.
Developmental expression analysis of Aeadsx

To analyze the developmental expression pattern of the
Ae. aegypti dsx gene, an RT-PCR analysis was performed
on total RNA extracted from different stages of development using primer pairs spanning the Aeadsx sexspecifically regulated region. The recently isolated Aedes
aegypti (Aearp49) homologue of the Drosophila rp49
constitutively expressed gene was tested as the positive
control for the RT-PCR analysis in non-saturating conditions [38-42]. Aearp49 was constitutively expressed
from the embryonic stage of Aedes until adulthood, as
in the fruitfly (Figure 5A).
In Drosophila, dsxM mRNAs are not readily detected
in 3-10-hour-old embryos of either sex but are easily
detected in 10-16-hour and 16-22-hour-old male XY
embryos [43]. These authors showed that in male
embryos, subsets of male somatic gonad cells were
clearly stained with anti-DSXM during embryonic stage
13. In Anopheles gambiae, sex-specifically spliced dsx
mRNAs are detected in sexed adult mosquitoes, but no
early developmental stages were investigated [19].
RT-PCR of Aedes with dsx3/dsx5 primers amplified
0.5-kb and 1.0-kb cDNA products from very early
embryonic stages (see Figure 5B.4) and an additional 1.5kb cDNA product from late larvae (3rd-4th instars). During pupal stages, the 1.5-kb cDNA product was highly
reduced, as well as the 1.0-kb cDNA product (Figure
5B.1 and Figure 5A as control). At adult stages in sexed
mosquitoes, the longer 1.0- and 1.5-kb cDNAs were
detected only in females, while the 0.5-kb cDNA was
detected only in males. Sequence analysis of the cDNA
products showed that they were Aeadsx alternatively
spliced transcripts encoding three different protein isoforms and corresponding in structure to those shown in
Figure 1A. Sequence analysis of these cDNA products
showed that exons 5a, 5b and 6 are included in the same
mRNA, which is detected in late larvae and at a lower
level in pupae and in adult females. Transcripts including
exons 5b and 6, but not exon 5a, are detected from early
embryonic stages during all development and in adult
females. Transcripts including exon 6 (encoding the
male-specific DSX C-terminus) but not exons 5a and 5b
are detected from early embryonic stages throughout
development and in adult males. Hence at least at adult
stages, both 5a and 5b exons are female specific, while
exons 2, 3a, 3b, 4 and 6 are not sex-specific. Furthermore,
it seems that exon 5a is used only from late larval stages,
while exon 5b is present already in early dsx mRNA.

Page 9 of 19

Although it is not presently possible to sex Aedes
embryos or early larvae, the length correspondence of
the adult sex-specific cDNA products with the respect
to those detected at early stages of development suggests that the early sex-specific dsx expression observed
in Drosophila is conserved not only in the other dipteran species Ceratitis capitata [44] but also in the
more distantly related Aedes aegypti.
In dissected ovaries, the dsx3/dsx5 primer pairs
detected the three Aeadsx cDNA fragments amplified
from late larval stages (Figure 5B.4). The shorter 0.5-kb
cDNA product, which corresponded in adults to a malespecific mRNA, was surprisingly present in a femalespecific tissue, namely the ovaries. However, this cDNA
product was absent in RT-PCR performed on the ovarydepleted female somatic carcasses (Figure 5B.4). The
dissected females were young but not all were virgins.
Furthermore, during the dissection of the ovaries, portions of the oviducts and uteri could have been
included, leading to the possible presence of fertilized
eggs in the dissected material. Because the dsx3/dsx5
primer pair also detected the same 0.5-kb cDNA product in 1.5 h embryos, it is possible that this product
was absent in the ovaries but present in the fertilized
eggs and hence not excluded in the final dissected
samples.
We then used two other primer pairs to extend the
RT-PCR expression analysis. The dsx3/dsx4 pair led to
amplification of the expected female-specific 0.4-kb long
cDNA product in adult females (see Figure 5B.2). This
cDNA product was amplified at larval and pupal stages,
confirming the previous data that showed the presence
of exon 5a during this developmental period. However,
the 0.4-kb cDNA fragment was also amplified at
embryonic and 1 st /2 nd instar larval stages, indicating
that exon 5a is present in mRNAs earlier than previously shown (see Figure 5B.2 and 5B.5). A possible
explanation of this apparently contrasting data is that
there is a third alternative mRNA in which exon 5a is
present but exon 5b and exon 6 are not. This mRNA
could be generated by alternative polyadenylation at the
3’ UTR of exon 5a. A northern blot analysis of total
RNA from sexed adult mosquitoes showed the presence
of a third female-specific Aeadsx transcript, offering
support to this explanation (Figure 5C). The two
mRNAs including exon 5a are different in the 3’ UTR
but potentially encode the same DSXF1 protein. Furthermore, a putative polyadenylation signal (AATAGA) was
identified in silico 333 bp downstream of the stop codon
present in exon 5a (Figure 6). Interestingly, the Apis
mellifera dsx homologue produces two female-specific
transcripts using two alternative polyadenylation signals,
and possibly as in Aedes, they both encode the same
DSXF protein [21].

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Page 10 of 19

Figure 5 Developmental expression analyses of the Aeadsx gene. The analyses were performed on the following samples: E1 = 0-1.5 h
embryos; E2 = 1.5-2 h embryos; E3 = 2-5 h embryos; E4 = 8-12 h embryos; E: 0-36 h embryos; O = dissected ovaries; FC = female carcasses
depleted of ovaries; L12= early larvae; L34= late larvae; P = pupae; M = adult males; F = adult female. Except for M, F, O and FC all samples are
composed of mixed sexes. Negative controls are not shown. (A) Amplification of Ae. aegypti rp49 transcripts with the Aearp49+/Aearp49- primer
pair. The Aedes aegypti ribosomal gene rp49 is constitutively expressed throughout development. (B) Aeadsx developmental expression pattern.

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Page 11 of 19

(B.1 and B.4) The dsx3/dsx5 primer combination amplified at adult stages a 0.5-kb male-specific cDNA fragment and two female-specific cDNA
fragments (1.0 kb and 1.5 kb). These three bands were detected in pupae and late larvae, while the 1.5-kb band was absent in embryos and
mid-larvae but present in ovaries and female carcasses. (B.2 and B.5) The dsx3-dsx4 primer combination amplified at adult stages a femalespecific cDNA fragment. A cDNA product of identical size was amplified at all developmental stages, including embryos, suggesting an early
Aeadsx female-specific regulation. (B.3 and B.6) The dsx1/dsx2 primer combination amplified in all samples two slightly different cDNA fragments
(0.37 kb and 0.31 kb), corresponding to the alternatively spliced isoforms of exon 2 either containing (0.37 kb) or not containing (0.31 kb) the 63bp intronic sequence. In contrast to the data reported in Figure B.1-3, the RT-PCR results in Figure B.4, B.5 and B.6 lack of a positive
semiquantitative control and the apparent changes in expression levels of Aeadsx isoforms during embryonic stages have to be further
investigated. (C) A northern blot analysis was performed on total RNA (20 μg) extracted from male and female Ae. aegypti adults. The genomic
position of the utilized probe is indicated in Figure 5B. The observed molecular size of Aeadsx transcripts confirms that isolated Aeadsx cDNA
clones were not full-length at the 3’ and 5’ ends.

dsx1/dsx2 primers amplified in all samples two slightly
different cDNA fragments (0.37 kb and 0.31 kb) corresponding to the alternatively spliced isoforms of exon 2
either containing or not containing the 63-bp intronic
sequence (see Figures. 3A, 5B.3 and 5B.6). Interestingly,
the relative ratio of the two RT-PCR products is
dynamic during development, with the longer one
becoming more prominent from pupal until adult stages
(Figure 5B3 and Figure 5A as control). These data suggest that this Aeadsx intron-retention splicing event is
subjected to stage-specific regulation. It would be of
interest to check in future if also in Anopheles during
development there is a similar dsx expression pattern,
concerning this small exon/intron.

Sex-specific expression of the Aeadsx gene was further
confirmed by northern blot hybridizations. A probe of
500 bp corresponding to the non-sex-specific region
(Probe A) was hybridized on a northern blot of total
RNA extracted from sexed adults. The probe identified
three female-specific transcripts of 10.5 kb, 10.0 kb
(weaker signals) and 8.5 kb (prominent signal) and an
8.0-kb male-specific transcript (Figure 5C).
Putative splicing regulatory elements of Aeadsx gene

In D. melanogaster, the female-specific splicing of dsx
pre-mRNA requires the binding of the splicing regulators TRA (which is female-specifically expressed) and
TRA-2 (an auxiliary factor expressed in both sex) to six

Figure 6 Putative cis-acting elements of the Aeadsx gene. The distribution of the putative cis-acting elements in the sex-specifically spliced
region of Aeadsx is reported. Black lowercase letters indicate intronic regions. Dark purple letters indicate the female-specific 5a and 5b exons.
Translational stop codons are reported in red uppercase letters. The putative polyadenylation signal of exon 5a is underlined.

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

repeats of the dsxRE element and to one PRE (purine
rich element) element, which is present only in the
untranslated region of the dsx female-specific exon
(Figure 2). TRA and TRA-2 activate a weak (due to the
presence of purine nucleotides in its polypyrimidine
tract) 3’ splicing acceptor site that precedes the femalespecific exon [45,46]. The activity of TRA/TRA-2 is not
required for the processing of pre-mRNA in males,
which constitutes the default type of splicing. This dsx
splicing regulation and the dsxRE element (13 nt long)
are highly and widely conserved in many dipteran species (for review, see [3]).
Novel types of regulatory cis-elements have recently
been identified in dsx homologues of three non-dipteran
species, such as the 20-bp CE1 element in the lepidopteran Bombyx mori dsx gene [47] and the 8-bp repeat in
the tra/fem-regulated dsx of Nasonia vitripennis and
Apis mellifera [48]. These results revealed the potential
evolvability of dsx splicing paralleled by changes in the
regulatory elements and the corresponding upstream
splicing regulators. The CE1 element is indeed recognized by the PSI protein, which negatively regulates
female-specific splicing in males [47]. The conserved
8-nt Nasonia/Apis repeat element [(T/G)GAAGAT(T/
A)] was suggested by Verhulst et al. (2010) to be a
potential TRA/TRA-2 binding motif. However, there is
no sequence similarity between this hymenopteran
sequence and the 13-nt Drosophila TRA/TRA-2 binding
element, known also as dsxRE [TC(T/A)(T/A)CAATCAACA], which is on the contrary conserved in all
investigated dipteran species. This hymenopteran type of
repeat element, which, in two distantly related hymenopteran species, appears to be conserved in sequence
and clustered distribution, is likely a novel key regulatory element involved in the sex-specific splicing regulation of dsx. To avoid confusion, we referred to this
novel element as NvdsxRE (Nasonia vitripennis dsx
repeat element). NvdsxRE is also present in Nasonia tra
[49] and fru [48], as well as, in Apis mellifera fem (not
shown) dsx and fru [48,50], strongly suggesting its involvement in sex-specific alternative splicing regulation.
Hence, an upstream common splicing factor is expected
to be present in hymenopterans, simultaneously controlling all three downstream target genes (fem/tra, dsx and
fru).
An in silico analysis of the intronic donor/acceptor
splicing sequences of the Aedes dsx gene was performed
(Table 1) and revealed that almost all sequences have
the conserved GT-AG motifs. Interestingly, in the
splice-acceptor site preceding the female-specific exon
5b, the AG was substituted by GT, strongly indicating a
significant deviation and hence a potentially regulated 3’
splicing acceptor site. We thus defined more precisely
the general consensus of the 3’ acceptor splicing sites in

Page 12 of 19

the Aedes aegypti genome through the tabulation of
4688 random intron sequences extracted from the
Ensembl database using the BIOMART tool. We derived
a consensus number of 8.02 ± 2.15, a value equivalent to
the one observed in the Anopheles genome based on 215
introns [19] (see Table 1). In the Aeadsx gene, pyrimidine stretches in most of the 3’ splice sites do not deviate significantly from this consensus. However, the
pyrimidine stretch preceding the female-specific exon 5b
deviates significantly from the consensus (5/12), suggesting that this sequence is a suboptimal 3’ splicing acceptor site.
Analysis of the 5’ splice donor sites of Aeadsx introns
revealed that most of the sites are conserved in their
consensus sequence (GTRAGY - Stephens et al. 1992).
Indeed, the 5’ splice donor site at the end of the femalespecific exon 5b presents only three conserved positions
out of six [51], suggesting again that this site could constitute a weak splice donor site requiring positive splicing regulation by an enhancer.
We then analyzed the Aeadsx genomic sequence,
including the two female-specific exons 5a and 5b and
the surrounding intron regions, using the MACAW
alignment software [52] to identify putative Drosophila,
lepidopteran and hymenopteran cis-acting elements
potentially involved in splicing regulation of Aeadsx. We
utilized the Drosophila dsx TRA/TRA-2 binding site and
PRE element, the Bombyx CE1 element and NvdsxRE
element as virtual probes. We found the following:
1) Five copies of TRA/TRA-2 binding site sequences
exclusively in the female-specific exon 5b. Interestingly, of the five repeats, three were located only
140 bp and 1 repeat 1 kb away from the potentially
regulated weak 5’ splice donor site at the end of the
female-specific exon 5b (Figure 6). The fourth repeat
was within the short intron 6 (208 bp), which separates the two female-specific exons, and the fifth
repeat was located 1 kb downstream of the femalespecific exon 5b in intron 7 (Figure 6). This is a
strong indication of their potential involvement in
the female-specific splicing of this Aeadsx region.
The sequences of the five putative Aedes TRA/TRA2-binding sites are more similar to the Drosophila
consensus than to the TRA/TRA-2 binding sites
found in the Anopheles dsx homologue. The deviations in the sequences occur within the first four
bases of the Aedes TRA/TRA-2-binding sites (See
Additional file 4 - Table S2).
2) Two putative PRE elements exclusively in the
female-specific exon 5b.
3) A cluster of four conserved NvdsxREs exclusively
in the female-specific exon 5a of the Aeadsx gene.
The sequence conservation in an untranslated region

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Page 13 of 19

Table 1 Exon-intron junctions of the Aeadsx gene
Aeadsx gene
Exon No.

Exon size(bp) Splice-donor

1?

—

2

518

Intron size(bp)

—
AG

—

45

PV

48

4

135

TD
GAACAG/gtgcgtacttccttaa
EG

43797

461

n.c.

85670

465

n.c.

1063

n.c.
acgaag/gtgagtgttctttttt

7

449

n.c.

10

DE
tcgtttccaatttcag/ACGACG

9

QA

11

cttctctgcctcgcag/GTCAAG
208

QM

5

acataatgaccacagt/GCAAAT
10392

YD

8

tcaatccctcaaacag/GATACG

cgacag/gtactgctattggagg
6

GP

13860

gttgag/gtcattataagcttcc
5b

12

tctcttctggtttcag/TTGGCC

ACGAAG/gtatgggggttcttac
5a

NH
tctcctctcttttcag/GCAACC

TACCAG/gtgagttcgctgttga
3b

N° of Y

—

274879

TTGCAG/gtaggtgtgaggcata
3a

Splice-acceptor

22437

n.c.
ctcttttcttcaacag/tttcac

11

—

—

—

tacacacgtacacattaaaatag
Consensus

AG/gtRagt

YYYYYYYYYYYYNYag/G 8,02 +/- 2,15

C
The exon/intron/exon boundaries of Aeadsx gene are reported. Exonic coding sequences are shown in uppercase letters, and non-coding regions (n.c.) are in
lowercase letters. Encoded aminoacids are reported above the first base of each triplet. R = A or G nucleotide. Y = T or C or nucleotide. N = any nucleotide. The
number of pyrimidines (Y) in the 12 bp preceding the 3’ splice-acceptor site (NYag) is indicated. The consensus number of pyrimidines (8.02) was derived from
the analysis of 4688 Ae. aegypti splice-acceptor sites. The Aeadsx gene intron 5 (13,860 bp) represents the intron preceding the female-specific exon 5a, and its
polypyrimidine stretch does not deviate significantly from the consensus. The splice-acceptor site of the short 208-bp intron preceding the female-specific exon
5b is a weak acceptor site, as is the female-specific exon 5b splice-donor site, which deviates significantly from the consensus sequence.

and its clustering within the regulated genomic
region strongly suggest a functional relevance of this
element. A further copy of the NvdsxRE repeat is
located in the 208-bp intron between Aeadsx
female-specific exons 5a and 5b. A similar search for
NvdsxREs was also performed for the Anopheles and
Drosophila dsx and fru homologues but failed to
identify any putative conserved element.
We extended our analysis to look for the presence of
two more cis-acting elements in the Aeadsx gene, the
RBP1 binding site and the TRA-2-ISS element. In
Drosophila, RBP1, a non-sex-specific SR splicing factor,
contributes to the activation of female-specific dsx splicing in vivo by recognizing two RBP1 target sequences
(Type A: DCADCTTTA; Type B: ATCYNNA, [53])
within the purine-rich polypyrimidine tract of the weak
female-specific 3’ splice site [54]. Furthermore, the
expression of functional TRA-2 protein in the male
germline of Drosophila is regulated through a negative
feedback mechanism, which is evolutionarily conserved
in many Drosophila species, in which a specific TRA-2
isoform represses splicing of the M1 intron in the TRA2 pre-mRNA by binding to an intronic splicing silencer

(CAAGR; TRA-2-ISS). Interestingly, the search in
Aeadsx for putative RBP1 and TRA-2-ISS binding elements was successful, revealing their presence as a main
cluster in the intronic region upstream of the femalespecific exon 5a (Figure 6).
The presence of all these conserved regulatory elements suggests that TRA-like, TRA-2 and RBP1 conserved proteins could be involved in Ae. aegypti as
upstream dsx splicing regulators, as in Drosophila. As
previously reported for Anopheles gambiae [55], tra-2
and rbp1 putative orthologs are also present in the
Aedes genome. We failed to find clear BLAST hits for
TRA homologous proteins in Aedes or Anopheles, probably because of the very weak sequence conservation of
TRA, which has been well documented in dipteran species and in Hymenopterans [9,13,14,49,56,57].
In Table S2 of additional file 4, the sequences of all
identified Aedes aegypti dsx repeat elements and their
counterparts in Drosophila, Anopheles and Nasonia are
summarized.
Evolution of splicing regulation in Aeadsx

Our analysis revealed that a bipartite distribution of
putative cis-acting elements is present between the two

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

female-specific Aeadsx exons, with TRA-2-ISS, RBP1
binding sites and NvdsxRE almost exclusively present in
the “strong” exon 5a and in the upstream intron, and
putative Aedes TRA/TRA-2 binding sites and the PRE
element present only in the “weak” exon 5b. The analysis of acceptor and donor splicing sites of the Aeadsx
sex-specific region revealed that 3’ and 5’ splicing sites
flanking exon 5a ("strong”) are apparently optimal, while
3’ and 5’ splicing sites flanking exon 5b ("weak”)
strongly deviate from consensus. These findings suggest
that in Aedes aegypti, the regulation of the sex-specific
splicing of dsx is achieved by a different mechanism
than in Drosophila and other dipteran species, using at
least two different splicing regulators acting on the two
alternatively used female-specific exons.
Our study show that splicing regulation of dsx is not as
robustly conserved as previously described in other dipteran species, that that there is a bipartite distribution of
putative cis-regulatory elements in the female-specific
exons of Aeadsx, and that some of these putative cis elements are also present in the dsx of hymenopteran species.
Based on our study we propose that the upstream splicing
regulators of Aeadsx splicing act in females as activators of
the weak female-specific exon 5b, while simultaneously
repressing the utilization of the first female-specific exon
5a in a subset of Aeadsx pre-mRNAs. In the other Aeadsx
mRNAs female-specific exon 5a is also included in the
mature transcript, because this repression does not take
place constitutively or very efficiently. We propose that in
males, both exons 5a and 5b are skipped out of the mRNA
by splicing factors able to inhibit the use of the corresponding strong splice site in exon 5a.
We propose a model of Aeadsx regulation in which,
similarly to Drosophila and other dipteran species, the
use of the conserved female-specific exon 5b is
enhanced in females by a splicing activator, while a
splicing repressor acts on exon 5a. A female-specific
SR-F protein (a TRA-like protein) would be required
in females to promote the alternative inclusion of
female-specific exon 5b through the TRA/TRA-2 elements, while “the strong” exon 5a would be included
by default; a male-specific SR-M would be required in
males to repress the inclusion of the “strong” exon 5a
possibly by TRA-2-ISS elements and NvdsxRE, while
exon 5b would be excluded because of the absence of
the SR-F protein, leading to the dsx male-specific splicing. The splicing repression of exon 5a could be
achieved by a direct action of the male-determining
gene, which would encode a splicing factor in this
case.
We suggest that the peculiar evolvability of dsx splicing regulation in Aedes could be an indication that, differently to other dipteran species, the primary signal M
acts directly on dsx in this mosquito species, which have

Page 14 of 19

homomorphic sexual chromosomes and hence a
“young” recently recruited Y chromosome bearing the
M. The presence of multiple copies of the Drosophila
TRA/TRA-2 binding element and the TRA-2-ISS element in exon 5a and its upstream intron sequence suggests an involvement of a putative Aedes TRA-2 as a
cofactor of SR splicing regulators (possibly including the
male-determining factor) in the regulation of dsx splicing. In the Aedes aegypti genome, there are three putative tra-2 orthologs that could be involved in this
process, either alone or in combination.
Less clear is the reason for the presence of the NvdsxRE
element. These elements are completely different from
the Drosophila consensus and hence are not expected to
be targets of TRA/TRA-2 orthologous proteins but rather
of other splicing factors. Perhaps these are additional
splicing signals required to evolutionarily stabilize the
dsx sex-specific splicing, which appears to be absent in
Drosophila and Anopheles dsx female-specific exons.
We propose a model for sex determination in Aedes
aegypti in which the male-determining factor M acts
directly or indirectly either to activate a downstream
SR-M factor or to encode the SR-M itself or finally to
inhibit an SR-F factor. Two alternative parallel regulatory events in both sexes lead alternatively to the Aeadsx
male-specific or female-specific splicing (Figure 7).
In Apis mellifera, Cristino et al. [22] reported that
honeybee dsx is sex-specifically spliced, indicating that
the use of different splicing forms of DSX in controlling
sexual differentiation was present in the common ancestor of holometabolous insects. In Apis sex-specific splicing regulation shares similar features of both B. mori
splicing regulation (female-specific exon skipping) and
Drosophila splicing regulation (sex-specific 3’ splice
site). Based on a further Apis dsx study Cho et al. [21]
proposed that the female dsx form is the default (as
observed in the silk moth Bombyx dsx) in ancestral
holometabolous insects and that the male form is generated by suppressing the female-specific splicing. On the
basis of the parsimony principle, they inferred from the
above observations the following: (1) the common
ancestor of holometabolous insects had both the dipteran-type and lepidopteran-type sex-specific dsx splicing patterns, (2) hymenopterans retain both ancestral
patterns, and (3) dipterans and lepidopterans each retain
either one or the other of the ancestral patterns.
The Aedes dsx gene contains not only the Drosophila
TRA/TRA-2 repeats but also hymenopteran-like dsxRE
repeats and seems to have a female-specific default splicing. This is similar to the regulation of Apis dsx gene
but different from other dipteran species including the
other mosquito Anopheles gambiae. Hence, the ancestral
dsx splicing regulation observed in Apis (and in lepidopteran) seems to have been stably maintained in Aedes

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Page 15 of 19

Figure 7 Model for sex determination in Aedes aegypti. In male embryos a male-determining factor (M) inhibits the function of an SR-F
protein required for the female-specific splicing of exon 5b and activates the function of an SR-M protein required for the male-specific
repression of exon 5a. It is also conceivable that the M could directly control the splicing of Aeadsx exon 5a. In any case, the result is the
skipping of both female-specific exons and only a male-specific product of dsx gene is produced in male embryos and this product induces the
male development. In female embryos the absence of the M leads to the default splicing of female-specific exons 5a and 5b and to the
activation of the SR-F factor which in turn regulates the female-specific splicing of exon 5b. As a result two female-specific DSX proteins are
produced that induce female development. Alternative male-specific and female-specific exons are represented as blue boxes and pink boxes,
respectively. Green dot represent NvdsxRE and TRA-2-ISS elements. White dot represents TRA/TRA-2 binding sites.

aegypti, which constitutes the first dipteran species
reported with this type of splicing regulation.

Conclusion
As in other dipteran species, dsx seems to be involved in
the control of sexual differentiation in Aedes mosquito
based on its conservation of sex-specific expression. In
contrast to other dipteran orthologs, the Aeadsx gene produces a novel female-specific isoform of DM-domain containing transcription factor differing in the C-terminus.
The novel female-specific isoform has the long common
region (248 aa) present in the other two sex-specific isoforms and a short different C-terminus (18 aa). Aeadsx
gene exhibits more complex sex-specific splicing regulation (an exon skipping in males, exon skipping in females,
intron retention in both sexes and two potential alternative polyadenylation sites) that seems to be a combination
of dipteran and hymenopteran types of dsx regulation.
Our study show that 1) dsx splicing regulation is
slightly less conserved then previously described in

dipteran species, including the other mosquito Anopheles gambiae, 2) there is a bipartite distribution of
putative cis regulatory elements in the two alternatively
regulated female-specific Aeadsx exons, 3) the putative
cis elements described in the dsx of dipteran and hymenopteran species are present also in untranslated regions
of the Aedes dsx gene.
These findings led us to propose that the upstream
splicing regulators of dsx splicing seem to act A) in
females as activators of the weak female-specific exon
5b, which simultaneously causes the skipping of the first
female-specific strong exon 5a in a subset of Aeadsx
pre-mRNA. In the remaining Aeadsx pre-mRNA molecules a default splicing event include the strong femalespecific exon 5a in the mature transcript; B) in males as
repressors of the female-specific strong exon 5a, where
the weak female-specific exon 5b is spliced out by a
default mechanism.
The evolution of these differences in the splicing regulation of the dsx orthologs of two mosquitoes, Anopheles

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

and Aedes, could be explained by a direct involvement
of different primary signals that evolved upstream of
dsx, namely the Y-linked M factor in Anopheles and the
M/m male-determining locus on one (neo Y) of the
Aedes sexual homomorphic chromosomes, overcoming
the use of an intermediate “transducer” such as transformer, although widely conserved in insects [58].
The identification of female- and male-specific transcripts of Aeadsx represents an important step toward
the understanding of the sex differentiation process in
Ae. aegypti. This genomic analysis and the identification
of novel putative cis-acting elements will facilitate the
isolation of upstream regulators, which are still unidentified despite a sequenced genome, also for Anopheles dsx
orthologue. Recently, transcription profiles of adult
female and male Aedes mosquitoes were defined through
microarray analysis, leading to the identification of 669
and 635 transcripts enriched in females and males,
respectively [26]. The differential expression of hundreds
of these genes, which could be involved in controlling the
phenotypic and molecular sexual dimorphisms of Aedes
aegypti, could be directly achieved by AeaDSX isoforms.
In future, in vivo knockdown experiments by RNAi
against the three sex-specific Aedes DSX isoforms will
confirm this hypothesis and will led to the identification
of new DSX targets in insects.
Furthermore, this knowledge may result in the development of novel approaches for vector-targeted control
of disease, as recently shown by the isolation and use of
sex-specifically expressed genes to develop transgenic
sexing strains in Aedes aegypti, which are useful for the
male sterile insect technique [59].

Methods
Aeadsx cloning strategy

Our starting point was the genome sequence of Ae. aegypti
AaegL1 [26]. We performed a BLASTP search of the
Ensembl Ae. aegypti genomic database (http://www.
ensembl.org/) using the non-sex-specific region of Anopheles gambiae DSX protein (236 aa) as a virtual probe,
and we identified a draft sequence located in supercontig
1.370 encoding a putative protein region 68% identical to
the corresponding region encoded by An. gambiae dsx
(Angdsx). In Angdsx, sex-specific transcripts share the same
3’ UTR sequence [19]. This is in contrast to Drosophila, in
which dsx sex-specific transcripts terminate with different
3’ UTR sequences [5,7]. Assuming that the Aeadsx homologue shares the same 3’ UTR regulation of An. gambiae,
we used a male-specific nucleotide sequence derived from
an Angdsx cDNA clone (AngdsxM, kindly provided by Pannuti A. and Lucchesi J., Emory University - USA) to search
via the BLASTN matching function of an Ae. aegypti EST
database (http://aaegypti.vectorbase.org/). We identified a
cDNA sequence (NABNG41TR, brugia_4289 of 537 bp)

Page 16 of 19

showing 59% identity at the nucleotide level (166/282).
Using specific primer pairs for this EST clone (dsx5 primer) and for the genomic sequence previously identified in
silico encoding the N-terminal region of the putative Aedes
DSX protein (dsx1 primer), we performed an RT-PCR analysis on RNA samples extracted from adult sexed Ae.
aegypti mosquitoes and successfully amplified sex-specific
products of the Aeadsx gene (two female-specific and one
male-specific cDNAs).
RT-PCR analyses

Total RNA was extracted using the TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen) from the following developmental stages: E1 = 0-1.5
h embryos; E2 = 1.5-2 h embryos; E3 = 2-5 h embryos; E4
= 8-12 h embryos; E = 0-36 h embryos; O = dissected ovaries; FC = female carcasses depleted of ovaries; L12= early
larvae; L34= late larvae; P = pupae; M = adult males; F =
adult female. All samples except for M, F, O and FC are
constituted by mixed sexes. Aliquots of 1 μg of each RNA
were treated with RNase-free DNase I, Amplification Grade
(Invitrogen), and first-strand cDNAs were synthesized by
Superscript First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s instruction. One twentieth
of the cDNA template was used in 49-μl PCRs containing
primer pairs specific for the various cDNAs, 50 mM KCl,
10 mM Tris·HCl (pH 8.3), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 μM each primer, 200 μM dNTPs (Roche), and 2.5 units Taq DNA polymerase (Roche). Appropriate annealing temperatures and
cycle numbers were adjusted to individual primers. Positive
controls and standardization were performed with the following primers:
Aearp49+ (5’-CCAAGATCGTCAAGAAGCGG-3’)
Aearp49- (5’-GGTTGGTCACAGCGATGG-3’).
These primers amplify the constitutive ribosomal protein 49 of Aedes aegypti. Amplifications were performed
by stopping the PCR reaction after 25 cycles, 30 cycles,
35 cycles and 40 cycles. The amplification products
were analyzed on 1% agarose gels. Following 30 cycles
of RT-PCR amplification, we observed no saturation in
the intensity of the Aearp49 amplification fragment.
Other Aeadsx-specific primers included:
dsx1: 5’-GAACGCCGCCGAACTGTG-3’
dsx2: 5’-ATCTTCGGTGCTGGGACAG-3’
dsx3: 5’-GATACTGAAAGGCGCCGACG-3’
dsx4: 5’-ATTGTGTGTCCAACCTCATTTC-3’
dsx5: 5’-GCAGAATATGGGACTGGTGC-3’.
The amplification products were cloned into the
pGEMT-Easy Vector (Promega) according to manufacturer’s instructions.
Rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and sequence
analyses

The 5’- and 3 ‘-ends of the Aeadsx cDNAs were determined with the Smart Race Amplification kit (Clontech

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Laboratories). Reverse transcription was performed as
recommended by the supplier. cDNAs containing open
reading frames (ORFs) were cloned into the pGEMT-Easy
Vector (Promega) and sequenced with the Applied Biosystem BigDye 1.1 sequencing kit. Sequence alignments were
performed with the Clustal-W software. The following Ae.
aegypti cDNA sequence files were deposited in GenBank:
AeadsxM1 [GenBank: DQ440534], Aeadsx F1 [GenBank:
DQ440532] and AeadsxF2 [GenBank: DQ440533].

Page 17 of 19

The mean pairwise ratio of dN/dS was calculated and used
to examine whether the sequences evolve under purifying
constraint (dN/dS < 1) or positive selection for amino acid
changes (dN/dS > 1).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1 Modified Censor output table of
repetitive elements identified in Aeadsx intronic regions.
Additional file 2: Figure S1 Censor analysis on Aeadsx introns.
Censor software graphically maps detected repeats with color-coding of
different types of repeats. Legend of Censor output is available at: http://
www.girinst.org/censor/help.html#MAP.

Northern blot analysis

Twenty micrograms of total RNA from adult sexed
mosquitoes was isolated as described above and blotted
onto nylon membranes (Hybond NX - Amersham Pharmacia). Hybridizations were performed at 42°C overnight in a buffer of 50% formamide, 6× SSC, 5×
Denhardt, 1% SDS and 100 μg/ml salmon sperm DNA.
Following hybridizations, the filters were washed for 10
minutes at room temperature in 2× SSC and 0.1% SDS,
followed by two washes for 20 minutes each at 42°C in
1× SSC and 0.1% SDS, and finally one wash for 15 minutes at room temperature in 1× SSC and 0.1% SDS. The
female-specific probe (400 bp) was prepared by nicktranslation (Invitrogen) labeling of Aeadsx cDNA
sequences in the presence of [a- 32 P]dCTP (3,000 Ci/
mmol Amersham). Filters were exposed on Kodak
X-OMAT Scientific imaging film.
Phylogenetic and Molecular Evolutionary Analyses

The nucleotide sequences encoding the OD1 domain and
the OD2 domain of the following dipteran doublesex homologues (Drosophila melanogaster [GenBank: ABK30895],
Ceratitis capitata [GenBank: AAN63598], Bactrocera tryoni
[GenBank: AAB99947], B. correcta [GenBank: ACN73403],
B. dorsalis [GenBank: AAV85891], B. oleae [GenBank:
CAD67986], Anastrepha bistrigata [GenBank: ABF50960],
A. serpentina [GenBank: ABF50957], A. amita [GenBank:
ABF50961], A. fraterculus [GenBank: ABF50955], Anopheles
gambiae [GenBank: AAZ78363], Aedes aegypti [GenBank:
ABD96571], Musca domestica [GenBank: AAR23812], Lucilia cuprina [GenBank: ADG37649] and Megaselia scalaris
[GenBank: AAK38831]) were aligned using Clustal-W, and
the resulting alignment [60] was manually edited using
BioEdit v7.0.5.3. The maximum parsimony and neighborjoining trees were obtained using the MEGA 5 package
[61]. The reliability of the resulting topologies was tested by
the bootstrap method [62]. Bootstrap proportions were calculated by analysis of 1500 replicates. Phylogenies were
rooted using dsx OD1 and OD2 domains of Lepidoptera
Bombyx mori [GenBank: NM_001043406] and Danaus
plexippus [GenBank: EY269445]. Pairwise synonymous (dS)
and non-synonymous (dN) nucleotide substitution rates
were estimated using the Jukes-Cantor distance model with
the Nei-Gojobori method [63] implemented in MEGA 5.

Additional file 3: Figure S3 Microsynteny analysis. Syntenic dsxcontaining regions of Aedes aegypti and Anopheles gambiae are reported.
In red the position of putative genes.
Additional file 4: Tables S2 Putative cis-acting elements identified in
Aeadsx and homologous elements in D. melanogaster, An. gambiae
and N. vitripennis. Bold letters indicate identical positions respect to the
sequences of Drosophila or Nasonia elements.

Acknowledgements
We are deeply grateful to Serena Aceto (Dept. Biol. Sciences, Federico II,
Naples, Italy) for helpful suggestions on sequence data analysis and
phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary analyses. We thank Paola Santoro
(National Institute of Statistic - ISTAT, Rome, Italy) for the useful suggestions
on statistical data analysis. We thank Maria Sica (Dept. Biol. Sciences,
Federico II, Naples, Italy) for her technical assistance. GS greatly thanks Kitsos
Louis (IMBB, Crete, Greece), who suggested and encouraged him to start a
sex determination Aedes aegypti project; GS thanks Gustavo Kourì, Juan
Bisset and all the colleagues of the IPK (Habana, Cuba), especially Daniel
Limonta and Clara Elena Delgado for hosting the visiting GS, MS and UM
and for fruitful discussion on Aedes aegypti dsx data. This work was funded
by WHO Grant A30289 (2004-2006) to GS.
Author details
Department of Biological Sciences - Section of Genetics and Molecular
Biology. University of Naples “Federico II” - Italy. 2CDF - Centro Diagnostico
Flegreo, Naples - Italy. 3Department of Public Health - Parasitology Section.
University of Rome “La Sapienza” - Italy. 4Department of Structural and
Functional Biology. University of Naples “Federico II” - Italy. 5Institute of
Genetics and Biophysics “Adriano Buzzati-Traverso” CNR Naples - Italy.

1

Authors’ contributions
GS designed the general research project. GS, BA, CP, FL, MS and UM
designed the experimental plans. UM performed the molecular cloning
experiments. UM, MS and FL performed the dsx developmental expression
analyses, and MS performed the Aearp49 developmental expression analysis.
UM and MS performed in silico analyses to define the dsx genomic
organization. AM and VZ helped with the molecular biology experiments.
MS and GS planned comparative analyses to identify cis-regulatory elements
potentially involved in the dsx splicing regulation. MS performed
bioinformatic, phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary analyses. UM, MS,
AM, VZ, FL, BA, CP and GS analyzed and discussed data. MS and GS wrote
the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 31 July 2010 Accepted: 10 February 2011
Published: 10 February 2011
References
1. Raymond SC, Shamu EC, Shen MM, Seifert JK, Hirsch B, et al: Evidence for
evolutionary conservation of sex-determining genes. Nature 1998,
391(6668):691-695.
2. Zarkower D: Invertebrates may not be so different after all. Novartis
Found Symp 2002, 244:115-126, discussion 126-135, 203-116, 253-117.

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

3.
4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

Sanchez L: Sex-determining mechanisms in insects. Int J Dev Biol 2008,
52(7):837-856.
An W, Cho S, Ishii H, Wensink CP: Sex-specific and non-sex-specific
oligomerization domains in both of the doublesex transcription factors
from Drosophila melanogaster. Mol Cell Biol 1996, 16(6):3106-3111.
Baker SB, Wolfner FM: A molecular analysis of doublesex, a bifunctional
gene that controls both male and female sexual differentiation in
Drosophila melanogaster. Genes Dev 1988, 2(4):477-489.
Baker SB, Belote MJ: Sex determination and dosage compensation in
Drosophila melanogaster. Annu Rev Genet 1983, 17:345-393.
Burtis CK, Baker SB: Drosophila doublesex gene controls somatic sexual
differentiation by producing alternatively spliced mRNAs encoding
related sex-specific polypeptides. Cell 1989, 56(6):997-1010.
Salvemini M, Robertson M, Aronson B, Atkinson P, Polito CL, et al: Ceratitis
capitata transformer-2 gene is required to establish and maintain the
autoregulation of Cctra, the master gene for female sex determination.
Int J Dev Biol 2009, 53(1):109-120.
Pane A, Salvemini M, Bovi PD, Polito C, Saccone G: The transformer gene
in Ceratitis capitata provides a genetic basis for selecting and
remembering the sexual fate. Development 2002, 129(15):3715-3725.
Ruiz FM, Sanchez L: Effect of the gene transformer of Anastrepha on the
somatic sexual development of Drosophila. Int J Dev Biol 2010,
54(4):627-633.
Sarno F, Ruiz FM, Eirin-Lopez MJ, Perondini LA, Selivon D, et al: The gene
transformer-2 of Anastrepha fruit flies (Diptera, Tephritidae) and its
evolution in insects. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:140.
Burghardt G, Hediger M, Siegenthaler C, Moser M, Dubendorfer A, et al: The
transformer2 gene in Musca domestica is required for selecting and
maintaining the female pathway of development. Dev Genes Evol 2005,
215(4):165-176.
Hediger M, Henggeler C, Meier N, Perez R, Saccone G, et al: Molecular
characterization of the key switch f provides a basis for understanding
the rapid divergence of the sex-determining pathway in the housefly.
Genetics 2010, 184(1):155-170.
Concha C, Scott JM: Sexual development in Lucilia cuprina (Diptera,
Calliphoridae) is controlled by the transformer gene. Genetics 2009,
182(3):785-798.
Hediger M, Burghardt G, Siegenthaler C, Buser N, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, et al:
Sex determination in Drosophila melanogaster and Musca domestica
converges at the level of the terminal regulator doublesex. Dev Genes
Evol 2004, 214(1):29-42.
Saccone G, Salvemini M, Pane A, Polito CL: Masculinization of XX
Drosophila transgenic flies expressing the Ceratitis capitata DoublesexM
isoform. Int J Dev Biol 2008, 52(8):1051-1057.
Alvarez M, Ruiz FM, Sanchez L: Effect of the gene doublesex of
anastrepha on the somatic sexual development of Drosophila. PLoS One
2009, 4(4):e5141.
Pannuti A, Kokacitak T, Lucchesi CJ: Drosophila as a Model for the study
of Sex Determination in Anopheline and aedine Mosquitoes. In AreaWide Control of Fruit Flies and Other Insect Pests. Edited by: Tan HK. Penang:
Penerbit Universiti Sains; 2000.
Scali C, Catteruccia F, Li Q, Crisanti A: Identification of sex-specific
transcripts of the Anopheles gambiae doublesex gene. J Exp Biol 2005,
208(Pt 19):3701-3709.
Ohbayashi F, Suzuki GM, Mita K, Okano K, Shimada T: A homologue of the
Drosophila doublesex gene is transcribed into sex-specific mRNA
isoforms in the silkworm, Bombyx mori. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem
Mol Biol 2001, 128(1):145-158.
Cho S, Huang YZ, Zhang J: Sex-specific splicing of the honeybee
doublesex gene reveals 300 million years of evolution at the bottom of
the insect sex-determination pathway. Genetics 2007, 177(3):1733-1741.
Cristino SA, Nascimento MA, Lda CF, Simoes LZ: A comparative analysis of
highly conserved sex-determining genes between Apis mellifera and
Drosophila melanogaster. Genet Mol Res 2006, 5(1):154-168.
Oliveira CD, Werren HJ, Verhulst CE, Giebel DJ, Kamping A, et al:
Identification and characterization of the doublesex gene of Nasonia.
Insect Mol Biol 2009, 18(3):315-324.
Suzuki GM, Ohbayashi F, Mita K, Shimada T: The mechanism of sex-specific
splicing at the doublesex gene is different between Drosophila
melanogaster and Bombyx mori. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2001,
31(12):1201-1211.

Page 18 of 19

25. Severson WD, Knudson LD, Soares BM, Loftus JB: Aedes aegypti genomics.
Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2004, 34(7):715-721.
26. Nene V, Wortman RJ, Lawson D, Haas B, Kodira C, et al: Genome sequence
of Aedes aegypti, a major arbovirus vector. Science 2007,
316(5832):1718-1723.
27. Erickson WJ, Quintero JJ: Indirect effects of ploidy suggest x chromosome
dose, not the x:a ratio, signals sex in Drosophila. PLoS Biol 2007, 5(12):
e332.
28. Clements NA: The Biology of Mosquitoes. London: Chapman & Hall; 1992.
29. Craig JGB, Hickey AW: In Genetics of Insect Vectors of Disease. Edited by:
Wright WJ, Pal R. New York: Elsevier; 1967:67-131.
30. Jurka J, Klonowski P, Dagman V, Pelton P: CENSOR–a program for
identification and elimination of repetitive elements from DNA
sequences. Comput Chem 1996, 20(1):119-121.
31. Kapitonov VV, Jurka J: A universal classification of eukaryotic transposable
elements implemented in Repbase. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9(5):411-412,
author reply 414.
32. Tu Z: Genomic and evolutionary analysis of Feilai, a diverse family of
highly reiterated SINEs in the yellow fever mosquito, Aedes aegypti. Mol
Biol Evol 1999, 16(6):760-772.
33. Cannon BS, Sterck L, Rombauts S, Sato S, Cheung FF, et al: Legume
genome evolution viewed through the Medicago truncatula and Lotus
japonicus genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(40):14959-14964.
34. Cho S, Wensink CP: DNA binding by the male and female doublesex
proteins of Drosophila melanogaster. J Biol Chem 1997, 272(6):3185-3189.
35. Erdman ES, Burtis CK: The Drosophila doublesex proteins share a novel
zinc finger related DNA binding domain. Embo J 1993, 12(2):527-535.
36. Ruiz MF, Eirín-López JM, Stefani RN, Perondini AL, Selivon D, Sánchez L: The
gene doublesex of Anastrepha fruit flies (Diptera, Tephritidae) and its
evolution in insects. Dev Genes Evol 2007, 217(10):725-31.
37. Hughes AL: Runaway evolution of the male-specific exon of the
doublesex gene in Diptera. Gene 2010.
38. Gentile C, Lima BJ, Peixoto AA: Isolation of a fragment homologous to
the rp49 constitutive gene of Drosophila in the Neotropical malaria
vector Anopheles aquasalis (Diptera: Culicidae). Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz
2005, 100(6):545-547.
39. Goodwin FS, Taylor JB, Villella A, Foss M, Ryner CL, et al: Aberrant splicing
and altered spatial expression patterns in fruitless mutants of Drosophila
melanogaster. Genetics 2000, 154(2):725-745.
40. O’Connell OP, Rosbash M: Sequence, structure, and codon preference of
the Drosophila ribosomal protein 49 gene. Nucleic Acds Res 1984,
12(13):5495-5513.
41. Polito C, Pannuti A, Lucchesi CJ: Dosage compensation in Drosophila
melanogaster male and female embryos generated by segregation
distortion of the sex chromosomes. Dev Genet 1990, 11(4):249-253.
42. Stanewsky R, Lynch SK, Brandes C, Hall CJ: Mapping of elements involved
in regulating normal temporal period and timeless RNA expression
patterns in Drosophila melanogaster. J Biol Rhythms 2002, 17(4):293-306.
43. Hempel UL, Oliver B: Sex-specific DoublesexM expression in subsets of
Drosophila somatic gonad cells. BMC Dev Biol 2007, 7:113.
44. Gabrieli P, Falaguerra A, Siciliano P, Gomulski ML, Scolari F, et al: Sex and
the single embryo: early development in the Mediterranean fruit fly,
Ceratitis capitata. BMC Dev Biol 2010, 10(1):12.
45. Inoue K, Hoshijima K, Higuchi I, Sakamoto H, Shimura Y: Binding of the
Drosophila transformer and transformer-2 proteins to the regulatory
elements of doublesex primary transcript for sex-specific RNA
processing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89(17):8092-8096.
46. Lynch WK, Maniatis T: Synergistic interactions between two distinct
elements of a regulated splicing enhancer. Genes Dev 1995, 9(3):284-293.
47. Suzuki GM, Imanishi S, Dohmae N, Nishimura T, Shimada T, et al:
Establishment of a novel in vivo sex-specific splicing assay system to
identify a trans-acting factor that negatively regulates splicing of
Bombyx mori dsx female exons. Mol Cell Biol 2008, 28(1):333-343.
48. Bertossa CR, Zande vd L, Beukeboom WL: The Fruitless gene in Nasonia
displays complex sex-specific splicing and contains new zinc finger
domains. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26(7):1557-1569.
49. Verhulst CE, Beukeboom WL, Zande vd L: Maternal control of haplodiploid
sex determination in the wasp Nasonia. Science 2010, 328(5978):620-623.
50. Salvemini M, Polito LC, Saccone G: fruitless alternative splicing and sex
behaviour in insects: an ancient and unforgettable love story? Journal of
Genetics 2010, 89(3):287-299.

Salvemini et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:41
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/41

Page 19 of 19

51. Stephens MR, Schneider DT: Features of spliceosome evolution and
function inferred from an analysis of the information at human splice
sites. J Mol Biol 1992, 228(4):1124-1136.
52. Lawrence CE, Altschul SF, Boguski MS, Liu JS, Neuwald AF, et al: Detecting
Subtle Sequence Signals: A Gibbs Sampling Strategy for Multiple
Alignment. Science 1993, 262:208-214.
53. Qi J, Su S, Mattox W: The doublesex splicing enhancer components Tra2
and Rbp1 also repress splicing through an intronic silencer. Mol Cell Biol
2007, 27(2):699-708.
54. Heinrichs V, Baker SB: The Drosophila SR protein RBP1 contributes to the
regulation of doublesex alternative splicing by recognizing RBP1 RNA
target sequences. Embo J 1995, 14(16):3987-4000.
55. Gailey AD, Billeter CJ, Liu HJ, Bauzon F, Allendorfer BJ, et al: Functional
conservation of the fruitless male sex-determination gene across 250
Myr of insect evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(3):633-643.
56. Gempe T, Hasselmann M, Schiott M, Hause G, Otte M, et al: Sex
determination in honeybees: two separate mechanisms induce and
maintain the female pathway. PLoS Biol 2009, 7(10):e1000222.
57. Ruiz FM, Milano A, Salvemini M, Eirin-Lopez MJ, Perondini LA, et al: The
gene transformer of anastrepha fruit flies (Diptera, tephritidae) and its
evolution in insects. PLoS ONE 2007, 2(11):e1239.
58. Saccone G, Salvemini M, Polito LC: The transformer gene of Ceratitis
capitata: a paradigm for a conserved epigenetic master regulator of sex
determination in insects. Genetica 2010.
59. Fu G, Lees SR, Nimmo D, Aw D, Jin L, et al: Female-specific flightless
phenotype for mosquito control. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107(10):4550-4554.
60. Thompson DJ, Higgins GD, Gibson JT: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22(22):4673-4680.
61. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(8):1596-1599.
62. Efron B, Halloran E, Holmes S: Bootstrap confidence levels for
phylogenetic trees. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93(14):7085-7090.
63. Nei M, Gojobori T: Simple methods for estimating the numbers of
synonymous and nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions. Mol Biol Evol
1986, 3(5):418-426.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-41
Cite this article as: Salvemini et al.: Genomic organization and splicing
evolution of the doublesex gene, a Drosophila regulator of sexual
differentiation, in the dengue and yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti.
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:41.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
