<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title> </title>
<meta name="Subject" content=" "/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content=" "/>
<meta name="Creator" content=" "/>
<meta name="Producer" content=" "/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

RESEARCH

VETERINARY RESEARCH

Open Access

Genome of Mycoplasma haemofelis, unraveling its
strategies for survival and persistence
Andrea P Santos1*, Ana MS Guimaraes1, Naíla C do Nascimento1, Phillip J SanMiguel2, Samuel W Martin2 and
Joanne B Messick1*

Abstract
Mycoplasma haemofelis is a mycoplasmal pathogen (hemoplasma) that attaches to the host’s erythrocytes.
Distributed worldwide, it has a significant impact on the health of cats causing acute disease and, despite
treatment, establishing chronic infection. It might also have a role as a zoonotic agent, especially in
immunocompromised patients. Whole genome sequencing and analyses of M. haemofelis strain Ohio2 was
undertaken as a step toward understanding its survival and persistence. Metabolic pathways are reduced, relying
on the host to supply many of the nutrients and metabolites needed for survival. M. haemofelis must import
glucose for ATP generation and ribose derivates for RNA/DNA synthesis. Hypoxanthine, adenine, guanine, uracil
and CMP are scavenged from the environment to support purine and pyrimidine synthesis. In addition,
nicotinamide, amino acids and any vitamins needed for growth, must be acquired from its environment. The core
proteome of M. haemofelis contains an abundance of paralogous gene families, corresponding to 70.6% of all the
CDSs. This “paralog pool” is a rich source of different antigenic epitopes that can be varied to elude the host’s
immune system and establish chronic infection. M. haemofelis also appears to be capable of phase variation, which
is particularly relevant to the cyclic bacteremia and persistence, characteristics of the infection in the cat. The data
generated herein should be of great use for understanding the mechanisms of M. haemofelis infection. Further, it
will provide new insights into its pathogenicity and clues needed to formulate media to support the in vitro
cultivation of M. haemofelis.
Introduction
Mycoplasma haemofelis is a hemotrophic mycoplasmal
pathogen (hemoplasma) of the cat. There are two phylogenetic clusters of hemoplasmas, the haemofelis cluster
and suis cluster, which appear to have descended from a
common ancestor. They are most closely related to
members of the pneumoniae group, albeit only peripherally. Specific characteristics distinguish the hemoplasmas
from other mycoplasmas, including unique tropism for
erythrocytes as well as relatively low sequence similarity
of their 16S rRNA genes when compared to the closest
related mucosal mycoplasma species. Nonetheless, like
other mycoplasmas, M. haemofelis has no cell wall and
is related to Gram-positive bacteria [1] from which they
evolved by a reduction of their genome size [2]. Despite

* Correspondence: santos1@purdue.edu; jmessic@purdue.edu
1
Department of Comparative Pathobiology, Purdue University, 725 Harrison
Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

numerous attempts, in vitro culture of M. haemofelis
has not been achieved.
M. haemofelis infection in the cat causes an acute
hemolytic anemia, either directly or by initiating
immune mediated destruction of red blood cells; it
might also trigger the suicidal death of infected erythrocytes (eryptosis), as recently suggested for M. suis [3]. A
wide range of clinical signs, including anemia, pyrexia,
lethargy, and splenomegaly characterizes the disease,
which if left untreated may result in death. M. haemofelis is also recognized as a pathogen in conjunction with
retroviruses such as feline immunodeficiency virus
(FIV), feline leukemia virus (FeLV), or other debilitating
diseases [4]. Based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
testing, 20% to as high as 40% of anemic and/or sick
cats are infected with M. haemofelis [5-7]. Currently,
there is no treatment that effectively clears the microorganisms from an infected host. Chronic infection is well
recognized and even in pet cats showing no clinical
signs, the prevalence of M. haemofelis infection may be

© 2011 Santos et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

as high as 4% [8]. While transmission of M. haemofelis
from an infected cat to a human host has been reported
[9], it appears to be a rare event and likely requires
immune suppression ([10], Santos AP, unpublished
observations).
Although mycoplasmas have reduced genomic sizes
[1] resulting in the loss of many of their biosynthetic
abilities, they retain genes important for their survival,
virulence and pathogenesis. It is believed that genes
encoding lipoproteins and membrane binding proteins
are key factors in inducing immunity. In particular, lipoproteins are considered one of the most important
pathogenic elements for mycoplasmas [11]. Phase and
antigenic variation of surface proteins is thought to be
pivotal to the adaptive strategies and survival of these
microorganisms [12,13]. Until recently, very little was
known about the membrane lipoproteins or any other
proteins encoded by the genome of M. haemofelis [14]
and related hemoplasmas [15]. Hemoplasma genes that
were retained or acquired during the process of reductive evolution may be particularly valuable to understanding mycoplasmas in general and red blood cell
parasitism by hemoplasmas in particular.
This study was undertaken as a step toward understanding how M. haemofelis has adapted to erythrocyte
parasitism and persists in the blood despite the host’s
immune response. Furthermore, information about the
biochemical pathways used by these bacteria will provide valuable clues about culture conditions needed to
support their growth in vitro. Herein, we present the
whole genome sequence, annotation, and bioinformatic
analyses of M. haemofelis strain Ohio2 [16] and a comparative analysis with the recently published genome of
M. haemofelis strain Langford 1 [17,18].

Materials and methods

Page 2 of 16

USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations
and purified by drop dialysis. The quality and quantity
of gMhf was assessed by two methods - gel electrophoresis and scanning UV spectrophotometry (NanoDrop®
ND-1000 UV/Vis Spectrophotometer, Thermo Fisher
Scientific Inc, Wilmington, DE, USA). The cat was treated and adopted according to our animal use protocol
(Purdue Animal Care and Use Committee, protocol
#08-003).
Sequencing and assembly

Whole-genome sequencing of M. haemofelis was performed by Purdue University’s Genomics Core Facility
using a GS-FLX (454) and Titanium chemistry to
sequence a 3 kb paired end library. Sequences were
assembled using Versions 2.3 of the Roche’s GS De
Novo Assembler (454 Life Sciences, Roche Applied
Science, Branford, CT, USA). The assembly was examined using consed [23] and where sufficient overlap
between adjacent contigs was found, they were joined
into a single contig.
Finishing and validation

Gap closure was performed by primer walking directly
on the genomic DNA combined with PCR followed by
bidirectional Sanger sequencing of amplicons. Gross
genome validation was achieved by comparing the virtual fingerprint patterns of M. haemofelis genomic DNA
to that of fragments derived from pulse-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) using the restriction enzymes, NruI,
SalI, and NotI, and with physical map data from an
independently derived bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC) library [22]. In addition, the sequencing of 21
inserts (0.2 to 4.5 kb) from two Lambda ZAPII libraries
of M. haemofelis [24] was accomplished and compared
to the M. haemofelis genomic sequence.

Bacteria and DNA extraction

M. haemofelis was obtained from a cat experimentally
infected with the Ohio2 strain; this was the second in
vivo passage of blood originally obtained from an
acutely ill animal. The cat was infected by intravenous
injection of a thawed aliquot (1.0 mL) of infected blood
from a -80°C stored stock. Prior to experimental infection, PCR testing for all feline hemoplasmas performed
on 3 separate occasions was negative [19-21]. Peripheral
blood was collected into EDTA tubes on 13th day post
infection when 60% of the erythrocytes were infected.
Infection was confirmed by microscopy and a PCR
assay specific for M. haemofelis [19]. Microorganisms
were detached and harvested from blood using a combination of filtration and ultracentrifugation procedures
[22]. High-molecular-weight (HMW) M. haemofelis
genomic DNA (gMhf) was extracted using QIAGEN
Genomic-tip 100/G kit (QIAGEN Inc., Valencia, CA,

Optical map

Finally, a high resolution, optical map was used to provide a purely independent means of sequence validation
(OpGen Technologies Inc, Madison, WI, USA) [25].
Briefly, the optical map was constructed from individual
M. haemofelis DNA molecules cleaved with NcoI. In
silico NcoI restriction map of the assembly contig of M.
haemofelis’ complete genome was constructed and compared to the NcoI optical map using MapSolver version
2.1.1 (OpGen Technologies Inc).
Genome annotation

First-pass annotation was achieved using blast2GO. To
confirm the results provided, the scaffold sequence of
M. haemofelis was submitted to the annotation service,
Manatee, provided by the Institute for Genome Sciences
(IGS) at the University of Maryland, School of Medicine.

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

Manual curation of each gene was achieved using the
annotation tool.

Page 3 of 16

one gap. Nonetheless, we were ultimately able to close
all 30 gaps by PCR and primer walking, which resulted
in a final sequence assembly of 1 155 937 bp.

Genome analyses

To make functional assignments of predicted protein
coding sequences (CDSs) several approaches were used.
Assignment of the origin of replication was performed
using the Ori-finder tool with parameters adjusted to
specific DNA boxes for Escherichia coli and Mycoplasma species and 1 or 2 unmatched sites permitted
[26]; bases in the genome were numbered starting with
dnaA as the first gene. Comparative analyses with other
bacterial genomes were performed based on genome
annotations deposited in the databases at National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, Bethesda,
MD, USA). Paralogous gene families were assigned
using BLASTclust tool at the Max-Planck Institute for
Developmental Biology [27], with 30% sequence identity
and 70% covered length thresholds. To identify structural features of the genome a set of software was used:
Tied Mixture Hidden Markov Model, TMHMM Server
v. 2.0 [28] and Dense Alignment Surface method, DAS
[29] were used to predict transmembrane helices; the
tandem repeats finder program was used to identify
repeated sequences throughout the genome [30]; and
LipoP and SignalP algorithms were used to predict lipoproteins and signal peptides, respectively [31,32]. Prediction of protein sorting signals and subcellular
localization was performed using PSORTb v.3.0 [33,34].
Predictions of metabolic pathways were based on the
KEGG pathway database [35] and the study performed
by Yus et al. [36]. Comparative analyses of the whole
genome of M. haemofelis strains Ohio2 and Langford 1
[GenBank: FR773153] were performed using the same
methods described above. Global genomic comparisons
were achieved by constructing in silico restriction maps
using MapSolver version 2.1.1 (OpGen Technologies
Inc).

Results and discussion
Sequencing and assembly

From a quarter PicoTitrePlate GS-FLX run, a total of
214 186 filter-pass sequence reads were generated with
an average read length of 350 bp. This generated
roughly 67 million bases of sequence after the removal
of adaptor sequence. In total, 219 contigs were generated, including 55 linked by paired-end reads into a single scaffold derived from M. haemofelis DNA and
comprising 85% of the reads. The balance of the contigs
was derived from cat DNA. The draft assembly of M.
haemofelis was 1 150 927 bp, however there were still
30 gaps and areas of questionable sequence fidelity. Due
to the presence of repeated sequences, some difficulties
were experienced in assembling the sequences to close

Validation

The optical map constructed from individual M. haemofelis DNA molecules cleaved with NcoI gave rise to 110
optical contigs with an average fragment size of 10 316
bp that were assembled into one circular consensus
chromosome (Additional file 1, Figure S1). The average
depth of coverage of the map was 74×, and no region in
the map was less than 34× coverage. The genome size
was 1 134 779 bp. In comparison, the in silico map of
the M. haemofelis sequence generated herein consisted
of 140 fragments with an average fragment size of 8 198
bp. The average length of the in silico map is 2 118 bp
shorter than the average fragment length of the optical
map. Since restriction fragments shorter than 500 bp
cannot be detected by optical mapping, this likely
explains the observed differences. Optical mapping identified an assembly error in the M. haemofelis sequence
consisting of a large inversion in the sequence assembly,
permitting the re-orientation of the data and correction
of the genome sequence (Additional file 2, Figure S2).
The optical map, otherwise, verified the 454 sequence
assembly.
In previous studies, a bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC) library and a physical map of M. haemofelis was
completed [22]; the size of the genome was calculated
to be approximately 1 113 kb and the average GC% of
coding sequences was 38.5%. Thus, our assembled
sequence in this study was 3.9% larger than that predicted by restriction enzyme maps but only 1.9% larger
than the estimated size by optical mapping.
General features

The general genome features of the M. haemofelis strain
Ohio2 are shown in Figure 1 and compared with other
mycoplasmas in Table 1. The genome of M. haemofelis
consists of a single circular chromosome with a size of 1
155 937 bp and an overall guanine and cytosine percentage (GC%) of 38.8. These are typical characteristics of
mycoplasmas, which have small genomes and GC% ranging from 23.8 to 40%. During the analyses of the genome of M. haemofelis strain Ohio2, the strain Langford
1 was reported [18]. To compare both genomes, we first
constructed in silico restriction maps of each genome
(Additional file 3, Figure S3). The restriction maps
revealed 10 regions of the genome with significant difference in the nucleotide sequence while no inversions
were observed. There is also an overall difference in size
between the two genomes; the Ohio2 genome size is 1
155 937 bp, which is 8 678 bp bigger than Langford 1.
Regions of gene duplications from paralogous families

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

Page 4 of 16

Figure 1 Diagram of overall structure of Mycoplasma haemofelis genome. The dnaA gene is at position zero. The distribution of genes is
depicted on two outermost concentric circles: First concentric circle: predicted coding regions on the plus strand. Second concentric circle:
predicted coding regions on the minus strand. Predicted coding regions are classified by functional categories (TIGR roles) according to the
color code. Moving inwards, the third circle displays the genes that are within paralogous gene families, where same color means CDSs from the
same family, except for light green representing all the families with 5 or less members. The fourth circle represents the tandem repeats (red),
the 17 predicted lipoproteins (orange), rRNAs (black) and tRNAs (blue). The innermost circle represents the GC skew. The figure was generated
using DNAPlotter version 1.4 from Artemis 12.0, Sanger Institute.

Pneumoniae group

Hominis group

Mycoides group

Feature

M.
haemofelis

M.
suis

M.
pneumoniae

M.
gallisepticum

M.
genitalium

M.
penetrans

M.
hominis

M.
hyopneumoniae

M.
synoviae

M.
pulmonis

M.
mycoides

Genome size (bp)

1 155 937

742
431

816 394

1 012 800

580 076

1 358 633

665 445

897 405

799 476

963 879

1 211 703

G + C content (%)

38.8

31.1

40

31

31.7

25.7

27.1

28

28

26.6

24

Total of genes

1584

883

733

817

524

1069

577

701

715

815

1053

Coding sequences

1549

844

689

763

475

1037

523

657

659

782

1017

22

4

0

14

6

0

14

11

15

0

0

Gene density (%)

94.2

89.9

88.7

91

90

88

89.8

88

91

91.4

83

Average gene length (bp)

693

783

1011

1,206

1,040

NRa

1,107

1,178

1,058

1,115

982

299
(19.3%)

293
(34.7%)

333
(48.3%)

469
(61.46%)

323
(68%)

585
(56.4%)

345
(65.9%)

412
(62.7%)

464
(70.4%)

486
(62.1%)

581
(57.1%)

No. of tRNAs
No. of rRNAs

31

32

37

32

36

29

33

30

34

29

30

16S

1

1

1

2

1

1

2

1

2

1

2

23S

1

1

1

2

1

1

2

1

2

1

2

5S

1

1

1

3

1

1

2

1

3

2

2

1103
(71.2%)

361
(42.8%)

132
(19.1%)

110
(14.4%)

25
(5.2%)

245
(23.6%)

38
(7.2%)

106
(16.1%)

121
(18.3%)

101
(12.9%)

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

Table 1 General features of Mycoplasma haemofelis strain Ohio2 genome compared to members of pneumoniae, hominis and mycoides phylogenetic groups
of Mycoplasmas.

266
(26.1%)

Pseudogenes

CDS with predicted
function

Genes in paralogous
families

Data was obtained from the GenBank database using the following accession numbers: M. haemofelis (CP002808), M. suis (CP002525), M. pneumoniae (U00089), M. gallisepticum (AE015450), M. genitalium (L43967), M.
penetrans (BA000026), M. hominis (FP236530), M. hyopneumoniae (AE017243), M. synoviae (AE017245), M. pulmonis (AL445566), M. mycoides (BX293980). Paralogous gene families were assigned using BLASTclust, with
30% sequence identity and 70% covered length thresholds.
a
NR, not reported.

Page 5 of 16

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

throughout the genome are largely responsible for the
size difference.
A total of 1549 CDSs have been computationally and
manually predicted. Putative biological function was
assigned to 299 CDSs (19.3%), whereas 80.25% were
hypothetical proteins showing no significant identity in
the databases; there were 0.45% conserved hypothetical
proteins (Additional file 4, Table S1). These results indicate that M. haemofelis genome likely encodes a large
number of unique proteins. This is not surprising considering that, unlike other mycoplasmas, M. haemofelis
has a tropism for red blood cells of the host which
probably demands a different set of genes to adapt to
the blood environment. Predicted CDSs are summarized
by role in Table 2. Besides the differences in the genome
size, all the CDSs with known function are conserved
between the strains Ohio2 and Langford 1 of M. haemofelis. The 2 strains were manually compared, gene by
gene, and only a few genes with known functions had
different annotations. However, the CDSs coding
hypothetical proteins varied in size and numbers; this
was mainly due to gene duplications in one or the other
genome (Additional file 5, Table S2).
The average gene length for M. haemofelis is shorter
than other mycoplasmas but comparable with that of M.
suis [37] (Table 1). This is a result of the presence of a
large number of paralogous genes with sequences
shorter than the average length; in the largest gene
family the average size is 634 bp, ranging from 384 to
882 bp, while the average size of genes that are not in
paralog families is 855 bp. For most bacteria, the

Page 6 of 16

number of paralogous genes also correlates to its genome size. However, the Mycoplasmas represent an
exception to this tendency, having small genomes with a
larger than expected percentage of paralogs [38].
Remarkably, the genome of M. haemofelis has the largest percentage of paralogous genes of any fully
sequenced bacteria to date. This is due to the expansion
of a few gene families with the largest gene family having 800 members. The presence of an extensive network
of paralogs in the genome of M. haemofelis suggests a
mechanism to support its survival as an extracellular red
blood cell-associated pathogen that is continually bombarded by the host immune system.
Replication, transcription and translation

We have assigned the origin of replication (oriC) based
on homologous gene searches to other mycoplasma genomes and GC-skew graph predictions [39]. A conserved
gene order for rpmH, dnaA and dnaN was observed in
M. haemofelis genome and typically, oriC is located near
these genes. The analysis of the GC skewing (Figure 1)
showed a significant inversion near the dnaA gene, providing additional evidence that the origin of replication
was properly located. We also attempted to identify
dnaA-box motifs, which typically are found within the
intergenic regions around dnaA gene. The Ori-finder
tool did not predicted dnaA-box motifs when allowing 1
unmatched site nor when using mycoplasma or Escherichia coli specific dnaA-boxes. When a more open search
was used (2 unmatched sites), dnaA-box motifs were
predicted in several areas of the genome. Thus, we

Table 2 Protein coding sequences of Mycoplasma haemofelis strain Ohio2 genome classified by role category (TIGR
roles).
Category

Number

%

Purines, pyrimidines, nucleosides, and nucleotides

29

1.85%

Fatty acid and Phospholipid metabolism

6

0.38%

Biosynthesis of co-factors, prosthetic groups, and carriers

7

0.45%

Energy metabolism

22

1.41%

Transport and binding proteins

32

2.04%

DNA metabolism

52

3.32%

Transcription

18

1.15%

Protein synthesis
Protein fate

97
19

6.20%
1.21%

Regulatory functions

3

0.19%

Signal Transduction

2

0.13%

Surface structures

7

0.45%

Cellular processes

10

0.64%

Unknown functions

8

0.51%

Conserved hypothetical proteins

7

0.45%

Hypothetical proteins

1246

79.62%

Total

1565a

100.00%

a

Some of the CDSs have more than one role.

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

found no convincing dnaA-box motifs around the dnaA
gene by this method. M. suis posseses a intergenic
region of 134 bp between genes rpmH and dnaA, with
only 18% of GC content, and the presence of 3 dnaAbox motifs within this area [37] leading to the prediction
of the oriC upstream the dnaA gene. The origin of replication was inferred to be upstream of the dnaA gene in
M. haemofelis strain Langford 1 [18]. However, this
region has only 5 bp of intergenic space between rpmH
and dnaA genes in both strains. Thus, we manually
searched the 28 bp region between dnaA and dnaN
genes; this intergenic space is exclusively composed of
AT. Within this area, we identified 3 dnaA-box motifs
with the consensus sequence pattern T(T/A)(T/A)A(T/
A)AA. Thus, as with other bacteria, including Mollicutes, the origin of replication of M. haemofelis was
mapped to an intergenic region downstream of the
dnaA gene. Nevertheless, experimental validation is
needed to conclusively locate the oriC of M. haemofelis.
Only few transcriptional factors are described in
Mycoplasma spp. [40]. We identified 13 putative genes
involved in transcription, including 3 transcriptional
antitermination factors (NusA, NusB and NusG), the
transcriptional elongation factor GregA, and the heat
inducible transcriptional repressor HrcA. Like other
mycoplasmas, M. haemofelis has the transcription initiation factor, the sigma factor 70 (RpoD). We also identified CDSs for the subunits of the RNA polymerase
RpoA, RpoB, RpoC, and a member of the extracytoplasmic function (ECF) subfamily RpoE. The latter responds
to signals from the external environment, presence of
misfolded proteins and heat/oxidative stress in other
bacteria [41-44] and presumably performs similar functions for M. haemofelis.
Several components of the translational system were
identified, including the 5S, 23S and 16S ribosomal
RNA genes, which are present as single copies located
within the same operon, and 48 ribosomal proteins. We
also identified 31 transfer RNAs (tRNAs) covering all 20
amino acids and the tRNA-SeC for the translation of
the amino acid selenocysteine. The tRNAs and rRNAs
are also conserved between the 2 strains of M. haemofelis, however 2 tRNAs are annotated differently in Langford 1 strain: HF1_t18, annotated as tRNA-Tpr instead
of tRNA-Sec and HF1_t20, annotated as tRNA-Cys
instead of tRNA-Arg (Additional file 6, Table S3). As in
all other mycoplasmas sequenced to date [1], the opal
stop codon (UGA) is used to encode tryptophan in M.
haemofelis. The tRNA-SeC also uses the opal stop
codon to insert selenocysteine in bacteria [45], but
whether hemoplasmas use selenocysteine is still unclear.
Other CDSs of the translation system are: 23 tRNA
synthetases and 12 translation factors including the 3
prokaryotic initiation factors (IF-1, IF-2 and IF-3) and 5

Page 7 of 16

GTP-binding proteins, including LepA, EngA and EngB.
The peptide release factor 1 (RF-1), responsible for the
recognition of stop codons UAA and UAG to terminate
translation, was identified in M. haemofelis genome,
while the peptide release factor 2 (RF-2) is missing. The
RF-2 helps terminate the translation at UGA codons in
other bacteria and is absent in all mycoplasmas
sequenced to date.
Restriction and modification (R-M systems)

The mechanisms of regulating gene expression are
poorly understood in Mycoplasmas. The low number of
transcription factors suggests that other regulation
mechanisms might occur in these organisms. Mechanisms of restriction and modification are known to protect the bacteria against invading DNA or phage
infection, but might also be responsible for genome
rearrangements [46]. Phase variation of these mechanisms is proposed to increase the variability of proteins
expressed [40], and ultimately adaptation to the host
niche.
Type I restriction systems are multifunctional enzymes
complexes that can catalyze both modification/methylation and restriction. The system activity is performed by
a holoenzyme with 3 subunits for specificity (HsdS),
modification (HsdM) and restriction (HsdR), which
cleaves double stranded DNA randomly through out the
genome [47]. M. haemofelis genome have 2 areas containing type I restriction enzymes; however, only one
area contains the entire complex HsdS/HsdM/HsdR.
Within this area we identified 21 CDSs for the HsdS
subunit (9 are truncated), 2 CDSs for the HsdM, and 2
CDSs for the HsdR subunit. Interestingly, 19 CDSs of
the HsdS subunit are within a family of paralogs and
contain several inter and intragenic tandem repeats.
This might indicate that the expression of these genes is
regulated by phase variation. Phase-variable type I
restriction enzymes were also identified in the M. pulmonis genome, for which an association with antigenic
variation was suggested [48].
Type II restriction activity, the simpliest of the R-M
systems, is performed by two distinct enzymes, a
sequence-specific endonuclease and a DNA methyltransferase [40]. We identified enzymes of the type II R-M
system in 2 areas of the genome of M. haemofelis, however only one area had the gene pair - a deoxyribonuclease, Sau96I-like and a C-5 cytosine-specific DNA
methylase. The second location had only the DNA
methylase. A Sau96I-like endonuclease also has been
reported in the genome of M. mycoides subsp. mycoides
and subsp. capri [GenBank: NC_005364.2 and
NC_015431.1]. Type III restriction enzymes were not
identified in the genome of M. haemofelis. In the pneumoniae clade, the Type III R-M system related

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

sequences were also not found in the genomes of M.
genitalium, M. pneumoniae, and M. gallisepticum [40].
Protein homeostasis

Chaperone and protease families are highly conserved
across most bacterial genomes and play important roles
in stabilizing protein conformations, refolding misfolded
proteins and degrading protein that may be detrimental
to the cell’s survival [49]. While two prominent chaperone systems (GroE and DnaK) are present in most bacteria, the members of the GroE protein homeostatic
network, GroEL/GroES, are absent from M. haemofelis
genome. Several other mycoplasmas have been reported
to specifically lack the GroE chaperone system [50].
GroE system was also absent from the genome of M.
suis [37], although the presence of GroEL protein has
been reported previously [51]. The complete DnaK chaperone system was found in the genome of M. haemofelis, suggesting that the DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE complex may
provide significant control over protein folding for this
and other GroE chaperone deficient mycoplasmas.
Another chaperone, the trigger factor (Tig) was also
identified in the genome of M. haemofelis, but was
absent in M. suis. Tig is involved in shielding nascent
polypeptides on the ribosome, thereby preventing their
degradation. Unlike the GroE and DnaK chaperone systems, Tig functions independently of ATP and its
expression is upregulated in cold shock [52]. Thus, it
seems unlikely that Tig could replace the missing functions of the GroE system in M. haemofelis.
Proteases also play a key role in the viability of bacterial cells, especially as it relates to degrading misfolded or
aggregated proteins [53]. In the genome of M. haemofelis, the proteases identified included the heat-shock
ATP-dependent protease Lon and a membrane
anchored FtsH. The ATPases from the Clp family, HslU
and HslV, on the other hand, are missing from the genome. It is likely that these proteases in M. haemofelis
might also function to assist with the breakdown of
imported peptides for protein synthesis.
It has been suggested that loss of specific proteases
and the chaperone GroEL/GroES system may result in a
shift toward proteolysis rather than protein folding as a
means of maintaining protein homeostasis in mycoplasmas [52]. These shifts might play a contributing role to
both survival and pathogenesis, leading some groups to
investigate their potential as antimicrobial targets [54].
The functional consequences of these gene losses in M.
haemofelis are unknown.
Secretion and transport

M. haemofelis appears to use the general secretion (Sec)
pathway [55] for translocation of newly synthesized proteins across the cytoplasmic membrane. The essential

Page 8 of 16

membrane receptor ATPase SecA, and members of the
integral membrane complex SecG, SecY, and SecD
(responsible for release of the mature peptide) are present. Whereas, like most other mycoplasmas, SecE (also
part of the integral membrane complex), SecF and the
non-essential chaperone SecB are missing. The absence
of SecB suggests that the export is via signal recognition
particle (SRP) [56]. The presence of the associated inner
membrane protein translocase YidC [57] and 2 signal
recognition particle proteins (FtsY and Ffh), that are
responsible for delivering protein to SecA, reinforces
this hypothesis. The Sec-independent twin arginine
translocation (Tat) secretion pathway is an alternate
route for folded proteins and co-factor-bound enzymes
secretion [58] in bacteria. Only one member of the Tat
pathway, TatD, was identified in the M. haemofelis genome, while essential components of the translocase,
TatA, TatB, and TatC, which in conjunction with TatE
form a translocation pore, are all missing. Since the
TatD protein does not appear to be required for operation of the Tat transport system, we speculate that the
TatD probably performs a different function, unrelated
to protein transport in M. haemofelis, and a functional
Tat secrection pathway is absent. Perhaps TatD in M.
haemofelis can function as a magnesium-dependent
DNase as previously described, thus suggesting a role
for this protein in DNA metabolism [59].
Transporter systems are conserved among bacteria
and are responsible for the transport of a wide range of
molecules across the membrane, including the import of
nutrients and export of toxins. Therefore, they are crucial for bacterial metabolism and play a role in virulence
[60]. Mycoplasmas are known to have fewer transporters
than other bacteria, suggesting that their transporters
may have broader substrate specificity [36]. M. haemofelis also dedicates only 2.2% (34/1549) of its CDSs, configured as operons, to transport and binding proteins.
As with most other mycoplasmas, ABC transporters in
M. haemofelis represent more than 50% of all membrane
transport proteins [61]; they are 70.6% (24/34) for M.
haemofelis. The phosphotransferase transport system
(PTS) is also represented in the genome of M. haemofelis, suggesting that sugar is acquired from the environment and translocated across the cell membrane [62]
for use in energy metabolism.
Energy metabolism

M. haemofelis uses the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP)
pathway (glycolysis) for energy metabolism (Additional
file 7, Figure S4a). The presence of CDSs in M. haemofelis for the PTS and enzymes responsible for the conversion of glucose into pyruvate molecules is consistent
with an organism that undergoes glycolysis. Interestingly, a non-phosphorylating NADPH-dependent

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPN),
responsible for a shunt in the glycolysis pathway by converting glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate into 3-phosphoglycerate, is present. This enzyme reduces NADP to
NADPH and has been described in some mycoplasmas
and a few other bacterial species as a means of oxidative
damage resistance and NADPH regeneration [63-65]. As
described in other Mollicutes, the F0F1 ATP synthase
complex is present, which can also generate ATP.
The pyruvate metabolism of M. haemofelis does not
appear to be complete. Orthologs to the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and acetate kinase are absent.
Enzymes of the coenzyme A metabolism are also not
present, which supports the lack of a pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.

Page 9 of 16

Like M. suis [37], M. haemofelis possesses spermidine/
putrescine transport system consisting of a membrane
associated ATPase (PotA), two transmembrane proteins
(PotB and PotC), and a periplasmic substrate-binding
protein (PotD). All of these proteins are necessary for
the uptake of spermidine and putrescine, which play a
vital role in the DNA and RNA metabolism and regulation of RNA and protein synthesis [66]. However, the
enzymes necessary for the synthesis of spermidine/
putrescine are missing, suggesting that M. haemofelis
imports these polyamines from the environment. Similarly, M. haemofelis possesses a transporter for cobalamine, suggesting this vitamin is also essential for its
survival.
The pentose phosphate pathway

Nicotinate/Nicotinamide metabolism

Molecules of NAD+ and NADP+ are end-products of the
niacin (nicotinate and nicotinamide) metabolism (Additional file 7, Figure S4b). We speculate that due to the
absence of two key enzymes from the nicotinate metabolism (nicotinate phosphorybosyltransferase and NAD+
synthase), M. haemofelis is more likely to use nicotinamide as a precursor for NAD+ and NADP+. This latter
pathway would include the use of the purine nucleoside
phosphorylase, which also participates in the purine
metabolism, and the use of a yet to be identified ribosylnicotinamide kinase, followed by the nicotinate-nucleotide adenylytransferase. Metabolic pathway comparisons
show that M. suis has the same enzymes to produce
NAD+, but a NAD+ kinase, present in M. haemofelis, is
absent in the pig pathogen [37]. This enzyme is responsible for the interconversion of NAD + and NADP + ,
which plays a critical role in maintaining the NADH/
NADPH pool balance inside the bacterial cell. Thus,
nicotinamide is likely to be the only requirement for
NAD + and NADP + production in M. haemofelis,
whereas in M. suis, NADP+ is possibly also needed.
Vitamin metabolism

Although the nine vitamins (nicotinate spermine, thiamin, pyridoxal, thioctic acid, riboflavin, choline, folic
acid and coenzyme A/panthothenate) are necessary for
optimal growth, none of these are synthesized by mycoplasmas [36]. The only enzyme related to vitamin metabolism present in M. haemofelis is the serine
hydroxymethyltransferase of the folate metabolism,
which was not found in M. suis. Consequently, M. haemofelis may interconvert L-serine to glycine, but to do
so it needs folate derivatives that are likely acquired
from its environment. Thus, the author’s speculate that
folate derivatives and other vitamins must be imported
from the bacteria’s environment to support its growth
and survival.

As observed in phytoplasmas [67] and in M. suis [37],
the pentose phosphate pathway is absent in M. haemofelis. This mycoplasma is likely to use other means of
NADPH regeneration and ribose production, including
acquiring it from the environment. Since a ribokinase
was not found in the genome of M. haemofelis, it is
more likely that this organism imports deoxyribose or
ribose/deoxyribose 5’ phosphate than ribose to produce
phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP). The latter
enzyme plays a critical role in purine/pyrimidine nucleotides synthesis (Additional file 7, Figure S4c and d).
Purine metabolism

Several studies have demonstrated that Mollicutes lack
the ability to synthesize de novo purine and pyrimidine
nucleotides resulting in the development of unique
mechanisms used to import precursors from their environment [68-70]. Of particular interest, CDSs for
enzymes of purine nucleotide production from hypoxanthine are present in the M. haemofelis genome (Additional file 7, Figure S4c). This pathway may represent an
adaptation to the blood environment; hypoxanthine is a
metabolite secreted as an end product from red blood
cell nucleotide metabolism and is required for the in
vitro growth of Plasmodium spp, another red blood cell
parasite [71,72]. M. haemofelis posseses 2 copies of the
enzyme hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase that
not only converts hypoxanthine into inosine 5’ monophosphate, but can also convert guanine into guanine 5’
monophosphate (GMP). However, hypoxanthine by itself
is able to serve as a precursor for purine nucleotides. M.
haemofelis is also capable of producing GTP and dGTP
from guanosine and ATP and dATP from adenine. The
latter reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme adenosine
kinase, which is unique to M. haemofelis among the
other mycoplasmas sequenced to date.
Interestingly, guanine and adenine can also possibly
serve as unique precursors of all purine nucleotides if

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

the first 2 reactions of each pathway have reversibility.
In this case, if guanine is used, glutamate must be available. Whereas, if adenine is used, fumarate must be
available: fumarate can be acquired from the L-aspartate
metabolism. These data suggests that M. haemofelis
might import hypoxanthine, adenine and/or guanine to
be used as precursors for the purine nucleotides ATP/
GTP (RNA) and dATP/dGTP (DNA).
Pyrimidines metabolism

Like most mycoplasmas, M. haemofelis lacks orotaterelated genes needed for the synthesis of pyrimidines
[73]. Uracil, however, can serve as precursor for uracil
and cytosine nucleotides for RNA production in M. haemofelis (Additional file 7, Figure S4d). Regarding DNA
production, the absence of the enzyme thymidine phosphorylase suggests that thymidine is likely the precursor
imported for dTTP production. Despite the similarities
to the M. suis pyrimidine metabolism, M. haemofelis has
a cytidylate kinase, which can convert cytidine 5’ monophosphate (CMP) to cytidine 5’ diphosphate (CDP). The
absence of this enzyme in M. suis [37] led to the speculation of the use of a phosphofructokinase to generate
CDP from cytidine 5’ triphosphate (CTP) [74], which
implies that uracil can be used to produce cytosine
nucleotides. In M. haemofelis, dCDP is likely produced
from cytosine derivatives, not from uracil. However,
enzymes responsible for the generation of CMP from
cytidine or cytosine were not found. It is thus unknown
which cytosine derivative (cytosine, cytidine or CMP)
must be imported for dCTP production.
Thus, the addition of hypoxanthine, adenine, guanine,
uracil, cytosine derivatives, and thymine/thymidine
could theoretically help to sustain M. haemofelis DNA
and RNA production in future attempts to cultivate this
organism in vitro.
Lipid metabolism

Phospholipids, glycolipids and sterols, are the three major
lipid constituents of cell membranes. Mycoplasmas are
thought to be completely incapable of fatty acid biosynthesis from acetyl-CoA, probably due to the loss of genetic
material [75]. Although some of the enzymes are missing,
M. haemofelis is likely to synthesize phospholipids from
glycerol (Additional file 7, Figure S4e). The presence of
CDS for glycerol kinase indicates that M. haemofelis produces glycerol-3-phosphate, an important precursor for
phosphatidate, the simplest phospholipid to be incorporated into biological membranes. There are some gaps in
this pathway, which include the enzymes: glycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase, 1-acyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphate
acyltransferase. These enzymes perform acylation of glycerol compounds using the acyl-carrier protein (ACP) as a
donor. This protein, as well as the coenzyme A (CoA)-

Page 10 of 16

biosynthesis pathway that acylates it, are absent in M. haemofelis. Likewise, the ACP is missing in M. hyopneumoniae, but other enzymes of the CoA metabolism are
present. It is likely that M. haemofelis uses another
mechanism of acyl transfer. From phosphatidate to cardiolipin formation, there is only one enzyme missing, the
phosphatidyl glycerophosphatase. The role of this enzyme
may be replaced by the enzyme cardiolipin synthase,
which can convert cytidine 5’ diphosphate diacylglycerol
directly to cardiolipin in the presence of phosphatidylglycerol. Thus, we speculate that phosphatidylglycerol is
acquired from the blood or another enzyme might produce this phospholipid.
Given the presence of choline kinase and cholinephosphate cytidylyltransferase, phosphatidylcholine is
also probably synthesized. In addition, we predict that
M. haemofelis, like other mycoplasmas, require the addition of exogenous sterols for their in vitro growth.
Amino acid metabolism

Like other mycoplasmas, M. haemofelis has lost the
genes required for amino acid metabolism, and is unable
to synthesize any of the amino acids. Surprisingly, only
one amino acid permease ABC transporter was identified in the genome of M. haemofelis. Since amino acids
are essential for optimal growth of mycoplasmas [36], it
is likely that ABC transporters in the genome of M. haemofelis having unknown substrate specificity or other
transporters yet to be identified, may be responsible for
this uptake.
Potential virulence factors

Bacteria have evolved several virulence factors that
enable them to establish an infection, which include the
production of cytolysins, toxins, and invasins. Mycoplasma genomic repertoires, as a general feature, appear
to contain few of these genes [76]. Nonetheless, we
identified 2 CDSs of primary virulence genes in the genome of M. haemofelis. The first of these, endopeptidase
o-sialoglycoprotein, was also found in the M. suis genome [37]. This enzyme might be directly involved in
erythrocyte lysis by cleavage of glycoproteins such as
glycophorin A, which is an abundant component of the
erythrocyte membrane. Secondly, we confirmed the presence of a CDS for the superoxide dismutase (SOD)
gene that was previously described in a sequencing survey of M. haemofelis [22]. The gene encoding this
enzyme has not been found in genomes of other mycoplasmas despite finding evidence of its activity [77] and
is absent from the genome of M. suis, the only other
fully sequenced hemoplasma [37]. This might suggest a
role for SOD in detoxifying reactive oxygen species,
thus protecting M. haemofelis from the onslaught of
oxidant damage that it encounters in its red blood cell

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

niche. The contribution of this enzyme to the virulence
of M. haemofelis, particularly its role as a primary
pathogen, is an intriguing question for future investigations. M. suis, on the other hand, is not a primary
pathogen and requires splenectomy of the pig for development of acute disease.
Lipid-associated membrane proteins are well described
in mycoplasmas and are the preferential target for the
host’s immune response [78]. A total of 17 putative lipoproteins were identified in the genome of M. haemofelis
(Figure 1). In addition, some putative surface lipoproteins were recently identified by immune screening of
an expression library of M. haemofelis [24].
To allow for the presence of diverse subpopulations
that can quickly respond to changing environmental
conditions, a common virulence feature in the genome
of several Mycoplasma species is the presence of strategically located tandem repeats [79]. Likewise, we identified 61 variable number tandem repeats (VNTR) in the
genome of M. haemofelis (Additional file 8, Table S4)
whereas M. suis had 33 (Guimaraes AMS, unpublished
observations). Most of the VNTRs were within intergenic regions of hypothetical proteins (Figure 1). Additionally, VNTRs flanking the CDS for RNA polymerase
sigma factor RpoD were identified. This feature was also
found in the genome of M. hyopneumoniae [50]. Several
VNTR’s were identified within the Type I restriction
system operon, as described above. Since the gain or
loss of nucleotides in the promoter region would act as
an on/off switch for promoter activity, it is speculated
that these genes might code for phase variable surface
proteins in M. haemofelis. Thus, as with other mycoplasmas, the strategic placement of these repetitive
sequences may be related to size and phase variation
[80]. While these repetitive sequences are somewhat
scattered throughout the genome, there are distinct
clusters (Figure 1). Palindromic structures, overlapping
of repeats and degenerate repeats were found in the
genome of M. haemofelis as well as that of M. suis (Guimaraes AMS, unpublished observations); these structures also have been shown to be related to virulence
and bacterial gene regulation [79]. The role that these
structures might play in helping M. haemofelis evade
host defenses, adapt to its microenvironment, and establish chronic infection is an area of current investigation.
Despite their relatively small size, a high proportion of
the genome in many mycoplasmas is dedicated to paralogous genes [73]. There is strong evidence to support a
role for these genes in the development of antigenic
diversity and the ability of the organism to avoid the
host’s immune response [80]. Search results using
BLASTclust showed that 1093 out of the 1549 (70.6%)
predicted proteins formed 46 paralogous gene families,
ranging from 2 to 800 CDSs per family (Additional file

Page 11 of 16

9, Table S5). Although the genome of M. suis is much
smaller, this closely related hemoplasma relative of M.
haemofelis still devotes 42.8% of its genome to paralogs
[37]. Using the same analysis conditions for identification of paralogs, the genomes of other mycoplasmas
were analyzed and compared to M. haemofelis (Table 1).
M. haemofelis has more genes organized in paralogous
families than all the mycoplasmas sequenced to date.
The paralogs in the M. haemofelis genome are mostly
hypothetical proteins, including the 3 largest families.
Most of them have members with internal alpha helices
or signal peptides, except for one family (family 3) with
CDSs predicted to be cytoplasmic (Table 3). Interestingly, CDSs of family 5 have conserved motifs matching
with the Staphylococcus aureus fibrinogen-binding protein A (clumping factor), an adhesin responsible for its
attachment to fibrinogen/fibrin [81]. Thus, this family of
membrane-associated putative proteins might act as
adhesins in M. haemofelis.
Using the same BLASTclust parameters, the total number of genes of in M. haemofelis strain Langford 1
within paralog families is 1042 (67.5% of CDSs). The
paralogous gene families are conserved between the 2
strains of M. haemofelis, except that strain Langford 1
has 723 CDSs in its largest family compared to 800
CDSs in Ohio2 (family 1). Further, strain Langford 1 has
2 additional families of 25 and 17 hypothetical proteins;
in strain Ohio2, these proteins are within family 1.
Strikingly, M. haemofelis devotes a high percentage of
its genome to paralogous gene families, a feature suggesting that evasion of the immune response is a high
priority for this pathogen. While these findings provide
evidence to support the presence of antigenic variation
by M. haemofelis, experimental studies are still needed
to understand the role and/or function of these
structures.
Only one gene related to antimicrobial resistance, a
ribosomal RNA adenine dimethylase family protein
(MHF_1613), was identified in the genome of M. haemofelis. The product of this gene is a methylase, responsible for modification of the 16S rRNA, optimizing
ribosome function and consequently translation. Lack of
methylation by this enzyme modifies the ribosomal
binding site for the aminoglycoside antimicrobial kasugamycin, leading to resistance [82]. Whether or not this
enzyme plays a role in antimicrobial resistance for M.
haemofelis must be experimentally confirmed.
Bacterium-host interactions

M. haemofelis, unlike most other hemoplasmas, is capable of acting as a primary pathogen and can cause
acute disease in immunocompetent hosts. Our laboratory recently proposed a new model based on genomic
findings for the acute disease caused by M. suis in pigs

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

Table 3 Analyses of the largest paralogous gene families (n > 5) in Mycoplasma haemofelis strain Ohio2 genome.
Family

Number of CDSs

Predictiona

Predicted function

Subcellular Localizationa

Internal Helix (> 1)

Non-Cytoplasmic (signal peptide)

Cytoplasmic

Cytoplasmic Membrane

Extracellular

Unknown

1

Hypothetical proteins

673

136

30

15

70

685

99

Hypothetical proteins

94

43

8

8

9

74

3

26

Hypothetical proteins

22

0

23

0

0

3

4
5

18
17

Type I restriction enzymes
Hypothetical proteins

0
2

0
10

15
1

0
13

0
0

3
3

6

11

Hypothetical proteins

8

1

0

2

0

9

7

10

Hypothetical proteins

10

4

2

0

0

8

8

8

Hypothetical proteins

8

1

3

0

2

3

9

7

Hypothetical proteins

1

3

2

0

0

5

10

6

Hypothetical proteins

4

2

3

1

0

2

11
a

800

2

5

Hypothetical proteins

5

2

0

0

0

5

PSORTb version 3 software.

Page 12 of 16

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

[37]. We believe that a nutrient competition and scavenging mechanism reduces the production of energy by
the erythrocyte leading to oxidative stress and shortened
life span of the cells, which are prematurely removed
from the circulation, contributing to the development of
anemia. The depletion of energy and oxidative stress
may also be a trigger to eryptosis, as recently proposed
for M. suis infection in pigs [3]. Based on the genomic
information herein, it is likely that M. haemofelis exerts
similar damage to the cat’s red blood cells. Additionally,
it is possible that the increased virulence of M. haemofelis (its ability to act as a primary pathogen) is due to
decreased susceptibility to reactive oxygen species generated by the host or by the bacteria itself. The superoxide dismutase activity, thus, contributes to survival of M.
haemofelis, and indirectly to its virulence. Since the end
product of SOD activity is H2O2, the possibility that the
enzyme is contributing to the virulence of M. haemofelis
cannot be discounted [18].
The disease presentation and genomic evidence suggest that the pathogenesis of M. haemofelis is also linked
to its antigenically dynamic cell surface. Thus, the ability
of this microorganism to change its surface features
might explain the cyclic bacteremic episodes that are
characteristic of M. haemofelis infection [83-85] and
persistence of the organism despite the host’s immune
response and/or antimicrobial treatment [86]. It is of
particular interest that cattle infected with Anaplasma
marginale, another red blood cell bacteria, have a persistent infection characterized by cyclic bacteremic bouts.
Each of these bouts appears to be associated with the
emergence of new antigenic variants, which are derived
from paralogous gene family recombination [87]. Given
that the genome of M. haemofelis is replete with paralogs as well as tandem repeats, we speculate that either
phase and/or antigenic variation may be involved in the
development of cyclic episodes and persistence of infection. The host presumably clears some of the microorganisms (nadir of the cycle), but M. haemofelis
expressing variant antigens, not yet identified by the
immune system, persist and multiply (peak of the cycle).
The failure of several groups [88,89] to find microorganisms sequestered in tissues, other than on erythrocytes
in the blood, adds further support to this hypothesis.
Although antigenic variation might explain the initial
fluctuations in bacteremia, it does not explain why the
cycling progressively declines and may disappear with
time. It is possible that the host establishes an antibody
response against non-variable antigens that helps to
maintain a low bacterial load or that antibodies formed
against variable antigens cross-react to some extent and
are able to partially control the bouts of bacteremia.
Another possible explanation is that the prolonged high
loads of bacteremia during infection of M. haemofelis

Page 13 of 16

result in a functional dysregulation of specific CD4+ T
cell response. Thus, as reported for A. marginale, the
failure to establish a strong memory T cell response
may contribute to bacterial persistence [90]. Further studies are underway to identify variable antigenic families,
as well as the possible mechanisms of immune evasion
by M. haemofelis infection in cats.
In summary, the pathogenicity of M. haemofelis
appears to be closely linked to intrinsic metabolic or
catabolic pathway functions and to its dynamic outer
surface. Virulence attributes of this bacterium allow it
to evade the immune system of the host, adhere to the
red blood cells and rapidly multiply, disseminate and
persist if the host survives acute infection. It is possible
that establishment of chronic infection facilitates transmission of the bacteria. The data generated in this
study should be of great value for future experiments
aimed at understanding the mechanisms this organism
employs in colonization of red blood cells, development of disease and persistent infection. Further, it
will provide new insights into the regulation of virulence factors and provide clues needed to formulate
media to support the in vitro cultivation of M.
haemofelis.
GenBank accession number

The sequence was submitted to the GenBank database
under the accession number CP002808.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1: Optical map of M. haemofelis strain
Ohio2 cleaved with NcoI (OpGen, Madison, WI, USA). The outermost
color circle is the consensus map and is built from the underlying maps
represented as arcs. Congruent restriction fragments shown in the
consensus map are denoted by a common color; the color-ordering
scheme is random to provide contrast.
Additional file 2: Figure S2: Validation of the M. haemofelis strain
Ohio2 sequence assembly by optical map comparison. Vertical lines
represent the restriction site. Regions with similarities are illustrated in
blue, regions with differences are illustrated in white.
Additional file 3: Figure S3: Comparative analysis of the whole
genomes of M. haemofelis strains Ohio2 and Langford 1 by in silico
restriction maps. Vertical lines represent the restriction sites. Regions
with similarities are illustrated in blue, regions with differences are
illustrated in white. (a) Restricted with NcoI (6 cutter), and (b) Restricted
with EcoRI (4 cutter).
Additional file 4: Table S1: Protein coding sequences of M.
haemofelis strain Ohio2 which are currently assigned to TIGR
microbial role categories, and sorted by role category. This list was
generated using the Manatee annotation tool, Institute for Genome
Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Maryland.
Additional file 5: Table S2: Comparison of the coding sequences of
M. haemofelis strains Ohio2 and Langford 1 genomes. BLASTp was
used for protein comparisons, when no match was found, BLASTn was
also use to avoid misinterpretation of annotation differences. NA = not
annotated or annotated differently; X = CDSs not found in the genome;
* Pseudogenes. Gray lines represent the regions with differences
correspondent to Figure S3 (b).

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

Additional file 6: Table S3: Comparison of the non-coding
sequences of M. haemofelis strains Ohio2 and Langford 1 genomes.
*Annotated differently in the M. haemofelis strain Langford 1 genome.
Additional file 7: Figure S4: Predicted metabolic pathways of M.
haemofelis strain Ohio2. Gray boxes represent substrates or products.
Gray ellipses are metabolites predicted to be imported from the
extracellular environment. White boxes represent enzymes with orthologs
in the genome of M. haemofelis. Dashed white boxes represent enzymes
with no orthologs in the genome of M. haemofelis. (a) Glycolysis, (b)
Nicotinate/Nicotinamide metabolism, (c) Purine metabolism, (d)
Pyrimidine metabolism, (e) Lipid metabolism. Pathway predictions were
based on KEGG pathway database [35] and the study performed by Yus
et al. [36].
Additional file 8: Table S4: Tandem repeats in M. haemofelis strain
Ohio2 genome. This list was generated using the Tandem Repeats
Finder Program.
Additional file 9: Table S5: List of GenBank accession numbers of
CDSs of M. haemofelis strain Ohio2 genome distributed in paralog
families. This list was generated using the BLASTclust software.

Page 14 of 16

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.
Acknowledgements
Our work was kindly supported by the Morris Animal Foundation (grant
D10FE-004). We also thank the University of Maryland’s Institute of Genomic
Sciences, which provided us with automatic annotation data and the
manual annotation tool Manatee.

14.

15.
Author details
1
Department of Comparative Pathobiology, Purdue University, 725 Harrison
Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. 2Purdue Genomics Core Facility,
Purdue University, 170 S. University Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

16.

17.
Authors’ contributions
Conceived and designed experiments: APS, AMSG, JBM. Performed
experiments: APS, AMSG, SWM, JBM. Analyzed the data: APS, AMSG, NCN,
PJS, JBM. Wrote and reviewed the paper: APS, AMSG, NCN, PJS, JBM. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 9 August 2011 Accepted: 21 September 2011
Published: 21 September 2011
References
1. Brown DR, May M, Bradbury JM, Balish MF, Calcutt MJ, Glass JI, Tasker S,
Messick JB, Johansson RE, Neimark H: Genus I. Mycoplasma. In Bergey’s
manual of systematic bacteriology. Volume 4.. 2 edition. Edited by: Krieg NR,
Staley JT, Brown DR, Hedlund BP, Paster BJ, Ward NL, Ludwig W, Whitman
WB. New York: Springer Science + Business Media; 2011:575-613.
2. Woese CR, Maniloff J, Zablen LB: Phylogenetic analysis of the
mycoplasmas. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980, 77:494-498.
3. Felder KM, Hoelzle K, Ritzmann M, Kilchling T, Schiele D, Heinritzi K,
Groebel K, Hoelzle LE: Hemotrophic mycoplasmas induce programmed
cell death in red blood cells. Cell Physiol Biochem 2011, 27:557-564.
4. George JW, Rideout BA, Griffey SM, Pedersen NC: Effect of preexisting
FeLV infection or FeLV and feline immunodeficiency virus coinfection on
pathogenicity of the small variant of Haemobartonella felis in cats. Am J
Vet Res 2002, 63:1172-1178.
5. Jensen WA, Lappin MR, Kamkar S, Reagan WJ: Use of a polymerase chain
reaction assay to detect and differentiate two strains of
Haemobartonella felis in naturally infected cats. Am J Vet Res 2001,
62:604-608.
6. Criado-Fornelio A, Martinez-Marcos A, Buling-Saranña A, Barba-Carretero JC:
Presence of Mycoplasma haemofelis, Mycoplasma haemominutum and
piroplasmids in cats from southern Europe: a molecular study. Vet
Microbiol 2003, 93:307-317.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.
27.

Kewish KE, Applevard GD, Myers SL, Kidney BA, Jackson ML: Mycoplasma
haemofelis and Mycoplasma haemominutum detection by polymerase
chain reaction in cats from Saskatchewan and Alberta. Can Vet J 2004,
45:749-752.
Hackett TB, Jensen WA, Lehman TL, Hohenhaus AE, Crawford PC, Giger U,
Lappin MR: Prevalence of DNA of Mycoplasma haemofelis, ‘Candidatus
Mycoplasma haemominutum,’ Anaplasma phagocytophilum, and species
of Bartonella, Neorickettsia, and Ehrlichia in cats used as blood donors
in the United States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006, 229:700-705.
Santos AP, Santos RP, Biondo AW, Dora JM, Goldani LZ, de Oliveira ST, de
Sá Guimaraes AM, Timenetsky J, de Morais HA, González FH, Messick JB:
Hemoplasma infection in HIV-positive patient, Brazil. Em Infect Dis 2008,
14:1922-1924.
Willi B, Meli ML, Lüthy R, Honegger H, Wengi N, Hoelzle LE, Reusch CE,
Lutz H, Hofmann-Lehmann R: Development and application of a universal
Hemoplasma screening assay based on the SYBR green PCR principle. J
Clin Microbiol 2009, 47:4049-4054.
Zuo LL, Wu YM, You XX: Mycoplasma lipoproteins and Toll-like receptors.
J Zhejiang Univ Sci B 2009, 10:67-76.
Citti C, Watson-McKown R, Droesse M, Wise KS: Gene families encoding
phase- and size-variable surface lipoproteins of Mycoplasma hyorhinis. J
Bacteriol 2000, 182:1356-1363.
Rosengarten R, Citti C, Glew M, Lischewski A, Droesse M, Much P, Winner F,
Brank M, Spergser J: Host-pathogen interactions in mycoplasma
pathogenesis: virulence and survival strategies of minimalist
prokaryotes. Int J Med Microbiol 2000, 290:15-25.
Santos AP, Guimaraes AMS, SanMiguel PJ, Messick JB: Complete genomic
sequence of the feline pathogen Mycoplasma haemofelis[abstract]. Vet
Pathol 2010, 47:s36.
Guimaraes AMS, Santos AP, Messick JB: A genomic survey for putative
virulence factors of Mycoplasma suis [abstract]. Vet Pathol 2010, 47:s191.
Messick JB, Santos AP, Guimaraes AM: Complete genome sequences of
two hemotropic mycoplasmas, Mycoplasma haemofelis Strain Ohio2 and
Mycoplasma suis Strain Illinois. J Bacteriol 2011, 193:2068-2069.
Barker EN, Helps CR, Peters IR, Darby AC, Radford AD, Tasker S: Complete
genome sequence of Mycoplasma haemofelis, a hemotropic
mycoplasma. J Bacteriol 2011, 193:2060-2061.
Barker EN, Darby AC, Helps CR, Peters IR, Heesom KJ, Arthur CJ, Crossett B,
Hughes MA, Radford AD, Tasker S: Molecular characterization of the
uncultivatable hemotropic bacterium Mycoplasma haemofelis. Vet Res
2011, 42:83.
Messick JB, Berent LM, Cooper SK: Development and evaluation of a PCRbased assay for detection of Haemobartonella felis in cats and
differentiation of H. felis from related bacteria by Restriction fragment
length polymorphism analysis. J Clin Microbiol 1998, 36:462-466.
Foley JE, Harrus S, Poland A, Chomel B, Pedersen NC: Molecular, clinical
and pathologic comparison of two distinct strains of Haemobartonella
felis in domestic cats. Am J Vet Res 1998, 59:1581-1588.
Santos AP, Messick JB, Biondo AW, Oliveira ST, Pedralli V, Lasta CS,
Lacerda LA, Esteves V, Hofmann-Lehmann R, Willi B, Gonzalez FHD: Design,
optimization and application of a conventional PCR assay with an
internal control for detection of ‘Candidatus Mycoplasma turicensis’ 16S
rDNA in domestic cats from Brazil. Vet Clin Pathol 2009, 38:443-452.
Berent LM, Messick JB: Physical map and genome sequencing survey of
Mycoplasma haemofelis (Haemobartonella felis). Infect Immun 2003,
71:3657-3662.
Gordon D, Abajian C, Green P: Consed: a graphical tool for sequence
finishing. Genome Res 1998, 8:195-202.
Messick JB, Santos AP: Identification, bioinformatics analyses, and
expression of immunoreactive antigens of Mycoplasma haemofelis. Clin
Vaccine Immunol 2011, 18:1275-1281.
Zhou S, Kile A, Bechner M, Place M, Kvikstad E, Deng W, Wei J, Severin J,
Runnheim R, Churas C, Forrest D, Dimalanta ET, Lamers C, Burland V,
Blattner FR, Schwartz DC: Single-molecule approach to bacterial genomic
comparisons via optical mapping. J Bacteriol 2004, 186:7773-7782.
Gao F, Zhang CT: Ori-Finder: a web-based system for finding oriCs in
unannotated bacterial genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:79.
Biegert A, Mayer C, Remmert M, Söding J, Lupas A: The MPI Toolkit for
protein sequence analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:W335-339.

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

28. Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonnhammer EL: Predicting
transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model:
application to complete genomes. J Mol Biol 2001, 305:567-580.
29. Cserzö M, Wallin E, Simon I, von Heijne G, Elofsson A: Prediction of
transmembrane alpha-helices in prokaryotic membrane proteins: the
dense alignment surface method. Protein Eng 1997, 10:673-676.
30. Benson G: Tandem repeats finder: a program to analyze DNA sequences.
Nucleic Acid Res 1999, 27:573-580.
31. Rahman O, Cummings SP, Harrington DJ, Sutcliffe IC: Methods for the
bioinformatic identification of bacterial lipoproteins encoded in the
genomes of Gram-positive bacteria. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 2008,
24:2377-2382.
32. Emanuelsson O, Brunak S, von Heijne G, Nielsen H: Locating proteins in
the cell using TargetP, SignalP, and related tools. Nat Protoc 2007,
2:953-971.
33. Nakai K, Horton P: PSORT: a program for detecting sorting signals in
proteins and predicting their subcellular localization. Trends Biochem Sci
1999, 24:34-36.
34. Yu NY, Wagner JR, Laird MR, Melli G, Rey S, Lo R, Dao P, Sahinalp SC,
Ester M, Foster LJ, Brinkman FS: PSORTb 3.0: improved protein subcellular
localization prediction with refined localization subcategories and
predictive capabilities for all prokaryotes. Bioinformatics 2010,
26:1608-1615.
35. Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M: KEGG: Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:29-34.
36. Yus E, Maier T, Michalodimitrakis K, van Noort V, Yamada T, Chen WH,
Wodke JA, Güell M, Martínez S, Bourgeois R, Kühner S, Raineri E, Letunic I,
Kalinina OV, Rode M, Herrmann R, Gutiérrez-Gallego R, Russell RB, Gavin AC,
Bork P, Serrano L: Impact of genome reduction on bacterial metabolism
and its regulation. Science 2009, 326:1263-1268.
37. Guimaraes AMS, Santos AP, SanMiguel P, Walter T, Timenestsky J,
Messick JB: Complete genome sequence of Mycoplasma suis and insights
into its biology and adaption to an erythrocyte niche. PLoS One 2011, 6:
e19574.
38. Pushker R, Mira A, Rodríguez-Valera F: Comparative genomics of genefamily size in closely related bacteria. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R27.
39. Lobry JR: Origin of replication of Mycoplasma genitalium. Science 1996,
272:745-746.
40. Brocchi M, Vasconcelos ATR, Zaha A: Restriction-modification systems in
Mycoplasma spp. Genet Mol Biol 2007, 30:236-244.
41. Hayden JD, Ades SE: The extracytoplasmic stress factor, sigmaE, is
required to maintain cell envelope integrity in Escherichia coli. PLoS One
2008, 3:e1573.
42. Noor R, Murata M, Yamada M: Oxidative stress as a trigger for growth
phase-specific sigmaE-dependent cell lysis in Escherichia coli. J Mol
Microbiol Biotechnol 2009, 17:177-187.
43. Xue X, Tomasch J, Sztajer H, Wagner-Döbler I: The delta subunit of RNA
polymerase, RpoE, is a global modulator of Streptococcus mutans
environmental adaptation. J Bacteriol 2010, 192:5081-5092.
44. Gibson JL, Lombardo MJ, Thornton PC, Hu KH, Galhardo RS, Beadle B,
Habib A, Magner DB, Frost LS, Herman C, Hastings PJ, Rosenberg SM: The
sigma(E) stress response is required for stress-induced mutation and
amplification in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 2010, 77:415-430.
45. Commans S, Böck A: Selenocysteine inserting tRNAs: an overview. FEMS
Microbiol Rev 1999, 23:335-351.
46. Kobayashi I: Behavior of restriction-modification systems as selfish
mobile elements and their impact on genome evolution. Nucleic Acids
Res 2001, 29:3742-3756.
47. Bickle TA, Krüger DH: Biology of DNA restriction. Microbiol Rev 1993,
57:434-450.
48. Dybvig K, Sitaraman R, French CT: A family of phase-variable restriction
enzymes with differing specificities generated by high-frequency gene
rearrangements. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:13923-13928.
49. Lund PA: Microbial molecular chaperones. Adv Microb Physiol 2001,
44:93-140.
50. Minion FC, Lefkowitz EJ, Madsen ML, Cleary BJ, Swartzell SM, Mahairas GG:
The genome sequence of Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae strain 232, the
agent of swine mycoplasmosis. J Bacteriol 2004, 186:7123-7133.
51. Hoelzle LE, Hoelzle K, Harder A, Ritzmann M, Aupperle H, Schoon HA,
Heinritzi K, Wittenbrink MM: First identification and functional
characterization of an immunogenic protein in unculturable

Page 15 of 16

52.
53.

54.
55.
56.
57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.
63.

64.

65.

66.
67.

68.
69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

haemotrophic Mycoplasmas (Mycoplasma suis HspA1). FEMS Immunol
Med Microbiol 2007, 49:215-223.
Wong P, Houry WA: Chaperone networks in bacteria: analysis of protein
homeostasis in minimal cells. J Struct Biol 2004, 146:79-89.
Dougan DA, Mogk A, Bukau B: Protein folding and degradation in
bacteria: to degrade or not to degrade? That is the question. Cell Mol
Life Sci 2002, 59:1607-1616.
Sinha K, Bhatnagar R: GroEL provides protection against Bacillus anthracis
infection in BALB/c mice. Mol Immunol 2010, 48:264-271.
Danese PN, Silhavy TJ: Targeting and assembly of periplasmic and outermembrane proteins in Escherichia coli. Annu Rev Genet 1998, 32:59-94.
Mori H, Ito K: The Sec protein-translocation pathway. Trends Microbiol
2001, 9:494-500.
Samuelson JC, Chen M, Jiang F, Möller I, Wiedmann M, Kuhn A, Phillips GJ,
Dalbey RE: YidC mediates membrane protein insertion in bacteria. Nature
2000, 406:637-641.
DeLisa MP, Samuelson P, Palmer T, Georgiou G: Genetic analysis of the
twin arginine translocator secretion pathway in bacteria. J Biol Chem
2002, 277:29825-29831.
Wexler M, Sargent F, Jack RL, Stanley NR, Bogsch EG, Robinson C, Berks BC,
Palmer T: TatD is a cytoplasmic protein with DNase activity. No
requirement for TatD family proteins in sec-independent protein export.
J Biol Chem 2000, 275:16717-16722.
Harland DN, Garmory HS, Brown KA, Titball RW: An association between
ATP binding cassette systems, genome sizes and lifestyles of bacteria.
Res Microbiol 2005, 156:434-442.
Nicolás MF, Barcellos FG, Nehab HP, Hungria M: ABC transporters in
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae and Mycoplasma synoviae: insights into
evolution and pathogenicity. Genet Mol Biol 2007, 30:202-211.
Barabote RD, Saier MH Jr: Comparative genomic analyses of the bacterial
phosphotransferase system. Microbiol Mol Bio Rev 2005, 69:608-634.
Boyd DA, Cvitkovitch DG, Hamilton IR: Sequence, expression, and function
of the gene for the nonphosphorylating, NADP-dependent
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase of Streptococcus mutans. J
Bacteriol 1995, 177:2622-2627.
Iddar A, Valverde F, Serrano A, Soukri A: Expression, purification, and
characterization of recombinant nonphosphorylating NADP-dependent
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase from Clostridium
acetobutylicum. Protein Expr Purif 2002, 25:519-526.
Iddar A, Valverde F, Assobhei O, Serrano A, Soukri A: Widespread
occurrence of non-phosphorylating glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase among gram-positive bacteria. Int Microbiol 2005,
8:251-258.
Shah P, Swiatlo E: A multifaceted role for polyamines in bacterial
pathogens. Mol Microbiol 2008, 68:4-16.
Oshima K, Kakizawa S, Nishigawa H, Jung HY, Wei W, Suzuki S, Arashida R,
Nakata D, Miyata S, Ugaki M, Namba S: Reductive evolution suggested
from the complete genome sequence of a plant-pathogenic
phytoplasma. Nat Genet 2004, 36:27-29.
Williams MV, Pollack JD: Pyrimidine deoxyribonucleotide metabolism in
members of the class Mollicutes. Int J Syst Bac 1985, 35:227-230.
McElwain MC, Chandler DKF, Barile MF, Young TF, Tryon VV, Davis JW Jr,
Petzel JP, Chang CJ, Williams MV, Pollack JD: Purine and pyrimidine
metabolism in Mollicutes species. Int J Syst Bact 1988, 38:417-423.
Pachkov M, Dandekar T, Korbel J, Bork P, Schuster S: Use of pathway
analysis and genome context methods for functional genomics of
Mycoplasma pneumoniae nucleotide metabolism. Gene 2007, 396:215-225.
Downie MJ, Kirk K, Mamoun CB: Purine salvage pathways in the
intraerythrocytic malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Eukaryot Cell
2008, 7:1231-1237.
Downie MJ, Saliba KJ, Bröer S, Howitt SM, Kirk K: Purine nucleobase
transport in the intraerythrocytic malaria parasite. Int J Parasitol 2008,
38:203-209.
Sasaki Y, Ishikawa J, Yamashita A, Oshima K, Kenri T, Furuya K, Yoshino C,
Horino A, Shiba T, Sasaki T, Hattori M: The complete genomic sequence of
Mycoplasma penetrans, an intracellular bacterial pathogen in humans.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:5293-5300.
Pollack JD, Myers MA, Dandekar T, Herrmann R: Suspected utility of
enzymes with multiple activities in the small genome Mycoplasma
species: the replacement of the missing “household” nucleoside

Santos et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:102
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/102

75.
76.

77.

78.

79.
80.
81.

82.

83.
84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

Page 16 of 16

diphosphate kinase gene and activity by glycolytic kinases. OMICS 2002,
6:247-258.
Pollack JD: Differentiation of Mycoplasma and Acholeplasma. Int J Syst
Bacteriol 1978, 28:425-426.
Calderon-Copete SP, Wigger G, Wunderlin C, Schmidheini T, Frey J,
Quail MA, Falquet L: The Mycoplasma conjunctivae genome sequencing,
annotation and analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10(Suppl 6):S7.
Meier B, Habermehl GG: Evidence for superoxide dismutase and catalase
in Mollicutes and release of reactive oxygen species. Arch Biochem
Biophys 1990, 277:74-79.
Chambaud I, Wróblewski H, Blanchard A: Interactions between
mycoplasma lipoproteins and the host immune system. Trends Microbiol
1999, 7:493-499.
van Belkum A, Scherer S, van Alphen L, Verbrugh H: Short-sequence DNA
repeats in prokaryotic genomes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1998, 62:275-293.
Citti C, Nouvel LX, Baranowski E: Phase and antigenic variation in
mycoplasmas. Future Microbiol 2010, 5:1073-1085.
McDevitt D, Nanavaty T, House-Pompeo K, Bell E, Turner N, McIntire L,
Foster T, Höök M: Characterization of the interaction between the
Staphylococcus aureus clumping factor (ClfA) and fibrinogen. Eur J
Biochem 1997, 247:416-424.
Demirci H, Murphy F IV, Belardinelli R, Kelley AC, Ramakrishnan V,
Dahlberg AE, Jogl G: Modification of 16S ribosomal RNA by the KsgA
methyltransferase restructures the 30S subunit to optimize ribosome
function. RNA 2010, 16:2319-2324.
Harvey W, Gaskin JM: Experimental feline haemobartonellosis. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 1977, 13:28-38.
Berent LM, Messick JB, Cooper SK: Detection of Haemobartonella felis in
cats with experimentally induced acute and chronic infections, using a
polymerase chain reaction assay. Am J Vet Res 1998, 9:1215-1220.
Tasker S, Peters IR, Papasouliotis K, Cue SM, Willi B, Hofmann-Lehmann R,
Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Knowles TG, Day MJ, Helps CR: Description of outcomes
of experimental infection with feline haemoplasmas: copy numbers,
haematology, Coombs’ testing and blood glucose concentrations. Vet
Microbiol 2009, 139:323-332.
Tasker S, Helps CR, Day MJ, Harbour DA, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Lappin MR: Use
of a Taqman PCR to determine the response of Mycoplasma haemofelis
infection to antibiotic treatment. J Microbiol Methods 2004, 56:63-71.
Palmer GH, Brown WC, Rurangirwa FR: Antigenic variation in the
persistence and transmission of the ehrlichia Anaplasma marginale.
Microbes Infect 2000, 2:167-176.
Berent LM, Messick JB, Cooper SK, Cusick PK: Specific in situ hybridization
of Haemobartonella felis with a DNA probe and tyramide signal
amplification. Vet Pathol 2000, 37:47-53.
Peters IR, Helps CR, Willi B, Hofmann-Lehmann R, Gruffydd-Jones TJ,
Day MJ, Tasker S: Detection of feline haemoplasma species in
experimental infections by in-situ hybridization. Microb Pathog 2011,
50:94-99.
Han S, Norimine J, Brayton KA, Palmer GH, Scoles GA, Brown WC:
Anaplasma marginale infection with persistent high-load bacteremia
induces a dysfunctional memory CD4+ T lymphocyte response but
sustained high IgG titers. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2010, 17:1881-1890.

doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-102
Cite this article as: Santos et al.: Genome of Mycoplasma haemofelis,
unraveling its strategies for survival and persistence. Veterinary Research
2011 42:102.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
