<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Forgotten forests - issues and prospects in biome mapping using Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests as a case study</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27. doi:10.1186/1472-6785-11-27"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Tiina Särkinen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Forgotten forests - issues and prospects in biome
mapping using Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests as
a case study
Särkinen et al.
Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27 (24 November 2011)

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Forgotten forests - issues and prospects in biome
mapping using Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests as
a case study
Tiina Särkinen1*, João RV Iganci2, Reynaldo Linares-Palomino3, Marcelo F Simon4 and Darién E Prado5

Abstract
Background: South America is one of the most species diverse continents in the world. Within South America
diversity is not distributed evenly at both local and continental scales and this has led to the recognition of various
areas with unique species assemblages. Several schemes currently exist which divide the continental-level diversity
into large species assemblages referred to as biomes. Here we review five currently available biome maps for
South America, including the WWF Ecoregions, the Americas basemap, the Land Cover Map of South America,
Morrone’s Biogeographic regions of Latin America, and the Ecological Systems Map. The comparison is performed
through a case study on the Seasonally Dry Tropical Forest (SDTF) biome using herbarium data of habitat specialist
species.
Results: Current biome maps of South America perform poorly in depicting SDTF distribution. The poor
performance of the maps can be attributed to two main factors: (1) poor spatial resolution, and (2) poor biome
delimitation. Poor spatial resolution strongly limits the use of some of the maps in GIS applications, especially for
areas with heterogeneous landscape such as the Andes. Whilst the Land Cover Map did not suffer from poor
spatial resolution, it showed poor delimitation of biomes. The results highlight that delimiting structurally
heterogeneous vegetation is difficult based on remote sensed data alone. A new refined working map of South
American SDTF biome is proposed, derived using the Biome Distribution Modelling (BDM) approach where
georeferenced herbarium data is used in conjunction with bioclimatic data.
Conclusions: Georeferenced specimen data play potentially an important role in biome mapping. Our study shows
that herbarium data could be used as a way of ground-truthing biome maps in silico. The results also illustrate that
herbarium data can be used to model vegetation maps through predictive modelling. The BDM approach is a
promising new method in biome mapping, and could be particularly useful for mapping poorly known,
fragmented, or degraded vegetation. We wish to highlight that biome delimitation is not an exact science, and
that transparency is needed on how biomes are used as study units in macroevolutionary and ecological research.

Background
South America is one of the world’s most diverse continents, housing around 90,000-110,000 species of seed
plants, c. 37% of the world’s total [1-3]. Taxonomic
diversity, however, is not evenly distributed within the
continent; on a broad scale, the Amazon rain forest is
home to completely different species to those from the
mountain tops of the Andes, and areas differ on a finer
* Correspondence: tiina.sarkinen@nhm.ac.uk
1
Department of Botany, Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London
SW7 5BD, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

scale in their species richness and endemism [4]. Understanding such diversity gradients, and the processes that
shape and maintain them, remains a focal question in
ecology and evolutionary biology.
Studies aiming to understand diversity gradients rely
on schemes depicting the distribution of this diversity.
At the continental scale, species diversity is divided into
major units referred to as biomes (also know as vegetation zones, phytogeographic regions, phytochoria, etc).
For example, Africa is divided into 22 biomes based on
floristic similarity, climatic factors, and vegetation structure. The African biome map was originally developed

© 2011 Särkinen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

Page 2 of 15

by White [5,6] and later revised and digitised using
remote sensing data [7]. White’s biome delimitation has
been widely accepted among ecologists, conservationists
and evolutionary biologists, and the stability of the African biome map has enhanced collaboration across
research fields (e.g. [8-10]).
South America is the focus of much biodiversity
research (e.g. [11-15]). In spite of this, a stable biome
scheme comparable to that available for Africa is still
lacking. Various digital biome maps are currently available (e.g. [16,17]), but these maps differ greatly in both
how they depict diversity across the continent and in
their principles of construction. The maps preferred by
many ecologists are based on remote sensing data,
where biomes are delimited based on vegetation structure (e.g. land cover map of South America [17]) (Table
1). Although remote sensing maps are superior in the
fine detail they provide at regional and local level across
the continent, such ‘structural maps’ do not consider
floristic similarity and hence may not represent biologically meaningful units. In contrast, ‘floristic maps’ (i.e.
maps which differentiate units mainly by their plant
assemblages, but may also use biological and physical
aspects) commonly used in biogeography, conservation
biology and macroevolution are based on data on species composition and endemism, but represent stylised
areas and lack detail at regional and local level (e.g.
WWF Ecoregion map [16]). The poor spatial resolution
of these ‘floristic maps’ potentially hinders their use for
hypothesis testing in macroevolution and ecology. Ultimately, an optimal map would have greater spatial detail
and include floristic data (Table 1).
The gap between the fields of ecology and evolution is
closing (e.g. [18,19]). As a result, there is a growing
need for a common frame of reference with which to
test hypotheses that bridge the fields. Currently, biomes
are used as study units in many macroevolutionary and
ecological studies (e.g. [20-24]), without critical analysis
of the biome maps used and their limitations. It is clear

that a thorough discussion is needed on what biomes
are and how they should be delimited. Defining a stable
biome map scheme for South America that could be
used in both macroevolutionary and macroecological
research would increase transparency and stimulate dialogue between the research fields.
The concept of biomes was originally developed by
Alexander von Humboldt [25] who first noted the
dynamic relationship between vegetation composition
and structure, climate, and geography. Humboldt argued
that vegetation had a central role in the understanding
of landscape level processes, and first articulated the
idea that biomes can be seen as evolutionary theatres
for the lineages they contain. The modern development
of Humboldt’s original concept, where biomes are seen
as biological meta-communities, comes largely from
recent molecular phylogenetic studies in which a strong
pattern of phylogenetic niche conservatism (PNC) is
seen across plant lineages at global level (e.g. [20]). The
expectation that related species tend to occupy similar
environments [26,27] is the basis for PNC. The PNC
concept potentially has a strong role in explaining historical species assembly, as it governs the composition
of regional floras and species pools from which communities are assembled over time [27]. This means that
biomes, and their dynamic history through time, can
have a strong effect on the evolution of the lineages
they host (e.g. [14,28]).
This study was initially started with the aim of exploring ways to derive better biome maps for South America
that could be used in biological research. In this paper
we focus on exploring how herbarium data can be used
as aid in biome mapping. First, we review a set of available digital biome maps of South America to discuss
their strengths and weaknesses. We focus on five
recently proposed biome maps which are available in
digital format, including the Land Cover Map (LCM)
[17], WWF Ecoregion map (ECO) [16], the Americas
Basemap (AB) [29], Latin American Biogeography

Table 1 General types of biome maps
Map
types

Baseline data

Spatial
detail

Hierarchical
representation of
regions

Representation
of ecological
affinities

Representation of
evolutionary
communities

Examples of
maps

End users

Floristic
maps

Species
composition,
richness &
endemism

Crude

Good

Poor

Good

WWF Ecoregions
[16]

Evolutionary biology
& conservation
science

Land
cover
maps

Remote sensing
data

Fine

Poor

Good

Poor

Land Cover Map
of South America
[17]

Ecology

Hybrid
maps

Climate, elevation,
and species
composition

Fine

Good

Good

Good

Ecological
Systems Map [31]

All research fields

Main types of biome maps summarised and compared.

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

Page 3 of 15

Scheme (LAB) [30], and the Ecological Systems Map
(ESM) [31]. The comparison is performed through a
case study of the Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests
(SDTF), a relatively poorly known biome with a strongly
fragmented distribution across South America. Georeferenced herbarium records of species endemic to the
biome are used to ground-truth the biome maps in
silico. In the second part of the study we propose Biome
Distribution Modelling approach (BDM) to biome mapping. Climatic and elevation data is used in conjunction
with herbarium specimen data of habitat specialist species to derive a new high resolution biome map for
SDTF in South America based on predictive modelling.
Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests

The SDTF, or BTES (Bosques Tropicales Estacionalmente
Secos) or FED/FES (Florestas Estacionais Deciduais e
Semideciduais), is a relatively recently identified biome,
which was first defined based on floristic similarity and
high endemism at both generic and species level [32,33].
The ecology and biology of neotropical SDTF have been
recently reviewed [34-36], but in short, SDTFs are found
in areas with low annual rain fall less than 1,100 mm/year
with a dry season at least 5-6 months long during which
rain fall remains below 100 mm [37,38]. The flora is dominated by species in the angiosperm families Leguminosae,
Cactaceae, and Bignoniaceae, and species show morphological adaptations to the long dry season during which
most of them are deciduous [38].
One of the reasons the SDTF biome has remained
poorly understood is the high structural variability of
SDTF vegetation. As defined by Prado [33] and Pennington et al. [34], the SDTF biome includes vegetation
of widely differing structure from closed canopy forests
to open scrublands. This structural variation has led to
confusion between SDTFs and the other South

American dry biomes, the savannas (e.g. Brazilian Cerrado) and the Chaco [39]. Whilst SDTF grow on rich
soils and have a succulent rich flora that lack fire adaptations (e.g. Cactaceae), most savannas are dominated by
grasses, occur on poor, aluminium-rich soils (e.g. the
Cerrados [40]), and experience regular fires (Table 2).
The Chaco, which is a temperate biome, differs from
SDTF in experiencing regular frosts (Table 2) among
several other environmental factors (see [41,42]).
The current distribution of SDTF in South America is
highly fragmented due to both natural factors (e.g. climatic factors and fluctuations) and human disturbance
[36,43]. Remaining forest areas have been divided into
18 isolated forest nuclei (Figure 1) [44]. The largest
nuclei are found in north-eastern Brazil (Caatinga), in
the Paraguay-Paraná river systems (Misiones), and in
south-western Bolivia and north-western Argentina
(Piedmont) (Figure 1) [45]. Two smaller but significant
SDTF nuclei include the Bolivian Chiquitanía, and the
coastal SDTF in northern Colombia and Venezuela (Figure 1). The least well characterized are the smallest fragments of SDTF found in the Andes along the interAndean valleys and the Pacific coast of Ecuador and
Peru (Figure 1) [46]. Although the SDTF biome as a
whole is generally poorly represented in biome maps,
and is often confused with savannas and the Chaco, the
Andean SDTF fragments are the most neglected and
underrepresented due to their small size.
The fragmented distribution and the structural variation
of the vegetation make the SDTF biome a perfect case
study for exploring how herbarium data could be used as
an aid in biome mapping. Firstly, fragmented biomes are
generally underrepresented in biome maps as small areas
often remain undetected in continental scale maps especially if spatial resolution is poor. The issue of how best to
map small but significant biome fragments has not thus

Table 2 Definitions of South American dry biomes
Biome

Annual
rainfall
(mm/
year)

Length of Dominant plant families
dry
season
(months)

Physiognomy of
vegetation

Notes on flora

Soils

Natural
fire
cycles

Frost

Seasonally
dry
tropical
forests
[45]

< 1,100

5-9

Leguminosae,
Bignoniaceae,
Euphorbiaceae, Cactaceae,
Bromeliaceae

Open to closed
canopy forest

Adaptations to
drought, scarcity
of perennial
grasses

Fertile, well
drained, shallow
soils. pH 6-7

Absent

Absent

Savannas
[40,68,69]

8002,200

3-5

Leguminosae, Myrtaceae,
Vochysiaceae, Poaceae,
Cyperaceae

Open to wooded
grasslands

Chaco
[41,42]

4501,200

c. 5
(variable)

Leguminosae (esp.
Mimosoideae),
Anacardiaceae, Cactaceae,
Poaceae, Bromeliaceae

Open to closed
canopy forest,
interspersed with
occasional savannas

Fire adaptations in Poor, Al rich, well Regular
Absent
most plants,
drained, deep
dominance of C4
soils. pH very
grasses
acid (~5)
Frost and salinity
Saline.
Occasional Regular,
tolerant species
Sometimes very
rarely
snow
with temperate
alkaline in depth
affinities
(up to pH 8-9)

Comparison of the tropical dry biomes of South America and their definitions. See Werneck et al. [36] for a review on South American dry biomes.

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 South American dry biomes. Distribution of the Seasonally Dry Tropical Forest (SDTF) biome in South America. The 18 major forest
nuclei are labelled. The Caatinga nucleus as defined here includes North-East Brejo and Peri-Caatinga nuclei. The two other dry biomes, the
Chaco and savannas (Llanos and Cerrado) are also shown for contrast and comparison. Figure from Linares-Palomino et al. [44].

far been discussed in detail, although the need for this has
been highlighted by conservation agencies [e.g. [16]]. Similarly, biomes that show structural variation propose a challenge due to the fact that many remote sensed applications
cannot readily pick up on the differences between structurally similar vegetation. Validation methods such as
ground-truthing are required for remote sensing maps,
but solutions for continental scale studies (e.g. biome
mapping) are sparse.

Results
Delimitation of SDTF on Available Biome Maps

The comparison shows large differences in how current
biome maps depict SDTF biome distribution (Table 3).

Maps based on species composition (AB, ECO, and
ESM) perform best despite their poor spatial resolution
(Tables 3 and 4). The WWF Ecoregion map is the best
performing map showing 46.6% of specimens falling
under SDTF (Table 3). There is a consistent pattern
across the biome maps where large fractions of specimens fall into other dry biomes, 5.2-15.4% under Cerrado and 2.2-8.4% under areas labelled as Chaco (Table
3; raw results in Additional file 1, Tables S1, S2, S3, S4,
and S5). Some areas labelled as Cerrado or Chaco
receive > 20 hits SDTF habitat specialist species indicating that SDTF fragments exist within these biomes:
ECO map includes 19, LCM six, and AB 13 of such
areas (Additional file 1, Table S6).

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

Page 5 of 15

Table 3 Performance of biome maps for SDTF
Percentage of specimens
Biome map
All
species

SDTF
Narrow endemics
only

All
species

Cerrado
Narrow endemics
only

All
species

Chaco
Narrow endemics
only

Latin American Biogeography Scheme
(LAB)
[30]

40.6

36.3

7.6

4.3

8.4

5.7

Americas Basemap (AB)
[29]

42.7

42.0

29.9

15.4

3.9

3.1

WWF Ecoregions (ECO)
[16]

46.6

43.6

9.9

5.2

5.7

4.9

14.6
(62.71)
36.4

16.2
(57.31)

6.3

4.5

2.2

2.2

32.4

13.9

6.6

6.7

5.5

Land Cover Map (LCM)
[17]
Ecological Systems Map (ESM)
[31]

Percentage of specimens which fell into the SDTF biome compared to the two other South American dry biomes, savannas (mainly Cerrado in our analysis) and
the Chaco.
1
Most specimens fall into agricultural land, and if these areas are considered as degraded SDTF, 62.7% of specimens fall into SDTF. This is likely an
overestimation as part of the agricultural land could be degraded savannas or Chaco.

species dominating the dataset, but due to a consistent
trend across species. Similarly, analysis of the smaller
data set where only narrowly restricted species were
included shows a consistent pattern with the wider
analysis, where less than half of specimens fall in
SDTF (Table 3). The secondary analysis shows slightly
smaller fractions of specimens mapping under Cerrado
and Chaco (Table 3).

Species-by-species breakdown of the results shows
that there is a consistent trend across species where
similar percentage of specimens fall within and outside SDTF (Additional file 2, Tables S7 and S8). Consistent percentage of specimens fall in either
neighbouring biomes or other dry biomes (Additional
file 2, Tables S7 and S8). This indicates that the
results of the map comparison are not due to single
Table 4 Biome maps of South America
Biome map

Source
publication

Primary data used

1st tier

2nd tier

3rd tier

4th tier

Label

No. of
classes

Label

No. of
classes

Label

No. of
classes

Label

No. of
classes

Latin
American
Biogeography
Scheme
(LAB)

[30]

Geography, and secondarily
species composition and
endemism

Dominions

2

Regions

3

Subregions

8

Provinces

55

Americas
Basemap
(AB)
WWF
Ecoregions
(ECO)

[29]

Species composition and
endemism

Biomes

6

Vegetation
zones

22

Vegetation
types

73

polygons

597

[16]

Biomes

111

-

-

Ecoregions

117

polygons

3,311

Land cover
map
(LCM)

[17]

Species endemism, but
landform used as primary data
in areas lacking widely used
biogeographic maps e.g.
South America
Remote sensing and elevation

Biomes

8

-

-

Land cover
classes

65

polygons

71,153

Ecological
Systems Map
(ESM)

[31]

Domains

3

Divisions

22

Ecological
systems

604

polygons 285,0002

Climate, elevation, geology,
land cover, and landform data

Comparison of the available biome maps for South America. The hierarchical division of each biome map is shown, followed by the number of headings under
each division. The number of headings includes areas within South America only, although some schemes extend to Central and North America. Human made
habitats (e.g. urban areas, agricultural land) and barren areas (e.g. water, ice, and snow) were excluded from the comparison where possible. Tiers above
continental scale (e.g. realms) are not shown.
1
Total number of terrestrial biomes in WWF Ecoregion map is 14 but some of the major biomes not found within South America.
2
Shape layers for the individual ecological systems are not available yet for the whole of South America. The number of polygons given is the current estimate.
The currently available map is divided into 604 polygons.

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

Regional level comparison of the biome maps shows
that the limiting spatial resolution of the biome maps is
largely responsible for the poor performance of the
SDTF ground-truthing (Figure 2). The Marañón Valley
in Northern Peru is one of the most diverse SDTF
nuclei in South America, and is geographically easily

Page 6 of 15

defined as it is a narrow inter-Andean valley situated
between the Western and Eastern Cordilleras. Only
three of the maps depict the Marañón Valley (LCM,
ECO & AB; Figure 2), whilst two of the maps miss the
forest nucleus and categorise the diverse Andean biomes
under a single unit (LAB & ESM; Figure 2).

Figure 2 Performance of the biome maps for the SDTF biome. Figure illustrating how biome maps differ in depicting biomes at local and
regional level. The same area from Northern Peru is shown for each of the five biome maps. The Marañón inter-Andean valley runs through the
area in roughly north-south orientation, and is most clearly visible in map B as a brown club-shaped area. The map D depicts a more realistic
picture of the river valley, however, showing a narrower valley with an extension of the dry forests further north. A. Morrone’s Biogeographic
map [30]; B. Americas Base Map [29]; C. WWF Ecoregions [16]; D. Land Cover Map [17]; E. Ecological Systems Map [31].

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

Despite its high spatial resolution the LCM performed
poorly in the map comparison recovering only 14.6% of
specimens under SDTF (Table 3). The poor performance is an artefact of the LCM including anthropogenic habitats, however. Nearly half of the specimens
fall into agricultural land (48.2%) under categories such
as ‘Mosaic agriculture and degraded forest’ (Additional
file 1, Table S1). Although strict comparison of the
LCM and the other maps is difficult, the results indicate
that large fraction of SDTF in South America is affected
by human disturbance and is severely fragmented. If the
agricultural areas are considered as SDTF, the LCM
map becomes the best performing map with 62.7% of
specimens mapping under the correct biome (Table 3).
Specimens falling outside SDTF map under Cerrado and
the Chaco biome, similar to the other maps (Table 3).
This indicates that the poor performance of LCM is not
because it misidentifies the biome, but due to the severe
human-induced fragmentation of the SDTF biome.
Biome Distribution Modelling

For all 10 runs of the occurrence data, resulting training
and test AUC values were good (mean AUC = 0.0.832
(SD 0.002) and 0.822 (SD 0.006), respectively). Omission
of test and training samples followed closely the predicted omission rate, indicating that the test and training data were independent. Jackknife tests showed that
all 20 environmental variables contributed to the model
evenly. No variable contained substantial amount of
unique information. The environmental variables most
important in shaping the model in the training and test
data sets as well according to the AUC score were mean
temperature of coldest quarter, annual precipitation,
precipitation of the wettest month, precipitation of wettest quarter, annual mean temperature, and temperature
seasonality. The modelled distribution of SDTF based
on one of the 10 runs using 30% of specimens for testing showed highly similar distribution of the biome
across South America compared to the most recent
schematic map of the biome (Figures 1 and 3). The
modelled distribution visualised small SDTF forest
nuclei along the Andes, as well as some within the
Chaco and the Cerrado biomes (Figure 3).

Discussion
Comparison of Current Biome Maps

Baseline data of the current biome maps of South
America reviewed here varies considerably, including
data on species composition, endemism, climate, elevation, and vegetation structure. Hence, biome delimitations are expected to vary between the maps. The
expectation reflects the fact that biomes are complex
empirical realities that are hard to organise into fixed
categories, an issue discussed in depth in previous

Page 7 of 15

publications (e.g. [31,47]). Despite this, there is a growing need to review how biomes are defined in biology
[48]. Macroecological and evolutionary research is developing into fields investigating ecological and evolutionary aspects of biomes, such as productivity gradients
[21], extinction risk [22], and forest die-back due to climate change across biomes [24]. Such studies should be
based on biomes defined as biologically meaningful
units, i.e. large evolutionary meta-communities that are
not only ecological similar but share evolutionary
lineages (species, genera, families, and orders). Ways of
deriving such evolutionary biome delimitations using
community phylogenetics have been explored in a
recent study [Oliveira-Filho AT, Pennington RT, Rotella
J, Lavin M: Exploring evolutionarily meaningful vegetation definitions in the tropics: a community phylogenetic approach, submitted].
With this in mind, we performed a detailed comparison of the five biome maps using the SDTF biome as an
example. SDTF is a poorly known biome with a strongly
fragmented distribution across South America, and
hence, it works as a perfect case study for exploring
issues in biome mapping. SDTF has been confused in
the past with other South American dry biomes, the
Chaco and savannas, especially the Brazilian Cerrado
and hence we expected to see major differences between
maps. We used georeferenced specimen data of SDTF
habitat specialist species to ground-truth the biome
maps and to test how the maps differed in depicting
SDTF distribution.
The results showed poor performance of all maps in
depicting known fragments of SDTF based on herbarium records of habitat specialist species. Less than half
of specimens were mapped under the SDTF biome in all
of the maps. Large proportions of specimens were
mapped under other biomes, mainly the Chaco and Cerrado, or under neighbouring biomes in the Andes. Our
first step was to fully explore the potential underlying
causes of the poor performance. The mismatch between
the species distribution data and the biome maps raised
the question of whether georeferenced herbarium specimens can be validly used as surrogates for biome distribution. Here we consider two important questions in
relation to herbarium data: (1) georeferencing errors,
and (2) species’ ecological lability and habitat
preferences.
Georeferencing errors are common in databases such
as GBIF, and rigorous cleaning is required before any
analysis can be done (see Methods). Most of the modern
herbarium specimens do not present an issue, as these
have been georeferenced in the field with GPS and have
relatively accurate coordinate data. Excluding obvious
typing errors, these modern collections can be considered as high quality data. Specimens without coordinate

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

Page 8 of 15

Figure 3 Modelled distribution of the SDTF biome in South America. SDTF distribution in South America as predicted by Maxent model
using 6,300 herbarium specimens of SDTF habitat specialist species occurrence data and high-resolution (c. 1 km × 1 km) bioclimatic and
elevational data for the continent. The logistic output of the model is shown, where areas with high probability of suitable environmental
conditions for SDTF are highlighted in red.

data, however, are being georeferenced after the actual
collection event based on the locality description on the
specimen label. This is where errors can take place.
Whether the georeferencing is done manually or with
automated software, both methods come with errors.
The beauty of herbarium data is, however, that each
specimen has duplicates, commonly as many as five,
which are deposited in other herbaria. As these specimens become georeferenced, they provide independent,
repeated samples which can be used to detect errors.

Hence we consider the role of georeferencing errors in
relation to herbarium data in general as a manageable
source of error that can be controlled with rigorous
cleaning. In our dataset, duplicate georeferenced specimens allowed efficient cleaning of our datasets, with c.
390 records deleted as a result.
The role of potential “weedy” species (species with a
broader ecological preference that spans the STDF limits) was investigated through re-analysing the maps
using smaller data sets of specimen records from

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

narrowly restricted endemics only. The narrowly
restricted endemics occur in a single or a small set of
SDTF nuclei only, rather than across the biome, and
can hence be considered as strict habitat specialists. The
results from the second analysis supported the wider
analysis, indicating that the choice of species did not
affect our results.
Excluding the possibility of large georeferencing errors
and weedy species, our data from the ground-truthing
analysis indicates two major issues with the current
biome maps. First we consider the effect of poor spatial
resolution. All maps, with the exception of the LCM,
showed a breakdown of resolution at regional scale.
Such poor spatial resolution strongly limits the use of
such maps in GIS applications. This is particularly the
case for areas with high elevational heterogeneity where
the landscape is naturally fragmented. Our example of
the Marañón Valley in Northern Peruvian Andes illustrates how the current maps oversimplify the complex
landscape, mainly due to their poor resolution. The only
map in our analysis which succeeded in depicting the
heterogenous landscape showing smaller SDTF forest
nuclei in the Andes was the LCM, a map based on
remote-sensed data.
Secondly, we consider the role of poor delimitation of
biomes in the current maps. Whilst the LCM does not
seem to suffer from lack of spatial resolution at regional
scale, it suffers greatly from poor delimitation of the
SDTF biome. Small fragments of SDTF depicted in the
Andes are labelled under categories such as ‘Shrub
savannah’ and ‘Montane forests’. This is not surprising
considering how difficult it is to distinguish between dry
vegetation types with remote sensed data alone [49].
The poor delimitation of the SDTF and other dry
biomes in the LCM suggests that there is a particular
need to use ground-truthing or other validation methods in remote sensing, especially for dry biomes.
Refining SDTF Distribution

So what is the best current estimate of the SDTF distribution? We used the BDM approach to generate a
refined distribution map of SDTF, where climatic and
elevation data was used in conjunction with the herbarium specimen data to model the biome distribution.
The modelled SDTF map strongly agrees with previously published maps [33,45] but is higher in spatial
detail. Whilst the current South American biome maps
failed in accurately depicting small SDTF fragments
such as the Andean forest nuclei, the modelled distribution gives a more realistic representation of the biome
in South America. The model performance was good,
close to excellent, which gives support to the idea that
modelling ecologically similar species under a single
model might be a justifiable approach. Previous study of

Page 9 of 15

the North American mouse species Peromyscus polionotus and its 15 subspecies concluded that modelling ecologically coherent units (i.e. subspecies in their case)
resulted in better distribution models compared to models where ecologically divergent subspecies were combined into a single data set [50]. Similar studies should
be done to explore model performance when mapping
multiple species using the BDM approach.
The availability of a more accurate distribution map
for the South American SDTF will hopefully highlight
the importance and diversity of the ecosystem, and is a
prerequisite for conservation planning and management.
For example, despite the small size of the Andean SDTF
fragments, depicting their distribution is of great importance, as these forest nuclei host unique biota comparable to the diversity found in the Galápagos Islands (e.g.
Marañón Valley, Northern Peru [46,51]). Furthermore,
our ground-truthing analysis of the LCM showed that
large percentage of SDTF areas are highly degraded due
to agriculture. Given that 54.2% of the remaining SDTF
are estimated to be in South America based on the
recent global overview of the SDTF conservation status
[52], our results paint a dire picture of the status of
these forgotten forests where approximately half of the
forest area has been degraded by agriculture. The
remaining areas are becoming smaller and smaller, and
hence harder to detect and depict in large scale maps.
Use of Herbarium Specimen Data in Biome Mapping

What can we learn from this case study? Our analysis
shows just how difficult it is to map highly discontinuous and fragmented vegetation like SDTF over large
spatial scales. Fragmented biomes are underrepresented
in biome maps in general, as smaller fragments are
easily missed especially if spatial resolution is poor.
Anthropogenic fragmentation poses additional challenges: vegetation cover is becoming increasingly fragmented due to human disturbance, and habitat
degradation is leading to changes in vegetation structure
even in biomes previously deemed structurally homogeneous. Both of these factors lead to difficulties of mapping biomes based on vegetation structure data alone (i.
e. remote sensing).
This is where herbarium data from habitat specialist
species could help, given that plants act as indicators of
the environment as a whole. With increasing number of
georeferenced specimens available through online databases (e.g. over 1.8 million specimens available for Brazil
through CRIASpecies link alone), we argue that specimen data can generally contribute to the growing need
of feasible validation tools for remote sensing maps (e.g.
[53,54]). Whilst ground-truthing over continental scales
is not feasible, it can be done in silico by downloading
and cleaning herbarium data in a relatively short time

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

over large spatial scales. Lack of validation tools has
been highlighted in recent reviews as a major area
requiring further research [55,56]. Herbarium specimens
are currently used in modelling species distributions and
in estimating species diversity [57,58], but no studies to
our knowledge have explored the use of georeferenced
specimen data as a validation tool, despite the availability of millions of specimens available online.
In silico ground-truthing would be particularly useful
for biome maps of highly environmentally heterogeneous areas such as the Andes. Current continental
scale biome maps depict a depauperate picture of
Andean diversity concatenating much of it into single
meaningless units such as ‘Montane vegetation of dry
forest and open woodland’. Strongly seasonal biomes,
such as SDTF, are another special case where herbarium
data can provide help. Remote sensing images are often
inadequate in distinguishing seasonal forests, as they can
appear like humid forests during wet season, but as
shrubland during the long dry season. Highly degraded
biomes and habitats provide yet another case where herbarium data could be used to study habitat loss over
time, as specimen data over time can provide an estimate of the original distribution of vegetation cover
based on plants collected before land clearance. Lastly,
human-induced disturbance and habitat degradation
causes issues in remote sensing, and herbarium data
could be used as an aid in distinguishing between
degraded savanna and degraded dry forest which is currently not feasible with remote sensed data alone.
Another use of herbarium data in biome mapping is
the BDM approach presented in this paper. The BDM
approach has previously been used to map historical distribution of biomes using past climate conditions in
combination with herbarium data [59-61], whilst our
focus was to use the approach to model current biome
distribution. The advantage of the BDM approach over
other mapping methods is that it combines high spatial
resolution environmental data with floristic data in the
form of georeferenced herbarium specimens. The
approach results in maps with extremely high spatial
resolution (1 km × 1 km) and requires less groundtruthing as maps are modelled based on floristic data. In
the case of SDTF, BDM approach produced a much
improved biome map with a relatively small effort. The
new map can be considered as a working hypothesis of
the SDTF distribution in South America, and as more
data is added to the model, the distribution of the
biome can be easily refined.

Conclusions
Current biome maps of South America perform poorly
in depicting known fragments of SDTF which are based
on herbarium records of habitat specialist species. The

Page 10 of 15

poor performance of the maps can be attributed to two
main factors: (1) the poor spatial resolution of the
biome maps, and (2) their poor delimitation of SDTF.
Georeferenced herbarium data could provide a validation tool for enhancing biome maps in general. Map
schemes that rely fully on remote sensed data could
gain from the use of herbarium specimens in particular,
as ground-truthing across continents with plot data is
currently not feasible. The lack of studies incorporating
herbarium specimens has been likely due to inadequate
specimen data across species distributions especially for
tropical taxa [62], but the situations is rapidly improving
as more information is collected and digitized, potentially leading to its use not only in validating biome
maps, but also in constructing them [48]. An alternative
approach is presented where herbarium specimens are
used in conjunction with environmental data to model
current biome distributions. Incorporating herbarium
data in biome mapping using either of the above
approaches should be encouraged, especially so in projects focusing on poorly known, fragmented and/or
structurally heterogeneous biomes. We highlight that
special attention should be given to specimen identification. Specimen determinations by taxonomic experts
should be used as a way to quality control data. Taxonomic sources should also be consulted in the choice of
species used.

Methods
SDTF Habitat Specialist Species Occurrence Data Set

Georeferenced herbarium specimen data of endemic
SDTF habitat specialist species was used to test the
accuracy of the available biome maps. Despite the generally high ß-diversity among SDTF nuclei, there are a
small set of widespread species that occur in most of
the forest nuclei across South American SDTFs [44].
Despite their wide distribution across the continent,
these species are considered as habitat specialists, and
all of the nine species were included in this study. A set
of further 23 species have been used to define the SDTF
distribution in previous publications [32,33,45].
Although recent data indicates that many of these species are ecologically more labile than previously thought
(e.g. Anadenanthera colubrina [63]), we included the 23
species in the data matrix. Lastly, in order to reach a
more comprehensive species list, we identified 23 narrowly distributed endemics from different SDTF nuclei
(e.g. Cyathostegia matthewsii, Solanum plowmanii,
Table 5). These narrowly distributed species acted also
to boost specimen numbers for generally poorly collected areas such as Andean Peru and Bolivia. The final
list included a total of 49 species (Table 5). Occurrence
data for the selected species were downloaded from
GBIF Data Portal (data.gbif.org, August 2011), CRIA

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

Page 11 of 15

Table 5 List of SDTF specialist species
No.

Species

Family

Prado & Gibbs
[32]

Prado
[33]

Linares-Palomino
et al.
[44]

No. of specimens
included

1

Amburana cearensis (Fr.All.) A.C.Smith

Leguminosae

x

x

SDTF generalist

243

2

Anadenanthera colubrina (Vell.) Brenan

Leguminosae

x

x

x

714

3
4

Aspidosperma polyneuron Müll. Arg.
Aspidosperma pyrifolium Mart.

Apocynaceae
Apocynaceae

x
x

x

x
x

171
300

x

x

53

5

Balfourodendron riedelianum (Engl.) Engl.

Rutaceae

6

Blanchetiodendron blanchetii (Benth.) Barneby & J.W.
Grimes

Leguminosae

7

Chloroleucon tenuiflorum (Benth.) Barneby & J.W.
Grimes

Leguminosae

8

Combretum leprosum Mart. Search in The Plant List

Combretaceae

x

x

x

78

9

Cordia americana (L.) Gottschling & J.S. Mill.

Boraginaceae

x

x

x

103

x

x
x

78

10

Cordia incognita Gottschling & J.S. Mill.

Boraginaceae

11

Cyathostegia matthewsii (Benth.) Schery

30
x

Leguminosae

47

57

12

Diatenopteryx sorbifolia Radlk.

Sapindaceae

x

x

x

96

13
14

Enterolobium contortisiliquum (Vell.) Morong
Geoffroea spinosa Jacq.

Leguminosae
Leguminosae

x
x

x

x
x

304
110

15

Machaerium aculeatum Raddi

Leguminosae

16

Machaerium condensatum Kuhlm. & Hoehne

Leguminosae

17

Machaerium ruddianum Mendonça Filho & A. M. G.
Azevedo

Leguminosae

174
x

20
13

18

Mimosa arenosa (Willd.) Poir.

Leguminosae

x

19

Myracrodruon urundeuva Fr.All.

Anacardiaceae

x

x

20

Nicotiana glutinosa L.

Solanaceae

15

21

Parapiptadenia blanchetii (Benth.) Vaz & Lima

Leguminosae

23

22

Parapiptadenia zehntneri (Harms) M. P. M. de Lima &
H. C. de Lima

Leguminosae

125

x

149

x

452

23

Peltogyne pauciflora Benth.

Leguminosae

24
25

Peltophorum dubium (Spreng.) Taub.
Phytolacca dioica L.

Leguminosae
Phytolaccaceae

x
x

x
x

75

26
27

Piptadenia viridiflora (Kunth) Benth.
Pityrocarpa moniliformis (Benth.) Luckow & R. W.
Jobson

Leguminosae
Leguminosae

x

x

28

Pouteria gardneriana (A. DC.) Radlk. Search in The
Plant List

Sapotaceae

x

x

x

64

x
x

216
216
216
188

29

Pterogyne nitens Tul.

Leguminosae

x

x

SDTF generalist

323

30

Ruprechtia laxiflora Meissn.

Polygonaceae

x

x

x

266

31

Schinopsis brasiliensis Engl.

Anacardiaceae

x

x

x

286

32

Sideroxylon obtusifolium (Roem. & Schult.) T.D.Penn.

Sapotaceae

x

x

317

33

Solanum amotapense Svenson

Solanaceae

13

34

Solanum chmielewskii (C.M.Rick et al.) D.M.Spooner
et al.

Solanaceae

7

35

Solanum confertiseriatum Bitter

Solanaceae

36
37

Solanum corumbense S.Moore
Solanum daphnophyllum Bitter

Solanaceae
Solanaceae

38

Solanum gnaphalocarpon Vell.
Solanum granuloso-leprosum Dunal

Solanaceae

70
35
55

Solanaceae

39

x

x
x

7

x

36

40

Solanum hibernum Bohs

Solanaceae

14

41

Solanum huaylasense Peralta,

Solanaceae

1

42

Solanum hutchisonii (J.F.Macbr.) Bohs

Solanaceae

43

Solanum iltisii K.E.Roe

Solanaceae

x

20

44
45

Solanum neorickii D.M.Spooner et al.
Solanum plowmanii S.Knapp

Solanaceae
Solanaceae

x

24
27

4

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

Page 12 of 15

Table 5 List of SDTF specialist species (Continued)
46

Solanum smithii S.Knapp

Solanaceae

47

Solanum stuckertii Bitter

Solanaceae

48

Ximenia americana L.

Ximeniaceae

49

Zanthoxylum fagara (L.) Sarg.

Rutaceae

15
19
x

x

232

x
TOTAL

199
6300

List of species used for ground-truthing the biome maps. See Methods for details on how species were chosen. Species highlighted in grey are narrowly
distributed endemics restricted to only a few of the SDTF nuclei. These were used in a secondary analysis where the effect of widespread and potentially weedy
species was investigated. Species used as SDTF indicators in previous studies are shown (x). Widespread but ecological specialised SDTF species defined by
Linares-Palomino et al. [44] are shown in bold (x).

speciesLink (splink.cria.org.br, August 2011), and the
Solanaceae source (http://www.nhm.ac.uk/research-curation/research/projects/solanaceaesource/, August 2011).
The data set was cleaned by comparing distributions
to areas noted in original taxonomic publications.
Obvious outliers were checked and deleted when
necessary. Duplicate specimens were used to check the
data quality; when duplicates with different coordinates
were spotted, these were deleted (390 specimens in
total). The resolution of the georeferenced material
varied from poor (degrees only) to excellent (degrees,
minutes and seconds). Specimens with degrees only

were excluded from the datasets. Cultivated specimens
were excluded. The final cleaned datasets included a
total of 6,300 specimens, and 3,733 unique localities
from across the SDTF biome distribution (Figure 4).
Secondary analysis was done with a smaller data set
(1,110 specimens) to test the effect of the widely distributed species in our analysis (Table 5; Figure 4).
The secondary analysis included the 23 narrowly distributed endemic species only (Table 5). Most of the
widely distributed species were discarded from this
analysis due to recent data indicating doubts on their
habitat preferences [63].

Figure 4 Distribution map of the SDTF specialist species. Combined distribution map of the herbarium records used in this study. A. Map
based on 6,300 specimen records of 49 SDTF specialist species; B. Map based on a reduced dataset of 1,110 specimen records where 23
narrowly distributed species with more restricted ecological ranges were included.

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

The combined distribution map of the specimens,
both the full and partial dataset (Figure 4) was drawn
using ArcMap 10, and was observed to match the SDTF
distribution depicted in previous publications [33,45].
Although no obvious gaps in the distribution data can
be identified, the dataset had only a few specimens from
northern South America (Figure 4). Most data points
were for Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Bolivia.
Comparison of Biome Maps

The maps included in the study are freely available
online or can be requested from the corresponding
authors. Attribute tables of biome maps were used to
obtain data on their hierarchical divisions using ArcMap
10. The number of divisions was recorded for South
America only, as this was the largest common denominator of all the maps. The Caribbean and the islands of
the coast of South America were excluded. Urban and
barren areas (e.g. water, ice, and snow) were omitted
from each biome map prior to calculations.
Map comparison was performed in ArcMap 10 using
the full and partial herbarium specimen data sets as a
way of ground truthing. The ArcToolbox option of Spatial Join was used to join the distribution data with the
biome map layer. Once the joined data file was created,
the number of specimens falling into each biome category was calculated using the enquiry tool. Specimens
that fell under categories ‘Shrublands’ and ‘Deserts and
xeric shrublands’ were included under SDTF (Additional
file 1). Because maps LAB and ESM did not distinguish
SDTF under a single category, areas ‘Caatinga’, ‘Arid
Ecuador’, ‘Tumbes-Piura’, and ‘Monte’ in LAB, and ‘Caatinga’, ‘Dry Meso-America’, and ‘Caribbean’ in ESM,
were regarded as SDTF (Additional file 1).

Page 13 of 15

variables included 19 bioclimatic variables and elevation
data from WorldClim at 30 arc-second spatial resolution
(c. 1 km2, http://www.worldclim.org/bioclim) [67]. The
layers were downloaded in tiles, including tiles 23-24,
33-34, and 43-44. The entire set of 19 climatic variables
was used to avoid any a priori assumptions of correlations among the variables. Maxent 3.3.2 (http://www.cs.
princeton.edu/) was run with default settings: convergence threshold 10-5, maximum number of iterations of
500, regularisation = 1. Distribution data set was partitioned so that 30% of the records were omitted from
model building and used as a test dataset (1,025 specimens). Ten iterations of the model were run with random seed to derive mean and standard deviation (SD)
of AUC model scores. The model output was evaluated
using the area under curve (AUC) value of receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) plot. AUC value of 1
indicates optimal performance, whilst AUC = 0.5 indicates performance equal to random. The importance of
the input environmental variables in model building was
measured using jackknife. Jackknife test compares gains
between models run with and without each environmental variable and measures the relative importance of
each variable to the final model build. The resulting distribution is given in logistical values, where 0 refers to
low probability and values near 1 mean high probability
of presence. Map was generated by visualising all areas
with logistical value > 0.5. Omission levels at this level
were 36% for training and 37% for testing data set. The
map is available from the authors by request.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Tables S1-S6. Results of each of the biome maps and
their performance using specimen data. Biomes corresponding to SDTF
are highlighted for each map (file available electronically).

Distribution Modelling of SDTF

A new map for the SDTF was constructed using an
approach here referred to as the biome distribution
modelling (BDM). BDM is based on species distribution
modelling, where environmental variables are used in
conjunction with species occurrence data to model species distributions. Instead of modelling a single species
distribution, BDM uses a composite data set of habitat
specialist species to model the distribution of the whole
biome.
BDM was performed using the maximum entropy
model as implemented in Maxent software [64,65] as
the model has been shown to perform well against other
presence only models [66]. The model uses the principle
of maximum entropy density estimation to generate a
probability distribution based on presence-only data
[64,65]. A single model was constructed for the South
America SDTF using the complete herbarium specimen
data set with 6,300 records. Input environmental

Additional file 2: Tables S7-S8. Species-by-species breakdown of results
for the WWF Ecoregion and the Land Cover Map (file available
electronically).

Acknowledgements
We thank Sandra Knapp who made invaluable comments on early versions
of the manuscript, and Nadia Bystriakova for advice on Maxent. We thank
NatureServe (collaboration with the Centro de Datos para la Conservación of
the Universidad Nacional Agraria La Molina, the Instituto de Investigación de
la Amazonía Peruana, Gonzalo Navarro, and Wanderley Ferreira) who
provided the Ecological Systems Data. The study was funded by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) grant “PBI Solanum - a world treatment”
DEB-0316614 [TS], and the Universidad Nacional de Rosario and Consejo
Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Argentina [DEP].
Author details
Department of Botany, Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London
SW7 5BD, UK. 2Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Programa de
Pós-Graduação em Botânica, Av. Bento Gonçalves, 9500 - Prédio 43433,
Bloco 4 - Sala 214, Campus do Vale, Porto Alegre- RS 91501-970, Brazil.
3
Herbario Forestal MOL, Universidad Nacional Agraria La Molina, Apartado
1

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

456, Lima 1, Peru. 4Embrapa Recursos Genéticos e Biotechnologia, PqEB,
Caixa Postal 02372, Brasilia-DF 70770-917, Brazil. 5Facultad de Ciencias
Agrarias, Universidad Nacional de Rosario. P.O. Box N°14, S2125ZAA Zavalla,
Argentina.
Authors’ contributions
TS led the design of the study with considerable contributions from all
authors. TS analysed the data and drafted the manuscript, and TS and JRVI
assembled and cleaned the data set. DP led the choice of specialist species
and the overall concept of SDTF in biome maps as the senior leading
researcher. All authors assisted in writing the manuscript, and read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 6 September 2011 Accepted: 24 November 2011
Published: 24 November 2011
References
1. Raven PH: Tropical floristics tomorrow. Taxon 1988, 37:549-560.
2. Prance GT: A comparison of the efficacy of higher taxa and species
numbers in the assessment of biodiversity in the Neotropics. Phil Trans R
Soc B London 1994, 345:89-99.
3. Thomas WW: Conservation and monographic research on the flora of
Tropical America. Biodivers Conserv 1999, 8:1007-1015.
4. Myers N, Mittermeier RA, Mittermeier CG, da Fonseca GAB, Kent J:
Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature 2000, 403:853-858.
5. White F: The vegetation of Africa: a descriptive memoir to accompany the
Unesco/AETFAT/UNSO vegetation map of Africa. Paris, Unesco 1983.
6. White F: The AETFAT chorological classification of Africa: history,
methods and applications. Bull Jard Bot Nat Belg 1993, 62:225-281.
7. Kindt R, Osino D, Orwa C, Nzisa A, van Breugel P, Graudal L, Lilleso JPB,
Kehlenbeck K, Dietz J, Nyabenge M, Jamnadass R, Neufeld H: Useful tree
species for Africa: interactive vegetation maps and species composition tables
based on the Vegetation Map of Africa Nairobi, World Agroforestry Centre;
2011.
8. Cardillo M: Phylogenetic structure of mammal assemblages at large
geographical scales: linking phylogenetic community ecology with
macroecology. Philos T R Soc B 2011, 366:2545-2553.
9. Fernández MH, Vrba ES: Macroevolutionary processes and biomic
specialization: testing the resource-use hypothesys. Evol Ecol 2005,
19:199-219.
10. Kelt DA, Meyer MD: Body size frequency distributions in African
mammals are bimodal at all spatial scales. Global Ecol Biogeogr 2009,
18:19-29.
11. ter Steege H, Pitman NCA, Phillips OL, Chave J, Sabatier D, Duque A,
Molino JF, Prevost MF, Spichiger R, Castellanos H, von Hildebrand P,
Vasquez R: Continental-scale patterns of canopy tree composition and
function across Amazonia. Nature 2006, 443:444-447.
12. Engelbrecht BMJ, Comita LS, Condit R, Kursar TA, Tyree MT, Turner BL,
Hubbell SP: Drought sensitivity shapes species distribution patterns in
tropical forests. Nature 2007, 447:80-82.
13. Carnaval AC, Hickerson MJ, Haddad CFB, Rodrigues MT, Moritz C: Stability
predicts genetic diversity in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest hotspot. Science
2009, 323:785-789.
14. Hoorn C, Wesselingh FP, ter Steege H, Bermudez MA, Mora A, Sevink J,
Sanmartin I, Sanchez-Meseguer A, Anderson CL, Figueiredo JP, Jaramillo C,
Riff D, Negri FR, Hooghiemstra H, Lundberg J, Stadler T, Sarkinen T,
Antonelli A: Amazonia through time: Andean uplift, climate change,
landscape evolution, and biodiversity. Science 2010, 330:927-931.
15. Jaramillo C, Ochoa D, Contreras L, Pagani M, Carvajal-Ortiz H, Pratt LM,
Krishnan S, Cardona A, Romero M, Quiroz L, Rodriguez G, Rueda MJ, de la
Parra F, Moron S, Green W, Bayona G, Montes C, Quintero O, Ramirez R,
Mora G, Schouten S, Bermudez H, Navarrete R, Parra F, Alvaran M, Osorno J,
Crowley JL, Valencia V, Vervoort J: Effects of rapid global warming at the
Paleocene-Eocene boundary on Neotropical vegetation. Science 2010,
330:957-961.
16. Olson DM, Dinerstein E, Wikramanayake ED, Burgess ND, Powell GVN,
Underwood EC, D’Amico JA, Itoya I, Strand HE, Morrison JC, Loucks CJ,
Allnutt TF, Ricketts TH, Kura Y, Lamoreux JF, Wettengel WW, Hedao P,
Kassem KR: Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: a new map of life on
earth. BioScience 2001, 51:933-938.

Page 14 of 15

17. Eva HD, Belward AS, de Miranda EE, di Bella CM, Gond V, Huber O, Jones S,
Sgrenzaroli M, Fritz S: A land cover map of South America. Glob Change
Biol 2004, 10:731-744.
18. Cavender-Bares J, Wilczek A: Integrating micro- and macroevolutionary
processes in community ecology. Ecology 2003, 84:592-597.
19. McInnes L, Baker WJ, Barraclough TG, Dasmahapatra KK, Goswami A,
Harmon LJ, Morlon H, Purvis A, Rosindell J, Thomas GH, Turvey ST,
Phillimore AB: Integrating ecology into macroevolutionary research. Biol
Lett 2011.
20. Crisp MD, Arroyo MTK, Cook LG, Gandolfo MA, Jordan GJ, McGlone MS,
Weston PH, Westoby M, Wilf P, Linder PH: Phylogenetic biome
conservatism on a global scale. Nature 2009, 458:754-756.
21. He K, Zhang JT: Testing the correlation between beta diversity and
differences in productivity among global ecoregions, biomes, and
biogeographical realms. Ecol Inform 2009, 4:93-98.
22. Fritz SA, Bininda-Emonds ORP, Purvis A: Geographical variation in
predictors of mammalian extinction risk: big is bad, but only in the
tropics. Ecol Lett 2009, 12:538-549.
23. Bofarull AM, Royo AA, Fernandez MH, Ortiz-Jaureguizar E, Morales J:
Influence of continental history on the ecological specialization and
macroevolutionary processes in the mammalian assemblage of South
America: Differences between small and large mammals. BMC Evol Biol
2008, 8.
24. Malhi Y, Aragao LEOC, Galbraith D, Huntingford C, Fisher R, Zelazowski P,
Sitch S, McSweeney C, Meir P: Exploring the likelihood and mechanism of
a climate-change-induced dieback of the Amazon rainforest. P Natl Acad
Sci 2009, 106:20610-20615.
25. von AHumboldt, Bonpland A: Essai sur la geographie des plantes Paris,
Levrault, Schoell & Cie; 1805.
26. Wiens JJ, Graham CH: Niche conservatism: Integrating evolution, ecology,
and conservation biology. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2005, 36:519-539.
27. Donoghue MJ: A phylogenetic perspective on the distribution of plant
diversity. P Natl Acad Sci 2008, 105:11549-11555.
28. Pennington RT, Lavin M, Sarkinen T, Lewis GP, Klitgaard BB, Hughes CE:
Contrasting plant diversification histories within the Andean biodiversity
hotspot. P Natl Acad Sci 2010, 107:13783-13787.
29. Daly DC, Mitchell JD: Lowland vegetation of tropical South America - an
overview. In Imperfect balance: Landscape transformations in the preColombian Americas. Edited by: Lentz D. New York, Columbia University
Press; 2000:391-454.
30. Morrone JJ: Biogeografia de America Latina y el Caribe Zaragoza, Manuales &
Tesis SEA; 2001.
31. Josse C, Navarro G, Comer P, Evans R, Faber-Langendoen D, Fellows M,
Kittel S, Menard S, Pyne M, Reid M, Schulz K, Snow K, Teague J: Ecological
systems of Latin America and the Caribbean: A working classification of
terrestrial systems Arlington VA, Nature Serve; 2003.
32. Prado DE, Gibbs PE: Patterns of species distributions in the Dry Seasonal
Forests of South America. Ann Mo Bot Gard 1993, 80:902-927.
33. Prado DE: Seasonally dry forests of tropical South America: from
forgotten ecosystems to a new phytogeographic unit. Ed J Bot 2000,
57:437-461.
34. Pennington RT, Ratter JA, Lewis GP: An overview of the plant diversity,
biogeography and conservation of neotropical savannas and seasonally
dry forests. In Neotropical savannas and seasonally dry forests: plant
biodiversity, biogeography and conservation. Edited by: Pennington RT, Ratter
JA, Lewis GP. Florida, CRC Press; 2006:1-29.
35. Dirzo R, Mooney H, Ceballos G, Young H: Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests:
Ecology and Conservation Island Press; 2011.
36. Werneck FP, Costa GC, Colli GR, Prado DE, Sites JW: Revisiting the
historical distribution of seasonally dry tropical forests: new insights
based on palaeodistribution modelling and palynological evidence.
Global Ecol Biogeogr 2011, 20:272-288.
37. Murphy P, Lugo AE: Ecology of tropical dry forests. Annu Rev Ecol Syst
1986, 17:67-88.
38. Gentry AH: Diversity and floristic composition of neotropical dry forests.
In Seasonally dry tropical forests. Edited by: Bullock SH, Mooney HA, Medina
E. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press; 1995:146-194.
39. Werneck FP: The diversification of eastern South American open
vegetation biomes: historical biogeography and perspectives. Quat Sci
Rev 2011, 30:1630-1648.

Särkinen et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/27

40. Furley PA, Ratter JA: Soil resources and plant communities of the central
Brazilian cerrado and their development. J Biogeogr 1988, 15:97-108.
41. Prado DE: What is the Gran Chaco vegetation in South America?. I. A
review. Contribution to the study of flora and vegetation of the Chaco.
V. Candollea 1993, 48:145-172.
42. Prado DE: What is the Gran Chaco vegetation in South America?. II. A
redefinition. Contribution to the study of flora and vegetation of the
Chaco. VII. Candollea 1993, 48:615-629.
43. Portillo-Quintero CA, Sanchez-Azofeifa GA: Extent and conservation of
tropical dry forests in the Americas. Biol Conserv 2011, 143:144-155.
44. Linares-Palomino R, Oliveira-Filho AT, Pennington RT: Neotropical
seasonally dry forests: Diversity, endemism, and biogeography of woody
plants. In Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests: Ecology and Conservation. Edited
by: Dirzo R, Mooney H, Ceballos G, Young H. Island Press; 2011:3-21.
45. Pennington RT, Prado DE, Pendry CA: Neotropical seasonally dry forests
and Quaternary vegetation changes. J Biogeogr 2000, 27:261-273.
46. Linares-Palomino R: Phytogeography and floristics of seasonally dry
tropical forests in Peru. In Neotropical savannas and seasonally dry forests:
plant biodiversity, biogeography and conservation. Edited by: Pennington RT,
Ratter JA, Lewis GP. Florida, CRC Press; 2006:257-279.
47. Oliveira-Filho AT: Classificação das fitofisionomias da América do Sul
cisandina tropical e subtropical: proposta de um novo sistema - prático
e flexível - u uma injeção a mais de caos? Rodriguésia 2009, 60:237-258.
48. Kreft H, Jetz W: A framework for delineating biogeographical regions
based on species distributions. J Biogeogr 2010, 37:2029-2053.
49. Kalacska M, Sanchez-Azofeifa GA, Rivard B, Calvo-Alvarado JC, Quesada M:
Baseline assessment for environmental services payments from satellite
imagery: A case study from Costa Rica and Mexico. J Environ Manag
2008, 88:348-359.
50. Gonzalez SC, Soto-Centeno JA, Reed DL: Population distribution models:
species distributions are better modelled using biologically relevant
data partitions. BMC Ecol 2011, 11:20.
51. Särkinen TE, Marcelo-Peña JL, Yomona AD, Simon MF, Pennington RT,
Hughes CE: Underestimated endemic species diversity in the dry interAndean valley of the Río Marañón, northern Peru: An example from
Mimosa (Leguminosae, Mimosoideae). Taxon 2011, 60:139-150.
52. Miles L, Newton AC, DeFries RS, Ravilious C, May I, Blyth S, Kapos V,
Gordon JE: A global overview of the conservation status of tropical dry
forests. J Biogeogr 2006, 33:491-505.
53. Foody GM: Status of land cover classification accuracy assessment.
Remote Sens Environ 2002, 80:185-201.
54. Turner W, Spector S, Gardiner N, Fladeland M, Sterling E, Steininger M:
Remote sensing for biodiversity science and conservation. Trends Ecol
Evol 2003, 18:306-314.
55. Gottschalk TK, Huettmann R, Ehlers M: Thirty years of analysing and
modelling avian habitat relationships using satellite imagery data: a
review. Int J Remote Sensing 2005, 26:2631-2656.
56. Gillespie TW, Foody GM, Rocchini D, Giorgi AP, Saatchi S: Measuring and
modelling biodiversity from space. Prog Phys Geog 2008, 32:203-221.
57. Raxworthy CJ, Martinez-Meyer E, Horning N, Nussbaum RA, Schneider GE,
Ortega-Huerta MA, Peterson AT: Predicting distributions of known and
unknown reptile species in Madagascar. Nature 2003, 426:837-841.
58. Saatchi S, Buermann W, ter Steege H, Mori S, Smith TB: Modeling
distribution of Amazonian tree species and diversity using remote
sensing measurements. Rem Sens Environ 2008, 112:2000-2017.
59. Carnaval AC, Moritz C: Historical climate modelling predicts patterns of
current biodiversity in the Brazilian Atlantic forest. J Biogeogr 2008,
35:1187-1201.
60. Graham CH, Moritz C, Williams SE: Habitat history improves prediction of
biodiversity in rainforest fauna. P Natl Acad Sci 2006, 103:632-636.
61. Werneck FP, Costa GC, Colli GR, Prado D, Sites JW Jr: Revisiting the
historical distribution of Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests: new insights
based on palaeodistribution modelling and palynological evidence.
Global Ecol Biogeogr 2011, 20:272-288.
62. Tobler MW, Honorio E, Janoyec J, Reynel C: Implications of collection
patterns of botanical specimens on their usefulness for conservation
planning: an example of two neotropical plant families (Moraceae and
Myristicaceae) in Peru. Biod & Conserv 2007, 16:659-677.
63. Oliveira-Filho AT: TreeAtlan 2.0, Flora arbórea da América do Sul
cisandina tropical e subtropical: Um banco de dados envolvendo

Page 15 of 15

64.

65.
66.

67.

68.
69.

biogeografia, diversidade e conservação. Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais 2010 [http://www.icb.ufmg.br/treeatlan/].
Phillips SJ, Dudík M, Schapire RE: A maximum entropy approach to
species distribution modeling. Proc Twenty-First Int Conf Machine Learning
2004, 655-662.
Phillips SJ, Anderson RP, Schapire RE: Maximum entropy modeling of
species geographic distributions. Ecol Modelling 2006, 190:231-259.
Elith J, Graham CH, Anderson RP, Dudik M, Ferrier S, Guisan A, Hijmans RJ,
Huettmann F, Leathwick JR, Lehmann A, Li J, Lohmann LG, Loiselle BA,
Manion G, Moritz C, Nakamura M, Nakazawa Y, Overton JMcC, Townsend
Peterson A, Phillips SJ, Richardson K, Scachetti-Pereira R, Schapire RE,
Soberon J, Williams S, Wisz MS, Zimmermann NE: Novel methods improve
predition of species’ distributions from occurrence data. Ecography 2006,
29:129-151.
Hijmans RJ, Cameron SE, Parra JL, Jones PG, Jarvis A: Very high resolution
interpolated climate surfaces for global land areas. Int J Climatology 2005,
25:1965-1978.
Ratter JA, Ribeiro JF, Bridgewater S: The Brazilian Cerrado vegetation and
threats to its biodiversity. Ann Bot 1997, 80:223-230.
Ratter JA, Bridgewater S, Ribeiro JF: Analysis of the floristic composition of
the Brazilian Cerrado vegetation III: comparison of the woody
vegetation of 376 areas. Ed J Bot 2003, 60:57-109.

doi:10.1186/1472-6785-11-27
Cite this article as: Särkinen et al.: Forgotten forests - issues and
prospects in biome mapping using Seasonally Dry Tropical Forests as a
case study. BMC Ecology 2011 11:27.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
