<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Transcribed-ultra conserved region expression profiling from low-input total RNA</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:149. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-149"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Paola Scaruffi"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Scaruffi et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:149
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/149

METHODOLOGY ARTICLE

Open Access

Transcribed-ultra conserved region expression
profiling from low-input total RNA
Paola Scaruffi1*, Sara Stigliani1, Simona Coco1, Franscesca Valdora2, Carla De Vecchi1, Stefano Bonassi3,
Gian Paolo Tonini1

Abstract
Background: Ultra Conserved Regions (UCRs) are a class of 481 noncoding sequences located in both intra- and
inter-genic regions of the genome. The recent findings that they are significantly altered in adult chronic
lymphocytic leukemias, carcinomas, and pediatric neuroblastomas lead to the hypothesis that UCRs may play a role
in tumorigenesis.
Results: We present a novel application of Ribo-SPIA™ isothermal linear amplification of minute RNA quantities for
quantifying Transcribed-UCR (T-UCR) expression by quantitative PCR. Direct comparison of non-amplified with
amplified cDNA in two neuroblastoma cell lines showed that the amplification approach increases sensitivity and
repeatability in T-UCR quantification. It is noteworthy that the Ribo-SPIA™ step allowed us to analyze all 481 T-UCRs
by using 150 ng of RNA, while introducing a minimal bias and preserving the magnitude of relative expression.
Only the less abundant T-UCRs have high intra-assay variability, consistently with the Poisson distribution statistics
and stochastic effects on PCR repeatability.
Conclusions: We demonstrated that the quantification procedure shown here is an accurate and reliable
technique for genome-wide non coding gene (i.e., UCRs) profiling using small amounts of RNA. This issue is
particularly important because studies of transcription regulation are increasingly conducted in small homogeneous
samples, such as laser capture microdissected or sorted cell populations.

Background
Ultra Conserved Regions (UCRs) are a class of noncoding sequences discovered in 2004 by Bejerano and colleagues [1,2]. The UCRs are located in both intra- and
inter-genic regions and 53% of them are nonexonic,
whereas the remaining 47% are either overlapping
mRNAs or possibly exonic. Since UCRs represent a
group of 481 sequences (200-779 bp in length) that are
100% conserved among orthologous regions of human,
mouse, and rat genomes, it has been suggested they may
be involved in ontogeny and phylogeny of mammals and
other vertebrates [3]. Previous studies identified a functional role for these noncoding sequences both in regulation of alternative splicing and in promoting the
expression of several genes [3]. Calin et al. [4] demonstrated that UCRs are significantly altered at both genomic and expression levels in adult chronic lymphocytic
* Correspondence: paola.scaruffi@istge.it
1
Translational Paediatric Oncology, National Cancer Research Institute (IST),
Largo R Benzi 10, Genoa, 16132, Italy

leukemias, colorectal and hepatocellular carcinomas. We
recently profiled both T-UCRs and microRNAs in a
cohort of 34 high-risk neuroblastoma (NB) tumors, with
the aim to investigate their putative role as sensitive
markers of outcome prediction in children with stage 4
NB [5]. Our study identified for the first time a signature based on T-UCR expression that is associated with
good outcome in non infant patients diagnosed with
metastatic NB. Moreover, our findings strongly suggest
that a deregulation of the microRNA/T-UCR network
may play an important role in the pathogenesis of
neuroblastoma.
Microarrays, Northern blot and reverse transcriptionquantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) have been successfully used to detect T-UCR expression [4]. However,
these methods preclude the use of many samples of
potential clinical interest, such as tumor biopsies, laser
microdissected tissues, and sorted cell populations,
because of the high quantities of RNA required for
expression analysis of all 481 T-UCRs. On this account,

© 2010 Scaruffi et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Scaruffi et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:149
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/149

accurate high-throughput profiling of T-UCRs starting
from low-input RNA is an emerging challenge in molecular biology.
Ribo-SPIA™ technology [6], developed by NuGEN™
Technologies, enables a fast, simple and sensitive
method for preparing amplified cDNA from total RNA
to detect low, medium, and high abundance transcripts.
The amplified product is single-stranded cDNA in the
antisense direction of the starting RNA and it is ready
for qPCR without any purification. Such RNA amplification procedure is suitable for expression analysis of both
eukaryotic and prokaryotic genes [7,8]. For the first time
here we present a novel application of the Ribo-SPIA™
isothermal linear amplification of minute RNA quantities for quantifying non-coding protein gene expression.

Methods
Cell lines and RNA isolation

Two NB cell lines (LAN-5 and GI-ME-N) (provided by
Interlab Cell Line Collection (ICLC), http://www.iclc.it)
were cultured at 37°C and 5% CO2 in RPMI 1640 medium
(Lonza, Basel, Switzerland), supplemented with 2 mM Lglutamine, 1% non-essential amino acids, and 10% foetal
bovine serum. Total RNA was extracted by using the PerfectPure™ RNA Cell Kit (5Prime, Hamburg, Germany),
including on-column RNase-free DNase I treatment
(Ambion, TX, USA). Total and small RNAs were quantified and quality control was assessed by RNA 6000 Nano®
and Small RNA® assays, respectively, on the 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). RNA samples
showed a RNA integrity number = 9.2. Both RNA samples
have been validated as DNA-free by a no-reverse transcription assay for Eukaryotic 18S rRNA gene.
Reverse transcription of total RNA

RNA (1 μg) was reverse transcribed using 20 pmoles of
random hexamers (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and
200 U of SuperScript II enzyme (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) in a total reaction volume of 20
μl. The mixture was incubated in a Mastercycler® epGradient S (Eppendorf) at 25°C for 10 minutes, 42°C for 60
minutes, and 85°C for 5 minutes to stop the reaction.
cDNA was diluted 10-fold in molecular biology grade
water to a final concentration of 5 ng/ul, assuming
100% reverse transcription efficiency.
Reverse transcription and amplification of total RNA

RNA was reverse transcribed and amplified by the WTOvation™ RNA Amplification System kit (NuGEN Technologies, San Carlos, CA) following manufacture’s
protocol and using the Mastercycler® epGradient S
(Eppendorf). In each reaction RNA input was 50 ng and
cDNA product was diluted 1:25 in molecular biology
grade water.

Page 2 of 7

Quantification of T-UCRs by qPCR

T-UCRs were quantified by pre-optimized Transcribed
Ultra Conserved Regions real-time PCR assays (PrimerDesign Ltd, Hants, UK) using SYBR® green chemistry.
Each assay was individually validated by PrimerDesign
Ltd and shown to be 100% specific and close to 100%
efficient. The qPCR reactions were carried out in a total
volume of 10 μl, containing 2 μl of diluted cDNA, 2.5×
RealMaster Mix SYBR ROX (5Prime) and 150 nM of
the specific T-UCR primer mix. Quantification of 18S
rRNA, used as reference gene, was performed by using
VIC-labeled TaqMan® Gene Expression assay (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in a total volume of 10 μl,
containing 2 μl of diluted cDNA, 2.5× RealMaster Mix
Probe (5Prime) and 20× primer/probe mix. Reactions
were setup in 96-white-well Twin.tec® real-time plates
(Eppendorf) by means of EpMotion 5070 Liquid Handling Workstation (Eppendorf). All reactions were performed in duplicate on the Mastercycler® epRealPlex4 S
system (Eppendorf). Cycling conditions were as follows:
95°C for 2 minutes, 40 cycles at 95°C for 15 seconds
and at 60°C for 1 minutes, followed by a melting curve
(ramping from 60°C to 95°C in 20 minutes) to ensure
the presence of the specific amplicon. Specificity of
qPCR reactions has been assessed by melting curve analysis and single runs were excluded when the melting
curves revealed unintended amplification products (e.g.,
primer dimers): curves with more than one peak, or one
single peak but with a melting temperature different
from the expected one (calculated by PrimerDesign’s
design software, accounting salt conditions of the mastermix). Raw qPCR data, melting temperatures and a
checklist according to the Minimum Information for
Publication of Quantitative Real-Time PCR Experiments
(MIQE) [9,10] are submitted as Supplemental data (see
additional file 1: Raw Cq data; additional file 2: Tm
data; additional file 3: MIQE checklist).
Data analysis

RealPlex software v. 2.0 (Eppendorf) was used to determine quantification cycle (Cq) in non-amplified (CqNA)
and amplified (CqA) total RNA samples. For each cDNA,
the duplicate T-UCR Cq values were averaged, and the
normalized Cq (dCq) was calculated by subtracting the
mean Cq value for 18S rRNA from each T-UCR mean
Cq value. Potential bias introduced upon the cDNA
amplification step and reliability of differential T-UCR
expression were assessed as previously described by
Mestdagh et al. [11]. Briefly, differential T-UCR expression between LAN-5 and GI-ME-N cell lines (ΔCq =
dCq GI-ME-N - dCq LAN-5 ) was determined for each
method, with (ΔCqA) or without (ΔCqNA) amplification.
Then, we have calculated the difference in differential
T-UCR expression (ΔΔCq = ΔCqA - ΔCqNA ). Optimal

Scaruffi et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:149
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/149

reliability of differential T-UCR expression upon cDNA
amplification should result in a difference lower than 1
PCR cycle (|ΔΔCq| < 1). The MedCalc® software (Mariakerke, Belgium) was used for statistical analyses. Significance tests were two tailed.

Results
Amplification approach increases sensitivity in
T-UCR quantification

In this study we analyzed expression of 481 UCRs in
LAN-5 and GI-ME-N cell lines by RT-qPCR either with
or without cDNA amplification. Since it is known that a
single copy target is generally detected around cycle 35,
those T-UCRs showing a CqNA above 35 were considered as not expressed. In qPCR assays performed on
non-amplified GI-ME-N and LAN-5 cDNAs the quantification rates were 384 and 357 T-UCRs, respectively,
whereas upon amplification the quantification rate
increased on average of 12% (up to 438 and 423
T-UCRs in GI-ME-N and LAN-5, respectively). The
results above demonstrate the improvement of informative data interrogation by RT-qPCR of the amplified
samples as compared to those generated using reverse
transcription of total RNA. It is noteworthy that the
qPCR reaction inputs were equivalent between amplified
and non-amplified samples. In fact, assuming 100%

Page 3 of 7

amplification efficiency according to the WT-Ovation™
technical reports http://www.nugeninc.com, amplification of 50 ng total RNA should result in about 4 μg of
cDNA. The cDNA in 40 μl was diluted 1:25, then 2 μl
(approximately cDNA equivalents of 8 ng) were added
per qPCR run. Similarly, cDNA equivalents of 10 ng
were used for non-amplified cDNA.
Amplification approach increases repeatability in
T-UCR quantification

We validated qPCR results by measuring intra-assay variation. We performed duplicate qPCR runs and rough
Cq values were used to calculate the standard deviation
(SD) for the Cq variance of each T-UCR. Highly and
moderately expressed T-UCRs (CqNA ≤ 30) have low SD
in both non-amplified (average SD = 0.16) and amplified
(average SD = 0.09) LAN-5 templates (Figure 1). The
SD values increase for low expressed T-UCRs (30 <
Cq NA ≤ 35), for both amplified and non-amplified
cDNA, showing a relevant PCR variability only at the
lowest abundant ranges. Similar results were obtained in
GI-ME-N cell line (see additional file 4: Figure S1). In
LAN-5 cells, the number of assessable duplicated
T-UCR runs with a SD ≤ 1 significantly increases upon
the amplification process (378 out of 398 in non-amplified cDNA versus 372 out of 373 in amplified cDNA,

Figure 1 Plots showing the relation between the average Cq value and the standard deviation for T-UCRs in LAN-5 cell line, using
reverse transcriptase of total RNA (A) and amplification system (B). Bar plots display the mean SD value for T-UCRs with an average Cq
value ranging between 15-20, >20-25, >25-30, and >30-35 cycles.

Scaruffi et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:149
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/149

p < 0.0001, Fisher’s exact test). Similarly, 348 out of 359
T-UCRs show a SD ≤ 1 in non-amplified GI-ME-N
cDNA compared to 358 out of 359 T-UCRs in amplified
cDNA (p = 0.006, Fisher’s exact test).
Minimal bias due to the amplification approach

In order to assess the potential bias introduced upon the
amplification step in each NB cell line, normalized Cq
values obtained with the WT-Ovation™ system (dCqA)
were compared with those obtained by reverse transcriptase of total RNA (dCqNA). Scatter plots for both
LAN-5 and GI-ME-N samples (Figure 2) show a linear
correlation between normalized Cq with or without
amplification with correlation coefficient r ≅ 0.88,

Page 4 of 7

indicating that the amplification approach provides a
reliable representation of T-UCR transcript abundance
in non-amplified cDNA. In order to evaluate why data
sets do not perfectly fit with a straight line correlation
model, we divided T-UCRs into three groups: highly
(Cq NA ≤ 25), moderately (25 < Cq NA ≤ 30), and low
expressed (30 < CqNA ≤ 35) T-UCRs. Upon amplification step in LAN-5 cell line, linear correlation analysis
shows high biases for the low abundant T-UCRs (r =
0.2696) as compared to the moderately (r = 0.7494) and
highly (r = 0.8880) expressed T-UCRs. Similar results
were obtained in GI-ME-N cell line: r = 0.4508, 0.7259,
and 0.9056 for low, moderately and highly expressed
T-UCRs, respectively.

Figure 2 Scatter plots showing the linear correlation (r) between normalized Cq values obtained with the SPIA™ system (dCqA) and by
reverse transcriptase of total RNA (dCqNA) in LAN-5 (A) and GI-ME-N (B) cell lines.

Scaruffi et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:149
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/149

Page 5 of 7

Amplification method preserves differential
T-UCR expression

by setting the CqNA cutoff at 30, 81% of the detectable
T-UCRs display a |ΔΔCq| ≤ 1.

We wondered whether upon amplification step the level
of T-UCR expression was maintained. For this purpose,
we calculated the difference between LAN-5 and GIME-N in T-UCR expression measured both with and
without amplification. The plot of the differential
T-UCR expression against each dCqNA value shows that
65% of the detectable T-UCRs display a |ΔΔCq| ≤ 1
(Figure 3). Moreover, our results show a near-perfect
correlation in differential T-UCR expression (|ΔΔCq| =
0.4) for the most abundant T-UCRs, whereas the average |ΔΔCq| value increases for the moderately expressed
T-UCRs (average |ΔΔCq| = 0.9), and further for the low
expressed T-UCRs (average |ΔΔCq| = 3.6). Consistently,

Discussion
In this study, we evaluated the sensitivity, repeatability,
and reliability of a cDNA amplification procedure for
estimating T-UCR expression by RT-qPCR. This
approach comprises steps for cDNA synthesis followed
by SPIA™-based linear, isothermal amplification initiated
both at the 3’ end and randomly throughout the whole
transcriptome [6]. Quantification of the corresponding
single-stranded cDNA product is based on the SYBR®
Green intercalating chemistry. We directly compared
non-amplified with amplified cDNAs of LAN-5 and GIME-N neuroblastoma cell lines. It is noteworthy that we

Figure 3 Plot of the difference in differential T-UCR expression between LAN-5 and GI-ME-N cell lines against each mean dCqNA value.
Bar plot shows the mean |ΔΔCq| value for T-UCRs with an average CqNA value ranging between 15-20, >20-25, >25-30, and >30-35 cycles.

Scaruffi et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:149
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/149

accurately investigated the advantages of the amplification approach by using equivalent cDNA inputs (10 ng)
for each amplified and non-amplified sample. The
superior sensitivity of a total RNA amplification prior to
qPCR is demonstrated, in fact about 12% more T-UCRs
were reliably and reproducibly quantified by the SPIA™
system than using reverse transcriptase of total RNA,
independently of the cell line.
Three separate RNA reverse transcriptions and three
amplification reactions were performed per sample to
interrogate all 481 T-UCRs. Therefore, to minimize the
bias in RNA processing efficiency, we separately pooled
non-amplified and amplified cDNAs necessary for all
subsequent qPCR runs. However, we measured intraassay variation due to i.e. robotic liquid handling and
PCR equipments by calculating the amount of error
when T-UCR assays were performed in duplicate. Standard deviation values showed an high repeatability of
sample replicates for highly and moderately expressed TUCRs, independently of the quantification method, indicating the unbiased amplification procedure. Only the
lowest abundant T-UCRs have high intra-assay variability, consistently with the influence of Poisson distribution
statistics and stochastic effects on PCR repeatability [12].
The major risk of an amplification procedure is the
loss of the proportional representation of T-UCR
expression levels in biological samples. Previous studies
reported the successful use of the SPIA™-basedprocedure
in expression profiling of both eukaryotic and prokaryotic genes [6], but so far the effects of such linear amplification on non-coding protein genes have not been
evaluated. We therefore assessed the potential bias of
the WT-Ovation™ system by comparison of T-UCR
expression in LAN-5 and GI-ME-N cell lines with or
without cDNA amplification. Correlation coefficient
values showed a very good linear relationship among
paired amplified and non-amplified samples for highly
and moderately expressed T-UCRs. The SPIA™ system
thus provides a reliable representation of the most
abundant T-UCR transcripts. Variation was high only
for rare T-UCRs, that displayed considerable amplification bias affecting their differential expression. Our
results are consistent with the influence of stochastic
models, which significantly contribute to evaluate the
accuracy of transcript quantification at low levels [13].
In particular, the Poisson’s statistics predict the frequency distribution of the number of RNA molecules
that will be present for measurement in each PCR tube.
In this context, stochastic fluctuations influence the sensitivity when only a small amount of quantifiable transcripts is available. This implies that the number of
measurement repetitions is relevant in the quantification
of rare transcripts and that repeated measurements of a

Page 6 of 7

transcript at low level should exactly reflect the Poisson
type of distribution. For example, with two replicates
(which is the number of qPCR runs that we conducted
per T-UCR) there is 86.5% chance to detect at least one
positive score when the expected value is 1. Under the
Poisson assumption, 8 replicates would detect the
remaining 13.5% [14]. However, it is questionable that
this improvement in accuracy is worth the cost. As a
practical matter, it should be unrealistic to perform all
necessary replicate assays to determine the exact
amount of rare T-UCR transcripts, also taking into
account that our analysis revealed that the trend of differential expression is always preserved for the low
abundant T-UCRs.
It is noteworthy that the amplification approach
allowed us to significantly reduce the amount of RNA
(150 ng) required to analyze all 481 T-UCRs per each
sample, preserving in the meantime the magnitude of
relative expression. Therefore, the quantification procedure described here is both an accurate and reliable
technique for genome-wide T-UCR profiling when minimal amounts of starting material are available. This
requirement is particularly important because tumor
sample size is often limited and studies of transcription
regulation are increasingly conducted in small homogeneous samples, such as laser capture microdissected or
sorted cell populations. It is noteworthy that the biological implications of the scientific advance presented in
this manuscript have been recently published [5]. In
fact, we applied the linear isothermal Ribo-SPIA™ amplification method on 34 NB biopsies and this enabled us
to establish a T-UCR-expression signature predictive of
outcome in non infant patients diagnosed with metastatic NB.

Conclusions
We have demonstrated that the SPIA™ system global
amplification of minute amounts of RNA prior to qPCR
enables sensitive and accurate interrogation of all 481
T-UCRs, while expression data should be considered
with caution for rare T-UCRs only. We strongly believe
that our results open the way to use the method presented here for an accurate high-throughput profiling of
non coding protein genes in those samples of potential
clinical interest, such as tumor biopsies, laser microdissected tissues, and sorted cell populations, when limited
RNA amounts are available.
Additional file 1: Raw Cq data. Raw Cq values for each qPCR reaction,
according to the Real-time PCR Data Markup Language (RDML).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11149-S1.XML ]

Scaruffi et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:149
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/149

Additional file 2: Tm data. Melting temperature values for each qPCR
reaction.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11149-S2.PDF ]
Additional file 3: MIQE checklist. Checklist according to the Minimum
Information for Publication of Quantitative Real-Time PCR Experiments.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11149-S3.PDF ]
Additional file 4: Figure S1. Plots showing the correlation between the
average Cq value and the standard deviation for T-UCRs in GI-ME-N cell
line, using reverse transcriptase of total RNA (A) and amplification system
(B). Bar plots display the mean SD value for T-UCRs with an average Cq
value ranging between 15-20, >20-25, >25-30, and >30-35 cycles.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11149-S4.PDF ]

Abbreviations
(T-UCRs): Transcribed-Ultra Conserved Regions; (RT-qPCR): reverse
transcription-quantitative real-time PCR; (NB): neuroblastoma; (Cq):
quantification cycle; (SD): standard deviation.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by Fondazione Italiana per la Lotta al
Neuroblastoma, Ministero dell’Università, Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica,
and Ministero della Salute/Regione Liguria (project: “Identification of tumor
biomarkers through a biology-driven integrated approach”). Authors are
grateful to Federica Del Grosso (Translational Paediatric Oncology, IST,
Genoa, Italy) for cell cultures and Silvia De Luca (Fondazione Italiana per la
Lotta al Neuroblastoma, Genoa, Italy) for language revision. A special thank
to Giorgio Canessa, Caterina Cremonesi and Carlo Costa (Eppendorf Italia,
Milan, Italy) for technical assistance.
Author details
Translational Paediatric Oncology, National Cancer Research Institute (IST),
Largo R Benzi 10, Genoa, 16132, Italy. 2Department of Oncology and
Genetics (DOBIG), University of Genoa, Largo R Benzi 10, Genoa, 16132, Italy.
3
Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Via della
Pisana 235, Roma, 00163, Italy.
1

Page 7 of 7

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

Rassenti L, Volinia S, Schmittgen TD, Kipps TJ, Negrini M, Croce CM:
Ultraconserved regions encoding ncRNAs are altered in human
leukemias and carcinomas. Cancer Cell 2007, 12:215-229.
Scaruffi P, Stigliani S, Moretti S, Coco S, De Vecchi C, Valdora F, Garaventa A,
Bonassi S, Tonini GP: Transcribed-ultra conserved region expression is
associated with outcome in high-risk neuroblastoma. BMC Cancer 2009,
9:441-449.
Dafforn A, Chen P, Deng G, Herrler M, Iglehart D, Koritala S, Lato S,
Pillarisetty S, Purohit R, Wang M, Wang S, Kurn N: Linear mRNA
amplification from as little as 5 ng total RNA for global gene expression
analysis. BioTechniques 2004, 37:854-857.
Kurn N, Chen P, Heath JD, Kopf-Sill A, Stephens KS, Wang S: Novel
isothermal, linear nucleic acid amplification systems for highly
multiplexed applications. Clin Chem 2005, 51:1973-1981.
Vermeulen J, Deveaux S, Lefever S, De Smet, De Preter K, Yigit N, De
Paepe A, Pattyn F, Speleman F, Vandesompele J: RNA pre-amplification
enables large-scale RT-qPCR gene-expression studies on limiting sample
amounts. BMC Research Notes 2009, 2:235-243.
Lefever S, Hellemans J, Pattyn F, Przybylski DR, Taylor C, Geurts R,
Untergasser A, Vandesompele J: RDML: structured language and reporting
guidelines for real-time quantitative PCR data. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37(7):2065-2069.
Bustin SA, Benes V, Garson JA, Hellemans J, Huggett J, Kubista M, Mueller R,
Nolan T, Pfaffl MW, Shipley GL, Vandesompele J, Wittwer CT: The MIQE
Guidelines: Minimum Information for Publication of Quantitative RealTime PCR Experiments. Clin Chem 2009, 55(4):611-622.
Mestdagh P, Feys T, Bernard N, Guenther S, Chen C, Speleman F,
Vandesompele J: High-throughput stem-loop RT-qPCR miRNA expression
profiling using minute amounts of input RNA. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:1-8.
Marino JH, Cook P, Miller KS: Accurate and statistically verified
quantification of relative mRNA abundances using SYBR Green I and
real-time RT-PCR. J Immunol Methods 2003, 283:291-306.
Bustin SA, Nolan T: Data analysis and interpretation. A-Z of quantitative
PCR International University Line PressBustin SA 2006, 446-448.
Arlinghaus R, Lin H, Kim HK, Guo JQ: Response to influence of stochastics
on quantitative PCR in the detection of minimal residual disease by
Rawer et al. Leukemia 2003, 17:2528-2529.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-149
Cite this article as: Scaruffi et al.: Transcribed-ultra conserved region
expression profiling from low-input total RNA. BMC Genomics 2010
11:149.

Authors’ contributions
PS developed the study design, carried out the preparation of RNA, the
quantification and assessment of transcript integrity, the RNA amplifications
and reverse transcriptions, supervised the T-UCR qPCR reactions, participated
in data analysis, drafted the manuscript. SS, SC, FV, CDV performed the TUCR qPCR reactions. SB participated in data analysis and critical revision of
the manuscript. GPT participated in study conception and critical revision of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 21 January 2010
Accepted: 3 March 2010 Published: 3 March 2010
References
1. Bejerano G, Haussler D, Blanchette M: Into the heart of darkness: Largescale clustering of human non-coding DNA. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:
I40-I48.
2. Bejerano G, Pheasant M, Makunin I, Stephen S, Kent WJ, Mattick JS,
Haussler D: Ultraconserved elements in the human genome. Science 2004,
304:1321-1325.
3. Bejerano G, Lowe CB, Ahituv N, King B, Siepel A, Salama SR, Rubin EM,
Kent WJ, Haussler D: A distal enhancer and an ultraconserved exon are
derived from a novel retroposon. Nature 2006, 441:87-90.
4. Calin GA, Liu CG, Ferracin M, Hyslop T, Spizzo R, Sevignani C, Fabbri M,
Cimmino A, Lee EJ, Wojcik SE, Shimizu M, Tili E, Rossi S, Taccioli C,
Pichiorri F, Liu X, Zupo S, Herlea V, Gramantieri L, Lanza G, Alder H,

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
