<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Detection of NASBA amplified bacterial tmRNA molecules on SLICSel designed microarray probes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:17. doi:10.1186/1472-6750-11-17"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ott Scheler"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Scheler et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/17

METHODOLOGY ARTICLE

Open Access

Detection of NASBA amplified bacterial tmRNA
molecules on SLICSel designed microarray probes
Ott Scheler1,2*, Lauris Kaplinski2,3, Barry Glynn4, Priit Palta2,3, Sven Parkel1,2, Kadri Toome1, Majella Maher4,
Thomas Barry4, Maido Remm2,3, Ants Kurg1,2

Abstract
Background: We present a comprehensive technological solution for bacterial diagnostics using tmRNA as a
marker molecule. A robust probe design algorithm for microbial detection microarray is implemented. The probes
were evaluated for specificity and, combined with NASBA (Nucleic Acid Sequence Based Amplification)
amplification, for sensitivity.
Results: We developed a new web-based program SLICSel for the design of hybridization probes, based on
nearest-neighbor thermodynamic modeling. A SLICSel minimum binding energy difference criterion of 4 kcal/mol
was sufficient to design of Streptococcus pneumoniae tmRNA specific microarray probes. With lower binding energy
difference criteria, additional hybridization specificity tests on the microarray were needed to eliminate non-specific
probes. Using SLICSel designed microarray probes and NASBA we were able to detect S. pneumoniae tmRNA from
a series of total RNA dilutions equivalent to the RNA content of 0.1-10 CFU.
Conclusions: The described technological solution and both its separate components SLICSel and NASBAmicroarray technology independently are applicative for many different areas of microbial diagnostics.

Background
The ssrA gene which encodes the tmRNA molecule has
been identified in all known bacterial phyla [1,2]. The
term tmRNA describes the dual “transfer” and “messenger” properties of this RNA molecule. In bacteria, the
function of the tmRNA molecules is to release ribosomes that have become stalled during protein synthesis
and to tag incomplete and unnecessary peptides for proteolysis. A typical tmRNA is between 300-400 nucleotides in size and is present in cells in relatively high
copy number around 1000 copies per cell [3]. tmRNA
molecules contain both conserved as well as variable
regions between different species; complementary 3’ and
5’ ends fold together into a tRNA like structure that
permits the entry to the ribosome when needed. Proteolysis-coding mRNA part and structural domains usually
make up for the rest of the molecule. All those characteristics make the tmRNA transcript (and its ssrA gene)
a suitable tool as a target marker molecule for
* Correspondence: ott.scheler@gmail.com
1
Dept. of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

phylogenetical analysis and species identification in
microbial diagnostics. Over the last 10 years tmRNA
and its corresponding gene have been used for species
identification in several methods including fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) detection of specific bacteria
[4], real-time PCR [5] and real-time NASBA [6] analysis
of food and dairy contaminants and pathogen detection
using biosensors [7]. Combining the capabilities of
tmRNA for species identification with DNA microarray
technology offers the potential to investigate samples
simultaneously for large numbers of different target
tmRNA molecules. DNA microarrays have found several
practical applications in microbial diagnostics such as
composition analysis and species identification of different environmental and medical samples as well as in
microbial diversity investigation [8-10]. Depending on
the experiment setup and specific probe design, precise
detection of one specific microbe [11] or more complex
analysis of microbial taxa can be performed [12]. The
design of microarray probes for the detection of bacterial RNA poses unique challenges, because certain RNA/
DNA or RNA/RNA mismatches have almost as strong
binding affinity as matches [13]. The nearest-neighbor

© 2011 Scheler et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Scheler et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/17

thermodynamic modeling (NN) approach should therefore be used to calculate the hybridization affinities
(ΔG) of probes [14-16]. The hybridization on microarray
surface is more complex then hybridization in solution
and the NN model should include surface and positional
parameters for more accurate modeling [17,18].
Although there are many recent studies of surface hybridization thermodynamics [19], the exact hybridization
properties of microarray probes cannot be precisely
modelled and experimental verification is still needed
[20,21]. A common feature of many microarray analysis
protocols is that the nucleic acid sequences of interest
are amplified and labeled prior to the hybridization
experiment. Hybridization protocols may involve labeled
cDNA [22], cRNA [23] or (RT-)PCR products [24].
RNA molecules can also be amplified by Nucleic Acid
Sequence Based Amplification (NASBA) [25]. Although
not as common as RT-PCR, NASBA is less prone to
genomic DNA contamination and therefore more suitable for applications where the testing of microbial viability is important [26]. Several methods have recently
been published that describe different NASBA product
labeling methods for the purpose of microarray hybridization. These methods include the dendrimer-based system NAIMA [27], biotin-streptavidin binding assisted
labeling [28] and aminoreactive dye coupling to aminoallyl-UTP (aa-UTP) molecules in NASBA products
[29]. In this report we present a complete technological
solution for detection of low amounts of bacterial
tmRNA molecules. We describe a new software program, SLICSel, for designing specific oligonucleotide
probes for microbial diagnostics using nearest-neighbor
thermodynamic modeling and evaluate SLICSel by testing the specificity of the designed tmRNA specific
probes. Finally we demonstrate the sensitivity of these
probes using a molecular diagnostics method that combines tmRNA amplification by NASBA with microarraybased detection [29]. Using this approach we were able
to specifically detect S.pneumoniae tmRNA in the
amount that corresponds to a single bacterium or less
in the presence of 4000-fold excess of other bacterial
tmRNA.

Page 2 of 7

universal and not bound to specific technology. We also
expect that NN parameters on surface, although slightly
different, are in correlation with the ones in solution
[19].
Bacterial strains

Streptococcus pneumoniae ATCC 33400 (S.pneumoniae),
Streptococcus pyogenes ATCC 12344 (S.pyogenes), Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 13883 (K.pneumoniae), Moraxella catarrhalis ATCC 25238 (M.catarrhalis) were
obtained from DSMZ (Braunschweig, Germany); Streptococcus agalactiae (S.agalactiae) and Group C/G streptococcus (GrC/G) from University College Hospital
(Galway, Ireland). Bacterial strains were grown in Brain
Heart Infusion Broth (Oxoid, Hampshire, UK). Total
RNA extraction and CFU counting is further described
in the Additional file 1.
Microarray design

We used the S.pneumoniae tmRNA molecule as the
main specific target molecule, while tmRNAs from other
bacteria were used as non-specific controls. The custom
made microarray for SLICSel validation experiments
contained 97 probes covering the whole S.pneumoniae
tmRNA sequence. For NASBA-microarray experiment,
the 25 best performing probes were selected and additional control probes specific to S.pyogenes, S.agalactiae,
M.catarrhalis and K.pneumoniae (three for each) were
also added. The precise probe list and microarray manufacturing have been described previously [30] and customization for the current article is described in the
Additional file 1.
In vitro tmRNA synthesis for validation experiment

For in vitro transcription of tmRNA ssrA genes of S.
pneumoniae, S.agalactiae, S.pyogenes, Group C/G streptococcus, M.catarrhalis and K.pneumoniae were inserted
in the pCR® II-TOPO vector (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA) under the transcriptional control of either T7 or
SP6 promoter sequence. tmRNA molecules were transcribed from vector as described previously [30] with
minor alterations. The complete protocol is available in
the Additional file 1.

Methods
SLICSel program for probe design

NASBA amplification experiment

The nearest-neighbor thermodynamic (NN) modeling of
probe hybridization strength with target (specific hybridization) and control (nonspecific hybridization) nucleotide sequences at exact annealing temperature is used as
design criterion of the SLICSel program. The previously
published empirical formula was used to adjust the calculated thermodynamic values to the actual annealing
temperature and salt concentration [15]. No surface and
positional effects were added to the model to keep it

A series of experiments were performed to determine
the detection capability of NASBA in combination with
microarray hybridization. A NASBA primer pair (see the
Additional file 1) was designed to amplify a 307 nucleotide tmRNA product using S.pneumoniae total RNA as
a template. The T7 promoter was added to the forward
primer in order to generate a sense strand of the RNA
molecule. Three different amounts of S. pneumoniae
total RNA were added to the NASBA reactions: 1 pg,

Scheler et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/17

100 fg and 10 fg, corresponding to 10, 1 and 0.1 CFU,
respectively. An equal volume of NASBA water
(included in EasyQ kit) was added to control experiment
without any S. pneumoniae total RNA. NASBA reactions
were performed with NucliSENS EasyQ Basic kit v2
(bioMerieux bv, Boxtel, NL) according to manufacturer’s
instructions but with addition of aminoallyl-UTP (aaUTP) as described previously [29]. Final concentration
of aa-UTP (Epicentre, Madison, WI, USA) used in the
reaction was 1 mM. EasyQ kit was used for 96 NASBA
amplifications instead of the original 48 by halving all of
the manufacturer suggested reagent volumes. In experiments with background RNA 10 pg of S.pyogenes, S.
agalactiae, M.cattarhalis and K.pneumoniae total RNA
were added, making the RNA excess ratios of each control to target RNA 10:1, 100:1 and 1000:1, respectively.
Following amplification, tmRNA was purified using a
NucleoSpin® RNA CleanUp Kit and vacuum dried using
RVC 2-25 CD rotational vacuum concentrator (Martin
Christ GmbH, Osterode am Harz, Germany).
Labeling of aa-UTP modified RNA and microarray
hybridization

Extra amine groups of aa-UTP modified tmRNA molecules were labeled with the monoreactive fluorescent
dye Cyanine™ 3-NHS (Cy3) (Enzo, Farmingdale, NY,
USA) as described previously [30]. For the SLICSel validation experiments, 300 ng of in vitro synthesized target
or control RNA was hybridized onto microarray. In
NASBA experiments all of the amplified material was
used in the subsequent microarray hybridization. In
both cases vacuum dried RNA was resuspended in 80 μl
of hybridization buffer and hybridized for 4 hours on
the microarray in an automated HS-400 hybridization
station (Tecan Austria, Grödig, Austria) at 55 C°. Complete hybridization protocol and reagents are shown in
the Additional file 1. After hybridization, the slides were
scanned using an Affymetrix 428 scanner (Affymetrix,
Santa Clara, CA, USA), l = 532 nm. Raw signal intensity data was analyzed using Genorama™ BaseCaller
software (Asper Biotech, Estonia).

Results
Probe design software

SLICSel was used to design hybridization probes for all
bacterial species in the experiment. It uses a brute-force
algorithm that finds all theoretically acceptable probe
sequences. All designed probes are guaranteed to have
at least specified minimum difference (ΔΔG control )
between the binding energies (ΔG) of specific and nonspecific hybridization and at most specified maximum
binding energy difference (ΔΔGtarget) between the binding energies of the hybridization with different target
sequences. The algorithm also accepts degenerate

Page 3 of 7

nucleotides in sequences; in which situation the worstcase variant is used (strongest binding for control set
and weakest binding for target set). The program uses
well-established thermodynamic models of hybridization
in solution, as the more complex surface effects are still
under active study and are also dependant on the microarray technology used. The program code can be easily
extended to take account of more specific models, if
needed. The tables for both DNA-DNA and DNA-RNA
nearest-neighbor hybridization thermodynamics are
included with the program. It is also possible to use a
custom table of thermodynamic parameters, necessary if
very specific experimental conditions are used. SLICSel
is available from web interface at http://bioinfo.ut.ee/
slicsel/
SLICSel validation

A series of hybridization experiments were conducted to
validate the SLICSel program by testing the specificity
of the SLICSel designed oligonucleotide probes and
their suitability for the use in development of diagnostical technology. In total 97 oligonucleotide probes were
designed complementary to the different regions of S.
pneumoniae’s tmRNA (the main target molecule). Control tmRNA molecules were from five other bacteria: S.
pyogenes, S.agalactiae, GrC/G streptococcus, K.pneumoniae and M.catarrhalis. All tmRNA sequences were
synthesized in vitro and then hybridized individually to
the panel of S.pneumoniae tmRNA specific probes on
microarray. Figure 1 shows the scatter plot of relative
signal intensities of control tmRNA hybridizations onto
microarray probes according to their binding energy difference ΔΔG between target and control RNA. From a
total of 463 hybridization events only 20 (~4.3%) gave
relative signal intensities higher than preset 10% false
positive signal threshold condition. For the remaining
443 hybridizations (95.7%) the control signals remained
under the threshold level. As shown in the Figure 1,
designing probes with higher binding energy difference
(ΔΔG) decreases the possibility of a false positive signal.
For example, choosing the probes with the minimum
ΔG difference of 4 kcal/mol was sufficient to avoid all
the false-positive bindings over the threshold while in
the case of ΔG difference 2 kcal/mol 6 signals remained
over the 10% signal threshold (~1.5% of hybridizations).
The average hybridization signal intensities of target and
control tmRNAs (all five together and individually) are
shown on a bar chart and complementary table in
Figure 2. Nearly fivefold increase of the probe specificity
was achieved with ΔΔG condition 4 kcal/mol as the
average false-positive control tmRNA signal intensity
dropped from 2.46% to 0.55%. All of the average falsepositive hybridization signals of individual tmRNAs were
lower with higher minimum ΔΔG criteria. In general,

Scheler et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/17

Figure 1 Non-specific microarray signal intensities from
hybridization experiments with target and five control
tmRNAs. Non-specific tmRNA signal intensities are divided by the
corresponding probe-specific signal intensity. Target hybridization
signal intensity is given on a y-axis as a 100% signal baseline.
A maximum false-positive signal threshold is shown as horizontal
10% dotted line. Microarray signals are distributed along x-axis
according to the calculated binding energy difference between the
specific and non-specific binding (ΔGtarget - ΔGcontrol (ΔΔG) 0.2...10.7
kcal/mol). Dotted vertical lines separate the probes with binding
energy difference smaller then 2 and 4 kcal/mol, respectively.

control tmRNAs from bacteria belonging to the Streptococcus genus showed stronger than/or near average
false-positive hybridization signals while signals of more
distant K.pneumoniae and M.catarrhalis remained
under the overall average. K.pneumoniae tmRNA produced lowest average false-positive signals in all three
different minimum ΔΔG conditions and had no signals
over the 10% threshold. All of the false-positive signals
greater than 10% were contributed by 10 single microarray probes. After removal of those problematic probes
the average hybridization signal intensities were under
1% for all the different control tmRNAs.
NASBA-microarray technology

To test the SLICel designed probes for their potential
use in microbial diagnostics; a new microarray was
designed that consisted of the 25 best performing
probes out of 97 according to their specificity and the
sensitivity in the validation experiments. For control
purposes oligonucleotide probes specific to S.pyogenes,
S.agalactiae, K.pneumoniae and M.catarrhalis were
also added to the microarray. tmRNA molecules of S.
pneumoniae were amplified from three different total
RNA dilutions (equaling to 0.1, 1 and 10 CFU, respectively) and labeled for microarray hybridization. Microarray signals were obtained with all three total RNA

Page 4 of 7

Figure 2 Average microarray signal intensities with target
Streptococcus pneumoniae and five different control tmRNAs.
The probe-specific target tmRNA hybridization signal average is
shown as a 100% bar. Control signal averages of five different
tmRNAs (Streptococcus pyogenes (S.pyo), Streptococcus agalactiae
(S.aga), GrC/G streptococcus (GrC/G), Klebsiella pneumoniae (K.pne)
and Moraxella catarrhalis (M.cat)) are given as a percentage of the
target signal. Three different average bars for control tmRNAs
represent the average hybridization signal intensities with probes’
minimum ΔG differences 0.2; 2 and 4 kcal/mol compared to the
hybridization with target molecule (ΔΔG = 0). Error bars show SD of
control signal averages. All of the average signal values of the
control tmRNA hybridization reactions are shown on the table
added onto the graph.

dilutions in all of the three parallel experiments including the 10 fg of total RNA sample equivalent to 0.1
CFU. According to the total RNA input into the
NASBA reaction, microarray signals increased correspondingly with 0.1 CFU being the lowest and 10 CFU
the highest in three replicate experiments (figure 3).
Hybridization experiments with NASBA amplified negative control solution provided no significant signals over
the background level on microarray. NASBA control
experiments with excess amounts of total RNA mix
from 4 control species (S.pyogenes, S.agalactiae, K.pneumoniae and M.catarrhalis) were performed to verify the
specificity of the NASBA-microarray based detection
method. 10 pg of total RNA from each of the control
species were added, making the background RNA ratio
to target RNA 4 × 10:1, 4 × 100:1 and 4 × 1000:1,
respectively. Addition of control total RNA-s to NASBA
reaction did not cause any changes to the microarray
signal intensities; all of the S.pneumoniae target dilutions were amplified and detected on the microarray
while the negative control remained blank. The capability of the described NASBA-microarray method to
detect tmRNA from low amounts of bacteria was also
confirmed experimentally when the total RNA was prepared from dilutions of S.pneumoniae cultures (0.1 to10

Scheler et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/17

Figure 3 Microarray signal intensities of NASBA amplified
tmRNA from Streptococcus pneumoniae total RNA dilutions. The
microarray signal intensity of NASBA amplified 1 CFU total RNA was
set as a 100% in all three parallel experiments. Rest of the RNA
dilution hybridization signals from 0 CFU (equal volume of NASBA
water as negative control), 0.1 and 10 CFU represent their relation
to 1 CFU signal as a percentage. Error bars show ± 1 SD of signal
averages over three parallel experiments. 1 CFU equivalent of total
RNA stands for 100 fg of RNA from S.pneumoniae.

CFU) instead of using total RNA dilutions, making the
experiment setup closer to real-world diagnostic situations where only small amounts of target bacteria may
be present.

Discussion
We selected tmRNA as a marker molecule for technological tool development in bacterial diagnostics because
they are present in all bacteria [1,2] in high copy number
and they contain both conserved as well as highly divergent regions [3]. Presence of intact RNA molecules can
additionally indicate the viability of the bacterial population in the analyte solution [26]. These characteristics
make tmRNA a suitable marker molecule in microbial
diagnostics. Although the aforementioned properties also
apply to16S rRNA (and its corresponding gene), possibly
the best known and most used marker in diagnostic and
phylogeny studies, the need for investigation of novel
alternative marker molecules like tmRNA remains as 16S
rRNA often cannot be used to detect and distinguish closely related species [4,31]. For microarray-based detection technologies, the signal strength is determined by
the number of target molecules hybridized to probes, i.e.
by the equilibrium point of hybridization, and can thus
be theoretically predicted using the nearest-neighbor
thermodynamic model. The same model, incorporating
mismatches, can also be used to predict the signal
strength of nonspecific hybridizations - i.e. false-positive
signals. In our approach the goal was not to design

Page 5 of 7

probes with maximum affinity, but instead maximize the
difference of affinity between specific and nonspecific
hybridization at annealing temperature. The microarray
hybridization experiments conducted with tmRNA specific probes gave information about the concept of designing probes using NN thermodynamic modeling in
SLICSel and whether the tested probes are suitable for
further species detection and identification. In general
the hybridization experiments with in vitro synthesized
target and control tmRNA molecules proved that SLICSel designed probes are highly capable of specific bacterial identification. By implementing stringent binding
energy difference criteria during probe design SLICSel
can minimize the possibility of designing probes that
would result in false-positive signals. In our validation
experiment the hybridization binding energy difference
ΔΔG 4 kcal/mol between control and target tmRNA was
sufficient to eliminate all the false-positive control signals
over the needed threshold level (Figure 1). We achieved
an almost fivefold increase in average probe specificity by
using stringent ΔΔG criteria 4 kcal/mol (Figure 2).
Although, the efficiency of average SLICSel designed
probe is high, there is no 100% guaranteed approach for
the in silico oligonucleotide probe design for hybridization based experiments with surface-immobilized probes.
Additional probe specificity evaluation in vitro and low
quality probe removal still remain as necessary steps in
any microarray experiment [20]. In our case the removal
of 10 probes was needed to assure that hybridization signals with control tmRNAs remain safely under the determined 10% threshold level. We designed a new
microarray incorporating only the optimum S.pneumoniae specific probe sequences for the detection of labeled
tmRNA products amplified using NASBA. A key characteristic of the NASBA-microarray technology, especially
in microbial diagnostics, is that the detection and the
identification of the correct target can be optimized at
two different points in the experimental protocol. The
selection of oligonucleotide primer set determines the
specificity of the NASBA amplification phase while a second level of specificity is provided by the SLICSel
designed immobilized microarray probes. Specific amplification of a single RNA molecule or wider selection of
various RNAs in case of multiplex-NASBA is possible.
Certain rules have been described for the NASBA primer
pair design [32], but as no convenient software has yet
been developed it remains somewhat a trial-and-error
approach. In our case the primer set was designed
according to the aforementioned rules to amplify a near
full length tmRNA molecule from S.pneumoniae. We
included additional control probes specific to S.pyogenes,
S.agalactiae, K.pneumoniae and M.catarrhalist in the
microarray to determine the specificity of NASBA amplification step conducted in the presence of a non-S.

Scheler et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/17

Page 6 of 7

pneumoniae total RNA background. The composition of
capture probes on the microarray depends on the overall
goal of the experiment. In our case the objective was to
specifically detect tmRNA molecules from S.pneumoniae
total RNA and test the sensitivity of the method previously described by us [29]. Our intention was to investigate whether the method is capable of detecting 1 CFU
by using tmRNA as a target molecule. Previous works
have shown that detection of 1 CFU by using NASBA
amplification of rRNA [33] or tmRNA [6] is possible.
The addition of highly parallel microarray based detection to this amplification technology could represent a
significant advance in microbial diagnostics; particularly
in situations where high number of different bacterial
species may be present (such as environmental samples)
or in clinical settings where it is necessary to identify one
particular infection causing species from a large panel
of potential pathogens. We successfully detected and
identified S.pneumoniae tmRNA molecules from all three
different dilutions of total RNA used in experiments (Figure 3). Our experiments proved that 0.1 CFU equivalent
total RNA was sufficient to produce strong reproducible
hybridization signals on our microarray. Addition of
background total RNAs to the NASBA reaction mix provided no signals on control probes on microarray, confirming the high specificity of NASBA-microarray
technology and also its components: NASBA primers
and microarray probes. In case of the specific tmRNA
detection from 0.1 CFU equivalent of S.pneumoniae
total RNA, the amount of non-specific RNA exceeded
the target 4000 times. The described high level of
achieved specificity and sensitivity demonstrates the
potential and suitability of NASBA-microarray technology for the purpose of pathogen detection in microbial
diagnostics or more complex analysis of microbial taxa in
environment.

Author details
Dept. of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. 3Dept. of
Bioinformatics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia. 4Molecular Diagnostics Research Group, National Centre for
Biomedical Engineering Science, National University of Ireland, Galway,
Ireland.

Conclusions
We have presented a novel technological procedure for
bacterial diagnostics and microbial analysis. The nearest-neighbor thermodynamics based SLICSel tool is not
exclusive for tmRNA and microarray probe design, but
can be used for any other hybridization based technology where DNA or RNA oligonucleotide probe design is
necessary. The combination of NASBA amplification
technology with microarray based fluorescently labeled
RNA detection enabled us to detect tmRNA molecules
from as low as 0.1 to 10 CFU of S.pneumoniae total
RNA. Using the described approach different patient
samples, food products or any analyte solution can be
tested and screened in a highly parallel approach for
several live pathogens or contaminants. SLICSel and
NASBA-microarray technology can be used separately
for different areas of microbial diagnostics including

References
1. Keiler KC, Waller PR, Sauer RT: Role of a peptide tagging system in
degradation of proteins synthesized from damaged messenger RNA.
Science (New York, N.Y.) 1996, 271:990-3.
2. Keiler KC, Shapiro L, Williams KP: tmRNAs that encode proteolysisinducing tags are found in all known bacterial genomes: A two-piece
tmRNA functions in Caulobacter. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2000, 97:7778-83.
3. Muto A, Ushida C, Himeno H: A bacterial RNA that functions as both a
tRNA and an mRNA. Trends in biochemical sciences 1998, 23:25-9.
4. Schönhuber W, Bourhis GL, Tremblay J, Amann R, Kulakauskas S: Utilization
of tmRNA sequences for bacterial identification. BMC Microbiology 2001.
5. O’Grady J, Sedano-Balbás S, Maher M, Smith T, Barry T: Rapid real-time PCR
detection of Listeria monocytogenes in enriched food samples based on
the ssrA gene, a novel diagnostic target. Food microbiology 2008,
25:75-84.
6. O’Grady J, Lacey K, Glynn B, et al: tmRNA–a novel high-copy-number RNA
diagnostic target–its application for Staphylococcus aureus detection
using real-time NASBA. FEMS microbiology letters 2009, 301:218-23.
7. Glynn B, Lacey K, Grady JO, et al: Reusable surface plasmon resonance
assay for the specific detection of streptococcus pneumoniae tmRNA.
JOURNAL OF RAPID METHODS AND AUTOMATION IN MICROBIOLOGY 2008,
16:210-221.

environmental monitoring, bio threat detection, industrial process monitoring and clinical microbiology.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Methods supplementary file. Additional file
describing thoroughly all of the necessary data and reagents needed for
the methods section

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the SLIC-513771 EU grant and by targeted
financing from Estonian Government SF0180027s10. This work was also
funded by grant SF0180026s09 from the Estonian Ministry of Education and
Research and by the EU through the European Regional Development Fund
through the Estonian Centre of Excellence in Genomics. Authors would like
to thank Indrek Valvas and Asper Biotech for microarray manufacturing
1

Authors’ contributions
OS conducted NASBA and microarray experiments, performed microarray
analysis and drafted the manuscript. LK designed SLICSel and microarray
probes, helped with microarray data analysis and drafted the manuscript. BG
carried out the microbiological experiments and RNA extraction and helped
to draft and review the manuscript. PP helped designing SLICSel and the
microarray probes, helped in data analysis and drafted the manuscript. SP
participated in NASBA and microarray experiments and data analysis. KT
participated in NASBA and microarray experiments and helped in
manuscript review. MM and TB conceived of the study, participated in its
design and coordinated microbiological experiments. MR conceived of the
study and participated in its design, conducted SLICSel design, helped to
draft and review the manuscript. AK conceived of the study, participated in
its design, coordinated NASBA and microarray experiments and helped to
draft and review the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 12 November 2010 Accepted: 28 February 2011
Published: 28 February 2011

Scheler et al. BMC Biotechnology 2011, 11:17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6750/11/17

8.

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.
26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Bryant P, Venter D, Robins-Browne R, Curtis N: Chips with everything: DNA
microarrays in infectious diseases. The Lancet infectious diseases 2004,
4:100-11.
Loy A, Bodrossy L: Highly parallel microbial diagnostics using
oligonucleotide microarrays. Clinica chimica acta; international journal of
clinical chemistry 2006, 363:106-19.
Miller MB, Tang Y-W: Basic concepts of microarrays and potential
applications in clinical microbiology. Clinical microbiology reviews 2009,
22:611-33.
Ye RW, Wang T, Bedzyk L, Croker KM: Applications of DNA microarrays in
microbial systems. Journal of microbiological methods 2001, 47:257-72.
Wilson KH, Wilson WJ, Radosevich JL, et al: High-Density Microarray of
Small-Subunit Ribosomal DNA Probes. Applied and environmental
microbiology 2002, 68:2535-2541.
Sugimoto N, Nakano M, Nakano S: Thermodynamics-structure relationship
of single mismatches in RNA/DNA duplexes. Biochemistry 2000,
39:11270-81.
Nugen SR, Leonard B, Baeumner AJ: Application of a unique server-based
oligonucleotide probe selection tool toward a novel biosensor for the
detection of Streptococcus pyogenes. Biosensors & bioelectronics 2007,
22:2442-8.
SantaLucia J, Hicks D: The thermodynamics of DNA structural motifs.
Annual review of biophysics and biomolecular structure 2004, 33:415-40.
Pozhitkov AE, Tautz D, Noble PA: Oligonucleotide microarrays: widely
applied–poorly understood. Briefings in functional genomics & proteomics
2007, 6:141-8.
Zhang L, Wu C, Carta R, Zhao H: Free energy of DNA duplex formation on
short oligonucleotide microarrays. Nucleic acids research 2007, 35:e18.
Naiser T, Kayser J, Mai T, Michel W, Ott A: Position dependent mismatch
discrimination on DNA microarrays - experiments and model. BMC
bioinformatics 2008, 9:509.
Hooyberghs J, Van Hummelen P, Carlon E: The effects of mismatches on
hybridization in DNA microarrays: determination of nearest neighbor
parameters. Nucleic acids research 2009, 37:e53.
Pozhitkov A, Noble Pa, Domazet-Loso T, et al: Tests of rRNA hybridization
to microarrays suggest that hybridization characteristics of
oligonucleotide probes for species discrimination cannot be predicted.
Nucleic acids research 2006, 34:e66.
Li S, Pozhitkov A, Brouwer M: A competitive hybridization model predicts
probe signal intensity on high density DNA microarrays. Nucleic acids
research 2008, 36:6585-91.
Hegde P, Qi R, Abernathy K, et al: A Concise Guide to cDNA Microarray
Analysis. Biotechniques 2000, 29:548-562.
’t Hoen P, de Kort F, van Ommen G, den Dunnen J: Fluorescent labelling
of cRNA for microarray applications. Nucleic Acids Research 2003,
31:20e-20.
Wilson WJ, Strout CL, DeSantis TZ, et al: Sequence-specific identification of
18 pathogenic microorganisms using microarray technology. Molecular
and cellular probes 2002, 16:119-27.
Compton J: Nucleic acid sequence-based amplification. Nature 1991,
350:91-2.
Keer JT, Birch L: Molecular methods for the assessment of bacterial
viability. Journal of Microbiological Methods 2003, 53:175-183.
Morisset D, Dobnik D, Hamels S, Zel J, Gruden K: NAIMA: target
amplification strategy allowing quantitative on-chip detection of GMOs.
Nucleic acids research 2008, 36:e118.
Mader A, Riehle U, Brandstetter T, et al: Microarray-based amplification
and detection of RNA by nucleic acid sequence based amplification.
Analytical and bioanalytical chemistry 2010, 397:3533-41.
Scheler O, Glynn B, Parkel S, et al: Fluorescent labeling of NASBA
amplified tmRNA molecules for microarray applications. BMC
biotechnology 2009, 9:45.
Kaplinski L, Scheler O, Parkel S, et al: Detection of tmRNA molecules on
microarrays at low temperatures using helper oligonucleotides. BMC
biotechnology 2010, 10:34.
Yamamoto S, Harayama S: PCR Amplification and Direct Sequencing of
gyrB Genes with Universal Primers and Their Application to the
Detection and Taxonomic Analysis of Pseudomonas putida Strains.
Applied and environmental microbiology 1995, 61:3768.

Page 7 of 7

32. Deiman B, van Aarle P, Sillekens P: Characteristics and applications of
nucleic acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA). Molecular
biotechnology 2002, 20:163-79.
33. Loens K, Beck T, Goossens H, et al: Development of conventional and
real-time NASBA for the detection of Legionella species in respiratory
specimens. Journal of microbiological methods 2006, 67:408-15.
doi:10.1186/1472-6750-11-17
Cite this article as: Scheler et al.: Detection of NASBA amplified bacterial
tmRNA molecules on SLICSel designed microarray probes. BMC
Biotechnology 2011 11:17.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
