<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Efficient α, β-motif finder for identification of phenotype-related functional modules</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-440"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Matthew C Schmidt"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Efficient a, b-motif finder for identification of
phenotype-related functional modules
Matthew C Schmidt1,2, Andrea M Rocha3, Kanchana Padmanabhan1,2, Zhengzhang Chen1,2, Kathleen Scott4,
James R Mihelcic3 and Nagiza F Samatova1,2*

Abstract
Background: Microbial communities in their natural environments exhibit phenotypes that can directly cause
particular diseases, convert biomass or wastewater to energy, or degrade various environmental contaminants.
Understanding how these communities realize specific phenotypic traits (e.g., carbon fixation, hydrogen
production) is critical for addressing health, bioremediation, or bioenergy problems.
Results: In this paper, we describe a graph-theoretical method for in silico prediction of the cellular subsystems
that are related to the expression of a target phenotype. The proposed (a, b)-motif finder approach allows for
identification of these phenotype-related subsystems that, in addition to metabolic subsystems, could include their
regulators, sensors, transporters, and even uncharacterized proteins. By comparing dozens of genome-scale
networks of functionally associated proteins, our method efficiently identifies those statistically significant functional
modules that are in at least a networks of phenotype-expressing organisms but appear in no more than b
networks of organisms that do not exhibit the target phenotype. It has been shown via various experiments that
the enumerated modules are indeed related to phenotype-expression when tested with different target
phenotypes like hydrogen production, motility, aerobic respiration, and acid-tolerance.
Conclusion: Thus, we have proposed a methodology that can identify potential statistically significant phenotyperelated functional modules. The functional module is modeled as an (a, b)-clique, where a and b are two criteria
introduced in this work. We also propose a novel network model, called the two-typed, divided network. The new
network model and the criteria make the problem tractable even while very large networks are being compared.
The code can be downloaded from http://www.freescience.org/cs/ABClique/

Background
Identifying and understanding cellular subsystems (or
functional modules) responsible for the expression of a
phenotype can assist genetic engineers with determining
which genes to introduce or modify [1] in order to aid
(or inhibit) the phenotype expression in an organism.
Identification of such subsystems (or functional modules) is often performed as a computational search for
specific network structures, or network motifs, in network models of biological data [2,3].
A type of network model, called protein functional
association network, lends itself to the identification of
functional modules. In protein functional association
* Correspondence: samatova@csc.ncsu.edu
1
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
27695, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

networks, a pair of vertices representing proteins is connected by an edge if the genes that encode these proteins are functionally associated, i.e, needed for the same
function [4]. Genes required for the same function may
co-occur in the same operon, co-express under similar
conditions, or be involved in gene fusion events [4]. Evidence of these phenomena can be empirically observed
and used to predict the functional association of two
genes.
Functional modules, in which all pairs of proteins are
functionally associated, can be modeled as maximal cliques in the context of protein functional association
networks [5,6]. Maximal cliques have been recognized
for: (a) finding biologically more relevant protein complexes, with more than 10% improvement in their functional homogeneity when compared to clusters [6]; and
(b) reducing the noise in the data [7]. Among all

© 2011 Schmidt et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

maximal cliques, we are only interested in those that
potentially help an organism express a particular phenotype, and this requires additional signals.
One signal that can be observed in biological networks
is the evolutionary conservation of a functional module.
A module that is phenotype-related is more likely to be
conserved in phenotype-expressing organisms than phenotype-non-expressing organisms [8,9].
With the nave approach (or the brute-force method),
identifying maximal cliques that are statistically biased
towards being present in the networks of phenotypeexpressing organisms requires at a minimum comparision of all maximal cliques across all the organismal networks considered. For any given network, the number of
maximal cliques can be exponential in terms of the network size. Thus, a multi-way comparison for such exponential spaces is impractical.
This paper describes an approach to make this problem tractable. The approach (Figure 1) introduces a

Figure 1 Overview of the (a, b)-motif finder.

Page 2 of 15

novel network model called the two-typed, divided network. It then enumerates all of the maximal cliques in
the constructed network that satisfy the introduced (a,
b)-criteria. The maximal clique enumeration in the constructed network then translates to identification of the
functional modules (modeled as a maximal clique) that
are conserved across at least a phenotype expressing
organisms and at most b phenotype non-expressing
organisms, thus avoiding the need to perform multi-way
clique comparisons (see Figure 2). It is hypothesized
that this approach will move the problem of identifying
the phenotype-related modules from the intractable
space to the tractable space because the number of (a,
b)-cliques will be much fewer than the total number of
maximal cliques across all the organismal networks. The
enumerated (a, b)-cliques are shown to be capable of
modeling known phenotype-related functional modules
(those found via literature search) through experiments
with different target phenotypes.

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

Page 3 of 15

(A) Number of α,β cliques in HvnH_800

(B) Number of α,β cliques in TvrT_800

Figure 2 A maximal clique conserved across multiple organismal networks forms a maximal clique in the two-typed, divided network.

Results and Discussion
Experimental Setup

Five experiments, each with a different target phenotype,
were set up. The phenotypes used were hydrogen-production, acid tolerance, tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
expression, aerobic respiration, and motility (see Additional file 1). The organisms for the aerobic respiration
and motility experiments come from Slonim et al. [10]
and for all the other phenotypes, the organisms were
identified through extensive literature search. Functional
association networks for the organisms for all the
experiments were downloaded from the STRING database [4]. Table 1 gives the statistics of the networks considered in the five experiments. In order to easily
determine protein orthology, the proteins in an organism were replaced by their corresponding cluster of
orthologous genes group (COGs [11]). COGs present in
an organism were determined by information from the
STRING database. Intra-organismal edges were defined
by the functional association edges present in each
organism. STRING database assigns a weight to each
edge on the basis of the evidence that supports the
functional association between the nodes at the two
ends of the edges [4]. Hence, a threshold was applied to
determine which intra-organismal edges were included

in the network (Edge Threshold column in Table 1).
The inter-organismal edges were defined in the manner
described in the Methods section. In the STRING network, a threshold of above 700 is termed as “high confidence,’’ so we only chose thresholds above 700.
In this section, the biological relevance of (a, b)-cliques
is demonstrated by comparing the sets of genes predicted to be phenotype-related functional modules to
known phenotype-related functional modules.
Network Edge Threshold Selection

Our network edge threshold selection strategy aims to
optimize the method performance on a small validation
set of COGs that are known to be associated with the
target phenotype. This prior knowledge is derived from
published literature. Starting with the most conservative
value (e.g., 999) of the edge threshold for the COGCOG organismal network in STRING database, we generate a set of networks till we reach a threshold of 500
with a 50 step difference. For each network, we calculate
the accuracy of identifying known phenotype-related
COGs from the validation set. We select the first
threshold that ensures at least 75% accuracy. Additionally, we check the distribution of the number of unique
COGs obtained per a given edge threshold and find the

Table 1 Phenotypes used to create the various networks used for experimentation
Network
Name

Phenotype

Edge
Threshold

Positive
Organisms

Negative
Organisms

Number of
Vertices

Number of IntraEdges

Number of InterEdges

HvnH_800

Hydrogen
Production

800

9

8

23,397

270,681

2,752,378

TvrT_800

TCA Cycle
Expression

800

14

6

25,433

300,025

3,481,638

AvAn_999

Aerobic
Respiration

999

68

33

49,768

147,332

11,575,277

MvnM_999

Motility

999

85

56

72,272

198,028

23,743,770

ATvnAT_750

Acid Tolerance

750

8

5

17,535

227,296

1,888,286

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

threshold that shows the maximum change in the number of COGs from the previous threshold and then analyze a few thresholds above and below that value using
the prior knowledge information. See Additional file 2
for the details of the edge threshold experiment for the
motility phenotype. The prior knowledge, or the validation set, for the motility phenotype was obtained from
Liu et al [12] with p-value ≤ 0.05.
Organism Selection

To identify phenotype-related functional modules for
each of the 5 phenotypes (biohydrogen production,
acid-tolerance, TCA expression, aerobic respiration, and
motility), phylogenetically diverse (as much as possible)
microorganisms representative of each phenotype were
identified. Each phenotype was treated separately, and
so the sets of organisms vary in each dataset (see Additional file 1). In some cases, for example, dark fermentative biohydrogen production and acid-tolerance,
individual organisms were present across multiple datasets. Selection of organisms was based solely on the ability of each organism to express at least one phenotype
discussed in the paper and not on the ability of each
organism to express all phenotypes discussed in the
paper. The organisms were chosen by reviewing the
existing literature. The aerobic respiration and motility
phenotypes were selected due to the availability of a
number of completely sequenced and annotated genomes for the organisms exhibiting the phenotypes. In
addition, to predict and distinguish between phenotypes
that are highly similar, we selected the TCA expression
phenotype.
In recent years, focus has shifted towards development
of metabolically engineered organisms capable of
expressing desired phenotypic traits. For the case of biohydrogen production using wastewater, this concept
could be applied to create a mixed microbial community
that is “ideal’’ for enhancing hydrogen production. This
is particularly important, since multiple phenotypes are
necessary to optimize overall hydrogen yields, and not a
single hydrogen-producing microorganism has been
identified that is capable of expressing all these phenotypes. Thus, phenotypes important for hydrogen production using wastewater and waste materials were
analyzed. Therefore, phenotypes selected for the study
related to biohydrogen production using wastewater
include:
• Hydrogen Production: In order to understand
metabolic and cellular processes involved in expression and regulation of the hydrogen production phenotype, microorganisms, representative of all three
types (dark fermentation, light fermentation, and

Page 4 of 15

bio-photolysis) of hydrogen production are selected
to identify phenotype-related functional modules.
• Acid-tolerance (pH = 4.5-6.5): Acid-tolerant organisms are those capable of growing in slightly acidic
and acidic conditions (pH 4-6). Similar to acidophiles, acid-tolerant organisms have developed metabolic and cellular acid tolerance response (ATR)
systems to protect themselves when exposed to acid
environments [13]. For hydrogen producers, the presence of ATR systems is extremely important, particularly, with respect to acidogenesis. During
acidogenesis, organic acids (e.g., butyrate and acetate) are produced, thus lowering the pH level in the
medium. In solventogenic organisms, such as Clastridium acetobutylicum, the change in pH results in
a metabolic shift from acidogenesis to solventogenesis. As a result, the organism will stop producing
acetate and butyrate and will generate solvents (e.g.,
acetone and butanol). To prevent metabolic shifts
and maintain conversion of glucose (or other sugar
compound) to hydrogen at maximum yields, organisms need to be able to tolerate acidic pH
conditions.
For acid-tolerence phenotype, we selected a subset of
species, since a diverse, large set of completely
sequenced acid-tolerant microorganisms was not available at the time of the study. Prior to the experiment a
number of acid-tolerant organisms were identified
through literature review. However, many of the organisms’ genome sequences were not completely sequenced.
To ensure the best predictions, a criterion for organism
selection was the presence of their sequenced and annotated genomes. Unfortunately, the organisms we identified are only representative of a small group of acidtolerant bacteria consisting of nine Firmicutes and one
Proteobacteria. As such, results obtained are somewhat
biased towards acid-tolerant Firmicutes.
Hydrogen Production

The set of (a, b)-cliques was enumerated for three different statistically significant (p-value less than 0.005) a,
b-values: (7,0) (see Additional file 3), (8,1) (see Additional file 4), and (9,2) (see Additional file 5). The
enumerated (a, b)-cliques were able to identify sets of
COGs that were known to be associated with hydrogen
production.
Four types of COGs for maturation of [NiFe]-hydrogenase as present in hydrogen producing organisms and
absent in hydrogen non-producing organisms were identified. Proteins associated with these COG groups are
HypC (COG0298), HypD (COG0409), HypE
(COG0309), and HypF (COG00068) (Table 2). In model
organisms such as, Escherichia coli, HypCDEF proteins

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

Page 5 of 15

Table 2 A functional module identified by the (a, b)motif finder for hydrogen production phenotype
COG ID

General Description

Gene name

COG0068

Hydrogenase maturation factor

hypF

COG0298

Hydrogenase maturation factor

hypC

COG0309
COG0409

Hydrogenase maturation factor
Hydrogenase maturation factor

hype
hypD

are described as regulators for maturation of uptake
hydrogenase through participation in development of
the active center [14,15]. Regulation is conducted
through the requirement of insertion of Fe, Ni, and diatomic ligands by HypA-F proteins into the hydrogenase
center for activation and maturation [16]. In this process, HypE and HypF are responsible for synthesis and
insertion of Fe cyanide ligands into the hydrogenase’s
metal center. However, to carry out this process, HypC
and HypD must form a complex for construction of the
cyanide ligands to occur [15,17].
Based on published studies of crystal structures for
hydrogenase maturation proteins, the presence and
coordinated interaction between the proteins are essential for synthesis of [NiFe]-hydrogenase. In this study,
we found similar evidence of functional associations
between HypCDEF proteins. This is shown in one of the
modules identified as associated with hydrogenase.
While associations between maturation proteins have
been well characterized in model organisms [15,18],
detailed molecular analysis of [NiFe]-hydrogenase structures and their associated proteins has not been conducted across all phenotype-expressing organisms. Based
on results obtained, it can be hypothesized that HypCDEF proteins are related to hydrogen producing organisms and will not be present in hydrogen non-producing
organisms.
In addition to hydrogen maturation proteins, the (a,
b)-motif finder was able to identify a module consisting
of COG groups (COG1348 and COG 2710) whose functions were associated with expression of the nitrogen
iron protein (NifH) and the molybdenum iron protein
(NifD) (Table 3) [19]. Together these proteins comprise
two essential components of nitrogenase, a key enzyme
in nitrogen-fixation [20]. During nitrogen-fixation, nitrogenase catalyzes the conversion of nitrogen gas to

ammonia and inadvertently results in the production of
hydrogen gas as a byproduct [19,21]. To carry out this
process, NifD serves as the binding site for substrates,
while NifH assists in biosynthesis of co-factors for NifD
[20]. While these proteins are associated with the nitrogen fixation phenotype, results from our algorithm suggest that these proteins are highly conserved across
various hydrogen producing organisms, thus they may
play an indirect role in hydrogen production.
Although the presence of these two proteins is essential for nitrogen-fixation and biological hydrogen production, association of other genes may play an
important role regulating Nif genes. Examples include
proteins such as cysteine sulfinate desulfinase
(COG1104; NifS) and nitrogen regulatory protein PII
(COG0347; GlnK), which are involved in synthesis of
the Fe-S cluster and regulation of proteins responsible
for nitrogen metabolism [22], respectively. For both
GlnK and NifS, the (a, b)-motif finder predicted associations between each COG group and Nif proteins. Specifically, we noted the association of NifH with the
regulatory protein PII (GlnK). In nitrogen fixing organisms, GlnK is described as a key signal transducer in
NifA in some organisms and regulatory protein in the
transcription of the nitrogenase protein NifH in other
organisms [23]. In this study, the association between
COG groups related to NifH and GlnK supports experimental evidence that PII proteins are involved in inactivation of nitrogenase across a number of nitrogen-fixing
species. In addition, identification of this COG-COG
associations suggests that PII proteins may play a vital
role in hydrogen production via nitrogenase.
Acid Tolerence

When a set of acid-tolerant microorganisms (Phylum
Firmicutes and Proteobacteria) were used by the (a, b)motif finder (see Additional file 6), the two main
mechanisms, lysine/arginine decarboxylase and arginine
deaminase, associated with acid-tolerance were not identified. However, eleven types of COGs associated with
amino acid transporters were identified, suggesting that
amino acid transport is highly related to the set of phenotype-expressing organisms in this study. Within
microorganisms, amino acid transporters can participate
in a number of metabolic and cellular processes, such as
energy metabolism and protein synthesis. In organisms

Table 3 A functional module associated with nitrogenase formation identified by the (a, b)-motif finder
COG ID

General Description

Gene name

COG0388

Predicted amidohydrolase

unknown

COG0446

Uncharacterized NAD(FAD)-dependent dehydrogenase

HcaD

COG1063

Threonine dehydrogenase and related Zn-dependent dehdyrogenases

Tdh

COG1348

Nitrogenase subunit

NifH

COG2710

Nitrogenase molybdenum-iron protein

NifD

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

Page 6 of 15

exposed to acid stress, decarboxylation of the two amino
acids, lysine and arginine, is reported as two mechanisms for neutralization of internal pH [13,24,25]. During
the neutralization process via arginine decarboxylation,
antiporters responsible for replacing the argmatine generated from arginine with another arginine brought in
from the surrounding environment [24]. In another system, arginine deaminase, ammonia is generated to help
protect against acid stress [13]. From our knowledge of
these systems, production or uptake of amino acids by
microorganisms may play an important role in regulating intracellular pH levels.
In this study, eleven COG groups for amino acid
transport were predicted as present across 10 acid-tolerant microorganisms. Proteins associated with these
COG groups include argininosuccinate lyase (COB0165;
ArgH) and the amino acid transporter LysP (COG0833)
(Table 4). Argininosuccinate lyase is responsible for
degrading argininosuccinate to form arginine and fumarate. LysP amino acid transporter is a permease system
used by some microorganisms to transport lysine into
cells [26]. Similar to arginine, decarboxylation of lysine
has been linked to acid response by some bacteria [27].
While the transport of lysine by the LysP amino acid
transporter system is not inhibited by arginine, arginine
has been reported to regulate utilization of lysine by the
lysine decarboxylation pathways [27]. While the direct
interaction between lysine transport and lysine production is not clear, results suggest that there is some regulatory control occurring between these two systems.
TCA Cycle

The tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle is a metabolic pathway involving eight different enzymes related to energy
production in aerobic organisms. Therefore, it could be
modeled by (a, b)-cliques in both the experiment comparing TCA expressing organisms to reverse TCA
(rTCA) expressing organisms (TvrT_800) and the
experiment comparing aerobic to anaerobic organisms
(AvAn_999). The set of COGs that contain enzymes
known to be involved in the TCA cycle are given in
Table 5. Since some of the enzymes involved in the
TCA cycle are not specific to organisms that express the
TCA cycle [28], comparative in silico methods have difficulty identifying all of the enzymes involved in the
pathway.
To determine if this functional module could be modeled as an (a, b)-clique, the set of (a, b)-cliques with
Table 4 A Functional module identified by the a, b-motif
finder for acid tolerance phenotype
COG ID

General Description

Gene name

COG0165

Argininosuccinate lyase

ArgH

COG0833

Amino acid transporter

LysP

significant a, b-values were enumerated in both networks. In the TvrT_800 network, this was defined as
any a, b-value that had a p-value less than 0.005. In the
AvAn_999, this was determined as any a, b-value that
had a p-value less than 1 * 10-5.
The statistically significant (a, b)-cliques enumerated
in the TvrT_800 network (see Additional file 7) contained COGs that represented all eight of the TCA
enzymes, while those enumerated in the AvAn_999 network (see Additional file 8) contained COGs representing seven of the eight TCA enzymes. One of the (a, b)cliques in the TvrT_800 network contained COGs
representing seven of the eight enzymes in the TCA
cycle (Table 6). It is significant to note that in the (a,
b)-clique identified in Table 6, only one of the COGs
has an individual distribution that is significantly biased
towards TCA expressing organisms. In the AvAn_999
network, the COGs representing the TCA enzymes were
less likely to be included in the same (a, b)-clique. This
is likely due to the higher edge threshold used in this
network.
Motility

The motility phenotype was examined to observe how
both the (a, b)-clique model and the enumeration algorithm performed when a large number of organisms
were used. The two-typed, divided network used in this
experiment (MvnM_999) was constructed using 85
functional association networks from motile organisms
and 56 functional association networks from non-motile
organisms. The (a, b)-cliques were enumerated in the
phylogenetic functional association network for all a, bvalues that had a p-value of less than 1 * 10 -5 . This
resulted in 95 unique (a, b)-cliques (see Additional file
9).
The enumerated set of (a, b)-cliques contained 38 (a,
b)-cliques that consisted entirely of flagella-related proteins. Additionally, five (a, b)-cliques were enumerated
that contained chemotaxis-related proteins. Flagella are
cellular structures that enable the movement of microorganisms, while chemotaxis is a chemical process that
determines how the microorganism moves in response
to its environment [10]. These immediate results suggest
that at least some of the remaining 52 (a, b)-cliques
include COGs that are motility-related.
Effects of Phylogenetic Diversity

In addition to introducing the phylogenetic diversity
scoring function S p () (see Methods section), we performed an experimental study to test the robustness of
our scoring method. For the hydrogen production phenotype, we grouped our input set of 17 organisms into
13 groups based on their genus. For each experiment,
we randomly selected one organism from each genus,
then chose a random subset (of size 8-13) of these

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

Page 7 of 15

Table 5 COGs associated with TCA cycle enzymes and whether any of them are part of an (a, b)-clique enumerated in
either two-typed, divided network
Enzyme Name

Associated COG IDs

Citrate synthase

COG0372

TvrT_800
Yes

AvAn_999
Yes

Aconitase

COG1048, COG1049

Yes

Yes

Isocitrate dehydrogenase
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase

COG0473, COG0538, COG2838, COG4579
COG0022, COG0508, COG0567, COG1071, COG1249

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

Succinyl-CoA synthetase

COG0045, COG0074

Yes

Yes

Succinate dehydrogenase

COG0479, COG1053, COG2009, COG2142

Yes

Yes

Fumarase

COG0114

Yes

Yes

Malate dehydrogenases

COG0039

Yes

Yes

organisms, and finally ran the (a, b)-motif finder algorithm on each subset. We then compared the results of
these experiments and found that based on both the
module’s significance score and the module’s phylogenetic score, the top 10 most significant modules identified remained unchanged. The organisms used in the
experiments and the results for various experiments are
avaliable in Additional files 10 and 11, respectively.
Effect of (a, b)-criterion on the Number of Maximal
Cliques

The results in this section describe the effect that different values of a and b have on the number of maximal cliques output when the algorithm is run on a
given two-typed, divided network. The (a, b)-cliques
corresponding to all possible values of a and b from
two-typed, divided network of two phenotypes, hydrogen production and TCA cycle expression were enumerated (see Additional files 12 and 13) to analyze the
effect.
Intuitively, the number of (a, b)-cliques decreased as
the a-value increased and the b-value decreased. Thus,
as shown in Figure 3, the maximum number of (a, b)cliques occurs when the a-value equals zero and the

b-value equals the number of negative divisions. This
is because this criteria are equivalent to the enumeration of all the maximal cliques in the network. Alternatively, the minimum number of (a, b)-cliques get
enumerated when the a-value equals the number of
positive divisions and the b-value equals zero. Large a
and small b is the problem space required for identifying (a, b)-cliques that may represent phenotype-related
functional modules. Thus, as hypothesized, the introduction of the (a, b)-criterion moves the problem into
a tractable space, because there are fewer (a, b)-cliques
to enumerate for statistically significant values of a
and b.
Effect of Search Bounds on Algorithm Runtime

This section presents results on the effectiveness of two
search bounds intended to reduce the search space and
runtime of the algorithm as the number of (a, b)-cliques
is reduced (see Additional files 12 and 13). Three implementations of Algorithm 1 were designed and their
resulting runtimes were compared to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the bounds. The first implementation,
referred to as NO-BOUND-AB-CLIQUE, only used the
output check on Line 2 of Algorithm 1 to ensure only

Table 6 The set of COGs modeled by an (a, b)-clique enumerated in the TvrT_800 network.
COG ID

COG Description

Positive
Organisms

Negative
Organisms

COG0039 Malate/lactate dehydrogenases

12

6

COG0045 Succinyl-CoA synthetase, beta subunit

12

6

COG0074 Succinyl-CoA synthetase, alpha subunit

12

6

COG0372 Citrate synthase
COG0473 Isocitrate/isopropylmalate dehydrogenase

14
13

6
6

COG0479 Succinate dehydrogenase/fumarate reductase, Fe-S protein subunit

13

6

COG0567 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, dehydrogenase (E1) component

12

0

COG1048 Aconitase A

12

2

COG1053 Succinate dehydrogenase/fumarate reductase, flavoprotein subunit

14

6

COG1249 Pyruvate/2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3)
component

13

4

The number of positive and negative organisms each COG is present in is given in the rightmost two columns. The complete (a, b)-clique is present in 11
positive organisms and 0 negative organisms.

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

(A) No-Bound-AB-Clique

Page 8 of 15

(B) Beta-Bound-AB-Clique

(C) Alpha-Beta-Bound-AB-Clique
Figure 3 The number of (a, b)-cliques for all a and b-values in TCA cycle and hydrogen production two-typed, divided networks.

(a, b)-cliques were enumerated. The second implementation, referred to as BETA-BOUND-AB-CLIQUE,
added the bound on Line 7 of Algorithm 1 to bound
the search space. The third algorithm, ALPHA-BETABOUND-AB-CLIQUE used all of the bounds in Algorithm 1 to bound the search space. Figure 4 demonstrates the effectiveness of the bounds for various values
of a and b when enumerating (a, b)-cliques in the phylogenetic functional association network constructed
from hydrogen-producing and hydrogen non-producing
organisms (see Additional file 12). The lack of any variation in the runtimes of the NO-BOUND-AB-CLIQUE
implementation for the various a, b-values is due to its
lack of bounds (Figure 4A). The runtime of BETABOUND-AB-CLIQUE is also invariant as the a-value
changes (Figure 4B). However, the reduction in its runtime correlates well with the reduction in the number of
(a, b)-cliques as b decreases. This property holds for the
ALPHA-BETA-BOUND-AB-CLIQUE implementation as
well (Figure 4C). However, the reduction in the number
of cliques as the a-value increases does not correlate as

well with the reduction in the runtime of the ALPHABETA-BOUND-AB-CLIQUE implementation.

Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a methodology that can
identify evolutionarily conserved functional modules
that are likely associated with the expression of a target
phenotype. The structure of the functional modules
considered in the paper is a maximal clique. The task of
enumerating the maximal cliques in a network and
comparing maximal cliques across multiple networks to
identify those biased towards phenotype-expressing
organisms can be computationally intractable for large
networks. In this paper, we have introduced a novel
type of network model called the two-typed, divided
network and the (a, b)-criterion that together help
move the problem to a tractable space with the modules
known to be related to the target phenotypes considered. Additional files 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 provide additional information about the (a, b)-cliques
identified for the five target phenotypes.

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

Page 9 of 15

1

2

Organism A and B
with the intra-organismal edges

Addition of inter-organismal edges
based on orthology information





Ăϭ
ĂϮ

Ăϯ

Ăϭ

ďϭ

Ăϯ

ďϯ

ďϮ

ďϭ
ĂϮ

ďϮ

ďϯ

DĂǆŝŵĂů ĐůŝƋƵĞƐ

4

3

Conserved maximal clique
forms a maximal clique in the
two-typed, divided network

Addition of inter-organismal edges based on
conservation of a functional association
across different organisms



Ăϭ
Ăϯ

ďϭ
ĂϮ

ďϮ

Ăϭ
ďϯ

Ăϯ

ďϭ
ĂϮ

ďϮ

ďϯ

Figure 4 The runtimes of the three implementations of Algorithm 1 for all a and b-values in the HvnH_800 network.

Methods
Overview

The following steps provide the pipeline of our methodology:
1. Build the two-typed, divided network model which
involves combining the individual organismal networks into the single network.

2. Identify statistically significant a and b values
using hypergeometric test.
3. Run the (a, b)-motif finder algorithm to identify
the phenotype-related functional modules.
4. Assign a phylogenetic diversity score to each functional module identified in the previous step.
5. Run Hendrix et al [29] algorithm using the functional modules identified and each of the organismal

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

networks used in the (a - b)-motif finder as input, to
account for the missing edges in the organismal
networks.

Two-typed, Divided Network Model

In a divided network N = (D, V, E), the set of vertices V
is completely divided amongst non-intersecting subsets
of vertices, called divisions, which are represented by the
set of subsets D. Edges in a divided network can be
either inter-organismal edges or intra-organismal edges.
If an edge connects two vertices that belong to different
divisions, then the edge is considered an inter-organismal edge. If an edge connects two vertices that belong
to the same organism, then the edge is considered an
intra-organismal edge.
Given the functional association networks of k organisms, the divided network N with k divisions representing the k organisms is constructed. Each division
includes all of the proteins from a single organism.
Thus from hereon, a division will be simply referred to
as an organism. An intra-organismal edge represents the
functional association of the two proteins being connected by the edge (Figure 2.1). An inter-organismal
edge can model two different relationships: (1) it can
connect two proteins from different organisms that are
functionally orthologous (Figure 2.2) (orthology is identified with the help of COG data) or (2) it can represent
the conservation of a functional association across different organisms (Figure 2.3). For an example of the latter, let a1 and a2 represent proteins in organism A, and
let b 1 and b 2 represent proteins in organism B. The
edges (a1,b2) and (a2,b1) would exist (Figure 2.3) if and
only if the following criteria are met:
1. a1 and a2 are functionally associated in A (Figure
2.1);
2. b1 and b2 are functionally associated in B (Figure
2.1);
3. a1 and b1 are orthologous proteins (Figure 2.2);
4. a2 and b2 are orthologous proteins (Figure 2.2);
The concept of a organism-type is introduced to differentiate the organisms according to the expression of
the phenotype. Each organism will be associated with a
type t. A phenotype-expressing organism will belong to
the positive type (t = p) and a phenotype-non-expressing
organism will belong to the negative type (t = n). Due to
the binary nature of phenotype expression and nonexpression, the network model is called a two-typed,
divided network, Nt. The set of organisms that have the
same type t are referred to as a type-set of t, T(t). For a
given clique S from Nt and type t, a type-count function
c(S, t) returns the number of organisms in the type-set

Page 10 of 15

T(t) that contain at least one vertex in S. This condition
is sufficient to check if the conserved clique is present
in an organism.
A clique in the two-typed, divided network (Figure
2.4) is made up of a set of cliques (e.g, the clique in Figure 2.4 is made up of two cliques of three vertices each:
one clique from Organism A and the other clique from
Organism B), where each individual organism contributes exactly one clique or nothing. Thus, the typecount function only needs to check if an organism is
participating in the current two-typed, divided network
clique or not. In other words, if any one vertex from the
organism is present in a two-typed, divided network clique, then the organism contributes a clique. Thus,
checking if at least one vertex of the clique is in the
organism is sufficient.
(a, b)-criterion

The (a, b)-criterion is introduced to reduce the number
of maximal cliques that need to be compared across
organismal networks and to identify those modules that
are highly biased towards phenotype-expressing organisms. A subnetwork S satisfies the a-criterion, if the
type count value c(S, p) ≥ a. A subnetwork S satisfies
the b-criteria, if the type count value c(S, n) ≤ b. A subnetwork S satisfies the (a, b)-criterion if and only if it
satisfies both the a-criterion and the b-criterion.
Parameter Threshold Selection

Thresholds for statistically significant values of a and b
parameters are identified using the hypergeometric test.
Given a population P (i.e., the set of all input organisms), let S be the set of successes (i.e., all the phenotype
expressing organisms) in the population, let X be a sample from P and Y be the set of successes in the sample
X. The null hypothesis states that a random draw of X
organisms from P with |S| successes will yield |Y| successes. The alternate hypothesis states that a random
draw of X organisms from P with |S| successes will not
yield |Y| successes.
If P is the set of all input organisms, S is the set of all
phenotype-expressing organisms, and S - P is the set of
all phenotype non-expressing organisms, then hypergeometric test provides the p-value for all a values from 1
to |S| in combination with all b values from 0 to |S - P|.
For each test, the a + b becomes the size of the sample
X and the a value becomes Y, while S and P are the
same as described earlier. We choose all (a, b) pairs
with a ≥ b that have p-value less than or equal to a specified threshold (e.g., p-value is less than 0.005).
Additionally, for each b value, we choose only the
smallest a value such that the associated pair (a, b)
satisfies the given threshold for its p-value. This way
only non-redundant pairs are considered and (a, b)-

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

cliques are identified if the maximal clique exists in at
least a of positive networks. Thus, if a maximal clique
exists for a0, then it is also part of the resulting set for
a 0 + 1 for the same value of b. Thus, the smallest a
value will contain all of the possible cliques for the
given b value.
In the hydrogen production phenotype experiment, |P|
= 17, |S| = 9 and |S - p| = 8 and a p-value threshold of
0.005, we identify all those non-redundant (a, b) pairs
with p-value ≤ 0.005. Additional file 21 contains these
results for the hydrogen production phenotype.
Note that this significance test does not take into
account the phylogenetic similarity or phylogenetic
diversity of the organisms in the input set and in the
selected sample. It only provides the candidate (a, b)
pairs used for running the algorithm. The additional
scoring of the identified (a, b)-clique based on phylogenetic diversity of the organisms is further applied, as
described below.
Phenotype-related Functional Module Identification

If it is assumed that a functional module in a single
organism will form a maximal clique in the organism’s
functional association network, then a functional module that is evolutionarily conserved will form a maximal
clique in the two-typed, divided network (Figure 2). A
functional module is present in two different organisms
if there is a one-to-one mapping between the proteins
of the module in one organism and the proteins of the
module in the other organism. The one-to-one mapping
is obtained by using orthology (Figure 2.2). By virtue of
the existance of intra-organism edges and the addition
of the inter-organismal edges (based on the two criteria
discussed earlier), a conserved functional module, will
form a maximal clique in the two-typed, divided network (Figure 2.4).
We hypothesize that conserved functional modules
that are related to phenotype-expression will likely form
maximal cliques and satisfy the (a, b)-criterion in the
two-typed, divided network. Given a large enough avalue, the a-criterion will ensure that the maximal clique is present in enough phenotype-expressing organisms to likely represent a phenotype-related functional
module. The b-criterion will ensure that the functional
module is less likely related to the phenotype-nonexpression. The maximal cliques that satisfy the (a, b)criteria are referred to as (a, b)-cliques.
The main distinction to make here is that not every
maximal clique in the two-typed, divided network is an
(a, b)-clique. A maximal clique is also an (a, b)-clique if
at least a of the phenotype-expressing organisms and
no more than b phenotype non-expressing organisms
participate in the maximal clique identified from the
two-typed, divided network. Hence, as we enumerate

Page 11 of 15

the maximal cliques, we keep track of the the number
of phenotype expressing and phenotype non-expressing
organisms that participate in this clique and only output
those that satisfy both the a and b criteria. A second
distinction to make is that a maximal clique of the twotyped, divided network is not the relevant motif; instead,
it is a set of maximal cliques (motifs), at most one from
each organism. These maximal cliques are equivalent to
each other and are representatives of a conserved phenotype-related motif.
a, b-motif Finder

Input: CLIQUE - The set of vertices in the current
clique
Input: CAND - The set of vertices that can be added
to the set to form a new clique
Input: NOT - The set of vertices that, if added to the
set, would form redundant cliques
1 if CAND is empty then
2
if NOT is empty AND c(CLIQUE, p) ≥ a AND c
(CLIQUE, n) ≤ b then
3
Output CLIQUE;
4
return
5 current = First vertex in CAND;
6 while current ≠ null do
7
if c(CLIQUE, n) ≤ b then
8
NEWCLIQUE = CLIQUE + current;
9
forall vertices v in CAND do
10
if isConnected(v, current) then
11
NEWCAND + = v;
12
forall vertices u in NOT do
13
if isConnected(u, current) then
14
NEWNOT + = u;
15
if c(NEWCLIQUE ∪ NEWCAND, p) ≥ a
then
16
Call a, b-motif Finder(NEWCLIQUE,
NEWCAND, NEWNOT);
17
CAND = CAND - current;
18
NOT = NOT + current;
19
if CAND has more vertices then
20
current = Next vertex in CAND;
21
else
22
current = null;
Algorithm 1: (a, b)-motif Finder Algorithm
The pseudocode of a recursive enumeration algorithm
for (a, b)-motif finder is given in Algorithm 1. The algorithm is a modification of the maximal clique enumeration algorithm of Bron and Kerbosch [30], which will be
referred to as the BK algorithm (see Additional file 22).
There are two key modifications introduced to generate
these phenotype-related modules. The first is the introduction of the type-count function c(S, t) dicussed in
methods section. The function is used in Line 2 to
restrict the output of the algorithm to (a, b)-cliques.

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

Page 12 of 15

The second modification is the introduction of two
bounds to reduce the search space and to make the
algorithm more efficient. As the BK algorithm traverses
the search tree it keeps track of three arrays. First is the
CLIQUE array, which contains all of the vertices already
in the clique. Second is the CAND array that keeps
track of all of the vertices that could be added to CLIQUE to form a new larger clique. The third is the NOT
array, which contains vertices that, if added to CLIQUE
would only identify maximal cliques that have previously
been enumerated. The first bound on Line 7 reduces the
search space using the value of c(CLIQUE, n). If c(CLIQUE, n) is greater than b, then there is no reason to
continue expanding the subtree of the current search
node as the b criterion has already been violated. The
second bound on Line 15 reduces the search space
using the value of c(CLIQUE, p). For any given search
node, the maximum c(CLIQUE, n) value that could exist
for any child of the search node is c(NEWCLIQUE ∪
NEWCAND, p). If this value is less than a, then there is
no reason for continuing the subtree expansion for the
current search node.
Statistical Significance of the (a, b)-cliques

Statistical significance of the (a, b)-clique being related
to the phenotype-expression is quantified by calculating
its bias towards the phenotype expressing organismal
networks. This significance is calculated using hypergeometric probability, where the population is the total set
of organisms in the experiment, the number of successes in the population is the number of phenotype
expressing organisms in the experiment, the sample size
is the total number of organisms that the (a, b)-clique
is found in, and the successes in the sample is the number of phenotype expressing organisms the (a, b)-clique
is found in.
Phylogenetic Diversity Score of the (a, b)-cliques

In any comparative study, there is a possibility that the
functional module is present across several networks
purely due to phylogenetic similarity of the organisms.
In order to quantify the phylogenetic diversity of the
identified phylogenetically-related functional module, we
introduce the phylogenetic score (Sp()). This score takes
into account the phylogenetic distance between all the
organisms that the given module M is present in. Given
the set OrgP of phenotype expressing organisms that M
is present in and the set OrgN of phenotype non-expressing organisms that M is present in, the phylogenetic
score is calculated as follows:
Sp (M) =

PP − PN − NN
PP + PN + NN

(1)

δ(i, j)

(2)

δ(i, j)

PP =

(3)

i∈OrgP j∈OrgP

PN =
i∈OrgP j∈OrgN

δ(i, j)

NN =

(4)

i∈OrgN j∈OrgN

where δ(i, j) is the phylogenetic distance between organism i and organism j. The function Sp() rewards the module if the phylogenetic distance between the phenotypeexpressing organisms is large, i.e, the module is conserved
among a set of diverse phenotype-expressing organisms.
The phylogenetic distance information was downloaded
from the IMG (Integrated Microbial Genomes) database
[31]. Section ‘’Effects of Phylogenetic Diversity’’ and Additional file 23 provide the results of the phylogenetic score
calculation and the robustness of the scoring function.
Handling Missing Data in Input Graphs

With real data, it is quite possible to have missing information, for instance, unobserved protein interactions or
missed orthologies, that would lead to missing edges
and/or vertices in the network model of this data. Handling possibly missing edges becomes imporant, because
the phenotype-related functional modules that we mine
are modeled as maximal cliques. Hence, missed information in any one organism could lead to identification
of cliques that do not model the complete phenotyperelated sub-system.
To address this drawback, we introduce a post-processing step utilizing our quasi-clique mining algorithm
with knowledge priors (DENSE) [29]. The algorithm
takes as input a set of query vertices as knowledge
priors and identifies those subgraphs that are “enriched’’
by the vertices from the query set and meet a certain
density (in terms of the number of edges) threshold. We
supply all the identified phenotype-related modules as
input to this algorithm and identify those extended
functional modules that are more loosely connected, or
form a quasi-clique. The density of the modules identified and the number of query vertices that will enrich
the modules are controlled by the two parameters, g and
μ, respectively. The results of running the algorithm
using the functional modules identified for the hydrogen
production phenotype (a = 9, b = 2)and the functional
association network of Clostridium acetobutylicum
ATCC 824 with μ = 0.5 and g = 0.5 can be found in
Additional file 24.
Comparison of the unique COGs identified by the two
algorithms (see Additional file 25) indicates that the

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

Page 13 of 15

DENSE algorithm was able to identify key hydrogen
producing-related COGS missed by the (a, b)-motif finder algorithm. One example of a COG missed includes
the iron only hydrogenase (COG4624). Enzyme complex
associated with this COG plays a key role in the generation of biological hydrogen in microorganisms. In our
initial results (see Section Hydrogen Production), the (a,
b)-motif finder identified COGs involved in maturation
and activation of [NiFe]-hydrogenases. While [NiFe]hydrogenases are important for regulating removal of
biological H2(g) in organisms, it is Fe-only hydrogenases
that are responsible for the production of H 2 (g). As
such, identification of motifs containing Fe-only hydrogenases is important for understanding how these genes
interact with other genes and sub-networks. Other
potentially important COGs included those indirectly
associated with hydrogen production. These included
COGs involved in the formation of acetate and AcetylCoA(COG0282, COG1013, COG1014). While these
COGs do not lead to the direct formation of H2(g), they
are involved in metabolic pathways that result in the
production of H 2 (g). For example, COG0282 corresponds to acetate kinase, the last enzyme in acidogenesis. During the overall pathway for acidogenesis,
hydrogen gas is produced. Although acetate kinase only
catalyzes the conversion of acetyl-phosphate to acetate
and not hydrogen, it is an indicator of acidogenesis.
Hence, acetate production can be considered a phenotype-related pathway for hydrogen production.
Time and Space Complexity of the (a, b)-motif Finder

The upper bound for the time complexity of the (a, b)motif finder algorithm is the same as the worst case of
the Bron and Kerbosh algorithm. The maximal clique
enumeration problem depends on the number of cliques
in the input graph, and in worst case that number can
n
be 3 3 , where n is the number of vertices in the graph
[32]. However, we have shown earlier [33] that biological networks typically do not exhibit this worst case
behavior. Table 7 provides details on the density of all
the networks used in the various experiments along
with the time taken to enumerate all maximal cliques
(not just those that satisfy the (a, b)-criterion). This is
achieved by setting the the a value to zero and b value

to the number of phenotype non-expressing organisms
in the input two-typed, divided network. This criteria is
the same as enumerating all the maximal cliques in the
graph because any maximal clique in the graph will be
present in at least 0 of the phenotype expressing organismal networks and can only be present in at most all
of the phenotye non-expressing organismal networks.
The runtime and memory usage for the various runs of
the algorithm for the various phenotypes is included in
Additional file 26.
The memory usage by the algorithm, in the worst
case, for the graphs used in the various experiments is
documented in Table 7. As we discussed in [33], the
Bron and Kerbosh algorithm, while exploring the graph
in the depth-first manner, keeps track of the paths it
has already visited and does not revisit them. Additionally, the algorithm uses a stack data structure, and
hence the memory requirement is polynomial in the size
of the input graph. However, the two-typed, divided network has more edges than the union of the edges across
the organism-specific networks. The constructed network will have the same number of vertices, but it will
have a superset of the edges in the union network. It
will contain all of the edges in the union network, plus
the inter-organismal edges, which do not exist in the
union network. In the worst-case, the number of interorganismal edges will be in O(N 2 * k), where k is the
number of organisms and N is the number of nodes per
organism-specific network. The alternative to adding
these inter-organismal edges would be comparing the
cliques enumerated in each organism-specific network
with those enumerated in another organism-specific network. This would require O(C k ) time, where C is the
number of maximal cliques in an organism-specific network, which is likely significantly larger than O(N2 * k).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplement1-organisms. List of organisms used in
the various experiments.
Additional file 2: Supplements 28 Choosing Edge Threshold. The
experiment for choosing network edge threshold for motility experiment.
Additional files 3: Hydrogen production phenotype results for a =
7 and b = 0. The (a, b)-cliques enumerated for the hydrogen production
phenotype for a = 7 and b = 0.

Table 7 Runtime and Memory Usage in the Worst Case
Network

Density

Maximal Cliques

Maximal Cliques/sec

Total time (sec)

Memory Usage (MB)

HvnH_800

0.01105

103596

2851

36.34

23.41

TvrT_800

0.01169

113741

2218

51.29

29.23

MvnM_999

0.00917

11884

11

1093.78

186.21

AvAn_999

0.00139

13878

19

728.28

91.48

ATvnAT_750

0.01343

78395

2273

34.49

16.30

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

Page 14 of 15

Additional files 4: Hydrogen production phenotype results for a =
8 and b = 1. The (a, b)-cliques enumerated for the hydrogen production
phenotype for a = 8 and b = 1.

query vertices and Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824 protein
functional association network.
Additional file 25: DENSE vs. a, b-motif finder. The comparison of
unique COGs found by DENSE and a, b-motif finder.

Additional files 5: Hydrogen production phenotype results for a =
9 and b = 2. The (a, b)-cliques enumerated for the hydrogen production
phenotype for a = 9 and b = 2.

Additional files 26: Runtimes and memory usage of various runs.
The runtimes and memory usage for the various runs of the various
phenotypes.

Additional file 6: Acid-tolerance phenotype results. The (a, b)-cliques
enumerated for the acid-tolerance phenotype.
Additional file 7: Aerobic respiration phenotype results. The (a, b)cliques enumerated for the aerobic respiration phenotype.
Additional file 8: TCA cycle expression phenotype results. The (a, b)cliques enumerated for the TCA cycle expression phenotype.
Additional file 9: Motility phenotype results. The (a, b)-cliques
enumerated for the motility phenotype.
Additional files 10: Organisms used in Effects of Phylogenetic
Diversity Experiments. The list of organisms used in Effects of
Phylogenetic Diversity Experiments.
Additional files 11: Effects of phylogenetic diversity. Results of
experiments conducted to test robusteness of our method along with
the list of organisms used in each experiment. All experiments were
conducted for hydrogen production phenotype.
Additional file 12: Algorithm runtimes for hydrogen production
phenotype. The (a, b)-motif finder algorithm runtimes for hydrogen
production phenotype.
Additional file 13: Algorithm runtimes for TCA expression
phenotype. The (a, b)-motif finder algorithm runtimes for TCA
expression phenotype.
Additional file 14: Size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for aerobic
respiration. The size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for aerobic respiration
and the corresponding list of organisms they are present in.
Additional files 15: Size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for hydrogen
production (a = 7, b = 0). The size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for
hydrogen production (a = 7, b = 0) and the corresponding list of
organisms they are present in.
Additional files 16: Size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for hydrogen
production (a = 8, b = 1). The size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for
hydrogen production (a = 8, b = 1) and the corresponding list of
organisms they are present in.
Additional files 17: Size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for hydrogen
production (a = 9, b = 2). The size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for
hydrogen production (a = 9, b = 2) and the corresponding list of
organisms they are present in.
Additional file 18: Size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for motility
phenotype. The size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for motility and the
corresponding list of organisms they are present in.
Additional file 19: Size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for tca cycle
phenotype. The size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for tca cycle
expression and the corresponding list of organisms they are present in.
Additional file 20: Size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for acid
tolerence phenotype. The size of (a, b)-cliques enumerated for acid
tolerence expression and the corresponding list of organisms they are
present in.
Additional file 21: Selection of (a, b) thresholds for hydrogen
production phenotype. The selection of the set of (a, b) thresholds for
the hydrogen production phenotype experiment.
Additional file 22: BK Algorithm. Details of the Bron and Kerbosch [30]
algorithm.
Additional file 23: Phylogenetic diversity score calculation.
Phylogenetic diversity score calculated for (a, b)-cliques enumerated for
the hydrogen production phenotype.
Additional file 24: Extended functional modules obtained by
running DENSE [29]. The extended functional modules obtained by
running Hendrix et al (DENSE) [29] using the phenotype-related
functional modules obtained for hydrogen production phenotype as

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of
Science, the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR) and the
Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER) and the U.S. National
Science Foundation (Expeditions in Computing). The work by AR was
supported by the Delores Auzenne Fellowship and the Alfred P. Sloan Minority
PhD Scholarship Program. Oak Ridge National Laboratory is managed by UTBattelle for the LLC U.S. D.O.E. under contract no. DEAC05-00OR22725.
Author details
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
27695, USA. 2Computer Science and Mathematics Division, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 37831, USA. 3Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, 33620, USA.
4
Department of Integrative Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa,
33620, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
MS, KP and ZC developed and implemented the computational model and
the algorithm and conducted computational experiments. AR and KS
provided biological validation. MS, KP, and AR provided the initial draft of
the manuscript. JM suggested and supervised the study related to the
hydrogen production from wastewater and waste materials. NS provided the
problem statement, supervised the developement of the computational
methodology, and provided suggestions on methodology validation. JM, KS,
and NF contributed to preparing the final version of the manuscript. All
authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 7 July 2011 Accepted: 11 November 2011
Published: 11 November 2011
References
1. Benfey PN, Mitchell-Olds T: From genotype to phenotype: systems
biology meets natural variation. Science 2008, 320(5875):495-497.
2. Sharan R, Ulitsky I, Shamir R: Network-based prediction of protein
function. Mol Syst Biol 2007, 3:88.
3. Zhu X, Gerstein M, Snyder M: Getting connected: analysis and principles
of biological networks. Genes Dev 2007, 21(9):1010-1024.
4. Jensen LJ, Kuhn M, Stark M, Chaffron S, Creevey C, Muller J, Doerks T,
Julien P, Roth A, Simonovic M, Bork P, von Mering C: STRING 8-a global
view on proteins and their functional interactions in 630 organisms.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37 Database: D412-D416.
5. Li X, Tan S, Foo C, Ng S: Interaction graph mining for protein complexes
using local clique merging. Genome Inform 2005, 16(2):260-269.
6. Zhang B, Park B, Karpinets T, Samatova NF: From pull-down data to
protein interaction networks and complexes with biological relevance.
Bioinformatics 2008, 24(7):979-86.
7. Tabb D, Thompson M, Khalsa-Moyers G, VerBerkmoes N, McDonald W:
MS2Grouper: Group assessment and synthetic replacement of duplicate
proteomic tandem mass spectra. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2005, 16:1250-1261.
8. Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning Protein Functions by Comparative Genome Analysis: Protein
Phylogenetic Profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999, 96(8):4285-4288.
9. Levesque M, Shasha D, Kim W, Surette MG, Benfey PN: Trait-to-Gene A
Computational Method for Predicting the Function of Uncharacterized
Genes. Curr Biol 2003, 13(2):129-133.
10. Slonim N, Elemento O, Tavazoie S: Ab initio genotype-phenotype
association reveals intrinsic modularity in genetic networks. Mol Syst Biol
2006, 2, (2006.2005).

Schmidt et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:440
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/440

11. Tatusov R, Fedorova N, Jackson J, Jacobs A, Kiryutin B, Koonin E, Krylov D,
Mazumder R, Mekhedov S, Nikolskaya A, Rao BS, Smirnov S, Sverdlov A,
Vasudevan S, Wolf Y, Yin J, Natale D: The COG database: an updated
version includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:41.
12. Liu Y, Li J, Sam L, Goh CS, Gerstein M, Lussier YA: An Integrative Genomic
Approach to Uncover Molecular Mechanisms of Prokaryotic Traits. PLoS
Comput Biol 2006, 2(11):e159.
13. Foster JW: Microbial Response to Acid Stress. In Bacterial Stress Responses.
Edited by: Storz G, Hengge-Aronis R. Washington, D.C.: ASM Press;
2000:99-116.
14. Vignais PM, Billoud B, Meyer J: Classification and phylogeny of
hydrogenases. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2001, 25(4):455-501.
15. Butland G, Zhang Jw, Yang W, Sheung A, Wong P, Greenbalt JF, Emili A,
Zamble DB: Interactions of the Escherichia coli hydrogenase biosynthetic
proteins: HybG complex formation. FEBS Letters 2006, 580:677-681.
16. Shomura Y, Komori H, Miyabe N, Tomiyama M, Shibata N, Higuchi Y: Crystal
Structures of Hydrogenase Maturation Protein HypE in the Apo and
ATP-bound Forms. J Mol Biol 2007, 372(4):1045-1054.
17. Blokesch M, Albracht SPJ, Matzanke BF, Drapal NM, Jacobi A, Bock A: The
Complex Between Hydrogenase-maturation Proteins HypC and HypD is
an Intermediate in the Supply of Cyanide to the Active Site Iron of
[NiFe]-Hydrogenases. J Mol Biol 2004, 344:155-167.
18. Butland G, Peregrin-Alvarez JM, Li J, Yang W, Yang X, Canadien V,
Starostine A, Richards D, Beattie B, Krogan N, Davey M, Parkinson J,
Greenblatt J, Emili A: Interaction network containing conserved and
essential protein complexes in Escherichia coli. Nature 2005,
433(7025):531-537.
19. Rey FE, Heiniger EK, Harwood CS: Redirection of metabolism for biological
hydrogen production. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007, 73(5):1665-1671.
20. Fani R, Gallo R, Lio P: Molecular evolution of nitrogen fixation: the
evolutionary history of the nifD, nifK, nifE, and nifN genes. J Mol Evol
2000, 51:1-11.
21. Rey FE, Oda Y, Harwood CS: Regulation of uptake hydrogenase and
effects of hydrogen utilization on gene expression in
Rhodopseudomonas palustris. J Bacteriol 2006, 188(17):6143-6152.
22. Zhang C, Liu S, Zhou Y: Fast and accurate method for identifying highquality protein-interaction modules by clique merging and its
application to yeast. J Proteome Res 2006, 5(4):801-807.
23. Atkinson MR, Blauwkamp TA, Ninfa AJ: Context-Dependent Functions of
the PII and GlnK Signal Transduction Proteins in Escherichia coli. J
Bacteriol 2002, 184(19):5364-5375.
24. Borden JR, Jones SW, Indurthi D, Chen Y, Terry Papoutsakis E: A genomiclibrary based discovery of a novel, possibly synthetic, acid-tolerance
mechanism in Clostridium acetobutylicum involving non-coding RNAs
and ribosomal RNA processing. Metab Eng 2010, 12(3):268-281.
25. Foster JW: Escherichia coli acid resistance: tales of an amateur
acidophile. Nat Rev Microbiol 2004, 2:898-907.
26. Steffes C, Ellis J, Wu J, Rosen BP: The lysP gene encodes the lysine-specific
permease. J Bacteriol 1992, 174(10):3242-3249.
27. Chou HT, Hegazy M, Lu CD: L-Lysine Catabolism Is Controlled by LArginine and ArgR in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1. J Bacteriol 2010,
192(22):5874-5880.
28. White D: The Physiology and Biochemistry of Prokaryotes. 3 edition. Oxford
University Press, USA; 2006.
29. Hendrix W, Rocha AM, Elmore MT, Trien J, Samatova NF: Discovery of
Enriched Biological Motifs Using Knowledge Priors with Application to
Biohydrogen Production. In BIOCOMP. Edited by: Arabnia HR, Tran QN,
Chang R, He M, Marsh A, Solo AMG, Yang JY. CSREA Press; 2010:17-23.
30. Bron C, Kerbosch J: Algorithm 457: Finding All Cliques of an Undirected
Graph. Commun ACM 1973, 16(9):575-577.
31. Markowitz VM, Korzeniewski F, Palaniappan K, Szeto E, Werner G, Padki A,
Zhao X, Dubchak I, Hugenholtz P, Anderson I, Lykidis A, Mavromatis K,
Ivanova N, Kyrpides NC: The integrated microbial genomes (IMG) system.
Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 34(suppl 1):D344-D348.
32. Moon JW, Moser L: On cliques in graphs. Israel J Math 1965, 3:23-28.
33. Schmidt MC, Samatova NF, Thomas K, Park B: A scalable, parallel algorithm
for maximal clique enumeration. J Parallel Distr Com 2009, 69(4):417-428.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-440
Cite this article as: Schmidt et al.: Efficient a, b-motif finder for
identification of phenotype-related functional modules. BMC
Bioinformatics 2011 12:440.

Page 15 of 15

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
