<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The evolutionary history of the Arabidopsis lyrata complex: a hybrid in the amphi-Beringian area closes a large distribution gap and builds up a genetic barrier</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:98. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-98"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Roswitha Schmickl"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The evolutionary history of the Arabidopsis lyrata
complex: a hybrid in the amphi-Beringian area
closes a large distribution gap and builds up a
genetic barrier
Roswitha Schmickl1, Marte H Jørgensen2, Anne K Brysting2, Marcus A Koch1*

Abstract
Background: The genomes of higher plants are, on the majority, polyploid, and hybridisation is more frequent in
plants than in animals. Both polyploidisation and hybridisation contribute to increased variability within species,
and may transfer adaptations between species in a changing environment. Studying these aspects of evolution
within a diversified species complex could help to clarify overall spatial and temporal patterns of plant speciation.
The Arabidopsis lyrata complex, which is closely related to the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, is a perennial,
outcrossing, herbaceous species complex with a circumpolar distribution in the Northern Hemisphere as well as a
disjunct Central European distribution in relictual habitats. This species complex comprises three species and four
subspecies, mainly diploids but also several tetraploids, including one natural hybrid. The complex is ecologically,
but not fully geographically, separated from members of the closely related species complex of Arabidopsis halleri,
and the evolutionary histories of both species compexes have largely been influenced by Pleistocene climate
oscillations.
Results: Using DNA sequence data from the nuclear encoded cytosolic phosphoglucoisomerase and Internal
Transcribed Spacers 1 and 2 of the ribosomal DNA, as well as the trnL/F region from the chloroplast genome, we
unravelled the phylogeography of the various taxonomic units of the A. lyrata complex. We demonstrate the
existence of two major gene pools in Central Europe and Northern America. These two major gene pools are
constructed from different taxonomic units. We also confirmed that A. kamchatica is the allotetraploid hybrid
between A. lyrata and A. halleri, occupying the amphi-Beringian area in Eastern Asia and Northern America. This
species closes the large distribution gap of the various other A. lyrata segregates. Furthermore, we revealed a
threefold independent allopolyploid origin of this hybrid species in Japan, China, and Kamchatka.
Conclusions: Unglaciated parts of the Eastern Austrian Alps and arctic Eurasia, including Beringia, served as major
glacial refugia of the Eurasian A. lyrata lineage, whereas A. halleri and its various subspecies probably survived in
refuges in Central Europe and Eastern Asia with a large distribution gap in between. The North American A. lyrata
lineage probably survived the glaciation in the southeast of North America. The dramatic climatic changes during
glaciation and deglaciation cycles promoted not only secondary contact and formation of the allopolyploid hybrid
A. kamchatica, but also provided the environment that allowed this species to fill a large geographic gap
separating the two genetically different A. lyrata lineages from Eurasia and North America. With our example
focusing on the evolutionary history of the A. lyrata species complex, we add substantial information to a broad
evolutionary framework for future investigations within this emerging model system in molecular and evolutionary
biology.

* Correspondence: mkoch@hip.uni-hd.de
1
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg Institute of Plant Sciences, Biodiversity
and Plant Systematics, Im Neuenheimer Feld 345, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany
© 2010 Schmickl et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

Background
Molecular biological research during the last decade has
largely focussed on model organisms such as Drosophila
melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Arabidopsis
thaliana. Now that knowledge in molecular genetics,
cell and developmental biology of these organisms has
greatly increased, closely related organisms emerge as
promising for studying characteristics not possible to
elucidate with model and/or single organisms [1,2].
Arabidopsis lyrata L. is a close relative of A. thaliana,
from which it diverged approximately five million years
ago [3,4]. Arabidopsis lyrata s.l. represents a small species complex of four species and several putative subspecies with a circumpolar arctic-alpine distribution
(Additional file 1, Table S1). Populations have been
adapted to various ecological conditions, including the
harsh environment of the arctic tundra, cryptic warmstage refugia (exposed rocks, rocky slopes) in Central
Europe, and different edaphic conditions with substrates
such as dolomite, silicious bedrocks, and even heavy
metal rich serpentine soil in Central Europe (Lower
Austria, personal observation) and the USA [Maryland;
[5]] [6]. Most members of the species complex are perennial diploid outbreeders (2n = 2x = 16), but also tetraploid cytotypes occur [7,6,8]. There are numerous
aspects of the biology of the A. lyrata complex that differ from and cannot be addressed in A. thaliana, like
self-incompatibility and perennial life cycle.
The A. lyrata complex has already proven to be a suitable study system for the analysis of character traits
such as flowering time [9,10] or pathogen defense [11].
Additionally, molecular mechanisms for the function of
sporophytic self-incompatibility have been investigated
[12-20], and comparative approaches to analyse sporophytic self-incompatibility in diploids versus polyploids
are underway (Jørgensen, unpublished data). Whole genome sequencing of A. lyrata was finished last year, and
data have been available for a few months (The A. lyrata genome sequence assembly v1.0, http://genome.jgipsf.org/Araly1/Araly1.info.html), enabling direct comparisons with the A. thaliana genome. However, in contrast to A. thaliana, where the evolutionary history has
been analysed in more detail [e.g. [21,22]], evolutionary
studies on the A. lyrata complex have so far been largely restricted to a small number of populations from
Central Europe [23-26] or larger sample sizes with a
more general genus-wide perspective [27,28]. A detailed
European study has revealed that population structure is
dominated by regional genetic bottlenecks, and genetic
structure exists within continents [Ansell, personal communication]. This suggests a comprehensive global
study is necessary to resolve the evolutionary history of
this complex.

Page 2 of 18

In this study we present the first worldwide evolutionary history of the A. lyrata complex, covering its whole
range of distribution and all taxonomically defined
units. We use a widely applied nuclear encoded marker
system (ITS, internal transcribed spacer region of
nuclear encoded ribosomal DNA) to study gene flow
between populations, a maternally inherited chloroplast
genome marker (trnL intron (trnL) and trnL/F intergenic spacer (trnL/F-IGS) of tRNA Ser and tRNA Thr ,
respectively) to investigate migrational movements due
to seed dispersal, and the nuclear encoded housekeeping
gene PgiC (cytosolic phosphoglucoisomerase), a single
copy gene, to discriminate between hybridising taxa. We
aim to focus on the following four aspects: (1) Unravelling general phylogeographic patterns of the A. lyrata
complex by identifying the main genetic lineages, and
interpreting genetic variation in space and time [29], in
the context of both climatic and geological events
throughout Pleistocene glaciation cycles; (2) Evaluating
the role of hybridisation and polyploidisation in the origin of A. kamchatica (Fisch. ex DC.) K. Shimizu &
Kudoh, an amphi-Beringian member of the A. lyrata
complex; (3) Explaining Pleistocene and postglacial
migration routes by analysing genetic diversity statistics:
The arctic-alpine A. lyrata complex is one of the rare
examples among higher plants with a distribution in
both Central Europe and North America and, additionally, a circumpolar distribution - other examples are
Cassiope tetragona [30], and Saxifraga oppositifolia [31];
and (4) Studying the role of Beringia as a refugia for
populations of arctic A. lyrata, since Beringia is assumed
to be one of the major refugia for arctic plants during
Pleistocene glaciations [30-36].

Methods
Plant material

Altogether 467 accessions of the A. lyrata complex were
analysed: 295 accessions newly analysed within this
study, 39 accessions sequenced by Schmickl et al. [28],
and 133 accessions analysed by Koch and Matschinger
[27]. Plant material was mainly collected from herbarium vouchers from BM (Natural History Museum, London), CAS (California Academy of Sciences, San
Fransisco), DAO (Vascular Plant Herbarium, Agriculture
and Agri-Food Canada, Ottawa), DH (Hobert and William Smith Colleges, New York), LE (The V.L. Komarov
Botanical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, St.
Petersburg), LI (Upper Austrian Provincial Museum,
Linz), O (Natural History Museum, University of Oslo,
Oslo), W (Natural History Museum, Vienna), and partly
collected in the field, documented at HEID (Herbarium
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg). Taxon determination followed the voucher labels, and was verified with

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

floras and determination keys [e.g. [37]; Flora of North
America, Al-Shehbaz, personal communication]. In our
study we followed the taxonomy of [37]. Twentyfive
accessions of the various subspecies of A. halleri (L.)
O’Kane & Al-Shehbaz were analysed from throughout
the distribution range because of the evidence that this
taxon served as a putative parent of A. kamchatica, previously also treated as A. lyrata ssp. kamchatica [[27];
and references therein], an evolutionary scenario which

Page 3 of 18

was recently confirmed by [8]. The distribution of the
investigated accessions is shown in Figure 1. The accession list is provided with Additional file 2, Table S2.
The following short overview of A. lyrata and A. halleri
taxonomy will introduce the concept of Al-Shehbaz and
O’Kane [37]. Elven (ed.) [38] persues a different taxonomic concept, which is summarised in the supplementary material (Additional file 1, Table S1), but will not
be discussed here. Apart from A. thaliana, the A. lyrata

Figure 1 Distribution of Arabidopsis accessions investigated. Accessions of the Arabidopsis lyrata complex were analysed for nuclear ITS and
PgiC regions, and cpDNA trnL/F. Accessions of the Arabidopsis halleri complex were analysed for PgiC only. Maximal glaciation of the LGM is
drawn according to Ehlers and Gibbard [56].

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

complex is one of three major species complexes in
the genus Arabidopsis [27], the other two being the A.
arenosa (L.) Lawalrée and A. halleri complexes
[39,40,6,27,41]. The A. lyrata complex is considered by
different authors to include different numbers of taxa of
various ranking, distribution areas, and ploidy levels
(Additional file 1, Table S1). Al-Shehbaz and O’Kane
[37] treat the complex as one species, A. lyrata, with
three subspecies: ssp. lyrata, ssp. petraea (L.) O’Kane &
Al-Shehbaz, and ssp. kamchatica (Fisch. ex DC.) O’Kane
& Al-Shehbaz. Subspecies lyrata is considered to be
broadly amphi-Pacific and of two ploidy levels (2n = 16,
32), ssp. petraea to be Northern Eurasian and Central
European with the same two ploidy levels, and kamchatica to be amphi-Pacific and tetraploid (2n = 32). A
comprehensive quantitative morphological analysis using
multivariate statistics is still not available for the A. lyrata complex. Moreover, information on the ploidy level
is largely lacking throughout the distribution range, and
further cytological investigations might be important for
taxon delimitation [7,8]. Arabidopsis arenicola (Richardson) Al-Shehbaz, Elven, D.F. Murray & Warwick has
only recently been included as part of the A. lyrata
complex [42]. It has, for a long time, been placed within
the genus Arabis L. Elven (ed.) [38] considers this taxon
to be diploid (2n = 16) and distributed in north-eastern
North America, and they are supported by Al-Shehbaz
in the upcoming Flora of North America [Al-Shehbaz,
personal communication]. Many of the mentioned taxa
include two ploidy levels, suggesting frequent polyploidisation events within the A. lyrata complex. An allopolyploid origin of kamchatica has already been confirmed
based on nuclear DNA sequences, with A. lyrata and A.
halleri ssp. gemmifera (Matsum.) O’Kane & Al-Shehbaz
as possible parental taxa [[43,27,28,8]; Jørgensen et al.,
unpublished data]. Otherwise, little is known with
regard to the number of polyploid units and their
origins.
Five subspecies have been recognised in A. halleri: ssp.
halleri, ssp. ovirensis (Wulfen) O’Kane & Al-Shehbaz,
ssp. dacica (Heuff.) Kolník, comb. nov., ssp. tatrica
(Pawl.) Kolník, comb. nov., all distributed in Central
Europe, and ssp. gemmifera in Eastern Asia, supported
by both morphometric analysis (Kolnik, unpublished
data) and genetic AFLP data (Marhold, unpublished
data).
DNA isolation, amplification and sequencing

Total DNA was obtained from dried leaf material and
extracted according to the CTAB protocol of Doyle and
Doyle [44] with the following modifications: 50-75 mg
of dry leaf tissue were ground in 2 ml tubes using a
Retsch swing mill (MM 200), 2 units of RNase A per
extraction were added to the isolation buffer, and the

Page 4 of 18

DNA pellets were washed twice with 70% ethanol. DNA
was dissolved in 50 μl TE-buffer for storage and diluted
1:3 in TE-buffer before use.
For the cpDNA markers trnL intron and trnL/F intergenic spacer (trnL/F-IGS), primers and PCR cycling
scheme followed the protocol of Dobeš et al. [45], using
a PTC200 (MJ Research, Waltham, USA) thermal cycler.
The PCR reaction volume of 50 μl contained 1× PCR
buffer (10 mM TRIS/50 mM KCl buffer, pH 8.0), 3 mM
MgCl2, 0.4 μM of each primer, 0.2 mM of each dNTP, 1
U Taq DNA polymerase (Amersham Biosciences, Chalfont St Giles, England), and approximately 1 ng of template DNA. Amplified sequences of trnL/F-IGS included
the complete trnL/F-IGS and the first 18 bases of the
trnF gene. Amplification of the nuclear marker internal
transcribed spacer region (ITS) was performed according to Dobeš et al. [46]. PCR reaction conditions were
the same as for the two cpDNA markers described
above, and PCR cycling scheme was 5 min at 95°C, 35
cycles of 1 min at 95°C, 1 min at 48°C, and 1 min at 72°
C, 10 min extension at 72°C, and a final hold at 4°C.
PCR products spanned the entire ITS1, 5.8 S rDNA,
and ITS2 region.
Before sequencing PCR products were checked for
length and concentrations on 1.5% agarose gels and purified with the NucleoFast Kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren,
Germany). Cycle sequencing was performed using the
DYEnamic ET Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit (Amersham Biosciences, Chalfont St Giles, England) and the
original primers. Both strands were amplified in order
to gain the complete sequence. PCR products were
resolved in 10 μl loading solution and run on a MegaBace 500 sequencer.
trnL/F and ITS sequence definition and map reconstruction

Plastidic trnL/F sequences were defined as haplotypes
and suprahaplotypes following our previous studies
[27,41,28]: Haplotypes are characterised by multiple trnF
pseudogenes in the 3’-region of the trnL/F-IGS close to
the functional trnF gene [47,48,27,49,41,50]. When
defining trnL/F suprahaplotypes, we excluded the pseudogene-rich region. Pseudogenes evolve with a 10 times
higher mutation rate than single nucleotide polymorphisms, which makes them non-applicable for phylogenetic
reconstructions on the species level [50]. Additionally,
their boundaries are under ongoing discussion. An alternative interpretation is provided by Ansell et al. [51]. In
summary, haplotypes belonging to one suprahaplotype
share the same base order throughout the whole
sequence except for the pseudogene-rich region, where
they vary in both length and base content. Suprahaplotypes differ from each other only by single point mutations and/or indels. Newly defined trnL/F haplotypes
were assigned to GenBank numbers [GQ922894GQ922903] (Additional file 2, Table S2).

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

ITS sequences were obtained from direct sequencing
of PCR products in order to detect hybrid individuals
according to ambiguous base positions. Sequences were
defined as ITS types and supratypes following our previous studies [27,41,28]: Most ITS types contained
ambiguous sites as a result of the direct sequencing
approach. They were combined to ITS supratypes by
replacing the ambiguous sites by the bases with higher
fluorescence intensity in the electropherogramm.
Sequences with equal fluorescence intensity of the two
bases at the ambiguous positions were only found
between ITS supratypes b and e and labelled b/e ambiguous. Koch and Matschinger [27] already showed that
analyses with either ITS types or ITS supratypes produce the same results. However, working with a limited
number of ITS supratypes in contrast to a vast number
of ITS types contributes to a clearer data display. Multiple ITS types within a single individual indicate the natural variability among ITS loci within an individual as
result of either mutations or gene flow between individuals. In these individuals concerted evolution, which
denotes the process of DNA sequence homogenisation
among members of multigene families by gene conversion and/or unequal crossing over [52-55], is not yet
completed. Newly defined ITS types were assigned to
GenBank numbers [GQ922904-GQ922910] (Additional
file 2, Table S2).
Maps were constructed using BioOffice version 2.0.6
to create shapefiles and drawn with ArcView version
8.2. Shapefiles for visualising the maximum extent of
the ice sheets during the LGM (Last Glacial Maximum)
were provided by Ehlers and Gibbard [56].
Network analyses and genetic diversity statistics

Network analyses and genetic diversity statistics were
exclusively performed using the trnL/F suprahaplotypes,
as the pseudogene-rich region is not applicable for phylogenetic reconstructions on the species level [50]. The
network was constructed using TCS version 1.21 [57]
using the statistical parsimony algorithm [58]. Gaps
(except polyT stretches) were coded as single additional
binary characters. Newly characterised suprahaplotypes
were added to the trnL/F network of the A. lyrata complex published earlier [28]. Genetic diversity statistics
were performed with Arlequin version 3.11 [59]. Pairwise genetic differentiation was calculated among the
following nine taxonomic and regional groups: A. lyrata
ssp. petraea from (1) unglaciated Central Europe, (2)
glaciated northern Europe, (3) northern Russia and western Beringia, (4) eastern Beringia; A. lyrata ssp. lyrata
from (5) unglaciated North America and the glaciated
Great Lakes region; (6) Arabidopsis arenicola from glaciated North America and Greenland; and A. kamchatica from (7) Japan, (8) north-eastern Russia, (9) Alaska

Page 5 of 18

and western Canada. FST values, regarding haplotype
frequencies only, and F ST values, which take into
account the genetic relationship between haplotypes as
pairwise character differences, were calculated. The significance of differentiation was examined using a permutation test with 1000 permutations. Additionally,
genetic diversity was estimated as nucleotide diversity π.
ITS parsimony analysis

ITS data were analysed based on a 652 bp alignment of
ITS supratypes [27]. The total number of variable sites
was 44, with 16 of them parsimony informative. From
altogether 10 supratypes of both the A. lyrata complex
and A. halleri ssp. gemmifera, a strict consensus tree
was constructed using maximum parsimony with
MEGA version 4.1 [60]. Heuristic searches were performed with 10 random addition sequences and Closest
Neighbour Interchange (CNI) branch swapping. Bootstrap values were calculated based on 500 replicates.
Length of the most parsimonious trees was 48 mutational steps with a consistency index (CI) = 0.89 and a
retention index (RI) = 0.96 (autapomorphies excluded).
Arabidopsis thaliana was used as outgroup.
Primer design for the nuclear marker PgiC

Various higher plants are known to have a duplicated
locus of the cytosolic enzyme phosphoglucoisomerase
[61-63], and the loci are normally unlinked. Also within
the genus Arabidopsis, extensive sequencing of the PgiC
locus using a cloning strategy revealed a duplication,
both in the A. lyrata and A. halleri complex, and this
duplication must have predated the evolutionary split
between these two species complexes (Additional file 3,
Figure S1; Jørgensen, unpublished data). Both loci were
initially simultaneously amplified with the general forward primer 5’-TGCTGTSAGCACTAATCTTGCG-3’
and the general reverse primer 5’-TCGAACCCGGGAGAGGTAGACCA-3’, following the protocol of Wright
et al. [23]. The resulting sequence data showed that a
group of alleles at the PgiC1 locus were exclusively
found in A. halleri and the allopolyploid A. kamchatica.
It was thus possible to design A. halleri-specific primers
that worked as a high-throughput and simple
PCR-based screening marker to discriminate between
genomes of the A. lyrata and A. halleri complex. Unfortunately, it was not possible to develop a PCR-based
reciprocal marker system characterising alleles from the
A. lyrata gene pool because of a lack of appropriate
DNA sequence variation. In general, the alleles from
both duplicated PgiC loci were only weakly differentiated among and within species. However, within the
PgiC1 locus we found a deletion of 7 bp length in the
A. lyrata complex compared to the A. halleri complex
(Additional file 4, Figure S2). Both groups of alleles

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

were also substantially differentiated by various SNPs. A
primer pair with the forward primer located partly
within this 7 bp indel (5’-CATTCAACAGATTGTG-3’)
and the reverse primer 5’-CCAGTAAACATCATGT-3’
was developed to amplify a 92 bp fragment within the
PgiC1 locus (Additional file 5, Figure S3). The PCR
reaction volume of 50 μl contained 1× PCR buffer (10
mM TRIS/50 mM KCl buffer, pH 8.0), 2.5 mM MgCl2,
0.13 μM of each primer, 0.2 mM of each dNTP, 1 U
Taq DNA polymerase (Amersham Biosciences, Chalfont
St Giles, England), and approximately 1 ng of template
DNA. The PCR cycling scheme was 3 min at 94°C, 35
cycles of 20 sec at 94°C, 30 sec at 56°C, and 20 sec at
68°C, 20 sec extension at 68°C, and a final hold at 4°C.
By screening the absence/presence of the PCR product
of this taxon-specific primer pair, we were able to follow
the genetic footprint of the A. halleri complex in its
allopolyploid hybrids throughout its distribution range.

Results
Chloroplast sequence data indicate three main genetic
lineages: Eurasia, North America, and the amphi-Pacific
region

The investigated accessions (Figure 1), spanning the
whole distribution range of the A. lyrata complex, were
grouped into three genetic and geographically separated
lineages: trnL/F suprahaplotype C in Eurasia, A in North
America, and B in the amphi-Pacific region (Figure 2).
The Eurasian lineage with suprahaplotype C had the largest distribution range: unglaciated Central Europe, formerly glaciated northern Europe, arctic Russia, Beringia,
and Alaska (north of Brooks Range). The North American lineage, characterised by suprahaplotype A, included
the United States (mainly around the Great Lakes),
northeastern and central Canada (to the Canadian Rocky
Mountains in the west), and Greenland. The third and
amphi-Pacific lineage spanned from Kamchatka via Beringia into western Canada (with the Canadian Rocky
Mountains as eastern border). These three suprahaplotypes were central in the suprahaplotype network (Figure
3), and all were connected to derived and less widely distributed suprahaplotypes: In the Eurasian lineage AC was
widespread and found in Central Europe, mainly Austria,
AG predominantly in the north (Iceland, Scandinavia,
Russia), and AR in western Beringia (incl. Wrangel
Island) (Figure 2). Unique suprahaplotypes, occurring
only once in the whole dataset, were observed in Scotland (AB, AS), Austria (AH, AI, AJ, AK, AL, K, R, V), Iceland (AO, AP), Faeroe Islands (G), and Sweden (S). The
North American lineage was additionally characterised
by the unique suprahaplotypes AQ and BD, and the
more widespread BF. Within the amphi-Pacific lineage,
AD was detected exclusively in Japan.

Page 6 of 18

Although all three lineages were characterised both by
lineage-specific central and “tip” suprahaplotypes, sharing of central suprahaplotypes was observed, e.g. suprahaplotypes A and B were detected in a few accessions of
the Eurasian lineage (Figure 2, Additional file 6, Table
S3). This finding is congruent with the observation of
central suprahaplotype sharing between the three main
species complexes of the genus, A. lyrata, A. halleri, and
A. arenosa [27]. This observation has been explained by
ancestral cpDNA polymorphism predating the radiation
of the genus approximately two million years ago [27].
Cytosolic phosphoglucose isomerase identifies
Arabidopsis halleri ssp. gemmifera as one parent of the
allopolyploid amphi-Pacific Arabidopsis kamchatica

The various PgiC alleles detected were defined either as
alleles at locus PgiC1 or PgiC2, and, therefore, considered as locus-specific (Additional file 3, Figure S1).
However, taxon-specific lineage sorting of the various
allele pools after the duplication event was not complete
for PgiC2. A. kamchatica carries PgiC2 alleles hardly
distinguishable from those of A. septentrionalis and A.
umbrosa, which is an additional indicator that an Asian
member of the A. lyrata complex served as one putative
parental taxon. In addition, European A. lyrata ssp. petraea shares similar alleles with A. halleri, also indicating
incomplete lineage sorting. The differentiation and lineage sorting of alleles at locus PgiC1 is more taxon-specific. Here, A. kamchatica shares alleles most similar to
those of A. halleri ssp. gemmifera from East Asia, and
all of these alleles are significantly distinct from those of
Eurasian A. lyrata. In summary, it is shown that PgiC is
not only a suitable marker to screen for hybrid speciation in A. kamchatica, but might also be a suitable marker to follow these alleles through space and time.
Amplification of PgiC1 alleles was successful in all
A. kamchatica accessions (Figure 4, Additional file 5,
Figure S3), but, as outlined above, failed in Eurasian and
North American members of the A. lyrata complex
(Figure 4, Additional file 5, Figure S3). PgiC1 amplification was positive in all A. halleri ssp. gemmifera accessions and additionally in European subspecies of
A. halleri (ssp. dacica, ssp. halleri, ssp. tatrica) (Figure
4, Additional file 5, Figure S3). Hence, presence of
PgiC1 alleles without deletion in the forward primer
sequence was characteristic for the whole A. halleri species complex, except for A. halleri ssp. ovirensis (data
not shown). In this subspecies either a secondary loss of
this locus or a complementary mutation in the primer
binding site might have occured. However, A. halleri
ssp. ovirensis is a genetically distinct, local endemite at
one single place in the southeastern Austrian Alps with
an unclear evolutionary history [27,41].

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

Page 7 of 18

Figure 2 Distribution of cpDNA trnL/F suprahaplotypes in the Arabidopsis lyrata complex. Data newly presented in this study were
combined with previous results from Koch and Matschinger [27] and Schmickl et al. [28]. TrnL/F suprahaplotypes were characterised as trnL
intron and trnLF-IGS excluding the pseudogene-rich region in the trnLF-IGS. Accessions from Austria are listed separately. Maximal glaciation of
the LGM is drawn according to Ehlers and Gibbard [56].

Gene diversity statistics show highest genetic diversity in
the Eurasian lineage, strongly reduced diversity in the
North American lineage, and extremely low diversity in
the allopolyploid amphi-Pacific lineage

For genetic diversity statistics the distribution of the
A. lyrata species complex was divided into nine different
groups, according to the evidence for genetic lineages
and Pleistocene history (Table 1). The Eurasian lineage

(A. lyrata ssp. petraea) was split into four groups: unglaciated Central Europe, previously glaciated northern
Europe or permafrost areas, northern Russia/western
Beringia, and eastern Beringia. The North American
lineage (A. lyrata ssp. lyrata) was separated into unglaciated North America/glaciated Great Lakes region and
glaciated North America/Greenland. Amphi-Pacific A.
kamchatica was differentiated into groups from Japan,

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

Page 8 of 18

Figure 3 CpDNA trnL/F suprahaplotype network of the Arabidopsis lyrata complex. Data newly presented in this study were combined
with previous results from Koch and Matschinger [27] and Schmickl et al. [28]. TrnL/F suprahaplotypes were characterised as trnL intron and
trnLF-IGS excluding the pseudogene-rich region in the trnLF-IGS. The sizes of the circles indicate the relative frequency of a suprahaplotype in
the whole dataset.

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

Page 9 of 18

Figure 4 Distribution of accessions with/without PgiC1 amplification in the Arabidopsis lyrata complex and A. halleri. Amplification was
successful in Arabidopsis halleri ssp. gemmifera from China and Japan, and in Central European subspecies of the Arabidopsis halleri complex (ssp.
dacica, ssp. halleri, and ssp. tatrica). Amplification was also successful in all A. kamchatica accessions. Maximal glaciation of the LGM is drawn
according to Ehlers and Gibbard [56].

Far Eastern Federal District of Russia, and Alaska/western Canada. The Eurasian lineage of A. lyrata ssp. petraea showed the highest cpDNA-based (trnL/F)
nucleotide diversity (π), and it was equally high in
unglaciated Central Europe (π = 0.0060), glaciated
northern Europe (π = 0.0076), and northern Russia/western Beringia (π = 0.0077), but reduced in eastern Beringia (π = 0.0034) (Table 1). Pairwise F ST and F ST
calculations showed only slight differentiation among
unglaciated Central Europe, glaciated northern Europe,

and northern Russia/western Beringia. For eastern Beringia the data were not statistically significant (P < 0.05;
Table 2). These observations could indicate long-term
survival of the A. lyrata complex in unglaciated Central
Europe and northern Russia/western Beringia, or postglacial colonisation of formerly glaciated northern Europe from those two regions. The generally high
nucleotide diversity in the Eurasian lineage was caused
by a high number of unique and rare suprahaplotypes
(Figure 2, Additional file 6, Table S3). In Central Europe

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

Page 10 of 18

Table 1 Taxonomic and regional genetic differentiation based on cpDNA suprahaplotypes.
n

Geographic region
A. lyrata ssp. petraea: Unglaciated Central Europe

π × 10-2

196

0.603 +/- 0.329

A. lyrata ssp. petraea: Glaciated N Europe

21

0.764 +/- 0.425

A. lyrata ssp. petraea: N Russia, W Beringia

33

0.774 +/- 0.422

A. lyrata ssp. petraea: E Beringia

7

0.339 +/- 0.236

A. lyrata ssp. lyrata: Unglaciated N America, glaciated Great Lakes region

55

0.080 +/- 0.072

A. arenicola: Glaciated N America, Greenland

17

0.031 +/- 0.042

A. kamchatica: Japan

9

0.000 +/- 0.000

9
38

A. kamchatica: Far Eastern Federal District of Russia
A. kamchatica: Alaska, W Canada

0.000 +/- 0.000
0.007 +/- 0.019

Sample size (n) and nucleotide diversity (π) are provided with the corresponding standard deviation.

the highest number of unique trnL/F suprahaplotypes
(AC, AF, AH, AI, AJ, AK, AL, J, K, Q, R, V) was found
in the foothills of the Eastern Austrian Alps, which
remained unglaciated during Pleistocene climate oscillations. A high number of unique and rare suprahaplotypes was also found in formerly glaciated northern
Europe (AB, AP - Scotland, AO - Iceland, G - Faeroe
Islands, S - Norway). Subsequent geographic isolation of
these populations during the Holocene warming might
have caused restriction of suprahaplotypes to single geographic locations.
In contrast to the Eurasian lineage of A. lyrata ssp.
petraea, the North American lineage showed an
approximately tenfold reduction in nucleotide diversity
and strong differentiation according to pairwise FST and
FST (Table 2). Nucleotide diversity of accessions from
predominantly unglaciated southeastern North America
(π = 0.0008) was higher than from North America and
Greenland (π = 0.0003) (Table 1), which had been
under the Laurentide ice sheet during the LGM, possibly
indicating genetic bottlenecks with subsequent rapid
postglacial immigration.
Extremely reduced nucleotide diversity was reported
from amphi-Pacific A. kamchatica (π = 0.0000) (Table
1). When all three genetic groups of A. kamchatica
were treated separately, only a single trnL/F suprahaplotype was found in each group (Japan: AD; China: C; Far
Eastern Federal District of Russia/Alaska/western
Canada: B) (Additional file 6, Table S3). Additionally,
haplotype diversity was low, especially in A. kamchatica
with suprahaplotype B. Only one haplotype (no. 84) was
detected over a vast amphi-Pacific area from Kamchatka
to western Canada (Additional file 7, Table S4).
Refugia as areas of secondary contact of formerly
allopatric populations: Beringia as an example

Beringia, an arctic region ranging from Lena River in
northeast Russia to Mackenzie River in Alaska and from
the Arctic Ocean to mountains in southern Siberia and
Alaska, is considered the major refugium for arctic taxa

(reviewed by Abbott and Brochmann [64] and DeChain
[65]), as it remained ice-free during Pleistocene climate
oscillations. If we consider only the Eurasian and North
American lineage of the A. lyrata complex, two major
ITS groups met in Beringia (Figure 5): (1) the mainly
Eurasian group carrying ITS supratype b (Figure 6),
comprising Europe (with additional ITS supratypes a, c,
d), northern Russia and western Beringia, and (2) the
North American group carrying ITS supratypes e and,
extremely rarely, y (Figure 6), including eastern and central North America, Greenland, and eastern Beringia
(north of Brooks Range). The main contact zone was
located in eastern Beringia, where accessions with trnL/
F suprahaplotype C, characteristic for the Eurasian lineage, showed ITS supratype e, characteristic for the
North American lineage. This is most likely due to
ancient and/or recent gene flow from populations of the
North American lineage into populations of the Eurasian lineage. Throughout the Beringian area ambiguous
sites in ITS DNA sequences, caused by multiple ITS
copies within a single genome and incomplete concerted
evolution [54,28], were mainly found between ITS
supratypes b (Eurasian lineage) and e (North American
lineage). These results indicate that gene flow between
these genetic groups may be counteracting the effects of
concerted evolution. Interestingly, the allopolyploid
amphi-Pacific lineage (A. kamchatica) also showed ITS
supratype b like the Eurasian lineage.

Discussion
High genetic diversity of the Arabidopsis lyrata complex
in Eurasia - postglacial migration from Central European
and northern Russianrefugia

For arctic-alpine taxa, centres of species and genetic
diversity are, in most cases, considered to concur with
Pleistocene refugia [64,66,67]. In the genus Arabidopsis,
both the number of accepted taxa, trnL/F suprahaplotype and ITS supratype diversity are highest in Central
Europe, indicating this area as a centre of diversity
[37,27]. Especially the Eastern Alps could have served as

0.40526

0.45048

0.37925

0.33441

0.59120

0.49758

0.54130

A. lyr. ssp. lyrata: Unglac.
N America, glac.
Great Lakes region

A. arenicola:
Glac.
N America, Greenland

A. kamch.: Japan

A. kamch.: Far Eastern Federal
District of Russia

A. kamch.: Alaska,
W Canada

0.33922

0.19769

0.40209

0.37345

0.49762

0.26978

[0.03253]

0.17315

A. lyr. ssp.
petraea:
N Russia, W
Beringia

0.94213

0.85450

0.88490

0.77234

0.79114

0.12632

0.17947

[-0.00029]

A. lyr. ssp.
petraea:
E Beringia

0.93015

0.90536

0.93046

[0.02119]

0.53564

0.43290

0.44407

0.47816

A. lyr. ssp. lyrata:
Unglac.
N America, glac.
Great Lakes region

0.97891

0.96954

0.97806

[0.08456]

0.71126

0.48110

0.50004

0.52477

A. arenicola:
Glac.
N America,
Greenland

0.97880

1.00000

0.92283

0.70822

0.76892

0.49746

0.48036

0.54797

A. kamch.:
Japan

[-0.05564]

1.00000

0.92283

0.70822

0.76892

0.48437

0.37743

0.53255

A. kamch.: Far
Eastern Federal
District of Russia

FST (above diagonal) and FST (below diagonal) are both estimated from cpDNA suprahaplotypes. Values with P < 0.05 are given in brackets (permutation test with 1000 permutations).

0.44301

0.25161

0.54668

0.23663

[-0.00716]

A. lyr. ssp. petraea:
E Beringia

[-0.00620]

0.19685

A. lyr. ssp. petraea:
N Russia, W Beringia

0.21832

A. lyr. ssp.
petraea: Glac.
N Europe

0.14828

A. lyr. ssp. petraea:
Unglac. Central
Europe

A. lyr. ssp. petraea: Glac.
N Europe

A. lyr. ssp. petraea: Unglac.
Central Europe

FST\FST

Table 2 Pairwise genetic differentiation (FST and FST) among taxonomic and regional groups.

[-0.05564]

0.95735

0.92688

0.76248

0.86207

0.60275

0.53503

0.56147

A. kamch.:
Alaska,
W Canada

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98
Page 11 of 18

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

Page 12 of 18

Figure 5 Distribution of ITS supratypes in the Arabidopsis lyrata complex. Data newly presented in this study were combined with
previous results from Koch and Matschinger [27] and Schmickl et al. [28]. ITS supratypes were characterised as ITS1, 5.8 S rDNA, and ITS2 region,
with ambiguous sites replaced by the bases with higher fluorescence intensity in the electropherogramm. Sequences with equal fluorescence
intensity of the two bases at the ambiguous positions were only found between ITS supratypes b and e and labelled b/e ambiguous. The ITS
supratypes are corresponding to those shown in Figure 6. Maximal glaciation of the LGM is drawn according to Ehlers and Gibbard [56].

a refugium of A. lyrata ssp. petraea, since both diploid
and cytogenetically stabilised tetraploid populations
occur there (Schmickl and Koch, unpublished data). For
the A. lyrata complex, however, Koch and Matschinger
[27] concluded that Central Europe is not the only centre of diversity. Our results support this conclusion,
showing that the Eurasian lineage of the A. lyrata complex is genetically diverse in both Central Europe and
arctic Eurasia, including Beringia. To our knowledge

such a pattern has not been observed for any other arctic plant with additional distribution in Central Europe.
Either genetic diversity is high in the Arctic compared
to the Alps, as in Saxifraga oppositifolia L., suggesting
long-term evolution in Beringia and more recent colonisation of the Alps [33,31], or genetic diversity is highest
in the Alps and decreasing towards the Arctic, as
observed in Arabis alpina L. [68,69], indicating recent
and rapid colonisation from Central Europe. Recent

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

Page 13 of 18

Figure 6 Strict consensus tree from the maximum parsimony analysis of ITS supratypes in the Arabidopsis lyratacomplex and
Arabidopsis halleri ssp. gemmifera. From altogether 10 ITS supratypes (with ambiguous sites replaced by the bases with higher fluorescence
intensity in the electropherogramm) of both the A. lyrata complex and A. halleri ssp. gemmifera, a strict consensus tree (length = 43) was
constructed using maximum parsimony with MEGA version 4.1 [60]. Heuristic searches were performed with 10 random addition sequences and
Closest Neighbour Interchange (CNI) branch swapping. Bootstrap values were calculated based on 500 replicates. Consistency index (CI) = 0.89,
retention index (RI) = 0.96. Arabidopsis thaliana was used as outgroup.

migration into the Arctic, associated with a loss of
genetic diversity due to repeated bottlenecks, was also
found in Ranunculus glacialis L. [70] and Rubus chamaemorus L. [71]. The overall high genetic diversity in
the Eurasian A. lyrata lineage can probably be explained
by long-term glacial survival in multiple refugia (Central
Europe, northern Russia, western and eastern Beringia).
So far, periglacial survival of A. lyrata was reported
only from unglaciated Central Europe, based on microsatellite data [25] and cpDNA sequences [27]. This
study showed high genetic diversity also in formerly glaciated northern Europe, caused by numerous unique,
locally distributed trnL/F suprahaplotypes. A possible
explanation might be geographic isolation of populations, which either periglacially survived along the coastline or postglacially migrated into northern Europe, as
reported from Ansell [personal communication].
Although several authors suggested periglacial survival
on nunataks along the Norwegian coastline, mainly
based on geomorphological investigations (reviewed by
Brochmann et al. [34]), we assume postglacial colonisation of formerly glaciated northern Europe from both
unglaciated Central Europe and northwestern Russia.
Subsequent geographic isolation of populations during
Holocene warming probably led to the fixation of local
sequence types. Although in our study the major trnL/F
suprahaplotypes C and AG were similarly frequent both
in Central and northern Europe, a comparative microsatellite study between populations from Central Europe
and Iceland revealed significant differences in marker
polymorphism [25]. Riihimäki and Savolainen [9] even

found divergent Central and northern European physiological morphotypes, with earlier and more frequent
flowering plants in the south, and later and rarer flowering plants in the north.
We observed high genetic diversity within the Eurasian A. lyrata lineage, but also some genetic homogenisation. The trnL/F suprahaplotypes C and AG were
found all over the distribution range, which could be
explained by repeated gene flow between populations
during glacial periods, additionally facilitated by rapid
long-distance dispersal of the small Arabidopsis seeds
across the smooth snow surface of the tundra and tundra-steppe by strong winds. This mode of long-distance
dispersal could have bridged distances up to 2000 km
[72] or even 4000 km (Westergaard et al., in prep.) and
seems to be frequent in the Arctic [34,73].
Ancient split of the Eurasian and North American lineage

The strong genetic differentiation we observed between
the Eurasian and North American lineages is probably the
result of long-term geographic isolation during Pleistocene glaciations. Muller et al. [26] detected genetic divergence between North American and western European
populations in a comparative microsatellite study, and
found that the former had a lower diversity. However,
they focused on a few populations only and included only
one North American population. The strong reduction of
genetic diversity we observed in the North American lineage compared to the Eurasian lineage is congruent with
nuclear and plastidic marker data of Wright et al. [23],
but contradicting Balaña-Alcaide et al. [24], who reported

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

similar genetic diversity based on two nuclear markers.
However, both studies included only two populations
from each of North America and Europe, and they may
not have been representative. Because of the strongly
reduced genetic diversity of the North American lineage,
we assume this lineage to be derived from the Eurasian
lineage. Future studies of more southern populations
from the USA will test this assumption. Migration into
North America apparently was associated with a strong
genetic bottleneck, which restricted populations to ITS
supratype e and trnL/F suprahaplotype A. Colonisation of
North America is possible from different directions, either
from Europe, or from East Asia. Both possibilities have
been discussed for various circumboreal species (reviewed
by Abbott and Brochmann [64]). In the case of A. lyrata,
colonisation of North America from Russia seems, however, most likely, as the North American genotype was
also rarely detected in western Beringia, but not at all in
Iceland or Scandinavia.
An amphi-Beringian Arabidopsis hybrid zone - due to
allopolyploid success?

The majority of arctic polyploids have a history as postglacial colonisers [74]. It has frequently been assumed
that polyploids have a broader adaptive potential for
recolonising formerly glaciated areas [75,76]. As one of
the major refugia for arctic plants, Beringia has a higher
proportion of diploids compared to areas glaciated during Pleistocene [74]. New adaptations in polyploids may
evolve either by genome rearrangements [77] and/or epigenetic changes [78-80] within the first generations after
polyploid formation, as reported from rapid gene silencing in the allopolyploid A. suecica (Fr.) Norrl. ex O.E.
Schulz [78]. Hybridisation is frequently involved in polyploidisation, leading to the formation of allopolyploids
with one each of the parental genomes. Allopolyploidisations have been reported for several arctic species complexes, such as the high polyploid Cerastium alpinum L.
complex [81], high polyploid Primula sect. Aleuritia
[82-84], tetra-/hexaploid Silene L. [85,86], tetra- to octoploid Saxifraga section Mesogyne Sternb. [87,88], and
tetra- to dodecaploid Cardamine digitata Richardson
[89]. Introgression, the integration of genetic material
from one species into another through repeated backcrossing, was observed between polyploid Saxifraga cernua L. and diploid Saxifraga sibirica L. [90]. The first
known Arabidopsis allopolyploid was A. suecica with the
maternal parent A. thaliana and the paternal parent A.
arenosa, confirmed by artificial crosses [78]. This species
probably developed around 20 000 years ago [91] or
between 20 000 and 300 000 years ago [92], with a single
origin in Fennoscandia [91,92]. The distribution range of
this mainly outcrossing [93] allopolyploid species is
rather small. The second natural Arabidopsis

Page 14 of 18

allopolyploid, A. kamchatica, has A. halleri ssp. gemmifera and a member of the A. lyrata complex as parental
taxa [[43,27,8]; Jørgensen, unpublished data]. This allopolyploid origin could be confirmed not only for Japanese,
but for all A. kamchatica accessions. According to chloroplast trnL/F data, three different genetic groups were
found, which are geographically isolated from each other:
(1) accessions of a widespread distribution range from
Kamchatka, western and eastern Beringia, to pacific western Canada (trnL/F suprahaplotype B), (2) Japanese
accessions (trnL/F suprahaplotype AD), and (3) accessions from pacific eastern China (trnL/F suprahaplotype
C). In a more detailed comparison of chloroplast trnL/F
and nuclear encoded ITS sequence data, two directions
of gene flow could be observed: Either the paternal genome originated from a member of the A. lyrata species
complex (ITS supratype b) and the maternal genome
from A. halleri ssp. gemmifera (trnL/F suprahaplotype
AD), as already reported for A. kamchatica from Japan
[27]. Or A. halleri ssp. gemmifera represented the paternal genome (ITS supratype z, derived from ITS supratype
r exclusively found in A. halleri ssp. gemmifera), and a
member of the A. lyrata species complex served as donor
of the maternal genome (trnL/F suprahaplotype C), as in
A. kamchatica from China. The North American lineage
of the A. lyrata complex could be excluded as a parent,
as neither ITS supratype e nor trnL/F suprahaplotype A
were detected in A. kamchatica. According to these data
we suggest at least three independent origins of A. kamchatica, first with maternal A. halleri ssp. gemmifera in
Japan, second with paternal A. halleri ssp. gemmifera in
China, and third with an unknown direction of gene flow
in Kamchatka, but in all cases with a member of the Eurasian A. lyrata lineage as hybridisation partner.
The most profound change in A. kamchatica in contrast to its parental species is the switch from outcrossing (with sporophytic self-incompatibility system) to
selfing [ssp. kamchatica: [15,8]; ssp. kawasakiana: [94]].
Selfing increases the possibility of rapid range expansion,
as a population can arise from a single individual independent of pollinators and pollen donors. Such a switch
is already well known from A. thaliana, dated from
around 413 000 [95] to one million years ago [96], and
is therefore not necessarily correlated with hybridisation
and polyploidisation. Change of mating systems is one
of the major driving forces for speciation, initiating
reproductive isolation of populations [97,98]. However,
it is still unclear if there is a correlation between mating
systems and hybridisation and/or polyploidisation. The
breakdown of self-incompatibility in an artificial cross
between A. thaliana and A. lyrata [99] could indicate a
correlation between hybridisation and a switch in mating system, and it could further indicate possible dominance of the selfer A. thaliana over A. lyrata.

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

Page 15 of 18

Otherwise, breakdown of the sporophytic self-incompatibility system has been reported mainly from diploid
individuals [16,100].
In contrast to A. suecica, allopolyploid A. kamchatica
has a vast distribution range spanning the whole amphiBeringian region. Our data suggest that this large distribution is partly due to postglacial colonisation of formerly glaciated areas in eastern Beringia and western
Canada. The extremely reduced genetic diversity, particularly of the group with suprahaplotype B, suggests that
postglacial immigration may have been rapid, possibly
facilitated by de novo adaptations as a result of hybridisation and polyploidisation. Moreover, the success of A.
kamchatica as a rapid coloniser may have been enhanced
by the availability of large, open landscapes, where habitats were frequently disturbed by glacial and/or permafrost activity. However, the change in mating systems
may have had a strong impact on the success of A. kamchatica as a postglacial coloniser, and also on the establishment of the genetic barrier between A. kamchatica
and the Eurasian and North American lineages.

Additional file 1: Table S1. The two main taxonomic concepts of the
Arabidopsis lyrata complex. Summarised from Al-Shehbaz and O’Kane
[37], including revision from the Flora of North America [Al-Shehbaz,
personal communication], and Elven [38]. Arabidopsis arenicola was
integrated from Warwick et al. [42]. Elven [38] excluded Arabidopsis lyrata
from taxonomic treatment, as they assumed it to be a non-arctic, boreal
taxon.
Additional file 2: Table S2. Within this list all information about
taxonomic unit, name on herbarium sheet, herbarium, herbarium
number, locality, latitude/longitude, collector, collection date, accession
number, ITS type, ITS GenBank number, ITS supratype, trnL intron type,
trnL GenBank number, trnL/F-IGS type, trnL/F-IGS GenBank number, trnL
intron + trnL/F-IGS type, trnL/F suprahaplotype, and PgiC1 amplification is
provided.
Additional file 3: Figure S1. Single most parsimonious tree (length =
553) with bootstrap/jackknife values above 95, based on 37 Arabidopsis
nuclear DNA PgiC sequences. Heuristic searches were performed with
100 random addition sequences and TBR branch swapping, saving three
trees per replicate, in TNT [102]. Gaps were treated as fifth state.
Consistency index (CI) = 0.69, retention index (RI) = 0.95. Investigated
accessions were from the A. lyrata complex (ssp. lyrata, ssp. petraea, A.
septentrionalis, and A. umbrosa) and the A. halleri complex (ssp.
gemmifera). Taxa with successful amplification of the chosen PgiC1
fragment, and, consequently, without the deletion in the forward primer
site, are marked with the blue box.
Additional file 4: Figure S2. Alignment of the duplicated
phosphoglucoisomerase loci PgiC1 and PgiC2 with the primer binding
sites indicated. The forward primer is partly located within the 7 bp
deletion between positions 1389 and 1396.

Beringia as contact zone between the Eurasian and North
American lineage of the Arabidopsis lyrata complex

Beringia served as a glacial refugium for numerous arctic plant taxa such as Dryas integrifolia Vahl. [32], Saxifraga hirculus L. [36], Saxifraga oppositifolia [33,31],
and Vaccinium uliginosum L. [35,101]. Periglacial survival in Beringia can also be assumed for the A. lyrata
complex, in particular, for the Eurasian lineage in arctic
western and eastern Beringia north of Brooks Range.
The nuclear sequence data indicate that gene exchange
with populations of the North American lineage (A. lyrata ssp. lyrata, A. arenicola) occurred inter- and postglacially. However, the data do not support glacial
survival of the North American lineage in Beringia, as
no plastidic sequence types of this lineage were found in
Beringia.

Conclusions
By presenting a worldwide evolutionary history of the
Arabidopsis lyrata species complex, we provide solid
knowledge about centres of genetic diversity, different
genetic lineages, their contact zones, and hybrid speciation. We could clearly differentiate three genetic
lineages, a Eurasian, a North American, and an amphiPacific one. The latter is constituted of the allopolyploid
A. kamchatica, a hybrid between A. lyrata and A. halleri. Further investigations of the population dynamics
and the role of selfing within this hybrid species should
be conducted to gain a deeper understanding of hybrid
establishment in the wild.

Additional file 5: Figure S3. Selected PCR reactions from the PgiC
screening: No PgiC1 amplification in members of the Arabidopsis lyrata
complex (A. lyrata ssp. lyrata, A. arenicola, Arabidopsis umbrosa, and A.
septentrionalis). Successful PgiC1 amplification in members of A. halleri
(ssp. halleri, ssp. dacica, ssp. tatrica, and ssp. gemmifera), and A.
kamchatica.
Additional file 6: Table S3. Taxonomic and regional genetic
differentiation based on cpDNA suprahaplotypes. Numbers of cpDNA
suprahaplotypes occurring in each region are provided.
Additional file 7: Table S4. List of ITS supratypes, ITS types, trnL/F
suprahaplotypes, and trnL/F haplotypes in the Arabidopsis lyrata complex
with their corresponding frequencies of occurrence throughout the
dataset (italic).

Acknowledgements
We thank Ishan Al-Shehbaz (Missouri, USA), Galina Gusarova (Oslo, Norway),
Gu Hongya (Beijing, P. R. China), Barbara Mable (Glasgow, Scotland), David L.
Remington (Greensboro, USA), Outi Savolainen (Oulu, Finland), and the
curators of the Herbariums of the Natural History Museums London and
Vienna for providing plant material, Susanne Ball and Stefan Wötzel for
laboratory assistance, and Jürgen Ehlers and Phil Gibbard for shapefiles of
the LGM. This research was supported by DFG grant KO 2302/5-2 to Marcus
A. Koch.
Author details
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg Institute of Plant Sciences, Biodiversity
and Plant Systematics, Im Neuenheimer Feld 345, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany. 2Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis (CEES),
Department of Biology, University of Oslo, PO Box 1066 Blindern, NO-0316
Oslo, Norway.

1

Authors’ contributions
RS carried out the molecular marker studies and statistical analyses,
constructed the maps and drafted the manuscript. MHJ constructed the
PgiC sequence alignment and helped to draft the manuscript. AKB
contributed to draft the manuscript. MAK designed and coordinated the

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

project and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 27 November 2009 Accepted: 8 April 2010
Published: 8 April 2010
References
1. Mitchell-Olds T: Arabidopsis thaliana and its wild relatives: a model
system for ecology and evolution. Trends Ecol Evol 2001, 16:693-700.
2. Benfey PN, Mitchell-Olds T: From genotype to phenotype: systems
biology meets natural variation. Science 2008, 320:495-497.
3. Koch MA, Haubold B, Mitchell-Olds T: Comparative evolutionary analysis
of chalcone synthase and alcohol dehydrogenase loci in Arabidopsis,
Arabis, and related genera (Brassicaceae). Mol Biol Evol 2000,
17:1483-1498.
4. Koch MA, Haubold B, Mitchell-Olds T: Molecular systematics of the
Brassicaceae: evidence from coding plastidic MATK and nuclear CHS
sequences. Am J Bot 2001, 88:534-544.
5. Turner TL, Von Wettberg EJ, Nuzhdin SV: Genomic analysis of
differentiation between soil types reveals candidate genes for local
adaptation in Arabidopsis lyrata. PLoS One 2008, 3:e3183.
6. Clauss MJ, Koch MA: Poorly known relatives of Arabidopsis thaliana.
Trends Plant Sci 2006, 11:449-459.
7. Zhukova PG, Petrovsky VV, Plieva TV: The chromosome numbers and
taxonomy of some plant species from Siberia and Far East. Botanicheskiy
Zhurnal 1973, 58:1331-1342.
8. Shimizu-Inatsugi R, Lihová J, Iwanaga H, Kudoh H, Marhold K, Savolainen O,
Watanabe K, Yakubov VV, Shimizu KK: The allopolyploid Arabidopsis
kamchatica originated from multiple individuals of Arabidopsis lyrata
and Arabidopsis halleri. Mol Ecol 2009, 18:4024-4048.
9. Riihimäki M, Savolainen O: Environmental and genetic effects on
flowering differences between northern and southern populations of
Arabidopsis lyrata (Brassicaceae). Am J Bot 2004, 91:1036-1045.
10. Riihimäki M, Podolsky R, Kuittinen H, Koelewijn H, Savolainen O: Studying
genetics of adaptive variation in model organisms: flowering time
variation in Arabidopsis lyrata. Genetica 2005, 123:63-74.
11. Clauss MJ, Dietel S, Schubert G, Mitchell-Olds T: Glucosinolate and
trichome defenses in a natural Arabidopsis lyrata population. J Chem Ecol
2006, 32:2351-2373.
12. Kusaba M, Dwyer K, Hendershot J, Vrebalov J, Nasrallah JB, Nasrallah ME:
Self-incompatibility in the genus Arabidopsis: characterization of the S
locus in the outcrossing A. lyrata and its autogamous relative A.
thaliana. Plant Cell 2001, 13:627-643.
13. Schierup MH, Mable BK, Awadalla P, Charlesworth D: Identification and
characterization of a polymorphic receptor kinase gene linked to the
self-incompatibility locus of Arabidopsis lyrata. Genetics 2001, 158:387-399.
14. Charlesworth D, Mable BK, Schierup MH, Bartolomé C, Awadalla P: Diversity
and linkage of genes in the self-incompatibility gene family in
Arabidopsis lyrata. Genetics 2003, 164:1519-1535.
15. Mable BK, Beland J, di Berardo C: Inheritance and dominance of selfincompatibility alleles in polyploid Arabidopsis lyrata. Heredity 2004,
93:476-486.
16. Mable BK, Robertson AV, Dart S, diBerardo C, Witham L: Breakdown of selfincompatibility in the perennial Arabidopsis lyrata (Brassicaceae) and its
genetic consequences. Evolution 2005, 59:1437-1448.
17. Charlesworth D, Kamau E, Hagenblad J, Tang C: Trans-specificity at loci
near the self-incompatibility loci in Arabidopsis. Genetics 2006,
172:2699-2704.
18. Hagenblad J, Bechsgaard J, Charlesworth D: Linkage disequilibrium
between incompatibility locus region genes in the plant Arabidopsis
lyrata. Genetics 2006, 173:1057-1073.
19. Schierup MH, Bechsgaard JS, Nielsen LH, Christiansen FB: Selection at work
in self-incompatible Arabidopsis lyrata: mating patterns in a natural
population. Genetics 2006, 172:477-484.
20. Schierup MH, Bechsgaard JS, Christiansen FB: Selection at work in selfincompatible Arabidopsis lyrata. II. Spatial distribution of S haplotypes in
Iceland. Genetics 2008, 180:1051-1059.
21. Sharbel TF, Haubold B, Mitchell-Olds T: Genetic isolation by distance in
Arabidopsis thaliana: biogeography and postglacial colonization of
Europe. Mol Ecol 2000, 9:2109-2118.

Page 16 of 18

22. Beck JB, Schmuths H, Schaal BA: Native range genetic variation in
Arabidopsis thaliana is strongly geographically structured and reflects
Pleistocene glacial dynamics. Mol Ecol 2008, 17:902-915.
23. Wright SI, Lauga B, Charlesworth D: Subdivision and haplotype structure
in natural populations of Arabidopsis lyrata. Mol Ecol 2003, 12:1247-1263.
24. Balañá-Alcaide D, Ramos-Onsins SE, Boone Q, Aguadé M: Highly structured
nucleotide variation within and among Arabidopsis lyrata populations at
the FAH1 and DFR gene regions. Mol Ecol 2006, 15:2059-2068.
25. Clauss MJ, Mitchell-Olds T: Population genetic structure of Arabidopsis
lyrata in Europe. Mol Ecol 2006, 15:2753-2766.
26. Muller MH, Leppälä J, Savolainen O: Genome-wide effects of postglacial
colonization in Arabidopsis lyrata. Heredity 2008, 100:47-58.
27. Koch MA, Matschinger M: Evolution and genetic differentiation among
relatives of Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:6272-6277.
28. Schmickl R, Jørgensen MH, Brysting AK, Koch MA: Phylogeographic
implications for the North American boreal-arctic Arabidopsis lyrata
complex. Plant Ecol Div 2008, 1:245-254.
29. Avise JC, Arnold J, Ball RM, Bermingham E, Lamb T, Neigel JE, Reeb CA,
Saunders NC: Intraspecific phylogeography: The mitochondrial DNA
bridge between population genetics and systematics. Annu Rev Ecol Syst
1987, 18:489-522.
30. Eidesen PB, Carlsen T, Molau U, Brochmann C: Repeatedly out of Beringia:
Cassiope tetragona embraces the Arctic. J Biogeogr 2007, 34:1559-1574.
31. Abott RJ, Comes HP: Evolution in the Arctic: a phylogeographic analysis
of the circumarctic plant, Saxifraga oppositifolia (Purple saxifrage). New
Phytol 2004, 161:211-224.
32. Tremblay NO, Schoen DJ: Molecular phylogeography of Dryas integrifolia:
glacial refugia and postglacial recolonization. Mol Ecol 1999, 8:1187-1198.
33. Abbott RJ, Smith LC, Milne RI, Crawford RM, Wolff K, Balfour J: Molecular
analysis of plant migration and refugia in the Arctic. Science 2000,
289:1343-1346.
34. Brochmann C, Gabrielsen TM, Nordal I, Landvik JY, Elven R: Glacial survival
or tabula rasa? The history of North Atlantic biota revisited. Taxon 2003,
52:417-450.
35. Alsos IG, Engelskjøn T, Gielly L, Taberlet P, Brochmann C: Impact of ice
ages on circumpolar molecular diversity: insights from an ecological key
species. Mol Ecol 2005, 14:2739-2753.
36. Oliver C, Hollingsworth PM, Gornall RJ: Chloroplast DNA phylogeography
of the arctic-montane species Saxifraga hirculus (Saxifragaceae). Heredity
2006, 96:222-231.
37. Al-Shehbaz IA, O’Kane SL Jr: Taxonomy and phylogeny of Arabidopsis
(Brassicaceae). The Arabidopsis Book Rockville, MD: American Society of
Plant Biologists 2002.
38. Elven R, (Ed): Checklist of the Panarctic Flora (PAF) Vascular Plants.
Version 2007 [http://www.binran.ru/infsys/paflist/index.htm].
39. O’Kane SL Jr, Al-Shehbaz IA: A synopsis of Arabidopsis (Brassicaceae).
Novon 1997, 7:323-327.
40. Al-Shehbaz IA, O’Kane SL Jr, Price RA: Generic placement of species
excluded from Arabidopsis (Brassicaceae). Novon 1999, 9:296-307.
41. Koch MA, Wernisch M, Schmickl R: Arabidopsis thaliana ’s wild relatives:
an updated overview on systematics, taxonomy and evolution. Taxon
2008, 57:933-943.
42. Warwick SI, Al-Shehbaz IA, Sauder CA: Phylogenetic position of Arabis
arenicola and generic limits of Aphragmus and Eutrema (Brassicaceae)
based on sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA. Can J Bot 2006,
84:269-281.
43. Shimizu KK, Fujii S, Marhold K, Watanabe K, Kudoh H: Arabidopsis
kamchatica (Fisch. ex DC.) K. Shimizu & Kudoh and A. kamchatica subsp.
kawasakiana (Makino) K. Shimizu & Kudoh, new combinations. Acta
Phytotax Geobot 2005, 56:163-172.
44. Doyle JJ, Doyle JL: A rapid DNA isolation procedure for small quantities
of fresh leaf tissue. Phytochem Bull 1987, 19:11-15.
45. Dobeš CH, Mitchell-Olds T, Koch MA: Extensive chloroplast haplotype
variation indicates Pleistocene hybridization and radiation of North
American Arabis drummondii, A. × divaricarpa, and A. holboellii
(Brassicaceae). Mol Ecol 2004, 13:349-370.
46. Dobeš C, Mitchell-Olds T, Koch MA: Intraspecific diversification in North
American Boechera stricta (= Arabis drummondii), Boechera × divaricarpa,
and Boechera holboellii (Brassicaceae) inferred from nuclear and

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

47.

48.

49.

50.
51.

52.

53.
54.

55.

56.
57.
58.

59.

60.

61.

62.
63.
64.
65.

66.

67.
68.

69.

70.

chloroplast molecular markers - an integrative approach. Am J Bot 2004,
91:2087-2101.
Koch MA, Dobeš C, Matschinger M, Bleeker W, Vogel J, Kiefer M, MitchellOlds T: Evolution of the trn F(GAA) gene in Arabidopsis relatives and the
Brassicaceae family: monophyletic origin and subsequent diversification
of a plastidic pseudogene. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:1032-1043.
Dobeš C, Kiefer C, Kiefer M, Koch MA: Plastidic trnF UUC pseudogenes in
North American genus Boechera (Brassicaceae): mechanistic aspects of
evolution. Plant Biol 2007, 9:502-515.
Koch MA, Dobeš C, Kiefer C, Schmickl R, Klimeš L, Lysak MA: Supernetwork
identifies multiple events of plastid trn F(GAA) pseudogene evolution in
the Brassicaceae. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:63-73.
Schmickl R, Kiefer C, Dobeš C, Koch MA: Evolution of trn F(GAA)
pseudogenes in cruciferous plants. Plant Syst Evol 2009, 282:229-240.
Ansell SW, Schneider H, Pedersen N, Grundmann M, Russell SJ, Vogel JC:
Recombination diversifies chloroplast trnF pseudogenes in Arabidopsis
lyrata. J Evol Biol 2007, 20:2400-2411.
Arnheim N, Krystal M, Schmickel R, Wilson G, Ryder O, Zimmer E: Molecular
evidence for genetic exchanges among ribosomal genes on
nonhomologous chromosomes in man and apes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1980, 77:7323-7327.
Liao D: Concerted evolution: molecular mechanism and biological
implications. Am J Hum Genet 1999, 64:24-30.
Koch MA, Dobeš C, Mitchell-Olds T: Multiple hybrid formation in natural
populations: Concerted evolution of the internal transcribed spacer of
nuclear ribosomal DNA (ITS) in North American Arabis divaricarpa
(Brassicaceae). Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20:338-350.
Carson AR, Scherer SW: Identifying concerted evolution and gene
conversion in mammalian gene pairs lasting over 100 million years. BMC
Evol Biol 2009, 9:156.
Ehlers J, Gibbard PL, (Eds): Quaternary glaciations - extent and chronology
Amsterdam: Elsevier 2004.
Clement M, Posada D, Crandall KA: TCS: a computer program to estimate
gene genealogies. Mol Ecol 2000, 9:1657-1659.
Templeton AR, Crandall KA, Sing CF: A cladistic analysis of phenotypic
associations with haplotypes inferred from restriction endonuclease
mapping and DNA sequence data. III. Cladogram estimation. Genetics
1992, 132:619-633.
Excoffier L, Laval G, Schneider S: Arlequin (version 3.0): An integrated
software package for population genetics data analysis. Evol Bioinform
Online 2005, 1:47-50.
Kumar S, Nei M, Dudley J, Tamura K: MEGA: a biologist-centric software
for evolutionary analysis of DNA and protein sequences. Brief Bioinform
2008, 9:299-306.
Gottlieb LD: Evidence for duplication and divergence of the structural
gene for phosphoglucoisomerase in diploid species of Clarkia. Genetics
1977, 86:289-308.
Ghatnekar L: A polymorphic duplicated locus for cytosolic PGI
segregating in sheep’s fescue (Festuca ovina L.). Heredity 1999, 83:451-459.
Ford VS, Gottlieb LD: Single mutations silence PgiC2 genes in two very
recent allotetraploid species of Clarkia. Evolution 2002, 56:699-707.
Abbott RT, Brochmann C: History and evolution of the arctic flora: in the
footsteps of Eric Hulten. Mol Ecol 2003, 12:299-313.
DeChain EG: A bridge or a barrier? Beringia’s influence on the
distribution and diversity of tundra plants. Plant Ecol Div 2008,
1:197-207.
Tribsch A, Schönswetter P: Patterns of endemism and comparative
phylogeography confirm palaeoenvironmental evidence for Pleistocene
refugia in the Eastern Alps. Taxon 2003, 52:477-497.
Hewitt GM: The structure of biodiversity - insights from molecular
phylogeography. Front Zool 2004, 1:4.
Koch MA, Kiefer C, Ehrich D, Vogel J, Brochmann C, Mummenhoff K: Three
times out of Asia Minor: the phylogeography of Arabis alpina L.
(Brassicaceae). Mol Ecol 2006, 15:825-839.
Ehrich D, Gaudeul M, Assefa A, Koch MA, Mummenhoff K, Nemomissa S,
Brochmann C: Genetic consequences of Pleistocene range shifts: contrast
between the Arctic, the Alps and the East African mountains. Mol Ecol
2007, 16:2542-2559.
Schönswetter P, Paun O, Tribsch A, Niklfeld H: Out of the Alps:
colonization of northern Europe by east alpine populations of the

Page 17 of 18

71.

72.
73.

74.
75.
76.
77.
78.

79.
80.
81.

82.

83.

84.
85.

86.
87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.
94.
95.

glacier buttercup Ranunculus glacialis L. (Ranunculaceae). Mol Ecol 2003,
12:3373-3381.
Ehrich D, Alsos IG, Brochmann C: Where did the northern peatland
species survive the dry glacials: cloudberry (Rubus chamaemorus) as an
example. J Biogeogr 2008, 35:801-814.
Savile DBO: Arctic adaptations in plants. Canada Department of Agriculture
Monograph 1972, 6:1-81.
Alsos IG, Eidesen PB, Ehrich D, Skrede I, Westergaard K, Jacobsen GH,
Landvik JY, Taberlet P, Brochmann C: Frequent long-distance plant
colonization in the changing Arctic. Science 2007, 316:1606-1609.
Brochmann C, Brysting AK, Alsos IG, Borgen L, Grundt HH, Scheen AC,
Elven R: Polyploidy in arctic plants. Biol J Linn Soc 2004, 82:521-536.
Manton I: The problem of Biscutella laevigata L. - II. The evidence from
meiosis. Ann Bot 1937, 1:439-462.
Stebbins GL: Polyploidy and the distribution of the arctic-alpine flora:
new evidence and a new approach. Bot Helv 1984, 94:1-13.
Soltis PS, Soltis DE: The role of genetic and genomic attributes in the
success of polyploids. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:7051-7057.
Comai L, Tyagi AP, Winter K, Holmes-Davis R, Reynolds SH, Stevens Y,
Byers B: Phenotypic instability and rapid gene silencing in newly formed
Arabidopsis allotetraploids. Plant Cell 2000, 12:1551-1568.
Wendel JF: Genome evolution in polyploids. Plant Mol Biol 2000,
42:225-249.
Liu B, Wendel JF: Epigenetic phenomena and the evolution of plant
allopolyploids. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 29:365-379.
Brysting AK, Oxelman B, Huber KT, Moulton V, Brochmann C: Untangling
complex histories of genome mergings in high polyploids. Syst Biol 2007,
56:467-476.
Guggisberg A, Mansion G, Kelso S, Conti E: Evolution of biogeographic
patterns, ploidy levels, and breeding systems in a diploid-polyploid
species complex of Primula. New Phytol 2006, 171:617-632.
Guggisberg A, Baroux C, Grossniklaus U, Conti E: Genomic origin and
organization of the allopolyploid Primula egaliksensis investigated by in
situ hybridization. Ann Bot 2008, 101:919-927.
Guggisberg A, Mansion G, Conti E: Disentangling reticulate evolution in
an arctic-alpine polyploid complex. Syst Biol 2009, 58:55-73.
Popp M, Erixon P, Eggens F, Oxelman B: Origin and evolution of a
circumpolar polyploid species complex in Silene (Caryophyllaceae)
inferred from low copy nuclear RNA polymerase introns, rDNA, and
chloroplast DNA. Syst Bot 2005, 30:302-313.
Popp M, Oxelman B: Origin and evolution of North American polyploid
Silene (Caryophyllaceae). Am J Bot 2007, 94:330-349.
Brochmann C, Xiang QY, Brunsfeld SJ, Soltis DE, Soltis PS: Molecular
evidence for polyploid origins in Saxifraga (Saxifragaceae): the narrow
arctic endemic S. svalbardensis and its widespread allies. Am J Bot 1998,
85:135-143.
Jørgensen MH, Elven R, Tribsch A, Gabrielsen TM, Stedje B, Brochmann C:
Taxonomy and evolutionary relationships in the Saxifraga rivularis
complex. Syst Bot 2006, 31:702-729.
Jørgensen MH, Carlsen T, Skrede I, Elven R: Microsatellites resolve the
taxonomy of the polyploid Cardamine digitata aggregate (Brassicaceae).
Taxon 2008, 57:882-892.
Kapralov MV, Gabrielsen TM, Sarapultsev IE, Brochmann C: Genetic
enrichment of the arctic clonal plant Saxifraga cernua at its southern
periphery via the alpine sexual Saxifraga sibirica. Mol Ecol 2006,
15:3401-3411.
Säll T, Jakobsson M, Lind-Halldén C, Halldén C: Chloroplast DNA indicates
a single origin of the allotetraploid Arabidopsis suecica. J Evol Biol 2003,
16:1019-1029.
Jakobsson M, Hagenblad J, Tavaré S, Säll T, Halldén C, Lind-Halldén C,
Nordborg M: A unique recent origin of the allotetraploid species
Arabidopsis suecica: Evidence from nuclear DNA markers. Mol Biol Evol
2006, 23:1217-1231.
Säll T, Lind-Halldén C, Jakobsson M, Halldén C: Mode of reproduction in
Arabidopsis suecica. Hereditas 2004, 141:313-317.
Sugisaka J, Kudoh H: Breeding system of the annual Cruciferae,
Arabidopsis kamchatica subsp. kawasakiana. J Plant Res 2008, 121:65-68.
Bechsgaard JS, Castric V, Charlesworth D, Vekemans X, Schierup MH: The
transition to self-compatibility in Arabidopsis thaliana and evolution
within S-haplotypes over 10 Myr. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:1741-1750.

Schmickl et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:98
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/98

Page 18 of 18

96. Tang C, Toomajian C, Sherman-Broyles S, Plagnol V, Guo YL, Hu TT,
Clark RM, Nasrallah JB, Weigel D, Nordborg M: The evolution of selfing in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Science 2007, 317:1070-1072.
97. Schoen DJ, Johnston MO, L’Heureux AM, Marsolais JV: Evolutionary history
of the mating system in Amsinckia (Boraginaceae). Evolution 1997,
51:1090-1099.
98. Rieseberg LH, Willis JH: Plant speciation. Science 2007, 317:910-914.
99. Nasrallah JB, Liu P, Sherman-Broyles S, Schmidt R, Nasrallah ME: Epigenetic
mechanisms for breakdown of self-incompatibility in interspecific
hybrids. Genetics 2007, 175:1965-1973.
100. Mable BK: Genetic causes and consequences of the breakdown of selfincompatibility: case studies in the Brassicaceae. Genet Res 2008, 90:47-60.
101. Eidesen PB, Alsos IG, Popp M, Stensrud Ø, Suda J, Brochmann C: Nuclear
vs. plastid data: complex Pleistocene history of a circumpolar key
species. Mol Ecol 2007, 16:3902-3925.
102. Goloboff PA, Farris JS, Nixon KC: TNT (Tree analysis using New
Technology). Published by the authors, Tucumán 2000.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-98
Cite this article as: Schmickl et al.: The evolutionary history of the
Arabidopsis lyrata complex: a hybrid in the amphi-Beringian area closes
a large distribution gap and builds up a genetic barrier. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:98.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
