<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>gb-2003-4-6-r39.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Open Access

Volume
et al.
Scholl
2003 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Research

Elizabeth H Scholl*†, Jeffrey L Thorne†, James P McCarter‡§ and David
Mck Bird*†

Correspondence: David Mck Bird. E-mail: david_bird@ncsu.edu.

Published: 19 May 2003

Received: 31 January 2003
Revised: 27 March 2003
Accepted: 22 April 2003

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

© 2003 Scholl et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.
perimental methods verifiedpreviously postulated horizontally transferred genes and revealed six new candidates. Screening was partially
dependent on sequence quality,in plant-parasitic transfer candidates as bona fidegenomic approachPhylogenetic analysis implicated rhizobial ancestors identified the thewith more candidates identified from clustered sequences than from raw EST data. Computational and exOur approach as donors genes horizontal gene nematodes: a high-throughput nematode genes.
Horizontally transferred of horizontally acquired genes in Meloidogyne.

Background: Published accounts of horizontally acquired genes in plant-parasitic nematodes have
not been the result of a specific search for gene transfer per se, but rather have emerged from
characterization of individual genes. We present a method for a high-throughput genome screen
for horizontally acquired genes, illustrated using expressed sequence tag (EST) data from three
species of root-knot nematode, Meloidogyne species.

ever, are adapted as parasites and are responsible for such
widespread problems as human disease, debilitation of livestock and crop damage. Plant-parasitic forms are responsible
for an estimated $100 billion in annual crop damage worldwide [2]. The most damaging family (the Heteroderidae) includes the root-knot (Meloidogyne spp.) and the cyst
(Globodera and Heterodera spp.) nematodes. Root-knot

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

information

Nematodes are the most abundant and speciose metazoans,
and account for up to 80% of the kingdom's members [1]. Not
surprisingly, nematodes have evolved to occupy diverse ecological niches. Like the well-studied Caenorhabditis elegans,
most are free-living and graze on microbes or detritus, and as
such, have no obvious direct impact on humans. Others, how-

interactions

Conclusions: High-throughput genomic screening is an effective way to identify horizontal gene
transfer candidates. Transferred genes that have undergone amelioration of nucleotide
composition and codon bias have been identified using this approach. Analysis of these horizontally
transferred gene candidates suggests a link between horizontally transferred genes in Meloidogyne
and parasitism.

refereed research

Results: Our approach identified the previously postulated horizontally transferred genes and
revealed six new candidates. Screening was partially dependent on sequence quality, with more
candidates identified from clustered sequences than from raw EST data. Computational and
experimental methods verified the horizontal gene transfer candidates as bona fide nematode
genes. Phylogenetic analysis implicated rhizobial ancestors as donors of horizontally acquired genes
in Meloidogyne.

deposited research

Abstract

reports

The electronic version of this article is the complete one and can be
found online at http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

Background

reviews

Addresses: *Center for the Biology of Nematode Parasitism, Box 7253, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.
†Bioinformatics Research Center, Box 7566, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA. ‡Genome Sequencing Center,
Department of Genetics, Box 8501, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63108, USA. §Divergence Inc., 893 North Warson
Road, St. Louis, MO 63141, USA.

comment

Horizontally transferred genes in plant-parasitic nematodes: a
high-throughput genomic approach

R39.2 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al.

nematodes penetrate plant hosts and migrate between the
cells in roots, where they induce formation of large multinucleate cells called 'giant cells'. Galls form around the giant
cells, and the roots become distorted, often leading to compromised root function and retardation of plant growth [3].
It is not clear which genetic differences between the plant parasitic and non-parasitic forms may be responsible for conferring parasitic ability. On the basis of phylogenetic analysis [4]
it appears that plant parasitism arose independently at least
three times over the course of nematode evolution. Consequently, one cannot be assured that any gene or set of genes
that aid in the parasitic lifestyle in one nematode species will
also exist in another. Conceptually, several mechanisms affecting evolution to parasitism can be envisioned. These include adaptation of pre-existing genes to encode new
functions; changes in genes regulating metabolic or developmental pathways; gene duplication; gene loss; and acquisition of genes from other species (horizontal gene transfer,
HGT). HGT has become a widely accepted mechanism of rapid evolution and diversification in prokaryotic populations
[5–7]. Recent genome analyses of primitive eukaryotes, such
as the sea squirt (Ciona intestinalis) [8] and single-celled parasitic diplomonads [9], implicate HGT events in early eukaryotic evolution. In contrast, the extent of horizontal transfer
involving higher eukaryotes has been controversial, with
many cases of hypothesized horizontally transferred genes
[10–14] having been refuted by later studies [15,16].
On the basis of biochemical and immunological criteria,
genes have been identified in Globodera rostochiensis and
Heterodera glycines that allow these nematodes to endogenously produce enzymes that can degrade cellulose and pectin, the two major components of plant cell walls. A possible
ancient bacterial origin of these genes has been theorized [17–
19]. A bacterial origin for a number of root-knot nematode
(RKN) genes also has been proposed, although their possible
role in parasitism is less clear. Some, such as a gene encoding
chorismate mutase [20], were likewise identified on the basis
of biochemical properties, whereas others, including a polygalacturonase gene [21], were identified from expressed sequence tag (EST) datasets, the latter from our data [22] using
a keyword search. Veronico et al. [23] isolated a presumed
polyglutamate synthetase gene with bacterial homology by
sequencing neighboring regions of the M. artiellia chitin synthetase locus. We wished to determine whether other RKN
genes might have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer,
particularly as such genes might potentially be related to
parasitism.
Claims of HGT have frequently pivoted on incongruencies between a particular gene tree and the assumed underlying species tree. Acquisition of new sequence data has often revealed
that genes believed to be absent in a species were merely
missing in the database rather than missing from the genome
[16]. Obviously, because full genomes are not available for all

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

plant and animal species, we are not able to make definitive
statements about the presence or absence of a particular gene
in every organism. However, with the completed C. elegans
genome available as a reference 'model' nematode, it is now
possible to examine the emerging genetic resources for Meloidogyne comprehensively, to begin to address the question
of evolution of parasitism and, in particular, a possible role
for HGT.
A similarity to a bacterial protein sequence is the simplest criterion for considering a nematode protein, and thus the gene
that encodes it, as a possible HGT candidate. For that candidate truly to define an HGT event, its presence must be incongruent with nematode phylogeny (Figure 1). Nevertheless, the
presence of a gene in one nematode species (such as Meloidogyne) but its absence in another (such as C. elegans) might
merely reflect a gene loss in the latter lineage. In addition to
C. elegans, several other invertebrate genomes have been
completely sequenced, and at the time of this study, the best
characterized of those was Drosophila melanogaster. Consequently, we chose this resource as a tool to identify genes
which may be present in nematodes, but which are absent in
C. elegans. A bacteria-like gene present in Meloidogyne and
Drosophila, but absent in C. elegans, is unlikely to have experienced HGT, but may rather reflect a gene loss in the C. elegans lineage. We therefore developed a 'phylogenetic filter'
based on these relationships to rapidly reveal Meloidogyne
HGT candidates identified by sequence similarity to bacterial
proteins. The intent of this filter is to efficiently eliminate
spurious HGT candidates.
Surprisingly, the relationship between the invertebrate phyla
Nematoda and Arthropoda (which includes Drosophila) is
controversial. The traditional view is that arthropods are
more closely related to annelids than to nematodes, but some
recent molecular phylogenies place nematodes and arthropods together in a high-level taxon named Ecdysozoa, which
does not include annelids [24,25]. Other molecular studies
give conflicting results [26,27]. Regardless of the evolutionary relationship between Nematoda and Arthropoda, C. elegans and Drosophila remain useful and valid models for our
analyses, and the relationships shown in Figure 1 are consistent with both hypotheses.
Genes that were transferred from bacteria to nematodes
would pass through our phylogenetic filter if the transfer
event occurred subsequent to the divergence of the C. elegans
and Meloidogyne lineages (Figure 1). Should a gene appear to
be present in other closely related plant parasites, such as the
cyst nematodes, the transfer event probably affected a common ancestor of the two families of parasitic nematodes
(event 'a' in Figure 1). Alternatively, the transfer event may be
more recent, such as to the progenitor of the Meloidogyne lineage since its divergence from the cyst nematodes (event 'b' in
Figure 1), or in a lineage leading to a single Meloidogyne species (event 'c').

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al. R39.3

Results and discussion

a
b

Drosophila

M. hapla
M. incognita
M. javanica
M. arenaria

M. artiellia

Heterodera

Globodera

C. elegans

Cyst nematodes Root-knot nematodes
(Meloidogyne)

interactions
information

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

refereed research

We describe here a comprehensive two-step search for HGT
candidates in M. incognita, M. javanica and M. hapla using
EST data [22,28,29]. Genome-to-genome comparisons were
made to discover patterns of presence and absence that would
indicate horizontally acquired genes. Second, kingdom-wide
comparisons further reduced the candidate pool; these genes
were then examined from an evolutionary standpoint. Twelve
Meloidogyne candidates were discovered and their potential
role in plant pathogenicity is discussed.

The main objective of the phylogenetic filter was to reduce the
computational load necessary to screen HGT candidates
against all metazoan proteins. A second filter, consisting of a
BLAST analysis against the GenBank nonredundant (nr) protein database, served to eliminate genes that may have been
independently lost in the C. elegans and Drosophila lineages,
but are still representative of a more ancient animal gene (Table 1). This filter eliminated four candidates from the WMi
data set. Examination of these showed a putative copper
homeostatis protein and a protein of unknown function, both
with significant matches to Homo sapiens (e-values of 1.10e23 and 4.20e-18respectively), one aldehyde dehydrogenase
with a significant match to Mus musculus (2.70e-26) and one
asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase. Three of the four had best
matches to bacteria (Table 2). Interestingly, manual inspection revealed that all four sequences did have significant
matches to C. elegans, but passed through our initial phylogenetic filter because the bacterial matches were stronger than
those for C. elegans or Drosophila. The 12 final candidates in
WMi had no significant match to C. elegans or Drosophila in
the preliminary screen. The best eukaryotic matches to these
candidates from the BLAST search against nr are shown in
Table 3. The second filter generated similar enrichment in
WMj, reducing the number of candidates from eleven to
seven.

deposited research

Although bacteria-like Meloidogyne genes that are not
present in C. elegans and Drosophila comprise a preliminary
pool of candidates, multiple gene loss may be responsible for
the presence/absence pattern revealed by the filter. To test
this more thoroughly, we established a screen to compare the
now small pool of preliminary candidates with all other sequences in the public databases. The most parsimonious explanation to be drawn from candidates with no significant
matches to any metazoan genes is that they arose by horizontal gene transfer from a non-metazoan pool, as opposed to
multiple independent gene losses in the metazoan lineages.
Candidates thus identified were subsequently validated
through phylogenetic analysis of relationships between the
most similar matches from our screening processes

reports

Figure 1
Schematic species tree indicating relationships between bacteria,
Drosophila, C. elegans and plant-parasitic nematodes in the family
Heteroderidae. The locations of three possible horizontal gene-transfer
events that would pass through our initial phylogenetic filter are indicated
by dotted lines. Transfer 'a' occurs after divergence of the lineages leading
to C. elegans and Heteroderidae, transfer 'b' after divergence of root-knot
nematodes and cyst nematodes, and transfer 'c' to the lineage leading to a
specific Meloidogyne species. Adapted from [59].

reviews

Bacteria

c

Given the large number of sequences to examine and the expectation that most were not horizontally acquired, we developed a phylogenetic filter based on genome-to-genome
sequence comparisons. Further, because the available data
included raw ESTs from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank (dbEST) as well as clustered
ESTs from the Parasitic Nematode Sequencing Project
[22,28,29], for which the data can be presumed to be significantly more reliable, we wished to compare the efficiency of
reducing each dataset with this filter. Meloidogyne sequences
from NCBI dbEST (M. incognita, M. javanica and M. hapla
sequences, named NMi, NMj, and NMh respectively) were
translated in six frames and individually compared to conceptual six-phase translations of the C. elegans and Drosophila
genomes as well as all available bacterial sequences. This first
filter, which makes no assumptions about gene annotation in
the target genomes, and which employed the relatively errorprone raw ESTs, reduced the pool of HGT candidates by eliminating more than 99% of the original ESTs for all three species tested (Table 1). Using clustered ESTs (M. incognita and
M. javanica sequences, named WMi and WMj) as queries to
the worm, fly and bacterial protein databases (which are
based on gene annotation) produced a similar degree of reduction (Table 1). Importantly, genes previously predicted to
be the result of HGT events were identified by, and passed
through, the phylogenetic filter (see below).

comment

Genome-to-genome comparisons act as a phylogenetic
filter in candidate searching

R39.4 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

Table 1
Efficiency of each step of screening Meloidogyne datasets for HGT candidates

Name

Original

First screen

Second screen

Final candidates

WMi

1,799

16 (0.889%)

12 (0.667%)

12 (0.667%)

WMj

3,119

11 (0.353%)

7 (0.224%)

7 (0.224%)

NMi

12,841

99 (0.771%)

27 (0.210%)

5 (0.038%)

NMj

5,630

54 (0.959%)

16 (0.284%)

6 (0.107%)

NMh

6,514

4 (0.061%)

0 (0.00%)

0 (0.00%)

Clustered ESTs (W) were from the Parasitic Nematode Sequencing Project at Washington University. Raw ESTs (N) were extracted from NCBI's
GenBank. Mi, Meloidogyne incognita; Mj, M. javanica; Mh, M. hapla. 'Original number' gives the size of the initial dataset. For both screens, matches
were declared when e-values were less than 1.0e-10. The percentage of the original number of sequences remaining after each screen is listed in
parentheses. 'Final candidates' reflects total number of candidates after removal of redundancy.

The fact that more candidates from the raw datasets were
eliminated during second-round filtering (for example, from
99 to 27 in NMi) reflects the redundancy in the datasets. If
multiple EST sequences representing a single gene pass
through the first filter, each of those EST sequences will be in
the preliminary candidate pool. The second filter is likely to
simultaneously remove more than one of these homologous
sequences if it removes any at all. Therefore, searching with
raw EST sequences is likely to result in a larger absolute decrease in the candidate number than will searching with clustered EST sequences.
The number of final candidates listed in Table 1 are candidate
HGT genes after clustering. A smaller number of candidates
was discovered from the raw EST datasets compared with the
clustered sequences, which suggests that our method of HGT
candidate searching is partially dependent on sequence quality. The lower number of final candidates obtained using raw
EST data is principally due to filtering of areas of low complexity and tandem repeats, and uncertainty of similarity
matching for shorter sequences during BLAST searches. Similarly, the size of the dataset influences the number of final
candidates obtained. Thus, the absence of candidates in M.
hapla is likely to be due to a combination of the small number
of unique ESTs analyzed (because of redundancy in the data),
and possibly overall quality of the raw ESTs, rather than to a
lack of laterally acquired genes in the genome. Despite the

lowered efficiency of candidate discovery when using the lower-quality, raw EST sequences, this tool was able to recover
five candidates from the NMi dataset, compared to the 12 candidates identified from the higher-quality clustered sequences in the WMi dataset. The fact that candidates were
discovered across disparate sequence-quality conditions not
only provides additional validation of our methods, but also
suggests a high degree of flexibility and robustness in the tool.

Identification of previously hypothesized HGT
candidates
The literature reports seven genes postulated to have been
horizontally acquired by M. incognita, M. hapla or M. javanica during evolution of plant-parasitic nematodes [17–21];
our search algorithm revealed six of these genes. The notable
exception is Mj-CM, which is postulated to encode chorismate mutase in M. javanica [20]. To examine why this gene
was not identified by our filtering process, we used both MjCM sequences found in GenBank (AF095949, AF095950) in
a series of BLASTX queries. No significant matches were
found in the Drosophila, C. elegans or bacterial databases,
nor in the Meloidogyne datasets used in this study. Recent
BLAST searches at nematode.net [30] against all Meloidogyne ESTs, including sequences not available when our analyses were first conducted confirm that the chorismate mutase
gene is absent from WMi and WMj, although a single, significant match to an M. arenaria chorismate mutase EST was

Table 2
Sequences from WMi that passed the preliminary screen but were removed from candidate pool after second screen

NemaGene ID
MI01839

Putative function

Bacteria

Drosophila

C. elegans

Other

Copper homeostasis protein

3.90e-31

1.70e-20

4.50e-22

1.10e-23 (Homo sapiens)

MI00665

Aldehyde dehydrogenase

4.30e-22

1.40e-10

4.30e-18

2.70e-26 (Mus musculus)

MI01016

Asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase

2.30e-46

1.80e-35

4.30e-29

4.50e-39 (Arabidopsis thaliana)

MI00754

Hypothetical protein

3.70e-61

9.80e-01

8.10e-17

4.20e-18 (Homo sapiens)

The best match in the preliminary screen was to bacteria. Significant matches to other eukaryotes (including C. elegans and Drosophila) exist for each
sequence. E-value for overall best match is listed in bold.
Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al. R39.5

Table 3
List of horizontal gene transfer candidates from M. incognita

Candidate

Name

Best eukaryotic match*
% identity

Name

e-value, %identity

comment

Best bacterial match

β1,4-endoglucanases
Bacillus sp. KSM-N252

(2.7e-24, 40%)

Orpinomyces joyonii

(5.6e-10, 32%)

Pseudomonas fluorescens

(2.5e-75, 47%)

Orpinomyces joyonii

(9.4e-41, 36%)

MI01381

Streptomyces coelicolor

(6.9e-13,

Orpinomyces joyonii

(0.013, 27%)

MI01842

Pseudomonas fluorescens

(1.2e-35, 44%)

None

Ralstonia solanacearum

(8.8e-61, 50%)

Arabidopsis thaliana

(5.1e-7, 40%)

Streptomyces coelicolor

(3.9e-12,31%)

Fusarium solani

(1.9e-7, 33%)

31%)

Pectinases
MI00252
MI00592

reviews

MI00537
MI01011

Rhizobial matches
Rhizobium leguminosarum

(8e-54, 58%)

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

(5e-38, 46%)

Mesorhizobium loti

(9e-45, 56%)

Blumeria graminis

(2e-15, 33%)

L-Threonine aldolase

Brucella melitensis

(1e-23, 48%)

Leishmania major

(0.096, 25%)

Sinorhizobium meliloti

(9e-45,

Caenorhabditis elegans

(3.9, 26%)

Amycolatopsis mediterranei

(4.9e-28, 53%)

Arabidopsis thaliana

(2.5e-4, 33%)

Amycolatopsis mediterranei

(3.0e-28,

Aspergillus fumigatus

(5.4e-6, 32%)

Unknown function

51%)

reports

NodL
Glutamine synthetase

Unknown function
MI01406
MI00267

58%)

Also revealed by our tool were six new HGT candidates, including homologs for glutamine synthetase, L-threonine aldolase and nodL, and three to which function could not be
unequivocally ascribed.

Of the six newly identified HGT candidates, four have highest
similarity to genes in the nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria that
nodulate plant roots and which are collectively termed rhizobia. Meloidogyne and rhizobia are sympatric (that is, they
share an ecological niche in the soil [3], and arguably in the

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

information

Rhizobial origin of Meloidogyne genes

interactions

The most extensively studied HGT candidates are four genes
encoding β-1,4-endoglucanase, initially identified in the cyst
nematodes G. rostochiensis and H. glycines [18,19]. These
four genes (NemaGene Contig IDs MI00537, MI01011,
MI01381 and MI01842) [30] appear to define two sets of paralogs formed before divergence of the cyst and root-knot
nematodes. As noted [18,19], β-1,4-endoglucanases presumably equip these nematodes with the ability to endogenously
degrade the most abundant component of cell walls, namely
cellulose. Similarly, the second most abundant component of
cell walls (pectin) is the assumed target of nematode-encoded
pectate lyase and exo-polygalacturonase, both functions also
postulated to have been acquired by HGT. The pectate lyase
gene (MI00592) was identified in G. rostochiensis and H.

glycines [17] and the exo-polygalacturonase (MI00252) was
identified in our M. incognita data [21,22]. Because of the obvious role of nematode genes that allow endogenous production of cell-wall degrading enzymes in attacking a plant host,
it has been hypothesized that their acquisition by HGT may
have been key steps in the evolution of plant-parasitic nematodes from ancestral free-living forms [3]. In that model, an
intermediate, symbiotic association of a soil-dwelling (but
free-living) nematode with a soil bacterium possessing these
enzymes is postulated before the HGT event. It was suggested
[3] that acquisition of these new functions (either by symbiosis or HGT) permitted previously free-living nematodes to expand their range into a new ecological niche (the plant) as a
prelude to speciation into parasitic forms.

refereed research

revealed. Another RKN gene also postulated to have been acquired by HGT, and which encodes polyglutamate synthetase,
was previously identified in M. artiellia [23]. Significantly,
hybridization data showed that this particular gene is absent
from both the M. javanica and G. rostochiensis genomes
[23]. We speculate that acquisition of this gene by M. artiellia
is a recent HGT event (event 'c', Figure 1), and thus it is truly
absent from the Meloidogyne genomes from which our datasets were derived. In other words, failure to 'discover' this
gene was not a failure of our screening process, but is likely to
be a correct reflection of the biology.

deposited research

The best bacterial and eukaryotic matches are listed with their e-values from a BLASTX search and percent identity as reported by BLAST. *Best
match to any eukaryote other than a plant-parasitic nematode.

R39.6 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al.

plant too [31]), satisfying the minimal requirement for an
HGT to occur, namely physical proximity. Interestingly, models of bacterial evolution suggest HGT as a mechanism of adaptation into either symbiosis or parasitism [32]. This is
specifically thought to be the case for divergent species of
rhizobia, such as the symbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti and
the pathogen Rhizobium radiobacter (formerly known as
Agrobacterium tumefaciens), where differential selection
and gene maintenance is likely to be responsible for different
lifestyle strategies [33].
Two of the Meloidogyne genes revealed by our filters, which
encode an L-threonine aldolase gene (MI01644) and a deduced protein of unknown function (MI00109), exhibit striking amino-acid identity to rhizobial proteins (48% and 51%
respectively), but a complete absence of meaningful homology with any eukaryotic sequence (Table 3). Consequently,
these genes are strong candidates for having entered nematodes via HGT, presumably from a rhizobial ancestor.
The deduced product of a third M. incognita gene (MI00426)
has striking sequence similarity to glutamine synthetase
(GS). Glutamine synthetases fall into two structurally and
functionally distinct classes. GSI, which to date appears restricted to prokaryotes [34], is involved in ammonium assimilation as part of the nitrogen-fixation pathway in rhizobia
[35]. The ability to be reversibly adenylylated at Tyr397 of the
active site is a characteristic of GSI. The second class, GSII, is
found in all eukaryotes and a small number of prokaryotes,
and appears to be involved in purine synthesis [35]. Unlike
GSI, GSII is not adenylylated (and lacks the conserved tyrosine). On the basis of both amino-acid sequence similarity
(Table 3) and a Pfam [36] HMM search (e-value 4.3e-24), it is
clear that the RKN glutamine synthetase is a GSI homolog,
implying a prokaryotic origin. Strikingly, the nematode protein has greatest similarity (56% amino-acid identity) to GSI
from the rhizobial bacterium, Mesorhizobium loti, including
conservation of Tyr397. The best match to a eukaryotic
glutamine synthetase (GSII) is substantially lower (Table 3),
strongly implicating the RKN gene as a robust candidate for
an HGT event.
The fourth rhizobial-like HGT candidate (MI01045) identified by our filter has 58% amino-acid identity (8.8e-54) to
NodL from Rhizobium leguminosarum (Table 3). This protein encodes an N-acetyltransferase previously thought to be
present only in rhizobia [37], where it functions in the biosynthesis of Nod factor. Nod factors are a rhizobial species-specific family of lipo-chito-oligosaccharides which function in
signal exchange between the bacterium and its symbiotic
partner plant [38]. The first visible signs of nodule formation
(root-hair deformation) as part of the symbiotic pathway are
triggered by Nod factors [39], and although the specific mechanisms of Nod factor function remain unknown, it is clear
that it has a central role in initiation of cell division and possibly also nodule differentiation in the root [40]. For most

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

rhizobia, the product of nodD acts as a transcriptional activator and induces expression of a set of nod genes. Experimental evidence [39] shows that lack of either nodABC or nodD in
rhizobia results in a Nod- phenotype (that is, a strain unable
to initiate nodule formation on the host plant). By contrast, R.
radiobacter, which forms a parasitic relationship with plants
by producing a crown gall rather than nodules, lacks these
genes, and appears to possess only nodL, nodX and nodN,
suggesting these three nod genes are sufficient to affect root
growth and are involved in a parasitic lifestyle rather than being specific to symbiosis [33].
To examine further the relationship between putative nodL
candidates found in M. incognita and M. javanica with the
cognate genes in rhizobia, we undertook a phylogenetic analysis and found that the two nematode genes fall squarely
within the rhizobial nodL clade (Figure 2). This analysis further grouped other sequences with significant similarity to
the deduced Meloidogyne NodL protein. Not surprisingly,
these enzymes clustered according to specific enzymatic function of the different classes of acetyltransferase. Significantly,
the solitary significant match of the Meloidogyne NodL sequences to a eukaryote is to a yeast serine-acetyltransferase,
an enzyme clearly separated from the RKN by function as well
as in our phylogeny (Figure 2).
Bayesian analysis of the amino-acid alignment confirms this
grouping. The posterior probability of the two Meloidogyne
sequences being most closely related to the one other eukaryotic sequence, from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is estimated
to be 0. Instead, a group consisting of the two Meloidogyne
sequences along with the Sinorhizobium meliloti and Rhizobium leguminosarum sequences is estimated to have a posterior probability of 1.0. For the clade consisting solely of the
four rhizobial and the two Meloidogyne sequences, the posterior probability is estimated to be about 0.657, and almost all
of the remaining posterior probability is accounted for by
adding the Streptomyces coelicolor sequence to this clade of
rhizobial and Meloidogyne sequences.
Using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers designed
from the Meloidogyne sequence we have attempted to amplify nodL from a range of nematode species. For each of the
Meloidogyne species tested (including M. hapla), we have
been able to confirm the presence of the gene. However, similar experiments do not yield amplification products from the
cyst nematodes we tested. Although other interpretations can
be made, these results are consistent with nodL being acquired by an 'event b' HGT (see Figure 1).

Meloidogyne nodL truly is a nematode gene
A question that arises in analyzing eukaryotic sequences with
strong matches to bacterial proteins, especially when the
match is unique, is whether the gene in question truly was isolated from a eukaryote, or whether it represents a prokaryotic
contaminant (any nucleic acid matches of ESTs to prokaryo-

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al. R39.7

Escherichia coli
Clostridium acetobutylicum

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Streptomyces coelicolor

Rhizobium radiobacter

69 85
96 99
80
80
100
85
100

Meloidogyne incognita

Escherichia coli
Bacillus subtilis
Bacillus halodurans

Sinorhizobium meliloti
Rhizobium leguminosarum

reviews

100

Mesorhizobium loti

comment

Lactobacillus delbrueckii

Meloidogyne javanica
0.1
reports

Key:
NodL
Unknown function
Serine acetyltransferase
Maltose acetyltransferase
Unknown sugar acetyltransferase
Figure 2
Cladogram of NodL-like proteins. The unrooted tree is generated by protein-distance and neighbor-joining methods and shows relationships of the
deduced, putative Meloidogyne NodL proteins with similar enzymes, color-coded according to known function. Numbers indicate percent support from
1,000 non-parametric bootstrap replicates [53]. The scale bar represents 0.1 amino-acid replacements per site across the length of a given branch.

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

information

Another way to consider nucleotide composition is through
codon usage. In particular, we considered how similar the
Meloidogyne codon usage is to that of a 'typical' rhizobial
protein by using the codon adaptation index (CAI) [44]. From
an R. leguminosarum codon-usage table, we calculated the
CAI for those amino acids precisely conserved between MiNodL and the rhizobial NodL protein to be 0.621 and 0.703
respectively. To evaluate the null hypothesis that the expected
codon usage between the two nodL genes is identical, the difference in CAI values was adopted as a test statistic. The observed value of this test statistic was 0.082 and its null
distribution was approximated by simulating 10,000 datasets
as described in Materials and methods. Because the absolute
value of the test statistic calculated from the simulated data-

interactions

In cases of a recent HGT, it has been suggested that the nucleotide composition of the transferred gene might reflect that of
the donor species rather than the recipient species [42]. To
establish a baseline nucleotide composition of M. incognita
transcripts, we calculated the average G+C content for our
entire M. incognita (WMi) sequence dataset, obtaining a value of 34.3%. By contrast, the average G+C content of rhizobial
species ranges from 57 to 65% [43]. Consistent with the

average for M. incognita, the G+C content of Mi-NodL is
36%. This value is strikingly different for the nodL genes in
Rhizobium leguminosarum (57% G+C) and Mesorhizobium
loti (68% G+C). We similarly examined the G+C content of all
12 HGT candidates, and found the values to be consistently
representative of Meloidogyne.

refereed research

tes, which probably would be contaminants, were removed
before database submission [28]). Claims of nematode genes
having been acquired by HGT [17–19,23] have addressed this
issue in a number of ways. To provide experimental evidence
that the Meloidogyne nodL sequences represent nematode
loci, we cloned and sequenced a full-length transcript from M.
incognita (Mi-NodL). Identification of the SL1 trans-splice
leader at the 5' end of the message [41], and a poly(A) tail at
the 3' end, confirmed that this is a bona fide nematode gene
(Figure 3). Analysis of genomic Mi-NodL sequences revealed
an intron (Figure 3), further reinforcing the notion that this
gene is integrated within the M. incognita genome.

deposited research

Galactoside acetyltransferase

R39.8 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al.

cccaagtttgagacaatgtctgatcaacaaaattatggaaaacatccaaaagaccccagc
M S D Q Q N Y G K H P K D P S
aaacctatgaaagaacgaatgttggctggggaactttattgtgttaatgatgttcttgaa
K P M K E R M L A G E L Y C V N D V L E
caagaaatgaatttaacagctaaatggctggcccgtttaaacgattcttcgtgttccagt
Q E M N L T A K W L A R L N D S S C S S
cgttctgaacggcaacaaattattagagaacgacttggggctatgggagaaggttgcgat
R S E R Q Q I I R E R L G A M G E G C D
atacggccacctttttattgtgattatggtggtgattaattcttttttgatagtttggtg
I R P P F Y C D Y
gtgattaattcttttttgatagtttgagctcactttttgtacattcaacactaattattt
gttgtgtgtgagtatacaaaaaatttttccattttgggaggcctactgcttcttaaggcc
aggaagtcaaaatttatttcgaatttatccatttctcggaattttcctttaaaatgtcta
aataccgtatttcctctaatagattatttgggcatatcaccttctaaaggggcattctat
tagagggggaatactaatgggggggggcattctaatagaggaaataccgtatgcatagaa
attcatcccaagtctgtattttacagtgagttccgaccttatccctaatggttttaataa

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

bacterial and nematode sequences are inconsistent with
HGT. However, analyses in which synteny and phylogenetic
information were also considered suggest that codon bias and
G+C content are poor indicators of HGT [45]. A role for 'amelioration', whereby structural characteristics of the foreign
gene are eventually homogenized to resemble those of the recipient species, has been assumed, but the rate was postulated to be the same as the rate of random, forward mutation
[42]. In addition to alterations in codon usage (as reflected in
G+C content), for a bacterial gene to function efficiently in a
nematode presumably requires acquisition of regulatory elements (including a promoter) and structural elements (including a poly(A) tail and, optionally, a trans-spliced leader).
Other elements (such as introns) might also be acquired. It is
possible that a careful phylogenetic analysis comparing rates
of evolution of Meloidogyne genes acquired by HGT with
those present in the more ancient nematode lineage, might
shed light on the rate of amelioration of gene structure following inter-kingdom HGT.

aaatttttccaggctcaaatatttttatgggaaaagatgtcattcttaactttaattgtt
G S N I F M G K D V I L N F N C
gtattttggatgtggttactgtgacaattggagacggcactttgtttggacccaacgttc
C I L D V V T V T I G D G T L F G P N V
agatttatcctgcagatcacccgagggacaaagaaacacgtctggaaggctgggaatttg
Q I Y P A D H P R D K E T R L E G W E F
gtcggcctattaaaataggcaaaaatgtttggattggtggaggggcaatgatacttcccg
G R P I K I G K N V W I G G G A M I L P
ggagtaactattggagatgatgctataattggtgctggttctgtagtgactagagatgtt
G V T I G D D A I I G A G S V V T R D V
ctgccaggcacaacagttgcgggaaatcctgcgcgtcctataataaaaaagtatgttaac
L P G T T V A G N P A R P I I K K Y V N
tgatgtcttctactaaaattaaagagaattgaagaggacatttcatttttgggttaaaaa
aacttgatatacagttaatcttctaataaacatataaccagttaattaatttaattgttg
tcatttttcactggttaaataaaattaaagaatttt

Figure 3
Structure of Meloidogyne incognita NodL and its deduced translation
product. Features of the genomic sequence were established by
comparison with that of a full-length cDNA clone, and are indicated by
arrows in the following order: addition site of SL-1 trans-splice leader;
beginning of intron; end of intron; and site of poly(A) tail.

sets exceeded 0.082 only 62 of 10,000 times, we reject the
null hypothesis of identical expected codon usage in the M.
incognita and R. leguminosarum nodL genes and conclude
that codon usage in these genes is significantly different between the species. Collectively, comparison of the nematode
and rhizobial nodL genes suggests that each is adapted for
function in the organism in which it resides, and despite the
high degree of similarity between the amino-acid sequences
of these genes, the DNA sequences are strikingly different.
From the Lawrence and Ochman model [42], in which differences in G+C and codon bias are diagnostic for HGT events, it
might be argued that our findings on the base composition of

Patterns of HGT from rhizobia
In the absence of an assembled genome sequence for Meloidogyne, it is not yet possible to examine conserved,
genome-wide gene order of HGT candidates between
nematodes and the hypothesized bacterial donor.
Nevertheless, because the origin of many of the nematode
HGT candidates appeared to be rhizobial, we wished to investigate the organization of the bacterial homologs. Unlike
many prokaryotes, in which the genome resides largely on a
single, circular chromosome, with varying numbers of small
episomes, rhizobial genomes are typically organized in a
manner conceptually more like eukaryotes. Sinorhizobium
meliloti, for example, has three large, single-copy plasmids
[43], and the primary Mesorhizobium loti chromosome is linear. Rhizobia have the ability to transfer genes horizontally to
other bacteria, and M. loti carries a 'symbiosis island' which
spans approximately 9% of its genome and has been shown to
have a role in rhizobial evolution via HGT [46]. This symbiosis island contains certain genes involved in nodulation and
nitrogen-fixation functions, but none of these is a homolog of
the nematode HGT candidates we have identified. However,
four of these genes do map to the same M. loti linear chromosome (Figure 4), including nodL and the glutamine synthetase gene, both of which are involved in nodulation/
nitrogen fixation in rhizobia. Together with the L-threonine
aldolase homolog candidate, these three genes are found
within 257 kb of each other, a distance that represents only
3.65% of the M. loti chromosome, which is less than half the
size of the symbiosis island. The fourth candidate, of unknown function, lies approximately 149 kb from the opposite
side of the symbiosis island from the other three (Figure 4).
Interestingly, examination of the colinearity and gene arrangements between S. meliloti, R. radiobacter and M. loti
indicates that the location of the genes in M. loti probably represents a more primitive state [33] and is therefore more likely to reflect the proximity of these genes in rhizobial ancestral

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

Genome Biology 2003,

218 kb

35 kb

2,165 kb

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al. R39.9

149 kb

NodL

L-threonine

aldolase

Glutamine
synthetase

Symbiosis
island

'Hypothetical
protein'

comment

612 kb

Figure 4
Schematic map (not to scale) of four genes on the Mesorhizobium loti linear chromosome with putative homologs in M. incognita, encoding NodL, Lthreonine aldolase, glutamine synthetase and an unknown function. Also indicated is the 612 kb transferable M. loti symbiosis island.

As a first round of phylogenetic filtering, automated comparison of e-values for each sequence allowed us to eliminate sequences with a best match to either C. elegans or Drosophila
from further analysis. The remaining sequences, those with a
best match to bacteria of order 1.0e-10 or better, provided a
preliminary pool of candidates for each dataset. A BLASTX
search was carried out for each candidate against the nr data-

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

information

Sequences were obtained from the Parasitic Nematode Sequencing Project (PNSP) [30] including clustered Meloidogyne ESTs built with the NemaGene approach [28]. We

Meloidogyne sequences from NCBI were analyzed using the
Tera-BLAST Hardware Accelerated BLAST algorithm (TimeLogic, Crystal Bay, NV). Single FASTA files were submitted
for three six-phase translated Tera-TBLASTX queries against
six-phase translated C. elegans and Drosophila genomic databases. Tera-TBLASTX parameters were Open Penalty = 8,
Extend Penalty = 2, Word Size = 4, Query Increment = 3 and
Neighborhood Threshold = 18. Perl scripts were employed to
parse the query name and associated best e-value from each
of the nine analyses (three each for NMi, NMj and NMh).

interactions

Available data

Analyses of the WMi and WMj data were performed via a local
installation of WU-BLAST 2.0 [48]. Each sequence in WMi
and WMj was extracted into individual FASTA format files
using Perl scripts and submitted for three six-phase translated WU-BLASTX searches, once each against the C. elegans,
Drosophila and bacterial protein databases. WU-BLASTX
parameters were E = 10, W = 3, T = 12. E-values were
extracted for the best match for each query sequence in each
of the three searches.

refereed research

Materials and methods

Candidate search algorithm

deposited research

We have demonstrated that a high-throughput bioinformatics approach based on EST sequences is an efficient and effective way to identify possible HGT candidates in plantparasitic nematodes. Previous reports of horizontally acquired genes have been based mainly on biochemical or immunological criteria. Using an informatics approach, we
rediscovered previously identified candidates (thus validating our method), and were able to identify new candidates for
HGT. Strikingly, a common theme underpinning the HGT
candidates is their apparent direct relationship to the parasitic lifestyle of Meloidogyne [3]. Also striking was our finding
that phylogenetically, rhizobia appear to be the predominant
group of 'donor' bacteria. This is significant for two reasons.
First, root-knot nematodes and rhizobia occupy similar niches in the soil and in roots, and thus the opportunity for HGT
may be omnipresent. Second, both organisms establish intimate developmental interactions with host plants, and
mounting evidence suggests that the mechanisms for these
interactions are also shared [31]. It seems a reasonable hypothesis that the origin of parasitism in Meloidogyne may
have been facilitated by acquisition of genetic material from
soil bacteria through horizontal transfer. Indeed, such events
may have represented key steps in speciation of plant-parasitic nematodes

reports

Conclusions

analyzed 1,799 M. incognita (WMi) sequences and 3,119 M.
javanica (WMj) sequences from these PNSP clusters. Additional raw sequences were extracted from the July 31, 2002
NCBI GenBank dbEST build with the Entrez Search and Retrieval System (Table 1) [47]. Meloidogyne incognita and M.
javanica datasets from NCBI (NMi and NMj respectively)
contain the individual ESTs generated by the PNSP, and from
which the clusters for the WMi and WMj datasets were generated. In addition, the NMi and NMj datasets included some
sequences from sources other than the PNSP. M. hapla sequences (NMh) were also retrieved from NCBI. Entrez was
used to extract all available nuclear sequences for D.
melanogaster, C. elegans and bacterial sequences from the
GenBank non-redundant (nr) database (May 1, 2002 build).

reviews

species. Although it cannot be known if these genes were acquired in a single transfer event between a rhizobial ancestor
and an ancestor to Meloidogyne, remnants of the HGT event
(other than the already identified genes) may remain, and
candidates are currently being mapped into the M. incognita
genome to examine possible synteny with M. loti. BLAST
analysis of the genes in the intervening span of chromosome
indicates only three significant matches to the M. incognita
(WMi) data set, all with significant matches to C. elegans, that
is, they are not HGT candidates.

R39.10 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al.

base, using the above parameters. The results from this second filter were examined and any sequence with a significant
match to a metazoan other than a closely related plant-parasitic nematode was removed from further analysis. An e-value
of 1.0e-10 was the threshold used to declare a match. The remaining sequences provided our final set of candidates for
horizontally transferred genes (Tables 1, 3).

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

chain Monte Carlo analysis used four heated chains and employed a burn-in period of 10,000 cycles, followed by
990,000 additional cycles. Convergence of the Markov chain
was diagnosed by performing two different runs from different initial parameter states. Prior distributions for all parameters were the default distributions incorporated in the
MrBayes software.

Codon usage analysis
The protein alignment of the M. incognita and R. leguminosarum nodL sequences was trimmed such that only identical amino acids remained, and the sequences back-translated,
retaining the correct codon usage. Ten thousand pairs of simulated sequences were generated by independently permuting the homologous codon pairs in the actual data. In other
words, the probability that the ith codon in the first simulated
sequence was assigned the ith codon from the actual M. incognita sequence and the ith codon in the second simulated
sequence was assigned the ith codon from the actual R. leguminosarum sequence was set to 0.5 and the probability that
the ith codon assignments in the simulated sequences were
reversed was also set to 0.5. Codon adaptation indices were
computed for each simulated sequence using the EMBOSS
suite of sequence analysis tools [49].

Phylogenetic analysis of candidates
For each candidate, the protein sequences for the top 15
matches with an e-value of 1.0e-10 or less were extracted from
the BLASTX search against the nr database. If there were not
15 matches with an e-value meeting this criterion, all sequences with e-values lower than 1.0e-10 were selected. Alignments of these sequences with the translated candidate
sequence were constructed with CLUSTALX [50]; improvements to the CLUSTALX alignments were performed manually. Sequences from the same species with more than 95%
identity after alignment were considered possible paralogs
and deemed redundant information for this analysis. Only
one sequence from each of these sets was used in further analysis. Poorly aligned sequences were also discarded.
Distances between aligned proteins were estimated with the
Dayhoff amino-acid replacement model [51]. Tree topologies
were then inferred from these distances via neighbor-joining
[52] and 1,000 non-parametric bootstrap replicates were
used to estimate clade support [53]. Maximum likelihood
analysis produced topologies consistent with the neighborjoining analysis. All phylogenetic reconstructions were performed with the PHYLIP and PAML software packages
[54,55].
Additional analyses of the putative nodL gene were conducted
with Version 3.0b4 of the MrBayes software [56]. For these
analyses, the Jones-Taylor-Thornton model of amino-acid replacement [57] was adopted and variation of replacement
rates among sites was incorporated by a discretized gamma
distribution with four rate categories [58]. Each Markov

Additional data files

The following files are available with the online version of this
article: the e-values of the best matches for the initial
BLASTX searches against bacteria, C. elegans and Drosophila for the WMi dataset (Additional data file 1), together with a
mapping file (Additional data file 2) that gives the MI contig
number associated with each filename; the best match and evalue for the BLASTX search of the WMj dataset against bacteria (Additional data file 3), C. elegans (Additional data file
4) and Drosophila (Additional data file 5); the e-value for the
best match to bacteria, C. elegans and Drosophila resulting
from a TBLASTX search for the NMi dataset (Additional data
file 6), the NMj dataset (Additional data file 7), the NMh dataset (Additional data file 8), where a value of 100 indicates
no match found; a text file with details of the data given in
each of these dataset files (Additional data file 9); the
alignment in Phylip format used to calculate the NodL tree
(Additional data file 10); the alignment in Phylip format of the
original sequences, before any manual adjustments were
made (Additional data file 11); and a key giving the gi number
listed in the alignment for each species (Additional data file
12).

Acknowledgements
We thank M. Burke for his technological support and advice, H. Kishino for
his helpful comments and insights, and M. Dante and J. Martin for
NemaGene clusters. This research was supported by NSF grant DBI0077503 to D.B. J.P.M. was supported by a Helen Hay Whitney/Merck
Postdoctoral Fellowship. E.H.S. and J.L.T. were supported by NSF grant
INT-990934, and J.L.T. was further supported by BIRD of Japan Science and
Technology Corporation. D.B. and J.M. are equity holders of Divergence
Inc.; none of this research was funded by Divergence Inc.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.

5.
6.

Boucher G, Lambshead PJD: Ecological biodiversity of marine
nematodes in samples from temperate, tropical, and deepsea regions. Conserv Biol 1994, 9:1594-1604.
Koenning SR, Overstreet C, Noling JW, Donald PA, Becker JO, Fortnum BA: Survey of crop losses in response to phytoparasitic
nematodes in the United States for 1994. J Nematol 1999,
31:587-618.
Bird DMcK, Koltai H: Plant parasitic nematodes: habitats, hormones, and horizontally-acquired genes. J Plant Growth Regul
2000, 19:183-194.
Blaxter ML, DeLey P, Garey J, Liu LX, Scheldeman P, Vierstraete A,
Vanfletern J, Mackey LY, Dorris M, Frisse LM, et al.: A molecular evolutionary framework for the phylum Nematoda. Nature
1998, 392:71-75.
Jain R, Rivera MC, Lake JA: Horizontal gene transfer among genomes: the complexity hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999,
96:3801-3806.
Lawrence JG: Gene transfer, speciation, and the evolution of

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

7.

9.
10.

12.
13.
14.

16.

18.

19.

21.
22.
23.

25.

26.

28.

29.

36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

44.
45.
46.
47.

48.
49.
50.

51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

information

27.

35.

interactions

24.

34.

refereed research

20.

33.

deposited research

17.

32.

74.
Nematode.net [http://www.nematode.net]
Koltai H, Dhandaydham M, Opperman C, Thomas J, Bird DMcK:
Overlapping plant signal transduction pathways induced by a
parasitic-nematode and a rhizobial endosymbiont. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 2001, 14:1168-1177.
Ochman H, Moran NA: Genes lost and genes found: evolution
of bacterial pathogensis and symbiosis. Science 2001, 292:10961098.
Wood DW, Setubal JC, Kaul R, Monks DE, Kitajima JP, Okura VK,
Zhou Y, Chen L, Wood GE, Almedia Jr NF, et al.: The genome of
the natural genetic engineer Agrobacterium tumefaciens C58.
Science 2001, 294:2317-2323.
Ludwig RA: Physiological roles of glutamine synthetase I and
II in ammonium assimilation in Rhizobium sp. 32H1. J Bacteriol
1980, 141:1209-1216.
Turner SL, Young JPW: The glutamine synthetases of rhizobia:
phylogenetics and evolutionary implications. Mol Biol Evol 2000,
17:309-319.
Bateman A, Birney E, Cerruti L, Durbin R, Etwiller L, Eddy SR, Griffiths-Jones S, Howe KL, Marshall M, Sonnhammer ELL: The Pfam
protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:276-280.
Downie JA, Young JPW: Genome sequencing: the ABC of
symbiosis. Nature 2001, 412:597-598.
Van Rhijn P, Vanderleyden J: The Rhizobium-plant symbiosis.
Microbiol Rev 1995, 59:124-142.
Göttfert M: Regulation and function of rhizobial nodulation
genes. FEMS Microbiol Rev 1993, 10:39-64.
Ditt RF, Nester EW, Comai L: Plant gene expression response
to Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98:10954-10959.
Ray C, Abbott AG, Hussey RS: Trans-splicing of a Meloidogyne
incognita mRNA encoding a putative esophageal gland
protein. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1994, 68:93-101.
Lawrence JG, Ochman H: Amelioration of bacterial genomes:
rates of change and exchange. J Mol Evol 1997, 44:383-397.
Capela D, Barloy-Hubler F, Gouzy J, Bothe G, Ampe F, Batut J, Boistard P, Becker A, Boutry M, Cadieu E, et al.: Analysis of the chromosome sequence of the legume symbiont Sinorhizobium
meliloti strain 1021. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:9877-9882.
Sharp PM, Li W-H: The codon adaptation index - a measure of
directional synonymous codon usage bias, and its potential
applications. Nucleic Acids Res 1987, 15:1281-1295.
Koski LB, Morton RA, Golding GB: Codon bias and base composition are poor indicators of horizontally transferred genes.
Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18:404-412.
Sullivan JT, Ronson CW: Evolution of rhizobia by acquisition of
a 500-kb symbiosis island that integrates into a phe-tRNA
gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:5145-5149.
Wheeler DL, Church DM, Lash AE, Leipe DD, Madden TL, Pontius
JU, Schuler GD, Schriml LM, Tatusova TA, Wagner L, Rapp BA: Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information: 2002 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:13-16.
WU-BLAST [http://blast.wustl.edu]
Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: The European molecular
biology open software suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16:276-277.
Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
Clustal_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple
sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:4876-4882.
Dayhoff MO: Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure. Volume 5 Supplement 3. Washington, DC: National Biomedical Research Foundation
1978.
Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method
for reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406425.
Felsenstein J: Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach
using the bootstrap. Evolution 1985, 39:783-791.
Felsenstein J: PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version
3.6a2. Seattle, WA: Department of Genetics, University of Washington 1993.
Yang Z: PAML: a program package for phylogenetic analysis
by maximum likelihood. Comput Appl Biosci 1997, 13:555-556.
Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of
phylogeny. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
Jones DT, Taylor WR, Thornton JM: The rapid generation of mutation data matrices from protein sequences. Comput Appl

reports

15.

30.
31.

Scholl et al. R39.11

reviews

11.

bacterial genomes. Curr Opin Microbiol 1999, 2:519-523.
Ochman H, Lawrence JG, Groisman EA: Lateral gene transfer and
the nature of bacterial innovation. Nature 2000, 405:299-304.
Dehal P, Satou Y, Campbell RK, Chapman J, Degnan B, De Tomaso A,
Davidson B, Di Gregorio A, Gelpke M, Goodstein DM, et al.: The
draft genome of Ciona intestinalis: insights into chordate and
vertebrate origins. Science 2002, 298:2157-2167.
Andersson JO, Sjögren ÅM, Davis LAM, Embley TM, Roger AJ: Phylogenetic analyses of diplomonad genes reveal frequent lateral gene transfers affecting eukaryotes. Curr Biol 2003, 13:94-104.
Stephens RS, Kalman S, Lammel C, Fan J, Marathe R, Aravind L, Mitchell W, Olinger L, Tatusov RL, Zhao Q: Genome sequence of an
obligate intracellular pathogen of humans: Chlamydia
trachomatis. Science 1998, 282:754-759.
Wolf YI, Aravind L, Koonin EV: Rickettsiae and Chlamydiae: evidence of horizontal gene transfer and gene exchange. Trends
Genet 1999, 15:173-175.
Royo J, Gimez E, Hueros G: CMP-KDO synthetase: A plant gene
borrowed from Gram-negative eubacteria. Trends Genet 2000,
16:432-433.
Lange BM, Rujan T, Martin W, Croteau R: Isoprenoid biosynthesis:
the evolution of two ancient and distinct pathways across
genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:13172-13177.
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium: Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature 2001,
409:860-921.
Brinkman FSL, Blanchard JL, Cherkasov A, Av-Gay Y, Brunham RC,
Fernandez RC, Finlay BB, Otto SP, Ouellette BFF, Keeling PJ, et al.: Evidence that plant-like genes in Chlamydia species reflect an
ancestral relationship between Chlamydiaceae, cyanobacteria, and the choloroplast. Genome Res 2002, 12:1159-1167.
Stanhope MJ, Lupas A, Italia MJ, Koretke KK, Volker C, Brown JR:
Phylogenetic analyses do not support horizontal gene transfers from bacteria to vertebrates. Nature 2001, 411:940-944.
Popeijus H, Overmars H, Jones J, Blok V, Goverse A, Helder J, Schots
A, Bakker J, Smant G: Degradation of plant cell walls by a
nematode. Nature 2000, 406:36-37.
Smant G, Stokkermans JPWG, Yan Y, De Boer JM, Baum TJ, Wang X,
Hussey RS, Gommers FJ, Henrissat B, et al.: Endogenous cellulases
in animals: Isolation of β-1,4-endoglucanase genes from two
species of plant-parasitic cyst nematodes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1998, 95:4906-4911.
Yan Y, Smant G, Stokkermans J, Qin L, Helder J, Baum T, Schots A,
Davis E: Genomic organization of four β-1,4-endoglucanase
genes in plant-parasitic cyst nematodes and its evolutionary
implications. Gene 1998, 220:61-70.
Lambert KN, Allen KD, Sussex IM: Cloning and characterization
of an esophageal-gland-specific chorismate mutase from the
phytoparasitic nematode Meloidogyne javanica. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 1999, 12:328-336.
Jaubert S, Laffaire J-B, Abad P, Rosso M-N: A polygalacturonase of
animal origin isolated from the root-knot nematode Meloidogyne incognita. FEBS Lett 2002, 522:109-112.
McCarter JP, Abad P, Jones J, Bird DMcK: Rapid gene discovery in
plant parasitic nematodes via expressed sequence tags.
Nematology 2000, 2:719-731.
Veronico P, Jones J, Di Vito M, De Giorgi C: Horizontal transfer
of a bacterial gene involved in polyglutamate biosynthesis to
the plant-parasitic nematode Meloidogyne artiellia. FEBS Lett
2001, 508:470-474.
Aguinaldo AM, Turbeville JM, Linford LS, Rivera MC, Garey JR, Raff
RA, Lake JA: Evidence for a clade of nematodes, arthropods
and other moulting animals. Nature 1997, 387:489-493.
Mallatt J, Winchell CJ: Testing the new animal phylogeny: first
use of combined large-subunit and small-subunit rRNA gene
sequences to classify the protostomes. Mol Biol Evol 2002,
19:289-301.
Hedges SB: The origin and evolution of model organisms. Nat
Rev Genet 2002, 3:838-849.
Blair JE, Ikeo K, Gojobori T, Hedges SB: The evolutionary position
of nematodes. BMC Evol Biol 2002, 2:7.
McCarter JP, Mitreva MD, Martin J, Dante M, Wylie T, Rao U, Pape
D, Bowers Y, Theising B, Murphy C, et al.: Analysis and functional
classification of transcripts from the root-knot nematode
Meloidogyne incognita. Genome Biol 2003, 4:R26.
McCarter JP, Clifton SW, Bird DMcK, Waterston R: Nematode
gene sequences; Update for June 2002. J Nematol 2002, 34:71-

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

comment

8.

Genome Biology 2003,

R39.12 Genome Biology 2003,

58.
59.

Volume 4, Issue 6, Article R39

Scholl et al.

Biosci 1992, 8:275-282.
Yang Z: Maximum likelihood phylogenetic estimation from
DNA sequences with variable rates over sites: approximate
methods J Mol Evol 1994, 39:306-314.
Tandingan-De Ley I, De Ley P, Vierstraete A, Karssen G, Moens M,
Vanfleteren J: Phylogenetic analyses of Meloidogyne small subunit rDNA. J Nematol 2002, 34:319-327.

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R39

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/6/R39

</pre>
</body>
</html>
