<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The role of actin isoforms in somatic embryogenesis in Norway spruce</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-89"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Katezina Schwarzerov_, Zuzana Vondr_kov_, Luk__ Fischer, Petra Boz_kov_, Erica Bellinvia, Katezina Eli__ov_, Lenka Havelkov_, Jindzi_ka Fi_erov_, Martin V_gner, Zden_k Opatrn_"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

The role of actin isoforms in somatic
embryogenesis in Norway spruce
Research article

Kateřina Schwarzerová†1, Zuzana Vondráková†2, Lukáš Fischer†1, Petra Boříková1, Erica Bellinvia1, Kateřina Eliášová2,
Lenka Havelková1, Jindřiška Fišerová1,3, Martin Vágner2 and Zdenek Opatrný*1

Abstract
Background: Somatic embryogenesis in spruce is a process of high importance for biotechnology, yet it comprises of
orchestrated series of events whose cellular and molecular details are not well understood. In this study, we examined
the role of actin cytoskeleton during somatic embryogenesis in Norway spruce line AFO 541 by means of anti-actin
drugs.
Results: Application of low doses (50-100 nM) of latrunculin B (Lat B) during the maturation of somatic embryos
predominantly killed suspensor cells while leaving the cells in meristematic centres alive, indicating differential
sensitivity of actin in the two cell types. The treatment resulted in faster development of more advanced embryos into
mature somatic embryos and elimination of insufficiently developed ones. In searching for the cause of the differential
actin sensitivity of the two cell types, we analysed the composition of actin isoforms in the culture and isolated four
spruce actin genes. Analysis of their expression during embryo maturation revealed that one actin isoform was
expressed constitutively in both cell types, whereas three actin isoforms were expressed predominantly in suspensor
cells and their expression declined during the maturation. The expression decline was greatly enhanced by Lat B
treatment. Sequence analysis revealed amino-acid substitutions in the Lat B-binding site in one of the suspensorspecific actin isoforms, which may result in a different binding affinity for Lat B.
Conclusions: We show that manipulating actin in specific cell types in somatic embryos using Lat B treatment
accelerated and even synchronized the development of somatic embryos and may be of practical use in
biotechnology.
Background
Embryogenesis in multicellular organisms comprises
orchestrated processes that determine the spatio-temporal cell positioning in the developing embryo. In higher
plants, which lack active cell movement, the structure
and position of individual tissues are determined solely
by the orientation of cell division, cell growth and developmentally regulated programmed cell death (PCD). Various cytoskeletal structures have been repeatedly
demonstrated to play a key role in all these processes.
Actin is a ubiquitous component of all eukaryotic cells.
In plants, actin cytoskeleton participates in the definition
of cell polarity and orientation of cell division, cell elonga* Correspondence: opat@natur.cuni.cz
1

Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Science, Department of Plant
Physiology, Viničná 5, CZ 12844 Prague 2, Czech Republic
† Contributed equally
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

tion, cell wall development, transport processes, positioning of membrane receptors (for reviews see [1]), and
in PCD [2,3]. To fulfil such a variety of specific roles, the
arrangement and dynamics of actin cytoskeleton must be
precisely regulated, including the composition of actin
isoforms as well as the composition and activity of associated proteins. Multiple genes encoding actin isoforms,
which are more or less specifically expressed in particular
tissues or organs, have appeared during plant evolution
[4-7]. Studies of actin gene expression in Arabidopsis
thaliana have led to their subdivision into vegetative and
reproductive classes, which probably diverged early in
land plant evolution [6-8]. The apparent functional nonequivalence of actin isoforms has been documented not
only by their different and characteristic developmental
expression profiles but also by genetic manipulation. In
Arabidopsis, ectopic expression of a reproductive actin
gene under the control of a vegetative actin promoter

© 2010 Schwarzerová et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Com-

BioMed Central mons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

severely altered organ morphology and caused dwarfism
[9]. On the other hand, some actins can complement each
other in their biological role [10] although elimination or
mutation of other actin genes can lead to fatal phenotypes.
Zygotic embryogenesis represents a complex developmental process that includes all the morphogenic activities mentioned above - cell division, cell growth and
differentiation as well as PCD. Analyses of early zygotic
embryogenesis are technically complicated by the fact
that zygotic embryos normally develop under several tissue layers in planta. Therefore, an alternative experimental system of somatic embryogenesis (SE) in vitro is
commonly used for this purpose [11-13]. SE of conifers
has also attracted much attention in recent years, being
the promising technology for clonal propagation and
breeding programs in forestry [14,15]. The principal
stages of conifer somatic embryo development have been
characterised according to their similarity to corresponding developmental stages in zygotic embryos [16,17].
Generally, conifer SE lines consist of two distinct cell
types: isodiametric cells of meristematic centres ("embryonal heads") containing dense cytoplasm and long, vacuolated suspensor cells [16].
The role of the cytoskeleton in the formation of somatic
embryos in Picea abies was demonstrated by Smertenko
et al. [18]. The authors showed that the cytoskeleton
organization differed in meristematic and suspensor cells
and that the microtubule-associated protein MAP65
played a role in the onset of early embryo development.
They also observed that the application of anti-actin
drugs latrunculin B (Lat B) and cytochalasin D (Cyt D)
prevented embryo formation, most probably via the inhibition of developmentally regulated PCD in suspensor
cells [2]. However, they found no pronounced differences
in Lat B and Cyt D effects and no positive impact on the
SE process was reported. Till now, more detailed cytological and molecular analysis of the behaviour of both
microtubular and actin cytoskeleton during the embryogenic process in SE lines was missing.
Based on our previous studies on the mechanisms of SE
regulations in conifers [17] we hypothesised that actin
cytoskeleton may play a role in developmental defects in
particular SE conifer lines. In this study, using Norway
spruce embryogenic line AFO 541 we found three actin
isoforms that were expressed in a cell type-specific manner. Application of the anti-actin drug latrunculin B (Lat
B) to embryogenic cells in order to study the effect of
actin depolymerization on somatic embryogenesis
revealed that the treatment promoted the development of
high-quality embryos while suppressing the formation of
non-mature embryos. The mechanism of this effect is
explained by selective elimination of suspensors due to

Page 2 of 13

higher actin sensitivity towards Lat B in suspensor cells
relative to meristematic cells.

Results
Embryogenesis in Norway spruce line AFO 541 cultured on
proliferation and maturation media

Embryogenic suspensor mass (ESM) cultured continuously on proliferation media consisted of single early
somatic embryos, free suspensor cells and polyembryogenic complexes. Polyembryogenic complexes and
somatic embryos consisted of long suspensor cells connected with meristematic centres. During the proliferation phase, new embryogenic structures emerged and
older structures were degraded. Further development of
ESM to mature embryos was induced by transfer onto
maturation media devoid of auxin and cytokinins but
supplemented with abscisic acid. The meristematic centres gradually increased and individual embryos were
released from polyembryogenic complexes. The maturation process was somewhat asynchronous so that the cultures consisted of embryos at various stages of
development and quality. The suspensors were gradually
degraded during the first three weeks of maturation.
Their cytoplasm became granular and the cells eventually
died, so that the frequency of suspensor cells connected
to individual meristematic centres decreased (Figure 1A,
C-E, I, J). After four weeks of maturation, only the largest
embryos with distinct cotyledons were fully developed.
Mature cotyledonary embryos generally lacked suspensors.
Latrunculin B accelerates the maturation of somatic
embryos and positively selects well-developed embryos

To examine the role of actin cytoskeleton in the process
of somatic embryogenesis, we applied the actin depolymerising drug latrunculin B (Lat B) either to proliferation or maturation cultures. The extent and the speed of
the response were dose-dependent. In general, broad
concentration scale of Lat B (1, 10, 25, 50, 100, 200 nM)
was tested. In the proliferating cultures, Lat B at the concentration of 1 nM had no effect, but 10 nM Lat B
induced cell death of suspensor cells. Progressive death of
the suspensors was followed by disintegration of the meristematic centres and subsequent death of their cells. At
100-200 nM concentrations, Lat B was clearly lethal (data
not shown).
When applied to maturation cultures, 50-100 nM Lat B
caused disintegration of suspensors already after one
week of exposure to the drug (Figure 1B, compare with
control in Figure 1A). After two weeks, the suspensor
cells of untreated culture were large, elongated, and
showed high viability (Figure 1C-E), whereas the suspensor cells in the Lat B treatment clearly showed decreased
viability (Figure 1F, G). The surviving suspensor cells

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Phenotype and viability of Norway spruce somatic embryos during maturation on media containing latrunculin B. Vital staining of
ESM with trypan blue (A, B) or with fluorescein diacetate (D, E, G, H, I-L). (A, B) ESM maturing for one week on a control medium (A) or a medium supplemented with 50 nM Lat B (B). Suspensors in controls consist of long viable cells (A), whereas most suspensor cells are dead in embryos maturing
in the presence of Lat B (B). (C-H) ESM maturing for two weeks on a control medium (C-E) or a medium containing 50 nM Lat B (F-H). Long viable cells
form long suspensors in the controls (D, E), whereas suspensors in the presence of Lat B consist of few short cells (G, H). Fluorescein diacetate staining
revealed numerous granules in the cytoplasm of these short cells (arrows in H), indicating dying cells. (I-L) Three weeks of maturation. Cotyledons have
developed in both treatments (I, K). A high degree of suspensor cell degradation is visible in the controls (J) and only few suspensor cells remain in
embryos maturing in the presence of 50 nM Lat B (L). Scale bars, 200 μm.

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

were short, with granular cytoplasm indicative of cell
death (Figure 1G, H). Interestingly, the meristematic cells
of the embryos were not directly influenced by the drug;
they remained fully viable and underwent further development (Figure 1D, G). After three weeks, embryos with
differentiated cotyledons were seen in both controls and
the Lat B treatments, and the cells remained viable (Figure 1I-L). In contrast to the controls, the suspensors of
embryos treated with Lat B were almost completely disintegrated (Figure 1L).
By the end of four weeks of maturation, the control cultures consisted of a mixture of embryos at various stages
of differentiation (Figure 2A, C). Surprisingly, development of embryos in the presence of Lat B was slightly
faster compared with untreated controls (Figure 2A, B).
Though the Lat B-treated culture produced significantly
fewer embryos, the proportion of well-developed/
matured ones increased by nearly twice under 100 nm
Lat B (table in Figure 2C), when we used the embryo
length as a simple substitutional criterion of embryo
maturity (embryos above 2.5 mm were considered as
matured ones; see inset in Fig. 2C and details in Methods). The effect of 50 nM LatB was less prominent in
both aspects - the total number of embryos was less
reduced, but simultaneously the proportion of matured
embryos increased only slightly. The embryos that
matured in the presence of Lat B showed no morphological abnormalities, were fully viable and germinated normally (Figure 2D).
Various time points of Lat B addition to maturating
embryos were tested; the addition at the beginning of
maturation was the most effective, applications in the
second week of maturation were less effective and no
effect on the embryo yield and maturity was observed
when Lat B was applied at the third and forth week of
maturation (data not shown).
Actin cytoskeleton in suspensor cells is distinctly sensitive
to latrunculin B

Actin cytoskeleton in meristematic cells normally consisted of dense, randomly oriented actin network (Figure
3C, G) whereas suspensor cells showed long, thick actin
cables oriented longitudinally to the cell axis accompanied by transversely oriented thinner actin filaments (Figure 3B, J). The organization of actin cytoskeleton
remained unchanged in ESM cultivated on proliferation
or maturation media for 4 or 10 days, and no specific
reorganization of actin cytoskeleton was observed at the
onset of maturation. During maturation in the presence
of 50 nM Lat B, actin cytoskeleton in the suspensor cells
was largely degraded, forming shorter randomly oriented
polymers (Figure 3E), although the effect was apparently
milder in the meristematic cells. Though the actin filaments appeared shorter in the presence of Lat B than

Page 4 of 13

those in the controls (compare Figure 3C and 3F), they
still formed a dense network (Figure 3F). Treatment with
the solvent DMSO alone had no detectable effect on actin
organization (data not shown).
To analyze the immediate effects of Lat B on actin
cytoskeleton, we cultivated embryos on normal maturation media for four days and then applied various concentrations of Lat B for one hour. The short treatment using
50 nM Lat B induced only minor changes in actin organization in meristematic cells, leaving a control-like dense
network of filaments (Figure 3H, compare with control in
Figure 3G). However, the same treatment resulted in
severe fragmentation of the long actin cables in the suspensor cells (Figure 3K, compare with control 3J). Treatment with 200 nM Lat B dramatically disrupted actin
organisation in both the suspensor and the meristematic
cells. Actin cables in suspensor cells were almost completely fragmented into short, randomly oriented rods
(Figure 3L), and actin filaments in meristematic cells were
fragmented into shorter bundles (Figure 3I) or even fully
depolymerized.
Multiple actin isoforms are expressed in the Norway spruce
line AFO 541

Because our results showed that the sensitivity of actin
cytoskeleton to Lat B is different between meristematic
and suspensor cells in the embryogenic line, we
embarked on analyzing the expression of actin genes as a
possible cause. The number of spruce gene sequences in
public databases is very limited, therefore we first
searched for additional actin genes using RT-PCR and
either degenerate primers or specific primers designed
according to actin-encoding ESTs from Pinus taeda. In
this way four new actin genes, three complete and one
truncated, were isolated from the Norway spruce (Picea
abies) line AFO 541 and named Pa1-4 (NCBI Accession
numbers FJ869868-FJ869871). We then analyzed the
expression levels of these four actin isoforms by semiquantitative RT-PCR using either RNA prepared from
maturing ESM that contained both meristematic centres
and suspensor cells, or RNA prepared from a purified
fraction that contained meristematic centres alone. The
expression pattern revealed that the levels of isoforms
Pa2, Pa3 and Pa4 in the non-fractionated ESM were distinctly higher than those in the purified fraction of meristematic centres (Figure 4). This result clearly indicates
that the expression of the isoforms Pa2, 3 and 4 predominated in suspensor cells, whereas the isoform Pa1 was
expressed more or less equally in both cell types.
Expression of the four actin isoforms was further analyzed in the non-fractionated ESM on day 3, 5, 7 and 10 of
maturation on control media or media with the addition
of 100 nM Lat B. In the controls, transcription of isoforms Pa1 and Pa2 slightly decreased, while transcription

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

Page 5 of 13

Figure 2 Effect of latrunculin B on the yield and quality of somatic embryos. (A, B) ESM after four weeks of maturation. Numerous embryos at
various stages of development formed in the controls (A), whereas fewer uniform embryos at advanced developmental stage formed in the presence
of 100 nM Lat B (B). (C) Comparison between the number of embryos and their length after four weeks of maturation in the controls or on media
containing various Lat B concentrations. Each point in the graph corresponds to one embryo and all embryos in each variant were arranged descending by size. The table shows percentage representation of embryos longer and shorter than 2.5 mm from the experiment shown in the graph (see
Methods for details on the yield evaluation). The embryo length was established as a simple criterion of embryo maturity (see inset), where the embryo
length 2.5 mm was considered as the minimal length for matured embryos. (D) Germination of somatic embryos for 2 weeks. Embryos that had matured in the presence of Lat B had a high ability to germinate. Scale bars are 2 mm (A, B) or 5 mm (D).

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

Page 6 of 13

Figure 3 Confocal images of actin cytoskeleton stained with rhodamine-phalloidin. ESM after two weeks of maturation on control media (A-C)
or media supplemented with 50 nM Lat B (D-F). Images show actin in polyembryogenic complexes (A) and in separated embryos (D) consisting of
suspensor cells (B, E) and meristematic centers (C, F). (G-L) ESM after four days maturation on control media followed by a short (1 hour) treatment
with Lat B. Actin in meristematic cells (G) and suspensor cells (J) in the controls. Actin in meristematic cells following a 1-hour treatment with 50 nM
(H) or 200 nM Lat B (I). Actin in suspensor cells following a 1-hour treatment with 50 nM (K) or 200 nM Lat B (L). Scale bars are 100 μm (A, D) and 30 μm
(B, C, E, F, G-L).

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

Page 7 of 13

Phylogenetic analysis reveals that gymnosperm and
angiosperm actins form distinct sub-families

The protein sequences of the four new actin isoforms
from the Norway spruce (Picea abies) line AFO 541 were
compared with representative actin sequences from
another gymnosperm, Pinus taeda, the angiosperms Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa, and the moss Physcomitrella patens (Additional file 1) using phylogenetic
analysis (Figure 6). The phylogenetic tree revealed that all
four newly identified Norway spruce genes formed pairs
of orthologues with genes from the phylogenetically most
closely related species Pinus taeda (grey rectangles in
Figure 6). Surprisingly, the pair of Norway spruce isoform
Pa4 and pine isoform Pt1 clustered in a branch together
with actins from the moss Physcomitrella patens. The
above-mentioned gymnosperm and moss actins clustered together with actins of the angiosperms Arabidopsis
thaliana and Oryza sativa, whereas the rest of Pinus
taeda isoforms (Pt4, 5, 8, 9 and 10) formed a clearly separated branch (grey oval in Figure 6). No orthologues of
these genes were isolated in our experiments with the
Norway spruce line AFO 541 despite repeated attempts
using either specific or degenerated primers designed
according to the Pinus taeda isoforms.
Figure 4 Expression of actin isoforms in control ESM and isolated
embryos determined by semiquantitative RT-PCR. Transcript levels
in non-fractionated ESM culture (ESM) and in isolated embryos (E) after
two weeks of maturation on control media. EF, gene for elongation factor ef1α (internal standard); Pa1-4, Picea abies actin isoforms 1-4. For details see Material and Methods and Results.

of isoforms Pa3 and Pa4 did not change significantly. In
the presence of Lat B, in contrast, transcription of the
suspensor-specific actin isoforms Pa2, Pa3 and Pa4
showed a distinct, gradual decline, while the transcript
level of Pa1 remained more or less unchanged (Figure 5).

Actin isoform Pa3 differs in the sequence of Latrunculin Bbinding domain

In an effort to identify the source of the apparent high
sensitivity of the suspensor actin filaments to Lat B, we
compared predicted amino acid sequences of suspensorspecific isoforms Pa2, Pa3 and Pa4 with that of the
latrunculin-binding region (from T186 to R210) of rabbit
actin [19]. Although the amino acids directly responsible
for the interaction with latrunculin, threonin T186 and
arginin R210, are apparently conserved in all four Norway
spruce isoforms, a few differences were detected in the
intervening region in the Pa3 and Pa4 isoforms (Figure
7). Most of the differences represent substitutions of
amino acids with similar chemical properties, such as,
methionin→alanin, serine→threonin, or phenylalanin→leucin. However, the substitution of aspartic acid
D187 to alanin in Pa3 necessarily disabled the formation
of the salt bridge between the aspartate D187 and arginin
R206 (Figure 7), which is important for stabilization of
the tertiary structure of actin and Lat B binding [19].

Discussion
Figure 5 Expression of actin isoforms during maturation in the
presence of Lat B as determined by semiquantitative RT-PCR.
Transcript levels in non-fractionated ESM cultures were monitored
during 10-days maturation on control media or media with the addition of 100 nM Lat B. EF, gene for elongation factor ef1α (internal standard); Pa1-4, Picea abies actin isoforms 1-4. The four columns of bands
in each treatment represent samples taken after 3, 5, 7 and 10 days of
maturation.

Expression of actin isoforms is regulated during somatic
embryo development

Actin is encoded by large gene families in both metazoans
and plants. In plants the number of family members
reaches dozens in soybean, tobacco, potato, rice or longpole pine [5,6,20] or even more than 100 members in
petunia [21]. In Arabidopsis, the actin family consists of

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

Page 8 of 13

Figure 6 Rooted phylogenetic trees of actin genes. The tree was constructed by (A) the maximal likelihood method using Phylip software and (B)
the neighbour joining method using Treecon software. Pairs of orthologous genes from Norway spruce AFO 541 (Picea abies) and Pinus taeda are highlighted in grey rectangles. The grey ellipse highlights a branch of Pinus taeda genes with no orthologues isolated from the Norway spruce AFO 541.
At, Arabidopsis thaliana; Os, Oryza sativa; Pa, Picea abies; Pp, Physcomitrella patens; Pt, Pinus taeda; Cr, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Actin isoform numbers
match the gene annotations in the case of Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa; isoform labelling in other species is novel.

eight genes and two pseudogenes. Phylogenetic analyses
of actin isoforms in Arabidopsis have indicated their
diversification into two clusters that are preferentially
expressed in either vegetative or generative organs [6,7,9].
Although the causality between the expression pattern
and sequence similarity remains unclear, it is apparent
that most individual isoforms are not functionally equivalent. The differences in actin sequences are responsible
for the characteristic features of either monomeric actin
or actin filaments, including interactions with other proteins. Individual actin genes have probably evolved along
with other interacting proteins in specific tissues and
organs, and therefore their sequence features are tightly
interconnected with specific expression levels and spatiotemporal patterns. This was clearly demonstrated by
introducing the generative ACT 1 gene under the control
of the vegetative ACT2 promoter into transgenic Arabidopsis, which resulted in a significantly increased pool of
G-actin, reduced organ size, delayed flowering, and

caused dwarfism and other phenotypic changes [9]. Pairs
of the most related actin genes in Arabidopsis (e.g. ACT1
and 3, ACT2 and 8, ACT4 and 12) encode identical proteins or proteins that differ in only a single amino-acid
residue. In spite of these tiny structural differences, these
genes have been maintained in the genome for 30-60 millions years [6,7], indicating that their functional differences and specific expression patterns are regulated
independently for the two genes in each pair.
No detailed data are available either in Arabidopsis or
any other plant species about differential expression of
individual actin isoforms during embryo development
that would be comparable with, for example, the documented changes in actin expression during pollen maturation and germination [22,23]. In Arabidopsis, actin
genes ACT1, ACT3 and ACT11 were found to be related
to zygotic embryogenesis [7]. However, the expression
patterns of these "reproductive actin" genes are not limited to embryos because ACT1 and ACT3 are also

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

Figure 7 Multiple alignments of latrunculin-binding region of a
rabbit actin and four spruce actin isoforms. Threonin T186 and arginin R210 directly binding latrunculin are framed with rectangles; aspartic acid D187 and arginin R206 forming a salt bridge (indicated by
arrows) are highlighted in dark gray; a loop moving under Lat B binding is in light gray, amino acid exchanges between the rabbit actin sequence and spruce isoforms are in bold. The amino-acid exchange
D187→A187 in isoform 3, hypothetically responsible for altered latrunculin binding, is underlined.

expressed in ovules, mature pollen and organ primordia,
and ACT11 is also expressed in pollen, carpel, seeds and
siliques. Most likely the specific expression pattern of
actin isoforms is related to specific interactions with
actin-associated regulatory proteins in the respective tissues.
In our study of actin functions in somatic embryogenesis in the Norway spruce line AFO 541 we succeeded to
identify four new actin genes. Considering the generally
high number of actin genes in plants, and almost twice as
many actin genes that we have found in the sequence
database of Pinus taeda, we assume that the four genes
do not represent the full spectrum of actins in spruce.
Our phylogenetic analysis of actin sequences from Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, Pinus taeda, Physcomitrella patens and the four newly identified spruce
isoforms (Figure 6) revealed that the four isoforms cluster
together with angiosperm actins and those from Physcomitrella patens. The cluster of Pinus taeda isoforms
Pt4, 5, 8, 9 and 10 probably represents a more ancient
group of actins that might be preferentially expressed in
vegetative organs.
The expression of the spruce embryonic actin isoforms
was to some extent developmentally regulated. Our
results clearly indicated that the expression of Pa2, Pa3
and Pa4 predominated in suspensor cells when compared
with meristematic cells, whereas Pa1 was expressed more
or less equally in both cell types. Differential expression
of the four actin isoforms in the suspensor cells may be
related to their unique developmental program based on
the necessity of rapid polar growth and programmed cell
death fate, contrasting with the continuous formative cell
divisions in the meristematic centres.
Latrunculin B preferentially blocks suspensor development

The effects of key actin depolymerizing drugs on somatic
embryogenesis of Picea abies were studied by Binarová et

Page 9 of 13

al. [24]. The authors described a relatively high resistance
of the thick actin filaments in suspensor cells towards
cytochalasin B. Baluška et al. [25] showed that treatment
with 0.2-5 μM Lat B impaired cell elongation, which
resulted in the formation of short suspensors and barrelshaped late somatic embryos, but the development of the
embryos was reported to occur normally. Smertenko et
al. [18] investigated the effect of either 100 nM Lat B or 5
μM cytochalasin D on the maturation of spruce embryogenic lines. The application of both drugs resulted in
gradual destruction of actin cytoskeleton in all cell types,
and either caused a reversion of the cultures back to a
proembryonic phenotype or was completely lethal [18].
We observed similar devastating effects of Lat B concentrations above 200 nM, which almost completely arrested
the maturation process. In contrast, however, 50-100 nM
Lat B did not negatively affect the development of highquality embryos, it only selectively inhibited the formation and growth of suspensors and initiated or accelerated their gradual destruction as shown by cytological
analysis (Figure 3). Moreover, the expression of suspensor-specific actin isoforms markedly decreased during
the maturation on media supplemented with Lat B, further indicating preferential degradation of the suspensor
cells. In contrast to the effect of low concentrations of Lat
B, application of cytochalasin D at any concentration
either exhibited no cytological/morphological effect
(concentrations 0.05 - 0.1 μM) or resulted in a gradual
non-specific disintegration and death of both suspensor
and meristematic cells (concentrations 0.5 - 2 μM). A
study on more detailed description of the morphoregulatory effect of these two anti-actin drugs on spruce AFO
451 SE line and several fir SE lines is in preparation (Vondráková et al., unpublished results).
A question arises why the Lat B effect was selectively
destructive towards the suspensor cells. The mode of
action of Lat B is based on binding to actin monomers,
thus preventing their polymerization [19]. In contrast,
cytochalasin D blocks the formation of actin filaments
through binding to their plus ends [26]. Considering that
Lat B binds directly to actin monomers, we assume that
the interaction between Lat B and actin may be isoformspecific. This explanation is consistent with our finding
that one of the suspensor-specific actin isoforms, Pa3,
contains an amino-acid substitution D187A, which prevents the formation of a salt bridge important for the
interaction with Lat B [19]. Altered affinity of Pa3 for Lat
B may influence the actin composition in F-actin pool
and the dynamics of polymerisation. Such changes may
lead to the accelerated death of suspensor cells, which is
generally regarded as a prerequisite for normal maturation of both somatic and zygotic embryos [27,28]. In
summary, the selective degradation of suspensor cells

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

probably resulted primarily from their ontogenetic predetermination to PCD that was further accelerated by
either altered actin dynamics or specific effects related to
the altered interaction of Pa3 isoform with Lat B. An
alternative explanation based on non-specific alteration
of actin dynamics or different permeability of Lat B into
the two cell types cannot be excluded.
The ability of Lat B to induce PCD in the SE conifer
lines has been previously demonstrated by Smertenko et
al. [18] and further studied by Bozhkov et al. [2]. In both
studies the role of apoptosis-like mechanisms was demonstrated. Thomas et al. [3] convincingly documented
the ability of Lat B to induce apoptosis-like PCD associated with caspase-3-like activity in Papaver rhoeas pollen
grains. In our experiments, the detection of PCD-related
DNA fragmentation using either TUNEL test or electrophoretic detection of DNA laddering in developing
embryos was negative.
Degradation of suspensors in early phases of maturation
promotes faster development of high-quality embryos

Early somatic embryos in the proliferating Norway
spruce line AFO 541 developed in an asynchronous manner. Subsequently, upon transfer to maturation media,
embryos in various developmental stages commenced the
process of maturation. Only embryos in advanced developmental stages were capable of further development to
mature cotyledonary embryos in the four weeks, whereas
all other embryos were malformed or arrested in their
maturation. As Lat B induced selective degradation of
suspensors in embryos at all developmental stages,
somatic embryos in the earliest developmental stages
containing only small meristematic centres were incapable of further development without functional suspensors
and died together with the suspensor cells. In contrast,
degradation of suspensors accelerated the development
of embryos at later developmental stages. The elimination of the earliest embryos under Lat B treatment
resulted in a lower total yield. However, embryos of high
quality were preferentially formed at the end of maturation, fully capable of further development. Lat B treatment may thus replace manual sorting of mature
embryos, which is a limiting factor in mechanized production of artificial seed. Our results thus provide not
only academic, but potentially also practical benefit concerning application of Lat B in conifer micropropagation.

Conclusions
Our results demonstrated that somatic embryo development is accompanied with spatio-temporally regulated
expression of at least four actin genes. Actin cytoskeleton
in the two main cell types of the embryogenic cultures
(meristematic and suspensor cells) differed in architec-

Page 10 of 13

ture and sensitivity to actin depolymerising drug Lat B.
Lat B treatment led to preferential block of suspensor
development. The degradation of suspensors in early
phases of the maturation accelerated the development of
high-quality embryos and caused the disintegration of
less developed ones.

Methods
Embryogenic culture of Picea abies L. (Karst.), genotype
AFO 541 (AFOCEL, France) was used in all experiments
and cultured as follows.
Somatic embryogenesis
Proliferation phase cultivation conditions

The culture was grown on GD media according to Gupta
and Durzan [29], solidified with 0.75% agar (SigmaAldrich, Steinheim, Germany). The pH was adjusted to
5.8 prior to autoclaving. This medium was supplemented
with 0.21 mM cefotaxime (Sefotak, Valeant Czech
Pharma, Prague, Czech Republic), 5 μM 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), 2 μM kinetin, 2 μM 6-benzylamino purine (BAP) and 30 g/l sucrose (Duchefa, Haarlem,
The Netherlands). All phytohormones and organic components except sucrose were diluted separately. The solutions were filter-sterilised and added to cooled autoclaved
media. The embryogenic cultures were maintained by
weekly subculturing into Magenta vessels (Magenta corporation, Chicago, Illinois) containing 40 ml of fresh
medium. Cultures were kept in darkness at 24 ± 1°C.
Maturation phase cultivation conditions

In order to initiate the maturation phase, the cytokinins
and auxin in the liquid GD medium were substituted with
20 μM abscisic acid (ABA, Sigma-Aldrich) and 3.75%
polyethylene glycol 4000 (PEG, Sigma-Aldrich). The PEG
solution was autoclaved separately and added to the
medium after autoclaving. During maturation the cultures were subcultured twice onto fresh medium of the
same composition in Magenta vessels with membrane
rafts (Osmotek, Rehovot, Israel). The subcultivating
interval was 1 week. Cultures were kept in darkness at 24
± 1°C for 4 weeks.
Desiccation

After four weeks of maturation, fully developed embryos
were selected and desiccated. The embryos were carefully
transferred onto dry paper in small Petri dishes (3 cm in
diameter). These open dishes were placed into large Petri
dishes (18 cm in diameter) with several paper layers wetted with sterile water (100% humidity). The dishes were
covered with lids, sealed with parafilm, and kept under a
light regime of 12 hours of light (PPFD approximately 1525 μmol m-2 s-1, daylight fluorescent tubes; Osram, Wintherthur, Switzerland) and 12 hours of darkness, at 20 ±
1°C for 3 weeks.

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

Germination

Desiccated embryos were transferred into Magenta vessels filled with 40 ml of 1/4 strength GD medium without
phytohormones but supplemented with 0.5% sucrose and
0.4% active charcoal (Duchefa), pH 5.8. Dishes with
embryos were placed in a cultivation room with light
regime of 12 hours of light (PPFD approximately 50 μmol
m-2 s-1, daylight fluorescent tubes; Osram) and 12 hours
of darkness, at 24 ± 1°C for 2 weeks.

Page 11 of 13

tures and those treated with 0.01% (v/v) DMSO were
used as controls.
Viability assay

Cell viability was assessed using fluorescein diacetate
(FDA, Sigma-Aldrich) staining according to the method
of Widholm [31]. Stock solution of FDA in acetone (2 mg/
ml) was freshly diluted with water to 0.02% (w/v) concentration, and 20 μl of this solution were mixed on a microscope slide with ESM resuspended in culture medium.

Evaluation of embryogenesis

The structure and appearance of the embryogenic suspensor mass (ESM) was evaluated during the proliferation and maturation phases. Changes induced by the
transfer of the ESM from proliferation to maturation
media and to media supplemented with latrunculin B
(Lat B) were recorded after one and two weeks. The ESM
material was placed on a microscopic slide, mixed with
one drop of 0.04% trypan blue (Sigma-Aldrich), a cover
glass was placed onto the ESM after 2 minutes of exposure, and the dye was rinsed out with distilled water. The
preparations were examined using Zeiss Jenaval transmission light microscope. For observation of later stages
of maturation, we used Nikon SMZ 1500 stereomicroscope. Images of four-week-old somatic embryos and
emblings after two weeks of germination were recorded
using Nikon DS-5M digital camera. All images were processed using the computer image analysis system Lucia G,
version 5 (Laboratory Imaging, Prague, Czech Republic).
The yield of embryos after four weeks of maturation
was evaluated using 10 clusters of embryogenic culture in
each variant. Each cluster was spread in 2 drops of distilled water in Petri dish (5 cm) and the image recorded
using Nikon DS-5M digital camera. All images were processed using the Lucia G analysis system as above, and
the total number of cotyledonary embryos and the length
of each embryo were measured.
For quantification of Lat B effect, the length of the
embryo at the end of maturation was used as a simple
substitutional criterion of embryo maturity. Embryo
maturity, however, is defined by complex factors including the size, morphology, biochemical markers or embryo
ability to germinate [30]. Generally, embryos longer than
2.5 mm were considered as matured embryos not
arrested in their development.
Latrunculin B application

Latrunculin B (Lat B; Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in
DMSO (Duchefa) in concentration 2.53 mM (stock solution). Lat B from the stock solution was added into the
proliferation or maturation media to achieve final concentrations of 1, 10, 25, 50, 100 and 200 nM. The maximum concentration of DMSO in the medium
supplemented with Lat B was 0.01% (v/v). Untreated cul-

Actin visualisation

Actin was visualised using rhodamine-phalloidin staining
according to the method of Blancaflor [32]. ESM was
incubated for 30 min in PME buffer (50 mM Pipes, 4 mM
MgSO4.7H2O, 10 mM EGTA, Sigma-Aldrich), pH 6.9,
supplemented with 300 μM 3-maleimidobenzoyl-Nhydroxy-succinimide ester (MBS, Sigma-Aldrich). The
samples were then incubated for 10 min in PME supplemented with 0.1 μM rhodamine-phaloidin (SigmaAldrich), 0.3 M mannitol (Duchefa) and 2% glycerol (v/v)
(Lachner, Neratovice, Czech Republic). Subsequently, the
ESM was washed twice for 10 min with PME buffer,
mounted on microscope slides and observed immediately
under a confocal laser microscope.
Microscopy

A Zeiss LSM 5 Duo confocal laser-scanning microscope
was used for visualization of FDA staining (excitation at
488 nm by Argon/2 laser, emission filter set LP 505). Rhodamine-phalloidin was observed either with the Zeiss 5
LSM Duo (excitation at 561 nm by DPSS laser, emission
filter set LP 575) or with Leica TCS SP2 confocal laser
scanning microscope (excitation at 543 nm, emission at
545 - 590 nm).
Isolation and expression analysis of actin isoforms

Total RNA was isolated using Qiagen Plant RNA extraction Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) from 100 mg of the
total ESM cultured for 3, 5, 7, 10 or 14 days on the maturation medium with or without Lat B, or alternatively
from embryos isolated from embryogenic culture cultivated for 14 days on the maturation medium. The total
RNA was used for reverse transcription using oligo-T23
primer and RevertAid™ M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase
(Fermentas, St.Leon-Rot, Germany) according to the
manufacturer's instructions. The resulting cDNA was
used as a template for subsequent PCR using recombinant Taq DNA Polymerase (Fermentas), 1× PCR buffer
with 20 mM (NH4)2SO4, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM dNTPs
and 0.2 μM degenerate primers that were designed to
match consensus sequences of conserved domains of
actin genes. Primers ActF: (GGCATCATACATTCTACAATGAGT) and ActR1: (CAACIACITTGATTTTCAT-

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

GCTGCT) were used for the isolation of isoforms 1 and
2, primers ActF2:(ATGGAIAAIATITGGCATCA) and
ActR2 (ATCCAIACAIIGTAITTCCT) were used for the
isolation of isoform 3. Primers for the isolation of isoform
4 were designed according to the specific region of Pinus
taeda actin isoform 1 (ActPt1F: CATTGATGAAGATTCTTACAGAAC, ActPt1R: TATTAAAGATGGCTGGAACAGC). Missing 5' ends of isolated segments of
actin genes were amplified using isoform-specific reverse
primers (see bellow) and forward primers designed
according to sequences of related actin isoforms from
Pinus taeda (Act1,2ATG: GAAGATGGCTGACGCWGAGG and Act4ATG: ATGGGTGATGCAGAAGAAATCC); missing 3' ends were obtained using
isoform-specific forward primers (see bellow) and
oligoT23 primer or using SMART™ RACE cDNA Amplification Kit and PowerScript™ ReverseTranscriptase (Clontech laboratories, Palo Alto, CA, USA). In case of Pa3
isoform, the isolation of missing ends was not successful
by any of the methods.
To analyze the expression of individual isoforms, specific primers were designed according to the most variable regions of the four actin genes to allow their specific
amplification as follows: Pa1F: ACATCCTGTACTTCTTACTGAA and Pa1R: CCTGTTCATAGTCCAGTGCC;
Pa2F: CACCCTATTCTTCTCACTGAG and Pa2R:
GCTCGTAACTCTTCTCCAGG; Pa3F: CAACCGCGAGAAGACGATCG and Pa3R: TAGTCCAGCGCCACGTAG; Pa4F: AGAGCGCGAGATTGTCCG and Pa4R:
ACTTCTGCACATCTGAACCGT.
As an internal standard, the transcript for the elongation factor ef1α was used [33] with universal primers generally applicable for amplification of ef1α from almost any
plant species: EF1F: TACTGCACTGTGATTGATGCC
[34] and PtEF1R: CATCCATCTTGTTACAGCAGC,
which was designed to match the sequence of ef1α from
Pinus taeda. The semiquantitative RT-PCR analysis had
at least two (usually three) repetitions with similar results
for every analysed sample and gene combination.
Sequence alignments and phylogenetic analysis

Sequences of actin isoforms isolated from Picea abies
were aligned with sequences found in gene databases
using ClustalX [35]. A phylogenetic tree from full length
protein sequences (if available) was constructed using
either neighbor-joining (NJ) method as implemented in
the Treecon software [36] with 1000 bootstrap samples
and Poisson correction for distance calculation, or the
heuristic approximation of the maximum likelihood (ML)
method [37] provided by Proml tool in combination with
the Seqboot and Consense tools from the PHYLIP package [38,39]. In ML analysis, the JTT (default) substitution
model for amino acids was used.

Page 12 of 13

Additional material
Additional file 1 List of sequences used for the construction of the phylogenetic tree.
Authors' contributions
KS, LH and JF carried out the actin visualization studies. LF designed primers for
isolation of actin genes and carried out sequence alignments and phylogenetic analysis. PB and EB isolated the actin isoforms and made the expression
analysis. PB was first to describe the positive effect of latrunculin B on the maturation of high quality somatic embryos. KS and KE performed the confocal
microscopy studies. ZV carried out majority of tissue culture work and computer image analysis. ZO conceived of the study, and together with MV, KS and
LF participated in design and coordination of the study. ZO, KS and LF drafted
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Dr. Jan Marc (University of Sydney) for helpful discussion and for critical reading of the manuscript. Our thanks belong also to Jarka
Špačková for excellent technical help. The work was supported by the Ministry
of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic (project numbers:
MSM0021620858, LC06034, COST 871 - OC158 and KONTAKT ME668) and
Grant Agency of Charles University (project number: 195/2004).
Author Details
1Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Science, Department of Plant
Physiology, Viničná 5, CZ 12844 Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute of
Experimental Botany v.v.i., Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Rozvojová 236, CZ 16502 Prague 6, Czech Republic and 3School of Biological
and Biomedical Sciences, Durham University, South Road, DH1 3LE, UK
Received: 11 September 2009 Accepted: 17 May 2010
Published: 17 May 2010
© 2010 Schwarzerová et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
This articleBiology 2010, 10:89distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC is an Open Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89
Plant is available article

References
1. Staiger CJ, Baluska F, Volkmann D, Barlow P: Actin: a dynamic framework for
multiple plant cell functions Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer; 2000.
2. Bozhkov PV, Filonova LH, Suarez MF, Helmersson A, Smertenko AP,
Zhivotovsky B, von Arnold S: VEIDase is a principal caspase-like activity
involved in plant programmed cell death and essential for embryonic
pattern formation. Cell Death Differ 2004, 11:175-182.
3. Thomas SG, Huang S, Li S, Staiger CJ, Franklin-Tong VE: Actin
depolymerisation is sufficient to induce programmed cell death in selfincompatible pollen. J Cell Biol 2006, 174:221-229.
4. Hightower RC, Meagher RB: The molecular evolution of actin. Genetics
1986, 114:315-332.
5. Meagher RB: Divergence and differential expression of actin gene
families in higher-plants. Int Rev Cytol 1991, 125:139-163.
6. McDowell JM, Huang SR, McKinney EC, An YQ, Meagher RB: Structure and
evolution of the actin gene family in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics
1996, 142:587-602.
7. Meagher RB, McKinney EC, Kandasamy MK: The significance of diversity
in the plant actin gene family. In Actin: A dynamic framework for multiple
plant cell functions Edited by: Staiger CJ, Baluška F, Volkmann D, Barlow P.
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer; 2000:3-28.
8. Meagher RB, McKinney EC, Vitale AV: The evolution of new structures clues from plant cytoskeletal genes. Trends Genet 1999, 15:278-284.
9. Kandasamy MK, McKinney EC, Meagher RB: Functional nonequivalency
of actin isovariants in Arabidopsis. Mol Biol Cell 2002, 13:251-261.
10. Gilliland LU, Kandasamy MK, Pawloski LC, Meagher RB: Both vegetative
and reproductive actin isovariants complement the stunted root hair
phenotype of the Arabidopsis act2-1 mutation. Plant Physiol 2002,
130:2199-2209.
11. von Arnold S, Sabala I, Bozhkov P, Dyachok J, Filonova L: Developmental
pathways of somatic embryogenesis. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult 2002,
69:233-249.
12. Fischerová L, Fischer L, Vondráková Z, Vágner M: Expression of the gene
encoding transcription factor PaVP1 differs in Norway spruce
embryogenic lines depending on their ability to develop somatic
embryos. Plant Cell Rep 2008, 27:435-441.

Schwarzerová et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/89

13. von Arnold S, Clapham D: Spruce embryogenesis. In Plant embryogenesis
Edited by: Suárez MF, Bozhkov PV. Totowa, USA: Humana Press;
2008:31-47.
14. Stasolla C, Yeung EC: Recent advances in conifer somatic
embryogenesis: improving somatic embryo quality. Plant Cell Tissue
Organ Cult 2003, 74:15-35.
15. Nehra NS, Becwar MR, Rottmann WH, Pearson L, Chowdhury K, Chang SJ,
Wilde HD, Kodrzycki RJ, Zhang CS, Gause KC, Parks DW, Hinchee MA:
Forest biotechnology: Innovative methods, emerging opportunities.
In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Plant 2005, 41:701-717.
16. Nagmani R, Diner AM, Garton S, Zipf AE: Anatomical comparision of
somatic and zygotic embryogeny in conifers. In Somatic embryogenesis
in woody plants Edited by: Jain SM, Gupta ML, Newton RJ. Dordrecht, The
Netherlands: Springer; 1995:23-48.
17. Vágner M, Fischerová L, Špačková J, Vondráková Z: Somatic
embryogenesis in Norway spruce. In Protocols for somatic embryogenesis
in woody plants Edited by: Jain SM, Gupta PK. Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Springer; 2005:141-155.
18. Smertenko AP, Bozhkov PV, Filonova LH, von Arnold S, Hussey PJ: Reorganisation of the cytoskeleton during developmental programmed
cell death in Picea abies embryos. Plant J 2003, 33:813-824.
19. Morton WM, Ayscough KR, McLaughlin PJ: Latrunculin alters the actinmonomer subunit interface to prevent polymerization. Nature Cell Biol
2000, 2:376-378.
20. Thangavelu M, Belostotsky D, Bevan MW, Flavell RB, Rogers HJ, Lonsdale
DM: Partial characterization of the Nicotiana-tabacum actin gene
family - evidence for pollen-specific expression of one of the gene
family members. Mol Gen Genet 1993, 240:290-295.
21. Baird WV, Meagher RB: A complex gene superfamily encodes actin in
Petunia. EMBO J 1987, 6:3223-3231.
22. Honys D, Twell D: Comparative analysis of the Arabidopsis pollen
transcriptome. Plant Physiol 2003, 132:640-652.
23. Wang Y, Zhang WZ, Song LF, Zou JJ, Su Z, Wu WH: Transcriptome
analyses show changes in gene expression to accompany pollen
germination and tube growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2008,
148:1201-1211.
24. Binarová P, Жihalíková C, Doležel J, Gilmer S, Fowke LC: Actin distribution
in somatic embryos and embryogenic protoplasts of white spruce
(Picea glauca). In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Plant 1996, 32:59-65.
25. Baluška F, Jasik J, Edelmann HG, Salajová T, Volkmann : Latrunculin Binduced plant dwarfism: Plant cell elongation is F-actin-dependent.
Dev Biol 2001, 231:113-124.
26. Flanagan MD, Lin S: Cytochalasins block actin filament elongation by
binding to high-affinity sites associated with F-Actin. J Biol Chem 1980,
255:835-838.
27. Goldberg RB: Plants - novel developmental processes. Science 1988,
240:1460-1467.
28. Goldberg RB, Depaiva G, Yadegari R: Plant embryogenesis - zygote to
seed. Science 1994, 266:605-614.
29. Gupta PK, Durzan DJ: Plantlet regeneration via somatic embryogenesis
from subcultured callus of mature embryos of Picea-abies (Norway
spruce). In Vitro Cell Dev Biol 1986, 22:685-688.
30. Svobodová H, Albrechtová J, Kumstýřová L, Lipavská H, Vágner M,
Vondráková Z: Somatic embryogenesis in Norway spruce: Anatomical
study of embryo development and influence of polyethylene glykol on
maturation process. Plant Physiol Biochem 1999, 37:209-221.
31. Widholm JM: The use of fluorescein diacetate and phenosafranine for
determining viability of cultured plant cells. Stain Technol 1972,
47:189-194.
32. Blancaflor EB: Cortical actin filaments potentially interact with cortical
microtubules in regulating polarity of cell expansion in primary roots
of maize (Zea mays L.). J Plant Growth Regul 2000, 19:406-414.
33. Nicot N, Hausman JF, Hoffmann L, Evers D: Housekeeping gene selection
for real-time RT-PCR normalization in potato during biotic and abiotic
stress. J Exp Bot 2005, 56:2907-2914.
34. Dvořáková L, Cvrčková F, Fischer L: Analysis of the hybrid proline-rich
protein families from seven plant species suggests rapid diversification
of their sequences and expression patterns. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:412.
35. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple
sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res
1997, 25:4876-4882.

Page 13 of 13

36. Vandepeer Y, Dewachter R: Treecon for Windows - a software package
for the construction and drawing of evolutionary trees for the
Microsoft Windows environment. Comput Appl Biosci 1994, 10:569-570.
37. Felsenstein J: Maximum likelihood and minimum-steps methods for
estimating evolutionary trees from data on discrete characters. Syst
Zool 1973, 22:240-249.
38. Felsenstein J: Phylogenies from molecular sequences - inference and
reliability. Ann Rev Genet 1988, 22:521-565.
39. PHYLIP package [http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip]
doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-89
Cite this article as: Schwarzerová et al., The role of actin isoforms in somatic
embryogenesis in Norway spruce BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:89

</pre>
</body>
</html>
