<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Composition and regulation of maternal and zygotic transcriptomes reflects species-specific reproductive mode</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58. doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-6-r58"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Shai S Shen-Orr, Yitzhak Pilpel, Craig P Hunter"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

Open Access

RESEARCH

Composition and regulation of maternal and
zygotic transcriptomes reflects species-specific
reproductive mode
Research

Shai S Shen-Orr1,2, Yitzhak Pilpel3 and Craig P Hunter*1

Abstract
Background: Early embryos contain mRNA transcripts expressed from two distinct origins; those expressed from the
mother's genome and deposited in the oocyte (maternal) and those expressed from the embryo's genome after
fertilization (zygotic). The transition from maternal to zygotic control occurs at different times in different animals
according to the extent and form of maternal contributions, which likely reflect evolutionary and ecological forces.
Maternally deposited transcripts rely on post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms for precise spatial and temporal
expression in the embryo, whereas zygotic transcripts can use both transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory
mechanisms. The differences in maternal contributions between animals may be associated with gene regulatory
changes detectable by the size and complexity of the associated regulatory regions.
Results: We have used genomic data to identify and compare maternal and/or zygotic expressed genes from six
different animals and find evidence for selection acting to shape gene regulatory architecture in thousands of genes.
We find that mammalian maternal genes are enriched for complex regulatory regions, suggesting an increase in
expression specificity, while egg-laying animals are enriched for maternal genes that lack transcriptional specificity.
Conclusions: We propose that this lack of specificity for maternal expression in egg-laying animals indicates that a
large fraction of maternal genes are expressed non-functionally, providing only supplemental nutritional content to
the developing embryo. These results provide clear predictive criteria for analysis of additional genomes.
Background
Early embryos contain mRNA transcripts expressed from
two distinct origins; those expressed from the mother's
genome and deposited in the oocyte (maternal) and those
expressed from the embryo's genome after fertilization
(zygotic). Because these transcripts originate from distinct origins they are subject to distinct regulatory constraints. Maternal transcripts rely on post-transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms for spatial and temporal control
of their embryonic expression, and thus contain all signals that control their stability, localization and relative
accessibility to the translational machinery [1-7]. In contrast, zygotically synthesized transcripts may utilize both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory
* Correspondence: hunter@mcb.harvard.edu
1

Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity
Ave, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

mechanisms to provide precise temporal and spatial
expression.
In all animals surveyed to date, at least 30% of proteincoding genes are detected as expressed during the transition from unfertilized oocyte to early embryo [8-13].
These may be divided into three basic groups. First, those
that must be expressed exclusively from either a maternal
or a zygotic origin, which include maternally expressed
genes required to 'jump start' embryogenesis and zygotically expressed patterning genes whose precocious
(maternal) expression would disrupt temporal or spatial
developmental events [14]. Second, those that must be
expressed by both the mother and the embryo - for example, because of low mRNA stability or because of a
change in spatial expression in transition between oocyte
and embryo [15]. The last group is those genes that can
accommodate either maternal or zygotic expression. It is
among this latter gene set that evolution can act to maxi-

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Shen-Orr et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

mize the efficiency, or other such measure, of embryogenesis or oogenesis.
A gene's regulatory architecture reflects the extent and
complexity of transcriptional and post-transcriptional
gene expression. For example, a gene such as sea urchin
endo-16, which is subject to complex spatial and temporal
regulation at a multi-cellular stage of embryogenesis,
contains a large complex intergenic regulatory region
[16]. In contrast, a gene such as Drosophila Oskar, which
is transcribed maternally and subject to multiple levels of
post-transcriptional regulation, has a large 3' UTR that
controls transcript localization, stability, and translation
[17]. Finally, many house-keeping genes are ubiquitously
expressed and consequently have relatively simple regulatory needs.
At present, accurately and comprehensively assessing
the regulatory architecture of the majority of genes is difficult, as the regulation of only a few has been well-characterized [18]. Yet, in organisms with relatively small
genomes (up to 150 Mb), genes expressed in many tissues
or involved in complex biological processes have longer
than average 5' intergenic regions (IGRs) [19,20] and 3'
UTRs [21]. Furthermore, the sizes of these regulatory
regions correlate positively with the number of known
and/or predicted cis-regulatory sites [20-22]. Particularly
interesting in the context of our study is the observation
that the 3' UTRs of maternal genes in D. melanogaster are
longer than average, suggesting that they are subject to
greater post-transcriptional control [5].
In organisms with larger genomes, such as human,
housekeeping genes are flanked by small IGRs [23-25]
and are associated with low density of conserved noncoding elements. Conversely, genes neighboring large
gene-free regions or having large introns have dense regulatory elements and are associated with developmental
functions and tissue specificity [25-27]. To first principles, these observations provide a means to assess a gene
regulatory architecture, where the extent of regulation is
approximated by the length of the regulatory regions, and
the type of the region, IGR or UTR, identifies whether the
regulation is, respectively, transcriptional or post-transcriptional.
Here, we assess the differing regulatory constraints
between maternal and zygotically expressed genes by
analyzing the regulatory architecture of individual genes.
To do so, we used mRNA time-course expression data to
identify maternal and zygotic genes in worm, fly, fish and
mouse (Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, Danio rerio and Mus musculus). For each data set,
at least one time point was collected prior to the start of
major zygotic transcription, and at least one time point
after [4,9,10,15]. In addition, genome-wide mRNA
expression data sets from chicken (Gallus gallus) eggs

Page 2 of 13

and human oocytes allowed identification of maternally
expressed genes in those organisms [12,28]. Comparative analysis of maternal and zygotic genes within an
animal reveals the effect of yet undescribed selective
evolutionary forces acting to modify the gene regulatory
architecture of thousands of genes, as a function of germline versus embryonic transcript synthesis. In contrast, cross-species comparisons allow studying this
force and understanding the factors that affect it. These
show that this selective force affecting gene regulation
at the molecular level is in agreement with the alternative strategies for managing maternal versus zygotic
energy expenditures at the physiological level, suggesting the maintenance of a delicate balance between different energy resources utilized to 'jump start'
embryonic development.

Results
Across the animal kingdom, 3' UTRs of maternally
expressed genes are not short, reflecting the requirement
for post-transcriptional regulation of maternal genes

Genes whose transcripts were detected as present in the
embryo before the initiation of zygotic transcription were
defined as members of the 'all-maternal' gene class (see
Materials and methods). To compare the relative contribution of post-transcriptional regulation among different
classes of maternal transcripts, we used the length of the
3' UTR as an estimate of the complexity of a gene's posttranscriptional program (addition of 5' UTR length
yielded qualitatively similar results; see Materials and
methods). To account for differences in functional complexity [19-21,26,29], we applied a genome-wide phylogenetic profile of 26 organisms [30] to classify genes as
either 'core' (conserved in both uni-cellular and multi-cellular organisms) or 'metazoan', and analyzed them separately. In all animals the 3' UTR lengths of the allmaternal class genes were significantly under-represented for short lengths compared to all other coding
genes (Figure 1a, b; P-value <0.05 in all cases using a
modified Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; see Figure 1 legend
and Materials and methods for details). In addition, with
the exception of C. elegans and G. gallus, significant differences were also detected between all-maternal core
and metazoan genes. This preservation of 3' UTR length
among maternal transcripts occurs across a 30-fold range
in genome size (100 Mb to 3 Gb), a 5-fold range in
genome-wide mean 3' UTR length (150 to 900 bp), and
large differences in development and stability of maternal
transcripts [7,31,32]. We conclude that across the animal
kingdom the post-transcriptional regulatory constraint
imposed on maternally expressed genes has selected
against short 3' UTRs.

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

(a)

Page 3 of 13

Fraction of genes with
region length < X

Core genes’ 3' UTR length
0.8
0.6
0.4
C. elegans
D. Melanogaster
D. rerio
G. gallus
M. musculus
H. sapiens

0.2
0

(b)

0

200

400

600

800

Fraction of genes with
region length < X

Metazoan genes’ 3' UTR length
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

200

400

600

800

Length in base pairs
Figure 1 3' UTRs of maternal genes are under-represented for
short lengths. 3' UTR lengths in six animals comparing all maternally
expressed core or metazoan genes (solid curves) versus all other core
or metazoan genes in the genome (dotted curves). (a) Core genes
(minimum P-value; percentile at which the minimum P-value was detected; top most percentile showing significance): C. elegans (P < 10-18;
20th; 100%); D. melanogaster (P < 10-9, 25th, 100%); D. rerio (P < 10-6,
20th , 85%); G. gallus (P < 10-5, 65th, 100%); M. musculus (P < 10-12, 25th,
100%); H. sapiens (P < 10-12, 25th, 100%). (b) Metazoan genes: C. elegans
(P < 10-26, 20th, 100%); D. melanogaster (P < 10-30, 35th , 100%); D. rerio
(P < 10-6, 45th, 100%); G. gallus (P < 10-17, 40th, 100%); M. musculus (P <
10-23, 20th, 100%); H. sapiens (P < 10-18, 35th, 100%).

D. melanogaster zygotic genes have longer 5' IGRs whereas
maternal genes are under-represented for short 3' UTRs

After the initiation of zygotic transcription, the assignment of relative maternal and zygotic transcription to a
gene's measured mRNA abundance becomes less certain.
However, for D. melanogaster, exact quantification of relative maternal and zygotic contributions to mRNA abundance was made possible through the use of embryos
lacking entire chromosomes [15]. This analysis defined
five separate gene classes for transcripts detected in early
embryos (see Materials and methods): strict-maternal
and strict-zygotic genes are expressed solely from one
origin of expression; mostly-maternal and mostly-zygotic
genes are those whose expression profile is similar to
their strict counterparts, but for whom at least some contribution (less than 33%) is due to zygotic or maternal ori-

gin, respectively [15]; and finally, the maternal-zygotic
genes are those that are transcribed maternally, but
whose transcript abundance level does not change significantly throughout the duration of the experiment (either
stable or supplemented by zygotic transcription).
Comparison of 3' UTR lengths between the five different origin-of-synthesis classes showcases the effect of the
biological constraints on 3' UTR length. The 3' UTRs of
maternal and zygotic class genes are significantly longer
than those of other genes in the genome. In particular,
with the exception of the core strict-zygotic class, both
core and metazoan strict-maternal genes are underrepresented for short 3' UTRs compared to all other classes
(Figure S1 in Additional file 1; across all comparisons Pvalue at least ≤ 0.02). Interestingly, the longest 3' UTRs
are those of zygotic genes.
Significant differences are also observed between
maternal and zygotic genes with respect to 5' IGR lengths
(addition of intron lengths and/or 3' IGR lengths yielded
qualitatively similar results; see Material and Methods).
For metazoan genes, the four gene classes that include
some maternally contributed transcripts have significantly shorter 5' IGR lengths than all other metazoan
genes in the genome (Figure 2a; P < 10-9, P < 10-4, P < 1012, P < 10-5 for strict-maternal, mostly-maternal, maternal-zygotic and mostly-zygotic, respectively). Strikingly,
the 5' IGR lengths of the small set of 282 genes belonging
to the strict-zygotic class are extremely long compared to
all other gene sets (P-values for core and metazoan genes,
respectively, were: strict-maternal, P < 10-5 and P < 10-18;
mostly-maternal, P < 10-6 and P < 10-12; maternal-zygotic,
P < 10-7 and P < 10-18; mostly-zygotic, P < 10-6 and P < 1013; the genome-wide set of all core and metazoan genes, P
< 10-11 and P < 10-10). Interestingly, this class is enriched
for patterning genes (P < 10-32), whereas the strict-maternal class is enriched for core genes (P < 10-115) [15], as
would be expected from the proposed theory on maternal
and zygotic gene expression in rapidly developing organisms [14]. Lastly, comparing the core genes to metazoan
genes the 3' UTRs and 5' IGRs of core genes are shorter
for nearly all maternal and zygotic classes (P-values for 3'
UTRs and 5' IGRs, respectively, were: strict-maternal, P <
10-6 and P < 0.07; mostly-maternal, P < 10-9 and P < 10-6;
maternal-zygotic, P < 10-35 and P < 10-21; mostly-zygotic,
P < 10-12 and P < 10-7; strict-zygotic, P < 10-4 and P < 10-3;
the genome-wide set of all core and metazoan genes, P <
10-21 and P < 10-72).
Similarity in regulatory architecture of maternal and
zygotic genes across the animal kingdom highlights the
complexity of regulation of mammalian maternal genes

To analyze the gene architecture of maternal and zygotically expressed genes in other animals (C. elegans, D.
rerio, G. gallus, M. musculus and Homo sapiens) we

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

Page 4 of 13

(a)

D. melanogaster

Strictly-zygotic
Mostly-zygotic

Mean

Median

25%

75%

Metazoan

(200)

Metazoan

(304)

{ Core

(82)

{ Core

(411)

Metazoan

Maternal-zygotic

(6,473)

Metazoan

Genome-wide

(1,748)

{ Core

(4872)

{ Core

(2,348)

Metazoan

Mostly-maternal

(249)

{ Core

(324)

Metazoan

Strict-maternal

(500)

{ Core

(737)
0

4

(b)
Strict-zygotic

Genome-wide

8

16 x10 3

12

C. elegans
(457)

Metazoan

{ Core

(227)

Metazoan

(10,082)

{ Core

(4,961)
(406)

Metazoan

Strict-maternal

{ Core

(372)
0

2,000

4,000

(c)
Strict-zygotic

Genome-wide

6,000

8,000

(d)

D. rerio
Metazoan

(182)

{ Core

{ Core

(7,096)

(122)

(351)

2

4

6

8

10

12 x10 4

Metazoan

{

0

(f)

G. gallus

{

(352)

(190)
0

Maternal

(9,610)

(4,540)

(e)

Genome-wide

(906)

(3,708)

Metazoan

(406)

(330)

{ Core

Metazoan

Strict-maternal

M. musculus

Metazoan

4

8

16 x104

12

H. sapiens

(9,699)

(5,738)
(4,865)

0

2

4

6

Number of base pairs

(1,388)

(1,619)

Core

(5,944)

(850)

Core

(1,249)

x 10

4

0

4

8

12 x 10

4

Number of base pairs

Figure 2 5' IGR length in all animals is dependent on both gene functional complexity and transcript origin of synthesis. (a) Genetic manipulation of D. melanogaster enables quantification of the maternal and zygotic components of mRNA abundance, allowing analysis of five gene classes.
Genes expressed solely by the zygote have long 5' IGRs, whereas genes expressed by the mother have short 5' IGRs. Observed differences are greatest
when comparing genes expressed exclusively from one origin. (b-d) Similar comparisons for C. elegans, D. rerio and M. musculus, where gene classification is based solely on characteristic strict-maternal and strict-zygotic expression profiles. In mouse an inverse relationship between maternal and
zygotic genes is observed. (e,f) 5' IGR length comparison of all maternally expressed genes in G. gallus and H. sapiens to all other genes in the genome.
Like mouse, human maternal genes have large 5' IGRs. In all plots, genes were partitioned to core and metazoan classes by phylogenetic filtering. Core
genes have shorter 5' IGRs than metazoan ones. Numbers in parentheses to the right of each box plot bar are numbers of genes per class.

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

defined three gene classes for transcripts detected in
early embryos: maternal, zygotic and maternal-zygotic.
For chicken and human, to the best of our knowledge,
only pre-zygotic transcript data are publicly available;
thus, for these species we contrasted the all-maternal
gene class with the genome-wide set of core and metazoan genes. Further, due to the lack of genetic controls
available in Drosophila, for these other species we must
rely on the characteristic expression profile to define the
origin of expression (see Materials and methods). For
clarity, we use the nomenclature applied to the Drosophila data and refer to the maternal and zygotic gene
classes as strict-maternal and strict-zygotic. By necessity,
the maternal-zygotic class is less precisely defined and
includes slowly decaying strict-maternal genes. Consistent with this, we find that the lengths of the regulatory
regions in the maternal-zygotic class are, by and large,
intermediate to those observed in the strict-maternal and
strict-zygotic gene classes (data not shown). Therefore,
unless otherwise noted, we exclude the maternal-zygotic
class from further analysis.
Next, for each species we compared the 5' IGR lengths
as proxies for the functional complexity of maternal and
zygotic gene regulatory regions. Additionally, within
these origin-of-synthesis class gene sets, we compared
the core and metazoan subclasses to the genome-wide
core or metazoan gene sets (see Materials and methods).
Because it is meaningless to compare the absolute lengths
of genes' regulatory region size across species with vastly
different genome sizes, the genome-wide core or metazoan gene sets provide a means to normalize length for
cross-species comparisons. Performing this comparative
analysis between maternal and zygotic gene classes separates the studied animals into two distinct groups. C. elegans, D. rerio and G. gallus genes show a pattern similar
to that described for D. melanogaster. The 5' IGRs of C.
elegans and D. rerio strict-maternal genes (Figure 2b,c)
are shorter than those of the respective zygotic genes (Pvalues for core and metazoan genes, respectively, were: C.
elegans, P < 10-10 and P < 10-27; D. rerio, P < 0.1 and P < 103) while the genome-wide average is intermediate. Similarly, G. gallus all-maternal genes' 5' IGRs are smaller than
the genome-wide average (Figure 2e; core, P < 10-5; metazoan, P < 10-3). Furthermore, C. elegans and D. rerio
maternal and all-maternal gene classes are enriched in
core genes compared to the zygotic class (P < 10-147). This
pattern is strikingly reversed in the mammals (Figure 2d,
f). Mouse strict-maternal gene 5' IGRs are longer than the
genome-wide average (core, P < 10-3; metazoan, P < 10-7)
while the 5' IGRs of strict-zygotic genes are smaller (core,
P < 10-9; metazoan, P < 0.01). Similarly, human all-maternal gene 5' IGR lengths are larger than the genome-wide
average (Figure 2f; core, P < 0.03; metazoan, P < 10-7).

Page 5 of 13

Unlike the other animals, mouse strict-maternal and allmaternal classes are enriched for metazoan genes (P < 10226).
These differences among maternal genes between
mammals and the other animals is highlighted by the otherwise consistent relationship observed in all animals of
shorter regulatory region lengths for core genes than for
metazoan genes (C. elegans, P < 10-49; D. rerio, P < 10-17;
G. gallus, P < 10-29; M. musculus, P < 10-20; H. sapiens, P <
10-5). Specifically, as observed in Drosophila, the 3' UTRs
of core genes are shorter than the 3' UTRs of metazoan
genes and the 3' UTRs of strict-maternal and all-maternal
transcripts are underrepresented for short lengths (Figure S2 in Additional file 1; Figure 1 for G. gallus and H.
sapiens). Thus, the only significant difference in gene
architecture between mammals and the other animals
examined here is in the length of the 5' IGRs of maternal
and zygotic genes. The relatively large size of mammalian
maternal 5' IGRs compared to the genome-wide set suggests that maternal genes in mammals have complex and
highly specific transcriptional regulation, whereas maternal genes in the other animals, which are much shorter
than the genome-wide set, are regulated with less specificity.
Mammalian maternal genes are under selective pressure to
maintain large 5' IGRs

These observations may reflect either an actual biological
difference or a limitation in our definition of maternal
and zygotic genes. In all animals, the data for identification of zygotically transcribed genes spanned a time
course extending many cell divisions after the start of
zygotic transcription, at least up to the metazoan hallmark of gastrulation [4,9,15,33]. It has been suggested
that gastrulation, and not fertilization, is the time point
best suited for alignment of eutherian development with
other metazoans [34]. If true, we would expect mouse
zygotic genes that are expressed at or after gastrulation to
exhibit increased transcriptional complexity. Interestingly, the density of conserved sequences is high in noncoding regions flanking genes expressed in mouse
embryos at 9.5 to 10.5 days of gestation but not earlier in
development [25]. Furthermore, genes flanked by gene
deserts are enriched in developmental functions in
mouse, as well as in human and chicken [26]. This suggests that analysis of IGRs of genes expressed later in
mouse development may identify a developmental time
point in which the 5' IGRs of the genes expressed will be
as long, if not longer, than those of the strict-maternal set.
For maternal genes, sparse mRNA abundance measurements may hamper our ability to distinguish strict-maternal-only genes from maternal-zygotic genes.
To confirm that our observations were due to a true
biological difference, we compared the all-maternal class

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

Discussion
The variations observed across six animals in 5' IGR and
3' UTR lengths provide an opportunity to understand the
evolutionary pressures shaping maternal and zygotic
genes. To do so, we have relied on the amassed knowledge that precise gene regulation in space, time and
abundance requires complex regulatory regions [36],
which, in turn, require more genomic real estate
[19,20,37,38]. Our observations that in every animal studied here, the regulatory regions of maternal or zygotic

Fraction of genes with 5’ IGR
length rank ratio < X

from each animal to its respective genome-wide average.
For mouse, 5' IGRs of the all-maternal class were larger
than the genome-wide average, whereas for all other animals the 5' IGRs of all-maternal genes were statistically
significantly shorter than the genome-wide average (Figure S3 in Additional file 1). These observations highlight
that the differences observed in the architecture of maternal genes' 5' IGRs, both when compared to zygotic genes
within the same animal and when compared across animals, are due to true biological variation.
The observed differences in gene architecture between
mammalian maternal genes and other animals may be
due to either the expression of different genes or differing
regulatory needs of the same genes. Comparative analysis
of relative changes in IGRs of maternally expressed versus
non-maternally expressed orthologous genes offers an
opportunity to discern the cause of the observed differences. From the animals studied here, G. gallus is phylogenetically closest to mammals but, unlike them, its
maternal genes have short 5' IGRs. To account for differences in absolute genome size, we normalized and ranked
regulatory region lengths and then calculated the ratio of
ranks between individual one-to-one ortholog pairs of
chicken-human and mouse-human (see Materials and
methods). For each orthologous pair we obtained one
value representing its fold change in percentile ranking of
IGR length between chicken and human, and another for
its fold change between mouse and human. Comparison
of fold changes of all-maternal one-to-one orthologs versus the set of all one-to-one orthologs shows a shift
towards larger fold changes in human to chicken (Figure
3, blue lines; P < 0.01). However, calculating this ratio for
mouse versus human genes showed no statistically significant fold changes (Figure 3, red lines). This implies that
the 5' IGRs of maternally expressed genes in human and
mouse have expanded more than would be expected
given the genome sizes or that chicken maternally
expressed genes have shrunk. Coupled to the observation
that oocyte deposited transcripts in chordates are highly
conserved [35], we conclude that the difference in maternal genes' 5' IGR lengths between mammals and other
animals may be due to selection for complex transcriptional regulation of mammalian maternal genes.

Page 6 of 13

All-maternal 1:1:1 orthologs
Human/Chicken
Human/Mouse

0.8

All other 1:1:1 orthologs
Human/Chicken
Human/Mouse

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-2

-1

0

1

2

Log2(Fold change)

Figure 3 Systematic change in relative size of 5' IGRs of maternally expressed human and chicken one-to-one orthologs. Shown is
the cumulative distribution of fold-change difference in relative 5' IGR
size for all human, chicken and mouse 1:1:1 orthologs (dotted curves)
versus those expressed maternally in all three organisms (solid curves).
Fold change is shown on a log2 axis. A fold change of zero implies that
the length of the 5' IGRs of a gene and its 1:1 ortholog ranked the same
within their respective genome. Similarly, a positive fold change implies a gene's 5' IGR has expanded in relative size in human (and/or
shrunk in mouse or chicken) with respect to the relative size of its ortholog's 5' IGR in mouse or chicken. The converse is implied by negative log2(fold change).

core genes are shorter than those of the respective metazoan genes support this notion.
D. melanogaster maternal genes have previously been
reported to have significantly longer 3' UTRs than nonmaternal genes [5]. However, our meta-analysis of early
embryogenesis in six different species suggests that this
statement is inaccurate in a subtle but important manner.
Specifically, our analysis suggests that the universal pattern for 3' UTRs of maternal genes is that they are not
longer than zygotic genes, but rather for both core and
metazoan classes are underrepresented for short lengths.
This suggests that the post-transcriptional regulatory
constraint imposed on maternally expressed genes has
functioned to maintain 3' UTR lengths across the animal
kingdom [1-3,6,7]. For maternal genes, transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms cannot specify spatiotemporal
expression patterns; therefore, any maternal gene that
shows complex expression must employ a post-transcriptional regulatory program. Conversely, this regulatory
constraint on 3' UTRs of maternal genes does not convey
any knowledge of the complexity of the regulatory program or require that zygotic genes not utilize post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. This is best observed
in the De Renzis et al. [15]D. melanogaster data set, in
which the maternal and zygotic contributions are precisely determined by genetic decoupling (Figure S1 in

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

Additional file 1). However, it is also apparent in our analysis of C. elegans (Figure S2a,b in Additional file 1) and D.
rerio metazoan genes (Figure S2b in Additional file 1), in
all of which the longest 3' UTRs belong to strict-zygotic
metazoan genes, in agreement with recent work on the
role of microRNAs in embryonic development [21,22,39].
In contrast, analysis of maternal and zygotic gene 5'
IGRs yielded a dichotomy between mammals and the
other animals. Given the highly conserved relationship
between core and metazoan genes with regard to 5' IGR
regulatory region size, what explains the divide in transcriptional specificity when it comes to transcriptional
regulation of maternal genes? An appealing possibility is
that differences in gene architecture are mirroring differences in development, specifically pre- and post-fertilization dynamics. We note that the divide in relative 5' IGR
size precisely matches the species mode of reproduction.
Those with relatively short 5' IGRs are all egg laying,
oviparous animals, whereas those with relatively long 5'
IGR length are the viviparous mammals. An important
difference between oviparous and viviparous animals that
is likely to affect gene architecture is the temporal constraint on maternal contributions to the embryo, which
for oviparous species ceases at fertilization, while in the
viviparous species continues post-fertilization. To our
knowledge, the only other developmental characteristic
that corresponds to the differences in regulatory region
size is that many oviparous embryos begin development
with a series of rapid cellular cleavages, while in mammals the initial cell cycles are slow, with rapid cleavages
occurring only later [34]. Indeed, in animals where initial
cleavage divisions are rapid, early zygotic genes often
have small or no introns [15], a gene architectural feature
important for producing a functional transcript during
these abbreviated cell cycles [40]. However, the 5' IGR is
not transcribed and transcription of the maternal genes
occurs before these rapid cleavages; thus, the rapid early
development can have only an indirect effect on maternal
gene architecture.
One mechanism by which developmental constraints,
such as rapid early development or a prolonged pre-fertilization stasis, can affect gene architecture is by the selection for or against expression of specific gene classes in
either the oocyte or embryo. Wieschaus [14] has proposed that gene expression is a limiting resource in rapidly developing oviparous animals. Under this hypothesis,
those genes whose expression can be accommodated
from either maternal or zygotic origin will, over evolutionary timescales, shift to maternal expression. This will
relieve the embryo from the synthetic cost (energy and
time) to express those genes, thereby minimizing the time
to hatching and maximizing the competitive advantage
for limited environmental resources. In the extreme, the
only transcripts to be expressed zygotically would be

Page 7 of 13

those providing spatial and temporal patterning information or whose precocious expression would disrupt early
events [14]. The analysis of the high resolution D. melanogaster data set is fully consistent with this hypothesis.
Strictly zygotic genes are highly enriched for patterning
genes. Similarly, we detect a strong enrichment for metazoan functions, including patterning, in the other oviparous species we analyzed. Furthermore, D. melanogaster
strictly zygotic genes have very large regulatory regions,
much larger than the genomic average or even of other
developmental genes (strict-zygotic versus developmental genes: core, P < 0.09; metazoan, P < 10-4; data not
shown). The insight we gain into complex regulation and
specificity from the analysis of core and metazoan genes
suggests that the expression of these strictly zygotic genes
is temporally and spatially complex. On the other hand,
the 5' IGR length (but not 3' UTRs) of maternally
expressed genes (including maternal-zygotic and mostlyzygotic) is dramatically shorter than the genomic average,
suggesting reduced regulatory specificity. Again, we
observe the same phenomena in the other oviparous species for which zygotic gene data are available (Figure 4a).
Wieschaus hypothesized an efficiency-based shift
towards maternal gene expression for fast-developing
oviparous organisms [14]. However, based on our data we
propose that the shift, under certain conditions, can be
towards zygotic gene expression. Specifically, viviparous
animals develop relatively slowly and the embryo competes for limited environmental resources only via the
mother. In contrast, the relatively undifferentiated mammalian oocyte needs to persist indefinitely, and thus may
be under selective pressure to minimize energy expenditures and thus maximize gene expression specificity
(larger 5' IGRs). Thus, selection for efficiency may generate complex 5' IGRs relative to the genome-wide average
for viviparous maternal genes and for oviparous zygotic
genes.
One of the most striking features of our analysis is the
low complexity of 5' IGRs of maternal genes relative to
the genome-wide average in oviparous animals. This feature is only partially explained by a shift in functional
composition, as it occurs for both core and metazoan
gene subclasses as well as in one-to-one orthologs (Figure
3). We consider two hypotheses to explain this. The first
is tolerated profligate expression. The apparently low
threshold for maternal expression may enable many
genes, over evolutionary time, to non-functionally sample
maternal expression. Over time, maternal expression of
developmentally neutral genes will accumulate. However,
this hypothesis does not explain the apparent selection
for non-short 3' UTRs, which suggests selection for posttranscriptional regulatory information. Thus, we propose
a second hypothesis: maternal contributions to embryonic development also include energy and nutrition.

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

Page 8 of 13

(a)

C.

el

D.

eg

D.

re

m

el

an

an

s

rio

og

as

M

G

.g

al

H.

.m

lu

s

us

cu

lu

te

Transcriptional
complexity

pi

en

s

r

Zygotic
Maternal

Reproductive
mode
Functional
complexity

sa

s

Oviparous

Viviparous

Metazoan
Core

(b)
Maternal class
composition enrichment

Metazoan
Core

2

Specificity of maternal genes’
transcriptional regulaion

1.8
1.6

Median
75%
Trimmed mean

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Low

Low

Medium

Medium

High

High

Amount of maternal
nutritional contribution

Figure 4 Specificity of expression of maternally expressed genes
correlates positively with the amount of maternal nutritional
contribution. (a) Schematic summarizing the size of transcriptional
regulatory regions of maternal and zygotic genes in each species, relative to one another and to the genome-wide average. We note a dichotomy that matches the reproductive mode. The highly conserved
relationship between core and metazoan genes' relative 5' IGR regulatory region size suggests that regulatory region length may be considered a metric for complexity and specificity of transcriptional
regulation. (b) Organizing animals by the amount of nutritional contribution provided by the mother (low, medium, high), we estimate the
specificity of maternal gene expression by the ratio of maternal metazoan gene 5' IGR length to the genome average. Shown are three measures of the ratio of maternal to genome-wide regulatory region
lengths for strict-maternal genes (for G. gallus and H. sapiens all maternally expressed genes). Comparison is restricted to metazoan genes, as
they comprise the subset most reflective of changes in regulatory
complexity.

Mammals rely on lactation and placentation, while oviparous animals deposit yolk, consisting mainly of proteins,
lipids, and phosphorous, into oocytes. The non-functional maternal transcripts provide nutrient stores of
nucleotides and phosphate for the rapidly developing
embryos. Our data show a positive correlation between
maternally provided nutrition (low for worm and fly,
higher in zebrafish and chicken, and highest in mammals)
and the complexity of maternal gene regulation (Figure
4b). Since maternal transcripts also provide a low osmotic
store of nucleotides and phosphate, they may be consid-

ered nutritional. Thus, it is possible that some maternal
transcripts are purely nutritional. Such a hypothesis suggests that 'misexpressing' a gene in the maternal germline
should not be associated with an energy or efficiency
cost. Rather, such 'profligate' expression of non-detrimental transcripts may be advantageous and selected for.
Furthermore, such a selective force could provide a
mechanism for creation of new non-coding RNA genes
that could evolve into coding genes or exons.
These two interpretations, developmental constraints
and nutrient stores, present three testable predictions.
First, both models predict a bias in gene function
between genes expressed maternally and genes expressed
zygotically. For example, consider a gene that is not
selected for either a maternal or a zygotic mode of
expression. The expectation is that expression of that
gene will drift between strict maternal and strict zygotic
expression, such that, at any given time, a set of such
genes would be equally represented in both groups. Thus,
any bias in the distribution indicates non-neutral evolution, either by functional restriction or gene flow based
on energy and timing considerations as described above.
Indeed, as we noted above, we observed maternal depletion/zygotic enrichment of metazoan-specific genes,
which are enriched for patterning functions, in fast developing embryos (Figure 4b).
Second, the nutrient stores model predicts enrichment
for expression of non-functional maternal genes in organisms with limited maternal nutritional contributions
(yolk). This is based on the positive correlation we
observe between the amount of yolk and the simplicity of
maternal gene expression, suggesting that maternal gene
regulation becomes promiscuous as maternal nutritional
contributions are limited (Figure 4b). Consistent with
this, many maternally expressed C. elegans and D. melanogaster genes do not have an apparent phenotype by
RNA interference knockdown [41-43]. In support of this,
we tested for regulatory region length differences
between C. elegans maternal genes for which an RNA
interference (RNAi) phenotype is detected and those for
which it is not (see Materials and methods). Significant
differences were detected in 5' IGR lengths (P < 10-8), but
not 3' UTRs (Figure S4 in Additional file 1).
Third, we predict that the constituency and regulation
of maternal and early zygotic transcripts will only mirror
phylogeny to the extent that it agrees with forms of
maternal contribution. Viviparity and oviparity have
developed multiple independent times, in various forms,
in distant branches such as arthropods, sharks, lizards
and eutherian mammals. Based solely on the extent of
maternal contribution, our results predict not only how
early developmental genes would be regulated in marsupials and monotreme species, relatively close to the studied mammals, but also that the regulation of genes in

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

early development would be more similar between two
distant viviparous animals than between closely related
animals with differing reproductive modes.

Conclusions
Here we analyze the regulation constraints of the maternal-zygotic transition, a key developmental process in all
animals, involving thousands of genes. The utilization of
regulatory region lengths to study complex molecular
processes circumvents the present deficiency in detailed
information on individual gene regulation and offers a
clear methodology for study of other, so-far undecipherable biological processes. Importantly, as a baseline control, we show that differences in the inferred lengths of
regulatory regions between different functional gene
classes are conserved, irrespective of genome size. At a
time when new, non-model organisms' and unannotated
genomes are being sequenced at an ever-increasing rate,
such methodologies are required to identify and study
genes in these organisms.
Our comparative analysis of maternal and zygotic genes
within an animal reveals that the location and abundance
of regulatory content is driven by at least two forces: one
reflected in the inferred functional complexity of gene
action [19,21], and a second related to the origin of synthesis of transcripts. This latter selective evolutionary
force is acting to modify, as a function of germline versus
embryonic transcript synthesis, the gene regulatory
architecture of thousands of genes. In contrast, crossspecies comparisons allow analyses of this force and suggest that it is coupled to the timing of the maternalzygotic transition, which correlates with alternative strategies for managing maternal versus zygotic energy expenditures at the physiological level. Taken together, these
results uncover an ancient force affecting the development of all multi-cellular organisms and provide clear
predictive criteria for the nature of maternal-zygotic gene
regulation in other animals.
Materials and methods
Classification of genes to maternal and zygotic classes

Gene identifiers, chromosomal locations and sequences
for all organisms were mined from EnsEMBL V42
December 2006 [44] and Wormbase (release WS160). To
classify genes to either maternal or zygotic origin, we
used the expression data sets of Baugh et al. [9], De Renzis et al. [15], Giraldez et al. [4] and Hamatani et al. [10]
for C. elegans, D. melanogaster, D. rerio and M. musculus,
respectively. To identify maternal genes in H. sapiens and
G. gallus, we used the expression data of Kocabas et al.
[12] and Lee et al. [28]. See Additional file 1 for a detailed
description of how maternal and zygotic genes were identified from each of these data sets.

Page 9 of 13

For C. elegans, maternal and zygotic classes correspond
respectively to the strictly maternal degrading and strictly
embryonic classes [9]. For D. melanogaster, De Renzis et
al. [15] reported, at a fold change of three and a P-value <
0.001, 6,485 maternally expressed genes, of which 2,110
decreased significantly in their abundance during the
time course. Of these 2,110 genes, 633 had a significant
zygotic component contributing to their measured abundance level (Table S7 in De Renzis et al. [15]). We considered the 6,485 genes as all-maternal and the 1,477
maternal decreasing genes with no zygotic component as
strict-maternal. For the zygotic class, we used the 334
genes expressed at cycle 14 with no maternal contribution (Table S4 in De Renzis et al. [15]). The remapping of
genes to FlyBase 4.3 reduced the number of genes in each
class to 5,923, 1,358 and 314 for all-maternal, strictmaternal and zygotic, respectively. For D. rerio we used
the Giraldez et al. [4] classification of D. rerio genes as
'predominantly maternal' and 'predominantly zygotic' as
'maternal' and 'zygotic' classes, respectively [4]. Briefly,
genes expressed at 1.5 hours post-fertilization and showing a significant reduction at 50% and 90% epiboly were
considered maternal. Genes expressed significantly at the
50 and 90% epiboly stages and not at 1.5 hours post-fertilization were considered zygotic. For G. gallus, we considered the top ranked 50% of expressed genes of stage X
embryos (a laid egg) as maternal. In stage X eggs, an
undifferentiated blastoderm has formed on top of the
yolk, but major zygotic activation has yet to occur [45].
Results did not change if we set the threshold to a more
restrictive 25%, but the number of genes was reduced,
which affected our orthologous gene comparisons (see
below). For M. musculus [10], genes mapping to clusters 7
or 9 were considered 'maternal' and genes mapping to
clusters 1, 4, 5 and 8 as 'zygotic'. To classify which genes
were expressed during gastrulation, we ranked genes
detected as expressed in wild-type embryos from 6.5 days
post-cleavage [33]. The top 25% expressed genes were
considered zygotic. Varying this threshold from 5 to 50%
did not change our results. The 5,331 transcripts identified by Kocabas et al. [12] as up-regulated in H. sapiens
MII oocyte transcripts were considered maternal. To the
best of our knowledge, a quality data set identifying
human zygotic genes is not available. For each organism
the genome-wide gene set was defined as all genes in the
genome that meet the criteria (as defined in the 'Classification of genes to core and metazoan classes' and 'Estimates of regulatory region lengths' sections below) to be
included in the analysis (for example, no downstream
operon genes were included in the C. elegans genomewide set when calculating the distribution of genomewide 5' IGR lengths).

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

Classification of genes to core and metazoan classes

We used the Inparanoid: Eukaryotic Ortholog Groups
database (release 5.1, January 2007) [30] to classify genes
into core and metazoan classes by phylogenetic profiling.
This version of Inparanoid contains an all-against-all protein coding gene blast comparison of 26 organisms - 1
prokaryote, 3 unicellular eukaryotes, 2 plants and 20
metazoans (including a urochordate, nematodes, insects,
fish, bird, amphibian and mammals) [30]. A core gene
was defined as any gene present in one or more of the
unicellular organisms included in InParanoid. A metazoan gene was defined as any gene present in two or more
animals included in Inparanoid that is not present in the
core gene set or in plants. The organisms used to define
the core gene set are Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Dictyostelium
discoideum.
We tried several different criteria (higher and lower) for
the metazoan gene set definition, and obtained similar
qualitative results with different values of significance.
For C. elegans and D. melanogaster we repeated our analysis using the classification scheme defined by Nelson et
al. [19], which classifies genes by their expected regulation complexity (simple or complex) based on their
molecular functions and the biological processes they are
involved in. For C. elegans we updated the gene annotations directly from Wormbase GO (release WS150). For
both species, all results obtained from this analysis were
qualitatively the same as those obtained from the phylogenetic profiling data set.
Estimates of regulatory region lengths

We defined a gene's 5' IGR length as the distance between
its 5'-most coding nucleotide and the closest respective
upstream or downstream coding nucleotide belonging to
a different gene on either DNA strand. Similarly, 3' IGR
length was calculated as the distance from the 3'-most
stop codon to the downstream closet coding nucleotide
belonging to a different gene. We defined the first intron
as the intron closest downstream to the translation start
site. To estimate first intron lengths, we used two measures: the length of the largest first intron of a gene
among all the first intron lengths of its alternative splicings, and the largest continuous non-coding segment in
the first intron. Both intron length measurement types
yielded similar results. In C. elegans, for genes transcribed as a part of an operon, only the 5'-most gene (first
gene) was included in any analysis involving 5' IGR
length.
The length of a gene's 3' UTR was approximated as the
maximum 3' UTR length of all of its alternatively spliced
transcripts. A similar calculation was performed for 5'
UTRs. We considered the sum of both 3' and 5' UTRs as
the total post-transcriptional regulatory region size for all

Page 10 of 13

animals except for C. elegans, where post-splicing makes
this metric moot. A large fraction of genes in any given
genome are annotated with either no UTR information or
with a UTR that is only a few base pairs long. We noticed
that this UTR annotation is replaced with full length
UTRs with successive updates of the database and hence
appears to be missing or have incomplete annotation. No
significant enrichment in extremely short UTRs (less
than 5 bp) was detected for either core, metazoan, maternal or zygotic genes; however, their inclusion in the analysis shifted the mean/median of the distributions greatly
due to their large numbers. Thus, we placed a lower
bound on UTR length, considering them as artifacts, and
discarded any 3' UTRs shorter than 5 bp and any 5' UTRs
shorter than 3 bp in all species.
We calculated 3' UTR lengths twice, once allowing for
multiple exons in the 3' UTR and once without. Roughly
10% of reported 3' UTRs in every organism have multiple
3' UTR exons, which are thought to be subject to nonsense mediated decay degradation [46] - statistical tests
and plots appearing here are all for 3' UTRs, which do not
contain multiple exons - but results are qualitatively the
same when allowing for multiple exons in 3' UTRs. For
zebrafish, only genes having a RefseqId [47] were
included in the analysis of 3' UTR lengths.
To determine that our results are robust to exact definitions of regulatory region lengths, we considered for both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional regions alternative definitions of a genes' regulatory regions. For transcriptional regulatory region length comparisons
between gene groups, we performed our analysis using
not only 5' IGRs, but also the total length of a gene's 5'
IGR plus the first intron, the sum of IGRs (5' IGR plus 3'
IGR), and the sum of all three (5' IGR plus first intron
plus 3' IGR). For post-transcriptional regulation we estimated the 3' UTR length as well as the total sum of UTRs
(5' plus 3'). Transcriptional regulatory region estimates
across all genes showed that they were highly correlated
with one another (Figure S5a in Additional file 1). Similarly, the two post-transcriptional regulatory region estimates were also highly correlated with one another
(Figure S5b in Additional file 1). We applied the analyses
presented here using each of the different estimates of
transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory
region length for each of the species. Analysis of each of
these for every species yielded qualitatively the same
results. The 5' IGR plus the first intron analysis mirrored
very closely the observed signal in the 5' IGR, whereas
analysis of regions that included the 3' IGR showed
reduced, but still significant, differences between regions.
Similarly, considering the sum of the 5' UTR and 3' UTR
regions for post-transcriptional regulation yielded similar
results qualitatively and significance wise. Thus, the

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

results of the analyses we present are robust to the exact
definition of regulatory region length, at least to a degree
matching the present knowledge of the location of a
gene's regulatory information.
Differences in regulatory region lengths between gene
classes

Differences in distributions of the different maternal and
zygotic classes were quantified using the non-parametric,
one-sided two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test at a significance level α = 0.05. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
tests the null hypothesis that two sample distributions are
drawn from the same distribution and does so by quantifying the distance between the two empirical cumulative
distributions. For a given comparison of two distributions, the reported significant P-values for this one-sided
test indicate that the first distribution of regulatory
region lengths under evaluation is shifted to the right
(that is, fewer shorter lengths) of the second. For both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory
regions, we performed this test once when considering all
(100%) regulatory region lengths within each group.
In addition, to quantify the extent that maternal UTRs
are under-represented for short lengths, we iteratively
applied a one-sided two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test on defined subsets of the distributions. The subsets
were determined empirically, beginning with the 15th
percentile and incrementing by 5%. For each comparison
we report the top most percentile that produced a Pvalue <0.05 and we identify the percentile at which the
minimum (most significant) P-value was detected. In the
text we report only the top-most significant percentile,
whereas in the Figure 1 legend we report the most significant P-value and the accompanying percentile as well as
the top-most significant percentile.
Orthologous gene analysis between chicken and mammals

To account for differences in genome size and gene number within one genome, we rank-ordered and normalized
all genes by 5' IGR length. We then identified all genes
with single orthologs in human, mouse and chicken
(1:1:1) using Inparanoid. For these, we calculated the ratio
of 5' IGR length ranks between every human gene and its
one-to-one orthologous chicken counterpart. This ratio
represents the fold change in percentile ranking. This
procedure was repeated for human and mouse genes. For
both chicken-human and mouse-human, these were then
divided into those orthologs classified as all-maternal in
both species and the remaining orthologous genes. Thus,
for every gene we obtained one value representing its fold
change in percentile ranking between chicken and
human, and another for its fold change between mouse
and human.

Page 11 of 13

Developmental constraints and nutritional/promiscuity
model analysis

To perform this analysis, animals were placed into one of
three classes (low, medium, high), based on the estimated
nutritional contribution provided by the mother. This
was estimated from the ratio of the size of an oocyte to
the size of an embryo at gastrulation. For each animal the
extent of maternal gene transcriptional regulatory complexity is estimated by the ratio of maternal metazoan
gene 5' IGR length to the genome average. We restricted
our comparison to metazoan genes as they comprise the
subset most reflective of changes in regulatory complexity. To calculate the ratio of maternal to genome-wide
regulatory region lengths for strict-maternal genes, we
used three different measures, including the median of
each gene class, the 75th percentile and a 5% trimmed
mean. For G. gallus and H. sapiens we used the all-maternally expressed genes as a substitute for a strict-maternal
class, which has not been defined.
To test for differences in regulatory region length
between C. elegans maternal genes for which an RNAi
phenotype is detected and those for which it is not, we
obtained from Wormbase WS200 a list of 700,000 C. elegans RNAi tests of function, each of which was annotated
as to whether a phenotype was observed or not. Crosschecking this against the maternal gene expression list
yielded 114,789 that were performed on one of the 5,591
all-maternally expressed genes. Classifying these genes by
whether or not a phenotype was observed for them in an
RNAi experiment yielded 922 genes that showed no
observed phenotype (presumed non-functional maternal
genes) and 4,669 with one or more functional (with phenotype) maternally expressed genes. Regulatory region
length comparisons between the two groups were performed as detailed in the 'Differences in regulatory region
lengths between gene classes' subsection of Materials and
methods.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Additional documentation and figures.
Abbreviations
Bp: base pair; IGR: intergenic region; RNAi: RNA interference; UTR: untranslated
region.
Authors' contributions
SSO conceived, designed and performed the study, analyzed the results and
drafted the manuscript. YP participated in the study design, analysis of the
results and drafting of the manuscript. CPH conceived and designed the study,
analyzed the results and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank A Jose, R Milo, R Baugh, I Yanai and J Whangbo for comments on the
manuscript and helpful discussions, M Kirschner, D Haig, D Petrov, G Bejerano
and A Giraldez for helpful ideas, and J Cuff and M Ethier for IT support. This
work was supported in part by NIH grant GM064429 to CPH.

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

Author Details
1Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity
Ave, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA, 2Current address: Departments of Pediatrics
and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
and 3Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, 76100, Israel
Received: 24 December 2009 Revised: 23 April 2010
Accepted: 1 June 2010 Published: 1 June 2010
Genome Biologyaccess 11:R58distributedCentral the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
© 2010 Shen-Orr2010, from: BioMed under Ltd
This article is available articlehttp://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58
is an open et al.; licensee

References
1. Pique M, Lopez JM, Foissac S, Guigo R, Mendez R: A combinatorial code
for CPE-mediated translational control. Cell 2008, 132:434-448.
2. Gavis ER, Lehmann R: Translational regulation of nanos by RNA
localization. Nature 1994, 369:315-318.
3. Merritt C, Rasoloson D, Ko D, Seydoux G: 3' UTRs are the primary
regulators of gene expression in the C. elegans germline. Curr Biol 2008,
18:1476-1482.
4. Giraldez AJ, Mishima Y, Rihel J, Grocock RJ, Van Dongen S, Inoue K, Enright
AJ, Schier AF: Zebrafish MiR-430 promotes deadenylation and
clearance of maternal mRNAs. Science 2006, 312:75-79.
5. Tadros W, Goldman AL, Babak T, Menzies F, Vardy L, Orr-Weaver T, Hughes
TR, Westwood JT, Smibert CA, Lipshitz HD: SMAUG is a major regulator of
maternal mRNA destabilization in Drosophila and its translation is
activated by the PAN GU kinase. Dev Cell 2007, 12:143-155.
6. Seydoux G, Fire A: Soma-germline asymmetry in the distributions of
embryonic RNAs in Caenorhabditis elegans. Development 1994,
120:2823-2834.
7. Schier AF: The maternal-zygotic transition: death and birth of RNAs.
Science 2007, 316:406-407.
8. Arbeitman MN, Furlong EE, Imam F, Johnson E, Null BH, Baker BS, Krasnow
MA, Scott MP, Davis RW, White KP: Gene expression during the life cycle
of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 2002, 297:2270-2275.
9. Baugh LR, Hill AA, Slonim DK, Brown EL, Hunter CP: Composition and
dynamics of the Caenorhabditis elegans early embryonic
transcriptome. Development 2003, 130:889-900.
10. Hamatani T, Carter MG, Sharov AA, Ko MS: Dynamics of global gene
expression changes during mouse preimplantation development. Dev
Cell 2004, 6:117-131.
11. Mathavan S, Lee SG, Mak A, Miller LD, Murthy KR, Govindarajan KR, Tong Y,
Wu YL, Lam SH, Yang H, Ruan Y, Korzh V, Gong Z, Liu ET, Lufkin T:
Transcriptome analysis of zebrafish embryogenesis using microarrays.
PLoS Genet 2005, 1:260-276.
12. Kocabas AM, Crosby J, Ross PJ, Otu HH, Beyhan Z, Can H, Tam WL, Rosa GJ,
Halgren RG, Lim B, Fernandez E, Cibelli JB: The transcriptome of human
oocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:14027-14032.
13. Azumi K, Sabau SV, Fujie M, Usami T, Koyanagi R, Kawashima T, Fujiwara S,
Ogasawara M, Satake M, Nonaka M, Wang HG, Satou Y, Satoh N: Gene
expression profile during the life cycle of the urochordate Ciona
intestinalis. Dev Biol 2007, 308:572-582.
14. Wieschaus E: Embryonic transcription and the control of
developmental pathways. Genetics 1996, 142:5-10.
15. De Renzis S, Elemento O, Tavazoie S, Wieschaus EF: Unmasking activation
of the zygotic genome using chromosomal deletions in the Drosophila
embryo. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e117.
16. Yuh CH, Bolouri H, Davidson EH: Genomic cis-regulatory logic:
experimental and computational analysis of a sea urchin gene. Science
1998, 279:1896-1902.
17. Johnstone O, Lasko P: Translational regulation and RNA localization in
Drosophila oocytes and embryos. Annu Rev Genet 2001, 35:365-406.
18. Birney E, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Dutta A, Guigo R, Gingeras TR,
Margulies EH, Weng Z, Snyder M, Dermitzakis ET, Thurman RE, Kuehn MS,
Taylor CM, Neph S, Koch CM, Asthana S, Malhotra A, Adzhubei I,
Greenbaum JA, Andrews RM, Flicek P, Boyle PJ, Cao H, Carter NP, Clelland
GK, Davis S, Day N, Dhami P, Dillon SC, Dorschner MO, Fiegler H, et al.:
Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1% of the human
genome by the ENCODE pilot project. Nature 2007, 447:799-816.
19. Nelson CE, Hersh BM, Carroll SB: The regulatory content of intergenic
DNA shapes genome architecture. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R25.
20. Walther D, Brunnemann R, Selbig J: The regulatory code for
transcriptional response diversity and its relation to genome structural
properties in A. thaliana. PLoS Genet 2007, 3:e11.

Page 12 of 13

21. Stark A, Brennecke J, Bushati N, Russell RB, Cohen SM: Animal MicroRNAs
confer robustness to gene expression and have a significant impact on
3'UTR evolution. Cell 2005, 123:1133-1146.
22. Shalgi R, Lieber D, Oren M, Pilpel Y: Global and local architecture of the
mammalian microRNA-transcription factor regulatory network. PLoS
Comput Biol 2007, 3:e131.
23. Eisenberg E, Levanon EY: Human housekeeping genes are compact.
Trends Genet 2003, 19:362-365.
24. Vinogradov AE: Compactness of human housekeeping genes: selection
for economy or genomic design? Trends Genet 2004, 20:248-253.
25. Sironi M, Menozzi G, Comi GP, Cagliani R, Bresolin N, Pozzoli U: Analysis of
intronic conserved elements indicates that functional complexity
might represent a major source of negative selection on non-coding
sequences. Hum Mol Genet 2005, 14:2533-2546.
26. Ovcharenko I, Loots GG, Nobrega MA, Hardison RC, Miller W, Stubbs L:
Evolution and functional classification of vertebrate gene deserts.
Genome Res 2005, 15:137-145.
27. Vinogradov AE: 'Genome design' model: evidence from conserved
intronic sequence in human-mouse comparison. Genome Res 2006,
16:347-354.
28. Lee BR, Kim H, Park TS, Moon S, Cho S, Park T, Lim JM, Han JY: A set of
stage-specific gene transcripts identified in EK stage X and HH stage 3
chick embryos. BMC Dev Biol 2007, 7:60.
29. Sironi M, Menozzi G, Comi GP, Cereda M, Cagliani R, Bresolin N, Pozzoli U:
Gene function and expression level influence the insertion/fixation
dynamics of distinct transposon families in mammalian introns.
Genome Biol 2006, 7:R120.
30. O'Brien KP, Remm M, Sonnhammer EL: Inparanoid: a comprehensive
database of eukaryotic orthologs. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:D476-480.
31. Richter JD: Cytoplasmic polyadenylation in development and beyond.
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1999, 63:446-456.
32. Tadros W, Westwood JT, Lipshitz HD: The mother-to-child transition. Dev
Cell 2007, 12:847-849.
33. Morkel M, Huelsken J, Wakamiya M, Ding J, van de Wetering M, Clevers H,
Taketo MM, Behringer RR, Shen MM, Birchmeier W: Beta-catenin
regulates Cripto- and Wnt3-dependent gene expression programs in
mouse axis and mesoderm formation. Development 2003,
130:6283-6294.
34. O'Farrell PH, Stumpff J, Su TT: Embryonic cleavage cycles: how is a
mouse like a fly? Curr Biol 2004, 14:R35-45.
35. Evsikov AV, Graber JH, Brockman JM, Hampl A, Holbrook AE, Singh P,
Eppig JJ, Solter D, Knowles BB: Cracking the egg: molecular dynamics
and evolutionary aspects of the transition from the fully grown oocyte
to embryo. Genes Dev 2006, 20:2713-2727.
36. Davidson EH: Genomic Regulatory Systems. Development and
Evolution. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2001.
37. Lee S, Kohane I, Kasif S: Genes involved in complex adaptive processes
tend to have highly conserved upstream regions in mammalian
genomes. BMC Genomics 2005, 6:168.
38. Vinogradov AE: 'Genome design' model and multicellular complexity:
golden middle. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:5906-5914.
39. Farh KK, Grimson A, Jan C, Lewis BP, Johnston WK, Lim LP, Burge CB, Bartel
DP: The widespread impact of mammalian MicroRNAs on mRNA
repression and evolution. Science 2005, 310:1817-1821.
40. Rothe M, Pehl M, Taubert H, Jackle H: Loss of gene function through
rapid mitotic cycles in the Drosophila embryo. Nature 1992,
359:156-159.
41. Kamath RS, Fraser AG, Dong Y, Poulin G, Durbin R, Gotta M, Kanapin A, Le
Bot N, Moreno S, Sohrmann M, Welchman DP, Zipperlen P, Ahringer J:
Systematic functional analysis of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome
using RNAi. Nature 2003, 421:231-237.
42. Perrimon N, Engstrom L, Mahowald AP: Zygotic lethals with specific
maternal effect phenotypes in Drosophila melanogaster. I. Loci on the X
chromosome. Genetics 1989, 121:333-352.
43. Perrimon N, Lanjuin A, Arnold C, Noll E: Zygotic lethal mutations with
maternal effect phenotypes in Drosophila melanogaster. II. Loci on the
second and third chromosomes identified by P-element-induced
mutations. Genetics 1996, 144:1681-1692.
44. Birney E, Andrews D, Caccamo M, Chen Y, Clarke L, Coates G, Cox T,
Cunningham F, Curwen V, Cutts T, Down T, Durbin R, Fernandez-Suarez
XM, Flicek P, Graf S, Hammond M, Herrero J, Howe K, Iyer V, Jekosch K,
Kahari A, Kasprzyk A, Keefe D, Kokocinski F, Kulesha E, London D, Longden

Shen-Orr et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/6/R58

I, Melsopp C, Meidl P, Overduin B, et al.: Ensembl 2006. Nucleic Acids Res
2006, 34:D556-561.
45. Zagris N, Matthopoulos D: Stage-specific gene expression in early chick
embryo. Dev Genet 1989, 10:333-338.
46. Lewis BP, Green RE, Brenner SE: Evidence for the widespread coupling of
alternative splicing and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in humans.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:189-192.
47. Pruitt KD, Tatusova T, Maglott DR: NCBI Reference Sequence (RefSeq): a
curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts
and proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:D501-504.
doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-6-r58
Cite this article as: Shen-Orr et al., Composition and regulation of maternal
and zygotic transcriptomes reflects species-specific reproductive mode
Genome Biology 2010, 11:R58

Page 13 of 13

</pre>
</body>
</html>
