<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity Survey (2006-2010): a summary of principal findings</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-258"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Alison R Sherwood"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity Survey
(2006-2010): a summary of principal findings
Alison R Sherwood1*, Akira Kurihara1,2, Kimberly Y Conklin1,3, Thomas Sauvage1, Gernot G Presting4

Abstract
Background: The Hawaiian red algal flora is diverse, isolated, and well studied from a morphological and
anatomical perspective, making it an excellent candidate for assessment using a combination of traditional
taxonomic and molecular approaches. Acquiring and making these biodiversity data freely available in a timely
manner ensures that other researchers can incorporate these baseline findings into phylogeographic studies of
Hawaiian red algae or red algae found in other locations.
Results: A total of 1,946 accessions are represented in the collections from 305 different geographical locations in
the Hawaiian archipelago. These accessions represent 24 orders, 49 families, 152 genera and 252 species/
subspecific taxa of red algae. One order of red algae (the Rhodachlyales) was recognized in Hawaii for the first
time and 196 new island distributional records were determined from the survey collections. One family and four
genera are reported for the first time from Hawaii, and multiple species descriptions are in progress for newly
discovered taxa. A total of 2,418 sequences were generated for Hawaiian red algae in the course of this study 915 for the nuclear LSU marker, 864 for the plastidial UPA marker, and 639 for the mitochondrial COI marker. These
baseline molecular data are presented as neighbor-joining trees to illustrate degrees of divergence within and
among taxa. The LSU marker was typically most conserved, followed by UPA and COI. Phylogenetic analysis of a
set of concatenated LSU, UPA and COI sequences recovered a tree that broadly resembled the current
understanding of florideophyte red algal relationships, but bootstrap support was largely absent above the ordinal
level. Phylogeographic trends are reported here for some common taxa within the Hawaiian Islands and include
examples of those with, as well as without, intraspecific variation.
Conclusions: The UPA and COI markers were determined to be the most useful of the three and are
recommended for inclusion in future algal biodiversity surveys. Molecular data for the survey provide the most
extensive assessment of Hawaiian red algal diversity and, in combination with the morphological/anatomical and
distributional data collected as part of the project, provide a solid baseline data set for future studies of the flora.
The data are freely available via the Hawaiian Algal Database (HADB), which was designed and constructed to
accommodate the results of the project. We present the first DNA sequence reference collection for a tropical
Pacific seaweed flora, whose value extends beyond Hawaii since many Hawaiian taxa are shared with other tropical
areas.

Background
The Rhodophyta, or red algae of Hawaii represent one of
the best studied red algal floras worldwide from a morphological perspective [1], making it an ideal flora for
molecular characterization. Endemism estimates for the
marine (19.5%) and freshwater (20.0%) algal floras of the
* Correspondence: asherwoo@hawaii.edu
1
Botany Department, 3190 Maile Way, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI USA
96822
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

islands are based on species lists from compiled traditional
taxonomic surveys, and the potential for unrecognized
genetic diversity is high [1,2]. It is almost certain that
these estimates will change as molecular techniques are
applied on a more routine basis to the Hawaiian flora and
in other areas of the tropical Pacific. Until this survey, only
a small proportion of the published studies of Hawaiian
Rhodophyta employed molecular approaches, although
those few resulted in substantial taxonomic revision to the
Hawaiian representatives of the genera Akalaphycus,

© 2010 Sherwood et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Galaxaura, Ganonema and Liagora [3-5]. Additionally, a
new red algal order (the Pihiellales) was described from
Hawaiian material as a result of molecular phylogenetic
analyses [6].
There has also been a bias toward the study of large,
conspicuous members of the Hawaiian seaweed flora
[1]. The red algae, however, display a vast array of
morphologies and reproductive strategies [7], and the
breadth of this diversity is often overlooked in general
survey efforts. It is certain that more concentrated
study of the less conspicuous turf and crustose
morphologies, as well as the epiphytic and parasitic
representatives, will yield unrecognized diversity [1,8].
Indeed, examination of a number of red algal taxa
using molecular techniques has revealed cryptic diversity that was previously unrecognized based on morphology and anatomy, e.g. [9,10].
Red algal systematics and taxonomy are fraught with a
number of issues, often making identification difficult.
Since the end of the 19th century, the classification of
red algae has been largely based on female reproductive
anatomy and post-fertilization events [7,11,12]. Later
additions to the suite of taxonomic characters included
the ultrastructure of pit connections between cells [13]
and the use of DNA sequence data [14,15]. Current red
algal systematics usually employs a blend of biological,
morphological and evolutionary species concepts,
depending on the subgroup under study. For example,
although the ability to interbreed and produce fertile
offspring is not usually explicitly tested in phycological
studies, some researchers have shown the biological species concept to be applicable [16,17]. Morphology continues to play a key role in red algal systematics,
although these data are now typically viewed in an evolutionary context, and the inclusion of molecular data
has become commonplace in the last two decades.
The traditional system of relying exclusively on reproductive characters for taxonomic purposes has several
disadvantages. These characters can be evaluated only
for those taxa that undergo sexual reproduction, which
may be encountered rarely in some taxa. Furthermore, a
number of red algae from Hawaii are believed to be
strictly asexual, including the genera Stylonema, Chroodactylon, Erythrocladia, Erythrotrichia, Compsopogon
and Hildenbrandia [1,18,19]. For others, only asexual
stages have been found in Hawaii, even though they are
known to be sexually reproductive in other geographical
regions (e.g. Peyssonnelia [1]). Some taxa are also highly
seasonal in their timing of reproduction, meaning that
collections must be made in a narrow window of the
year to observe the necessary characters (e.g. Acrosymphyton, Dudresnaya and Naccaria [1]). Still other taxa
rarely undergo sexual reproduction, with no apparent
seasonal pattern (e.g. Acrochaetium [1]).

Page 2 of 29

Heteromorphic taxa (those with morphologically
distinct gametophyte and sporophyte life history phases)
present another challenge for red algal systematics and,
in Hawaii, include members of the Bangiales, Batrachospermales, Bonnemaisoniales, Gigartinales and some
members of the Nemaliales [1,2,20]. Until recently,
researchers have relied on culturing methods to link
heteromorphic counterparts of the same taxon, and this
approach has had profound impacts on the taxonomy of
red algae [21,22]. A number of taxa in the Hawaiian
Islands are known for which these two phases are spatially separated and morphologically distinguishable, and
collecting often results in the recovery of only one of
these phases. Often the gametophyte is the more conspicuous of the two generations, as an upright phase,
while the tetrasporophyte is an overlooked filamentous
or crustose stage [1,23]. In cases like these, DNA
sequences associated with each morphological specimen
can reveal molecular identity of morphologically distinct
life history stages.
Biodiversity research is based on the ability to apply
taxonomic names to collections. This is often not simple for the red algae, for reasons described above.
DNA barcoding is a more recent development in biodiversity studies that has the potential to allow greater
discrimination among cryptic species than traditional
taxonomic methods. DNA barcodes are short, speciesspecific DNA sequences from one or more genetic
loci, allowing for differentiation of individuals at the
species level [24]. The purpose of a DNA barcode is to
assign unknown individuals to species and to enhance
the discovery of new species [25,26], both of which are
fundamental aims of this project. One of the major
components of the present study is the acquisition and
analysis of short DNA marker sequences from the
nuclear (partial 28 S rRNA gene, or LSU [27]), plastidial (partial 23 S rRNA gene, Universal Plastid Amplicon, or UPA [28,29]) and mitochondrial (partial
cytochrome c oxidase I gene, or COI [9]) genomes of
Hawaiian red algae to assess intraspecific variation and
to provide a DNA sequence framework for the Hawaiian Rhodophyta.
The Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity Survey
(2006-2010) was undertaken to document and archive
the marine, freshwater and terrestrial red algae of the
Hawaiian Islands with an unprecedented depth of analysis and coverage by vouchering morphological samples
and total genomic DNA extracts and undertaking an
assessment of DNA sequence diversity for as many samples as possible. Compilations of freely available taxonomic data sets such as this fulfil the mandate of the
“Biodiversity Commons” [30]. Resulting archived collections are invaluable for studies into the phylogenetic
relationships among taxa, species-level descriptions of

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

the flora, preliminary population genetic analyses, and
biogeographic studies within the Hawaiian Islands and
among other tropical Pacific island systems.
The Hawaiian archipelago extends in a northwesterly
direction for almost 2,400 km, includes a series of small
islands, atolls and seamounts [31], and is well known as
a center of endemism and biological uniqueness [32]. In
2006 the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands were declared
the Papahanaumokuakea National Marine Monument,
and this large portion of the archipelago is understudied
for most algae. An imminent need exists to document
the biodiversity of this unique island chain in the face of
threats from ongoing alien and/or invasive species, algal
blooms, climate change and corresponding sea-level rise
[33,34]. Characterizing native biodiversity provides
essential baseline data for future detection of algal introductions, and for monitoring changes in assemblages at
particular sites. To this end, we undertook a series of
collecting expeditions and analyses to document the
Hawaiian red algal diversity, and here present a
summary of our findings.

Page 3 of 29

Results
Diversity of sampling locations

A total of 305 sites were sampled in the Hawaiian
Rhodophyta Biodiversity Project; 293 from the Main
Hawaiian Islands (MHI) and 12 from the Northwestern
Hawaiian Islands (NWHI) (Figure 1, Additional file 1).
The vast majority of the collecting sites were marine or
brackish (290), while a much smaller number of freshwater (13) and terrestrial (2) locations were also
included. Marine and brackish water sites were typically
located in the intertidal and shallow subtidal areas,
although some collections from SCUBA depth (up to ca.
60 m) were also included. Hawaii Undersea Research
Laboratory (HURL) submersible collections (a total of
20 “sites”, or container collections) were labelled according to dive and container data and provided representation from Hawaiian deep water habitats, but are not
included in the above site totals since they are not
accompanied by GPS data.
Seventeen sites yielded large numbers (≥25) of accessions (red algal individuals), including two from the

Figure 1 Survey locations for the Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity Project. Map of the Main Hawaiian Islands showing the distribution of
295 collecting sites from the Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity Project (12 sites from the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands were also sampled but
are not illustrated on this map).

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

island of Hawaii, three from Kauai, three from Maui,
one from Molokai and eight from Oahu (Figure 2).
Although the high number of accessions from these
sites is partly based on accessibility (especially those
from Oahu, which is where the authors’ laboratories are
based), they are still highly diverse locations that, in
most cases, were surveyed multiple times because of
their impressive numbers of taxa.
Summary of Rhodophyta collections

The vast majority of accessions analyzed were from
marine and brackish locations (1,928), while 16 were
from freshwater habitats and two were from terrestrial
locations. A total of 24 orders, 49 families, 152 genera
and 252 species/subspecific taxa of red algae are represented in the collections (species counts do not include
those identified only to genus as “sp.”). Additional file 2
presents a checklist of taxa collected, identified and analyzed as part of the biodiversity survey, including new
island and state records.
New records reported here do not include most of the
coralline red algae (orders Corallinales and Sporolithales), which are being studied in detail by other
researchers. In our new records, we included specimens
from the Bernice P. Bishop Museum (BISH) that were
not reported in Abbott’s 1999 [1] assessment of distributional records, and also compared our distributional

Page 4 of 29

data to publications since this treatise and to those not
covered therein. Included are those for freshwater red
algae [35-39], descriptions of more recently recognized
species of marine algae (e.g. Dasya atropurpurea [40];
the order Pihiellales [6]) and reports of previously
unrecognized taxa (e.g. marine species of the genus
Hildenbrandia [19]).
One new order of red algae (the Rhodachlyales) was
recorded from our survey collections, although a
number of additional new ordinal names are
applied compared to those listed in Abbott [1] due to
nomenclatural revision and inclusion of previously
unreported taxa (i.e. the orders Acrosymphytales,
Batrachospermales, Colaconematales, Compsopogonales, Halymeniales, Hildenbrandiales, Nemastomatales, Peyssonneliales, Pihiellales, Plocamiales,
Rhodachlyales, Sporolithales, Stylonematales and Thoreales). The family Rhodachlyaceae is reported for the
first time, as are the genera Chroothece, Madagascaria,
Pseudobangia and Rhodachlya. Species designations for
most of these newly reported genera are still being
assessed, but it is likely that many of them represent
undescribed species. Many new island distributional
records (196 in total) were determined from the survey
collections (Additional file 2).
Abbott [1] listed 343 species of marine red algae in
the Hawaiian Islands, of which 218 were also identified

Figure 2 Sites yielding large numbers of accessions. Collecting sites with greater than (or equal to) 25 accessions are listed, by island, with
their total number of accessions.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 5 of 29

Figure 3 Sequence counts by order. The number of sequences for the LSU (blue), UPA (red) and COI (green) markers for each red algal order
studied as part of the Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity Survey.

Figure 4 Comparison of sequence marker data for biodiversity assessment. UPGMA phenograms for Hawaiian Rhodophyta based on
nuclear (top panel), plastidial (center panel) and mitochondrial sequences (bottom panel). Differences in the resolution of the three markers are
evident. Scale on y-axis = evolutionary distances based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood method.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 6 of 29

Figure 7 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
Batrachospermales, Colaconematales, Hildenbrandiales,
Rhodachlyales and Thoreales. Sequence diversity based on the
LSU nuclear marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging
to the orders Batrachospermales, Colaconematales, Hildenbrandiales,
Rhodachlyales and Thoreales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the
Maximum Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0.
Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Figure 5 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
Bangiales, Compsopogonales, Erythropeltidales and
Stylonematales. Sequence diversity based on the UPA plastid marker
for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the orders
Bangiales, Compsopogonales, Erythropeltidales and Stylonematales.
Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood
nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Figure 6 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
Bangiales, Compsopogonales and Erythropeltidales. Sequence
diversity based on the COI mitochondrial marker for surveyed
Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the orders Bangiales,
Compsopogonales and Erythropeltidales. Neighbor-joining tree is
based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in
MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

from our biodiversity survey collections. The remaining
125 taxa, which included large numbers of species in
the genera Colaconema, Ceramium/Gayliella, Herposiphonia and Polysiphonia/Neosiphonia, were not identified during our survey; however, these are primarily
diminutive taxa that require a great deal of specialized
morphological expertise for identification, and were not
surveyed as readily as the more conspicuous macrophyte

Figure 8 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
Batrachospermales, Colaconematales, Hildenbrandiales and
Thoreales. Sequence diversity based on the UPA plastid marker for
surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the orders
Batrachospermales, Colaconematales, Hildenbrandiales and
Thoreales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Figure 9 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
Batrachospermales, Colaconematales, Hildenbrandiales and
Thoreales. Sequence diversity based on the COI mitochondrial
marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the orders
Batrachospermales, Colaconematales, Hildenbrandiales and
Thoreales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

taxa. It is also possible that some of these taxa are not
permanent members of the Hawaiian red algal flora
since attempts to collect from reported localities have
not yielded examples of these taxa.

Page 7 of 29

Figure 11 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
Bonnemaisoniales. Sequence diversity based on the UPA plastid
marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the order
Bonnemaisoniales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

HQ422585-HQ423135] (Figure 3, Additional file 3). The
LSU and UPA markers amplified and sequenced across
the red algae with the greatest ease, as illustrated by
the total number of sequences obtained. However, the
resolution of the three markers was quite different,
with the COI marker being the least conserved (as

Summary of DNA sequence data

A total of 2,418 sequences were generated for Hawaiian
red algae through this study - 915 for the nuclear LSU
marker [GenBank: FJ554841-FJ554852, GU223830GU223850, HQ421677-HQ422584], 864 for the plastidial
UPA marker [GenBank: EU628656, FJ554863-FJ554875,
HM582901-HM582908, EF426600-EF426661, HQ420906HQ421676], and 639 for the mitochondrial COI marker
[GenBank: EU636722, FJ554853-FJ554858, HM582889HM582900, EU146155-EU146190, GU223879-GU223896,

Figure 10 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
Bonnemaisoniales. Sequence diversity based on the LSU nuclear
marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the order
Bonnemaisoniales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

Figure 12 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
Bonnemaisoniales. Sequence diversity based on the COI
mitochondrial marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens
belonging to the order Bonnemaisoniales. Mitochondrial lineages 13 of Asparagopsis taxiformis are labelled following the convention of
[43,45]. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum Composite
Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions
per site.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 8 of 29

Figure 14 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
Corallinales and Sporolithales. Sequence diversity based on the
UPA plastid marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging
to the orders Corallinales and Sporolithales. Neighbor-joining tree is
based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in
MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.
Figure 13 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
Corallinales and Sporolithales. Sequence diversity based on the
LSU nuclear marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging
to the orders Corallinales and Sporolithales. Neighbor-joining tree is
based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in
MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

evidenced by the abundance of high divergences, or
long branches), the LSU marker being relatively divergent at higher taxonomic levels but conserved for closely related species, and the UPA marker being
approximately twice as conserved as COI, but with a
similar topological pattern (Figure 4).

DNA sequence diversity of Hawaiian Rhodophyta

Sequence data for each of the three markers sequenced
(UPA, COI and LSU) were employed to investigate the
molecular diversity of Hawaiian red algae. Sequence
diversity for each sampled taxon for the three markers
is presented as a series of neighbor-joining (NJ) trees in
Figures 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34,
35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 (except for the LSU marker for
the Bangiales, Compsopogonales, Erythropeltidales and
Stylonematales, since very few sequences were obtained).

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 9 of 29

Figure 15 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
Corallinales and Sporolithales. Sequence diversity based on the
COI mitochondrial marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens
belonging to the orders Corallinales and Sporolithales. Neighborjoining tree is based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood
nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Taxa are grouped by order (or groups of related orders),
or by family (or parts of families, or groups of families)
in the case of the Ceramiales (due to tree size). Since
only short molecular markers were used (COI, which is
employed as the DNA barcode for red algae [9,41] and
UPA and LSU, which are also <700 bp in length), we
did not attempt to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships among our collections for the individual marker
data sets, nor assess branch support, but instead focused
on patterns of diversity for species and groups of closely
related species (i.e. DNA barcoding analyses [9,41,42]).
Thus, higher order relationships in the NJ sequence
diversity trees should not be evaluated.
Some trends of marker utility are evident. Overall, a
pattern of #LSU sequences > #UPA sequences > #COI
sequences was observed in a number of instances,
including for the Acrosymphytales, Gigartinales, Nemastomatales, Peyssonneliales, Plocamiales and Pihiellales

Figure 16 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
Acrosymphytales, Gigartinales, Nemastomatales,
Peyssonneliales and Plocamiales. Sequence diversity based on
the LSU nuclear marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens
belonging to the orders Acrosymphytales, Gigartinales,
Nemastomatales, Peyssonneliales and Plocamiales. Neighbor-joining
tree is based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood nucleotide
model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 10 of 29

Figure 18 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
Acrosymphytales, Gigartinales, Nemastomatales,
Peyssonneliales and Plocamiales. Sequence diversity based on
the COI mitochondrial marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens
belonging to the orders Acrosymphytales, Gigartinales,
Nemastomatales, Peyssonneliales and Plocamiales. COI lineages A
and B of Kappaphycus are labelled following the convention of [27].
Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum Composite
Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions
per site.

Figure 17 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
Acrosymphytales, Gigartinales, Nemastomatales,
Peyssonneliales, Pihiellales and Plocamiales. Sequence diversity
based on the UPA plastid marker for surveyed Rhodophyta
specimens belonging to the orders Acrosymphytales, Gigartinales,
Nemastomatales, Peyssonneliales, Pihiellales and Plocamiales. UPA
lineages A and B of Kappaphycus are labelled following the
convention of [27]. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

(Figures 16, 17 and 18, Additional file 3), the Gelidiales,
Gracilariales and Halymeniales (Figures 19, 20 and 21,
Additional file 3), and many of the Ceramiales (Figures
28, 29, 30, 31, 32 and 33, Additional file 3). In contrast
to this, the large number of COI sequences for the
Bonnemaisoniales (Figure 12) relative to LSU (Figure
10) and UPA (Figure 11) is due to targeting of the COI
region for a mtDNA-based phylogeographic study [43].
Overall, amplification and sequencing success was much
higher for the LSU and UPA markers than for the COI

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 11 of 29

Figure 20 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
Gelidiales, Gracilariales and Halymeniales. Sequence diversity
based on the UPA plastid marker for surveyed Rhodophyta
specimens belonging to the orders Gelidiales, Gracilariales and
Halymeniales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

Figure 19 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
Gelidiales, Gracilariales and Halymeniales. Sequence diversity
based on the LSU nuclear marker for surveyed Rhodophyta
specimens belonging to the orders Gelidiales, Gracilariales and
Halymeniales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

marker, based on the laboratory protocols employed in
this study.
A number of taxa were represented by multiple clusters of sequences according to one or more of the markers, including Hydrolithon reinboldii (Corallinales)
(Figures 13, 14 and 15), Grateloupia filicina (Halymeniales) (Figures 19, 20 and 21), Dichotomaria marginata
(Nemaliales) (Figures 22 and 24), Champia parvula

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Figure 21 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
Gelidiales, Gracilariales and Halymeniales. Sequence diversity
based on the COI mitochondrial marker for surveyed Rhodophyta
specimens belonging to the orders Gelidiales, Gracilariales and
Halymeniales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

(Rhodymeniales) (Figure 27), Spyridia filamentosa (Ceramiales) (Figures 28, 29 and 30), Martensia flabelliformis
and M. fragilis (Ceramiales) (Figures 31, 32 and 33),
Laurencia crustiformans and L. mcdermidiae (Ceramiales) (Figures 35 and 36), and Amansia glomerata
(Ceramiales) (Figures 37, 38 and 39). These clusters may
be due to cryptic or incipient speciation, or phylogeographic structure, and these taxa should be investigated
through detailed anatomical and morphological comparison of specimens (and comparison to the type specimens) as well as increased sampling for molecular
analyses, in order to clarify which of these processes
accounts for the diversity observed in the NJ trees.

Page 12 of 29

Figure 22 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
Nemaliales. Sequence diversity based on the LSU nuclear marker
for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the order
Nemaliales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

Other taxa were identified that will require taxonomic
attention to reconcile patterns of molecular diversity
with currently applied taxonomic names. For example,
the genera Ahnfeltiopsis (Gigartinales) (Figures 16 and
18), Peyssonnelia (Peyssonneliales) (Figures 16 and 17)
and Gelidium (Gelidiales) (Figures 19 and 20) all have
clusters of sequences for at least one marker with multiple species names applied. Along these same lines, some
pairs of taxa were shown to possibly be conspecific

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 13 of 29

Figure 23 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
Nemaliales. Sequence diversity based on the UPA plastid marker
for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the order
Nemaliales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

according to all three molecular markers employed here
(e.g. Gracilaria eppihippisora /G. salicornia, and G. coronopifolia /G. dotyi [Figures 19 and 20]).
Phylogenetic analysis of concatenated UPA, LSU and
COI sequences

Although sequences for each of the three markers are
short in length, when concatenated they yield 1,321 bp
of data (with no indels and after trimming ambiguous
regions) that can be used for phylogenetic analyses. A
RAxML maximum likelihood analysis of sequence data

Figure 24 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
Nemaliales. Sequence diversity based on the COI mitochondrial
marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the order
Nemaliales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

for all accessions for which sequences of all three markers were available (n = 284 concatenated sequences)
yielded a phylogenetic tree (Figure 40) that generally
resembled current understanding of florideophyte red
algal evolutionary relationships; however, bootstrap support was generally present only at and below the level of

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Figure 25 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
Rhodymeniales. Sequence diversity based on the LSU nuclear
marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the order
Rhodymeniales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

Page 14 of 29

Figure 26 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
Rhodymeniales. Sequence diversity based on the UPA plastid
marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the order
Rhodymeniales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

family. Of the 17 red algal orders included in the analysis, nine were supported as monophyletic, five were
represented by only a single accession and thus did not
have an associated bootstrap value, and three were not
supported as monophyletic (the Ceramiales, Gigartinales
and Nemaliales) (Figure 40). A total of 37 families were
represented in the analysis, with 24 supported as monophyletic, nine represented by only a single accession,
and four not supported as monophyletic (the Dasyaceae,
Wrangeliaceae (topologically monophyletic but lacking
bootstrap support), Phyllophoraceae, and Dumontiaceae)
(Figure 40).
Phylogeographic analyses of widespread taxa

Although our collecting strategy was to analyze
approximately three specimens per taxon, several common taxa (as identified using [1] or more recent references listed in [44]) were represented in the survey
collections by numerous sequences for the mitochondrial COI marker (Amansia glomerata (Figure 41a),

Figure 27 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
Rhodymeniales. Sequence diversity based on the COI
mitochondrial marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens
belonging to the order Rhodymeniales. Neighbor-joining tree is
based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in
MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Figure 28 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
families Callithamniaceae, Ceramiaceae, Spyridiaceae and
Wrangeliaceae of the order Ceramiales. Sequence diversity based
on the LSU nuclear marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens
belonging to the families Callithamniaceae, Ceramiaceae,
Spyridiaceae and Wrangeliaceae of the order Ceramiales. Neighborjoining tree is based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood
nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Page 15 of 29

Figure 29 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
families Callithamniaceae, Ceramiaceae, Spyridiaceae and
Wrangeliaceae of the order Ceramiales. Sequence diversity based
on the UPA plastid marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens
belonging to the families Callithamniaceae, Ceramiaceae,
Spyridiaceae and Wrangeliaceae of the order Ceramiales. Neighborjoining tree is based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood
nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 16 of 29

Figure 31 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
families Dasyaceae, Delesseriaceae and Sarcomeniaceae of the
order Ceramiales. Sequence diversity based on the LSU nuclear
marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the
families Dasyaceae, Delesseriaceae and Sarcomeniaceae of the order
Ceramiales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

Figure 30 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
families Callithamniaceae, Ceramiaceae, Spyridiaceae and
Wrangeliaceae of the order Ceramiales. Sequence diversity based
on the COI mitochondrial marker for surveyed Rhodophyta
specimens belonging to the families Callithamniaceae, Ceramiaceae,
Spyridiaceae and Wrangeliaceae of the order Ceramiales. Neighborjoining tree is based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood
nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Asparagopsis taxiformis (Figure 41b), Dasya iridescens
(Figure 41c) and Dichotomaria marginata (Figure
41d)). Preliminary sequence analyses suggested that
intraspecific variation was present for each of these,
and thus they were employed as phylogeographic
examples to explore whether general patterns are discernable for members of the Hawaiian red algal flora
(Figure 41a-d).

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 17 of 29

Figure 33 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the
families Dasyaceae, Delesseriaceae and Sarcomeniaceae of the
order Ceramiales. Sequence diversity based on the COI
mitochondrial marker for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens
belonging to the families Dasyaceae, Delesseriaceae and
Sarcomeniaceae of the order Ceramiales. Neighbor-joining tree is
based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in
MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Figure 32 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
Dasyaceae, Delesseriaceae and Sarcomeniaceae of the order
Ceramiales. Sequence diversity based on the UPA plastid marker
for surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the families
Dasyaceae, Delesseriaceae and Sarcomeniaceae of the order
Ceramiales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

formed at the 95% connection limit; one that contains
three samples from the south shore of the island of Oahu
(which possibly represent a recent introduction), belonging to Lineage 4 (sensu [43,45]), and the remainder forming a large network that is broadly divided into Lineage 1
(widespread throughout the MHI and Nihoa) and Lineage 2 (NWHI and MHI in distribution) (Figure 41b; [43]).
Dasya iridescens

A. glomerata is widely distributed throughout the
Hawaiian archipelago [1]. Statistical parsimony analysis
yielded three distinct networks; one containing NWHI
samples (French Frigate Shoals), and two containing
MHI samples (Figure 41a; [10]).

A single network was formed by statistical parsimony
analysis containing both MHI and NWHI samples
(Figure 41c). The NWHI samples were closely related
to one another and separated from MHI samples.
Additionally, greater nucleotide diversity was present
for MHI samples, especially those from the island of
Oahu.

Asparagopsis taxiformis

Dichotomaria marginata

This species is sought after as a food source in the
Hawaiian culture [1]. Statistical parsimony analysis of
COI sequences for this taxon yielded two networks

Two networks were formed by statistical parsimony analysis, both of which contained only MHI samples (Figure
41d). Samples from the island of Molokai formed two

Amansia glomerata

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Figure 34 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
family Rhodomelaceae (part 1) of the order Ceramiales.
Sequence diversity based on the LSU nuclear marker for surveyed
Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the family Rhodomelaceae
(primarily the Laurencia complex) of the order Ceramiales. Neighborjoining tree is based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood
nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Page 18 of 29

Figure 35 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
family Rhodomelaceae (part 1) of the order Ceramiales.
Sequence diversity based on the UPA plastid marker for surveyed
Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the family Rhodomelaceae
(primarily the Laurencia complex) of the order Ceramiales. Neighborjoining tree is based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood
nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Figure 36 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the family
Rhodomelaceae (part 1) of the order Ceramiales. Sequence
diversity based on the COI mitochondrial marker for surveyed
Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the family Rhodomelaceae
(primarily the Laurencia complex) of the order Ceramiales. Neighborjoining tree is based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood
nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions per site.

Page 19 of 29

Figure 37 Neighbor-joining tree of LSU sequences of the
family Rhodomelaceae (part 2) of the order Ceramiales.
Sequence diversity based on the COI mitochondrial marker for
surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the family
Rhodomelaceae (excluding the Laurencia complex) of the order
Ceramiales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale
bar = substitutions per site.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Figure 38 Neighbor-joining tree of UPA sequences of the
family Rhodomelaceae (part 2) of the order Ceramiales.
Sequence diversity based on the COI mitochondrial marker for
surveyed Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the family
Rhodomelaceae (excluding the Laurencia complex) of the order
Ceramiales. Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum
Composite Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar =
substitutions per site.

Page 20 of 29

Figure 39 Neighbor-joining tree of COI sequences of the family
Rhodomelaceae (part 2) of the order Ceramiales. Sequence
diversity based on the COI mitochondrial marker for surveyed
Rhodophyta specimens belonging to the family Rhodomelaceae
(excluding the Laurencia complex) of the order Ceramiales.
Neighbor-joining tree is based on the Maximum Composite
Likelihood nucleotide model in MEGA 4.0. Scale bar = substitutions
per site.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 21 of 29

diversity across the sampled range (based on p-distances, and reported as sequence identity) (Table 1).
These species - Acanthophora pacifica, Coelothrix irregularis, Haliptilon subulatum, Laurencia majuscula,
Lithophyllum insipidum, Polysiphonia howei and Tolypiocladia glomerulata - are all presumed to be native to
the Hawaiian Islands [1] and represent three different
orders of red algae (the Ceramiales, Corallinales and
Rhodymeniales). These examples demonstrate that not
all widespread Hawaiian red algal taxa have high intraspecific divergence, and hence lend further support to
Asparagopsis taxiformis, Amansia glomerata and Dichotomaria marginata consisting of species complexes in
the Hawaiian Islands.

Figure 40 RAxML analysis of concatenated LSU, UPA and COI
sequences. Maximum-likelihood tree of 284 florideophyte red algal
samples based on an alignment of concatenated LSU, UPA and COI
sequences. Taxa are summarized by family. Bootstrap values ≥70%
are shown.

distinct haplotypes in the most populated network, while
samples from the other islands (Kauai, Oahu, Maui and
Hawaii) were represented in the most geographically
diverse haplotypes (Figure 41d).
In contrast to these findings, a number of taxa were
analyzed for which multiple sequences were obtained
(for at least two markers), but with little or no sequence

Discussion
The Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity Survey yielded
only a few new taxonomic records for the Hawaiian
Islands, but many new distributional records. The flora
has been remarkably well-studied from a morphological
and anatomical perspective, most notably by Abbott [1],
and many of her designations are supported by our
molecular investigations. However, many taxa have also
been revealed to be in need of in-depth taxonomic
study based on our molecular survey data due to
instances of suspected cryptic or incipient speciation (e.
g. Amansia glomerata and Spyridia filamentosa; see
results for full list), or conspecificity (e.g. Gracilaria
eppihippisora and G. salicornia). As such, our survey
data provide a unique opportunity to flag Hawaiian red
algal taxa for further study. Although identification of
these taxonomic issues, rather than full resolution, was
the goal of the Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity Survey, several of these flagged taxa have been investigated
in detail under the auspices of the project (e.g.
[8,10,43]), and we hope that other researchers will be
able to make use of the data for similar purposes, for it
is detailed taxonomic studies that will ultimately lead to
a floristic revision of the Hawaiian red algae. Also, additional taxonomic expertise for some of the lineages of
red algae investigated during the project (in particular,
for many of the Ceramiales), will be needed for taxonomic resolution. However, despite adding relatively few
new taxa to the species list, we have substantially
updated the reported range of many taxa, with 196 new
island-level distributional records included from our
sampling records.
The vast majority of accessions analyzed were from
marine and brackish locations (1,928, or 99%), while 16
were from freshwater habitats and two were from terrestrial locations. This breakdown is close to the accepted
consensus that, worldwide, approximately 97% of red
algal species are marine [46].

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 22 of 29

Figure 41 Phylogeographic analysis of selected Hawaiian Rhodophyta. Statistical parsimony networks (95% connection limit) of four
Hawaiian red algal taxa for which multiple collections were analyzed (a - Asparagopsis taxiformis, b - Ceramium dumosertum, c - Dasya iridescens,
d - Amansia glomerata). The number of sequences for each haplotype is given in parentheses. Rectangles represent the hypothesized ancestral
haplotype. Small circles indicate hypothetical intermediate haplotypes with single nucleotide changes. Haplotype size is proportional to
frequency (relative for each taxon).

The three molecular markers chosen for diversity
assessment of our red algal collections (nuclear LSU,
mitochondrial COI and plastid UPA) differ markedly in
both their degree of conservation and ease of amplification/sequencing, based on the protocols that were
applied to our survey samples. Since the Hawaiian

Rhodophyta Biodiversity Survey encompassed an evolutionarily diverse set of samples, and we aimed to generate a large number of sequences (i.e. >2,000), we were
constrained by the need for minimal variations of protocol for each marker (including primer design, PCR cocktail components/concentrations and amplification

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 23 of 29

Table 1 Hawaiian Rhodophyta with low intraspecific divergence
Taxon

Represented range

COI*

UPA*

LSU*

Coelothrix irregularis (Rhodymeniales)

Oahu, Molokai, Maui, Hawaii

0.996-1.000 (5)

1.000 (5)

1.000 (5)

Lithophyllum insipidum (Corallinales)

Oahu, Lanai, Hawaii

0.991-0.995 (3)

0.980-0.997 (4) 0.991-1.000 (6)

Haliptilon subulatum (Corallinales)

Kauai, Oahu, Molokai, Hawaii

0.990-1.000 (7)

0.997-1.000 (4) 1.000 (6)

Tolypiocladia glomerulata (Ceramiales) Oahu, Molokai, Maui, Hawaii

1.000 (7)

1.000 (7)

Polysiphonia howei (Ceramiales)

Oahu, Maui, Hawaii

1.000 (5)

0.997-1.000 (4) 1.000 (6)

Acanthophora pacifica (Ceramiales)

Oahu, Molokai, Maui, Kahoolawe, Hawaii

0.998-1.000 (8)

1.000 (7)

Laurencia majuscula (Ceramiales)

Laysan, French Frigate Shoals, Kauai, Oahu, Molokai, Lanai 0.995-1.000 (12) 1.000 (14)

1.000 (3)
1.000 (7)
1.000 (19)

*divergences reported as sequence identity (number of sequences in parentheses following sequence identities)

conditions). The LSU and UPA markers were sequenced
without modification (i.e. according to the primers and
conditions described in [27] and [29] respectively), and
these first two markers yielded the highest and second
highest overall number of sequences, respectively. In
contrast, the COI marker required the design of an
additional reverse primer, and yielded the lowest number of sequences. Ease of data acquisition and performance characteristics of each of the three markers are
further examined and discussed in [47], as well as below.
All clean sequences (those with clearly readable chromatograms that could be assembled with confidence)
were retained in HADB, regardless of whether or not
they corresponded to the taxon under study; contaminant sequences (e.g. from epiphytes) were re-labelled as
such and given new accession numbers. All three markers yielded some contaminant sequences, but the UPA
marker yielded the highest number (30), followed by
LSU (15) and COI (7).
The LSU marker was the simplest for which to reliably
obtain clean sequence data; only a single pair of primers

was needed, and most samples were successfully
sequenced on the first attempt. The disadvantage of the
LSU marker, however, was a lack of reliable species-level
resolution (e.g. Figure 21, Nemaliales LSU sequence data
show no divergence between some members of the genera
Akalaphycus, Ganonema, Izziella, Liagora and Trichogloea). A recent investigation of the characteristics and
phylogenetic “performance” of the LSU, UPA and COI
markers based on this same data set confirmed that the
LSU marker is the most conserved of the three, that it was
the easiest for which to obtain sequence data, and illustrated that florideophyte red algal sequence data for the
marker became saturated at F84 distances of approximately 0.30 (although there was variation when individual
orders were examined) [47]. The LSU marker was
included in the survey to provide representation from the
nuclear genome (both the UPA and COI are organellar
markers). However, given that the level of resolution for
the LSU marker differs so strongly from the other two
markers (Figure 4), it would be difficult to recommend its
inclusion in future biodiversity surveys.

Figure 42 Representation of base frequencies along 663 nt of Rhodophyta COI. Nucleotide frequency values (G, C, A, and T from top to
bottom row) for a given site are reported on a red to blue scale (0 to 100% conservation). The positions of GazR1 [9] and our nested primer,
R686, are displayed and the GC-rich region in which R686 lies is highlighted. The numerous polyTs in COI 3’end (four or more successive
thymidines), potentially affecting GazR1 specificity, can be seen as thick blue bands. The multiple alignment used to create this figure contained
accessions EF136591-EF434941, Z47547 NC_001677 and AF118119 (Gigartinales and Gracilariales), Z48930, D89861 and NC_000887 (Cyanidiales),
and AF114794 and NC_002007 (Bangiales), which were selected for their length, extending past GazR1. The region shown depicts sites 205-868
of the Cyanidium caldarium (Z48930) complete COI sequence.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

The UPA marker, which was first described in 2006
[28] and tested for a selection of algal lineages in 2007
[29], can be amplified and sequenced for most cyanobacterial and plastid-containing algal lineages, with only
a few genus-level exceptions noted to date (e.g. Cladophora, Symbiodinium). This universality is exceptional
among algal primers, and lends great potential for the
use of this marker in assessment of environmental samples that contain multiple algal lineages [48]. For this
reason, we believe it is important to continue to generate framework data for this marker for as many algal
representatives as possible. Recent work has shown that
the UPA marker falls between in the COI and LSU markers in terms of ease of data acquisition, that it is quite
conserved (although slightly less so than LSU), and that
saturation is not an issue for any group of the florideophyte red algae based on UPA sequences [47].
The COI marker was somewhat more difficult to
amplify and sequence across red algal lineages, and two
combinations of primers were used to obtain the 639
sequences reported here (although new primers have
been designed recently that are generally more successful; G.W. Saunders, pers. comm.). Others have reported
requiring up to seven primer combinations to obtain
COI sequences for samples within a single family of red
algae [49]. However, the COI marker is widely recognized as the DNA barcode for red algae [9,41,49], and
as such, provides a useful sequence data set due to the
immediate comparative power of COI sequences against
the 11,925 red algal DNA barcode sequences in the Barcode of Life Data Systems (BOLD) v.2.5 database
(accessed 05 November 2010 [50]). This trade-off
between universal amplification and resolution has been
noted in the past [42,49]. We recently reported that
these COI florideophyte red algal sequence data were
the most difficult of the three markers to obtain (i.e.
low ease of acquisition), but that the COI marker is the
least conserved (and is especially variable at the third
codon position), and that saturation of the entire data
set occurs at F84 distances of approximately 0.11
(although this number varies substantially depending on
which order is being examined) [47].
Maximum likelihood analysis of the concatenated LSU
+UPA+COI sequences yielded a phylogenetic tree that
included support for most of the florideophyte red algal
orders and families included in the data set (i.e. 3/17
orders and 4/37 families were not recovered as monophyletic; Figure 40). A number of explanations may be
responsible for the lack of full resolution in the phylogeny, including insufficient sequence data [47,51], insufficient taxonomic representation, or unresolved
identifications of some specimens. Verbruggen et al.
[51], in their recent research on the data requirements
for resolving the red algal tree of life, indicated that up

Page 24 of 29

to 2.8 × 10 5 nucleotides of sequence data may be
required to resolve some regions of the phylogeny,
which is orders of magnitude more data than that provided by our concatenated three-marker data set. We
[47] preliminarily evaluated the phylogenetic performance of the three markers with the same data set by
assessing changes in neighbour-joining bootstrap support with the addition of marker data (progressing from
UPA, to UPA+LSU, to UPA+LSU+COI), and also concluded that the fully concatenated phylogeny was supported largely at the family and ordinal level, with
higher level relationships not resolved. Nonetheless, the
sequences of the three markers will make a valuable
addition to the red algal species assignment framework
of data, and in concatenated form are useful for examining phylogenetic relationships at lower taxonomic levels.
Considering the taxa studied using statistical parsimony analysis (Figure 41), the debate arises as to
whether observed breaks in networks represent strong
phylogeographic signal or species boundaries. It has
been suggested that the 95% connection limit under statistical parsimony, which is commonly used in phylogeographic studies, is a useful criterion for indicating
biological species boundaries [52]. Applying this criterion to our analyses suggests that cryptic species may be
common in the Hawaiian red algal flora. Only one of
the four taxa investigated formed a single haplotype network at the 95% connection limit (Dasya iridescens),
while the remaining taxa formed two (Asparagopsis taxiformis and Dichotomaria marginata) or three networks
(Amansia glomerata). If this pattern holds true for a
number of other Hawaiian red algal taxa (which will
only be determined as more taxa are studied in depth),
then there may be many more species than currently
recognized in the flora. Sorting out phylogeographic signal from species boundaries requires an understanding
of the limits of phenotypic plasticity for each case. Most
of our identifications were made, at least preliminarily,
based on morphology and anatomy. We largely relied
on the detailed descriptions of Abbott [1] but supplemented these with more recent or taxon-specific studies
that were relevant to each taxon (a list of this additional
literature can be found in [44]). Nonetheless, lately there
have been a number of cases in the phycological literature where cryptic species complexes have been revealed
through molecular data, and in a number of these
instances other characters (morphological, anatomical,
life history, physiological, etc.) have later been identified
that allowed recognition of the species on grounds other
than molecular data, e.g. [49,53]. More detailed phylogeographic, morphological/anatomical and life history
analyses of suspected species complexes will be necessary for confirmation, but the DNA sequences from the
present survey provide a valuable starting point for

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

identification of these phenomena, and pave the way for
taxonomic revision of the floristic checklist.
Interestingly, not all common Hawaiian Rhodophyta
species have notable intraspecific sequence variation.
Eight taxa representing three different orders (Table 1)
were reported to have little to no sequence divergence
for the three markers sequenced. Although these taxa
require stronger sampling for confirmation and resolution of these trends, one important finding from the
survey is that phylogeographic patterns are likely to
vary, even for taxa considered to be native to the Hawaiian Islands, and that histories of individual taxa need to
be studied (e.g. time since colonization or speciation,
colonization order of the islands, interisland dispersal
vectors, introduction events from other regions) to
obtain a fuller understanding of intraspecific molecular
patterns. It does not seem to be the case that increased
within-taxon sampling will always reveal obvious phylogeographic patterns. This difference could be due to
many factors, including the length of time since colonization of the species (or speciation, in the case of endemic taxa), ease of dispersal, dispersal vectors and type of
life history (i.e. whether there is an easily spread life history stage, such as a floating, filamentous form), habitat
and physicochemical parameter tolerances.
Ekrem et al. [54] emphasized that DNA barcode data
will only ever be as useful as the reference library of
sequences against which comparisons are made. This is
a compelling argument for support of biodiversity surveys of entire floras, such as this one, that attempt to
account for the diversity of a region with both morphological and molecular sequence characterizations, and
that make these data available to others in easily-accessible formats for comparisons. Zhang et al. [55], however,
rightly point out that sample sizes for most DNA barcode studies are insufficient to assess genetic diversity of
a species, and the level of intraspecific sampling for our
project is no exception. Given the limited time and
funds for the survey, we aimed to strike a balance
between representation of as many taxa as possible and
sufficient coverage of common taxa to assess intraspecific diversity. We emphasize that the patterns discussed
here are largely preliminary, and that a more thorough
examination is warranted to reveal the full story.
The value of the Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity
Survey is multifaceted: through this project we have generated baseline molecular diversity data for much of the
flora, revealed taxa requiring further systematic investigation (both in terms of possible cryptic species that have
not been previously recognized, and morphologically/
molecularly similar taxa that may be synonymous), begun
to elucidate phylogeographic patterns for Hawaiian red
algae, revised the species checklist for Hawaiian Rhodophyta, and reported a number of new records (both

Page 25 of 29

taxonomic and distributional). All of these data (our own
collections plus those from BISH), as well as photographs
and micrographs, specimen details and collecting site
information, are available via the publicly accessible
Hawaiian Algal Database [56], and the data have also
been shared with the Global Biodiversity Information
Facility [57] and GenBank [58]. Voucher specimens and
the DNA extract library are available to other researchers, enhancing the long-term value of the survey collections. The value of the survey will also increase as other
studies make use of the data and our initial observations
are developed into additional projects.

Conclusions
Here we describe the principal findings of the Hawaiian
Rhodophyta Biodiversity Survey, a four-year effort to
inventory and assess the species of red algae from the
Hawaiian Islands. Numerous new taxonomic and distributional records resulted from the collections, which
allowed for an updated taxonomic checklist of Hawaiian
red algae. Three molecular markers (one each from the
nucleus, plastid and mitochondrion) were sequenced for
numerous collections, and the data from each marker
compared to establish baseline molecular diversity profiles for the flora. A number of cases were highlighted
where the molecular data helped to identify taxa or
groups of taxa in need of systematic revision, illustrating
the value of constructing this baseline molecular diversity data set. In the case of widespread and common
species, the sequence data were also helpful in beginning
to elucidate phylogeographic patterns, which differed
substantially depending on the taxon. A maximum likelihood analysis based on concatenated sequence data for
17 red algal orders yielded a tree topology that is largely
consistent with current understanding of red algal phylogeny, but with lower support at deeper nodes, indicating that the DNA barcode-like markers have
phylogenetic utility at and below the ordinal level. The
value of each of the markers for biodiversity surveys was
also assessed, and recommendations made for inclusion
or exclusion in future surveys of algal floras.
Methods
Sampling strategy

Samples were field-collected or subsampled from accessioned material at the Bernice P. Bishop Museum’s Herbarium Pacificum (BISH). Annual collecting expeditions
to the islands of Kauai, Oahu, Molokai, Maui, Lanai and
Hawaii were undertaken to survey nearshore coastal
areas and streams. Samples from the Main Hawaiian
Islands of Niihau and Kahoolawe were processed as they
were opportunistically obtained, as were those from the
Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. We aimed to collect
three specimens per species, although there was

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

variation around this number due to rare or, conversely,
extremely widespread taxa.
Sample processing and analysis

Field-collected samples were processed as described in
Sherwood [43]. Samples were examined using light
microscopy (Olympus BX-41 compound microscope
[Olympus, Center Valley, PA, USA] and a Zeiss SteREO
Discovery.v12 stereomicroscope, Carl Zeiss Microimaging Inc., Göttingen, Germany). Identifications were
made using the most current sources, with [1] forming
the foundation for identifications and more recent primary literature being added where appropriate [3-6,40].
Material analyzed from BISH was labelled as per the
assigned identification on the herbarium sheet, except in
cases of obvious mis-identification or where microscopic
examination revealed the sample to belong to a different
taxon (herbarium sheets were subsequently annotated to
reflect these changes).
DNA was extracted from field-collected and herbarium material following the methods described in [27].
All DNA extracts are housed in the Hawaiian Algal
DNA Library at the University of Hawaii at Manoa,
which is maintained at -80°C in the Sherwood Laboratory. Duplicate DNA extracts of material from herbarium sheets housed at BISH are maintained at Bishop
Museum’s Pacific Center for Molecular Biodiversity.
Three short DNA markers were amplified and
sequenced for as many of the collections as possible;
these markers were selected to represent different genomes within the cell (i.e. nucleus - part of the 28 S
rRNA gene (LSU), plastid - the Universal Plastid Amplicon (UPA) [28,29], and mitochondrion - the cytochrome
oxidase I barcode region (COI) [9]). PCR primers and
cycling conditions used for each of the markers are
referenced in [27], with information on additional LSU
and COI primer derivation as follows.
We aligned the entire GenBank content for Rhodophyta LSU (>650 sequences ranging from ~800-2700
bp) and designed primers to amplify a central portion
where most of the data overlapped. These primers,
nu28SF (5’-GGAATCCGCYAAGGAGTGTG-3’; Tm =
56.9°C) and nu28SR (5’-TGCCGACTTCCCTTA
CCTGC-3’; Tm = 59.7°C) produced an amplicon of variable length; 580-650 bp depending on the taxon. Cycling
conditions for this amplicon were as follows: 94°C for 2
min, 40 cycles of 94°C for 20 s, 55°C for 30 s, 72°C for
50 s, and a 5 min final extension at 72°C.
We experienced inconsistent sequencing results for
COI using the published primer pair GazF1-GazR1 [9].
For the same PCR product, reverse chromatograms
(GazR1) were regularly lower in quality than the forward
reads (GazF1). We suspect that GazR1 polyA 3’end (5’ACTTCTGGATGTCCAAAAAAYCA-3’; Tm = 53.9°C)

Page 26 of 29

poses specificity problems, mispriming and/or mismatching with several polyTs located near the GazR1 priming
site. A search for suitable priming sites in the first 863 bp
of COI did not reveal any single 10-15-bp unit fully conserved across red algal taxa, making the design of universal
primers a challenge. However, we identified a GC-rich
region nested upstream of GazR1 containing successive
CCs and GGs, theoretically offering stronger specificity
(Figure 42). We designed an alternate reverse primer
within this region, R686 5’-CCACCWGMAGGATCAA-3’
(Tm = 49.7°C). GazF1-R686 produces an amplicon of 616
bp (vs. 720 bp for GazF1-GazR1) that still contains the 500
bp required by BOLD for barcode designation [50]. We
prioritized amplifying with GazR1 for the longer amplicon
it produces, and used R686 to re-sequence low quality
reads and/or re-attempt amplification when the former
failed. PCR thermal profiles were optimized for COI with
GazF1-R686: 94°C for 1.5 min, 40 cycles of 94°C for 30 s,
47°C for 40 s, 72°C for 40 s, and a 5 min final extension at
72°C. PCR products were purified and sequenced, and
resulting chromatograms manually assembled according to
previously published protocols [27].
Data storage and dissemination

All relevant project data (photographs and micrographs,
locality information, DNA sequences, identifications,
voucher type and archival information) were entered
into the Hawaiian Algal Database (HADB); a database
that was specially designed and constructed for the project to allow organization and accessibility of the data.
HADB is internet accessible at http://algae.manoa.
hawaii.edu and is fully described in [59].
Data analyses
Mapping of GPS data

Collection locality data (GPS points) were downloaded
from HADB and plotted on a map of the Hawaiian
Islands using GPS Visualizer [60]. All coastal, freshwater
and terrestrial MHI points were included, while those
from the NWHI were excluded since most were only at
island-scale resolution.
Construction of DNA sequence diversity trees

Sequences for each marker were downloaded from
HADB and aligned using Clustal X [61]. Neighbor-joining trees of sequences for the UPA, COI and LSU markers were constructed based on the maximumlikelihood composite model in MEGA v.4 [62]. Separate
trees were constructed for each marker, and for each
red algal order (or groups of related orders when sample
numbers were low enough to still visualize taxon labels
on trees), or by family (in the case of the order
Ceramiales, which accounts for approximately half of
the Hawaiian red algal diversity). Summary labels
were added to the trees to indicate the following: a)

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

previously identified lineages of species from the literature (in these cases the citations are given in the figure
legends), b) groups of sequences that, to the best of our
knowledge, belong to the same species although some
sequence divergence is present (e.g. Chroodactylon
“ornatum“; Figure 5), c) groups of sequences that do not
have a consistent taxonomy but nonetheless likely represent a single taxon (e.g. Platoma sp.; Figure 16), and d)
groups of sequences that do or do not have a consistent
taxonomy and likely represent multiple species (e.g.
Peyssonnelia spp.; Figures 16 and 17).
Phylogenetic analysis of concatenated sequence data

All accessions for which sequences of all three markers
were available (n = 284) were concatenated using the
software package APE [63] with R [64]. Fast evolving
loops of LSU (indel rich regions) were removed because
sequence homology could not be ascertained with confidence, leaving only stems for this marker. Similarly, a
very short segment of UPA, which aligned ambiguously
on the scale of the entire data set, had to be removed.
Concatenated sequences were analyzed with the rapid
bootstrap (RBS) and maximum likelihood (ML) search
algorithm of the RAxML Blackbox server http://phylobench.vital-it.ch/raxml-bb/ [65]. RAxML uses a hillclimbing algorithm that searches the tree space using
Lazy Subtree Rearrangement [66] while allowing specification of partitioned models useful for concatenated
data sets. An exploratory analysis of the sequences can
be found in [47] which demonstrates the varying levels
of substitution saturation and substitution rates for
UPA, LSU, and all three codon positions of the COI
marker. Following this five-partition scheme, the
RAxML analysis was launched with a GTR+G4 model
and branch length optimization per partition with the
default 100 RBS. The returned ML tree was summarized
by family and order in MEGA [62] and RBS values
≥70% were illustrated.
Phylogeographic analyses

Phylogeographic patterns for Amansia glomerata, Asparagopsis taxiformis, Dichotomaria marginata and Dasya
iridescens (representatives of widespread Hawaiian red
algae with evident structuring at the molecular level)
were estimated using COI marker sequences (which is
commonly used for phylogeographic inference, e.g. [24]
and the statistical parsimony method of Templeton et
al. [67] using TCS v.1.21 [68], employing a 95% connection limit and treating gaps as a 5 th state. Sequence
divergences for the widespread taxa Acanthophora pacifica, Champia parvula, Coelothrix irregularis, Haliptilon
subulatum, Laurencia majuscula, Lithophyllum insipidum, Polysiphonia howei and Tolypiocladia glomerulata
were calculated based on p-distances using MEGA v.4
[62] and reported as percent identities.

Page 27 of 29

Additional material
Additional file 1: List of collection locations. Collection locations for
samples surveyed as part of the Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity
Project. Islands are listed in alphabetical order. Geographical coordinates
are listed in decimal degrees.
Additional file 2: Taxonomic checklist and new records. Taxonomic
checklist and new records from the Hawaiian Rhodophyta Biodiversity
Project. Taxon records are arranged by order. New taxon and island
records are indicated in bold.
Additional file 3: Sequence accessions. Hawaiian Algal Database
accession numbers for all sequences analyzed as part of the Hawaiian
Rhodophyta Biodiversity Survey. Accessions are given as superscripts for
each of the three markers (N = nuclear LSU, M = mitochondrial COI, P =
plastid UPA).

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by a grant from the National Science Foundation
(DEB-0542608 to A.R.S. and G.G.P.) to support the Hawaiian Rhodophyta
Biodiversity Project. T.S. was partially supported by The David and Lucile
Packard Foundation (grant #2006-30569 to I.A. Abbott), and this grant also
supported the collection and processing of many samples from the
Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. Many thanks to Norman Wang for
maintaining HADB and providing data downloads. We thank the many
phycologists who helped by providing samples or collecting assistance.
Napua Harbottle, Neal Evenhuis, Jack Fisher and Roy Tsuda of the Bernice
P. Bishop Museum are acknowledged for their assistance with sampling
from collections at the Herbarium Pacificum.
Author details
1
Botany Department, 3190 Maile Way, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI USA
96822. 2Kobe University Research Center for Inland Seas, 1-1 Rokkodai, Kobe
657-8501 Japan. 3Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, P.O. Box 1346, Kaneohe,
HI USA 96744. 4Department of Molecular Biosciences and Bioengineering,
1955 East-West Rd, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI USA 96822.
Authors’ contributions
ARS, AK, KYC, and TS conducted field work and processed collections
(including identification, voucher archival, photography/photomicroscopy
and DNA sequencing). ARS, AK and KYC performed the data analyses. TS
performed primer design and troubleshooting for the LSU and COI-R686
primers. NW constructed and maintained the Hawaiian Algal Database for
project data management, and provided data downloads. ARS and GGP
conceived the study, designed the project, obtained funding and
coordinated the work. ARS wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 27 July 2010 Accepted: 22 November 2010
Published: 22 November 2010
References
1. Abbott IA: Marine Red Algae of the Hawaiian Islands Honolulu, Bishop
Museum Press; 1999.
2. Sherwood AR: Bibliographic checklist of the non-marine algae of the
Hawaiian islands. Bish Mus Occas Pap Ser 2004, 80:1-23.
3. Huisman JM, Sherwood AR, Abbott IA: Studies of Hawaiian Galaxauraceae
(Nemaliales, Rhodophyta): Large subunit rDNA gene sequences support
conspecificity of Galaxaura rugosa and G. subverticillata. Crypto Algol
2004, 25:337-352.
4. Huisman JM, Abbott IA, Sherwood AR: Large subunit rDNA gene
sequences and reproductive morphology reveal Stenopeltis as a member
of the Liagoraceae (Nemaliales, Rhodophyta), with a description of
Akalaphycus gen. nov. Eur J Phycol 2004, 39:257-272.
5. Huisman JM, Abbott IA, Sherwood AR: The Liagoraceae (Nemaliales,
Rhodophyta) of the Hawaiian Islands III: The genus Ganonema, with a
description of Ganonema yoshizakii sp. nov. Phycologia 2004, 43:296-310.

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.
20.

21.

22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27.

28.

29.
30.
31.

Huisman JM, Sherwood AR, Abbott IA: Morphology, reproduction, and the
18 S rRNA gene sequence of Pihiella liagoraciphila gen. et sp. nov.,
(Rhodophyta), the so-called ‘monosporangial discs’ associated with
members of the Liagoraceae (Rhodophyta), and proposal of the
Pihiellales ord. nov. J Phycol 2003, 39:978-987.
Saunders GW, Hommersand MH: Assessing red algal supraordinal
diversity and taxonomy in the context of contemporary systematic data.
Am J Bot 2004, 91:1494-1507.
Kurihara A, Abe T, Tani M, Sherwood AR: Molecular phylogeny and
evolution of red algal parasites: a case study of Benzaitenia, Janczewskia,
and Ululania (Ceramiales). J Phycol 2010, 46:580-590.
Saunders GW: Applying DNA barcoding to red macroalgae: a preliminary
appraisal holds promise for future application. Phil Trans Roy Soc Ser B
2005, 360:1879-1888.
Sherwood A, Kurihara A, Conklin KY: Molecular diversity of
Amansieae (Ceramiales, Rhodophyta) from the Hawaiian Islands: a
multi-marker assessment reveals high diversity within Amansia
glomerata. Phycol Res .
Schmitz F: 6. Klasse Rhodophyceae. 2. Unterklasse Florideae. In Syllabus
der Vorlesungen über specielle und medicinisch-pharmaceutische Botanik...
Grosse Ausgabe. Edited by: Engler A. Gebr. Borntraeger, Berlin; 1892:16-23.
Kylin H: Die Gattungen der Rhodophyceen Lund, Gleerups Förlag; 1956.
Pueschel CM, Cole KM: Rhodophycean pit plugs: an ultrastructural survey
with taxonomic implications. Am J Bot 1982, 69:703-720.
Saunders GW, Bailey JC: Phylogenesis of pit-plug associated features in
the Rhodophyta: inferences from molecular systematic data. Can J Bot
1997, 75:1436-1447.
Ragan MA, Bird CJ, Rice EL, Gutell RR, Murphy CA, Singh RK: A molecular
phylogeny of the marine red algae (Rhodophyta) based on the nuclear
small-subunit rRNA gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994, 91:7276-7280.
Kamiya M, Tanaka J, King RJ, West JA, Zuccarello GC, Kawai H: Reproductive
and genetic distinction between broad and narrow entities of
Caloglossa continua (Delesseriaceae, Rhodophyta). Phycologia 1999,
38:356-367.
Zuccarello GC, West JA: Multiple cryptic species: Molecular diversity and
reproductive isolation in the Bostrychia radicans/B. moritziana complex
(Rhodomelaceae, Rhodophyta) with a focus on North American isolates.
J Phycol 2003, 39:948-959.
Kumano S: Freshwater Red Algae of the World Bristol, Biopress Ltd; 2002.
Sherwood AR: The first report of a marine representative of the genus
Hildenbrandia in Hawai’i. Haw Bot Soc Newsl 2002, 41:7.
Coomans RJ, Hommersand MH: Vegetative growth and organization. In
Biology of the Red Algae. Edited by: Cole KM, Sheath RG. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press; 1990:275-304.
Guiry MD, West JA: Life history and hybridization studies on Gigartina
stellata and Petrocelis cruenta (Rhodophyta) in the North Atlantic. J
Phycol 1983, 19:474-494.
Guiry MD, West JA, Kim D-H, Masuda M: Reinstatement of the genus
Mastocarpus Kützing (Rhodophyta). Taxon 1984, 33:53-63.
Garbary DJ, Gabrielson PW: Taxonomy and evolution. In Biology of the Red
Algae. Edited by: Cole KM, Sheath RG. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press; 1990:477-498.
Hebert PDN, Cywinska A, Ball SL, deWaard JR: Biological identifications
through DNA barcodes. Proc Roy Soc Lond Ser B 2003, 270:313-322.
Stoeckle M: Taxonomy, DNA and the bar code of life. Bioscience 2003,
53:2-3.
Moritz C, Cicero C: DNA barcoding: Promise and pitfalls. PLoS Biol 2004,
2:1529-1531.
Conklin KY, Kurihara A, Sherwood AR: A molecular method for
identification of the morphologically plastic invasive algal species
Eucheuma denticulatum and Kappaphycus spp. (Rhodophyta,
Gigartinales) in Hawaii. J Appl Phycol 2009, 21:691-699.
Presting GG: Identification of conserved regions in the plastid genome implications for DNA barcoding and biological function. Can J Bot 2006,
84:1434-1443.
Sherwood AR, Presting GG: Universal primers amplify a 23 S rDNA plastid
marker in eukaryotic algae and cyanobacteria. J Phycol 2007, 43:605-608.
Agosti D: Encyclopedia of life: Should species description equal gene
sequence? Trends Ecol Evol 2003, 18:273.
Juvik SP, Juvik JO: Atlas of Hawaii. 3 edition. Honolulu, University of Hawaii
Press; 1998.

Page 28 of 29

32. Zeigler AC: Hawaiian Natural History, Ecology, and Evolution Honolulu,
University of Hawaii Press; 2002.
33. Smith JE, Hunter CL, Smith CM: Distribution and reproductive
characteristics of nonindigenous and invasive marine algae in the
Hawaiian islands. Pac Sci 2002, 56:299-315.
34. Webster JM, Clague DA, Riker-Coleman K, Gallup C, Braga JC, Potts D,
Moore JG, Winterer EL, Paull CK: Drowning of the -150 m reef off Hawaii:
A casualty of global meltwater pulse 1A? Geology 2004, 32:249-252.
35. Vis ML, Sheath RG, Hambrook JA, Cole KM: Stream macroalgae of the
Hawaiian Islands: A Preliminary Survey. Pac Sci 1994, 48:175-187.
36. Filkin NR, Sherwood AR, Vis M: Stream macroalgae of the Hawaiian
Islands: 23 Additional Collection Sites. Pac Sci 2003, 57:421-431.
37. Sherwood AR, Vis ML, Sheath RG: Phenology and phylogenetic
positioning of the Hawaiian endemic freshwater alga Batrachospermum
spermatiophorum (Rhodophyta, Batrachospermales). Phycol Res 2004,
52:193-203.
38. Sherwood AR: Stream macroalgae of the Hawaiian islands: a floristic
survey. Pac Sci 2006, 60:191-205.
39. Chiasson WB, Johansen KG, Sherwood AR, Vis ML: Phylogenetic affinities
of Chantransia pygmaea (Rhodophyta) specimens from the Hawaiian
islands. Phycologia 2007, 46:257-262.
40. Vroom PS: Dasya atropurpurea sp. nov. (Ceramiales, Rhodophyta), a
deep-water species from the Hawaiian Archipelago. Phycologia 2005,
44:572-580.
41. Saunders GW: Routine DNA barcoding of Canadian Gracilariales
(Rhodophyta) reveals the invasive species Gracilaria vermiculophylla in
British Columbia. Mol Ecol Res 2009, 9:140-150.
42. Sherwood AR, Vis ML, Entwisle TJ, Necchi O Jr, Presting GG: Contrasting
intra- versus inter-species DNA sequence variation for representatives of
the Batrachospermales (Rhodophyta). Phycol Res 2008, 56:269-279.
43. Sherwood AR: Phylogeography of Asparagopsis taxiformis
(Bonnemaisoniales, Rhodophyta) in the Hawaiian Islands: two mtDNA
markers support three separate introductions. Phycologia 2008, 47:79-88.
44. Kurihara A, Sherwood AR: Checklist of the Hawaiian (marine, freshwater
and terrestrial) red algae. Edition 2010.ix. Worldwide electronic
publication, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii;[http://algae.manoa.
hawaii.edu].
45. Andreakis N, Procaccini G, Maggs C, Kooistra WHCF: Phylogeography of
the invasive seaweed Asparagopsis (Bonnemaisoniales, Rhodophyta)
reveals cryptic diversity. Mol Ecol 2007, 16:2285-2299.
46. Sheath RG: The Biology of Freshwater Red Algae. Progress in Phycological
Research 1984, 3:89-157.
47. Sherwood AR, Sauvage T, Kurihara A, Conklin KY, Presting GG: A
comparative analysis of COI, LSU and UPA marker data for the Hawaiian
florideophyte Rhodophyta: implications for DNA barcoding of red algae.
Crypto Algol .
48. Sherwood AR, Chan Y, Presting GG: Application of universal plastid
primers to environmental sampling of a Hawaiian stream periphyton
community. Mol Ecol Res 2008, 8:1011-1014.
49. Clarkston BE, Saunders GW: A comparison of two DNA barcode markers
for species discrimination in the red algal family Kallymeniaceae
(Gigartinales, Florideophyceae), with a description of Euthora timburtonii
sp. nov. Botany 2010, 88:119-131.
50. Ratnasingham S, Hebert PDN: BOLD: The Barcode of Life Data System.
Mol Ecol Notes 2007, 7:355-364 [http://www.barcodinglife.org].
51. Verbruggen H, Maggs CA, Saunders GW, LeGall L, Yoon HS, DeClerck O:
Data mining approach identifies research priorities and data
requirements for resolving the red algal tree of life. BMC Evol Biol 2010,
10:16.
52. Hart MW, Sunday J: Things fall apart: biological species form
unconnected parsimony networks. Biol Lett 2007, 3:509-512.
53. LeGall L, Saunders GW: DNA barcoding is a powerful tool to uncover
algal diversity: a case study of the Phyllophoraceae (Gigartinales,
Rhodophyta) in the Canadian flora. J Phycol 2010, 46:374-389.
54. Ekrem T, Willassen E, Stur E: A comprehensive DNA sequence library is
essential for identification with DNA barcodes. Mol Phyl Evol 2007,
43:530-542.
55. Zhang AB, He LJ, Crozier RH, Muster C, Zhu C-D: Estimating sample sizes
for DNA barcoding. Mol Phylo Evol 2010, 54:1035-1039.
56. The Hawaiian Algal Database. [http://algae.manoa.hawaii.edu].
57. Global Biodiversity Information Facility. [http://www.gbif.org].

Sherwood et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:258
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/258

Page 29 of 29

58. National Center for Biotechnology Information GenBank. [http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/].
59. Wang N, Sherwood AR, Kurihara A, Conklin KY, Sauvage T, Presting GG: The
Hawaiian Algal Database: a laboratory LIMS and online resource for
biodiversity data. BMC Plant Biol 2009, 9:117.
60. GPS Visualizer. [http://www.gpsvisualizer.com/].
61. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignments through
sequence weighting, position specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
62. Tamura K, Nei JDudley, Kumar MS: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
63. Paradis E, Claude J, Strimmer K: APE: analyses of phylogenetics and
evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:289-290.
64. R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria; [http://www.R-project.org].
65. Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont JR: A Rapid Bootstrap Algorithm for
the RAxML Web Servers. Syst Biol 2008, 57:758-771.
66. Stamatakis A, Ludwig T, Meier H: RAxML-III: A fast program for maximum
likelihood-based inference of large phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:456-463.
67. Templeton AR, Crandall KA, Singh CF: A cladistic analysis of phenotypic
associations with haplotypes inferred from restriction endonuclease
mapping and DNA sequence data. III. Cladogram estimation. Genetics
1992, 132:619-633.
68. Clement M, Posada D, Crandall KA: TCS: a computer program to estimate
gene genealogies. Mol Ecol 2000, 9:1657-1660.
doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-258
Cite this article as: Sherwood et al.: The Hawaiian Rhodophyta
Biodiversity Survey (2006-2010): a summary of principal findings. BMC
Plant Biology 2010 10:258.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
