<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Extensive loss of translational genes in the structurally dynamic mitochondrial genome of the angiosperm Silene latifolia</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:274. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-274"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Daniel B Sloan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Extensive loss of translational genes in the
structurally dynamic mitochondrial genome of
the angiosperm Silene latifolia
Daniel B Sloan1*, Andrew J Alverson2, Helena Štorchová3, Jeffrey D Palmer2, Douglas R Taylor1
Abstract
Background: Mitochondrial gene loss and functional transfer to the nucleus is an ongoing process in many
lineages of plants, resulting in substantial variation across species in mitochondrial gene content. The
Caryophyllaceae represents one lineage that has experienced a particularly high rate of mitochondrial gene loss
relative to other angiosperms.
Results: In this study, we report the first complete mitochondrial genome sequence from a member of this family,
Silene latifolia. The genome can be mapped as a 253,413 bp circle, but its structure is complicated by a large
repeated region that is present in 6 copies. Active recombination among these copies produces a suite of
alternative genome configurations that appear to be at or near “recombinational equilibrium”. The genome
contains the fewest genes of any angiosperm mitochondrial genome sequenced to date, with intact copies of only
25 of the 41 protein genes inferred to be present in the common ancestor of angiosperms. As observed more
broadly in angiosperms, ribosomal proteins have been especially prone to gene loss in the S. latifolia lineage. The
genome has also experienced a major reduction in tRNA gene content, including loss of functional tRNAs of both
native and chloroplast origin. Even assuming expanded wobble-pairing rules, the mitochondrial genome can
support translation of only 17 of the 61 sense codons, which code for only 9 of the 20 amino acids. In addition,
genes encoding 18S and, especially, 5S rRNA exhibit exceptional sequence divergence relative to other plants.
Divergence in one region of 18S rRNA appears to be the result of a gene conversion event, in which
recombination with a homologous gene of chloroplast origin led to the complete replacement of a helix in this
ribosomal RNA.
Conclusions: These findings suggest a markedly expanded role for nuclear gene products in the translation of
mitochondrial genes in S. latifolia and raise the possibility of altered selective constraints operating on the
mitochondrial translational apparatus in this lineage.

Background
The mitochondrial genomes of flowering plants exhibit a
number of characteristics that distinguish them from the
mitochondrial genomes of other eukaryotes [1]. They
are large and variable in size with ample non-coding
content [2], including substantial amounts of “promiscuous” DNA of nuclear and chloroplast origin [3,4] as well
as sequences of horizontal origin acquired from the
mitochondrial genomes of other land plants [5,6].
Angiosperm mitochondrial genomes also contain
* Correspondence: dbs4a@virginia.edu
1
Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

numerous introns, some of which have been split such
that the resulting gene fragments must be transcribed
separately and then trans-spliced together [7]. Gene
expression also relies on extensive C-to-U (and sometimes U-to-C) RNA editing, in which substitution of
specific pyrimidines in the mRNA sequence restores
phylogenetically conserved codons [8]. Plant mitochondrial genomes generally experience some of the slowest
documented rates of nucleotide substitution [9,10] but
are subject to rapid structural evolution [11]. High frequency intra- and intermolecular recombination among
large repeated sequences is the rule, generating a heterogeneous pool of genome configurations within a

© 2010 Sloan et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

single individual [12-14]. The size and complexity of
plant mitochondrial genomes, especially when compared
with animals and fungi, make them powerful models for
exploring the forces affecting eukaryotic genome structure and evolution.
The genomes of plant mitochondria, like any organelle
genome, depend on highly integrated functional coordination with the nucleus. For example, translation of
mitochondrially-encoded genes requires a mix of
nuclear and mitochondrially encoded components. Plant
mitochondrial genomes contain genes for their own
rRNA subunits as well as for some of the ribosomal proteins and tRNAs required for translation (Figure 1), but
many necessary ribosomal protein and tRNA genes are
located in the nuclear genome, so their gene products
must be imported into the mitochondrion [15]. The
tRNA population within plant mitochondria represents
a particularly complex assemblage derived from at least
3 anciently divergent classes of genes [15-17]: 1) “native”
tRNAs encoded in the mitochondrial genome and inherited from the a-proteobacterial progenitor of mitochondria, 2) chloroplast-like tRNAs, which are also encoded
in the mitochondrial genome but which were acquired
by functional gene transfer from the chloroplast genome
during land plant evolution, and 3) nuclear-encoded
tRNAs imported from the cytosol.
This mixture of tRNA genes is phylogenetically
dynamic. Sequenced plant mitochondrial genomes differ
in both the number and the identity of tRNA genes that
they contain (Figure 1) [4,18]. Likewise, ribosomal protein gene content in the mitochondrial genome is highly
variable among plant lineages. The process of mitochondrial gene loss and functional transfer to the nucleus is
active and ongoing in plants, and 15 of the 17 protein
genes that have been subject to frequent loss across the
angiosperm phylogeny encode ribosomal proteins
[19-21].
The Caryophyllaceae represents one angiosperm lineage with a relatively high rate of mitochondrial gene
loss/transfer. Adams et al. [19] used Southern blots to
show that 2 genera from this family (Dianthus and Stellaria) lack most mitochondrial protein genes outside the
core set of 24 genes that are nearly universally conserved throughout angiosperms, and we recently
reported that 2 species from a third genus (Silene) are
similarly reduced in gene content [22]. The genus Silene
is of particular interest with respect to mitochondrial
genome evolution and transmission [23,24]. This large
genus exhibits substantial diversity in breeding system,
including a high frequency of gynodioecy (mixed populations of hermaphrodites and females), which is often
the result of mitochondrial mutations that induce cytoplasmic male sterility [25]. Furthermore, Silene species
differ markedly in mitochondrial mutation rate

Page 2 of 15

[10,26-28] and in the amount of mitochondrial sequence
polymorphism that they maintain [26,27,29,30]. Previous
analyses of Silene mitochondrial genomes, however,
have been limited to individual gene sequences.
In this study, we report the complete mitochondrial
genome sequence of Silene latifolia, which confirms earlier findings of reduced mitochondrial protein gene content in the Caryophyllaceae. We also found a reduction
in tRNA gene content that is unprecedented in plants as
well as a major increase in the substitution rate for
some rRNA genes. In addition, we use paired-end
sequence data and Southern blot hybridizations to analyze the complex structural dynamics of this genome,
which are driven by a large recombining repeat
sequence that is present in 6 copies. These methods
could be used more broadly to explore the complex
dynamics of mitochondrial genomes in established plant
model systems.

Methods
Study Species and Plant Material

Silene latifolia Poir. (Caryophyllaceae) is a short-lived,
herbaceous perennial that is widespread in its native
Eurasia [31]. Frequently associated with human disturbance, it is also introduced and invasive in other
regions, including North America [32]. Like other members of Silene section Elisanthe, S. latifolia has a dioecious breeding system with XY chromosomal sex
determination [25,33].
We grew seeds from a single maternal family in the
greenhouse. These seeds were collected by D.R. Sowell
from a common garden experiment in Oxford, England,
but the maternal plant was derived from seed originally
collected on the Apple Orchard Falls Trail in Bedford
County, Virginia, USA. A voucher specimen from this
family was deposited in the Massey Herbarium at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (D. Sloan
#004). Fifteen weeks after the seeds were sown, we harvested 500 g of flowers and fresh green leaves from a
total of 550 plants.
Mitochondrial DNA Extraction, Sequencing, Assembly,
and Finishing

We followed previously published protocols for plant
organelle DNA extraction [34,35], which yielded
approximately 4 μg of mitochondrial DNA. We confirmed the purity of the DNA by digesting a 100 ng
sample with PstI and observing a well-defined electrophoretic banding pattern on an agarose gel.
Library construction, cloning, shotgun sequencing, and
genome assembly were performed by the Genome Center at Washington University in St. Louis. The genomic
DNA was fragmented using a Hydroshear (Digilab; Holliston, MA), end polished, and run on a 0.8% agarose

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Gene content in seed plant mitochondrial genomes. Dark gray boxes indicate the presence of an intact reading frame or folding
structure and, therefore, a putatively functional gene, while light gray boxes indicate the presence of a putative pseudogene. The numbers at
the bottom of each gene group indicate the total number of intact genes for that species. Note that in some cases the presence of an intact
gene sequence may not actually reflect functionality. In particular, for tRNA genes of chloroplast origin, it is possible that transferred sequences
still appear intact, but nevertheless, are not functionally expressed in the mitochondrion [37,90]. GenBank accession numbers for each genome
are indicated in parentheses.

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

gel. A fraction of that gel corresponding to a 4-6.5 kb
size range was excised, purified and ligated into the
pSMART vector system (Lucigen; Middleton, WI). After
transformation, 2688 subclones were purified, cycle
sequenced from both ends with BigDye v3.1 (Applied
Biosystems; Foster City, CA), and analyzed on an ABI
3730 capillary sequencer, providing an average of 7×
genome sequence coverage.
Shotgun sequence data were assembled with Phrap
followed by manual sorting in Consed to resolve misassemblies [36]. Assembly gaps were closed by sequencing
subclones with paired-end reads that mapped to the
ends of adjacent contigs. Regions with low quality or
single read coverage were augmented by PCR and Sanger sequencing of total cellular DNA.
Genome Annotation

Protein, rRNA, and tRNA genes as well as regions of
chloroplast origin were identified using BLAST and
tRNAscan-SE as described previously [37]. Regions that
were not annotated as belonging to one of these categories were used to search against the NCBI non-redundant nucleotide and protein databases (nt/nr) with
BLASTN (r = 5, q = -4, G = 8, E = 6, W = 7, and e =
0.001) and BLASTX (netblast v2.2.19 default parameters
except e = 0.001). Perfectly repeated sequences were
identified with REPuter [38]. The annotated genome
sequence was deposited in GenBank (HM562727).
Sequence Analysis

Previous studies have shown substantial variation in
substitution rates among mitochondrial genes within the
genus Silene [26,28]. To quantify differences in substitution rate, we analyzed individual protein and rRNA
genes in a phylogenetic context with PAML v4.1 [39].
For each gene, we included sequences from 18 seed
plant species for which complete mitochondrial genome
sequences are available. In these analyses, phylogenetic
relationships among the species were constrained
according to previous studies [40,41]. For protein genes,
branch lengths were estimated in terms of both synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions per site with
the program codeml as described previously [28]. For
rRNA genes, branch lengths were estimated in terms of
substitutions per site with the program baseml. We
employed a K80 (Kimura 2-parameter) model of substitution for rrn5 (5S rRNA) and an HKY model for rrn18
(18S rRNA) and rrn26 (26S rRNA). For all 3 genes, we
modeled rate variation among sites with a gamma distribution. These substitution models were chosen based on
the results of likelihood ratio tests between pairs of
competing models. Because the annotated boundaries of
rRNA genes differ slightly across species, we trimmed
all sequences to the shortest annotated length.

Page 4 of 15

Our analysis revealed a substantial elevation in substitution rate for rrn5 in S. latifolia. To determine the
structural consequences of these substitutions we used
the RNAeval program within the Vienna RNA Package
v1.8.4 [42] to calculate the free energy of the predicted
secondary structure for plant mitochondrial 5S rRNA
[43,44]. To test for selection for conservation of secondary structure in S. latifolia, we generated 10,000
sequences by randomly placing 16 substitutions (the
number observed in S. latifolia) into the Beta vulgaris
rrn5 sequence. Beta vulgaris was chosen because it is
the most closely related species with an available rrn5
sequence, and it appears to have maintained the ancestral sequence of core eudicots. We compared the free
energy of the conserved 5S rRNA secondary structure
for S. latifolia to the distribution of values from the
10,000 simulated sequences to determine whether the S.
latifolia structure was more highly conserved than
expected by chance.
Southern Blot Hybridizations

We used Southern blots to assess the existence and relative abundance of alternative genome conformations
resulting from intramolecular recombination between
large repeated sequences. Total cellular DNA was purified from individual fresh leaves using a sorbitol extraction method [45]. Samples were taken from 2
individuals from each of 2 full-sib families. Each of
these families was generated by crossing a female from
the family used for genome sequencing with a male
from an unrelated family. Between 0.5 and 1 μg of genomic DNA was digested with EcoRI (HF enzyme, New
England BioLabs), electrophoresed overnight on a 0.9%
agarose gel, and transferred to a positively charged
nylon membrane (Roche) by capillary blotting. Two
probes were generated to target single copy regions
flanking large repeated sequences. The probes correspond to genomic positions 140,389-141,463 nt (“left”)
and 5636-6500 nt (“right”) and were generated with the
following PCR primers: LeftF1 5’- AGTCTGCCTTT
GTCCGACTG; LeftR1 5’- TCCCCTTGGGGTTCTTA
TCT; RightF2 5’-TCTTTCTTTGCGCTTTCGAT;
RightR2 5’-CATTGGCCTTTGCTTCCTT. The probes
were labeled with digoxigenin (DIG) using Roche’s PCR
labeling kit. The genomic blots were hybridized in an
EasyHyb buffer (Roche) with the DIG-labeled probe at
42°C overnight, washed at high stringency (0.1× SSC,
65°C), and detected using CDPStar (Roche). An exposure time of 5 to 20 minutes was sufficient to achieve
clear bands on ECL film (Kodak). Preliminary data
showed that, when amplified directly from genomic
DNA, the “right” probe yielded non-specific hybridization, so the PCR fragment was cloned in pGEM T Easy
vector (Promega). The resulting plasmid was used as a

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

template to generate the probe with the same PCR primers. The “left” probe was amplified directly from genomic DNA.

Results
Genome Size and Organization

The sequenced S. latifolia mitochondrial genome can be
mapped as a 253,413 bp “master” circle with a total
complexity of 244,058 bp if only a single copy of perfectly repeated sequences greater than 100 bp is
included (Figure 2). The majority of the repeated
sequence in the genome is represented by a 1362 bp
“core” repeat sequence that is present in 6 identical
copies, all of which are in the same (i.e., direct) orientation relative to each other. Most of the remaining
repeated sequence is found in “extensions” of the core
repeat. The extensions are identical stretches of
sequence between 12 and 1593 bp shared by 2 or more
(but not all 6) of the flanking sequences on either the
“left” or “right” side of the core repeat (Figure 3). With
the exception of this 6-copy repeat and its extensions,
the S. latifolia mitochondrial genome is relatively devoid
of repeated sequences, containing only 2 other repeat
families greater than 100 bp (123 bp and 167 bp). Each
of these is a 2-copy repeat.
The master circle depicted in Figure 2 represents only
one of many possible genome conformations. No single
circle is fully consistent with all the sequencing reads
because there are numerous paired-end conflicts, i.e.,
cases where 2 reads from the same subclone map too
far apart or in the wrong orientation. With default filtering settings in Consed, these conflicts are exclusively
associated with the large 6-copy repeat sequence, suggesting active intra- and intermolecular recombination
among repeats [13,14].
With 6 copies of the core repeat, there are 36 possible
pairs of flanking sequences if all core repeats recombine
with each other. Of these, 26 pairs are supported by multiple subclones from our shotgun sequence data. The
lack of evidence for the remaining 10 flanking pairs could
reflect a reduced frequency or complete absence of these
recombination products, but it may also be the result of
stochastic sampling and/or cloning bias given our relatively low (7×) sequencing coverage. To distinguish
between these possibilities, we first performed (nonquantitative) PCR with all possible pairwise combinations
of primers designed for the left and right single-copy
regions that flank each core repeat plus its repeat extensions. We detected all 36 possible flanking sequence pairs
in DNA extracted from a single leaf (data not shown).
We then utilized Southern blots to assess the relative
abundance of the various recombination products and
confirm that the results from the PCR experiment were
not simply an artefact of PCR-mediated recombination

Page 5 of 15

[46]. We separately hybridized probes representing one
“left” single-copy flanking sequence and one “right” single-copy flanking sequence (Figure 3) to genomic DNA
digested with EcoRI. In each case, we detected 6 strong
bands, corresponding to the expected sizes of the 6 possible recombination products (Figure 4; Additional File 1).
All 6 bands are of similar intensity, suggesting that the
alternative conformations of the S. latifolia mitochondrial
genome exist at relatively equal frequencies. The “right”
probe also unexpectedly hybridized to a 1.8 kb fragment,
producing a seventh, fainter band that was present in a
subset of the individuals (Figure 4). Studies are ongoing
to assess the possibility that this seventh band reflects the
existence of sublimons and substoichiometric shifting in
S. latifolia [47,48].
Gene Content
Protein Genes

The S. latifolia mitochondrial genome contains intact
and putatively functional copies for all 24 of the protein
genes that are nearly universally conserved across the
large sample of angiosperm mitochondrial genomes
examined to date (Figure 1) [19]. In contrast, the genome appears to lack functional copies for most of the
17 other protein genes that were ancestrally present in
angiosperm mitochondrial genomes, but which have
been subsequently lost, and for the most part, functionally transferred to the nucleus, many times during the
course of angiosperm evolution [19,20].
Eleven of these 17 genes have little or no remnant in
the genome, while most of the other 6 genes (rpl5, rps3,
rps4, rps13, rps14, and sdh3) appear to be pseudogenes.
Of this group, only rpl5 is fully intact relative to other
angiosperms. It is possible that rps3 and rps14 are functional, but both of these genes show evidence of degeneration. The first exon (75 bp) of rps3 has been lost,
and the much larger second exon (1773 bp) exhibits a
substantial 3’ extension before the first in-frame stop
codon relative to other angiosperms. The 5’ portion of
rps14 is altered by a frameshift mutation that is corrected after 45 bp by a second frameshift indel. The
remaining genes either lack substantial regions that are
conserved in other angiosperms (rps4) or are truncated
by internal stop codons (rps13 and sdh3). Based on
these results, we have identified putatively functional
genes and pseudogenes in Figure 1, though a more definitive classification will require detailed analysis of gene
expression and function. Regardless, it is apparent that
the S. latifolia mitochondrial genome has lost a large
fraction of the protein genes that were part of the ancestral angiosperm mitochondrial genome.
tRNA Genes

The S. latifolia mitochondrial genome contains substantially fewer tRNA genes than any angiosperm

Page 6 of 15

-5

rep
ea
t2
na
d5
ex
on
s4

atp6

s 1-2

nad2
exon
Ψsd
s 1-2
h3

nad5 exon

Fn
ccm

dpo

3

ΨtrnM(CAT)

Ψrps

3
nad

d4
na

m

na

d6 4
na rps
Ψ

on

m

C

ttB

ex

Silene latifolia

ma 4
tR

cc

d1

-cp

t3

ea

rep

rpo

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

mitochondrial genome
253,413 bp

atp

9

nad

2 ex

ons

complex I (NADH dehydrogenase)
complex II (succinate dehydrogenase)
complex III (ubichinol cytochrome c reductase)
complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase)
complex V (ATP synthase)
cytochrome c biogenesis
ribosomal proteins (SSU)
ribosomal proteins (LSU)
maturases
polymerases
other genes
transfer RNAs
ribosomal RNAs
introns
core repeats
repeat extensions

3-5
trnY(
G
trnC(G trnN(G TA)
TT)-c
CA)
p

atp1
cox2

eat

rep

4

9
nadcp
G) cp
(TG A)rnP C
Ψt nW(C
tr

c
mF

cc

repeat 1

cox1

t
na rnP(T
d1
exo GG)
na
n5
d
atp4L
4
trn
fM
na
(C
d5
AT
ex
)
on
3

p

)-c

TG

(G

trnI(CAT)

rep
6

nad7

rrn26

rep
e

at

t
ea

5

nad
1
Ψrp exon
s13
2-3

d1
e
na

)
TC
E(
T

5
rrn n18
rr

cob

trn

B
ccmpl5
r 4
s1
Ψrp

xo

n1

H

trn

8
atp
3
cox

Figure 2 Mitochondrial genome map. One of many possible master circle representations of the Silene latifolia mitochondrial genome
(although this does not necessarily reflect the in vivo structure of the genome; see Discussion). Boxes inside and outside the circle correspond
to genes on the clockwise and anti-clockwise strand, respectively. Arrows indicate the orientation of repeats as shown in Figure 3. This figure
was generated with OGDraw v1.1 [91].

mitochondrial genome sequenced to date. A search of
the genome with BLASTn and tRNAscan-SE identified
only 11 tRNA genes, and at least 2 of these (trnP-cp and
trnM-cp) are potential pseudogenes based on the presence of multiple substitutions and insertions in their
anticodon loops. A third gene (trnfM) shows an elevated

substitution rate, but its anticodon and secondary structure appear largely intact (Additional File 2). Five of the
11 genes (including both potential pseudogenes) are of
chloroplast origin, representing apparently ancient
cpDNA transfers that pre-date the divergence between
Silene and Beta. Collectively, the genes encode a set of

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

Page 7 of 15

Figure 3 Structure of large repeated sequences in the Silene latifolia mitochondrial genome. The genome contains a 1362 bp direct
repeat present in 6 copies (white boxes). Additional repeat extensions (gray boxes) of varying length are shared by some but not all of the
regions that flank the repeat. Shorter repeat extensions are identical in sequence to the initial portions of longer repeat extensions, with the
exception of the “left” flanking regions next to repeat copies 4 and 5, which share a short 12 bp sequence (solid black boxes) that is unique
relative to the other flanking sequences. Single copy sequences flanking the repeats are shown by thin black lines. The red bars indicate the
location of probes used in Southern blot hybridizations (Figure 4). The values on the left and right side indicate the length of the respective
repeat extensions. The order of the repeat copies and their flanking sequences corresponds to the genome conformation shown in Figure 2.

tRNAs that, even after including the potential pseudogenes and assuming expanded wobble pairing rules
[49,50], can translate only 17 of the 61 sense codons,
encoding only 9 of the 20 amino acids (Table 1). By
comparison, mitochondrially-encoded tRNAs in Beta
vulgaris (the most closely related species with a complete mitochondrial genome sequence) can potentially
recognize 35 codons, encoding 16 amino acids. Therefore, it is likely that an unusually large fraction of the S.

latifolia mitochondrial tRNA population is encoded in
the nuclear genome and imported from the cytosol.
rRNA Genes

Like other angiosperm mitochondrial genomes, the S.
latifolia genome contains genes encoding 3 ribosomal
RNA species (rrn5, rrn18, and rrn26). Two divergent
copies of the rrn5 gene are present, although one is
likely non-functional, exhibiting 3 substantial insertions
(7, 9, and 16 bp) and multiple substitutions that greatly

Figure 4 Recombining repeats in the Silene latifolia mitochondrial genome. (A) A stylized version of the master circle undergoing one of
many possible recombination events. The black boxes represent the 6-copy repeat with numbering corresponding to Figure 2. The lettered
sections represent intervening single-copy regions. The “left” and “right” probes used in Southern blot hybridizations are indicated with small
gray bars and labeled L and R, respectively. The dotted gray lines indicate a crossover event between repeat copies that produces 2 subgenomic molecules. Given all possible recombination events, each left flanking sequence has the potential to be paired with 6 different right
flanking sequences (and vice versa), and therefore, each probe is expected to hybridize to 6 restriction fragments. (B) Southern blot
hybridizations with “left” and “right” probes each show 6 strong bands, corresponding to the sizes predicted based on recombination among
the 6 large repeats (see Additional File 1 for a more resolved replicate of the “left” probe blot). The left pair of lanes contain DNA samples from
one full-sib family, while the right pair contain DNA samples from a second full-sib family. The size standards are indicated by the values
between the two blots. The values on either side represent the predicted fragment sizes with the corresponding single-copy flanking sequence
noted in parentheses. The black triangle indicates an unexpected 1.8 kb fragment detected in some but not all individuals with the “right”
probe.

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

Page 8 of 15

Table 1 Translational capacity of mitochondrially encoded tRNAs in Silene latifolia
UUU

Phe

–

UCU

Ser

–

UAU

Tyr

wobble

UGU

Cys

wobble

UUC
UUA

Phe
Leu

–
–

UCC
UCA

Ser
Ser

–
–

UAC
UAA

Tyr
*

trnY(gua)
–

UGC
UGA

Cys
*

trnC(gca)
–

UUG

Leu

–

UCG

Ser

–

UAG

*

–

UGG

Trp

trnW(cca)-cp

CUU

Leu

–

CCU

Pro

wobble

CAU

His

wobble

CGU

Arg

–

CUC

Leu

–

CCC

Pro

wobble

CAC

His

trnH(gug)-cp

CGU

Arg

–

CUA

Leu

–

CCA

Pro

trnP(ugg)3

CAA

Gln

–

CGA

Arg

–

CUG

Leu

–

CCG

Pro

wobble

CAG

Gln

–

CGG

Arg

–

AUU

Ile

–

ACU

Thr

–

AAU

Asn

wobble

AGU

Ser

–

AUC
AUA

Ile
Ile

–
trnI(cau)1

ACC
ACA

Thr
Thr

–
–

AAC
AAA

Asn
Lys

trnN(guu)-cp
–

AGC
AGA

Ser
Arg

–
–

AUG

Met

trnfM(cau)2

ACG

Thr

–

AAG

Lys

–

AGG

Arg

–

GUU

Val

–

GCU

Ala

–

GAU

Asp

–

GGU

Gly

–

GUC

Val

–

GCC

Ala

–

GAC

Asp

–

GGC

Gly

–

GUA

Val

–

GCA

Ala

–

GAA

Glu

trnE(uuc)

GGA

Gly

–

GUG

Val

–

GCG

Ala

–

GAG

Glu

wobble

GGG

Gly

–

1

The C in the first anticodon position of trnI(cau) is assumed to be post-transcriptionally converted to lysidine, which pairs with A.
2
trnfM(cau) transfers formylmethionine and therefore is assumed to recognize only the AUG start codon. The genome also contains a gene with homology to the
chloroplast trnM gene (which recognizes internal AUG codons), but it has experienced a large expansion in its anticodon loop, making its functionality (and its
anticodon) uncertain (Additional File 2).
3
The genome contains a native trnP(ugg) gene as well as a homolog of the chloroplast trnP(ugg) gene. The chloroplast-derived copy is likely a pseudogene in S.
latifolia, as it is believed to be in some other angiosperm mitochondrial genomes [90,93]. Its anticodon loop has experienced multiple substitutions, including
one that converts the ancestral UGG anticodon to AGG (Additional File 2).

reduce the stability of the widely conserved 5S rRNA
secondary structure (see below).
Intron and RNA Editing Content

The S. latifolia mitochondrial genome contains a total
of 19 group II introns, 6 of which are trans-spliced. All
19 introns are found in protein genes, and all but one
occur in genes that encode subunits of complex I
(NADH dehydrogenase). The S. latifolia lineage has lost
the second nad4 intron and both of the cox2 introns
found in other angiosperms [51]. It also lacks the group
I intron in cox1, which has been widely distributed
across the angiosperm phylogeny by numerous horizontal transfer events [52]. A previous study identified a
total of 287 C-to-U RNA editing sites within the genome’s protein genes, which is fewer than typically found
in angiosperm mitochondrial genome but substantially
more than observed in the rapidly evolving congeners S.
noctiflora and S. conica [22].

genes found on linear mitochondrial plasmids in angiosperms and other eukaryotes [53]. These polymerase
genes have also been integrated into the mitochondrial
genomes in a number of other angiosperms [54,55].
By searching the complete mitochondrial genome
sequence against a collection of diverse chloroplast genomes, we identified a total of 2462 bp of apparent chloroplast origin distributed in 9 fragments ranging in size from
43 to 588 bp. The total chloroplast contribution represents
1.0% of the genome, which is on the low end of the range
of approximately 1 to 12% detected in other sequenced
angiosperm mitochondrial genomes [37,56]. As found in
other angiosperms, the S. latifolia mitochondrial genome
also contains numerous sequences of apparent nuclear origin, including many regions with homology to (presumably inactivated) angiosperm transposable elements.
Nevertheless, based on our search criteria, more than
143.5 kb of intergenic sequence (a full 56.6% of the genome) lacks detectable homology with any DNA or protein
sequence in the NCBI nt/nr databases.

Intergenic Regions

A BLAST search of intergenic regions from the S. latifolia mitochondrial genome found that 46.2 kb (23.1%) of
this sequence exhibits significant similarity to other land
plant mitochondrial genomes (after excluding sequences
of clear chloroplast origin). Much of this conserved
sequence is directly flanking annotated genes and likely
represents regulatory elements, UTRs and trans-spliced
introns [37]. The genome also contains 2 open reading
frames (ORFs) related to the DNA and RNA polymerase

Nucleotide Composition and Codon Usage

The S. latifolia mitochondrial genome has a 42.6% GC
content, which is slightly below the range of 42.8% to
45.2% observed in other sequenced angiosperm mitochondrial genomes [37,57]. The patterns of codon usage
in protein genes (Additional File 3) are very similar to
other angiosperm mitochondrial genomes [57], despite
the significant changes in tRNA gene content in the
S. latifolia genome.

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

Substitution Rates

Based on a phylogenetic analysis of 18 complete plant
mitochondrial genomes, Silene latifolia consistently
shows higher substitution rates than its sister lineage,
Beta vulgaris (Figure 5). For the most part, these differences are minor, and the substitution rates in S. latifolia
are consistent with the low rates that generally characterize plant mitochondrial genomes [10,28]. There are, however, 2 notable outliers with more extreme elevations in
substitution rate: the protein gene atp9 and the putatively
functional copy of the ribosomal rRNA gene rrn5 (Figure
6). Elevated substitution rates for atp9 have previously
been reported throughout Silene [28], but this study
represents the first analysis of rrn5 in the genus.
Despite their elevated substitution rates, both atp9
and rrn5 exhibit evidence of purifying selection, suggesting that they are still functionally expressed in the mitochondria. While the observed synonymous substitution
rate in atp9 is more than 5-fold higher than in any
other protein gene in S. latifolia, this is the only gene
without a single inferred non-synonymous substitution,
suggesting strong purifying selection on amino acid
sequence (Figure 6; note that atp9, at 225 nt in length,
is the shortest protein gene in the genome). In the case
of the ribosomal rRNA gene rrn5 (ca. 111 nt), 13 of the
16 inferred substitutions occur in loops within the conserved secondary structure (Figure 7) [43,44]. Moreover,
the 3 substitutions within helices are structurally conservative. Two of those substitutions compensate for each
other by altering both bases in a single pairing, resulting
in a C:G to G:C change at positions 27:56 (Figure 6).
The third substitution found at a conserved helix

Page 9 of 15

position (A-to-G at position 98) should still allow for
base pairing (G:U instead of A:U). The one predicted
change in secondary structure in S. latifolia results from
a T-to-G substitution at position 34. This position normally represents the first base of the terminal loop on
that branch, but the substitution should allow it to pair
with C46 and extend the preceding helix (Figure 7). As a
result, the predicted secondary structure is slightly more
stable in S. latifolia (ΔG = -40.80) than in other angiosperms (e.g., Beta vulgaris; ΔG = -39.16). A simulation
test that randomly placed mutations in rrn5 showed
that, given the number of substitutions in S. latifolia,
the conservation of secondary structure is much stronger than expected by chance (p < 0.0001). Therefore, it
appears that, despite its elevated substitution rate in S.
latifolia, rrn5 is still under selection to maintain folding
stability. In contrast, a second rrn5 copy in S. latifolia is
likely a pseudogene, as it contains 3 insertions as well as
3 nucleotide substitutions that disrupt conserved base
pairing in helices (ΔG = -17.58).
Gene Conversion Between Mitochondrial and Chloroplast
Sequences

The distribution of substitutions contributing to the elevated rrn18 divergence in S. latifolia is noticeably clustered (Figure 8a). One cluster of substitutions is likely the
result of a gene conversion event in which a segment of at
least 47 bp of rrn18 sequence was converted by a homologous chloroplast rrn16 gene (Figure 8b). The boundaries
of this apparent conversion tract correspond precisely to
the beginning and end of helix 240 (domain I) in the secondary structure model for 16S rRNA in Escherichia coli

Figure 5 Phylogenetic analysis of substitution rates in seed plant mitochondrial genomes. rRNA gene branch lengths are in terms of
substitutions per site, while protein gene branch lengths reflect synonymous substitutions per site based on a concatenated dataset of 25 genes
present in the mitochondrial genomes of all 18 species. All analyses used a constrained topology.

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

Page 10 of 15

Figure 6 Substitution rate variation among genes in Silene latifolia. Each bar represents the terminal branch length for S. latifolia based on
a phylogenetic analysis of 18 land plant species with fully sequenced mitochondrial genomes. For protein genes, branch lengths were estimated
in terms of non-synonymous substitutions (black bars) or synonymous substitutions (white bars) per site. For rRNA genes, branch lengths were
estimated in terms of substitutions per site (gray bars). Error bars represent standard errors, which were calculated as described by Parkinson
et al. [79].

[58]. Therefore, the result of the gene conversion appears
to have been a clean exchange of the entirety of this helix.
The region appears to have been further modified by multiple substitutions and indels since the conversion event.
Evidence of this conversion is also present in S. vulgaris,
but not in S. acaulis, indicating that it occurred after the
split between the two Silene subgenera but before the
divergence of the major lineages in subgenus Behenantha

[28]. We did not find evidence of cpDNA-mediated conversion in any other Silene mitochondrial genes, including
the rapidly evolving rrn5 and atp9 genes.

Discussion
Mitochondrial Gene Loss

The vast majority of genes in plant mitochondrial genomes can be placed into one of two functional

Figure 7 Predicted secondary structure for Silene latifolia 5S ribosomal RNA (rrn5). Sites that have experienced a substitution in the
S. latifolia lineage are highlighted in black. The black arrow indicates the one predicted change in secondary structure resulting from nucleotide
substitution (a novel base pairing between positions 34 and 46). The figure was generated with VARNA v3.6 [92].

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

Page 11 of 15

Figure 8 Gene conversion between mitochondrial and chloroplast small subunit rRNA genes. (A) The spatial distribution of substitutions
(vertical lines) in mitochondrial rrn18 that distinguish Silene latifolia from Beta vulgaris (regions that could not be reliably aligned in a multiple
species alignment were excluded). The black box indicates the region shown in detail below. (B) Aligned sequences of angiosperm
mitochondrial rrn18 and chloroplast rrn16. Dots in the alignment indicate sequence identity with the Zea reference sequence. The red box
shows the minimal extent of the region inferred to have experienced a gene conversion event, which also corresponds to the position of helix
240 in E. coli 16S rRNA [58]. Analysis of these sequences with GENECONV v1.81a using a mismatch cost of 1 found highly significant evidence for
gene conversion in this region (p < 0.0001). The asterisk indicates the inferred phylogenetic timing of that event. Gene sequences were taken
from published genomes (see Figure 1) with the exception S. acaulis and S. vulgaris rrn18 (GenBank EF547249 and HM562728) and S. latifolia
rrn16 (AB189069).

categories: 1) bioenergetics, i.e., oxidative phosphorylation and ATP synthesis (atp, ccm, cob, cox, nad, and sdh
genes) and 2) translational machinery (ribosomal protein, rRNA, and tRNA genes). Analysis of the phylogenetic distribution of protein genes across seed plants has
clearly shown that ribosomal proteins are subject to
more rapid rates of loss than genes involved in bioenergetics [19]. The complete sequence of the S. latifolia
mitochondrial genome provides the first evidence that
mitochondrial tRNA genes, another component of the
organelle’s translational machinery, can also be lost
rapidly and in large numbers in plants. This finding is
consistent with broader patterns in eukaryotic evolution,
as numerous independent lineages have experienced the
loss of most or even all of their mitochondriallyencoded tRNAs [59]. The present study also extends
earlier work that found reduced protein gene content in
2 other genera in the Caryophyllaceae [19]. The similar
reduction in protein gene content in these 3 taxa suggests that much of the observed protein gene loss probably occurred prior to the diversification of this family,
although some degree of parallel loss within the family
is also possible.
Protein genes that are lost from mitochondrial genomes can experience a variety of fates. For example, the
evolutionary history of eukaryotes has been characterized by a massive physical transfer of genes from the

mitochondrial genome to the nucleus. This process is
ongoing in plants, and there are a number of well-established cases of such endosymbiotic gene transfer that
have occurred since the divergence of angiosperms
[60-63]. Losses can also occur when a gene is functionally replaced by an anciently divergent homolog
[20,21,64,65], and when a protein or even an entire
multi-subunit complex is no longer functionally required
(e.g., the loss of the NADH dehydrogenase complex I in
apicomplexans and at least 2 yeast lineages [66,67]). In
Silene, an analysis of the S. vulgaris transcriptome
(unpublished data) revealed evidence of nuclear copies
for at least 9 of the protein genes that appear to have
been functionally lost from the S. latifolia mitochondrial
genome.
To the best of our knowledge, a functional transfer of
a mitochondrial tRNA gene to the nucleus has never
been documented. Instead, mitochondrial tRNA gene
loss is typically offset by importing tRNAs of eukaryotic
nuclear origin from the cytosol [17,59]. Therefore, it is
likely that Silene mitochondria import a greatly
expanded set of nuclear tRNAs relative to other plants–
a prediction that could be tested by purifying and
sequencing Silene organelle tRNAs.
In some specific cases, however, more complex evolutionary changes may be required to explain the loss of
mitochondrially-encoded tRNAs. For example, in plant

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

mitochondria, the function of tRNA-Gln is dependent
on coordinated enzymatic processes. Aminoacyl tRNA
synthetases play an essential role in translation by
matching tRNAs with their corresponding amino acids,
but plant organelles generally lack a Gln tRNA synthetase. Instead, tRNA-Gln is typically aminoacylated by a
Glu tRNA synthetase followed by a chemical modification (amidation) to convert Glu to Gln [68].
The gene encoding tRNA-Gln (trnQ) is present in all
sequenced seed plant mitochondrial genomes with the
exception of S. latifolia. The loss of the mitochondriallyencoded copy of tRNA-Gln in S. latifolia raises several
possibilities. First, it is conceivable that aminoacylation
and amidation are carried out in the same fashion with
an imported cytosolic tRNA-Gln. This may be unlikely,
however, because it would require associated changes in
tRNA recognition for multiple enzymes. Second, it is
possible that, unlike other plants, S. latifolia imports the
cytosolic Gln tRNA synthetase into its mitochondria,
allowing for direct aminoacylation of an imported tRNAGln without the use of a Glu intermediate. Finally, it is
possible that S. latifolia has experienced an unprecedented transfer of a functional tRNA gene (trnQ) from
the mitochondrial genome to the nucleus, where it is
expressed and its product targeted back to the mitochondria. All of these possibilities should be investigated to
better understand the mechanisms involved in the coevolution of organellar and nuclear gene content.
It is intriguing that extensive gene loss in two components of Silene mitochondrial translation machinery has
been associated with accelerated evolutionary rates in a
third component, rRNA genes. This pattern raises the
possibility of a correlated reduction in functional constraint across these 3 translational components. A general relaxation of selection on organelle translation has
been observed in cases such as the chloroplasts of nonphotosynthetic plants where the organelle’s functional
role has been greatly reduced [69]. However, we have
no a priori reason to expect relaxed selection on mitochondrial gene expression in Silene, and the distribution
of substitutions in rrn5 suggests that its secondary structure is under strong selection to maintain function.
Broader comparative and functional analyses would be
of value in assessing the extent to which correlated evolutionary pressures act on these 3 components of mitochondrial translation machinery.
An alternative interpretation of our results is that,
rather than being lost, certain genes have been functionally retained in the mitochondrial genome but escaped
detection by our annotation methods. For example,
cryptic genes could result from accelerated rates of evolution or the proliferation of introns and RNA editing
sites [18,70]. Although these explanations are unlikely
given the generally slow rate of plant mtDNA sequence

Page 12 of 15

evolution and the trend towards a reduced frequency of
introns and RNA editing in Silene [22], they certainly
cannot be ruled out. Likewise, it is possible that some of
the gene fragments that we have classified as pseudogenes are functional. Mitochondrial tRNAs often exhibit
aberrant or non-canonical secondary structures, making
detection of genes and the assessment of functionality
more difficult [71,72]. Under any of these scenarios,
however, it is still evident that the S. latifolia lineage has
experienced a period of significant evolutionary change
in its mitochondrially-encoded translation machinery.
Mitochondrial Substitution Rates and Gene Conversion
with Chloroplast Genes

Given that the divergence between mitochondria (proteobacteria) and chloroplasts (cyanobacteria) spans billions of years of evolution [73], the notion that gene
conversion is occurring between their respective genomes is rather astonishing. Nevertheless, examples of
conversion between the mitochondrial atp1 and chloroplast atpA genes have been documented in multiple
angiosperm lineages [74]. The S. latifolia mitochondrial
genome sequence provides compelling evidence for a
similar history of conversion in an rRNA gene. Evidence
of recombination between divergent rRNA sequences
has also been found in free-living bacteria and archaea
[75-77], including one other example of a chimeric proteobacterial/cyanobacterial small subunit rRNA [78].
In all documented cases of apparent conversion between
mitochondrial and chloroplast genes, the mitochondrial
gene acted as the recipient, which may reflect the propensity of angiosperm mitochondrial genomes to acquire and
retain “promiscuous sequences”, including those of chloroplast origin. If a conversion event in Silene did result from
a copy of chloroplast rrn16 that had been incorporated
into the mitochondrial genome, the promiscuous sequence
must have been subsequently lost, because it is no longer
present in the S. latifolia mitochondrial genome.
The history of gene conversion in S. latifolia rrn18 was
readily detectable because the conversion tract (47 to 60
bp in length) introduced a distinct cluster of 14 substitutions (although 2 of these appear to have been obscured
by subsequent mutations; Figure 8). These changes contributed to an accelerated rrn18 substitution rate in Silene
(Figure 5). Although we did not identify other clusters of
substitutions that could be readily explained by gene conversion with homologous chloroplast sequence, it is conceivable that more localized conversion events occurred
but escaped detection. It would be difficult if not impossible to distinguish conversion events that introduce only 1
or 2 substitutions from de novo point mutations. It has
been hypothesized that increases in the frequency of gene
conversion with reverse transcribed mitochondrial mRNA
("mutagenic retroprocessing”) might explain elevated

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

evolutionary rates in some angiosperm mitochondrial genomes [79]. Given the evidence for gene conversion
between mitochondrial and chloroplast genes, the role of
DNA-mediated conversion between divergent homologs
(or even non-homologous sequences that share small
regions of similarity) should be investigated as another
potential source of mutational input in plant mitochondrial genomes.
Repeats, Recombination, and Genome Structure

With rare exception [80], the structure of angiosperm
mitochondrial genomes is characterized by the presence
of large repeated sequences that facilitate intra-and intermolecular recombination [12,14]. These repeats are generally present in 2 or sometimes 3 copies. In this study,
we identified an unprecedented 6-copy family of large,
actively recombining repeats in the S. latifolia mitochondrial genome. Given a repeat family of this size and
recombinational activity, there are 120 different possible
conformations for the idealized “master circle”, which
differ in the precise order of the 6 single-copy regions.
The genome structure depicted in Figure 2 represents
one of these possible conformations. However, the genome organization is much more complex than any single
circular representation for at least 2 reasons. First, a 6copy family of recombining repeats will potentially generate hundreds of possible subgenomic circles containing
anywhere from 1 to 5 repeat loci, as well as a theoretically infinite number of supergenomic circles through
multimerization. Second, plant mitochondrial genomes
have been shown to exist in vivo as a complex assemblage
of linear, circular and branched molecules [81,82].
As observed in cases of repeat families with lower
copy number [12,83-89], our Southern blot hybridizations confirm the co-existence of multiple alternative
genome conformations. The similar intensity of each
band (Figure 4) suggests that recombination among the
repeats is sufficiently frequent that the many possible
pairs of flanking sequences occur at relatively equal
levels, a condition defined as “recombinational equilibrium” [13]. Moreover, the repeat copies appear to be
completely identical in sequence, providing further evidence for a high rate of homogenization through recombination/gene conversion.
For this study, we utilized Southern blots and in silico
predictions from a completely sequenced plant mitochondrial genome to provide a semi-quantitative assessment of recombination activity. Extending these
methods to other sequenced genomes that differ in the
number and size of repeat families could provide valuable comparative data on recombination activity in plant
mitochondria. Moreover, the advent of DNA sequencing
technologies (e.g., 454 and Illumina) that produce deep
sequencing coverage of large span paired-end libraries

Page 13 of 15

can provide an opportunity to generate quantitative estimates of the relative abundance of alternative genome
conformations.

Conclusions
Overall, the patterns of gene loss and divergence in the
S. latifolia mitochondrial genome suggest a markedly
expanded role for nuclear gene products in the translation of mitochondrial genes. Furthermore, the novel,
recombinationally active repeat structure of this genome
represents a complex elaboration of one of the long list
of unique features that distinguish plant mitochondrial
genomes. With ongoing efforts to sequence the mitochondrial genomes of other Silene species that differ
profoundly in mitochondrial mutation rates and breeding system, the S. latifolia mitochondrial genome should
provide a valuable comparative model for investigating
the evolutionary forces that shape genome organization.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Southern blot hybridizations.
Additional file 2: Predicted secondary structures of mitochondriallyencoded tRNAs.
Additional file 3: Summary of codon usage.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the sequencing work of Lucinda Fulton and the
WUSTL Genome Center. We would also like to thank Janis Antonovics, Peter
Fields, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on an earlier
version of this manuscript. This study was supported by NSF DEB-0808452
(to DBS and DRT), NIH RO1-GM-70612 (to JDP), and MŠMT KONTAKT
ME09035 and LC06004 (to HŠ). AJA was supported by an NIH Ruth L.
Kirschstein NRSA Postdoctoral Fellowship (1F32GM080079).
Author details
1
Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.
2
Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA. 3Institute
of Experimental Botany, v.v.i, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Prague 6, Lysolaje, 16502 Czech Republic.
Authors’ contributions
DBS planned the study, extracted DNA, performed genome finishing and
most of the data analysis, and drafted the manuscript. AJA extracted DNA
and helped plan the study, analyze the data and draft the manuscript. HŠ
performed the Southern blot analysis and helped draft the manuscript. JDP
and DRT helped plan the study, analyze the data and draft the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 1 July 2010 Accepted: 10 September 2010
Published: 10 September 2010
References
1. Gray MW, Burger G, Lang BF: Mitochondrial evolution. Science 1999,
283(5407):1476-1481.
2. Ward BL, Anderson RS, Bendich AJ: The mitochondrial genome is large
and variable in a family of plants (Cucurbitaceae). Cell 1981,
25(3):793-803.
3. Ellis J: Promiscuous DNA–chloroplast genes inside plant mitochondria.
Nature 1982, 299(5885):678-679.

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.
12.
13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Kubo T, Newton KJ: Angiosperm mitochondrial genomes and mutations.
Mitochondrion 2008, 8(1):5-14.
Richardson AO, Palmer JD: Horizontal gene transfer in plants. J Exp Bot
2007, 58(1):1-9.
Bock R: The give-and-take of DNA: horizontal gene transfer in plants.
Trends Plant Sci 2010, 15(1):11-22.
Malek O, Brennicke A, Knoop V: Evolution of trans-splicing plant
mitochondrial introns in pre-Permian times. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1997,
94:553-558.
Gray MW, Covello PS: RNA editing in plant mitochondria and
chloroplasts. FASEB J 1993, 7(1):64-71.
Wolfe KH, Li WH, Sharp PM: Rates of nucleotide substitution vary greatly
among plant mitochondrial, chloroplast, and nuclear DNAs. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 1987, 84(24):9054-9058.
Mower JP, Touzet P, Gummow JS, Delph LF, Palmer JD: Extensive variation
in synonymous substitution rates in mitochondrial genes of seed plants.
BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7(1):135.
Palmer JD, Herbon LA: Plant mitochondrial DNA evolves rapidly in
structure, but slowly in sequence. J Mol Evol 1988, 28(1-2):87-97.
Palmer JD, Shields CR: Tripartite structure of the Brassica campestris
mitochondrial genome. Nature 1984, 307:437-440.
Lonsdale DM, Brears T, Hodge TP, Melville SE, Rottmann WH: The plant
mitochondrial genome: homologous recombination as a mechanism for
generating heterogeneity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1988,
319(1193):149-163.
Marechal A, Brisson N: Recombination and the maintenance of plant
organelle genome stability. New Phytol 2010, 186:299-317.
Dietrich A, Small I, Cosset A, Weil JH, Marechal-Drouard L: Editing and
import: strategies for providing plant mitochondria with a complete set
of functional transfer RNAs. Biochimie 1996, 78(6):518-529.
Small I, Akashi K, Chapron A, Dietrich A, Duchene AM, Lancelin D, MaréchalDrouard L, Menand B, Mireau H, Moudden Y: The strange evolutionary
history of plant mitochondrial tRNAs and their aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases. J Hered 1999, 90(3):333-337.
Glover KE, Spencer DF, Gray MW: Identification and structural
characterization of nucleus-encoded transfer RNAs imported into wheat
mitochondria. J Biol Chem 2001, 276(1):639-648.
Grewe F, Viehoever P, Weisshaar B, Knoop V: A trans-splicing group I
intron and tRNA-hyperediting in the mitochondrial genome of the
lycophyte Isoetes engelmannii. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37(15):5093-5104.
Adams KL, Qiu YL, Stoutemyer M, Palmer JD: Punctuated evolution of
mitochondrial gene content: high and variable rates of mitochondrial
gene loss and transfer to the nucleus during angiosperm evolution. Proc
Natl Acad Sci 2002, 99(15):9905-9912.
Mower JP, Bonen L: Ribosomal protein L10 is encoded in the
mitochondrial genome of many land plants and green algae. BMC Evol
Biol 2009, 9(1):265.
Kubo N, Arimura S: Discovery of the rpl10 gene in diverse plant
mitochondrial genomes and its probable replacement by the nuclear
gene for chloroplast RPL10 in two lineages of angiosperms. DNA Res
2010, 17(1):1-9.
Sloan DB, MacQueen AH, Alverson AJ, Palmer JD, Taylor DR: Extensive loss
of RNA editing sites in rapidly evolving Silene mitochondrial genomes:
Selection vs. retroprocessing as the driving force. Genetics 2010,
185(4):1369-1380.
McCauley DE, Bailey MF, Sherman NA, Darnell MZ: Evidence for paternal
transmission and heteroplasmy in the mitochondrial genome of Silene
vulgaris, a gynodioecious plant. Heredity 2005, 95(1):50-58.
Bernasconi G, Antonovics J, Biere A, Charlesworth D, Delph LF, Filatov D,
Giraud T, Hood ME, Marais GAB, McCauley D: Silene as a model system in
ecology and evolution. Heredity 2009, 103:5-14.
Desfeux C, Maurice S, Henry JP, Lejeune B, Gouyon PH: Evolution of
reproductive systems in the genus Silene. Proc R Soc Lond B 1996,
263(1369):409-414.
Barr CM, Keller SR, Ingvarsson PK, Sloan DB, Taylor DR: Variation in
mutation rate and polymorphism among mitochondrial genes in Silene
vulgaris. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24(8):1783-1791.
Sloan DB, Barr CM, Olson MS, Keller SR, Taylor DR: Evolutionary rate
variation at multiple levels of biological organization in plant
mitochondrial DNA. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(2):243-246.

Page 14 of 15

28. Sloan DB, Oxelman B, Rautenberg A, Taylor DR: Phylogenetic analysis of
mitochondrial substitution rate variation in the angiosperm tribe
Sileneae (Caryophyllaceae). BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:260.
29. Stadler T, Delph LF: Ancient mitochondrial haplotypes and evidence for
intragenic recombination in a gynodioecious plant. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2002, 99(18):11730-11735.
30. Touzet P, Delph LF: The effect of breeding system on polymorphism in
mitochondrial genes of Silene. Genetics 2009, 181(2):631-644.
31. Jalas J, Suominen J: Atlas florae Europaeae. Distribution of vascular plants
in Europe. III. Caryophyllaceae. 1987.
32. Taylor DR, Keller SR: Historical range expansion determines the
phylogenetic diversity introduced during contemporary species invasion.
Evolution 2007, 61(2):334-345.
33. Nicolas M, Marais G, Hykelova V, Janousek B, Laporte V, Vyskot B,
Mouchiroud D, Negrutiu I, Charlesworth D, Moneger F: A gradual process
of recombination restriction in the evolutionary history of the sex
chromosomes in dioecious plants. PLoS Biol 2005, 3(1):47-56.
34. Kolodner R, Tewari KK: Physicochemical characterization of mitochondrial
DNA from pea leaves. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1972, 69(7):1830-1834.
35. Palmer JD: Physical and gene mapping of chloroplast DNA from Atriplex
triangularis and Cucumis sativa. Nucleic Acids Res 1982, 10(5):1593-1605.
36. Gordon D, Abajian C, Green P: Consed: a graphical tool for sequence
finishing. Genome Res 1998, 8(3):195-202.
37. Alverson AJ, Wei X, Rice DW, Stern DB, Barry K, Palmer JD: Insights into the
evolution of plant mitochondrial genome size from complete sequences
of Citrullus lanatus and Cucurbita pepo (Cucurbitaceae). Mol Biol Evol
2010, 27(6):1436-1448.
38. Kurtz S, Choudhuri JV, Ohlebusch E, Schleiermacher C, Stoye J, Giegerich R,
Journals O: REPuter: the manifold applications of repeat analysis on a
genomic scale. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29(22):4633-4642.
39. Yang Z: PAML 4: Phylogenetic Analysis by Maximum Likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24(8):1586-1591.
40. Buckler ES, Holtsford TP: Zea systematics: ribosomal ITS evidence. Mol Biol
Evol 1996, 13(4):612-622.
41. Soltis DE, Soltis PS, Chase MW, Mort ME, Albach DC, Zanis M, Savolainen V,
Hahn WH, Hoot SB, Fay MF: Angiosperm phylogeny inferred from 18S
rDNA, rbcL, and atpB sequences. Bot J Linn Soc 2000, 133(4):381-461.
42. Hofacker IL, Fontana W, Stadler PF, Bonhoeffer LS, Tacker M, Schuster P:
Fast folding and comparison of RNA secondary structures. Monatshefte
für Chemie 1994, 125(2):167-188.
43. Spencer DF, Bonen L, Gray MW: Primary sequence of wheat
mitochondrial 5S ribosomal ribonucleic acid: functional and evolutionary
implications. Biochemistry 1981, 20(14):4022-4029.
44. Brennicke A, Möller S, Blanz PA: The 18S and 5S ribosomal RNA genes in
Oenothera mitochondria: Sequence rearrangments in the 18S and 5S
rRNA genes of higher plants. Mol General Genet 1985, 198(3):404-410.
45. Štorchová H, Hrdličková R, Chrtek J Jr, Tetera M, Fitze D, Fehrer J: An
improved method of DNA isolation from plants collected in the field
and conserved in saturated NaCl/CTAB solution. Taxon 2000, 49:79-84.
46. Meyerhans A, Vartanian JP, Wain-Hobson S: DNA recombination during
PCR. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18(7):1687-1691.
47. Small ID, Isaac PG, Leaver CJ: Stoichiometric differences in DNA molecules
containing the atpA gene suggest mechanisms for the generation of
mitochondrial genome diversity in maize. EMBO J 1987, 6(4):865-869.
48. Arrieta-Montiel MP, Shedge V, Davila J, Christensen AC, Mackenzie SA:
Diversity of the Arabidopsis mitochondrial genome occurs via nuclearcontrolled recombination activity. Genetics 2009, 183(4):1261-1268.
49. Crick FH: Codon–anticodon pairing: the wobble hypothesis. J Mol Biol
1966, 19(2):548-555.
50. Cochella L, Green R: Wobble during decoding: more than third-position
promiscuity. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2004, 11(12):1160-1162.
51. Joly S, Brouillet L, Bruneau A: Phylogenetic implications of the multiple
losses of the mitochondrial coxII.i3 intron in the angiosperms. Int J Plant
Sci 2001, 162(2):359-373.
52. Sanchez-Puerta MV, Cho Y, Mower JP, Alverson AJ, Palmer JD: Frequent,
phylogenetically local horizontal transfer of the cox1 group I intron in
flowering plant mitochondria. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(8):1762-1777.
53. Shutt TE, Gray MW: Bacteriophage origins of mitochondrial replication
and transcription proteins. Trends Genet 2006, 22(2):90-95.

Sloan et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:274
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/274

54. Robison MM, Wolyn DJ: A mitochondrial plasmid and plasmid-like RNA
and DNA polymerases encoded within the mitochondrial genome of
carrot (Daucus carota L.). Curr Genet 2005, 47(1):57-66.
55. Goremykin VV, Salamini F, Velasco R, Viola R: Mitochondrial DNA of Vitis
vinifera and the issue of rampant horizontal gene transfer. Mol Biol Evol
2009, 26(1):99-110.
56. Kubo T, Mikami T: Organization and variation of angiosperm
mitochondrial genome. Physiol Plantarum 2007, 129(1):6-13.
57. Sloan DB, Taylor DR: Testing for selection on synonymous sites in plant
mitochondrial DNA: the role of codon bias and RNA editing. J Mol Evol
2010, 70:479-491.
58. Cannone JJ, Subramanian S, Schnare MN, Collett JR, D’Souza LM, Du Y,
Feng B, Lin N, Madabusi LV, Müller KM: The Comparative RNA Web (CRW)
Site: an online database of comparative sequence and structure
information for ribosomal, intron, and other RNAs. BMC Bioinformatics
2002, 3:2.
59. Gray MW, Lang BF, Cedergren R, Golding GB, Lemieux C, Sankoff D,
Turmel M, Brossard N, Delage E, Littlejohn TG, Plante I, Rioux P, SaintLouis D, Zhu Y, Burger G: Genome structure and gene content in protist
mitochondrial DNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26(4):865-878.
60. Nugent JM, Palmer JD: RNA-mediated transfer of the gene coxII from the
mitochondrion to the nucleus during flowering plant evolution. Cell
1991, 66(3):473-481.
61. Kubo N, Harada K, Hirai A, Kadowaki K: A single nuclear transcript
encoding mitochondrial RPS14 and SDHB of rice is processed by
alternative splicing: common use of the same mitochondrial targeting
signal for different proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999, 96(16):9207-9211.
62. Adams KL, Daley DO, Qiu YL, Whelan J, Palmer JD: Repeated, recent and
diverse transfers of a mitochondrial gene to the nucleus in flowering
plants. Nature 2000, 408(6810):354-357.
63. Liu SL, Zhuang Y, Zhang P, Adams KL: Comparative analysis of structural
diversity and sequence evolution in plant mitochondrial genes
transferred to the nucleus. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26(4):875-891.
64. Adams KL, Daley DO, Whelan J, Palmer JD: Genes for two mitochondrial
ribosomal proteins in flowering plants are derived from their chloroplast
or cytosolic counterparts. Plant Cell 2002, 14(4):931-943.
65. Mollier P, Hoffmann B, Debast C, Small I: The gene encoding Arabidopsis
thaliana mitochondrial ribosomal protein S13 is a recent duplication of
the gene encoding plastid S13. Curr Genet 2002, 40(6):405-409.
66. Paquin B, Laforest MJ, Forget L, Roewer I, Wang Z, Longcore J, Lang BF:
The fungal mitochondrial genome project: evolution of fungal
mitochondrial genomes and their gene expression. Curr Genet 1997,
31(5):380-395.
67. Gardner MJ, Hall N, Fung E, White O, Berriman M, Hyman RW, Carlton JM,
Pain A, Nelson KE, Bowman S, Paulsen IT, James K, Eisen JA, Rutherford K,
Salzberg SL, Craig A, Kyes S, Chan MS, Nene V, Shallom SJ, Suh B,
Peterson J, Angiuoli S, Pertea M, Allen J, Selengut J, Haft D, Mather MW,
Vaidya AB, Martin DM, Fairlamb AH, Fraunholz MJ, Roos DS, Ralph SA,
McFadden GI, Cummings LM, Subramanian GM, Mungall C, Venter JC,
Carucci DJ, Hoffman SL, Newbold C, Davis RW, Fraser CM, Barrell B:
Genome sequence of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum. Nature 2002, 419(6906):498-511.
68. Pujol C, Bailly M, Kern D, Marechal-Drouard L, Becker H, Duchene AM: Dualtargeted tRNA-dependent amidotransferase ensures both mitochondrial
and chloroplastic Gln-tRNAGln synthesis in plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci
2008, 105(17):6481-6485.
69. Wolfe KH, Morden CW, Ems SC, Palmer JD: Rapid evolution of the plastid
translational apparatus in a nonphotosynthetic plant: loss or accelerated
sequence evolution of tRNA and ribosomal protein genes. J Mol Evol
1992, 35(4):304-317.
70. Feagin JE, Abraham JM, Stuart K: Extensive editing of the cytochrome c
oxidase III transcript in Trypanosoma brucei. Cell 1988, 53(3):413-422.
71. Okimoto R, Wolstenholme DR: A set of tRNAs that lack either the T psi C
arm or the dihydrouridine arm: towards a minimal tRNA adaptor. EMBO
J 1990, 9(10):3405-3411.
72. Schnare MN, Greenwood SJ, Gray MW: Primary sequence and posttranscriptional modification pattern of an unusual mitochondrial tRNA
(Met) from Tetrahymena pyriformis. FEBS Lett 1995, 362(1):24-28.
73. Sheridan PP, Freeman KH, Brenchley JE: Estimated minimal divergence
times of the major bacterial and archaeal phyla. Geomicrobiol J 2003,
20(1):1-14.

Page 15 of 15

74. Hao W, Palmer JD: Fine-scale mergers of chloroplast and mitochondrial
genes create functional, transcompartmentally chimeric mitochondrial
genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2009, 106(39):16728-16733.
75. Parker MA: Case of localized recombination in 23S rRNA genes from
divergent Bradyrhizobium lineages associated with neotropical legumes.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2001, 67(5):2076-2082.
76. Schouls LM, Schot CS, Jacobs JA: Horizontal transfer of segments of the
16S rRNA genes between species of the Streptococcus anginosus group.
J Bacteriol 2003, 185(24):7241-7246.
77. Boucher Y, Douady CJ, Sharma AK, Kamekura M, Doolittle WF:
Intragenomic heterogeneity and intergenomic recombination among
haloarchaeal rRNA genes. J Bacteriol 2004, 186(12):3980-3990.
78. Miller SR, Augustine S, Olson TL, Blankenship RE, Selker J, Wood AM:
Discovery of a free-living chlorophyll d-producing cyanobacterium with
a hybrid proteobacterial/cyanobacterial small-subunit rRNA gene. Proc
Natl Acad Sci 2005, 102(3):850-855.
79. Parkinson CL, Mower JP, Qiu YL, Shirk AJ, Song K, Young ND,
DePamphilis CW, Palmer JD: Multiple major increases and decreases in
mitochondrial substitution rates in the plant family Geraniaceae. BMC
Evol Biol 2005, 5:73.
80. Palmer JD, Herbon LA: Unicircular structure of the Brassica hirta
mitochondrial genome. Curr Genet 1987, 11(6-7):565-570.
81. Oldenburg DJ, Bendich AJ: Size and Structure of Replicating
Mitochondrial DNA in Cultured Tobacco Cells. Plant Cell 1996,
8(3):447-461.
82. Backert S, Borner T: Phage T4-like intermediates of DNA replication and
recombination in the mitochondria of the higher plant Chenopodium
album (L.). Curr Genet 2000, 37(5):304-314.
83. Lonsdale DM, Hodge TP, Fauron CMR, Flavell RB: A predicted structure for
the mitochondrial genome from the fertile cytoplasm of maize. In Plant
molecular biology: UCLA symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology, New
Series. Edited by: Goldberg RB. New York: AR Liss; 1983:12:445-456.
84. Stern DB, Palmer JD: Recombination sequences in plant mitochondrial
genomes: diversity and homologies to known mitochondrial genes.
Nucleic Acids Res 1984, 12(15):6141-6157.
85. Palmer JD, Herbon LA: Tricircular mitochondrial genomes of Brassica and
Raphanus: reversal of repeat configurations by inversion. Nucleic Acids
Res 1986, 14(24):9755-9764.
86. Stern DB, Palmer JD: Tripartite mitochondrial genome of spinach:
physical structure, mitochondrial gene mapping, and locations of
transposed chloroplast DNA sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1986,
14(14):5651-5666.
87. Palmer JD: Intraspecific variation and multicircularity in Brassica
mitochondrial DNAs. Genetics 1988, 118(2):341-351.
88. Siculella L, Palmer JD: Physical and gene organization of mitochondrial
DNA in fertile and male sterile sunflower. CMS-associated alterations in
structure and transcription of the atpA gene. Nucleic Acids Res 1988,
16(9):3787-3799.
89. Folkerts O, Hanson MR: Three copies of a single recombination repeat
occur on the 443 kb master circle of the Petunia hybrida 370
mitochondrial genome. Nucleic Acids Res 1989, 17(18):7345-7357.
90. Leon P, Walbot V, Bedinger P: Molecular analysis of the linear 2.3 kb
plasmid of maize mitochondria: apparent capture of tRNA genes. Nucleic
Acids Res 1989, 17(11):4089-4099.
91. Lohse M, Drechsel O, Bock R: OrganellarGenomeDRAW (OGDRAW): a tool
for the easy generation of high-quality custom graphical maps of plastid
and mitochondrial genomes. Curr Genet 2007, 52(5-6):267-274.
92. Darty K, Denise A, Ponty Y: VARNA: Interactive drawing and editing of the
RNA secondary structure. Bioinformatics 2009, 25(15):1974-1975.
93. Placido A, Damiano F, Losacco M, Rainaldi G, De Benedetto C, Gallerani R:
Variable structures of promoters regulating transcription of cp-like tRNA
genes and of some native genes on the sunflower mitochondrial
genome. Gene 2006, 371(1):93-101.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-274
Cite this article as: Sloan et al.: Extensive loss of translational genes in
the structurally dynamic mitochondrial genome of the angiosperm
Silene latifolia. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:274.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
