<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The role of unintegrated DNA in HIV infection</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Retrovirology 2011, 8:52. doi:10.1186/1742-4690-8-52"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Richard D Sloan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

REVIEW

Open Access

The role of unintegrated DNA in HIV infection
Richard D Sloan and Mark A Wainberg*
Abstract
Integration of the reverse transcribed viral genome into host chromatin is the hallmark of retroviral replication. Yet,
during natural HIV infection, various unintegrated viral DNA forms exist in abundance. Though linear viral cDNA is
the precursor to an integrated provirus, increasing evidence suggests that transcription and translation of
unintegrated DNAs prior to integration may aid productive infection through the expression of early viral genes.
Additionally, unintegrated DNA has the capacity to result in preintegration latency, or to be rescued and yield
productive infection and so unintegrated DNA, in some circumstances, may be considered to be a viral reservoir.
Recently, there has been interest in further defining the role and function of unintegrated viral DNAs, in part
because the use of anti-HIV integrase inhibitors leads to an abundance of unintegrated DNA, but also because of
the potential use of non-integrating lentiviral vectors in gene therapy and vaccines. There is now increased
understanding that unintegrated viral DNA can either arise from, or be degraded through, interactions with host
DNA repair enzymes that may represent a form of host antiviral defence. This review focuses on the role of
unintegrated DNA in HIV infection and additionally considers the potential implications for antiviral therapy.
Review
Multiple forms of unintegrated DNA

The retrovirus family is characterized by reverse transcription of the viral RNA genome to cDNA and its
integration into the host cell genome. Integration of the
reverse transcribed cDNA is mediated by the viral
encoded and imported integrase enzyme. Integrase
excises a dinucleotide from the 3’ terminus of the
cDNA in a step known as 3’ processing. 3’ processed
viral DNA is then covalently linked to host DNA in a
process known as strand transfer [1]. Single stranded
DNA breaks, in the host genome at the site of integration, are then repaired by host factors [2]. The viral genome is preferentially integrated into transcriptionally
active open chromatin [3-5], following the transcription
of viral genes which occurs via host transcription factors, leading to synthesis of the viral transactivating protein, Tat, and subsequent Tat mediated transactivation
of the viral LTR promoter. This process ensures that
viral genes integrated in the host genome are transcribed, ultimately leading to synthesis of viral proteins
and completion of the viral replication cycle [2].
However, during natural HIV-1 infection the vast
majority of viral cDNA exists in an unintegrated state
* Correspondence: mark.wainberg@mcgill.ca
McGill University AIDS Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital,
Montréal, QC, Canada

[6-10]. Multiple forms of unintegrated viral DNA exist,
including linear cDNA, the most abundant form that is
the direct product of reverse transcribed viral RNA and
is the substrate for the integration reaction [6]. All other
unintegrated DNA products derive from linear cDNA
and are circular in form (Figure 1).
Unintegrated circles can be produced through autointegration (sometimes called suicidal integration), in
which the 3’-ends of the reverse transcript are processed
by integrase and then attack sites within the viral DNA,
producing either internally rearranged or less than full
length DNA circles (Figure 1) [2,11]. Autointegration is
seen in murine Moloney leukemia virus (MoMLV),
Rous Sarcoma Virus (RSV) and HIV-1 infections, and is
thus a likely common feature of retroviral replication
[12-14]. This process occurs with relatively high frequency, and so approximately 20% of the circular DNA
products were found to be autointegrants in MoMLV
infections [12].
1-LTR circles are found exclusively in the nucleus and
can be formed through homologous recombination of
linear DNAs at the LTRs, resulting in a circular DNA
bearing one copy of the viral LTR (Figure 1). Early
experiments determined that cellular factors were
required to mediate 1-LTR circle formation [15]. Later
analysis showed that the RAD50/MRE11/NBS1 nuclease
components were implicated in 1-LTR circle formation

© 2011 Sloan and Wainberg; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

Page 2 of 15

linear cDNA

autointegration

recombination

host DNA
repair

integration

truncated
autointegrant
internally rearranged
autointegrant

2-LTR circle

1-LTR circle

degradation

integrated proviral DNA
Figure 1 The various forms of unintegrated HIV cDNA. Linear cDNA, the product of reverse transcription, is susceptible to a number of fates
other than integration into host chromatin as proviral DNA. Autointegration may lead to the formation of truncated or internally rearranged
circular forms. Although recombination may yield 1-LTR circles, host factors may also contribute their presence. Host factors, such as those
involved in the non-homologous end joining pathway, participate in the formation of 2-LTR circles. Various DNA repair factors and restriction
factors may also result in direct degradation of linear cDNA. Collectively, these processes help to explain patterns of unintegrated viral DNA
present in infected cells.

[16]. However, 1-LTR circles can also be formed via
ligation of interrupted reverse transcription intermediates (Figure 1) [17]. Interestingly, Foamy virus particles,
which can complete endogenous reverse transcription in
the virion prior to infection, have been shown to contain
1-LTR circles [18]. In HIV, however, endogenous
reverse transcription does not occur naturally, and even
in vitro assays do not yield near full-length products, so
it is unlikely that HIV 1-LTR circles could form outside
the cell [19]. In this regard, it must be noted that 1-LTR
circles are also absent in the cytosolic fraction of HIVinfected cells [15]. Formal quantification of 1-LTR circles via quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
is technically challenging, due to a lack of unique
sequence features, although end point blot and PCR
analysis methods do exist for detection of 1-LTR circles
[20,21].
The elucidation of the rolling circle hypothesis of
phage DNA replication was formulated in 1968 [22,23],

and led to the appealing hypothesis that 2-LTR circles,
that contain the full length HIV DNA and both sets of
LTRs, might be the direct precursor of integrated DNA
(Figure 1). Although some experiments suggested that
2-LTR circular DNA could bind cellular target DNA
[24], this hypothesis has since been disproven, and it is
now established that linear cDNA is the only precursor
to proviral DNA [25-27]. Accordingly, unintegrated circular products cannot sustain replication in themselves
and have been considered to be the “dead end products
of abortive infections” [2,28,29].
It is now known that 2-LTR circles are the products
of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) DNA repair
events that are mediated in the nucleus as a protective
host response to the presence of double stranded DNA
[10,11] (Figure 1). It has been seen that viral cDNA
replication intermediates are associated with host Ku
components of the NHEJ pathway [30-32]. Additionally,
inactivation of the NHEJ components Ku, ligase 4 or

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

XRCC4 leads to reductions in 2-LTR levels upon infection, whilst inhibition of the DNA-dependent protein
kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), which is also a
component of the NHEJ machinery, had a more modest
but measurable effect on 2-LTR circle formation [16,32].
When specific NHEJ processes were abolished in some
studies, apoptosis was seen in infected cells [30,33].
Under these circumstances, reverse transcription but
not integration was required to yield apoptosis, implicating unintegrated viral cDNA as a key signal that promotes apoptosis when NHEJ processes are depleted [30].
It was previously considered that the cytopathic effect
of HIV might actually be due to excessive accumulation
of unintegrated cDNAs upon superinfection, as their
presence would trigger apoptosis even in infected cells
with intact NHEJ machinery [34-36]. But cytopathic
effect has since been proven to be separable from accumulation of unintegrated DNA [37,38].
Given that 2-LTR circles are exclusively found in the
nucleus, they have become a useful marker of viral
nuclear import in studies of viral trafficking [39]. This is
due to the unique nature of the LTR-LTR junction that
can be readily assayed by PCR [40]. Thus, levels of 2LTR circles are often recognized as overall markers of
total unintegrated DNA in the cell, despite the fact that
2-LTR circles are present at relatively lower levels than
other unintegrated DNA species [15,40]. However,
detection sensitivity of 2-LTR circles (and other nonintegrated forms) can be improved by separating high
molecular weight mass genomic DNA from samples
[41-43].
Host cell factors that inhibit viral integration

Other than circularization by NHEJ machinery resulting
in 2-LTR circles, there are many further mechanisms
that recognize and neutralize infecting retroviral DNA.
These involve a variety of factors, many of which are
involved in cellular DNA repair processes. For example,
XPB and XPD are cellular DNA helicases that are components of the TFIIB basal transcription complex that
plays a role in DNA nucleotide excision repair [44].
Recently, XPB and XPD also were implicated in controlling retroviral infection [45,46]. In comparison to cells
which have reduced XPD and XPB function, it was
shown that retroviral cDNA is degraded in wild type
cells in the absence of an accumulation of 2-LTR circles.
This implies an XPB- and XPD-mediated mechanism of
linear viral cDNA degradation. Further analysis has
shown that XPB-mediated degradation of retroviral
cDNA is dependent on nuclear entry. However, these
restrictive effects do not involve XPB and XPD mediated
up-regulation of host gene expression or induction of
APOBEC3G or other proteasome-mediated pathways
[46].

Page 3 of 15

There are similar findings involving other DNA repair
mechanisms; Rad18 is a component of the post-replication DNA repair pathway which was identified as contributing to HIV integrase stability [47]. More recent
analysis demonstrated that cells lacking Rad18 were
hyper susceptible to infection by MLV and HIV [48].
This effect was even seen with non-integrating virus,
leading to the conclusion that Rad18 perhaps exerts its
influence on viral cDNA prior to integration. Another
example of the involvement of DNA repair pathways in
preventing retroviral infection is found in the homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair protein Rad52
[49]. In cells with reduced Rad52 expression, increased
levels of HIV-1 transduction were observed upon infection, yet reductions in levels of other HR components
(XRCC2, XRCC3 and BRCA2) had no such effect. Interestingly, 2-LTR circle levels were found to be reduced in
infected cells that over-expressed Rad52, yet there was
no apparent effect on apoptosis. These observations
imply a direct degradation of linear viral cDNA by
Rad52.
The well characterized restriction factors APOBEC3G
and APOBEC3F may also influence the forms of unintegrated DNA seen upon HIV infection. APOBEC3G and
APOBEC3F are nucleic acid editing enzymes which
restrict viral replication by introducing cytidine to uracil
changes in first strand synthesis of viral DNA, resulting
in mutated virus [50]. APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F are
also thought to function more directly by inhibiting viral
reverse transcription, and there now is also evidence
that APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F also directly inhibit
integration by modifying the linear cDNA substrate,
thus rendering it unsuitable for provirus formation
[51,52]. APOBEC3G generates a 6 base extension at the
U5 end of the viral 3’ LTR which causes the linear
cDNA to be a less suitable substrate for integrase,
whereas APOBEC3F, which has a more potent affect
upon integration, functions by inhibiting the 3’ processing of the viral cDNA prior to integration. Curiously,
APOBEC3G-mediated inhibition of integration leads to
a two-fold reduction in 2-LTR circles upon infection
with a Δ-vif virus when compared controls lacking
APOBEC3G [53]. It is possible that the inhibition process may render the linear cDNA template a less suitable substrate for the cellular NHEJ machinery leading to
less 2-LTR circle formation, and/or there may be a
direct degradation of the modified cDNA.
Another DNA repair factor, uracil DNA glycosylase 2
(UNG2), which is part of the uracil base excision repair
pathway, is thought to directly inhibit retroviral DNA at
a preintegration step [54], a process which may be
counteracted by HIV-1 Vpr [55]. Yet, the precise role of
UNG2 in the HIV lifecycle remains controversial; some
evidence suggests that UNG2 may be required to

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

mitigate APOBEC3G restriction in order to allow successful reverse transcription [56], but there is also evidence that indicates a lack of involvement of UNG2 in
APOBEC3G-mediated effects on infectivity [57]. Recent
data also suggests that HIV DNA tolerates a high rate
of uracilation, rendering it a poor target for strand
transfer when compared to uracil-poor chromosomal
DNA, a process which seems to protect viral DNA from
autointegration [58]. These contradictory findings make
it difficult to reconcile the true role of UNG2 in HIV
replication.
Accordingly, multiple host factors involved in DNA
repair serve to subvert retroviral infection, resulting in
the formation of retroviral cDNA circles. Additionally,
other DNA repair mechanisms directly degrade or modify viral linear cDNA and may act in conjunction with
constituents of the intrinsic/innate immunity responses,
in order to prevent viral integration. The importance of
these restrictive measures to the host cell is demonstrated by the finding that NHEJ genes in both yeast
cells and primates were under strong selective pressure,
indicating a competition between host and pathogen
[59,60]. Collectively, these processes help to explain the
observation that the majority of reverse transcribed
DNA does not obtain the status of integrated viral DNA
[61,62].
Host cell factors that aid viral integration

HIV uses cellular host factors to increase the likelihood
of successful integration. One of the best characterized
is LEDGF/p75 which is required to tether viral DNA to
host chromatin in association with integrase, and also
aids virus to preferentially integrate in open chromatin
[63-65]. Blocking the integrase-LEDGF/p75 interaction
with small molecule inhibitors leads to elevated levels of
2-LTR circles [66]. The host factor HMG I(Y) has been
shown to be a component of the pre-integration complex (PIC) for both HIV-1 and MoLV. Although HMG I
(Y) can stimulate integration in vitro, cells depleted of
HMG I(Y) were not defective in regard to HIV infection
[67-70]. Another factor which aids integration is the
host protein INI 1, also known as SNF5. INI 1, is a core
component of the ATP-dependent chromatin remodelling complex SWI/SNF and is also a component of the
PIC which can stimulate HIV-1 integrase activity in
nucleosome regions of chromatin [71,72]. Thus, multiple
host factors are components of the PIC and act in concert to promote the success of the integration reaction;
it is possible that more such factors remain to be
identified.
Once the integration reaction has been completed,
cellular DNA repair enzymes are thought to be used to
repair the strand break after the viral genome has been
tethered to that of the host. Although the data available

Page 4 of 15

provide a far from complete picture, members of the
PIKK family, i.e. ATM, DNA-PKcs and ATR have all
been implicated in this process [33,73,74]. However,
some studies found no influence on HIV-1 transduction
when ATM, ATR, DNA-PKcs, and PARP-1 were
knocked down [75]. Surprisingly, DNA-PKcs when
knocked down led to slightly lower levels of 2-LTR circles, meaning that DNA-PKcs has been described to
have both a positive and negative effect on the integration process [16,33]. Although Ku70 depletion can lead
to reductions in 2-LTR circle formation, it has also
recently been suggested that Ku70 also protects viral
integrase from ubiquitination and subsequent degradation, or that Ku70 may be involved in DNA repair after
integration of viral DNA into host chromatin, suggesting
a positive role for Ku70 in HIV replication [32]. In order
to identify novel host factors required for successful
integration, an siRNA screen was recently performed
that targeted components of cellular DNA repair
mechanisms [76]. This process identified proteins
involved in base excision repair (BER) as factors
required for efficient lentiviral, but not gamma retroviral, integration. Further analysis of this screen characterized the role of the damage recognition glycosylases
OGG1 and MYH and the late repair factor POLb as
ones that can augment lentiviral integration, although
the mechanistic basis for this is as yet unknown, the
authors propose that BER proteins might help to complete repair of the integration intermediate [77].
Retroviruses may also use host factors to increase the
efficiency of integration, by reducing the likelihood of
autointegration. For MoMLV, the host-derived barrier
to autointegration factor (BAF) was found to be a component of the PIC which protects viral cDNA from
autointegration [78]. In vitro analyses of HIV-1 PICs
also found that BAF also functioned in this manner
[79]. However, despite clear in vitro activity, for HIV the
knockdown of BAF in cells did not seem to prevent
viral replication [80]. HIV-1 and HIV-2 also use components of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated SET
complex, which consists of three DNAses (APE1,
TREX1, and NM23-H1), to prevent autointegration.
Knockdown of these components measurably increased
levels of viral autointegrants following infection [13].
Little is understood about the process, but a direct
interaction between the SET complex and the PIC was
observed. However, this effect did not extend to either
murine leukemia virus (MLV) or avian sarcoma virus
(ASV). Given the propensity for retrovirus to autointegrate, it will be interesting to uncover what methods
viruses have evolved to counteract this process.
Thus, viral cDNA undergoes a series of complex positive and negative interactions with host factors during
integration into host chromatin. These interactions

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

ultimately dictate the levels and proportions of unintegrated DNA species that are observed upon retroviral
infection by either influencing the likelihood that certain
unintegrated DNA species are formed, by promoting
degradation of unintegrated DNA species, or by promoting the likelihood that linear cDNA becomes provirus
(Figure 1).
Transcription of viral genes from unintegrated HIV DNA

The primary function of unintegrated DNA in the HIV
replication cycle is to provide the link between viral
RNA and integrated proviral DNA, in the form of linear
cDNA [2]. Yet, when viral integration may not yet have
occurred, transcription of viral genes can still be
observed [81,82]. Some experiments have used integrase-defective viruses, in which various point mutations
were inserted into the amino acids of the catalytic triad
D(64)D(116)E(152), to yield a non-functional integrase
domain of the pol polyprotein which becomes packaged
into an otherwise functional virion [83]. Common mutations for this approach are D64E, D116N and E152A,
but inhibitory concentrations of integrase strand transfer
inhibitors, such as raltegravir, can also be used to block
integration [84].
Using these approaches, it has been shown that virally
imported Vpr can promote the transcription of viral
genes from unintegrated DNA, a process that is independent of Tat transactivation [85]. This process of
Vpr-mediated transcription may ultimately lead to Tat
expression and subsequent positive feedback of the transcription process from unintegrated DNA via Tat. Thus,
one role of virally imported Vpr may be to initiate transcription and early Tat synthesis (Figure 2).
When transcription from unintegrated DNA does
occur, all classes of multiply-spliced, singly spliced and
unspliced viral mRNA transcripts can be observed (Figure 2) [86-88]. However, the relative proportions of each
splice class vary compared to those observed during
productive infection, i.e. whilst multiply spliced transcripts are abundant in the absence of integration, levels
of singly-spliced and unspliced transcripts are reduced
in this circumstance [86,87]. Both integrating and nonintegrating virus produced similar levels of multiply
spliced viral mRNA transcripts in infections of the RevCEM T-cell line when assayed by qRT-PCR [81].
Another study described a transcript unique to the
LTR-LTR junction of 2-LTR circles, though it is
unknown if this transcript fulfils any function [89].
Despite extensive transcription from unintegrated
DNA, a key limitation in the translation of viral genes
leading to the expression of late viral gene products is
the low levels of Rev that are transcribed from unintegrated DNA. A paucity of Rev limits the nuclear export
of Rev-response-element (RRE) bearing-singly-spliced

Page 5 of 15

and unspliced transcripts, which code for structural proteins or are incorporated into nascent virions. Providing
Rev in trans can rescue late gene synthesis [88].
In the case of the Rev-CEM indicator cell line [90],
transcription of GFP is under the control of the HIV-1
LTR, and the gene is surrounded by splice donor and
acceptor sites downstream of a RRE [91]. This cell line
was made by transducing the parental CEM-SS T-cell
line with the pNL-GFP-RRE-SA construct. In the presence of Tat, the viral LTR is transactivated and mRNA
produced, but, if Rev is absent, the GFP coding
sequence is spliced out and not translated. Thus, GFP is
expressed in infected cells due to the presence of both
Tat and Rev; this is also the case for integrase defective
infections, as Tat and Rev can also be expressed from
an unintegrated template [92]. As the system is codependent on Rev, there is very little transactivation of
the viral LTR by cellular factors as occurs with reporters
that are dependent only on Tat [90]. The cell line is
therefore useful for detecting transcriptionally active
viral infections by GFP, even from non-integrated templates, as was seen in a study that characterized the
degree of transcription from preintegrated HIV [92].
Previous calculations, based on Tat transactivation of
the viral LTR alone in HeLa-CD4-LTR-b-Gal indicator
cells, estimated that total transcription from unintegrated templates following infection with integrase
defective virus was about 10% of that for productive
infections [93]. The Rev-CEM-based study, using a parallel approach, showed that expression from integrasedefective virus was around 70% of that of productive
infections [92]. The higher level of LTR transactivation
from cellular factors in the earlier study could have
resulted in a high background readout that masked
detection of some transcripts, a problem avoided with
the more specific Rev/Tat co-dependent approach.
The second goal of the study was to address the nature of the transcriptional template in non-integrated
infections. It was possible to sort the transcriptionally
active cell population bearing unintegrated DNA based
on infection-induced GFP expression in Rev-CEM. 2LTR circle levels were measured by qPCR in the GFP
positive cells [92]. Overall, there were many fewer
detectable 2-LTR circles than the total number of
actively transcribing GFP positive cells. The authors
concluded that 2-LTR circles alone could not entirely
account for the level of transcription that was seen.
A different study aimed to define the transcriptional
capacity of each unintegrated HIV DNA template by
constructing artificial linear cDNA, 1-LTR and 2-LTR
circle mimics and transfecting each of them into HeLa
cells [94]. It was found that all three species of unintegrated DNA could serve as transcriptional templates,
and that 1-LTR circles in particular could lead to high

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

Page 6 of 15

Cytoplasm
Integrated proviral DNA
CXCR4 / CCR5
CD4
Integration

Linear cDNA

Reverse
Nuclear import
transcription
of PIC

Preintegration /
nonintegration
Unintegrated
DNA

Nucleus

MHC-I
downregulation
Transcription
CXCR4 / CCR5
downregulation

MS RNA

CD4
downregulation

Tat

Translation

Nef
Cytokine secretion

Vpr

Rev

Tat

Activation

Activation

Figure 2 Transcription from preintegrated or unintegrated DNA. Prior to integration, or if integration is blocked, transcription from
unintegrated cDNA may still occur, the template for which is unknown. Virally imported Vpr is important in the initial stages of viral gene
transcription. Translation of multiply-spliced RNA (msRNA) transcripts leads to expression of Tat, Nef and Rev. Levels of Rev are insufficient to lead
to the export of singly spliced and unspliced transcripts. Rev is thought to later interfere with the integration process and to thereby inhibit
superinfection. Tat and Nef collectively lead to increased cellular activation in resting T-cells. Newly synthesized Tat will also promote viral gene
transcription. Nef downregulates cell surface CD4, CXCR4, CCR5 and MHC-I (HLA Class I), thereby limiting superinfection, signal transduction and
likely resulting evasion from cytotoxic T-lymphocytes. Preintegration transcription of viral genes has also been linked to altered cytokine secretion
in both resting T-cells and macrophages.

levels of viral protein expression. However, all unintegrated HIV DNA forms yielded levels of protein synthesis that were an order of magnitude less than for
integrating virus. This finding, combined with the observation that there are relatively high numbers of 1-LTR
circles in comparison to the other templates, implies
that 1-LTR circles could be a major contributor towards
transcription from unintegrated templates [15]. However, this study also noted that late gene products, such
as p24, were synthesised from all unintegrated templates. This finding is at odds with studies that assayed
transcription from unintegrated DNA via viral infections
that yielded no p24 synthesis [88]. This demonstrates
that the means of delivery of viral DNA to the nucleus

might influence the level of transcription observed;
alternatively the cell type may also be a factor [93].
Nonetheless, all three forms of unintegrated DNA have
the innate potential to serve as a transcriptional template, raising the question as to why this does not occur
to a higher level in infections.
In other studies, expression of late viral genes from
SupT1 cells and monocyte-derived macrophages
infected with integrase defective virus was augmented
through treatment of the cells with short-chain fatty
acid histone deacetylase inhibitors [95]. These findings
suggest that unintegrated DNA must be contained, in
part, in condensed chromatin structures. This was surprising as studies of transfected plasmid DNA had

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

indicated that such constructs would typically be maintained as part of open chromatin, but may be silenced
by epigenetic mechanisms over longer time periods in
stable transfections [96-98]. This suggests that the presence of viral DNA that has been part of the PIC leads
to a specific pattern epigenetic modifications and associations with host factors that are not necessarily captured in transfection studies. These results also imply
that there is active control of transcription from unintegrated DNA and it will be interesting to uncover if this
influence is due to the virus or the host cell.
The issue of how transcription of viral cDNA arises
from unintegrated infections is important, since expression of early viral genes might have benefit for HIV
infection. This topic also has implications for gene therapy, since delivery of non-integrating retrovirus to a target cell could lead to expression of genes of interest
without the risk of insertational mutagenesis as could
occur with integrating vectors. Therefore, understanding
and optimising gene transcription from non-integrating
lentivirus is an important endeavour [99-102].
Translation of viral genes from unintegrated DNA

It is now understood that circular unintegrated HIV
DNA is not a precursor for viral integration, so it was
surprising that one study noted that integrase-defective
virus could nonetheless yield synthesis of all viral gene
products and to productive infection itself [93]. This led
to the proposal that cell-type specific differences might
exist in the capacity of cells to sustain transcription
from unintegrated DNA. However, such synthesis of late
genes from unintegrated DNA was later understood to
be only observable in T-cell lines such as MT-2 that
were chronically infected with HTLV-1, it was later concluded that the presence of transcriptionally active
HLTV was able to rescue integration-defective HIV
[103]. However, other studies have also demonstrated
that infections of various T-cell lines, activated or resting primary CD4 + T-lymphocytes and macrophages,
may lead to expression of a limited range of viral proteins in the absence of viral integration. There is evidence for Tat transcripts from unintegrated DNA
[87-89]. However, there is no direct evidence for the
expression of Tat, in part due to difficulty in resolving it
through Western blot at low levels. There is however
much indirect evidence for Tat expression from unintegrated DNA due to its capacity to transactivate viral
LTRs [82,93]. The same is true for Rev, although Rev
transcripts have been readily identified from non-integrated infections [88], there is no evidence directly
showing Rev expression in this circumstance. Nonetheless, its expression can be readily inferred from Tat and
Rev dependent Rev-CEM GFP reporter cells which
express GFP even when infected with integrase defective

Page 7 of 15

virus [90,92]. Nef is the only viral protein that can be
readily demonstrated to be expressed from non-integrated viral infections, and has been observed in a number of studies [81,87,88,104].
Tat has a role in modulating T-cell activation, and it
has been shown that expression of Tat and Nef from
unintegrated DNA in resting T-cells increases cellular
activation, IL-2 secretion and the likelihood of productive infection (Figure 2) [86]. These data show that
expression of viral genes prior to integration can assist
the infection process. It is still unclear if the fate of
every PIC imported into the nucleus is to perform this
function in order to prime cells for successful infection,
but it is a very appealing concept.
Patterns of transcription and translation prior to integration in productive infections of T-cells are identical
to those seen in the absence of integration [88]. This
suggests that studies of gene expression in which integration has been blocked are equivalent to studies of
gene expression prior to integration. Experiments that
use common mutations in the integrase DDE catalytic
triad or that employ integrase inhibitors to prevent integration, may therefore model preintegration events.
The best-studied HIV protein in this context is Nef
which is a multifunctional non-enzyme adaptor protein
that acts to subvert cellular signalling and trafficking
pathways [105]. As Nef is myristolated, it is directed to
cellular membranes, where it exerts many of its roles in
immune-evasion, cellular activation, and modulation of
virion infectivity [106,107]. The first two of those roles
indicate that it is advantageous that Nef be expressed
early in infection for viral replication. In support of this,
Nef-mediated functions are present even in the absence
of viral integration [81,86].
In addition to modulating the activation threshold of
infected CD4+ resting T-cells, Nef can downregulate cell
surface CD4 expression in activated primary CD4+ Tcells infected with integrase-defective virus [108].
Another study confirmed Nef-mediated downregulation
of CD4 in the SupT1 cell line, and further demonstrated
that this activity was predominantly dependent on the
import of Vpr with the virion in order to promote the
initiation of transcription [109]. In studies using the
Rev-CEM cell line, it was seen that Nef, expressed in
the absence of integration, could downregulate each of
the chemokine co-receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, and
CD4 [104]. Thus, the products of unintegrated DNA
can promote extensive downregulation of entry receptors (Figure 2). This process might be to restrict superinfection and its associated toxicity. Indeed, Nef can
restrict superinfection via downregulation of CD4,
CCR5 and CXCR4 during productive infections
[110-112]. An additional benefit might extend to a
reduction of signal transduction through these receptors

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

which might otherwise affect transcription, chemotaxis
and apoptosis [113-115]. Whilst signal transduction following viral binding to coreceptors is important in
infection [114], excessive additional signalling after entry
might interfere with infection.
Rev may interact with viral integrase and the host factor LEDGF/p75 to negatively regulate integration
[116,117]. This is seen with both integrating and nonintegrating virus, thereby effectively regulating superinfection at the level of integration rather than entry
[117]. Expression of Rev might not significantly inhibit
the first infecting and Rev producing virus, but might
inhibit further superinfecting viruses from integrating.
The authors of these studies also demonstrated that
entry receptor downregulation contributed to restriction
of superinfection prior to integration, as additional
superinfection resistance was seen with following infection with a Δ-rev virus bearing an HIV envelope when
compared to a Δ-rev VSV-G envelope bearing pseudovirus. Such findings are consistent with studies showing
that downregulation of CD4 and chemokine receptors
reduces superinfection [104,108,109], and is also consistent with studies that use an inducible cell line (293Affinofile) to control receptor and coreceptor density in
order to demonstrate that their reduction leads to proportional loss of infection [118-120]. Thus, Rev and Nef
can act in concert to restrict superinfection prior to, or
without, integration (Figure 2).
Nef also has a role in immune evasion by inducing
downregulation of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
class I allotypes that are recognized by cytotoxic T-cells
(CTLs), i.e. HLA-A and HLA-C, while selectively not
downregulating HLA antigens recognized by NK cells
(HLA-B and HLA-E), which could respond to downregulation by inducing apoptosis [121-124]. Studies of
infected Rev-CEM cells showed that Nef expressed from
unintegrated virus could downregulate HLA-ABC (i.e.
an epitope composed of HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C in
combination), HLA-A31, but not HLA-E, essentially
mirroring the effects seen in productive infections [81].
The extent of downregulation seen in the absence of
integration was similar to that seen in productive infection using wild type virus. Thus, the activity of Nef was
not linked to integration in regards HLA class I modulation, a finding confirmed in primary activated CD4+ Tcells. This is also consistent with current understanding
that CTL responses are an important contributor in
immune control of HIV infection [125-127]. Thus,
another benefit of early Nef expression may be immune
evasion from CTLs for virus that has not yet integrated.
For cell types with slower replication kinetics the lag
between initiation of transcription from preintegrated
DNA and transcription of provirus might be long, providing a larger window of benefit for products of

Page 8 of 15

unintegrated DNA in regard to immune evasion. In
macrophages, integration of the viral genome can take
2-3 days [128], although maximum integration levels in
a cell culture population required as many as 30 days
[87]. In resting CD4+ T-cells, this process can take 2-3
days [86], whereas for activated CD4+ T-cells or T-cell
lines, an average of only 12-24 hours is required [129].
In the case of resting CD4+ T-cells, however, there may
be limitations on nuclear export of multiply-spliced viral
transcripts [130], although there is evidence of gene
expression in this state [82,86]. Thus in all HIV-1 infections the only viral DNA is unintegrated over a significant period of time. It may be that the transcription
observed during this period is beneficial. Therefore, the
role of Tat, Nef and Rev regarding their many other
functions, but prior to integration, is unknown and
therefore remains an interesting question [105].
Persistence of unintegrated DNA in infected cells

Although other viral episomes (e.g. hepatitis B virus
(HBV) covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA)
[131,132] and herpesvirus episomes [133,134]) can be
stable within host cells, unintegrated HIV DNA lacks an
origin of replication; and so it is not copied with each
cell division. Additionally, linear unintegrated cDNA is
more labile than circular forms inside cells [88,135]; this
pattern may be explained by host defence and DNA
repair responses directed to the presence of linear
cDNA. The ultimate stability of circular cDNA forms,
which are generally stable in cells, is then therefore largely driven by the rate of cell division [136-138].
Accordingly, a rapid rate of lymphocyte turnover and
cell division explain why 2-LTR circle levels are not well
maintained in the total CD4 + T-cell population in
patients [138], despite cell culture data demonstrating
their relative intracellular stability [136]. Maintenance of
circular HIV cDNA in dividing cells can be rescued
when an origin of replication is introduced into integrase-defective HIV [99,139]. Further, experiments that
sought to arrest the cell cycle of T-cells through use of
cell cycle inhibitors such as aphidocolin, which arrests
cells in the G1/S phase, also demonstrated that unintegrated DNA circle stability was increased to ≈ 5-7 days
in such cells [136,140-142].
Infections of non-, or slowly-dividing cells can occur
in vivo (e.g. naïve CD4+ T-cells, resting memory CD4+
T cells, and macrophages). In infections of quiescent
CD4 + T-cells, reverse transcription can occur, but is
often not completed and displays greatly reduced
kinetics, or PICs might not be imported into the nucleus
efficiently when levels of ATP are lacking; therefore
integration can be delayed or may not occur at all
[86,143,144]. In these circumstances, unintegrated DNA
may persist in the resting cell, and viral gene

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

transcription may be observed [82]. Subsequent activation of the cell prior to degradation of the functional
PIC may yield productive infection; hence this state is
referred to as preintegration latency [10,144-149]. This
form of latency is therefore more labile and functionally
quite distinct from post-integration latency that can
happen when integration occurs, but the provirus is
transcriptionally silent, an outcome that can be rendered
through a variety of host-mediated mechanisms [144].
Experiments in macrophages, which are a naturally
non-dividing population, have also demonstrated longevity of unintegrated DNA. One study found that
macrophages infected with integrase-defective virus still
contained cells bearing unintegrated DNA up to 30 days
post-infection [87]. Viral mRNA transcripts were detectable throughout as were viral proteins such as Nef. A
similar study on infected macrophages performed with
an integrase defective virus, bearing a luciferase reporter
gene showed that unintegrated DNA products were still
detectable in the cell up to 21 days post infection; luciferase was detectable throughout the study period [150].
Finally, infections of animal models with integrase defective lentiviral vectors for gene therapy studies found that
such vectors were very stable in non-dividing cells for
extended periods, up to one year in some instances
[151,152]. Therefore, unintegrated HIV-1 DNA likely
has the capacity to persist in slow or non-dividing cells
in vivo.
Unintegrated DNA as a diagnostic marker

There has been interest in using 2-LTR circle titres as
measured by qPCR as a clinical diagnostic assay, since it
was hoped that their levels would be representative of
nascent infections [8]. This approach was supported by
prior observations that levels of total unintegrated DNA
decrease during highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART) [153,154]. These findings can be explained by
degradation of abundant linear unintegrated cDNAs
within cells and dilution of circular forms with each cell
division [6]. Subsequent studies of HIV-infected patient
samples demonstrated that measuring 2-LTR circle
levels specifically was not a reliable marker of effective
therapy when compared to plasma viral RNA
[43,135,141]. Confounding factors for this approach are
likely due to the persistence of 2-LTR circles in long
lived or non-dividing cellular reservoirs, the lag between
administration of antiviral drugs and actual blockage of
infection, and the possibility of ongoing replication, or
viral release from stable reservoirs despite seemingly
effective therapy [87,135,155].
Some of these potentially mitigating effects have been
investigated by monitoring 2-LTR circle levels in
patients during drug intensification studies in which
further drugs are added to an already successful highly-

Page 9 of 15

active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) regimen. In one
such study, patients with undetectable viral load were
given the integrase inhibitor raltegravir [156]. In these
circumstances it is argued that the detection of an
increase in 2-LTR circle levels is indicative of de novo
viral infection that continues in the face HAART, but
below the detection limit of quantification of common
qRT-PCR assays. Evidence was found for a surge of 2LTR circles in 13/45 (29%) patients upon intensification,
yet this did not translate to a change in plasma viral
RNA levels when using a sensitive single copy assay.
This latter finding was confirmed in a randomized clinical trial wherein again no decrease in plasma viral RNA
was seen with raltegravir intensification [157]. Given the
contradictory nature of these findings, it is unclear to
what extent raltegravir intensification does inhibit
ongoing infection and why an apparent inhibition of
replication does not go on to alter viral load. One suggestion is that the cells in which there is a 2-LTR surge
arise from a site which does not communicate freely
with plasma [157]. However, it should be noted that a
previous small scale study of treatment intensification
using non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
(nnRTIs), or protease inhibitors, found that adding these
drugs had no effect on viral load using single copy
qPCR assays, implying that ongoing infection is likely
not the source of residual viremia [158]. This concept is
supported by phylogenetic evidence showing that upon
treatment interruption rebounding virus arises from a
small number of invariant clones, a finding that does
support the notion of ongoing replication [159].
Yet having knowledge about levels of 2-LTR circles
might still provide clinically useful data. A recent study
isolated env sequences from 2-LTR episomes in patients
who suspended therapy [160]. It was shown by sequence
analysis that rebounding virus matched that found in
viral episomes prior to plasma viral RNA rebound.
Thus, episomal sequences might predict the potential
for emergence of resistance mutations or altered coreceptor tropism. Therefore, although the value of knowing 2-LTR circle levels in therapy has been discredited
and is also disputed in intensification studies, sequences
deriving from such circles may still be of clinical benefit.
Further, knowing 2-LTR circle levels can still provide
useful data in clinical and pre-clinical studies in which
integrase mechanisms are being studied. For example,
elite suppressors of HIV, i.e. patients who control their
infection successfully without antiviral therapy, were
found to have lower rates of viral integration and higher
levels of 2-LTR circles than observed in patients who
were on or off HAART [161]. The mechanism underlying this effect is unknown, but ex vivo analysis has
excluded a role for innate restriction factors that affect
viral integration. A more recent study of CD4+ T-cells

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

from elite controllers suggests that upregulation of cellular p21 in such cells might be important in how they
resist infection, but the effects of p21 were seen at the
level of viral gene transcription and not at integration
[162]; therefore, the factor that might underlie any integration-related effects remain to be identified.
Unintegrated viral DNA and antiviral therapy

Since the development of the first integrase strand
transfer inhibitors, it has been known that their use
leads to elevated levels of unintegrated DNA as measured via qPCR for 2-LTR circles [40,84]. In the absence
of integration, there is greater substrate availability for
the cellular NHEJ pathway [30]. This phenomenon has
been of utility in cell culture studies of integrase inhibitor therapy, as levels of 2-LTR circles, relative to levels
for wild-type virus, can be considered to be indicative of
integrase dysfunction [163,164].
The observation of elevated 2-LTR circle levels with
integrase inhibitors has led to some speculation that
these might influence the natural course of infection or
the success of therapy. In clinical trials, use of the integrase strand transfer inhibitor raltegravir, compared to
the non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor efavirenz [165-167], led to more rapid viral RNA decay
kinetics [166]. One study suggested that increased apoptosis in HIV-1 infected cells, due to accumulation of
unintegrated DNA, might explain these kinetics [168].
However, an alternative explanation, based on mathematical modeling of the rate of viral decay in the various
infected cell types is that raltegravir acted at a later
stage of viral replication than efavirenz, and was thus
able to influence its antiviral effect on a larger population of infected cells [128,169,170]. Confirmation of this
model was achieved in cell culture analysis, which
demonstrated that the stage of viral replication targeted
by each drug class contributes to the effectiveness of
viral RNA decay. Furthermore, the success of each drug
combination was controlled by the latest acting drug in
the combination [129].
Despite their effectiveness, integrase inhibitors are
unique in their capacity to lead to populations of cells
in being able to block replication at an early stage with
reduced cytopathic effect. Although expression of early
viral gene products in this circumstance is observed,
integrase inhibitor treated cells block infection in such a
way that the cell cannot directly contribute to viral load.
However, in patients receiving raltegravir treatment, a
surge in 2-LTR circle proliferation is seen following
therapy [171]. This effect is only temporary in PBMCs,
as they lose unintegrated DNA with cell division
[136,138]. But it remains to be seen for how long unintegrated DNA might persist in slow or non-dividing cell
types in patients receiving integrase inhibitor therapy,

Page 10 of 15

given data for infections with integrase defective lentiviral vectors in animal models, it might be anticipated
that such a reservoir would be relatively long lived
[151,152].
The persistence of unintegrated cDNA is important
since infection in cells infected by integrase-defective
viruses can be rescued by a superinfection with wild
type virus [172,173]. The second, integrating infection
can yield Tat to promote transcription from the unintegrated template, resulting in synthesis of full length
genomic RNA from the unintegrated DNA. Such RNA
will be packaged into virions, providing opportunity for
recombination also [172]. These findings mirror early
observations on viral replication with integrase defective
viruses, suspected to result from HTLV-1 complementation [93]. Similar observations have been made with
integrase-competent drug resistant virus, in which drug
sensitive virus has been rescued by drug resistant virus
in cell culture [174], so there is little reason to suspect
that this could not occur with integrase inhibitor resistance and unintegrated DNA. In this sense, both unintegrated and integrated viral DNA can be considered to
be viral reservoirs [175].
Conclusions and Perspectives

Without integration, virus cannot initiate late gene
synthesis and productive infection [28,29]. Even with
successful entry and reverse transcription, there is a rate
of attrition associated with attempts to integrate virus
into host chromatin that is mediated by host factors
[61,62]. Of the host mechanisms identified in this process, the NHEJ pathways have perhaps been better characterized [16,30], but very little is understood about the
apparent direct degradation of linear DNAs by factors
such as the cellular DNA helicases XPB and XPD
[45,46]. It is still not known how HIV overcomes the
obstacles of DNA repair and host-restriction factors
directed against pathogen DNA; as despite their function, viral integration still readily occurs in target cells.
These interactions are likely complex. For example, the
cellular nuclease Trex1 is important in controlling endogenous retroelements by metabolizing reverse transcribed DNA [176,177]. Conversely, HIV-1 has been
found to use Trex1 to digest the non-productive DNA
by-products of reverse transcription in order to evade
host nucleic acid sensing proteins and subsequent triggering of innate immunity pathways [178]. Such DNA
detection may lead to apoptosis of the infected cell, a
process which may underlie CD4+ T-cell depletion of
lymphoid tissue [179]. The relative importance of these
host-pathogen-DNA interactions is demonstrated by the
unexpected finding that primate NHEJ genes are under
strong positive selection [60]. Detailed understanding
of such defence pathways will have important

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

consequences for understanding how the host tolerates
DNA-utilizing viruses.
Persistence of unintegrated viral DNA in the nucleus
can yield extensive transcriptional activity, either before,
or in the absence of integration [81,180]. Expression of
certain gene products early in the viral life cycle could
provide an advantage to the virus e.g. effects on T-cell
activity via Tat and Nef [86], as well as downregulation
of CD4, CXCR4 & CCR5 via Nef [101,102,106], modulation of HLA Class I expression via Nef [81], and restriction of superinfection at the level of entry and
integration via Nef and Rev respectively [117]. It is
unclear whether all viruses perform preintegration transcription, as this cannot be elucidated from studies of
cell populations. Kinetic and single cell analyses might
help to better define this process.
Despite such functionality, 1-LTR and 2-LTR circles
are dead end products of failed infections and their
demise is mediated either by host factors or by the virus
itself [16,30]. Conceivably, unintegrated DNA species
are simply transcribed because they are present in the
nucleus. Yet, studies of transfected versions of these
products show different patterns of gene expression,
arguing against this viewpoint [94]. Gene expression
from unintegrated DNA seems to be controlled in natural infection. The expression of early gene products
suggests a benefit for infection. However, it may be
argued that such genes that are the first to be expressed
anyway. A possible epigenetic modification of unintegrated DNA is intriguing given parallels with control of
gene expression in HBV and herpesvirus episomes
[95,181,182]. The nature of the transcriptional template
for preintegration transcription is unknown; all DNA
species remain candidates, although 2-LTR titres are too
infrequent to be the predominant template [92]. This
information would have relevance for gene therapy
approaches using non-integrating vectors [101].
How frequently might transcription from unintegrated
templates occur in lentiviruses? In SIVs, which are closely related to HIV, there might be benefit from a similar pattern of early gene expression [183]. Further afield,
it is interesting to consider if viruses which encode different, or more limited, early genes might benefit from
preintegration transcription, such as feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) that does not encode nef, but does
contain rev [184].
Preintegration latency may contribute to viral RNA
decay dynamics with therapy, but is likely to play only a
minor role [128,148,169,170]. Though it is unknown
how long unintegrated HIV DNA can persist in other
non-dividing cell types in vivo, but the results of
extended periods of gene expression in macrophages in
cell culture suggest a capacity to persist, over long periods [87,150]. The ability of such unintegrated DNA to

Page 11 of 15

be rescued, and perhaps recombine with a second
incoming virus, might be a contributing factor to the
generation of viral diversity [172]. Drug resistant viruses
can also rescue non-resistant viruses and it is likely that
unintegrated DNA could equally contribute to diversity
in this context [174].

Conclusions
In summary, much of the true nature and function of
unintegrated DNA species still remains enigmatic, but
unintegrated DNA may well fulfil a multitude of roles in
the promotion of HIV infection.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR).
RDS is funded by a postdoctoral fellowship from the CIHR Canadian HIV
Trials Network (CTN). We thank Aaron Donahue and Björn Kuhl for help in
preparing this review.
Authors’ contributions
RDS wrote the manuscript. MAW modified parts of the manuscript in his
role as head of the laboratory. Both authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 29 April 2011 Accepted: 1 July 2011 Published: 1 July 2011

References
1. Bar-Magen T, Sloan RD, Faltenbacher VH, Donahue DA, Kuhl BD, Oliveira M,
Xu HT, Wainberg MA: Comparative biochemical analysis of HIV-1 subtype
B and C integrase enzymes. Retrovirology 2009, 6:103.
2. Coffin JM, Hughes SH, Varmus HE: Retroviruses Cold Spring Harbor (NY):
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1997.
3. Scherdin U, Rhodes K, Breindl M: Transcriptionally active genome regions
are preferred targets for retrovirus integration. J Virol 1990, 64:907-912.
4. Schröder AR, Shinn P, Chen H, Berry C, Ecker JR, Bushman F: HIV-1
integration in the human genome favors active genes and local
hotspots. Cell 2002, 110:521-529.
5. Wang GP, Ciuffi A, Leipzig J, Berry CC, Bushman FD: HIV integration site
selection: analysis by massively parallel pyrosequencing reveals
association with epigenetic modifications. Genome Res 2007,
17:1186-1194.
6. Chun T, Carruth L, Finzi D, Shen X, DiGiuseppe J, Taylor H, Hermankova M,
Chadwick K, Margolick J, Quinn T, et al: Quantification of latent tissue
reservoirs and total body viral load in HIV-1 infection. Nature 1997,
387:183-188.
7. Pang S, Koyanagi Y, Miles S, Wiley C, Vinters H, Chen I: High levels of
unintegrated HIV-1 DNA in brain tissue of AIDS dementia patients.
Nature 1990, 343:85-89.
8. Sharkey M, Teo I, Greenough T, Sharova N, Luzuriaga K, Sullivan J, Bucy R,
Kostrikis L, Haase A, Veryard C, et al: Persistence of episomal HIV-1
infection intermediates in patients on highly active anti-retroviral
therapy. Nat Med 2000, 6:76-81.
9. Teo I, Veryard C, Barnes H, An S, Jones M, Lantos P, Luthert P, Shaunak S:
Circular forms of unintegrated human immunodeficiency virus type 1
DNA and high levels of viral protein expression: association with
dementia and multinucleated giant cells in the brains of patients with
AIDS. J Virol 1997, 71:2928-2933.
10. Bukrinsky M, Stanwick T, Dempsey M, Stevenson M: Quiescent T
lymphocytes as an inducible virus reservoir in HIV-1 infection. Science
1991, 254:423-427.
11. Shoemaker C, Goff S, Gilboa E, Paskind M, Mitra SW, Baltimore D: Structure
of a cloned circular Moloney murine leukemia virus DNA molecule

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

17.

18.
19.

20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.
34.

35.

36.

containing an inverted segment: implications for retrovirus integration.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980, 77:3932-3936.
Shoemaker C, Hoffman J, Goff SP, Baltimore D: Intramolecular integration
within Moloney murine leukemia virus DNA. J Virol 1981, 40:164-172.
Yan N, Cherepanov P, Daigle JE, Engelman A, Lieberman J: The SET
complex acts as a barrier to autointegration of HIV-1. PLoS Pathog 2009,
5:e1000327.
Lee YM, Coffin JM: Efficient autointegration of avian retrovirus DNA in
vitro. J Virol 1990, 64:5958-5965.
Farnet C, Haseltine W: Circularization of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 DNA in vitro. J Virol 1991, 65:6942-6952.
Kilzer JM, Stracker T, Beitzel B, Meek K, Weitzman M, Bushman FD: Roles of
host cell factors in circularization of retroviral dna. Virology 2003,
314:460-467.
Miller MD, Wang B, Bushman FD: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1
preintegration complexes containing discontinuous plus strands are
competent to integrate in vitro. J Virol 1995, 69:3938-3944.
Deyle DR, Li Y, Olson EM, Russell DW: Nonintegrating foamy virus vectors.
J Virol 2010, 84:9341-9349.
Quan Y, Gu Z, Li X, Li Z, Morrow CD, Wainberg MA: Endogenous reverse
transcription assays reveal high-level resistance to the triphosphate of
(-)2’-dideoxy-3’-thiacytidine by mutated M184V human
immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Virol 1996, 70:5642-5645.
Yoder KE, Fishel R: PCR-based detection is unable to consistently
distinguish HIV 1LTR circles. J Virol Methods 2006, 138:201-206.
Mbisa JL, Delviks-Frankenberry KA, Thomas JA, Gorelick RJ, Pathak VK: Realtime PCR analysis of HIV-1 replication post-entry events. Methods Mol Biol
2009, 485:55-72.
Gilbert W, Dressler D: DNA replication: the rolling circle model. Cold
Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 1968, 33:473-484.
Pereira da Silva L, Eisen H, Jacob F: [On the replication of the lambda
bacteriophage]. C R Acad Sci Hebd Seances Acad Sci D 1968, 266:926-928.
Panganiban AT, Temin HM: Circles with two tandem LTRs are precursors
to integrated retrovirus DNA. Cell 1984, 36:673-679.
Fujiwara T, Mizuuchi K: Retroviral DNA integration: structure of an
integration intermediate. Cell 1988, 54:497-504.
Brown PO, Bowerman B, Varmus HE, Bishop JM: Correct integration of
retroviral DNA in vitro. Cell 1987, 49:347-356.
Brown PO, Bowerman B, Varmus HE, Bishop JM: Retroviral integration:
structure of the initial covalent product and its precursor, and a role for
the viral IN protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:2525-2529.
Englund G, Theodore T, Freed E, Engelman A, Martin M: Integration is
required for productive infection of monocyte-derived macrophages by
human immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Virol 1995, 69:3216-3219.
Wiskerchen M, Muesing M: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1
integrase: effects of mutations on viral ability to integrate, direct viral
gene expression from unintegrated viral DNA templates, and sustain
viral propagation in primary cells. J Virol 1995, 69:376-386.
Li L, Olvera JM, Yoder KE, Mitchell RS, Butler SL, Lieber M, Martin SL,
Bushman FD: Role of the non-homologous DNA end joining pathway in
the early steps of retroviral infection. EMBO J 2001, 20:3272-3281.
Jeanson L, Subra F, Vaganay S, Hervy M, Marangoni E, Bourhis J,
Mouscadet JF: Effect of Ku80 depletion on the preintegrative steps of
HIV-1 replication in human cells. Virology 2002, 300:100-108.
Zheng Y, Ao Z, Wang B, Danappa Jayappa K, Yao X: Host protein Ku70
binds and protects HIV-1 integrase from proteasomal degradation and is
required for HIV replication. J Biol Chem 2011, 286:17722-17735.
Daniel R, Katz RA, Skalka AM: A role for DNA-PK in retroviral DNA
integration. Science 1999, 284:644-647.
Pauza CD, Galindo JE, Richman DD: Reinfection results in accumulation of
unintegrated viral DNA in cytopathic and persistent human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection of CEM cells. J Exp Med 1990,
172:1035-1042.
Pauza C, Galindo J, Richman D: Reinfection results in accumulation of
unintegrated viral DNA in cytopathic and persistent human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection of CEM cells. J Exp Med 1990,
172:1035-1042.
Robinson H, Zinkus D: Accumulation of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 DNA in T cells: results of multiple infection events. J Virol 1990,
64:4836-4841.

Page 12 of 15

37. Laurent-Crawford AG, Hovanessian AG: The cytopathic effect of human
immunodeficiency virus is independent of high levels of unintegrated
viral DNA accumulated in response to superinfection of cells. J Gen Virol
1993, 74(Pt 12):2619-2628.
38. Bergeron L, Sodroski J: Dissociation of unintegrated viral DNA
accumulation from single-cell lysis induced by human
immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Virol 1992, 66:5777-5787.
39. Bukrinsky MI, Sharova N, Dempsey MP, Stanwick TL, Bukrinskaya AG,
Haggerty S, Stevenson M: Active nuclear import of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 preintegration complexes. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1992, 89:6580-6584.
40. Butler S, Hansen M, Bushman F: A quantitative assay for HIV DNA
integration in vivo. Nat Med 2001, 7:631-634.
41. Koelsch KK, Liu L, Haubrich R, May S, Havlir D, Günthard HF, Ignacio CC,
Campos-Soto P, Little SJ, Shafer R, et al: Dynamics of total, linear
nonintegrated, and integrated HIV-1 DNA in vivo and in vitro. J Infect Dis
2008, 197:411-419.
42. Hirt B: Selective extraction of polyoma DNA from infected mouse cell
cultures. J Mol Biol 1967, 26:365-369.
43. Brussel A, Mathez D, Broche-Pierre S, Lancar R, Calvez T, Sonigo P,
Leibowitch J: Longitudinal monitoring of 2-long terminal repeat circles in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with chronic HIV-1
infection. AIDS 2003, 17:645-652.
44. Deng W, Roberts SG: TFIIB and the regulation of transcription by RNA
polymerase II. Chromosoma 2007, 116:417-429.
45. Yoder K, Sarasin A, Kraemer K, McIlhatton M, Bushman F, Fishel R: The DNA
repair genes XPB and XPD defend cells from retroviral infection. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:4622-4627.
46. Yoder KE, Roddick W, Hoellerbauer P, Fishel R: XPB mediated retroviral
cDNA degradation coincides with entry to the nucleus. Virology 2010,
410:291-298.
47. Mulder LC, Chakrabarti LA, Muesing MA: Interaction of HIV-1 integrase
with DNA repair protein hRad18. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:27489-27493.
48. Lloyd AG, Tateishi S, Bieniasz PD, Muesing MA, Yamaizumi M, Mulder LC:
Effect of DNA repair protein Rad18 on viral infection. PLoS Pathog 2006,
2:e40.
49. Lau A, Kanaar R, Jackson SP, O’Connor MJ: Suppression of retroviral
infection by the RAD52 DNA repair protein. EMBO J 2004, 23:3421-3429.
50. Goila-Gaur R, Strebel K: HIV-1 Vif, APOBEC, and intrinsic immunity.
Retrovirology 2008, 5:51.
51. Mbisa JL, Bu W, Pathak VK: APOBEC3F and APOBEC3G inhibit HIV-1 DNA
integration by different mechanisms. J Virol 2010, 84:5250-5259.
52. Bishop KN, Verma M, Kim EY, Wolinsky SM, Malim MH: APOBEC3G inhibits
elongation of HIV-1 reverse transcripts. PLoS Pathog 2008, 4:e1000231.
53. Mbisa JL, Barr R, Thomas JA, Vandegraaff N, Dorweiler IJ, Svarovskaia ES,
Brown WL, Mansky LM, Gorelick RJ, Harris RS, et al: Human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 cDNAs produced in the presence of
APOBEC3G exhibit defects in plus-strand DNA transfer and integration. J
Virol 2007, 81:7099-7110.
54. Fenard D, Houzet L, Bernard E, Tupin A, Brun S, Mougel M, Devaux C,
Chazal N, Briant L: Uracil DNA Glycosylase 2 negatively regulates HIV-1
LTR transcription. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:6008-6018.
55. Ahn J, Vu T, Novince Z, Guerrero-Santoro J, Rapic-Otrin V, Gronenborn AM:
HIV-1 Vpr loads uracil DNA glycosylase-2 onto DCAF1, a substrate
recognition subunit of a cullin 4A-ring E3 ubiquitin ligase for
proteasome-dependent degradation. J Biol Chem 2010, 285:37333-37341.
56. Priet S, Gros N, Navarro JM, Boretto J, Canard B, Quérat G, Sire J: HIV-1associated uracil DNA glycosylase activity controls dUTP
misincorporation in viral DNA and is essential to the HIV-1 life cycle. Mol
Cell 2005, 17:479-490.
57. Kaiser SM, Emerman M: Uracil DNA glycosylase is dispensable for human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication and does not contribute to
the antiviral effects of the cytidine deaminase Apobec3G. J Virol 2006,
80:875-882.
58. Yan N, O’Day E, Wheeler LA, Engelman A, Lieberman J: HIV DNA is heavily
uracilated, which protects it from autointegration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2011, 108:9244-9249.
59. Sawyer SL, Malik HS: Positive selection of yeast nonhomologous endjoining genes and a retrotransposon conflict hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2006, 103:17614-17619.

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

60. Demogines A, East AM, Lee JH, Grossman SR, Sabeti PC, Paull TT, Sawyer SL:
Ancient and recent adaptive evolution of primate non-homologous end
joining genes. PLoS Genet 2010, 6:e1001169.
61. Brussel A, Sonigo P: Analysis of early human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 DNA synthesis by use of a new sensitive assay for quantifying
integrated provirus. J Virol 2003, 77:10119-10124.
62. Van Maele B, De Rijck J, De Clercq E, Debyser Z: Impact of the central
polypurine tract on the kinetics of human immunodeficiency virus type
1 vector transduction. J Virol 2003, 77:4685-4694.
63. Cherepanov P, Maertens G, Proost P, Devreese B, Van Beeumen J,
Engelborghs Y, De Clercq E, Debyser Z: HIV-1 integrase forms stable
tetramers and associates with LEDGF/p75 protein in human cells. J Biol
Chem 2003, 278:372-381.
64. Maertens G, Cherepanov P, Pluymers W, Busschots K, De Clercq E,
Debyser Z, Engelborghs Y: LEDGF/p75 is essential for nuclear and
chromosomal targeting of HIV-1 integrase in human cells. J Biol Chem
2003, 278:33528-33539.
65. Engelman A, Cherepanov P: The lentiviral integrase binding protein
LEDGF/p75 and HIV-1 replication. PLoS Pathog 2008, 4:e1000046.
66. Christ F, Voet A, Marchand A, Nicolet S, Desimmie BA, Marchand D,
Bardiot D, Van der Veken NJ, Van Remoortel B, Strelkov SV, et al: Rational
design of small-molecule inhibitors of the LEDGF/p75-integrase
interaction and HIV replication. Nat Chem Biol 2010, 6:442-448.
67. Farnet CM, Bushman FD: HIV-1 cDNA integration: requirement of HMG I
(Y) protein for function of preintegration complexes in vitro. Cell 1997,
88:483-492.
68. Brin E, Yi J, Skalka AM, Leis J: Modeling the late steps in HIV-1 retroviral
integrase-catalyzed DNA integration. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:39287-39295.
69. Li L, Yoder K, Hansen MS, Olvera J, Miller MD, Bushman FD: Retroviral
cDNA integration: stimulation by HMG I family proteins. J Virol 2000,
74:10965-10974.
70. Beitzel B, Bushman F: Construction and analysis of cells lacking the
HMGA gene family. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:5025-5032.
71. Kalpana GV, Marmon S, Wang W, Crabtree GR, Goff SP: Binding and
stimulation of HIV-1 integrase by a human homolog of yeast
transcription factor SNF5. Science 1994, 266:2002-2006.
72. Lesbats P, Botbol Y, Chevereau G, Vaillant C, Calmels C, Arneodo A,
Andreola M-L, Lavigne M, Parissi V: Functional Coupling between HIV-1
Integrase and the SWI/SNF Chromatin Remodeling Complex for Efficient
in vitro Integration into Stable Nucleosomes. PLoS Pathog 2011, 7:
e1001280.
73. Yang YX, Guen V, Richard J, Cohen EA, Berthoux L: Cell context-dependent
involvement of ATR in early stages of retroviral replication. Virology 2010,
396:272-279.
74. Lau A, Swinbank KM, Ahmed PS, Taylor DL, Jackson SP, Smith GC,
O’Connor MJ: Suppression of HIV-1 infection by a small molecule
inhibitor of the ATM kinase. Nat Cell Biol 2005, 7:493-500.
75. Ariumi Y, Turelli P, Masutani M, Trono D: DNA damage sensors ATM, ATR,
DNA-PKcs, and PARP-1 are dispensable for human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 integration. J Virol 2005, 79:2973-2978.
76. Espeseth AS, Fishel R, Hazuda D, Huang Q, Xu M, Yoder K, Zhou H: siRNA
Screening of a Targeted Library of DNA Repair Factors in HIV Infection
Reveals a Role for Base Excision Repair in HIV Integration. PLoS One 2011,
6:e17612.
77. Yoder KE, Espeseth A, Wang XH, Fang Q, Russo MT, Lloyd RS, Hazuda D,
Sobol RW, Fishel R: The base excision repair pathway is required for
efficient lentivirus integration. PLoS One 2011, 6:e17862.
78. Lee MS, Craigie R: A previously unidentified host protein protects
retroviral DNA from autointegration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:1528-1533.
79. Chen H, Engelman A: The barrier-to-autointegration protein is a host
factor for HIV type 1 integration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:15270-15274.
80. Shun MC, Daigle JE, Vandegraaff N, Engelman A: Wild-type levels of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infectivity in the absence of
cellular emerin protein. J Virol 2007, 81:166-172.
81. Sloan R, Kuhl B, Donahue D, Roland A, Bar-Magen T, Wainberg M:
Transcription of Preintegrated HIV-1 cDNA Modulates Cell Surface
Expression of Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I via Nef. Journal
of Virology 2011, 85:2828-2836.

Page 13 of 15

82. Stevenson M, Stanwick TL, Dempsey MP, Lamonica CA: HIV-1 replication is
controlled at the level of T cell activation and proviral integration. EMBO
J 1990, 9:1551-1560.
83. Engelman A, Englund G, Orenstein J, Martin M, Craigie R: Multiple effects
of mutations in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 integrase on viral
replication. J Virol 1995, 69:2729-2736.
84. Hazuda D, Felock P, Witmer M, Wolfe A, Stillmock K, Grobler J, Espeseth A,
Gabryelski L, Schleif W, Blau C, Miller M: Inhibitors of strand transfer that
prevent integration and inhibit HIV-1 replication in cells. Science 2000,
287:646-650.
85. Poon B, Chen I: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Vpr
enhances expression from unintegrated HIV-1 DNA. J Virol 2003,
77:3962-3972.
86. Wu Y, Marsh J: Selective transcription and modulation of resting T cell
activity by preintegrated HIV DNA. Science 2001, 293:1503-1506.
87. Kelly J, Beddall M, Yu D, Iyer S, Marsh J, Wu Y: Human macrophages
support persistent transcription from unintegrated HIV-1 DNA. Virology
2008, 372:300-312.
88. Wu Y, Marsh J: Early transcription from nonintegrated DNA in human
immunodeficiency virus infection. J Virol 2003, 77:10376-10382.
89. Brussel A, Sonigo P: Evidence for gene expression by unintegrated
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 DNA species. J Virol 2004,
78:11263-11271.
90. Wu Y, Beddall M, Marsh J: Rev-dependent indicator T cell line. Curr HIV Res
2007, 5:394-402.
91. Wu Y, Beddall M, Marsh J: Rev-dependent lentiviral expression vector.
Retrovirology 2007, 4:12.
92. Iyer S, Yu D, Biancotto A, Margolis L, Wu Y: Measurement of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 preintegration transcription by using
Rev-dependent Rev-CEM cells reveals a sizable transcribing DNA
population comparable to that from proviral templates. J Virol 2009,
83:8662-8673.
93. Stevenson M, Haggerty S, Lamonica C, Meier C, Welch S, Wasiak A:
Integration is not necessary for expression of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 protein products. J Virol 1990, 64:2421-2425.
94. Cara A, Cereseto A, Lori F, Reitz MS: HIV-1 protein expression from
synthetic circles of DNA mimicking the extrachromosomal forms of viral
DNA. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:5393-5397.
95. Kantor B, Ma H, Webster-Cyriaque J, Monahan P, Kafri T: Epigenetic
activation of unintegrated HIV-1 genomes by gut-associated short chain
fatty acids and its implications for HIV infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106:18786-18791.
96. Krishnan M, Park JM, Cao F, Wang D, Paulmurugan R, Tseng JR,
Gonzalgo ML, Gambhir SS, Wu JC: Effects of epigenetic modulation on
reporter gene expression: implications for stem cell imaging. FASEB J
2006, 20:106-108.
97. Buschhausen G, Wittig B, Graessmann M, Graessmann A: Chromatin structure
is required to block transcription of the methylated herpes simplex virus
thymidine kinase gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987, 84:1177-1181.
98. Smith CL, Hager GL: Transcriptional regulation of mammalian genes in
vivo. A tale of two templates. J Biol Chem 1997, 272:27493-27496.
99. Vargas JJ, Gusella G, Najfeld V, Klotman M, Cara A: Novel integrasedefective lentiviral episomal vectors for gene transfer. Hum Gene Ther
2004, 15:361-372.
100. Michelini Z, Negri D, Cara A: Integrase defective, nonintegrating lentiviral
vectors. Methods Mol Biol 2010, 614:101-110.
101. Negri DR, Michelini Z, Cara A: Toward integrase defective lentiviral
vectors for genetic immunization. Curr HIV Res 2010, 8:274-281.
102. Banasik MB, McCray PB: Integrase-defective lentiviral vectors: progress
and applications. Gene Ther 2010, 17:150-157.
103. Nakajima N, Lu R, Engelman A: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1
replication in the absence of integrase-mediated dna recombination:
definition of permissive and nonpermissive T-cell lines. J Virol 2001,
75:7944-7955.
104. Sloan RD, Donahue DA, Kuhl BD, Bar-Magen T, Wainberg MA: Expression of
Nef from unintegrated HIV-1 DNA downregulates cell surface CXCR4
and CCR5 on T-lymphocytes. Retrovirology 2010, 7:44.
105. Arhel NJ, Kirchhoff F: Implications of Nef: host cell interactions in viral
persistence and progression to AIDS. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2009,
339:147-175.

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

106. Matsuura Y, Maekawa M, Hattori S, Ikegami N, Hayashi A, Yamazaki S,
Morita C, Takebe Y: Purification and characterization of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 nef gene product expressed by a
recombinant baculovirus. Virology 1991, 184:580-586.
107. Yu G, Felsted RL: Effect of myristoylation on p27 nef subcellular
distribution and suppression of HIV-LTR transcription. Virology 1992,
187:46-55.
108. Gillim-Ross L, Cara A, Klotman M: Nef expressed from human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 extrachromosomal DNA downregulates
CD4 on primary CD4+ T lymphocytes: implications for integrase
inhibitors. J Gen Virol 2005, 86:765-771.
109. Poon B, Chang M, Chen I: Vpr is required for efficient Nef expression
from unintegrated human immunodeficiency virus type 1 DNA. J Virol
2007, 81:10515-10523.
110. Michel N, Allespach I, Venzke S, Fackler O, Keppler O: The Nef protein of
human immunodeficiency virus establishes superinfection immunity by
a dual strategy to downregulate cell-surface CCR5 and CD4. Curr Biol
2005, 15:714-723.
111. Venzke S, Michel N, Allespach I, Fackler O, Keppler O: Expression of Nef
downregulates CXCR4, the major coreceptor of human
immunodeficiency virus, from the surfaces of target cells and thereby
enhances resistance to superinfection. J Virol 2006, 80:11141-11152.
112. Wildum S, Schindler M, Münch J, Kirchhoff F: Contribution of Vpu, Env,
and Nef to CD4 down-modulation and resistance of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected T cells to superinfection. J Virol
2006, 80:8047-8059.
113. Davis C, Dikic I, Unutmaz D, Hill C, Arthos J, Siani M, Thompson D,
Schlessinger J, Littman D: Signal transduction due to HIV-1 envelope
interactions with chemokine receptors CXCR4 or CCR5. J Exp Med 1997,
186:1793-1798.
114. Wu Y, Yoder A: Chemokine coreceptor signaling in HIV-1 infection and
pathogenesis. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000520.
115. Tremblay M, Meloche S, Gratton S, Wainberg M, Sékaly R: Association of
p56lck with the cytoplasmic domain of CD4 modulates HIV-1
expression. EMBO J 1994, 13:774-783.
116. Levin A, Rosenbluh J, Hayouka Z, Friedler A, Loyter A: Integration of HIV-1
DNA is regulated by interplay between viral rev and cellular LEDGF/p75
proteins. Mol Med 16:34-44.
117. Levin A, Hayouka Z, Friedler A, Brack-Werner R, Volsky D, Loyter A: A novel
role for the viral Rev protein in promoting resistance to Super-infection
by Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1. J Gen Virol 2010.
118. Pugach P, Ray N, Klasse P, Ketas T, Michael E, Doms R, Lee B, Moore J:
Inefficient entry of vicriviroc-resistant HIV-1 via the inhibitor-CCR5
complex at low cell surface CCR5 densities. Virology 2009, 387:296-302.
119. Johnston S, Lobritz M, Nguyen S, Lassen K, Delair S, Posta F, Bryson Y,
Arts E, Chou T, Lee B: A quantitative affinity-profiling system that reveals
distinct CD4/CCR5 usage patterns among human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 and simian immunodeficiency virus strains. J Virol 2009,
83:11016-11026.
120. Lassen K, Lobritz M, Bailey J, Johnston S, Nguyen S, Lee B, Chou T,
Siliciano R, Markowitz M, Arts E: Elite suppressor-derived HIV-1 envelope
glycoproteins exhibit reduced entry efficiency and kinetics. PLoS Pathog
2009, 5:e1000377.
121. Cohen G, Gandhi R, Davis D, Mandelboim O, Chen B, Strominger J,
Baltimore D: The selective downregulation of class I major
histocompatibility complex proteins by HIV-1 protects HIV-infected cells
from NK cells. Immunity 1999, 10:661-671.
122. Collins K, Chen B, Kalams S, Walker B, Baltimore D: HIV-1 Nef protein
protects infected primary cells against killing by cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Nature 1998, 391:397-401.
123. Cocchi F, DeVico A, Garzino-Demo A, Arya S, Gallo R, Lusso P: Identification
of RANTES, MIP-1 alpha, and MIP-1 beta as the major HIV-suppressive
factors produced by CD8+ T cells. Science 1995, 270:1811-1815.
124. Schwartz O, Maréchal V, Le Gall S, Lemonnier F, Heard J: Endocytosis of
major histocompatibility complex class I molecules is induced by the
HIV-1 Nef protein. Nat Med 1996, 2:338-342.
125. Borrow P, Lewicki H, Hahn B, Shaw G, Oldstone M: Virus-specific CD8+
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activity associated with control of viremia in
primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. J Virol 1994,
68:6103-6110.

Page 14 of 15

126. Dyer W, Ogg G, Demoitie M, Jin X, Geczy A, Rowland-Jones S, McMichael A,
Nixon D, Sullivan J: Strong human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-specific
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activity in Sydney Blood Bank Cohort patients
infected with nef-defective HIV type 1. J Virol 1999, 73:436-443.
127. Ogg G, Kostense S, Klein M, Jurriaans S, Hamann D, McMichael A,
Miedema F: Longitudinal phenotypic analysis of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes:
correlation with disease progression. J Virol 1999, 73:9153-9160.
128. Spivak AM, Rabi SA, McMahon MA, Shan L, Sedaghat AR, Wilke CO,
Siliciano RF: Dynamic Constraints on the Second Phase Compartment of
HIV-Infected Cells. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2011.
129. Donahue DA, Sloan RD, Kuhl BD, Bar-Magen T, Schader SM, Wainberg MA:
Stage-Dependent Inhibition of HIV-1 Replication by Antiretroviral Drugs
in Cell Culture. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 2010, 54:1047-1054.
130. Lassen KG, Ramyar KX, Bailey JR, Zhou Y, Siliciano RF: Nuclear retention of
multiply spliced HIV-1 RNA in resting CD4+ T cells. PLoS Pathog 2006, 2:
e68.
131. Ling R, Harrison TJ: Production of hepatitis B virus covalently closed
circular DNA in transfected cells is independent of surface antigen
synthesis. J Gen Virol 1997, 78(Pt 6):1463-1467.
132. Robinson WS, Clayton DA, Greenman RL: DNA of a human hepatitis B
virus candidate. J Virol 1974, 14:384-391.
133. Nonoyama M, Tanaka A: Plasmid DNA as a possible state of Epstein-Barr
virus genomes in nonproductive cells. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol
1975, 39(Pt 2):807-810.
134. Adams A, Lindahl T: Epstein-Barr virus genomes with properties of
circular DNA molecules in carrier cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1975,
72:1477-1481.
135. Fischer M, Trkola A, Joos B, Hafner R, Joller H, Muesing MA, Kaufman DR,
Berli E, Hirschel B, Weber R, et al: Shifts in cell-associated HIV-1 RNA but
not in episomal HIV-1 DNA correlate with new cycles of HIV-1 infection
in vivo. Antivir Ther 2003, 8:97-104.
136. Butler S, Johnson E, Bushman F: Human immunodeficiency virus cDNA
metabolism: notable stability of two-long terminal repeat circles. J Virol
2002, 76:3739-3747.
137. Pierson T, Kieffer T, Ruff C, Buck C, Gange S, Siliciano R: Intrinsic stability of
episomal circles formed during human immunodeficiency virus type 1
replication. J Virol 2002, 76:4138-4144.
138. Sharkey M, Triques K, Kuritzkes D, Stevenson M: In vivo evidence for
instability of episomal human immunodeficiency virus type 1 cDNA. J
Virol 2005, 79:5203-5210.
139. Lu R, Nakajima N, Hofmann W, Benkirane M, Jeang K, Sodroski J,
Engelman A, Teh-Jeang K: Simian virus 40-based replication of
catalytically inactive human immunodeficiency virus type 1 integrase
mutants in nonpermissive T cells and monocyte-derived macrophages. J
Virol 2004, 78:658-668.
140. Mannioui A, Schiffer C, Felix N, Nelson E, Brussel A, Sonigo P, Gluckman J,
Canque B: Cell cycle regulation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
integration in T cells: antagonistic effects of nuclear envelope
breakdown and chromatin condensation. Virology 2004, 329:77-88.
141. Bushman F: Measuring covert HIV replication during HAART: the
abundance of 2-LTR circles is not a reliable marker. AIDS 2003,
17:749-750.
142. Saenz DT, Loewen N, Peretz M, Whitwam T, Barraza R, Howell KG,
Holmes JM, Good M, Poeschla EM: Unintegrated lentivirus DNA
persistence and accessibility to expression in nondividing cells: analysis
with class I integrase mutants. J Virol 2004, 78:2906-2920.
143. Zack JA, Arrigo SJ, Weitsman SR, Go AS, Haislip A, Chen IS: HIV-1 entry into
quiescent primary lymphocytes: molecular analysis reveals a labile,
latent viral structure. Cell 1990, 61:213-222.
144. Colin L, Van Lint C: Molecular control of HIV-1 postintegration latency:
implications for the development of new therapeutic strategies.
Retrovirology 2009, 6:111.
145. Pierson T, Zhou Y, Kieffer T, Ruff C, Buck C, Siliciano R: Molecular
characterization of preintegration latency in human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 infection. J Virol 2002, 76:8518-8531.
146. Petitjean G, Al Tabaa Y, Tuaillon E, Mettling C, Baillat V, Reynes J,
Segondy M, Vendrell J: Unintegrated HIV-1 provides an inducible and
functional reservoir in untreated and highly active antiretroviral therapytreated patients. Retrovirology 2007, 4:60.

Sloan and Wainberg Retrovirology 2011, 8:52
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/52

147. Zamborlini A, Lehmann-Che J, Clave E, Giron ML, Tobaly-Tapiero J,
Roingeard P, Emiliani S, Toubert A, de Thé H, Saïb A: Centrosomal preintegration latency of HIV-1 in quiescent cells. Retrovirology 2007, 4:63.
148. Zhou Y, Zhang H, Siliciano JD, Siliciano RF: Kinetics of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 decay following entry into resting CD4+
T cells. J Virol 2005, 79:2199-2210.
149. Zack JA, Haislip AM, Krogstad P, Chen IS: Incompletely reverse-transcribed
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 genomes in quiescent cells can
function as intermediates in the retroviral life cycle. J Virol 1992,
66:1717-1725.
150. Gillim-Ross L, Cara A, Klotman M: HIV-1 extrachromosomal 2-LTR circular
DNA is long-lived in human macrophages. Viral Immunol 2005,
18:190-196.
151. Yáñez-Muñoz RJ, Balaggan KS, MacNeil A, Howe SJ, Schmidt M, Smith AJ,
Buch P, MacLaren RE, Anderson PN, Barker SE, et al: Effective gene therapy
with nonintegrating lentiviral vectors. Nat Med 2006, 12:348-353.
152. Philippe S, Sarkis C, Barkats M, Mammeri H, Ladroue C, Petit C, Mallet J,
Serguera C: Lentiviral vectors with a defective integrase allow efficient
and sustained transgene expression in vitro and in vivo. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2006, 103:17684-17689.
153. Donovan RM, Bush CE, Smereck SM, Moore E, Cohen F, Saravolatz LD:
Antiretroviral therapy is associated with a decrease in unintegrated HIV1 DNA in pediatric patients. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1994,
7:1237-1241.
154. Donovan RM, Bush CE, Smereck SM, Baxa DM, Markowitz NP, Saravolatz LD:
Rapid decrease in unintegrated human immunodeficiency virus DNA
after the initiation of nucleoside therapy. J Infect Dis 1994, 170:202-205.
155. Agosto LM, Liszewski MK, Mexas A, Graf E, Pace M, Yu JJ, Bhandoola A,
O’Doherty U: Patients on HAART often have an excess of unintegrated
HIV DNA: implications for monitoring reservoirs. Virology 2011, 409:46-53.
156. Buzón MJ, Massanella M, Llibre JM, Esteve A, Dahl V, Puertas MC, Gatell JM,
Domingo P, Paredes R, Sharkey M, et al: HIV-1 replication and immune
dynamics are affected by raltegravir intensification of HAART-suppressed
subjects. Nat Med 2010, 16:460-465.
157. Gandhi RT, Zheng L, Bosch RJ, Chan ES, Margolis DM, Read S, Kallungal B,
Palmer S, Medvik K, Lederman MM, et al: The effect of raltegravir
intensification on low-level residual viremia in HIV-infected patients on
antiretroviral therapy: a randomized controlled trial. PLoS Med 2010, 7.
158. Dinoso JB, Kim SY, Wiegand AM, Palmer SE, Gange SJ, Cranmer L, O’Shea A,
Callender M, Spivak A, Brennan T, et al: Treatment intensification does not
reduce residual HIV-1 viremia in patients on highly active antiretroviral
therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:9403-9408.
159. Joos B, Fischer M, Kuster H, Pillai SK, Wong JK, Böni J, Hirschel B, Weber R,
Trkola A, Günthard HF, Study SHC: HIV rebounds from latently infected
cells, rather than from continuing low-level replication. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2008, 105:16725-16730.
160. Sharkey M, Babic DZ, Greenough T, Gulick R, Kuritzkes DR, Stevenson M:
Episomal Viral cDNAs Identify a Reservoir That Fuels Viral Rebound after
Treatment Interruption and That Contributes to Treatment Failure. PLoS
Pathog 2011, 7:e1001303.
161. Graf EH, Mexas AM, Yu JJ, Shaheen F, Liszewski MK, Di Mascio M,
Migueles SA, Connors M, O’Doherty U: Elite Suppressors Harbor Low
Levels of Integrated HIV DNA and High Levels of 2-LTR Circular HIV DNA
Compared to HIV+ Patients On and Off HAART. PLoS Pathog 2011, 7:
e1001300.
162. Chen H, Li C, Huang J, Cung T, Seiss K, Beamon J, Carrington MF, Porter LC,
Burke PS, Yang Y, et al: CD4+ T cells from elite controllers resist HIV-1
infection by selective upregulation of p21. J Clin Invest 2011,
121:1549-1560.
163. Bar-Magen T, Sloan RD, Donahue DA, Kuhl BD, Zabeida A, Xu HT,
Oliveira M, Hazuda DJ, Wainberg MA: Identification of Novel Mutations
Responsible for Resistance to MK-2048, a Second-Generation HIV-1
Integrase Inhibitor. Journal of Virology 2010, 84:9210-9216.
164. Delelis O, Malet I, Na L, Tchertanov L, Calvez V, Marcelin AG, Subra F,
Deprez E, Mouscadet JF: The G140S mutation in HIV integrases from
raltegravir-resistant patients rescues catalytic defect due to the
resistance Q148H mutation. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:1193-1201.
165. Lennox JL, DeJesus E, Lazzarin A, Pollard RB, Madruga JV, Berger DS, Zhao J,
Xu X, Williams-Diaz A, Rodgers AJ, et al: Safety and efficacy of raltegravirbased versus efavirenz-based combination therapy in treatment-naive

Page 15 of 15

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.
174.

175.

176.
177.
178.

179.

180.
181.

182.
183.

184.

patients with HIV-1 infection: a multicentre, double-blind randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 2009, 374:796-806.
Markowitz M, Nguyen BY, Gotuzzo E, Mendo F, Ratanasuwan W, Kovacs C,
Prada G, Morales-Ramirez JO, Crumpacker CS, Isaacs RD, et al: Rapid and
durable antiretroviral effect of the HIV-1 Integrase inhibitor raltegravir as
part of combination therapy in treatment-naive patients with HIV-1
infection: results of a 48-week controlled study. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr 2007, 46:125-133.
Markowitz M, Nguyen BY, Gotuzzo E, Mendo F, Ratanasuwan W, Kovacs C,
Prada G, Morales-Ramirez JO, Crumpacker CS, Isaacs RD, et al: Sustained
antiretroviral effect of raltegravir after 96 weeks of combination therapy
in treatment-naive patients with HIV-1 infection. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr 2009, 52:350-356.
Goffinet C, Allespach I, Oberbremer L, Golden P, Foster S, Johns B,
Weatherhead J, Novick S, Chiswell K, Garvey E, Keppler O:
Pharmacovirological impact of an integrase inhibitor on human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 cDNA species in vivo. J Virol 2009,
83:7706-7717.
Sedaghat A, Dinoso J, Shen L, Wilke C, Siliciano R: Decay dynamics of HIV1 depend on the inhibited stages of the viral life cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2008, 105:4832-4837.
Sedaghat AR, Siliciano RF, Wilke CO: Constraints on the dominant
mechanism for HIV viral dynamics in patients on raltegravir. Antivir Ther
2009, 14:263-271.
Reigadas S, Andréola ML, Wittkop L, Cosnefroy O, Anies G, RecordonPinson P, Thiébaut R, Masquelier B, Fleury H: Evolution of 2-long terminal
repeat (2-LTR) episomal HIV-1 DNA in raltegravir-treated patients and in
in vitro infected cells. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010, 65:434-437.
Gelderblom H, Vatakis D, Burke S, Lawrie S, Bristol G, Levy D: Viral
complementation allows HIV-1 replication without integration.
Retrovirology 2008, 5:60.
Wu Y: The second chance story of HIV-1 DNA: Unintegrated? Not a
problem! Retrovirology 2008, 5:61.
Quan Y, Liang C, Brenner B, Wainberg M: Multidrug-resistant variants of
HIV type 1 (HIV-1) can exist in cells as defective quasispecies and be
rescued by superinfection with other defective HIV-1 variants. J Infect Dis
2009, 200:1479-1483.
Levy DN, Aldrovandi GM, Kutsch O, Shaw GM: Dynamics of HIV-1
recombination in its natural target cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004,
101:4204-4209.
Stetson DB, Ko JS, Heidmann T, Medzhitov R: Trex1 prevents cell-intrinsic
initiation of autoimmunity. Cell 2008, 134:587-598.
Bhoj VG, Chen ZJ: Linking retroelements to autoimmunity. Cell 2008,
134:569-571.
Yan N, Regalado-Magdos AD, Stiggelbout B, Lee-Kirsch MA, Lieberman J:
The cytosolic exonuclease TREX1 inhibits the innate immune response
to human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Nat Immunol 2010,
11:1005-1013.
Doitsh G, Cavrois M, Lassen KG, Zepeda O, Yang Z, Santiago ML,
Hebbeler AM, Greene WC: Abortive HIV infection mediates CD4 T cell
depletion and inflammation in human lymphoid tissue. Cell 2010,
143:789-801.
Wu Y, Marsh J: Gene transcription in HIV infection. Microbes Infect 2003,
5:1023-1027.
Belloni L, Pollicino T, De Nicola F, Guerrieri F, Raffa G, Fanciulli M,
Raimondo G, Levrero M: Nuclear HBx binds the HBV minichromosome
and modifies the epigenetic regulation of cccDNA function. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:19975-19979.
Bloom DC, Giordani NV, Kwiatkowski DL: Epigenetic regulation of latent
HSV-1 gene expression. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010, 1799:246-256.
Korber B, Muldoon M, Theiler J, Gao F, Gupta R, Lapedes A, Hahn BH,
Wolinsky S, Bhattacharya T: Timing the ancestor of the HIV-1 pandemic
strains. Science 2000, 288:1789-1796.
Talbott RL, Sparger EE, Lovelace KM, Fitch WM, Pedersen NC, Luciw PA,
Elder JH: Nucleotide sequence and genomic organization of feline
immunodeficiency virus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86:5743-5747.

doi:10.1186/1742-4690-8-52
Cite this article as: Sloan and Wainberg: The role of unintegrated DNA
in HIV infection. Retrovirology 2011 8:52.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
