<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Phylometrics: a pipeline for inferring phylogenetic trees from a sequence relationship network perspective</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:S18. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-S6-S18"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Samuel A Smits"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Smits and Ouverney BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S18

PROCEEDINGS

Open Access

Phylometrics: a pipeline for inferring phylogenetic
trees from a sequence relationship network
perspective
Samuel A Smits*, Cleber C Ouverney
From Seventh Annual MCBIOS Conference. Bioinformatics: Systems, Biology, Informatics and Computation
Jonesboro, AR, USA. 19-20 February 2010

Abstract
Background: Comparative sequence analysis of the 16S rRNA gene is frequently used to characterize the microbial
diversity of environmental samples. However, sequence similarities do not always imply functional or evolutionary
relatedness due to many factors, including unequal rates of change and convergence. Thus, relying on top BLASTN
hits for phylogenetic studies may misrepresent the diversity of these constituents. Furthermore, attempts to
circumvent this issue by including a large number of BLASTN hits per sequence in one tree to explore their
relatedness presents other problems. For instance, the multiple sequence alignment will be poor and
computationally costly if not relying on manual alignment, and it may be difficult to derive meaningful
relationships from the resulting tree. Analyzing sequence relationship networks within collective BLASTN results,
however, reveal sequences that are closely related despite low rank.
Results: We have developed a web application, Phylometrics, that relies on networks of collective BLASTN results
(rather than single BLASTN hits) to facilitate the process of building phylogenetic trees in an automated, highthroughput fashion while offering novel tools to find sequences that are of significant phylogenetic interest with
minimal human involvement. The application, which can be installed locally in a laboratory or hosted remotely,
utilizes a simple wizard-style format to guide the user through the pipeline without necessitating a background in
programming. Furthermore, Phylometrics implements an independent job queuing system that enables users to
continue to use the system while jobs are run with little or no degradation in performance.
Conclusions: Phylometrics provides a novel data mining method to screen supplied DNA sequences and to
identify sequences that are of significant phylogenetic interest using powerful analytical tools. Sequences that are
identified as being similar to a number of supplied sequences may provide key insights into their functional or
evolutionary relatedness. Users require the same basic computer skills as for navigating most internet applications.

Background
The breadth of knowledge of microbial diversity continues to rapidly expand as 16S rRNA genes are
sequenced from environmental samples and comparisons
to existing data are drawn. Culture-independent methods
have enabled the application of a molecular-phylogenetic
approach to discover that the environmental microbes
* Correspondence: samsmits@gmail.com
Department of Biological Sciences, San José State University, One
Washington Square, San José, California, 95192-0100, USA

constitute the majority of evolutionary diversity [1]. Phylogenetic studies have further recognized that over 99%
of all prokaryotes are uncultivated [2,3]. Therefore, in
attempts to continue to explore the evolution and composition of microbial communities it is now standard
practice to sequence the 16S rRNA gene [4].
These DNA sequences are being added to public databases rapidly since they have become the most cost effective, if not the only method available to identify and
quantify the uncultivated microbes. Deriving meaningful
knowledge from the inundation of sequences, then,

© 2010 Smits and Ouverney; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Smits and Ouverney BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S18

necessitates methods to judge which sequences are of particular interest to the study. A common method in screening DNA sequences derived in a study is to assign each
sequence to a taxonomic group by comparing it to the closest relative in publically available databases, such as
Greengene’s Simrank [5] and NCBI’s BLASTN [6].
Although this method is rapid, it has been recognized that
neither the top ranking hits nor the most similar sequences
are always the most closely related phylotype [7,8].
Phylotypes may also be determined to be closely
related by examining the network of sequence relationships based on their similarities [9]. A network is established using the following principle: if sequences A, B,
and C each return sequence a as a BLASTN hit (with
varying ranks), sequence a is considered to be “associated” with the three sequences. In the context of
screening the sequences derived from environmental
samples, analyzing the associations between the
BLASTN hits of a collection will unveil sequences of
great phylogenetic interest despite the possibility of having scored low in the BLASTN ranking system [10].
Recognizing these associations before aligning large collections of sequences reduces both the computational
expense and the obfuscation that many sequences will
inherently contribute to its analysis.
Here we introduce a web application, Phylometrics,
which automates many key tasks for DNA sequence
analysis in a high-throughput method. Instead of single
BLASTN inquiries, Phylometrics automatically analyzes
multiple BLASTN results, cross-comparing each
BLASTN result against others within seconds. A graphical tool for mining these sequence relationships is
also provided and includes them in a multiple
sequence alignment process according to user-defined
parameters. This approach can discover sequences of
great interest for further phylogenetic examination
which would otherwise be missed without significant
human involvement. Finally, the application generates
phylogenetic trees according to numerous methods of
tree inference which may be selected and configured
using a wizard-style form. As the results are being generated, the user may continue to interact and queue
additional analyses without interrupting the ongoing
processes.
Phylometrics offers a number of key advantages: simplicity in the user interface, powerful analytics to examine sequence relationships, the ability to install the
application locally and the ability to queue batch jobs.
The code is also released as open source allowing it to
be extended and integrated into workflows as desired.
Finally, due to the architectural decision to make the
application driven by job queues (a list of tasks to be
run asynchronously), cloud computing services may be
integrated and directed by the queue to perform the

Page 2 of 7

more CPU-intensive processes such as multiple
sequence alignments.

Implementation
Design aims

Many popular tools available for sequence analysis (such
as PHYLIP [11] and PhyML [12]) require command-line
syntax and cryptic parameter settings that are foreign to
biologists without programming experience. We identified four design aims for the system:
1. Implement a simple, widely usable interface that
does not involve user programming, by implementing a wizard-styled approach.
2. Provide rich, interactive visual representations of
the data generated by the pipeline.
3. Allow for the import of sequences in multiple formats and the export of data at every stage of the
pipeline so as to give the user the flexibility to use
alternative software solutions for those steps.
Furthermore, the system must maintain a record of
the parameters the user set for each step in the
pipeline.
4. Allow batch jobs to be queued and/or running
while being able to simultaneously create new jobs
or able to access completed reports.
These goals were met by architecting Phylometrics
with three main components: the web browser, a scriptprocessing engine running on a web server and a database server (see Figure 1). A Flash-enabled web browser,
without any other plugin requirements, acts as the user
interface and offers the unique advantage of not requiring a high-performance device and also allows the system to be accessed remotely. The back end is coded in
PHP using a Model-View-Controller object-oriented
programming paradigm, making it an extendable application. Phylometrics uses the open source MySQL database server to store sequence collections and reports.
User interface and pipeline wizard

A common web browser serves as the user interface. It
is advantageous due to the low learning curve and
accessibility from a number of devices. It also incorporates simple yet useful features such as printing and
searching from within the browser experience.
Phylometrics implements a Wizard-style pipeline
which prompts the user for parameters necessitated at
each pipeline stage (see Figure 2). The first step in the
process is creating a new “Collection” by importing
sequences for analysis. On importing, a sequence record
is created for each sequence and associated with a Collection record which is then pushed through the
pipeline.

Smits and Ouverney BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S18

Page 3 of 7

Data Layer

Data Processing Layer

Database Server

PHP Scripting Engine

MySQL

Model
View
Controller

Presentation Layer

Asynchronous

Perl
Job Manager
Web Browser

Applications
Blast, ClustalW,
PhyML, PHYLIP,
TreeVector
* may reside on a separate server

Web Server (Windows/Linux)

Figure 1 Architectural overview of Phylometrics. There are three main components to the system which are fully decoupled enabling them
to be run on different hardware: the data, processing and presentation layers. The data processing layer may also be split in order to run highcomputational applications on a different server.

The second step of the Wizard is “BLAST Setup.” The
software queries NCBI’s live database by default; this
may be modified, however, to search a local BLASTN
database instead. After entering BLASTN parameter
options, the user has the ability to “Generate a Screening Report,” or to continue with the pipeline. Both processes are queued and allow the user to continue to use
the system, while the option to generate the screening
report will halt the pipeline at this second step before
continuing the progression through the pipeline. A
Screening Report will be generated irrespective of the
choice the user makes at this point, allowing one to
revisit this report to create any number of alignments
and trees based on their filters.
The following step is “Alignment” with the options to
select parameters based on ClustalW [13], a multiple
sequence alignment program. Once the Screening
Report is generated, users may choose to create alignments using various filters which set thresholds, gate
and also specifically toggle individual sequences. In fact,
one can use the same dataset to create many alignments
using different parameters and compare the results in
the generated trees.
The final step of the Wizard is “Build Tree”, where
one can choose between various methods of tree

inferences based on the PHYLIP [11] and PhyML [12]
software packages. The NEWICK file format outputs of
these packages are then rendered into images using
TreeVector [14]. Similar to the many-to-one relationship
of alignments to collections, many trees can be generated from one alignment.
Interactive visual analytics

An interactive analytical tool developed in Adobe Flex
and utilizing the Flare library is used to represent
sequence relationship networks (see Figure 3). The user
is prompted to select a number of filtering criteria from
which a report is generated, including the minimum
number of associations a BLASTN hit must have with
individual supplied sequences. The report itself is interactive; scrolling over a sequence name with the mouse
will reveal the sequence accession identification and
description. Clicking a sequence name will highlight the
relationship associations with other sequences based on
the results obtained in BLASTN reports.
Data usability

Sequences are initially imported by the user into a “Collection” from the Wizard in FASTA, Genbank or Raw
format. On Wizard completion, the user is be able to

Smits and Ouverney BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S18

Page 4 of 7

Figure 2 Wizard-style data input. The wizard process guides the user through four steps to explore phylogenetic relationships from a group
of phylotypes: collection creation, BLAST setup, multiple sequence alignment parameters and tree inference algorithm selections. The interface
provides visual contextualisation of the process, while allowing complex many-to-one relationships between collections, alignments and trees to
be made simply.

download the BLASTN report in XML format, the multiple sequence alignments in PHYLIP format, and the
tree inferences in NEWICK, SVG and PNG file formats.
The user may also click on the generated results to
review the parameters that were used to generate the
reports within the Wizard process.
Asynchronous job queues

The pipeline processing and job queues are managed by
Perl scripts which utilize the BioPerl library [15]. These
scripts are decoupled from the system in such a way so

as to allow them to be run on a completely separate
hardware platform, receiving job instructions from the
database layer. This setup allows the user to continue to
access and analyze generated reports while jobs are processing, in addition to being able to queue an unlimited
number of jobs. As the tasks progress through the pipeline an unobtrusive panel displays the progress of each
submitted job. Furthermore, this setup can be exploited
to process jobs which are computationally expensive on
other servers simultaneously or even utilize cloud computing services such as Amazon EC2.

Smits and Ouverney BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S18

Page 5 of 7

Figure 3 Screening Report. A screenshot of a typical Screening Report with an illustrated stepwise process for utilizing the report.

Results and discussion
We have compared the features of Phylometrics to a
number of tools that are commonly used for small-subunit RNA analyses that offer differing advantages (see
Table 1). Many phylogenetic tools (such as MEGA [17]
and STAP [18]) utilize standard programs such as ClustalW and PhyML to perform common tasks. Phylometrics utilizes these and other standard packages (such
as PHYLIP), and therefore does not differ from other
pipelines or packages in these core functions. Thus, the
performance on identical hardware will be similar. For
instance, a representative collection of 20 sequences
pushed through the full pipeline with default settings

required 5.5 minutes on a Windows Server with a modest 2.66 Ghz single-core processor and 1GB RAM. Phylometrics differentiates itself from these tools by
providing a novel method for discovering sequences that
are ranked low yet may be phylogenetically significant in
a high-throughput manner.
Phylometrics makes it possible to explore sequence
relationships within a collection in order to quickly
build phylogenetically meaningful trees. Using a visual
and interactive interface, sequences that may provide
key insights into functional or evolutionary relatedness
are identified much faster than the current standard
manual approach. Furthermore, the identification of

Smits and Ouverney BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S18

Page 6 of 7

Table 1 Comparison of Phylometrics to existing commonly-used tools for generating phylogenetic trees
Phylometrics

STAP

ARB

MEGA 4.1

User Interface

Web Browser

Command line

GUI

GUI

Where is it installed?

Local or Remote

Local

Local

Local

Open source

Yes

Yes

No

No

Offers Manual Alignment

No

No

Yes

Yes

Parallel Processing

Yes

Yes

No

No

Batch Jobs

Yes

Yes

No

No

Visualization of Sequence Networks

Yes

No

No

No

homologous sequences previous to multiple sequence
alignments and tree building significantly reduces computational costs and time by minimizing the inclusion of
unrelated sequences.
Once a dataset has been refined and pertinent sequences
have been identified, Phylometrics enables one to explore
the differences between alignments and each method of
tree inference to determine which set of methods and
parameters may suit the data best. The parameters used in
each of the processes are also permanently stored, allowing one to replicate the results manually.
Results can be exported from any stage in the pipeline
for personal collection databases or to be further analyzed in other popular sequence analysis packages, such
as ARB [16]. The formats of the output include: Phylip
for alignments, Newick for tree inferences and JPG and
SVG formats for tree visualizations. The multiple
sequence alignments are especially useful for export, as
manually aligning sequences may be necessary to
improve the quality of the resulting tree. The visual
representations are also printable from within the Flash
movie by accessing the menu with a right-click.

Conclusions
Phylometrics offers an automated, high-throughput
pipeline for phylogenetic inferences in a simple wizardstyle web interface, requiring basic computer skills and
no user programming experience. It incorporates novel
analytical tools to mine sequence collections for biologically significant associations generating trees that provide insights into their respective functional or
evolutionary implications.
Availability and requirements
Project name: Phylometrics
Project home page: http://www.phylometrics.com
Operating system: Platform independent
Programming Language: PHP, Perl, Javascript
License: GPL
Acknowledgements
We thank the four anonymous reviewers for their time in providing
constructive comments on the manuscript. This work has been funded in

part by NIH Grant #SC3GM082291 and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Science Education Grant # 52006312.
This article has been published as part of BMC Bioinformatics Volume 11
Supplement 6, 2010: Proceedings of the Seventh Annual MCBIOS
Conference. Bioinformatics: Systems, Biology, Informatics and Computation.
The full contents of the supplement are available online at
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11?issue=S6.
Authors’ contributions
SAS developed the application, and drafted the manuscript. CCO
contributed to the conception of the project and manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 7 October 2010
References
1. Pace NR: A Molecular View of Microbial Diversity and the Biosphere.
Science 1997, 276:734-740.
2. Hugenholtz P: Exploring prokaryotic diversity in the genomic era.
Genome Biol 2002, 3:REVIEWS0003.
3. Rappé MS, Giovannoni SJ: The uncultured microbial majority. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol 2003, 57:369-394.
4. Imhoff JF, Caumette P: Recommended standards for the description of
new species of anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
2004, 54:1415-1421.
5. DeSantis TZ, Hugenholtz P, Larsen N, Rojas M, Brodie EL, Keller K, Huber T,
Dalevi D, Hu P, Andersen GL: Greengenes, a chimera-checked 16S rRNA
gene database and workbench compatible with ARB. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol 2006, 72:5069-5072.
6. Altschul S, Madden T, Schaffer A, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman D:
Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database
search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
7. Koski LB, Golding GB: The Closest BLAST Hit Is Often Not the Nearest
Neighbor. Journal of Molecular Evolution 2001, 52:540-542.
8. Eisen JA: Phylogenomics: Improving Functional Predictions for
Uncharacterized Genes by Evolutionary Analysis. Genome Research 1998,
8:163-167.
9. Suderman M, Hallett M: Tools for visually exploring biological networks.
Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2651-2659.
10. Fokkens L, Botelho S, Boekhorst J, Snel B: Enrichment of homologs in
insignificant BLAST hits by co-complex network alignment. BMC
Bioinformatics 2010, 11:86.
11. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP - Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2).
Cladistics 1989, 5:166, 164.
12. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst. Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
13. Larkin M, Blackshields G, Brown N, Chenna R, McGettigan P, McWilliam H,
Valentin F, Wallace I, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson J, Gibson T, Higgins D:
Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2947-2948.
14. Pethica R, Barker G, Kovacs T, Gough J: TreeVector: Scalable, Interactive,
Phylogenetic Trees for the Web. PLoS ONE 2010, 5:e8934.
15. Stajich JE, Block D, Boulez K, Brenner SE, Chervitz SA, Dagdigian C,
Fuellen G, Gilbert JGR, Korf I, Lapp H, Lehväslaiho H, Matsalla C, Mungall CJ,
Osborne BI, Pocock MR, Schattner P, Senger M, Stein LD, Stupka E,

Smits and Ouverney BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S18

Page 7 of 7

Wilkinson MD, Birney E: The Bioperl toolkit: Perl modules for the life
sciences. Genome Res 2002, 12:1611-1618.
16. Ludwig W, Strunk O, Westram R, Richter L, Meier H, Yadhukumar ABuchner,
Lai T, Steppi S, Jobb G, Forster W, Brettske I, Gerber S, Ginhart AW, Gross O,
Grumann S, Hermann S, Jost R, Konig A, Liss T, Lussmann R, May M,
Nonhoff B, Reichel B, Strehlow R, Stamatakis A, Stuckmann N, Vilbig A,
Lenke M, Ludwig T, Bode A, Schleifer K: ARB: a software environment for
sequence data. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1363-1371.
17. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol. Biol. Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
18. Wu D, Hartman A, Ward N, Eisen JA: An Automated Phylogenetic TreeBased Small Subunit rRNA Taxonomy and Alignment Pipeline (STAP).
PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e2566.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-S6-S18
Cite this article as: Smits and Ouverney: Phylometrics: a pipeline for
inferring phylogenetic trees from a sequence relationship network
perspective. BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11(Suppl 6):S18.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
