<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1475-9292-3-1.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease

BioMed Central

Open Access

Focus

Trypanosoma rangeli Transcriptome Project: Generation and
analysis of expressed sequence tags
Cristiane Quimelli Snoeijer1, Gisele Fernanda Picchi2,
Bibiana Paula Dambrós1, Mário Steindel1, Samuel Goldenberg2,
Stênio Perdigão Fragoso2, Daniel Macedo Lorenzini1 and
Edmundo Carlos Grisard*1
Address: 1Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Caixa postal 476, Santa Catarina, Brazil, 88040900 and 2Instituto de Biologia Molecular do Paraná, Paraná, Brazil
Email: Cristiane Quimelli Snoeijer - crisquimelli@hotmail.com; Gisele Fernanda Picchi - gpicchi@tecpar.br;
Bibiana Paula Dambrós - bibipaula@pop.com.br; Mário Steindel - ccb1mst@ccb.ufsc.br; Samuel Goldenberg - sgoldenb@tecpar.br;
Stênio Perdigão Fragoso - sfragoso@tecpar.br; Daniel Macedo Lorenzini - dloren@usp.br; Edmundo Carlos Grisard* - grisard@ccb.ufsc.br
* Corresponding author

Published: 13 May 2004
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3:1

Received: 09 February 2004
Accepted: 13 May 2004

This article is available from: http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/1
© 2004 Snoeijer et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Trypanosoma rangeli is an important hemoflagellate parasite of several mammalian species in Central
and South America, sharing geographical areas, vectors and reservoirs with T. cruzi, the causative
agent of Chagas disease. Thus, the occurrence of single and/or mixed infections, including in
humans, must be expected and are of great importance for specific diagnosis and epidemiology. In
comparison to several Trypanosomatidae species, the T. rangeli biology and genome are little
known, reinforcing the needs of a gene discovery initiative. The T. rangeli transcriptome initiative
aims to promote gene discovery through the generation of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and
Orestes (ORF ESTs) from both epimastigote and trypomastigote forms of the parasite, allowing
further studies of the parasite biology, taxonomy and phylogeny.

The Trypanosoma rangeli EST project
Trypanosoma rangeli and T. cruzi are hemoflagellate protozoan parasites transmitted by triatomine bugs in a wide,
overlapped distribution area in Central and South America [1,2]. T. cruzi is the etiological agent of Chagas disease
that affects 16 million people [3], whereas T. rangeli infection does not seems to be pathogenic for vertebrate hosts
[1]. Beyond their morphological similarity, the sharing of
several antigenic determinants allows the occurrence of
inconclusive or wrong serological diagnosis of human
infection, constituting a serious problem for the epidemiology of both etiologies [4,5]. Nowadays, only few methods or specialized techniques can undoubtedly

differentiate T. cruzi from T. rangeli, being not available
for routine diagnosis [2]. Moreover, the controversial taxonomic position of T. rangeli has been discussed for several years. Presenting a remarkable pleomorphism and
biological characteristics of distinct Trypanosoma Subgenus, the T. rangeli biology in its vertebrate hosts is still
awaiting to be revealed [2]. Thus, it is necessary to develop
new strategies in order to allow specific differentiation in
a fast, secure, easy and economically viable way, to provide valuable information on genetic markers and to support functional studies in order to clarify the parasite
biology and taxonomic position. Comparing to the actual
number of T. cruzi entries in the GenBank (42,410 nucle-

Page 1 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3

otides and 1,602 proteins), a small number of T. rangeli
nucleotide sequences or genes (68) and proteins (42)
have been characterized and the overall picture of the
genome is still absent. Due the absence of such information, little is known about important biological features
such as the host-parasite relationships at the molecular
level and the taxonomic position of the parasite [5,6].
Considering the ongoing initiatives over the T. cruzi
genome [7] and the usefulness of cDNA partial sequencing to generate expressed sequence tags (ESTs) or Orestes
(ORF ESTs) as a rapid and efficient approach to establish
a detailed profile of the genes and the gene expression as
well [8-14], we have started the "Trypanosoma rangeli EST
Project" under the auspices of CNPq, a Brazilian Government Agency. Considering the importance of this parasite
and its under representation on the current genomic/proteomic scenario, the project aims to generate a overview of
the T. rangeli transcriptome through sequencing ESTs and
ORESTES from both epimastigotes and trypomastigotes
forms of the parasite. Initially, tree distinct normalized
and non-directional T. rangeli cDNA libraries were constructed using epimastigote forms of the Choachi strain
[15]. Total RNA was obtained using standard protocols
[16] followed by phenol-chloroform extraction and
poliA+ RNA was prepared using the Oligotex RNA purification kit (Qiagen, Valencia). The cDNA libraries were
constructed by cloning size-purified fragments in pGEM
T-Easy plasmid (Promega, Madison) using the Clontech
PCR-SelectTM cDNA Subtraction kit (BD Biosciences,
Franklin Lakes). A total of ~3,360 clones were obtained
and the validation of the libraries was performed by
sequencing a single end of the inserts in a MegaBace 1000®
equipment (Molecular Dynamics/Amersham Biosciences,
Piscataway) using the DYEnamicET dye terminator kit
(Amersham Biosciences). The mean size of the inserts for
all cDNA libraries was of ~750 bp as revealed by EcoRI
restriction analysis. The obtained sequences were edited
and analyzed using the new ESTonSQL system under
development in collaboration of D.M. Lorenzini with the
UFSC Bioinformatics laboratory http://www.bioinformat
ica.ufsc.br. ESTs with 150 bp and phred quality > 10 http:/
/www.phrap.org were considered valid by ESTonSQL and
were analyzed by comparison with the EMBL-EBI, GenBank, Swissprot and Interpro databases. Sequences < 150
bp or with Phred value < 10 were labeled as invalid ESTs
and stored. Up to now, a total of 656 valid ESTs were generated among which, 386-showed similarity with
trypanosomatid sequences (Table 1). Several matches
were observed with distinct organisms, but considering
only the trypanosomatids database, 168 sequences were
similar to T. cruzi sequences and only 20 showed similarity with T. rangeli sequences (Table 2). Despite the preliminary analysis, several ESTs revealed similarity to
sequences not previously reported for T. rangeli such as a
human topoisomerase III (GenBank accession

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/1

AAH02432) and a putative Leishmania major quinone oxidoreductase (NP_859482). Over 37% of the valid ESTs
returned no hits and may represent T. rangeli specific
genes, unknown genes or even 5' or 3' end untranslated
regions (UTRs), proving the usefulness of this type of
strategy to gather new information and the needs of
genomic studies of this parasite. Along with the continuing EST generation by sequencing both ends of all
obtained clones, ORESTES (ORF ESTs) profiles [17] will
be obtained from the same libraries used for EST generation. While ESTs are generated by sequencing the 5' and/
or 3' ends of cDNA clones, the ORESTES technique allows
the generation of sequences belonging to the middle portion of the genes [17]. Through the combination of both
EST and ORESTES approaches to study the transcriptome
of a target organism, a significant number of coding
regions can be rapidly obtained. Having described a
method to induce T. rangeli metacyclogenesis in vitro [18],
our group is currently working on a cDNA library of this
parasite form in order to perform an intra and inter-specific comparative study of both epimastigotes and trypomastigote ESTs and ORESTES.

Conclusions
The number of studies involving T. rangeli is increasing
due several aspects such as i) the importance on Chagas
disease diagnosis and epidemiology, ii) the unknown life
cycle on vertebrate hosts and iii) the contradictory taxonomic position of the parasite. Several molecular
approaches have been used during the last few years to
address these points. However, in order to perform comparative transcriptomics to address taxonomic studies, to
bring up new markers for specific diagnosis, to discover,
understand and/or compare some biological processes
such as the involvement of the 3' end UTR on the posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression or even to
assess intra-specific variability, a genomic panorama of
the parasite must be revealed. Upon the release of the T.
cruzi, T. brucei and L. major genome databases, not so far
from now, the existence of well annotated ESTs and
ORESTES from distinct T. rangeli forms will allow comparative transcriptomic studies with the state of the art technologies such as microarrays. Upon the end of the project,
free accession to the T. rangeli transcriptome data, as well
as tools for comparative genomics/transcriptomics under
development, will be available through the UFSC Bioinformatics Laboratory website http://www.bioinformat
ica.ufsc.br.

Competing interests
C.Q. Snoeijer and B.P. Dambrós are Research Scholars
from Capes and CNPq (Brazilian Government Agencies),
respectively. The T. rangeli EST project is funded by a
MCT/CNPq grant. The ESTonSQL system is under devel-

Page 2 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/1

Table 1: Current status of the Trypanosoma rangeli transcriptome project.

EST matching with:

Number of matches*

(%)*

Trypanosomatids
Other organisms
Unknown
Total

386
25
245
656

58.84
3.81
37.35
100

*Updated values can be obtained at http://www.bioinformatica.ufsc.br/trangeli

Table 2: Actual number of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) generated by the Trypanosoma rangeli transcriptome project distributed
according to the similarity with sequences of distinct species.

Species

Number of ESTs*

Trypanosoma cruzi
T. brucei brucei
T. brucei
T. rangeli
T. carassii
T. brucei rhodesiense
T. congolense
Leishmania major
L. infantum
L. tarentolae
Neurospora crassa
Homo sapiens
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Ictalurus punctatus
Plasmodium yoelii yoelii
Dictiostelium discoideum
Emericella nidulans
Mycine glutinosa
Oryza sativa
Shigella flexneri
Trypanoplasma borreli
Zea mays
Total

168
77
25
20
3
2
1
71
15
1
8
5
3
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
656

*Updated values can be obtained at http://www.bioinformatica.ufsc.br/trangeli

opment by D.M. Lorenzini, to whom inquiries must be
sent.

References

Author's contributions

2.

1.

The present work is part of C.Q. Snoeijer Masters thesis.
All other authors have equally contributed to this work.
3.

Acknowledgments
To the IBMP staff for their technical support on the cDNA libraries construction and to Dr. Ana Tereza R. de Vasconcellos from the Laboratório
Nacional de Computação Científica (LNCC) for helping on bioinformatics
analysis.

4.
5.
6.

D'Alessandro A, Saravia NG: Trypanosoma rangeli. In: Protozoal Diseases Edited by: Herbert M Gilles. London: Arnold Press;
1999:398-412.
Grisard EC, Steindel M, Guarnieri AA, Eger-Mangrich I, Campbell DA,
Romanha AJ: Characterization of Trypanosoma rangeli strains
isolated in Central and South America: overview. Mem Inst
Oswaldo Cruz 1999, 94:203-209.
Guhl F, Jaramillo C, Carranza JC, Vallejo GA: Molecular characterization and diagnosis of Trypanosoma cruzi and T. rangeli. Arch
Med Res 2002, 33:362-370.
Afchain D, LeRay D, Fruit J, Capron A: Antigenic make-up of
Trypanosoma cruzi culture forms: Identification of a specific
component. J Parasitol 1979, 65:507-514.
Grisard EC: Salivaria or Stercoraria? The Trypanosoma rangeli
dilemma. Kinet Biol Dis 2002, 1:5.
Stevens JR, Teixeira MM, Bingle LE, Gibson WC: The taxonomic
position and evolutionary relationships of Trypanosoma
rangeli. Int J Parasitol 1999, 29:749-757.

Page 3 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3

7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.

18.

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/1

Verdun RE, Di Paolo N, Urmenyi TP, Rondinelli E, Frasch AC, Sanchez
DO: Gene discovery through expressed sequence tag
sequencing in Trypanosoma cruzi. Infect Immun 1998,
66:5393-5398.
Adams MD: Expressed sequence tags as tools for physiology
and genomics. In: Automated DNA sequencing and analysis Edited by:
Adams MD, Fields C, Venter JC. London: Academic Press;
1994:71-76.
Ajioka JW, John CB, Brunk BP, Hehl A, Hillier L, Manger ID, Marra M,
Overton GC, Roos DS, Wan KL, Waterston R, Sibley LD: Gene discovery by EST sequencing in Toxoplasma gondii reveals
sequences restricted to the Apicomplexa. Genome Res 1998,
8:18-28.
Djikeng A, Aguda C, Donelson JE, Majiwa PAO: Generation of
expressed sequence tags as physical landmarks in the
genome of Trypanosoma brucei. Gene 1998, 221:93-106.
Fan J, Minchella DJ, Day SR, McManus DP, Tiu WU, Brindley PJ: Generation, identification and evaluation of expressed sequence
tags from different developmental stages of the asian blood
fluke Schistosoma japonicum. Biochem Biophys Res Comm 1998,
252:348-356.
Levick MP, Blackwell JM, Connor V, Coulson RMR, Miles A, Smith HE,
Wan KL, Ajioka JW: An expressed sequence tag analysis of a
full-length, spliced-leader cDNA library from Leishmania
major promastigotes. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1996, 76:345-348.
Porcel BM, Tran AN, Tammi M, Nyarady Z, Rydåker M, Urmenyi TP,
Rondinelli E, Pettersson U, Andersson B, Åslund1 L: Gene survey of
the pathogenic protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi. Genome Res
2000, 10:1103-1107.
Verjovski-Almeida S, Demarco R, Martins EAL, Guimarães PEM,
Ojopi EPB, Paquola ACM, Piazza JP, Nishiyama MY, Kitajima JP, Adamson RE, Ashton PD, Bonaldo MF, Coulson PS, Dillon GP, Farias LP,
Gregorio SP, Ho PL, Leite RA, Malaquias LCC, Marques RCP, Miyasato PA, Nascimento Alto, Ohlweiler FP, Reis EM, Ribeiro MA, Sá RG,
Stukart GC, Soares MB, Gargioni C, Kawano T, Rodrigues V, Madeira
AMBN, Wilson RA, Menck CFM, Setubal JC, Leite LCC, Dias-Neto E:
Transcriptome analysis of the acoelomate human parasite
Schistosoma mansoni. Nat Genet 2003, 35:148-157.
Schotelius J: Neuraminidase fluorescent test for differentiation of Trypanosoma cruzi and Trypanosoma rangeli. Trop Med
Parasitol 1987, 38:323-327.
Chomczynski P, Sacchi N: Single-Step Method of RNA Isolation
by Acid Guanidinium Thiocyanate-Phenol-Chloroform
Extracion. Anal Biochem 1987, 62:156-159.
Dias Neto E, Correa RG, Verjovski-Almeida S, Briones MR, Nagai
MA, Da Silva W JR, Zago MA, Bordin S, Costa FF, Goldman GH, Carvalho AF, Matsukuma A, Baia GS, Simpson DH, Brunstein A, De
Oliveira PS, Bucher P, Jongeneel CV, O'Hare MJ, Soares F, Brentani
RR, Reis LF, De Souza SJ, Simpson AJ: Shotgun sequencing of the
human transcriptome with ORF expressed sequence tags.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:3491-3496.
Koerich LB, Emmanuelle-Machado P, Santos K, Grisard EC, Steindel
M: Differentiation of Trypanosoma rangeli: High production of
infective trypomastigote forms in vitro. Parasitol Res 2002,
88:21-25.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 4 of 4
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
