<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The contribution of molecular epidemiology to the understanding and control of viral diseases of salmonid aquaculture</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56. doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-56"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Michael Snow"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

REVIEW

VETERINARY RESEARCH

Open Access

The contribution of molecular epidemiology to
the understanding and control of viral diseases of
salmonid aquaculture
Michael Snow

Abstract
Molecular epidemiology is a science which utilizes molecular biology to define the distribution of disease in a
population (descriptive epidemiology) and relies heavily on integration of traditional (or analytical) epidemiological
approaches to identify the etiological determinants of this distribution. The study of viral pathogens of aquaculture
has provided many exciting opportunities to apply such tools. This review considers the extent to which molecular
epidemiological studies have contributed to better understanding and control of disease in aquaculture, drawing
on examples of viral diseases of salmonid fish of commercial significance including viral haemorrhagic septicaemia
virus (VHSV), salmonid alphavirus (SAV) and infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV). Significant outcomes of
molecular epidemiological studies include:
Improved taxonomic classification of viruses
A better understanding of the natural distribution of viruses
An improved understanding of the origins of viral pathogens in aquaculture
An improved understanding of the risks of translocation of pathogens outwith their natural host range
An increased ability to trace the source of new disease outbreaks
Development of a basis for ensuring development of appropriate diagnostic tools
An ability to classify isolates and thus target future research aimed at better understanding biological function
While molecular epidemiological studies have no doubt already made a significant contribution in these areas, the
advent of new technologies such as pyrosequencing heralds a quantum leap in the ability to generate descriptive
molecular sequence data. The ability of molecular epidemiology to fulfil its potential to translate complex disease
pathways into relevant fish health policy is thus unlikely to be limited by the generation of descriptive molecular
markers. More likely, full realisation of the potential to better explain viral transmission pathways will be dependent
on the ability to assimilate and analyse knowledge from a range of more traditional information sources. The
development of methods to systematically record and share such epidemiologically important information thus
represents a major challenge for fish health professionals in making the best future use of molecular data in
supporting fish health policy and disease control.
Table of Contents
1. Introduction

2. Case studies highlighting the contribution of molecular epidemiology to the understanding and control of
viral disease of salmonid aquaculture

1.1 What is molecular epidemiology?
1.2 Setting the scene: fish viruses, aquaculture and
molecular epidemiology

Correspondence: drsnowm@gmail.com
Marine Scotland Science, 375 Victoria Road, Aberdeen, AB11 9DB Scotland, UK

2.1 Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus
2.1.1 Overview
2.1.2 Molecular epidemiology facilitates the taxonomic classification of VHSV and provides a
basis for understanding the relationship between
isolates

© 2011 Snow; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

Page 2 of 12

2.1.3 Understanding genetic relationships provides an insight into the origins of VHS in
aquaculture
2.1.4 Understanding the range of naturally occurring pathogens highlights the risk associated with
their translocation
2.1.5 Identification of genetic relationships is
used to trace the spread of pathogens in
aquaculture
2.1.6 A sound knowledge of molecular epidemiology supports strategies for surveillance and
further knowledge
2.2 Salmonid alphavirus (SAV)
2.2.1 Overview
2.2.2 Molecular epidemiology facilitates the taxonomic classification of SAV and provides a basis
for understanding the relationship between isolates
2.2.3 Understanding genetic relationships provides an insight into the origins of SAV in
aquaculture
2.2.4 Identification of genetic relationships is
used to trace the spread of pathogens in
aquaculture
2.2.5 A sound knowledge of molecular epidemiology supports strategies for surveillance and
further knowledge
2.3 Infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV)
2.3.1 Overview
2.3.2 Molecular epidemiology facilitates the taxonomic classification of ISAV and provides a basis
for understanding the relationship between
isolates
2.3.3 Understanding genetic relationships provides an insight into the origins of ISAV in
aquaculture
2.3.4 Identification of genetic relationships is
used to trace the spread of pathogens in
aquaculture
2.3.5 A sound knowledge of molecular epidemiology supports strategies for surveillance and
further knowledge

Molecular Biology
Descriptive

– Distribution of disease
– Molecular markers

3. Future perspectives and challenges
4. Competing interests

1. Introduction
1.1 What is molecular epidemiology?

Epidemiology, or the study of factors affecting the health
of populations is as old as science itself, with Hippocrates (460-377 BC) being the first to examine the relationship between disease occurrence and environmental
issues. More recent technological developments have
facilitated the identification and exploitation of molecular biomarkers, whose use alongside traditional epidemiological approaches has led to a better understanding
of the underlying mechanisms of disease transmission in
populations. This young science of “molecular epidemiology” has emerged since the 1970s when the term
was first coined in relation to the study of influenza
virus [1]. Molecular epidemiology utilises molecular
biology to define the distribution of disease in a population (descriptive epidemiology) but still relies heavily on
integration of traditional (or analytical) epidemiological
approaches to identify the etiological determinants of
such relationships (Figure 1).
Descriptive molecular epidemiology most often
involves an attempt at establishing the evolutionary history of a given viral species called its phylogeny. A phylogenetic tree is a graphical summary of this inferred
evolutionary relationship between isolates from which
the pattern and in some cases timing of events that
occurred as viruses diversified can be hypothesised.
Since all life is related by common ancestry, viruses (or
other organisms) in current circulation display genetic
diversity which reflects their evolutionary history due to
the accumulation and inheritance of mutations when
genetic material is copied. In the absence of historical
information or isolates, which are often unavailable, the
evolutionary history of viruses in current circulation can
be hypothesised based on the sampling of current
genetic markers and by working backwards to infer the
most likely series of events which best explain the
observed relationships. Fundamental to reconstructing

Molecular Epidemiology

Epidemiology
Analytical

– Determinants of disease

Figure 1 Definition of molecular epidemiology, spanning the disciplines of descriptive and analytical epidemiology.

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

such an evolutionary history is the comparison of homologous characters (often nucleotide or amino acid
sequence positions); i.e. those which descend from a
common ancestor. In practice, this involves creating an
alignment of sequences which represents a hypothesis of
positional homology and provides the basis for reconstructing evolutionary history based on a mathematical
model of evolution. This review aims to focus on the
contribution that the application of such descriptive
tools has made to the practical understanding and control of viruses of salmonid aquaculture, rather than the
techniques themselves, which have been extensively
reviewed by others (e.g. [2]).
Analytical epidemiology is based on observations of
disease trends and incidence in different populations
that turn into testable hypotheses, and entails rigorous
collection of data for all aspects of study [3]. As noted
by Porta et al. [4], the lack of careful application of the
science of epidemiology can limit the amount of useful
information obtained from studies of molecular epidemiology. This remains a significant challenge in the
field of fish virology where the application of descriptive molecular epidemiology is gathering momentum,
yet data required for adequate interpretation is often
lacking or at best collected haphazardly. Despite this,
molecular epidemiology has made a significant contribution to the understanding and control of viral diseases of fish. This review aims to illustrate some of
these contributions, whilst highlighting some future
challenges faced in this field to ensure that molecular
epidemiology fulfils its potential of converting complex
viral transmission pathways into relevant fish virus
control policies.
1.2 Setting the scene: fish viruses, aquaculture and
molecular epidemiology

Fish, unlike many other domestically reared farmed animals, are most often reared in open systems (cages)
where they are exposed to a wide diversity of naturally
occurring environmental pathogens. Recent estimates
suggest the presence of a staggering 108 viruses/mL in
coastal seawater [5]. Although the majority of these
viruses appear to be infective [6], most are pathogens of
planktonic organisms and have a narrow range of potential host species [5]. Whilst the importance of the role of
viruses as agents of microbial mortality and regulators of
global carbon and nutrient cycling in the oceans is being
realised [7], some viruses are also, clearly, progenitors of
disease in higher organisms such as fish. Given the
extent of the viral genetic diversity present in both marine and freshwaters [8], it is perhaps not surprising that
viruses of fish are represented in most of the major
established viral genera (for review see [9]). Indeed,

Page 3 of 12

culturing fish in an open seawater (or freshwater) system rich in viral diversity clearly presents opportunity
for the introduction of many potential pathogens into
aquaculture systems. The good news is that the vast
majority of these potential progenitors of disease do not
cause a problem in healthy wild and farmed fish populations. In natural systems, where viruses and their piscine
hosts have apparently existed for millenia, this would
appear to be a consequence of co-evolution, where killing of the host might otherwise have led to viral extinction. In support of this, examples exist of naturally
occurring marine reservoirs of fish viruses recovered
from asymptomatic hosts with no demonstrated deleterious effect on fish populations [10-12]. However virulence can still be an adaptive response of pathogens
[13], and disease can be a significant factor in regulating
natural fish populations [14,15].
The advent of intensive fish husbandry and associated
international movements of fish has fundamentally
altered the natural equilibrium by exposing animals to
new environments and their viruses to new host species
[16]. As a consequence, increased rates of evolution of
fish viruses are apparent in aquaculture as compared to
those in natural systems [17]. In intensive culture systems, higher rates of evolution result from increased
selective pressures from factors associated with modern
aquaculture including the use of novel host species, continuous addition of susceptible fish, high rearing densities, differing temperatures and the presence of
immunised fish [18]. The effects of such selection pressures are further amplified by virtue of the fact that
many significant viral pathogens of fish have an RNA
genome. Viruses with RNA genomes are characterised
by the presence of an error-prone RNA polymerase and
high mutation rates. This results in the generation of
“quasispecies” populations comprised of a spectrum of
mutant genomes which are continually generated [19].
This constitutes the raw material for evolution, with
such mutants potentially having a greater biological fitness, thus providing a mechanism for adaptation to
changing conditions.
The accumulation of relatively high levels of genetic
variation in viruses associated with aquaculture provides
excellent and exciting opportunities for understanding
the relative contribution of molecular epidemiology to
their understanding and control. In order to identify the
extent to which this capacity has been exploited in this
field, this review focuses on three of the most significant
and well studied RNA pathogens of salmonid aquaculture, viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus (VHSV),
infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV) and salmonid
alphavirus (SAV). In this area the application of molecular epidemiology has provided important new knowledge

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

of fundamental importance to disease management and
control in the following key areas:
• Viral taxonomy and classification
• Understanding origins of diseases of aquaculture
• Viral phylogeography and risks associated with
viral translocation
• Outbreak tracing and disease control
• Genetic diversity and viral surveillance

2. Case studies highlighting the contribution of
molecular epidemiology to the understanding
and control of viral disease of salmonid
aquaculture
2.1 Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus
2.1.1 Overview

Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) was, until the late
1980s thought to be a disease exclusive to the freshwater rainbow trout industry of Continental Europe,
which is characterised by extensive degeneration and
necrosis of the internal tissues [20]. The disease can
result in mortalities of up to 90% [21]. Multiple occurrences of disease were later associated with European
[22,23] and Asian [24] marine aquaculture and a widespread global marine distribution of VHS virus in an
ever increasing variety of largely aysmptomatic marine
host species is now acknowledged. A growing body of
evidence suggests the original import of VHSV into
freshwater systems from marine sources, with the most
recent example of this being the apparent introduction
of VHSV into the Great Lakes system of North America
where extensive mortality in wild fish has resulted
[25,26].
2.1.2 Molecular epidemiology facilitates the taxonomic
classification of VHSV and provides a basis for
understanding the relationship between isolates

VHSV is one of several important fish viral species that
were originally identified as belonging to the family
Rhabdoviridae based on the distinctive morphology of
viral particles in electron micrographs. Until relatively
recently, insufficient data existed to assign any of the
fish rhabdoviruses to novel genera with tentative groupings of “unassigned” and “vesiculovirus-like” viruses
being proposed based on protein electrophoretic data
and antigenic relatedness [27]. Sequence determination
and phylogenetic analysis of the glycoprotein gene subsequently indicated that the lyssavirus-like viruses,
including VHSV, infectious haematopoietic necrosis
virus (IHNV) and hirame rhabdovirus (HIRRV) warranted classification within a new genus [28]. This distinction has since been supported by the comparison of
genetic variation at the G-L gene junction which represents a major point of distinction between the different

Page 4 of 12

established genera of rhabdoviruses [29]. Indeed, the
presence of an additional and characteristic NV gene at
this junction in the fish viruses VHSV, IHNV and
HIRRV supported their designation within a new genus
(genus novirhabdovirus) [30]. Taxonomic classification
of fish viruses is important in identifying their potential
biological properties based on comparison with their
often better studied counterparts (e.g. rabies virus). Such
studies have also represented the first steps towards a
deeper understanding of the classification of fish rhabdoviruses such as VHSV which have led to significant
and tangible outcomes of practical relevance to disease
control.
To date, four main genetic groups of VHSV are
recognised worldwide [17,31], as depicted in Figure 2.
In the case of VHSV, these genotypes reflect a largely
geographic rather than a species-specific distribution
and in the absence of recombination in negative strand
viruses have been shown to be robust and independent
of the preferred gene of analysis [32]. Genotype I
includes a wide range of viruses originating from freshwater rainbow trout farms in continental Europe
[17,33], and a large number of isolates originating from
marine species in the Baltic Sea/Skagerrak/Kattegat/
English channel [17,31,34]. These isolates fall within 2
of 5 proposed subgroups within Genotype I (subgroups
1a and 1b respectively) [17]. Marine isolates from subgroup 1b differ markedly from other Genotype I isolates
since it has been experimentally shown that they are of
low pathogenicity to rainbow trout [35]. The remaining
subgroups identified within Genotype I include isolates
recovered from Danish freshwater rainbow trout farms
in the 1980s (subgroup Ic), marine-farmed rainbow
trout in Scandinavia (subgroup Id) [17,36] and isolates
recovered from turbot and rainbow trout in Georgia
and the Black Sea region (subgroup Ie) [37]. Genotype
II includes a limited number of VHSV isolates recovered from the Baltic sea [31], while Genotype III
includes isolates originating from outbreaks of VHS in
turbot farms in the British Isles along with a number of
isolates recovered from a variety of marine species
caught in Scottish and North Atlantic waters [31]. The
final genetic group of VHSV isolates identified to date
comprises a range of isolates recovered from wild marine fish from the Pacific Northwest [24,38,39] and eastern coastal areas of Canada and the USA, isolates from
Japanese flounder [24] and isolates originating from a
recent series of epidemics in the Great Lakes of North
America [25,26]. Establishing the genetic relationships
between currently circulating isolates of VHSV through
molecular epidemiological studies has led to new understanding in a number of areas of critical importance to
disease control and the development of sustainable
aquaculture.

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

Page 5 of 12

2.1.3 Understanding genetic relationships provides an
insight into the origins of VHS in aquaculture

c
d

b
e

a

I
77

98

100

III

II

100
b

IV
a

0.1

Figure 2 Overview of the genetic relationships between the
main recognized genotypes of VHSV based on a dataset
comprised of partial G gene data from 2 representatives of
each of the established major genetic subgroups. Publicly
available sequences derived from up to 2 isolates from each
genotype recognized to date were imported into Bioedit version
7.0.5.3 [76] and a multiple alignment performed using Clustal X [77].
The final alignment consisted of 17 unique sequences spanning a
partial region of the VHSV G Gene (649nt). The phylogenetic
relationship among VHSV isolates was inferred using a maximum
likelihood based approach implemented within PAUP* (version 4.0;
[78]) and using the PaupUP interface v1.0.3.1 [79]. The jModeltest
0.1.1 program [80]) was used to identify the model that best fits the
sequence data from 56 models using the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC; [81]). The optimal unrooted maximum likelihood tree
was identified using a heuristic search implemented in PAUP* and
evaluated using 100 bootstrap iterations [82]. Significant bootstrap
values for the major clades were transferred to the unrooted tree
derived from the original data.

VHS was traditionally thought to be a disease exclusive
to freshwater rainbow trout farming, where it has historically been responsible for significant economic loss.
The first and subsequent identification of marine isolates of VHSV virus of differing genetic type in Europe
[40] and North America [41] questioned this dogma.
The fact that these genotypes were indicated to have
become separated a long time before fish farming was
established on both continents [28], coupled to the fact
that VHS is not a disease problem in rainbow trout in
North America, indicated existence of long standing
natural marine reservoirs of VHS virus. The existence of
naturally occurring marine reservoirs of VHS virus is
now widely recognised and a long list of species which
may be infected with the virus has been established (an
updated list of natural and experimental hosts for
VHSV can be found via the International Database on
Aquatic Animal Disease [42]). The demonstration that
some of these naturally occurring marine VHS viruses
(Genotype 1b; Figure 2) bear a close genetic relationship
to those responsible for disease in freshwater rainbow
trout farms (Genotype 1a; Figure 2) suggested that such
isolates represent the most likely origins of introduction
of VHS into rainbow trout aquaculture in Europe (for a
review see Skall et al. [43]). Since the use of unpasteurised “trash” marine fish was widely used as a source
of aquaculture feed in the early days of the industry,
this may be a mechanism via which the pathogen was
introduced. Whatever the mechanism, since naturally
occurring marine genotype 1b viruses have been shown
to be non-pathogenic for rainbow trout [35], it is clear
that the virus must have adapted a new pathogenic lifestrategy within rainbow trout aquaculture. This may be
a consequence of the high selective pressures and continuous availability of susceptible hosts associated with
aquaculture. Such conditions may favour development
of an alternate “pathogenic” life-strategy to that in the
natural environment where death of the host may represent an evolutionary dead-end. The introduction of
VHSV from the marine environment into rainbow trout
aquaculture appears to have occurred on more than one
occasion. Indeed, the identification of Genotypes 1c, 1d
and 1e [17] has led to the interpretation that host adaptation from marine environment/species to rainbow
trout has occurred 3 or 4 times in freshwater farms in
Denmark and more recently in fish reared at the coast
of Finland and Sweden [17].
Until recently, only the adaptation of marine Genotype
I strains of VHSV in rainbow trout had been shown to
occur. Much like the Genotype Ib marine isolates, other
naturally occurring genotypes of VHSV have been
experimentally shown to be of low virulence to rainbow

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

trout [35]. The recent demonstration that VHS disease
in a marine rainbow trout farm in Norway was caused
by a Genotype III virus [44], suggests that the potential
for adaptation to this species is not an exclusive property of Genotype I viruses. Indeed, given the potential
for continuous adaptation of RNA viruses, it is perhaps
not surprising to find that other viruses are capable of
dramatic shifts in host specificity given the appropriate
opportunity. Such opportunity in an aquaculture context
can include factors such as the use of continuous production systems without synchronous fallowing which
can allow pathogens to persist for long periods resulting
in increased potential for adaptation to occur.
While the above examples assume the input and subsequent adaptation of naturally non-pathogenic viruses in
aquaculture systems, naturally occurring viruses can in
some cases also cause disease without requirement for
change. Following outbreaks of disease in marine farmed
turbot in the British Isles caused by VHSV [22], experimental trials with a range of naturally occurring GIII isolates indicated that turbot were susceptible to these
viruses [45]. The susceptibility of turbot to naturally
occurring VHSV is thus a significant risk to the sustainable production of turbot within the natural range of
such isolates. The susceptibility of turbot to naturally
occurring VHSV is at odds with the conventional wisdom
that pathogens evolve toward non-pathogenic lifestyles in
natural systems. This may be a consequence of the lack
of exposure to the pathogen in nature with commercial
aquaculture resulting in the exposure of previously naïve
species to new pathogens. Another example of a pathogen which can cause disease without adaptation is that of
VHS disease epidemics which occur periodically in wild
Pacific herring and which result from a naturally occuring
and widespread reservoir of virus [15]. In this instance,
evolution towards a virulent state appears to have been
an adaptive response of VHSV in this species.
2.1.4 Understanding the range of naturally occurring
pathogens highlights the risk associated with their
translocation

Understanding the phylogenetic relationships between
VHSV isolates highlights the existence of major viral
genotypes confined largely to different geographical
areas as discussed above. The physical separation of
these areas has resulted in limited geneflow and independent evolution of the viruses circulating in these
regions. It stands to reason that VHS viruses in these
regions have not evolved independently but have rather
co-evolved with their hosts to ensure continued survival.
Since viruses rely on the availabilty of hosts to avoid
extinction it is perhaps not surprising to find many
examples where viruses within their natural range do
not cause disease in their hosts. Anthropogenic factors,
including those associated with international

Page 6 of 12

aquaculture, have in general lead to the increased potential for VHSV viruses to be translocated outwith their
naturally occurring range. An extreme example of the
potential consequence of such occurrence is that of the
recent series of VHS epidemics in the Great Lakes
region of North America. This series of epidemics,
which spread rapidly through the region and resulted in
dramatic fish kills, was shown to have been caused by a
virus whose natural range appeared to be marine species
inhabiting the eastern coastal areas of the USA or
Canada [46]. The introduction of this Genotype 1b virus
into the freshwater system of the Great Lakes is thought
to have originated from one of several possible sources
including ballast water, baitfish translocation or by anadromous or catadromous species that can enter the
Great Lakes via the St. Lawrence river [46]. The Great
Lakes system is one of the largest freshwater systems in
the world and is noted for its rich biodiversity [47]. The
fact that VHSV virus spread rapidly through the Great
Lakes system causing large scale mortality in a wide
range of susceptible species, has highlighted the potential risk of translocation of viruses and exposure to previously naïve species.
2.1.5 Identification of genetic relationships is used to trace
the spread of pathogens in aquaculture

Molecular epidemiology is a powerful tool, which
alongside more traditional epidemiological tools has
potential for tracing the origins and spread of new disease outbreaks. Such an approach relies not only on
the availability of large genetic datasets relating to phylogenetically informative and defined regions of the
genome but also on availability of data relating to
potential epidemiological contact. The latter is often
more challenging to obtain. An example of the application and potential of such tools is the recent occurrence of VHS disease in rainbow trout in the British
Isles, which until this point had a history of freedom
from VHS. The disease was first identified and contained on a farm in North Yorkshire, England in May
2006 and initial investigations into the likely origin of
introduction proved inconclusive. Subsequent molecular epidemiological analysis of the causative virus identified a Genotype Ia virus which was very similar to
isolates from Denmark and Germany circulating
between 2004 and 2006 and suggested likely introduction from this region [48]. However, the lack of identification of an exact matching sequence and lack of
epidemiological contact information hindered identification of a more exact source.
2.1.6 A sound knowledge of molecular epidemiology
supports strategies for surveillance and further knowledge

Understanding the natural sequence variation and divergence among isolates is of fundamental importance to
ensuring adoption of an appropriate surveillance regime

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

for VHSV and in interpretation of its results. Molecular
detection methods such as real-time PCR are increasing
being employed in this field due to benefits including
sensitivity, specificity, high throughput, ease of interpretation and ability to include appropriate controls. Molecular methods rely on the specificity of primers and
probes to ensure detection of their intended targets.
Targetting such methods to the required well characterised and conserved regions of the genome thus
requires a thorough knowledge of molecular variation of
the species. Even with this knowledge, the risk that
highly specific single-plex assays such as probe-based
real-time PCR could fail to detect new emerging variants
of pathogens should be recognised. Such methods as
developed for VHSV have to date, however, proven to
be robust in detecting all known variants of the virus in
known circulation [49].
Since phenotypic properties of viruses may in some
cases be consistent with genetic origin, selecting isolates
representative of the different genotypes can be a sensible strategy for further research into establishing their
biological properties. Previous work on VHSV has investigated the consistency of pathogenic properties of different genotypes for different species [45,50]. Selection
of representative strains for selection on this basis also
ensures that the widest knowledge of the properties of
the species as a whole can be obtained. Alternatively,
other studies have specifically selected virus isolates of
known genetic similarity that were expected to display
different pathogenic properties based on their history of
origin. In this way, very similar isolates with only 5
amino acid substitutions were identified, which displayed differing virulence for rainbow trout [51]. Such
work provides an important basis for resolving those
epitopes responsible for conferring the virulent phenotype, which in turn can lead to improved methods for
disease control.
2.2 Salmonid alphavirus (SAV)
2.2.1 Overview

Salmonid alphaviruses are responsible for salmon pancreas disease (SPD) and sleeping disease (SD) conditions,
primarily of farmed Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout,
respectively. Clinical signs associated with SPD include
abnormal swimming behaviour and lack of appetite,
while characteristic histopathological signs include severe
degeneration of exocrine pancreas, cardiomyopathy and
skeletal myopathy [52]. SD involves similar lesions but
often manifests itself as fish lying on their side or “sleeping” as a consequence of extensive necrosis of skeletal
red muscle [53]. Until recently, the presence of SAV has
not been reported outside of salmonid aquaculture,
where it is responsible for significant economic loss, principally in Western Europe.

Page 7 of 12

2.2.2 Molecular epidemiology facilitates the taxonomic
classification of SAV and provides a basis for
understanding the relationship between isolates

Molecular analyses of salmonid alphaviruses have
recently demonstrated that they represent a group of
viruses within the genus alphaviridae in the family
Togaviridae, and differ markedly from the previously
established New World viruses of Venezuelan equine
encephalitis virus (VEEV) and eastern equine encephalitis virus and the Old World viruses of Aura and Sindbis
virus [54]. Salmon pancreas disease virus (SPDV) has
been officially recognised as a species by the International Committee for the Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV)
which includes isolates causing both SD and SPD in
rainbow trout and Atlantic salmon [55].
Classification in this way can give clues as to the
potential biological properties and functions of salmonid
alphaviruses based on the established properties of their
better studied relatives. Interestingly, most alphavirus
lifecycles involve an obligate, commonly arthropod
intermediate host. Such an intermediate host does not
appear to be a requirement of salmonid alphavirus
transmission since these viruses have been shown to
efficiently transmit horizontally via direct water-borne
transmission [56]. Whether arthropods (e.g. sealice)
have a potential role on the epizootiology of salmonid
alphaviruses remains an interesting research question.
The most comprehensive molecular epidemiological
analysis of the genetic relationships within the salmonid
alphaviruses was recently conducted by Fringuelli et al.
[57]. This relationship is illustrated in Figure 3. The existence of a total of six discrete and identifiable subtypes has
been suggested based on analysis of partial E2 and nsP3
sequences. Subtypes I, IV and V are genetically very closely related and include isolates from Atlantic salmon
farms in the British Isles responsible for salmonid pancreas
disease (SPD). Subtype VI included a single isolate from
Ireland. The disease in Norway has to date been exclusively associated with a different genetic group of viruses
belonging to subtype III. Subtype II isolates include those
which have caused sleeping disease (SD) in rainbow trout
farms from Europe. While viruses responsible for SPD in
Atlantic salmon and SD in rainbow trout generally fall
within different genetic subgroups there are exceptions.
This fact, coupled to their close genetic similarity supports
the taxonomic designation of the salmonid alphaviruses as
a single species.
2.2.3 Understanding genetic relationships provides an
insight into the origins of SAV in aquaculture

The monophyletic nature of the freshwater rainbow
trout subtype of SAV (Subtype II, Figure 3) has been
interpreted to indicate a single introduction and subsequent dissemination of SAV within this industry. This,
based on current knowledge might be expected to have

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

Page 8 of 12

Subtype VI
Subtype II

100
100

100

Subtype III

99
Subtype IV

60
Subtype I

57
78

93

Subtype V

0.1

Figure 3 Overview of the genetic relationships between the
main recognized genotypes of SAV based on a dataset of
partial E2 sequence data (298nt). Publically available sequences
derived from isolates from each subtype recognized to date were
imported into Bioedit version 7.0.5.3 [76] and a multiple alignment
performed using Clustal X [77]. Duplicate sequences were removed
and the final alignment consisted of 36 unique sequences
representing a total of 83 isolates and spanned a region of 298nt of
the open reading frame of SAV E2 gene. The phylogenetic
relationship among SAV isolates was inferred using the method
described in the legend of Figure 2.

occurred from a salmonid source. Recent information,
however, derived from the screening of marine fish species by real-time PCR in areas remote from aquaculture,
has indicated the presence of SAV RNA in marine species including common dab (Limanda limanda) and
plaice (Pleuronectes platessa) [58]. The identification of
subtype V SAV sequences associated with these detections suggests that, as in the case for VHSV, marine
reservoirs of SAV might exist. Whilst the exact implications of this remain unclear, it is possible that the origins of SAV in freshwater rainbow trout may have been
from a similar marine source or indeed, import via contact with infected Atlantic salmon. It is interesting to
speculate as to whether in time a more extensive marine
reservoir of SAV will become apparent, as has been
shown for VHSV, and whether this might suggest independent import of SAV into Norwegian and UK aquaculture respectively.

farms located within the same bodies of water have
been demonstrated [57]. Furthermore, the fact that
sequences from one cluster of outbreaks in the West of
Ireland was associated with a subtype of virus distinct to
that prevalent in the region of origin of these fish supports horizontal rather than vertical transmission as the
predominant source of infection. Horizontal transmission can occur directly through the water or via fomites,
and SAV has been shown to have a mimimum half-life
of 5.7 days in seawater at 10°C [59]. Having said this,
understanding the epizootiology of SAV is complex for
a number of reasons. Firstly, the disease is not notifiable
in the UK, meaning than information on disease occurrence and characterisation of responsible agents is often
lacking. Secondly, the virus appears to have a relatively
low rate of evolution and identical viral sequences have
been reported to be detected over extended periods of
time within single populations, within farms and
between different farms. This makes interpretation of
epidemiological links difficult. A clearer explanation has,
however, been identified for the import of sleeping disease into the UK, since evidence of French common
ancestry of contemporary isolates circulating in both
France and Scotland/England supports epidemiological
evidence that import was associated with the processing
of fish imported from France in 2002 [57,60,61].
2.2.5 A sound knowledge of molecular epidemiology
supports strategies for surveillance and further knowledge

Knowledge of molecular epidemiology and genetic
diversity of SAV has led to the development of sensitive
and specific molecular diagnostic methods [62] capable
of detecting the range of reported SAV subtypes.
Further, these methods are capable of subtype discrimination and might prove useful in rapid screening of isolates to highlight translocation of new subtypes to new
geographic areas. Genotypic differentiation has again
been used to identify isolates for further detailed
research, in particular to understand the clinical presentation of disease following infection with different genotypes [63]. Recent work developing reverse genetics
approaches to study SAV [64] offers great potential in
realising the biological significance of the genetic differences between strains. Such work has important implications for disease surveillance programmes in addition
to contributing to a deeper understanding of the biology
of the causative agent and thus how to apply practical
disease mitigation control strategy.

2.2.4 Identification of genetic relationships is used to trace
the spread of pathogens in aquaculture

2.3 Infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV)
2.3.1 Overview

Molecular epidemiology has been applied to the study of
SAV and has provided evidence to support farm to farm
transmission in both Scotland and Ireland where clusters of identical sequences from isolates from different

Infectious salmon anaemia (ISA) is a disease of farmed
Atlantic salmon that has been responsible for extensive
losses in all major regions where this species is farmed
including, Norway, Canada, Scotland, the Faroe Islands

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

Page 9 of 12

and Chile. The disease is characterised by severe anaemia, ascites and haemorrhagic liver necrosis and congestion [65]. While continued disease problems occur in
Norway, Canada and Chile, the disease has successfully
been eradicated from both Scotland and the Faroes. In
the latter case, however, this was only achieved at the
expense of collapse of the entire industry.

EU-NS

European
Genotype

EU-G1
EU-G2
EU G3

10

2.3.2 Molecular epidemiology facilitates the taxonomic
classification of ISAV and provides a basis for
understanding the relationship between isolates

Molecular epidemiological study has made a significant
contribution to our understanding of ISAV. Following
identification and initial characterisation, the virus was
recognised as an orthomyxovirus [66], and ultimately
assigned to its own genus. Orthomyxoviruses such as
influenza viruses are characterised by a high potential for
adaptation via a repertoire of mechanisms for genetic
change including mutation, reassortment and recombination. Indeed, these properties have all been demonstrated
for ISAV within aquaculture [67]. Relationships among
ISAV isolates have been explored most extensively on the
basis of their surface protein coding genes, namely the
haemagglutinin esterase (HE) and fusion (F) protein
genes [68,69]. Though some complicated subdivisions of
ISAV subtypes have been proposed, these analyses have
revealed the same general pattern of existence of single
major European and North American genotypes of ISAV
(Figure 4). Within the European genotype of ISAV, different subtypes have been proposed to classify isolates
from Europe (EUG1, EUG2 and EUG3), and some isolates from North America (EU-NS) which appear to
share a more recent common ancestor with European
ISAV than with the true North American ISAV genotype.
2.3.3 Understanding genetic relationships provides an
insight into the origins of ISAV in aquaculture

North American and European evolutionary lineages of
ISAV appear to have been present and diverged long
before the development of commercial Atlantic salmon
aquaculture [70]. Interestingly, all pathogenic variants of
ISAV associated with disease outbreaks are characterised by the occurrence of a sequence deletion within
the so-called highly polymorphic region (HPR), with
respect to a putative ancestral form of the HE gene
[69]. This putative ancestral form is designated HPR0
and its presence has been detected in healthy farmed
and wild fish in all the major regions of Atlantic salmon
production worldwide including, Norway [12,69], Scotland [71,72], Canada [73], Chile [68] and the Faroe
Islands (Dr Christiansen, personal communication).
Molecular epidemiological evidence supports the suggestion that pathogenic ISAV which causes disease in
fish farms likely originates from a reservoir of the
ISAV-HPR0 variant since a wide variety of HPR0
sequences reflecting the broad diversity of virulent

100

North
American
Genotype

0.1

Figure 4 Overview of the genetic relationships between the
two main identified genotypes of ISAV. Publically available ISAV
sequences were imported into Bioedit version 7.0.5.3 [76]and a
multiple alignment performed using Clustal X [77]. Identical
sequences were identified and only a single representative of each
sequence type retained in the dataset to reduce subsequent
analytical bias. The final alignment consisted of 38 unique
sequences spanning a region of 987 (positions 25-1012 with respect
to the open reading frame of ISAV segment 6). The phylogenetic
relationship among ISAV isolates was inferred using the method
described in the legend of Figure 2.

isolates have been identified and are distributed
throughout the tree depicted in Figure 4. The mechanisms governing adaptation of the ISAV-HPR0 variant in
aquaculture are, however, poorly understood. The fact
that new cases of ISA which have emerged in countries
previously free of the disease, however, does suggest
that a lack of synchronous fallowing and thus provision
of opportunity for pathogens to persist over long time
periods may contribute to the risk of emergence of disease. In this instance a better understanding of the
potential risk factors in emergence of ISA disease has
contributed to practical fish health policy aimed at mitigating such risks. Such solutions include the creation of
management areas, which amongst other measures aim
to achieve periods of synchronous fallowing in order to
limit opportunity for pathogens, including ISAV to
reside within production systems.
2.3.4 Identification of genetic relationships is used to trace
the spread of pathogens in aquaculture

Molecular epidemiogical study has been applied to
understanding the appearance of ISA in Chile [68],

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

which has caused a significant decline in production.
Molecular evidence in this instance pointed strongly
towards a Norwegian source, with vertical or transgenerational transmission being highlighted as a plausible explanation, based on the significant and historical
import of fertilised eggs into Chile from this area. Such
knowledge has raised concerns over the future risk of
import of disease in association with ova and has lead to
an application of biosecurity measures aimed at guarding against such import. This includes broodstock testing regimes based on molecular detection, accompanied
by destruction of ova originating from positive-testing
parents and the development of protocols for the disinfection of imported egg products. Whether true vertical
transmission of ISAV (ie the internal transmission of
virus within the gametes) occurs in ISAV remains somewhat controversial though it has been suggested [69]. It
seems clear from evidence in Chile that transgenerational transmission is highly likely to have occurred.
Whether this represents true vertical transmission or
resulted from inadequate disinfection of eggs remains
uncertain. In this case, the application of molecular epidemiological study has identified the probable origin of
import of ISAV into Chile, thus highlighting a potential
risk that can be mitigated based on the implementation
and maintenance of appropriate biosecurity measures.
Since horizontal transmission remains the main
mechanism for dissemination of ISAV where it is present, the major challenge now faced, is to apply molecular epidemiological tools to understand and control the
spread of ISA within Chile.
2.3.5 A sound knowledge of molecular epidemiology
supports strategies for surveillance and further knowledge

Molecular detection methodologies have been developed
to cover the broad range of ISAV viruses in global circulation [74], providing confidence that the pathogen
can be accurately detected. Information on the existence
of the ISAV-HPR0 variant has been invaluable in interpreting the results of molecular diagnostic tests which
currently do not differentiate between this and other
variants of the virus. The fact that the ISAV-HPR0 variant has been shown to be present, even in territories
with freedom of ISA disease, suggests a clear distinction
in risk associated with the presence of ISAV-HPR0 and
other disease causing variants. Differentiation of viruses
with different biological properties such as HPR0, also
provides the basis for developing understanding of
the genetic determinants of biological phenotype.
Such knowledge is fundamental to managing pathogenassociated risk in open aquaculture systems.
3. Future perspectives and challenges

The application of molecular epidemiology to the study
of fish viruses has to date largely focussed on the use of

Page 10 of 12

descriptive techniques and interpretation of genetic relationships has often been hampered by a lack of associated analytical epidemiological information. The
development of next generation sequencing technology
promises a revolution in the ability to generate sequence
data and thus information of potential epidemiological
relevance. Descriptive molecular data alone is, however,
inadequate in tracing pathogen spread, especially when
variation is limited and evolution does not occur in a
clock-like or regular fashion. The ability of molecular
epidemiology to fulfil its potential to translate complex
disease pathways into relevant fish health policy is thus
unlikely to be limited by the generation of descriptive
molecular markers. More likely, full realisation of the
potential to better explain viral transmission pathways
will be dependent on the ability to assimilate and
analyse knowledge from a range of more traditional
information sources. The development of methods to
systematically record and share such epidemiologically
important information thus represents a major challenge
for fish health professionals in making the best future
use of molecular data in supporting fish health policy
and disease control.
Making best use of this generated data to better
understand the molecular basis of virulence also remains
an important area for future research. Significant progress has been made in developing reverse genetic
approaches for fish viruses (for review see [75]) which
offer great potential for better understanding viral virulence and thus the risk factors which may contribute to
the emergence of new pathogens.
Despite the limitations in available knowledge, molecular epidemiology has led to an improved understanding
of the origins and spread of viruses in aquaculture and
wild fish, which in turn has lead to significant practical
improvements in disease management strategies and
policy. A common theme in the examples explored
seems to be the prevalence of probably benign viruses in
the environment, which undergo an adaptation in association with aquaculture, where they adopt a pathogenic
lifestyle. Major challenges for sustainable aquaculture are
to manage the risk associated with such occurrence by
reducing the opportunity for pathogens to reside and
thus potentially adapt within aquaculture systems,
coupled to their rapid identification and containment following disease emergence. Both these factors can be
facilitated through implementation of biosecurity measures and the use of synchonous fallowing strategies to
break potential long term cycles of infection and ensure
rapid and appropriate containment of disease in discrete
management areas. The implementation of surveillance
programs based on the best available molecular epidemiological information offers great potential to support
such measures in further developing a healthy and

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

sustainable aquaculture industry that is necessary to
satisfy an increasing world demand for cultured fish
products.

Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
Received: 16 August 2010 Accepted: 1 December 2010
Published: 5 April 2011
References
1. Kilbourne ED: The molecular epidemiology of influenza. J Infect Dis 1973,
127:478-487.
2. Kumar S, Filipski A: Molecular phylogeny reconstruction. Encyclopedia of
Life Sciences (ELS) Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2008.
3. Slatterty ML: The science and art of molecular epidemiology. J Epidemiol
Community Health 2002, 56:728-729.
4. Porta M, Malats N, Vioque J, Carrato A, Soler M, Ruiz L, Barbera V, Ayude D,
Real FX: Incomplete overlapping of biological, clinical and environmental
information in molecular epidemiological studies: a variety of causes
and a cascade of consequences. J Epidemiol Community Health 2002,
56:734-738.
5. Suttle CA: Viruses in the sea. Nature 2005, 437:356-361.
6. Wilhelm SW, Weinbauer MG, Suttle CA, Pledger RJ, Mitchell DL:
Measurements of DNA damage and photoreactivation imply that most
viruses in marine surface waters are infective. Aquat Microb Ecol 1998,
14:215-222.
7. Wilhelm SW, Suttle CA: Viruses and nutrient cycles in the sea. Bioscience
1999, 49:781-788.
8. Maranger R, Bird DF: Viral abundances in aquatic systems: a comparison
between marine and fresh waters. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 1995, 121:217-226.
9. Essbauer S, Ahne W: Viruses of lower vertebrates. J Vet Med B Infect Dis Vet
Pub Health 2001, 48:403-475.
10. Skall HF, Olesen NJ, Mellergaard S: Prevalence of viral haemorrhagic
septicaemia virus in Danish marine fishes and its occurrence in new
host species. Dis Aquat Org 2005, 66:145-151.
11. Skall HF, Olesen NJ, Mellergaard S: Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus in
marine fish and its implications for fish farming- a review. J Fish Dis
2005, 28:509-529.
12. Plarre H, Devold M, Snow M, Nylund A: Prevalence of infectious salmon
anaemia virus (ISAV) in wild salmonids in western Norway. Dis Aquat Org
2005, 66:71-79.
13. Bull JJ: Perspective-virulence. Evolution 1994, 48:1423-1437.
14. Patterson KR: Modelling the impact of disease-induced mortality in an
exploited population of the fungal parasite Icthyophonus hoferi in the
North Sea herring (Clupea harengus). Can J Fish Aquat Sci 1996,
53:2870-2877.
15. Marty GD, Quinn TJ, Carpenter G, Meyers TR, Willits NH: Role of disease in
abundance of a Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) population. Can J Fish
Aquat Sci 2003, 60:1258-1265.
16. Reno PW: Factors involved in the dissemination of disease in fish
populations. J Aquat Anim Health 1998, 10:160-171.
17. Einer-Jensen K, Ahrens P, Forsberg R, Lorenzen N: Evolution of the fish
rhabdovirus viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus. J Gen Virol 2004,
85:1167-1179.
18. Winton JR: Evolution of fish rhabdoviruses. OJI International Symposium on
Salmonid Diseases Hokkaido University Press; 1992, 88-95.
19. Steinhauer DA, Holland JJ: Rapid evolution of RNA viruses. Ann Rev
Microbiol 1987, 41:409-433.
20. Wolf K: Viral Hemorrhagic Septicemia. Fish viruses and fish viral diseases
Ithaca: Cornell University Press; 1988, 217-248.
21. Basurco B, Benmansour A: Distant strains of the fish rhabdovirus VHSV
maintain a sixth functional cistron which codes for a nonstructural
protein of unknown function. Virology 1995, 212:741-745.
22. Ross K, McCarthy U, Huntly PJ, Wood BP, Stuart D, Rough EI, Smail DA,
Bruno DW: An outbreak of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) in
turbot (Scophthalmus maximus) in Scotland. Bull Eur Assoc Fish Pathol
1994, 14:213-214.

Page 11 of 12

23. Schlotfeldt HJ, Ahne W, Jørgensen PEV, Glende W: Occurrence of viral
haemmorhagic septicaemia in turbot (Scophthalmus maximus) - a
natural ioutbreak. Bull Eur Assoc Fish Pathol 1991, 11:105-107.
24. Nishizawa T, Iida H, Takano R, Isshiki T, Nakajima K, Muroga K: Genetic
relatedness among Japanese, American and European isolates of viral
hemorrhagic septicemia virus (VHSV) based on partial G and P genes.
Dis Aquat Org 2002, 48:143-148.
25. Gagne N, Mackinnon AM, Boston L, Souter B, Cook-Versloot M, Griffiths S,
Olivier G: Isolation of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus from
mummichog, stickleback, striped bass and brown trout in eastern
Canada. J Fish Dis 2007, 30:213-223.
26. Lumsden JS, Morrison B, Yason C, Russell S, Young K, Yazdanpanah A,
Huber P, Al-Hussinee L, Stone D, Way K: Mortality event in freshwater drum
Aplodinotus grunniens from Lake Ontario, Canada, associated with viral
haemorrhagic septicemia virus, type IV. Dis Aquat Org 2007, 76:99-111.
27. Wunner W, Calisher C, Dietzgen R, Jackson A, Kitajima E, Lafon M, Leong J,
Nichol S, Peters D, Smith J, PJ W: The Rhabdoviridae. In Virus Taxonomy Sixth
Report of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. Edited by: FA
M, CM F, DHL B, SA G, AW J, GP M, MA M, MD S. Vienna 1995:275-288.
28. Benmansour A, Basurco B, Monnier AF, Vende P, Winton JR, de Kinkelin P:
Sequence variation of the glycoprotein gene identifies three distinct
lineages within field isolates of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus, a
fish rhabdovirus. J Gen Virol 1997, 78:2837-2846.
29. Kurath G, Higman KH, Bjorklund HV: Distribution and variation of NV
genes in fish rhabdoviruses. J Gen Virol 1997, 78:113-117.
30. Walker PJ, Benmansour A, Calisher CH, Dietzgen R, Fang RX, JAckson AO,
Kurath G, Leong JC, Nadin-Davies S, Tesh RB, Tordo N: Family
Rhabdoviridae. The seventh report of the international committee for
taxonomy of viruses San Diego: Academic Press; 2000, 563-583.
31. Snow M, Bain N, Black J, Taupin V, Cunningham CO, King JA, Skall HF,
Raynard RS: Genetic population structure of marine viral haemorrhagic
septicaemia virus (VHSV). Dis Aquat Org 2004, 61:11-21.
32. Einer-Jensen K, Ahrens P, Lorenzen N: Parallel phylogenetic analyses using
the N, G or Nv gene from a fixed group of VHSV isolates reveal the
same overall genetic typing. Dis Aquat Org 2005, 67:39-45.
33. Thiery R, de Boisseson C, Jeffroy J, Castric J, de Kinkelin P, Benmansour A:
Phylogenetic analysis of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus (VHSV)
isolates from France (1971-1999). Dis Aquat Org 2002, 52:29-37.
34. Dixon PF, Feist S, Kehoe E, Parry L, Stone DM, Way K: Isolation of viral
haemorrhagic septicaemia virus from Atlantic herring Clupea harengus
from the English Channel. Dis Aquat Org 1997, 30:81-89.
35. Skall HF, Slierendrecht WJ, King JA, Olesen NJ: Experimental infection of
rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss with viral haemorrhagic septicaemia
virus isolates from European marine and farmed fishes. Dis Aquat Org
2004, 58:99-110.
36. Raja-Halli M, Vehmas TK, Rimaila-Parnanen E, Sainmaa S, Skall HF, Olesen NJ,
Tapiovaara H: Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) outbreaks in Finnish
rainbow trout farms. Dis Aquat Org 2006, 72:201-211.
37. Nishizawa T, Savas H, Isidan H, Ustundag C, Iwamoto H, Yoshimizu M:
Genotyping and pathogenicity of viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus
from free-living turbot (Psetta maxima) in a Turkish coastal area of the
Black Sea. Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72:2373-2378.
38. Benmansour A, Basurco B, Monnier AF, Vende P, Winton JR, de Kinkelin P:
Sequence variation of the glycoprotein gene identifies three distinct
lineages within field isolates of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus, a
fish rhabdovirus. J Gen Virol 1997, 78:2837-2846.
39. Stone DM, Way K, Dixon PF: Nucleotide sequence of the glycoprotein
gene of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) viruses from different
geographical areas: a link between VHS in farmed fish species and
viruses isolated from North Sea cod (Gadus morhua L.). J Gen Virol 1997,
78:1319-1326.
40. Jensen NJ, Bloch B, Larsen JL: The ulcus syndrome in cod (Gadus morhua)
III. A preliminary virological report. Nordisk Veterinaermedicin 1979,
31:436-442.
41. Brunson R, True K, Yancey J: VHS virus isolated at Makah National Fish
Hatchery. Am Fish Soc News 1989, 17:3.
42. OIE Collaborating Centre for Information on Aquatic Animal Diseases.
[http://www.collabcen.net].
43. Skall HF, Olesen NJ, Mellergaard S: Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus in
marine fish and its implications for fish farming–a review. J Fish Dis 2005,
28:509-529.

Snow Veterinary Research 2011, 42:56
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/56

44. Duesund H, Nylund S, Watanabe K, Ottem KF, Nylund A: Characterisation
of a VHS virus genotype III isolated from rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) at a marine site on the West coast of Norway. Virology J 2010,
7:19.
45. Snow M, King JA, Garden A, Shanks AM, Raynard RS: Comparative
susceptibility of turbot (Scopthalmus maximus) to different genotypes of
viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus. Dis Aquat Organ 2005, 67:31-38.
46. Elsayed E, Faisal M, Thomas M, Whelan G, Batts W, Winton J: Isolation of
viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus from muskellunge, Esox
masquinongy (Mitchill), in Lake St Clair, Michigan, USA reveals a new
sublineage of the North American genotype. J Fish Dis 2006, 29:611-619.
47. Coon TJ: Icthyofauna of the Great Lakes Basin. In Great Lakes Policy and
Management. Edited by: Taylor WW, Ferreri CP. East Lansing, MI.: Michigan
State University Press; 1999:55-71.
48. Anon: Epidemiological Investigations into an Outbreak of Viral
Haemorrhagic Septicaemia (VHS) in Yorkshire, United Kingdom. Second
Report (Molecular Epidemiology Findings). Weymouth, UK: CEFAS; 2007.
49. Matejusova I, McKay P, McBeath AJ, Collet B, Snow M: Development of a
sensitive and controlled real-time RT-PCR assay for viral haemorrhagic
septicaemia virus (VHSV) in marine salmonid aquaculture. Dis Aquat Org
2008, 80:137-144.
50. Snow M, King JA, Garden A, Raynard RS: Experimental susceptibility of
Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) and Atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus
hippoglossus) to different genotypes of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia
virus (VHSV). J Fish Dis 2005, 28:737-742.
51. Campbell S, Collet B, Einer-Jensen K, Secombes CJ, Snow M: Identifying
potential virulence determinants in viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus
(VHSV) for rainbow trout. Dis Aquat Org 2009, 86:205-212.
52. McLoughlin MF, Nelson RN, McCormick JI, Rowley HM, Bryson DB: Clinical
and histopathological features of naturally occurring pancreas disease in
farmed Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar L. J Fish Dis 2002, 25:33-43.
53. Boucher P, Laurencin FB: Sleeping disease and pancreas disease:
comparative histopathology and acquired cross-protection. J Fish Dis
1996, 19:303-310.
54. Weston J, Villoing S, Bremont M, Castric J, Pfeffer M, Jewhurst V,
McLoughlin M, Rodseth O, Christie KE, Koumans J, Todd D: Comparison of
two aquatic alphaviruses, salmon pancreas disease virus and sleeping
disease virus, by using genome sequence analysis, monoclonal
reactivity, and cross-infection. J Virol 2002, 76:6155-6163.
55. Fauquet CM, Mayo MA, Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball LA: Virus
Taxonomy: VIIIth Report of the International Committee on Taxonomy of
Viruses. Elsevier Academic Press; 2005.
56. McLoughlin MF, Nelson RT, Rowley HM, Cox DI, Grant AN: Experimental
pancreas disease in Atlantic salmon Salmo salar post-smolts induced by
salmon pancreas disease virus (SPDV). Dis Aquat Org 1996, 26:117-124.
57. Fringuelli E, Rowley HM, Wilson JC, Hunter R, Rodger H, Graham DA:
Phylogenetic analyses and molecular epidemiology of European
salmonid alphaviruses (SAV) based on partial E2 and nsP3 gene
nucleotide sequences. J Fish Dis 2008, 31:811-823.
58. Snow M, Black JA, Matejusova I, McIntosh R, Baretto E, Wallace IS,
Bruno DW: Evidence for the detection of salmonid alphavirus (SAV) RNA
in wild marine fish in ares remote from aquaculture activity: Implications
for the origins of salmon pancreas disease (SPD) in aquaculture. Dis
Aquat Org 2010, 91:189-200.
59. Graham DA, Staples C, Wilson CJ, Jewhurst H, Cherry K, Gordon A,
Rowley HM: Biophysical properties of salmonid alphaviruses: influence of
temperature and pH on virus survival. J Fish Dis 2007, 30:533-543.
60. Branson E: Sleeping disease in trout. Vet Rec 2002, 150:759-760.
61. Weston JH, Graham DA, Branson E, Rowley HM, Walker IW, Jewhurst VA,
Jewhurst HL, Todd D: Nucleotide sequence variation in salmonid
alphaviruses from outbreaks of salmon pancreas disease and sleeping
disease. Dis Aquat Org 2005, 66:105-111.
62. Hodneland K, Endresen C: Sensitive and specific detection of Salmonid
alphavirus using real-time PCR (TaqMan). J Virol Methods 2006,
131:184-192.
63. Graham DA, Frost P, McLaughlin K, Rowley HMI, Gabestad I, Gordon A,
McLoughlin MF: A comparative study of marine alphavirus subtypes 1-6
using an experimental cohabitation model. J Fish Dis 2011.
64. Karlsen M, Villoing S, Rimstad E, Nylund A: Characterization of untranslated
regions of the salmonid alphavirus 3 (SAV3) genome and construction
of a SAV3 based replicon. Virol J 2009, 6:173.

Page 12 of 12

65. Thorud K, Djupvik HO: Infectious anaemia in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar
L.). Bull Eur Assoc Fish Pathol 1988, 8:109-111.
66. Krossoy B, Hordvik I, Nilsen F, Nylund A, Endresen C: The putative
polymerase sequence of infectious salmon anemia virus suggests a new
genus within the Orthomyxoviridae. J Virol 1999, 73:2136-2142.
67. Devold M, Karlsen M, Nylund A: Sequence analysis of the fusion protein
gene from infectious salmon anaemia virus isolates: evidence of
recombination and reassortment. J Gen Virol 2006, 87:2031-2040.
68. Kibenge FS, Godoy MG, Wang Y, Kibenge MJ, Gherardelli V, Mansilla S,
Lisperger A, Jarpa M, Larroquete G, Avendano F, Lara M, Gallardo A:
Infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV) isolated from the ISA disease
outbreaks in Chile diverged from ISAV isolates from Norway around
1996 and was disseminated around 2005, based on surface glycoprotein
gene sequences. Virol J 2009, 6:88.
69. Nylund A, Plarre H, Karlsen M, Fridell F, Ottem KF, Bratland A, Saether PA:
Transmission of infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV) in farmed
populations of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). Arch Virol 2007, 152:151-179.
70. Blake S, Bouchard D, Keleher W, Opitz M, Nicholson BL: Genomic
relationships of the North American isolate of infectious salmon anemia
virus (ISAV) to the Norwegian strain of ISAV. Dis Aquat Org 1999,
35:139-144.
71. Cunningham CO, Gregory A, Black J, Simpson I, Raynard RS: A novel
variant of the infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV) haemagglutinin
gene suggests mechanisms for virus diversity. Bull Eur Ass Fish Pathol
2002, 22:366-374.
72. McBeath AJ, Bain N, Snow M: Surveillance for infectious salmon anaemia
virus HPR0 in marine Atlantic salmon farms across Scotland. Dis Aquat
Org 2009, 87:161-169.
73. Cook-Versloot M, Griffith S, Cusack R, McGeachy S, Ritchie R: Identification
and characterisation of infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV)
haemagglutinin gene highly polymorphic region (HPR) type 0 in North
America. Bull Eur Ass Fish Pathol 2004, 24:203-208.
74. Snow M, Mckay P, McBeath AJA, Black J, Doig F, Kerr R, Cunningham CO,
Nylund A, Devold M, (Eds): Development, application and validation of a
Taqman real-time RT-PCR assay for the detection of infectious salmon
anaemia virus (ISAV) in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). In New Diagnostic
Technology: Applications in Animal Health and Biologics Controls. Dev Biol.
Volume 126. Edited by: Vannier P, Espeseth D. Basel, Karger; 2006:133-145.
75. Biacchesi S: The reverse genetics applied to fish RNA viruses. Vet Res
2011, 42:12.
76. Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucl. Acids. Symp. Ser. Nucl
Acids Symp Ser 1999, 41:95-98.
77. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal × version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23:2947-2948.
78. Swofford DL: Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other
Methods). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts;, 4 2000.
79. Calendini F, Martin J-F: PaupUP v1.0.3.1 A free graphical frontend for
Paup* Dos software. 2005.
80. Posada D: jModelTest: phylogenetic model averaging. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25:1253-1256.
81. Akaike H: A new look at the statistical model indentification’ IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control. IEEE Trans Aut Control 1974,
19:716-722.
82. Felsenstein J: Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach using the
bootstrap. Evolution 1985, 39:783-791.
doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-56
Cite this article as: Snow: The contribution of molecular epidemiology
to the understanding and control of viral diseases of salmonid
aquaculture. Veterinary Research 2011 42:56.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
