<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Concept and application of a computational vaccinology workflow</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Immunome Research 2010, 6:S7. doi:10.1186/1745-7580-6-S2-S7"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Johannes Söllner"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

IMMUNOME RESEARCH

RESEARCH

Open Access

Concept and application of a computational
vaccinology workflow
Johannes Söllner1*, Andreas Heinzel1,2, Georg Summer2, Raul Fechete1, Laszlo Stipkovits3, Susan Szathmary4,
Bernd Mayer1,5

Abstract
Background: The last years have seen a renaissance of the vaccine area, driven by clinical needs in infectious
diseases but also chronic diseases such as cancer and autoimmune disorders. Equally important are technological
improvements involving nano-scale delivery platforms as well as third generation adjuvants. In parallel
immunoinformatics routines have reached essential maturity for supporting central aspects in vaccinology going
beyond prediction of antigenic determinants. On this basis computational vaccinology has emerged as a discipline
aimed at ab-initio rational vaccine design.
Here we present a computational workflow for implementing computational vaccinology covering aspects from
vaccine target identification to functional characterization and epitope selection supported by a Systems Biology
assessment of central aspects in host-pathogen interaction. We exemplify the procedures for Epstein Barr Virus
(EBV), a clinically relevant pathogen causing chronic infection and suspected of triggering malignancies and autoimmune disorders.
Results: We introduce pBone/pView as a computational workflow supporting design and execution of
immunoinformatics workflow modules, additionally involving aspects of results visualization, knowledge sharing
and re-use. Specific elements of the workflow involve identification of vaccine targets in the realm of a Systems
Biology assessment of host-pathogen interaction for identifying functionally relevant targets, as well as various
methodologies for delineating B- and T-cell epitopes with particular emphasis on broad coverage of viral isolates
as well as MHC alleles.
Applying the workflow on EBV specifically proposes sequences from the viral proteins LMP2, EBNA2 and BALF4 as
vaccine targets holding specific B- and T-cell epitopes promising broad strain and allele coverage.
Conclusion: Based on advancements in the experimental assessment of genomes, transcriptomes and proteomes
for both, pathogen and (human) host, the fundaments for rational design of vaccines have been laid out. In
parallel, immunoinformatics modules have been designed and successfully applied for supporting specific aspects
in vaccine design. Joining these advancements, further complemented by novel vaccine formulation and delivery
aspects, have paved the way for implementing computational vaccinology for rational vaccine design tackling
presently unmet vaccine challenges.

Background
Immunological applications of computational biology
date back to the roots of the field, e.g. for deriving
hydrophilicity profiles based on the primary protein
sequence and relating these profiles to B-cell antigenicity [1]. While modern immunoinformatics is not as
* Correspondence: johannes.soellner@emergentec.com
1
emergentec biodevelopment GmbH, Rathausstrasse 5/3, 1010 Vienna,
Austria
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

burgeoning as other areas of bioinformatics (in particular to note the omics field) there is a well established
community for traversing models of immune responses
into the world of translational research and application.
Recent success examples of immunoinformatics include
contributions to the understanding of H1N1 immunity
[2] and methods to predict determinants of cellular
immune responses for potentially every sequenced class
I HLA-A and -B variant [3]. Even more recently, reviews
aimed at highlighting important concepts of the

© 2010 Söllner et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

emerging area of computational vaccinology have been
presented [4]. While definitions of computational vaccinology vary, a consensus may be formulated as ‘computational technologies dedicated to supporting and
improving development of vaccines’.
This work intends to point out classical as well as
novel components relevant to computational vaccinology. We have chosen an example workflow as the vehicle to convey a basic scaffold and practical application
examples for rational vaccine design. While there has
been some argument concerning the principal feasibility
of rational vaccine design [5] we demonstrate procedures on how computational methods can be harnessed
to streamline the process of vaccine R&D, to reduce
development cost and time, and to ultimately increase
probability of success in formulating novel as well as
improve existing vaccines.
Computational vaccinology embodies a complex collection of (bio)informatics, where a number of core
areas can be identified [4]. One of these involves methods necessary for understanding the function of proteins
and genes including, as invigorated by next generation
sequencing technologies, assembly and annotation of
genomes. These methods have recently been complemented by computational Systems Biology approaches
with the aim to infuse static biological objects with the
notion of context not only for providing a better understanding of a pathogen but specifically for analyzing
host-pathogen interaction. A second major element, following a reductionist approach, confers to epitope
(immune determinant) prediction for delineating targets
of immune responses at highest possible resolution [6].
Due to the inherent complexity of this field with
respect to methodologies applied and for integrating
existing as well as generated data in tight connection
with experimentalists methods for knowledge management and remote collaboration become inevitable.
While not strictly bioinformatical in nature these components resemble important aspects of computational
vaccinology via fostering an integration of results of
involved bioinformatics and wet lab work into the larger
context of integrated, highly multidisciplinary research
and development. In this second field numerous generic
components such as WIKIs or other collaborative solutions can be used. In this context we in particular propose network based data viewers which, although
inherently generic, appear particularly well suited to
support heterogeneous data landscapes as found in vaccinology in general.
We use Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) as a model for
exemplifying elements of a computational vaccinology
workflow, as this pathogen shows substantial clinical
relevance. However, no broadly applicable vaccine has
been developed so far [7,8].

Page 2 of 28

As a DNA virus causing chronic infection potentially
associated with numerous neoplasms and autoimmune
disorders EBV belongs to a new class of hard to manage
pathogens. This group is characterized by a frequently
chronic, immune-modulatory or immuno-evasive phenotype imposing particular pitfalls when applying traditional vaccine approaches. On the other hand these
pathogens may become addressable by utilizing emerging vaccine technologies [9-11], eventually in combination with alternative approaches such as peptide
vaccines [12-15].
Next to providing an overview of major building blocks
valuable in computational vaccinology we focus in the following on the concept of workflows. Although generic in
nature we want to stress the particular importance of
computational workflows for integration of heterogeneous
methods and data as found in computational vaccinology.
Here numerous and highly specialized immunoinformatics
as well as more general bioinformatics tools come into
play, which in their totality require temporal and spatial
organization. Temporal organization refers to the need for
following a structured process, e.g. when output of one
functional module is default input for the subsequent
method. Spatial organization refers to the need for distributed computing for efficiently handling tasks. We discuss
our workflow design approach utilizing the Taverna platform [16]. While workflows are important for structuring
R&D processes their interim results data can be utterly
overwhelming just by the sheer amount and heterogeneity
of output generated. We therefore address specific issues
to be considered when implementing a bioinformatics
workflow for control, organization and data/results visualization supporting computational vaccinology.

Results
Workflow overview

We in the following present an example workflow for a
vaccine design R&D project centrally resting on computational vaccinology. We define scope, functional modules and a set of technologies relevant in this context, as
schematically presented in Figure 1.
Evident from Figure 1, computational vaccinology
resembles comparable procedure as applied in any vaccine
design project. Before project start the medical, scientific
and application perspective needs to be analyzed. Informatics provides a number of tools already supporting this
early phase. Generic knowledge management systems, in
particular WIKIs, facilitate handling of literature and
results sharing in particular in a distributed, collaborative
research environment. Next to supporting knowledge
management, tools from literature mining are well suited
for identifying and analyzing routes to take regarding the
design of a vaccine for a specific pathogen. For example,
NCBI MeSH terms (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 3 of 28

Figure 1 Prototypic representation of a (computational) vaccine design workflow. The scheme spans the entire pre-clinical project life
cycle from concept phase, determination of vaccine targets, further to detailed epitope analysis, formulation, and experimental validation. The
entire process is optimally embedded in an integrated data and knowledge management framework.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 4 of 28

factsheets/mesh.html), a controlled, hierarchical biomedical vocabulary associated with all publications in Medline,
allow retrieval of pathogen-to-disease associations. In the
case of EBV e.g. associations with autoimmune diseases as
well as cancer are revealed by identification of co-occurrence of pathogen and disease categories as found in the
scientific literature. Indeed, EBV has been associated with
numerous autoimmune disorders and malignancies as
summarized in Table 1.
Certainly additional evidence is needed for verifying
such associations, to be retrieved either by applying
more subtle text mining methods or ideally by involving
domain experts. However, in the case of EBV the literature derived association is supported by various further
evidence regarding the etiological link between the virus
and prevalent diseases including Multiple Sclerosis and
Rheumatoid Arthritis as well as nasopharyngeal neoplasms and lymphomas, although considerable criticism
remains regarding these associations [17,18].
After clarifying generic project boundaries the further
procedures can be separated into two main sections.
The first section includes identification of vaccine targets integrating a broad range of computational

methodologies in tight interaction with domain knowledge and given experimental data.
The second section comprises target protein analysis
and epitope selection specifically focusing on the type of
immune response needed for addressing a particular
pathogen, but also taking care of the envisaged formulation and delivery platform to be used. T-cell epitope
prediction e.g. is particularly well suited for target protein ranking in the context of DNA vaccines for improving reactivity in a given (MHC specific) patient
population. Alternatively, putative B- and T-cell epitopes
may be selected for designing peptide vaccines.
A central aspect in downstream formulation is the use
of adjuvants (e.g. in the case of DNA vaccines interleukins may be explicitly coded) to increase immunogenicity, and equally important to direct the immune
response towards making use of desired effectors (such
as humoral versus cytotoxic immune response). Formulated vaccines in a next step have to be validated in animal models for analyzing efficiency in the in-vivo
(challenge) situation, complemented by in-vitro assays
e.g. testing neutralizing effects of antibodies and reactivity of T-cell epitopes.

Table 1 Association between autoimmune diseases, neoplasms and pathogens as found by NCBI MeSH
pathogen

autoimmune disease

# cooccurrence

pathogen

neoplasm

# cooccurrence

Measles virus

Multiple Sclerosis

384

Papillomaviridae

Uterine Cervical Neoplasms

5854

Herpesvirus 4, Human

Arthritis, Rheumatoid

279

Helicobacter pylori

Stomach Neoplasms

3231

Campylobacter jejuni

Guillain-Barre Syndrome

167

Papillomaviridae

Carcinoma, Squamous Cell

2252

Enterovirus B, Human

Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1

164

Papillomaviridae

Cervical Intraepithelial
Neoplasia

1922

Campylobacter jejuni

Polyradiculoneuropathy

150

Herpesvirus 4,
Human

Cell Transformation, Viral

1899

Herpesvirus 4, Human

Multiple Sclerosis

136

Herpesvirus 4,
Human

Burkitt Lymphoma

1853

Herpesvirus 4, Human

Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic

126

Hepatitis B virus

Liver Neoplasms

1673

Helicobacter pylori

Purpura, Thrombocytopenic,
Idiopathic

124

Hepatitis B virus

Carcinoma, Hepatocellular

1615

Theilovirus

Multiple Sclerosis

118

Herpesvirus 4,
Human

Nasopharyngeal Neoplasms

1518

Herpesvirus 6, Human

Multiple Sclerosis

113

Herpesvirus 8,
Human

Sarcoma, Kaposi

1391

Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Arthritis, Rheumatoid

110

Hepacivirus

Carcinoma, Hepatocellular

1005

Escherichia coli

Arthritis, Rheumatoid

101

Hepacivirus

Liver Neoplasms

996

Chlamydophila pneumoniae

Multiple Sclerosis

74

Herpesvirus 4,
Human

Hodgkin Disease

975

Streptococcus pyogenes

Arthritis, Rheumatoid

61

Simian virus 40

Cell Transformation, Viral

860

Human T-lymphotropic virus
1

Multiple Sclerosis

61

Herpesvirus 4,
Human

Lymphoma

753

Lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus

Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1

61

Oncogenic Viruses

Neoplasms

720

Rubella virus

Multiple Sclerosis

61

Helicobacter pylori

Lymphoma, B-Cell, Marginal
Zone

704

Table 1 lists the most frequent co-occurrences found between disease (autoimmune disorders and malignancies) and pathogen terms according to MeSH term
mining of scientific literature given in Medline. HHV4 (EBV) entries are given in bold.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 5 of 28

Ideally the various steps are embedded in an integrated data and knowledge management framework.
Dedicated knowledge management tools are available
for reflecting specific procedural structure and access
permissions for following standard operating procedures
(SOPs). Data representation and visualization generically
support such workflows, which, together with a more
detailed view on selected procedures raised here, will be
discussed in the following sections.

alignment) to the associated project and merges these
with results of previously run workflow elements for the
specific project. pView is designed as a downstream
results data exploration environment. A central part of
pView is flexible data loading and visualization. The
researcher controls a set of specific visualization elements for various data formats at hand. Central visualization modes include protein/nucleotide sequences,
sequence alignments, and diverse data compatible with
line and block graphs or plain text.

pBone/pView concepts and implementation

pBone

We consider computational workflows as essential for
structuring computational vaccinology. Our implementation, pBone/pView, revolves about the idea of modular, pre-defined tasks linked in vaccine (pathogen)
specific workflows. Various tools are readily available for
supporting computational workflow design, including
Taverna, Triana, Kepler and Pegasus [19]. The process
(Back) Bone (pBone) takes care of storing and providing
process templates and supervising execution of instances
of templates on available resources (be it a single server
or a cluster). Process View (pView) takes data generated
in the workflows, connects (relates) them to what is
already available for a particular project and provides a
visualization interface, in some aspects comparable to
Jalview [20]. The overall concept of pBone and pView is
shown in Figure 2.
Taverna provides a graphical user interface to create
and execute workflows. For creating pBone workflows
the user is provided with access to a set of specialized
web services provided by a central pBone server. The
pBone web services wrap existing software applications
and integrate them into pBone without modification.
This web service-centered environment supports data
comparison and identification and allows data tracking.
In the context of pBone a workflow is a set of tasks
which depend on their predecessors. Workflows are
typically sequential, but branching is possible. If created
as atomic as possible, larger workflows can be customized from these generic elements for customizing the
flow for specific project requirements. Such workflows
furthermore allow researchers to adapt to the fast changing bioinformatics tools environment.
A central idea of pBone is to gather the data produced
by workflows into dedicated projects. A project is
defined through a basic set of descriptors such as project name (e.g. EBV), creator, creation date, etc. The
amount of project information is kept small on purpose,
as pBone and pView are not supporting conventional
project management requirements but centrally serve in
data generation and subsequent analysis. For a specific
project a user may run a customized workflow (or workflow component, e.g. including a newly sequenced EBV
isolate). pBone then automatically adds results (multiple

pBone itself does not execute workflows, these are
handled by the Taverna Remote Execution Server.
pBone in conjunction with pView provides the remote
execution server with entire XML workflow templates
including input files required. Each computational task
is wrapped into a specific interface for providing additional functionality (Module Wrapper). Wrapper functionality for external software applications is to retrieve
data, as well as to register and link new data objects. All
available computational modules are registered at the
Module Registration Global Web Service. SOAP based
web services thereby provide a de-facto standard
method for remote access to computational resources.
A wrapper consists of two parts: (a) an XML based
configuration file which defines the input required, output generated, and how these are connected with the
actual service, and (b) a Java class launching the service
and handling pBone specific tasks.
The process of invoking a service on pBone starts by
retrieving or storing new data files. To minimize data
traffic pBone deposits all incoming and generated data
files into a predefined location on the pBone server, the
Central File Heap. Each file receives a unique identifier,
and a unique md5 hash [21] is calculated. The md5
hash is used to determine if two files are identical to
avoid saving files multiple times. A service wrapper has
access to the file heap and retrieves files as necessary.
The wrapper then builds an execution command for the
service and provides input files as needed. The XML
configuration file provides the mapping information for
the command. This XML file defines which parameters
are visible to the user when creating a workflow and
how these parameters are mapped on the service. The
wrapper then starts the services with a unique home
directory for invocation. These unique home directories
are necessary to ensure that each generated file can be
identified. After the service has finished, the wrapper
collects files generated and deposits them into the file
heap. The next task of the wrapper is to retrieve data
objects saved in the files. This additional level of
abstraction allows pBone to identify multiple objects in
one file (like a batch of EBV sequences in one FastA
file, where each sequence is represented by a data

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 6 of 28

Figure 2 Schematic overview of the relation between the Taverna Workbench, Taverna Remote Execution Server, pBone and pView:
Workflow templates are generated in the Taverna Workbench and imported into the pBone system via pView. pView then acts as control
element for project creation/extension, data import and processing in pBone. Individual components of pBone are set into relation including
dependency on Taverna Remote Execution Server for processing of Taverna workflows.

object). Data in the output files are assigned to new data
object identifiers, furthermore their relation and the
input data object is stored. This connection builds up
the hierarchical structure in which objects are grouped.
In addition to the parent-child connection of data
objects, pBone is able to determine if two data objects
are identical. If a researcher starts two workflows with
the same input file (e.g. one for generating a multiple
sequence alignment and one for computing secondary
structure) within a project, pBone recognizes this redundancy, and the two resulting hierarchical data object
structures are merged. This allows users to run multiple
workflows with the same initial data at various project
stages and still maintain relations between runs.
pBone introduces three different types for categorizing
individual data objects:
1. Sequences are either protein or nucleotide
sequences.
2. Descriptors are objects that provide additional
information about another object. A descriptor can
be, for example, antigenicity, average secondary
structure element propensity, or any other sequence

feature. A descriptor can be linked to all other data
object types by including another descriptor.
3. The Entity type of objects. An example for an
Entity is e.g. a multiple sequence alignment as this
data set does not provide additional information
about a single sequence and is not one single
sequence as such. The multiple sequence alignment
is to some extent a set of sequences but through the
alignment additional information is provided.
The last job of the wrapper is to map output of a service according to the XML configuration file, and return
unique identifiers which can be used as input for the
next service in the workflow.
pBone and pView store data from different origin into
one database. This data diversity naturally complicates
development of individual parts of the system. A basic
set of interfaces was designed to allow access to individual components within pBone. To build a more robust
and flexible database access system pBone and pView
use the Hibernate (http://www.hibernate.org) persistence
manager. Hibernate hides all database related operations
from the user and reduces development time and error

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

rate. By default pBone and pView save data into a relational database. Hibernate takes care of most of the
database need of the system and allows simplified
change of the backend database server by altering a configuration file. This enables pBone and pView to be
deployed in existing environments without the need for
a new database infrastructure.
pView

Whereas pBone is responsible for data generation it is
the purpose of pView to aid users in analysis of results.
Projects are created in pView and workflows are
launched through it. To launch a workflow pView
makes use of the Taverna Remote Execution Client plugin. After launching a workflow the user is able to add
data and their structure to the project. At this point
users have connections to newly processed, as well as to
existing data. To facilitate data exploration pView provides a visualization front-end allowing to open different
content in various formats within pView, additionally
providing customized plugins. A visualization plugin
consists of two components: The first reads data from a
generic source according to its format and represents
them in an arbitrary data structure. The second component uses this structure and builds a visual representation. Figure 3 exemplarily displays sequence and

Page 7 of 28

structure visualization. pView provides a set of default
visualization methods including support for multiple
sequence alignment, single sequences, as well as various
types of graphs.
Generally, navigation in large data sets is problematic.
Similarly, determining the exact position of amino acids
in a MSA (multiple sequence alignment), and at the
same time in multiple, associated graphs is cumbersome.
pView provides a marking system that allows the selection of a range of positions in one data object (e.g. in a
sequence alignment) and this selection is then propagated to all associated data objects (e.g. identifying the
marked sequence stretch in the corresponding sequence
stretch of the antigenicity profile). The relationship
between objects is defined by pBone during workflows
execution. Multiple selections are possible and each
selection can be saved, making it persistent in the
pBone database. Adding a comment to a specific selection allows users to document conclusions drawn from
specific data analysis tracks.
pBone and pView shall serve as example workflow
implementation for structuring two central procedures
in computational vaccinology discussed next: identification of target proteins, followed by identification of antigenic determinants.

Figure 3 A typical workflow situation utilizing pView. On top a multiple sequence alignment is provided. For the sequences various single
sequence profiles are given in separate windows further including a 3D model of the protein of interest.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Identification of vaccine targets

Some generic reasoning applies for selecting vaccine targets. Generally, a target should be reasonably conserved
across pathogen isolates, while being dissimilar to host
factors. Functionalities which are easily lost without
gross detrimental effects for the pathogen are not suitable. If a number of sequenced strains is available functional annotation is helpful for assessing essentiality of a
particular factor. In this area the interface to bioinformatics procedures for (next generation) sequencing,
annotation and data handling is obvious.
If (unfortunately) no specific information on the proteome is available and consequently proteome-wide antigenicity prediction becomes necessary a ranking of
targets may be performed based on suitable classes of
cytotoxic and helper T-cell epitopes, lack of cross-reactivity with the host, and conservation of epitopes across
strains. Vaccines focusing on humoral (B-cell) responses
add some further layers of complexity. Antibody targets
are preferred to be accessible (extracellular). If no functional sites (for example protein-protein interaction
interfaces of toxins, or protease active sites relevant for
pathogenicity) are targeted then the antigen has to be
strongly expressed or concentrated on certain patches of
the pathogen surface to allow antibody-dependent cellmediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) or opsonization. Computationally this mingles into prediction of expression
(particularly for bacteria) and analysis of respective transcriptomics and/or proteomics data. Numerous bioinformatics routines for functional annotation and prediction
of function [22,23], as well as prediction of sub-cellular
localization are useful in this context. Resources such as
the pathogen antigen database AntigenDB [24] add
value when combined with tools for sequence or HMMbased homology search, furthermore including fold
recognition methods for detection of remote homologues. Some aspects of protective antigens have been
integrated into dedicated predictors of vaccine targets
such as VaxiJen [25].
EBV is a relatively well studied organism; consequently we in the following rely on mapping of known
protective epitopes derived from other herpesviruses as
well as on literature data concerning relevance of potential target proteins for the viral life-cycle. We included
these aspects in a Systems Biology approach to reach
further insight into the pathogenicity mechanisms of
EBV. The following sections specifically focus on these
aspects.
Homology mapping of given B-cell epitopes

The aim of B-cell epitope prediction in vaccine design is
to identify regions which should be targeted, or, equally
important, avoided. The latter include, among others,
immunodominant and/or highly variable regions which
can act as decoy epitopes (diverting immune responses

Page 8 of 28

from more effective targets), and which may provide little cross-protection between isolates. Selected epitopes
ideally confer to an area on the protein relevant for
function. Antibodies targeted at such sites are referred
to as neutralizing, although neutralization of a pathogen
may also result from other effects as ADCC, being more
dependent on antigen density on a surface rather than
on a specific functional site.
B-cell epitopes (antibody binding sites) are intrinsically
less stringently defined than T-cell epitopes. Nevertheless, due to their relevance in immunology numerous
in-silico methods for their prediction have been published. Many of these focus on the prediction of linear
B-cell epitopes, some on discontinuous epitopes, and
very few attempt to build models for neutralizing epitopes [6,26]. The latter are usually considered ideal targets for vaccines, since the simple binding process may
already lead to inactivation of the pathogen or key
pathogenicity functionalities. Due to the scarcity of such
prediction systems, the availability of utility data, and
overall interest in neutralizing immune responses, we
have equipped our B-cell epitope discovery workflow
with an epitope homology mapping process. This process makes use of already known epitopes to discover
new candidates by using information about experimentally validated epitopes and homology (or remote
homology between proteins from the whole pathogen
family).
The 31,844 Herpesviridae-associated sequences downloaded from the NCBI formed the basis for a protein
homology network. Position specific iterated BLAST
(PSI-BLAST) [27] was used to add edges (relations)
between proteins based on their degree of homology.
For each of the 31,844 sequences three iterations against
the uniref90-database [28] were performed to generate a
PSSM (position specific scoring matrix) which was used
to perform a single BLAST search against the Herpesviridae sequence set. The resulting hits from the final
BLAST search were considered as homologues of the
initial query protein. For each resulting hit holding an
expect value below 10-20 an edge between query protein
and hit protein was added to the graph. Additional
information such as the alignment, expect-value and
alignment score were stored as edge attributes. Applying
this procedure for all 31,844 Herpesviridae-associated
proteins resulted in a weighted, directed graph. This
graph does not only connect obviously homologous proteins, but also allows inferring remote homologies.
Epitopes retrieved from the IEDB were filtered in a
manner such that the resulting set of epitopes fulfilled
the following four criteria: 1) B-cell epitopes of the type
‘continuous’, 2) source organism must not be EBV, 3) at
least one association with a positive assay, 4) antibody
binding must result in biological activity. Remaining

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

epitopes were added to the homology graph as vertices
and connected to the vertex representing their source
protein. Few epitopes could not be directly connected
because their source protein was not in the initial set of
herpesviridae proteins. In these cases a single BLAST
search against the initial set of herpesviridae proteins
was conducted to identify the best substitution for the
original protein source sequence. The resulting directed
graph connects the set of selected B-cell epitopes with
their source proteins which are connected to their
homologs. Therefore, based on a given epitope this procedure allows identification of proteins which contain a
region homologous to the original linear epitope region.
The epitope protein homology graph was used to map
any of the given epitopes on any of the given EBV
sequences. Therefore all possible paths up to a length of
three between any of the epitopes and any of the EBV
sequences were explored and evaluated by the following
criteria: 1) length of the path, 2) quality of the alignment, 3) is the region of the linear epitope within the
alignment, and 4) conservation of the linear epitope
region.
After evaluation of the four criteria the highest scoring
path was selected and further evaluated by secondary
structure comparison and domain alignment between
the affected proteins. Figure 4 gives an overview of
selected shortest paths between known epitopes and the
EBV protein gp110.

Page 9 of 28

The major advantage of this method compared to PSIBLAST alone is that the generated PSSM is otherwise
centered between identified proteins, possibly posing a
problem for borderline homology. Starting from individual identified proteins may therefore yield different
PSSMs from homology space thereby increasing
sensitivity.
Explorative data representation

Analysis of complex data of multiple object types and
their relations require viewers capable of representation
based on a different paradigm. A general trend is representation of complex biological and associated data in
the form of networks. To some level similar to representations of MindMaps [29] context (edge) arranged content (vertices associated with data) allows display of
diverse object types such as publications, proteins, peptides or validation data using specific vertex classes
brought into relation via specific edge classes. Figure 5
shows an example derived for EBV data.
The graph given in Figure 5 visualizes a subgraph of
selected IEDB content and relations. Utilizing such a
representation significantly supports the identification of
epitope dependencies, their source organisms, and associated experimental validation status. As an extension to
the IEDB the graph links protein variants given in IEDB
to a homology network of sequenced herpes viruses.
Sequences can thus be linked in a straightforward way
by bioinformatics means, further enriched by biological

Figure 4 Presented is an overview of the epitope mapping process. The upper part depicts a subgraph comprising shortest paths between
known epitopes and EBV gp110. The lower part of the figure shows the first 300 positions of a multiple secondary structure alignment of
homologous envelope glycoproteins of EBV, HHV-5, HHV-1 and EHV-2. To improve readability secondary structures are color coded (helical areas
in red, beta sheets in green, coils in blue, signal peptides in yellow and gaps in grey). The black strands above the multiple alignment mark
possible mapping positions with respect to their position on the gp110 protein of EBV which are connected to their predecessor in the shortest
path.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 10 of 28

Figure 5 Representation of heterogeneous data in a network context. Provided is a subgraph encoding information available for EBV
homology data enriched by IEDB object types, relationships and content. Red nodes represent EBV proteins from completely sequenced
proteomes which are linked to IEDB data. Turquoise nodes represent proteins listed in the IEDB, orange triangles represent scientific publications,
blue diamonds represent peptide epitopes, and green diamonds encode experimental assays.

information (epitopes, neutralization status, etc.) and
experimental records (assay records, etc.). Various utilities exist for generating such network views including
CytoScape [30] which also provides various layout
options.
Systems biology

The concept of systems biology is intrinsically biological
with some different technological interpretations
attached. The basic idea is to view not single, isolated
biological objects like transcripts and proteins, but to
take their dependencies into account, i.e. interpreting
objects in their context. Understanding the host-pathogen interaction allows to shed light on the molecular
mechanism connecting infection and disease, being at
the core of designing effective vaccines. In the context
of EBV this is particularly interesting due to the association with numerous malignancies. The basic idea of
using Systems Biology in target selection is to identify
essential elements of viral pathogenicity and to select
most crucial pathogen components as targets. In the
course of this process other issues become relevant, like
the use of druggable host (or pathogen) proteins amenable to established medical regimen suitable for auxiliary
treatment along therapeutic vaccines.
To obtain a basic set of experimentally determined
EBV-EBV and EBV-human protein interaction, we
extracted protein interaction data provided by Fossum
et al. [31] and Calderwood et al. [32]. These given

records were further enriched by interaction data specified in the virusMINT database [33]. While physical
interactions are of high value, more complex dependencies may exist between two factors, for example by
indirect interaction or genetic co-regulation. For representing such data human genes differentially regulated
in the course of EBV primary and re-infection presented
by Chen et.al (the Meta-A dataset) [34] were connected
using shortest paths utilizing the human proteome interaction network omicsNET [35]. This resulting subgraph
was merged with the EBV-EBV and EBV-human subgraphs as noted above, and further enriched by direct
omicsNET connections between the two sets of proteins. Further protein-protein interactions between
human components given in the graph were added if
such an interaction was supported by entries in at least
one of four commonly used databases (namely Ophid
[36], IntAct [37], BioGrid [38] and Reactome [39]).
A subgraph was exemplarily selected to demonstrate
the merits of such integrated interpretation for understanding viral function and subsequently for hypothesis
generation supporting target selection. Figure 6 shows
specific interaction types and selected protein products
of differentially expressed genes in the neighborhood of
CD9, a cofactor of CD21 which is the EBV receptor on
B-cells [40].
For the generation of this subgraph vertices directly
connected to CD9, as well as next neighbors were

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 11 of 28

Figure 6 Selection of vertices and edges from the EBV-human interaction graph centered around differentially regulated CD9. EBV
proteins are shown in red, human proteins in green. Solid lines indicate physical interactions, dashed lines omicsNET connections. Red, blue and
green edges indicate EBV-EBV, EBV-human and human-human interactions, respectively. Human genes significantly differentially regulated upon
infection/reactivation are shown as hexagon.

selected. This subset represents two EBV proteins for
which all connected human factors and EBV proteins
were added, further enriched by proteins differentially
regulated and directly connected.
Generation of homology models

For B-cell epitope prediction within this EBV example
two proteins were exemplarily chosen to demonstrate a
bioinformatics sample process and relevant biological
rationale. BALF4 (gp110) and BLLF1 (gp350/gp220) are
both essential, surface accessible and well studied components of infectious EBV [41-43]. For both proteins at
least partial 3D structures are available in the PDB.
gp220 is a splice variant of gp350 [44] lacking a long,
according to prediction, strongly glycosylated and intrinsically disordered region being rich in repeats.
Unfortunately these structures are incomplete, primarily
lacking some short loops or otherwise unresolved residues,
or are non-identical to the sequence of the reference virus

used in this study (EBV type 1). While a certain degree of
variability will usually not lead to a substantially altered
structure it is recommended to visually inspect where
changes occur within a 3D context, and also to confirm via
homology modeling if these changes might interfere with the
structure. In the case of missing loops adding the sequences
in structure modeling at least provides an idea which regions
may be less accessible by antibodies, or which loops are
structurally favorable to use as continuous B-cell epitopes.
Model templates applied for the EBV example made
use of the PDB entries 3FVC and 2H6O for gp110 and
gp350, respectively. While 2H6O directly served as template for monomeric gp350, gp110 presumably forms
trimers [43,45]. As multimerization of proteins massively
alters accessibility of protein domains the likely quaternary structure was retrieved through the PQS interface of
PDBe (also part of wwPDB) [46]. Homology modeling
was then based on this trimer.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 12 of 28

Figure 7 Structural alignment of gp350 (PDB entry 2H6O, turquoise) and EBV type 1 gp350 N-terminal domain model (green).
Mutations differentiating the two proteins are highlighted by red spheres. Glycosylations (which are part of the 2H6O structure) are drawn in
blue and indicate which residues may not be directly accessible to antibodies. Mutations are located outside the CD21 interacting region which
is non-glycosylated and has been implicated in neutralizing immunity. The arrow indicates the CD21/gp350 interface.

Figure 7 shows the structural alignment of 2H6O
serving as template for gp350 superimposed with the
modeled structure of EBV type 1. The alignment
reveals overall very little dissonance between the structures. Glycosylation was taken from the original structure. Figure 8 shows the optimized trimer model of
gp110. One of the added loops is particularly extended
(57 residues) and presumably different from the proposed models. Yet it can be beneficial to visualize the
approximate extent of a loop for manual epitope
selection.

Identification of antigenic determinants
Prediction of B-cell epitopes

We applied various methods for B-cell epitope prediction involving individual sequences or multiple sequence
alignments. Sequences for multiple alignments were
manually selected based on homology. In general selection from multiple species (rather than multiple isolates)
is possible but certainly carries substantial risks. Different viruses, in some cases even isolates of the same
virus, can alter tissue tropism and may therefore show
characteristic changes in their surface glycoproteins.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Figure 8 The optimized model for the EBV type 1 gp110
protein is given. Monomers are drawn in green, red and blue. The
arrow indicates one of the large coils added by homology
modeling. The lower part is close to the viral membrane while the
stem and head extend into the solvent and are free for molecular
interaction. Potential glycosylations were not further considered.

Those changes may erroneously be interpreted as variability connected to low relevance. To alleviate this problem for our example scenario, isolate-specific EBV
sequences and those of closely related viruses (Callitrichine herpesvirus 3 and Pongine herpesviruses 1-3)
were aligned to gp110. In the case of gp350 sequences
from Cercopithicine herpesvirus 15 and Macacine herpesvirus 4 were added. All four mentioned non-EBV
viruses belong to the genus Lymphocryptovirus and can
therefore be considered as close relatives of EBV.
B-cell epitopes aimed at blocking virus entry or inhibition of viral functions responsible for pathogenesis were
then predicted by semi-automatically creating a consensus table comprising results of all applied methods
represented on the level of the consensus sequence. A
graphical representation of epitope areas for gp110 is
given in Figure 9.

Page 13 of 28

Aim was the selection of peptides of at most 15 amino
acids in length. For considering a particular protein
region as a candidate for protective immune responses
(reflecting functional importance as well as antigenicity)
at least one of two methods implicated for functional
relevance of a linear segment was required to produce a
positive prediction in the region, augmented and further
localized by at least two different B-cell epitope prediction methods. In addition, surface accessibility, accessibility changes through putative multimerization, and
variability were taken into consideration. Briefly, peptides should be well accessible as measured by side
chain solvent accessibility determined either from the
3D model where available, or by sequence-based prediction. In addition multimerization should not (or only
marginally) alter solvent accessibility of candidate sites
on monomers, as this would indicate potential hindrance for accessibility to antibodies. Effects of multimer
formation were only assessed for gp110 within the area
where the experimental 3D structure was available, as
no multimer models are available for gp350. Sequence
variability determined from multiple alignments was
integrated by shifting peptides where possible to foster a
(hypothetical) broadly effective vaccine.
In standard vaccine development settings all available
data including experimentally mapped peptides would
be integrated to enable an expert in the field to conclude on optimal candidates. In computational vaccinology one validation approach is against experimental
sources. In our example validation of predictions were
done against IEDB data. In the case of EBV gp110 no
neutralizing epitopes have been described so far, which
may be astonishing as this protein is among the most
conserved sequences of herpesviruses, and resembles an
essential component of the attachment/membrane
fusion mechanism [47]. Neutralizing epitopes have in
contrast been described in HHV-1, HHV-5 and EHV-2
homologues, and these were mapped to gp110. While
these mapped epitopes may be neutralizing based on
blocking function there is of course also the possibility
that indicated regions are neutralizing through a
mechanism requiring high surface density of the target
protein, e.g. opsonization with complement components.
Also, dominance of gp110 and gp350 homologues in
cellular attachment can be different even among closely
related herpesviruses [48]. While experimental clarification is pending we consider the gp110 peptides identified by homology mapping as being part of neutralizing
epitopes as valid assumption. Neutralizing gp350 epitopes were published by Urquiza et al. [42], consequently validation is straightforward.
Over the entire sequence of gp110 19 non-overlapping
peptides of 15 residues length at maximum were
selected. Seven of those were excluded because of

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 14 of 28

Figure 9 Representation of the gp110 putative trimer surface and secondary structure cartoons in lateral and top view (left to right).
Monomers are drawn in green, violet and cyan. Regions covered by predicted, potentially neutralizing epitiopes are shown in blue, residues
predicted to be glycosylated are given in brown. Areas coded in red were experimentally shown to be neutralizing in homologous proteins of
other herpesviruses, while areas coded in orange were additionally predicted as epitopes. The orange spot at the stem of the molecule indicates
the terminus of a neutralizing epitope close to the N-terminus of the protein (unfortunately only partially resolved in the structure model).

overall low accessibility (or specifically low accessibility
of more than 30% of the peptide sequence). Of the
remaining 12 candidates, two substantially overlapped
with protective peptides as mapped onto gp110. Another
mapped sequence reported as neutralizing peptide was
missed, however, the immunogenicity of this particular
peptide is unclear as the indicated region should be
inaccessible according to MEMSAT3 prediction and
UniProt [49] entries. One of the likely neutralizing epitopes is in part affected by multimerization but was
accepted after manual inspection of the crystal structure
(serving as example for the importance of manual
results integration and analysis).
From a biological but also from a vaccine design perspective it makes sense to target amino acid repeats, as
these may carry relevant functionality and allow to
cover extended areas of a target using a single peptide
for immunization. Among the two methods applied for
detection of internal repeats, RADAR presented by
Heger and Holm [50] identified five repeats, and HHrepID derived by Biegert and Söding [51] identified four
repeats. Results of these procedures are presented in
Table 2.
Manual analysis of the repeat regions showed that the
five repeats with three variants, each of length 18,
strongly overlapped with a 12-mer repeat which exists

in only two variants and also occurred a sixth time. The
specific motif of this repeat is ‘VTTPTPNAT[SG]PT’.
Presumably this shorter variant has been missed due to
maximizing repeat length rather than number of occurrences. This repeat is the most prevalent and invariant
motif identified, and strongly enriched in six copies
found between residues 512 and 614 of gp350, while
lacking in the alternative splice product gp220 (deletion
of residues 502-698) [52]. Five of these repeats are present as ‘VTTPTPNATSPT’, which was subsequently
included into the list of candidate B-cell epitopes as this
region is encompassed by good solvent-accessibility,
albeit also N-glycosylation might appear. Only one of
these copies (residues 561-572) is associated with a predicted, putatively neutralizing epitope, yet repeats are

Table 2 Repeats identified by RADAR
start

stop

peptide

variant

521
542

538
559

TSPTPAVTTPTPNATSPT
TTPTPNATSPTLGKTSPT

1
2

563

580

TTPTPNATSPTLGKTSPT

2

584

601

TTPTPNATSPTLGKTSPT

2

605

621

TTPTPNATGPTVGETSPQ

3

Table 2 lists residues dissimilar to peptide sequence variant (1) in bold,
identical repeats are considered as one variant.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 15 of 28

inherently interesting targets as argued above. The prediction of neutralization in the vicinity of one of these
therefore further supported the selection of the minimal
motif. Interestingly, Urquiza et al. [42] summarized
reports of monoclonal antibodies mapping to the given
(or closely associated) repeats, apparently confirming
presented considerations.
Table 3 lists some commonly used amino acid-focused
quality metrics for B-cell epitope prediction, while Table
4 focuses on validation on a peptide basis, assuming
that substantial overlap or sub-selections of neutralizing
epitopes can have the same effect as the entire/exact
epitope sequence.
To account for the effects of repeat peptides where a
single peptide covers multiple sites three different
results were included in Table 3. In the first approach
selection of the repeat is neglected, interpreting constituent residues of a single occurrence as false negatives. In the second row only one repeat is considered
predicted, the others are considered true negatives. In
the third row all repeats are considered epitopes and
predicted as such (true positives). While the latter is
probably most consistent with reality it biases validation as a single peptide drastically increases the number of true positives. It is also obvious that neglecting
the repeat strongly reduces sensitivity of predictions.
Based on single amino acid evaluation, accuracy and
specificity are good while sensitivity could be
improved. This impression is alleviated, however, by
considering entire peptides. Table 4 shows that in
gp110 two out of three, and in gp350 four out of four
neutralizing epitopes were re-discovered, where only
one of the four is the repeat peptide. In the case of
gp350 validation is found to be less biased than for
gp110, as epitopes accepted as neutralizing were validated by Urquiza et al. [42] through peptide immunization. It is interesting to know that in this validation
more peptides were indicated by cell binding assays
than in subsequent neutralization experiments. These
peptides carry the essential element of immunogenicity and cross-neutralization with a native antigen
rather than the potential to be neutralizing only in a
conformational context.

Prediction of T-cell epitopes and variability of T-cell
antigenicity

For the prediction of T-cell epitopes also an exemplary
approach is presented below, focusing on a few HLA
alleles of particular relevance. EBV is one of the causative agents of the most prevalent childhood cancer in
equatorial Africa, namely endemic Burkitt’s lymphoma
(eBL) [53]. This in mind we selected human haplotypes
presumably prevalent in the region as these should in
consequence be of particular importance for a vaccine
and utilized publicly available sequence based T-cell epitope predictors to identify potential epitopes on EBV
antigens. In contrast to molecular dynamics based predictions these classifiers can be scaled efficiently to
screen entire proteomes against a multitude of MHC
alleles for potential T-cell epitopes [54].
Selection of suitable MHC/HLA alleles

Dominant HLA alleles were determined by gathering
frequently occurring class I and II alleles from a publicly
accessible database of allele frequencies for relevant
countries [55]. HLA alleles were ranked by a simple
score formed by the product of the number of countries
they were reported in at minimum levels (usually >=
2%) and median prevalence within those countries.
Class I alleles were further analyzed for population coverage by Population Coverage Calculation, a tool provided in conjunction with the IEDB [56]. In addition,
MHC supertypes were determined for the highest ranking alleles based on a classification table provided by
Sidney et.al [57]. Table 5 shows HLA alleles and their
supertypes in order of putative relevance for a vaccine
in equatorial Africa.
Regarding genetic immunization (DNA vaccines) the
selection of antigens combining epitopes for as many
MHC/HLA types as possible is feasible. For peptide vaccines in contrast this constraint does not apply as peptides from multiple proteins can be combined with as
much or little effort as for a single protein. We exemplify the analysis for one specific protein and selected
epitopes for multiple HLA alleles. For that purpose EBV
specific T-cell epitopes were retrieved from IEDB and
allele coverage was analyzed. Among six proteins carrying identified class I T-cell determinants the protein

Table 3 Metrics for estimating the quality of neutralising epitope prediction
protein

baseline

TP

FP

TN

FN

sensitivity

specificity

accuracy

precision

gp110

5.72%

26

141

667

23

0.53

0.83

0.81

0.16

MCC
0.21

gp350 (no repeat)
gp350 (single repeat)

8.05%
8.05%

47
59

224
224

615
615

26
14

0.64
0.81

0.73
0.73

0.73
0.74

0.17
0.21

0.22
0.32

gp350

12.35%

95

224

576

17

0.85

0.72

0.74

0.3

0.39

Table 3 provides TP (True Positives), FP (False Positives), TN (True Negatives), FN (False Negatives), MCC (Matthews correlation coefficient) for selected sequences.
The baseline value corresponds to the percentage of residues belonging to neutralizing epitopes. For gp350 tree entries have been added, depending whether a
single copy of ‘VTTPTPNATSPT’ is interpreted as False Negatives (FN), namely i) no repeats are considered as predicted, ii) a single repeat is accepted as
predicted, or iii) all four copies are accepted as predicted (default).

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 16 of 28

Table 4 Peptide coverage of neutralizing epitopes
protein baseline number of peptides
selected

percentage (%) of
protein covered

number of potentially neutralizing
peptides selected

coverage of known
neutralizing epitopes

gp110

5.72%

12

19.49%

2

2/3 = 66%

gp350

12.35%

20

35.17%

5

4/4 = 100%

Table 4 gives the number of selected peptides (and percentage of entire protein covered by these) in combination with the percentage of residues belonging to
neutralizing epitopes and coverage of known neutralizing epitopes as an indicator of selection effectiveness for gp110 and gp350. A definition of the baseline is
given in Table 3.

LMP2A showed the broadest coverage of alleles, providing epitopes for HLA-A*2301 (A24), HLA-B*3501 (B07)
and HLA-B*1402 (B27).
The possibility of using an unmodified LMP2A DNA
vaccine is set aside because utilizing the entire, unmodified LMP2A would likely be detrimental, as this protein
resembled a cytoproliferative factor potentially involved
in the development of lymphomas and has been associated with autoimmune disorders [58]. For HLAA*2301 (A24) and HLA-B*3501 (B07) netMHC provides
artificial neural network (ANN) predictors trained on
allele specific data. Predictions for HLA-B*1402 (B27)
can be done via NetMHCpan which implements a panallele approach extrapolating ligand specificities from
closely related alleles with defined preference.
For MHC class II a few alleles can be found in several
different countries, some of them at high frequencies
(data not shown). Selected class II alleles include
DRB1*1101, DRB1*1102, DRB1*1503, DRB1*0301 and
DRB1*1302. Generally, but in particularly for Uganda
IEDB tools suggest relatively low population coverage
for this allele combination (overall 14.89%). DRB1*1101,

DRB1*0301 and DRB1*1302 ligands were predicted
using NetMHCII, DRB1*1102, and ligands for
DRB1*1503 were derived by applying NetMHCIIpan.
Visualization of T-cell antigenicity

T-cell epitopes are continuous fragments (peptides)
interspersed throughout a protein sequence. In cases
where regions of a protein are to be selected for formulation of a vaccine, independent whether recombinant,
DNA subunit, or peptide vaccine, conservancy should
be considered. Even small changes in sequence may lead
to drastic changes in T-cell antigenicity. Reasons include
reduced ligand affinity by alteration of essential anchor
residues, decreased proteasomal processing, decreased
TAP transport rate, or increased similarity to self antigens. There are different ways to approach these issues.
For the workflow discussed here we show a supportive
method for manual analysis as well as an automated
approach: ‘Conservancy Constrained T-cell Epitope
Clusters’ or CCTECs.
While it is possible and sensible to restrict analysis to
fully conserved clusters most pathogens exhibit at least
some degree of variability even in functionally essential

Table 5 HLA alleles particularly indicated for coverage of ethnicities in selected equatorial African countries
HLA allele

HLA supertype

# of countries

prevalence

score

Cumulative population coverage

B5802

B58

2

10.3

20.6

12.34

B1503

B27

2

7.4

14.8

22.56

B5301

B07

3

4.9

14.7

31.93

B4901

Unclassified

3

4.6

13.8

35.77

B4201

B07

2

6

12

42.23

B4501
B1510

B44
B27

3
2

3.8
4.25

11.4
8.5

47.41
50.57

B1402

B27

2

3.95

7.9

52.84

B3501

B07

3

2.2

6.6

55.8

B8101

B07

2

2.6

5.2

58.49

B5703

B58

2

2.5

5

59.5

B5801

B58

2

2.3

4.6

64.57

A7401

A03

2

2.1

4.2

66.35

B0702
B4101

B07
B44

2
1

1.9
2.7

3.8
2.7

68.49
69.35

A2301

A24

1

2.5

2.5

70.97

Table 5 lists allele data for equatorial Africa as obtained from a publicly accessible allele frequency database. Overall frequencies are biased towards HLA-B
alleles. ‘Countries’ indicates the number of countries with a substantial sub-population, ‘Prevalence’ gives the median of allele prevalence in available datasets,
‘Score’ provides the product of Countries and Prevalence, ‘Cumulative Population Coverage’ resembles the cumulative average coverage of populations in Kenya,
Uganda and Rwanda by adding individual alleles in order of their rank.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

regions. To avoid exclusion of regions comprising
changes we removed only putative ligands where
mutants / sequence variants show drastically decreased
MHC affinity. In the biological context this means
accepting the possibility that T-cell populations may not
be efficiently cross-reactive among all variants. Selection
of the actual immunogen for formulation can be based
on most prevalent peptides, clinically most relevant
pathogen isolates, or variants most likely cross-reactive
with as many other variants as possible. The latter is difficult to assess as no clear metric has been defined so
far, but may be approached using standard substitution
matrices such as the BLOSUM series [59,60]. As an
alternative and thus alleviating the problem, sets of epitopes can be used for vaccine development. In practice
this can be realized by using peptides or possibly short
DNA constructs. Epitope mixtures can either be applied
in a single, combined formulation of peptides, or in a
heterologous vaccine schedule. Either way, using a formulation of mixtures should support the development
of cross-reactive T-cell populations while using a heterologous schedule may be more effective in that
respect, as only cross-reactive populations are stimulated
upon boosting with homologous epitopes distinct from
the immune primer.
Manual inspection of data can be insightful in this
context, and we developed a simple system for visualization of heterogeneous T-cell epitope prediction results.
The software framework integrates output from class I
(NetMHC, NetMHCpan) and II (NetMHCII, NetMHCIIpan) ligand, cytotoxic T-cell epitope (NetCTL), as
well as proteasomal cleavage site (NetChop) prediction
with multiple sequence alignments into a single data
source, as exemplarily shown in Figure 10.
Sequence alignments provided in Figure 10 include
LMP2-A and -B isoforms denoted by leading ‘A_’ and
‘B_’, respectively. Homologous A and B isoforms of Cercopithicine herpesvirus_15 (CHV), Cercopithecine herpesvirus 12 (HVP) and Macacine herpesvirus 4 (MHV)
were also included to assess conservation across relatively closely related herpes virus species for delineating
indications of constrained sequence evolution.
Conservancy constrained T-cell epitope clusters (CCTEC)

Based on the same data set as used for supporting visual
analysis also detection of conservancy constrained T-cell
epitope clusters (CCTEC) is performed. The idea is to
identify peptides of minimal length which integrate conserved ligands for as many different HLA/MHC alleles
as possible. This is one approach for tackling the issue
of limited HLA coverage in most peptide vaccines, particularly when compared to subunit or whole pathogen
strategies, and can be viewed as an alternative or extension of HLA supertype prediction. HLA supertypes
select peptides which cover multiple HLA alleles, while

Page 17 of 28

epitope clusters may contain overlapping epitopes. If
only class I epitopes are included adequate proteasomal
processing should be considered in analysis. Different
strategies exist for realization such a concept, depending
on whether fixed length peptides are to be selected, only
coverage of individual HLA supertypes is considered, or
if multiple ligands for each HLA are favorably scored as
these will presumably increase the likelihood of peptides
to stimulate a relevant immune response. In addition,
certain diseases show HLA association, which is to be
considered for selecting T-cell epitopes.
The algorithm we describe for this workflow consists
of the following components, based on multiply aligned
sequences where for each sequence numerous predictive
methods are applied:
1. Identification of conserved antigenic peptides.
Conservation of antigenicity refers to the observation
that while sequence can change antigenicity may be
conserved. Vice versa, minimal changes may lead to
severe alteration of antigenicity. We thus do not
require full conservation of aligned (homologous)
peptides predicted to be antigenic but consider drop
of any of them below 500 nM for class I and II predictions, or below a NetCTL combined score of 0.75
as loss of antigenicity and therefore as an exclusion
criterion. While this step does not explicitly respect
any classical sequence variability filter such as Shannon entropy there is implicit preference for more
conserved regions also on the sequence level, as
those are more likely to conserve substantial antigenicity as well. The algorithm considers individually
aligned peptides only for the sake of antigenicity
conservation, for cluster formation the alignment is
treated as a virtual sequence containing conserved
regions associated with certain HLA classes.
2. Identification of clusters. A window of a width
of e.g. 20 amino-acids is moved over the alignment.
HLA alleles specific for antigenic, conserved peptides
within the windows are registered. A length of 20 is
an arbitrarily selected value adequate primarily for
peptide vaccines, where synthesis cost and fidelity
are of relevance, but much less so for DNA or subunit vaccines.
3. Ranking. 20-mers are ranked by the number of
different HLA alleles they serve as ligands. These
epitope cluster containing regions are monitored
including HLAs covered and degree of HLA coverage (number of ligands per 20-mer).
For each cluster region of interest individual 20-mer
peptides constituting the alignment in the region can be
accessed and used for formulating a vaccine. Individual
peptides can be shorter than 20 residues e.g. based on

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 18 of 28

Figure 10 A snapshot for visualizing T-cell antigenicity of the N-terminal LMP2A. Data from numerous prediction methods were
integrated and visualized in form of an HTML table using a Perl framework. Rows contain aligned EBV sequences; colors indicate degree of
antigenicity for a particular allele. The snapshot was selected for three spots of potential HLA-B3501 antigenicity. Bars below the alignments
indicate (in this order) allele, start position of the ligand, as well as minimum and maximum IC50 in nM of nanomer peptides. Red indicates high
affinity ligands (IC50 in nM around 1), blue indicates low affinity ligands (IC50 in nM around 500).

gaps in the alignment, but usually clusters containing
gaps have to be excluded during manual control of output. Results for our implementation of the algorithm
can be found in Table 6 where only EBV LMP2A
sequences were considered for conservancy analysis
although also other organisms are represented in the
alignment. EBV LMP2B was also excluded as the Nterminally missing region would otherwise be interpreted as deletion/variability.
Figure 10 illustrates one of the potential drawbacks or
limitations of selecting peptides containing epitope clusters. The third B3501 epitope (alignment positions 1624 ‘SPGGDPDGY’) is only partially conserved, but if
antigenic then this sequence represents a better binder
than the other potential ligands. This epitope may therefore dominate the immune response while probably
being largely ineffective with respect to almost 50% of
isolates. Peptide vaccines can potentially avoid this disadvantage by selecting individual epitopes without constraining to local clusters of high conservancy. Epitope
clusters, on the other hand, may have the potential to

include several moderately conserved ligands for one
allele to alleviate this restriction while reducing the
number of peptides to be synthesized.
Congruency of prediction and literature

To exemplify validation of T-cell epitope prediction for
LMP2, class I T-cell ligands of supertypes relevant for
this study were obtained from the IEDB. We consider
LMP2 to be an interesting target, both from a vaccine
point of view as well as for the sake of demonstration.
Experimentally validated nonamer epitopes for LMP2
extracted from the IEDB are: ‘MGSLEMVPM’ (B07/
HLA-B*3501), ‘RRRWRRLTV’ (B27/-), ‘RRWRRLTVC’
(B27/HLA-B*1402) and ‘PYLFWLAAI’ (A24 /HLAA*2301), where supertype and specific allele are given in
parenthesis (if available). Please note that in this context
supertype does not refer to supertype ligands in the
sense of peptides binding to multiple HLA types within
a supertype, but rather that they bind at least one member of the supertype as determined by allele typing.
‘MGSLEMVPM’ is fully conserved and is included as
the N-terminal peptide in Figure 10. According to

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Table 6 Listing of top-ranked peptides for LMP2A
Conservancy Constrained T-cell Epitope Cluster (CCTEC)
analysis
start

stop

HLA count

alleles

177

196

5

A2301(1), B3501(2), B7(1), B27(1), A24(1)

178

197

5

A2301(1), B3501(2), B7(1), B27(1), A24(1)

179

198

5

A2301(1), B3501(2), B7(1), B27(1), A24(1)

230

249

5

A2301(1), B3501(1), B7(1), B27(2), A24(1)

236
237

255
256

5
5

A2301(1), B3501(1), B7(1), B27(4), A24(1)
A2301(1), B3501(1), B7(1), B27(4), A24(1)

243

262

5

A2301(1), B3501(1), B27(1), A24(1), B1402(1)

349

368

5

A2301(1), B1402(1), B7(1), B27(2), A24(1)

350

369

5

A2301(1), B1402(2), B7(1), B27(2), A24(1)

351

370

5

A2301(2), B1402(2), B7(1), B27(2), A24(2)

352

371

5

A2301(2), B1402(2), B7(1), B27(2), A24(2)

353

372

5

A2301(2), B1402(2), B7(1), B27(2), A24(2)

354
355

373
374

5
5

A2301(2), B1402(2), B7(1), B27(2), A24(2)
A2301(2), B1402(2), B7(1), B27(2), A24(2)

120

139

4

A2301(1), B3501(1), B7(1), A24(1)

121

140

4

A2301(1), B3501(1), B7(1), A24(1)

122

141

4

A2301(1), B3501(1), B7(1), A24(1)

123

142

4

A2301(1), B3501(1), B7(1), A24(1)

124

143

4

A2301(1), B3501(1), B7(2), A24(1)

125

144

4

A2301(2), B3501(1), B7(2), A24(2)

Table 6 provides the top 20 peptides from conservancy constrained class I Tcell epitope cluster scan ranked by number of covered HLA alleles. ‘Start’ and
‘Stop’ indicate start and stop residues of the proposed region on the
alignment and need therefore not be congruent with positions on the
reference sequence. ‘HLA count’ indicates how many different class I HLA
alleles and supertypes are covered including the alleles HLA-A*2301, HLAB*3501, HLA-B*1402 and supertypes B7, B27, A24. Numbers in parenthesis
indicate how many ligands were identified within the screening window (20
amino acids) per allele/supertype.

prediction this fragment should show moderate affinity
to HLA-B*3501 while not being a high affinity binder.
‘RRRWRRLTV’ and ‘RRWRRLTVC’ are strongly overlapping. Both are not considered as good candidates for
HLA-B*1402 according to netMHCpan, however
netCTL supertype prediction ranks both high with
respect to supertype B27, which can be considered as
indirect evidence that at least the supertype matches for
‘RRWRRLTVC’. No more detailed typing is included in
the IEDB for ‘RRRWRRLTV’. Both peptides are fully
conserved even on the sequence level across all human
EBV isolates and both LMP2 isoforms. ‘PYLFWLAAI’ is
predicted to be a moderate affinity HLA-A*2301 ligand
and, following NetCTL, is strongly implicated in supertype A24 antigenicity. Positive NetCTL prediction in
this case is mainly based on high ligand affinity and Cterminal processing, and additionally the TAP transport
aspect is favorable. A visualization of variability of antigenicity for ‘PYLFWLAAI’ comparing viruses is depicted
in Figure 11 (alignment positions 137-145).

Page 19 of 28

Discussion
Computational vaccinology workflows

For reducing development efforts a frequently pursued
approach is usage of existing software components. For
example, pBone and pView rest on Taverna for both,
workflow design and execution. Certainly, each software
application is designed for a specific task and corresponding specifications, consequently the trade off for
adapting software modules has to be kept in mind.
However, using frameworks as Taverna renders computational vaccinology workflow design and implementation highly efficient. Similarly, Java offers significant
utility libraries.
Web services are the preferred method of communication for pBone and pView, being in widespread use and
providing (backed by industry standards) an easy
method for accessing computational resources.
Restricted efficacy is seen when transferring larger data
volumes when e.g. compared to remoting technologies
such as RMI or CORBA. For pBone/pView the computational efficacy issue can be neglected because real time
responsiveness is not required for such applications.
However, large data volumes have to be kept in mind
for bioinformatics applications, where Taverna tends to
cause problems distributing 10+ MB of data between
workflow modules. This problem is rooted in the way
web services operate, as the SOA protocol uses XML as
a basis for messages. XML parsers often have problems
dealing with large files because building the XML data
structure is a computationally expensive task. For example, a series of PSI-BLAST runs which were calculated
for the homology mapping of the EBV virus resulted in
overall 30 GB of data, individual sequences produced
PSI-BLAST results of 8 to 10 MB. To combat these data
size issues pBone was designed for using file storage,
subsequently allowing exchange of file identifiers rather
than files as such. A technology currently spreading
throughout the Java community is object-relationalmapping. The frequently utilized implementation via
Hibernate significantly simplifies the development of
database access code. Using Hibernate allows switching
the focus to developing application code rather than
data persistence code, in turn substantially decreasing
overall development time.
Bioinformatics is a fast evolving area commonly featuring short software life cycles, often due to major
improvements or development of alternative solutions.
When requiring input from multiple sources as is the
case in computational vaccinology designing non-monolithic, flexible and adaptable software applications is
therefore a logical step. The practical problem faced is
that designing such software applications takes more

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

Page 20 of 28

Figure 11 Color coded display of variability of antigenicity comparing virus isolates in a region associated with an experimentally
determined epitope. NetCTL (left block) and NetMHC (right block) predictions for supertype A24 and specifically HLA-A2301 are shown,
respectively. The area represented is centered around known A2301/supertype A24 ligand peptide ‘PYLFWLAA’ starting at alignment position
137. Sequences in the alignments are in the same order as in Figure 10, where the first four and last two sequences are not of EBV origin.

time than creating applications exactly for one narrowly
defined task, accenting the importance of a reasonable
assessment of flexibility on the one and focus on the
other hand. pBone and pView have been made for
bioinformatics-rich environments with the analysis of
proteins in mind. However, allowing pBone to make use
of an expandable list of bioinformatics tools made it
necessary to create a wrapper providing this flexibility.
Multiple sequence alignments and variability are a
central part of the visualization concept of pView. At
the first glimpse pView looks similar to the popular
sequence alignment viewer Jalview. Indeed, both make
use of similar concepts such as an MSA centered view,
web-services, and inclusion of project support features.
The facultative focus on processes with access to a central data repository resembles one of the most significant differences, allowing pBone/pView fast processing
of large data volumes. One additional aspect is the ease
of adding or editing of (also overlapping) annotations.
Annotations are an important collaborative feature, as
well as necessary for project controlling. Support for
persistence of annotations to a central (pBone) repository was therefore included. To support easy extendibility pView allows addition of new data formats and
visualization on a ’plugin’ basis.
Identification of vaccine targets

Various strategies and predictors exist for selecting vaccine targets and antigenic determinants, also in pathogens less well studied than EBV. Available predictors

used in the presented workflow were selected based on
superior or at least representative performance judged
by state-of-the-art. In many cases comparable alternative
methods exist or larger consensus predictions could be
included, as is usually the case in a bioinformatics environment. Applied workflows therefore can only represent
one possible realization within a larger set of options.
Selection of B-cell targets is strongly synonymous with
annotation of genomes, as the assignment of function is
usually indicative for relevance e.g. in metabolism,
pathogenesis, and possibly conservation across isolates.
Expression of proteins only during certain phases of the
pathogen life cycle, an aspect sometimes criticized for
vaccines generated from cultivated pathogens, is of particular relevance. Similarly, antigen abundance can be
tackled to a certain degree utilizing transcriptomics or
proteomics data (or alternatively sequencing methods)
[61-63]. While level of expression is of high importance
for T- as well as B-cell epitopes, understanding of
expression variability during pathogen life-cycle such as
early and late viral genes can be of importance [64,65].
It is not yet clear whether mimcry or natural immunity
should be the aim particularly in chronically infecting
pathogens, where immune responses in naive hosts are
by definition not particularly successful for clearance of
infection. Immuno-diversion or -evasion through specific pathogenicity factors may be more often the problem
than lack of effective epitopes or epitope variability.
Homology mapping allows the usage of known epitopes on proteins to predict epitope regions on related

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

(homologous) proteins. Utilizing the concept of homology between biological entities is common practice for
various tasks such as gene or protein annotation. Thus
the idea of using epitope information from homologous
proteins for predicting epitope regions is obvious. Previous work has demonstrated that PSI-BLAST provides
an eligible basis particularly for detecting moderate
remote homology [66,67].
As in all mapping procedures a few key components
exerting major influence on the final outcome have to
be respected. The use of the UniRef90 sequence database for generation of the PSI-BLAST homology network reduces runtime and overcomes the problem of
over-emphasizing groups of closely related sequences.
Using cascading PSI-BLAST may therefore at least in
theory be more sensitive to biases resulting in less sensitive searches. In our example the use of only three PSIBLAST iterations and a stringent cutoff for the final,
non-iterative BLAST against the Herpesviridae (e-value
<= 10 -20 ) ensured that only highly homologous
sequences are identified. In contrast to other remote
homology detection methods which focus on overall
homology at least of domains, our method uses this
concept as a first step and then focuses on identified
regions containing experimentally validated epitopes.
Naturally, mapping of protective antigens can be of
great value in vaccine design per se. We attempt to
make use of as much information as possible by mapping homologous regions of those reported to be
involved in protective immune responses. In consequence each significant PSI-BLAST alignment has to be
re-evaluated in the context of individual neutralizing
peptides. This approach ensures that relevant regions lie
within aligned regions, and that the overall secondary
structure correlates. Even if simple one-to-one mappings
already allow carrying forward experimentally verified
data on epitope sequences, the use of multiple mapping
steps within a homology network is valuable since it
allows propagating information among distantly related
proteins at the borderline of PSI-BLAST sensitivity.
Care has to be taken, however, to avoid false positive
mappings. Alternatively, CSI-BLAST [68] may be
applied which was reported to be more sensitive than
the widely used NCBI-BLAST.
Sequence areas supported by mapping of multiple epitopes even of different pathogens may indicate that such
an area allows targeting several of these pathogens with
one peptide when using homologous region if they are
at least moderately conserved.
Expectations towards Systems Biology in supporting
an understanding of host-pathogen interactions are substantial. While relatively new, this field has already produced encouraging results [69]. Chronically infecting
pathogens like EBV are in this context of particular

Page 21 of 28

interest due to extensive mechanisms for interfering
with the host’s immune system aimed at provoking
immune evasion or misdirection [70]. For vaccinology
insights into such mechanisms are central for identifying
pathogen factors crucial for maintaining viral life-cycle
(or even leading to subsequent diseases as malignancies).
We exemplarily focused on the molecular environment of differentially regulated CD9 on B-cells, a factor
associated with the primary EBV receptor CD21, for
deriving some of the effects EBV may have on host-cell
network organization and function. While EBV can also
infect CD21 negative cells (probably through binding to
B-cells first) this complement receptor clearly plays a
central role in EBV pathogenesis [17]. According to
UNIPROT CD21 is expressed on mature B-lymphocytes
as well as on some other immunologically relevant cell
types and further on pharyngeal epithelial cells. This is
of particular interest as the two groups of malignancies
which have been speculated to be most likely associated
with EBV infection are lymphoid tumours (primarily of
B-cell origin) as well as nasopharyngeal carcinomas.
Several observations can be made in a Systems Biology
analysis. Among the 48 human factors being in context
to EBV in a CD9-centered interaction network 12 are
directly targeted by HHV-4 proteins while none of the
direct binders is differentially regulated. Probably most
apparent is the strong presence of immunologically relevant players (12 of 48). This may not seem astonishing
as the network was built around down-regulated CD9,
thus likely including factors involved in B-cell regulation, although data on differential regulation were
derived from epithelial cells and not B-cells. While
CD21 is present in epithelial cells, this specific enrichment of functionality centrally assigned to B-cells is an
interesting finding when targeting a virus infecting both
cell types. This finding certainly raises the question in
how far pathogenicity mechanisms of EBV are specialized for epithelial cells or B-cells, or work similarly in
both. There is certainly one major exception, however,
as EBV only shows a latent (dormant) status in the Bcell lineage. Concerning interference with homeostatic
B-cell regulation, the latency associated antigen LMP2
plays a major role as has been shown previously [71].
LMP2 prevents EBV reactivation in latently infected
cells through suppression of SYK and LYN activity [72].
On the other hand this protein bypasses developmental
checkpoints allowing immature B-cells to proliferate, an
aspect which may be associated with malignancy. Similarly LMP1, a functional CD40 homologue [73], exerts
major effects on control of B-cell proliferation [74]. The
association with CD209 (DC-SIGN) is not unexpected
as this protein is known to bind several envelope viruses
including human cytomegalovirus, a relative of EBV
[75]. The third observation is the strong enrichment of

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

factors associated with neoplastic disorders. At least eleven out of 48 proteins present in the interaction graph
have been explicitly associated with cancer.
The direct interaction between the latency associated
protein EBNA2 and the host factor MCP (CD46) is also
of particular interest. MCP acts as a receptor for multiple pathogens including Measles virus and Human Herpesvirus 6 [76,77], the latter being phylogenetically
related to EBV. MCP exhibits several immunity associated functionalities, one being a co-stimulatory factor
for T-helper cell development which enact at least part
of their potential through IL-10 release [78]. Generally,
the immune-evasive strategy of EBV appears to rest
strongly on IL-10, as the virus itself also codes for an
IL-10 homologue (vIL-10; BCRF1) being expressed during the lytic cycle. The immunosuppressive effects
mediated through regulatory T-cells during EBV latency
may also exert certain side effects pertaining to autoimmune-disease. Hypothetically this may happen
through the inability (or decreased efficiency) to fully
resolve certain infections in the presence of EBV.
IMPDH2, a rate limiting enzyme of guanine nucleotide synthesis, is consistently down-regulated, much in
contrary to what may be expected during oncogenic
transformation or increased metabolic needs for virus
production. While there is no safe way to generalize
findings found for specific tumors, at least in colorectal
cancer up-regulation of this protein and associated
auto-antibodies were observed [79]. The down-regulation seen may result from anti-viral mechanisms striving
to limit the metabolic rate (or may reflect the epithelial
origin of the transcriptomics data used). However,
IMPDH2 was not reported as consistently differentially
regulated in the ‘meta-B’ dataset presented by Chen et
al. in both, nasopharyngeal carcinoma and primary effusion lymphoma [34]. Similarly, MAP3K5 up-regulation
may be a reaction to viral infection as this protein is
thought to be associated with apoptotic death [80].
Interestingly, this is also the case in latently infected
cells suggesting viral mechanisms to overcome this
apoptotic stimulus. Of relevance in this context is the
finding of the down-regulation of the pro-apoptotic factor TRIP12. Down-regulation of APPBP1 (NAE1) is
somewhat unexpected as it may suggest attempted cellcycle arrest also in latently infected cells, while on the
other hand avoiding the apoptotic stimulus [81]. However, this may be a tissue specific assumption as apoptosis data was generated in neuronal tissue. Laminin
receptor ITGA6 is down-regulated during latent infection but up-regulated during recurrent infection.
The further observation of potential interest derived
on the Systems Biology analysis of EBV infection is the
interaction between BALF4 (gp110;gB) and human
LAMB1 (Laminin subunit beta-1) as well as FN1

Page 22 of 28

(fibronectin). BALF4, and at least its homologue in
HHV-1 (UL27;gB), act as essential secondary receptors
after initial activity of the primary adhesin (BLLF1 in
the case of EBV). UL27 is also essential for initial
attachment to host proteoglycans [82]. gp110 is also of
specific interest for homology mapping and epitope prediction as this protein is highly conserved in herpesviruses and present in fairly diverse viral species. EBV
gp350 (BLLF1) binds to host CD21, and in a second
step BALF4 is required for host-membrane fusion
[47,82-84]. As LAMB2 and FN1 are both components of
the extracellular matrix this may suggest a way to enrich
in certain tissues lacking CD21. An alternative interpretation is the potential enrichment of laminins such as
LAMB1 (or alternatively fibronectin) in the viral membrane, as these may potentially serve as primary receptors interfacing with gp110. While this may seem farfetched, LAMB1 and FN1 bind to integrins (receptors)
ITGA3 and ITGB1, as well as LAMB1 alone binds to
ITGA7. The integrins ITGA3 and ITGB1 also directly
interact with CD9 and CD19 suggesting that a hypothetical uptake of laminins or fibronectin in the viral membrane would utilize similar membrane complexes as the
classical CD19 assembly. According to UNIPROT annotation LAMB1 is thought to interact with other laminins
through coiled coil structures and can be taken up by a
high affinity receptor. The reduction of extracellular
matrix in cell-cultures may thus be part of the reason
why the tissue tropism of EBV seems to be more
restricted in-vitro than in-vivo. Also, an increased
amount of BALF4 in mature virions can expand tropism
to epithelial cells [84,85]. To verify this adhesion
hypothesis EBV particle proteomics would be helpful, as
host proteins have been shown to be components of virions in Herpes simplex virus 1 [85-87].
The presented interaction network in particular suggests LMP2, EBNA2 and BALF4 (gp110) for inclusion
into a list of vaccine targets resulting from the Systems
Biology analysis of interfacing to host cellular processes
involved in both, immunological response as well as
neoplastic disorders.
Methods for selecting candidate B-cell antigens and
epitopes for protective immune responses have been significantly put forward in the recent past [25,88]. Particularly with respect to protective epitopes we stress to
include functional considerations for B-cell epitope prediction, essentially ranking pure antigenicity as a secondary selection criterion. We consider functionally well
accessible sites as preferred targets for stimulating an
immune response interfering with relevant pathogen (or
other target) functionality. Such considerations primarily
pertain to peptide vaccines although it may well be
extended to entire domains and select recombinant antigens. The presented approach primarily relies on the

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

classification method previously proposed by Söllner
et al. [88], as well as inclusion of potential binding sites
in disordered regions [89]. This concept will have to be
significantly expanded as new predictors for functional
sites [90-92] and annotation resources with respect to
target coverage expand [93,94]. From our point of view
prediction of B-cell epitopes is far less an issue for one
specific epitope prediction routine than a suite of bioinformatics resources for characterizing a candidate protein. Routines applied in this area are naturally in
constant flow due to generally short software life-cycles
in bioinformatics. Dedicated predictors for continuous as
well as discontinuous epitopes are just one element. In
the study presented here semi-manual analysis of protectivity yielded encouraging results. Comparison of precision and baseline for amino acid based comparison and
particularly coverage of known neutralizing epitopes
clearly demonstrate the practical benefit for utilizing
such tools in vaccinology. The concept of considering
functionally conserved sites is naturally also applicable to
T-cell epitopes. In this context it will also be interesting
whether furin dependent maturation of EBV gp110 is
therapeutically tangible [47]. In the realm of T-cell epitope prediction several successful methods have been
published. For this study we selected a number of human
HLA alleles relevant for equatorial Africa and integrated
predictions performed by several of the CBS tools
(netMHC, netCTL, netMHCpan, netChop, netMHCIIpan) into a format amenable for visual analysis of variability of antigenicity. In this context it is worth
mentioning that while the difference between antigenicity
and immunogenicity of peptides is a highly important
concept it is often underappreciated in immunoinformatics practice. Modeling of immunological pathways
will likely improve prediction of antigenicity, whereas
immunogenicity and immunodominance are decidedly
less well understood and represented in models. Nevertheless we see prediction of antigenicity as a reasonable
estimate of immunogenicity and immunodominance.
While manual analysis of single sequences for a reduced
set of alleles has its merits it is often necessary to screen
proteins or entire proteomes for peptides covering multiple alleles. Cluster contained epitopes may not necessarily
be immuno-dominant during natural infection but may
still provide the merit of broad HLA/MHC coverage. This
approach tends to identify supertype binders for several
MHC classes or alternatively potentially overlapping epitopes depending on the length of input epitopes and
length of the output peptides. We term this concept ‘Conservancy Constrained T-cell Epitope Cluster (CCTEC)’
and understand it as a complement or extension of previously published methods for optimizing vaccine coverage
[95]. For the implementation presented here we used fixed
width windows leading to ranked peptides of equal length.

Page 23 of 28

While this is a straightforward approach it may be preferred to allow peptides within a certain length range, possibly applying a penalty function for particularly long
peptides. This would lead to most efficient selections in
terms of covering most alleles with as few amino acids to
be included as possible. As an additional advantage Cterminal processing of epitopes would be less relevant as
at least a fraction of the epitopes would end with the cluster C-terminus thus potentially leading to enhanced availability for MHC loading. Also it may be desirable to
weight specific alleles and allele classes differently, for
example for achieving optimal coverage of one supertype
before searching for additional supertype specificities. One
aspect to consider for T-cell epitope clusters is that they
are probably best suited for DNA vaccines, as encoded
proteins go through the proteasome for which good predictive models such as netChop are available. For peptide
and subunit vaccines the lysosomal pathway of proteolysis
should apply, so the prediction of dominantly produced
peptides ready for cross-presentation [96] may be a hurdle
for efficient application of CCTECs in dendritic cell based
(T-cell focused) peptide vaccines. In any case, validation of
T-cell epitopes, optimally in suitable animal models [97],
is of crucial importance due to various difficult to predict
factors [98].

Conclusions
Integration of bioinformatics workflows for target, peptide, or subunit selections, combined with experimental
results and overall management of such distributed
knowledge are key for enabling efficient and high quality
vaccine designs. Integration is of particular relevance for
pathogens where experimental setups are complicated
or nested, e.g. for determining optimal dosage of adjuvants suited for specific steering of immune responses
[99]. We consider a better integration of literature
mining results with standard procedures for target selection and decision making as further key area, next to the
specific relevance of a multitude of bioinformatics procedures in the context of computational vaccinology [4].
Certainly most of the immunoinformatics modules need
further improvement and new models have to be
derived e.g. for accessing cross-reactivity between epitopes [100]. The latter is of crucial importance to decide
on the number of epitopes necessary to efficiently cover
a site with given variability, or to decide whether host or
unrelated pathogen epitopes may be cross-reactive.
Among the many aspects to be improved, homology
mapping should not remain focused on continuous epitopes only, but attempts should be made to map any
type of protectivity data. Omics data will be needed
including splicing information, as suggested e.g. by
opposed effects of human ST5 and particularly implicated for isoform abundance altering viruses such as

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

EBV [101]. In particular a closer link to genome sequencing will be seen in the near future [102].

Methods
Data sources and retrieval

All protein sequences associated with the family of Herpesviridae were retrieved from NCBI. As of August 2009
the Herpesviridae family contained 31,844 sequences.
B-cell epitopes for all herpes viruses were downloaded
from the IEDB [103] in XML format (data status as of
May 2009). Peptide sequences and additional data such
as functional effect of antibodies were extracted from
this source. For the purpose of protectivity prediction
we consider ‘antibody leading to biological activity’ as
sufficiently precise.
Two complete EBV genomes have so far been deposited at the NCBI, namely EBV type 1 (wt) and EBV type
2 (strain AG876), where these assemblies may be reconstituted from multiple isolates [104,105]. In addition to
these two complete standard (reference) sequences
numerous partial genomes from other viral isolates are
available.
Homology modeling

Homology models were generated using MODELLER
version 9v6 [106]. Adequate templates were identified
using BLAST searches against RCSB PDB (part of
wwPDB) sequences [107]. PDB entries 3FVC and 2H6O
for gp110 and gp350, respectively, were identified and
used during the modeling process. The sequence available from PDB entry 3FVC and the equivalent part of
gp110 are to 99% identical. In the case of gp350 the two
sequence parts are to 98% identical. For multi-chain
models the modeling setup was based on the data provided in ‘model-multichain.py’. Loops were optimized
using the ‘dope’ loop model. For optimization, the functions ‘library_schedule’ (VTFM optimization) and
‘md_level’ were both set to ‘slow’.
For asparagine and glutamine amide rotamer correction we used NQ-Flipper [108], for visualization of 3D
molecular structures we used Pymol [109].
Prediction of B-cell epitopes

Functional context was assigned by ANCHOR (disorder
to order transitions in motif contexts) [89,110], or effective prediction involving protective sites [88]. Methods
for prediction of continuous B-cell epitopes comprised
COBEpro [111], FBCpred [112] and PCA19 previously
reported in association with protectivity prediction [88],
complemented by a method referred to as clusters of
optimal peptides (COP). Briefly, the proposed protectivity predictions work through machine-learning models
based on 10-mer peptides featuring an unweighted total
score integrating maximum antigenicity, minimized

Page 24 of 28

probability for post-translational modifications, and
minimal variability. Instead of using these models the
optimized 10-mers can be directly used for determination of clusters. For the COP approach we selected at
least the 25 most-optimal peptides per protein and
retrieved sequence stretches where selected peptides
overlap as most promising areas. Screening for discontinuous epitopes on crystallized or modeled protein
domains was done by utilizing DiscoTope [113] and ElliPro [114].
All methods were applied using standard settings for
each routine, for COBEpro a minimum cutoff value of
15 was used. For assessment of trans-membrane topology MEMSAT3 [115] and TMHMM2 [116,117] were
used, sequence-based solvent accessibility prediction was
done applying Sable [118,119]. Protein glycosylation was
determined using NetNGlyc and NetOGlyc [120,121].
Presence and boundaries of protein internal repeats
were analyzed using RADAR [50], HHrepID [51], and
by performing manual inspection. Quality of B-cell epitope predictions was measured using sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and the Matthews correlation coefficient
(MCC), a common measure for the quality of binary
classification [122,123].
Prediction of T-cell epitopes

T-cell epitopes were predicted using tools provided by
the Center of Biological Sequence analysis, Technical
University of Denmark. In particular NetMHC 3.0
[124,125], NetCTL v1.2 [126], NetMHCII v1.1 [127] and
NetChop v3.0 [128] were applied. For class I and class
II epitopes where no dedicated classifiers were provided
ligand affinities as determined by NetMHC, NetMHCpan [129], and NetMHCIIpan [130] were used.
pBone/pView relevant software and software libraries

Software platforms and libraries necessary for realizing
the technical implementation of the concept of pBone /
pView presented in this publication are available in the
public domain. Workflow design and execution can be
realized using Taverna [16] (http://www.taverna.org.uk/).
The Taverna Workbench (http://www.mygrid.org.uk/
tools/taverna/taverna-1/taverna-download/) provides an
easy to use graphical interface for workflow design, the
Taverna Remote Execution Service (http://www.mygrid.
org.uk/tools/taverna/associated-tools/taverna-remoteexec ution/) allows to schedule and execute workflows
on a dedicated server. The Remote Execution Service
provides an easy to use REST webservice interface
which can be utilized to manage workflows directly
within pView. The module wrapper can be realized
using plain Java. Implementation of a common interface
ensures that wrapped modules can be registered at the
Module Registration Global Webservice. Housekeeping

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

work necessary to retrieve input data and persist output
data can be achieved by interacting with the other
pBone software components, execution of the wrapped
program can be realized using the Java System class
which provides functionality to execute system commands in a separated sub-process. The Module Registration Global Web Service can be realized using the
Apache Axis (http://ws.apache.org/axis2/) library to
expose modules via a webservice, and Apache Tomcat
(http://tomcat.apache.org/) to deploy it. Instead of those
two components Soaplab [131] (http://soaplab.sourceforge.net/) could be used to expose command-line programs as webservice, however some additional code for
required housekeeping functionality would still be
necessary. The other pBone software components, such
as the Central File Heap or the Project Manager, are
straight forward to implement using Java as programming language, the Hibernate framework (http://www.
hibernate.org/) for object relational mapping, and
MySQL (http://www.mysql.com/) as database management system. However, using well defined interfaces for
each component and keeping a modular design in mind
is critical for a successful implementation. Based on
individual needs the single components can be interconnected using webservices or may be aggregated into a
single monolithic component.
The concept of pView may be realized using Java
Swing and a conventional model view control architecture. Basically, data generated during workflow execution can be retrieved via the corresponding pBone
components, e.g. Central File Heap, Dataobject Tracker
and Project Manager, transformed into an adequate data
structure using the reader supplied with the corresponding visualization plugin and visualized with the visualization component supplied by the visualization plugin.
Arranging those data structures in a graph like data
structure eases the implementation of the range selection propagation features. Communication can be realized via webservices using Apache Axis. The BioJava
[132] (http://biojava.org/wiki/Main_Page)- and the Phylogenetic Analysis Library [133] (http://www.cebl.auckland.ac.nz/pal-project/) come in handy for reading
various file formats. The JFreeChart library (http://www.
jfree.org/jfreechart/) provides straight forward ways to
realize chart based visualizations. The Java Universal
Network/Graph Framework (http://jung.sourceforge.net/
) can be used to manage the data structures in a graph
like data structure. Instead of implementing pView from
scratch it can be realized by extending Jalview [20]
(http://www.jalview.org/).
A comprehensive set of workflow modules can be
assembled from public domain software. For example
the calculation of multiple sequence alignments can be
realized using MUSCLE [134]. Memsat3 [115], Sable

Page 25 of 28

[118] and Psipred [135] allow to predict trans-membrane domains, solvent accessibility and secondary
structure, respectively.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr. Paul Perco for his helpful suggestions and support
concerning Systems Biology analyses.
This article has been published as part of Immunome Research Volume 6
Supplement 2, 2010: Computational Vaccinology: State-of-the-art
Assessments. The full contents of the supplement are available online at
http://www.immunome-research.com/supplements/6/S2.
Author details
1
emergentec biodevelopment GmbH, Rathausstrasse 5/3, 1010 Vienna,
Austria. 2University of Applied Sciences, Softwarepark 11, 4232 Hagenberg,
Austria. 3RT-Europe Research Center, 9200 Mosonmagyarovar, Var 2, Hungary.
4
Galenbio Kft., Erdőszél köz 21, 1037 Budapest, Hungary and GalenBio, Inc.,
5922 Farnsworth Ct, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA. 5Institute for Theoretical
Chemistry, University of Vienna, Währinger Strasse 17, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
Authors’ contributions
BM initiated the study, participated in design and coordination and
participated in manuscript preparation. AH and GS designed and
implemented the pBone/pView system, AH was responsible for the
homology mapping process and was strongly involved in the Systems
Biology analysis. JS conceived of the pBone/pView system, designed the
study, drafted the manuscript and performed all work related to homology
modeling and epitope predictions and was strongly involved in Systems
Biology analyses. RF provided data and data processing for Systems Biology
analyses. SS contributed to target selection and together with LS critically
reviewed the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare having no competing interests
Published: 3 November 2010
References
1. Hopp TP: Retrospective: 12 years of antigenic determinant predictions,
and more. Peptide Research 1993, 6:183-190.
2. Greenbaum JA, Kotturi MF, Kim Y, Oseroff C, Vaughan K, Salimi N, Vita R,
Ponomarenko J, Scheuermann RH, Sette A, Peters B: Pre-existing immunity
against swine-origin H1N1 influenza viruses in the general human
population. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2009, 106:20365-20370.
3. Nielsen M, Lundegaard C, Blicher T, Lamberth K, Harndahl M, Justesen S,
Røder G, Peters B, Sette A, Lund O, Buus S: NetMHCpan, a method for
quantitative predictions of peptide binding to any HLA-A and -B locus
protein of known sequence. PloS One 2007, 2:e796.
4. Flower DR: Bioinformatics for Vaccinology. Wiley, 1 2008.
5. Van Regenmortel MHV: The rational design of biological complexity: a
deceptive metaphor. Proteomics 2007, 7:965-975.
6. Yang X, Yu X: An introduction to epitope prediction methods and
software. Reviews in Medical Virology 2009, 19:77-96.
7. Gershburg E, Pagano JS: Epstein-Barr virus infections: prospects for
treatment. The Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 2005, 56:277-281.
8. Cohen JI, Bollard CM, Khanna R, Pittaluga S: Current understanding of the
role of Epstein-Barr virus in lymphomagenesis and therapeutic
approaches to EBV-associated lymphomas. Leukemia & Lymphoma 2008,
49(Suppl 1):27-34.
9. Lahiri A, Das P, Chakravortty D: Engagement of TLR signaling as adjuvant:
towards smarter vaccine and beyond. Vaccine 2008, 26:6777-6783.
10. De Gregorio E, D’Oro U, Wack A: Immunology of TLR-independent
vaccine adjuvants. Current Opinion in Immunology 2009, 21:339-345.
11. Mutwiri G, Gerdts V, Lopez M, Babiuk LA: Innate immunity and new
adjuvants. Revue Scientifique Et Technique (International Office of Epizootics)
2007, 26:147-156.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

12. Nickle DC, Rolland M, Jensen MA, Pond SLK, Deng W, Seligman M,
Heckerman D, Mullins JI, Jojic N: Coping with viral diversity in HIV vaccine
design. PLoS Computational Biology 2007, 3:e75.
13. Azizi A, Diaz-Mitoma F: Viral peptide immunogens: current challenges
and opportunities. Journal of Peptide Science: An Official Publication of the
European Peptide Society 2007, 13:776-786.
14. Bijker MS, Melief CJM, Offringa R, van der Burg SH: Design and
development of synthetic peptide vaccines: past, present and future.
Expert Review of Vaccines 2007, 6:591-603.
15. Purcell AW, McCluskey J, Rossjohn J: More than one reason to rethink the
use of peptides in vaccine design. Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery 2007,
6:404-414.
16. Hull D, Wolstencroft K, Stevens R, Goble C, Pocock MR, Li P, Oinn T:
Taverna: a tool for building and running workflows of services. Nucleic
Acids Research 2006, 34:W729-732.
17. Niller HH, Wolf H, Minarovits J: Regulation and dysregulation of EpsteinBarr virus latency: implications for the development of autoimmune
diseases. Autoimmunity 2008, 41:298-328.
18. Pohl D: Epstein-Barr virus and multiple sclerosis. Journal of the
Neurological Sciences 2009, 286:62-64.
19. De Roure D, Goble C: Software Design for Empowering Scientists. IEEE
Software 2009, 26:88-95.
20. Waterhouse AM, Procter JB, Martin DMA, Clamp M, Barton GJ: Jalview
Version 2–a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis
workbench. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2009, 25:1189-1191.
21. The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm. [http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1321].
22. Fieldhouse RJ, Merrill AR: Needle in the haystack: structure-based toxin
discovery. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 2008, 33:546-556.
23. Sachdeva G, Kumar K, Jain P, Ramachandran S: SPAAN: a software
program for prediction of adhesins and adhesin-like proteins using
neural networks. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2005, 21:483-491.
24. Ansari HR, Flower DR, Raghava GPS: AntigenDB: an immunoinformatics
database of pathogen antigens. Nucleic Acids Research 2009.
25. Doytchinova IA, Flower DR: VaxiJen: a server for prediction of protective
antigens, tumour antigens and subunit vaccines. BMC Bioinformatics 2007,
8:4.
26. Reitmaier R, Reitmaier R: Review of Immunoinformatic approaches to insilico B-cell epitope prediction. Nature Precedings 2007.
27. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Research 1997, 25:3389-3402.
28. Suzek BE, Huang H, McGarvey P, Mazumder R, Wu CH: UniRef:
comprehensive and non-redundant UniProt reference clusters.
Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2007, 23:1282-1288.
29. Buzan T: The Mind Map Book. BBC Active, 1 2006.
30. Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome
Research 2003, 13:2498-2504.
31. Fossum E, Friedel CC, Rajagopala SV, Titz B, Baiker A, Schmidt T, Kraus T,
Stellberger T, Rutenberg C, Suthram S, Bandyopadhyay S, Rose D, von
Brunn A, Uhlmann M, Zeretzke C, Dong Y, Boulet H, Koegl M, Bailer SM,
Koszinowski U, Ideker T, Uetz P, Zimmer R, Haas J: Evolutionarily conserved
herpesviral protein interaction networks. PLoS Pathogens 2009, 5:
e1000570.
32. Calderwood MA, Venkatesan K, Xing L, Chase MR, Vazquez A, Holthaus AM,
Ewence AE, Li N, Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Hill DE, Vidal M, Kieff E, Johannsen E:
Epstein-Barr virus and virus human protein interaction maps. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2007,
104:7606-7611.
33. Chatr-aryamontri A, Ceol A, Peluso D, Nardozza A, Panni S, Sacco F, Tinti M,
Smolyar A, Castagnoli L, Vidal M, Cusick ME, Cesareni G: VirusMINT: a viral
protein interaction database. Nucleic Acids Research 2009, 37:D669-673.
34. Chen X, Liang S, Zheng W, Liao Z, Shang T, Ma W: Meta-analysis of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma microarray data explores mechanism of EBVregulated neoplastic transformation. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:322.
35. Bernthaler A, Mühlberger I, Fechete R, Perco P, Lukas A, Mayer B: A
dependency graph approach for the analysis of differential gene
expression profiles. Molecular BioSystems 2009.
36. Brown KR, Jurisica I: Online predicted human interaction database.
Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2005, 21:2076-2082.

Page 26 of 28

37. Aranda B, Achuthan P, Alam-Faruque Y, Armean I, Bridge A, Derow C,
Feuermann M, Ghanbarian AT, Kerrien S, Khadake J, Kerssemakers J, Leroy C,
Menden M, Michaut M, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Neuhauser SN, Orchard S,
Perreau V, Roechert B, van Eijk K, Hermjakob H: The IntAct molecular
interaction database in 2010. Nucleic Acids Research 2010, 38:D525-531.
38. Stark C, Breitkreutz B, Reguly T, Boucher L, Breitkreutz A, Tyers M: BioGRID:
a general repository for interaction datasets. Nucleic Acids Research 2006,
34:D535-539.
39. Vastrik I, D’Eustachio P, Schmidt E, Joshi-Tope G, Gopinath G, Croft D, de
Bono B, Gillespie M, Jassal B, Lewis S, Matthews L, Wu G, Birney E, Stein L:
Reactome: a knowledge base of biologic pathways and processes.
Genome Biology 2007, 8:R39.
40. D’Addario M, Ahmad A, Morgan A, Menezes J: Binding of the Epstein-Barr
virus major envelope glycoprotein gp350 results in the upregulation of
the TNF-alpha gene expression in monocytic cells via NF-kappaB
involving PKC, PI3-K and tyrosine kinases. Journal of Molecular Biology
2000, 298:765-778.
41. Szakonyi G, Klein MG, Hannan JP, Young KA, Ma RZ, Asokan R, Holers VM,
Chen XS: Structure of the Epstein-Barr virus major envelope
glycoprotein. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 2006, 13:996-1001.
42. Urquiza M, Lopez R, Patiño H, Rosas JE, Patarroyo ME: Identification of
three gp350/220 regions involved in Epstein-Barr virus invasion of host
cells. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 2005, 280:35598-35605.
43. Backovic M, Longnecker R, Jardetzky TS: Structure of a trimeric variant of
the Epstein-Barr virus glycoprotein B. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 2009, 106:2880-2885.
44. Beisel C, Tanner J, Matsuo T, Thorley-Lawson D, Kezdy F, Kieff E: Two major
outer envelope glycoproteins of Epstein-Barr virus are encoded by the
same gene. Journal of Virology 1985, 54:665-674.
45. Park SJ, Seo M, Lee SK, Lee BJ: Membrane binding properties of EBV
gp110 C-terminal domain; evidences for structural transition in the
membrane environment. Virology 2008, 379:181-190.
46. Henrick K, Thornton JM: PQS: a protein quaternary structure file server.
Trends in Biochemical Sciences 1998, 23:358-361.
47. Sorem J, Longnecker R: Cleavage of Epstein-Barr virus glycoprotein B is
required for full function in cell-cell fusion with both epithelial and B
cells. The Journal of General Virology 2009, 90:591-595.
48. Herold BC, Gerber SI, Belval BJ, Siston AM, Shulman N: Differences in the
susceptibility of herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 to modified heparin
compounds suggest serotype differences in viral entry. Journal of
Virology 1996, 70:3461-3469.
49. Apweiler R, Bairoch A, Wu CH, Barker WC, Boeckmann B, Ferro S,
Gasteiger E, Huang H, Lopez R, Magrane M, Martin MJ, Natale DA,
O’Donovan C, Redaschi N, Yeh LL: UniProt: the Universal Protein
knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Research 2004, 32:D115-119.
50. Heger A, Holm L: Rapid automatic detection and alignment of repeats in
protein sequences. Proteins 2000, 41:224-237.
51. Biegert A, Söding J: De novo identification of highly diverged protein
repeats by probabilistic consistency. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2008,
24:807-814.
52. Baer R, Bankier AT, Biggin MD, Deininger PL, Farrell PJ, Gibson TJ, Hatfull G,
Hudson GS, Satchwell SC, Séguin C: DNA sequence and expression of the
B95-8 Epstein-Barr virus genome. Nature 1984, 310:207-211.
53. Chene A, Donati D, Orem J, Mbidde ER, Kironde F, Wahlgren M,
Bejarano MT: Endemic Burkitt’s lymphoma as a polymicrobial disease:
new insights on the interaction between Plasmodium falciparum and
Epstein-Barr virus. Seminars in Cancer Biology 2009, 19:411-420.
54. Tsurui H, Takahashi T: Prediction of T-cell epitope. Journal of
Pharmacological Sciences 2007, 105:299-316.
55. Middleton D, Menchaca L, Rood H, Komerofsky R: New allele frequency
database: [http://www.allelefrequencies.net]. Tissue Antigens 2003,
61:403-407.
56. Bui H, Sidney J, Dinh K, Southwood S, Newman MJ, Sette A: Predicting
population coverage of T-cell epitope-based diagnostics and vaccines.
BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:153.
57. Sidney J, Peters B, Frahm N, Brander C, Sette A: HLA class I supertypes: a
revised and updated classification. BMC Immunology 2008, 9:1.
58. Swanson-Mungerson M, Longnecker R: Epstein-Barr virus latent
membrane protein 2A and autoimmunity. Trends in Immunology 2007,
28:213-218.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

59. Henikoff S, Henikoff JG: Amino acid substitution matrices from protein
blocks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 1992, 89:10915-10919.
60. Henikoff S, Henikoff JG: Performance evaluation of amino acid
substitution matrices. Proteins 1993, 17:49-61.
61. Herbeck JT, Wall DP, Wernegreen JJ: Gene expression level influences
amino acid usage, but not codon usage, in the tsetse fly endosymbiont
Wigglesworthia. Microbiology 2003, 149:2585-2596.
62. Roymondal U, Das S, Sahoo S: Predicting gene expression level from
relative codon usage bias: an application to Escherichia coli genome.
DNA Research: An International Journal for Rapid Publication of Reports on
Genes and Genomes 2009, 16:13-30.
63. Willenbrock H, Ussery D: Prediction of highly expressed genes in
microbes based on chromatin accessibility. BMC Molecular Biology 2007,
8:11.
64. Oseroff C, Kos F, Bui H, Peters B, Pasquetto V, Glenn J, Palmore T, Sidney J,
Tscharke DC, Bennink JR, Southwood S, Grey HM, Yewdell JW, Sette A: HLA
class I-restricted responses to vaccinia recognize a broad array of
proteins mainly involved in virulence and viral gene regulation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2005, 102:13980-13985.
65. Pasquetto V, Bui H, Giannino R, Banh C, Mirza F, Sidney J, Oseroff C,
Tscharke DC, Irvine K, Bennink JR, Peters B, Southwood S, Cerundolo V,
Grey H, Yewdell JW, Sette A: HLA-A*0201, HLA-A*1101, and HLA-B*0702
transgenic mice recognize numerous poxvirus determinants from a wide
variety of viral gene products. Journal of Immunology (Baltimore, Md.:
1950) 2005, 175:5504-5515.
66. Bhadra R, Sandhya S, Abhinandan KR, Chakrabarti S, Sowdhamini R,
Srinivasan N: Cascade PSI-BLAST web server: a remote homology search
tool for relating protein domains. Nucleic Acids Research 2006, 34:
W143-146.
67. Melvin I, Weston J, Leslie C, Noble WS: RANKPROP: a web server for
protein remote homology detection. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2009,
25:121-122.
68. Biegert A, Söding J: Sequence context-specific profiles for homology
searching. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2009, 106:3770-3775.
69. Querec TD, Akondy RS, Lee EK, Cao W, Nakaya HI, Teuwen D, Pirani A,
Gernert K, Deng J, Marzolf B, Kennedy K, Wu H, Bennouna S, Oluoch H,
Miller J, Vencio RZ, Mulligan M, Aderem A, Ahmed R, Pulendran B: Systems
biology approach predicts immunogenicity of the yellow fever vaccine
in humans. Nature Immunology 2009, 10:116-125.
70. Ressing ME, Horst D, Griffin BD, Tellam J, Zuo J, Khanna R, Rowe M,
Wiertz EJHJ: Epstein-Barr virus evasion of CD8(+) and CD4(+) T cell
immunity via concerted actions of multiple gene products. Seminars in
Cancer Biology 2008, 18:397-408.
71. Caldwell RG, Wilson JB, Anderson SJ, Longnecker R: Epstein-Barr virus
LMP2A drives B cell development and survival in the absence of normal
B cell receptor signals. Immunity 1998, 9:405-411.
72. Miller CL, Burkhardt AL, Lee JH, Stealey B, Longnecker R, Bolen JB, Kieff E:
Integral membrane protein 2 of Epstein-Barr virus regulates reactivation
from latency through dominant negative effects on protein-tyrosine
kinases. Immunity 1995, 2:155-166.
73. Graham JP, Moore CR, Bishop GA: Roles of the TRAF2/3 binding site in
differential B cell signaling by CD40 and its viral oncogenic mimic,
LMP1. Journal of Immunology (Baltimore, Md.: 1950) 2009, 183:2966-2973.
74. Lee DY, Sugden B: The latent membrane protein 1 oncogene modifies Bcell physiology by regulating autophagy. Oncogene 2008, 27:2833-2842.
75. Halary F, Amara A, Lortat-Jacob H, Messerle M, Delaunay T, Houlès C,
Fieschi F, Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Moreau JF, Déchanet-Merville J: Human
cytomegalovirus binding to DC-SIGN is required for dendritic cell
infection and target cell trans-infection. Immunity 2002, 17:653-664.
76. Naniche D, Varior-Krishnan G, Cervoni F, Wild TF, Rossi B, RabourdinCombe C, Gerlier D: Human membrane cofactor protein (CD46) acts as a
cellular receptor for measles virus. Journal of Virology 1993, 67:6025-6032.
77. Santoro F, Kennedy PE, Locatelli G, Malnati MS, Berger EA, Lusso P: CD46 is
a cellular receptor for human herpesvirus 6. Cell 1999, 99:817-827.
78. Kemper C, Chan AC, Green JM, Brett KA, Murphy KM, Atkinson JP:
Activation of human CD4+ cells with CD3 and CD46 induces a Tregulatory cell 1 phenotype. Nature 2003, 421:388-392.

Page 27 of 28

79. He Y, Mou Z, Li W, Liu B, Fu T, Zhao S, Xiang D, Wu Y: Identification of
IMPDH2 as a tumor-associated antigen in colorectal cancer using
immunoproteomics analysis. International Journal of Colorectal Disease
2009, 24:1271-1279.
80. Tobiume K, Saitoh M, Ichijo H: Activation of apoptosis signal-regulating
kinase 1 by the stress-induced activating phosphorylation of pre-formed
oligomer. Journal of Cellular Physiology 2002, 191:95-104.
81. Chen Y, McPhie DL, Hirschberg J, Neve RL: The amyloid precursor proteinbinding protein APP-BP1 drives the cell cycle through the S-M
checkpoint and causes apoptosis in neurons. The Journal of Biological
Chemistry 2000, 275:8929-8935.
82. Subramanian RP, Geraghty RJ: Herpes simplex virus type 1 mediates
fusion through a hemifusion intermediate by sequential activity of
glycoproteins D, H, L, and B. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2007, 104:2903-2908.
83. Reimer JJ, Backovic M, Deshpande CG, Jardetzky T, Longnecker R: Analysis
of Epstein-Barr virus glycoprotein B functional domains via linker
insertion mutagenesis. Journal of Virology 2009, 83:734-747.
84. Backovic M, Leser GP, Lamb RA, Longnecker R, Jardetzky TS:
Characterization of EBV gB indicates properties of both class I and class
II viral fusion proteins. Virology 2007, 368:102-113.
85. Neuhierl B, Feederle R, Hammerschmidt W, Delecluse HJ: Glycoprotein
gp110 of Epstein-Barr virus determines viral tropism and efficiency of
infection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2002, 99:15036-15041.
86. Loret S, Guay G, Lippé R: Comprehensive characterization of extracellular
herpes simplex virus type 1 virions. Journal of Virology 2008, 82:8605-8618.
87. Padula ME, Sydnor ML, Wilson DW: Isolation and preliminary
characterization of herpes simplex virus 1 primary enveloped virions
from the perinuclear space. Journal of Virology 2009, 83:4757-4765.
88. Sollner J, Grohmann R, Rapberger R, Perco P, Lukas A, Mayer B: Analysis
and prediction of protective continuous B-cell epitopes on pathogen
proteins. Immunome Research 2008, 4:1.
89. Dosztányi Z, Mészáros B, Simon I: ANCHOR: web server for predicting
protein binding regions in disordered proteins. Bioinformatics 2009,
25(20):2745-2746.
90. Panchenko AR, Kondrashov F, Bryant S: Prediction of functional sites by
analysis of sequence and structure conservation. Protein Science: A
Publication of the Protein Society 2004, 13:884-892.
91. Schwarz R, Seibel PN, Rahmann S, Schoen C, Huenerberg M, MüllerReible C, Dandekar T, Karchin R, Schultz J, Müller T: Detecting species-site
dependencies in large multiple sequence alignments. Nucleic Acids
Research 2009, 37:5959-5968.
92. Sankararaman S, Kolaczkowski B, Sjölander K: INTREPID: a web server for
prediction of functionally important residues by evolutionary analysis.
Nucleic Acids Research 2009, 37:W390-395.
93. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Cherukuri PF, DeWeese-Scott C, Geer LY,
Gwadz M, He S, Hurwitz DI, Jackson JD, Ke Z, Lanczycki CJ, Liebert CA,
Liu C, Lu F, Marchler GH, Mullokandov M, Shoemaker BA, Simonyan V,
Song JS, Thiessen PA, Yamashita RA, Yin JJ, Zhang D, Bryant SH: CDD: a
Conserved Domain Database for protein classification. Nucleic Acids
Research 2005, 33:D192-196.
94. Rawlings ND, Barrett AJ, Bateman A: MEROPS: the peptidase database.
Nucleic Acids Research 2009.
95. Toussaint NC, Dönnes P, Kohlbacher O: A mathematical framework for the
selection of an optimal set of peptides for epitope-based vaccines. PLoS
Computational Biology 2008, 4:e1000246.
96. Basha G, Lizée G, Reinicke AT, Seipp RP, Omilusik KD, Jefferies WA: MHC
class I endosomal and lysosomal trafficking coincides with exogenous
antigen loading in dendritic cells. PloS One 2008, 3:e3247.
97. Kotturi MF, Assarsson E, Peters B, Grey H, Oseroff C, Pasquetto V, Sette A: Of
mice and humans: how good are HLA transgenic mice as a model of
human immune responses? Immunome Research 2009, 5:3.
98. Assarsson E, Sidney J, Oseroff C, Pasquetto V, Bui H, Frahm N, Brander C,
Peters B, Grey H, Sette A: A quantitative analysis of the variables affecting
the repertoire of T cell specificities recognized after vaccinia virus
infection. Journal of Immunology (Baltimore, Md.: 1950) 2007, 178:7890-7901.
99. Overstreet MG, Freyberger H, Cockburn IA, Chen YC, Tse SW, Zavala F: CpGenhanced CD8+ T cell responses to peptide immunization are severely
inhibited by B cells. Eur J Immunol 2010, 40:124-133.

Söllner et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 2):S7
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S2/S7

100. Ishizuka J, Grebe K, Shenderov E, Peters B, Chen Q, Peng Y, Wang L,
Dong T, Pasquetto V, Oseroff C, Sidney J, Hickman H, Cerundolo V, Sette A,
Bennink JR, McMichael A, Yewdell JW: Quantitating T cell cross-reactivity
for unrelated peptide antigens. Journal of Immunology (Baltimore, Md.:
1950) 2009, 183:4337-4345.
101. Verma D, Swaminathan S: Epstein-Barr virus SM protein functions as an
alternative splicing factor. Journal of Virology 2008, 82:7180-7188.
102. Seib KL, Dougan G, Rappuoli R: The key role of genomics in modern
vaccine and drug design for emerging infectious diseases. PLoS Genetics
2009, 5:e1000612.
103. Peters B, Sidney J, Bourne P, Bui H, Buus S, Doh G, Fleri W, Kronenberg M,
Kubo R, Lund O, Nemazee D, Ponomarenko JV, Sathiamurthy M,
Schoenberger S, Stewart S, Surko P, Way S, Wilson S, Sette A: The immune
epitope database and analysis resource: from vision to blueprint. PLoS
Biology 2005, 3:e91.
104. de Jesus O, Smith PR, Spender LC, Elgueta Karstegl C, Niller HH, Huang D,
Farrell PJ: Updated Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA sequence and analysis
of a promoter for the BART (CST, BARF0) RNAs of EBV. The Journal of
General Virology 2003, 84:1443-1450.
105. Dolan A, Addison C, Gatherer D, Davison AJ, McGeoch DJ: The genome of
Epstein-Barr virus type 2 strain AG876. Virology 2006, 350:164-170.
106. Eswar N, Webb B, Marti-Renom MA, Madhusudhan MS, Eramian D, Shen M,
Pieper U, Sali A: Comparative protein structure modeling using Modeller.
Current protocols in bioinformatics / editoral board, Andreas D. Baxevanis ...
[et al.] 2006, Chapter 5:Unit 5.6.
107. Berman H, Henrick K, Nakamura H: Announcing the worldwide Protein
Data Bank. Nature Structural Biology 2003, 10:980.
108. Weichenberger CX, Sippl MJ: NQ-Flipper: validation and correction of
asparagine/glutamine amide rotamers in protein crystal structures.
Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2006, 22:1397-1398.
109. DeLano W: The PyMOL User’s Manual. DeLano Scientific Palo Alto, CA, USA
2002.
110. Mészáros B, Simon I, Dosztányi Z: Prediction of protein binding regions in
disordered proteins. PLoS Computational Biology 2009, 5:e1000376.
111. Sweredoski MJ, Baldi P: COBEpro: a novel system for predicting
continuous B-cell epitopes. Protein Engineering, Design & Selection: PEDS
2009, 22:113-120.
112. El-Manzalawy Y, Dobbs D, Honavar V: Predicting flexible length linear Bcell epitopes. Computational Systems Bioinformatics / Life Sciences Society.
Computational Systems Bioinformatics Conference 2008, 7:121-132.
113. Haste Andersen P, Nielsen M, Lund O: Prediction of residues in
discontinuous B-cell epitopes using protein 3D structures. Protein Science:
A Publication of the Protein Society 2006, 15:2558-2567.
114. Ponomarenko J, Bui H, Li W, Fusseder N, Bourne PE, Sette A, Peters B:
ElliPro: a new structure-based tool for the prediction of antibody
epitopes. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:514.
115. Jones DT: Improving the accuracy of transmembrane protein topology
prediction using evolutionary information. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
2007, 23:538-544.
116. Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonnhammer EL: Predicting
transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model:
application to complete genomes. Journal of Molecular Biology 2001,
305:567-580.
117. Sonnhammer EL, von Heijne G, Krogh A: A hidden Markov model for
predicting transmembrane helices in protein sequences. Proceedings / ...
International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology ; ISMB.
International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology 1998,
6:175-182.
118. Adamczak R, Porollo A, Meller J: Accurate prediction of solvent
accessibility using neural networks-based regression. Proteins 2004,
56:753-767.
119. Adamczak R, Porollo A, Meller J: Combining prediction of secondary
structure and solvent accessibility in proteins. Proteins 2005, 59:467-475.
120. Julenius K, Mølgaard A, Gupta R, Brunak S: Prediction, conservation
analysis, and structural characterization of mammalian mucin-type Oglycosylation sites. Glycobiology 2005, 15:153-164.
121. Prediction of N-glycosylation sites in human proteins. [http://www.cbs.
dtu.dk/services/NetNGlyc/].
122. Matthews BW: Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary
structure of T4 phage lysozyme. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta 1975,
405:442-451.

Page 28 of 28

123. Baldi P, Brunak S, Chauvin Y, Andersen CA, Nielsen H: Assessing the
accuracy of prediction algorithms for classification: an overview.
Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2000, 16:412-424.
124. Buus S, Lauemøller SL, Worning P, Kesmir C, Frimurer T, Corbet S,
Fomsgaard A, Hilden J, Holm A, Brunak S: Sensitive quantitative
predictions of peptide-MHC binding by a ‘Query by Committee’ artificial
neural network approach. Tissue Antigens 2003, 62:378-384.
125. Nielsen M, Lundegaard C, Worning P, Lauemøller SL, Lamberth K, Buus S,
Brunak S, Lund O: Reliable prediction of T-cell epitopes using neural
networks with novel sequence representations. Protein Science: A
Publication of the Protein Society 2003, 12:1007-1017.
126. Larsen MV, Lundegaard C, Lamberth K, Buus S, Lund O, Nielsen M: Largescale validation of methods for cytotoxic T-lymphocyte epitope
prediction. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:424.
127. Nielsen M, Lundegaard C, Lund O: Prediction of MHC class II binding
affinity using SMM-align, a novel stabilization matrix alignment method.
BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:238.
128. Nielsen M, Lundegaard C, Lund O, Keşmir C: The role of the proteasome
in generating cytotoxic T-cell epitopes: insights obtained from improved
predictions of proteasomal cleavage. Immunogenetics 2005, 57:33-41.
129. Hoof I, Peters B, Sidney J, Pedersen LE, Sette A, Lund O, Buus S, Nielsen M:
NetMHCpan, a method for MHC class I binding prediction beyond
humans. Immunogenetics 2009, 61:1-13.
130. Nielsen M, Lundegaard C, Blicher T, Peters B, Sette A, Justesen S, Buus S,
Lund O: Quantitative predictions of peptide binding to any HLA-DR
molecule of known sequence: NetMHCIIpan. PLoS Computational Biology
2008, 4:e1000107.
131. Senger M, Rice P, Bleasby A, Uludag M: Soaplab: open source web
services framework for Bioinformatics programs. In The 10th Annual
Bioinformatics Open Source Conference. Satellite Workshop of the Joint 17th
Annual International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology
(ISMB 2009) and 7th European Conference on Computational Biology, ECC B.
2009, 168:27-28.
132. Holland RCG, Down TA, Pocock M, Prlić A, Huen D, James K, Foisy S,
Dräger A, Yates A, Heuer M, Schreiber MJ: BioJava. Bioinformatics 2008,
24:2096-2097.
133. Drummond A, Strimmer K: PAL: an object-oriented programming library
for molecular evolution and phylogenetics. Bioinformatics 2001,
17:662-663.
134. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Research 2004, 32:1792-1797.
135. Jones DT: Protein secondary structure prediction based on positionspecific scoring matrices. Journal of Molecular Biology 1999, 292:195-202.
doi:10.1186/1745-7580-6-S2-S7
Cite this article as: Söllner et al.: Concept and application of a
computational vaccinology workflow. Immunome Research 2010 6(Suppl
2):S7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
