<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A hitchhikers guide to the Galápagos: co-phylogeography of Galápagos mockingbirds and their parasites</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-284"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jan tefka"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
A hitchhikers guide to the Galápagos: cophylogeography of Galápagos mockingbirds and
their parasites
Štefka et al.
Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284 (3 October 2011)

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A hitchhikers guide to the Galápagos: cophylogeography of Galápagos mockingbirds and
their parasites
Jan Štefka1,2*, Paquita EA Hoeck3, Lukas F Keller3 and Vincent S Smith1
Abstract
Background: Parasites are evolutionary hitchhikers whose phylogenies often track the evolutionary history of their
hosts. Incongruence in the evolutionary history of closely associated lineages can be explained through a variety of
possible events including host switching and host independent speciation. However, in recently diverged lineages
stochastic population processes, such as retention of ancestral polymorphism or secondary contact, can also
explain discordant genealogies, even in fully co-speciating taxa. The relatively simple biogeographic arrangement
of the Galápagos archipelago, compared with mainland biomes, provides a framework to identify stochastic and
evolutionary informative components of genealogic data in these recently diverged organisms.
Results: Mitochondrial DNA sequences were obtained for four species of Galápagos mockingbirds and three
sympatric species of ectoparasites - two louse and one mite species. These data were complemented with nuclear
EF1a sequences in selected samples of parasites and with information from microsatellite loci in the mockingbirds.
Mitochondrial sequence data revealed differences in population genetic diversity between all taxa and varying
degrees of topological congruence between host and parasite lineages. A very low level of genetic variability and
lack of congruence was found in one of the louse parasites, which was excluded from subsequent joint analysis of
mitochondrial data. The reconciled multi-species tree obtained from the analysis is congruent with both the
nuclear data and the geological history of the islands.
Conclusions: The gene genealogies of Galápagos mockingbirds and two of their ectoparasites show strong
phylogeographic correlations, with instances of incongruence mostly explained by ancestral genetic polymorphism.
A third parasite genealogy shows low levels of genetic diversity and little evidence of co-phylogeny with their
hosts. These differences can mostly be explained by variation in life-history characteristics, primarily host specificity
and dispersal capabilities. We show that pooling genetic data from organisms living in close ecological association
reveals a more accurate phylogeographic history for these taxa. Our results have implications for the conservation
and taxonomy of Galápagos mockingbirds and their parasites.

Background
Parasites represent evolutionary hitchhikers on their
hosts with evolutionary histories of each lineage often
running in parallel [e.g. [1,2]]. When the hosts speciate,
those parasites which are host specific may also become
reproductively isolated, potentially leading to co-speciation. Analysis of these host-parasite associations is analogous to reconstructing the evolution of genes tracking
* Correspondence: jan.stefka@gmail.com
1
Entomology Department, Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, SW7
5BD, London, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

organisms, and organisms tracking geological and geographical changes [3,4]. Parasites can also serve as an
independent source of information when evolutionary
data on the host is insufficient [5]. Host specific ectoparasites have proven to be good proxies for resolving
host population structure [6]. This is particularly true
when an ectoparasite’s life-cycle is entirely bound to a
host individual resulting in co-speciation [e.g. [7-10]].
Nevertheless, co-speciation cannot be assumed in all
systems where there are high levels of host specificity [e.
g. [11,12]] and careful investigation is required to

© 2011 Štefka et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

explain the complex associations between hosts and
parasites.
A theoretical framework relating co-phylogenetic patterns with population genetic processes was defined by
Rannala and Michalakis [4], who formulated assumptions under which congruence between host and parasite genealogies might be expected. These include the
assumption of 1) no migration events between splitting
populations and 2) coalescence of both host and parasite
lineages in the ancestral population. This is difficult to
achieve in situations where historical host-parasite associations may have been affected by recurrent migrations
or climatic oscillations [e.g. [13,14]], which is common
in the fauna of mainland biomes.
Due to their relative isolation from mainland biota,
restricted surface area and low probability of multiple
colonization events, oceanic islands like Galápagos provide a convenient model to study co-phylogenetic patterns in hosts and parasites. Founding populations of
island colonists are typically small in size and can only
carry a limited number of gene alleles leading to rapid
coalescence. Consequently the effects of selection and
genetic drift quickly lead to genetic differentiation and
the formation of new species [15].
The Galápagos islands, and Galápagos mockingbirds
(Mimus spp.) in particular, have played a prominent role
in research on island speciation. It was Charles Darwin’s
observation on the distinctiveness of Galápagos mockingbirds from their mainland relatives that provided
much of the founding evidence for the idea that species
evolve through time [16].
The geological origin of the Galápagos is very well
understood [17-19]. This permits a detailed investigation
of the impact of geographic isolation on the formation
of population structure and speciation in Galápagos
biota. Similar to other archipelagos that arose in the
form of a successive chain of volcanic islands (e.g.
Hawai’i), it has been proposed that the pattern of speciation by endemics follow the successional origin of
islands in the chain, a phenomenon sometimes called
the progression rule [20]. Geological evidence shows a
strong northwest to southeast gradient in the age of the
Galápagos islands (Figure 1). The youngest rise above a
volcanic mantle hotspot in the northwest of the archipelago, and as they migrate along a tectonic plate transition towards the Southeast, the islands age and shrink
due to erosion [18]. Thus the youngest islands (Isabela
and Fernandina) are less than 0.5 million years (My)
old, whereas the oldest extant islands (San Cristóbal and
Española) are more than 2.5 My. Submerged islands of
up to 14 My are found east of Española [17,21] suggesting a much earlier origin is possible for at least some
Galápagos biota. However, only a few instances of endemic fauna older than the age of the extant islands have

Page 2 of 18

Figure 1 Map of the Galápagos islands. Approximate geological
age of the archipelago is provided (My = million years) based on
literature data [18]. The islands are divided into three zones
bordered by a dashed line. Genovesa island is sometimes estimated
to be more recent than shown here [e.g. [89]]. Abbreviations of the
island names are consistent with those used across all figures.

been confirmed, such as the Galapaganus weevils [22].
A vast majority of terrestrial species are younger than
2.5 My and also fit the progression rule pattern of colonization [for a review see [23]].
Exceptions to the progression rule include species capable of long distance dispersal, such as Darwin’s finches
[24] and some species of winged insects [25,26], both of
which show complex colonization histories. Arbogast et
al. [27] showed that the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
phylogeny of mockingbirds largely follows the progression rule. This corresponds with low levels of long-distance dispersal as detected by population genetic
surveys [28]. Comparing the level of divergence in Galápagos mockingbirds with mutation rates commonly
found for coding mtDNA genes in birds Arbogast et al.
[27] estimated that their colonisation of the Galápagos
falls well within the age of present islands, and the distribution of the clades amongst particular islands was
generally congruent with patterns of island age.
Arbogast et al. [27] also showed that the mtDNA data
only partially fit the traditional taxonomy of Galápagos
mockingbirds. Morphologically there are four nominal
species of Galapágos mockingbirds, each with distinct
geographic distributions. The Hood mockingbird
(Mimus macdonaldi) inhabits Española, the San Cristóbal mockingbird (M. melanotis) is found on the island
of the same name and the Floreana mockingbird M. trifasciatus is present on two islets adjacent to Floreana.
The rest of the archipelago is populated by the Galápagos mockingbird (M. parvulus) (Figure 2). Despite

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

Page 3 of 18

Figure 2 Geographic distribution of sampled hosts and parasites. Numbers of sequenced specimens for the host (denoted with H) and
each parasite taxon (denoted using first letter of the respective generic name) are listed under each island name. Total number of parasite
specimens collected on each island are in parentheses. The island colour scheme used here is consistent with those used across all subsequent
figures. Mockingbird allopatric species distribution is indicated by the fine dashed lines.

belonging to three different nominal species, birds from
the eastern islands of the archipelago (Española, San
Cristóbal, and Genovesa) possess similar mtDNA haplotypes, while populations from Isabela in the west of the
archipelago, are genetically more divergent from other
M. parvulus populations than previously expected [27].
A study conducted by Hoeck et al. [28] shows that
nuclear genetic data obtained using microsatellites largely agrees with the morphological distinction of species. Thus, at least some of the mtDNA differences are
an exclusive feature of the mtDNA genealogy while
other mtDNA sequences agree with the traditional
taxonomy.
Discrepancies between mitochondrial and nuclear genealogies have been observed on multiple occasions in
phylogeographic studies during the past two decades
[29]. Several processes can explain these divergences,
with secondary contact of previously separated lineages,
ancestral allelic polymorphism and horizontal gene
transfer representing the most common reasons for discordance. Typically, the age of the mtDNA lineages or
alleles of nuclear genes predate the time of the

population separation [30]. Therefore, the genetic pool
of colonists may contain several copies of these haplotypes or alleles during the colonization event. Over
time, random genetic drift leads to fixation of different
mtDNA haplotypes and nuclear alleles in different
populations. This ultimately leads to discordant genealogies amongst different loci, which hamper the interpretation of phylogeographic data based on analysis of
single genes [31].
In this paper we reconstruct the common phylogeographic patterns shared between mockingbirds and their
parasites inhabiting Galápagos islands using mtDNA
and nuclear data. We evaluate the level of ancestral
polymorphism affecting species phylogenies based on
mtDNA data. Our analyses are partitioned by populations of all four mockingbird species and three associated parasites: an Astigmatid mite (Analges sp.) which
has yet to be taxonomically described, an amblyceran
parasitic louse (Myrsidea nesomimi) and an ischnoceran
parasitic louse (Brueelia galapagensis). All three species
of parasites are Galápagos endemics and are commonly
associated with Galápagos mockingbirds [[32,33]

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

Page 4 of 18

authors’ observation]. Despite sharing the same host
spectrum, the three parasites represent three phylogenetically unrelated lineages [34,35] that differ in their ecology. Feather mites of the genus Analges feed
predominantly on feathers and are strictly host specific
[36]. The two genera of chewing lice (Myrsidea and
Brueelia) are known to differ in their feeding habits and
in their levels of host specificity, which is strict in Myrsidea and more relaxed in Brueelia [e.g. [32,37]]. This
assemblage of parasitic taxa allows us to discern shared
evolutionary signal from unique evolutionary events
affected by varying life history traits.

Methods
Material collection

Collection of both the host and parasite material was perfomed between 2004 and 2008 in the frame of previous
research [28]. Mockingbird blood samples were obtained
from 14 Galápagos islands and the birds were examined
for ectoparasites on 11 of the 14 islands (see Figure 2).
Myrsidea and Analges samples were found on all 11
islands, whereas Brueelia was found only on 6 islands.
Birds were captured using mist nets or potter traps and a
small blood sample was collected from a small puncture
on the wing vein. Ectoparasites were collected from the
plumage of the birds using dust ruffling [38]. Birds were
ringed to prevent resampling and released immediately
after sample collection. A single parasite specimen was
analysed for each parasite taxon per host individual, with
seven exceptions (four for Brueelia, two for Analges and
one for Myrsidea) when the host infection rate was exceptionally low. For a complete list of analysed samples
including GPS coordinates of the sampling localities and
GenBank accession numbers see table in Additional file 1.

DNA extraction of parasite samples was performed
using Qiagen’s MicroDNA extraction kit following the
voucher method of Cruickshank et al. [39]. After DNA
extraction voucher specimens were either mounted on
permanent slides or preserved in ethanol. MtDNA
sequences of mockingbirds were amplified from DNA
extractions made from blood samples previously used
for a microsatellite population genetic study [28].
Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequencing

We sequenced a homologous 1050 bp fragment of the
Cytochrome oxidase subunit I (COI) gene in the mockingbirds and all three parasite taxa using a combination
of previously described universal primers and dedicated
primers based on sequences of related taxa available
from GenBank (see Table 1 for primer sequences). The
PCRs contained 20 μl volume of: 1 to 2 μl of extracted
DNA solution, 5 pM of each primer, 15 mM MgCl2, 10
mM concentration of each dNTP, and 0.25 units of Taq
polymerase. The PCR profile was as follows: 5 min at
95°C followed by 35 cycles of 1 min at 94°C, 45 sec at
the annealing temperature specified below and 1 min 15
sec at 72°C. The final elongation step was performed for
10 min at 72°C. The annealing temperatures were 57°C
for Mimus, 48°C for Analges and Brueelia, and 50°C for
Myrsidea. To obtain complementary information on the
population structure of ectoparasites independent of
mitochondrial DNA, the Elongation factor 1 alpha
(EF1a), a nuclear gene, was sequenced in two parasites,
Brueelia and Analges. EF1-For3 and Cho10 primers [40]
were used for both PCR amplification and sequencing.
The PCRs contained the same concentrations of
reagents as above and the PCR profile was as follows: 5
min at 95°C followed by 30 cycles of 1 min at 94°C, 40

Table 1 PCR primers for amplification of the COI gene.
Species

Primer name

Direction

Primer sequence

Reference

Mimus

BirdF1_Nes
COIH_Nes

F
R

AACCAACCACAAAGATATCGGCAC
GGGCTACTACGTAGTAAGTGTCATGT

Modified from BirdF1 [87]
Modified from COI H7005 [74]

Nes_InF

F

CTCACCGACCGCAACCTCAA

This study

Nes_InR

R

GGATAGTATGGCTCATACTATTCCTATGTA

This study

An_F

F

ATATCCACTAATCACAAAGATATTG

This study

COI H7005

R

CCGGATCCACNACRTARTANGTRTCRTG

[74]

An_InF

F

CCGTAATTTTAATTCTACTTTTTTTG

This study

An_InR

R

CAAACCCAGGTAAAATCAAAATATA

This study

Myr_F
COI H7005

F
R

ATATTGGYACTCTYTAYTTAATCTTTGGTT
CCGGATCCACNACRTARTANGTRTCRTG

This study
[74]

Myr_InF

F

CCGAAATTTTAATACCTCTTTCTTTG

This study

Myr_InR

R

AGATTATACCAATGACCCCAAAACT

This study

COI LCO1490

F

GGTCAACAAATCATAAAGATATTGG

[88]

COI H7005

R

CCGGATCCACNACRTARTANGTRTCRTG

[74]

Bru_InF

F

TCGTAATTTGAATTCTTCTTTTTTTG

This study

Bru_InR

R

ACCCAAAAACTTCCTTCTTTCC

This study

Analges

Myrsidea

Brueelia

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

sec at 54°C and 45 sec at 72°C. The final elongation step
was performed for 10 min at 72°C. EF1-For3 and Cho10
primers did not reliably amplify in Myrsidea and thus
the EF1a gene was not analyzed for this species. Prior
to sequencing COI and EF1a PCR products were purified using Alkaline Phosphatase and Exonuclease I
enzymes according to manufacturer’s protocol (New
England Biolabs). The COI PCRs were sequenced using
newly designed species-specific internal primers (Table
1) aligning from the middle part of the sequence and
extending towards the ends. To check for consistency of
sequence reads at the ends, approximately 15% of
sequences were also sequenced from 5’ and 3’ ends
using PCR primers. Sequencing was performed either
on an ABI 3730 sequencer (Applied Biosystems) or
using a commercial service (Macrogen Inc., South
Korea). Sequence contigs were prepared in Seqman
(DNAstar) and alignments were created manually in
Seaview 4.2 [41] without need for gap adjustments. Individual sequences were collapsed into haplotypes using
Collapse 1.2 [42].
Amplification of mockingbird microsatellites

400 Mimus individuals covering the spectrum of 11
islands available for parasite sampling were genotyped
using microsatellites. Extraction of DNA from blood on
filter paper and amplification at 26 microsatellite loci
(MpAAT18, 25, 26, 45, 83 and 96, and Nes01, 03, 04,
05, 06, 07, 08, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
22 and 23) were performed as described previously [43].
Microsatellite loci were amplified in six independent
multiplex reactions (Panel A-D, Hoeck et al., [43]; Panel
E with MpAAT18, 25, 45 and 83; Panel F with
MpAAT26 and 96 under the same PCR conditions as
Panel B & C). Fragment analyses were performed on a
3730 DNA Analyser using Gene-Scan-500 LIZ size standard (ABI) and Genemapper v.4 software (ABI) followed
by manual proofreading of genotypes.
Phylogenetic analysis of sequence data

Three approaches were employed for genealogical reconstruction using COI haplotypes in Mimus, Analges and
Myrsidea. Due to a very low level of sequence polymorphism Brueelia was excluded from the phylogenetic
analysis. Neighbor Joining (NJ) trees of haplotypes were
obtained in PAUP*4.0b10 [44]. Maximum Likelihood
(ML) phylogeny was reconstructed using PhyML 2.4.4
[45], and MrBayes 3.1 [46] was employed to perform
Bayesian Inference (BI) from the data. In MrBayes two
independent runs with 4 chains each and 30 million
MCMC replications were performed for each dataset.
The first 3 million replications at the beginning of the
runs were discarded as burnin. The model of molecular
evolution for all analyses was selected according to AIC

Page 5 of 18

and BIC criteria in jModeltest 12.2.0 [47]. HKY+I+G was
selected for Analges, HKY+G for both Myrsidea and
Mimus. Sequences of Analges sturninus (Genbank no.:
GQ864342), Myrsidea eisenrati (AF545731) plus Mimus
gundlachii (EF484222) and M. gilvus (EF484220), were
used respectively as outgroups for the Analges, Myrsidea
and Mimus datasets. The COI haplotype data and ML
treefiles have been deposited in TreeBASE (http://www.
treebase.org; study accession number S11770).
The branch support of NJ and ML phylogenies was
obtained with 1000 bootstraps of the data in PAUP and
PhyML, respectively. Convergence between estimated
values of model parameters obtained in independent BI
runs and their effective sampling sizes were checked
using Tracer 1.5 [48]. Convergence of inferred BI topologies was inspected using AWTY [49].
Due to allelic variability and frequent occurrence of
heterozygotes in EF1a sequences of Analges, the allelic
phase of specimens could not be unequivocally reconstructed from sequences obtained through direct
sequencing. The heterozygous sites in the DNA
sequence resulted in ambiguous nucleotides. Hence the
EF1a sequences were not analysed phylogenetically.
Instead each position in the alignment for each specimen was scored either as homozygous or heterozygous
(when ambiguous). Then the distribution of heterozygous or homozygous states for each site within the
alignment was compared across island populations.
These data were contrasted with gene genealogies
obtained from the COI data. A similar approach was
adopted for exploring the Brueelia EF1a dataset, which
was, on the contrary, extremely uniform and contained
only one informative mutation (see Results section).
Genealogy and population genetic statistics

Due to extremely low levels of genetic variability in the
COI Brueelia sequences, this dataset was not analysed
using traditional phylogenetic reconstruction. Instead
genealogical information of Brueelia and the other taxa
was extracted from a haplotype network built using the
program TCS 1.2 [50]. Estimates of genetic divergence
were performed in Mega 5.0 [51]. For each taxon we
calculated overall mean genetic distances (p-distances)
[52] and pairwise genetic distances between the islands.
The software DNASP 5.1 [53] was used to calculate per
island statistics of haplotype diversity and nucleotide
variability, and to perform neutrality tests (Tajima’s D,
Fu and Li’s D) for all four organisms. Significance of the
values obtained in neutrality tests was tested with
10,000 coalescence simulations of the data.
Microsatellite data analysis

To obtain an estimate of population structure in the
mockingbirds that is independent of mtDNA genealogy,

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

mockingbird microsatellite data were analysed using the
Bayesian clustering algorithm in Structure 2.3.3 [54,55].
This analysis complements the estimates of genetic
variability and differentiation presented in Hoeck et al
[28]. The Bayesian clustering analysis was performed on
an extended microsatellite dataset and provides an estimate of population structure by assigning individual
specimens to genetic clusters. The analysis was run
using 500,000 MCMC replications as a burnin followed
by 1 million replications from which posterior distributions were drawn. To test for possibility of intra-island
population structure the number of clusters (K) modelled in the analysis was increased by one (to 12), compared to the 11 sampled islands. An admixture ancestry
model with the assumption of correlated allele frequencies was used as a prior in the analysis. 15 independent
runs of the analysis were performed to check for consistency of the results. Mean values of log likelihood, L(K),
and the ΔK statistics of Evanno et al. [56] were used to
determine the optimum number of genetic clusters.
Graphic visualisation of the results was prepared in Distruct 1.1 [57].
MtDNA reconstruction of shared evolutionary history

*BEAST [58] is a recently introduced extension of
BEAST 1.6 [59] and supports Bayesian analysis allowing
simultaneous estimation of phylogeny and node age.
*BEAST was employed to perform comparison of mutation rates between Mimus and their Analges and Myrsidea ectoparasites. This software was originally
developed to infer species trees from multilocus data,
and was used here to reconcile the evolutionary history
of the three organisms. This was achieved by inferring a
multi-species tree from gene trees obtained from
Mimus, Analges and Myrsidea, for which sampling was
available on all 11 islands. Because no missing information on any of the analysed species-island combinations
is allowed in the analysis, the Brueelia dataset containing data on only 6 islands was excluded. Datasets containing COI sequences of all available specimens (i.e.
not collapsed into haplotypes) were used for all *BEAST
analyses. These were run selecting the same models of
molecular evolution as in the phylogenetic analysis. In
the first analysis relative evolutionary rates between the
three gene trees (Mimus, Analges, Myrsidea) were estimated. A prior of 1.0 was set on the rate for Mimus,
allowing relative estimation of rates for the parasites.
Clock-like behaviour of the Mimus dataset was tested in
baseml, a program from the PAML package [60] and it
was rejected (X2 = 39.44, df = 23, P < = 0.02). Therefore
uncorrelated lognormal relaxed clock priors were
selected for rate comparisons. The analysis was run for
100 million MCMC replications and a speciation birthdeath process was selected as a tree prior. Two

Page 6 of 18

independent runs were performed and convergence
between the estimates of parameters was assessed using
Tracer 1.5 [48]. Results of the two runs were combined
in Logcombiner 1.6.1 [59] with 10% burnin. A separate
analysis was performed to estimate the topology of the
species tree and the dates of the co-speciation events. In
this analysis the age of the root of the species tree was
defined with a lognormal prior, using a mean set to 2.9
million years ago (Mya) and standard deviation set to 0.4.
This calibration prior sets the highest probability of the
age of the root to the estimated geologic age of Española,
the oldest extant island of the archipelago [18] but also
allows for an earlier origin on the submerged islands east
of Española [17]. An uncorrelated relaxed clock with
uninformative priors was selected for the three gene
trees. Two independent runs were conducted with 500
million MCMC replications each. As above the convergence between runs was inspected in Tracer 1.5 [48] and
results were combined in Logcombiner 1.6.1 [59]. We are
aware that restricting the analysis with only one calibration point is insufficient to provide precise estimates of
the node ages. However, our aim was solely to provide
ordinal information on the succession of origin of the
fauna in particular regions of the archipelago, rather than
to provide exact dates of diversification events.
Complementary to the *BEAST analysis, the tree
topologies of Mimus and its parasites (Analges and Myrsidea) were reconciled using the program Jane [61]. This
program allows mapping parasite trees onto host phylogeny using a heuristic approach with the so-called
Genetic Algorithm. The TreeMap costs model [62] was
used to score the numbers of evolutionary events (cospeciations, host switches, duplications and losses).
Then the statistical significance of the cost of identified
co-speciations is tested using permutation analysis. Tree
topologies obtained in the ML analysis and pruned to
contain only the main mitochondrial lineages were supplied to the program. Mapping was run with Genetic
Algorithm set to 500 generations with population size
300. The permutations were run both randomising the
tips of the trees and randomising the parasite tree topology using the sample size of 1000.
Geophylogenies

To visualise the level of congruence between gene genealogies and incorporate information on the geographic
distribution of the specimens, mtDNA phylogenies were
converted to KML files, which can be viewed using the
freely available Google Earth application [63]. The
online tool GeoPhylo 2-4 [64] was used to convert ML
phylogenies of Mimus, Analges and Myrsidea, and a
multi-species tree into KML files. For the visualisation
purposes a NJ tree of Brueelia was generated in
PAUP*4.0b10 [44] using JC distance model and

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

Page 7 of 18

converted into KML format. The root of the tree was
assigned according to a mutation split identified in the
EF1a sequences that divides the populations into two
groups - the Española and the rest of the archipelago
(see Results section). Rooting with an outgroup was not
possible in Brueelia due to the very low genetic diversity
of Brueelia samples and a lack of sequences for close
relatives in GenBank.

Results
107 sequences of the COI gene were obtained in
Mimus, 86 in Analges, 98 in Myrsidea, and 45 in Brueelia. These sequences were collapsed into 25, 71, 37 and
8 haplotypes, respectively. 51 EF1a sequences were
obtained in Analges and 29 in Brueelia. The list of
sequenced specimens and associated haplotype numbers
are available in Additional file 1.
Genetic comparison of populations

COI sequence data show that Analges is genetically the
most diverse organism, both in terms of number of haplotypes (Hd) and nucleotide diversity (Pi), followed by
Myrsidea (Table 2). Mimus shows considerably smaller
levels of population variability, while Brueelia is the

most conserved taxon with only a few mutations spread
across the 1050 bp alignment and each island population made up of one to three haplotypes. This is
reflected in the values of genetic divergence (p-distances) seen for the four taxa (Additional file 2). The
overall mean genetic divergence is highest for Analges
followed by Myrsidea, Mimus and Brueelia. Similarly a
comparison of distances between particular islands
shows that the values are in general highest for Analges
and lowest for Brueelia.
Neutrality tests performed separately for each island
population for all taxa generally show moderately negative values, and are only significantly different from
expected values in a few cases. Populations showing significantly negative values of both Tajima’s D and
Fu&Li’s D are Española in Mimus, Marchena in Analges
and Santiago and Gardner by Floreana (GbF) in Myrsidea (Table 2). Negative values caused by an excess of
low frequency polymorphisms usually indicate population size expansion after an earlier bottleneck or a selective sweep [65]. Only the Mimus population on Rábida
shows significantly positive values (again for both statistics) suggesting population shrinkage or an effect of balancing selection. These tests could only be performed

Table 2 Genetic diversity of sampled populations and neutrality test results.
Island

No. Specim.

No. Haps.

H A

M B

H A

Española

7 8

9

13 4 8

7

Gardner by
Española

5 6

8

5

1 5

San Cristóbal

8 10 10 .

Champion

8 7

Gardner by
Floreana

Hd

M B H

Pi
A

M

B

Tajima’s D/Fu&Li’s D
A

M

B

2 0.714 1.000 0.893 0.318 0.0011 0.0090 0.0016 0.0014 -1.43/1.51

-0.59/
0.02

-1.28/0.13

-1.32/0.37

4

1 0.000 0.933 0.714 0.000 0.0000 0.0087 0.0017 0.0000 x

0.45/
0.51

0.61/0.07

x

2 9

2

.

0.250 0.978 0.467 .

0.0002 0.0074 0.0005 .

-1.05/1.13

-0.59/0.67

0.82/
0.80

.

10 .

1 3

1

.

0.000 0.667 0.000 .

0.0000 0.0008 x

x

0.21/0.06

x

.

8 9

9

5

1 6

3

2 0.000 0.833 0.417 0.400 0.0000 0.0025 0.0007 0.0008 x

-0.43/0.30

-1.51/1.68

-0.97/0.97

Santa Fé

8 8

9

11 1 6

5

2 0.000 0.893 0.417 0.182 0.0000 0.0018 0.0019 0.0002 x

-1.36/1.36

-0.56/0.37

-1.13/1.29

Santa Cruz

8 10 10 .

2 10 4

.

0.250 1.000 0.583 .

0.0005 0.0115 0.0010 .

-1.30/1.41

-0.70/0.44

-1.15/0.28

.

Santiago

8 3

8

.

3 3

4

.

0.464 x

0.0005 x

-1.30/1.41

x

-1.45/1.57

.

Rábida

8 4

9

6

6 3

2

1 0.893 0.833 0.500 0.000 0.0060 0.0011 0.0005 0.0000 1.76/
1.53

0.52/
0.59

0.99/
0.84

x

Isabela

8 10 8

.

2 9

7

.

1.17/
0.89

-0.59/0.68

0.03/
0.29

.

Marchena

8 11 8

6

4 9

4

3 0.786 0.945 0.643 0.600 0.0044 0.0038 0.0029 0.0006 -0.10/
0.37

-2.03/2.39

-1.05/0.88

-1.13/1.16

Fernandina

7 .

.

.

2 .

.

.

0.286 .

.

.

0.0003 .

.

.

-1.01/1.05

.

.

.

Genovesa

8 .

.

.

1 .

.

.

0.000 .

.

.

0.0000 .

.

.

x

.

.

.

Pinta

8 .

.

.

2 .

.

.

0.250 .

.

.

0.0002 .

.

.

-1.05/1.13

.

.

.

0.643 .

0.536 0.978 0.964 .

H

A

M

B

.

0.0007 .

0.0005 0.0101 0.0053 .

H

Abbreviations and comments: “Hd” haplotype diversity; “Pi” nucleotide diversity. Values of significant neutrality tests (P < 0.05) are in bold. “.” no sampling for a
given taxon; “x” statistics not performed due to lack of variability (< 2 haplotypes) or too few samples (< 4); species abbreviations (H, A, M, B) as in Figure 2.

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

for populations containing two or more haplotypes, thus
many Mimus populations comprising single haplotypes
could not be tested because they lacked variability (Hd
and Pi = 0, Table 2). The Champion and Gardner by
Española (GbE) population of Myrsidea, and the Rábida
populations of Brueelia similarly comprise single
haplotypes.
Mitochondrial phylogenies

COI topology of the Mimus haplotypes (Figure 3) is largely congruent with the earlier results of Arbogast et al
[27], who analysed a different set of mockingbird samples
using shorter fragments of the COI gene in combination
with 2 other mtDNA loci. The most basal split separates
mockingbird populations inhabiting the South-East
islands (Española, GbE, San Cristóbal and Genovesa)
from the rest of the archipelago. Isabela and Fernandina
formed another monophyletic lineage followed by GbF
and Champion, which comprise a single haplotype. The
rest of the islands form a single lineage. This picture largely follows the traditional taxonomy of Galápagos mockingbirds with two exceptions. 1) As in Arbogast et al. [27]
the Genovesa population (M. parvulus) was grouped into
a single clade with the San Cristóbal (M. melanotis) and
Española (M. macdonaldi) populations. 2) Due to the
near basal position of Isabela and Fernandina populations, the M. parvulus is polyphyletic with respect to M.
trifasciatus. These data contradict current taxonomic and
nuclear DNA (microsatellite) results [28] that group the
Genovesa population with the neighbouring M. parvulus
populations from the North-Western islands of the archipelago. Hoeck et al. [28] also found that the Española and
San Cristóbal populations, although closely related, form
two clearly distinguishable clusters based on microsatellite distance data.
The topologies of the COI phylogenies obtained for
Myrsidea and Analges sp. parasites broadly follow that
of the host phylogeny. The split between populations
from the Southeast islands of the archipelago are located
at the root in all phylogenies (Figure 3). Most islands or
groups of islands form very well supported monophyletic lineages suggesting a deep origin for mitochondrial
clades associated with island populations. A few exceptions where the bootstrap and posterior probability support is weaker are also seen. These are usually located
near the base of the trees and probably reflect rapid succession of diversification events in ancestral populations
of the corresponding mitochondrial lineages. Despite the
general congruence of the three phylogenies, the topology of relationships between some of the clades differs
both between the two parasites and with their host.
Most discordant was the clustering of the Champion
population of Myrsidea with a clade found on Santa Fé
and Santa Cruz. For the other two taxa (Mimus and

Page 8 of 18

Analges), Champion samples were grouped with Gardner by Floreana populations, which was expected, since
both islands are small islets adjacent to Floreana and
host remnant populations of the endangered Floreana
mockingbird that went extinct on Floreana in the late
19 th century. This means the two populations are of
recent common origin. Indeed, the mockingbird
mtDNA sequences show a single haplotype for the two
islets, complying with the close relationship and reduced
population sizes.
Population genealogies and EF1a variability

The pattern of population structure seen in the mtDNA
haplotype networks shows several strongly differentiated
lineages in Mimus, Myrsidea and Analges (Figure 4). In
contrast, the haplotype network of Brueelia shows very
little sequence variation (Figure 4d). Despite this, several
Brueelia populations contain exclusive haplotypes (e.g.
Española together with GbE and Marchena), highlighting a degree of genetic isolation between the islands.
The Brueelia dataset of 29 EF1a sequences supports
this view. The EF1a gene is almost invariable, out of the
347 bp sequenced, there were only 10 mutated sites,
which were mostly singletons. Only one mutation,
which was shared among multiple specimens, is informative and it differentiates Española and GbE populations from the rest. This confirms that the deepest
genetic separation in Brueelia lies between the SE
islands and the rest of the archipelago (fine red line in
Figure 4b and 4d), as identified in the other three taxa
using outgroup sequences (Figure 3).
In contrast to Brueelia, the pattern of haplotype distribution in Analges shows an extreme level of diversification, with each island (with the exception of GbE)
comprising an exclusive set of haplotypes (Figure 4b).
Less population structure is seen in Myrsidea, where a
few haplotypes are shared between Isabela and Marchena, Santa Fé and Santa Cruz, Santiago and Rábida, and
one haplotype was shared between Champion and Santa
Fé (Figure 4c). One haplotype was also shared between
Champion and Santa Fé. Much lower levels of differentiation are found in Mimus, where several haplotypes
are shared between two or three islands in the central
and North-West part of the archipelago. Analges also
shows extremely high levels of allelic variability in EF1a
sequences. The distribution of genetic variation is geography dependent, showing clear structure between the
South-East and North-West (Figure 4b). Samples from
Española, GbE, San Cristóbal, Champion and GbF only
contain a few heterozygous positions in the alignment,
with 47 out of the total of 58 mutated sites present as
fixed homozygotes. In contrast, populations from the
other six islands show a much higher proportion of heterozygous sites (data not shown).

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

Page 9 of 18

Figure 3 Maximum likelihood phylogenies of COI haplotypes. (a) Mimus, (b) Analges and (c) Myrsidea. Bootstrap values and posterior
probabilities (NJ/ML/BI) for major clades are indicated. Clades with bootstrap support above 75% and BI posterior probabilities higher than 0.95
are depicted in bold. Outgroups are not shown.

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

Page 10 of 18

Figure 4 MtDNA haplotype networks of populations generated with TCS. (a) Mimus, (b) Analges, (c) Myrsidea and (d) Brueelia. Haplotypes
are scaled proportionately to the number of samples. Colours of the haplotypes refer to the geographic origin of the specimens (Figure 2).
Empty circles mark missing haplotypes along mutational pathways. Dotted lines represent relationships beyond the parsimonious criterion of 14
mutations calculated in TCS. Most island populations in Analges are too divergent to be unequivocally linked. Fine dashed red lines in the
Analges and Brueelia networks denote the transition in allelic variability identified from the EF1a sequences.

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

Microsatellite analysis of mockingbirds

The pattern of population structure in Mimus obtained
using Structure software shows hierarchical structuring
of genetic diversity (Figure 5). The steepest change in
the ΔK statistics of Evanno et al. [56] was identified
for K = 3 (Figure 5a). The three determined clusters
are represented by 1) Española with GbE and San Cristóbal, 2) Champion and GbF, and 3) the rest of the
archipelago (Figure 5c). Despite M. melanotis from San
Cristóbal being clustered with M. macdonaldi, there is
a slight difference in the genetic composition between
the two species: The San Cristóbal population possesses partially mixed genotypes (Figure 5c).
The ΔK statistics are known to pick up the deepest
level of genetic structure (i.e. evolutionary oldest) for
datasets containing hierarchical data [56]. In contrast L
(K) identifies much shallower divergences. The values of
the mean L(K) levels off at K = 10 (Figure 5b), where a
geographically determined pattern of population structure is seen with all but two of the islands comprising
exclusive clusters (Figure 5c). The exception is GbE

Page 11 of 18

which shares the same genetic cluster with its parent
island of Española. This is almost certainly due to the
very small geographic distance between GbE and Española (approximately 1 km) that allows for frequent
exchange of migrants. With K = 10 each Mimus species
belongs to a separate cluster (M. melanotis and M. macdonaldi) or is split into several clusters (M. parvulus
and M. trifasciatus; Figure 5c).
Estimation of shared evolutionary signal

To reconcile the evolutionary history of the parasites
and their hosts, a putative “multi-species” tree was
reconstructed in *BEAST. The topology of the resulting
tree (Figure 6) is compatible with the geological history
of the islands [18], the host microsatellite data in Hoeck
et al [28] and the microsatellite analysis presented here.
Posterior probabilities [PP] are above 0.95 in all but
three nodes (Figure 6b). The branches with lower support are amongst the shortest ones on the tree. One of
these branches joins Rabida with Santiago (PP = 0.89),
the other two join Santa Cruz with Santa Fe (PP = 0.86)

Figure 5 Microsatellite structure of mockingbird populations. (a) Evanno et al’s ΔK statistics and (b) mean values of L(K) plus/minus standard
deviation obtained from 15 runs of the analysis. (c) Results of assignment tests for numbers of clusters K = 3 and K = 10. Individual specimens
are represented by vertical bars. Number of samples analysed per each island (N) are provided. Each genetic cluster is represented by a different
colour and, where possible, these match the colour of the associated island on the map in Figure 2.

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

Page 12 of 18

Figure 6 MtDNA reconstruction of the evolutionary history shared between taxa. Schematic representation of individual gene trees
(phylogenies from Figure 3) are provided (a). The multi-species tree (b) was generated in *BEAST and individual gene genealogies are plotted
against putative evolutionary history of taxa based on the topology of the multi-species tree (c).

and Santa Fe with the lineage containing Champion and
GbF (PP = 0.67). As is the case with the individual mitochondrial genealogies, the basal split lies between the
South East (SE) islands (Española, GbE, San Cristóbal)
and the rest. The clade containing SE populations is
further divided separating Española with GbE from San
Cristóbal. A second major clade comprising islands
from the central and northern part of the archipelago
shows sub-structuring into two lineages. One consists of
populations from Champion, GbF, Santa Fé and Santa
Cruz, while the other comprises the northern-most
islands clustering Isabela together with Marchena and
Rábida with Santiago (Figure 6b). Despite several incongruences between individual tree genealogies observed
for particular taxa, the independent phylogenetic signals

become evident when sequences are jointly analysed.
This is best seen when individual genealogies are contrasted with the resulting species tree in Figure 6c, or
using a Google Earth visualisation available in Additional File 3. *BEAST was also used to estimate relative
evolutionary rates between the host and their parasites.
Results are congruent with the differences in genetic
variability estimated in DNASP. Analges shows the fastest mutation rate and is approximately 9 times faster
than Mimus (mean = 8.70, 95% Highest Posterior Density interval [HDP]: 6.81-10.00). Myrsidea is considerably
slower than Analges but still significantly faster than its
host (mean = 1.87, 95% HDP: 1.09-2.74). Despite the
statistically significant result of the baseml test highlighting deviation from clock-like behaviour, the values

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

of standard deviations of the uncorrelated lognormal
clock obtained in *BEAST were below 1 for all three
taxa (lowest in Analges = 0.20, highest in Myrsidea =
0.69). Values below 1 indicate only moderate deviation
from clock-like behaviour [66], thus our estimates of
relative mutation rates were not significantly affected by
these deviations.
Estimates of node ages from the multi-species tree
have very wide confidence intervals due to the single
calibration point (see below). However, observed values
lie within the date ranges determined from geological
data [18], and are indicative of the time axis for the succession of speciation events. The basal split between the
SE islands and the rest of archipelago is within the prior
interval, with mean value of 1.20 Mya (95% HDP: 2.220.39). Subsequent splits are much younger, with the age
of the split between San Cristóbal and Española estimated at 0.43 Mya (95% HDP: 1.01-0.05) and 0.19 Mya
(95% HDP: 0.43-0.04) for the split between the two
groups of North-Western islands (see Additional file 4
for a complete chronogram). The multi-species estimates probably reflect the final stage in the separation
of faunas as opposed to estimates obtained from the
same analysis of individual species genealogies that
showed slightly earlier separation of mtDNA clades. For
instance, the age of the basal split showed values of 1.58
Mya (95% HDP: 3.24-0.41) in Analges, 1.54 Mya (95%
HDP: 3.14-0.38) in Mimus and 1.53 (95% HDP: 3.10.39) in the genealogy of Myrsidea (Additional file 4).
Results obtained in the reconciliation analysis with
Jane show significant level of co-speciation in the
Mimus-Analges association (P < 0.03, in both permutation tests). 4 co-speciations, 2 duplications, 1 host
switch and 1 loss were identified. In contrast only 1 cospeciation with 3 host switches and 4 duplications was
found for the Mimus-Myrsidea association. This solution was did not show significant cospeciation in the
permutation tests (P < 0.87). More co-speciation events
for the Mimus-Myrsidea dataset could be manually
enforced to reflect better relative timing of splitting
diversification events between the two trees. However,
these adjustments would come at higher cost because
they would inflate the number of losses or host
switches. Figures containing mapped phylogenies for
both host-parasite associations are available in Additional file 5.

Discussion
We studied the co-evolutionary patterns between populations of four host and three ectoparasite species living
in close ecological association on the Galápagos islands
using mtDNA (COI) and nuclear loci (EF1a sequences,
microsatellites). Despite varying levels of genetic variability between species and loci, reconstructed

Page 13 of 18

phylogeographic patterns show that the population
structure between host and parasite lineages is broadly
congruent and their diversification is sequentially
ordered according to the geological age of each island.
In all cases the deepest genetic splits occur between SE
islands and the rest of the archipelago (Figures 3 and 6).
Most incongruent events between individual gene phylogenies are likely to be attributable to the effect of ancestral polymorphism. Assessing the contribution of
stochastic processes on the evolutionary patterns
obtained for each species is possible through reconciling
the phylogeny of these taxa. Output from this simultaneous analysis agrees with the traditional classification
of the mockingbird species and with Mimus microsatellite results much more closely than when the Mimus
mtDNA data are analysed separately.
Ancestral polymorphism and phylogeography

The occurrence of ancestral polymorphism followed by
a process of lineage sorting creates differences in topologies between gene trees and species trees of closely
related taxa. When unrecognized, this makes accurate
interpretation of genealogical data extremely difficult [e.
g. [67]]. Ancestral polymorphism affects both nuclear
and mitochondrial genes, but is more problematic for
mitochondrial data due to their haploid nature. Despite
this, mtDNA remains one of the most valuable
resources for phylogeographic inference, mainly due to
its fast mutation rate and lack of recombination, which
clusters individuals at the intra-specific level [68]. To
obtain an unambiguous picture of species history several
independent (i.e. nuclear) loci are recommended to be
co-analysed with mitochondrial data [29]. Such nuclear
loci might include sequences of nuclear genes or multilocus data like AFLP, microsatellites, and SNP’s. Unfortunately, nuclear coding genes often do not provide
sufficient resolution to detect all relationships in
recently diverged taxa, and non-coding fast evolving
genes like rDNA spacers (ITS1, ITS2) often create paralogues prone to stochastic evolution [e.g. [69,70]].
Furthermore, developing multilocus markers de novo is
prohibitively time consuming and expensive when
required for multiple taxa.
Here we show that pooling mtDNA data from several
organisms, when there is reasonable a priori expectation
of them having a shared evolutionary history, improves
confidence in the inferred phylogeographic patterns.
Parasites, and host specific ectoparasites in particular,
can predict the population structure of their hosts [e.g
[1,71]], and in some cases can reveal more about the
host’s recent evolution than the host data in isolation.
Whiteman et al [72] showed that the population structure of lice parasitizing Galápagos hawks suggests that
the hawks (Buteo galapagoensis) colonised the

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

archipelago very recently. This is not evident in independent studies of the hawk populations themselves
because the genetic differences have not had time to fix.
In the case of the mockingbird parasites, the effect of
parasite isolation through host specificity is strongly
enhanced by physical allopatric isolation of the host
populations on different islands. Hoeck et al [28] measured pairwise genetic distances (Nei’s Ds) between
mockingbird populations from 15 different islands.
These data show that populations of mockingbirds
occupying separate islands represent distinguishable
genetic pools.
A similar picture of strongly isolated mockingbird
populations was obtained in the present study using the
Bayesian clustering algorithm in the Structure software,
where populations are delimited solely by the genetic
character of the individuals without prior information
on their geographic distribution. This strongly indicates
that mockingbirds do not regularly migrate between
islands. The ecological dependencies between mockingbirds and their obligate parasites mean that the lice and
mites similarly lack opportunities for frequent interisland migration. Hence, most of the cases where parasite genealogies do not match the inferred multi-species
tree (Figure 6) are likely to be a result of ancestral polymorphism in the distribution of haplotypic lineages
across the islands, and are not due to recent migrations
followed by switches to different host clades. The distribution of genetic diversity in mtDNA haplotypes
between the islands strongly supports such a view. For
example, nearly all incongruences between particular
genealogies are observed in samples from younger
North-Western islands where the processes of genetic
drift followed by accumulation of mutations has had less
time to act. Furthermore, there is evidence that even in
the case of younger islands, population structure is not
affected by recent migration. For example, Analges,
which exhibits a remarkably high mutation rate (see discussion below), shows no haplotypes that are shared
between any of the islands, including the youngest ones
like Isabela, Rábida and Marchena (haplotype network
in Figure 4b). Populations of mites on individual islands
diverged from each other through mutation and the
resulting population structure has not been stirred up
by any migration.
There is one possible exception to this general pattern. Despite the close geographic distance and putative
recent common origin of Floreana mockingbirds on
Champion and GbF [73], the populations of Myrsidea
on the two islands are strikingly different (Figure 3c).
The Champion population constitutes a single haplotype
that is very closely related to haplotypes from Santa Fé.
The Champion haplotype is even shared with one specimen from Santa Fé (see haplotype network in Figure

Page 14 of 18

4c). This close link suggests that a recent migration
event between these islands is a more probable explanation than shared ancestry. Such a migration would
require an unknown louse vector since neither Floreana
mockingbirds nor Analges mites exhibit recent links
with Santa Fé. Unfortunately, unlike the other three taxa
where microsatellite or EF1a data provide additional
clues, no nuclear markers were available for Myrsidea,
thus resolving this problem with confidence will require
additional data. This probably also affected the position
of Champion and GbF islands on the multi-species tree
(Figure 6b). Nodes joining these islands together with
Santa Fe and Santa Cruz have the lowest posterior probabilities on the multi-species tree (0.67 and 0.86 respectively) and this topology is also in conflict with the
traditional taxonomy of mockingbirds. The close relationship of the Champion and GbF populations of M.
trifasciatus with those on Santa Cruz and Santa Fé
make the M. parvulus populations inhabiting Santa
Cruz, Santa Fé and the youngest parts of the archipelago
paraphyletic. This contradicts the microsatellite data,
which clearly distinguish all M. parvulus populations
from M. trifasciatus on Champion and GbF.
Like other species tree reconciliation methods based
on multi-species coalescent models [58], the *BEAST
algorithm assumes no horizontal gene transfer in the
gene genealogies. In one instance this assumption is violated by our data through the possibility of a recent
introduction of Myrsidea from Santa Fé to Champion
island, which is analogous to a host switch in host-parasite reconciliation methods. This is the only case where
the incongruence between the topologies is located on
the terminal nodes. We can reasonably suppose that the
deeper incongruences are caused by ancient ancestral
polymorphism, which is accommodated in the *BEAST
analysis. Excluding this terminal event, other instances
of incongruence do not significantly affect our interpretation of the reconciled multi-species tree.
An improved fit between the genealogies of Analges
and Mimus compared to the Myrsidea - Mimus association is also seen in the results produced by the Jane analysis, where only one co-speciation was inferred for the
latter pair. Instead Jane identified a relatively large number of host switches or duplications. This highlights a
pitfall of the multi-gene *BEAST analysis which cannot
accommodate host switching events. Nevertheless, Jane
cannot incorporate ancestral polymorphism, which is
critical for analysing evolutionary recent associations.
For this reason we consider the reconciliation analysis
via tree mapping less suitable for the Galápagos dataset.
Furthermore, traditional reconciliation analysis is only as
good as the supplied trees. By utilising tree topologies
instead of raw sequential data for all available specimens, the analysis is limited to the solutions permitted

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

by the tree topologies and cannot assess uncertainty in
the input data in a way that is possible in the Bayesian
analysis.
Mockingbird conservation

Understanding the origin of the Champion population
of Myrsidea is also interesting with respect to the conservation of the endangered Floreana mockingbird. Floreana mockingbirds on Champion and GbF represent
remnants of the bird population extinct on Floreana.
Bird populations on both islets show dramaticaly low
levels of genetic variability, as identified through the
haplotype diversity presented here and by Arbogast et al
[27]. Microsatellite data generated by Hoeck et al [73]
also show very short coalescence times for the populations on the two islets. Nevertheless, both Hoeck et al
[28] and the Structure analysis performed here group
the two Floreana mockingbird populations together
when compared to other Galápagos mockingbird species. More detailed knowledge about the epidemiology
and evolutionary history of Myrsidea on Champion and
GbF would provide valuable data relevant to a tentative
reintroduction of mockingbirds on Floreana. Additional
genetic loci and extended sampling would help to assess
the level of host-parasite co-adaptation in the two populations, and help assess risks connected with uniting the
populations on Floreana.
Louse Taxonomy

Palma and Price [33] identify two subspecies of Myrsidea nesomimi within the Galápagos based on morphological data. These subspecies comprise M. n. nesomimi
(found on Epaňola, GbE and on the two islets of Floreana) and M. n. borealis (occupying the rest of the
archipelago). Genetic data presented here clearly separate the Epaňola and GbE population of Myrsidea from
the rest of the archipelago (Figure 3c). However, the
Champion and GbF populations seem to be genetically
distinct from Española and, at least in the case of GbF,
also from the other Galápagos islands.
Mutation rates

Greater population differentiation has occurred in the
parasites (excluding Brueelia) than in their hosts (Figure
4). This is congruent with the faster parasite mutation
rate identified in the *BEAST analysis. When compared
to their hosts, elevated mutation rates are a common
feature in lice and might be explained through the
shorter louse generation time leading to quicker accumulation of new mutations [74]. Relative evolutionary
rates of mockingbird Myrsidea are approximately twofold faster than their hosts, which is in line with the rate
difference commonly found in other studies of lice and
their vertebrate hosts [e.g. [74-77]]. However, the nine-

Page 15 of 18

fold faster mutation rate of Analges is unexpectedly
high. This remarkable difference requires further attention, not least because the length of the generation time
in Analges is probably not different to lice. Although
exact data on Analgid mites are lacking, the generation
times of taxonomically related Sarcoptid mites are two
to three weeks [78], similar to most parasitic lice [37].
To our knowledge, there are no studies of feather mites
that provided relative mutational rate estimates for comparison. However, the fast genomic evolution in Analges
is likely to be a lineage specific character. In addition to
Analges, Astigmatid mites, containing many other parasitic and free-living species, have been shown to have
significantly faster mutation rates than other mite
groups [35].
Louse ecology influencing genetic patterns

As representatives of two separate louse suborders the
louse species analysed in this study differ considerably
with respect to their ecology and evolutionary origins.
Brueelia, as other ischnoceran lice, feed on feathers,
whereas amblyceran Myrsidea include host body fluids
in their diet. Amblycera are therefore more exposed
to the host’s immune response than Ischnocera [37].
Such interaction may promote selection towards host
specific forms in Myrsidea and might accelerate their
genetic differentiation relative to ischnoceran
Brueelia.
Other ecological characters may also explain the different levels of genetic differentiation in these different
suborders of parasitic lice. The pattern reported here of
lower levels of intra-specific variability in Ischnocera
relative to Amblycera has also been identified in other
taxonomic studies of lice. For example, Bueter et al. [79]
compared levels of intra-generic genetic diversity
between Brueelia and Myrsidea parasitizing thrushes
(genus Catharus, Passeriformes). Their data show
decreased genetic diversity and lack of co-speciation in
Brueelia when compared to their hosts. This could be
explained by increased dispersal capabilities in Brueelia,
either through direct contact of host organisms or via
phoresis (transport) on hippoboscid flies parasitizing
various bird hosts [80].
Comparative studies of genetic differences at a very
low (intra-specific) evolutionary levels are rare in lice
[for exceptions see [81-83]] but in these cases different
dispersal capabilities have also been suggested as
important factors contributing to the differences in
population structure. The role of phoresis in facilitating the dispersal of lice has been documented on
numerous occasions in Ischnocera with a majority of
cases citing Brueelia attached to hippoboscid flies. In
contrast, phoretic associations involving Amblycera are
very rare [80]. Hippoboscid flies are present on

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

Page 16 of 18

Galápagos mockingbirds [authors’ observation] making
dispersal through phoresis a possible explanation for
the lack of inter-island differentiation in Brueelia.
However, it is improbable that hippoboscids could
migrate between islands without being attached to a
bird. Thus any migration of Brueelia between islands,
whether vectored by hippoboscids or not, is likely to
involve another bird host. Brueelia galapagensis has
been recorded from several other species of hosts
including the Small Ground Finch (Geospiza fuliginosa)
[32,84] which is endemic to the Galápagos and is capable of migration between islands [24,85]. Although
records of B. galapagensis from non-specific hosts (i.e.
other than Mimus) have been questioned and may be
attributed to contamination [R.L. Palma, personal communication] it is possible that B. galapagensis occasionally occurs on the Small Ground Finch as
stragglers. The lack of genetic structure in B. galapagensis might be explained by phoretic transfer to the
Small Ground Finch and the inter-island migration of
this species, followed by recurrent phoretic transfer
back to mockingbirds.
Brueelia also show very little intra-population variability, which is compatible with low population sizes of the
parasite recovered during collecting. Despite large numbers of mockingbirds inspected for lice, Brueelia was
absent on many islands, especially on larger islands of
the archipelago and in those instances when Brueelia
was present, its abundance and prevalence were very
low in comparison to Myrsidea (Figure 2). This might
suggest lower levels of adaption for Brueelia on mockingbirds compared to the other two parasitic taxa. We
can only speculate as to why Brueelia is missing on larger islands. It may be the case that Brueelia is only capable of surviving on mockingbirds that exist in smaller,
genetically depleted host populations. For instance, a
similar link between host genetic diversity and the prevalence of an ischnoceran parasite, was reported in
populations of a wild lesser kestrel, Falco naumanni and
their lice, Degeeriella rufa [86].

Brueelia such as their dispersal capabilitity, abundance,
and lower levels of host specificity. A more accurate
picture of the phylogeographic history of these
lineages, congruent with the geological history of the
islands and with available nuclear data was obtained
through a joint analysis of data for the three co-evolving groups. We show that pooling genetic data for
several organisms living in close ecological association
improves the inference of phylogeographic histories in
recently diverged species.

Conclusions
Using mitochondrial DNA sequences and nuclear data
we studied 400 samples of recently diverged Galápagos
mockingbirds and 229 specimens of 3 species of their
parasites (Analges, Myrsidea and Brueelia). We found
that co-phylogeographic patterns inferred on the level
of single gene genealogies (for Mimus, Analges and
Myrsidea) are considerably impacted by differential
distribution of ancestral polymorphism. In contrast,
extremely low genetic variability and lack of co-phylogeographic congruence was found in Brueelia. These
differences may be explained by life history traits in

Author details
Entomology Department, Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, SW7
5BD, London, UK. 2Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia and
Biology Centre ASCR, Institute of Parasitology, Branisovska 31, 37005 Ceske
Budejovice, Czech Republic. 3Institute of Evolutionary Biology and
Environmental Studies, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057
Zurich, Switzerland.

Additional material
Additional file 1: List of samples sequenced for COI and EF1a.
Additional file 2: Matrices of mean genetic divergence (p-distances)
for the COI gene.
Additional file 3: *BEAST chronograms. Provided are multi-species
chronogram (a) and chronograms for Mimus (b), Analges (c) and Myrsidea
(d) datasets. Tip labels on the multi-species tree are the same as in
Figure 1. Tip labels on the individual species trees are abbreviations of
the island names from Figure 1 and voucher numbers from Additional
file 1. Mean values of ages for major clades are provided with blue bars
ranging the 95% highest posterior probability interval.
Additional file 4: Zipped archive containing KML files for each of
the taxon phylogenies. These data files should be viewed in Google
Earth [http://www.google.com/earth].
Additional file 5: Host-parasite phylogenies mapped with Jane
software. Results for Mimus-Analges (a) and Mimus-Myrsidea (b)
associations are shown. Hollow circles mark co-speciations, solid circles
mark duplications. Host switches are marked by arrows and losses by
dashed lines. Host trees are in black, mapped parasite histories are in
blue. Yellow nodes indicate another location of equal cost exists, red
nodes mark the solution with the lowest cost. Taxon labels were
assigned as species and island abbreviations as shown in Figures 1 and
2.

Acknowledgements
We thank the Galápagos National Park Service for permission to conduct this
research (Permit No. PC-48-10) and the Charles Darwin Foundation for
assistance. The authors are grateful to Václav Hypša, Kevin Johnson and two
anonymous reviewers for useful comments on the manuscript. This work
was supported by Marie Curie Fellowship (project Galápagos, no. 235123,
FP7-PEOPLE-IEF-2008) and by the Czech Science Foundation (project No.
206/08/1019). Part of the work was carried out by using the resources of the
Computational Biology Service Unit at Cornell University.
1

Authors’ contributions
JŠ sequenced the studied taxa, performed computional analyses and drafted
the manuscript. VS concieved the idea of studying host-parasite co-evolution
in mockingbirds, provided guidance with data analyses and contributed to
drafting the manuscript. PH concluded fragment analysis of the mockingbird
microsatellites. PH and LK collected all study material and helped with
finishing the manuscript text. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

Received: 7 April 2011 Accepted: 3 October 2011
Published: 3 October 2011
References
1. Nieberding C, Morand S, Libois R, Michaux JR: A parasite reveals cryptic
phylogeographic history of its host. Proc Biol Sci 2004, 271:2559-2568.
2. Linz B, Balloux F, Moodley Y, Manica A, Liu H, Roumagnac P, Falush D,
Stamer C, Prugnolle F, van der Merwe SW, Yamaoka Y, Graham DY, PerezTrallero E, Wadstrom T, Suerbaum S, Achtman M: An African origin for the
intimate association between humans and Helicobacter pylori. Nature
2007, 445:915-918.
3. Page RDM, Charleston MA: Trees within trees: phylogeny and historical
associations. Trends Ecol Evol 1998, 13:356-359.
4. Rannala B, Michalakis Y: Population genetics and cospeciation: from
process to pattern. In Tangled Trees: phylogeny, cospeciation and
coevolution. Edited by: Page RDM. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
Illinois; 2002:120-143.
5. Nieberding CM, Olivieri I: Parasites: proxies for host genealogy and
ecology? Trends Ecol Evol 2007, 22:156-165.
6. Whiteman NK, Parker PG: Using parasites to infer host population history:
a new rationale for parasite conservation. Animal Conservation 2005,
8:175-181.
7. Clayton DH, Bush SE, Goates BM, Johnson KP: Host defense reinforces
host-parasite cospeciation. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2003, 100:15694-15699.
8. Hafner MS, Demastes JW, Spradling TA, Reed DL: Cophylogeny between
pocket gophers and chewing lice. In Tangled Trees: phylogeny, cospeciation
and coevolution. Edited by: Page RDM. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
Illinois; 2002:195-220.
9. Morelli M, Spicer GS: Cospeciation between the nasal mite Ptilonyssus
sairae (Acari: Rhinonyssidae) and its bird hosts. Systematic and Applied
Acarology 2007, 12:179-188.
10. Hughes J, Kennedy M, Johnson KP, Palma RL, Page RDM: Multiple
cophylogenetic analyses reveal frequent cospeciation between
pelicaniform birds and Pectinopygus lice. Syst Biol 2007, 56:232-251.
11. Banks JC, Palma RL, Paterson AM: Cophylogenetic relationships between
penguins and their chewing lice. J Evol Biol 2006, 19:156-166.
12. Gómez-Díaz E, González-Solís J, Peinado MA, Page RDM: Lack of hostdependent genetic structure in ectoparasites of Calonectris shearwaters.
Mol Ecol 2007, 16:5204-5215.
13. Nieberding CM, Durette-Desset MC, Vanderpoorten A, Casanova JC, Ribas A,
Deffontaine V, Feliu C, Morande S, Libois R, Michaux JR: Geography and
host biogeography matter for understanding the phylogeography of a
parasite. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2008, 47:538-554.
14. Štefka J, Hypša V: Host specificity and genealogy of the louse Polyplax
serrata on field mice, Apodemus species: A case of parasite duplication
or colonization? Int J Parasitol 2008, 38:731-741.
15. Barton NH: Natural selection and random genetic drift as causes of
evolution on islands. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1996, 351:785-794.
16. Darwin CR: Narrative of the surveying voyages of His Majesty’s Ships
Adventure and Beagle between the years 1826 and 1836, describing
their examination of the southern shores of South America, and the
Beagle’s circumnavigation of the globe. Journal and remarks 1832-1836.
London, UK: Henry Colburn; 1839.
17. Christie DM, Duncan RA, McBirney AR, Richards MA, White WM, Harp KS,
Fox CG: Drowned islands downstream from the Galápagos hotspot
imply extended speciation times. Nature 1992, 355:246-248.
18. White WM, McBirney AR, Duncan RA: Petrology and geochemistry of the
Galápagos Islands: Portrait of a pathological mantle plume. J Geophys
Res-Solid Earth 1993, 98:533-563.
19. O’Connor JM, Stoffers P, Wijbrans JR, Worthington TJ: Migration of
widespread long-lived volcanism across the Galápagos Volcanic
Province: Evidence for a broad hotspot melting anomaly? Earth Planet Sci
Lett 2007, 263:339-354.
20. Funk VA, Wagner WL: Biogeographic patterns in the Hawaiian Islands. In
Hawaiian Biogeography: Evolution on a Hot Spot Archipelago. Edited by:
Wagner WL, Funk VA. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press;
1995:379-419.
21. Werner R, Hoernle K, Bogaard PVD, Ranero C, Huene RV, Korich D: Drowned
14-m.y.-old Galápagos archipelago off the coast of Costa Rica:
Implications for tectonic and evolutionary models. Geology 1999,
27:499-502.

Page 17 of 18

22. Sequeira AS, Lanteri AA, Scataglini MA, Confalonieri VA, Farrell BD: Are
flightless Galapaganus weevils older than the Galápagos Islands they
inhabit? Heredity 2000, 85:20-29.
23. Parent CE, Caccone A, Petren K: Colonization and diversification of
Galápagos terrestrial fauna: a phylogenetic and biogeographical
synthesis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008, 363:3347-3361.
24. Petren K, Grant PR, Grant BR, Keller LF: Comparative landscape genetics
and the adaptive radiation of Darwin’s finches: the role of peripheral
isolation. Mol Ecol 2005, 14:2943-2957.
25. Sequeira AS, Lanteri AA, Albelo LR, Bhattacharya S, Sijapati M: Colonization
history, ecological shifts and diversification in the evolution of endemic
Galápagos weevils. Mol Ecol 2008, 17:1089-107.
26. Schmitz P, Cibois A, Landry B: Molecular phylogeny and dating of an
insular endemic moth radiation inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear
genes: the genus Galagete (Lepidoptera: Autostichidae) of the
Galápagos Islands. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007, 45:180-192.
27. Arbogast BS, Drovetski SV, Curry RL, Boag PT, Seutin G, Grant PR, Grant BR,
Anderson DJ: The origin and diversification of Galápagos mockingbirds.
Evolution 2006, 60:370-382.
28. Hoeck PEA, Bollmer JL, Parker PG, Keller LF: Differentiation with drift: a
spatio-temporal genetic analysis of Galápagos mockingbird populations
(Mimus spp.). Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2010, 365:1127-1138.
29. Avise JC: Phylogeography: retrospect and prospect. J Biogeogr 2009,
36:3-15.
30. Nichols R: Gene trees and species trees are not the same. Trends Ecol Evol
2001, 16:358-364.
31. Funk DJ, Omland KE: Species-level paraphyly and polyphyly: frequency,
causes, and consequences, with insights from animal mitochondrial
DNA. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 2003, 34:397-423.
32. Price RD, Hellenthal RA, Palma RL, Johnson KP, Clayton DH: The Chewing
Lice: World Checklist and Biological Overview. Illinois Natural History
Survey Special Publication 2003.
33. Palma RL, Price RD: The species of Myrsidea Waterston (Insecta:
Phthiraptera: Menoponidae) from the Galápagos Islands, with
descriptions of new taxa. Tuhinga 2010, 21:135-146.
34. Johnson KP, Yoshizawa K, Smith VS: Multiple origins of parasitism in lice.
Proc Biol Sci 2004, 271:1771-1776.
35. Dabert M, Witalinski W, Kazmierski A, Olszanowski Z, Dabert J: Molecular
phylogeny of acariform mites (Acari, Arachnida): strong conflict between
phylogenetic signal and long-branch attraction artifacts. Mol Phylogenet
Evol 2010, 56:222-2241.
36. Proctor HC: Feather mites (Acari: Astigmata): ecology, behavior, and
evolution. Annu Rev Entomol 2003, 48:185-209.
37. Marshall AG: The ecology of ectoparasitic insects. Academic Press,
London, UK; 1981.
38. Clayton DH, Drown DM: Critical evaluation of five methods for
quantifying chewing lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera). J Parasitol 2001,
87:1291-1300.
39. Cruickshank RH, Johnson KP, Smith VS, Adams RJ, Clayton DH, Page RD:
Phylogenetic analysis of partial sequences of elongation factor 1 alpha
identifies major groups of lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera). Mol Phylogenet Evol
2001, 19:202-215.
40. Danforth BN, Ji SQ: Elongation factor-1 alpha occurs in two copies in
bees: implications for phylogenetic analysis of EF-1 alpha sequences in
insects. Mol Biol Evol 1998, 14:381-390.
41. Gouy M, Guindon S, Gascuel O: SeaView version 4: a multiplatform
graphical user interface for sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree
building. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:221-224.
42. Posada D: Collapse: describing haplotypes from sequence alignments.
[http://darwin.uvigo.es/software/collapse.html].
43. Hoeck PEA, Bucher TB, Wandeler P, Keller LF: Microsatellite primers for the
four Galápagos mockingbird species (Mimus parvulus, M. macdonaldi, M.
melanotis and M. trifasciatus). Mol Ecol Resour 2009, 9:1538-1541.
44. Swofford DL: Paup*: Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other
Methods). Sinauer Associates, Inc. Publishers, Sunderland, Massachusetts;
2001.
45. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
46. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MRBAYES 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.

Štefka et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:284
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/284

47. Posada D: JModelTest: phylogenetic model averaging. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25:1253-1256.
48. Rambaut A, Drummond AJ: TRACER.[http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/tracer].
49. Nylander JAA, Wilgenbusch JC, Warren DL, Swofford DL: AWTY (are we
there yet?): a system for graphical exploration of MCMC convergence in
Bayesian phylogenetics. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:581-583.
50. Clement M, Posada D, Crandall K: TCS: a computer program to estimate
gene genealogies. Mol Ecol 2000, 9:1657-1660.
51. Tamura K, Peterson D, Peterson N, Stecher G, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA5:
Molecular evolutionary genetics analysis using Maximum Likelihood,
Evolutionary Distance, and Maximum Parsimony methods. Mol Biol Evol
2011.
52. Nei M, Kumar S: Molecular Evolution and Phylogenetics Oxford University
Press, New York; 2000.
53. Librado P, Rozas J: DnaSP v5: a software for comprehensive analysis of
DNA polymorphism data. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1451-1452.
54. Falush D, Stephens M, Pritchard JK: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data: linked loci and correlated allele
frequencies. Genetics 2003, 164:1567-1587.
55. Falush D, Stephens M, Pritchard JK: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data: dominant markers and null alleles. Mol
Ecol Notes 2007, 7:574-578.
56. Evanno G, Regnaut S, Goudet J: Detecting the number of clusters of
individuals using the software STRUCTURE: a simulation study. Mol Ecol
2005, 14:2611-2620.
57. Rosenberg NA: DISTRUCT: a program for the graphical display of
population structure. Mol Ecol Notes 2004, 4:137-138.
58. Heled J, Drummond AJ: Bayesian inference of species trees from
multilocus data. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:570-580.
59. Drummond AJ, Rambaut A: BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary analysis by
sampling trees. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:214.
60. Yang Z: PAML 4: phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24:1586-1591.
61. Conow C, Fielder D, Ovadia Y, Libeskind-Hadas R: Jane: a new tool for the
cophylogeny reconstruction problem. Algorithms Mol Biol 2010, 5:16.
62. Charleston MA, Robertson DL: Preferential host switching by primate
lentiviruses can account for phylogenetic similarity with the primate
phylogeny. Syst Biol 2002, 51:528-535.
63. Google Earth. [http://www.google.com/earth].
64. Hill AW, Guralnick RP: GeoPhylo: an online tool for developing
visualizations of phylogenetic trees in geographic space. Ecography 2010,
33:633-636.
65. Simonsen KL, Churchill GA, Aquardo CF: Properties of statistical tests of
neutrality for DNA polymorphism data. Genetics 1995, 141:413-429.
66. Drummond AJ, Ho SYW, Phillips MJ, Rambaut A: Relaxed phylogenetics
and dating with confidence. PLoS Biology 2006, 4:e88.
67. Anderson TJ: The dangers of using single locus markers in parasite
epidemiology Ascaris as a case study. Trends Parasitol 2001, 17:183-188.
68. Zink RM, Barrowclough GF: Mitochondrial DNA under siege in avian
phylogeography. Mol Ecol 2008, 17:2107-2121.
69. Buckler-Iv ES, Ippolito A, Holtsford TP: The evolution of ribosomal DNA:
divergent paralogues and phylogenetic implications. Genetics 1997,
145:821-832.
70. Kraálovaá-Hromadovaá I, Štefka J, Špakulová M, Orosová M, Bombarová M,
Hanzelová V, Bazsalovicsová E, Scholz T: Intra-individual internal
transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1) and ITS2 ribosomal sequence variation linked
with multiple rDNA loci: A case of triploid Atractolytocestus huronensis,
the monozoic cestode of common carp. Int J Parasitol 2010, 40:175-181.
71. Toon A, Hughes JM: Are lice good proxies for host history? A
comparative analysis of the Australian magpie, Gymnorhina tibicen and
two species of feather louse. Heredity 2008, 101:127-135.
72. Whiteman NK, Kimball RT, Parker PG: Co-phylogeography and comparative
population genetics of the threatened Galápagos hawk and three
ectoparasite species: ecology shapes population histories within parasite
communities. Mol Ecol 2007, 16:4759-4773.
73. Hoeck PEA, Beaumont MA, James KE, Grant RB, Grant PR, Keller LF: Saving
Darwin’s muse: evolutionary genetics for the recovery of the Floreana
mockingbird. Biol Lett 2010, 6:212-215.
74. Hafner MS, Sudman PD, Villablanca FX, Spradling TA, Demastes JW,
Nadler SA: Disparate rates of molecular evolution in cospeciating hosts
and parasites. Science 1994, 265:1087-1090.

Page 18 of 18

75. Reed DL, Smith VS, Hammond SL, Rogers AR, Clayton DH: Genetic analysis
of lice supports direct contact between modern and archaic humans.
PloS Biol 2004, 2:1-12.
76. Page RDM, Lee PLM, Becher SA, Griffiths R, Clayton DH: A different tempo
of mitochondrial DNA evolution in birds and their parasitic lice. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 1998, 9:276-293.
77. Light JE, Hafner MS: Codivergence in heteromyid rodents (Rodentia:
heteromyidae) and their sucking lice of the genus Fahrenholzia
(Phthiraptera: anoplura). Syst Biol 2008, 57:449-465.
78. Kettle DS: Medical and Veterinary Entomology. 2 edition. CAB International,
Cambridge; 1995.
79. Bueter C, Weckstein J, Johnson KP, Bates JM, Gordon CE: Comparative
phylogenetic histories of two louse genera found on Catharus thrushes
and other birds. J Parasitol 2009, 95:295-307.
80. Keirans JE: A review of the phoretic relationship between Mallophaga
(Phthiraptera: Insecta) and Hippoboscidae (Diptera: Insecta). J Med
Entomol 1975, 12:71-76.
81. Johnson KP, Williams BL, Drown DM, Adams RJ, Clayton DH: The
population genetics of host specificity: genetic differentiation in dove
lice (Insecta: Phthiraptera). Mol Ecol 2002, 11:25-38.
82. Toon A, Hughes JM: Are lice good proxies for host history? A
comparative analysis of the Australian magpie, Gymnorhina tibicen and
two species of feather louse. Heredity 2008, 101:127-135.
83. Balakrishnan CN, Sorenson MD: Dispersal ecology versus host
specialization as determinants of ectoparasite distribution in brood
parasitic indigobirds and their estrildid finch hosts. Mol Ecol 2007,
16:217-229.
84. Hopkins GHE: Stray notes on Mallophaga. - XI. 93. The identities of three
forms described by Kellogg & Kuwana. Ann Mag Nat Hist 1951,
12:375-377.
85. Grant PR, Grant BR: Conspecific versus heterospecific gene exchange
between populations of Darwin’s finches. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol
Sci 2010, 365:1065-1076.
86. Ortego J, Aparicio JM, Calabuig G, Cordero PJ: Risk of ectoparasitism and
population genetic diversity in a wild lesser kestrel population. Mol Ecol
2007, 16:3712-3720.
87. Kerr KCR, Stoeckle MY, Dove CJ, Weigt LA, Francis CM, Hebert PDN:
Comprehensive DNA barcode coverage of North American birds. Mol
Ecol Notes 2007, 7:535-543.
88. Folmer O, Black M, Hoeh W, Lutz R, Vrijenhoek R: DNA primers for
amplification of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I from
diverse metazoan invertebrates. Mol Mar Biol Biotechnol 1994, 3:294-299.
89. Harpp KS, Wirth KR, Korich DJ: Northern Galapagos Province: Hotspotinduced, near-ridge volcanism at Genovesa Island. Geology 2002,
30:399-402.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-284
Cite this article as: Štefka et al.: A hitchhikers guide to the Galápagos:
co-phylogeography of Galápagos mockingbirds and their parasites. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:284.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
