<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The two α-dox genes of Nicotiana attenuata: overlapping but distinct functions in development and stress responses</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010 10:171. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-171"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Anke Steppuhn"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The two a-dox genes of Nicotiana attenuata:
overlapping but distinct functions in
development and stress responses
Anke Steppuhn2†, Emmanuel Gaquerel1†, Ian T Baldwin1*

Abstract
Background: Plant fatty acid a-dioxygenases (a-DOX) are oxylipin-forming enzymes induced by biotic and abiotic
stresses, which also participate in developmental processes. In Nicotiana attenuata, herbivory strongly induces the
expression of an a-dox1 gene. To determine its role, we silenced its expression using Agrobacterium-mediated
plant transformation with an inverted repeat construct. More than half of the transformed lines showed a severe
dwarf growth phenotype that was very similar to the phenotype of tomato plants mutated at a second a-dox
isoform. This led us to identify the corresponding a-dox2 gene in N. attenuata and examine the regulation of both
a-dox genes as well as the consequences of their silencing in plant development and anti-herbivore defense.
Results: The transformed lines exhibiting a dwarf growth phenotype are co-silenced for both a-dox genes
resulting in a nearly complete suppression of a-DOX activity, which is associated with increases in ABA, JA and
anthocyanin levels, all metabolic signatures of oxidative stress. The other lines, only silenced for a-dox1, developed
similarly to wild-type plants, exhibited a 40% reduction of a-DOX activity resulting in a 50% reduction of its main
product in planta (2-HOT) and showed no signs of oxidative stress. In contrast to a-dox1, the expression of a-dox2
gene is not induced by wounding or elicitors in the oral secretions of Manduca sexta. Instead, a-dox2 is expressed
in roots and flowers which lack a-dox1 expression, but both genes are equally regulated during leaf maturation.
We transiently silenced a-dox gene copies with gene-specific constructs using virus induced gene silencing and
determined the consequences for plant development and phytohormone and 2-HOT levels. While individual
silencing of a-dox1 or a-dox2 had no effects on plant growth, the co-suppression of both a-dox genes decreased
plant growth. Plants transiently silenced for both a-dox genes had increased constitutive levels of JA and ABA but
silencing a-dox1 alone resulted in lower M. sexta-induced levels of JA, 2-HOT and ABA.
Conclusions: Thus, both a-dox isoforms function in the development of N. attenuata. In leaf maturation, the two
a-dox genes have overlapping functions, but only a-dox2 is involved in root and flower development and only
a-dox1 functions in anti-herbivore defense.

Background
Fatty acid (FA) hydroperoxides are intermediates in different oxylipin pathways controlling plant development
[1] and plant responses to stresses [2]. To date, much
of the research on oxylipin signals has focused on jasmonic acid (JA) whose biosynthesis starts with the
peroxidation of linolenic acid (C18:3) mediated by
* Correspondence: baldwin@ice.mpg.de
† Contributed equally
1
Department of Molecular Ecology, Max-Planck-Institute for Chemical
Ecology, Hans-Knöll-Str. 8, Jena 07745, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

13-lipoxygenase (13-LOX) enzymes. In Nicotiana
attenuata, silencing of lox3, a gene coding for a 13LOX isoform, considerably reduces the accumulation of
herbivory-induced jasmonic acid and as a consequence,
the accumulation of several direct defense compounds,
such as nicotine and trypsin proteinase inhibitors, as
well as terpenoid volatiles that function as indirect
defenses [3]. Consistent with its important regulatory
role in mediating responses to herbivory, lox3 expression increases after herbivore attack [4].
In N. attenuata, one of the transcripts most strongly
elicited by the feeding of different herbivores is an

© 2010 Steppuhn et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

a-dioxygenase (a-dox), a gene homologue of Nicotiana
tabacum (Nt) a-dox [5-8]. The Nta-dox was first identified as a pathogen inducible oxygenase (PIOX) sharing
significant homologies with mammalian prostaglandin
endoperoxidases [9]. a-DOXs are FA-hydroperoxidases
which target the a-carbon (C2) of a broad range of FAs
[9,10]. In vitro, their catalytic activity is characterized by
the production of long-chain aldehydes formed from
a-hydroperoxy-FA molecules that escape reduction to
a-hydroxy-FA and undergo spontaneous decarboxylation [10]. Like LOXs, a-DOXs also use linolenic acid
(C18:3) as substrate, but convert it to heptadecatrienal
(HDT) in vitro. However, quantification of the oxidative
products of a-DOX activity in response to bacterial
inoculation, revealed that 2-hydroxy-C18:3 (2-HOT) is
the major product synthesized in tobacco plants [11].
Because 2-HOT exhibits antimicrobial activity at high
concentrations, it may directly protect plants against
pathogen attack [11,12]. However, the biological functions of this and other a-DOX products remain largely
unknown.
Several lines of evidence indicate that a-dox genes are
involved in responses to different abiotic and biotic
stresses. In tomato roots, for example, ethylene increases
a-dox transcript accumulation during salt stress [13].
Other abiotic stresses, such as UV-B exposure, heavy
metal stress, and cold stress, increase a-dox transcript
accumulation in Nicotiana longiflora, rice and Arabidopsis, respectively [14-16]. However, more work has examined whether a-DOX is involved in a plant’s response to
pathogens and herbivores. In Capsicum annuum transcripts of an a-DOX homolog increase during pathogen
infection [17]. In Arabidopsis thaliana and N. tabacum,
the transcriptional up-regulation of a-dox is amplified
when the infection results in a hypersensitive response
[9,18]. Ponce de León et al. [19] showed that a-dox
gene expression is impaired in salicylic acid (SA)compromised plants and transgenic A. thaliana plants
silenced in a-dox expression do more rapidly develop
severe necrotic lesions in response to incompatible bacteria than do wild-type (WT) plants. This suggests that
a-DOX1 activity protects tissues from excessive necrosis; however, the responsible mechanisms remain
unknown.
In N. attenuata, the effects of pathogen inoculation
and treatment with pathogen-derived elicitors on N.
attenuata a-dox transcript accumulation is much
weaker than that of its homologues in other species [5].
The strong transcriptional up-regulation of N. attenuataa-dox in response to herbivore attack involves the
initial perception of fatty acid amino acid conjugates
(FACs), which are herbivore specific elicitors in the oral
secretions (OS) of lepidopteran larvae [20]. In addition,
the up-regulation of a-dox requires the JA-signaling

Page 2 of 15

pathway as demonstrated by the lack of a-dox transcript
accumulation in OS-elicited lox3-silenced plants [3]. JA
elicitation of a-dox transcripts has also been reported in
Oryza sativa [15] and N. tabacum [9]. This regulation
suggests an anti-herbivore function for Naa-DOX in
N. attenuata.
Generally, the increased transcription of a-dox genes
in plants attacked by herbivores and pathogens suggests
a defensive function; however, plant a-dox transcripts
and activity are also regulated during developmental
processes. Fatty acida-oxidation was first reported in
peanut seedlings during germination [21]. Also during
germination, one of the first a-DOX proteins was isolated in pea. Pea seedlings accumulate Psa-dox transcripts at much higher levels than do leaves and dry
seeds [22] and these are lost during maturation [23] and
later detected exclusively in roots. Additional evidence
for a role in development is suggested by the increasing
expression Nta-dox gene during leaf senescence in
N. tabacum [24].
FA a-oxidation is phylogenetically widespread, as even
preparations from green alga form 2-hydroxypalmic acid
from palmic acid [25]. The a-DOX proteins identified in
different plant species show high amino acid homologies.
For example, the amino acid sequence of N. tabacum
a-DOX shares high amino acid similarities with the proteins in N. attenuata (95% identity), C. annuum (85%
identity), Solanum lycopersicum (84% identity), A. thaliana
(75% identity), and O. sativa (63% identity) [18]. In addition to these proteins, referred to as a-DOX1, another
a-DOX isoform exists. A second protein, first identified in
tomato and A. thaliana, shares more homology between
species than with the corresponding a-DOX1 sequence of
the same species. This second protein, encoded by a-dox2,
is the S. lycopersicum feebly gene, which leads to a dwarf
phenotype in a knock-out mutant [26]. The patterns of adox2 transcript accumulation differ from those of a-dox1
in both S. lycopersicum and A. thaliana. Whereas a-dox2
transcript accumulation is not increased by pathogen
infection, it is enhanced in seedlings and in wilting leaves
3 to 6 days after detachment [27]. Despite a similar transcriptional regulation of a-dox2 in S. lycopersicum and
A. thaliana, its role in plant development appears to be
species-specific. Ectopic expression of the Ata-dox2 in a
tomato mutant deficient for a-dox2 partially complemented the compromised growth phenotype, but deletion of
Ata-dox2 did not result in a growth phenotype [28]. In
summary, although a-DOX proteins are widespread across
the plant kingdom their specific functions, presumably in
defense and development, remain to be elucidated.
To determine the role of the herbivore responsive
a-dox1 gene in N. attenuata, we used Agrobacterium
mediated plant transformation with an inverted repeat
(IR) construct to silence its expression. More than half

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

of the lines showed a severe dwarf growth phenotype,
the other lines developed similarly to WT plants.
Though the a-DOX activity was reduced in all lines, it
was not detectable in those lines exhibiting a dwarf phenotype. To test whether this resulted from a co-silencing
of a second a-dox isoform in the dwarf phenotype lines,
we used a consensus sequence of a-dox2 isoforms in
L. esculentum and A. thaliana to clone a gene fragment
of the N. attenuata a-dox2 gene. The dwarf phenotype
correlated with the co-silencing of the Naa-dox2 gene.
In contrast to Naa-dox1, Naa-dox2 transcripts were not
induced by wounding or simulations of Manduca sexta
attack. Instead, a-dox2 was more expressed in roots and
flowers. To investigate the functions of both isoforms,
we transiently silenced both with gene specific constructs using virus induced gene silencing (VIGS) and
examined the consequences for plant development and
constitutive and induced phytohormone levels.

Results
Silencing Naa-dox in N. attenuata results in two growth
phenotypes

To examine the function of Naa-dox1 [GenBank
AF229926], we transformed N. attenuata with an IR
construct containing a 457 bp fragment of Naa-dox1 to
silence its expression (Additional file 1). Two distinct
growth phenotypes were observed: 11 of the 18 independently transformed lines showed stunted growth
(IRa-doxS), whereas the other lines showed a mild phenotype (IRa-doxM) and were indistinguishable from WT
plants in their growth and development. Plants of the
IRa-doxS lines germinate normally though a higher proportion of infertile seeds were produced by these plants.
Young IRa-doxS seedlings appear similar to WT plants,
but already when transplanted into soil two weeks after
germination, they are slightly delayed in development.
At rosette stage, approximately 35 days after germination, IRa-doxS plants are clearly delayed with rosette diameters of about a third of that of WT and IR a-dox M
plants (Figure 1A). At flowering, approximately 60 days
after germination, IR a-dox S plants only attained one
fourth to a third of the height of WT plants and produced only few flowers (Figure 1B). Whereas WT
N. attenuata plant in 1 L pots produce between 50 and
120 capsules, homozygous IRa-doxS plants usually produce between 0 and 5 capsules. The a-DOX activity
was reduced in all IRa-dox lines. However, whereas IRadox M plants showed a reduction of around 40% in
a-DOX activity, only very low or no activity was detectable in dwarf IRa-doxS plants (Figure 1C). The accumulation of the main product of a-DOX in planta: 2-HOT
was reduced by more than 50% in IRa-doxM plants compared to WT and was at the detection limit in IRa-doxS
plants (Figure 1D).

Page 3 of 15

A a-dox2 isoform in N. attenuata is co-silenced in the
IRa-dox lines

In S. lycopersicum and A. thaliana a second gene with
high sequence similarity to a-dox1 was identified [27].
The phenotype of tomato plants mutated at this Sladox2 locus (feebly, divarcata) is very similar to that of
the IRa-doxS plants [26,28]. A Southern-blot analysis performed by Hermsmeier et al. (2001) has already demonstrated that N. attenuata’s genome contains at least two
a-dox gene copies. We therefore investigated whether a
homologue of S. lycopersicum and A. thaliana a-dox2
may also be present in N. attenuata and may have been
co-silenced in the IRa-doxS plants. We used a consensus
sequence of a-dox2 isoforms in S. lycopersicum and
A. thaliana with low sequence identity to the N. attenuata a-dox1 gene to design primers to amplify a putative
Naa-dox2 gene. We amplified a sequence and cloned it
into Escherichia coli. Subsequently, a 355 bp gene fragment [GenBank EU681953.1] of the Naa-dox2 was
sequenced from 3 independent clones. By comparison of
this gene fragment to a custom data base of the
complete N. attenuata transcriptome we identified a
cDNA sequence of Naa-dox2 of 2290 bp [GenBank
HM140643]. The translated amino-acid sequence
deduced from this sequence clusters in a phylogenetic
tree of plant a-DOX sequences close to the a-dox2
isoforms in S. lycopersicum and A. thaliana but apart
from N. attenuata a-dox1 (Additional file 2).
By SYBR Green-based real-time (RT)-PCR with gene
specific primers for Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 (for primer
specificity see Additional file 3A), transcript accumulation of both genes was determined in IRa-doxM and IRadoxS plants after repeated treatment with M. sexta OS to
puncture wounds, a treatment known to strongly induce
Naa-dox1 transcription [29]. Transcript accumulation of
Naa-dox1 was reduced by 40% in IRa-doxM and by 85%
in IRa-doxS plants of WT levels (Figure 2A). Moreover,
in IRa-doxS plants transcript accumulation of Naa-dox2
transcripts was reduced by 70%, whereas IR a-dox M
plants had Naa-dox2 transcript levels comparable to
those of WT plants (Figure 2B). Thus, the dwarf phenotype of IRa-doxS plants is correlated with a concomitant
silencing of the Naa-dox2 isoform in conjunction with a
stronger silencing of the Naa-dox1 gene.
Distinct transcriptional regulation of Naa-dox1 and Naadox2

To evaluate the roles that Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 play
during development we analyzed transcripts of both
genes in various tissues of developing N. attenuata
plants. Both genes show strong tissue specific differences
in their transcript abundance (Figure 3A). In N. attenuata leaves, transcripts of both Naa-dox genes accumulate with plant and leaf maturation resulting in highest

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 Silencing Naa-dox1 results in lines with two different growth phenotypes correlating with the suppression level of a-DOX
activity. The growth phenotype of (A) 35-day-old and (B) 60-day-old WT and T3 homozygous Nicotiana attenuata plants transformed with an
inverted repeat (IR) construct to silence Naa-dox1. More than half of 18 independently transformed lines are severely stunted (IRa-doxS) whereas
the other lines (IRa-doxM) are morphologically indistinguishable from wild-type plants (WT). (C) a-DOX activity (mean ± SE of 4 biological
replicates) of protein extracts from leaves by in vitro measurements of the formation of 8,11,14-heptadecatrienal (HDT). Leaves had been
wounded and treated with 2.5 μL of OSWT every 30 min for four times. Leaves were harvested 30 min after the last treatment. (D) Leaf levels of
2-hydroxyoctadetrienoic acid (2-HOT; mean ± SE of 4 biological replicates), the main a-DOX product in planta. Asterisks signify significant
differences between IRa-doxand WT plants (unpaired t-test WT vs. lines P < 0.05). nd: not detected.

transcript levels in senescing leaves. In leaf tissues, Naadox1 transcripts are generally more abundant than Naadox2 transcripts. Though this difference was only significant in the young rosette leaves, the same tendency was
observed in stem leaves, rosette leaves (paired t-test P =
0.053), and senescing leaves. The difference between the
two Naa-dox genes was more pronounced in roots,
flower buds, and flowers, but in these tissues Naa-dox2
transcripts were much more abundant than those of
Naa-dox1. In brief, Naa-dox2 expression is increased in
roots, during flower formation, as well as during leaf
maturation and senescence, but only the latter process
also enhanced Naa-dox1 transcripts.
As both Naa-dox genes have a similar transcriptional
regulation during normal leaf maturation, the question
arises, whether the Naa-dox2 is also regulated during
herbivore attack as is known for the Naa-dox1 gene in
the leaves of N. attenuata. Therefore, we compared the
inducibility of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 transcript

accumulation by wounding and herbivore specific elicitors. By SYBR Green-based RT-PCR gene specific transcript accumulation of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 genes
was determined in WT N. attenuata plants after
repeated treatment with M. sexta OS to puncture
wounds. As known from previous studies [5,30] transcript accumulation of Naa-dox1 is increased significantly by wounding and is further up-regulated by the
treatment of the wounds with M. sexta OS (Figure 3B).
Interestingly, the Naa-dox2 gene does not respond to
wounding or to the application of M. sexta OS.
Co-silencing of both Naa-dox genes increases constitutive
levels of ABA, JA and anthocyanins

We measured phytohormone levels in leaves to characterize the metabolic consequences of silencing either
Naa-dox1 or additionally Naa-dox2. We quantified
levels of JA, abscisic acid (ABA) and SA because previous studies indicated that a-DOX is involved in the

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

Page 5 of 15

Because the retarded growth phenotype of the IRaplants is already evident at the seedling stage, we
also measured anthocyanins in the seedling stage.
Anthocyanins are general indicators of stress responses
and thought to be involved in a stress signaling
response via reactive oxygen species (ROS) [31]. In
seedlings of an IR a-doxS line, levels of total anthocyanins were more than five-fold higher than WT levels
11 and 15 days after germination started (Additional
file 3B). Seedlings of a second IRa-doxS line had anthocyanin levels increased by more than 10% 19 days after
sowing. The increase in anthocyanins in IRa-doxS lines
compared to WT seedlings was significant (MannWhitney U-tests P < 0.05 for 11 and 15 days old seedlings of both lines and for 19 days old seedling of one
line).

dox S

Consequences of silencing Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2
individually and concomitantly

Figure 2 The stunted growth phenotype of stably transformed
IRa-doxS plants is associated with a stronger silencing of Naadox1 and a co-silencing of Naa-dox2. Transcript accumulation
(mean ± SE of 5 biological replicates) as measured by SYBR Greenbased real time-PCR of (A) Naa-dox1 and (B) Naa-dox2 in wild-type
Nicotiana attenuata (WT) and plants transformed with an inverted
repeat (IR) construct to silence Naa-dox1. The transcript abundance
is expressed relative to WT expression. Whereas lines that are
morphologically similar to WT plants (IRa-doxM) show a moderate
silencing of a-dox1, severely stunted lines (IRa-doxS) are more
strongly reduced in a-dox1 transcripts and co-silenced for the
a-dox2 gene. Leaves had been wounded and treated with 2.5 μL of
OS every 30 min for four times. Leaves were harvested 30 min after
the last treatment. Asterisks signify significant differences between
IRa-doxand WT plants (unpaired t-test for transcripts of Naa-dox1: M1
P = 0.04, M2 P = 0.03, S1 P = 0.001, S2 P = 0.01; of Naa-dox2: M1
P = 0.37, M2 P = 0.63, S1 P = 0.01, S2 P = 0.03).

physiological processes mediated by these phytohormones. The major signaling molecule in herbivore
induced responses, JA, has been shown to be required
for a-dox1 expression in N. attenuata [3] and levels of
ABA and SA have been reported to regulate a-dox
expression in Arabidopsis and tomato plants [9,13]. The
IRa-doxS plants that were co-silenced for both Naa-dox
isoforms showed strongly increased levels of the phytohormone ABA, but the IRa-doxM plants did not (Additional file 4A). In 39-days old rosette stage plants, we
found an almost 3-fold increase in constitutive ABA
levels and a slight increase in constitutive JA levels
(Additional file 4B) in IRa-doxS plants compared to WT.
Similarly, constitutive levels of SA were increased in
IRa-doxS plants compared to WT (Additional file 4C).

To disentangle the single and combined effects of Naadox1 and Naa-dox2 silencing we created gene-specific
silencing constructs and transiently silenced Naa-dox1
and Naa-dox2 separately and in combination using
VIGS and examined growth parameter. That VIGS constructs were gene specific was confirmed by real time
PCR for Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 genes in VIGS plants
(Figure 4A). To compare VIGS of Naa-dox1 with stably
transformed in IRa-doxM lines and to IRa-doxS lines we
inoculated in addition to WT also IRa-doxM plants with
the empty vector (ev) and the VIGS construct to specifically silence Naa-dox2. Stable and transient silencing of
only Naa-dox1 as well as transient silencing of only
Naa-dox2 did not affect plant growth, but the additional
silencing of Naa-dox2 in a stable line silenced for Naadox1 resulted in stunted growth (Figure 4B, C). Thus,
VIGSa-dox2 in IRa-doxM transformants resembled the
growth phenotype when both genes were co-silenced in
stably transformed IRa-doxS lines.
To investigate the role of Naa-dox genes in the plant
response to herbivory, we analyzed phytohormones regulating physiological processes that a-DOX has been associated with and induced nicotine accumulation in the
plants transiently silenced for either Naa-dox1 or Naadox2 or both. Further, we accessed the contribution of
Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 to constitutive and M. sextainduced 2-HOT production. Constitutive 2-HOT levels
were significantly reduced in plants silenced for Naa-dox1
or Naa-dox2 (Figure 5A) with the strongest reduction in
plants silenced for both genes. Herbivory by M. sexta significantly increased 2-HOT levels. This induction was
compromised in all plants silenced in Naa-dox1 (Fisher’s
PLSD VIGSev in WT vs. a-dox1 silenced transformants
P < 0.001) but silencing only Naa-dox2 accounted for a
minor reduction in herbivory-induced 2-HOT (Fisher’s

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Transcriptional regulation of Naa-dox genes in development and the response to wounding and Manduca sexta oral
secretions. (A) Mean ± SE (3 biological replicates) of transcript abundance of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 (relative to actin transcripts) in various
tissues of developing wild-type Nicotiana attenuata. Different letters signify significant differences between different tissues for transcript
abundance of Naa-dox1 (in black) and Naa-dox2 (in gray and brackets) respectively (ANOVAs with factor tissue: a-dox1 F6,21 = 18.65, P < 0.0001
and a-dox2 F6,21 = 20.63, P < 0.0001; Fisher’s PLDS for significant differences P < 0.036). Paired t-tests were used to test for significant differences
between transcript abundance of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 in the tissues (roots: P = 0.005, young rosette leaves P = 0.047, stem leaves P = 0.053,
old rosette leaves P = 0.047, senescing leaves P = 0.075, flower buds P = 0.02, flowers P = 0.03). (B) Mean ± SE (5 biological replicates) of
transcript abundance of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 (relative to actin transcripts) in leaves from N. attenuata rosette stage plants wounded at the
first fully expanded source leaf with a fabric pattern wheel every 30 min for four times. To the resulting puncture wounds 2.5 μL of either water
(W) or M. sexta’s oral secretions (OS) were added. Only the expression of Naa-dox1 but not that of Naa-dox2 increased after wounding, which
was amplified by OS application (2 factorial ANOVA with factors treatment and time: Naa-dox1 P < 0.0046 for both factors the interaction; for
Naa-dox2: P > 0.45 for both factors the interaction).

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

Page 7 of 15

Figure 4 Co-silencing of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 reduced plant growth of Nicotiana attenuata. (A) Relative transcript abundance of Naadox genes (mean ± SE of 5 biological replicates) in plants subjected to virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS). Wild-type plants (WT) and plants
stably silenced for Naa-dox1 using an inverted repeat (IR) construct were inoculated with VIGS constructs when 22 days old. Gene expression
levels relative to empty vector controls (ev) confirm the gene specific silencing of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 and was analyzed in rosette leaves by
SYBR Green-based real time PCR (B) Rosette diameter of 39-days old and (C) stalk length of 60-days old plants (mean ± SE of 11 biological
replicates) silenced for Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 by VIGS. Stable and transient silencing of only Naa-dox1 as well as transient silencing of only
Naa-dox2 did not affect plant growth, but the silencing of Naa-dox2 in a stable line silenced for Naa-dox1 resulted in stunted growth. Different
letters signify significant differences in growth parameters or transcript abundance of Naa-dox1 (in black) and Naa-dox2 (in gray and brackets)
respectively (ANOVAs with factor transformant: for rosette diameters F4,50 = 12.81, P < 0.0001 for stem length F4,50 = 197.87, P < 0.0001; Fischer’s
PLSD comparisons between VIGSa-dox2 in IRa-doxM vs. all other transformants P < 0.0001, whereas for comparisons between all other
transformants P > 0.21).

PLSD VIGSa-dox2 in WT vs. all transformants silenced
for Naa-dox1 P < 0.004).
The key hormone for responses during pathogen
infection salicylic acid (SA) was not significantly affected
by the feeding of M. sexta but by the expression of
a-DOX in the transformed lines (Additional file 4D, E).
SA tended to be reduced in all a-dox silenced plants

with and without herbivory by M. sexta, however, this
trend was only significant for the comparison between
WT plants inoculated with VIGSev and VIGSa-dox2.
Feeding by M. sexta significantly increased ABA levels
(Figure 5B). Constitutive and M. sexta-induced levels of
ABA are significantly enhanced in plants silenced
for both Naa-dox genes (Fisher’s PLSD VIGSa-dox2 in

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

Page 8 of 15

Figure 5 Silencing Naa-dox1 and/or Naa-dox2 in Nicotiana attenuata differentially affects defense 2-HOT, hormone and nicotine
accumulation. Mean ± SE (n = 6 induced & 5 constitutive plants) of leaf levels of (A) 2-HOT, (B) ABA, (C) A, and (D) nicotine of plants that had
been fed on by Manduca sexta larvae for 4 days or left undamaged. Plants were transiently silenced for Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 by virusinduced gene silencing (VIGS) or transformed with an empty vector (ev). Wild-type plants (WT) and plants stably silenced for Naa-dox1 using an
inverted repeat (IR) construct were inoculated with VIGS constructs when 22 days old. Larvae were applied on day 39. Two-factorial ANOVAs with
factor transformant and factor M. sexta feeding revealed significant effects of (2-HOT levels: transformant F4,40 = 23.27, M. sexta F1,40 = 203.41,
interaction F4,40 = 5.07, all P < 0.002; ABA levels: transformant F4,35 = 10.53, P < 0.001, M. sexta F1,35 = 8.08, P = 0.007, interaction F4,35 = 0.82,
P = 0.52; JA levels: transformant F4,35 = 10.15, P < 0.0001, M. sexta F1,35 = 1058.2, P < 0.0001, interaction F4,35 = 0.41, P = 0. 80). Different letters
signify significant differences according to 1-factorial ANOVAs and Fisher’s PLDS at P < 0.05 (ANOVA P and F values are given in the graph).

IRa-doxM vs. all other transformants P < 0.001). Silencing Naa-dox1 decreases M. sexta-induced ABA levels,
as ABA levels in VIGSa-dox1 plants were significantly
lower compared to VIGSev WT plants and the same
tendency was observed in VIGSev in IR a-doxM plants
(Fisher’s PLSD VIGSev in WT vs. VIGSev in IRa-doxM
P = 0.06). As expected, JA levels were strongly increased
in response to M. sexta feeding (Figure 5C). The levels
of induced JA were lower in plants transiently and stably
silenced only for Naa-dox1 compared to VIGSev WT
(Fisher’s PLSD VIGSev vs. VIGSa-dox1 P = 0.0007, VIGSev in WT vs. VIGSev in IRa-doxM P = 0.007), but not
in those silenced for a-dox2 (Fisher’s PLSD VIGSev vs.
VIGSa-dox2 P = 0.32). Plants silenced for both Naa-dox
genes had higher levels of JA compared to plants
silenced for Naa-dox1 alone, which was already

apparent in constitutive JA levels (Fisher’s PLSD VIGSadox2 in IR a-dox M vs. other transformants P < 0.03
except vs. VIGSev WT P = 0.70) and did not result
from an increased induction after M. sexta feeding.
Induced nicotine accumulation in VIGS plants corresponded well with the observed JA induction pattern
and was lower in the plants only silenced for Naa-dox1,
but not in those silenced for Naa-dox2 (Figure 5D).
However, the data with heterogeneous variances were
not normally distributed and no transformation for the
nicotine data allowed for parametric statistical analysis;
the Mann-Whitney U-test only detected a significant difference between plants silenced for Naa-dox1 and those
silenced for both Naa-dox genes (VIGSa-dox1 WT vs.
VIGSa-dox2 in IR a-dox M P = 0.01) because nicotine
levels were highest in the latter plants.

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

These results indicate that the effects of individual and
simultaneous silencing of the two Naa-dox genes exhibit
opposing effects likely resulting from different causes.
Whereas stable and transient silencing of the Naa-dox1
gene weakens the herbivore-induced plant response with
respect to JA and ABA as well as secondary metabolite
production, the silencing of both Naa-dox genes, which
stunts growth, results in higher constitutive levels of
diverse stress-related traits, some of which are likely to
also be elicited by herbivore attack.

Discussion
The function of the a-DOX pathway, which is widespread in the plant kingdom, is poorly understood. Here
we identify the Naa-dox2 gene in N. attenuata and
demonstrate that a-oxidation of fatty acids plays an
important role during its development and that Naadox1 and Naa-dox2 differ in their transcriptional regulation. Both genes are transcriptionally up-regulated during leaf maturation and senescence and silencing both
genes results in retarded growth of N. attenuata plants.
However, the distinct expression patterns of the two
Naa-dox genes indicate a more important role of the
Naa-dox2 gene during plant development, especially in
root and flower development and seedling maturation.
The strong transcriptional regulation of Naa-dox1 in
response to herbivory and the reduced induction of JA
when Naa-dox1 is silenced suggest a role in plant
defense responses, whereas Naa-dox2 shows no transcriptional regulation in response to herbivory and its
silencing did not change the elicitation of JA. We infer
from the different patterns of transcriptional regulation
that the two Naa-dox genes contribute differently to
functions in primary and secondary plant metabolism in
N. attenuata.
Functional diversification of plant a-dox genes

We identified the Naa-dox2 gene and obtained a 2290
bp cDNA sequence from a full transcriptome data base
of N. attenuata. The Naa-dox2 likely corresponds to an
orthologue of Arabidopsis and tomatoa-dox genes with
which they share 89% and 79% sequence homology,
whereas sequence homology between Naa-dox1 and
Naa-dox2 is 69%. The duplication of a-dox genes likely
occurred early in the evolution of eudicots before the
split of Solanaceae and Brassicaceae, since the orthologues between species contain significantly more homologies than do the paralogues within species.
Stable transformation of N. attenuata plants with a
silencing construct for Naa-dox1 resulted in two distinct
growth phenotypes. Whereas growth and development
of IRa-doxM lines with a ca. 40% reduction of a-DOX
activity were indistinguishable from those of WT plants,
about 60% of the generated lines with low or

Page 9 of 15

undetectable a-DOX activity were highly stunted (IRaStable transformations were performed before the
a-dox2 paralogues were known and gene specific real
time PCR revealed that these two phenotypes correlated
with a dissimilar silencing of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2
in the respective lines. Whereas IR a-dox M plants are
reduced in Naa-dox1 transcript accumulation by 40%,
they are not significantly altered in Naa-dox2 transcript
accumulation. IR a-dox S lines, on the other hand, are
reduced by 85% in Naa-dox1 and 70% in Naa-dox2
transcript accumulation. The Naa-dox1 silencing construct shares 72% sequence similarity with the Naadox2 gene and contains a 24 nucleotide match with only
one mismatch, which was probably sufficient for the cosilencing of both Naa-dox genes in the majority of
transformed lines. The stunted growth could either
result from a concomitant silencing of both Naa-dox
genes or the loss of the Naa-dox2 function alone. The
latter hypothesis is consistent with the stunted growth
phenotype of feebly [26] and divaricata mutants [32] in
tomato, which result from insertional mutagenesis at the
locus of the Sla-dox2 homologue. However, Arabidopsis
mutants of Ata-dox2 do not show any developmental
abnormalities, indicating that the developmental role of
a-dox2 may be restricted to a specific clade e.g. Solanaceae. Alternatively, a-dox functions in N. attenuata may
also be distinct from those in tomato, and the stunted
growth of in IR a-dox S lines is the consequence of an
almost complete loss of total a-DOX activity due to a
silencing of both Naa-dox genes.

doxS).

Silencing both Naa-dox genes is required to stunt plant
growth

By using VIGS-constructs specific for Naa-dox1 and
Naa-dox2 we recognized that silencing Naa-dox1 and
Naa-dox2 individually did not affect growth, but silencing both genes concomitantly decreased plant growth.
This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that the
stunted growth phenotype results from a reduction in
total a-DOX activity and indicates that the a-oxidation
activity of the enzymes of both genes can compensate
for the loss of function of the other. With in vitro
assays, Bannenberg et al. [28] demonstrated that tomato
Sla-dox1 and Sla-dox2 have a similar range of fatty acid
substrates and activities. In N. attenuata both Naa-dox
genes can function in plant development, whereas in
tomato the loss of Sla-dox2 function is sufficient to
stunt growth and in Arabidopsis the loss of both Atadox genes does not affect growth [28]. The normal
growth of N. attenuata plants silenced for Naa-dox2 by
VIGS may alternatively be explained by a lower silencing
efficiency compared to the Sla-dox2 tomato insertional
mutant, however this seems unlikely given that VIGS
reduced Naa-dox2 transcripts by 80% and silencing by

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

stable transformation only reduced transcript levels by
70% in the dwarf IRa-doxS plants.
That the stunted growth in stably transformed IR adoxS lines is more pronounced than in the VIGS plants
co-silenced for Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 is probably due
to greater effects of silencing a gene early than later in
development. The growth of IRa-doxS plants was already
delayed two weeks after germination. Though we did
not observe obvious growth differences between WT
and IRa-doxS seedlings, the importance of a-DOX activity during seedling maturation in N. attenuata is supported by highly increased levels of anthocyanins in IRadoxS seedlings. Increased levels of anthocyanins are also
described for tomato mutants lacking Sla-dox2 function
[28]. The importance of a-oxidation of fatty acids during germination processes is also suggested by the
increased transcript accumulation and enzymatic activity
of a Psa-dox during the first days of germinating pea
plants [23]. Increased levels of anthocyanins and ABA
are often associated with oxidative stress [33] and levels
of ABA are also increased in IRa-doxS plants. Additionally, constitutive levels of the phytohormones JA and SA
are increased in IRa-doxS plants. Thus, strong silencing
of both Naa-dox genes in IRa-doxS plants could have led
to severe physiological stress resulting in increased levels
of several stress-related metabolites such as several phytohormones. Alternatively, higher levels of constitutive
phytohormones could be a consequence of less cellular
expansion in these lines, rather than specific effects on
specific metabolic pathways. None of these changes
were observed in IRa-doxM plants indicating that a moderate silencing of Naa-dox1 does not result in comparable physiological stress during development.
Both Naa-dox genes have overlapping but distinct roles
in plant development

Transcript accumulation of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 in
various tissues of developing N. attenuata plants were
determined to characterize their endogenous roles. In
roots, transcript accumulation of Naa-dox2 is very high,
whereas it is very low for Naa-dox1, which is consistent
with previous studies in N. attenuata [5] that found no
Naa-dox1 expression in roots. The root specific expression of Naa-dox2 distinguishes N. attenuata from pea,
Arabidopsis and tomato, in which a-dox1 is expressed
in roots but not a-dox2. Bannenberg et al. [28] found
no detectable Ata-dox2 transcripts in roots of Arabidopsis and only very low levels of Sla-dox2 transcripts but
high levels of one Sla-dox1 isoform in tomato roots. In
Arabidopsis, the Ata-dox1 promoter is exclusively active
in roots whereas the Ata-dox2 promoter is exclusively
active in shoots [19,28,34]. In pea seedlings, Psa-dox is
almost exclusively expressed in roots and this gene
shares a greater degree of amino acid sequence

Page 10 of 15

similarity with Nta-dox1 and Ata-dox1 than with Atadox2 [23]. In this regard, the stunted phenotype of IRadox S lines could also result from silencing Naa-dox2,
which may have interfered with root development causing the observed growth and stress responses. IRa-doxS
lines are characterized by a small main root and very
few lateral roots; to determine whether this is a cause or
a consequence of the dwarf growth, grafting experiments would be required. However, the loss of function
of Naa-dox2 in root development can only contribute to
but not cause the dwarf phenotype, as the silencing of
both Naa-dox genes is required to stunt growth. In N.
attenuata, the transcripts of both Naa-dox genes accumulate during leaf maturation and natural senescence
with levels of Naa-dox1 exceeding those of Naa-dox2.
This is in contrast to tomato and Arabidopsis, in which
Ata-dox2 and Sla-dox2 transcripts only accumulate in
response to the artificial senescence stimulus of leaf
detachment [27,28], whereas neither a-dox1 nor a-dox2
genes accumulate in leaves attached to plants. Moreover,
in contrast to N. attenuata, in which the levels of Naadox1 transcripts exceed those of Naa-dox2, in Arabidopsis and tomato Ata-dox1 and Sla-dox1 transcripts
are barely detected in leaves and showed only an extremely weak response to leaf detachment. However, the
results in N. attenuata are in line with the increasing
expression of Naa-dox1 gene during natural leaf senescence in N. tabacum [24]. We propose that in Nicotiana
species a-dox genes may be involved in the regulation of
senescence, whereas in Arabidopsis and tomato increasing oxidative stress in the dying tissue of a detached leaf
may be at work. The loss of function of both Naa-dox
genes during leaf maturation may be involved in the
dwarf phenotype of the IRa-doxS lines as the overlapping
transcriptional regulation of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 in
leaves corresponds well to the observation that silencing
of both genes is necessary to stunt growth.
During flower maturation in N. attenuata, only Naadox2 transcripts accumulate, so that they are twofold
higher in mature flowers than in flower buds. Consistent
with Hermsmeier et al. [5], who found no transcripts of
Naa-dox1 in flowers of N. attenuata, we found very low
transcript abundance of Naa-dox1 in flowers. However,
in Arabidopsis, promoters of both Ata-dox genes are
active in anthers and the Ata-dox2 promoter was additionally shown to be active in the ovaries and siliques
[19,28]. In distylous species of Turnera, a homologue of
a-dox1 is specifically expressed in short-styled plants
[35]. Interestingly, long chain aldehydes, similar to those
generated in vitro by the activity of a-DOX proteins, are
emitted by many flowers [36]; however, the role of
a-dox genes during flower maturation remains unknown
and is likely not involved in causing the stunted
phenotype.

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

Only Naa-dox1 is involved in responses to herbivory

The similar regulation of the two Naa-dox genes in N.
attenuata leaves is restricted to developmental regulation, however in contrast to Naa-dox1, the Naa-dox2
gene does not respond to wounding or the elicitors in
the OS of M. sexta larvae. In agreement with its upregulation during herbivory, Naa-dox1 contributed most
to the herbivore-inducible 2-HOT level. Silencing of
Naa-dox1 by VIGS or stable transformation reduced
herbivore-inducible 2-HOT levels by 60% while silencing
only Naa-dox2 had only a marginal effect. Accordingly,
we found no effect of silencing Naa-dox2 by VIGS on
induced responses to M. sexta herbivory, whereas stable
and transient silencing of Naa-dox1 decreased the
M. sexta-induced levels of JA by 30% and tended to
decrease induced levels of the direct defense metabolite,
nicotine. VIGS of Naa-dox1 also reduced M. sextainduced ABA levels by 25%. Thus, Naa-dox1 plays an
important role in the regulation of the plant’s response
to herbivory, whereas silencing Naa-dox2 did not affect
induced phytohormone levels. VIGS of both Naa-dox
genes concomitantly only increased constitutive levels of
JA and ABA and strongly decreased constitutive levels
of 2-HOT which is consistent with the phytohormone
phenotype in stably transformed plants co-silenced for
Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2. Because plants silenced for
both Naa-dox genes display the loss of function in
development and in the plant’s response to herbivory,
the specific role of Naa-dox1 during herbivory should
be further investigated using IRa-doxM plants and plants
silenced by VIGS for Naa-dox1. A kinetic analysis of JA
induction in the Naa-dox1 silenced plants may reveal
potential feedback regulation by 2-HOT, as we show
here that Naa-dox1 gene expression is mediated by but
also affects JA signaling.

Conclusions
In this study we identified the a-dox2 isoform in
N. attenuata and revealed that both Naa-dox genes
function in development but that only Naa-dox1 functions in anti-herbivore defense. The conditions that regulate the two a-dox isoforms and the consequences of
their loss of function in N. attenuata and other plants
share commonalities and clear differences supporting
quite divergent functions in different plant species.
Interestingly, phylogenetic relation is a poor predictor of
the regulation of a-dox genes in different plant species
(see Additional file 5 for a summary of the putative
functions in a phylogenetic context), but transcriptional
regulation is suggested to determine function of a-dox
genes, because the enzymatic activity is largely similar
for the a-dox paralogues within species as well as for
the orthologes among species. This suggests that the
a-DOX pathway is a relatively plastic metabolic route in

Page 11 of 15

plant primary metabolism which became repeatedly
co-opted for specialized functions associated with adaptation to environmental stress. A better mechanistic
understanding of the role of a-dox genes during plant
development and stress responses will help to explain
the differences and seemingly convergent similarities of
a-dox regulation in different plant species.

Methods
Plant material & transformation

We used inbred lines of Nicotiana attenuata Torr.
ex Watson derived from field-collected seeds (Baldwin,
1998) for transformation and all experiments. Seed germination and Agrobacterium tumefaciens (strain LBA
4404)-mediated transformation procedure are described
in Krügel et al. [37]. All plants were grown in the glasshouse in 1 L pots at 26-28°C under 16 h of light supplied by Philips Sun-T Agro 400- or 600-W sodium
lights.
To silence the expression of the N. attenuata a-dox1
gene [GenBank AF229926], a 458 bp fragment [5] was
cloned twice in an inverted-repeat orientation into a
pRESC5 transformation vector. T1 plants were screened
for resistance to hygromycin (hygromycin phosphotransferase II gene from pCAMBIA-1301 [GenBank
AF234297] contained in the pRESC5 vector). Homozygosity was determined by resistance screening of the T2
plants. Flow cytometric analysis described by Bubner et
al. [38] revealed that all the lines were diploid. Each
transformed line harbored only a single insertion, as
determined by Southern blot analysis (Additional file
3C) performed on EcoRV-digested genomic DNA with a
probe specific for the selective marker gene hygromycin
phosphotransferaseII (plasmids used for transformation
were included as a positive control and additionally
digested with XhoI). For the experiments we used two
IR a-dox S lines (line 1: A03-77; line 2: A03-137) with
stunted and two IR a-dox M lines with normal growth
(line 1: A03-282; line 2: A03-75), whereas IRa-doxM line
2 was used in the VIGS experiment.
For virus induced gene silencing, PCR amplified fragments of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 (each fragment was
187 bp long, for specific sequence see Additional file 1)
were digested with BamHI and SalI and each cloned
into the pTV00 vector digested with the same restriction
enzymes. The pTV00 vector is a 5.5-kb plasmid with an
origin of replication for Escherichia coli and A. tumefaciens and a gene for kanamycin resistance (Ratcliff et al.,
2001). Early rosette-stage plants (3 weeks old) were
pressure-injected with A. tumefaciens (strain GV3101)
harboring either the pTVa-dox1, pTVa-dox2 or the
empty vector (ev) control pTV00. A phytoene desaturase-silencing construct (pTVpds) that causes photobleaching was used as a visible positive control for the

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

VIGS process in all experiments. Inoculation and constructs are described in Saedler and Baldwin [39]. When
the leaves of phytoene desaturase-silenced plants began
to bleach (17 days after inoculation) leaves of a-doxsilenced and ev-inoculated plants were used.
Plant treatments

Experiments with stable transformants were performed
with T3 generation IRa-dox plants. Analysis of induced
responses (phytohormones, a-DOX activity, and transcriptional changes) was performed with four to five
week-old (rosette-stage) plants and treatments were randomly assigned. To mimic herbivory, the first fully
expanded source leaf was wounded four times with a
fabric pattern wheel with a row of puncture wounds on
each side of the midrib and each row received 5 μL of a
1:1 v/v dilution of the oral secretions of M. sexta. At
specified time points, leaves were excised, immediately
frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until use.
Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 constitutive transcript abundances were measured in different tissue parts from WT
N. attenuata plants. The entire young rosette-stage
plant was harvested 30 days after germination. Roots,
green or senescing yellow rosette leaves, stem leaves
(S5-S8) and flower buds were harvested from 54-day old
plants. Complete flowers were harvested 62 days after
germination.
Plants that had been subject to virus-induced gene
silencing were measured for rosette diameter 17 days
after inoculation (at which time there were no differences in plant size) and for stalk elongation 38 days
after inoculation. Half of the plants received a M. sexta
neonate on the transition leaf after inoculation and
these larvae were allowed to feed for 4 days. On day 4,
leaves on which neonates were feeding were harvested
for metabolite measurements. Eggs of M. sexta were
from North Carolina State University (Raleigh, NC,
USA) and maintained in a growth chamber (Snijders
Scientific, Tilburg, Netherlands) at 26°C 16 h light, 24°C
8 h darkness until the larvae hatched.
Identification of the Naa-dox2 gene

Primers were designed according to a consensus
sequence of a-dox2 isoforms in S. lycopersicum and
A. thaliana which have a low sequence identity to the
Naa-dox1 gene. The resulting PCR amplicon was cloned
into pGEM-T Easy plasmid (Promega), transformed into
Escherichia coli competent cells (JM109) and subsequently sequenced on a Genetic Analyzer 3100 (Applied
Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany) from 3 independent
clones. The resulting 355 bp gene fragment of the Naadox2 was compared to a data base of the complete transcriptome of N. attenuata (VERTIS Biotechnologie AG,

Page 12 of 15

Germany) and a 2290 bp cDNA sequence of the Naadox2 gene was identified.
Analysis of transcript expression by quantitative real time
PCR

Total RNA was extracted with trizol following the TIGR
protocol available under http://www.jcvi.org/potato/sol_ma_protocols.shtml and cDNA was synthesized from
150 ng RNA using MultiScribe™ reverse transcriptase
(Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). Quantitative
real time PCR (ABI PRISM™ 7000; Applied Biosystems)
was conducted using the quantitative PCR™ core reagent
kit (Eurogentec, Seraing, Belgium) and gene specific primers for SYBR Green-based quantitative PCR (Naadox1 forward primer: GTGTTGCTAGGTACAATGAA
TTTC; Naa-dox1 reverse primer: CAACCATCAGATCCAATTCTTCT;
Naa-dox2
forward
primer:
GTTCCACGGTACAACGAGTTCA; Naa-dox2 reverse
primer: AACTTGGAGATCTAGCTTCTCA). PCR conditions were used according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations. For each treatment/line combination
cDNA of 3 biological replicates were repeated with 3
technical replicates. Relative expression levels were calculated according to a linear standard curve of the
threshold cycle number regressed against the log concentration of a dilution series of cDNA standards that
were analyzed on each 96-well plate. The expression of
actin [GenBank EU273278.1] was used as an internal
reference to normalize cDNA concentrations.
Analysis of a-DOX activity

Leaves (pooled from 5 plants) were crushed in liquid
nitrogen and 250 μL extraction buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl
pH 7.5) were used for every 100 mg tissue. Leaf tissues
were subsequently completely homogenized by being
vortexed at 4°C for 45 min. After centrifugation, protein
concentration of the resulting supernatants was measured using a Bio-Rad protein assay kit with bovine
serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. The a-DOX activity
was assayed indirectly by measuring HDT formation in
response to a-linolenic acid (C18:3) incubation. The
reaction mixture consisted of 200 μM C18:3 incubated
with 200 μL of protein solution and Tris-HCl buffer (0.1
M, pH 7.5) in a total volume of 500 μL. a-DOX products
and the residual C18:3 were extracted with ethyl acetate;
HDT was quantified by reverse-phase HPLC-UV after
2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine derivatization, following the
established procedure described in Kohlmann et al. [40].
Analysis of secondary metabolites and phytohormones
and 2-HOT

Nicotine was analyzed by HPLC as described previously
(Keinanen et al., 2001) with the following modification

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

of the extraction procedure: approximately 100 mg of
frozen tissue was homogenized in 1 mL of extraction
buffer using the FastPrep extraction system (Savant
Instruments, NY, USA). Samples were homogenized in
FastPrep tubes containing 900 mg of lysing matrix (BIO
101) by shaking at 6.0 m/s for 45 s.
To analyze phytohormones and 2-hydroxy-octadecatrienoic acid (2-HOT), 200 mg leaf samples were
extracted with ethyl acetate containing 40 ng/ml D 6 ABA, D4 -SA and JA- 13C 6 -Ile and 200 ng/ml of D 2-JA
according to Wu et al. [41]. A 10 μl aliquot of the
resulting extracts was analyzed by reverse-phase HPLC
coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC/ESI-MS/
MS). Phytohormones were separated from extracts at a
flow rate of 100 μL min -1 on a Pursuit C8 column
(3 μm, 150 × 2 mm; Varian) using a binary solvent system (A: 0.05% v/v formic acid in deionized water; B:
0.05% v/v formic acid in methanol) in gradient mode.
Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) was conducted on
a 1200 L MS/MS system (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA),
operated in negative ionization mode. Parent-ion/daughter-ion selections and collision energies were set as follows: 213/59 (D 2 -dihydro-JA, 12V), 209/59 (JA, 12V),
328/136 (13C6-JA-Ile, 19V), 322/130 (JA-Ile, 19V), 269/
159 (D6-ABA, 9V), 263/153 (ABA, 9V), 141/97 (D4-SA,
15V), 137/93 (SA, 15V) and 293/191 (2-HOT). The area
beneath the MRM product ion peak was determined for
each analyte and internal standard (IS). The quantity of
the analyte was calculated according to the formula:
analyte product ion peak area × (IS concentration/IS
product ion peak area). A calibration curve obtained by
the extraction and analysis of a pool leaf sample spiked
with increasing of amounts 2-HOT (Larodan Fine
Chemicals, Sweden) was used for 2-HOT quantification.
For anthocyanin measurements 11, 15 and 19 days old
seedlings of WT and two IRa-doxS lines were extracted
according to Rabino and Mancinelli [42]. Approximately
30 seedlings (100 mg) were harvested, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for at least 20
minutes. After grinding 200 μl of 1% HCl/methanol
solution were added and incubated overnight (15 h) at
room temperature with constant vortexing. After centrifugation (5000 g, 5 min) the absorbance of the supernatant and a dilution series of cyanidin-5-O-glucoside at
530 nm and 657 nm was determined. The amount of
anthocyanin was calculated according to the absorbance
difference (530 nm - 657 nm).
Statistics

Data were analyzed using the statistic program StatView® 5.0 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). All data
were checked graphically for normal distribution and for
variance homogeneity using the F-test and transformed

Page 13 of 15

if required to meet these assumptions. The general level
of significance applied was a = 0.05.
The effects of Naa-dox silencing on a-DOX activity,
Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 transcript accumulation, and
levels of ABA and JA in leaves were determined by
comparing transformed lines against the WT N. attenuata by unpaired t-tests. Data for transcript accumulation
were cube-root transformed for normality and variance
homogeneity. Because no transformation was found to
meet the requirements for parametric statistical analyses, levels of anthocyanins were compared between
WT and IRa-doxS lines by Mann-Whitney U-tests.
The tissue-specific expression was compared between
the different tissues by individual 1-factorial ANOVAs
followed by Fisher’s PLSD for Naa-dox1 and the Naadox2 gene. The transcript accumulation of Naa-dox1
and Naa-dox2 in each tissue was compared by unpaired
t-tests. Data were cube root-transformed for normality
and variance homogeneity.
The growth parameter and transcript accumulation
of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 for the plants silenced by
VIGS were compared for statistically significant differences between transformants by 1-factorial ANOVA
followed by Fisher’s PLSD for individual comparisons.
Growth data were box cox-transformed (l = 1 for
rosette diameters and l = 2 for stem length) and transcript data were cube root-transformed for normality
and variance homogeneity. The leaf levels of phytohormones of control and M. sexta induced VIGS plants
were compared for statistically significant differences
by 2-factorial ANOVA with the factors induction
(2 groups: control, M. sexta feeding) and silencing
(5 groups: VIGSev WT, VIGSa-dox1 WT, VIGSa-dox2
WT, VIGSev in IR a-dox M, VIGSa-dox2 in IR a-dox M)
followed by Fisher’s PLSD. Additionally, levels of JA,
SA and ABA were analyzed by 1-factorial ANOVAs for
constitutive and M. sexta induced plants separately.
Data for JA and SA were log-transformed and data for
ABA were cube root-transformed for normality and
variance homogeneity. Because no transformation was
found to meet parametric assumptions, levels of nicotine in VIGS plants were compared for significant differences between transformants by Mann-Whitney
U-tests.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Alignment of Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 cDNA.
Sequences were aligned in Bioedit using the ClustalW algorithm. Regions
used to design the inverted repeat silencing construct: The region of the
Naa-dox1 gene used for the stable silencing construct is displayed in
purple and shares a match of 24 nucleotides with the Naa-dox2 gene
(containing one mismatch). The virus-induced gene silencing constructs
are highlighted in blue for Naa-dox1 and in red for Naa-dox2.

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

Additional file 2: Phylogenetic relationship based on deduced
amino acids sequences of plant a-DOXs. The consensus neighborjoining tree was constructed after 5000 iterations with the MEGA 3.1
software after sequence alignment using the ClustalW algorithm
embedded into Bioedit. The GenBank accession numbers of the
sequences are displayed onto the tree for the following plant species:
Arabidopsis thaliana (At), Capsicum annuum (Ca), Cicer arietinum (Car),
Medicago truncatula (Mt), Nicotiana attenuata (Na), Nicotiana tabacum
(Nt), Oryza sativa (Os), Physcomistrella patens (Pp), Pisum sativum (Ps),
Populus trichocarpa (Pt), Ricinus communis (Rc), Solanum lycopersicon (Sl),
Turnera subulata (Tsu), Turnera scabra (Tsc), Vitis vinifera (Vv).
Additional file 3: Primer specificity, anthocyanin levels, and single
insertions. (A) Gel electrophoresis of gene specific PCR products on TAE
gel after Ethidium bromide staining. Plasmids (50 ng) containing either
the Naa-dox1 gene (2 left lanes) or a 355 bp fragment of Naadox2 (2 right lanes) were amplified with (B) 2 primer pairs, designed to
specifically amplify a 144 bp fragment of either Naa-dox1 (P1) or Naadox2 (P2). The bands revealed that only primer pair P1 amplified the
plasmid containing the Naa-dox1 gene and only primer pair P2 amplified
the plasmid containing the Naa-dox2 fragment. (B) Anthocyanin levels
(mean ± SE of 3 biological replicates) measured in 100 mg tissue of 11,
15, and 19 days old seedlings of WT and T3 homozygous Nicotiana
attenuata plants transformed with an inverted repeat (IR) construct to
silence Naa-dox1 (line 2). (C) Southern analysis of three independently
transformed IRa-dox lines (S1, M1 & M2) showing single insertion.
Genomic DNA (10 μg) from individual plants was digested with EcoR1
and blotted onto a nylon membrane. The blot was hybridized with a
PCR fragment of the hygromycin phosphotransferase II gene, specific for
the selective marker on the T-DNA.
Additional file 4: Co-silencing Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 results in
increased constitutive ABA, JA and SA levels. Mean ± SE (n = 4
biological replicates) levels of (A) ABA, (B) JA, and (C) SA in untreated
rosette leaves of wild-type (WT) Nicotiana attenuata plants transformed
with an inverted repeat (IR) construct to silence Naa-dox1. In contrast to
lines silenced for Naa-dox1only (IRa-doxM), lines that were co-silenced for
Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 have higher constitutive levels of ABA, JA, and
SA. Asterisks signify significant differences between IRa-dox and WT plants
(unpaired t-test for levels of ABA: M1 P = 0.65, M2 P = 0.30, S1 P = 0.001,
S2 P = 0.03; JA: M1 P = 0.09, M2 P = 0.51, S1 P = 0.001, S2 P = 0.02, SA:
M1: P = 0.43, M2: P = 0.36, S1 P = 0.05, S2 P = 0.002). Leaf SA levels
(mean ± SE of plants that (D) had be fed on by Manduca sexta larvae for
4 days (n = 6) or (E) were undamaged (n = 5). WT and IRa-doxM plants
were transiently silenced for Naa-dox1 and Naa-dox2 by virus-induced
gene silencing (VIGS) or transformed with an empty vector (ev). Plants
were inoculated with VIGS constructs when 22 days old and Larvae were
applied on day 39. Though SA tended to be reduced in all a-dox
silenced plants, this was only significant for VIGS Na a-dox2 (2-factorial
ANOVA: for factor transformant F4,35 = 2.73, P = 0.04, for factor M. sexta:
F1,35 = 0.018, P = 0.895; Fischer’s PLSD: VIGS ev WT vs. VIGS Na a-dox2
WT P = 0.0037, VIGS ev WT vs. VIGS ev IRa-doxM P = 0.054).
Additional file 5: Table summarizing putative functions of a-dox
genes in different plant species along the plant phylogenetic tree.
The occurrence of a-dox genes in different tissues or the regulation by
pathogens, herbivores, wounding, or phytohormones it is indicated by
“+” (usually a positive regulation except for ethylene in Oryza sativa),
whereas the lack of expression is indicated by “-”. References are given
according to the reference list in the manuscript.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Max Planck Society. We thank Dr. K.
Gase for vector construction, M. Maccani for anthocyanin measurement and
both for helping to clone the Naa-dox2 gene fragment.
Author details
Department of Molecular Ecology, Max-Planck-Institute for Chemical
Ecology, Hans-Knöll-Str. 8, Jena 07745, Germany. 2Molecular Ecology

1

Page 14 of 15

Department/Dahlem Centre of Plant Sciences, Institute for Biology/Free
University of Berlin, Haderslebener Str. 9, Berlin 12163, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
AS carried out the screening of stably transformed lines, participated in the
identification of the Naa-dox2 gene, VIGS experiments, the metabolite
analyses, performed the statistical analysis and participated in drafting the
manuscript. EG performed the transcriptional analysis, participated in the
identification of the Naa-dox2 gene, VIGS experiments, metabolite analyses,
carried out the sequence alignment and participated in drafting the
manuscript. ITB conceived the study and participated in its design and
coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 23 March 2010 Accepted: 11 August 2010
Published: 11 August 2010
References
1. Creelman RA, Mullet JE: Jasmonic acid distribution and action in plants regulation during development and response to biotic and abiotic
stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:4114-4119.
2. Blee E: Impact of phyto-oxylipins in plant defense. Trends Plant Sci 2002,
7:315-322.
3. Halitschke R, Baldwin IT: Antisense LOX expression increases herbivore
performance by decreasing defense responses and inhibiting growthrelated transcriptional reorganization in Nicotiana attenuata. Plant J 2003,
36:794-807.
4. Creelman RA, Mullet JE: Biosynthesis and action of jasmonates in plants.
Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 1997, 48:355-381.
5. Hermsmeier D, Schittko U, Baldwin IT: Molecular interactions between the
specialist herbivore Manduca sexta (Lepidoptera, Sphingidae) and its
natural host Nicotiana attenuata. I. Large-scale changes in the
accumulation of growth- and defense-related plant mRNAs. Plant Physiol
2001, 125:683-700.
6. Schittko U, Hermsmeier D, Baldwin IT: Molecular interactions between the
specialist herbivore Manduca sexta (Lepidoptera, Sphingidae) and its
natural host Nicotiana attenuata. II. Accumulation of plant mRNAs in
response to insect-derived cues. Plant Physiol 2001, 125:701-710.
7. Voelckel C, Baldwin IT: Herbivore-induced plant vaccination. Part II. Arraystudies reveal the transience of herbivore-specific transcriptional
imprints and a distinct imprint from stress combinations. Plant J 2004,
38:650-663.
8. Voelckel C, Baldwin IT: Generalist and specialist lepidopteran larvae elicit
different transcriptional responses in Nicotiana attenuata, which
correlate with larval FAC profiles. Ecol Lett 2004, 7:770-775.
9. Sanz A, Moreno JI, Castresana C: PIOX, a new pathogen-induced
oxygenase with homology to animal cyclooxygenase. Plant Cell 1998,
10:1523-1537.
10. Hamberg M, Sanz A, Castresana C: a-Oxidation of fatty acids in higher
plants - identification of a pathogen-inducible oxygenase (PIOX) as an
a-dioxygenase and biosynthesis of 2-hydroperoxylinolenic acid. J Biol
Chem 1999, 274:24503-24513.
11. Hamberg M, Sanz A, Rodriguez MJ, Calvo AP, Castresana C: Activation of
the fatty acid alpha-dioxygenase pathway during bacterial infection of
tobacco leaves - Formation of oxylipins protecting against cell death.
J Biol Chem 2003, 278:51796-51805.
12. Prost I, Dhondt S, Rothe G, Vicente J, Rodriguez MJ, Kift N, Carbonne F,
Griffiths G, Esquerre-Tugaye MT, Rosahl S, et al: Evaluation of the
antimicrobial activities of plant oxylipins supports their involvement in
defense against pathogens. Plant Physiol 2005, 139:1902-1913.
13. Tirajoh A, Aung TST, McKay AB, Plant AL: Stress-responsive alphadioxygenase expression in tomato roots. J Exp Bot 2005, 56:713-723.
14. Seki M, Narusaka M, Ishida J, Nanjo T, Fujita M, Oono Y, Kamiya A,
Nakajima M, Enju A, Sakurai T, et al: Monitoring the expression profiles of
7000 Arabidopsis genes under drought, cold and high-salinity stresses
using a full-length cDNA microarray. Plant J 2002, 31:279-292.
15. Koeduka T, Matsui K, Hasegawa M, Akakabe Y, Kajiwara T: Rice fatty acid
alpha-dioxygenase is induced by pathogen attack and heavy metal stress:
activation through jasmonate signaling. J Plant Physiol 2005, 162:912-920.

Steppuhn et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:171
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/171

16. Izaguirre MM, Scopel AL, Baldwin IT, Ballare CL: Convergent responses to
stress. Solar ultraviolet-B radiation and Manduca sexta herbivory elicit
overlapping transcriptional responses in field-grown plants of Nicotiana
longiflora. Plant Physiol 2003, 132:1755-1767.
17. Kim Y-C, Yi S-Y, Mang HG, Kim WT, Choi D: Pathogen-induced expression
of cylo-oxygenase homologue in hot pepper (Capsicum annuum cv.
Pukang). J Exp Bot 2002, 53:383-385.
18. Hamberg M, Ponce de Leon I, Sanz A, Castresana C: Fatty acid alphadioxygenases. Prostaglandins and Other Lipid Mediators 2002, 6869:363-374.
19. Ponce de León I, Sanz A, Hamberg M, Castresana C: Involvement of the
Arabidopsis a-DOX1 fatty acid dioxygenase in protection against
oxidative stress and cell death. Plant J 2002, 29:61-72.
20. Halitschke R, Schittko U, Pohnert G, Boland W, Baldwin IT: Molecular
interactions between the specialist herbivore Manduca sexta
(Lepidoptera, Sphingidae) and its natural host Nicotiana attenuata. III.
Fatty acid-amino acid conjugates in herbivore oral secretions are
necessary and sufficient for herbivore-specific plant responses. Plant
Physiol 2001, 125:711-717.
21. Newcomb EH, Stumpf PK: Fatty acid synthesis and oxidation in peanut
cotyledons. Phosphorus Metabolism Baltimore: John Hopkins PressMcElroy
WD, Glass B 1952, 291-300.
22. Saffert A, Hartmann-Schreier J, Schon A, Schreier P: A dual function alphadioxygenase-peroxidase and NAD(+) oxidoreductase active enzyme from
germinating pea rationalizing alpha-oxidation of fatty acids in plants.
Plant Physiol 2000, 123:1545-1552.
23. Meisner AK, Saffert A, Schreier P, Schon A: Fatty acid alpha-dioxygenase
from Pisum sativum: Temporal and spatial regulation during germination
and plant development. J Plant Physiol 2009, 166(4):333-43.
24. Obregón P, Martin R, Sanz A, Castresana C: Activation of defence-related
genes during senescence: a correlationn between gene expression and
cellular damage. Plant Mol Biol 2001, 46:67-77.
25. Akakabe Y, Matsui K, Kajiwara T: Enantioselective alpha-hydroperoxylation
of long-chain fatty acids with crude enzyme of marine green alga Ulva
pertusa. Tetrahedron Lett 1999, 40:1137-1140.
26. van der Biezen EA, Brandwagt BF, vanLeeuwen W, Nijkamp HJJ, Hille J:
Identification and isolation of the FEEBLY gene from tomato by
transposon tagging. Mol Gen Genet 1996, 251:267-280.
27. Hamberg M, de Leon IP, Rodriguez MJ, Castresana C: alpha-Dioxygenases.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005, 338:169-174.
28. Bannenberg G, Martinez M, Rodriguez MJ, Lopez MA, de Leon IP,
Hamberg M, Castresana C: Functional analysis of a-DOX2, an active
a-dioxygenase critical for normal development in tomato plants. Plant
Physiol 2009, 109.145094.
29. Halitschke R, Gase K, Hui DQ, Schmidt DD, Baldwin IT: Molecular
interactions between the specialist herbivore Manduca sexta
(Lepidoptera, Sphingidae) and its natural host Nicotiana attenuata. VI.
Microarray analysis reveals that most herbivore-specific transcriptional
changes are mediated by fatty acid-amino acid conjugates. Plant Physiol
2003, 131:1894-1902.
30. Hui D, Iqbal J, Lehmann K, Gase K, Saluz HP, Baldwin IT: Molecular
interactions between the specialist herbivore Manduca sexta
(Lepidoptera, Sphingidae) and its natural host Nicotiana attenuata: V.
Microarray analysis and further characterization of large-scale changes
in herbivore-induced mRNAs. Plant Physiol 2003, 131:1877-1893.
31. Gould K, Davies K, Winefield C, (Eds): Anthocyanins: Biosynthesis,
Functions, and Applications. New York: Springer 2009.
32. Stevens MA, Rick CM: Genetics and breeding. The tomato crop, a scientific
basis for crop improvement Chapman and Hall, New YorkAtherton JG,
Rudich J 1986, 35-100.
33. Zhou XF, Hua DP, Chen ZZ, Zhou ZJ, Gong ZZ: Elongator mediates ABA
responses, oxidative stress resistance and anthocyanin biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis. Plant J 2009, 60:79-90.
34. Vellosillo T, Martinez M, Lopez MA, Vicente J, Cascon T, Dolan L,
Hamberg M, Castresana C: Oxylipins produced by the 9-lipoxygenase
pathway in Arabidopsis regulate lateral root development and defense
responses through a specific signaling cascade. Plant Cell 2007,
19:831-846.
35. Khosravi D, Yang ECC, Siu KWM, Shore JS: High level of alpha-dioxygenase
in short styles of distylous Turnera species. International Journal of Plant
Sciences 2004, 165:995-1006.

Page 15 of 15

36. Ikeda N, Ishihara M, Tsuneya T, Kawakita M, Yoshihara M, Suzuki Y,
Komaki R, Inui M: Volatile components of honeysuckle (Lonicera japonica
thunb.) flowers. Flavour and Fragrance Journal 1994, 9:325-331.
37. Krügel T, Lim M, Gase K, Halitschke R, Baldwin IT: Agrobacterium-mediated
transformation of Nicotiana attenuata, a model ecological expression
system. Chemoecology 2002, 12:177-183.
38. Bubner B, Gase K, Berger B, Link D, Baldwin IT: Occurrence of tetraploidy
in Nicotiana attenuata plants after Agrobacterium-mediated
transformation is genotype specific but independent of polysomaty of
explant tissue. Plant Cell Reports 2006, 25:668-675.
39. Saedler R, Baldwin IT: Virus-induced gene silencing of jasmonate-induced
direct defences, nicotine and trypsin proteinase-inhibitors in Nicotiana
attenuata. J Exp Bot 2004, 55:151-157.
40. Kohlmann M, Bachmann A, Weichert H, Kolbe A, Balkenhohl T,
Wasternack C, Feussner I: Formation of lipoxygenase-pathway-derived
aldehydes in barley leaves upon methyl jasmonate treatment. European
Journal of Biochemistry 1999, 260:885-895.
41. Wu JQ, Hettenhausen C, Meldau S, Baldwin IT: Herbivory rapidly activates
MAPK signaling in attacked and unattacked leaf regions but not
between leaves of Nicotiana attenuata. Plant Cell 2007, 19:1096-1122.
42. Rabino I, Mancinelli AL: Light, temperature, and anthocyanin production.
Plant Physiol 1986, 81:922-924.
doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-171
Cite this article as: Steppuhn et al.: The two a-dox genes of Nicotiana
attenuata: overlapping but distinct functions in development and stress
responses. BMC Plant Biology 2010 10:171.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
