<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Introgressive hybridization and the evolutionary history of the herring gull complex revealed by mitochondrial and nuclear DNA</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-348"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Viviane Sternkopf"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Introgressive hybridization and the evolutionary
history of the herring gull complex revealed by
mitochondrial and nuclear DNA
Viviane Sternkopf1, Dorit Liebers-Helbig1, Markus S Ritz2, Jun Zhang3, Andreas J Helbig, Peter de Knijff4*

Abstract
Background: Based on extensive mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence data, we previously showed that the
model of speciation among species of herring gull (Larus argentatus) complex was not that of a ring species, but
most likely due more complex speciation scenario’s. We also found that two species, herring gull and glaucous gull
(L. hyperboreus) displayed an unexpected biphyletic distribution of their mtDNA haplotypes. It was evident that
mtDNA sequence data alone were far from sufficient to obtain a more accurate and detailed insight into the
demographic processes that underlie speciation of this complex, and that extensive autosomal genetic analysis was
warranted.
Results: For this reason, the present study focuses on the reconstruction of the phylogeographic history of a
limited number of gull species by means of a combined approach of mtDNA sequence data and 230 autosomal
amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) loci. At the species level, the mtDNA and AFLP genetic data were
largely congruent. Not only for argentatus and hyperboreus, but also among a third species, great black-backed gull
(L. marinus) we observed two distinct groups of mtDNA sequence haplotypes. Based on the AFLP data we were
also able to detect distinct genetic subgroups among the various argentatus, hyperboreus, and marinus populations,
supporting our initial hypothesis that complex demographic scenario’s underlie speciation in the herring gull
complex.
Conclusions: We present evidence that for each of these three biphyletic gull species, extensive mtDNA
introgression could have taken place among the various geographically distinct subpopulations, or even among
current species. Moreover, based on a large number of autosomal AFLP loci, we found evidence for distinct and
complex demographic scenario’s for each of the three species we studied. A more refined insight into the exact
phylogeographic history within the herring gull complex is still impossible, and requires detailed autosomal
sequence information, a topic of our future studies.

Background
For speciation, the divergence of an ancestral population
into two reproductively isolated sister taxa requires
genetic differentiation of at least those loci involved in
reproductive (sexual) functions [1]. With ongoing gene
flow this process will be delayed and it is unclear to
what extent gene flow must be reduced - or is still
allowed - in order for speciation to be “complete” [2,3].
It was Ernst Mayr [4], who proposed that reproductive
* Correspondence: P.de_Knijff@lumc.nl
4
MGC-Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Center, P.O. Box 9503, NL-2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

isolation could evolve through ‘isolation-by-distance’, i.e.
with continuous gene flow, when peripheral populations
meet after expanding around a large, uninhabitable area.
This specific speciation model was later termed the ‘ring
species’ model [5]. Geographic overlap between taxa
that are elsewhere connected through interbreeding
populations is an essential element of this model,
because it is ongoing gene flow that distinguishes ring
species from cases of allopatric speciation that happen
to be arranged in a roughly circular fashion [6].
For a long time, the herring gull (Larus argentatus)
complex was considered the classical example of a ring
species. The herring gull complex comprises of more

© 2010 Sternkopf et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 2 of 18

Figure 1 Two contrasting hypotheses about the differentiation and colonization history of the herring gull complex. Large ovals show
hypothetical ancestral refugia. Arrows indicate inferred colonization routes. (A) Mayr’s model [4], proposed that herring gulls originated in the
Aralo-Caspian region (cachinnans), from where gulls spread in three directions (1) west via the Mediterranean into the Atlantic giving rise to
Mediterranean (michahellis) and Atlantic (atlantis) yellow-legged gulls; (2) east toward Inner Asia giving rise to Mongolian gull (mongolicus) and
(3) north to the Arctic Ocean (heuglini). Along the north Eurasian coasts, the ancestral population expanded into two opposite directions: (a)
west across Scandinavia towards Britain and Iceland differentiating into dark-mantled lesser black-backed gulls (fuscus), and (b) east all the way
to the North Pacific, giving rise to progressively paler-mantled forms vegae (eastern Siberia), and into North America (glaucoides and
smithsonianus). Mayr proposed that, following the last Glacial Maximum, North American herring gulls (smithsonianus) subsequently crossed the
North Atlantic and invaded Europe, where they gave rise to the pale-mantled European herring gull (argentatus) that now overlaps with the
dark-mantled lesser black-backed gulls (fuscus) [4,9]. Note that Mayr did not include marinus and hyperboreus in his original model. (B) Alternative
model based on results of Liebers et al. [8]. Two ancient refugia are inferred. Taxa derived from Atlantic refugium are shown in green, those
derived from Aralo-Caspian refugium in red. No invasion of herring gulls from North America to Europe occurred. Marinus developed
reproductive isolation in allopatry (probably in north-eastern North America) before making secondary contact with North American
smithsonianus and Eurasian argentatus/fuscus. Two separate colonisation events from the Atlantic into the Mediterranean led to the
differentiation of armenicus and michahellis.

than 20 taxa of large gulls [7] occupying a circumpolar
breeding range in the northern hemisphere. The various
herring gull taxa differ in body size, in the darkness of
their dorsal plumage, and in bare part colours. According to Mayr’s model [4], herring gulls originated in the
Aralo-Caspian region, from where gulls spread in a
number of different directions (see Figure 1A and reference [8]). Mayr and others envisioned all taxa of the circumpolar chain to be connected by gene flow, while
herring gulls and lesser black-backed gull (L. fuscus) in
Europe, the hypothetical endpoints of the ring, have
reached full reproductive isolation and now coexist as
distinct species [4,9].
In contrast, we found strong evidence that the ring
species model did not adequately describe the evolution

of the herring gull group because, contrary to Mayr’s [4]
proposal, there was no overlap between the endpoints of
a ring of interbreeding taxa ([8], Figure 1B). We identified two major only distantly related groups of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence haplotypes - termed
clade 1 and clade 2 [8]. Sympatric coexistence, e.g.
between argentatus (not derived from smithsonianus as
assumed by Mayer) and fuscus in Europe, occurred
between taxa with clade 1 and clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes and was not due to “circular overlap”, but to secondary sympatry between forms that diverged in
allopatry. We also found that more taxa than originally
suspected (and not included by Mayr) were full members of the species complex, e.g. great black-backed gull
(Larus marinus), and glaucous gull (L. hyperboreus).

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Unexpectedly, we observed two biphyletic taxa in the
mtDNA haplotype network with argentatus showing no
discrete geographic pattern in carrying clade 1 or clade
2 mtDNA haplotypes. In contrast, Nearctic breeding
hyperboreus carried exclusively clade 2 haplotypes
whereas Palearctic breeding hyperboreus carried only
clade 1 haplotypes. We provisionally explained this by
the combined effects of hybridization events and past
gene flow episodes or incomplete lineage sorting of a
polymorphic ancestral gene pool. Recently, Vigfussdottir
et al. [10] tried to unravel the underlying processes
among these two biphyletic gull species with a combined molecular approach (using mtDNA sequence haplotypes and autosomal microsatellite genotypes) from
argentatus and hyperboreus breeding in Iceland and
Greenland. They also found the Icelandic breeding
hyperboreus to be closely related to other European
breeding hyperboreus, whereas the Greenland breeding
birds share their genetic information exclusively with
Nearctic hyperboreus. Vigfussdottir, like Liebers et al. [8]
found mtDNA haplotypes of both clades among Icelandic argentatus populations. Interestingly, they also
observed a change over time with respect to mtDNA
clade membership, with an increase of clade 2 haplotypes among more recently sampled argentatus. It is
obvious from both studies [8,10] that there is a need for
a much more detailed investigation of these the two
biphyletic taxa based on many more autosomal polymorphic loci. For this reason, we used AFLP (amplified
fragment length polymorphisms [11]) as autosomal
nuclear markers in the present study. Previous studies
have shown that AFLP is a good marker system for
population genetics [12-15], reconstruction of shallow
phylogenies [16-18], population assignment [19], and
hybrid detection [20].
Much to our surprise, we discovered a third biphyletic
member of the herring gull complex, the great blackbacked gull (Larus marinus) in the early stages of this
study. Palearctic marinus all carry a clade 1 mtDNA
haplotypes whereas Nearctic marinus displayed a mix of
clade 1 and clade 2 haplotypes.
Therefore, the present study focuses more specifically
on the three taxa that were biphyletic in the mtDNA
network, argentatus, hyperboreus, and marinus, in order
to obtain a more detailed insight into the various demographic/introgression events that caused the present-day
pattern of genetic variation. We also included samples
of a number of closely related taxa, Mediterranean and
Macaronesian yellow-legged gulls (michahellis, and
atlantis), Caspian gull (cachinnans), North American
herring gull (smithsonianus), and lesser black-backed
gulls (fuscus and graellsii), all members of the herring
gull complex [8].

Page 3 of 18

Methods
Sampling, taxon designation, and sample selection

Blood and tissue samples were taken from adults or
unrelated chicks, almost exclusively from breeding colonies. The exception being five non-breeding hyperboreus
sampled on the Faroe Islands during the winter. Taxon
designations were based on phenotype of breeding
adults and on geographic location. In this paper we
describe results from a mixture of currently recognised
species and subspecies that all clearly belong to the herring gull (Larus argentatus) species assemblage. These
include (i) herring gulls breeding in the Palearctic (European herring gull, L. argentatus) with subspecies argentatus, and argenteus, (ii) herring gulls breeding in the
Nearctic (American herring gull, L. smithsonianus), (iii)
yellow-legged gulls from the Atlantic (L. michahellis
atlantis) and the Mediterranean (L. m. michahellis), (iv)
Caspian gull (L. cachinnans), (v) lesser black-backed
gull (L. fuscus) with subspecies fuscus and graellsii, (vi)
glaucous gull (L. hyperboreus) from its Nearctic and
Palearctic breeding range, and (vii) great black-backed
gull (L. marinus), also from its Nearctic and Palearctic
breeding range. Throughout this manuscript we prefer
to indicate all taxa by their terminal taxon names,
because, although some are clearly separable phenotypically and/or geographically, others are not and their
exact taxonomic position is far from unanimously
defined.
Our sampling strategy mainly focussed on argentatus,
marinus, and hyperboreus. A total of 377 argentatus
individuals from 16 different European colonies were
initially screened for their mtDNA hypervariable region
1 (HVR1) profile (Additional File 1 and Additional File
2). Of these, we selected a subset of 109 birds based on
their HVR1 defined clade 1 or clade 2 memberships
(Table 1). For each colony we tried to select an equal
number of birds with clade 1 and clade 2. For two colonies, WSA and NET this was not possible. These 109
selected birds were further analysed by means of AFLP
and mtDNA cytochrome B (cytB) sequencing (see
below).
For marinus we screened 32 individuals from five European colonies and 32 individuals from three eastern
North American colonies (Table 1). For hyperboreus we
screened 32 birds from four Eurasian colonies and 35
birds from four North American colonies (Table 1). In
addition, we also analyzed smithsonianus (35 individuals
from four North American colonies), fuscus+graellsii (n
= 30), michahellis+atlantis (n = 31), and cachinnans (n
= 33), all for the same HVR1, cytB and AFLP profiles.
Details of geographic origin and sample sizes are given
in Table 1. Voucher material has been deposited at the
German Oceanographic Museum in Stralsund.

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 4 of 18

Table 1 Taxonomic designation, sample size, geographic origin, and colony abbreviation of gull populations used in
this study
taxon

n

geographic origin

argentatus

10

Russia, White Sea

WSA

67°09’N,32°23’E

I. Charitonova, A. Filchagov

6

Norway, Tromso

NNO

69°40’N,19°00’E

R. R. Snell

6
6

Finland, Lake-Saimaa
Estonia, Matsalu

FIN
EST

61°16’N,28°15’E
58°46’N,23°44’E

R. Juvatse
R. Juvaste

2

Poland, Wloclawek

POL

52°39’N,19°05’E

M. Zielinski

4

Germany, Hiddensee

MVP

54°20’N,13°10’E

R. Barth, A. J. Helbig

4

Denmark, Lindholm

DEN

55°43’N,11°43’E

K. T. Pederson

4

Sweden, NW Skane

SSW

56°27’N,12°34’E

K. Bengtson

6

Norway, Vest-Agder

SNO

58°10’N,06°40’E

T. O. Hansen

18

Iceland, Skruder

ICE

65°00’N,13°20’W

R. R. Snell

10
4

Iceland, Karlsskali
Denmark, Faroe Islands

ICW
FAR

65°00’N,13°20’W
62°20’N,07°20’W

R. R. Snell
R. R. Snell

6

England, Isle of May

ENG

56°11’N,02°33’W

B. H. Bailey, M.Harris

8

France, Finistere

FRA

48°40’N,03°20’W

R. R. Snell

11

Netherlands, Maasvlakte

NET

51°56’N,04°28’E

F. Cottaar, N v. Swelm

argenteus

abbreviation

geographic coordinates

collected by

4

Germany, Helgoland

HGL

54°11’N,07°54’E

N. Robert

hyperboreus

8

Russia, Novaja Semlja

NOS

73°15’N,56°01’E

A. J. Helbig

Eurasia

10
5

Svalbard, Longyearbyen
Denmark, Faroe Islands

SVA
FAR

78°13’N,15°20’E
61°35’N,05°00’W

R. R. Snell
J. K. Jensen

9

Iceland, Bjarnhafnarfjall

ICB

65°00’N,23°00’W

R. R. Snell

hyperboreus

17

Canada, NWT, Baffin Island

BAF

69°00’N,68°00’W

R. R. Snell

N. Am.

7

USA, Alaska, Yukon

ALY

62°25’N,165°31’W

A. J. Baker

9

USA, NW Alaska

ALA

71°11’N,163°51’W

J. A. Gerwin

2

USA, Washington

WAS

47°20’N,120°05’W

R. Chandler, S. Rohwer

marinus

11

Denmark, Katholm, Jylland

KAT

55°43’N,11°43’E

E. Fritze, K. T. Pedersen

Europe

2
2

Netherlands, Maasvlakte
France, Finistere

NET
FRA

51°56’N,04°28’E
48°40’N,03°20’W

F. Cottaar, N v. Swelm
R. R. Snell

15

Denmark, Faroe Islands

FAR

61°35’N,05°00’W

J. K. Jensen

2

Iceland, Skruder

ICE

65°00’N,13°20’W

R. R. Snell

marinus

3

Canada, Newfoundland

NFL

47°18’N,52°48’W

A. J. Baker

N. Am.

11

Canada, Bay of Fundy

FUN

45°12’N,86°09’W

C. Pekarik

18

Canada, Lake Ontario

ONT

43°53’N,76°23’W

C. Pekarik

3
5

Portugal, Berlenga Islands
Morocco, Essaouria

39°24’N,09°30’W
31°29’N,09°45’W

M.v. Leeuwen, L. Moreis
M.v. Leeuwen, N. v. Swelm

5

Portugal, Island of Madeira

32°52’N,17°10’W

M.v. Leeuwen, N. v. Swelm

atlantis

michahellis

Spain, Gibraltar

36°08’N,05°21’W

M.v. Leeuwen, N. v. Swelm

France, Alsace

48°10’N,08°00’W

M. Boschert

4

Italy, Capraia Island

43°03’N,09°48’W

N. Baccetti

2

Malta, Filfla Island

35°57’N,14°26’W

J. Sultana, C. Gauci

5

Greece, Island of Crete

35°10’N,25°50’W

A. J. Helbig

6
4

Rumania, Danube Delta
Ukraine, Odessa

44°30’N,28°30’E
46°20’N,32°30’E

R. Klein, A. Buchheim
A. Rudenko, N. v. Swelm

7

Ukraine, Azov’ Black Sea

44°30’N,28°30’E

V. Dierschke, D. Liebers

16

cachinnans

5
2

Russia, N Caspian Sea

45°00’N,48°20’E

T. Tennhardt, D. Liebers
R. Juvaste

fuscus

17

Finland, Lake Saimaa

61°16’N,28°15’E

graellsii

4

Denmark, Faroe Islands

61°35’N,05°00’W

E. Fritze

8

Iceland

64°09’N,21°57’W

A. Sigfusson

6
15

Canada, Lake Ontario
Canada, New Brunsewick

45°20’N,80°02’W
47°51’N,64°33’W

D. Liebers
R. R. Snell

smithsonianus

ONT
NBR

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 5 of 18

Table 1 Taxonomic designation, sample size, geographic origin, and colony abbreviation of gull populations used in
this study (Continued)
9

Canada, Prince Edward Island

PEI

46°10’N,63°30’W

R. R. Snell

5

USA, Alaska, Fairbanks

ALF

64°50’N,147°10’W

R. R. Snell

Indicated are the commonly used taxonomic names, sample sizes, geographic origins, and sample collectors for all gull populations used in this study. The
colony abbreviations correspond with those in figures 3, 4, and 5.

Laboratory methods
Mitochondrial DNA sequencing

Laboratory protocols for DNA extraction, amplification
and sequencing of mtDNA cytB gene and HVR1 have
been described in detail elsewhere [8,10].
AFLP genotyping

The AFLP-protocols followed Vos et al. [11]. Briefly,
total genomic DNA (300 ng) was restricted over night
at 37°C with 3 units each of Eco RI and Mse I (by Fermentas), after which a ligation mix containing 0,5 pmol/
μl E-adaptor and 5 pmol/μl M-adaptor and 0,5 units of
T4 DNA-ligase was added and incubated at 37°C for 4
hours. A preselected amplification was performed with
an additional C at the 3’-end of the Eco RI-primer and
the Mse I-primer (Table 2).
The product of the preselective amplification was
diluted 20 times and used in a series of selective PCR
amplifications aimed at testing 100 combinations of
selective primers, each containing three additional
nucleotides at the 3’-end (including the C of the preselective PCR). The fragments were separated in 6% polyacrylamid gels and detected by fluorescein labelled Eco
RI-primer on a Li-Cor DNA Sequencer (Long Reader
4200a).
Analysis of mitochondrial DNA

All cytB sequences (1143 bp) were aligned without gaps
and contained no stop codons. Alignment of HVR1
sequences (391 - 430 bp) required the insertion of single
gaps at three positions, which were deleted prior to
further analysis.
To provisionally explore the mitochondrial population
structure of all samples (including the full set of 377
argentatus HVR1 sequences, see Additional File 1)
throughout Europe we computed a UPGMA-tree using
the average distance BLOSUM62 [21] routine in JALVIEW [22] based on the HVR1 sequence only (Additional File 2). Based on this tree, all samples were
assigned to either clade 1 or clade 2.
A subset of 109 argentatus individuals (Table 1) was
selected for more detailed analysis, based on their
mtDNA clade 1 or clade 2 membership. For all colonies
except those from the White Sea (WSA) and the Netherlands (NET) we were able to choose equal numbers of
birds from mitochondrial clade 1 and clade 2. From
these 109 argentatus, together with the 260 individuals

from the other six taxa, a complete concatenated
mtDNA sequence alignment was constructed, containing a total of 369 cytB and HVR1 sequences (see Additional File 3).
A median-joining network was constructed using
NETWORK v. 4502 [23]. Variable sites were differentially weighted reciprocally according to their site-specific mutation rate in the total network. Rooting of the
network was done by the use of previously published [8]
Western gull (L. occidentalis) sequences. The final network figure was made using a combination of NETWORK and NETWORK PUBLISHER (Figure 2).
Analysis of AFLP

The initial AFLP selection was performed by screening
the two most distinct taxa in the mitochondrial network,
cachinnans (n = 6) and michahellis (n = 6) for all combinations of 10 EcoRI and 10 MseI primers, resulting in
different 100 primer combinations (Table 2). We
selected those primer combinations that showed more
than five variable loci. As a result of this, 19 primer
combinations were chosen for the present study. Of the
19 primer combinations only the products of 17 combinations could be score reliably in the full dataset. AFLP
fragments were coded as ‘1’ (presence of a fragment) or
‘0’ (absence of a fragment). We further reduced the total
dataset to only those primer combinations that resulted
in scores among all individuals tested (this reduction
also included the sex-specific AFLP loci). As a result of
this, the total AFLP dataset used for this study consisted
of the 1/0 scores of 230 loci among 369 individuals
(available upon request).
In order to identify AFLP loci that could be used to
better distinguish all distinct seven taxa, locus specific
Fst-values were calculated in TFPGA v.1.3 [24]. Using a
minimum threshold of 0.2, we identified among all 230
loci, 43 most discriminating AFLP loci. TFPGA was also
used to estimate unbiased heterozygosities averaged
across all loci for each population separately (not
shown).
Population structure was explored in two ways. First
we used the program STRUCTURE 2.2.3 [25,26] assuming admixture and correlated allele frequencies and a
recessive genotype mode. For each run, the number of
clusters, K, needs to be specified a-priori and we used
values in the range of 1-10. For the burn-in-period, the

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Table 2 Primer sequences and names used for screening
and scoring of AFLP fragments
EcoR - primer sequences

Page 6 of 18

Table 2 Primer sequences and names used for screening
and scoring of AFLP fragments (Continued)
EcoC4 Mse7

27

for pre-amplification:

5’-GACTGCGTACCAATTC-C-3’

EcoC5 Mse1

14

for sequencing

5’-GACTGCGTACCAATTC-Cxx-3’

EcoC5 Mse3

11

ending:

primer name:

EcoC7 Mse1

11

CAA

EcoC1

CAC

EcoC2

CAT

EcoC3

CCA

EcoC4

CCC

EcoC5

CCT

EcoC6

CGC

EcoC7

CGT

EcoC8

CTA

EcoC9

CTT

EcoC10

This table lists the used EcoR1 and Mse1 core-primer and their triplet endings
for the pre- amplification and sequencing step. For the pre-amplification only
one primer pair was chosen (EcoR1+C/Mse1+C). The full primer sequences are
indicated. In order to find the best sequence primer pairs (showing the
highest level of variable loci) for final analyses we screened all possible 100
combinations of triplet-endings. We selected those 19 combinations that
showed more than five variable loci when screening a set of six cachinnans
and six michahellis (the two most distinct taxa in the mtDNA shown in
reference [8]. Of these, 2 combinations were subsequently removed because
they were not sufficiently variable among our full set of gulls. The remaining
final set of 17 primer pairs are given in this table, together with their number
of variable loci resulting in the whole dataset.

Mse - primer sequences
for pre-amplification:

5’-GATGAGTCCTGAGTAA-C-3

for sequencing

5’-GATGAGTCCTGAGTAA-Cxx-3

ending:

primer name:

CAC

Mse1

CAG

Mse2

CAT

Mse3

CCA

Mse4

CCT

Mse5

CGA

Mse6

CGT

Mse7

CTA

Mse8

CTG

Mse9

CTT

Mse10
Selected 17 primer-pairs

Primer combinations used

number of detected variable loci

EcoC1 Mse8

13

EcoC1 Mse10

18

EcoC2 Mse4

6

EcoC2 Mse5

5

EcoC2 Mse6

20

EcoC2 Mse7

5

EcoC2 Mse8

12

EcoC3 Mse1

17

EcoC3 Mse2

13

EcoC3 Mse4

9

EcoC3 Mse5

10

EcoC3 Mse10

22

EcoC4 Mse1

17

number of iterations used was 20.000. For MCMC replications we used 10.000 iterations. For each value of K
we repeated STRUCTURE analysis 25 times in order to
explore consistency. For additional analyses within three
species we used the same settings. The STRUCTURE
output files were first processed using STRUCTURE
HARVESTER v0.3 [27]. This produces an output consisting of a series of files, including graphical files representing, per K and per repeated run, the estimated Ln
probability of each run, and three other Ln based estimates that allow the selection of the most optimal value
for K [28]. Also included are files that can be used as
input file in CLUMPP [29]. Subsequently CLUMPP produces output files that can be used as input in DISTRUCT [30]. We used CLUMPP to estimate, per K, the
number of identical repeated runs. DISTRUCT was used
to synchronize colour coding per ancestral population
among repeated runs per K. Samples were analysed
without any prior population information, but are sorted
by their sampling population once STRUCTURE is
completed. The STRUCTURE output graphs in Figures
3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 were produced using Microsoft Excel
and Microsoft PowerPoint based on averaged raw
STRUCTURE output tables.
Our second approach involved using Laplacian Eigenfunction analysis (LAPEA [31]). LAPEA, in analogy to e.
g. principal components analysis (PCA), is a statistical
tool one can use to achieve dimension reduction of
highly complex sets of (genetic) data. A major advantage
of LAPEA over PCA is that it compares each individual
only to its close neighbours, rather than to all other
individuals (where, here, closeness refers to genetic
relatedness, not geographic distance). This makes

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 7 of 18

Figure 2 Median-joining network of mtDNA haplotypes among herring gull taxa. Median-joining network of 368 concatenated cytB and
HVR1 mtDNA sequence haplotypes (see Additional file 2) of all gull taxa included in this study. Distinct haplotype groups are labelled A-I. The
network was rooted by the inclusion of previously published [8]occidentalis sequences. The network shows three biphyletic taxa of which
individuals either carry clade 1 or clade 2 haplotypes: The European herring gull (argentatus/argenteus - pale blue) in haplogroup B, F and G; the
glaucous gull (hyperboreus - grey) in group B, H and I; and the black-backed gull (marinus - black) in haplogroup C, I and H.

LAPEA much less sensitive to distinct outliers, compared to PCA. As with PCA, LAPEA results can be
visualized as simple two-dimensional dot-plots. In these
plots, genetically similar individuals cluster more close
together. Also in analogy to PCA, LAPEA results consist
of more than two Eigenvectors and each of these
explains part of the total observed variance. Here we
only show the results of the first two vectors and the
percentage of total variance they explain.
What LAPEA shares with STRUCTURE is that they
both allow the analysis of large numbers of individuals
for large numbers of genetic loci. Moreover, they are
both based on comparing the genetic profiles of individuals without any prior classifier. Only after analyzing
the samples, each individual can be labelled in retrospect.
Web Resource

Accession numbers for all mtDNA sequences are listed
in Additional file 1 and Additional file 3. The corresponding sequences can be found at:

GenBank, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/GenBank/
Network software can be found at:
http://www.fluxus-engineering.com/sharenet.htm
Network Publisher can be purchased via:
http://www.fluxus-engineering.com/sharenet.htm
Structure Harvester can be found at: http://users.soe.
ucsc.edu/~dearl/software/struct_harvest/

Results
Mitochondrial phylogeography

Based on the concatenated mtDNA-HVR1 and cytB
sequences of 369 large white headed gull individuals
(109 selected argentatus and 260 individuals of six other
species; Table 1) a median joining network was drawn
(Figure 2). As expected, the basic structure of this network is very similar to the one previously published by
us [8]. In the complete network shown in Figure 2, two
distinct groups (or clades) can be readily identified.
Clade 1 consists of all michahellis and atlantis, part of
marinus, part of hyperboreus, and part of argentatus

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 8 of 18

Figure 3 Geographic distribution, mtDNA haplotype distribution, and autosomal AFLP based admixture proportions of European
herring gull (L. argentatus) populations. The geographical distribution of the two European herring gull subspecies are indicated in solid dark
blue (western subspecies argenteus), and light blue (north-eastern subspecies argentatus). Their geographical overlap (striated area) is also shown.
Two mtDNA HVR1 sequence haplotype groups were identified (Additional file 1, Figure 2, Additional file 2, and reference [8]): clade 1 and clade
2. For each of the 16 herring gull colonies the black pie chart area reflects the relative frequency of individuals with clade 1 mtDNA haplotypes.
Similarly, the white area corresponds to clade 2. Also, the exact number of individuals with clade 1 (left) and clade 2 (right) haplotypes and
abbreviated colony names (Table 1) are indicated. Two cachinnans haplotypes, shown in grey, are indicated in the Estonian (EST) colony. Clade 1
mtDNA haplotypes are more frequent among northern colonies, whereas clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes are more frequent among southern
colonies. There is less congruence between mtDNA haplotype distribution and sub-species: northern Icelandic argenteus displays predominantly
clade 1 haplotypes. Eastern Finnish argentatus displays predominantly clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes. The boxed areas define, for each colony, those
individuals that we used for the analyses of 230 AFLP loci and cytB sequencing. AFLP genotypes were analysed by STRUCTURE and revealed the
presence of four distinct ancestral populations among present day argentatus, here shown with yellow, green, blue, and red. Each individual is
represented by a (multi) coloured bar, on top of which there is a black-filled square (clade 1 membership), or a white square (clade 2
membership). The proportion of each colour within a single bar indicates the relative contribution of one of these four ancestral populations to
the genome of that individual gull.

individuals. Clade 2 contains the remaining marinus,
hyperboreus, and argentatus individuals, in addition to
all cachinnans, all smithsonianus, and all fuscus and
graellsii individuals.
Mitochondrial (sub)structure of argentatus, marinus, and
hyperboreus

Based on the UPGMA-tree of mtDNA-HVR1 sequences
(Additional File 2), each of the 377 argentatus individuals was assigned to either the mtDNA sequence

haplotype defined clade 1 or clade 2. This clade composition, per each of the 16 different colonies, is illustrated
as black-and-white pie charts in Figure 3. Among the
more northern distributed colonies, the majority of individuals carry clade 1 haplotypes (black proportion),
while clade 2 haplotypes (white proportion) are more
frequent throughout the southern colonies.
Of the 32 European marinus individuals all but one (a
bird from the Faroe Islands), display clade 1 mtDNA haplotypes, (here indicated for each individual separately by

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 9 of 18

Figure 4 Geographic distribution, mtDNA haplotype distribution, and autosomal AFLP based admixture proportions of great blackbacked gull (L. marinus) populations. The breeding range (black), and sampling locations (red dots) of marinus. For each of the eight colonies
a boxed area contains individuals that we used for the analyses of 230 AFLP loci and HVR1 and cytB mtDNA sequencing. Colony name
abbreviations above the top-left corner of each box correspond with those in Table 1. Genotypes were analysed by STRUCTURE and revealed
the presence of four distinct ancestral populations among present day marinus. In this figure these are represented by four different colours
(pale red, pale blue, pale green, and pale orange). Each individual is represented by a single (multi) coloured bar, on top of which there is either
a black filled square (indicating that this individual displayed an mtDNA clade 1 haplotype), or a white square (representing clade 2 mtDNA
haplotypes). The proportion of each colour within a single bar indicates the relative contribution of one of these four ancestral populations to
the genome of that gull. For instance, the top left panel represents 18 marinus from a Nearctic population (ONT). Of these, 11 displayed a clade
1 mtDNA haplotype (black squares above the coloured bars), whereas seven displayed a clade 2 mtDNA haplotype (white squares). Among the
18 birds, the leftmost five display a 100% fixed autosomal contribution of the ancestral population coded by pale red to their genomes. The
rightmost nine individuals show 100% fixed contribution of another (pale green) ancestral population. There are also four individuals with
various degrees of admixed contributions of two or more ancestral populations.

small black squares in Figure 4). Among the 32 North
American marinus we find a more admixed distribution.
The majority (n = 21) have clade 1 mtDNA haplotypes,
while the remaining (n = 11) have clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes (indicated by white squares in Figure 4).
Among hyperboreus the picture is more clear. All but
two out of 32 European hyperboreus (representing wintering birds from the Faroe Islands) have clade 1
mtDNA haplotypes (black squares in Figure 5). However, all 35 North American hyperboreus have clade 2
haplotypes (white squares in Figure 5).
AFLP; Overall results

Of the original 19 AFLP primer combinations only the
products of 17 combinations were used. Consequently, the
resulting final AFLP dataset consisted of the 1/0 scores of
230 loci among 369 individuals (available upon request).

We explored the genetic population structure among
all 369 individuals in two unbiased ways. First, we used
a modified version of STRUCTURE that allows the analysis of recessive loci [25], and second, using Laplacian
Eigenfunction analysis (LAPEA) [31]. By means of
STRUCTURE, we attempted to assess whether or not
the complete sampled dataset contained hitherto hidden
substructure consisting of an unknown number of distinct (ancestral) genetic subgroups, or simply constituted
one single panmictic population in Hardy Weinberg
equilibrium. It is important to stress here, that by doing
so we initially ignore species/subspecies designations
and sampling locations of the individuals included in
this analysis. This information is only used to group/
cluster individuals once STRUCTURE analysis is completed. We performed a series of STRUCTURE runs
varying between one and ten a-priori defined genetic

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 10 of 18

Figure 5 Geographic distribution, mtDNA haplotype distribution, and autosomal AFLP based admixture proportions of glaucous gull
(L. hyperboreus) and American herring gull (L. smithsonianus) populations. The breeding ranges (blue for smithsonianus, grey for
hyperboreus), and sampling locations (yellow for smithsonianus, red for hyperboreus). For each of the 12 colonies a boxed area contains all
individuals that we used for the analyses of 230 AFLP loci and HVR1 and cytB mtDNA sequencing. Colony name abbreviations above the top-left
corner of each box correspond with those in Table 1. Genotypes were analysed by STRUCTURE and revealed the presence of three distinct
ancestral populations among present day smithsonianus and hyperboreus. In this figure these are represented by three different colours (pale
yellow, pale blue, and red). Each individual is represented by a single (multi) coloured bar, on top of which there is either black-filled square
(indicating that this individual displayed an mtDNA clade 1 haplotype), or a white square (representing clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes). The
proportion of each colour within a single bar indicates the relative contribution of one of these three ancestral populations to the genome of
that gull. For instance, the bottom left panel represents nine smithsonianus from a Nearctic population (PEI). They all display a clade 2 mtDNA
haplotype (white squares). Among the nine birds, the leftmost three display a nearly 100% fixed autosomal contribution of the ancestral
population coded by pale yellow to their genomes. The rightmost three individuals show a near 100% fixed contribution of another (red)
ancestral population. The remaining three individuals display various degrees of admixed contributions of the three ancestral populations.

subgroups or clusters (K = 1 to K = 10) using all 369
individuals and all 230 AFLP loci in order to detect the
most optimal value of K in the total dataset. Selection of
the optimal number of clusters was done by post processing all runs by means of STRUCTURE HARVESTER [27], allowing the combined use of visual
inspection of the resulting plots, and methods proposed
by Evanno [28]. For each K we performed 25 independent runs, and by means of the combined use of
CLUMPP [29] and DISTRUCT [30], we could explore,
summarize and visualize all STRUCTURE results (Figure 6A

and 6B). Based on all 230 AFLP loci there was a clear
optimum of K = 6, with 23 out of 25 runs showing nearly
identical results (Figure 6A). It is remarkable that at
K = 6 not all distinct taxa can be readily distinguished.
Only argentatus (indicated by pale blue), marinus (black),
and hyperboreus (grey) could be clearly distinguished.
Distinct taxa such as fuscus and cachinnans were
grouped into one (visualised by red) genetic cluster. We
speculated that this could be due to a high number of
non-informative AFLP loci in the total dataset and
repeated the complete selection procedure using only

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 11 of 18

Figure 6 Results of STRUCTURE and LAPEA analyses for all 230 AFLP loci. A STRUCTURE and Laplacean Eigenvector analysis (LAPEA) was
performed on 369 gulls, representing seven distinct species (taxon names indicated in the top row boxes in panel A). (A). STRUCTURE was used
to explore values of K = 1 to K = 10. For each K 25 independent runs were performed. Consistency among runs was explored by the combined
use of Structure Harvester, CLUMPP, and DISTRUCT. For each value of K, the most frequent mode is displayed, with the number of independent
runs with this mode indicated to the right of each multicoloured panel. Individuals are depicted as vertical bars segmented in their calculated
membership of each of the various clusters (reflecting ancestral populations). Each colour reflects the estimated relative contribution of each of
the populations to that individual’s AFLP-based genome. Individuals are posteriori sorted according to their taxon definition. K = 6 is the most
optimal overall number of clusters in the total dataset, with 23 out of 25 runs with exactly the same mode of differentiation. At K = 7 two clear
modes were visible, with the one shown here being most frequent (13 out of 25), but failed to differentiate fuscus from cachinnans. The other
(12 out of 25, not shown) did represent a mode that could differentiate all seven taxa. (B). A graph showing for each of the 25 replicate runs for
K = 1 to k = 10, the Ln probability of the data estimated by STRUCTURE. (C). LAPEA of 230 AFLP loci of all 369 gulls from seven different taxa.
Shown are the first two Eigenvectors and the percentage of the total variance they explain. Each dot represents a single individual and its colour
corresponds with those of the seven taxa in panel (A). None of the seven taxa could be clearly differentiated.

those AFLP loci (n = 43) with an Fst value of 0.2 or
higher according to a TFPGA analysis on the complete
dataset (Figure 7A and 7B). This resulted in K = 7 being
the optimal number of clusters, with all 25 runs resulting
in near identical results (Figure 7a). These now gave consistent results with all seven taxa identified as genetically
distinct subgroups, when using 43 polymorphic autosomal AFLP loci. Still, among all taxa, multiple individuals
with autosomal genetic contributions typical for other
taxa could be observed, a clear signal for relatively close
genetic affinities and/or ongoing gene flow within this
species complex.
Also by means of LAPEA we analysed the full set of
230 AFLP loci and the set of 43 AFLP loci selected
because of their high among taxon Fst values (Figures 6C
and 7C). We only show the graphical results based on
the first two Laplacian Eigenvectors in both datasets. As

with STRUCTURE, using all 230 loci, LAPEA only
weakly discriminates between all taxa, whereas the 43
AFLP locus set resulted in a much more clear differentiation. Based on the 43 loci, marinus, cachinnans, and
michahellis each group into distinct clusters, with the
remaining taxa (fuscus, argentatus, hyperboreus, and
smithsonianus) more weakly defined (Figure 7C). The difference in resolution between the two sets of loci is also
reflected in the percentage of variance explained by
LAPEA. For the 230 AFLP loci the first two Eigenvectors
explained 11.9% (6.4% and 5.5% respectively), whereas for
the set of 43 selected AFLP loci the first two Eigenvectors
explained 24.8% (13.9% and 10.9% respectively).
AFLP; herring gulls, argentatus

Using all 230 AFLP loci we analysed all 109 argentatus
by means of STRUCTURE (Figure 3) and LAPEA

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 12 of 18

Figure 7 Results of STRUCTURE and LAPEA analyses for 43 selected AFLP loci. A STRUCTURE and Laplacean Eigenvector analysis (LAPEA)
was performed on 369 gulls, representing seven distinct species (taxon names indicated in the top row boxes in panel A). Based on Fst
calculation, 43 AFLP loci (Fst> 0.2 or higher according to a TFPGA analysis on the complete dataset) were selected for these analyses. (A).
STRUCTURE was used to explore values of K = 1 to K = 10. For each K 25 independent runs were performed. Consistency among runs was
explored by the combined use of Structure Harvester, CLUMPP, and DISTRUCT. For each value of K, the most frequent mode is displayed, with
the number of independent runs with this mode indicated to the right of each multicoloured panel. Individuals are depicted as vertical bars
segmented in their calculated membership of each of the various clusters (reflecting ancestral populations). Each colour reflects the estimated
relative contribution of each of the populations to that individual’s AFLP-based genome. Individuals are posteriori sorted according to their taxon
definition. K = 7 is the most optimal overall number of clusters in the total dataset, with all 25 runs with exactly the same mode of
differentiation. This mode enabled the differentiation of all seven taxa. (B). A graph showing for each of the 25 replicate runs for K = 1 to K =
10, the Ln probability of the data estimated by STRUCTURE. (C). LAPEA of 43 AFLP loci of all 369 gulls from seven different taxa. Shown are the
first two Eigenvectors and the percentage of the total variance they explain. Each dot represents a single individual and its colour corresponds
with those of the seven taxa in panel (A). Note that three taxa, (cachinnans, michahellis, and marinus) clearly cluster in distinct groups. The other
taxa remain weakly differentiated.

(Additional File 4). For STRUCTURE, we explored a
range of clusters (from K = 1 to K = 10). Again, for
each K we performed 25 independent runs and all
results were processed by means of STRUCTURE HARVESTER, CLUMPP, and DISTRUCT. We observed a
clear optimum at K = 4 (results not shown) indicating
that among present day argentatus we see the presence
of at least four distinct (ancestral) genetic populations.
We subsequently plotted, for each individual and each
sampling site, the results of the STRUCTURE K = 4,
and the mtDNA based clade 1/clade 2 designation (Figure 3). We observed a remarkable complex autosomal
substructure among all 109 European argentatus individuals. In Figure 3 and Additional File 4, we indicated
each of the contributions of these four ancestral populations by means of a unique colour. In analogy to the

mtDNA sequence variation, also among AFLP loci we
observed two genetic components with a clear north/
south differentiation. One (indicated with yellow) is predominantly present among argentatus individuals from
northern populations, with many individuals showing
(close to) 100% of their autosomal gene pool comprised
by this component. Another distinct genetic component
(green) is predominantly present, with (nearly) fixed
contributions) among argentatus from southern populations. However, there are also clear signals from two
other ancestral populations or demographic events. One
of these (the blue component) is present among individuals from all over the entire distribution of argentatus
and was already notable at K = 2 (not shown) in exactly
the same individuals and frequencies as shown in Figure
3 (with K = 4). This suggests that it could represent a

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 13 of 18

marinus, whereas the other three (pale green, pale blue
and pale orange) are observed among all populations,
although with varying frequencies and levels of admixture. As with argentatus, LAPEA results in marinus also
corresponds with STRUCTURE in terms of the order of
identification of each of the four distinct ancestral populations. Pale orange and pale green (clearly distinct by
the first Laplacian Eigenvector) were also identified by
STRUCTURE K = 2 and K = 3. Pale red and pale blue
only became visible as distinct groups at STRUCTURE
K = 4, and can not easily be separated by the first two
Laplacian Eigenvectors (together explaining 16% of the
total variance). It appears that the birds of the North
American populations are more genetically homogeneous than in the European populations, which is
reflected by their reduced unbiased heterozygosity (0.23)
compared to European marinus (0.29, not shown).

signal of an important (perhaps early) demographic
event. At K = 3 (not shown), the fourth (red) component became visible, also in exactly the same individuals
as shown in Figure 3. Only at K = 4, the green and yellow components became visible as distinct genetic entities. This strongly suggests that these latter two
components (green and yellow) reflect a more subtle (or
recent) demographic event. There was no correlation
between mtDNA clade membership and carrier status of
any of the four autosomal genetic components (Chisquare test not significant, results not shown). To
exclude the possibility that this marked genetic substructure among Eurasian herring gulls could be due to
autosomal influences introduced by hyperboreus, a taxon
we speculate (see below) to have expanded out of the
Nearctic into the Palearctic relatively recently, we performed a STRUCTURE analysis using the AFLP genotypes of the combined group of argentatus (n = 109)
and hyperboreus (n = 67) individuals. Since we were
unable to detect any shared genetic component between
these two taxa (results not shown), it is not very likely
that the substructure among argentatus is due to hyperboreus influences.
These STRUCTURE results were independently confirmed by LAPEA analysis (Additional File 4). The first
Eigenvector (explaining 12.3% of the total variance)
clearly separates the two more ancient events/populations (blue and red) from the more recent contributions
(green and yellow). The second Eigenvector (explaining
5.3% of the total variance) provides a strong contrast
between blue and red, and also differentiates green from
yellow. Note the seven individuals with clear intermediate positions between the three clusters. These individuals also show approximately equally admixed
contributions by STRUCTURE. Only at higher levels
(third and fourth Eigenvectors) green and yellow could
be more clearly distinguished (results not shown). Alternatively, when only the green/yellow individuals were
analysed separately, they could be distinguished at the
first Eigenvector (results not shown). Taken together,
STRUCTURE and LAPEA analyses both supported the
presence of genetic signals of at least four distinct
ancestral populations among present day argentatus,
with, very likely, the most recent ones (still) enabling a
differentiation between northern and southern argentatus populations.

Because of their very close genetic affinities ([8], see also
Figure 2), we analysed the AFLP data from Eurasian and
North American hyperboreus together with another
Nearctic species, smithsonianus. We again used STRUCTURE (Figure 5) and LAPEA (Additional File 6) to analyse the 230 AFLP loci. STRUCTURE revealed a clear
optimum at K = 3, and this is confirmed by LAPEA.
The first two Laplacian Eigenvectors (Additional File 6;
explaining 12% of the total variance) were sufficient to
distinguish between each of the three distinct ancestral
populations indicated by STRUCTURE at K = 3 (Figure
5). Apart from the marked difference in mtDNA clade
membership (see before), there is no clear autosomal
difference between Nearctic and Palearctic hyperboreus.
In both groups of populations we see the contributions
of two ancestral populations (pale yellow and pale blue),
with some admixture of a third component (red). This
latter component is present in a very high frequency
among two north-east American smithsonianus populations. A third smithsonianus population (from Lake
Ontario) strongly resembles the majority of the hyperboreus populations (predominantly pale yellow with
some red admixture), whereas the fourth smithsonianus
population (from Fairbanks, Alaska) harbour individuals
that are inseparable from many Nearctic hyperboreus
(nearly fixed for the pale blue component, carrying
clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes).

AFLP; great black-backed gulls, marinus

Discussion

Also marinus, based on 230 autosomal AFLP loci,
STRUCTURE (figure 4) and LAPEA (Additional File 5)
demonstrated an unexpected autosomal complexity.
Using STRUCTURE, we observed a distinct maximum
at K = 4 ancestral populations. One of these (indicated
with pale red) is predominantly present among Nearctic

Evolution of European argentatus

AFLP; glaucous gulls, hyperboreus

The European herring gull L. argentatus has long been
considered a single species with many different subspecies and/or geographical variants [4,7,9]. We were able
to reduce this complex picture into an assemblage
including several distinct taxa (e.g. argentatus and

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

smithsonianus) which were not each other’s closest relatives [8]. Contrary to Mayr’s [4] proposal, the herring
gull assemblage did not represent a ring species model.
We discovered that the current mitochondrial DNA
genetic make-up of the argentatus showed clear signs of
past hybridisation between birds derived from different
ancestral refugia, although no definite geographic scenario could be reconstructed for this reticulation
because of insufficient sampling in our previous study.
Such a biphyletic representation in the mtDNA haplotype network (also evident in hyperboreus and marinus,
see Figure 2 in this article) provided a striking illustration of how discrepancies could arise between a single
gene tree (in this case mtDNA based) and a taxon phylogeny. The fact that some gull species, apparently due
to complex past demographic events, contain highly
divergent mtDNA haplotypes suggests that mitochondrial lineage sorting could have quite different and
unpredictable outcomes.
In the present study we tried to obtain more clarification into the apparent north versus south genetic differentiation in argentatus. Based on a detailed mtDNA
analysis among 377 European herring gulls from 16 different breeding colonies we now clearly demonstrate
that the more northern breeding birds (based on geography considered to be nominate argentatus and/or omissus) display predominantly clade 1 mtDNA haplotypes,
whereas southern breeding birds (of the subspecies
argenteus) display typical clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes
(see the pie charts in Figure 3). Using STRUCTURE,
and independently confirmed by LAPEA, we found
strong evidence for a complex autosomal genetic substructure among argentatus based on 230 AFLP loci
(Figure 3, Additional File 4). This substructure, consisting of four distinct ancestral populations, is partly
explained by a distinct northern (yellow in both figures)
and a distinct southern (green in both figures) distribution. However, at the level of individual gulls these did
not correlate with the two geographically distinct
mtDNA clades. We also observed genetic signals of two
other ancestral populations, probably reflecting more
ancient demographic events (red and blue). This pattern
of a number of distinct ancestral contributions among
present day individuals resembles very much the distinct
substructure pattern among globally dispersed human
populations. Based on genome wide sets of genetic polymorphisms [32], human populations carry the signals of
a number of marked demographic events, generally
assumed to reflect the combined effects of genetic bottlenecks and substantial migration events, leading to a
distinct clinal pattern of isolation by distance. The timing of this process is often reflected in the hierarchy by
means of which distinct ancestral genetic populations
was estimated by STRUCTURE. Among humans, the

Page 14 of 18

first marked event is nearly always visible at K = 2 (distinguishing African from non-African populations). If
we assume that the patterns revealed by STRUCTURE
and LAPEA among argentatus also reflects (in part) the
temporal timing of a number of important demographic
events, the most likely scenario explaining the genetic
substructure among argentatus is the one whereby the
blue component represents the first expansion of birds
(carrying clade 1 mtDNA haplotypes, [8]) out of the original Aralo-Caspian refugium. The red autosomal component subsequently reflects the second expansion
(carrying mtDNA clade 2 haplotypes) out of the same
Aralo-Caspian refugium. A relatively more recent process (the last Glaciation?) could subsequently be responsible for the differentiation between discrete northern
(yellow) and southern (green) argentatus populations,
both involving birds that already harboured signals from
the two more ancient events. The complex present day
distribution of both the two mtDNA types as well as the
four autosomal types among argentatus is most likely
explained by an ongoing, and complex process of introgression while populations expand and contract [33].
Colonization pattern of marinus

Our previous study did not support the traditional view
of greater black-backed gulls (L. marinus) being a distinct outgroup relative to the herring gull complex,
although marinus is fully reproductively isolated from
all species it co-occurs with [8]. We suggested that marinus diverged in allopatry from the rest of clade 1. Our
present study now also includes a substantial number of
Nearctic breeding marinus (n = 32) in addition to 32
samples from Palearctic breeding colonies. Apart from a
single individual from the Faroe Islands, all Palearctic
marinus have clade 1 mtDNA haplotypes, that are also
observed among the majority (21 out of 32) Nearctic
marinus samples. This confirms that marinus most
likely developed originally in Europe as a member of
mtDNA clade 1, and only very recently moved towards
the west and colonized eastern North American coasts.
This process is supported by our AFLP results. STRUCTURE (Figure 4) and LAPEA (Additional File 5) analysis
clearly showed that 15 Nearctic marinus carry autosomal signals that are identical to all 32 Palearctic marinus
(the pale green, blue and orange genetic components).
The remaining 17 Nearctic marinus display a unique
(pale red) genetic component that is nearly fixed in
birds from Lake Ontario (Figure 4). For this unique
genetic component there are two possible explanations.
One, it could be due to inbreeding/or a population bottleneck, both leading to a much reduced genetic heterogeneity. It is known that such individuals can group
together when analyzed by STRUCTURE, and this
seems to be confirmed by their reduced unbiased

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

heterogeneity (0.23, compared to 0.29 among Palearctic
marinus). Initially, we could not exclude a second explanation that this unique nearctic genetic component
could be due to autosomal introgression by, very possibly smithsonianus. We investigated this possibility by a
combined analysis of marinus together with smithsonianus. We were unable to discern a shared autosomal
genetic component between these two gull taxa (results
not shown). As a consequence, the combined mtDNA
and AFLP results strongly suggest that after only a brief
period of hybridization of marinus in the Nearctic with
members of the Beringian clade [34], most likely with
smithsonianus, they again rapidly became reproductively
isolated. This process could have involved only a limited
number of individuals and only lasted a limited number
of generations. As such this is not an exceptional process. Although L. marinus is now fully reproductively
isolated from all species it co-occurs with, in the
mtDNA network it is nested among several taxa with
known hybridization during colonization processes:
argentatus × hyperboreus [35,36], michahellis × graellsii
[37], cachinnans × argentatus [38], and earlier in the
20th century argentatus × fuscus [39]. This also supports
the general view that reinforcement plays an important
role in the evolution of reproductive isolation [40,41]. If
this is also true in gulls, and our present data seems to
support this, it could mean that marinus, after a period
of allopatric divergence, has had a relatively long history
of geographic contact with closely related taxa which
facilitated the perfection of reproductive barriers
through reinforcement multiple times. This may also
explain why marinus achieved complete reproductive
isolation more rapidly than other taxa in the herring
gull group and, thus, why the phylogenetic age of the
marinus lineage was previously overestimated.
Phylogeographic history of circumpolar breeding
hyperboreus

Among the circumpolar breeding glaucous gull (L.
hyperboreus) we see an even more distinct clustering of
mtDNA haplotypes into two subgroups. All hyperboreus
from Nearctic breeding colonies display exclusively
clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes, whereas Palearctic breeding
hyperboreus display clade 1 mtDNA haplotypes (Figures
2 and 5). The only two Palearctic hyperboreus with
clade 2 mtDNA sequences are individuals wintering on
Faroe Islands. The glaucous gull is a member of the
very large Beringian clade [34] that originated and diversified in the North Pacific/NW Arctic coasts of North
America and North-East of Russia. Based on its clade 2
mtDNA haplotypes it is genetically very closely related
to smithsonianus (see Figure 2). This tight genetic affinity between hyperboreus and smithsonianus is confirmed by means of our AFLP data. The STRUCTURE

Page 15 of 18

and LAPEA analyses on only these two taxa combined,
based on all 230 AFLP loci, confirm the close relationship between these two taxa (Figure 5, Additional File
6). In addition, when analysing all taxa combined, for
230 AFLP loci and 43 selected AFLP loci, STRUCTURE
combines these two taxa at lower levels (K = 2 - 4) in a
majority of independent runs. From the mtDNA network it appears that hyperboreus only shares non-basal
clade 1 haplotypes with argentatus (Figure 2, group B)
that are obviously genetically more similar to each other
than the widely spaced clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes
observed among the Nearctic hyperboreus (Figure 2,
group H and I). This suggests that after the most recent
deglaciation event Nearctic hyperboreus spread along
the most northern Palearctic coasts into northern Europe where they came into contact with argentatus birds
of clade 1. The AFLP data shows that the North American hyperboreus populations are inseparable from Eurasian hyperboreus. If we combine the mtDNA results and
AFLP results, the simplest explanation is a scenario
where, on its way into Europe, hyperboreus lost their
original mtDNA by complete introgression of argentatus
mtDNA, but retained their original autosomal gene
pool. A sufficiently long time of hybridization of hyperboreus with argentatus combined with continued skewed
introgression resulted in the complete mitochondrial
replacement by clade 1 haplotypes into the gene pool of
European hyperboreus, that reaches as far east as Taimyr. Unfortunately we have no samples from further
east in Russia. Obviously, only with those samples we
can completely resolve this circumpolar expansion/
introgression process.

Conclusions
The present study focuses on the reconstruction of the
phylogeographic history of three gull species: European
herring gull (L. argentatus), glaucous gull (L. hyperboreus), and great black-backed gull (L. marinus). For
argentatus and hyperboreus we observed a biphyletic
distribution of mtDNA sequence haplotypes in a previous study [8], whereas the present study also demonstrated a biphyletic mtDNA haplotype distribution for
marinus. For argentatus the mtDNA biphyletic distribution corresponded partly with a geographically distinct
distribution among breeding colonies. AFLP loci indicate a remarkable complex autosomal pattern of genetic
substructure. Among European herring gulls we detect
signals of a number of distinct demographic events that
could correspond with a repeated expansion out of the
same ancestral refugium, later followed by a separation
into a northern and southern population. Moreover, our
data also suggest that there is a still ongoing process of
introgression among all argentatus populations that is
impossible to discern in more detail using AFLP.

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

For hyperboreus, the most likely scenario explaining
their present biphyletic mtDNA distribution is a process
whereby Nearctic hyperboreus invaded into northern
argentatus refugia. After some time, upon complete
replacement of their original clade 2 mtDNA haplotypes
by argentatus derived clade 1 haplotypes, they again
became more-or-less reproductively isolated (but see
[10]). As a consequence of this process, Palearctic hyperboreus now strictly displays clade 1 mtDNA haplotypes,
but still remain genetically more similar in their autosomes to their closely related Nearctic ancestors (also
including smithsonianus).
The present data presents an even more recent expansion process of Palearctic marinus into the Nearctic. If
our current AFLP and mtDNA data are reliable, the
most likely scenario of marinus involves a very recent
extension of their breeding range into Northern America that briefly involved some hybridisation with (most
likely) smithsonianus, that seems only reflected in
mtDNA.
We originally speculated that in addition to a more
detailed mtDNA analyses, the use of AFLP markers
could substantially supplement and clarify the complex
process of population expansions among members of
the herring gull assemblage. AFLP loci have proven to
be very useful and informative [42,43]. In some cases,
AFLP results strongly supported those based on mtDNA
haplotypes among Greenish Warblers and Wild turkeys
[44,45], although others report a much less clear result,
e.g. among Crossbills [46], most likely due the latter’s
more recent “speciation” process, not unlike the situation among the herring gull assemblage. Our present
study demonstrates that AFLP loci do provide additional
support for a much more complex speciation process
among the herring gull species assemblage. However,
for a more detailed reconstruction of the timing and
directions of the various processes of gene flow, we
need massive autosomal sequence haplotype information. This, obviously, is the topic of our future analyses
among the members of this fascinating species complex.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Argentatus variable nucleotide positions and
accession numbers of mitochondrial hypervariable region 1. This file
contains a table of aligned variable nucleotide positions of mitochondrial
hypervariable region 1 (HVR1) sequences and their Genbank accession
numbers for 377 herring gull samples from 16 colonies sorted by colony
membership. Dotted positions indicate identity to the reverence
sequence. These sequences were used for counting the numbers of
individuals belonging to clade 1 or clade 2 as shown in Figure 3. For
each sequence we indicate its clade 1 or clade 2 allocation.
Additional file 2: UPGMA-tree based on mitochondrial
hypervariable region 1 (HVR1). This file contains a UPGMA-tree based
on sequences of hypervariable region 1. Calculation was done by using
the average distance BLOSUM62 [21] routine in JALVIEW [22]. A total set

Page 16 of 18

of 377 argentatus from 16 different European colonies, 32 marinus from
five European colonies and 32 marinus from three eastern North
American colonies, 32 hyperboreus from four Eurasian colonies and 35
hyperboreus from four North American colonies, 35 smithsonianus from
four North American colonies, 30 fuscus and graellsii, 31 michahellis and
atlantis, and 33 cachinnans were sequenced on HVR1 (see also Additional
files 1 and 3) and used for the tree calculation. Based on this resulting
tree, all samples were assigned to either clade 1 or clade 2. Rooting of
the tree was done by the use of previously published [8] Western gull (L.
occidentalis) sequences.
Additional file 3: Variable positions and Genbank accession
numbers of mitochondrial sequences. This file contains a table of
aligned variable nucleotide positions of mitochondrial cytochrome b gene
and hypervariable region 1 sequences and their Genbank accession
numbers for 368 analysed large gulls. The reference sequence is
argentatus_0127 from Russia, White Sea. Dotted positions indicate
identity to the reverence sequence. Also indicated are taxon
membership, geographic origin, and sample ID for each individual. These
sequences were used to calculate the median-joining networks in Figure
2 of this article.
Additional file 4: Laplacian Eigenfunction plot based on 230 AFLP
loci among European herring gulls (L. argentatus). This file contains
the two-dimensional plot of the two first Eigenvectors (and the
percentage of the total variance they explain) of LAPEA on 109 herring
gull individuals using all 230 AFLP loci. These LAPEA results
independently confirmed the STRUCTURE results (see Figure 3). The four
different colours in this LAPEA plot correspond with those in Figure 3.
The first Eigenvector clearly separates the two ancestral populations
indicated with blue and red from those indicated in green and yellow.
The second Eigenvector provides a strong contrast between blue and
red, and weakly differentiates green from yellow.
Additional file 5: Laplacian Eigenfunction plot based on 230 AFLP
loci among great black-backed gulls (L. marinus). This file contains
the two-dimensional plot of the two first Eigenvectors (and the
percentage of the total variance they explain) of LAPEA on 32 Palaearctic
and 32 Nearctic marinus. Also in marinus LAPEA results correspond with
those from STRUCTURE (see figure 4). The four different colours in this
LAPEA plot correspond with those in Figure 4. The first Eigenvector
clearly separates individuals carrying contributions from the ancestral
population indicated by pale orange from those carrying contributions
from the ancestral population indicated with pale green. The first
Eigenvector also separates (although less strongly), the individuals
carrying contributions from the two less distinct ancestral populations
(pale red and pale blue). The second Eigenvector separates individuals
carrying contributions from the two ancestral populations indicated by
pale orange and pale green from those carrying contributions from the
other two ancestral populations (indicated with pale red and pale blue).
Additional file 6: Laplacian eigenfunction plot based on 230 AFLP
loci among glaucous gulls (L. hyperboreus) and North American
herring gulls (L. smithsonianus). This file contains the two-dimensional
plot of the two first Eigenvectors (and the percentage of the total
variance they explain) of LAPEA on 32 Palaearctic hyperboreus, 35
Nearctic hyperboreus, and 35 Nearctic smithsonianus. These LAPEA results
correspond with those from STRUCTURE (see figure 5). The three
different colours in this LAPEA plot correspond with those in Figure 5.
The first Eigenvector clearly separates individuals carrying contributions
from the ancestral population indicated by pale yellow from those
carrying contributions from the ancestral populations indicated with red
and pale blue. The The second Eigenvector separates individuals carrying
contributions from the two ancestral populations indicated by pale
yellow and red from those carrying contributions from the ancestral
population indicated with pale blue.

Acknowledgements
We wish to acknowledge the Department of Ecology of the University of
Jena for cooperation and lab use. We thank all collectors for help with the
sampling. We wish to acknowledge Thirsa Kraaijenbrink and Kristiaan van

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

der Gaag for their support in producing valuable data. In addition we wish
to acknowledge Michael Weiß for his support in statistical analyses. This
work was supported by funds from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) to DLH (Li 1049/1-1, 1-2), and by a grant from the Netherlands
Genomics Initiative (NGI) and Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO) within the framework of the Forensic Genomics Consortium
Netherlands (FGCN) to PdK.
Author details
1
German Oceanographic Museum, Katharinenberg 14-20, D-18439 Stralsund,
Germany. 2University of Jena, Institute of Ecology, Dornburger Str. 159, D07743 Jena, Germany. 3Department of Radiology, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, USA. 4MGC-Department of Human and Clinical Genetics,
Leiden University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9503, NL-2300 RA Leiden, The
Netherlands.
Authors’ contributions
VS, DLH, MR and PdK are equally responsible for the molecular lab work, the
data analyses and manuscript composition. PdK, VS, and JZ performed most
of the statistical data analyses, including running STRUCTURE, TFPGA,
NETWORK, and LAPEA. AJH initiated the study, DLH and PdK supervised it.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Page 17 of 18

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.
24.

Received: 16 December 2009 Accepted: 11 November 2010
Published: 11 November 2010
25.
References
1. Dobzhansky T: Genetics and the origin of species. New York: Columbia
Univ Press; 1937.
2. Slatkin M: Gene flow and the geographic structure of natural
populations. Science 1987, 236:787-792.
3. Turelli M, Barton NH, Coyne JA: Theory and speciation. Trends Ecol Evol
2001, 16:330-343.
4. Mayr E: Systematics and the origin of species. New York: Columbia Univ
Press; 1942.
5. Cain AJ: Animal species and their evolution. London: Hutchinson House;
1954.
6. Irwin DE, Irwin HJ, Price TD: Ring species as bridges between
microevolution and speciation. Genetica 2001, 112-113:223-243.
7. Haffer J: Systematik und Taxonomie der Larus argentatus - Artengruppe.
In Handbuch der Vögel Mitteleuropas. Volume 8. Edited by: Glutz von
Blotzheim UN, Bauer KM. Wiesbaden Akad Verlagsges; 1982:502-514.
8. Liebers D, de Knijff P, Helbig AJ: The herring hull (Larus argentatus)
complex is not a ring species. Proc Roy Soc London B, Biol Sci 2004,
271:893-901.
9. Geyr von Schweppenburg H: Zur Systematik der fuscus-argentatusMöwen. J Ornithol 1938, 86:345-365.
10. Vigfussdottir F, Palsson S, Ingolfsson A: Hybridization of glaucous gull
(Larus hyperboreus) and herring gull (Larus argentatus) in Iceland:
mitochondrial and microsatellite data. Phil Trans R Soc B 2008,
363:2851-2860.
11. Vos P, Hogers R, Bleeker M, Reijans M, van de Lee T, Hornes M, Frijters A,
Pot J, Peleman J, Kuiper M: AFLP: a new technique for DNA
fingerprinting. Nucleic Acids Res 1995, 23:4407-4414.
12. Barluenga M, Stölting KN, Salzburger W, Muschick M, Meyer A: Sympatric
speciation in Nicaraguan crater lake cichlid fish. Nature 2006, 439:719-723.
13. Belaj A, Satovic Z, Cipriani G, Baldoni L, Testolin R, Rallo L, Trujillo I:
Comparative study of the discriminating capacity of RAPD, AFLP and
SSR markers and of their effectiveness in establishing genetic
relationships in olive. Theor Appl Genet 2003, 107:736-744.
14. Woodhead M, Russell J, Squirrell J, Hollingsworth PM, Mackenzie K,
Gibby M, Powell W: Comparative analysis of population genetic structure
in Athyrium distentifolium (Pteridophyta) using AFLPs and SSRs from
anonymous and transcribed gene regions. Mol Ecol 2005, 14:1681-1695.
15. Sonstebo JH, Borgstrom R, Heun M: A comparison of AFLPs and
microsatellites to identify the population structure of brown trout
(Salmo trutta L.) populations from Hardangervidda, Norway. Mol Ecol
2007, 16:1427-1438.
16. Despre’s L, Gielly L, Redoutet B, Taberlet P: Using AFLP to resolve
phylogenetic relationships in a morphologically diversified plant species

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.
31.
32.

33.

34.

35.
36.
37.
38.

39.
40.

complex when nuclear and chloroplast sequences fail to reveal
variability. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 27:185-196.
Kardolus JP, van Eck HJ, van den Berg RG: The potential of AFLPs in
biosystematics: a first application in Solanum taxonomy (Solanaceae).
Plant Syst Evol 1998, 210:87-103.
Perrie LR, Brownsey PJ, Lockhart PJ, Large MF: Evidence for an
allopolyploid complex in New Zealand Polystichum (Dryopteridaceae).
NZ J Bot 2003, 41:189-215.
Campbell D, Duchesne P, Bernatchez L: AFLP utility for population
assignment studies: analytical investigation and empirical comparison
with microsatellites. Mol Ecol 2003, 12:1979-1991.
Bensch S, Helbig AJ, Salomon M, Seibold I: Amplified fragment length
polymorphism analysis identifies hybrids between two subspecies of
warblers. Mol Ecol 2002, 11:473-481.
Henikoff S, Henikoff JG: Amino acid substitution matrices from protein
blocks. PNAS 1992, 89:10915-10919.
Waterhouse AM, Procter JB, Martin DMA, Clamp M, Barton GJ: Jalview
Version 2 - a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis
workbench. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1189-1191.
Bandelt HJ, Forster P, Röhl A: Median-joining networks for inferring
intraspecific phylogenies. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:37-48.
Miller MP: Tools for population genetic analyses (TFPGA). A Windows©
program for the analysis of allozyme and molecular population genetic
data. Version 1.3. Distributed by the author 1997 Department of Biological
Sciences, Northern Arizona University.
Falush D, Stephens M, Pritchard JK: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data: dominant markers and null alleles.
Molecular Ecology Notes 2007, 7:474-478.
Rosenberg NA, Burke T, Elo K, Feldman MW, Freidlin PJ, Groenen MA,
Hillel J, Maki-Tanila A, Tixier-Boichard M, Vignal A, Wimmers K, Weigend S:
Empirical evaluation of genetic clustering methods using multilocus
genotypes from 20 chicken breeds. Genetics 2001, 159:699-713.
Earl DA: Structure Harvester v0.3. 2009 [http://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~dearl/
software/struct_harvest/].
Evanno G, Regnaut S, Goudet S: Detecting the number of clusters of
individuals using the software STRUCTURE: a simulation study. Molecular
Ecology 2005, 14:2611-2620.
Jakobsson M, Rosenberg NA: CLUMPP: a cluster matching and
permutation program for dealing with label switching and
multimodality in analysis of population structure. Bioinformatics 2007,
23:1801-1806.
Rosenberg NA: DISTRUCT: a program for the graphical display of
population structure. Mol Ecol Notes 2004, 4:137-138.
Zhang J, Niyogi P, McPeek MS: Laplacian Eigenfunctions learn population
structure. PLoS ONE 2009, 4:e7928.
Jakobsson M, Scholz SW, Scheet P, Gibbs JR, VanLiere JM, Fung H-C,
Szpiech ZA, Degnan JH, Wang K, Guerreiro R, Bras JM, Schymick JC,
Hernandez DG, Traynor BJ, Simon-Sanchez J, Matarin M, Britton A, van de
Leemput J, Rafferty I, Bucan M, Cann HM, Hardy JM, Rosenberg NA,
Singleton AB: Genotype, haplotype and copy-number variation in
worldwide human populations. Nature 2008, 451:998-1003.
Mierauskas P, Greimas E, Buzun V: A comparison of morphometrics, wing
tip pattern and vocalizations between yellow-legged herring gulls (Larus
argentatus) from Eastern Baltic and Larus cachinnans. Acta Ornithol
Lithuanica 1991, 4:3-26.
de Knijff P, Helbig AJ, Liebers D: The Beringian connection: speciation in
the herring gull assemblage of North America. Am Birding 2005,
37:402-411.
Ingolfsson A: Hybridization of glaucous gulls Larus hyperboreus and
herring gulls L. argentatus in Iceland. Ibis 1970, 112:340-362.
Spear LB: Hybridization of glaucous and herring gulls at the Mackenzie
Delta, Canada. Auk 1987, 104:123-125.
van Swelm ND: Status of yellow-legged gull Larus michahellis as a
breeding bird in the Netherlands. Sula 1998, 12:199-202.
Panov EN, Monzikov DG: Intergradation between the herring gull Larus
argentatus and the southern herring gull Larus cachinnans in European
Russia. Russian J Zool 1999, 78:334-348.
Tinbergen N: The Herring Gull’s World. London: Collins; 1953.
Coyne JA, Orr HA: “Patterns of speciation in Drosophila” revisited.
Evolution 1997, 51:295-303.

Sternkopf et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:348
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/348

Page 18 of 18

41. Servedio MR, Saetre GP: Speciation as a positive feedback loop between
postzygotic and prezygotic barriers to gene flow. Proc R Soc London B
2003, 270:1473-1479.
42. Bensch S, Akesson M: Ten years of AFLP in ecology and evolution: why
so few animals? Mol Ecol 2005, 14:2899-2914.
43. Meudt HM, Clarke AC: Almost forgotten or latest practice? AFLP
applications, analyses and advances. Trends in Plant Science 2007,
12:106-117.
44. Irwin DE, Bensch S, Irwin HJ, Price TD: Speciation by distance in a ring
species. Science 2005, 307:414-416.
45. Mock KE, Theimer TC, Rhodes OE Jr, Greenberg DL, Keim P: Genetic
variation across the historical range of the wild turkey (Meleagris
gallopavo). Mol Ecol 2002, 11:643-657.
46. Parchman TL, Benkman CW, Britch SC: Patterns of genetic variation in the
adaptive radiation of New World crossbills (Aves: Loxia). Mol Ecol 2006,
15:1873-1887.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-348
Cite this article as: Sternkopf et al.: Introgressive hybridization and the
evolutionary history of the herring gull complex revealed by
mitochondrial and nuclear DNA. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:348.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
