<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Comparative analysis of replication characteristics of BoHV-1 subtypes in bovine respiratory and genital mucosa explants: a phylogenetic enlightenment</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33. doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-33"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Lennert Steukers"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

RESEARCH

VETERINARY RESEARCH
Open Access

Comparative analysis of replication characteristics of
BoHV-1 subtypes in bovine respiratory and genital
mucosa explants: a phylogenetic enlightenment
Lennert Steukers1*, Annelies P Vandekerckhove1, Wim Van den Broeck2, Sarah Glorieux1†, Hans J Nauwynck1†

Abstract
In general, members of the Alphaherpesvirinae use the epithelium of the upper respiratory and/or genital tract as a
preferential site for primary replication. Bovine herpesvirus type 1 (BoHV-1) may replicate at both sites and cause
two major clinical entities designated as infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR) and infectious pustular
vulvovaginitis/balanoposthitis (IPV/IPB) in cattle. It has been hypothesized that subtype 1.1 invades preferentially
the upper respiratory mucosa whereas subtype 1.2 favors replication at the peripheral genital tract. However, some
studies are in contrast with this hypothesis. A thorough study of primary replication at both mucosae could
elucidate whether or not different BoHV-1 subtypes show differences in mucosa tropism. We established bovine
respiratory and genital organ cultures with emphasis on maintenance of tissue morphology and viability during in
vitro culture. In a next step, bovine respiratory and genital mucosa explants of the same animals were inoculated
with several BoHV-1 subtypes. A quantitative analysis of viral invasion in the mucosa was performed at 0 h, 24 h,
48 h and 72 h post inoculation (pi) by measuring plaque latitude and penetration depth underneath the basement
membrane. All BoHV-1 subtypes exhibited a more profound invasion capacity in respiratory tissue compared to
that in genital tissue at 24 h pi. However, at 24 h pi plaque latitude was found to be larger in genital tissue
compared to respiratory tissue and this for all subtypes. These similar findings among the different subtypes take
the edge off the belief of the existence of specific mucosa tropisms of different BoHV-1 subtypes.
Introduction
Alphaherpesviruses in general have a broad epithelial
tropism. BoHV-1, the known etiological agent of infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR) and infectious pustular
vulvovaginitis/balanoposthitis (IPV/IPB) in cattle, may
replicate in both respiratory and genital mucosa. However, respiratory and genital infections have been
assigned to different BoHV-1 strains in the past [1].
Although there is proof of the existence of the virus as
early as 1941, BoHV-1 was first isolated in 1955 [2,3]. In
the late 1950’s both the respiratory disease prototype
strain Cooper and the genital disease prototype strain
K22 were isolated from field cases of respectively IBR
and IPV in the United States [4,5]. Importantly, before
* Correspondence: lennert.steukers@ugent.be
† Contributed equally
1
Laboratory of Virology, Department of Virology, Parasitology and
Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Salisburylaan
133, B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

1977, a continental discrepancy was present. Genital
infections were predominant throughout Europe
whereas respiratory infections were mainly prevalent at
feedlots in the United States and Canada. Some authors
believe that the virulent respiratory strains emerged out
of the less virulent genital strains. They state that the
enhanced virulence of the virus for the respiratory
epithelium is a consequence of rapid passages of the
virus in crowded susceptible populations present in “feedlots”, typically for the United States at that time. Since
1977, severe “North American like” IBR has emerged on
the European continent [6-8].
An attempt was made to see if BoHV-1 could be subdivided into distinct types with different tropisms i.e.
whether a correlation could be found between IBR and
IPV on the one hand and distinct virus subtypes on the
other hand. A classification was made of different
BoHV-1 subtypes using restriction endonuclease digestion and reactivity tests on a panel of monoclonal antibodies. BoHV-1.1 was associated with respiratory

© 2011 Steukers et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

Page 2 of 11

disease and abortion whereas BoHV-1.2 was regarded as
a genital type [9-11]. At that time point distinguished
subtype BoHV-1.3 was renamed into BoHV-5 [12,13].
Furthermore, a distinction was made between different
BoHV-1.2 subtypes. BoHV-1.2b causes local genital
lesions and possibly mild respiratory illness; BoHV-1.2a
seems to have both tropism for the genital and respiratory mucosa and is associated with abortion [9,10,14].
However, this postulation about several subtypes possessing diverse mucosa tropisms has been contested since
several studies showed no correlation between the different genotypes and their clinical manifestations
[6,7,14-18].
A good way to elucidate the relationship between the distinct viral BoHV-1 subtypes and the clinical entities would
be to test isolates representing the different subtypes on
similar groups of animals under identical conditions. Practical, ethical and financial reasons make this in vivo
approach difficult to perform. For that purpose, suitable in
vitro systems resembling the in vivo situation and implementing the three R’s principle of Russell and Burch
(1959), are needed to study primary host-virus interactions.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate quantitatively the replication characteristics of different BoHV-1
subtypes in in vitro systems of bovine respiratory and
genital mucosa explants. Previously, we optimized an in
vitro bovine respiratory organ culture [19]. Here, we elaborate the set up of an air-liquid interface bovine genital
organ culture using vestibulum vaginae tissue. Similarly
as for the previously optimized respiratory organ culture, the effect of an in vitro culture on viability and
morphometry was extensively evaluated up to 96 h of in
vitro cultivation for the genital organ culture. Furthermore, bovine organ cultures of trachea and vestibulum
vaginae derived from the same animals were infected
with several BoHV-1.1, BoHV-1.2a and BoHV-1.2b isolates. A quantitative analysis of viral mucosal invasion
was performed for the different BoHV-1 subtypes and
compared at 0 h, 24 h, 48 h and 72 h post inoculation
(pi) by measuring plaque latitude and penetration depth
underneath the basement membrane (BM).

performed to determine peripheral blood progesterone
levels and BoHV-1 specific antibody titers respectively.

Materials and methods

Evaluation of tissue morphometry

Selection of animals

At 0 h, 24 h, 48 h, 72 h and 96 h of cultivation, explants
of genital tissue were gathered for further analysis.
A thorough morphometrical assessment was performed
by means of light microscopy, transmission electron
microscopy and scanning electron microscopy in an
analogous way as for the previously optimized bovine
respiratory organ culture.

At the slaughterhouse, seven different female slaughter
animals between 3 and 5 years old were selected. Criteria to include the animals in this experiment were
based on both female reproductive hormone level and
BoHV-1 specific serological status. At slaughter, a thorough palpation and visual inspection of the ovaries was
performed to select cows with a clear marked corpus
luteum. Moreover, blood was collected at slaughter. On
all sera, a progesterone determination and a complement-dependent seroneutralization (SN)-test were

Gathering of tissues and preparation of air-liquid
interface organ cultures

From seven different cows, proximal trachea and vestibulum vaginae were collected at the local abattoir immediately after slaughter. A similar set up was used for bovine
respiratory and genital mucosal explants. Briefly, tissues
were immediately placed in phosphate buffered saline
(PBS), supplemented with 1 μg/mL gentamycin (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK), 1 mg/mL streptomycin (Certa, Braine
l’Alleud, Belgium), 1 mg/mL kanamycin (Sigma, St.
Louis, MO, USA), 1000 U/mL penicillin (Continental
Pharma, Puurs, Belgium) and 5 μg/mL fungizone (Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, USA) for transportation to
the laboratory. Respiratory and genital mucosa was
stripped from the underlying layers. Small square tissue
pieces were made and placed on fine-meshed gauze for
culture. The explants were cultivated in serum-free medium (50% DMEM (Invitrogen)/50% Ham’s F-12 GlutaMAX (Invitrogen)) supplemented with 0.1 mg/mL
streptomycin (Certa), 100 U/mL penicillin (Continental
Pharma) and 1 μg/mL gentamycin (Invitrogen) for up to
96 h (37 °C, 5% CO2). Genital tissue from four animals
was used for an extensive morphometry and viability analysis. Both respiratory and genital tissue of three other
cows was used to evaluate BoHV-1 subtype replication
characteristics.
Evaluation of tissue viability

The effect of in vitro cultivation on viability was evaluated using an In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche
Diagnostics Corporation, Basel, Switzerland), based on
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase mediated dUTP
Nick End labeling (TUNEL). The test was performed
according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. The amount
of TUNEL-positive cells was counted from five randomly chosen fields of 100 cells in both epithelium as
well as lamina propria. An analysis was made at 0 h,
24 h, 48 h, 72 h and 96 h of cultivation.

Light microscopy

Fixation of explants was performed at the different time
points by submerging them in a phosphate-buffered
3.5% formaldehyde solution for 24 h. Embedding in

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

paraffin and further processing happened according to
standard methods. As a parameter for the effect of in
vitro culture on the epithelial morphometry, epithelial
thickness was measured by means of a haematoxylineosin staining. At 40×magnification, five randomly
selected places in five randomly chosen fields were measured in each explant. Next, a reticulin staining to evaluate continuity and thickness of the basement membrane
was carried out. Five randomly chosen places in five
randomly chosen zones were measured in each sample.
Finally, the structure of the connective tissue was evaluated by means of a Van Gieson staining. In five randomly chosen fields, the relative amounts of collagen
and nuclei were calculated in a defined region of interest (ROI) by setting a threshold. All measurements and
calculations were performed using the Cell F Software
linked to a BX61 light microscope (Olympus, Hamburg,
Germany) (magnification 40×).
Scanning electron microscopy

After gathering the explants at the defined time points,
fixation of the explants in a HEPES-buffer containing
2% paraformaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde solution
during 24 h was followed by a post-fixation step in an
un-buffered 1% osmium tetroxide solution for 2 h.
Then, the fixed explants were dehydrated through
ascending grades of alcohol and critical point dried with
CO2 (CPD 030, Balzers, Sercolab, Merksem, Belgium),
mounted on metal stubs, platinum-coated (JFC-1300
Autofine Coater, Jeol, Tokyo, Japan) and examined by a
Jeol JSM 5600 LV scanning electron microscope (Jeol).
The integrity of the epithelium was examined using 1
500× and 5 000× magnification.
Transmission electron microscopy

After an overnight fixation step at 4 °C in Karnovsky’s
fixative (2% paraformaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde
in 0.2 M sodium cacodylate buffer pH 7.4), the explants
were rinsed in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer pH 7.4 for
8 h. Next, an overnight post-fixation step in 2% osmium
tetroxide at 4 °C was performed. Further, the tissues were
dehydrated stepwise in ascending grades of alcohol
before they were embedded in a low viscosity embedding
(LVR) medium (Agar Scientific ltd., Stansted, Essex, UK).
Finally, ultrathin sections of embedded material were cut,
using a diamond knife on an Ultramicrotome Ultracut
EM UC6 (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Afterwards, a Leica Microsystems EM staining was performed
and samples were analyzed on a JEM-1010 transmission
electron microscope (Jeol) operating at 60 kV.

Page 3 of 11

1972 from an IBR-case in the Netherlands [20,21]. The
prototype 1.2 strain K22 is typed as a subtype 1.2b [9].
This isolate was obtained from an IPV outbreak in New
York [4]. The Schönböken isolate is designated as a
BoHV-1.2a subtype and was isolated in Germany
[22,23]. All strains obtained were from unknown passages. From each of them, a second passage was produced and utilized in our laboratory.
After 24 h of cultivation, explants were inoculated with
the different strains. The explants were taken from their
gauze and placed in a 24-well plate after rinsing with
warm medium. In each well, 1 mL of virus-containing
medium (107 TCID 50 /mL) was added. The submerged
explants were incubated for 1 h (37 °C, 5% CO2). Before
the tissues were placed back again on their gauze, they
were thoroughly washed. In that way, different explants,
both proximal trachea and vestibulum vaginae from the
same animal were infected with the different strains.
Samples were collected at 0 h, 24 h, 48 h and 72 h pi. At
every time point, 2 respiratory and 2 genital explants
from each animal for each strain were collected. Finally,
all gathered explants were embedded in a cryoprotection
medium (Methocel®, Fluka (Sigma)) and frozen at -70 °C.
Evaluation of BoHV-1 subtype kinetics

From all collected samples, cryosections were produced,
fixed in methanol (-20 °C, 100%) and kept at -20 °C until
staining. An immunofluorescence staining was performed
to evaluate plaque latitude and plaque penetration depth
underneath the BM. Firstly, to stain the BM, mouse anticollagen VII antibodies (Sigma) and goat anti-mouse
Texas Red® (Molecular Probes (Invitrogen)) were used.
Next, an FITC ®-labeled goat anti-IBR polyclonal antiserum (VMRD, Pullman, WA, USA) directed against
viral proteins was applied. Mounted samples were analyzed by means of a confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP2
confocal microscope). Using the software program ImageJ, dissemination characteristics were monitored.
Statistical analysis

The data obtained were assessed using SPSS software
(ANOVA) to evaluate the variance. The results shown
represent means + standard deviation of quadruple and
triple independent experiments of respectively viability/
morphometry analysis and analysis of viral subtype
replication characteristics. The results with P values of
≤ 0.05 were considered significant.

Results
Inoculation of explants with different BoHV-1 subtypes

Progesterone determination and Sn-test

Different strains were used, representing the known different genotypes of BoHV-1. The Cooper strain, which
is considered as the prototype 1.1 subtype, was isolated
in Colorado [5]. Another 1.1 strain, Lam, was isolated in

All animals included in the experiment had a peripheral
blood progesterone (P4) level of > 1 ng/mL, suggesting
they were in the luteal phase of the reproductive cycle.
Three animals showing an Sn-titer of < 2 for BoHV-1

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

Page 4 of 11

specific antibodies were selected for the study of BoHV1 subtype dissemination characteristics. The four other
animals were used for a thorough morphometry and viability analysis. The latter animals had an Sn-titer ranging
from 2 to 96.

intercellular spaces were observed between some basal
cells (Figure 2f). Remarkably, large apical electronlucent cells randomly spread across the epithelium,
were observed starting from time point 0 h of cultivation. Conservation of microvilli at 0 h, 24 h, 48 h, 72 h
and 96 h of cultivation was noticed.

Tissue viability

We saw no major differences in the occurrence of apoptosis in the epithelium with increasing times of in vitro
culture. However, a small significant increase in apoptotic epithelial cells was observed at 96 h of cultivation.
For the connective tissue, we noticed a small increase in
the occurrence of apoptosis during culture time (to
7.7 ± 2.7 at 96 h). Values of the effect of in vitro culture
on the viability of bovine genital mucosa explants are
given in Table 1.
Morphometry of the epithelium
Light microscopy

No significant changes were noticed in the epithelial
thickness of the vestibulum vaginae measured during
cultivation. A clear non-keratinized stratified squamous
epithelium was visible for all samples (Figure 1a-b).
However, for all cows, a few zones containing a stratified columnar to stratified cuboidal epithelium were
observed. Moreover, one cow (1.03 ng/mL P4 level)
showed especially at 0 h of cultivation some columnar
to cuboidal cells in the stratified columnar to cuboidal
epithelial zones containing a strong periodic acid +
Schiff (PAS) positive substance (Figure 1c-d).
Scanning electron microscopy

The evaluation of epithelial integrity by scanning the
surface of the epithelium showed no significant changes
in epithelial morphology during in vitro culture for up
to 96 h. Surface cells had an irregular pavement-like
appearance (Figure 2a-b). Moreover, on the surface
secretory blebs were visible. All epithelial cells contained
stubby microvilli and at the cell borders, clear microridges were visible (Figure 2c). These cell surface structures could be maintained at all time points.
Transmission electron microscopy

Overall integrity was evaluated by means of transmission electron microscopy. The epithelial structure was
maintained during the entire cultivation period (96 h)
(Figure 2d-e). Starting from 0 h of cultivation, small

Morphometry of the basement membrane
Light microscopy

After analysis of the reticulin stained sections, significant
changes were not observed regarding the thickness of
the lamina reticularis during in vitro culture (Figure 3a).
Transmission electron microscopy

The continuity and integrity of the lamina densa of the
basement membrane were evaluated by means of transmission electron microscopy. During the 96 h of in vitro
cultivation, no significant changes in lamina densa continuity and integrity were found (Figure 3b-c).
Morphometry of the connective tissue

Using a Van Gieson staining, no significant changes
were noticed in relative percentage of collagen and
nuclei in the connective tissue with increasing time after
sampling (Figure 4).
BoHV-1 subtype kinetics

Individual plaques were visible starting from 24 h pi for
all strains in all tissues. All different BoHV-1 subtypes
were found to spread in a plaquewise manner in both
the respiratory and genital mucosa derived from three
animals. The analysis of plaque latitude and penetration
depth underneath the BM was performed at different
time points pi for all BoHV-1 subtypes on proximal trachea and vestibulum vaginae (Figure 5).
Plaque latitude

Individual plaque measurement was performed at 0 h,
24 h, 48 h and 72 h pi (Figure 6a).
In relation to time At 0 h pi, no viral plaques were visible. A significant increase in plaque latitude was
observed between 0 h, 24 h, 48 h and 72 h for all strains
on the different tissues.
In relation to tissue Interestingly, we observed a significant difference in plaque latitude between proximal trachea and vestibulum vaginae at 24 h pi. This was
noticed for all different BoHV-1 subtypes. Lateral spread

Table 1 Percentage of TUNEL-positive cells in epithelium and lamina propria as a parameter for the effect of in vitro
culture on the viability of bovine genital mucosa explants
% of TUNEL-positive cells at ... h of cultivation
0

Values are given as means ± SD.

48

72

96

Epithelium

0.3 ± 0.1

0.4 ± 0.3

0.8 ± 0.4

0.3 ± 0.2

1.5 ± 0.5

Lamina propria

Vestibulum Vaginae

24

0.9 ± 0.4

3.2 ± 1.5

4.8 ± 3.2

5.8 ± 4.5

7.7 ± 2.7

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

Page 5 of 11

Figure 1 Photomicrographs of bovine stratified squamous epithelium lining the vestibulum vaginae at 0 h (a) and 96 h (b) of in vitro
cultivation (end of experiment) (HE-staining). One cow showed zones containing an active mucus-secreting (PAS +) stratified columnar to
cuboidal epithelium, prominent at 0 h of in vitro cultivation. This active epithelium is shown in c (HE-staining) and d (PAS-staining).

was more clear in vestibulum vaginae compared to the
proximal trachea. At 48 h pi, the Lam and Schönböken
strain still exhibited a higher dissemination capacity in
the epithelium of the vagina compared to the trachea
whereas Cooper and K22 did not. All strains no longer
showed a significant difference in plaque latitude when
comparing proximal trachea and vestibulum vaginae at
72 h pi (Figure 6a).
In relation to strain When comparing the strains, no
significant differences between the subtypes could be
observed at 0 h, 24 h, 48 h and 72 h pi. All did exhibit a
higher average plaque latitude at 24 h pi in vestibulum
vaginae compared to proximal trachea (Figures 5-6a).
Plaque penetration depth underneath the BM

The average invasion depth of different BoHV-1 subtypes was measured at 0 h, 24 h, 48 h and 72 h pi
(Figure 6b).
In relation to time At 0 h pi, no vertical spread was
observed for all different BoHV-1 subtypes in both
proximal trachea and vestibulum vaginae. All strains
included showed an increase in plaque penetration

depth between 0 h, 24 h, 48 h and 72 h pi in proximal
trachea and vestibulum vaginae. This increase was significant for all strains on all tissues between 48 h and
72 h pi.
In relation to tissue Both respiratory strains Cooper and
Lam showed a clear advantage on proximal trachea compared to the vestibulum vaginae. The average invasion
depth was significantly higher in respiratory tissue than
in genital tissue and this at 24 h (Lam en Cooper) and
48 h (Cooper) pi. Interestingly, for both designated genital 1.2-strains Schönböken and K22, we did not see a significant difference when comparing both target tissues.
However, we must mention that for both genital strains
at 24 h pi, not one plaque crossed the BM in the genital
tract whereas some plaques did in the respiratory tract.
At 48 h (except Cooper) and 72 h pi, no significant differences were found when comparing all strains on proximal trachea and vestibulum vaginae (Figures 5-6b).
In relation to strain We observed no significant differences amongst strains at 0 h, 24 h, 48 h and 72 h pi.
The penetration depth of the Cooper strain in the

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

Page 6 of 11

Figure 2 Scanning electron and transmission electron microscopical images of bovine vaginal epithelium. Pavement-like cells containing
microvilli were seen at all time points (0 h-96 h) of in vitro culture when evaluating the epithelial surface by means of scanning electron
microscopy (a-b). Cells are aligned with clear microridges (c, indicated by white arrows). Epithelial integrity and structure was maintained at all
time points (0 h-96 h) as seen with transmission electron microscopy (d-e). Starting from 0 h of cultivation, small intercellular spaces between
basal cells were observed (f, indicated by black arrows). The dotted line represents the basement membrane (BM).

proximal trachea was significantly higher than the penetration depth of the Schönböken strain in the proximal
trachea only at 24 h pi.

Discussion
In this study, we developed and utilized bovine respiratory and genital organ culture systems to reconstruct
key elements in BoHV-1 mucosal invasion and moreover, to shed some light on the current classification of
different BoHV-1 subtypes with particular tropisms.
Because of their in vivo relevance, these in vitro models
are highly appreciated since laboratory animal use is
diminished and confounding factors such as individual
animal variation and environmental factors are excluded.
Therein lies their strength, when comparing an array of
strains/subtypes on viral behavior at mucosal entry
ports. Until now, organ cultures of bovine vestibulum
vaginae have not been described.

The first part of the current study consisted of the
development of an organ culture of bovine vestibulum
vaginae. Some interesting facts were seen when evaluating tissue morphology. One cow showed highly active
columnar to cuboidal cells in the stratified columnar to
cuboidal epithelial zones containing a PAS positive substance. It is noteworthy that at the time of sampling, this
cow was in a transition phase of the reproductive cycle
namely from a progesterone to an estrogen dominance
or vice versa (P4 1.03 ng/mL), this mucin production
might be an outcome of estrogen influence on the epithelium [24]. These hormone-related findings are important
since herpesvirus infections at the genital site are known
to be influenced by reproductive hormone levels [25].
Starting from 0 h of cultivation, few intercellular spaces
were visible between basal cells of the epithelium. We
made the same observations when establishing the bovine
respiratory mucosa explant model [19]. When using

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

Page 7 of 11

Figure 3 Evaluation of basement membrane (lamina densa and lamina reticularis) continuity and thickness by means of transmission
electron microscopy and light microscopy (reticulin staining). Average thickness of the lamina reticularis was monitored throughout in vitro
culture (a, black arrows indicate lamina reticularis). No significant changes were observed in lamina reticularis thickness when analyzing reticulin
stainings. The lamina densa remained continuous at all time during the entire cultivation period (up to 96 h) as shown by the transmission
electron microscopical images (b-c, black arrows indicate lamina densa). Data are represented as means + SD (error bars).

transmission electron microscopy, salient large electronlucent apical cells, randomly spread across the epithelium
starting from 0 h of cultivation, were noticed. Regli and
Kress saw similar cells in the vaginal epithelium of the
marsupial Monodelphis domestica, describing the
remarkable fact as cells damaged by the previous desquamation process or not yet differentiated cells [26]. However, no significant changes in the number of these
particular cells were found throughout cultivation. At
96 h of cultivation, we observed a small increase in the
number of apoptotic epithelial cells together with an
increase in apoptotic lamina propria cells as culture time
passed by. An analogous trend was seen in the viability
assessment of upper respiratory tract cultured tissues
[19]. Overall, we can state that the newly developed
organ culture of bovine vestibulum vaginae was successfully maintained for at least 96 h in culture at air-liquid
interface without demonstrable changes in tissue architecture or viability.

In the second part of the study, bovine respiratory and
genital mucosa explants from the same animals were
inoculated with several BoHV-1 subtypes. We clearly
saw that both respiratory and genital mucosa are susceptible to infection with all different BoHV-1 subtypes.
This dual tropism is also seen in closely related animal
alphaherpesviruses with either emphasis on the genital
tract such as Caprine herpesvirus type 1 and Cervid herpesvirus type 2; or on the respiratory tract such as Cervid herpesvirus type 1 and Suid herpesvirus type 1 (PrV)
[27-31]. However, subdivision into different subtypes of
the latter viruses never was an issue. Moreover, comparison of the DNA sequences of different BoHV-1 subtypes is generally accepted to show at least 95%
homology [32,33]. This percentage is analogous among
some strains of other herpesviruses such as PrV. Pair
wise analysis of full genome DNA sequence comparisons
of different strains of PrV has been performed before
[34]; some strains did exhibit a degree of divergence of

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

Page 8 of 11

Figure 4 Average percentages of collagen and cells were measured in the connective tissue and assessed on conservation throughout
cultivation (up to 96 h) using Van Gieson stainings. By giving different colors to collagen and nuclei (setting a threshold), relative amounts of
collagen and nuclei were measured within a region of interested (roi) (roi is indicated by a rectangle). Representation of the data is visualized as
means + SD (error bars).

Figure 5 Confocal fluorescent images of bovine respiratory (a) and genital (b) mucosa explants inoculated with different BoHV-1
subtypes at 24 h pi (left side) and 72 h pi (right side). Viral antigen is colored with an FITC®- labeled goat anti-IBR polyclonal antiserum.
Collagen VII is marked with mouse anti-collagen VII and goat anti-mouse Texas Red® antibodies.

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

Page 9 of 11

Figure 6 Replication characteristics of different BoHV-1 subtypes in respiratory and genital tissues derived from the same animals.
Evolution of plaque latitude (a) and plaque penetration depth underneath the basement membrane (BM) (b) was evaluated at 0 h, 24 h, 48 h
and 72 h pi. Data are given as means + SD (error bars). Significant differences between respiratory and genital tissue are indicated by means of
asterisks.

around 5%, which is similar when comparing BoHV-1
subtypes 1.1 and 1.2.
Next, a thorough analysis on the dissemination characteristics of different BoHV-1 subtypes on both respiratory
and genital mucosa divulged important information on
the current phylogenetic classification. Looking at average plaque penetration depth, key findings were twofold.
Firstly, the so called respiratory subtypes Cooper and
Lam invaded significantly deeper in respiratory tissue
compared to genital tissue at 24 h and 48 h pi. However,
secondly, in general all BoHV-1 subtypes exhibited a
more profound invasion capacity in respiratory tissue
compared to that in genital tissue at 24 h pi. It is known
that massive accumulation of neutrophils and activation
of macrophages reach peaks between 24-48 h post
BoHV-1 infection [35]. Thus, the latter findings clearly
demonstrate the outright advantage of all subtypes when
invading respiratory tissues in pathogenesis. Caprine herpesvirus type 1, which is responsible for genital and

respiratory disease in goats, shows a similar advantage on
the respiratory tract. In general, infection by the genital
route is often locally confined while the virus can spread
by viremia after respiratory infection [30]. The observed
rapid spread through the BM towards blood vessels in
respiratory tissues and the avoidance of the local immunity peak, might be an explanation why BoHV-1-induced
abortion is mainly seen after a respiratory infection [1].
Concerning average plaque latitude, all strains replicated
to a similar extent in epithelial cells. It is noteworthy that
at 24 h pi, plaque latitude was found to be higher in genital tissue compared to respiratory tissue and this for all
subtypes. This higher plaque latitude in the genital tract
may be a compensation of the virus for the hampered
spread into the depth compared to respiratory tissue, as
mentioned above. Differences in BoHV-1 spread between
upper respiratory and genital tissues could potentially be
related to differences in apoptosis during cultivation of
these different tissues. The only differences observed in

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

BoHV-1 subtype replication characteristics in the different tissues were noticed at 24 h pi. However, at this point
(48 h of cultivation), we see very little, if any, differences
in the occurrence of apoptosis between the upper
respiratory and genital tract. For this, we conclude that
the small increase in apoptotic cells throughout cultivation is likely negligible for the replication characteristics
of BoHV-1 strains.
Our findings are in line with the vision of McKercher.
He believes that virulent respiratory strains arose out of
the less virulent genital strains and that in general the
virus may be limited in invasion capacity due to biochemical and physiological characteristics of the vagina
with emphasis on barrier function [6,7].
We can conclude that the respiratory and genital
organ culture is suitable to study BoHV-1 invasion at
primary entry ports and that they can be extrapolated to
other species and viruses. Taken together, our findings
and the existing knowledge on BoHV-1 classification,
clearly take the edge off the belief of the existence of
specific mucosa tropisms of different BoHV-1 subtypes
and make the phylogenetic BoHV-1 subdivision rather
farfetched. The question arises whether this could be
a difference in virulence between strains, as seen in
all other viruses, rather than a difference in mucosa
tropism?
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by a Ph.D. grant of the Agency for Innovation by
Science and Technology (IWT). The authors would like to express their
gratitude to L De Bels, L Pieters and L Standaert for their aid in preparing all
the morphological samples. M Bauwens is acknowledged for performing Sntests. Special thanks go to Prof. Dr Etienne Thiry and Dr Günther Keil for
providing different BoHV-1 subtypes.

Page 10 of 11

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
Author details
1
Laboratory of Virology, Department of Virology, Parasitology and
Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Salisburylaan
133, B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium. 2Department of Morphology, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Salisburylaan 133, B-9820 Merelbeke,
Belgium.
Authors’ contributions
LS set up the study design, carried out the optimization of the organ culture
as well as the infection experiments and the processing of all samples,
performed the statistical analysis and drafted the manuscript. APV assisted in
the set up of both experiments and sampling. WVdB participated in the
analysis and the interpretation of all the morphological results. SG took part
in the design of the study and critically analyzed all the results. HJN
coordinated the study and participated in its design. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 24 November 2010 Accepted: 15 February 2011
Published: 15 February 2011

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.
24.

References
1. Muylkens B, Thiry J, Kirten P, Schynts F, Thiry E: Bovine herpesvirus 1
infection and infectious bovine rhinotracheitis. Vet Res 2007, 38:181-209.

Gillespie JH, McEntee K, Kendrick JW, Wagner WC: Comparison of
infectious pustular vulvovaginitis virus with infectious bovine
rhinotracheitis virus. Cornell Vet 1959, 49:288-297.
Madin SH, Mckercher DG, York CJ: Isolation of the infectious bovine
rhinotracheitis virus. Science 1956, 124:721-722.
Kendrick JW, Gillespie JH, McEntee K: Infectious pustular vulvovaginitis of
cattle. Cornell Vet 1958, 48:458-495.
York CJ, Schwarz AJ, Estela LA: Isolation and identification of infectious
bovine rhinotracheitis virus in tissue culture. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1957,
94:740-744.
House JA: Bovine herpesvirus IBR-IPV. Strain differences. Cornell Vet 1972,
62:431-453.
Mckercher DG: Studies of the etiologic agents of infectious bovine
rhinotracheitis and Blaschenausschlag (coital vesicular exanthema). Am J
Vet Res 1963, 24:501-509.
Smith GA, Young PL, Reed KC: Emergence of a new bovine herpesvirus 1
strain in Australian feedlots. Arch Virol 1995, 140:599-603.
Mayfield JE, Good PJ, VanOort HJ, Campbell AR, Reed DE: Cloning and
cleavage site mapping of DNA from bovine herpesvirus 1 (Cooper
strain). J Virol 1983, 47:259-264.
Metzler AE, Matile H, Gassmann U, Engels M, Wyler R: European isolates of bovine
herpesvirus 1: a comparison of restriction endonuclease sites, polypeptides,
and reactivity with monoclonal antibodies. Arch Virol 1985, 85:57-69.
Misra V, Babiuk LA, Darcel CL: Analysis of bovine herpes virus-type 1
isolates by restriction endonuclease fingerprinting. Arch Virol 1983,
76:341-354.
Collins JK, Ayers VK, Whetstone CA, van Drunen Little-van den Hurk S:
Antigenic differences between the major glycoproteins of bovine
herpesvirus type 1.1 and bovine encephalitis herpesvirus type 1.3. J Gen
Virol 1993, 74:1509-1517.
Metzler AE, Schudel AA, Engels M: Bovine herpesvirus 1: molecular and
antigenic characteristics of variant viruses isolated from calves with
neurological disease. Arch Virol 1986, 87:205-217.
Spilki FR, Esteves PA, de Lima M, Franco AC, Chiminazzo C, Flores EF,
Weiblen R, Driemeier D, Roehe PM: Comparative pathogenicity of bovine
herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) subtypes 1 (BHV-1.1) and 2a (BHV-1.2a). Pesq Vet
Bras 2004, 24:43-49.
Christensen LS, Madsen KG, Nylin B, Rønsholt L: A contribution to the
systematization of bovine herpesvirus 1 based on genomic mapping by
restriction fragment pattern analysis. Virus Res 1996, 46:177-182.
D’Arce RC, Almeida RS, Silva TC, Franco AC, Spilki F, Roehe PM, Arns CW:
Restriction endonuclease and monoclonal antibody analysis of Brazilian
isolates of bovine herpesviruses types 1 and 5. Vet Mircrobiol 2002,
88:315-324.
Magyar G, Tanyi J, Hornyák A, Bartha A: Restriction endonuclease analysis
of Hungarian bovine herpesvirus isolates from different clinical forms of
IBR, IPV and encephalitis. Acta Vet Hung 1993, 41:159-170.
Morozov IA, Shuliak AF, Artiushin SK, Koromyslov GF: Differentiation of
strains of bovine infectious rhinotracheitis virus using restriction
analysis. Mol Gen Mikrobiol Virusol 1991, 4:29-32, (article in Russian).
Steukers L, Vandekerckhove AP, Van den Broeck W, Glorieux S,
Nauwynck HJ: Kinetics of BoHV-1 dissemination in an in vitro culture of
bovine upper respiratory tract mucosa explants. ILAR e-J .
Esteves PA, Dellagostin OA, Pinto LS, Silva AD, Spilki FR, Ciacci-Zanella JR,
Hübner SO, Puentes R, Maisonnave J, Franco AC, Rijsewijk FAM,
Batista HBCR, Teixeira TF, Dezen D, Oliveira AP, David C, Arns CW,
Roehe PM: Phylogenetic comparison of the carboxy-terminal region of
glycoprotein C (gC) of bovine herpesviruses (BoHV) 1.1., 1.2 and 5 from
South America (SA). Virus Res 2008, 131:16-22.
Van Engelenburg FA, Kaashoek MJ, Rijsewijk FA, van den Burg L,
Moerman A, Gielkens AL, van Oirschot JT: A glycoprotein E deletion
mutant of bovine herpesvirus 1 is avirulent in claves. J Gen Virol 1994,
75:2311-2318.
Engelhardt T, Keil GM: Identification and characterization of the bovine
herpesvirus 5 US4 gene and gene products. Virology 1996, 225:126-135.
Keil GM, Engelhardt T, Karger A, Enz M: Bovine herpesvirus 1 US open
reading frame 4 encodes a glycoproteoglycan. J Virol 1996, 70:3032-3038.
Miroud K, Noakes DE: Histological changes in the vaginal mucosa of the
cow during the oestrous cycle, after ovariectomy and following
exogenous oestradiol benzoate and progesterone treatment. Br Vet J
1991, 147:469-477.

Steukers et al. Veterinary Research 2011, 42:33
http://www.veterinaryresearch.org/content/42/1/33

Page 11 of 11

25. Kaushic C, Ashkar AA, Reid LA, Rosenthal KL: Progesterone increases
susceptibility and decreases immune responses to genital herpes
infection. J Virol 2003, 77:4558-4565.
26. Regli C, Kress A: Changes in the epithelium of the vaginal complex
during the estrous cycle of the marsupial Monodelphis domestica. Cells
Tissues Organs 2002, 172:276-296.
27. Das Neves CG, Mørk T, Godfroid J, Sørensen KK, Breines E, Hareide E, Thiry J,
Rimstad E, Thiry E, Tryland M: Experimental infection of reindeer with
cervid herpesvirus 2. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2009, 16:1758-1765.
28. Miry C, Pensaert MB: Sites of replication in the genital organs of boars
inoculated in the cavum vaginale with pseudorabies virus. Am J Vet Res
1989, 50:345-348.
29. Romero CH, Meade P, Santagata J, Gillis K, Lollis G, Hahn EC, Gibbs EP:
Genital infection and transmission of pseudorabies virus in feral swine
in Florida, USA. Vet Microbiol 1997, 55:131-139.
30. Tarsitano E, Camero M, Bellacicco AL, Decaro N, Martella V, Buonavoglia C,
Tempesta M: Glycoprotein C gene of caprine herpesvirus type 1 contains
short sequence repeats (SSR). Open Virol J 2010, 25:85-87.
31. Thiry J, Keuser V, Muylkens B, Meurens F, Gogev S, Vanderplasschen A,
Thiry E: Ruminant Alphaherpesviruses related to bovine herpesvirus 1.
Vet Res 2006, 37:169-190.
32. Engels M, Giuliani C, Wild P, Beck TM, Loepfe E, Wyler R: The genome of
bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) strains exhibiting a neuropathogenic
potential compared to known BHV-1 strains by restriction site mapping
and cross-hybridization. Virus Res 1986, 6:57-73.
33. Seal BS, St Jeor SC, Lee Tayler RE: Restriction endonuclease analysis of
bovine herpesvirus 1 DNA and nucleic acid homology between isolates.
J Gen Virol 1985, 66:2787-2792.
34. Klupp BG, Hengartner CJ, Mettenleiter TC, Enquist LW: Complete,
annotated sequence of the pseudorabies virus genome. J Virol 2004,
78:424-440.
35. Hipíková V, Mojzisová J, Bajová V, Takácová D, Strojný L: Evaluation of
indicators of cellular immunity in experimental infectious bovine
rhinotracheitis virus infection in calves treated with glucan. Vet Med
(Praha) 1993, 38:385-394, (article in Slovak).
doi:10.1186/1297-9716-42-33
Cite this article as: Steukers et al.: Comparative analysis of replication
characteristics of BoHV-1 subtypes in bovine respiratory and genital
mucosa explants: a phylogenetic enlightenment. Veterinary Research 2011
42:33.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
