<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Motion dazzle and camouflage as distinct anti-predator defenses</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2011, 9:81. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-81"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Martin Stevens"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Motion dazzle and camouflage as distinct antipredator defenses
Martin Stevens1*, W Tom L Searle1, Jenny E Seymour1, Kate LA Marshall1 and Graeme D Ruxton2

Abstract
Background: Camouflage patterns that hinder detection and/or recognition by antagonists are widely studied in
both human and animal contexts. Patterns of contrasting stripes that purportedly degrade an observer’s ability to
judge the speed and direction of moving prey (’motion dazzle’) are, however, rarely investigated. This is despite
motion dazzle having been fundamental to the appearance of warships in both world wars and often postulated
as the selective agent leading to repeated patterns on many animals (such as zebra and many fish, snake, and
invertebrate species). Such patterns often appear conspicuous, suggesting that protection while moving by motion
dazzle might impair camouflage when stationary. However, the relationship between motion dazzle and
camouflage is unclear because disruptive camouflage relies on high-contrast markings. In this study, we used a
computer game with human subjects detecting and capturing either moving or stationary targets with different
patterns, in order to provide the first empirical exploration of the interaction of these two protective coloration
mechanisms.
Results: Moving targets with stripes were caught significantly less often and missed more often than targets with
camouflage patterns. However, when stationary, targets with camouflage markings were captured less often and
caused more false detections than those with striped patterns, which were readily detected.
Conclusions: Our study provides the clearest evidence to date that some patterns inhibit the capture of moving
targets, but that camouflage and motion dazzle are not complementary strategies. Therefore, the specific
coloration that evolves in animals will depend on how the life history and ontogeny of each species influence the
trade-off between the costs and benefits of motion dazzle and camouflage.

Background
Across the animal kingdom, risk of predation has led to
the evolution of anti-predator defenses. Of these, defensive coloration (including camouflage, startle displays,
warning signals, and mimicry) is widespread [1-3].
Recently, the study of camouflage in particular has seen
a resurgence across a wide range of disciplines [3].
Recent experiments have shown that disruptive coloration, involving high-contrast markings that break up the
body outline and shape, is an effective method of concealment over and above simply matching the background [4-8]. However, despite recent significant
advances, two major gaps in our understanding of
camouflage exist.
* Correspondence: ms726@cam.ac.uk
1
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

First, it remains controversial whether some animal
markings can inhibit the predator’s judgment of the
speed and trajectory of a moving prey animal and thus
inhibit capture, a phenomenon termed ‘motion dazzle’
[9,10]. Such markings are thought to include the highcontrast bands, stripes, and zig-zag markings common
in snakes, fish, mammals (for example, zebra), and various invertebrates (for example, fast-flying butterflies).
To date, only three studies have investigated motion
dazzle. Our previous study [11] used a computer game,
in which human subjects had to capture moving prey
with different markings. This study found that while an
unpatterned target matching the background luminance
was hardest to capture, targets with certain striped and
zig-zag markings made capture more difficult compared
with uniform conspicuous targets. However, although
these results are suggestive, the study used a limited
number of striped patterns, and did not compare these

© 2011 Stevens et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

with other arrangements, such as camouflage markings.
Thus, it remains unclear whether patterning itself can
interfere with motion perception, or whether specific
marking arrangements are needed for this. A second
experiment [12] investigated markings expressed by the
cuttlefish, Sepia officinalis, when stationary and when
moving. They found that cuttlefish adopted low-contrast
markings when moving, implying that high-contrast patterns might actually facilitate capture. Third, a recent
psychophysical experiment [13] investigated how different types of markings (similar to those used in our previous study [11]) could affect speed perception in
human participants who had to choose which of two stimuli moved more quickly. The researchers found evidence that markings can affect speed perception, but
unlike in [11], they did not have an unmarked camouflage control with which to compare the markings. In
addition, their study was designed to test potential
effects of dazzle coloration in human conflict, such as a
combatant throwing a grenade at a moving vehicle,
rather than in nature. Despite the above limitations,
these studies provide initial evidence that motion dazzle
could work, and high-contrast dazzle markings were
once common during wartime on ships, mainly in an
attempt to hinder targeting by enemy submarines [14].
In addition, analyses of snake markings indicate an association between marking type and movement patterns
[15-17], implying that dazzle coloration may exist in
nature.
Second, we currently have little understanding of how
different types of anti-predator coloration relate to each
other [9]. Theory predicts that disruptive coloration
should be most effective when comprising high-contrast
markings [1,18]. This prediction is supported by some
recent work [4], provided that pattern contrast does not
exceed that found in the background [5,8]. High contrast is also often believed to be used in motion dazzle,
potentially affording a dual benefit for some pattern
types, being effective for both motion dazzle and disruptive camouflage [18]. However, human psychophysical
experiments indicate that low contrast makes objects
appear to move more slowly [19-22], causing underestimates of motion. In some cases, low-contrast gratings
appear to move up to 50% more slowly than high-contrast equivalents moving at the same speed [21]. To
date, no experiments have tested the role of contrast in
motion dazzle or in a prey-capture style task.
In this paper, we present experiments using human
subjects attempting to capture artificial computer ‘prey’
(as in our previous study [11]) with different markings
and contrast. We tested capture success (number of targets caught and the number of missed attempts) using
prey with dazzle coloration (stripes), camouflage markings that were either background matching (where the

Page 2 of 11

markings were a random sample of the background, but
with the stipulation that no markings touched the body
edge, as in [4]), or disruptive coloration (where the
markings were a sample of the background with at least
some pattern components touching the body edge [4]),
and unpatterned targets (camouflage gray and conspicuous white). Experiments were conducted on both moving and stationary targets. We tested (i) if some specific
pattern arrangements inhibit successful capture when
moving, (ii) the role of contrast in motion dazzle, and
(iii) whether some pattern types could offer dual protection, that is, camouflage when stationary, and of motion
dazzle when moving.

Results
The role of pattern in motion dazzle

Experiment 1 tested how capture success of moving targets was influenced by pattern type (Figure 1; see Methods). Based on previous work [11], we predicted that
uniform gray (G), striped (S), and interval-striped (IS)
targets would be difficult to capture, and that the uniform white (W) would be captured with relative ease. In
addition, we also explored how background matching
(B) and disruptive camouflage (D) patterns affected capture success (see Figure 1 for images of the different target types).
For all experiments, we recorded the number of prey
items of a given type captured per minute (’hits’), and
the number of times that a subject attempted to capture
a moving target but missed in their attack and touched
the background part of the screen instead (’misses’; see
Methods). Participants were presented with six one-minute trials, one for each prey type (with presentation
order balanced across all subjects; see Methods).
For experiment 1, capture success (hits) data showed
that there was a significant effect of treatment (that is,
of prey type: F(5, 359) = 10.53, P < 0.001; see Figure 1).
We used planned contrasts whenever possible in our
analysis because these are more powerful than using a
series of unplanned post hoc comparisons or simply
comparing confidence intervals. These showed that the
conspicuous uniform white target was caught more
often than the other treatments (F(1) = 38.43, P < 0.001),
and the uniform gray target was caught less often than
the aggregate of the patterned prey (F(1) = 13.12, P <
0.001). Targets with stripes were caught less often than
the camouflage (disruptive and background matching)
targets (F(1) = 8.37, P = 0.004). There was no difference
in capture success between the banded and intervalstriped targets (F(1) = 0.01, P = 0.928), or between the
background matching and disruptive targets (F (1) <
0.001, P = 0.967).
Unlike our previous study [11], we were also able to
record how many unsuccessful (missed) capture

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

Page 3 of 11

Figure 1 Stimuli used in experiments 1 and 2, and results. Top panels: stimuli and an example background used in experiment 1 and 2.
Target types had: black and white stripes (S), interval stripes of gray, white, and black (IS), uniform camouflage gray (G), uniform conspicuous
white (W), background matching (B), and disruptive (D) coloration (see main text for details). All target types except W have the same average
luminance as the background. Middle and lower panels: the mean number (plus 95% confidence interval (CI)) of successful captures (left panels)
and missed attempts (right panels) of the different target types in experiment 1 (moving targets), and medians (plus interquartile range (IQR)) for
experiment 2 (stationary targets).

attempts each subject made for a given prey type. There
was a non-significant trend for a difference between the
treatments (F(5, 359) = 2.06, P = 0.070). Planned comparisons showed that the uniform gray targets were missed
more often than the patterned target types (F(1) = 4.22,
P = 0.042), and the targets with stripes were missed
more often than the camouflaged targets (F(1) = 8.05, P
= 0.005). There was no significant difference in misses
between the white target and all other prey types (F(1) =
0.71, P = 0.399), between the disruptive and background
matching targets (F(1) = 0.26, P = 0.610), or between the
prey with interval stripes and those with banding (F(1) =
0.24, P = 0.627) (Figure 1). Therefore, overall, the

uniform gray and dazzle targets were caught less often
and missed more often than the other target types.
The role of pattern in preventing detection and capture
when stationary

Experiment 2 tested the ability of participants to detect
(and therefore capture) stationary prey of the same
treatments used in experiment 1. In this experiment
(and experiment 4) capture success (hits) corresponded
to when a subject successfully located and touched the
target. The misses (or false detections) data corresponded to when a person misidentified part of the
screen as a target when the target was in fact elsewhere,

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

and consequently they touched the wrong location on
the screen. Therefore, in the stationary experiments, the
results correspond more to signal-detection theory,
where subjects can correctly detect and attack a target;
not detect a target; or erroneously ‘detect’ a target and
attack part of the background. We predicted that the
camouflage (background matching and disruptive) targets would have low capture rates, whereas the conspicuous white targets would be detected easily. The
uniform gray target might have intermediate protection,
because it matched the overall luminance of the background, but lacked the background patterns. The regular
high-contrast patterns of the striped prey might either
make them conspicuous, or act in disruptive
camouflage.
There was a significant effect of treatment on capture
(detection) success (S(5) = 86.87, P < 0.001; Figure 1).
The white target was caught more often than the
banded target (S(1) = 16.00, P < 0.001), the banded target was caught more often than the target with interval
stripes (S(1) = 14.22, P < 0.001), the interval-striped target was caught more often than the uniform gray target
(S(1) = 18.00, P < 0.001), and the gray target was caught
more often than the background matching target (S(1) =
18.00, P < 0.001). There was no difference between the
background matching and disruptive targets (S(1) < 0.01,
P = 1.000).
There was a significant difference between the treatments for the number of times targets were missed (S(5)
= 17.16, P = 0.004; Figure 1). The gray target was
missed less often than each of the disruptive (S (1) =
9.00, P = 0.003), background matching (S(1) = 7.12, P =
0.008), and white targets (S(1) = 6.25, P = 0.012). There
were non-significant trends (using sequential Bonferroni
critical P-value threshold adjustment; see Methods)
between the banded and gray targets (S(1) = 4.57, P =
0.033), and between the white and interval-striped targets (S(1) = 3.56, P = 0.059). The low number of misses
of the gray compared with the camouflaged targets was
probably because patches of the background were unlikely to be misidentified as this target type because of its
uniform block of color. The relatively high number of
misses for the white target may be because it was so
easy to detect that subjects struck quickly towards it
and sometimes missed. However, without latency-tostrike or other similar data, this is speculative. Overall,
when stationary, the camouflaged targets were caught
least often and caused most false identifications, whereas
the white and striped targets were caught most often.
The role of pattern contrast in motion dazzle

Experiment 3 tested the effect of pattern contrast on
motion dazzle. In addition to the uniform gray (G) and
white (W) targets used in experiments 1 and 2, we used

Page 4 of 11

targets that had striped (banded) markings of either
high contrast (black and white stripes; HS) or low contrast (intermediate gray stripes; LS) and camouflage
markings of high or low contrast that were either disruptive (HD and LD) or background matching (HB and
LB) patterns (see Figure 2 for images of the stimuli).
Based on previous work, we predicted that motion dazzle would be more effective with low-contrast markings
(see above).
For capture success there was a significant effect of
treatment (F(7, 511) = 39.76, P < 0.001; Figure 2). The
white target was caught more often than all other target
types (F(1) = 174.48, P < 0.001), and the patterned targets were caught more often than the uniform gray target (F(1) = 58.55, P < 0.001). The low-contrast patterned
targets were caught less often than the targets with
high-contrast markings (F(1) = 14.71, P < 0.001). Specifically, the low-contrast striped target was caught less
often than the high-contrast striped target (F(1) = 5.59, P
= 0.022), and the low-contrast camouflaged targets were
caught less often than the high-contrast camouflage targets (F(1) = 11.06, P = 0.001). There was no difference in
capture success for the background matching and disruptive targets (F(1) = 0.14, P = 0.704), or between the
banded and camouflaged prey (F(1) = 1.56, P = 0.213).
For the number of missed attempts, there was also a
significant effect of treatment (F (7, 511) = 7.09, P <
0.001). The white target was missed less often than the
other target types (F(1) = 12.40, P < 0.001), and the patterned targets were missed less often than the uniform
gray target (F (1) = 8.51, P = 0.004). In addition, the
striped targets were missed more often than the camouflaged targets (F(1) = 20.17, P < 0.001). There were nonsignificant trends for the low-contrast targets to be
missed more often than the high-contrast targets (F(1) =
2.92, P = 0.088), including for the low-contrast striped
target being missed more often than the high-contrast
equivalent (F(1) = 2.87, P = 0.096). There were no significant differences between the low- and high-contrast
camouflaged targets (F(1) = 1.27, P = 0.261), or between
the disruptive and background matching prey (F (1) =
0.92, P = 0.339). Therefore, the gray target was captured
less often than the other targets, and the gray and
striped targets were missed more often than the other
target types. As predicted, targets with high-contrast
patterns were caught more often and missed less often
than those of low contrast.
The role of contrast in concealment

The final experiment tested the relative advantages of
contrast and pattern type on the same treatments as
used in experiment 3, but when stationary. We predicted that the camouflaged targets would be captured
(detected) less often than the uniform targets, and that

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

Page 5 of 11

Figure 2 Stimuli used in experiments 3 and 4 and results. Top panels: stimuli and an example background used in experiments 3 and 4.
Target types are: uniform camouflage gray (G), uniform conspicuous white (W), high-contrast black and white striped (HS), low-contrast gray
striped (LS), high-contrast background matching (HB), low-contrast background matching (LB), high-contrast disruptive (HD), and low-contrast
disruptive (LD) patterns (see main text for details). All target types except W have the same average luminance as the background. Middle and
lower panels: the mean number (plus 95% confidence interval (CI)) of successful captures (left panels) and missed attempts (right panels) of the
different target types in experiment 3 (moving targets) and experiment 4 (stationary targets).

the uniform gray target should have a lower capture risk
than the white and striped targets. Based on previous
work [4], disruptive targets might be more effectively
concealed when of high rather than low contrast.
For capture success, there was a significant effect of
treatment (F(7, 191) = 537.28, P < 0.001). The white target was caught more often than striped target types (F(1)
= 24.63, P < 0.001), and the striped targets were caught
more often than the gray target (F (1) = 340.54, P <
0.001). The gray target was captured more often than
the camouflaged targets (F(1) = 428.15, P < 0.001). There
was no difference in capture risk between the disruptive

and background matching targets (F (1) = 0.01, P =
0.906), between the high and low-contrast targets overall
(F(1) = 0.05, P = 0.817), between the high and low-contrast stripes [F(1) = 2.84, P = 0.112], or between the high
and low-contrast disruptive targets (F (1) = 0.07, P =
0.789).
For misses (false detections), there was a significant
effect of treatment (F (7, 191)1 = 2.12, P = 0.045). The
gray target was missed less often than the camouflaged
targets (F(1) = 7.40, P = 0.008) and less often than the
striped targets (F(1) = 16.08, P < 0.001). Otherwise, there
were no significant differences between the white and

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

striped targets (F(1) = 0.04, P = 0.834), the disruptive
and background matching targets (F (1) = 0.25, P =
0.617), the targets with high- or low-contrast patterns (F
(1) = 0.02, P = 0.879), those with high- versus low-contrast striped (F(1) = 0.57, P = 0.460), or those with highand low-contrast disruptive patterns (F(1) = 1.76, P =
0.203). Overall, these results show that the camouflaged
targets were captured least often, and the white and dazzle targets captured most often. There was no effect of
contrast on either captures or misses.

Discussion
In this study, we found that moving prey with striped
markings were captured less often than targets with
either camouflage patterns or uniform conspicuous
white targets. Therefore, specific pattern arrangements
do promote motion dazzle, making the speed and trajectory of moving targets difficult to judge accurately.
Although in experiment 3 there was no difference in
mean capture rate between the camouflaged and striped
targets, the striped prey were missed significantly more
often than the camouflaged targets. This indicates that
participants found striped prey more difficult to capture,
and made more misdirected attacks. Thus, in both
experiments 1 and 3, there was clear evidence that
striped targets induce motion dazzle. However, as in our
previous study [11], the unpatterned gray target was at
least equally as effective as the striped prey at reducing
capture. In experiment 3, the reduced effectiveness of
stripes compared with the gray target may be because
the background was more complex than in experiment
1, comprising five shades of gray instead of three. Previous work shows that background texture may affect
speed perception [23], and the effectiveness of motion
dazzle may be partly background-dependent. In stationary prey, background complexity can also increase the
detection times of camouflaged prey [24].
Targets were more effective at preventing capture
when of low contrast. This is consistent with studies of
cuttlefish markings [12] and with human experiments
indicating that low contrast can cause underestimation
of speed [19,21,22]. Dazzle markings, therefore, may be
most effective when of low contrast. In addition, highcontrast patches and edges might present positional
cues to detect and track motion [25]. In our study, all
stimuli were achromatic. However, future work should
investigate motion dazzle in chromatic stimuli, both
because many animal markings have high chromatic
contrast, and because at slow speeds and with low-contrast stimuli, speed discrimination is worse for chromatic compared with achromatic stimuli, and perceived
stimulus speed can show a greater dependence on chromatic contrast than on luminance [20,26]. In addition,
our set-up only recorded whether a person missed or

Page 6 of 11

successfully captured a target, but not whether subjects
were drawn to attack and miss the trailing edge, for
example. This would be valuable to explore in future
work.
While our experiments show that motion dazzle can
effectively prevent capture, the mechanisms underlying
how motion dazzle works are unclear, although a range
of possibilities exist [11,27]. One possibility relates to
the so-called ‘aperture problem’, where the motion of a
line viewed through a narrow window is ambiguous for
motion parallel to the line itself, and only movement
perpendicular to the line is detectable. If movement is
detected by local receptive fields that are combined to
produce a global estimate of motion, then the true
movement of a striped object may be difficult to judge
[27]. In addition, the advantage of striped patterns may
stem from the repeating nature of the markings, as spatial frequency can affect speed perception [28], and such
markings may fatigue or cause adaptation in motionsensitive cells [29]. In contrast, blotches and spots may
provide reference points to facilitate effective tracking
and may underlie the ineffectiveness of camouflage patterns in motion dazzle.
In the experiments in which targets were stationary,
those with camouflaged markings were captured least
often. By contrast, the striped prey was caught often
(only the conspicuous white targets were captured
more frequently). Thus, although striped markings are
highly effective in reducing capture when moving, they
are costly when stationary. By contrast, camouflage
patterns are ineffective at reducing capture during
movement, but provide strong protection when stationary. Our study indicates that those markings that
are effective in motion dazzle are not effective in
camouflage, and vice versa. This is consistent with evidence showing that many animals, including insect larvae and snakes, change their color patterns during
development and growth [30,31]. However, markings
used in motion dazzle might still have other functions.
For example, the zig-zag markings on some snakes
seem to function as distinctive warning signals rather
than as disruptive camouflage [32,33]. Furthermore,
high contrast or conspicuousness may not always be a
key aspect of effective warning signals, but rather of
communicating distinctiveness from profitable prey
[34,35]. Thus, a dual benefit of motion dazzle and
aposematism may not arise as a result of high contrast,
but rather of distinctive pattern arrangements. In addition, some striped patterns, such as the blue and yellow markings on marine fish, can have a distancedependent function, acting as a means of communication in close proximity, but camouflage from a distance
[36]. Once camouflage is broken, motion dazzle may
allow the prey animal to escape.

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

Our results provide evidence that prey can obtain protection from predators through using aspects of their
appearance confusing predators’ estimation of prey trajectory (motion dazzle), and that such protection can
come at a cost of reduction in crypsis when the prey is
stationary. Our results also suggest that the range of
appearance types capable of showing such effects may
extend beyond the repeated contrasting stripes previously considered. Specifically, we found that uniform
gray prey had similar properties to striped prey with
regard to protection when moving but vulnerability
when still. This has potential implications both for our
expectation of the importance of motion dazzle in the
natural world, and for understanding the sensory and
cognitive mechanisms that might underlie it. It would
be useful to explore the generality of this result with
respect to background complexity, prey shape and
movement behaviors. We also note, as above, that there
may be a range of selection pressures on prey appearance (for example, warning signals, sexual selection),
making uniform coloration in nature relatively uncommon. Our results show that when animals are under
selection for patterned appearance, certain arrangements
of markings can be especially important in motion
dazzle.
We found no difference between background matching or disruptive patterns for prey, either when moving
or stationary. This may have been because the background and prey were comprised of discrete blotches,
rather than of more continuous patches of color, brightness and pattern, under which circumstances clear survival advantages of disruptive prey have been shown
previously [4,5,7,8]). By contrast, recent aviary experiments using birds foraging for artificial prey against
similar background types to those used here also failed
to find a survival advantage of disruptive targets over
background matching prey [24]. In both that study and
the present one, there was no advantage of high contrast
for disruptive prey. Therefore, the survival advantage of
disruptive coloration may often be backgrounddependent.
In this study, the effect size for appearance on predation risk of moving prey was generally less than the analogous effect size for stationary prey. It is well known
that crypsis is a highly effective mechanism to avoid predation. However, crypsis can impose various restrictions
and opportunity costs on animals, including being limited to one or a few background types, and restrictions
on movement that is known to facilitate detection of
cryptic prey that would otherwise be hard to detect
when stationary. This means that for many species,
crypsis is not an effective strategy. Animals that are
bright and conspicuous, such as those with visual warning or sexual signals, often cannot rely on crypsis. In

Page 7 of 11

such cases, the benefits of motion dazzle may be greatest. In addition, the effect of motion dazzle may be substantially enhanced if prey respond to detecting a
predator by fleeing; even if they do not move around
much ordinarily, motion dazzle may still be important if
predators generally see them in motion rather than
when stationary. However, a full evaluation of the relative selection pressures on crypsis and motion dazzle
requires consideration of how frequently prey are in
motion when in close proximity to hunting predators.
This is likely to be quite variable between species, and
even between sexes or age classes within a species.
Our aim in this paper has been to provide a first test
of the hypothesis of conflict between motion dazzle
while a target is moving and crypsis when that target is
stationary. We have achieved such a ‘proof of concept’,
and found that the potential for such conflict does exist.
As such, we consider that further work into this question is justified. We see two distinct but connected
routes to further progress. First, it is now important to
explore the biological importance of the trade-off
between motion dazzle and concealment. We used
human participants in this study for convenience, for
ethical reasons, and because of the considerable effect
that the concept of dazzle has had on naval camouflage.
A first step to exploring generality across species might
involve a similar experimental set-up to that used here
but with non-human predators: birds can readily be
trained to peck at targets on a computer screen and this
has been used effectively to explore questions in adaptive coloration [37]. Interestingly, Bain et al. [38]
showed that humans and pigeons produced very similar
rankings of the accuracy of different hoverflies’ mimicry
of wasps, suggesting that cognitive systems related to
prey detection and recognition may be similar across
phylogeny. Tests involving predator behavior closer to
real predation events, using physical models of prey
with different appearance, should also be possible. As an
example, Powell [39] used captive birds of prey attacking
moving weasel models to explore the adaptive function
of tail coloration; a similar system could be used to
explore the issues considered here, perhaps using snake
models. In real predator-prey systems, it should also be
possible to obtain reliable data on prey-movement
speeds and banding properties (spatial frequency and
contrast of stripes), and reasonable information is
known about many key predators (such as birds) and
their temporal vision, potentially allowing modeling of
prey patterns and movement in terms of visual
mechanisms.
Second, now that we have shown that conflict can
occur, it would be valuable to adopt existing methods in
experimental psychology to explore the underlying
mechanisms in terms of predator sensory and cognitive

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

systems. Our experiments were not in the form of a
‘pure’ psychophysical experimental design, but rather
were intended to reflect a more natural prey-capture
task. Both approaches have their merits, and more conventional psychophysical experiments will be useful to
test the ideas and results presented here. Our results for
the trials with moving targets are consistent with those
of other recent psychophysical work investigating military-style dazzle camouflage, in which humans were presented with a binary choice task involving stimuli of two
pattern types, and asked to specify which of the two stimuli appeared to move more quickly [13]. It would be
useful for future studies to measure eye movements for
human subjects given similar tasks to those considered
here, but in a more controlled environment, in order to
explore how different types of stimuli and different
backgrounds influence visual search and object tracking.

Conclusions
The idea that animals can combine multiple types of
protective coloration is widespread, but empirical investigation is lacking. Our study shows that animals may
face trade-offs between the type of color patterns they
have, and the functions of those markings. It may often
not be possible to combine multiple functions with the
same pattern, and the likelihood of this may be strongly
dependent upon the circumstances. In general, the
defensive strategy that animals use may be strongly
linked to their life history, developmental stage, and
habitat. For example, highly mobile and active animals
found in open environments may benefit more from
motion-dazzle markings, whereas animals that rest during the day and are found on a limited number of backgrounds may do best by being camouflaged.
Methods
We produced a computer game created using Scratch
software (2009, version 1.4; http://scratch.mit.edu/), in
which human participants attempted to find and capture targets against a background. The general design
of the study followed a recent experiment [11], except
that we used a touchscreen rather than asking participants to capture targets with a mouse and cursor. This
change, with participants directly touching the screen
to capture prey, made the task more realistic. In
experiments 1 and 3, a single ‘prey’ item (target)
moved at a constant speed against the background: 25
cm/s (approximately 31.13° visual angle per second). In
addition to average speed, the distance of target displacement between consecutive refreshes of the screen as
it moves may also be important in influencing the outcomes of motion-detection mechanisms, as outlined in
previous work with humans [40]. Our display refreshed
at 75 Hz, which would equate to a frame-to-frame

Page 8 of 11

displacement of 0.4° visual angle (see below). However,
we calculated that the software used refreshed at
approximately 40 Hz, which would result in a frameby-frame displacement of about 0.77 degrees. This
relatively large value may make our findings regarding
dazzle effects conservative, as past work indicates that
human motion detection may work most effectively at
short displacements. Therefore, it is possible that smaller displacements (produced by faster screen refresh
rates) would result in greater motion-dazzle effects
than those reported here.
In the game, the prey changed direction unpredictably
between 1° and 3° clockwise during movement, and
bounced back from the edges of the background with
the addition of a 45° anticlockwise turn (that is, the 45°
change was in addition to the normal effect of bouncing
back off the screen edge, to make the target trajectory
less predictable). After successful capture the prey disappeared, and after a delay of 0.5 seconds, reappeared in a
random position on the screen. The patterns on the
prey rotated as the main body of the target rotated. For
example, the striped patterns were always perpendicular
to the direction of movement, irrespective of which
direction the target was actually travelling.
In experiments 2 and 4 prey were stationary, and the
task was to find and then capture a prey item. Once a
target was caught, a uniform gray background appeared
for 0.5 seconds, before the experimental background
reappeared with a new prey target in a random location.
This was essential because if the prey item simply reappeared in a new location after capture, its reappearance
would reveal its new location. For all experiments,
within a single trial, participants had to capture as many
prey targets of the same type as possible within one
minute. This was repeated for each type of prey target
(treatment). Treatment order was balanced in all experiments so that each treatment appeared an equal number
of times in each order. We recorded the number of prey
items captured, where a subject managed to touch the
point on the screen at which the moving prey item was
located at that time. We also recorded the number of
missed attempts. Missed attempts in the moving-prey
trials were the times when subjects saw the target but
misdirected their attacks and touched the background
part of the screen instead of the prey item. In the stationary prey trials, the subjects incorrectly touched the
screen where they thought the target was located, but it
was in fact elsewhere (false detection). Note that we did
not expect that misses and hits should be inversely
related, because several factors can affect this relationship; for example, a subject may concentrate more on
capturing a target that seems to be moving faster, and
make fewer capture attempts (and thus also fewer
misses).

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

Prey targets and backgrounds were achromatic (shades
of gray) created using Photoshop Elements (version 7.0;
Adobe Systems Inc., East Oldsmar, FL, USA) as highresolution, low-compression JPEG files. In all experiments, targets were 2 cm wide and 0.9 cm tall (3.11°
and 1.12° visual angle subtended on the viewer’s eye).
Targets were presented against patterned artificial backgrounds comprising black, white and gray markings on
a uniform gray. Several versions of the backgrounds
were used in each experiment (six in experiments 1 and
2, and eight in experiments 3 and 4; for all backgrounds
used see Additional file 1) to remove any potential interactions that could occur between a given treatment and
a specific background arrangement. All experiments
were conducted on the same 15 inch (38 cm) touchscreen monitor (Elo 1515L; Tyco Electronics, Shanghai,
China) with a refresh rate of 75 Hz (higher than the 60
Hz from our previous study [11]). The flicker of the
striped targets was 62.5 Hz (based on calculating the
time taken for one complete cycle of white and black
stripes), and although relatively high, is still lower than
the refresh rate of the display. We calibrated the visual
contrast of the different shades of gray displayed on the
prey and background in terms of luminance (cd m -2),
using a luminance meter (Minolta LS-110; Osaka,
Japan), as described previously [11]. We determined the
background value that would correspond to an intermediate level of gray between black and white, and for
experiments 3 and 4, to several intermediate shades of
gray. The luminance values were as follows (in cd m-2):
white = 196, black = 8, gray = 40, light gray = 90, and
dark gray = 18. The contrast values, based on Michelson
contrast, were 0.66 for white/black against intermediate
gray, and 0.38 for light gray/dark gray versus intermediate gray. All treatment types, except the white target,
had the same average luminance as the background, and
so the key difference between them was in their patterning and contrast. Participants were positioned in front of
the touchscreen, approximately 46 cm away, under
ambient light conditions (standard fluorescent office
lights) kept approximately constant.
In all experiments, participants (166 in total: 60 in
experiment 1, 18 in experiment 2, 64 in experiment 3,
and 24 in experiment 4) were volunteers naïve to the
experimental aims, and were predominantly undergraduate students with normal vision or corrected-to-normal
vision. We gave participants only the information
needed to undertake the trials. No subject participated
more often than once across all experiments. All participants carried out a one-minute practice trial before the
main experiment, in which they had to capture a uniform black prey item against a white background.
Neither this background or prey target was used in any
of the main experiments.

Page 9 of 11

Statistical analyses

The statistical approach has been described previously
[11]. Where possible, we analyzed the results with general linear models (GLMs), with the factors of prey type
and order of presentation, with the subject as a random
factor. When the data violated the assumptions of a
GLM and could not be successfully transformed, we
analyzed the results with a non-parametric Friedman
test. For most experiments we used planned post hoc
comparisons [41] by rerunning the main test with the
factor prey type replaced with each comparison in turn,
using no more comparisons than spare degrees of freedom. This is a much more powerful approach than
undertaking multiple unplanned comparisons, and best
reflects our specific hypotheses [11,41]. In experiment 2,
for the data on number of misses, planned comparisons
were not intuitive, and so we reran the main test with
all pairwise comparisons, and used a sequential Bonferroni procedure to adjust critical P-value thresholds to
control for multiple testing. We did not always use the
same comparisons for the data on hits and misses
because these data can reveal different aspects of the
subject’s strategy and success, and need not be inversely
related (see above and Discussion).
Experiment 1: The role of pattern arrangement in motion
dazzle

We used six prey types: a uniform gray (G) target
matching the average background luminance; a conspicuous uniform white (W) target; a target with perpendicular black (3 mm wide) and white (2 mm wide)
alternating stripes (S); a target with pairs of 3 mm black
and 1.2 mm white stripes separated by interval gray
stripes of 4 mm (IS); a camouflaged background matching target (B), consisting of a random sample of the
background with the stipulation that no markings
touched the target edge; and a camouflaged disruptive
prey type (D), comprising samples of the background
with at least some patterns located on the target edge
(Figure 1).
The results were analyzed with a GLM. We included
the uniform white prey item in the overall treatment
test because there was no prior reason to believe that
this should be treated differently from the other conspicuously-marked treatments. In any case, we focused
specifically on planned comparisons between individual
prey types rather than on omnibus comparisons across
all treatments in our interpretation of results. For the
data on misses, we had to transform the data to the
power of 0.06, calculated using a Box-Cox procedure
(we found a Box-Cox transformation produced the most
effective transformation in this case). For our planned
comparisons, we compared (i) white versus the aggregate of all other prey types, (ii) gray versus the aggregate

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

of all patterned prey types, (iii) dazzle prey (stripes and
interval stripes) versus the camouflage prey (background
matching and disruptive coloration), (iv) striped versus
interval stripes, and (v) background matching versus disruptive coloration.
Experiment 2: The role of pattern arrangement in
preventing detection and capture when stationary

Experiment 2 comprised the same treatments as in
experiment 1, but the targets were stationary. Our aim
was to test whether, when stationary, the camouflagedprey targets would be harder to detect (and therefore
capture) than either the dazzle or uniform targets.
The main results and post hoc comparisons for both
captures and misses were analyzed using a Friedman
test. For the capture data, we predicted that the conspicuous white target would be the easiest to capture, and
the background matching and disruptive targets most
difficult. In addition, although their average luminance
matched the background, the arrangement of the striped
patterns might render the striped and interval-striped
prey more conspicuous than the uniform gray prey.
Alternatively, the stripes may function in disruptive
camouflage. Based on these predictions, we conducted a
series of planned stepwise comparisons, comparing
treatments with successively lower capture levels in
turn. This resulted in comparisons of (i) W versus S, (ii)
S versus IS, (iii) IS versus G, (iv) G versus B, and (v) B
versus D. For the misses it was difficult to make clear a
priori predictions. Therefore, we compared all treatments with each other, and then ranked contrasts in
terms of P value (lowest to highest). We then selected
the comparisons with the five smallest P values, and
used critical P-value adjustment based on a sequential
Bonferroni correction.
Experiment 3: The role of pattern contrast in motion
dazzle

In experiment 3, there were eight treatments: a uniform white (W) target; a uniform gray (G) target; background matching targets with either low-contrast (LB)
light and dark gray spots, or high-contrast (HB) with
black and white spots; disruptive targets of either high
(HD) or low (LD) contrast; and striped prey with
markings of either high (HS) or low (LS) contrast. In
ensuring both types of patterned prey had the same
average luminance, we slightly modified the width of
the stripes in the low-contrast striped prey (2 mm
light-gray and 2 mm dark gray stripes). The backgrounds comprised an average intermediate gray, plus
white, black, light-gray, and dark-gray spots in approximately equal proportion.
Results for both captures and misses were analyzed
with GLMs. Planned comparisons were: (i) white versus

Page 10 of 11

the aggregate of all prey types, (ii) gray versus the aggregate of all patterned prey types, (iii) the aggregate of the
low-contrast patterned prey versus the aggregate of the
high-contrast prey, (iv) low-contrast stripes versus highcontrast stripes, (v) low-contrast camouflaged disruptive
and background matching versus high-contrast camouflaged prey, (vi) striped versus camouflage prey, and (vii)
background matching versus disruptive.
Experiment 4: The role of contrast in concealment

The design of experiment 4 and treatments followed
that of experiment 3, but with stationary targets. Results
were analyzed with GLMs, with data for the number of
misses being square root transformed. There was a single prominent outlier in this data even after transformation. However, rerunning the analysis with this outlier
excluded did not change the results (the effect of prey
type became more significant without the outlier
included). We conducted the following planned comparisons: (i) white versus the striped prey, (ii) stripes versus
the gray target, (iii) gray versus the camouflage targets,
(iv) high versus low-contrast prey, (v) disruptive versus
background matching, (vi) high versus low-contrast
stripes, and (vii) high versus low-contrast disruptive
prey.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Additional backgrounds used in the experiments.
Images of the different background samples used in the experiments.

List of abbreviations
B: background matching pattern; D: disruptive-camouflage pattern; G:
uniform gray; GLM: general linear model; HB: high-contrast background
matching pattern; HD: high-contrast disruptive pattern; HS: high-contrast
striped pattern; IS: interval-striped pattern; LB: low-contrast background
matching pattern; LD: low-contrast disruptive pattern; LS: low-contrast
striped pattern; W: uniform white.
Acknowledgements and Funding
MS and KLAM were funded by a Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council David Phillips Research Fellowship (BB/G022887/1), and MS
thanks Churchill College, Cambridge. We thank David Tolhurst for use of his
luminance meter. We are grateful to two anonymous referees, a journal
Advisor, and the Editors for constructive comments on the manuscript.
Author details
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK. 2College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
1

Authors’ contributions
All authors designed the experiments; MS, WTLS, JES, and KLAM undertook
the experiments; MS and GDR performed the statistics, and MS, GDR and
KLAM wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 23 August 2011 Accepted: 25 November 2011
Published: 25 November 2011

Stevens et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:81
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/81

References
1. Cott HB: Adaptive coloration in animals. London: Methuen & Co. Ltd;
1940.
2. Ruxton GD, Sherratt TN, Speed MP: Avoiding Attack Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 2004.
3. Stevens M, Merilaita S: Introduction. Animal camouflage: current issues
and new perspectives. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Series
B 2009, 364:423-427.
4. Cuthill IC, Stevens M, Sheppard J, Maddocks T, Párraga CA, Troscianko TS:
Disruptive coloration and background pattern matching. Nature 2005,
434:72-74.
5. Fraser S, Callahan A, Klassen D, Sherratt TN: Empirical tests of the role of
disruptive coloration in reducing detectability. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Series B 2007, 274:1325-1331.
6. Merilaita S, Lind J: Background-matching and disruptive coloration, and
the evolution of cryptic coloration. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, Series B 2005, 272:665-670.
7. Schaefer MH, Stobbe N: Disruptive coloration provides camouflage
independent of background matching. Proceedings of the Royal Society,
Series B 2006, 273:2427-2432.
8. Stevens M, Cuthill IC, Windsor AMM, Walker HJ: Disruptive contrast in
animal camouflage. Proceedings of the Royal Society, Series B 2006,
273:2433-2438.
9. Stevens M: Predator perception and the interrelation between different
forms of protective coloration. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London,
Series B 2007, 274:1457-1464.
10. Thayer GH: Concealing-coloration in the animal kingdom: an exposition
of the laws of disguise through color and pattern: being a summary of
Abbott H. Thayer’s discoveries. New York: Macmillan; 1909.
11. Stevens M, Yule DH, Ruxton GD: Dazzle coloration and prey movement.
Proceedings of the Royal Society, Series B 2008, 275:2639-2643.
12. Zylinski S, Osorio D, Shohet AJ: Cuttlefish camouflage: context-dependent
body pattern use during motion. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, Series B 2010, 276:3963-3969.
13. Scott-Samuel NE, Baddeley R, Palmer CE, Cuthill IC: Dazzle camouflage
affects speed perception. PLoS ONE 2011, 6(6):e20233.
14. Behrens RR: The role of artists in ship camouflage during world war I.
Leonardo 1999, 32:53-59.
15. Jackson JF, Ingram W, Campbell HW: The dorsal pigmentation pattern of
snails as an antipredator strategy: a multivariate approach. American
Naturalist 1976, 110:1029-1053.
16. Lindell LE, Forsman A: Sexual dichromatism in snakes: support for the
flicker-fusion hypothesis. Behavioral Ecology 1996, 74:2254-2256.
17. Shine R, Madsen T: Sexual dichromatism in snakes of the genus Viperia: a
review and a new evolutionary hypothesis. Journal of Herpetology 1994,
28:114-117.
18. Stevens M, Merilaita S: Defining disruptive coloration and distinguishing
its functions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Series B 2009,
364:481-488.
19. Anstis S: Moving objects appear to slow down at low contrasts. Neural
Networks 2003, 16:933-938.
20. McKeefry DJ, Burton MP: The perception of speed based on L-M and S-(L
+M) cone opponent processing. Vision Research 2009, 49:870-876.
21. Stone LS, Thompson P: Human speed perception is contrast dependent.
Vision Research 1992, 32:1535-1549.
22. Thompson P: Perceived rate of movement depends on contrast. Vision
Research 1982, 22:377-380.
23. Blakemore MR, Snowden RJ: Textured backgrounds alter perceived speed.
Vision Research 2000, 40:629-638.
24. Dimitrova M, Merilaita S: Prey concealment: visual background complexity
and prey contrast distribution. Behavioral Ecology 2010, 21:176-181.
25. Fang F, He S: Strong influence of test patterns on the perception of
motion aftereffect and position. Journal of Vision 2004, 4:637-642.
26. Hawken MJ, Gegenfurtner KR, Tang C: Contrast dependence of colour and
luminance motion mechanisms in human vision. Nature 1994,
367:268-270.
27. Troscianko T, Benton CP, Lovell GP, Tolhurst DJ, Pizlo Z: Camouflage and
visual perception. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Series B
2009, 364:449-461.
28. Diener HC, Wist ER, Dichgans J, Brandt T: The spatial frequency effect on
perceived velocity. Vision Research 1976, 16:169-176.

Page 11 of 11

29. Snowden RJ: Shifts in perceived position following adaptation to visual
motion. Current Biology 1998, 8:1343-1345.
30. Pough HF: Multiple cryptic effects of crossbanded and ringed patterns of
snakes. Copeia 1976, 4:834-836.
31. Grant JB: Ontogenetic colour change and the evolution of aposematism:
a case study in panic moth caterpillars. Journal of Animal Ecology 2007,
76:439-447.
32. Niskanen M, Mappes J: Significance of the dorsal zigzag pattern of Vipera
latastei gaditana against avian predators. Journal of Animal Ecology 2005,
74:1091-1101.
33. Valkonen J, Niskanen M, Björklund M, Mappes J: Disruption or
aposematism? Significance of dorsal zigzag pattern of European vipers.
Evolutionary Ecology 2011, 25:1047-1063.
34. Merilaita S, Ruxton GD: Aposematic signals and the relationship between
conspicuousness and distinctiveness. Journal of Theoretical Biology 2007,
245:268-277.
35. Sherratt TN, Beatty CD: The evolution of warning signals as reliable
indicators of prey defence. The American Naturalist 2003, 162:377-389.
36. Marshall NJ: Communication and camouflage with the same ‘bright’
colours in reef fishes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, Series B 2000, 355:1243-1248.
37. Bond AB, Kamil AC: Apostatic selection by blue jays produces balanced
polymorphism in virtual prey. Nature 1998, 395:594-596.
38. Bain RS, Rashed A, Cowper VJ, Gilbert FS, Sherratt TN: The key mimetic
features of hoverflies through avian eyes. Proceedings of the Royal Society,
Series B 2007, 274:1949-1954.
39. Powell RA: Evolution of black-tipped tails in weasels: predator confusion.
American Naturalist 1982, 119:126-131.
40. Boulton JC, Hess RF: The optimal displacement for the detection of
motion. Vision Research 1990, 30:1101-1106.
41. Ruxton GD, Beauchamp G: Time for some a priori thinking about post
hoc testing. Behavioral Ecology 2008, 19:690-693.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-81
Cite this article as: Stevens et al.: Motion dazzle and camouflage as
distinct anti-predator defenses. BMC Biology 2011 9:81.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
