<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution of a unique predatory feeding apparatus: functional anatomy, development and a genetic locus for jaw laterality in Lake Tanganyika scale-eating cichlids</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010 8:8. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-8"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Thomas A Stewart"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolution of a unique predatory feeding
apparatus: functional anatomy, development and
a genetic locus for jaw laterality in Lake
Tanganyika scale-eating cichlids
Thomas A Stewart, R Craig Albertson*

Abstract
Background: While bilaterality is a defining characteristic of triploblastic animals, several assemblages have
managed to break this symmetry in order to exploit the adaptive peaks garnered through the lateralization of
behaviour or morphology. One striking example of an evolved asymmetry in vertebrates comes from a group of
scale-eating cichlid fishes from Lake Tanganyika. Members of the Perissodini tribe of cichlid fishes have evolved
dental and craniofacial asymmetries in order to more effectively remove scales from the left or right flanks of prey.
Here we examine the evolution and development of craniofacial morphology and laterality among Lake
Tanganyika scale-eating cichlids.
Results: Using both geometric and traditional morphometric methods we found that the craniofacial evolution in
the Perissodini involved discrete shifts in skeletal anatomy that reflect differences in habitat preference and
predation strategies. Further, we show that the evolutionary history of the Perissodini is characterized by an
accentuation of craniofacial laterality such that certain taxa show elaborate sided differences in craniofacial shape
consistent with the sub-partitioning of function between sides of the head during attacks. Craniofacial laterality in
the scale-eating specialist Perissodus microlepis was found to be evident early in development and exhibited a
unimodal distribution, which is contrary to the adult condition where jaw laterality has been described as a
discrete, bimodal antisymmetry. Finally, using linkage and association analyses we identified a conserved locus for
jaw handedness that segregates among East African cichlids.
Conclusions: We suggest that, during the evolution of the Perissodini, selection has accentuated a latent,
genetically determined handedness of the craniofacial skeleton, enabling the evolution of jaw asymmetries in order
to increase predation success. Continued work on the developmental genetic basis of laterality in the Perissodini
will facilitate a better understanding of the evolution of this unique group of fishes, as well as of left-right axis
determination among vertebrates in general.

Background
Most multicellular animals exhibit one of two forms of
symmetry: radial, in which multiple planes of symmetry
can be drawn across an organism; or bilateral, where a
single plane of symmetry, the sagittal plane, bisects an
organism into mirrored halves [1]. Bilateral symmetry is
a synapomorphy of the bilateria, a taxonomic group that
* Correspondence: rcalbert@syr.edu
Department of Biology, Syracuse University, 130 College Place, Syracuse, NY,
13244, USA

encompasses most animal phyla. Despite its utility as a
diagnostic character, however, symmetry is not ubiquitous across all organ systems. For example, there is
marked asymmetry in the patterning of the brain, heart
and visceral organs in vertebrates and the genes that
regulate the asymmetric morphogenesis of these structures (for example, nodal, lft1, pitx2) are well known
[2]. Likewise, a myriad of asymmetries have evolved in
normally paired structures among various vertebrate
lineages. Owls have evolved asymmetrical ears, which
differ in size and placement on the skull, making them

© 2010 Stewart and Albertson; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

more effective auditory predators [3]. The eyes of flatfish
migrate over the midline of the body during development and the oral jaws develop asymmetrically such
that adults can lie on the benthic substrate and ambush
prey [4]. Conspicuous craniofacial asymmetries are also
evident in narwals [5], fruit bats [6] and a group of
snail-eating snakes [7]. The prevalence of laterality in
nature suggests that bilateral symmetry may, in fact, be
more superficial than originally thought and, while
much is known about the developmental genetic basis
for normal asymmetric development of the visceral
organs and brain, comparatively little is known about
the genetic basis of laterality in normally paired
structures.
Asymmetries are typically differentiated according to
their causal origin and tend to be grouped into three
classes. The first is fluctuating asymmetry, where the
breaking of symmetry is a consequence of developmental ‘noise’ and lacks a strict genetic basis. Asymmetries
of this type are normally distributed around a mean
symmetrical form [8]. The second type of asymmetry is
antisymmetry, where the nature of the asymmetry (that
is, which traits are affected) is genetically determined,
but the side in which the trait manifests itself is purported to be environmentally determined [9,10]. The
random environmental determination of handedness
results in an equal bimodal distribution on either side of
a symmetrical mean [10]. The third category is directional asymmetry, in which both the trait of interest and
handedness are genetically determined. Directional
asymmetries are found in populations as skewed unimodal distributions, with populations biased towards a particular side. The evolution of directional asymmetries is
thought to occur either directly from a symmetrical
ancestor or as a progression from symmetry to antisymmetry to directional asymmetry [9,11].
Scale-eating cichlids from Lake Tanganyika present a
striking example of an evolved asymmetry in mouth
direction. The Perissodini are a monophyletic cichlid
tribe from Lake Tanganyika whose evolutionary history
is marked by an ecological expansion from a deep-water
generalized predator to shallow-water specialists that
feed almost exclusively on scales (lepidophagy) [12].
Within the Perissodini, Perissodus species exhibit jaw
asymmetries that are dimorphic [13-18], with mixed
populations of both ‘lefty’ individuals, that attack the left
side of prey species with mouths angled off to the right,
and ‘righty’ individuals, that correspondingly attack the
right side with mouths bent to the left [19]. The nature
of this asymmetry has been attributed to sided differences in the length of the jaw joint (that is, the left-side
is longer in lefty individuals) [15] but little more detail
has been offered.

Page 2 of 11

In P. microlepis lefty and righty morphs are maintained through frequency-dependent selection, where
the minority morph experiences a higher fitness than
the majority morph as a consequence of a preferential
prey avoidance of the more abundant morph [14]. The
relative frequency of each morph fluctuates around a
mean of 0.5 and the presence of both morphs appears
to be an evolutionary stable state [14]. This system is a
commonly cited example of antisymmetry, as jaw asymmetry is bimodal and there appears to be no species
level bias in handedness [10]. Although the handedness
of antisymmetric traits is generally assumed to be environmentally determined, a genetic basis has been suggested for jaw laterality in P. microlepis [14,19], as well
as for the freshwater goby Rhinogobius flumineus [20]
and the herbivorous cichlid Neolamprologus moorii [19],
suggesting widespread heritable laterality in mouth
direction among Perciformes. Jaw laterality, therefore,
does not appear to fit neatly into any one category of
asymmetry [10]. The bimodal distribution of mouth
direction in P. microlepis populations is what would be
expected for an antisymmetric trait [13]. However, a
genetic basis for jaw handedness is more consistent with
a directional asymmetry [10]. This apparent paradox has
led to some debate in the literature concerning the causal origin of this trait [10].
Here we explore the evolution of craniofacial morphology and laterality among scale-eating cichlids. Using
geometric and traditional morphometric techniques, we
show that the evolution of the Perissodini involved discrete shifts in craniofacial shape that are correlated with
foraging habitat and that sided differences in craniofacial
anatomy are evident in certain species that feed exclusively on scales, consistent with the lateralization of
feeding mechanics. In P. microlepis, we observe jaw
laterality early in development and identify a conserved
locus segregating with craniofacial handedness in East
African cichlids. Our data are consistent with the
hypothesis that jaw laterality evolved in Tanganyikan
scale-eaters due to selection on a conserved locus for
handedness and that, as species became increasingly
specialized to feed on scales, selection favoured an elaboration of this asymmetry through the evolution of
sided differences in jaw shape.

Results and discussion
Shifts in craniofacial anatomy correspond to different
foraging niches

Relative warp (RW) analysis was performed in order to
compare the craniofacial architecture of seven species
within the Perissodini tribe (Figures 1 and 2). RW1
accounted for 40% of total shape variation among individuals and described variation in skull length. RW2

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

accounted for 24% of shape variation and reflected differences in the rotation of the mouth (Figure 2B). Haplotaxodon microlepis has a dramatically up-turned
mouth and is significantly different from all other species along RW2 (Figure 1G). A second relative warp
analysis was performed excluding H. microlepis in order
to better resolve shape variation among species in the
genus Perissodus (Figure 2C). As with the previous analysis, RW1 (now 51%) described shifts in skull length
but RW2 (17%) characterized differences in eye size
(Figure 2C).
These shifts in anatomy correspond to differences in
foraging niche. H. microlepis is a member of the

Page 3 of 11

Perissodini tribe, and is a sister taxon to the Perissodus
genus (Figure 2A). The only symmetrical species among
those analysed, it is a shallow water predator with large
eyes and an up-turned mouth. Much of its diet is composed of small, pelagic Mysis shrimps and juvenile fishes
[12,21]. Mysis shrimps are extremely light sensitive and
tend to be nocturnal [22,23]. Large eyes, similar to those
of deep-water species, would facilitate predation on this
food source. H. microlepis also feeds on schools of juvenile fish that occupy the upper few centimetres of the
water column and it has been proposed that its upturned mouth allows it to exploit this resource by stalking and attacking prey from below [21]. Among the

Figure 1 Representative individuals of Perissodini species included in shape analyses. (A) Perissodus straeleni; (B) P. microlepis; (C) P.
paradoxus; (D) P. elaviae; (E) P. multidentatus; (F) P. hecqui; (G) Haplotaxodon microlepis. Both the left and right sides of the head were
photographed and analysed for all species except H. microlepis for which only the left-hand side was examined, as this species does not exhibit
an overt jaw asymmetry. Landmarks represent functionally significant points that characterize the geometry of the skull and were adapted from
Cooper and Westneat [34]. Images are of representative Perissodini species with head shapes that are close to the species mean for craniofacial
shape (that is, at the centre of each species’ two-dimensional distribution shown in Figure 2). Corresponding warps represent the average twodimensional head shape (including both the left and right sides of the head) in each species.

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

Page 4 of 11

Perissodus species, scale-eating evolved from a more
generalized predation strategy in deep water carnivores
[12], a trend that is reflected in the large eye size of
Perissodus species that still forage at depth (Figures 1
and 2). Among the Perissodus species that forage in the
shallows, a divergence in skull length is observed (Figure
2). The sister taxa, P. microlepis and P. straeleni, lay at
opposite ends of this axis and exhibit pronounced differences in head length (Figure 2), which probably reflect
differences in predatory behaviour [16]. The short skull
length and deep body of P. straeleni allows it to attack
from short distances, relying on manoeuverability to
capture prey, while the longer skulls and shallow bodies
of P. microlepis facilitate attacks from greater distances,
employing speed to successfully capture prey [16].
These strategies represent alternate adaptations for lepidophagy in shallow water with high visibility [16].
Scale eaters exhibit sided differences in craniofacial shape

Figure 2 Phylogenetic history and craniofacial morphospace of
the Perissodini. (A) Ancestral state reconstruction for foraging
habits and diet of the Perissodini, modified from Takahashi et al.[12].
Ancestral foraging preferences are labelled on the tree and
preferred habitat depths are indicated to the right. Species are
colour coded according to the scatter plots in B and C. Relative
warp (RW) analysis revealed several shifts in craniofacial anatomy
during Perissodini diversification that correlate with shifts in
ecological foraging niches (B, C). (B) Among the Perissodini, RW1
accounts for 39.87% of the variation in shape among species and
represents variation in skull length. RW2 accounts for 24.22% of
shape variation among species and reflects differences among
species in the angle of the mouth. (C) When considering only those
species in the genus Perissodus, RW1 accounts for 50.88% of the
variation in shape among species and represents variation in skull
length. RW2 reflects variation in eye size and accounts for 17.00% of
the shape variation.

Asymmetries in the length of the jaw joint and mouth
orientation were noted for all Perissodus species, consistent with previous descriptions [13-15,17,18]. Subtle, but
consistent, asymmetries were also observed for a variety
of traits, including the thickness of the maxilla and premaxilla and curvature of the nasal bone, underscoring
the complexity of this phenotype. We next wanted to
test whether Perissodus species exhibited quantitative
asymmetries in craniofacial shape. Using relative warp
analysis to compare the ‘towards’ (facing prey) and
‘away’ (opposite to prey) sides within species, we found
that only P. straeleni, a shallow water scale-specialist,
exhibited an asymmetry in overall head shape (Figure
3A). Sided differences in this species were characterized
by variation in the length of the preorbital region of the
skull (grids, Figure 3A). These data suggest an integration of effects across broad regions of the head, with an
overall elongation of the preorbital region of the skull
noted for the side of the head facing prey during attacks.
Next, we tested whether Perissodus species exhibited
consistent asymmetries in specific functionally relevant
characters of the jaw. In order to do this we modelled
the mechanics of the lower jaw as a first order lever,
where the fulcrum was taken as the jaw joint, the outlever was measured as the distance between the foremost tip of the jaw and the fulcrum, the opening inlever was estimated as the distance from the tip of the
retroarticular process of the lower jaw to the fulcrum
and the closing in-lever was the distance from the end
of the ascending arm of the lower jaw to the fulcrum
[24] (Figure 3). From these lengths, mechanical advantage (MA) was calculated for jaw opening and closing as
the ratio of in-lever to out-lever lengths, which can be
used to estimate the relative speed and force of a lever
[24]. A high MA is predictive of fish with powerful
bites, while a low MA is predictive of fast, weaker bites

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

Page 5 of 11

Figure 3 Perissodus species exhibit sided differences in craniofacial shape. (A) Perissodus straeleni shows marked differences in the entire
geometry of the skull associated with a general lengthening of the preorbital region (shaded region of the grids) of the skull on the side facing
prey. (B) Lever models of the lower jaw were used in order to evaluate the functional implications of jaw asymmetry. (C) Analysis of variance,
comparing the mechanical advantage of opening and closing lever systems in the lower jaw, predicts sided differences in the force and speed
of the lower jaw in both P. straeleni and P. microlepis.

[25]. We found that both P. straeleni and P. microlepis
exhibited discrete sided differences in the MA of both
the jaw opening and closing lever systems, predicting a
lateralization in the speed and force of lower jaw rotation (Figure 3B and 3C). For both species, relatively
lower MAs were estimated for the side of the fish that
would be closest to the prey (toward the prey), consistent with a coordinated partitioning of force and speed
between different sides of the jaw. No biases in MA
were detected in other Perissodus species, which suggests that asymmetries have been elaborated in species
adapted for shallow-water foraging strategies to include
functionally significant sided differences in jaw shape.
The exact nature and biological relevance of these functional asymmetries remain to be explored. One reasonable hypothesis is that, as the Perissodus foraging niche
expanded from deep-water generalized predation to
shallow-water specialization on scale-eating [12], selection favoured modifications of the feeding apparatus in
order to increase foraging success, including the subpartitioning of feeding mechanics between opposite
sides of the jaw.
Jaw laterality is evident early in development and is not
distributed as an antisymmetric trait

A brood of 141 larval P. microlepis were collected from
the mouth of a lefty female, and were staged to the late
larval period [26]. Each animal retained a significant
amount of yolk, indicating that they had not yet begun
to feed for themselves, and the pharyngeal skeleton had

only just begun to mineralize. Nevertheless, conspicuous
craniofacial asymmetries were observed in many of
these larval samples (Figure 4A and 4B), consistent with
a genetic basis for jaw handedness. Asymmetries were
noted for jaw direction, hyoid length and curvature and
pharyngeal jaw dentition. The degree of asymmetry varied widely among individuals and, while both lefty and
righty individuals were clearly present, the distribution
of jaw laterality was unimodal, suggesting that this textbook antisymmetric trait has a more complicated developmental origin.
The distribution of larval jaw asymmetry was biased to
the right-side (lefty). However, the family-level mean
was not statistically different from zero (one-sample ttest, t = -0.87, P = 0.39) (Figure 4C). While a genetic
basis for jaw laterality among P. microlepis would make
the most sense in the context of a directional asymmetry, it will require the analysis of additional individuals
from multiple families to determine whether this early
larval phenotype represents a fluctuating or directional
asymmetry.
The observation of an early unimodal distribution of
jaw asymmetry in scale eaters could provide a solution
to the Perissodus paradox. However, it would require a
population-level shift from a unimodal distribution in
young fish to a discrete, bimodal antisymmetry in adults.
Whether, and how, such a shift might occur would be a
fruitful topic for future investigations. It is possible that
the early asymmetry in jaw patterning could arise

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

Page 6 of 11

Figure 4 Larval Perissodus microlepis individuals exhibit discrete pharyngeal skeletal asymmetries. A clutch of P. microlepis was collected
from the mouth of a wild-caught female and staged to the late larval period. Skeletal preparations revealed clear asymmetries in a subset of
these individuals (A, B), including sided differences in the shape of Meckel’s (me) and ceratohyal (ch) cartilages. The degree of asymmetry for
each individual was quantified following Hori et al. [19], in which the differences in the angle from the preorbital processes to the premaxillary
symphysis was determined. Unlike that found for adult fish, the distribution of larval asymmetries is unimodal (C). The arrow indicates mean
laterality for the clutch. Abbreviation: pt, pharyngeal teeth.

through the co-option of the conserved asymmetric signalling pathway used to define the left-right axis in vertebrates. Work on zebrafish has demonstrated that
modulating distinct members of this signaling cassette
not only disrupts normal asymmetric patterning, but
also breaks symmetric patterning of paired structures,
including the pharyngeal skeleton and somites [27-29].
Moreover, these mutational effects are of a directional
(not fluctuating) nature, affecting one side of the body
more often than the other, which suggests that they are

not the result of developmental noise. Once this unimodal asymmetry has been established in young fishes, the
transition to antisymmetry could involve asymmetric
growth and remodelling of the jaw [15], leading to a
shift away from the mean and an accentuation of the
tails of the distribution. Haploinsufficiency of zebrafish
fgf8 has been linked to asymmetric remodelling of the
craniofacial skeleton, offering a putative molecular
mechanism for this phenomenon [28]. The lateralization
of foraging behaviour might also influence the transition

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

to antisymmetry. Lateralizations in behaviour have been
well studied in vertebrates and relationships between
behavioural and morphological lateralization have been
documented for many fish species. A behavioural laterality in zebrafish swimming, for example, has been associated with sided differences in white and red muscle
masses [30] and asymmetric foraging behaviours have
been linked to mouth laterality in a number of species
[13,14,20,31]. In P. microlepis, an early directional asymmetry might be accentuated and reinforced by lateralized foraging behaviour and jaw plasticity through a
positive feedback loop, wherein the behavioural asymmetry would lead to the asymmetric remodelling of the
jaw (which would be most pronounced in near symmetric larval fish). This would lead to a further functional lateralization and increased foraging success
which, in turn, would reinforce the behavioural asymmetry, and so on. Finally, it is likely that selection has
shaped the bimodal distribution of jaw handedness
observed in adult P. microlepis. If symmetric, or nearly
symmetric, fry were selected against and those with
asymmetric jaws were selected for, this would lead to a
population-level shift from a unimodal distribution in
juveniles to a bimodal distribution in adults. In all likelihood, a confluence of factors underlie the development
of jaw handedness in scale-eating cichlids, leaving many
questions to be answered regarding (i) the genetic basis,
(ii) ontogeny and (iii) plasticity of jaw laterality in the
Perissodini.
Identification of a conserved locus for jaw handedness

Previous studies have documented similar patterns of
inheritance for jaw handedness in several groups of
fishes [19,20] consistent with the hypothesis that craniofacial laterality is regulated, at least in part, by an evolutionarily conserved locus. We reasoned that, if the
evolution of craniofacial asymmetries in the Perissodini
were the consequence of selection upon a latent and
conserved locus for jaw handedness, it would also segregate in other East African cichlids. Taking advantage of
a preexisting cross between two herbivorous Lake
Malawi species, we looked for a genetic signature of
handedness in different oral traits. Indices of asymmetry
were generated for various jaw dimensions and we
found significant variation in the index of asymmetry
for the length of the retroarticular process of the lower
jaw among F2 hybrids. Handedness in this trait has been
used previously to describe jaw laterality in other cichlid
species [19]. We next performed a mapping experiment
using laterality (left versus right) as our trait of interest
and found a narrow region on linkage group 10 that
was significantly associated with handedness of the retroarticular process of the lower jaw: markers significantly associated with the direction of retroarticular
asymmetry were GM294 and UNH2101 (Figure 5E).

Page 7 of 11

In order to evaluate whether or not this locus segregates with handedness in P. microlepis, larval samples
from a single family were typed as either lefty or righty
and genotyped at both microsatellite loci. Only 93 (of
141) animals showed unambiguous jaw laterality. While
individuals were invariant for GM294, they exhibited a
size polymorphism for UNH2101. Two alleles where
recovered from this family: ‘A’ - 150 bp, and ‘B’ - 158
bp. The mother was scored as heterozygous and, given
that all three genotypic classes were recovered, we
deduced that the sire was also heterozygous. Using three
additional microsatellites, we found no evidence for
multiple paternity. A departure from expected genotypic
frequencies was determined using a X2 goodness of fit
test for each morphotype and for the family as a whole.
Association analysis showed a clear difference in genotypic frequencies among morphs with righties tending to
be homozygous for the ‘B’ allele (X2 = 32.89, df = 2, P <
0.0001) and lefties exhibiting a disproportionate number
of heterozygous animals (X 2 = 14.13, df = 2, P =
0.0009). These data are consistent with breeding experiments that have demonstrated dominance of the lefty
allele over the righty [19]. Notably, we also observed a
deficiency in the frequency of ‘A’ homozygous animals,
which is also consistent with previously documented
patterns of inheritance in P. microlepis, specifically, early
lethality of animals homozygous for the dominant allele
[14,19]. In fact, patterns of inheritance at UNH2101
were not different from what would be expected under
a model of a lefty (A/B) x lefty (A/B) cross with the
dominant allele being homozygous lethal (X2 = 3.49, df
= 1, P = 0.062). The few A/A individuals in our family
appeared normal and were lefty or righty with equal
frequency.

Conclusions
The evolution of lepidophagy in the Perissodini is
marked by specific shifts in ecomorphology and an elaboration of craniofacial asymmetries. While asymmetries
are evident throughout the genus Perissodus, their progression from simple sided differences in jaw size/length
to more complicated, functionally significant, differences
in jaw shape illustrates how crucial this adaption has
been in the exploitation of scales as food source. Our
developmental and genetic data strongly support a
genetic basis for jaw laterality in cichlids but also suggest a degree of complexity in the morphogenesis of this
trait that has not been previously recognized. We speculate that jaw laterality in adult Perissodus is the result of
multiple ‘layers’ of asymmetric processes acting throughout ontogeny, including early patterning mechanisms,
growth and remodelling and, potentially, behaviour.
Notably, zebrafish lacking two functional copies of fgf8
exhibit jaw asymmetries that are strikingly similar to

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

Page 8 of 11

Figure 5 Identification of a conserved locus for jaw laterality. A prominent feature of jaw laterality in Perissodus microlepis is a sided
difference in the length of the retroarticular processes (ra) of the jaw (A, B). We found that a similar asymmetry segregates in the F2 from an
interspecific cross between two herbivorous species from Lake Malawi (C, D). (E) Linkage analysis revealed a significant association between
handedness of retroarticular length and two linked markers on linkage group 10. (F) Larval P. microlepis were typed as either righty (R) or lefty (L)
and genotyped at both markers. GM294 was invariant, but UNH2101 showed a size polymorphism that segregated with handedness in this
family. Patterns of inheritance are consistent with dominance of the lefty allele and early lethality when the dominant allele is homozygous,
which is similar to what has previously been reported by Hori and Hori et al. [14,19].

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

those in Lake Tanganyika scale eaters [28]. While fgf8 is
not in the interval that segregates with jaw laterality in
cichlids, it is still possible that it participates in the
development of this trait as a member of a larger signalling network. Alternately, there could be several ways in
which to lateralize the skull. Continued work in both
laboratory models and natural populations should facilitate a better understanding of the genes and signalling
networks involved in the lateralization of the vertebrate
body plan.

Methods
Morphometric analysis

Seven of the nine species in the Perissodini tribe were
included in this analysis [Perissodus straeleni (n = 9),
Perissodus microlepis(n = 9), Perissodus paradoxus(n =
5), Perissodus elaviae(n = 2), Perissodus multidentatus(n
= 2), Perissodus hecqui(n = 5) and Haplotaxodon microlepis(n = 4)]. Given that many Perissodini species are
rare, and that our morphometric method was somewhat
destructive, we were only able to procure individuals
from a subset of species. However, good phylogenetic
coverage is obtained with these seven species (Figure
2A). Specimens came from the personal collection of
RCA at Syracuse University, the University of Michigan
at Ann Arbor, Cornell University and the Royal
Museum for Central Africa in Belgium. The left and
right sides of each specimen’s skull were dissected in
order to remove skin and connective tissues, exposing a
set of 16 landmarks, points that characterize the
mechanics and geometry of the skull (Figure 1). Dissected specimens were photographed using an Olympus
SP-570 and landmarks were digitized using the program
tpsDig [32].
Lefty and righty individuals were grouped in this analysis and tests of laterality focused on the differences
between sides of the skull that would be facing
(towards) or opposite (away) the prey. The sides of each
individual were characterized as either ‘towards’ or
‘away’ depending on whether, when photographed, the
specimen’s mouth was bending ‘towards’ or ‘away’ from
the camera. The mandibular symphysis for all Perissodus
species was within 5° (or 4% of total head length) of the
sagittal midline of the skull. The degree of error due to
the bending out of the plan of focus of the camera
should, therefore, be minimal. Using tpsRelw [33], RW
analysis was performed as previously described [28] in
order to identify major axes of shape variation among
all samples. The set of landmarks and methods used to
analyse the skull of Perissodini species were adapted
from previously published work on damselfish craniofacial morphology [34].
MA was calculated for jaw opening and closing in four
Perissodus species as the ratio of in-lever to out-lever

Page 9 of 11

lengths [25]. In order to ensure the accurate planar
orientation of the left and right sides of the jaw when
photographed, we only used cleared and stained specimens for this analysis. Specimens of P. straeleni(n = 8),
P. microlepis (n = 5), P. paradoxus(n = 6), and P. hecqui
(n = 4) were enzymatically cleared with trypsin and
bones were stained with Alizarin red using a method
described by Potthoff [35]. These were the only species
that we were able to obtain in sufficient numbers for
this analysis but they provide good phylogenetic and
ecological coverage (for example, deep- versus shallowwater predators) across the Perissodini. Photographs
were taken of each side of the lower-jaw. Landmarks,
pivot points and lever arms of the lower-jaw were
placed using tpsDig [32] and MAs were calculated. Analyses of variances were used to test for asymmetries in
MAs within species.
Larval P. microlepis

A brood of 141 P. microlepis was collected from the
mouth of a wild-caught female and staged to the late
larval period following [26]. The posterior half of each
animal was taken for DNA isolation and genotypic analysis, and the anterior half was cleared and stained
according to the method described by Walker and Kimmel [36] in order to visualize bone and cartilages. Skeleton preparations were photographed in the dorsal and
ventral views using a Zeiss Axiocam digital imaging system mounted to an M2 Bio stereomicroscope (Zeiss)
and processed used Adobe Photoshop CS4.
Our method for quantifying asymmetric mouth direction in these samples followed that of Hori et al. [19]. It
involved measuring and comparing the angles formed
by the lines between the left and right preorbital processes and from the preorbital processes to the symphysis of the upper jaw. A measure of laterality for each
specimen was obtained by taking the difference between
the left and right angles (L-R as in [19]).
Linkage analyses

A hybrid cross, that was originally generated in order
to identify loci that segregate with jaw shape [37,38],
was used to determine whether or not the handedness
of the oral jaw is genetically determined in Lake
Malawi cichlids. The F2 mapping population (n = 173)
was generated by crossing two Lake Malawi cichlid
species, Labeotropheus fuelleborni and Metriaclima
zebra. We used a linkage map that assigned 165 markers (both microsatellites and SNPs) to 25 linkage
groups using JoinMap 3.0 [39]. Details of the map construction have been published elsewhere [37,38]. We
used the nonparametric mapping function of MapQTL
4.0 [40] to estimate the genomic position of jaw handedness. This approach employs the Kruskal-Wallis
rank sum test and is described in detail in a paper by
Streelman et al.[41].

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

Marker association analysis in wild P. microlepis larvae

Of the 141 P. microlepis larvae, 93 could be reliably
scored as either lefty or righty. A subset (n = 25) of
these animals was genotyped at microsatellite loci linked
to
handedness.
Primers
were
GM294F/R
GCTCGTCCTATCTTTAGAACA/AAACCAGCCCGCTATT,
and
UNH2101F/R
CTGCAGGGTCAAGTTTTCGT/GGCTGGGAGGAGAAAGAAAT.
GM294 was found to be invariant but UNH2101
showed a size polymorphism. The remaining larvae
were grouped by handedness and genotyped at
UNH2101. A X2 goodness of fit test was used to test for
a departure from expected genotypic frequencies for
each morphotype, and for the family as a whole.

Page 10 of 11

9.

10.
11.
12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

Abbreviations
MA: mechanical advantage; RW: relative warp.

17.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Biology Department at Syracuse University,
the Reneé Crown Honors Department and the McNair Undergraduate PostBaccalaureate Achievement Program. We would like to thank J T Streelman
and N Parnell for providing the most recent Malawi cichlid linkage map for
use in this study. We would also like to thank S Renn and H Hofmann for
providing the collection of P. microlepis specimens from the field. Finally, we
thank four anonymous reviewers, as well as J T Streelman, T D Kocher, K A
Parsons and W J Cooper, for reading and commenting on earlier drafts of
this manuscript.

18.

Authors’ contributions
RCA designed the experiments. TAS performed the morphometric
experiments. TAS and RCA performed the genetic mapping and association
analysis. Both authors analysed and interpreted the results and wrote the
manuscript.
Received: 15 September 2009
Accepted: 26 January 2010 Published: 26 January 2010
References
1. Carroll SB, Grenier JK, Weatherbee SD: From DNA to Diversity: Molecular
Genetics and the Evolution of Animal Design. Malden: Blackwell
Publishing, 2 2005.
2. Raya A, Belmonte JC: Left-right asymmetry in the vertebrate embryo:
from early information to higher-level integration. Nat Rev Genet 2006,
7(4):283-293.
3. Norberg RA: Occurrence and independent evolution of bilateral ear
asymmetry in owls and the implications on owl taxonomy. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London 1977, 280(B):376-406.
4. Hubbs CL, Hubbs LC: Bilateral asymmetry and bilateral variation in fishes.
Papers from the Michigan Academy of Science, Arts and Letters 1945,
30:229-311.
5. Ness AR: A measure of asymmetry of the skulls of odontocete whales.
Journal of Zoology, London 1967, 153:209-221.
6. Juste J, Ibanez C: An Asymmetric Dental Formula in a Mammal, the SaoTome Island Fruit Bat Myonycteris brachycephala (Mammalia,
Megachiroptera). Canadian Journal of Zoology-Revue Canadienne De
Zoologie 1993, 71(1):221-224.
7. Hoso M, Asami T, Hori M: Right-handed snakes: convergent evolution of
asymmetry for functional specialization. Biology Letters 2007,
3(2):169-U162.
8. Leary RF, Allendorf FW: Fluctuating Asymmetry as an Indicator of Stress Implications for Conservation Biology. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 1989,
4(7):214-217.

19.

20.
21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.
33.
34.

Palmer AR: From symmetry to asymmetry: phylogenetic patterns of
asymmetry variation in animals and their evolutionary significance. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93(25):14279-14286.
Palmer AR: Antisymmetry. Variation: A central concept in biology Burlington,
MA: Elsevier IncHallgrimmson B, Hall BK 2005, 359-398.
Palmer AR: Symmetry breaking and the evolution of development.
Science 2004, 306(5697):828-833.
Takahashi R, Watanabe K, Nishida M, Hori M: Evolution of feeding
specialization in Tanganyikan scale-eating cichlids: a molecular
phylogenetic approach. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:195.
Hori M: Feeding relationships among cichlid fishes in Lake Tanganyika:
effects of intra- and interspecific variation of feeding behavior on their
coexistence. INTECOL Bulletin 1991, 19:89-102.
Hori M: Frequency-Dependent Natural Selection in the Handedness of
Scale-Eating Cichlid Fish. Science 1993, 260(5105):216-219.
Liem KF, Stewart DJ: Evolution of scale-eating cichlid fishes of Lake
Tanganyika: a generic revision with a description of a new species.
Bulletin for the Museum of Comparative Zoology 1976, 147(7):313-350.
Takahashi R, Moriqaki T, Hori M: Foraging behaviour and functional
morphology of two scale-eating cichlids from Lake Tanganyika. Journal
of Fish Biology 2007, 70:1458-1469.
Takahashi S, Hori M: Unstable evolutionarily Stable Strategy and
Oscillation - a Model of Lateral Asymmetry in Scale-Eating Cichlids.
American Naturalist 1994, 144(6):1001-1020.
Takahashi S, Hori M: Oscillation maintains polymorphisms - a model of
lateral asymmetry in two competing scale-eating cichlids. J Theor Biol
1998, 195(1):1-12.
Hori M, Ochi H, Kohda M: Inheritance pattern of lateral dimorphism in
two cichlids (a scale eater, Perissodus microlepis, and an herbivore,
Neolamprologus moorii) in Lake Tanganyika. Zoological Science 2007,
24(5):486-492.
Seki S, Kohda M, Hori M: Asymmetry of mouth morph of a freshwater
goby, Rhinogobius flumineus. Zoological Science 2000, 17(9):1321-1325.
Konings A: Tanganyika cichlids in their natural habitat. Cichlid Press 1998.
Boscarino B, Rudstam LG, Loew ER, Mills EL: Predicting the vertical
distribution of the opossum shrimp, Mysis relicta, in Lake Ontario: a test
of laboratory-based light preferences. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and
Aquatic Sciences 2009, 66(1):101-113.
Juvonen P: Diel vertical migration of planktonic shrimps, jellyfish and
copepods in Lake Tanganyika. Results of the 1999 LTR’s 20th multidisciplinary cruise Bujumbura: FAO/FINNIDA Research for the Management
of the Fisheries of Lake TanganyikaMölsä H, Salonen K, Sarvala J 1999.
Westneat MW: Feeding Mechanics of Teleost Fishes (Labridae,
Perciformes) - a Test of 4-Bar Linkage Models. Journal of Morphology
1990, 205(3):269-295.
Westneat MW: A biomechanical model for analysis of muscle force,
power output and lower jaw motion in fishes. Journal of Theoretical
Biology 2003, 223(3):269-281.
Fujimura K, Okada N: Development of the embryo, larva and early
juvenile of Nile tilapia Oreochromis niloticus (Pisces: Cichlidae).
Developmental staging system. Dev Growth Differ 2007, 49(4):301-324.
Albertson RC, Yelick PC: Roles for fgf8 signaling in left-right patterning of
the visceral organs and craniofacial skeleton. Dev Biol 2005,
283(2):310-321.
Albertson RC, Yelick PC: Fgf8 haploinsufficiency results in distinct
craniofacial defects in adult zebrafish. Dev Biol 2007, 306(2):505-515.
Kawakami Y, Raya A, Raya RM, Rodriguez-Esteban C, Belmonte JC: Retinoic
acid signalling links left-right asymmetric patterning and bilaterally
symmetric somitogenesis in the zebrafish embryo. Nature 2005,
435(7039):165-171.
Heuts BA: Lateralization of trunk muscle volume, and lateralization of
swimming turns of fish responding to external stimuli. Behavioural
Processes 1999, 47(2):113-124.
Mboko SK, Kohda M, Hori M: Asymmetry of Mouth-Opening of a Small
Herbivorous Cichlid Fish Telmatochromis temporalis in Lake Tanganyika.
Zoolog Sci 1998, 15(3):405-408.
tpsDig2. http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/soft-tps.html.
tpsRelw. http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/soft-tps.html.
Cooper WJ, Westneat MW: Form and function of damselfish skulls: rapid
and repeated evolution into a limited number of trophic niches. BMC
Evol Biol 2009, 9:24.

Stewart and Albertson BMC Biology 2010, 8:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/8

Page 11 of 11

35. Potthoff T: Clearing and staining techniques. Ontogeny and systematics of
fishes Lawrence: American Society of Ichtheologists and
HerpetologistsMoser HG 1984.
36. Walker MB, Kimmel CB: A two-color acid-free cartilage and bone stain for
zebrafish larvae. Biotech Histochem 2007, 82(1):23-28.
37. Albertson RC, Streelman JT, Kocher TD: Directional selection has shaped
the oral jaws of Lake Malawi cichlid fishes. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2003, 100(9):5252-5257.
38. Albertson RC, Streelman JT, Kocher TD, Yelick PC: Integration and
evolution of the cichlid mandible: the molecular basis of alternate
feeding strategies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(45):16287-16292.
39. Van Ooijen JW, Voorrips RE: JoinMap 3.0. Plant Research International,
Wageningen, the Netherlands 2001, Software for the calculation of genetic
linkage maps.
40. Van Ooijen JW, Boer MP, Jansen RC, Maliepaard C: QTLMap 4.0. Plant
Research International, Wageningen, the Netherlands 2002, Software for the
calculation of QTL positions on genetic maps.
41. Streelman JT, Albertson RC, Kocher TD: Genome mapping of the orange
blotch colour pattern in cichlid fishes. Mol Ecol 2003, 12(9):2465-2471.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-8
Cite this article as: Stewart and Albertson: Evolution of a unique
predatory feeding apparatus: functional anatomy, development and a
genetic locus for jaw laterality in Lake Tanganyika scale-eating cichlids.
BMC Biology 2010 8:8.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
