<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Visualization and Exploration of Conserved Regulatory Modules Using ReXSpecies 2</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:267. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-267"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Stephan Struckmann; Daniel Esch; Hans Schöler; Georg Fuellen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

SOFTWARE

Open Access

Visualization and Exploration of Conserved
Regulatory Modules Using ReXSpecies 2
Stephan Struckmann1,2*, Daniel Esch3, Hans Schöler3,4 and Georg Fuellen1*

Abstract
Background: The prediction of transcription factor binding sites is difficult for many reasons. Thus, filtering
methods are needed to enrich for biologically relevant (true positive) matches in the large amount of
computational predictions that are frequently generated from promoter sequences.
Results: ReXSpecies 2 filters predictions of transcription factor binding sites and generates a set of figures
displaying them in evolutionary context. More specifically, it uses position specific scoring matrices to search for
motifs that specify transcription factor binding sites. It removes redundant matches and filters the remaining
matches by the phylogenetic group that the matrices belong to. It then identifies potential transcriptional
modules, and generates figures that highlight such modules, taking evolution into consideration. Module
formation, scoring by evolutionary criteria and visual clues reduce the amount of predictions to a manageable
scale. Identification of transcription factor binding sites of particular functional importance is left to expert filtering.
ReXSpecies 2 interacts with genome browsers to enable scientists to filter predictions together with other
sequence-related data.
Conclusions: Based on ReXSpecies 2, we derive plausible hypotheses about the regulation of pluripotency. Our
tool is designed to analyze transcription factor binding site predictions considering their common pattern of
occurrence, highlighting their evolutionary history.

Background
The investigation of gene regulation in general, and
transcription factor binding in particular, is a challenging task [1-3], and many data sources should be considered. In silico predictions based on position specific
scoring matrices (describing binding motifs) suffer from
many matches. These matches may be false positives,
since they only rely on the primary structure of a
sequence. For instance, the spatial structure and accessibility of DNA, which is not only defined by its sequence,
is important when considering transcription factor binding. Hence, predictions made using only the primary
structure of a sequence are usually not presumed to be
very specific.
One may expect that similarity between a base
sequence and a known binding motif is a necessary
* Correspondence: stephan.struckmann@uni-rostock.de; fuellen@uni-rostock.
de
1
University of Rostock, Institute for Biostatistics and Informatics in Medicine
and Ageing Research, Heydemannstrasse 8, 18057 Rostock, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

condition for binding, but it is neither a necessary, nor a
sufficient one. On one hand, transcription factors can
bind sequences that are quite dissimilar from their
known binding motif. On the other hand, other effects
(such as spatial DNA structure) can prevent the transcription factor from binding, even if the binding motif
is matching. Nevertheless, to arrive at a binary binding/
non-binding statement, predictions with a sequencebased similarity score below an arbitrary threshold are
usually discarded. A binary decision is of course problematic, since binding and functionality are both better
reflected by a gradual scale. In vitro analyses may likewise not be reliable. That is, even if transcription factor
binding is measured, this may be an experimental artifact and does not necessarily imply regulatory effects.
No method or algorithm based on sequence data alone
can predict regulatory function of individual transcription factor binding sites, even if binding has been
demonstrated in vivo.
To make the best of this situation, we and others proposed to integrate data from different sources [4,5].

© 2011 Struckmann et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Apart from computational predictions, curated data and
gene expression experiments can be considered; some
are available from genome browsers such as the UCSC
browser [6]. However, such data is usually not available.
Then again, conservation data on the sequence level is
very often available, and conservation of transcriptional
modules [5] can help to improve hypotheses about transcriptional regulation. Based on this premise, using the
conservation of binding sites between species, we developed a tool called ReXSpecies [7,8] for the identification
of transcriptional modules, and of their gain/loss patterns in evolution.
In the following, a transcriptional module is defined as
a set of transcription factor binding sites, and a gain/loss
pattern is defined as a transcriptional module, for which
we find a gain or loss in evolution, see Implementation.
Please note that the term transcriptional module as
defined here is closely related to the term regulatory
module. In turn, the term regulatory module has three
distinct definitions in the literature. A regulatory module
is defined either (a) as a sequence region that contains
regulatory functions with no particular reference to transcription factor binding sites, or (b) as a particular transcription factor binding site combination that has one
defined transcriptional function, or (c) as a sequence
region that contains regulatory functions, including transcription factor binding site combinations that may separately or simultaneously have one or more transcriptional
functions. ReXSpecies aims to find regulatory modules in
the sense of definition (c). It highlights regions in
sequences as potentially functional and proposes transcriptional modules, i.e. sets of transcription factor binding sites providing one or more of such functions.
Here, we present version 2.0 of ReXSpecies, which
offers an array of new features, and has been improved
in terms of graphical visualization, interactivity, and
usability. It provides full automation; the only input
needed is a gene name, or the coordinates of a promoter
region. In case of a gene name, a genomic region
upstream of the transcription start site is taken, based
on UCSC [9] data. Starting from a precomputed selection of homologous regulatory regions available via
UCSC [9], ReXSpecies 2 automatically searches for transcription factor binding sites therein, using position specific scoring matrices and the PoSSuM tool [10].
Further, it generates novel hypotheses about modules
and the gain/loss patterns associated with these. Such
groups of predicted transcription factor binding sites are
relevant for the study of gene regulation; their evolutionary conservation and history can now be visualized
by means of the following figures:
1. An annotated alignment, combining sequence and
binding site information,

Page 2 of 20

2. An annotated phylogenetic tree, including ancestral states estimated for the transcription factor
binding sites found in today’s species,
3. A combination of alignment and tree,
4. Interactive web pages of 1-3,
5. Interactive genome browser web pages (e.g. UCSC
[6]). In particular, ReXSpecies 2.0 can now write
BED file format [11] that can be visualized using the
UCSC genome browser [6] and the EnsEMBL genome browser [12].
See also Additional File 1, Part II for an overview of
all figure types.
Interpretation of predicted transcription factor binding
sites - lots of false positives or lots of ubiquitous
transcription?

As methods for the investigation of gene regulation
neglect some aspects of binding and frequently generate
a large amount of predictions, a high false positive rate
is usually assumed. However, an alternative to declaring
that most predicted transcription factor binding sites are
false positives is motivated by the concept of “ubiquitous
transcription” [13]. In general, ubiquitous transcription
refers to the observation that virtually every nucleotide
is transcribed [13,14], even though often at low levels,
and usually with negligible biological effect. The biological effect may in turn depend on the biological context.
Ubiquitous transcription can be explained by a utilization of binding sites by transcription factors that is
much higher than usually estimated. Such binding
would be highly context-dependent; in particular it may
depend on transcription factor abundance, and on epigenetic influences that modify DNA accessibility. If the
regulatory regions of specific genes are studied, as will
be the case here, high utilization of binding sites means
that many predicted binding sites and corresponding
modules are functional, even though many of them are
only functional in specific, often negligible contexts.
In this paper, we cannot and do not need to prove or
disprove ubiquitous transcription. However, the actual
amount of ubiquitous transcription has implications for
the interpretation of the results we find. The more ubiquitous transcription there is, the more likely the predicted binding sites and corresponding modules are
functional, and the closer the findings we report below
are a true reflection of reality. In the remainder of this
paper, our interpretation will be on the conservative
side, and we will write about the “large amount of false
positives” in the usual fashion. In the extreme case,
almost every predicted binding site may be considered
“false positive”. We suggest, however, that binding sites
found by ReXSpecies, which are included in an evolutionarily conserved module and which are gained or lost

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

together, have a good chance of being “true positive”. In the
Results and Discussion section, we wish to demonstrate
that there is some evidence for our suggestion provided by
the plausibility of many of the modules that we detect.
Other approaches to filter transcription factor binding
sites using evolutionary conservation

As discussed, we assume that there are many putatively
false positive predicted transcription factor binding sites
found as matches of position specific scoring matrices in
eukaryotic genomes (see also [7]). In our case, predictions
will be filtered by taking binding sites forming a module
that is conserved in evolutionary time. A critical point for
filtering by evolutionary conservation is to identify homology. Such homology should not just hold for the base
sequence. Instead, evolutionary constraints also apply to
binding effects, which depend on the spatial structure and
accessibility of the DNA and on binding affinities (also
weak binding) of transcription factor molecules to the
DNA, which classical alignments based on sequence
(Smith-Waterman, BLAST) fail to consider. Moreover,
functional equivalence of different sub-sequences may be
retained although the sequence itself changes heavily.
To overcome some of these difficulties, two
approaches are possible in principle. One way is to first
search for transcription factor binding sites, and to
afterwards identify homology (alignment free methods).
The other way is to start with finding homologous
sequences and their alignment, and then to search for
transcription factor binding sites therein (phylogenetic
footprinting). In each case, the first step is crucial.
• Finding transcription factor binding sites first
(alignment free) means that it is not possible to use
evolutionary conservation for that step, and a decline
in specificity may be the result.
• If analyses start generating an alignment (phylogenetic footprinting), the result, i.e. statements about
homology on the sequence level, given by the alignment, may be of low quality. During the alignment
step, no knowledge about the putative transcription
factor binding sites found in the sequences can then
be used, so their possible homology cannot be taken
into account. For example, some binding sites may
inadvertantly be torn apart by the alignment in one
of the sequences, because they are not considered
during the alignment step.

Page 3 of 20

Unlike the RRS method, ReXSpecies 2.0 belongs to the
phylogenetic footprinting methods, generating an alignment first. It does not generate de-novo transcription
factor binding site motifs, but instead it uses libraries of
known binding site motifs, and it subsequently generates
de-novo modules of transcription factor binding sites.
Manke et al. [16] published such a method that finds
transcription factor binding site modules in conserved
regulatory sequences. It is based on gene expression
data and gene function (gene ontology [17]) data and
their algorithm does not directly consider a phylogeny,
but evolutionary conservation is used. Similarly,
MCAST [18] allows one to search for clusters of motif
matches, but without using phylogenic information.
GibbsModule [19] and PhyME [20] provide de-novo
detection of motifs and transcriptional modules constituted by such motifs. Compared to these two tools,
ReXSpecies 2.0 uses validated libraries of position specific scoring matrices [21,22] for finding transcription factor binding sites and searches for sets of potentially
cooperating transcription factor binding sites, using
their phylogenetic conservation.
Other important frameworks used to analyze transcriptional regulation are Genomatix [23] with its FrameWorker module, Transfac [24] and Mapper [25]. Except for
Mapper, these tools are only commercially available.
Mapper and Transfac do not search for modules, but for
transcription factor binding sites only. One feature of
Mapper is that it provides a user interface to MEME [26],
a tool to generate de novo transcription factor binding
site models. Genomatix FrameWorker does not reconstruct ancestral states, but searches in a set of sequences
for common patterns to detect modules.
Many of the approaches listed above only generate
lists of putative modules but lack the ability to render
sophisticated figures. When these approaches generate
figures (Genomatix) or interact with genome browsers
(Mapper), they only show aligned sequences where
glyphs (squares/rectangles) below these sequences represent the predictions. They fail to show the evolutionary
history of single transcription factor binding sites or
CRMs. ReXSpecies 2.0 provides some novel figure types
(see “Results and Discussion: Output Files generated by
ReXSpecies”) that were designed to analyze transcriptional regulation, including its evolution.

Results and Discussion
Input for ReXSpecies 2.0

One alignment-free method is the Regulatory Region
Score (RRS) proposed by Koohy et al. [15]. It combines
gene expression related features with sequence features
and then calculates average scores for sequences to be
bound by certain transcription factors. It afterwards generates a list of functionally homologous sequences.

Once logged in to the ReXSpecies web-server to start a
new analysis, only genome coordinates (either mouse or
human) or a gene name have to be entered. Additionally,
the set of position specific scoring matrices to use (JASPAR [21] matrices are available in ReXSpecies, other
matrices can be uploaded by the user) may be changed

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

and the parameters for the different stages/steps (see
Figure 1) of the analysis may be adjusted.
Workflow of ReXSpecies 2.0

After starting an analysis, ReXSpecies 2.0 first supplements the data with a set of regulatory regions from
other species homologous to the selected one. This is

Page 4 of 20

done using the multiz track of the UCSC genome database [6,9]. In the next step (see Figure 1), sequence
based predictions for transcription factor binding sites
are generated by PoSSuM [10], in particular based on
the JASPAR position specific scoring matrix database
[21]. In the following two steps (see Figure 1), these predictions are aligned and annotated, such that redundant
matches are clustered and homologous predictions are
detected. This generates a table of predictions for each
species. Then, in the 5th step (Figure 1), the nodes of
the phylogenetic species tree for the species under
investigation [27-29] (Figure 2) are labelled using the
table of predictions and Fitch parsimony [30] reconstruction for the ancestral states. The edges of this tree
are then, in the 6th step, annotated with all gains and
losses of transcription factor binding sites based on the
node annotations generated in the step before. Finally,
in the set of predicted gains and losses, ReXSpecies 2.0
searches for gain/loss patterns of modules and generates
the output files as described next.
Output Files generated by ReXSpecies 2.0

Figure 1 Flowchart of a ReXSpecies 2.0 analysis. The steps as
shown are executed automatically upon user input. Necessary input
are only the gene name or the genome coordinates of the region
to analyze. Optionally, most steps can be configured further: other
PSSMs may be selected, the thresholds for the PSSM search tool
can be set up, clustering and homology detection can be adjusted,
the species tree to use can be selected, the patterns can be filtered
based on different criteria, and the figures can be configured (size,
format, hide/show elements, pattern highlighting). Further data
curation can then be done manually.

ReXSpecies 2.0 generates different files, especially figures
that allow users to visualize regulatory sequences and
that highlight evolutionary conserved modules. All figures can be exported in PDF format. Depending on a
file’s content (table or figure), it can also be exported in
different spreadsheet formats (ODF, XLS), or in common graphic formats (PNG, TIFF, BMP, SVG, EPS, PS).
Additionally, ReXSpecies can write BED files [11]. Such
BED files (optionally extended BED files with STRING
[31,32] and iHOP [33,34] information about the transcription factor proteins) are input files for genome
browsers such as UCSC [6,35] or EnsEMBL [12,36]. The
genome browser can then be used to generate figures of
the transcription factor binding site predictions made by
ReXSpecies, with extended annotations available via the
user interface of the genome browser as clickable links.
(See Figures 3, 4, 5, 6 and Additional files 2, 3, 4, and
5.) ReXSpecies 2.0 can also generate figures that show
an annotated alignment with color-coded species, giving
an overview of the annotated sequences (See Figure 7,
and Additional Files 6, 7, 8). Another type of output file
is a table (available as Excel sheet, as OpenDocument
sheet or as PDF) that lists all modules with gain/loss
patterns (See Additional Files 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
and 16). All output files are systematically presented in
Additional File 1, Part II.
BED files, and UCSC visualization

Using UCSC [6] and EnsEMBL [12,36], custom annotation tracks may be uploaded in BED (Browser Extensible
Data) format [11]. Therefore, we implemented export of
results generated by ReXSpecies 2.0 as BED files [11].
These files can be uploaded to the UCSC genome

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 5 of 20

Figure 2 The taxonomic tree used by ReXSpecies 2.0 by default. The tree is based on the taxonomic trees published in [27-29]. The species
codes at the leaves are the standard UCSC species codes.

browser and to EnsEMBL. UCSC can also directly be
opened from ReXSpecies 2.0 with the BED file already
uploaded, enabling scientists to analyze ReXSpecies 2.0
predictions in a familiar manner together with other

features as proposed in [5]. (See Figure 3, 4, 5, 6 and
Additional files 2, 3, 4 and 5. ReXSpecies 2.0 can also
write a “BED detail format”, so that information about
each transcription factor acquired from the STRING

100 bases
Scale
chr17:
35641650
35641700
35641750
35641800
35641850
---> L W G A L G F L R L C D S P WG L R S E H G V G A D R Q T P S L A D R H S E G Y S L A K I T K H Q A S N G I L R L G P E N H S R E V Q G R L S A P P P P N P V S L V S F R Q H R N G G G V G D E D
T
H C G V L W A F * G C V I H P G A F V Q S M V * E Q T D K H H P L Q T G T L R A I L L Q R * L S T R P V M G S S DW A Q K T T L G K F R V G S L H P L L L I P S P * C L S A S T G M G E G W V T R
T V G C S G L F E A V * F T L G P S F R A W C R S R Q T N T I P C R Q A L * G L F S C K D N * A P G Q * WD P Q T G P R K P L * G S S G * A L C T P S S * S R L L S V F P P A Q E W G R G G * R G
#1 !bls=411@[Eutheria]
MEIS1
Sox17
DBP
STAT3
Mafb
STAT5A
cap
PRGR
SMAD
Klf4
Hand1Tcfe2a
IRF
GATA3
BRCA1USF2
SMAD3
USF2
BRCA1
RFX
Wiki Track user annotations
Make new entry
CR3
1A(PE)demethyl
1A(PE) SF1
UCSC Genes Based on RefSeq, UniProt, GenBank, CCDS and Comparative Genomics
Placental Mammal Basewise Conservation by PhyloP
2.1 _
Mammal Cons

0-3.3
lod=18
lod=18
Rat
Human
Orangutan
Dog
Horse
Opossum
Chicken
Stickleback

PhastCons Euarchontoglires Conserved Elements, 30-way Multiz Alignment
PhastCons Placental Mammal Conserved Elements, 30-way Multiz Alignment
lod=23
PhastCons Vertebrate Conserved Elements, 30-way Multiz Alignment
lod=23
Multiz Alignments of 30 Vertebrates

Figure 3 CR3 pattern at UCSC. The pattern found in the murine CR3 region at the UCSC genome browser. The pattern is shown as one track,
more patterns would be in a new track. The tracks are sorted by branch length score [37], which is shown in the track description. The color
and the number in the track description are unique for each pattern, the ancestral species predicted to be the origins of the pattern are also
given in the track description. (If all transcription factor binding sites of a pattern are predicted for mouse, this is denoted using an exclamation
mark.) If a pattern does not occur for mouse at all, it is not shown in the UCSC figure. The color intensity of the glyphs (squares/rectangles) that
represent the binding sites reflects the matrix similarity score. This score is based on the position specific scoring matrix match that yielded the
murine transcription factor binding site prediction. Below the prediction tracks, the wiki track is shown. This track contains annotations that we
have listed in [5], see also Table 1. The wiki track entries are linked with the PubMed [42] entries of the papers that published the corresponding
transcription factor binding site. At the bottom of the figure, sequence conservation is shown. We analyzed the PhastCons [43] most conserved
elements only; also we did not analyze the untranslated regions (UTRs) of genes. The very first track lists the nucleotide bases; stop codons (*) in
the “amino acid track” indicate that the region is non-coding.

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 6 of 20

Figure 4 CR1 patterns at UCSC. The patterns found in the murine CR1 region at the UCSC genome browser. See Figure 3 for further
explanations.

database [31,32] and the iHOP database [33,34] is
directly available through the web interface of UCSC.
As specified by the user, BED files may contain either
modules of transcription factor binding sites, or

transcription factor binding sites with a branch length
score (BLS, [37]) above a given threshold. Given a phylogenetic species tree annotated with binding site predictions, the branch length score corresponds to the

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 7 of 20

Figure 5 SRR1 patterns at UCSC. The patterns found in the murine SRR1 region at the UCSC genome browser. See Figure 3 for further
explanations.

summation of all branch lengths (from UCSC multiz
track [28]) of the subtree, in which for all leaves the prediction is annotated. Thus, the BED files contain either
transcription factor binding sites as parts of modules, or
highly conserved transcription factor binding sites filtered and ranked by their individual branch length
score.
Annotated Alignment (Homology-based)

In genome browsers, figures are generated in a
sequence-centered way and annotations are usually
plotted below the sequence. A complementary
sequence-centered figure is generated by ReXSpecies
since 1.0 visualizing the transcription factor binding
sites species-by-species (see Additional File 1, part II).
This figure is called alignment-based figure. Examples
are provided in Additional Files 17, 18, 19 and 20. However, because we usually consider homologous
sequences from many species, which often contain
many predictions, we will generate very large images if
we consider all species in the alignment separately. To
consider all species simultaneously, ReXSpecies (since
version 1.0) clusters homologous predictions, and the
size of the figure can thus be reduced to fewer glyphs
(squares/rectangles) by eliminating redundant ones.
Only one glyph is then used for each transcription

factor binding site prediction, instead of many different
ones for each prediction in each species. To generate
such figures, we implemented a homology-based rendering in ReXSpecies 2.0 where each prediction is shown
only once, as in Figure 7. For each transcription factor
binding site prediction, all species in which homologous
transcription factor binding sites occur are color coded.
In Figure 7, the species tree is plotted to the left of the
predictions and its nodes are colored the same way as
the predictions are.
We developed a color assignment algorithm that
assigns similar colors to closely related species and different colors to distant species. This algorithm implements the following principles:
• The color hue of the nodes follows a gradient
along the leaves of the tree, so that evolutionary distant nodes are assigned dissimilar colors while evolutionary close nodes are similarly colored.
• Nodes close to the root get darker colors than
nodes close to the leaves.
Homology-based figures emphasize highly conserved
predictions in a natural way since they are rendered in
many colors, because they are present in many species.

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 8 of 20

Figure 6 N1 patterns at UCSC. The patterns found in the murine N1 region at the UCSC genome browser. See Figure 3 for further
explanations.

(Such highly conserved homologs are also reflected by
high branch length scores.) Also, it is easy to find predictions that are present in two distant regions of the
species tree, because for each region, a block of similar
colors is shown. Such predictions present in two distant
regions often form a gain/loss pattern.

As in all types of figure (alignment- and homologybased figures), gain/loss patterns can be highlighted
using the pattern color option. If activated, colors are
assigned to patterns, and the pattern colors are shown
in the left half of each prediction box in the alignment,
while node-(gradient)-colors of the transcription factor

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 9 of 20

Figure 7 CR3 pattern, Homology-based figure. The pattern and the transcription factor binding sites found in the murine CR3 region. The
various components of the homology based figure are described in the main text, under the heading “Legend of the homology based figure”.

binding site prediction (with colors denoting the species)
are plotted to the right of the pattern colors. The nodes
are then split in half, where the left half shows the pattern colors, and the right half shows the node (gradient)
colors. Examples for homology-based figures are Figure
7 and Additional Files 6, 7, 8.

Legend of the homology based figure

In Figure 7, the pattern and the transcription factor
binding sites found in the murine CR3 region are visualized species by species. The leaves of the species tree
consist of colored boxes that are split into a left and a
right half. On the left, all patterns that are predicted to

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

be gained at this node by parsimony are indicated by
color (see the root node); on the right, another color
indicates the species corresponding to the node. In case
of CR3, only one pattern is found, and it is gained at
the root; hence we see only the dark pink color for this
one pattern at the root. As explained above, species are
indicated using another color scheme, going from green
(top) to brown (bottom). A plus “+” sign next to the
box denotes that a node gains transcription factor binding sites predicted by parsimony. Between the box just
discussed, and the label with the species name, another
box (or set of boxes) indicates those patterns, whose
transcription factor binding sites all are predicted to
exist for the species in question. In case of CR3, only
one pattern is found, hence we see only the dark pink
boxes for this one pattern. On top, alignment coordinates and genome coordinates of the reference genome
(mm9 in this case) are shown. The transcription factor
binding sites (i.e., usually, clusters of transcription factor
binding sites) are labelled using their cluster name that
contains the name of the transcription factor, the strand
(if identical for all transcription factor binding sites clustered and all homologs), the (middle) position in alignment coordinates and the length of the transcription
factor binding site in base pairs (without gaps), if identical for all clustered transcription factor binding sites
and homologs. The transcription factor binding sites
have colored overlays that represent the species where
homologs of that transcription factor binding site are
predicted. The thicker part of these overlays (pointed to
by curvy pink arrows) indicates the patterns (glyphs
with sharp edges), for which the transcription factor
binding site is predicted by parsimony. The thin part
indicates extant species (leaves), for which the transcription factor binding site is predicted using position specific scoring matrices and clustering. In the legend below
the figure, all leaf/species and all pattern colors are
explained. To keep the figures readable, by default, only
the first 10 patterns (ordered by branch length score)
are shown in the homology-based figures.
Table with all Details about Patterns

The most extensive output is the full list of gain/loss
patterns of transcriptional modules. Each pattern is
shown with its branch length score, the nodes in the
tree where the gain/loss occurred, its transcription factor binding sites, and two logos:
• The pattern logo (PatternLogo) shows the pattern
as it would occur in the alignment-based figure.
That is, it shows a small alignment-based zoom-in
where only the transcription factor binding sites
consisting of the pattern are drawn.
• The tree logo (TreeLogo) shows the species tree.
In this tree, the ancestral inner gain/loss nodes of

Page 10 of 20

the pattern as found by parsimony (as described in
the implementation section below) are highlighted in
the pattern color. Furthermore, all leaves of extant
species, where the full pattern is present, are drawn
in that color. The TreeLogo is strongly related to
the branch length score. More specifically, the
branch length score increases when there are more
highlighted leaves and when the evolutionary distance separating the leaves is greater.
The pattern table can also be downloaded in Excel
[38] or OpenOffice calc OpenDocument format [39], as
a PDF or as an XML file, which could be processed
further, using XSL transformation [40].
A long version of the pattern table includes sequence
logos [41] for each sequence motif that is part of the
pattern. Furthermore, direct links to different databases
are provided, linking to
• the NCBI EntrezGene [42] entries for the genes
that code for the transcription factors,
• the STRING [31,32] network of all transcription
factors and the target gene of the regulatory
sequence,
• a Google search for the transcription factors of the
pattern and the target gene of the regulatory
sequence,
• iHOP [33,34] searches for the transcription factor
names, especially for those that are not mapped to
any gene identifier.
Each match can easily be found in the figures generated by ReXSpecies (since 1.0) using a JavaScript function that highlights the corresponding elements, using
the ReXSpecies web site. Pattern tables can be found in
the supplement as Additional Files 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15 and 16.
Insights into the regulation of two of the core genes of
pluripotency, Pou5f1 and Sox2

In the following, we will exemplify the use of ReXSpecies
2.0 by four case studies. We used position specific scoring matrices from two databases [21,22] to analyze the
so-called “most conserved elements” (PhastCons [43]) of
known regulatory sequences of pluripotency related
genes. For the following case studies, we have chosen the
CR1 (without the untranslated region of the overlapping
first exon) and the CR3 of the murine Pou5f1 gene [44].
The CR1 is found at chr17:35,642,919-35,643,044, and
CR3 at chr17:35,641,642-35,641,746 in version 9 of the
mouse genome. Further, we analyzed the N1 and SRR1
[45,46] regions of the murine Sox2 gene. The N1 region
is found at chr3:34,564,105-34,564,403 and the SRR1
region at chr3:34,545,031-34,545,378; it is part of the N2

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 11 of 20

region [45,46]. ReXSpecies 2.0 was used to remove duplicate matches, to find putative homologous matches, and
to remove implausible matches such as plant specific
transcription factor binding sites in mammals. Further, it
was used to generate figures to visualize transcription
factor binding in an evolutionary context and to highlight
interesting evolutionary patterns.
Here, we present ReXSpecies 2 figures for all above
mentioned regions and formulate hypotheses about their
biological function. We will discuss these hypotheses in
the context of what is known about these regions.
Therefore, Table 1 includes all transcription factors
listed in [5] that are known to bind to the regions investigated here, indicating which of these are available to
ReXSpecies 2.0 based on the JASPAR/Transfac [21,22]
libraries it uses. Table 1 is only used to discuss ReXSpecies results; there is no initial expert-guided restriction
on the transcription factor binding sites considered by
ReXSpecies.
One should keep in mind that our hypotheses require
experimental validation; some experiments will be
reported in the next section. Following the hypothesis of
“ubiquitous transcription” (see “Background”), we
Table 1 Transcription factor binding sites from our wiki
track annotation [5] of the regulatory regions
investigated here
Transcription factor

JASPAR

Transfac

Region

Sp1

+

+

Sp3

-

+

CR1

TR2

-

-

CR1

Nr2c1
Ear2

-

-

CR1
CR1

Nr2f6

-

-

CR1

RARE

-

-

CR1

SF1

-

+

CR1

COUP-TF2

-

+

CR1

Nr2f1

+

+

CR1

COUP-TF1

+

+

CR1

Nr2f2
Nr6a1

-

+
-

CR1
CR1

GCNF

-

+

CR1

LRH-1

-

+

CR1

Nr5a2

-

-

CR1

Fgf

-

-

N1

LEF1

-

-

N1

Gli2

-

+

SRR1

Stat3
Oct4

+
+

+
+

SRR1
SRR1

Brn1

-

+

SRR1

CR1

Transcription factor binding sites from [5] and their availability in JASPAR [21]
or Transfac [22] (commercial version) as of 2010. “-” indicates that a position
specific scoring matrix is not available, “+” indicates that it is. Instead of RARE,
retinoic receptor RARA and RAR-gamma are available.

suggest that many of the following interpretations do
have a small, but often negligible, probability to hold
true in a specific biological context. Nevertheless, one or
more interpretations may emerge as important new
links in the transcriptional regulatory network, if more
experiments are done. Patterns are ordered by branch
length score [37]. The numbering of patterns in the
UCSC tracks of some figures is not always consecutive;
while patterns found only in species other than mouse
are included in the ReXSpecies 2.0 pattern list for the
respective regulatory region, they are not included in a
figure using mouse as the reference genome.
Interpretation 1, the CR3 region (see also Figures 3 and 7
and Additional Files 2, 9, 10, and 17)

The CR3 region is of interest because there are no
known binding sites (cf. Table 1).
The only module found by ReXSpecies 2.0 in the CR3
region (Figure 3) includes Smad (left) and Klf4/Stat
(right), matching the module proposed in Tomlinson &
Chambers (2009) [47], Figure six therein. The Smad3Klf4 cooperation was also demonstrated by Hu et al,
2007 [48]. Moreover, we were able to demonstrate that
both Smad and Klf4 binding have a regulatory impact
on the CR3 region, see the next section.
Figure 7 displays further transcription factor binding
sites gained by primates (green), as well as transcription
factor binding sites gained by rodents (cyan). The specific sites for primates are Sp1, LRF, LFA1, MZF1, ZF5,
ETF, HNF4, Churchill, MZF114 and Kid3; and the specific sites for rodents are FOXO1, CDPCR3, CIZ,
FOXO3, FOXD1, Sox5, FOXL1, Kid3/ZNF354 and
Prrx2. Since there are very few papers describing species-specific transcription of Pou5f1 or Sox2, or speciesspecific usage of transcription factors involved in pluripotency, currently there is no easy validation of these
sites available.
Interpretation 2, the CR1 region (see also Figure 4 and
Additional Files 3, 6, 11, 12, and 18)

Sorting the patterns found for CR1 by branch length
score, the first six patterns with exception of the forth
are describing “small modules”. The binding sites they
include are often also included in the “large modules”
#4, #8, #9 and #12.
Pattern #1 (in Euteleostomi, but not human) is composed of Ets1 and ETF (a.k.a. TEF-4). Notably, it is long
known that Ets1 activity is enhanced by TEF-4 (in COS7 cells, derived from African green monkey, Chlorocebus [49]), leading to activity of CTalpha. CTalpha in
turn regulates phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis, which is
implied in mouse embryonic development [50], and its
possible co-regulation with Pou5f1 may be reflected by
this module.
Pattern #2 (in Euteleostomi and in Boreotheria) may
relate to Vitamin D receptor (Vdr) expression, which

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

plays a role in growth and differentiation. It consists of
Wt1 and Zeb1 binding sites, both of which up-regulate
the activity of the Vdr promoter (as does Sp1) [51].
Thus, Vdr activation may go hand in hand with Oct4/
Pou5f1 repression by way of this module. Moreover,
Zeb1 is an EMT inducer [52], and Wt1 is required for
EMT in embryonic stem cells (see [53], their Figure
four), providing another possible connection to repression of pluripotency and Pou5f1.
Pattern #3, ETF (Embryotrophic factor-3) and BRCA1
(Breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein) in Euteleostomi (with few seemingly random exceptions) are both
linked to proliferation, just by their names. However,
investigating the literature and databases (Google Scholar, STRING) no other connection between these two
putative stimulators of Pou5f1 could be found.
Pattern #4 features some of the earlier discussed transcription factors, as well further transcription factors
that are known to be involved in pluripotency and differentiation (MyoD, Sp1, Zfx, Klf4, E2f1, Gata1). Notably, the Sp3 site (arrow, see also Table 1) matches a
literature-curated site (of the wiki track), thus this is
already experimentally validated.
Pattern #5 is found in all Boreotheria. The transcription factor ACAAT shows similarity to the binding
motif of the Sox30 protein (5’-ACAAT-3’ [54]). Unfortunately, no position specific scoring matrix for Sox30 is
available in JASPAR nor in Transfac. Sox30 was proposed to play a role in differentiation of male germ cells
[54]. GATA was discussed to play a potential role in
germ cells [55]. It is possible that both differentiationrelated transcription factors are involved in Pou5f1 regulation, suppressing its expression in the course of germ
cell differentiation.
Pattern #6 in Boreotheria includes transcription factors that are implied in the development of the pancreas, CD44+ cells and photoreceptor cells. If it is
functional, it may simply be inhibitory. This pattern also
contains Pax and Gata3, which may work together in
regulation of kidney development [56]. Pattern #8 is like
Pattern #4 quite large. Even though it is predicted for
the Boreotheria by parsimony, only parts of it are available for many of the Boreotheria including mouse and
human. It contains many factors that are relevant for
the control of pluripotency, such as COUP (matching
the literature curated site, arrow, see also Table 1), Stat,
Gata, and Esrrb, but no clear interpretation is possible.
Pattern #9 (Eutheria, by parsimony) overlaps with the
literature-curated known binding site LRH-1 (arrow, see
also Table 1). At the “far left” (in the homology-based
figure), it includes Ets1 and TEF1; this part is not found
in mouse (and not shown in the UCSC figure). Since it
is not found in some other species either, it triggers a
disharmonic TreeLogo (Additional files 11 and 12).

Page 12 of 20

LRH-1 may cooperate with some other transcription
factors in the pattern, which are implicated into pluripotency, such as Klf4 and p300. Pattern #12 in Murinae
yields an interesting hypothesis of the mouse- specific
cooperation of the pluripotency-related transcription
factor binding sites Zic2/3, Mycn, COUP-TF2 (which is
experimentally validated, arrow, see also Table 1;
COUP-TF2 also known as Arp1), and Yy1.
Interpretation 3, the N2/SRR1 region (see also Figure 5 and
Additional Files 4, 7, 13, 14, and 19)

Part of the SRR1 region was already analyzed by
ReXSpecies 2.0 in [5] (Figure seven therein). In that analysis, we zoomed into the small subsection of SRR1 that
includes the Stat3 and Oct4/Brn1/2 binding sites experimentally validated in mouse: this subsection is conserved up to fish. We found patterns including the Stat3
and Oct4/Brn1/2 binding sites, and two further patterns
that combine predicted binding sites of transcription
factors of dual (neural as well as pluripotency) relevance,
possibly reflecting the known dual role of the N2/SRR1
region [5]. In Figure 5, we show the patterns that we
observe if we zoom out and analyze the entire SRR1
region. In particular, pattern #3 includes matches to the
experimentally validated Oct4/Brn1/2 binding sites,
designated Brn2 and OCTx (arrows, see also Table 1).
In the earlier zoom-in analysis, the first Oct4/Brn1/2
binding site was out-of-scope and could not be found;
this first site is now found, in pattern #3, together with
the second validated Oct4/Brn1/2 binding site, and it
co-localizes with Sox-related binding (Sry) as well as
Stat-related binding (Stat5A/6). Pattern #3 includes,
besides others, Nobox and Pdx1 binding sites on the left
that are missing in mouse (and not shown in the figure).
Therefore, not the entire pattern is found in mouse/rat.
However, it is estimated by parsimony to be gained first
in Tetrapods.
The first two tracks (patterns #1 and #2) are surprising; PU.1 and Gata1 are known as antagonistic regulators of hematopoiesis [57] and no connection with
pluripotency or (early) neural development has been
described so far. Thus, either 1. the patterns are false
positives, or they contribute to ubiquitous transcription
(which is the most likely scenario; see “Background”); or
2. PU.1 and Gata1 are involved in pluripotency or early
neural development, that is they are “moonlighting” in
addition to their well-known role; or 3. the region under
investigation is involved in hematopoiesis (implying with
high probability that Sox2 is); or 4. PU.1 and Gata1
could fulfill a repressive function on the Sox2 locus, to
ensure that there is no ectodermal pattern being
expressed in the hematopoietic cells.
There is a hint of evidence for scenario (2), since the
Sox2 N2 region regulates the anterior neural plate [45]
and Rekhtman et al [57] report that after injection of

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 13 of 20

PU.1 RNA, Xenopus “embryos also displayed defects
unrelated to hematopoiesis in the developing dorsal axis,
seen first as an uneven neural plate (not shown) and
resulting in abnormally shaped tails.” It should be noted
that although the PU.1 pattern (pattern #1) is inferred
to be amniotic (same as the GATA pattern, pattern #2),
it also appears in some fish (Percomorpha), where it
must have been gained independently, according to parsimony. Then again, it is more likely that it was gained
once in Euteleostomi, but lost in zebrafish and frog.
In the next two tracks, patterns #4 and #6 are displayed. They both feature Stat1, which is slightly
upstream of the validated Stat3 binding site. They also
feature MOVO-B/Ovol2, which is required for embryonic development, in particular of the cranial neural tube
[58]. Finally, the last two patterns occur in very few species, reflected by their low branch length score. If they
are not false positive, they are likely a “negligible” part
of ubiquitous transcription.

(their Figure six), the first Lef1 binding site is found in
all tetrapods that were investigated, whereas the second
Lef1 binding site was lost (or never gained) in Xenopus
frog. In line with this observation, we infer that patterns
with the second site were gained in amniotes (patterns
#7, #10, #17, red arrows), whereas patterns with the first
site are inferred to be gained in tetrapods (patterns #1
and #14, blue arrows). All these patterns include a variety of other predicted binding sites, with no clear overrepresentation of specific groups of transcription factors.
Apart from the group of patterns that include Lef1, a
second group of patterns is worth to be discussed (#2,
#6, #8 and #12). These patterns include Oct and/or Sox
motifs (green arrows). In particular, the Oct/Sox (Sry/
Sox5/Oct1) motif of pattern #2 may indicate an involvement of N1 not just in neural development, but also in
pluripotency.

Interpretation 4, the N1 region (see also Figure 6 and
Additional Files 5, 8, 15, 16, and 20)

In order to evaluate the benefits of ReXSpecies 2, transactivation of three transcription factors to the conserved
regions of the Pou5f1 regulatory region [44] was investigated by luciferase assays (see Figure 8). LIF (Leukemia
inhibitory factor) was used to trigger the Stat-pathway
and resulted in a significant transcriptional decrease in
CR1, while it showed no effect on CR3 in comparison
to the negative control. The straightforward

The N1 region regulates the anterior neural plate [45]; it
features few binding sites that were experimentally validated in mouse (a tandem Lef1 binding site, and a single
Fgf binding site [45]). However, Transfac-based computational analyses cannot find Fgf binding sites, because
there is no model (see Table 1). As reported by [45]

Experimental validation

Figure 8 Luciferase assay of the CR1 and CR3 regions. Transactivation activity of Smad3, Stat3 and Klf4 on the conserved regions (CR1 and
CR3) was investigated by the dual-glow luciferase assay. Smad3 shows elevated transactivation activity on CR3. Stat3 leads to transcriptional
repression on CR1. Klf4 binding results in a repressive effect on CR1 and CR3.

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

interpretation is that only the CR1 region has a functional Stat binding site in the context of our experimental setup. This functional binding site may match the
one predicted to be part of pattern #8. Activin A was
used to activate the Smad-pathway, facilitating Smad3
binding to its downstream target genes. The activation
of Smad3 showed a modest but reproducible increase of
the luciferase activity on CR3 while it shows no regulatory effect on the CR1. This matches the ReXSpecies 2based results for these two conserved regions that we
presented above; no Smad binding is predicted for the
CR1 region, in contrast to the CR3 region. Klf4 overexpression led to a transcriptional repression in the conserved regions 1 and 3 in our assay; Klf4 was predicted
to bind to both conserved regions.
Since it was shown that Klf4 partners with the histone
acetyltransferase p300, and the luciferase system lacks the
epigenetic landscape of the endogenous regulatory elements, the transcriptional repression may not represent
the full picture of Klf4 function on the regulatory region
of the Pou5f1 gene. However, the observed effects on the
transactivation activity clearly indicate that Stat binds to
the CR1, Smad3 binds to the CR3, and Klf4 binds to the
CR1 and CR3 regions. These experimental data validate in
part the predicted modules and highlight the value of the
ReXSpecies 2 filters for experimental researchers.

Conclusions
Exploration of regulatory sequences made easier

The examples show that there are usually large amounts
of filtered data returned by ReXSpecies 2.0, which must
still be vetted by an expert. This is not necessarily the
fault of ReXSpecies, but it is due to the fact that only
sequence information, but no gene expression data, etc.,
which is not usually available, is used as input. Moreover, as discussed in the next section, the large amount
of filtered data returned by ReXSpecies 2.0 may reflect
reality at least to some degree. Nevertheless, we believe
that scientists benefit from its first-line filtering, and
they moreover can benefit from our visualization and
from the interactive tools we provide. The incorporation
of evolutionary considerations can help identify true
positive transcription factor binding site predictions.
The putative evolution of (predicted) transcription factor
binding sites is thus displayed, going beyond common
visualization approaches such as genome browsers.
ReXSpecies 2.0 helps to explore the large amount of
predictions returned by matching classic position specific scoring matrices. It automates many steps from
downloading the data to running position specific scoring matrix software, and it aligns sequences and predictions in order to find conserved patterns in the output
data. It then converts the results into useful formats
(PDF, PS, SVG, WMF, XLS,...).

Page 14 of 20

Furthermore, it interfaces with genome browsers to
analyze the conserved patterns in other contexts. Thus,
integrative and comparative studies with known tracks
at UCSC and other genome browsers are made easy and
supplementing results of such regulation studies with
other published work is facilitated. Scientists can therefore find relevant transcription factor binding site predictions for their work.
Ubiquitous transcription and the interpretation of
ReXSpecies results

To exemplify the advantages of evolution-aware analyses
of transcriptional regulation using ReXSpecies 2.0, we
have derived some plausible hypotheses for murine
Oct4/Pou5f1 and Sox2 regulation. We verified some of
these experimentally. Even for the other predictions,
many of which do not match known transcription factor
binding sites, reasonable interpretations are often possible. This is in line with the hypothesis of ubiquitous
transcription (that is, transcription may be more common than previously thought, see the Background section), because one explanation for ubiquitous
transcription is the possibility that transcription factor
binding may also be more common than previously
thought. As discussed in the Background section, ubiquitous transcription sheds new light onto computational predictions, hypothesizing that most of them are
in fact real, as are the modules we find, even though in
many biological contexts (of transcription factor abundance and/or DNA accessibility) they are utilized only
to a negligible degree.

Implementation
Prediction of transcription factor binding sites
Sequence based prediction of transcription factor binding
sites

Usually, in-silico transcription factor binding site predictions are based on the DNA base sequence of regulatory
sequences. Therefore, a table (position specific scoring
matrix) of log-likelihoods (or log-odds) is used to detect
transcription factor binding sites in a regulatory
sequence; each column in that table stands for a position in the binding sequence, and each row represents a
base (A, T, C, or G) [59]. The entries in the table
express how often a base occurs at a position in a set of
known binding sites of the transcription factor that the
position specific scoring matrix belongs to.
ReXSpecies 2.0 uses PoSSuM [10] in combination with
the freely available JASPAR database [21] for the purpose of searching for transcription factor binding sites.
More transcription factor binding site models besides
JASPAR may be uploaded in Transfac file format
[22,60]. For our examples, we used the 2010 Transfac
position specific scoring matrix library (commercial

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

version), [22]. Table 1 features a detailed list of all transcription factor binding sites curated in [5] and found in
the regions investigated here, indicating for which a
position specific scoring matrix exists in our position
specific scoring matrix libraries from Jaspar and/or
Transfac [21,22].
Alignment and clustering of transcription factor binding site
predictions

ReXSpecies 2.0 fetches the regulatory sequence under
investigation specified by absolute genome coordinates
or by coordinates relative to the transcription start site
of a gene from the UCSC genome browser [9]. At
UCSC, the multiz alignment tracks [9] provide homologous sequences of other species. Alternatively, users
may upload homologous sequences of their own. The
multiz-alignment was pre-calculated by UCSC for 30
different species in the mouse genome and 17 in the
human genome. This alignment is used by default as the
sequence alignment. If activated, ReXSpecies 2.0 can
employ several sequence alignment tools to redo the
alignment, per default muscle [61] is used. Then,
ReXSpecies aligns the transcription factor binding site
predictions such that their sequence coordinates are
converted to alignment coordinates considering gaps,
which have been introduced by the alignment tool, as
described in [7]. Afterwards, ReXSpecies tries to identify
homologous transcription factor binding sites. Two
binding sites are considered to be homologous if they
essentially overlap and if they are bound by homologous
transcription factors based on HomoloGene [42].
“Essentially overlapping” means that the beginning or
the ending of the two aligned predictions overlap.
Beginning and ending are two regions in the alignment
related to a transcription factor binding site prediction.
If the sequence length (not counting gaps) of the prediction in base pairs is called l, its start position in the
alignment in alignment coordinates (i.e. including gaps)
is called s and its end position in the alignment (in
alignment coordinates) is called e, then the beginning is
the region in the alignment from s to s + l (in alignment
coordinates), and the ending is the region from e - l to e.
These calculations are done to prevent predictions with
binding sites with larger gaps, i.e., disrupted binding
sites containing insertions gained during evolution from
being considered homologous to all binding sites for
similar factors within that insertion. Such larger gaps
could also be the result of alignment errors. Each prediction is then assigned a branch length score as proposed in [37]. Predictions can be filtered based on
different scores, e. g. the matrix similarity score [23], the
branch length score [37], or the E-value. Additionally,
filtering based on other features, such as target species/
clade of the model or name of the transcription factor is
possible.

Page 15 of 20

Finally, considering each species separately, redundant
predictions are identified. Predictions are clustered if
they share the start, middle (middle =

start+end
2

) or end

(alignment-)coordinate, their length in base pairs is the
same and at least one of the following conditions is true:
• The names of the transcription factor binding sites
predicted are similar (not considering upper/lower
case, spaces, numbers).
• The predictions are made for homologous transcription factors (based on HomoloGene [42]).
Clustering overlapping transcription factor binding site
predictions of similar name can be done, because a similar name in the Jaspar database [21] implies that the
transcription factors in question are homologs. Clustering has the effect that many probably equivalent overlapping predictions are replaced by only one prediction.
Therefore, fewer matches are reported. For example,
Figure 9 displays the binding site motifs of various transcription factors of similar name (Sox). These are all
Sox homologs. If the overlap conditions are met, they
are clustered, yielding only one prediction for all overlapping Sox matches named “Sox”. In particular,
ReXSpecies identifes redundancy by removing numbers
from the transcription factor names (Sox2 ® sox, Sox17
® sox) and comparing the resulting strings (sox). The
rigid matching rule (same start, middle or end coordinate plus same length), however, prevents the clustering
of predictions that are not redundant. On the other
hand, the user can completely turn off clustering. In two
cases predictions may also be joined if they simply overlap (relaxed matching rule): a) if they are made for the
same binding transcription factor, or b) if they are at
least made for a homologous transcription factor based
on HomoloGene [42]. Note that the clustering of redundant predictions, which is done right after detection, is
distinct from the joining of homologous predictions.
Joined and clustered predictions are assigned a combined name e. g., Sox for the Sox2/Sox17 predictions.
Likewise, synonyms such as Pou5f1 and Oct4 are
assigned a name such as Pou5f1 Oct4. If needed, manual
joining is also possible.
Phylogenetic tree with labelling by inferred ancestral
transcription factor binding site predictions

After the generation of position specific scoring matrixbased binding site predictions for the sequences,
ReXSpecies (since 1.0) labels a phylogenetic species tree
[27-29] (Figure 2) using the binding site predictions as
labels for the leaves of the tree and employing the Fitch
parsimony [30] method to reconstruct the labels for the
ancestral species in the tree. Thus, the extant species
are labelled with the binding site predictions and the

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 16 of 20

Figure 9 Different Sox transcription factor binding site motifs. The sequence logos [41] for different Sox paralogs from different sources
(JASPAR and Transfac [21,22]) are shown. Transfac uses a slightly different color coding (colors of A and T are switched). Obviously, Sox5 and
Sox9 match nearly the same motifs, Sry matches a closely related one. The reverse complement of the ACAA core of these motifs is furthermore
part of the other JASPAR motifs (TTGT in Sox2, Sox10 and Sox17). TTGT is also part of the first two Transfac motifs shown and ACAA is part of
two of the three Transfac Sry motifs. The Transfac Sox-Motif is a family motif that is assigned to many different Sox-paralogs (Sox2, Sox3, Sox4,
Sox5, L-Sox5, Sox6, Sox6 isoforms, Sox8, Sox9, Sox10, Sox11, Sox12, Sox13, Sox14, Sox15, Sox18, Sox20, Sox21, SRY, SoxLZ, Sox-xbb1) from
different taxa (Mouse, Rat, Chicken, Human, the whole Mammalia taxon, and some more less known model species).

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 17 of 20

inner nodes are inferred by parsimony. Alternatively, the
common tree originating from either the NCBI taxonomy browser [62], the tree used for the multiz alignment [28], or a user-provided tree can be labelled.
The parsimony method minimizes the number of
changes that have to be assumed to explain the data
given for the extant species in a phylogenetic tree.
There are also statistical methods (e.g. Bayesian statistics
[63] and maximum likelihood methods [64]) to predict
ancestral states, but they do not always predict fewer
false positives [65]. Since it is quite fast and generates
results even if data is noisy and sparse, we decided to
use the parsimony method. Nevertheless, parsimonygenerated models of binding site evolution tend to overfit so that ReXSpecies also suffers from that overfitting.
Interpretations of ReXSpecies output must take care of
this fact. In particular in combination with the noisy
underlying alignment data this causes erroneous predictions of losses, if parts of the alignment are wrong or
missing.

these scores for ranking and filtering transcription factor
binding site predictions.

Finding groups of transcription factor binding sites gained/
lost together

Future work
We plan to integrate some more genomes from UCSC
[6]. Furthermore, we plan to implement a software module that finds homologous promoter sequences by running BLAST searches in genome data or using the
HomoloGene database [42], or based on alignment-free
promoter search [15]. We would like to be able to predict gene transcriptional regulation networks that could
be analyzed using tools such as Cytoscape [66] and
ExprEssence [67], and that could be viewed using Cytoscape or VANLO [68].

Once the tree has been labelled, ReXSpecies 2.0 finds
gain/loss patterns. As defined in the background section,
a transcriptional module is defined as a set of transcription factor binding sites, and a gain/loss pattern is
defined as a transcriptional module, for which we find a
gain or loss in evolution. In other words, ReXSpecies 2.0
finds sets of two or more transcription factor binding
sites that are separated by a specific number of base
pairs, all of which are either gained or lost at the same
node of the phylogenetic tree; the transcription factor
binding sites making up a module must have the same
conserved distance (in base pairs) in all species where
they are present. See also Additional File 1, Part I for
the pattern detection algorithm. By default, we focus on
transcription factor binding site gains only, because we
consider gains more informative than losses. The patterns are then ranked using a branch length score as
proposed in [37]. Furthermore, by default we ignore
gains and losses in the extant species, because of the
large amount of binding site matches in these. There
are far fewer matches to consider if we base our analysis
on parsimony reconstruction of ancestral labels in the
species tree, because parsimony-based reconstructions
for an inner node are based on two or more predictions
for the leaves (the extant species). As described in the
last section, these reconstructions may nevertheless be
noisy.
As an alternative to gain/loss patterns, ReXSpecies 2.0
supports the calculation of branch length scores as proposed by [37] for each transcription factor binding site
prediction (as well as for gain/loss patterns), and to use

Experimental validation

The dual-glow luciferase assay (Promega) was used to
monitor the binding of transcription factors to the regulatory elements of the Pou5f1 gene. The conserved
regions CR1 and CR3 were cloned into the pGL3 vector,
driving the expression of firefly luciferase. 1 ug pGL3
was cotransfected with 10 ng of pRL (encoding renilla
luciferase) for normalization. 20 × 10000 Human
embryonic kidney cells (293T) were cultured in DMEM
(1000 mg/l glucose) supplemented with 10% FCS, nonessential amino-acids and Glutamine (2 mM). LIF (2000
u/ml) and Activin A (100 ng/ml) were used to trigger
STAT3 and Smad3 pathways respectively. Klf4 was
cloned into pMX retroviruses and co-transfected into
293T cells together with reporter and effector constructs
using Fugene (Roche).

Availability and requirements
Project name: rexspecies
Project home page: http://sourceforge.net/projects/
rexspecies
Operating system: Web application running on Linux
[8]
Programming language: Perl
Other requirements: bioperl, muscle, mysql, ldap,
MrBayes, PoSSuM
License: GNU LGPL [69]
Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary methods and results. The pattern
search algorithm is described. Furthermore, all additional output files that
are not described in the main article are listed here.
Additional file 2: BED detail format file with the annotations for the
CR3 region. This file can be uploaded to UCSC. It contains the
transcription factor binding site pattern found in the conserved murine
CR3 region near the Pou5f1 gene. All transcription factor binding sites
are annotated with their STRING [31,32] and their iHOP [33,34]
annotations, if available.

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 18 of 20

Additional file 3: BED detail format file with the annotations for the
CR1 region. This file can be uploaded to UCSC. It contains all
transcription factor binding site patterns found in the conserved murine
CR1 region near the Pou5f1 gene. All transcription factor binding sites
are annotated with their STRING [31,32] and their iHOP [33,34]
annotations, if available.
Additional file 4: BED detail format file with the annotations for the
SRR1 region. This file can be uploaded to UCSC. It contains all
transcription factor binding site patterns found in the conserved murine
SRR1 region near the Sox2 gene. All transcription factor binding sites are
annotated with their STRING [31,32] and their iHOP [33,34] annotations, if
available.
Additional file 5: BED detail format file with the annotations for the
N1 region. This file can be uploaded to UCSC. It contains all
transcription factor binding site patterns found in the conserved murine
N1 region near the Sox2 gene. All transcription factor binding sites are
annotated with their STRING [31,32] and their iHOP [33,34] annotations, if
available.
Additional file 6: CR1 patterns, Homology-based figure. The patterns
and the transcription factor binding sites found in the murine CR1
region. See Figure 7 for further explanations.
Additional file 7: SRR1 patterns, Homology-based figure. The
patterns and the transcription factor binding sites found in the murine
SRR1 region. See Figure 7 for further explanations.
Additional file 8: N1 patterns, Homology-based figure. The patterns
and the transcription factor binding sites found in the murine N1 region.
See Figure 7 for further explanations.

Additional file 19: SRR1 patterns, Alignment based figure. The
patterns and the transcription factor binding sites found in the murine
SRR1 region. See Additional File 17 for an explanation.
Additional file 20: N1 patterns, Alignment based figure. The patterns
and the transcription factor binding sites found in the murine N1 region.
See Additional File 17 for an explanation.

Acknowledgements
This study was supported in part by the DFG SPP 1356, ‘Pluripotency and
Cellular Reprogramming’ (FU583/2-1) and by the BMBF (01GN0901,
Generation of pluri-and multipotent stem cells). We thank Stefan Funke,
Gregor Warsow, Steffen Brasch and Sebastian Adler for inspiring discussions.
Furthermore, we thank Sherry Freiesleben for reviewing the text concerning
good and comprehensible style, and Jürgen Schmitz for advice on trees. We
thank two anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions.
Author details
University of Rostock, Institute for Biostatistics and Informatics in Medicine
and Ageing Research, Heydemannstrasse 8, 18057 Rostock, Germany. 2E.M.A.
University of Greifswald, Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science,
Rathenaustrasse 47, 17487 Greifswald, Germany. 3Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine,
Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany. 4Medical Faculty, University of
Münster, Domagkstrasse 3, 48149 Münster, Germany.
1

Additional file 10: CR3 pattern, detailed table format. The pattern
found in the murine CR3 region, detailed version of Additional File 2.

Authors’ contributions
SS wrote the software, did the ReXSpecies part of the analyses, generated all
figures and wrote large parts of the text. GF wrote the interpretations of the
ReXSpecies output and did further literature studies; furthermore, he
supervised the project. Experimental validation of some of our results was
performed and described by DE under the guidance of HS. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.

Additional file 11: CR1 patterns, table format. The patterns found in
the murine CR1 region. See also Additional File 7 for a more detailed
version of this table.

Received: 15 March 2011 Accepted: 24 September 2011
Published: 24 September 2011

Additional file 9: CR3 pattern, table format. The pattern found in the
murine CR3 region. See also Additional File 3 for a more detailed version
of this table.

Additional file 12: CR1 patterns, detailed table format. The patterns
found in the murine CR1 region, detailed version of Additional File 6.
Additional file 13: SRR1 patterns, table format. The patterns found in
the murine SRR1 region. See also Additional File 11 for a more detailed
version of this table.
Additional file 14: SRR1 patterns, detailed table format. The patterns
found in the murine SRR1 region, detailed version of Additional File 10.
Additional file 15: N1 patterns, table format. The patterns found in
the murine N1 region. See also Additional File 15 for a more detailed
version of this table.
Additional file 16: N1 patterns, detailed table format. The patterns
found in the murine N1 region, detailed version of Additional File 14.
Additional file 17: CR3 pattern, Alignment based figure. The pattern
and the transcription factor binding sites found in the murine CR3
region. In principle, the elements of this figure correspond to those in
Figure 7. Obviously, the alignment-based figures are much larger than
their homology-based version. In contrast to the homology-based figure
type, the leaves of the species tree on the left are corresponding to the
sequences of the extant species on the right. The sequences are shown
in a sequence alignment and the transcription factor binding site
predictions are plotted below the sequences. Because the species
belonging to each prediction is obviously determined by its vertical
position (the leaves are not color coded here), only the thicker part of
the colored overlays (see Figure 7) is informative and thus it is shown; it
denotes the pattern by referring to its color. To keep the figures
readable, by default only the first 10 patterns (ordered by branch length
score) are shown in the alignment-based figures.
Additional file 18: CR1 patterns, Alignment based figure. The
patterns and the transcription factor binding sites found in the murine
CR1 region. See Additional File 17 for an explanation.

References
1. Bourque G, Leong B, Vega VB, Chen X, Lee YL, Srinivasan KG, Chew JL,
Ruan Y, Wei CL, Ng HH, Liu ET: Evolution of the mammalian transcription
factor binding repertoire via transposable elements. Genome Res 2008,
18:1752-1762.
2. Schmidt D, Wilson MD, Ballester B, Schwalie PC, Brown GD, Marshall A,
Kutter C, Watt S, Martinez-Jimenez CP, Mackay S, Talianidis I, Flicek P,
Odom DT: Five-vertebrate ChIP-seq reveals the evolutionary dynamics of
transcription factor binding. Science 2010, 328:1036-1040.
3. Tuch BB, Li H, Johnson AD: Evolution of eukaryotic transcription circuits.
Science 2008, 319:1797-1799.
4. Fuellen G: Evolution of gene regulation-on the road towards
computational inferences. Brief Bioinformatics 2010.
5. Fuellen G, Struckmann S: Evolution of gene regulation of pluripotency the case for wiki tracks at genome browsers. Biol Direct 2010, 5:67.
6. Karolchik D, Baertsch R, Diekhans M, Furey T, Hinrichs A, Lu Y, Roskin K,
Schwartz M, Sugnet C, Thomas D, Weber R, Haussler D, Kent W: The UCSC
Genome Browser Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:51-4.
7. Struckmann S, Arauzo-Bravo M, Schöler H, Reinbold R, Fuellen G:
ReXSpecies - a tool for the analysis of the evolution of gene regulation
across species. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2008, 8:111[http://www.
biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/8/111].
8. ReXSpecies - Regulation across species. [http://bio.math-inf.uni-greifswald.
de/ReXSpecies].
9. Blanchette M, Kent WJ, Riemer C, Elnitski L, Smit AFA, Roskin KM,
Baertsch R, Rosenbloom K, Clawson H, Green ED, Haussler D, Miller W:
Aligning multiple genomic sequences with the threaded blockset
aligner. Genome Res 2004, 14(4):708-715.
10. Beckstette M, Strothmann D, Homann R, Giegerich R, Kurtz S:
PoSSuMsearch: Fast and Sensitive Matching of Position Specific Scoring
Matrices using Enhanced Suffix Arrays. Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI)
2004, 53.

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

11. The UCSC BED format. [http://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat].
12. Ensembl Genome Browser. [http://www.ensembl.org/index.html].
13. Lander ES: Initial impact of the sequencing of the human genome.
Nature 2011, 470:187-197.
14. Birney E, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Dutta A, Guigo R, Gingeras TR,
Margulies EH, Weng Z, Snyder M, Dermitzakis ET, Thurman RE, Kuehn MS,
Taylor CM, Neph S, Koch CM, Asthana S, Malhotra A, Adzhubei I,
Greenbaum JA, Andrews RM, Flicek P, Boyle PJ, Cao H, Carter NP,
Clelland GK, Davis S, Day N, Dhami P, Dillon SC, Dorschner MO, Fiegler H,
et al: Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1human
genome by the ENCODE pilot project. Nature 2007, 447:799-816.
15. Koohy H, Dyer NP, Reid JE, Koentges G, Ott S: An alignment-free model
for comparison of regulatory sequences. Bioinformatics 2010,
26:2391-2397.
16. Manke T, Dieterich C, Vingron M: Detecting Functional Modules of
Transcription Factor Binding Sites in the Human Genome. In Regulatory
Genomics, Volume 3318 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Edited by:
Eskin E, Workman C. Springer Berlin/Heidelberg; 2005:14-21.
17. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis A,
Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M, Rubin GM, Sherlock G: Gene
ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nat Genet 2000, 25:25-9.
18. Bailey TL, Noble WS: Searching for statistically significant regulatory
modules. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(suppl 2):ii16-ii25[http://bioinformatics.
oxfordjournals.org/content/19/suppl_2/ii16.abstract].
19. Xie D, Cai J, Chia NY, Ng HH, Zhong S: Cross-species de novo
identification of cis-regulatory modules with GibbsModule: application
to gene regulation in embryonic stem cells. Genome Res 2008,
18(8):1325-35.
20. Sinha S: PhyME: a software tool for finding motifs in sets of orthologous
sequences. Methods Mol Biol 2007, 395:309-18.
21. Portales-Casamar E, Thongjuea S, Kwon AT, Arenillas D, Zhao X, Valen E,
Yusuf D, Lenhard B, Wasserman WW, Sandelin A: JASPAR 2010: the greatly
expanded open-access database of transcription factor binding profiles.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, , 38 Database: D105-10, [Eng].
22. Wingender E: The TRANSFAC project as an example of framework
technology that supports the analysis of genomic regulation. Brief
Bioinform 2008, 9(4):326-32, [Eng].
23. Cartharius K, Frech K, Grote K, Klocke B, Haltmeier M, Klingenhoff A,
Frisch M, Bayerlein M, Werner T: MatInspector and beyond: promoter
analysis based on transcription factor binding sites. Bioinformatics 2005,
21(13):2933-42.
24. Matys V, Kel-Margoulis O, Fricke E, Liebich I, Land S, Barre-Dirrie A, Reuter I,
Chekmenev D, Krull M, Hornischer K, Voss N, Stegmaier P, LewickiPotapov B, Saxel H, Kel A, Wingender E: TRANSFAC(R) and its module
TRANSCompel(R): transcriptional gene regulation in eukaryotes. Nucl
Acids Res 2006, 34(suppl 1):D108-110[http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/
content/abstract/34/suppl_1/D108].
25. Marinescu V, Kohane I, Riva A: The MAPPER database: a multi-genome
catalog of putative transcription factor binding sites. Nucleic Acids Res
2005, , 33 Database: D91-7.
26. Bailey TL: Discovering novel sequence motifs with MEME. Curr Protoc
Bioinformatics 2002, Chapter 2:Unit 2.4.
27. Churakov G, Sadasivuni MK, Rosenbloom KR, Huchon D, Brosius J, Schmitz J:
Rodent evolution: back to the root. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:1315-1326.
28. Murphy WJ, Eizirik E, O’Brien SJ, Madsen O, Scally M, Douady CJ, Teeling E,
Ryder OA, Stanhope MJ, de Jong WW, Springer MS: Resolution of the early
placental mammal radiation using Bayesian phylogenetics. Science 2001,
294:2348-2351.
29. Murphy WJ, Eizirik E, Johnson WE, Zhang YP, Ryder OA, O’Brien SJ:
Molecular phylogenetics and the origins of placental mammals. Nature
2001, 409:614-618.
30. Fitch W: Common Taxonomy Tree: Toward Defining the Course of
Evolution: Minimum Change for a Specific Tree Topology. Systematic
Zoology 1971, 20(4):406-416.
31. Jensen LJ, Kuhn M, Stark M, Chaffron S, Creevey C, Muller J, Doerks T,
Julien P, Roth A, Simonovic M, Bork P, von Mering C: STRING 8-a global
view on proteins and their functional interactions in 630 organisms.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D412-416.

Page 19 of 20

32. von Mering C, Jensen LJ, Kuhn M, Chaffron S, Doerks T, Kruger B, Snel B,
Bork P: STRING 7-recent developments in the integration and prediction
of protein interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D358-362.
33. Hoffmann R, Valencia A: A gene network for navigating the literature. Nat
Genet 2004, 36:664.
34. Information Hyperlinked over Proteins. [http://www.ihop-net.org/].
35. Genome Browser Gateway. [http://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgGateway].
36. Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Ayling S, Ballester B, Beal K, Bragin E, Brent S, Chen Y,
Clapham P, Clarke L, Coates G, Fairley S, Fitzgerald S, Fernandez-Banet J,
Gordon L, Graf S, Haider S, Hammond M, Holland R, Howe K, Jenkinson A,
Johnson N, Kahari A, Keefe D, Keenan S, Kinsella R, Kokocinski F, Kulesha E,
Lawson D, Longden I, et al: Ensembl 2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37
Database: D690-7, [Eng].
37. Stark A, Lin MF, Kheradpour P, Pedersen JS, Parts L, Carlson JW, Crosby MA,
Rasmussen MD, Roy S, Deoras AN, Ruby JG, Brennecke J, curators HF,
Project BDG, Hodges E, Hinrichs AS, Caspi A, Paten B, Park SW, Han MV,
Maeder ML, Polansky BJ, Robson BE, Aerts S, van Helden J, Hassan B,
Gilbert DG, Eastman DA, Rice M, Weir M, et al: Discovery of functional
elements in 12 Drosophila genomes using evolutionary signatures.
Nature 2007, 450(7167):219-232.
38. Microsoft Excel. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_Excel].
39. OpenDocument format. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenDocument].
40. XSL Transformation. [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XSL_Transformation].
41. Schneider TD, Stephens RM: Sequence Logos: A New Way to Display
Consensus Sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18:6097-6100.
42. Sayers EW, Barrett T, Benson DA, Bolton E, Bryant SH, Canese K,
Chetvernin V, Church DM, Dicuccio M, Federhen S, Feolo M, Geer LY,
Helmberg W, Kapustin Y, Landsman D, Lipman DJ, Lu Z, Madden TL,
Madej T, Maglott DR, Marchler-Bauer A, Miller V, Mizrachi I, Ostell J,
Panchenko A, Pruitt KD, Schuler GD, Sequeira E, Sherry ST, Shumway M,
et al: Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, , 38 Database: D5-16.
43. Siepel A, Bejerano G, Pedersen JS, Hinrichs AS, Hou M, Rosenbloom K,
Clawson H, Spieth J, Hillier LW, Richards S, Weinstock GM, Wilson RK,
Gibbs RA, Kent WJ, Miller W, Haussler D: Evolutionarily conserved
elements in vertebrate, insect, worm, and yeast genomes. Genome Res
2005, 15(8):1034-1050.
44. Nordhoff V, Huebner K, Bauer A, Orlova I, Malapetsa A, Schoeler H:
Comparative analysis of human, bovine, and murine Oct-4 upstream
promoter sequences. Mammalian Genome 2001, 12(4):309-317.
45. Kamachi Y, Iwafuchi M, Okuda Y, Takemoto T, Uchikawa M, Kondoh H:
Evolution of non-coding regulatory sequences involved in the
developmental process: reflection of differential employment of
paralogous genes as highlighted by Sox2 and group B1 Sox genes.
Proceedings of the Japan Academy, Serie B, Physical and Biological Sciences
2009, 85(2):55-68.
46. Sikorska M, Sandhu JK, Deb-Rinker P, Jezierski A, Leblanc J, Charlebois C,
Ribecco-Lutkiewicz M, Bani-Yaghoub M, Walker PR: Epigenetic
modifications of SOX2 enhancers, SRR1 and SRR2, correlate with in vitro
neural differentiation. J Neurosci Res 2008, 86:1680-1693.
47. Chambers I, Tomlinson SR: The transcriptional foundation of pluripotency.
Development 2009, 136:2311-2322.
48. Hu B, Wu Z, Liu T, Ullenbruch MR, Jin H, Phan SH: Gut-enriched Krüppellike factor interaction with Smad3 inhibits myofibroblast differentiation.
Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2007, 36:78-84.
49. Sugimoto H, Sugimoto S, Tatei K, Obinata H, Bakovic M, Izumi T, Vance DE:
Identification of Ets-1 as an important transcriptional activator of CTP:
phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha in COS-7 cells and coactivation with transcriptional enhancer factor-4. J Biol Chem 2003,
278:19716-19722.
50. Wu G, Aoyama C, Young SG, Vance DE: Early embryonic lethality caused
by disruption of the gene for choline kinase alpha, the first enzyme in
phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:1456-1462.
51. Lazarova DL, Bordonaro M, Sartorelli AC: Transcriptional regulation of the
vitamin D(3) receptor gene by ZEB. Cell Growth Differ 2001, 12:319-326.
52. Takeyama Y, Sato M, Horio M, Hase T, Yoshida K, Yokoyama T, Nakashima H,
Hashimoto N, Sekido Y, Gazdar AF, Minna JD, Kondo M, Hasegawa Y:
Knockdown of ZEB1, a master epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) gene, suppresses anchorage-independent cell growth of lung
cancer cells. Cancer Lett 2010, 296:216-224.

Struckmann et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:267
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/267

Page 20 of 20

53. Martinez-Estrada OM, Lettice LA, Essafi A, Guadix JA, Slight J, Velecela V,
Hall E, Reichmann J, Devenney PS, Hohenstein P, Hosen N, Hill RE, MunozChapuli R, Hastie ND: Wt1 is required for cardiovascular progenitor cell
formation through transcriptional control of Snail and E-cadherin. Nat
Genet 2010, 42:89-93.
54. Osaki E, Nishina Y, Inazawa J, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA,
Ohsugi M, Tezuka T, Yoshida M, Semba K: Identification of a novel Sryrelated gene and its germ cell-specific expression. Nucleic Acids Res 1999,
27:2503-2510.
55. Siggers P, Smith L, Greenfield A: Sexually dimorphic expression of Gata-2
during mouse gonad development. Mechanisms of Development 2002,
111:159-162, (4).
56. Grote D, Souabni A, Busslinger M, Bouchard M: Pax 2/8-regulated Gata 3
expression is necessary for morphogenesis and guidance of the nephric
duct in the developing kidney. Development 2006, 133:53-61.
57. Rekhtman N, Radparvar F, Evans T, Skoultchi AI: Direct interaction of
hematopoietic transcription factors PU.1 and GATA-1: functional
antagonism in erythroid cells. Genes Dev 1999, 13:1398-1411.
58. Mackay DR, Hu M, Li B, Rheaume C, Dai X: The mouse Ovol2 gene is
required for cranial neural tube development. Dev Biol 2006, 291:38-52.
59. Ben-Gal I, Shani A, Gohr A, Grau J, Arviv S, Shmilovici A, Posch S, Grosse I:
Identification of transcription factor binding sites with variable-order
Bayesian networks. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2657-2666, [Pmid15797905].
60. Transfac file format. [http://www.gene-regulation.com/pub/databases/
transfac/doc/matrix1SM.html].
61. Edgar R: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced
time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
62. Common Taxonomy Tree. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/
CommonTree/wwwcmt.cgi].
63. Huelsenbeck J, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(8):754-5.
64. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(21):2688-2690[http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/
abstract/22/21/2688].
65. Kolaczkowski B, Thornton JW: Performance of maximum parsimony and
likelihood phylogenetics when evolution is heterogeneous. Nature 2004,
431:980-984.
66. Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res
2003, 13:2498-2504.
67. Warsow G, Greber B, Falk SS, Harder C, Siatkowski M, Schordan S, Som A,
Endlich N, Schöler H, Repsilber D, Endlich K, Fuellen G: ExprEssencerevealing the essence of differential experimental data in the context of
an interaction/regulation net-work. BMC Syst Biol 2010, 4:164.
68. Brasch S, Linsen L, Fuellen G: VANLO-interactive visual exploration of
aligned biological networks. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:327.
69. GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL). [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/
lgpl.html].
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-267
Cite this article as: Struckmann et al.: Visualization and Exploration of
Conserved Regulatory Modules Using ReXSpecies 2. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2011 11:267.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
