<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Comparative genomics of the social amoebae Dictyostelium discoideum and Dictyostelium purpureum</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20. doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-2-r20"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Richard Sucgang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

RESEARCH

Open Access

Comparative genomics of the social amoebae
Dictyostelium discoideum and Dictyostelium purpureum
Richard Sucgang1†, Alan Kuo2†, Xiangjun Tian3†, William Salerno1†, Anup Parikh4, Christa L Feasley5, Eileen Dalin2,
Hank Tu2, Eryong Huang4, Kerrie Barry2, Erika Lindquist2, Harris Shapiro2, David Bruce2, Jeremy Schmutz2,
Asaf Salamov2, Petra Fey6, Pascale Gaudet6, Christophe Anjard7, M Madan Babu8, Siddhartha Basu6,
Yulia Bushmanova6, Hanke van der Wel5, Mariko Katoh-Kurasawa4, Christopher Dinh1, Pedro M Coutinho9,
Tamao Saito10, Marek Elias11, Pauline Schaap12, Robert R Kay8, Bernard Henrissat9, Ludwig Eichinger13,
Francisco Rivero14, Nicholas H Putnam3, Christopher M West5, William F Loomis7, Rex L Chisholm6,
Gad Shaulsky3,4, Joan E Strassmann3, David C Queller3, Adam Kuspa1,3,4* and Igor V Grigoriev2

Abstract
Background: The social amoebae (Dictyostelia) are a diverse group of Amoebozoa that achieve multicellularity by
aggregation and undergo morphogenesis into fruiting bodies with terminally differentiated spores and stalk cells.
There are four groups of dictyostelids, with the most derived being a group that contains the model species
Dictyostelium discoideum.
Results: We have produced a draft genome sequence of another group dictyostelid, Dictyostelium purpureum, and
compare it to the D. discoideum genome. The assembly (8.41 × coverage) comprises 799 scaffolds totaling 33.0 Mb,
comparable to the D. discoideum genome size. Sequence comparisons suggest that these two dictyostelids shared
a common ancestor approximately 400 million years ago. In spite of this divergence, most orthologs reside in small
clusters of conserved synteny. Comparative analyses revealed a core set of orthologous genes that illuminate
dictyostelid physiology, as well as differences in gene family content. Interesting patterns of gene conservation and
divergence are also evident, suggesting function differences; some protein families, such as the histidine kinases,
have undergone little functional change, whereas others, such as the polyketide synthases, have undergone
extensive diversification. The abundant amino acid homopolymers encoded in both genomes are generally not
found in homologous positions within proteins, so they are unlikely to derive from ancestral DNA triplet repeats.
Genes involved in the social stage evolved more rapidly than others, consistent with either relaxed selection or
accelerated evolution due to social conflict.
Conclusions: The findings from this new genome sequence and comparative analysis shed light on the biology
and evolution of the Dictyostelia.

Background
The social amoebae have been used to study mechanisms
of eukaryotic cell chemotaxis and cell differentiation for
over 70 years. The completion of the Dictyostelium discoideum genome sequence provided a wealth of information about the basic cell and developmental biology of
* Correspondence: akuspa@bcm.edu
† Contributed equally
1
Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX
77030, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

these organisms and highlighted an unexpected similarity
between the cell motility and signaling systems of the
social amoebae and the metazoa [1]. For example, the
D. discoideum genome encodes numerous G-protein
coupled receptors (GPCRs) of the frizzled/smoothened,
metabotropic glutamate, and secretin families that were
previously thought to be specific to animals, suggesting
that the GPCR gene families branched prior to the animal/fungal split. Numerous other examples, such as SH2
domain based phosphoprotein signaling, the full complement of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter gene

© 2011 Sucgang et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

families, and the apparently complex actin cytoskeleton,
served to strengthen the idea that amoeba and amoeboid
animal cells are related in a more fundamental way than
one might have guessed based on their gross physiological traits. We compared the D. discoideum genome with
a second dictyostelid genome, that of Dictyostelium purpureum, in order to determine the set of genes they
share, as well as their genomic differences that might illuminate variations in physiology within the social amoeba.
The Amoebozoa are closely related to the opisthokonts (animals and fungi) and include unicellular amoebae (for example, Acanthamoeba castellani), obligate
parasitic amoeba (for example, Entamoeba histolytica),
the true slime molds (for example, Physarum polycephalum) and the social amoebae, or Dictyostelia (often
incorrectly referred to as ‘slime molds’). In the 10 years
since the monophyly of the Amoebozoa was proposed
[2], genomic-scale analysis has confirmed the hypothesis
[3] and the phylogenetic relationships between the
major amoeboid lineages have been clarified [4-6].
A molecular phylogeny of the Dictyostelia has been constructed and suggests four major groups; the basal,
group 1 parvisporids that produce small spores; the
group 2 heterostelids; the group 3 rhizostelids; and the
group 4 dictyostelids, which include D. purpureum and
the well-studied D. discoideum [7]. The dictyostelid
group contains the largest number of described species
of social amoeba and all of them produce large fruiting
bodies with single sori, containing oblong spores, held
aloft on a single cellular stalk.
D. purpureum differs from D. discoideum in a number
of developmental and morphological ways [8]. In particular, during the social stage, D. discoideum delays irreversible commitment by cells to sterile stalk tissue until
slug migration is complete. D. purpureum, by contrast,
forms a stalk of dead cells as the slug moves towards
light, increasing its ability to cross gaps [9]. In addition,
D. purpureum makes taller fruiting bodies with smaller
spores than D. discoideum [7]. D. purpureum fruiting
bodies are purple with a triangular base formed from
specialized stalk cells, whereas D. discoideum fruiting
bodies are yellow and supported by a basal disc. D. purpureum also exhibits greater sorting into kin groups in
the social stage than does D. discoideum [10,11].
The D. discoideum genome sequence was the first
amoebozoan genome to become available, and the
deduced gene list improved our understanding of the
facultative multicellular lifestyle of the social amoeba
[1,12]. Here we present our initial analysis of the D. purpureum genome and compare it to the D. discoideum
genome. Since these two species represent the two
major clades of the group 4 dictyostelids, a comparison
of their genomes has revealed much of the genomic
diversity and conservation within this group of social

Page 2 of 23

amoebae. Overall, the two genomes are similar in size
and gene content, sharing at least 7,619 orthologous
protein coding genes and many more paralogous genes.
A global analysis of sequence divergence suggests that
the genetic diversity of the dictyostelids is similar to
that of the vertebrates, from the bony fishes to the
mammals. Some large gene families are nearly completely conserved between these two dictyostelids, while
others have markedly diverged. Our analyses highlight
general characteristics that are conserved among the
dictyostelids, as well as potential differences, linking the
genomic potential with the physiology of these soil
microbes.

Results and Discussion
Structure and comparative genomics of the D. purpureum
genome
Genome assembly

The genome of D. purpureum strain DpAX1, an axenic
derivative of QSDP1, was sequenced using a whole genome shotgun sequencing approach (see Materials and
methods) and assembled into 1,213 contigs arranged
into 799 scaffolds with 240 larger than 50 kb (Additional
file 1). There were 12,410 genes predicted and annotated
using the JGI annotation pipeline (see Materials and
methods); these are available from the JGI Genome Portal [13] and from dictyBase [14]. Thirty-three percent of
the genes were supported by at least one EST clone and
89% of genes displayed some similarity to a gene in the
NCBI non-redundant gene databases (Additional file 1).
The genome size, gene count and average gene structure
are very similar to those of D. discoideum (Table 1).
Moreover, a recent comparative transcriptome analysis
of D. purpureum and D. discoideum, using ‘RNAsequence’ (RNA-seq), provides evidence for the transcription of 7,619 genes encoding protein orthologs
within these species, or approximately 61% of the predicted D. purpureum genes [15].
Repetitive elements and simple sequence repeats

The D. purpureum genome contains 1.1 Mb of transposons (3.4%), fewer than in D. discoideum. The largest
Table 1 Comparison between the predicted protein
coding genes of D. purpureum and D. discoideum
Feature

D. purpureum

D. discoideuma

Genome size (Mb)

33

34

Number of genes

12,410

13,541

Gene density (kb per gene)

2.66

2.5

Mean gene length (nucleotides)

1,760

1,756

Intron per gene (spliced genes)
Mean intron length (nucleotides)

1.51
177

1.9
146

Mean protein length (amino acids)

483

518

a

From [1].

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

Page 3 of 23

families of transposons are Gypsy (approximately 400
kb, 35.8% of total transposons), Mariner (approximately
186 kb, 16.7%), MSAT1_Dpu (126 kb, 11.4%), and hAT
(105 kb, 9.5%).
The previously sequenced D. discoideum genome
showed an unusually high number, length, and density
of simple sequence repeats, including triplet repeats that
code for amino acid homopolymers [1]. If unopposed by
selection, simple sequence repeats can accumulate in
genomes because of their high mutation rates and mutation to different repeat numbers that occur by misalignment and slippage during replication [16]. They are
often thought of as non-functional ‘junk’ DNA, though
some are known to be functional [17], and the expansion of some triplet repeats in humans are known to
cause disease when the number of repeats exceeds a
particular threshold [18]. Despite its considerable evolutionary distance from D. discoideum (see below), D. purpureum also has a considerable density of simple
sequence repeats (Figure 1a). Simple sequence repeats
comprise 4.4% of the D. purpureum genome, compared
to 11% in D. discoideum [1]. There are fewer long
repeats that exceed 100 bp in length; 54 in D. purpureum compared to 1,436 in D. discoideum. The lower
proportion of simple repeats in the D. purpureum genome and their shorter length may be due to current status of the assembly relative to the D. discoideum
genome, since these repeats are difficult to assemble.
Dinucleotide repeats, often the most common repeat in
other species, are comparatively rare in both dictyostelid
genomes (Figure 1b) [1].

(a)

Coding (D. purpureum)

Amino acid homopolymers

One of the most distinctive characteristics of the D. discoideum genome is the extreme abundance of amino
acid homopolymers within coding sequences [1]. As in
D. discoideum, simple sequence repeats are common in
D. purpureum coding sequences (Figure 1a), particularly
those with repeat motifs of three nucleotides or multiples of three (Figure 1b). These types of repeats contribute to many amino acid homopolymers (Figure S1 in
Additional file 1), including 2,645 that are longer than
expected by chance (>5 to >9 residues, depending on
the amino acid; Table S1 in Additional file 1). Though
the abundance and density is lower than in D. discoideum, the relative abundance of different amino acids
repeats in D. purpureum is very similar, with asparagine
and glutamine repeats dominating, followed by serine
and threonine (Figure 2a). The correlation between the
two species in the densities of different amino acid
repeats is 0.997 (Pearson’s correlation coefficient, P <
0.001), much higher than either species’ correlation with
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (0.516 for D. discoideum, and
0.486 for D. purpureum), or with Drosophila melanogaster (0.241 and 0.238). However, the correlations are
also high for the densities of amino acid repeats with
the A/T-rich protist Plasmodium falciparum (0.917 and
0.923), in agreement with a study showing that A/T
content exerts a major influence on which amino acid
repeats accumulate and persist within genomes [19].
Codon usage within these amino acid homopolymers
is quite similar to codon usage for the same amino acids
outside of repeats, with a pattern quite similar to

(b)

Coding (D. purpureum)
Coding (D. discoideum)

Non-coding (D. purpureum)

Non-coding (D. purpureum)

Non-coding (D. discoideum)

Length of repeat tracts (bp)

Number of occurrences

Number of occurrences

Coding (D. discoideum)

Non-coding (D. discoideum)

Repeat unit length (bp)

Figure 1 Number of occurrences of simple sequence repeats in D. purpureum and D. discoideum genomes. (a,b) The numbers of repeats
were classified by the length of repeat tracts (a) and the length of repeat units (b). The D. purpureum genome (circles) has fewer and shorter
microsatellites than the D. discoideum genome (triangles) in both coding regions (solid circles and triangles, and solid lines) and non-coding
regions (open circles and triangles, and dashed lines). Not shown are three D. discoideum repeats above 250 nucleotides in (a). The minimum
number of repeats of the unit motif was 10 repeats for mononucleotides, 7 repeats for dinucleotides, 5 repeats for trinucleotides, 4 repeats for
tetranucleotides, 3 repeats for pentanucleotides and longer (6- to 20-nucleotide) motifs.

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

Page 4 of 23

D. discoideum density per 1000 amino acids

(a)
100
N

10

Q
T
S

1

D

G
F

0.1
Y V

0.01

E
P

K
L H
IA

R
M

0.001
0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

D. purpureum density per 1000 amino acids

(b)
0.30

Non-synonymous substitution rate

n = 1718

n = 1136

0.25

n = 1754
0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

Repeat in
D. discoideum

Repeat in
D. purpureum

No repeat

Figure 2 Densities of different homopolymer amino acid
repeats in D. purpureum and D. discoideum. (a) The density of
each kind of amino acid repeat was calculated by summing the
lengths of non-random repeats of that amino acid (Table S1 in
Additional file 1) over protein sequences of all genes from
D. purpureum and D. discoideum, dividing by the total length of
coding sequence, and multiplying by 1,000. Letters indicate which
amino acid each point represents. The Pearson’s correlation
coefficient between them is 0.997, P < 0.001. (b) Mean (± standard
error) non-synonymous substitution rates (dNs) of genes with and
without amino acid repeats. The non-synonymous substitution rates
were calculated between orthologs (excluding repeat sequences) of
D. purpureum and D. discoideum. Orthologs without amino acid
repeats have significantly lower dN than orthologs with repeats in
either D. discoideum and D. purpureum (Students t-test, both tests
P < 0.0001). Error bars show standard errors of the means.

D. discoideum (Figure S2 in Additional file 1). Again, as
in D. discoideum, many amino acid homopolymers contain a single codon, consistent with the relatively recent
expansion of those triplet repeats. However, the codon
diversity of D. purpureum amino acid repeats is

significantly higher than it is for D. discoideum
(Figure S3 in Additional file 1), consistent with the D.
discoideum repeats being younger, with less time to
accumulate changes from the original codon.
The potential function of most amino acid repeats is
unknown, but the availability of the D. purpureum genome permits some new tests. If amino acid repeats are
generally functionally important, they should tend to be
conserved in their position within orthologous proteins.
Sixty-four percent of the 2,645 D. purpureum amino
acid repeats and 68% of the 11,243 D. discoideum
repeats occur in genes that do not have homologs in the
other species. Even in those with orthologs, only 19% of
D. purpureum repeats and 5% of the D. discoideum
repeats appeared to be homologous within global alignments of their respective proteins. The count of homologous repeats would be higher if we included matches
where at least one falls below the threshold expectation
for non-random homopolymers (for example, a match
between 25 asparagines in D. discoideum and 8 in
D. purpureum would be excluded as a chance event; P >
0.01; Table S1 in Additional file 1). On the other hand,
some could be fortuitous matches forced by a large
number of repeated amino acids that are not truly
homologous. Inspection of selected sequences shows at
least some that appear to be convincing homologs, with
strong identity on both sides of the repeat (Figure S4 in
Additional file 1). Still, the apparent small fraction of
homologous repeats suggests that the very similar patterns of amino acid homopolymer abundance and distribution do not come primarily from conserved ancestral
repeats. Instead they may come from some shared physiological properties - perhaps distinctive DNA polymerases or repair enzymes or high AT-content - that
generate similar patterns independently.
In addition to the lack of homology for amino acid
homopolymers between D. discoideum and D. purpureum, several pieces of evidence suggest that these triplet
repeats may be ‘junk’ that accumulates due to weak
selection on proteins that are relatively unimportant for
fitness. For genes that have homologs in the two species,
those with amino acid repeats in either species have
higher non-synonymous substitution rates in the nonrepeat regions, as expected if genes with repeats are
generally less subject to purifying selection (Figure 2b).
Another indicator of the degree of selective constraint
on a gene is its expression level, particularly in the single-celled, vegetative stage where the selective pressure
is likely to be the greatest. If amino acid repeats accumulate in genes where selective constraints are low, we
would predict that they will be more common in genes
expressed in the social or developmental stages, as
opposed to vegetative stages. Using the recent comparison of the transcriptional profiles of D. discoideum and

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

D. purpureum development by RNA-seq analysis [15],
this prediction is confirmed (Figure S5a,c in Additional
file 1). Similarly, we would predict, looking only at
RNA-seq reads from the vegetative stage, that genes
coding for amino acid repeats would be less abundant
and this is also confirmed (Figure S5b,d in Additional
file 1). In sum, although a small number of repeats
appear to be conserved over long periods of time, most
appear to have arisen relatively recently in genes where
selection against amino acid changes is weak.
Phylogeny of D. purpureum

A phylogeny based on small subunit ribosomal RNA
gene sequences places D. purpureum and D. discoideum
into distinct clades within the most derived of the four
groups of social amoebae, the group 4 dictyostelids [7].
Thus, these two species should represent much of the
diversity of the group. We constructed a global phylogeny of representative plant, animal, fungal and amoebal
species, based on 389 orthologous gene clusters, in
order to estimate the divergence of D. purpureum and
D. discoideum relative to other eukaryotes (Figure 3).
This analysis suggests that the group 4 dictyostelids
span a comparable degree of protein sequence divergence as occurs among vertebrate species ranging from
the bony fishes to the mammals. Recent comprehensive
analyses of orthologous protein clusters from complete
predicted proteomes suggests that the rates of protein
evolution in the Amoebozoa are comparable to those of
the plants and animals [20]. If gene sequence evolution
occurs at the same rate in the two groups, these two
observations suggest that D. purpureum and D. discoideum shared a common ancestor approximately 400
million years ago.
Horizontal gene transfer

The initial description of the D. discoideum genome
included 18 genes that were proposed to be horizontal
gene transfer (HGT) events from bacterial species [1].
After 5 years of refinement of the underlying genome
sequence, 16 D. discoideum genes remain potential
HGT events. They have not been recognized in the
characterized plant, animal or fungal genomes, and each
of them is phylogenetically embedded within a bacterial
clade. In addition, the thymidylate synthase gene, thyA,
has been confirmed as an HGT; it is present only in a
minority of the described bacterial species and is structurally unrelated to the canonical eukaryotic thymidylate
synthase [21]. To narrow the time frame wherein the
HGT events might have occurred, we searched the
D. purpureum genome for orthologs to these genes.
Each of the proposed D. discoideum HGT genes have an
ortholog in the D. purpureum genome (Table 2). This
suggests that all 16 of these potential HGT events
occurred after the divergence of the Amoebozoa from

Page 5 of 23

Arabidopsis
Chlamydomonas
Neurospora
sea anemone
lancelet
fish
chicken
human
D. discoideum
D. purpureum
Entamoeba
0.1 substitutions per site
Figure 3 Phylogeny of the dictyostelids. Orthologs (389) defined
by pairwise genome comparisons for reciprocal best hits using
BLASTP from human [100] versus each of Oryzias latipes [100], Gallus
gallus [100], Branchiostoma floridae [101], Nematostella vectensis [28],
Neurospora crassa (Broad release 7) [102], Arabidopsis thaliana (TAIR8)
[103], Chlamydomonas reinhardtii [104], Dictyostelium discoideum [14],
plus D. discoideum versus each of D. purpureum, and Entamoeba
histolytica [22]. A concatenated alignment of the orthologs was
analyzed with mrBayes 3.1.2 using the WAG model, I + Gamma for
100,000 generations, with the first 50% of sampled trees discarded.
The resulting consensus tree was rooted at the midpoint of the
branch connecting the green plants to the rest of the tree.

the plants and animals, but prior to the radiation of the
group 4 dictyostelids.
Functional information now exists for 6 of the 16 proposed HGT genes and it is interesting to see how the
dictyostelids have utilized these contributions from bacteria. ThyA has completely replaced an essential enzyme
in central metabolism [21]. Since it is also present in the
amoebozoan slime mold Physarum polycephalum (GenBank accession number [GenBank:AAY87038] [22]), the
change over to the rare bacterial enzyme must have
taken place quite early in the radiation of the amoebozoa. The isopentenyl transferase, IptA, produces discadenine, which is a sporulation inducer and spore
germination inhibitor [23]. Another gene, pscA, encodes

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

Page 6 of 23

Table 2 Candidate horizontal gene transfers from Bacteria
Pfam domaina Function in
bacteriab

D. discoideum
dictyBase IDc

Function in D. discoideumc

D. purpureum
protein IDd

D. purpureum
dictyBase ID

Beta_elim_lyase Aromatic amino acid
lyase

DDB_G0281127

Unknown

154359

DPU_G0057350

BioY

Biotin metabolism

DDB_G0292424

Unknown

79107

DPU_G0053374

Cna_B
Peroxidase

Unknown
Dyp_peroxidase

DDB_G0292696
DDB_G0273083

colA, Colossin A slug protein
Unknown

96318
35644

DPU_G0069302
DPU_G0056076

Endotoxin_N

Insecticidal crystal
protein

DDB_G0289249

Unknown

96621

DPU_G0058298

IPT

Isopentenyl
transferase

DDB_G0277215

Discadenine production

92712

DPU_G0062048

IucA_IucC
OsmC

Siderophore synthesis DDB_G0294004
Osmoregulation
DDB_G0268884

Unknown
Unknown

No modele
93234

No modele
DPU_G0070822

Peptidase S13

Dipeptidase/
b-lactamase

DDB_G0271902

Penicillin-sensitive
carboxypeptidase

6688

DPU_G0063426

PP_kinase

Polyphosphate
synthesis

DDB_G0293524

Polyphosphate synthesis

45674

DPU_G0062710

TerD

Tellurium resistance

DDB_G0277501

capA/B

57536

DPU_G0062378

Thy1

Thymidylate synthesis DDB_G0280045

thyA, thymidylate synthesis

149635

DPU_G0069806

DUF885

Unknown

Unknown

155362

DPU_G0059974

DDB_G0278355

DUF1121

Unknown

DDB_G0277411

Unknown

39626

DPU_G0062812

DUF1289

Unknown

DDB_G0282477

Unknown

27078

DPU_G0056950

DUF1294

Unknown

DDB_G0285825

Unknown

86664

DPU_G0067456

a

b

c

The Pfam domain designation [99]. Confirmed or proposed function of the prokaryotic ortholog is given. The D. discoideum gene ID number and functional
annotation are from dictyBase [14]. dD. purpureum ortholog protein ID numbers [13]. All orthologs are 90 to 100% similar in amino acid sequence to the D.
discoideum protein over >90% of their length. eA related sequence is present, but no protein model could be produced from the current assembly.

an active penicillin-sensitive peptidase but its function is
not known [24], and Ppk1 is a bacterial type polyphosphate synthase [25]. Colossin A (ColA) appears to be a
structural protein of the slug that was fashioned out of
hundreds of repeats of a bacterial Cna_B domain [1].
CapA and CapB are two cAMP-binding proteins whose
carboxy-terminal half is derived from a subunit of a bacterial tellurium resistance complex [26]. Recently, CapB
was identified in a proteomic screen for centrosomal
proteins [27].
Conserved gene order between the D. purpureum and
D. discoideum genomes

Genomes evolve through base substitution and insertion/deletion, and also through rearrangements that
alter the order and orientation of genes on chromosomes. Synteny, the nature and extent of conserved
gene order between species, serves as an important
gauge of the dynamics of genome evolution [28]. To
characterize the potential synteny between D. purpureum and D. discoideum, we identified blocks of approximately conserved gene order between their genomes,
and compared the number and sizes of these potential
conserved syntenic blocks to control genomes in which
the gene orders were artificially scrambled. Although
the D. purpureum genome is not fully assembled, the
current level of contiguity allows for an analysis of conserved gene order on a small scale (approximately 50

kb). Blocks of potential synteny were constructed by single-linkage clustering of D. purpureum genes, where
pairs of genes are considered linked if (i) they fall on
the same scaffold of the assembly with at most w intervening genes that have D. discoideum orthologs, and (ii)
their D. discoideum orthologs all fall on a single chromosome, with no more than w intervening genes that
have D. purpureum orthologs. For stretches of perfectly
conserved gene order (blocks constructed with w = 0),
4,734 (63%) of the 1:1 ortholog pairs used in the analysis
lie in a genomic block of conserved gene order involving
at least two genes in each genome. The mean size of
such blocks is 2.8 genes in each genome, with the longest perfectly conserved stretch containing 10 genes.
To determine the maximum length scale over which
significant conservation of gene order persists, we compared the increase in potential syntenic clusters as a
function of an increasing number of intervening genes
(w) for D. purpureum versus D. discoideum to the rate
obtained for the permutation controls (Figure S6 in
Additional file 1). We found that for up to about 15
intervening genes, potential conserved gene clusters
grow significantly faster than what is expected for the
same two genomes with randomized gene orders, which
provides a conservative threshold for identifying blocks
of conserved gene order. With this estimate, 76% of
orthologous gene pairs participate in a block of

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

approximately conserved gene order, compared to 5.8 ±
0.4% in controls, with a false positive rate, on a gene-bygene basis, of approximately 7%. The 5,793 genes contained in these blocks, and their positions in the genome, are listed in Additional file 2. This indicates that
the majority of orthologs in D. purpureum and D. discoideum are found in small neighborhoods of exactly
conserved gene order between the two species, and that
these neighborhoods are themselves clustered into larger
regions of approximately conserved gene order.
Gene content comparisons of D. purpureum and D.
discoideum genomes
Non-coding RNA genes

The described catalog of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in
the Dictyostelia was long limited to tRNAs, rRNAs, and
a handful of experimentally identified short RNAs, all
found in D. discoideum (for review, see [29]). Recent
work has expanded this repertoire to include a family of
spliceosomal ncRNAs and two classes (class I and class
II) of novel ncRNAs [30,31]. The spliceosomal RNAs
identified in D. discoideum, U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6, are
each characterized by both specific RNA-binding motifs
and the ability to fold into characterized secondary
structures [30,31]. Using a modified BLAST search
(Additional file 1), we have identified a set of D. purpureum spliceosomal homologs that are predicted to fold
into the appropriate secondary structures (Table S3a in
Additional file 1).
In D. discoideum a ‘Dictyostelium upstream sequence
element’ (DUSE) has been described that sits approximately 63 bp upstream of many ncRNAs, including the
class I and II ncRNAs [31]. Identification of the DUSE
motif ([AT]CCCA[AT]AA) in D. purpureum revealed
that a DUSE also sits upstream of all D. purpureum spliceosomal RNA genes. The DUSE also enriches for a
family of putative D. purpureum ncRNAs that are
homologous to the two novel classes of D. discoideum
ncRNAs. This suggests that the DUSE is not specific to
D. discoideum.
Operating under the assumption that the DUSE sits
upstream of certain ncRNAs in D. purpureum, we
sought to identify novel ncRNAs by focusing on DUSEenriched 8-bp sequences (see Additional file 1 for methods). Two of the three 8-mers that were found to be
highly enriched, CCTTACAG and CTTACAGC, also
occur in the novel classes of D. discoideum ncRNAs.
These ncRNA gene products are 50 to 60 bp long and
have distinct 5’ and 3’ sequences predicted to form 5-bp
stem structures that are conserved within each class
(Figure 4). Both classes share a 12-bp ‘bulge’ sequence,
CCTTACAGCCAA, which is immediately 3’ to the 5’
stem sequence [30]. This ‘bulge’ sequence is predicted
to not bind with any other region of the ncRNA, thus

Page 7 of 23

constituting a non-self-binding region (NSBR). The two
8-mers both sit within this NSBR.
To identify putative homologs to the class I and II
ncRNAs in D. purpureum, we used the structural characteristics of these ncRNAs to filter all sequences containing the DUSE-enriched 8-mers. Forty members of
the class I and II ncRNAs were originally identified in
D. discoideum. Some are described as putative, with
nine lacking the canonical bulge sequence, and five
others lacking an upstream DUSE, or having a degenerate DUSE. The class I ncRNAs have a 5’ stem sequence
of GTTGA, while two class II ncRNAs have a 5’ stem
sequence of GCTCG, and all members have a 3’ stem
sequence complementary to the 5’ stem sitting 40 to 70
bp away from the 5’ stem [29].
In our analysis of the masked D. discoideum genome,
we identified 46 occurrences of the CTTACAGC 8-mer
(Additional file 1). Of these, 26 possess both an
upstream DUSE and a 5’/3’ stem pair sitting 40 to 70 bp
apart, and each corresponds to a previously identified
class I or II ncRNA. In the masked D. purpureum genome there are 61 occurrences of the CCTTACAG
8-mer; 26 of these 8-mers have both an upstream DUSE
and a 5’/3’ stem pair consisting of an identical 5’
sequence (GAATT) (Figure 4). These results suggest a
class of ncRNAs in D. purpureum similar to the class I
and II ncRNAs found in D. discoideum.
The comparative genomics approach to identifying
these ncRNAs in D. purpureum lends deeper insight
into their function. The 5’ and 3’ stem sequences have
diverged between species, but have done so in a compensatory manner that maintains the predicted 5’/3’
structure. The NSBR sequence, however, has remained
perfectly conserved between species, and in neither
species is it predicted to self-bind. This suggests a functional role for the NSBR beyond self-interaction, possibly as a binding site for another functional element.
Initial genomic analysis of the dictyostelids Dictyostelium citrinum and Polysphondylium violaceum also
revealed putative ncRNAs with an upstream DUSE, the
conserved NSBR sequence, a 5’/3’ stem structure, but
5’/3’ stem sequences different from those of D. discoideum and D. purpureum (unpublished data).
Determination of protein orthologs

Of the 12,410 predicted D. purpureum proteins, we
identified 7,619 that are likely to be orthologous to
D. discoideum proteins using the Inparanoid algorithm,
best reciprocal blast hits, and manual curation (Additional file 3). An additional 2,759 predicted proteins are
similar to genes in D. discoideum, while 2,001 appear to
be unique to D. purpureum (Additional file 4). Thus, at
least 84% of the protein-coding genes in D. purpureum
share orthologs or paralogs in the D. discoideum
genome. The gene product predictions from the

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

Page 8 of 23

3’ Stem
No c

onse

nsus

C

struc

ture

5’ Stem

C
T

A
T

5’ NSBR

A
A

C

C
A

G

Dd_r49
Dd_r21
Dd_r23A
Dd_r25
Dd_r28
Dd_r41
Dd_r47
Dd_r59
Dd_r62
Dd_r35
Dd_r36

GTTTACCTTACAGCAAA-TCTTACAGTTCCTTCATTCTAAGAAAACCTTCCGTCAACTGTCTTTTTTTTAATTG-TTTGTTATGGAT
GTTGACCTTACAGCAAACCCTAC-------AGT---CATTTCAT--------------------AAGAAAAAC----TACCGTCAAC
GTTGACCTTACAGCAAATCTAAC-------ATTTCCTTACATTC--------------------AAAGA-AAC----CTTCGTCAAC
GTTGACCTTACAGCAAATCTTAC-------AGTTCCTTCATTCT--------------------AAGAAAACC-----TCCGTCAAC
GTTGACCTTACAGCAATCTAATC-------ACAAATTTTTACTTCAC-----------------AAAAAAAAAACCCCTTCGTCAAC
GTTGACCTTACAGCAAATCTTAA-------AGCTACTTCATTCT--------------------AAGAAAAAC----TCCTGTCAAC
GCTGACCTTACAGCAATTCTATC-------ACT--CTACATTCC--------------------AAAGAAATC----CTTCGTCAGC
GTTGACCTTACAGCAATCTCAAC-------AATTTTATCACATT--------------------ATAAAAAAA-----AACCTCAGT
GTTGACCTTACAGCAAATCT-TG-------CAGAA--AACCTTA-------------------------------------GTCAAC
GCTCGCCTTACAGCAATTACTCT-------G-ATTTTTCTCCAA--------------------AAAAAAAAC----CTTCGCGAGT
GCTGCGCTTACAGCAATTACTCT-------GAATTTTTCTCCAA--------------------AAAAAAACC----CTTCGCGAGT

Dp_1
Dp_10
Dp_11
Dp_19
Dp_2
Dp_20
Dp_22
Dp_4
Dp_13
Dp_3

GAATTCCTTACAGCAATGA--CT-------CATCTGAAACCCTT-------------------------------------GGATTC
GAATTCCTTACAGCAAT--ATAA-------C--ATTCAAAATTTAAC-----------------TCTGAAAT------CTTGAATTC
GAATTCCTTACAGCAATTAAACT-------C--ATTCAAAATTTAAC-----------------TCTGAAAT------CTCGAATTC
GAATTCCTTACAGCAATAAACTT-------GACTCTGAAATCTT-------------------------------------AAATTC
GAATTCCTTACAGCAATTA-CAT-------TATTGAAGAAACCT-------------------------------------GAATTC
GAATTCCTTACAGCAATATAACT-------C--ATTCAAAATTTAAC-----------------TCTGAAAT------CTCGAATTC
GAATTCCTTACAGCATTTTATCT-------CTCTTTGAATTCGGTTA-----------------GTATCGAAAG-ATATTGGGGTTC
GAATTCCTTACAGCAATTG--AC-------ATTTTCCCTCCC----------------------ATAGAAAAA----ATCCGAATTC
GAATTCCTTACAGCAATGAAATGATG----ATCTGGAGAGACCCACTCATTAGAGAACCATGGGTCTTTCCGGGAAAAATTGGATTC
GAATTCCTTACAGCAATCAAAAGTTT----ATCTTGAGAGGCCCACT---------------GGTCTTTCTGGGAAAAATTGGATTC

Figure 4 Putative novel ncRNAs in D. purpureum. The sequences and predicted structures of select class I and II ncRNAs in both
D. discoideum and D. purpureum. The red dots indicate base pair positions that possess high mutual information but lack sequence identity. This
region contains the 5’ and 3’ stem sequences, which are conserved among each species but not between both. Blue dots indicate base
positions where sequences are perfectly conserved, corresponding to the non-self-binding region (NSBR). The starred positions are connected via
a variable sequence (green box in alignment), which lacks primary sequence or secondary structure conservation (see Figure S8 in Additional file
1 for complete alignment).

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

D. purpureum genome should be enormously useful for
further refinement of the predicted proteome of D. discoideum. Some gene families are completely conserved
between D. purpureum and D. discoideum, with clear
orthologs for every member of the family, while other
families appear to have undergone considerable divergence between the two species (Figure S9 in Additional
file 1, and Additional file 4). The differences amongst
gene family members should illuminate the physiological
differences between these two dictyostelids, whereas the
similarities may indicate where the selective pressures,
exerted by their common environment, have resulted in
stable gene inventories required for survival.
Polyketide synthases

Polyketide synthases (PKSs) are enzymatic production
lines for making small molecules by the repeated condensation of malonyl-CoA and other thio-esters of coenzyme A (CoA). A large number of polyketides exist and
are probably made for ecological purposes, but they also
serve as model natural products for the development of
drugs, antibiotics and food additives. Soil amoebae are
not commonly regarded as polyketide producers, but
they too must face complex ecological challenges, which
could be met by polyketide production; competition
from other amoebae, infection by bacteria and predation
by nematodes, amoebae and fungi. A small number of
potential eco-chemicals have been identified from social
amoebae [32,33], but the completed D. discoideum genome sequence revealed a much larger potential
[1,34,35]. These PKSs are large, modular proteins of
2,000 to 3,500 amino acids, each having a core of
domains for the condensation reaction, together with
optional domains for methylation, carbonyl reduction
and product release. Two have a unique, ‘steely’, architecture in which a second PKS - a chalcone synthase is fused to the carboxyl terminus of a modular PKS [36].
One of these steely proteins makes the precursor of differentiation-inducing factor (DIF)-1, a chlorinated signal
molecule for stalk cell differentiation [37], and the other
a pyrone or an olivetol derivative [35,36,38].
The D. purpureum genome has 50 predicted PKS
genes. We constructed phylogenetic trees using the
highly conserved ketoacyl synthase and acyl transfer
domains of the PKS genes from both species to discern
evolutionary relationships (Figure 5a; see Table S6 in
Additional file 1 for corresponding genomic loci). The
two steely genes within each species are only distantly
related to each other but are clearly orthologous
between species. This implies that both genes were present in the last common ancestor and that their function has been maintained in both species. There is also
a clear ortholog in D. purpureum of the methyltransferase catalyzing the last step of DIF-1 biosynthesis [39]
and so D. purpureum is likely to make DIF-1, like

Page 9 of 23

D. discoideum, and Dictyostelium mucoroides [40],
another group 4 dictyostelid [7]. Two other clear orthologous pairs of genes are apparent. Dp2 and the very
similar Dd1/Dd2 likely encode fatty acid synthases based
on their similarity to other fatty acid synthases and their
high expression levels. Dp12 and Dd3 are of unknown
function, though mutation of Dd3 causes a ‘cheater’
phenotype, suggesting that it may produce a developmental signal [41].
In contrast to the four D. purpureum genes described
above, most D. purpureum PKS genes do not have
obvious orthologs in D. discoideum, indicating speciesspecific expansions. Given the overall gene conservation
between these two species, the divergence of the PKS
gene sets is striking. We speculate that this greater evolutionary fluidity reflects different selective pressures
placed on the two species, perhaps by different competitor species in their ecological niches, and therefore that
most of their polyketides are produced for ecological
purposes.
The D. purpureum genome confirms the high potential of social amoebae for polyketide production. The
relative paucity of orthologs to D. discoideum PKSs
raises the possibility that polyketide production varies
substantially from species to species amongst the dictyostelids. As natural products remain the major source
of drugs [42], this diversity suggests that natural products of social amoebae deserve systematic exploration.
The ATP-binding cassette transporters

The ABC transporters are one of the largest protein
superfamilies that are encoded by any genome. In stark
contrast to the lineage-specific radiation of the PKS proteins, the complement of ABC transporters has
remained remarkably stable since the divergence of
D. purpureum and D. discoideum. ABC proteins all have
a conserved domain of 200 to 250 amino acids, the
ATP-binding cassette, and typically have 12 transmembrane domains. Seven different eukaryotic families have
been defined on the basis of sequence homology,
domain topology and function. The superfamily has
been extensively analyzed in D. discoideum [43] and this
allowed a detailed comparison to the predicted D. purpureum ABC superfamily members. Both genomes carry
similar numbers of ABC genes overall, but differences in
gene number can be observed within groups of closely
related genes belonging to the largest families (Tables
S7 and S8 in Additional file 1). Only 58 genes can be
considered clear orthologs; the remaining genes should
be considered paralogs (Figure S10 in Additional file 1).
These genes may play partially redundant roles and this
might allow their sequences to drift to a point of uncertain orthology.
The Tag subfamily proteins (TagA-D) of the ABC B
family have a novel domain structure with a serine

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

(b)
18
17

25 24 23
2726

25
24
23
22
21
20
19

(a)

Page 10 of 23

28

DhkM

52

100

6
,1
154 3
1 2,1
1

29

100
11
10

36
37
38

56

99
9

22
21

8

100

20
19
18
17
16

26
27
28
29
30

67

100
100

77

100

15
14
13

4
410
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
501
5 2
5

38 9
3

100

5
4
12
3

100

10

63

69

9

Dictyostelium discoideum
4 56

8
7

DhkC
Dp DhkC
AcrA
Dp AcrA
DhkD

DhkI

61

62

11

Dp DhkM

Dp DhkD

100
7
6

31
37

100

100

58

Dictyostelium purpureum

Dp DhkI
DhkG
Dp DhkG
DokA
Dp DokA
DhkL
Dp DhkL

60
74

12
(fas)

2

stlA

100

83

100

3

DhkJ
Dp DhkJ

100

71

DhkK
Dp DhkK

100

67

DhkB
Dp DhkB

100
100

51

DhkE
Dp DhkE

100

69

DhkA
Dp DhkA

100

66

DhkH
Dp DhkH

100

64

DhkF
Dp DhkF

stlB
(DIF)

1

Figure 5 Polyketide synthases and histidine kinases of D. purpureum. (a) The phylogram of putative polyketide synthases was constructed
from the ketoacyl synthase and acyltransferase domains of each predicted protein. Red numbers indicate D. discoideum genes and blue
numbers indicate D. purpureum genes, with the corresponding genomic loci given in Table S6 in Additional file 1. Orthologous genes are circled
in grey; the steely (stlA, stlB) and the putative fatty acid synthase (fas) genes are indicated. (b) Unrooted phylogram of the putative histidine
kinases and the AcrA protein of D. discoideum and D. purpureum (denoted with ‘Dp’ before the gene names). Bootstrap values at each node are
given for 1,000 iterations of tree building. The red numbers indicate the percent amino acid sequence identity between each pair of predicted
proteins. Note the striking one-to-one correspondence between each gene in the two species.

protease domain on the amino terminus, a single set of
six transmembrane domains, and one ABC domain on
the carboxyl terminus. Three of the Tag proteins have
defined roles in cell differentiation; TagA is involved in
early cell fate determination [44], TagB is required for
pre-stalk cell differentiation [45], and TagC is expressed
in pre-stalk cells and required to process acyl-CoA binding protein into a spore differentiation peptide signal
[46]. Interestingly, TagA, B and C are conserved
between D. purpureum and D. discoideum, but whereas
the TagA orthologs are quite similar, the relationship
between the TagB and TagC proteins in the two species

is not as clear (they were named based on their gene
order within a block of synteny between D. discoideum
and D. purpureum).
Protein kinases

D. purpureum has a similar complement of protein
kinases compared to D. discoideum. Like D. discoideum, D. purpureum does not appear to have receptor
tyrosine kinases, or other notable protein kinases such
as P70, ATM, and PASK. There are 262 eukaryotic
protein kinases and 41 atypical protein kinases, including potential pseudogenes (Table S9 in Additional file
1). This compares to 247 identified eukaryotic protein

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

kinases and 39 atypical protein kinases in D. discoideum [47].
The 14 D. purpureum histidine kinase genes, and the
related acrA gene, each have an unambiguous ortholog
in D discoideum (Figure 5b). There is little homology
between non-orthologous genes outside of the kinase
domain. Thus, the histidine kinases appear to have
diverged from a common ancestor before the radiation
of the dictyostelids, suggesting that each one of them
carries out a distinct and conserved function. The adenylyl cyclase of D. discodeum, AcrA, carries a non-functional histidine kinase domain with mutations in key
amino acids that preclude kinase activity [48]. This
domain and its variations are well conserved in the D.
purpureum AcrA, suggesting that there is a selective
advantage to maintaining this non-catalytic domain,
probably as a dimerization domain.
The catalytic subunit of cAMP dependent protein
kinase (PKA), PkaC, in D. purpureum shows 65% amino
acid identity with its D. discoideum ortholog. The
homology is highest in the catalytic core and lowest in
the low complexity amino-terminal domain, with the
exception of the region encompassing the aA amphipathic helix [49]. This helix, which is predicted to interact with a hydrophobic pocket on the catalytic core of
the enzyme, is 95% identical in these dictyostelids,
which is suggestive of a conserved regulatory function.
The regulatory subunit of PKA, PkaR, of D. purpureum
and D. discoideum shows 79% amino acid identity and
each of them lack the dimerization domain found in
metazoa.
G-protein coupled receptors

GPCRs are found in all eukaryotes and transduce a variety of extracellular signals via heterotrimeric G-proteins
and effector proteins inside the cell to elicit physiological responses. GPCRs are characterized by an extracellular domain, an intracellular domain, and a core domain
that contains seven transmembrane regions. The GPCRs
are subdivided into six major families that, aside from
their conserved secondary domain structure, do not
share significant sequence similarity. The D. purpureum
genome encodes the same families of GPCRs as in D.
discoideum, but has a reduced total number, which is
mainly due to differences in the numbers of cAMP,
family 3 and family 5 receptors (Figure S12 and Table
S10 in Additional file 1). There are only two cAMP
receptors in the D. purpureum genome, namely orthologs of Dictyostelium carA and carB, but there are no
orthologs of carC and carD. In addition, there are 35%
fewer family 3 receptors and 40% fewer family 5 receptors. This difference must be due either to an expansion
of family 3, 5 and cAR receptors in D. discoideum or to
a reduction in the D. purpureum genome. Either D. discoideum has evolved many new functions for GPCRs

Page 11 of 23

compared to D. purpureum or else there is more functional overlap amongst the D. discoideum receptors.
Transcription factors

The overall comparison of transcription factors in D.
discoideum and D. purpureum shows gross conservation
both in the total number of genes in each family, and at
the protein sequence level (Table S11 in Additional file
1). There are only 11 basic leucine zipper (bZIP)
domains in D. purpureum, versus 19 in D. discoideum.
Among the 11 bZIPs found in both species are DimA
and DimB, which are involved in DIF signaling in D.
discoideum, as well as bZIP candidates for CREB and
GCN4, which are the most conserved bZIPs among
eukaryotes (E. Huang, M. Katoh-Kurasawa and G.
Shaulsky; unpublished). There are an equal number of
STAT transcription factors in D. purpureum and D. discoideum (four), each with a high degree of protein
sequence identity. In the original description of the D.
discoideum genome, the paucity of transcription factors
was noted [1]. One explanation for the small number of
recognized transcription factors was the possibility of
new classes of transcription factors that evade conventional detection based on sequence searches. One example is the recently defined CudA nuclear protein that
binds in vivo to the promoter of the cotC prespore gene
[50]. CudA-related proteins have recently been defined
as being specific to the amoebozoa [51], but there are
distantly related proteins in plants [50].
The actin cytoskeleton and its regulation

The D. purpureum repertoire of microfilament system
proteins is almost an exact replica of that described in
D. discoideum (Table S12 in Additional file 1) [52]. In
contrast, the actin-depolymerizing factor (ADF) protein
family differs between the Dictyostelium species. A phylogenetic tree of all ADF domains encoded by the genomes of both species shows three major groups (Figure
S13 in Additional file 1). The ADF domains present in
cofilin, twinfilin and GMF (glia maturation factor) constitute one group. D. purpureum has two genes encoding cofilins, cofA and cofG. Only cofA has a direct
ortholog amongst the eight D. discoideum genes. An
additional group of ADF domains is present in D. purpureum that includes three proteins, one of which
(DPU_G0064410) has no direct ortholog in D. discoideum and another (DPU_G0060306) that is related
to two D. discoideum genes (DDB_G0270134 and
DDB_G0270132).
A family of proteins where there has been some
expansion in D. purpureum is that of the I/LWEQ
domain-containing proteins. Besides two talins and a
single Sla2/HIP1, D. purpureum harbors three more
genes related to hipA encoding only a carboxy-terminal
fragment that encompasses the I/LWEQ domain. It is
not clear whether these are actually pseudogenes.

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

Similarly, we have found a group of at least eight genes
that encode short proteins related to the carboxy-terminal part of HIP1 immediately upstream of the I/LWEQ
domain. The extensive family of calponin homology
(CH) domain proteins in D. purpureum has two members absent in D. discoideum. One (DPU_G0069574) is
related to conventional fimbrins but lacks EF hands and
has a weakly conserved fourth CH domain. The other
(DPU_G0074288) is a protein with a carboxy-terminal
CH domain.
Rho signaling

Cytoskeletal remodeling during chemotaxis and phagocytosis is regulated by a considerable number of
upstream signaling components. Especially important
are those components involved in signaling to and from
small GTPases of the Rho family, as recently described
in D. discoideum [53]. In general terms the repertoire of
genes encoding proteins that participate in Rho signaling is very similar in both dictyostelid species, with
some exceptions (Tables S13 and S14 in Additional file
1). The Rho GTPase family itself has diversified considerably in D. purpureum and D. discoideum (Figure S14
in Additional file 1). This family currently comprises 20
rac genes and one pseudogene in D. discoideum and 18
genes in D. purpureum. Most D. discoideum rac genes
have a direct ortholog in D. purpureum, but the degree
of conservation is variable. There is a second rac1arelated gene, indicating that the ancestral rac1 gene
duplicated independently in each organism. There is no
ortholog for D. discoideum rac1b, rac1c, racF1, racF2,
racI and racM to racO, and the pseudogene racK and,
conversely, D. purpureum has five more rac genes without a D. discoideum counterpart (racR to racW), again
indicating that the rac family has undergone independent divergence in both species.
Among the Rho regulators D. purpureum appears to
have one RhoGAP gene less than D. discoideum. The
missing RhoGAP gene is gacII; the corresponding protein consists of a RhoGAP domain followed by a SH3
domain. The protein is very similar to the amino-terminal half of RacGAP1 (xacA gene), suggesting that gacII
resulted from a partial duplication of xacA in D. discoideum. Among the Rho effectors, the class PI4P 5
kinases have undergone a notable expansion in D. purpureum (Table S14 in Additional file 1). Additional
descriptions of Ras superfamily members can be found
in Additional file 1.
The D. purpureum glycome

Glycosylation is an extensive post-translational modification of proteins, and also occurs on lipids, nucleic acids
and, of course, polysaccharides, in all forms of life.
Though basic glycosylation pathways tend to be conserved among eukaryotes, glycosylation details can vary

Page 12 of 23

between species and cell types, and even between individual proteins as ‘microheterogeneities’. In D. discoideum, protein glycosylation has been implicated in
protein sorting and stability, cell proliferation, adhesion
and sorting, spore coat assembly, resistance to cisplatin,
and oxygen signaling. The inventory of predicted glycogenes likely to be associated with both anabolic and
catabolic aspects of glycan metabolism approaches 2.5%
of the genome (Tables S16, S17, S18, and S19 in Additional file 1), typical for metazoans but lower than for
higher plants. As discussed below, a comparison of D.
purpureum with the previously annotated glycogenes of
D. discoideum [54], in the context of the global CAZy
classification [55,56], suggests examples of both considerable conservation and diversification of their glycomes.
N-linked glycosylation

Protein N-glycosylation, the most prevalent and highly
conserved type of protein glycosylation, is initiated in
the rough endoplasmic reticulum of D. discoideum by
the transfer of a 14-sugar chain from a lipid-linked precursor [57] that is identical to the yeast and human precursor but distinct from that of many protists [58].
Maturation of the sugar chain leads to a preponderance
of high-mannose glycans with bisecting and novel intersecting b-linked GlcNAc, and a3-linked core fucose
characteristic of plants and invertebrates, followed by
increased a-mannosidase processing during development [59,60]. D. discoideum N-glycans are often rendered anionic by phosphorylation and sulfation [57,59],
in contrast to the typical sialic acid or uronic acid modifications of animal glycans.
A genomic comparison suggests that the N-glycome of
D. purpureum will be similar to that of D. discoideum
but with some interesting differences (Table S16 in
Additional file 1). For example, putative CAZy GT49
b3-GlcNAc transferases, GT10 a3/4-fucosyltransferases,
and glycophosphotransferases, expected to mediate peripheral modifications of N-linked and perhaps other glycans, are represented by much smaller gene families in
D. purpureum, and low amino acid sequence similarities
make ortholog predictions for individual family members less certain. Thus, D. purpureum may exhibit
reduced prevalence and diversity of its peripheral glycan
modifications.
The most dramatic predicted difference between the
two dictyostelid glycomes stems from the apparent
absence in D. purpureum of the four-member CAZy
GT17 class of GT-like proteins expected to mediate
addition of peripheral bisecting and/or intersecting b4GlcNAc residues. We tested this by performing a
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry glycomic analysis,
which confirmed the presence in D. discoideum of Nglycans containing two peripheral GlcNAc residues and/

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

or an a3-linked core fucose, and revealed an apparent
absence of these species in D. purpureum (Figure 6).
The results suggest that CAZy family GT17 and GT10
sequences present in D. discoideum but absent from D.
purpureum encode a novel N-glycan b-GlcNAc transferase and a core a3-fucosyltransferase, respectively,
emphasizing the value of comparative genomics for predicting gene functions. Other studies have indicated that
N-glycans are dominant contributors to the cell surface
glycocalyx, and therefore may strongly influence intraand inter-specific encounters with other amoebae, and
interactions with potential predators, pathogens and
prey. Thus, the dramatically different N-glycomes of
these species might contribute to, for example, their differential sorting in interspecific mixtures [61].
Other glycosylation events associated with the secretory
pathway

A previous inspection of the predicted D. discoideum
proteome also indicated the existence of some major
classes of biosynthetic enzymes associated with mucintype O-glycans, O-phosphoglycans, and glycosylphosphatidylinisotol (GPI) anchors [54], in agreement with
biochemical studies [57]. For example, mucin-type Oglycosylation is initiated in the Golgi by a CAZy GT60
polypeptide a-GlcNAc transferase, conserved in both
dictyostelids and related to the polypeptide a-GalNAc
transferases associated with mucin-type O-glycosylation
in animals [62]. Glycophosphorylation of the hydroxyamino acids threonine and serine may be less prevalent
in D. purpureum owing to the much smaller size of its
glycophosphotransferase-like gene family (Table S16).
Although the glycogene comparison suggests a general
conservation of these other aspects of the glycome, differences suggest that there may be equally dramatic variations as observed for N-glycosylation.
Cytoplasmic glycome

Whereas glycosylation occurs predominantly in the
secretory compartments, formation of the precursors for
these pathways generally originates in the cytoplasm, and
the cytoplasm is also a site for catabolic deglycosylation.
The genome encodes proteins associated with these functions as expected. In addition, like most eukaryotes, D.
discoideum encodes a potential nucleo-cytoplasmic Spylike GT41 O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT or Ser/ThrbGlcNAc transferase) and D. purpureum encodes two;
the physiological function(s) of O-GlcNAc in protists is
currently unknown [63]. D. discoideum also possesses a
complex cytoplasmic O-glycosylation pathway that modifies hydroxyproline and has an ancient evolutionary relationship with O-glycosylation in the secretory pathway
and bacterial glycosylation [64]. The genes of this pathway are highly conserved in D. purpureum, and bioinformatics and biochemical data indicate its partial
conservation across at least four major protist phyla. This

Page 13 of 23

pathway is devoted to the modification of the E3 ubiquitin ligase subunit Skp1, and is involved in oxygen regulation of development in D. discoideum [65].
Carbohydrate binding proteins

Many glycan functions are mediated in trans via carbohydrate binding domains (CBDs) or lectins. During
initial remodeling within the rough endoplasmic reticulum, N-glycans are recognized by lectins in a folding/
quality control cycle and, unlike many protists, this
pathway appears to be highly conserved between the
dictyostelids and animals [66]. D. discoideum encodes
numerous cytoplasmically localized lectins, including
multiple discoidin, Cup and comitin proteins [67-69],
and glycogen-binding proteins involved in metabolic
regulation (Tables S18 and S19 in Additional file 1).
Except for the latter, the natural glycan ligands in the
cytoplasm are unknown. Interestingly, discoidins, like
galectins of animals, exit cells via a non-classical process
and potentially bind self, prey or predator glycans containing Gal or GalNAc [70]. Discoidin and Cup CBDs
appear to be dictyostelid-specific and evolutionarily
dynamic, suggesting they serve species-specific functions
as suggested for other lineage-specific expansions [71].
Carbohydrate catabolism

Both genomes encode a few more glycohydrolases (Table
S16 in Additional file 1) than glycosyltransferases, with
suspected substrates ranging from dietary polysaccharides and glycans of bacterial, yeast and perhaps other
prey to endogenous glycans for recycling. Potentially 11
of the glycohydrolase domains are fused to carbohydrate
binding modules (CBMs), a subset of CBDs associated
with enzymes. As described for some cellulases such as
CelA, the CBM may localize the enzyme to the target
substrate after secretion, and may also directly promote
catalysis [72]. Peptidases may be localized at the cell surface by a similar mechanism. Cellulases are likely to be
involved in remodeling of slime sheath cellulose during
morphogenesis and spore coat breakdown during germination. D. purpureum and D. discoideum also have a cellulase associated with extracellular digestion in fungi and
other cellulose-digesting organisms (CAZy GH7), suggesting a similar role in the social amoebae. Though the
number of glycosyltransferases and known glycan binding proteins is 10 to 20% smaller in D. purpureum than
D. discoideum, correlating with fewer peripheral modifications, the number of potential glycohydrolases is
approximately 10% greater. The latter differences occur
in lysozyme-, chitinase-, and alpha-mannosidase-like
enzymes, suggesting variation in the spectrum of bacterial and yeast prey between the species.
Multicellular development and dictyostelid sociality

The dictyostelid social amoebae undergo multicellular
development when nutrients become limiting for

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

Page 14 of 23

(a) D. discoideum
2150.1

H8N4F1

H8N4

L-fucose

2296.2

D-mannose
D-GlcNAc

H9N2
1906.0

H8N2

Intensity [a.u.]

1743.8

(b) D. purpureum

1947.0

H8N3

2109.1

H9N3
H7N3
1785.0

H9N2
1906.0

Figure 6 Comparison of the N-glycomes of D. purpureum and D. discoideum cells. Cells were harvested from co-cultures with Klebsiella
aerogenes, and N-glycans were released from total CHAPS-solubilized, pepsin-digested protein using PNGase A [59,60]. (a) Matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF)/TOF mass spectrometry spectrum of underivatized D. discoideum N-glycans. (b) Corresponding
spectrum from D. purpureum. Structure assignments are based on glycan compositions derived from m/z values (H = Hex, N = HexNAc, F =
Fuc), tandem mass spectrometry analysis, linkage analysis and exoglycosidase digestions. Brackets indicate uncertainties in the positions of
peripheral GlcNAc (= N) and mannose (= H) residues. The major ions are [M + Na]+; minor [M + K]+ ions are also present. D. purpureum Nglycans lack a3-linked core fucose and the fourth peripheral b4-linked GlcNAc consistent with the absence of CAZy GT10 and GT17 genes
predicted to encode the glycosyltransferases responsible for these peripheral modifications in D. discoideum (Table S16 in Additional file 1). A.u.,
arbitrary units.

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

vegetative growth. The ensuing events of aggregation of
individual cells into an initial mound, slug migration,
and ultimately fruiting body morphogenesis, require several cooperative interactions between the cells. These
cooperative cellular behaviors include: cellular chemotaxis to self-generated, field-wide spiral waves of extracellular cAMP; the coordinated movements of cells
within specialized tissues of the mounds and slugs
requiring differential cell adhesion; an innate immune
system; and the apparent altruism displayed by the prestalk cells that die as they construct the stalk, presumably to aid the dispersal of the spores in the sorus. The
initial analyses of the D. discoideum genome uncovered
a number of protein classes that might mediate this
extensive cellular cooperation, and that were previously
thought to be unique to metazoa [1]. These proteins
included certain subfamilies of ABC transporters, metabotropic GPCRs, and cell surface proteins predicted to
contain repeated epidermal growth factor (EGF) or Iglike domains that had not previously been seen in
plants, fungi or amoebae.
One large family of 37 metazoan-like proteins
described in D. discoideum, the Tiger (transmembrane,
IPT, Ig-like, E-SET repeat) proteins, contain family
members that mediate cell-cell interactions during
development. Mutations in tgrB1, tgrC1 (formerly lagC),
tgrD1 and tgrE1 all result in the arrest of development
at the mound stage, and TgrB1 and TgrC1 have been
implicated in a self/non-self recognition system that
may mediate kin recognition [73]. Twenty-six Tiger-protein encoding genes are present in the D. purpureum
genome, including orthologs to D. discoideum’s tgrC1,
tgrD1, tgrF1, tgrK1, tgrM2, and tgrN1 genes. Their presence suggests that the Tiger protein family may be generally involved in allorecognition in the dictyostelids.
An innate immune system has been recently described
that functions during slug migration of D. discoideum
and appears to be present in other group 4 dictyostelids,
including D. purpureum [74]. It consists of a population
of sentinel cells that patrol the body of the slug, engulf
any bacteria that are present, bind to the slime sheath,
and then exit the slug by being left behind in the slime
trail. Sentinel cells are 1% of all slug cells and express
particular genes that are related to innate immunity signaling genes in plants and animals, such as slrA and
tirA. In particular, tirA, a Toll/interleukin receptor I
domain containing protein, is required for some aspects
of sentinel cell function [74]. D. purpureum has orthologs for both slrA and tirA, as well as three amoeba-specific lysozymes (Additional file 4).
Cyclic nucleotide signalling genes

cAMP controls many aspects of dictyostelid development. As a dynamically secreted chemoattractant it
directs the cell movement that causes cells to aggregate,

Page 15 of 23

and aggregates to transform into fruiting structures.
Secreted cAMP also triggers pre-spore differentiation,
up-regulates the expression of aggregation genes and
down-regulates stalk gene expression. As an intracellular
messenger for other stimuli, cAMP induces spore and
stalk encapsulation and maintains spore dormancy
[23,46,75,76].
In D. discoideum, 19 proteins are directly responsible
for synthesis, detection and degradation of cAMP and
its sister molecule, cGMP, which acts as a signaling
intermediate for chemotaxis [77]. To assess whether
cyclic nucleotides play similar roles in D. purpureum
development, we analyzed conservation and change in
all genes that are directly involved in cyclic nucleotide
signaling. D. discoideum uses the adenylate cyclases
ACA, ACB and ACG and the guanylate cyclases sGC
and GCA for synthesis of cAMP and cGMP, respectively
[76,78]. All five cyclases are present in D. purpureum
inclusive of their functional domain architecture (Figure
7a). The structurally distinct cell surface cAMP receptors (cARs) and intracellular cyclic nucleotide (cNMP)
binding domains are the sole targets for cyclic nucleotides in dictyostelids. D. discoideum has four cARs,
which are conserved in two other group 4 taxa, D.
mucoroides and Dictyostelium rosarium [79]. Nonetheless, only the cAR1 and cAR2 genes were detected in the
D. purpureum genome (Figure 7b). No firm conclusions
about the absence of cAR3 and cAR4 can yet be drawn,
since the assembly of this genome is not fully complete.
The cNMP binding domains are found in the regulatory subunit of PKA (PkaR), the cGMP binding proteins
GbpC and GbpD and the phosphodiesterases (PDEs)
PdeD and PdeE. PdeD is a cGMP phosphodiesterase
that is stimulated by cGMP binding to its cNMP binding domains, while PdeE is a cAMP-stimulated cAMP
phosphodiesterase [76,80]. GbpC is a complex multidomain protein in which cGMP binding to its cNMP binding domains sequentially activates the intrinsic RasGEF,
Ras/Roc and protein kinase domain, which eventually
leads to increased cell polarization. GbpD also contains
a RasGEF domain, but no output protein kinase domain.
Its cNMP binding domains are not functional and it
functions as an antagonist of GbpC in the chemotactic
response [81,82]. Genes encoding all five cNMP binding
proteins with their complete sets of functional domains
are present in the D. purpureum genome (Figure 7c).
In D. discoideum cyclic nucleotides are hydrolyzed by
three structurally distinct PDEs [80]. The cAMP PDEs
RegA and Pde4 and the cGMP PDE Pde3 harbor a
PDE_I type domain with HDc motif that is common to
mammalian PDEs. The dual-specificity PDEs PdsA and
PDE7 harbor a PDE_II type domain with HSHLDH
motif. PdeD and PdeE, which hydrolyze cGMP and
cAMP, respectively, carry a related HCHADHDS motif,

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

Page 16 of 23

Figure 7 Architectural conservation of cyclic nucleotide signaling genes. Deduced sequences of D. discoideum (Ddis) and D. purpureum
(Dpur) proteins were analyzed by SMART [105] for the presence of functional domains, signal peptides and transmembrane helices. To build
protein phylogenies, conserved shared functional domains were aligned using CLUSTAL-W [106] and edited when necessary in BioEdit [107] to
juxtapose functionally essential amino acid residues. Regions that did not align unambiguously were deleted. For proteins with two similar
domains (cyclases and cyclic nucleotide (cNMP) binding proteins), a tandem alignment of both domains was used, with the single domains of
ACB and ACG used twice. Phylogenetic relationships between aligned sequences were determined by Bayesian inference [108] using a mixed
amino acid model. Rate variation between sites was estimated by a gamma distribution with a proportion of invariable sites. Analyses were run
for 100,000 generations or until the standard deviation of split frequences was <0.01. The phylogenetic trees are decorated with the domain
architectures of the proteins, except for the D. mucoroides (Dmuc) and D. rosarium (Dros) cAMP receptor (cAR) sequences, which were derived
from genes that were only partially amplified by PCR [79]. All trees are unrooted, except for the cAR tree, which is rooted on the single cAR of
the group 3 taxon Dictyostelium minutum (Dmin). The posterior probabilities (BIPP) of nodes are represented by line thickness. (a) Cyclases; (b)
cAMP receptors; (c) cNMP binding domains; (d) cNMP phosphodiesterases. Dpur protein IDs and, if available, dictyBase IDs: SGC, 153022
(DPU_G0054494); ACB, 154751 (DPU_G0058520); GCA, 151484 (DPU_G0075774); ACA, 51614 (DPU_G0071214); ACG, 38950 (DPU_G0061484);
GbpC, 168746; GbpD, 88426 (DPU_G0055716); PdeD, 98774 (DPU_G0059600); PdeE, 56777 (DPU_G0059268); PkaR, 157660 (DPU_G0065616); cAR1,
99295 (DPU_G0064058); cAR2, 92050 (DPU_G0053090); Pde3, 34050 (DPU_G0053756); Pde4, 150656 (DPU_G0073898); PdsA, 98685
(DPU_G0058978); PdsB, 168741 (DPU_G0056384); PdsC, 91767 (DPU_G0073930). GenBank accession numbers for Ddis sequences: ACB, [GenBank:
AAD50121]; GCA, [GenBank:CAB42641]; ACA, [GenBank:AAA33163]; ACG, [GenBank:Q03101]; GbpC, [GenBank:AAM34041]; GbpD, [GenBank:
AAM34042]; PdeD, [GenBank:AAL06059]; PdeE, [GenBank:AAL06060]; PkaR, [GenBank:P05987]; cAR1, [GenBank:AAA33177]; cAR2, [GenBank:
AAB25436]; cAR3, [GenBank:AAB25437]; cAR4, [GenBank:AAB32419]; Pde3, [GenBank:B0G0Y8]; Pde4, [GenBank:AAO59486]; PdsA, [GenBank:
XP_637948]; Pde7, [GenBank:EAL62880]. GenBank accession numbers for Dmuc sequences: cAR1, [GenBank:ACF17575]; cAR2, [GenBank:ACF17576];
cAR3, [GenBank:ACF17577]; cAR4, [GenBank:ACF17578]. GenBank accession numbers for Dros sequences: cAR1, [GenBank:AAW24476]; cAR2,
[GenBank:AAW24477]; cAR3, [GenBank:ACF17573]; cAR4, [GenBank:ACF17574]. GenBank accession number for Dmin cAR, [GenBank:AAS59250].

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

but are structurally more similar to the lactamase_B
protein family. The PDE_I and PDE_III enzymes are
fully conserved between D. discoideum and D. purpureum, but the latter species has three instead of two type
II PDEs (Figure 7d).
The high level of conservation between D. discoideum
and D. purpureum of all adenylate and guanylate
cyclases, cNMP binding domains and seven out of eight
PDEs, combined with the complete conservation of
functional domain architecture of these proteins, is indicative of the central roles of cAMP and cGMP in the
control of chemotaxis, morphogenesis and gene regulation in the dictyostelids.
DIF signaling

DIF is produced predominantly by pre-spore cells during D. discoideum development and is part of a signaling
mechanism that sets the ratio of stalk and spore cells
produced in the fruiting body. It both limits the number
of pre-spore cells produced and induces differentiation
of a subset of pre-stalk cells. DIF is made by a three
step biosynthetic pathway, in which a 12-carbon polyketide is assembled by the StlB polyketide synthase, then
successively chlorinated by a chlorinating enzyme, and
methylated by the DmtA methyltransferase [36,83,84].
Clear stlB and dmtA homologs exist in the D. purpureum genome, as does a homologue of a recently identified FAD-dependent chlorinating enzyme (C Neumann,
C Walsh and RR Kay, unpublished). DIF is inactivated
by glutathione-dependent dechlorination [85], and again
this enzyme has recently been identified and has a clear
homolog in D. purpureum (F Velazquez and RR Kay,
unpublished). It thus appears certain that D. purpureum
makes and degrades DIF in a similar way to D. discoideum, and presumably utilizes it in a similar way to regulate multicellular development.
Social genes

Dictyostelids are interesting social organisms because
about 20% of the cells in each fruiting body sacrifice
themselves to build the stalk. Groups form through
aggregation of formerly separate cells, so different clones
can aggregate together, and do so in both the lab and in
the field [86]. Clones that successfully compete to get
into spores, relegating their partners to the sterile stalk,
will be more successful. Some degree of conflict is
therefore predicted, and the resulting evolution of strategies and counter strategies may drive rapid adaptive
evolution, as appears to be true for genes involved in
host-parasite conflicts and male-female conflicts [87].
But there is also a second reason to expect that social
genes may evolve more rapidly than genes expressed
primarily in the solitary stage. If the social stage occurs
relatively infrequently, which seems likely but is
unknown, then social genes are less scrutinized by

Page 17 of 23

selection and could accumulate more changes through
genetic drift.
We tested for more rapid evolution using two ways of
defining social genes. The first was to examine the set
of genes that emerged from a selection for mutants that
cheat (make more than their fair share of spores in mixtures) and compare them with all other genes [41]. The
two sets do not differ significantly in the probability of
having homologs, suggesting that they neither differentially disappear nor differentially evolve beyond the
point of clear homology (Figure S18a in Additional file
1). The two sets also do not differ in probability of having paralogs, suggesting that they do not duplicate at
different rates (Figure S18b in Additional file 1). Finally,
the two sets do not differ for either dN (the rate of nonsynonymous change) or conservation score (a measure
that declines with both point differences and with nonaligned portions of the sequences) (Figures S18c and
S19d in Additional file 1). However, this set of social
genes is relatively small, and some will be false positives
(of 198 genes identified, 40 were tested for cheating, of
which 31 were cheaters).
A larger set of social genes can be identified using
RNA-seq reads from the vegetative stage and six social
time points (4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 hours after starving)
[15]. Using genes with sufficient reads and high reproducibility (Additional file 1), we defined a gene’s index
of social expression as the average percentage representation in the social-stage libraries over that average plus
the percentage representation in vegetative stage (that is,
Social expression/Social expression + Vegetative
expression).
Using this classification, social genes showed higher
rates of change, and manifested fewer orthologs, higher
rates of non-synonymous substitution, and lower conservation scores. Genes with orthologs in D. discoideum
and D. purpureum have a significantly lower social
expression index in D. discoideum than those without
orthologs (Figure S19a in Additional file 1; n = 1,739,
1,300, P < 2.2e-16, Mann-Whitney U test). This is driven by significant differences in each time point of the
developmental stages (data not shown). An analysis
using genes with D. purpureum RNA-seq data following
the above criteria gives a similar overall result (Figure
S19b in Additional file 1; n = 3,649, 2,102, P < 2.2e-16,
Mann-Whitney U test). Thus, genes with more social
expression are less likely to have orthologs, indicating
more rapid evolution in the gain or loss of genes, or in
change of genes beyond the point where they are identifiable as homologs. Homologs that had inparalogs show
no significant difference of social indices from those
that lacked inparalogs when the social expression is
measured with RNA-seq reads from D. discoideum

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

Page 18 of 23

(Figure S19c in Additional file 1; n = 95, 1,644, P = 0.93,
Mann-Whitney U test) and D. purpureum (Figure S19d
in Additional file 1; n = 137, 3,512, P = 0.24, MannWhitney U test), suggesting no significant bias of duplication for the social genes of dictyostelids.
Figure 8a plots conservation score and rates of nonsynonymous substitution (dN) as a function of the
D. discoideum social expression index. As the percentage of a gene’s RNA-seq reads found in social stages
increases, there is a significant drop in conservation
score and a significant increase in dN, supporting the
hypothesis that social genes change more rapidly than
vegetative ones. The same significant results hold if
we use the RNA-seq reads of D. purpureum genes
(Figure 8b). Figure S20 in Additional file 1 shows how
the effect is partitioned between different social stages.
Previous studies have suggested that individual social
genes or small sets of them evolve rapidly because of
evolutionary arms races, with conflict driving continuing
adaptation and counter-adaptation [88]. This is the first
such evidence on a genomic scale. Nonetheless, we cannot rule out the alternative hypotheses that the lower
selective scrutiny of social genes might arise if the social
stage is not very frequent and not as selectively important as the vegetative stage. Distinguishing these hypotheses further will have to await the more sensitive tests
that can be applied to genomes that are more closely
related than D. discoideum and D. purpureum.
Dictyostelium has a sexual cycle in which two cells
fuse and then engulf many other cells to form a giant
macrocyst that undergoes meiosis. However, with the
exception of one successful cross [89], the sexual system
has not been available in lab studies of D. discoideum.

(a) D. discoideum

Although macrocysts are readily formed, there are problems with germination [90] and, when there is germination, there may be no recombinants [91]. Finding the
right conditions for sex would add a valuable genetic
dimension to D. discoideum studies, but this search
would be fruitless if most strains have lost the ability to
have sex. If they have lost this ability, we would expect
that sex-specific genes would have degraded. We tested
this hypothesis using ESTs from gamete-stage libraries
made from cells grown in conditions that make them
competent for fusion [92]. Figure 8c shows that genes
expressed disproportionately in the gamete stage are
actually more conserved than other genes, as measured
by both dN and conservation score. Provided these truly
are sex-specific genes, then it appears that the macrocyst
system is functional and not degenerating in D. discoideum. This is supported by an analysis showing that 13
meiosis genes [93] have normal dN and conservation
score values compared to other genes (Figure S21 in
Additional file 1).

Conclusions
Comparisons of the D. purpureum genome, the second
group 4 dictyostelid to be sequenced, with the previously sequenced D. discoideum have provided insights
into the evolution of this clade of social amoebae. Like
D. discoideum, the genome of D. purpureum encodes a
high number of triplet nucleotide repeats distributed in
both exonic and non-protein-coding regions. However,
these tracts are not generally congruent between the
two genomes, indicating that their expansion is a consequence of an intrinsic physiology favoring high rates of
triplet repeat formation, rather than retention and

(b) D. purpureum

1.0

(c) D. discoideum
1.0

0.8

CS and dN

CS and dN

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0 0.0

0.2

0.4

Social expression index

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Gamete expression index

Figure 8 Conservation score (CS, blue open circles) and non-synonymous substitution rate (dN, red crosses) as a function of the
degree of a gene’s expression in social versus vegetative stages (a,b) or of sexual versus vegetative stages (c). (a) For D. discoideum
RNA-seq reads (1,739 genes) both regressions are significant (CS, y = -0.17x + 0.68, R2 = 0.063, P < 0.0001; dN, y = 0.11x + 0.21, R2 = 0.032, P <
0.0001). (b) For D. purpureum RNA-seq reads (3,649 genes), both regressions are also significant (CS, y = -0.20x + 0.69, R2 = 0.11, P < 0.0001; dN,
y = 0.14x + 0.21, R2 = 0.017, P < 0.0001). (c) Conservation score and non-synonymous substitution rate as a function of the percentage of D.
discoideum ESTs expressed in the gamete stage (932 genes, including 835 and 16 genes with a gamete expression index of 0% and 100%,
respectively). Both regressions are significant: CS, y = -0.0070x + 0.73, R2 = 0.0072, P < 0.01; dN, y = 0.00051x + 0.17, R2 = 0.00708, P = 0.01.

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

accumulation of ancient triplet repeats. Although the D.
purpureum genome was not finished to the same extent
as the D. discoideum genome, syntenic regions containing orthologous genes are detected. Genes that have
been hypothesized as having been acquired through horizontal gene transfer in the D. discoideum genome have
orthologs in the D. purpureum genome; thus, any HGT
events involving these genes likely occurred in the common ancestor of the group 4 dictyostelids. Likewise,
large gene families of ABC transporters and histidine
kinases underwent expansion in the common ancestor
before the species line split, while the expansion of polyketide synthase genes occurred in a lineage-specific
manner. The repertoire of microfilament system proteins is virtually identical between the two species, but
the regulatory proteins differ. Two distinct transferases
involved in the N-linked glycosylation were detected in
D. discoideum but not in D. purpureum, and the predicted change in the glycosylation state of the respective
species proteins was validated through glycomic analysis.
Comparative analyses also enabled the identification of
two novel classes of ncRNAs specific to the dictyostelid
lineage. High conservation of enzymes involved in
cNMP metabolism and DIF production and degradation
indicate the central role these signaling systems play in
the social behavior of these amoebozoa. A detailed comparison of the variation between cohorts of genes with
specific expression patterns between the two genomes
demonstrate that genes involved in sociality evolve more
rapidly, probably due to continuous adaptation and
counter-adaptation.

Materials and methods
Sequence and assembly

D. purpureum was described in 1902 by Olive [94].
D. purpureum isolate QSDP1 from the Queller and
Strassmann laboratories at Rice University, and its axenic derivative DpAX1, were used in this study. DpAX1
was selected from QSDP1 for the ability to grow axenically, in defined liquid media, by culturing in plastic
Petri dishes containing HL5 medium supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum [95].
QSDP1 was used for EST production and sequencing.
Cells were grown in association with Klebsiella pneumoniae, harvested and developed on nitrocellulose filters as
described [95]. RNA samples were prepared from developing cells at 0, 6, 12, and 18 hours [45]. Two cDNA
libraries were prepared from each of these four RNA
samples and a total of 14,949 validated EST clones were
sequenced from them. Briefly, polyA-selected RNA was
reverse transcribed with superscript reverse transcriptase
III (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using dT primer (5’

Page 19 of 23

GACTAGTTCTAGATCGCGAG CGGCCGCCCTTT
TTTTTTTTTTTTVN-3’). cDNA was synthesized with
Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I, E. coli DNA ligase,
and E. coli RNaseH. The DNA ends were repaired with
T4 DNA polymerase. SalI adapters (5’-TCGACCCACGCGTCCG-3’ and 5’-P04-CGGACGCGTGGG-3’)
were ligated to cDNA and the product was digested
with NotI. The cDNA digestion products were gel
purified and directionally ligated into SalI- and NotIdigested pCMVsport6 and transformed into ElectroMAX, T1 DH10B E. coli cells (Invitrogen). Plasmid
DNA was amplified by a rolling circle method (Templiphi, GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) and purified.
The insert of each clone was sequenced from both ends
with primers complementary to flanking vector
sequences using Big Dye terminator chemistry and
resolved by an ABI 3730 sequenator (ABI, Foster City,
CA, USA).
To prepare high quality genomic DNA, DpAX1 cells
were grown in shaking cultures in HL5 medium, and
DNA was prepared from isolated nuclei by cesium
chloride equilibrium density gradients. Genomic libraries
were constructed by shearing genomic DNA with a
Hydroshear (Genomic Solutions Inc., Ann Arbor, MI,
USA) to create 6- to 10-kb fragments. The DNA fragments were size selected, purified, blunt-end repaired
(End-It Kit, Epicentre Biotechnologies Madison, WI,
USA) and ligated into a pMCL200 vector. The ligation
product was purified and precipitated, and then transformed into ElectroMax DH10B competent cells (Invitrogen). The percentage of no-insert clones in the
library was assessed by colony PCR, using primers flanking the cloning site (Expand long Template PCR system,
Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IND, USA). Genomic DNA libraries with average insert sizes of 2.3 to 3.0
kb and 3 to 4 kb were produced by similar methods.
Primary sequence data were derived from whole-genome shotgun sequencing of the three plasmid libraries
[96]. The reads were screened for vector sequence with
cross_match [97] and trimmed for vector and low quality sequences. Reads shorter than 100 bases after trimming were excluded from the assembly. The trimmed
read sequence data were assembled with release 1.0.3 of
Jazz, a whole genome shotgun assembler [98]. The
assembly was next filtered for redundant scaffolds that
matched larger scaffolds (<5 kb length where >80%
matched a scaffold of >5 kb length). Finally, scaffolds
that showed homology to prokaryotic and non-cellular
contaminants (viroids and viruses) were identified and
removed. The filtered assembly contains 799 scaffolds,
comprising 33.0 Mb, with an estimated sequence coverage of 8.41 × (Additional file 1). The data were

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

deposited in GenBank under project ID 30991 [GenBank:ADID00000000].
The JGI genome annotation pipeline

For genome annotation we use the JGI annotation pipeline, which combines several gene prediction, annotation
and analysis tools. First, the genome assembly is masked
using RepeatMasker and a custom repeat library. Next,
available ESTs and full-length cDNAs are clustered and
aligned to the scaffolds with BLAT. Model organism protein sequences from the non-redundant set of proteins
from the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(GenBank) are aligned to the scaffolds with BLASTX [22].
Gene models and associated transcripts/proteins are predicted or mapped using (i) data from putative full-length
cDNAs derived from available mRNA, ESTs and EST clusters, (ii) homology-based methods Genewise and Fgenesh
+, and (iii) ab initio method Fgenesh trained on putative
full-length genes (see above), manually curated genes (if
available), and reliable homology-based models. Additional
gene models generated externally with other gene predictors trained for a particular genome can be added as well.
The clustered ESTs/cDNAs are used to extend and correct
predicted gene models where the exons overlap and splice
junctions are not consistent in comparing EST sequences
to gene models. This often adds 5’ and/or 3’ UTRs to the
models. With gene structure in place, function is assigned
to models based on Smith-Waterman homology to annotated genes from nr, KEGG, and KOG databases. InterproScan is used to identify predicted domains and the
Gene Ontology is used to identify function and/or subcellular location. SignalP is used to assist with identification
of secreted proteins. Since multiple models with overlapping sequences are generated for each locus, a single
model is chosen to produce a non-redundant set of genes.
Model selection is based on homology to known proteins
from other organisms, EST support, as well as protein and
transcript completeness (that is, inclusion of 5’ methionine, 3’ stop codon, and UTRs). This automatically generated set was further refined by manual curation and
submitted to GenBank. Whole genome analysis is performed on the non-redundant set of gene models or a
snapshot of a manually curated gene catalog assuming the
latter includes significant number of changes compared to
the automatically generated non-redundant set.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary text, figures and tables.
Supplementary text, figures and tables that include many details of the
genome annotation.
Additional file 2: Supplementary Table S2. A table listing blocks of
partially conserved gene order between the D. discoideum and D.
purpureum genomes.

Page 20 of 23

Additional file 3: Supplementary Table S4. A table listing the
predicted orthologs that are shared between D. discoideum and D.
purpureum.
Additional file 4: Supplementary Tables S5. A table listing the
predicted paralogs that are shared between D. discoideum and D.
purpureum.

Abbreviations
ABC: ATP-binding cassette; ADF: actin-depolymerizing factor; bp: base pair;
bZIP: basic leucine zipper; cAR: cAMP receptor; CBD: carbohydrate binding
domain; CBM: carbohydrate binding module; CH: calponin homology; cNMP:
cyclic nucleoside monophosphate; DIF: differentiation-inducing factor; DUSE:
Dictyostelium upstream sequence element; EST: expressed sequence tag;
GPCR: G-protein coupled receptor; HGT: horizontal gene transfer; ncRNA:
non-coding RNA; NSBR: non self-binding region; PDE: phosphodiesterase;
PKA: cAMP dependent protein kinase; PKS: polyketide synthase; UTR:
untranslated region.
Acknowledgements
This work was performed under the auspices of the US Department of
Energy’s Office of Science, Biological and Environmental Research Program
and the University of California, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
under contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC52-07NA27344, Los Alamos National
Laboratory under contract No. DE-AC02-06NA25396. The annotation effort
was supported by grants HD39691 (A Kuspa, GS, and RS), GM64426 (RLC),
HG0022 (RLC) and GM84383 (CMW) from the National Institute of Health,
and by grants EF-0626963 and DEB-0918931 (JES and DCQ) from the
National Science Foundation. AP was supported by a fellowship from the
Keck Center for Interdisciplinary Bioscience Training of the Gulf Coast
Consortia (NIH Grants 1 T90 DA022885 and 1 R90 DA023418).
Author details
1
Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX
77030, USA. 2US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell
Drive, Walnut Creek, CA 9458, USA. 3Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, TX 77005,
USA. 4Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 5Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oklahoma Center for Medical
Glycobiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 110 N. Lindsay,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. 6dictyBase, Center for Genetic Medicine,
Northwestern University, 750 N. Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
7
Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biology, University
of California, 9500 Gilman Dr, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
8
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, MRC Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2
2QH, UK. 9Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques,
UMR6098, CNRS, Universities of Aix-Marseille I & II, 13288 Marseille, France.
10
Department of Materials and Life Sciences, Sophia University 7-1 Kioi-Cho,
Chiyoda-Ku, Tokyo 102-8554, Japan. 11Departments of Botany and
Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague, Albertov 6,
Prague 128 43, Czech Republic. 12College of Life Sciences, University of
Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD15EH, UK. 13Center for Molecular Medicine
Cologne, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931 Cologne,
Germany. 14Centre for Biomedical Research, The Hull York Medical School
and Department of Biological Sciences, University of Hull, Hull, HU6 7RX, UK.
Authors’ contributions
MK-K and GS derived the DpAx1 strain and purified the nucleic acids used
in the project; Alan K, ED, HT, KB, EL, HS, DB, JS, and AS produced the
primary DNA sequence, genome assembly, and gene annotation within the
JGI pipeline; PF, PG, SB, YB and RLC carried out annotation and data
accessibility at dictyBase; CA, MMB, XT, WS, AP, CLF, HvdW EH, CMW, WFL,
GS, CD, PMC, TS, ME, PS, RRK, BH, LE, FR, and GS were involved in the
analysis of the data and drafted sections of the paper; AP carried out the
ortholog and paralog predictions; WS annotated the non-coding RNAs; NHP
carried out the phylogeny and synteny analyses; CLF, HvdW, PMC, BH, and

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

CMW carried out the glycoprotein analyses; JES, DCQ, RS, Adam K, and IVG
provided overall project management; and Adam K assembled and edited
the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 20 July 2010 Revised: 9 December 2010
Accepted: 28 February 2011 Published: 28 February 2011
References
1. Eichinger L, Pachebat JA, Glöckner G, Rajandream MA, Sucgang R,
Berriman M, Song J, Olsen R, Szafranski K, Xu Q, Tunggal B, Kummerfeld S,
Madera M, Konfortov BA, Rivero F, Bankier AT, Lehmann R, Hamlin N,
Davies R, Gaudet P, Fey P, Pilcher K, Chen G, Saunders D, Sodergren E,
Davis P, Kerhornou A, Nie X, Hall N, Anjard C, et al: The genome of the
social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. Nature 2005, 435:43-57.
2. Cavalier-Smith T: A revised six-kingdom system of life. Biol Rev Camb
Philos Soc 1998, 73:203-266.
3. Bapteste E, Brinkmann H, Lee JA, Moore DV, Sensen CW, Gordon P,
Durufle L, Gaasterland T, Lopez P, Muller M, Philippe H: The analysis of 100
genes supports the grouping of three highly divergent amoebae:
Dictyostelium, Entamoeba, and Mastigamoeba. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2002, 99:1414-1419.
4. Fiore-Donno AM, Berney C, Pawlowski J, Baldauf SL: Higher-order
phylogeny of plasmodial slime molds (Myxogastria) based on elongation
factor 1-A and small subunit rRNA gene sequences. J Eukaryot Microbiol
2005, 52:201-210.
5. Minge MA, Silberman JD, Orr RJ, Cavalier-Smith T, Shalchian-Tabrizi K,
Burki F, Skjaeveland A, Jakobsen KS: Evolutionary position of breviate
amoebae and the primary eukaryote divergence. Proc Biol Sci 2009,
276:597-604.
6. Fiore-Donno AM, Nikolaev SI, Nelson M, Pawlowski J, Cavalier-Smith T,
Baldauf SL: Deep phylogeny and evolution of slime moulds (Mycetozoa).
Protist 2010, 161:55-70.
7. Schaap P, Winckler T, Nelson M, Alvarez-Curto E, Elgie B, Hagiwara H,
Cavender J, Milano-Curto A, Rozen DE, Dingermann T, Mutzel R, Baldauf SL:
Molecular phylogeny and evolution of morphology in the social
amoebas. Science 2006, 314:661-663.
8. Raper KB: The Dictyostelids Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1984.
9. Raper KB, Thom C: Interspecific mixtures in the Dictyosteliaceae. Am J Bot
1941, 28:69-78.
10. Mehdiabadi NJ, Jack CN, Farnham TT, Platt TG, Kalla SE, Shaulsky G,
Queller DC, Strassmann JE: Social evolution: kin preference in a social
microbe. Nature 2006, 442:881-882.
11. Ostrowski EA, Katoh M, Shaulsky G, Queller DC, Strassmann JE: Kin
discrimination increases with genetic distance in a social amoeba. PLoS
Biol 2008, 6:e287.
12. Loomis WF, Kuspa A: Dictyostelium Genomics. 1 edition. Norfolk: Horizon
Bioscience; 2005.
13. JGI Dictyostelium purpureum genome portal. [http://genome.jgi-psf.org/
Dicpu1/Dicpu1.home.html].
14. dictyBase. [http://dictybase.org/].
15. Parikh A, Miranda ER, Katoh-Kurasawa M, Fuller D, Rot G, Zagar L, Curk T,
Sucgang R, Chen R, Zupan B, Loomis WF, Kuspa A, Shaulsky G: Conserved
developmental transcriptomes in evolutionary divergent species.
Genome Biol 2010, 11:R35.
16. Schlotterer C: Evolutionary dynamics of microsatellite DNA. Chromosoma
2000, 109:365-371.
17. Karlin S, Burge C: Trinucleotide repeats and long homopeptides in genes
and proteins associated with nervous system disease and development.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:1560-1565.
18. Gatchel JR, Zoghbi HY: Diseases of unstable repeat expansion:
mechanisms and common principles. Nat Rev Genet 2005, 6:743-755.
19. Tian X, Strassmann JE, Queller DC: Genome nucleotide composition
shapes variation in simple sequence repeats. Mol Biol Evol 2010,
28:899-909.
20. Song J, Xu Q, Olsen R, Loomis W, Shaulsky G, Kuspa A, Sucgang R:
Comparing the Dictyostelium and Entamoeba genomes reveals an
ancient split in the Conosa lineage. PLoS Comput Biol 2005, 1:e71.

Page 21 of 23

21. Myllykallio H, Lipowski G, Leduc D, Filee J, Forterre P, Liebl U: An
alternative flavin-dependent mechanism for thymidylate synthesis.
Science 2002, 297:105-107.
22. NCBI. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/].
23. Anjard C, Loomis WF: Cytokinins induce sporulation in Dictyostelium.
Development 2008, 135:819-827.
24. Yasukawa H, Kuroita T, Tamura K, Yamaguchi K: Identification of a
penicillin-sensitive carboxypeptidase in the cellular slime mold
Dictyostelium discoideum. Biol Pharm Bull 2003, 26:1018-1020.
25. Zhang H, Gomez-Garcia MR, Shi X, Rao NN, Kornberg A: Polyphosphate
kinase 1, a conserved bacterial enzyme, in a eukaryote, Dictyostelium
discoideum, with a role in cytokinesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:16486-16491.
26. Bain G, Tsang A: Disruption of the gene encoding the p34/31
polypeptides affects growth and development of Dictyostelium
discoideum. Mol Gen Genet 1991, 226:59-64.
27. Reinders Y, Schulz I, Graf R, Sickmann A: Identification of novel
centrosomal proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum by comparative
proteomic approaches. J Proteome Res 2006, 5:589-598.
28. Putnam NH, Srivastava M, Hellsten U, Dirks B, Chapman J, Salamov A,
Terry A, Shapiro H, Lindquist E, Kapitonov VV, Jurka J, Genikhovich G,
Grigoriev IV, Lucas SM, Steele RE, Finnerty JR, Technau U, Martindale MQ,
Rokhsar DS: Sea anemone genome reveals ancestral eumetazoan gene
repertoire and genomic organization. Science 2007, 317:86-94.
29. Hinas A, Soderbom F: Treasure hunt in an amoeba: non-coding RNAs in
Dictyostelium discoideum. Curr Genet 2007, 51:141-159.
30. Aspegren A, Hinas A, Larsson P, Larsson A, Söderbom F: Novel non-coding
RNAs in Dictyostelium discoideum and their expression during
development. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:4646-4656.
31. Hinas A, Larsson P, Avesson L, Kirsebom LA, Virtanen A, Soderbom F:
Identification of the major spliceosomal RNAs in Dictyostelium
discoideum reveals developmentally regulated U2 variants and
polyadenylated snRNAs. Eukaryot Cell 2006, 5:924-934.
32. Takaya Y, Kikuchi H, Terui Y, Komiya J, Furukawa KI, Seya K, Motomura S,
Ito A, Oshima Y: Novel acyl alpha-pyronoids, dictyopyrone A, B, and C,
from Dictyostelium cellular slime molds. J Org Chem 2000, 65:985-989.
33. Kikuchi H, Saito Y, Sekiya J, Okano Y, Saito M, Nakahata N, Kubohara Y,
Oshima Y: Isolation and synthesis of a new aromatic compound,
brefelamide, from dictyostelium cellular slime molds and its inhibitory
effect on the proliferation of astrocytoma cells. J Org Chem 2005,
70:8854-8858.
34. Zucko J, Skunca N, Curk T, Zupan B, Long PF, Cullum J, Kessin RH,
Hranueli D: Polyketide synthase genes and the natural products
potential of Dictyostelium discoideum. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2543-2549.
35. Ghosh R, Chhabra A, Phatale PA, Samrat SK, Sharma J, Gosain A,
Mohanty D, Saran S, Gokhale RS: Dissecting the functional role of
polyketide synthases in Dictyostelium discoideum: biosynthesis of the
differentiation regulating factor 4-methyl-5-pentylbenzene-1,3-diol. J Biol
Chem 2008, 283:11348-11354.
36. Austin MB, Saito T, Bowman ME, Haydock S, Kato A, Moore BS, Kay RR,
Noel JP: Biosynthesis of Dictyostelium discoideum differentiation-inducing
factor by a hybrid type I fatty acid-type III polyketide synthase. Nat
Chem Biol 2006, 2:494-502.
37. Morris HR, Taylor GW, Masento MS, Jermyn KA, Kay RR: Chemical structure
of the morphogen differentiation inducing factor from Dictyostelium
discoideum. Nature 1987, 328:811-814.
38. Saito T, Taylor GW, Yang JC, Neuhaus D, Stetsenko D, Kato A, Kay RR:
Identification of new differentiation inducing factors from Dictyostelium
discoideum. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006, 1760:754-761.
39. Thompson CR, Kay RR: Cell-fate choice in Dictyostelium: intrinsic biases
modulate sensitivity to DIF signaling. Dev Biol 2000, 227:56-64.
40. Kay RR, Taylor GW, Jermyn KA, Traynor D: Chlorine-containing compounds
produced during Dictyostelium development - detection by labelling
with Cl-36. Biochem J 1992, 281:155-161.
41. Santorelli LA, Thompson CR, Villegas E, Svetz J, Dinh C, Parikh A, Sucgang R,
Kuspa A, Strassmann JE, Queller DC, Shaulsky G: Facultative cheater
mutants reveal the genetic complexity of cooperation in social
amoebae. Nature 2008, 451:1107-1110.
42. Newman DJ, Cragg GM: Natural products as sources of new drugs over
the last 25 years. J Nat Prod 2007, 70:461-477.

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

43. Anjard C, Loomis WF: Evolutionary analyses of ABC transporters of
Dictyostelium discoideum. Eukaryot Cell 2002, 1:643-652.
44. Good JR, Cabral M, Sharma S, Yang J, Van Driessche N, Shaw CA,
Shaulsky G, Kuspa A: TagA, a putative serine protease/ABC transporter of
Dictyostelium that is required for cell fate determination at the onset of
development. Development 2003, 130:2953-2965.
45. Shaulsky G, Kuspa A, Loomis WF: A multidrug resistance transporter
serine protease gene is required for prestalk specialization in
Dictyostelium. Genes Dev 1995, 9:1111-1122.
46. Anjard C, Loomis WF: Peptide signaling during terminal differentiation of
Dictyostelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:7607-7611.
47. Goldberg JM, Manning G, Liu A, Fey P, Pilcher KE, Xu Y, Smith JL: The
dictyostelium kinome - analysis of the protein kinases from a simple
model organism. PLoS Genet 2006, 2:e38.
48. Soderbom F, Anjard C, Iranfar N, Fuller D, Loomis WF: An adenylyl cyclase
that functions during late development of Dictyostelium. Development
1999, 126:5463-5471.
49. Veron M, Radzio-Andzelm E, Tsigelny I, Taylor S: Protein kinases share a
common structural motif outside the conserved catalytic domain. Cell
Mol Biol 1994, 40:587-596.
50. Yamada Y, Wang HY, Fukuzawa M, Barton GJ, Williams JG: A new family of
transcription factors. Development 2008, 135:3093-3101.
51. Watkins RF, Gray MW: Sampling gene diversity across the supergroup
Amoebozoa: large EST data sets from Acanthamoeba castellanii,
Hartmannella vermiformis, Physarum polycephalum, Hyperamoeba
dachnaya and Hyperamoeba sp. Protist 2008, 159:269-281.
52. Rivero F, Eichinger L: The microfilament system of Dictystelium
discoideum. In Dictyostelium Genomics. Edited by: Loomis WF, Kuspa A.
Norfolk: Horizon Bioscience; 2005:125-172.
53. Vlahou G, Rivero F: Rho GTPase signaling in Dictyostelium discoideum:
insights from the genome. Eur J Cell Biol 2006, 85:947-959.
54. West C, van der Wel H, Coutinho PM, Henrissat B: Glycosyltransferase
genomics in Dictyostelium. In Dictyostelium Genomics. Edited by: Loomis
WF, Kuspa A. Norfolk: Horizon Bioscience; 2005:235-264.
55. CAZy: Carbohydrate-Active enZYmes Database. [http://www.cazy.org/].
56. Cantarel BL, Coutinho PM, Rancurel C, Bernard T, Lombard V, Henrissat B:
The Carbohydrate-Active EnZymes database (CAZy): an expert resource
for Glycogenomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D233-238.
57. Freeze HH: Dictyostelium discoideum Glycoproteins: Using a Model System for
Organismic Glycobiology Elsevier; 1998.
58. Samuelson J, Banerjee S, Magnelli P, Cui J, Kelleher DJ, Gilmore R,
Robbins PW: The diversity of dolichol-linked precursors to Asn-linked
glycans likely results from secondary loss of sets of glycosyltransferases.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:1548-1553.
59. Feasley CL, Johnson JM, West CM, Chia CP: Glycopeptidome of a heavily
N-glycosylated cell surface glycoprotein of Dictyostelium implicated in
cell adhesion. J Proteome Res 2010, 9:3495-510.
60. Schiller B, Hykollari A, Voglmeir J, Poltl G, Hummel K, Razzazi-Fazeli E,
Geyer R, Wilson IB: Development of Dictyostelium discoideum is
associated with alteration of fucosylated N-glycan structures. Biochem J
2009, 423:41-52.
61. Sternfeld J: Evidence for differential cellular adhesion as the mechanism
of sorting-out of various cellular slime mold species. J Embryol Exp Morph
1979, 53:163-178.
62. Wang F, Metcalf T, van der Wel H, West CM: Initiation of mucin-type Oglycosylation in Dictyostelium is homologous to the corresponding step
in animals and is important for spore coat function. J Biol Chem 2003,
278:51395-51407.
63. Banerjee S, Robbins PW, Samuelson J: Molecular characterization of
nucleocytosolic O-GlcNAc transferases of Giardia lamblia and
Cryptosporidium parvum. Glycobiology 2009, 19:331-336.
64. West CM, Wang ZA, van der Wel H: A cytoplasmic prolyl hydroxylation
and glycosylation pathway modifies Skp1 and regulates O2-dependent
development in Dictyostelium. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010, 1800:160-171.
65. West CM, van der Wel H, Wang ZA: Prolyl 4-hydroxylase-1 mediates O2
signaling during development of Dictyostelium. Development 2007,
134:3349-3358.
66. Banerjee S, Vishwanath P, Cui J, Kelleher DJ, Gilmore R, Robbins PW,
Samuelson J: The evolution of N-glycan-dependent endoplasmic
reticulum quality control factors for glycoprotein folding and
degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:11676-11681.

Page 22 of 23

67. Alexander S, Sydow LM, Wessels D, Soll DR: Discoidin proteins of
Dictyostelium are necessary for normal cytoskeletal organization and
cellular morphology during aggregation. Differentiation 1992, 51:149-161.
68. Schreiner T, Mohrs MR, Blau-Wasser R, von Krempelhuber A, Steinert M,
Schleicher M, Noegel AA: Loss of the F-actin binding and vesicleassociated protein comitin leads to a phagocytosis defect. Euk Cell 2003,
1:906-914.
69. Coukell B, Li Y, Moniakis J, Cameron A: The Ca2+/calcineurin-regulated
cup gene family in Dictyostelium discoideum and its possible
involvement in development. Eukaryot Cell 2004, 3:61-71.
70. Aragao KS, Satre M, Imberty A, Varrot A: Structure determination of
Discoidin II from Dictyostelium discoideum and carbohydrate binding
properties of the lectin domain. Proteins 2008, 73:43-52.
71. Lespinet O, Wolf YI, Koonin EV, Aravind L: The role of lineage-specific
gene family expansion in the evolution of eukaryotes. Genome Res 2002,
12:1048-1059.
72. Ramalingam R, Blume JE, Ennis HL: The xi spore germination-specific
cellulase is organized into functional domains. J Bacteriol 1992,
174:7834-7783.
73. Benabentos R, Hirose S, Sucgang R, Curk T, Katoh M, Ostrowski E,
Strassmann JE, Queller DC, Zupan DC, Shaulsky G, Kuspa A: Polymorphic
members of the lag-gene family mediate kin-discrimination in
Dictyostelium. Curr Biol 2009, 19:567-572.
74. Chen G, Zhuchenko O, Kuspa A: Immune-like phagocyte activity in the
social amoeba. Science 2007, 317:678-681.
75. Meima ME, Schaap P: Fingerprinting of adenylyl cyclase activities during
Dictyostelium development indicates a dominant role for adenylyl
cyclase B in terminal differentiation. Dev Biol 1999, 212:182-190.
76. Saran S, Meima ME, Alvarez-Curto E, Weening KE, Rozen DE, Schaap P:
cAMP signaling in Dictyostelium - complexity of cAMP synthesis,
degradation and detection. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 2002, 23:793-802.
77. Veltman DM, Keizer-Gunnik I, Van Haastert PJ: Four key signaling pathways
mediating chemotaxis in Dictyostelium discoideum. J Cell Biol 2008,
180:747-753.
78. Kriebel PW, Parent CA: Adenylyl cyclase expression and regulation during
the differentiation of Dictyostelium discoideum. IUBMB Life 2004,
56:541-546.
79. Kawabe Y, Morio T, James JL, Prescott AR, Tanaka Y, Schaap P: Activated
cAMP receptors switch encystation into sporulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2009, 106:7089-7094.
80. Bader S, Kortholt A, Van Haastert PJ: Seven Dictyostelium discoideum
phosphodiesterases degrade three pools of cAMP and cGMP. Biochem J
2007, 402:153-161.
81. Bosgraaf L, Waijer A, Engel R, Visser AJ, Wessels D, Soll D, van Haastert PJ:
RasGEF-containing proteins GbpC and GbpD have differential effects on
cell polarity and chemotaxis in Dictyostelium. J Cell Sci 2005,
118:1899-1910.
82. van Egmond WN, Kortholt A, Plak K, Bosgraaf L, Bosgraaf S, KeizerGunnink I, van Haastert PJ: Intramolecular activation mechanism of the
Dictyostelium LRRK2 homolog Roco protein GbpC. J Biol Chem 2008,
283:30412-30420.
83. Kay RR: The biosynthesis of differentiation-inducing factor, a chlorinated
signal molecule regulating Dictyostelium development. J Biol Chem 1998,
273:2669-2675.
84. Thompson CR, Kay RR: The role of DIF-1 signaling in Dictyostelium
development. Mol Cell 2000, 6:1509-1514.
85. Nayler O, Insall R, Kay RR: Differentiation-inducing-factor dechlorinase, a
novel cytosolic dechlorinating enzyme from Dictyostelium discoideum.
Eur J Biochem 1992, 208:531-536.
86. Gilbert OM, Foster KR, Mehdiabadi NJ, Strassmann JE, Queller DC: High
relatedness maintains multicellular cooperation in a social amoeba by
controlling cheater mutants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:8913-8917.
87. Yang Z: The power of phylogenetic comparison in revealing protein
function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:3179-3180.
88. Greig D, Travisano M: The prisoner’s dilemma and polymorphism in yeast
SUC genes. Proc Biol Sci 2004, 271(Suppl 3):S25-26.
89. Francis D: High frequency recombination during the sexual cycle of
Dictyostelium discoideum. Genetics 1998, 148:1829-1832.
90. Wallace MA, Raper KB: Genetic exchanges in the macrocysts of
Dictyostelium discoideum. J Gen Microbiol 1979, 113:327-337.

Sucgang et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R20
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R20

91. Francis D, Eisenberg R: Genetic structure of a natural population of
Dictyostelium discoideum, a cellular slime mold. Mol Ecol 1993, 2:385-392.
92. Muramoto T, Suzuki K, Shimizu H, Kohara Y, Kohriki E, Obara S, Tanaka Y,
Urushihara H: Construction of a gamete-enriched gene pool and RNAimediated functional analysis in Dictyostelium discoideum. Mech Dev 2003,
120:965-975.
93. Malik SB, Pightling AW, Stefaniak LM, Schurko AM, Logsdon JM Jr: An
expanded inventory of conserved meiotic genes provides evidence for
sex in Trichomonas vaginalis. PLoS ONE 2007, 3:e2879.
94. Olive EW: Monograph of the Acrasieae. Proc Boston Soc Natur Hist 1902,
30:451-513.
95. Sussman M: Cultivation and synchronous morphogenesis of
Dictyostelium under controlled experimental conditions. Methods Cell Biol
1987, 28:9-29.
96. Weber JL, Myers EW: Human whole-genome shotgun sequencing.
Genome Res 1997, 7:401-409.
97. Ewing B, Hillier L, Wendl MC, Green P: Base-calling of automated
sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res 1998,
8:175-185.
98. Aparicio S, Chapman J, Stupka E, Putnam N, Chia JM, Dehal P, Christoffels A,
Rash S, Hoon S, Smit A, Gelpke MD, Roach J, Oh T, Ho IY, Wong M,
Detter C, Verhoef F, Predki P, Tay A, Lucas S, Richardson P, Smith SF,
Clark MS, Edwards YJ, Doggett N, Zharkikh A, Tavtigian SV, Pruss D,
Barnstead M, Evans C, et al: Whole-genome shotgun assembly and
analysis of the genome of Fugu rubripes. Science 2002, 297:1301-1310.
99. Pfam. [http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/].
100. Ensembl. [http://uswest.ensembl.org/].
101. Putnam NH, Butts T, Ferrier DE, Furlong RF, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Robinson-Rechavi M, Shoguchi E, Terry A, Yu JK, Benito-Gutiérrez EL,
Dubchak I, Garcia-Fernàndez J, Gibson-Brown JJ, Grigoriev IV, Horton AC, de
Jong PJ, Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kohara Y, Kuroki Y, Lindquist E, Lucas S,
Osoegawa K, Pennacchio LA, Salamov AA, Satou Y, Sauka-Spengler T,
Schmutz J, Shin-I T, et al: The amphioxus genome and the evolution of
the chordate karyotype. Nature 2008, 453:1064-1071.
102. Neurospora crassa Database. [http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/
genome/neurospora/MultiHome.html].
103. TAIR. [http://www.arabidopsis.org/].
104. Merchant SS, Prochnik SE, Vallon O, Harris EH, Karpowicz SJ, Witman GB,
Terry A, Salamov A, Fritz-Laylin LK, Maréchal-Drouard L, Marshall WF, Qu LH,
Nelson DR, Sanderfoot AA, Spalding MH, Kapitonov VV, Ren Q, Ferris P,
Lindquist E, Shapiro H, Lucas SM, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Cardol P,
Cerutti H, Chanfreau G, Chen CL, Cognat V, Croft MT, Dent R: The
Chlamydomonas genome reveals the evolution of key animal and plant
functions. Science 2007, 318:245-250.
105. Schultz J, Milpetz F, Bork P, Ponting CP: SMART, a simple modular
architecture research tool: identification of signaling domains. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:5857-5864.
106. Chenna R, Sugawara H, Koike T, Lopez R, Gibson TJ, Higgins DG,
Thompson JD: Multiple sequence alignment with the Clustal series of
programs. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:3497-3500.
107. Hall TA: Bioedit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program fro Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser 1999,
41:95-98.
108. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
109. Alba MM, Guigo R: Comparative analysis of amino acid repeats in
rodents and humans. Genome Res 2004, 14:549-554.
110. Lowe TM, Eddy SR: tRNAscan-SE: a program for improved detection of
transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:955-964.
111. Hinas A, Reimegard J, Wagner EG, Nellen W, Ambros VR, Soderbom F: The
small RNA repertoire of Dictyostelium discoideum and its regulation by
components of the RNAi pathway. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:6714-6726.
112. Protein coding regions of the D. purpureum genome.. [ftp://ftp.jgi-psf.
org/pub/JGI_data/Dictyostelium_purpureum/v1.0/annotation/
Dicpu1_best_genes.gff.gz].
113. Protein coding regions of the D. disdoideum genome. [http://dictybase.
org/download/gff3/dicty_gff3_10212009.zip].
114. LocARNA. [http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/LocARNA.cgi].
115. RNALogo: CreateLogo. [http://rnalogo.mbc.nctu.edu.tw/createlogo.html].

Page 23 of 23

116. Remm M, Storm CE, Sonnhammer EL: Automatic clustering of orthologs
and in-paralogs from pairwise species comparisons. J Mol Biol 2001,
314:1041-1052.
117. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G,
Forslund K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer EL, Bateman A: The Pfam protein
families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36 Database: D281-288.
118. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
119. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
120. Polyketide synthase gene analyses. [http://www.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/
genomes/madanm/rrk].
121. Bockaert J, Pin JP: Molecular tinkering of G protein-coupled receptors: an
evolutionary success. EMBO J 1999, 18:1723-1729.
122. Prabhu Y, Eichinger L: The Dictyostelium repertoire of seven
transmembrane domain receptors. Eur J Cell Biol 2006, 85:937-946.
123. Pandey S, Nelson DC, Assmann SM: Two novel GPCR-type G proteins are
abscisic acid receptors in Arabidopsis. Cell 2009, 136:136-148.
124. King N, Hittinger CT, Carroll SB: Evolution of key cell signaling and
adhesion protein families predates animal origins. Science 2003,
301:361-363.
125. Joseph JM, Fey P, Ramalingam N, Liu XI, Rohlfs M, Noegel AA, MullerTaubenberger A, Glockner G, Schleicher M: The actinome of Dictyostelium
discoideum in comparison to actins and actin-related proteins from
other organisms. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e2654.
126. Torija MJ, Novo M, Lemassu A, Wilson W, Roach PJ, François J, Parrou JL:
Glycogen synthesis in the absence of glycogenin in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEBS Lett 2005, 579:3999-4004.
127. Deschamps P, Colleoni C, Nakamura Y, Suzuki E, Putaux JL, Buléon A,
Haebel S, Ritte G, Steup M, Falcón LI, Moreira D, Löffelhardt W, Raj JN,
Plancke C, d’Hulst C, Dauvillée D, Ball S: Metabolic symbiosis and the birth
of the plant kingdom. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:536-548.
128. Elbein AD, Pan YT, Pastuszak I, Carroll D: New insights on trehalose: a
multifunctional molecule. Glycobiology 2003, 13:17R-27R.
129. Blanton RL, Fuller D, Iranfar N, Grimson MJ, Loomis WF: The cellulose
synthase gene of Dictyostelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:2391-2396.
130. Wang YZ, Slade MB, Gooley AA, Atwell BJ, Williams KL: Cellulose-binding
modules from extracellular matrix proteins of Dictyostelium discoideum
stalk and sheath. Eur J Biochem 2001, 268:4334-4345.
131. West CM, Nguyen P, van der Wel H, Metcalf T, Sweeney KR, Blader IJ,
Erdos GW: Dependence of stress resistance on a spore coat
heteropolysaccharide in Dictyostelium. Eukaryot Cell 2009, 8:27-36.
132. West CM: Comparative analysis of spore coat formation, structure, and
function in Dictyostelium. Int Rev Cytol 2003, 222:237-293.
133. Yu YK, Wootton JC, Altschul SF: The compositional adjustment of amino
acid substitution matrices. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:15688-15693.
134. Huang X, Brutlag DL: Dynamic use of multiple parameter sets in
sequence alignment. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:678-686.
135. Yang Z: PAML 4: phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24:1586-1591.
136. Lopez-Bigas N, Ouzounis CA: Genome-wide identification of genes likely
to be involved in human genetic disease. Nucleic Acids Res 2004,
32:3108-3114.
doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-2-r20
Cite this article as: Sucgang et al.: Comparative genomics of the social
amoebae Dictyostelium discoideum and Dictyostelium purpureum. Genome
Biology 2011 12:R20.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
