<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>ACI_2008_00004 37..49</title>
<meta name="Creator" content="3B2 Total Publishing System 7.51n/W"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 6.0.1 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Epigenetics, Behaviour, and Health
Moshe Szyf, PhD and Michael J. Meaney, PhD
The long-term effects of behaviour and environmental exposures, particularly during childhood, on health outcomes are well
documented. Particularly thought provoking is the notion that exposures to different social environments have a long-lasting impact
on human physical health. However, the mechanisms mediating the effects of the environment are still unclear. In the last decade,
the main focus of attention was the genome, and interindividual genetic polymorphisms were sought after as the principal basis for
susceptibility to disease. However, it is becoming clear that recent dramatic increases in the incidence of certain human pathologies,
such as asthma and type 2 diabetes, cannot be explained just on the basis of a genetic drift. It is therefore extremely important to
unravel the molecular links between the ‘‘environmental’’ exposure, which is believed to be behind this emerging incidence in certain
human pathologies, and the disease’s molecular mechanisms. Although it is clear that most human pathologies involve long-term
changes in gene function, these might be caused by mechanisms other than changes in the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence.
The genome is programmed by the epigenome, which is composed of chromatin and a covalent modification of DNA by methylation.
It is postulated here that ‘‘epigenetic’’ mechanisms mediate the effects of behavioural and environmental exposures early in life, as
well as lifelong environmental exposures and the susceptibility to disease later in life. In contrast to genetic sequence differences,
epigenetic aberrations are potentially reversible, raising the hope for interventions that will be able to reverse deleterious epigenetic
programming.
Key words: autoimmune disease, demethylation, DNA methylation, epigenetics chromatin, epigenome, histone modification,
maternal care, socioeconomic status

Genes, Gene Expression Programs, and Phenotype
The comprehensive sequencing of the human genome has
generated great anticipation that by comparing the
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence between individuals, we will be able to understand the basis of phenotypic
diversity between individuals, including the reasons for
diseases such as asthma and other autoimmune and atopic
states. However, our current understanding suggests that
this might not be the complete story. There are clear
Moshe Szyf: Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill
´
University, Montreal, QC; and Michael Meaney: Douglas Institute–
Research, Montreal, QC.
These studies were supported by a grant from the Canadian Institutes for
Health Research (CIHR) to M.J.M. and M.S. and from the National
Cancer Institute of Canada to M.S. M.J.M. is supported by a CIHR
Senior Scientist Award, and the project was supported by a Distinguished
Investigator Award to M.J.M. from the National Alliance for Research on
Schizophrenia and Affective Disorders.
Correspondence to: Dr. Moshe Szyf, Department of Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, McGill University, 3655 Sir William Osler Promenade,
´
#1309, Montreal, QC H3G 1Y6; e-mail: moshe.szyf@mcgill.ca.

DOI 10.2310/7480.2008.00004

environmental factors that facilitate the emergence of these
pathologies. What are the mechanisms that memorize
exposures at different points in life, leading to long-term
impact on human health? One of the factors that are
known to impact the incidence of asthma is socioeconomic status in early childhood. How can the socioeconomic environment affect physical and physiologic
parameters? The genomic theory focuses on differences in
gene function as the molecular mechanism of pathologic
processes. The principal hypothesis is that differences in
gene sequences are behind differences in gene function.
However, it is now clear that long-lasting differences in
gene function might be brought about by mechanisms
other than gene sequence variations, which we define as
‘‘epigenetic’’ processes. These mechanisms are excellent
candidates to mediate the long-lasting impact of environmental exposure.
The genome has to be programmed to express its
unique patterns of gene expression. Different cell types
execute distinctive plans of gene expression, which are
highly responsive to developmental, physiologic, pathologic, and environmental cues. The combinations of
mechanisms, which confer long-term programming to

Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology, Vol 4, No 1 (Spring), 2008: pp 37–49

37

38

Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology, Volume 4, Number 1, 2008

genes and could bring about a change in gene function
without changing the gene sequence, are called epigenetic
changes here. The dynamic nature of epigenetic regulation in contrast to the static nature of the gene sequence
provides a mechanism for reprogramming gene function
in response to changes in lifestyle trajectories. Thus,
epigenetics could provide an explanation for welldocumented gene–environment interactions. An important implication of the possible involvement of epigenetics is the potential for therapeutic intervention.
Epigenetic mechanisms are dynamic and potentially
reversible and are therefore amenable to therapeutic
intervention.1 Drugs that target the epigenetic machinery
are currently tested in clinical trials in cancer2,3 and
psychiatric disorders.4 Moreover, once we understand the
rules through which different environmental exposures
modify the epigenetic processes, we might be able to
design behavioural and therapeutic strategies to prevent
and revert deleterious environmentally driven epigenetic
alterations.
During the normal processes of development and
cellular differentiation, a cell type–specific pattern of
epigenetic marks is generated.5 This normal ‘‘pattern’’ of
epigenetic marks defines the normal pattern of gene
function in each tissue and cell type.6 The normal pattern
of gene-function is critical for the execution of the normal
life necessities, physiologic and behavioural functions. A
change in the normal pattern of gene function would result
in phenotypic differences. Gene function could change by
sequence alterations, which either completely eliminate the
function of the gene or alter the function of the protein
encoded by the gene, resulting in either an increase or a
decrease in its activity. A paradigm of epigenetic silencing
is the case of ‘‘tumour suppressor’’ genes in cancer.
Tumour suppressor genes are normally active and protect
our cells from abnormal growth. The first tumour
suppressor gene that was characterized was the retinoblastoma gene, a recessive mutation leading to childhood
tumours in either one or two eyes.7,8 All tumour
suppressor genes were originally discovered by looking
for a recessive mutation, which led to a specific type of
cancer. It was later found that many of these tumour
suppressor genes were silenced by epigenetic inactivation
in cancer rather than by genetic lesions.9 Thus, epigenetic
silencing and genetic silencing could have similar phenotypic consequences.
The epigenome consists of the chromatin and its
modifications, as well as a covalent modification by
methylation of cytosine rings found at the dinucleotide
sequence CG.10 The epigenome determines the accessi-

bility of the transcription machinery, which transcribes the
genes into messenger ribonucleic acid (RNA), to the DNA.
Inaccessible genes are therefore silent, whereas accessible
genes are transcribed. We therefore distinguish between
open and closed configuration of chromatin.11–15 Densely
packaged chromatin could be visualized microscopically
and is called heterochromatin, whereas open accessible
chromatin is called euchromatin. Recently, another new
level of epigenetic regulation by small noncoding RNAs
called microRNAs has been discovered.16 MicroRNAs
regulate gene expression at different levels: silencing of
chromatin, degradation of messenger RNA, and blocking
translation. MicroRNAs were found to play an important
role in cancer17 and could potentially play an important
role in behavioural pathologies as well.18

Chromatin and Its Modifications
The DNA is wrapped around a protein-based structure
called chromatin. The basic building block of chromatin is
the nucleosome, which is formed from an octamer of
histone proteins. There are five basic forms of histone
proteins, H1, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4,19 as well as other
minor variants, which are involved in specific functions,
such as DNA repair or gene activation.20 The octamer
structure of the nucleosome is composed of an H3-H4
tetramer flanked on either side with an H2A-H2B
dimer.19 The N-terminal tails of these histones are
extensively modified by methylation,21 phosphorylation,
acetylation,22 and ubiquitination.23 The state of modification of these tails plays an important role in defining the
accessibility of the DNA wrapped around the nucleosome
core. It was proposed that the amino terminal tails of H3
and H4 histones that are positively charged form tight
interactions with the negatively charged DNA backbone,
thus blocking the interaction of transcription factors with
the DNA. Modifications of the tails neutralize the charge
on the tails, thus relaxing the tight grip of the histone
tails. Different histone variants, which replace the
standard isoforms, also play a regulatory role and serve
to mark active genes in some instances.24 The specific
pattern of histone modifications was proposed to form a
‘‘histone code,’’ which delineates the parts of the genome
to be expressed at a given point in time in a given cell
type.25 A change in histone modifications around a gene
will change its level of expression and could convert an
active gene to become silent, resulting in ‘‘loss of
function,’’ or switch a silent gene to be active, leading
to ‘‘gain of function.’’

Szyf and Meaney, Epigenetics, Behaviour, and Health

Histone-Modifying Enzymes
The most investigated histone-modifying enzymes are
histone acetyltransferases (HATs), which acetylate H3
histone at the K9 and other residues and H4 tails at a
number of residues, and histone deacetylases (HDACs),
which deacetylate histone tails.26 Histone acetylation is
believed to be a predominant signal for an active
chromatin configuration.27,28 Deacetylated histones signal
inactive chromatin, which is chromatin associated with
inactive genes. Many repressors and repressor complexes
recruit HDACs to genes, thus causing their inactivation.29
Histone tail acetylation is believed to enhance the
accessibility of a gene to the transcription machinery,
whereas deacetylated tails are highly charged and believed
to be tightly associated with the DNA backbone, thus
limiting accessibility of genes to transcription factors.26
Histone modification by methylation is catalyzed by
different histone methyltransferases. Some specific methylation events are associated with gene silencing and some with
gene activation. For example, methylation of the K9 residue
of H3 histone tails is catalyzed by the histone methyltransferase SUV3-9 and is associated with silencing of the associated
gene.30 Particular factors recognize histone modifications
and further stabilize an inactive state. For example, the
heterochromatin-associated protein HP-1 binds H3 histone
tails methylated at the K9 residue and precipitates an inactive
chromatin structure.30 Recently described histone demethylases remove the methylation, causing either activation or
repression of gene expression.31,32

Chromatin Remodeling
Chromatin remodeling complexes, which are adenosine
triphosphate dependent, alter the position of nucleosomes
around the transcription initiation site and define its
accessibility to the transcription machinery.15 It is becoming clear that there is an interrelationship between
chromatin modification and chromatin remodeling. For
example, BRG1, the catalytic subunit of SWI/SNF-related
chromatin remodeling complexes, is required for histone
acetylation and regulation of b-globin expression during
development.33

Targeting of Chromatin-Modifying Enzymes to
Specific Genes
A basic principle in epigenetic regulation is targeting.
Histone-modifying enzymes are generally not gene specific.
Specific transcription factors and transcription repressors

39

recruit histone-modifying enzymes to specific genes and thus
define the gene-specific profile of histone modification.25
Transcription factors and repressors recognize specific cisacting sequences in genes, bind to these sequences, and
attract the specific chromatin-modifying enzymes to these
genes through protein–protein interactions. The cis-acting
sequences act as area codes, whereas the transcription factors
that read these codes deliver a load of chromatin-modifying
and -remodeling enzymes. Specific transacting factors are
responsive to cellular signaling pathways such as those
signaling through increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). One of the transcription factors that respond
to increased cAMP is CREB (cAMP response element
binding protein). CREB binds cAMP response elements in
certain genes. CREB also recruits CREB binding protein
(CBP). CBP is a HAT that acetylates histones.34 Thus,
elevation of cAMP levels in response to an extracellular
signal would result in a change in the state of histone
acetylation in specific genes.

DNA Methylation
In addition to chromatin, which is associated with DNA,
DNA itself is chemically modified by methyl residues at the
59 position of the cytosine rings in the dinucleotide sequence
CG in vertebrates (Figure 1).10 What distinguishes DNA
methylation in vertebrate genomes is the fact that not all CGs
are methylated in any given cell type.10 Distinct CGs are
methylated in different cell types, generating cell type–
specific patterns of methylation (Figure 2). Thus, the DNA
methylation pattern confers on the genome its cell type
identity.10 Active regions of the chromatin, which enable
gene expression, are associated with hypomethylated DNA,
whereas hypermethylated DNA is packaged in inactive
chromatin (Figure 3).10,35 It is generally accepted that DNA
methylation plays an important role in regulating gene
expression (Figure 4). DNA methylation in distinct
regulatory regions is believed to mark silent genes. There
are now overwhelming data indicating that aberrant
silencing of tumour suppressor genes by DNA methylation
is a common mechanism in cancer.36

DNA Methylation Enzymes
The DNA methylation pattern is not copied by the DNA
replication machinery but by independent enzymatic
machinery, the DNA methyltransferase(s) (DNMT).35
The methylation of DNA occurs immediately after
replication by a transfer of a methyl moiety from the
donor S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet; SAM) in a

40

Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology, Volume 4, Number 1, 2008

Figure 1. Methylation and demethylation reactions. DAM 5 Sadenosylmethionine; dMTase 5 demethylase; DNMT 5 DNA
methyltransferase.

reaction catalyzed by DNMTs (see Figure 1). Three distinct
phylogenetic DNMTs were identified in mammals.
DNMT1 shows preference for hemimethylated DNA in
vitro, which is consistent with its role as a maintenance
DNMT, whereas DNMT3a and DNMT3b methylate
unmethylated and methylated DNA at an equal rate,
which is consistent with a de novo DNMT role.37 Two
additional DNMT homologues were found: DNMT2,
whose substrate and methylation activity is unclear,38
and DNMT3L, which belongs to the DNMT3 family of
DNMTs by virtue of its sequence. It is essential for the
establishment of maternal genomic imprints but lacks key
methyltransferase motifs and is possibly a regulator of
methylation rather than an enzyme that methylates
DNA.39 Knockout mouse data indicate that DNMT1 is
responsible for a majority of DNA methylation in the
mouse genome,40 whereas DNMT3a and DNMT3b are
responsible for some but not all de novo methylation
during development.41

DNA Demethylation Enzymes
It was a long-held belief that the DNA methylation pattern
is solely dependent on DNMTs and that the reverse

Figure 3. Chromatin structure, gene expression, and DNA methylation are tightly correlated; DNA methylation and chromatin program
and control gene expression. Ac 5 acetylated histone tails; horizontal
arrow 5 transcription; M 5 methylated DNA.

reaction cannot occur. Thus, according to the classic
model, DNA methylation patterns were generated during
development but were then copied faithfully by the
maintenance DNMT. The only reaction that takes place
according to this model in differentiated cells is maintenance DNA methylation during cell division. The answer
to the question of whether the DNA methylation is

Figure 2. The DNA methylation pattern is sculpted during development
by methylation and demethylation
reactions to generate a cell type–
specific pattern of methylation. Circle
5 CG site; CH3 methylated CG site;
dark line 5 nascent DNA strand; grey
line 5 parental DNA strand.

Szyf and Meaney, Epigenetics, Behaviour, and Health

41

Figure 4. DNA methylation silences
gene expression by two mechanisms.
A, Methylation interferes with binding
of a transcription factor to its recognition element. B, Methylated DNA
attracts methylated DNA binding proteins such as MeCP2, which recruits
histone deacetylase (HDAC), corepressor Sin3A, histone methyltransferases such as SuV39, and methyl K9
H3-histone binding protein (HP1).

reversible has important implications for the possibility
that DNA methylation is dynamic and responsive to
physiologic and environmental signals throughout life.
This issue of the reversibility of the DNA methylation
reaction has important implications for our understanding
of the role of DNA methylation in nondividing tissues
such as neurons. If DNA methylation happens only when
DNMT is copying DNA methylation patterns during cell
division, as suggested by the classic model, there is no need
for DNMTs in neurons. Nevertheless, DNMTs are present
in neurons,42 and there are data suggesting that DNMT
levels in neurons change in certain pathologic conditions,
such as schizophrenia.43 The presence of DNMT in
neurons would make sense only if the DNA methylation
is dynamic in postmitotic tissues and is a balance of
methylation and demethylation reactions (see Figure 1).1
Without active demethylation, there is no need for DNA
methylation in neurons.
We proposed awhile ago that the DNA methylation
pattern is a balance of methylation and demethylation
reactions that are responsive to physiologic and environmental signals and thus forms a platform for gene–
environment interactions (see Figures 1 and 5).44 There is
a long list of data from both cell culture and early mouse
development supporting the hypothesis that active methylation occurs in embryonal and somatic cells. There are
now convincing examples of active, replication-independent DNA demethylation during development, as well as
in somatic tissues. Active demethylation was reported for
the myosin gene in differentiating myoblast cells,45 the

interleukin-2 gene on T-cell activation,46 the interferon-c
gene on antigen exposure of memory CD8 T cells,47 and
the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) gene promoter in adult
rat brains on treatment with the HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA).48
The main challenge of the field is identifying the
enzymes responsible for demethylation.
The characteristics of the enzymes responsible for
active demethylation are controversial. One proposal has
been that a G/T mismatch repair glycosylase also functions
as a 5-methylcytosine DNA glycosylase, recognizes methyl
cytosines, and cleaves the bond between the sugar and the
base. The abasic site is then repaired and replaced with a
nonmethylated cytosine, resulting in demethylation.49 An
additional protein with a similar activity was recently
identified, methylated DNA binding protein 4 (MBD4).50
Although such a mechanism can explain site-specific
demethylation, global demethylation by a glycosylase
would involve extensive damage to DNA that would
compromise genomic integrity. Another report has
proposed that methylated binding protein 2 (MBD2) has
demethylase activity. MBD2b (a shorter isoform of MBD2)
was shown to directly remove the methyl group from
methylated cytosine in methylated CpGs.51 This enzyme
was therefore proposed to reverse the DNA methylation
reaction. However, other groups disputed this finding.52
Our recent data further support the role of MBD2 in active
demethylation.53–55 Very recent data suggest that active
demethylation early in embryogenesis and in somatic cells
is catalyzed by a nucleotide excision repair mechanism,

42

Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology, Volume 4, Number 1, 2008

Figure 5. The steady-state methylation pattern is a dynamic equilibrium
between methylase and demethylase
activities. Different environmental
exposures trigger signaling pathways,
which affect chromatin structure and,
in turn, affect DNA methylation.

whereby methylated cytosines are replaced by unmethylated cytosines, which involves the growth arrest and
damage response protein Gadd45a and the DNA repair
endonuclease XPG.56 The main problem with this
mechanism is that it involves the risk of extensive damage
to the DNA. Although a number of biochemical processes
were implicated in demethylation, it is unclear how and
when these different enzymes participate in shaping and
maintaining the overall pattern of methylation and how
these activities respond to different environmental exposures.

Targeting DNA Methylation and Demethylation:
Chromatin and DNA Methylation
Methylation and demethylation enzymes do not have
exquisite sequence specificity; how could these enzymes

maintain highly specific DNA methylation patterns?
Methylation and demethylation enzymes have to be
targeted to specific genes to either preserve or change in
a regulated manner their pattern of methylation. The
picture that is currently emerging is that the DNA
methylation pattern is tightly coordinated with the
chromatin structure; that is, ‘‘opening’’ of chromatin leads
to demethylation, and a ‘‘closed configuration’’ of
chromatin leads to methylation. Thus, we propose that
the direction of the DNA methylation reaction is defined
by the state of chromatin and as discussed above (see
Figures 5 and 6). The gene specificity of the state of
chromatin is defined by sequence-specific trans-acting
factors that recruit chromatin-modifying enzymes to
specific genes. Chromatin configuration then gates the
accessibility of genes to either DNA methylation or
demethylation machineries.57,58 In support of this hypoth-

Figure 6. Activation of chromatin by
increasing acetylation facilitates
demethylation. Acetylation of histones
could be increased by either recruitment of histone acetyltransferases
(HAT) or pharmacologic inhibition
of histone deacetylases with trichostatin A (TSA). Histone acetylation
facilitates interaction of demethylases
with the DNA and DNA demethylation.

Szyf and Meaney, Epigenetics, Behaviour, and Health

esis, we have previously shown that the HDAC inhibitor
TSA, which causes histone hyperacetylation, also causes
active DNA demethylation.57 A change in histone acetylation is normally caused by transcription factors, which
recruit HATs (see Figure 6). Thus, binding of transcription
factors to a specific sequence in a gene could recruit HATs,
which would cause histone acetylation, facilitating, in turn,
demethylation. We propose that a similar mechanism
mediates the effects of cellular signaling pathways fired by
environmental exposures on the state of DNA methylation.
There is evidence to support this model. Histone
modification enzymes interact with DNA-methylating
enzymes and participate in recruiting them to specific
targets. A growing list of histone-modifying enzymes has
been shown to interact with DNMT1, such as HDAC1 and
HDAC2, the histone methyltransferases SUV3-9 and
EZH2, and a member of the multiprotein polycomb
complex PRC2, which methylates H3 histone at the K27
residue.59–62 DNMT3a was recently also shown to interact
with EZH2, which targets the DNA methylation-histone
modification multiprotein complexes to specific sequences
in DNA.62 Trans-acting repressors target both histonemodifying enzymes and DNMTs to specific cis-acting
signals in regulatory regions of particular genes, causing
gene-specific DNA methylation and chromatin modification. For example, the promyelocytic leukemia PML-RAR
fusion protein engages histone deacetylases and DNMTs to
its target binding sequences and produces de novo DNA
methylation of adjacent genes.63
Evidence is emerging that supports the hypothesis that
sequence-specific transcription factors target demethylation to specific genes. Transcription factors recruit HATs
to specific genes, causing gene-specific acetylation, and
thus facilitate their demethylation. For example, the
intronic kappa chain enhancer and the transcription factor
nuclear factor kB are required for B cell–specific
demethylation of the kappa immunoglobulin gene.64 We
discuss below how maternal care is employing this
mechanism to program gene expression through recruitment of the transcription factor NGFI-A to one of the GR
gene promoters in the hippocampus.65

How Does DNA Methylation Silence Gene
Expression?
There are two main mechanisms by which cytosine
methylation suppresses gene expression (see Figure 4).
The first mechanism involves direct interference of the
methyl residue with the binding of a transcription factor to
its recognition element in the gene. The interaction of

43

transcription factors with genes is required for activation
of the gene; lack of binding of a transcription factor would
result in silencing of gene expression.66,67 This form of
inhibition of transcription by methylation requires that the
methylation events occur within the recognition sequence
for a transcription factor. A second mechanism is indirect.
A certain density of DNA methylation moieties in the
region of the gene attracts the binding of methylated-DNA
binding proteins such as MeCP2.68 MeCP2 recruits other
proteins, such as SIN3A, and histone-modifying enzymes,
which lead to formation of a ‘‘closed’’ chromatin
configuration and silencing of gene expression.68 Several
methylated-DNA binding proteins, such as MBD1, MBD2,
and MBD3, suppress gene expression by a similar
mechanism.52,69,70

Maternal Care Model and Its Implications for
Epigenetics as a Mediator and Effector of Social
Environment on Gene Function
Our hypothesis is that the social environment would
trigger long-term changes in gene expression that could
lead to pathology by eliciting signaling pathways in the
brain, which will, in turn, cause epigenetic reprogramming. The best-documented case to date of epigenetic
programming triggered by the social environment is the
long-term impact that maternal care has on expression of
the GR gene in the hippocampus of the offspring in the rat.
In the rat, the adult offspring of mothers that exhibit
increased levels of pup licking/grooming (ie, high licking/
grooming [LG] mothers) over the first week of life show
increased hippocampal GR expression, enhanced glucocorticoid feedback sensitivity, decreased hypothalamic
corticotropin-releasing factor expression, and more modest hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal stress responses compared with animals reared by low LG mothers.71,72 Crossfostering studies suggest an epigenetic mechanism rather
than a genetic mechanism since the fostering mother and
not the biologic mother defined the stress response of its
adult offspring.70,71 The critical question was obviously the
mechanism. How could the behaviour of the caregiver
cause a stable change in gene expression in the offspring
long after the caregiver was gone? We postulated an
epigenetic mechanism; that is, we hypothesized that the
maternal behaviour of the caregiver triggered an epigenetic
change in the brain of the offspring.73
This model has two nodal implications for our
understanding of the relationship between behaviour and
epigenetics. First, the social behaviour of one subject can
affect epigenetic programming in another subject. Thus,

44

Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology, Volume 4, Number 1, 2008

our model provides a molecular mechanism mediating the
effects of nurture on nature. Second, epigenetic programming can have a long-term impact on behaviour, stress
response, and health status.
Increased maternal LG is associated with histone
acetylation increased transcription factor NGFI-A occupancy and demethylation of the exon 17 GR promoter.48
The difference in the methylation status of this CpG site
between the offspring of high and low LG mothers emerges
over the first week of life, is reversed with cross-fostering,
persists into adulthood, and is associated with altered
histone acetylation and NGFI-A binding to the GR
promoter (Figure 7).48 We have also shown that maternal
care early in life affected the expression of hundreds of
genes in the adult hippocampus,74 thus illustrating the
profound effect of the social environment early in life on
gene expression programming throughout life. These
results have quite tantalizing implications. They imply
that differences in maternal care early in life can result in
gene expression changes, which remain persistent into
adulthood in numerous genes. This range of change in
gene expression would have required simultaneously
mutating hundreds of genes had it been accomplished by
genetic means. This illustrates the potential power of
epigenetic processes in modulating our genomic inheritance.

Epigenetic Programming that Occurred Early in Life
in Response to Social Exposure Is Reversible in the
Adult Animal
Although epigenetic programming by maternal care is
highly stable and results in long-term changes in gene
expression, it is nevertheless reversible (Figure 8). The
combination of reversibility and stability is one of the

Figure 7. Timeline of demethylation of hippocampal glucocorticoid
receptor (17) in response to maternal care.

Figure 8. In the adult (day 90) rat, hippocampal glucocorticoid
receptor methylation of low licking/grooming and arched-back
nursing (LG-ABN) offspring is reversed by trichostatin A and
hypomethylation of the high LG-ABN offspring is reversed by
methionine.

appealing aspects of epigenetics and might have immense
implications for therapeutic approaches to many late-onset
diseases, such as asthma, diabetes, and others. We
previously proposed as discussed above that chromatin
states and DNA methylation states were linked, so opening
up of chromatin by increasing histone acetylation would
tilt the balance of the DNA methylation equilibrium
toward demethylation (see Figures 5 and 7).57,75 Treating
adult offspring of low licking/grooming and arched-back
nursing (LG-ABN) maternal care with an HDAC inhibitor,
TSA, reversed the epigenetic marks on the GR exon 17
promoter; histone acetylation increased, the gene was
demethylated, and there was increased occupancy of the
promoter with the transcription factor NGFI-A, resulting
in increased GR exon 17 promoter expression (see Figure
8). The epigenetic reversal was accompanied by a
behavioural change, so the stress response of the TSAtreated adult offspring of low LG-ABN mothers was
indistinguishable from the offspring of high LG-ABN
mothers.76 These data illustrate the tight association
between the DNA methylation and histone acetylation
equilibriums in the adult brain and the potential
reversibility of the DNA methylation pattern in the
nondividing adult neuron.
If the DNA methylation state remains in equilibrium of
methylation-demethylation in adult neurons throughout
life, it should be possible also to reverse the DNA
methylation in the opposite direction by increasing DNA
methylation (see Figure 8). We previously demonstrated
that the methyl donor SAM inhibits the demethylation
reaction.55 Thus, changing SAM levels would alter the
DNA methylation equilibrium by either increasing the rate
of the DNA methylation reaction, by inhibiting the
demethylation reaction, or both. Since SAM is an unstable

Szyf and Meaney, Epigenetics, Behaviour, and Health

45

compound, we injected the precursor of SAM, the amino
acid L-methionine, into the brain of adult offspring of
either high or low LG-ABN mothers. Systemic injection of
methionine was previously shown to increase SAM
concentrations in the brain.77 Injection of methionine to
the brain led to hypermethylation and reduced expression
of the GR exon 17 expression in the adult hippocampus of
the offspring of high LG-ABN mothers and reversal of its
stress response to a pattern, which was indistinguishable
from that of the offspring of low LG-ABN mothers.78
Thus, maternal epigenetic programming could be reversed
later in life in both directions. Methionine is especially
interesting since the levels of methionine in cells are
influenced by diet. Thus, this might provide an example of
a potential link between dietary intake and alteration in
epigenetic programming in the brain.

Mechanisms Leading from Maternal Care to
Epigenetic Programming
How would LG-ABN result in distinct epigenetic changes
in certain genes? In vivo and in vitro studies suggest that
maternal LG or postnatal handling, which increase
maternal LG, increase GR gene expression in the offspring
through a thyroid hormone–dependent increase in serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) activity at 5-HT7
receptors and the subsequent activation of cAMP and
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A.79–81 Both the in vitro
effects of 5-HT and the in vivo effects of maternal
behaviour on GR messenger RNA expression are accompanied by increased hippocampal expression of NGFI-A
transcription factor. The GR exon 17 promoter region
contains a binding site for NGFI-A.82 Our findings are
consistent with the hypothesis that maternal LG-ABN
results in increased targeting of NGFI-A to the GR exon 17
promoter and that this targeting leads to increased binding
of CBP (a histone acetyltransferase), increased acetylation,
and DNA demethylation.65 Thus, our data depict a
conduit leading from exposure to maternal behaviour
down to targeting of gene-specific epigenetic reprogramming (Figure 9).
To test a causal link between NGFI-A binding and
epigenetic reprogramming of the GR exon 17 promoter, we
resorted to cell culture experiments. The GR exon 17
promoter was introduced into a reporter vector that
contained the complementary DNA encoding the firefly
luciferase enzyme under its direction to report for the
transcriptional activity of this promoter. The promoter
was methylated with a CG-specific bacterial DNA
methyltransferase in vitro to completion; thus, all of the

Figure 9. Behavioural gene programming. Maternal care elicits a
signaling pathway in hippocampal neurons, leading to epigenetic
reprogramming of the glucocorticoid receptor exon 17 promoter.

CG dinucleotides in the plasmids were methylated. The
methylated reporter plasmid was then introduced into
HEK 293 cells.
Our results show that in cell culture, DNA methylation
causes a significant inhibition of GR exon 17 promoter–
luciferase transcription activity, reduced NGFI-A binding,
reduced CBP binding, and reduced histone acetylation
when transfected into HEK 293 cells, thus confirming that
DNA methylation plays a causal role in the silencing of GR
exon 17 promoter. However, if an expression vector
expressing high levels of NGFI-A is cotransfected with
the methylated GR exon 17 promoter–luciferase, the
transcription activity of the promoter is induced, there is
an increased recruitment of NGFI-A to the promoter as
expected, increased recruitment of CBP, increased histone
acetylation, and methylation mapping indicating that the
GR exon 17 promoter was demethylated. We suggest that
the role that NGFI-A plays in regulation of the GR exon 17
promoter is bimodal. Under low concentrations of NGFIA, binding to the target sequence is inhibited by DNA
methylation. However, under conditions of high NGFI-A
activity, some NGFI-A interacts with the methylated GR
exon 17 promoter, launching a cascade of events leading to
demethylation of the promoter. Thus, increased activation
of NGFI-A triggered by a repetitive and frequent behaviour
such as maternal LG leads to binding of NGFI-A to the
methylated promoter and recruitment of CBP. We
proposed that the recruitment of CBP led to increased
histone acetylation that resulted in demethylation.65 This
sequence of events is consistent with our working

46

Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology, Volume 4, Number 1, 2008

hypothesis on the relationship between histone acetylation
and DNA demethylation.57,75 Thus, we show that, similar
to acetylation in response to pharmacologic administration of TSA, targeted acetylation by recruitment of a
transcription factor leads to demethylation of DNA.65
We then tested the hypothesis that MBD2, which we
previously characterized to be a demethylase,51 mediated
the demethylation of GR exon 17 promoter. We first tested
whether MBD2 interacted with the GR exon 17 promoter
in the hippocampi of day 6 pups at the point in life when
the pups are licked and groomed by their mother. Our
results indicate that MBD2 binds the GR exon 17 promoter
in the hippocampi of day 6 pups and that this binding is
increased with high maternal LG-ABN. Using a transient
transfection assay, we showed that ectopically expressed
MBD2 transcriptionally activates in vitro the methylated
GR exon 17 promoter–luciferase reporter construct,
increases the interaction of CBP, and increases histone
acetylation to the promoter. A combination of chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and bisulfite mapping of
DNA methylation indicated that MBD2-bound GR exon
17 promoter molecules were demethylated at a CG site
found in the NGFI-A recognition element. Using a doubleChIP approach, which involves immunoprecipitation
sequentially with both NGFI-A and MBD2 antibodies,
we show that both proteins simultaneously bind the same
GR exon 17 promoter molecule (Weaver IC, 2008) (see
Figure 9).
In summary, our studies establish a first working of the
hypothesis on how maternal behaviour can result in
epigenetic reprogramming in the offspring. Neurotransmitter release results in activation of a signaling
pathway that leads to recruitment of particular transcription factors such as NGFI-A to their recognition elements
in front of specific genes. Our hypothesis is that NGFI-A
facilitates MBD2 interaction through recruitment of CBP
and that the ensuing increased acetylation of the GR exon
17 promoter opens up the chromatin configuration, thus
increasing the accessibility of the sequence to MBD2.

Epigenetic Programming and Human Behavioural
Exposure
A fundamental question that remains to be answered is
whether a mechanism similar to the mechanism described
in the rat operates in generating interindividual differences
in humans and that exposure to different social behaviour
results in differences in epigenetic programming of gene
expression, leading to altered gene function with consequences on health status. The hypothesis is obviously

attractive; social adversity in early childhood similar to low
LG-ABN might result in aberrant epigenetic programming,
causing changes in gene expression, which will stably
impact on behaviour and physiologic functions later in
life. Similarly strong environmental exposures later in life
might reverse or alter epigenetic programming of the genes
regulating human behaviour. The main impediment in
studying epigenetic programming in living humans is
obviously the inaccessibility of the brain and other tissues
to epigenetic analysis. Although candidate genes could be a
reasonable approach to identify differentially methylated
targets, a nonbiased approach might identify other
unanticipated candidates. Thus, whole-epigenome analyses
should enable the identification of hitherto unknown
epigenetic markers of human behaviour exposures.

Summary
Recent data from the rat maternal care model chart a
pathway leading from the behaviour of the mother to
long-term programming of gene expression in the offspring (see Figure 9). This pathway involves the firing of
neurotransmitter receptors in response to the behaviour
and signaling pathways, which activate sequence-specific
transcription factors such as NGFI-A. NGFI-A interacts
with its recognition element in the GR exon 17 promoter
and recruits the HAT CBP to the gene. This results in
acetylation of chromatin and recruitment of DNA
demethylases such as MBD2, leading to demethylation
and stable activation of this gene. These data point to a
thought-provoking notion that epigenetic processes play a
role in shaping human behaviour in response to different
levels of social adversity early in life and later during
adulthood (Figure 10). Preliminary data examining a few
genes, the ribosomal RNA genes, and the GR exon 1f in the
hippocampi of suicide victims and their matched controls
suggest that differences in epigenetic programming do
exist between individuals and that these variations might
associate with exposure to social adversity early in life
(MacGowen PO, unpublished data). The rapid development of high-throughput sequencing techniques will
enable in the future the unbiased mapping of epigenomes
and identification of candidate genes, which exhibit
epigenetic differences among individuals. The possibility
that epigenetic mechanisms might be playing a role in
generating interindividual differences in behaviour has
tremendous potential to provide a mechanism for the ageold question of the relationship of nurture and nature (see
Figure 10 for a model).

Szyf and Meaney, Epigenetics, Behaviour, and Health

47

understanding of the late-onset diseases, including autoimmune disease and asthma. More importantly, since
epigenetic processes are reversible, this might lead to a
paradigm shift in prophylactic and therapeutic approaches
to late-onset pathologies.

References

Figure 10. The implications of a lifelong dynamic epigenome.
Environmental exposures impact our epigenome, which, in turn,
impacts our response to these exposures. The final outcome is a
change in phenotype, including effects on health status.

Similar mechanisms might be at play in autoimmune
disease and in asthma. It is well established that alteration
in DNA methylation plays a role in the autoimmune
disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).83 Drugs
known to induce lupus, such as procainamide and
hydralazine, also induce demethylation,84–86 and the
demethylating agent 5-azacytidine induces lupus.87 The
genome of T cells from SLE patients is demethylated in
comparison with T cells from control subjects.88 It is
proposed that demethylation activates genes whose
expression confers on T cells’ self-reactivity. Interestingly,
MBD2, which was implicated to be responsible for
epigenetic reprogramming and demethylation in response
to maternal care in our studies, detailed above, was also
found to be upregulated in T cells from lupus patients.88
Lupus serves as a nice illustration of the notion that
exposure to different xenobiotics, such as procainamide,
could precipitate a pathologic state, which is mediated by
epigenetic reprogramming. Our studies on maternal care
suggest that similar signaling pathways that lead to lupus,
such as MBD2 induction, could also be triggered by
behavioural exposures. Unraveling the mechanisms linking
environmental exposures, including the social environment, to health outcomes could open new horizons in our

1. Szyf M. Towards a pharmacology of DNA methylation. Trends
Pharmacol Sci 2001;22:350–4.
2. Weidle UH, Grossmann A. Inhibition of histone deacetylases: a
new strategy to target epigenetic modifications for anticancer
treatment. Anticancer Res 2000;20:1471–85.
3. Kramer OH, Gottlicher M, Heinzel T. Histone deacetylase as a
therapeutic target. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2001;12:294–300.
4. Simonini MV, Camargo LM, Dong E, et al. The benzamide MS275 is a potent, long-lasting brain region-selective inhibitor of
histone deacetylases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:1587–92.
5. Razin A, Riggs AD. DNA methylation and gene function. Science
1980;210:604–10.
6. Razin A, Szyf M. DNA methylation patterns. Formation and
function. Biochim Biophys Acta 1984;782:331–42.
7. Neel JV, Falls HF. The rate of mutation of the gene responsible for
retinoblastoma in man. Science 1951;114:419–22.
8. Sparkes RS, Murphree AL, Lingua RW, et al. Gene for hereditary
retinoblastoma assigned to human chromosome 13 by linkage to
esterase D. Science 1983;219:971–3.
9. Gonzalez-Zulueta M, Bender CM, Yang AS, et al. Methylation of
the 59 CpG island of the p16/CDKN2 tumor suppressor gene in
normal and transformed human tissues correlates with gene
silencing. Cancer Res 1995;55:4531–5.
10. Razin A. CpG methylation, chromatin structure and gene
silencing-a three-way connection. Embo J 1998;17:4905–8.
11. Groudine M, Eisenman R, Gelinas R, Weintraub H.
Developmental aspects of chromatin structure and gene expression. Prog Clin Biol Res 1983;134:159–82.
12. Marks PA, Sheffery M, Rifkind RA. Modulation of gene expression
during terminal cell differentiation. Prog Clin Biol Res 1985;191:
185–203.
13. Ramain P, Bourouis M, Dretzen G, et al. Changes in the chromatin
structure of Drosophila glue genes accompany developmental
cessation of transcription in wild type and transformed strains. Cell
1986;45:545–53.
14. Grunstein M. Histone acetylation in chromatin structure and
transcription. Nature 1997;389:349–52.
15. Varga-Weisz PD, Becker PB. Regulation of higher-order chromatin
structures by nucleosome-remodelling factors. Curr Opin Genet
Dev 2006;16:151–6.
16. Bergmann A, Lane ME. HIDden targets of microRNAs for growth
control. Trends Biochem Sci 2003;28:461–3.
17. Zhang B, Pan X, Cobb GP, Anderson TA. MicroRNAs as
oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Dev Biol 2007;302:1–12.
18. Vo N, Klein ME, Varlamova O, et al. A cAMP-response element
binding protein-induced microRNA regulates neuronal morphogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:16426–31.
19. Finch JT, Lutter LC, Rhodes D, et al. Structure of nucleosome core
particles of chromatin. Nature 1977;269:29–36.

48

Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology, Volume 4, Number 1, 2008

20. Sarma K and Reinberg D. Histone variants meet their match. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005;6:139–49.
21. Jenuwein T. Re-SET-ting heterochromatin by histone methyltransferases. Trends Cell Biol 2001;11:266–73.
22. Wade PA, Pruss D, Wolffe AP. Histone acetylation: chromatin in
action. Trends Biochem Sci 1997;22:128–32.
23. Shilatifard A. Chromatin modifications by methylation and
ubiquitination: implications in the regulation of gene expression.
Annu Rev Biochem 2006;75:243–69.
24. Henikoff S, McKittrick E, Ahmad K. Epigenetics, histone H3
variants, and the inheritance of chromatin states. Cold Spring Harb
Symp Quant Biol 2004;69:235–43.
25. Jenuwein T, Allis CD. Translating the histone code. Science 2001;
293:1074–80.
26. Kuo MH, Allis CD. Roles of histone acetyltransferases and
deacetylases in gene regulation. Bioessays 1998;20:615–26.
27. Perry M, Chalkley R. Histone acetylation increases the solubility of
chromatin and occurs sequentially over most of the chromatin. A
novel model for the biological role of histone acetylation. J Biol
Chem 1982;257:7336–47.
28. Lee DY, Hayes JJ, Pruss D, Wolffe AP. A positive role for histone
acetylation in transcription factor access to nucleosomal DNA. Cell
1993;72:73–84.
29. Wolffe AP. Histone deacetylase: a regulator of transcription.
Science 1996;272:371–2.
30. Lachner M, O’Carroll D, Rea S, et al. Methylation of histone H3
lysine 9 creates a binding site for HP1 proteins. Nature 2001;410:
116–20.
31. Shi Y, Lan F, Matson C, et al. Histone demethylation mediated
by the nuclear amine oxidase homolog LSD1. Cell 2004;119:941–
53.
32. Tsukada Y, Fang J, Erdjument-Bromage H, et al. Histone
demethylation by a family of JmjC domain-containing proteins.
Nature 2006;439:811–6.
33. Bultman SJ, Gebuhr TC, Magnuson T. A Brg1 mutation that
uncouples ATPase activity from chromatin remodeling reveals an
essential role for SWI/SNF-related complexes in beta-globin
expression and erythroid development. Genes Dev 2005;19:2849–
61.
34. Ogryzko VV, Schiltz RL, Russanova V, et al. The transcriptional
coactivators p300 and CBP are histone acetyltransferases. Cell
1996;87:953–9.
35. Razin A, Cedar H. Distribution of 5-methylcytosine in chromatin.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1977;74:2725–8.
36. Baylin SB, Esteller M, Rountree MR, et al. Aberrant patterns of
DNA methylation, chromatin formation and gene expression in
cancer. Hum Mol Genet 2001;10:687–92.
37. Okano M, Xie S, Li E. Cloning and characterization of a family of
novel mammalian DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferases. Nat
Genet 1998;19:219–20.
38. Vilain A, Apiou F, Dutrillaux B, Malfoy B. Assignment of
candidate DNA methyltransferase gene (DNMT2) to human
chromosome band 10p15.1 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet
Cell Genet 1998;82:120.
39. Bourc’his D, Xu GL, Lin CS, et al. Dnmt3L and the establishment
of maternal genomic imprints. Science 2001;294:2536–9.
40. Li E, Bestor TH, Jaenisch R. Targeted mutation of the DNA
methyltransferase gene results in embryonic lethality. Cell 1992;69:
915–26.

41. Okano M, Bell DW, Haber DA, Li E. DNA methyltransferases
Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are essential for de novo methylation and
mammalian development. Cell 1999;99:247–57.
42. Goto K, Numata M, Komura JI, et al. Expression of DNA
methyltransferase gene in mature and immature neurons as well as
proliferating cells in mice. Differentiation 1994;56:39–44.
43. Veldic M, Guidotti A, Maloku E, et al. In psychosis, cortical
interneurons overexpress DNA-methyltransferase 1. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:2152–7.
44. Ramchandani S, Bhattacharya SK, Cervoni N, Szyf M. DNA
methylation is a reversible biological signal. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 1999;96:6107–12.
45. Lucarelli M, Fuso A, Strom R, Scarpa S. The dynamics of
myogenin site-specific demethylation is strongly correlated with its
expression and with muscle differentiation. J Biol Chem 2001;276:
7500–6.
46. Bruniquel D, Schwartz RH. Selective, stable demethylation of the
interleukin-2 gene enhances transcription by an active process. Nat
Immunol 2003;4:235–40.
47. Kersh EN, Fitzpatrick DR, Murali-Krishna K, et al. Rapid
demethylation of the IFN-gamma gene occurs in memory but
not naive CD8 T cells. J Immunol 2006;176:4083–93.
48. Weaver IC, Cervoni N, Champagne FA, et al. Epigenetic
programming by maternal behavior. Nat Neurosci 2004;7:847–54.
49. Jost JP. Nuclear extracts of chicken embryos promote an active
demethylation of DNA by excision repair of 5-methyldeoxycytidine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:4684–8.
50. Zhu B, Zheng Y, Hess D, et al. 5-Methylcytosine-DNA glycosylase
activity is present in a cloned G/T mismatch DNA glycosylase
associated with the chicken embryo DNA demethylation complex.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:5135–9.
51. Bhattacharya SK, Ramchandani S, Cervoni N, Szyf M. A
mammalian protein with specific demethylase activity for mCpG
DNA. Nature 1999;397:579–83.
52. Ng HH, Zhang Y, Hendrich B, et al. MBD2 is a transcriptional
repressor belonging to the MeCP1 histone deacetylase complex.
Nat Genet 1999;23:58–61.
53. Detich N, Theberge J, Szyf M. Promoter-specific activation and
demethylation by MBD2/demethylase. J Biol Chem 2002;277:
35791–4.
54. Detich N, Bovenzi V, Szyf M. Valproate induces replicationindependent active DNA demethylation. J Biol Chem 2003;278:
27586–92.
55. Detich N, Hamm S, Just G, et al. The methyl donor Sadenosylmethionine inhibits active demethylation of DNA: a
candidate novel mechanism for the pharmacological effects of Sadenosylmethionine. J Biol Chem 2003;278:20812–20.
56. Barreto G, Schafer A, Marhold J, et al. Gadd45a promotes
epigenetic gene activation by repair-mediated DNA demethylation.
Nature 2007;445:671–5.
57. Cervoni N, Szyf M. Demethylase activity is directed by histone
acetylation. J Biol Chem 2001;276:40778–87.
58. D’Alessio AC, Szyf M. Epigenetic tete-a-tete: the bilateral relationship between chromatin modifications and DNA methylation.
Biochem Cell Biol 2006;84:463–76.
59. Fuks F, Burgers WA, Brehm A, et al. DNA methyltransferase
Dnmt1 associates with histone deacetylase activity. Nat Genet
2000;24:88–91.

Szyf and Meaney, Epigenetics, Behaviour, and Health

60. Fuks F, Hurd PJ, Wolf D, et al. The methyl-CpG-binding protein
MeCP2 links DNA methylation to histone methylation. J Biol
Chem 2003;278:4035–40.
61. Rountree MR, Bachman KE, Baylin SB. DNMT1 binds HDAC2
and a new co-repressor, DMAP1, to form a complex at replication
foci. Nat Genet 2000;25:269–77.
62. Vire E, Brenner C, Deplus R, et al. The Polycomb group protein
EZH2 directly controls DNA methylation. Nature 2006;439:871–4.
63. Di Croce L, Raker VA, Corsaro M, et al. Methyltransferase
recruitment and DNA hypermethylation of target promoters by an
oncogenic transcription factor. Science 2002;295:1079–82.
64. Lichtenstein M, Keini G, Cedar H, Bergman Y. B cell-specific
demethylation: a novel role for the intronic kappa chain enhancer
sequence. Cell 1994;76:913–23.
65. Szyf M, Weaver I, Meaney M. Maternal care, the epigenome and
phenotypic differences in behavior. Reprod Toxicol 2007;24:9–19.
66. Comb M, Goodman HM. CpG methylation inhibits proenkephalin
gene expression and binding of the transcription factor AP-2.
Nucleic Acids Res 1990;18:3975–82.
67. Inamdar NM, Ehrlich KC, Ehrlich M. CpG methylation inhibits
binding of several sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins from
pea, wheat, soybean and cauliflower. Plant Mol Biol 1991;17:111–
23.
68. Nan X, Campoy FJ, Bird A. MeCP2 is a transcriptional repressor
with abundant binding sites in genomic chromatin. Cell 1997;88:
471–81.
69. Fujita N, Takebayashi S, Okumura K, et al. Methylation-mediated
transcriptional silencing in euchromatin by methyl-CpG binding
protein MBD1 isoforms. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:6415–26.
70. Hendrich B, Bird A. Identification and characterization of a family
of mammalian methyl-CpG binding proteins. Mol Cell Biol 1998;
18:6538–47.
71. Liu D, Diorio J, Tannenbaum B, et al. Maternal care, hippocampal
glucocorticoid receptors, and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
responses to stress. Science 1997;277:1659–62.
72. Francis D, Diorio J, Liu D, Meaney MJ. Nongenomic transmission
across generations of maternal behavior and stress responses in the
rat. Science 1999;286:1155–8.
73. Meaney MJ, Szyf M. Maternal care as a model for experiencedependent chromatin plasticity? Trends Neurosci 2005;28:456–63.
74. Champagne FA, Weaver IC, Diorio J, et al. Maternal care
associated with methylation of the estrogen receptor-alpha1b
promoter and estrogen receptor-alpha expression in the medial
preoptic area of female offspring. Endocrinology 2006;147:2909–
15.
75. Cervoni N, Detich N, Seo SB, et al. The oncoprotein Set/TAF1beta, an inhibitor of histone acetyltransferase, inhibits active
demethylation of DNA, integrating DNA methylation and
transcriptional silencing. J Biol Chem 2002;277:25026–31.

49

76. Weaver IC, Diorio J, Seckl JR, et al. Early environmental regulation
of hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor gene expression: characterization of intracellular mediators and potential genomic target
sites. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004;1024:182–212.
77. Tremolizzo L, Carboni G, Ruzicka WB, et al. An epigenetic mouse
model for molecular and behavioral neuropathologies related to
schizophrenia vulnerability. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:
17095–100.
78. Weaver IC, Champagne FA, Brown SE, et al. Reversal of maternal
programming of stress responses in adult offspring through methyl
supplementation: altering epigenetic marking later in life. J
Neurosci 2005;25:11045–54.
79. Meaney MJ, Aitken DH, Sapolsky RM. Thyroid hormones
influence the development of hippocampal glucocorticoid receptors in the rat: a mechanism for the effects of postnatal handling on
the development of the adrenocortical stress response.
Neuroendocrinology 1987;45:278–83.
80. Meaney MJ, Diorio J, Francis D, et al. Postnatal handling increases
the expression of cAMP-inducible transcription factors in the rat
hippocampus: the effects of thyroid hormones and serotonin. J
Neurosci 2000;20:3926–35.
81. Laplante P, Diorio J, Meaney MJ. Serotonin regulates hippocampal
glucocorticoid receptor expression via a 5-HT7 receptor. Brain Res
Dev Brain Res 2002;139:199–203.
82. McCormick JA, Lyons V, Jacobson MD, et al. 59-Heterogeneity of
glucocorticoid receptor messenger RNA is tissue specific: differential regulation of variant transcripts by early-life events. Mol
Endocrinol 2000;14:506–17.
83. Richardson BC. Role of DNA methylation in the regulation of cell
function: autoimmunity, aging and cancer. J Nutr 2002;132:2401S–
5S.
84. Cornacchia E, Golbus J, Maybaum J, et al. Hydralazine and
procainamide inhibit T cell DNA methylation and induce
autoreactivity. J Immunol 1988;140:2197–200.
85. Scheinbart LS, Johnson MA, Gross LA, et al. Procainamide inhibits
DNA methyltransferase in a human T cell line. J Rheumatol 1991;
18:530–4.
86. Deng C, Lu Q, Zhang Z, et al. Hydralazine may induce
autoimmunity by inhibiting extracellular signal-regulated kinase
pathway signaling. Arthritis Rheum 2003;48:746–56.
87. Quddus J, Johnson KJ, Gavalchin J, et al. Treating activated CD4+
T cells with either of two distinct DNA methyltransferase
inhibitors, 5-azacytidine or procainamide, is sufficient to cause a
lupus-like disease in syngeneic mice. J Clin Invest 1993;92:38–53.
88. Balada E, Ordi-Ros J, Serrano-Acedo S, et al. Transcript overexpression of the MBD2 and MBD4 genes in CD4+ T cells from
systemic lupus erythematosus patients. J Leukoc Biol 2007;81:
1609–16.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
