<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Differentiation and fiber type-specific activity of a muscle creatine kinase intronic enhancer</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25. doi:10.1186/2044-5040-1-25"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Phillip WL Tai"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

RESEARCH

Skeletal Muscle
Open Access

Differentiation and fiber type-specific activity of a
muscle creatine kinase intronic enhancer
Phillip WL Tai1, Katherine I Fisher-Aylor2, Charis L Himeda1, Catherine L Smith1, Alexandra P MacKenzie1,
Deri L Helterline1, John C Angello1, Robert E Welikson1, Barbara J Wold2 and Stephen D Hauschka1*

Abstract
Background: Hundreds of genes, including muscle creatine kinase (MCK), are differentially expressed in fast- and
slow-twitch muscle fibers, but the fiber type-specific regulatory mechanisms are not well understood.
Results: Modulatory region 1 (MR1) is a 1-kb regulatory region within MCK intron 1 that is highly active in terminally
differentiating skeletal myocytes in vitro. A MCK small intronic enhancer (MCK-SIE) containing a paired E-box/myocyte
enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) regulatory motif resides within MR1. The SIE’s transcriptional activity equals that of the
extensively characterized 206-bp MCK 5’-enhancer, but the MCK-SIE is flanked by regions that can repress its activity
via the individual and combined effects of about 15 different but highly conserved 9- to 24-bp sequences. ChIP and
ChIP-Seq analyses indicate that the SIE and the MCK 5’-enhancer are occupied by MyoD, myogenin and MEF2. Many
other E-boxes located within or immediately adjacent to intron 1 are not occupied by MyoD or myogenin.
Transgenic analysis of a 6.5-kb MCK genomic fragment containing the 5’-enhancer and proximal promoter plus the
3.2-kb intron 1, with and without MR1, indicates that MR1 is critical for MCK expression in slow- and intermediatetwitch muscle fibers (types I and IIa, respectively), but is not required for expression in fast-twitch muscle fibers (types
IIb and IId).
Conclusions: In this study, we discovered that MR1 is critical for MCK expression in slow- and intermediate-twitch
muscle fibers and that MR1’s positive transcriptional activity depends on a paired E-box MEF2 site motif within a
SIE. This is the first study to delineate the DNA controls for MCK expression in different skeletal muscle fiber types.

Background
Muscle creatine kinase (MCK) is among the most abundant transcripts in striated muscle [1]. In differentiating
muscle cell cultures, the onset of MCK expression occurs
shortly after proliferating myoblasts exit the cell cycle [2]
and begin to express differentiation-specific transcription
factors [3]. In mouse embryos, MCK expression is
initiated after the activation of myogenic transcription
factors. MCK mRNA is first detectable in embryonic day
13 (E13) cardiac and skeletal muscles, and its expression
is maintained throughout adulthood [4]. The expression
of MCK between different anatomical muscle groups is
quite variable; for example, MCK protein as well as its
enzymatic product, creatine phosphate, are about two or
three times higher in fast-twitch muscles than in slow* Correspondence: haus@u.washington.edu
1
Department of Biochemistry, 1705 NE Pacific St., University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

twitch muscles [5,6]. Fiber type-specific muscle regulatory factors (MRFs) have been studied in several other
skeletal muscle genes, such as in MLC2v, MLC1/3f and
aldolase genes [7-10] and even more extensively in slow
and fast troponin I genes [11-16]. These studies have
provided important clues that implicate a variety of transcriptional control mechanisms in muscle fiber typespecific gene expression. Aspects of these mechanisms
are both similar to and different from those that regulate
MCK expression in fast- and slow-twitch fiber types.
While MCK gene expression has been extensively studied [17-22], some of its regulatory regions have yet to be
fully characterized. Currently, the 5’-enhancer (-1,256 to
-1,050) is the best characterized of the known regions
[18,20,23-28]. It has the ability (1) to drive high-level
transcription of reporter genes in skeletal and cardiac
muscle in both transgenic mice and cell culture and (2)
to function with heterologous promoters [29]. Deletion
and mutation analyses within this region in cultured

© 2011 Tai et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

skeletal myocytes and in transgenic mice have defined
seven control elements: muscle-specific (CArG) and
serum response element promoters, activator protein 2
(AP-2), Six4/5, AT-rich, left and right E-boxes and myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) [23,24]. The MCK proximal promoter (-358 to +1) has also been thoroughly
studied. It is active in skeletal and cardiac myocytes in
culture and can function independently of the 5’-enhancer. The proximal promoter is also active in transgenic
skeletal muscle, and the combination of both the 5’enhancer and the proximal promoter exhibits significant
synergy in both cell culture and transgenic mice. The
proximal promoter contains at least four active transcription factor binding sites: p53, E-box, CArG, and MPEX, a
recently discovered sequence that recruits both Mycassociated zinc finger protein (MAZ) and Krupple-like
factor 3 (KLF3) [30-33]
Studies involving the systemic delivery of expression
constructs via adeno-associated vector type 6 vectors and
transgenic mice have demonstrated that the MCK 5’enhancer and proximal promoter confer transcriptional
activity several orders of magnitude higher in muscles
containing primarily fast-twitch fibers, such as the tibialis
anterior (TA) and quadriceps, than in muscles containing
slow-twitch fibers, such as the diaphragm and soleus
[22,34,35]. In contrast, the ratio of endogenous MCK
protein levels in fast- to slow-twitch skeletal muscles is
only about 2:1 [5,6,36]. The discrepancy between gene
construct expression levels and endogenous MCK levels
suggests that MCK gene transcription in slow-twitch
fiber types is partially governed by regulatory elements
located elsewhere in the MCK locus. This hypothesis is
supported by previous transgenic tests of an approximately 6.5-kb mouse MCK gene region (-3,349 to
+3,236) that was used to express dystrophin in mdx mice
[37]. While fiber-type expression ratios were not included
in these studies, the detection of dystrophin in all fibers
implied that one or more subregions within the -3,349 to
+3,236 sequence in addition to the 5’-enhancer and proximal promoter play major roles in MCK expression in
slow- and intermediate-twitch muscle fibers.
The MCK gene locus also contains a less well-characterized 1-kb control region called modulatory region 1
(MR1), which resides within the +740 to +1,721 portion
of the gene’s first intron. In previous and very preliminary studies, MR1 was shown to promote muscle-specific
transcription in skeletal myocyte cultures and in transgenic skeletal muscle [19,22,38]. We began the present
study by comparing MR1 sequences among six mammalian species and discovered that MR1 is highly conserved
throughout its sequence. Most of the conserved motifs
are not sequences known to bind muscle gene transcription factors, but a 95-bp subregion within MR1, the
MCK small intronic enhancer (MCK-SIE), was shown to

Page 2 of 19

contain conserved and functional E-box and MEF2 control elements, and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays and ChIP-Seq analyses demonstrate that
the MCK-SIE’s E-box and MEF2 elements interact with
MyoD/myogenin and MEF2, respectively. The MCK-SIE
exhibits much higher transcriptional activity than the
entire MR1 in differentiated skeletal muscle cultures, and
the SIE’s elevated activity is due to removing it from the
repressive effects of highly conserved regions flanking the
MCK-SIE’s 5’- and 3’-borders.
Upon discovering the enhancer-like properties of the
MCK-SIE, and recalling that MCK transgenes containing
only the 5’-enhancer and proximal promoter regions
express relatively poorly in slow- and intermediate-twitch
fibers, we hypothesized that expression of MCK in these
fiber types may require the MCK-SIE-containing MR1
region. We therefore generated transgenic mouse lines
that carry the 6.5-kb MCK regulatory region with or
without MR1. Comparison of transgene fiber-type
expression patterns between these lines supports our
hypothesis. Interestingly, while E-box and MEF2 elements are common to other important regulatory regions
in the MCK-SIE and the rat slow upstream regulatory
element (SURE) region in slow troponin I, the key DNA
control elements that ensure slow-twitch muscle fiber
expression in the SURE region [11,13,14,39], are not present in the MCK-SIE (see Discussion).

Results
Sequence analysis of the intron 1 modulatory region MR1
reveals multiple highly conserved sequence motifs

To begin our characterization of mouse MR1 and its role
in MCK gene expression, a 1,081-bp region (+740 to
+1,721) was aligned to the MR1 regions of five other
mammalian species (human, cat, dog, bovine and pig) to
reveal the presence of potentially functional control elements (Figure 1 and Additional file 1, Figure S1). This
comparison revealed several MR1 subregions containing
many highly conserved sequence motifs, which were then
compared to a transcription factor binding motif library
deposited in the TRANSFAC database [40]. Of particular
interest was a 95-bp region (+901 to +995) that was subsequently proven to exhibit the properties of a transcriptional enhancer (Figure 1). The MCK-SIE exhibits high
sequence conservation and contains four motifs known to
control the transcription of many muscle genes: two core
E-boxes (CAnnTG) [41,42], a MEF2 site and an overlapping MAF half-site and AP-1 site (Figure 1). Among six
mammalian species, 11 to 12 bp of the more 5’-E-boxes
conform to the 14-bp MyoD/myogenin consensus binding
site: [C/G]N[A/G]2 CA[C/G]2 TG[C/T]2 N[C/G] [17] and
10 to 12 bp of the more 3’-E-boxes conform to the consensus binding sequence. Since the dog and mouse E-box
sequences are located further 5’ than in the other species

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

Page 3 of 19

MAF half-site
5’-E-box

3’-E-box

AP1

Shifted 3’-E-boxes

MEF2

Figure 1 Modulatory region 1 (MR1) contains a highly conserved subregion containing known myogenic control element motifs.
Sequence alignment of MR1 reveals a highly conserved 95-bp subregion, muscle creatine kinase (MCK) small intronic enhancer (MCK-SIE), that
contains five putative control elements: an E-box motif pair, a myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) consensus motif and partially overlapping
sequences that match proven MAF half-site and activator protein 1 (AP-1) sequences (see also Additional file 1 Figure S1). Bases that are
identical in all six species (Homo sapiens, Felis catus, Bos taurus, Sus scrota, Canis familiaris and Mus musculus) are shown in black, while bases
conserved between at least three species are shown in gray. The 3’-E-box is present in all six species, but is slightly more 5’ in the mouse and
further 5’ in the dog. Conformation of mouse control element sequences to the MyoD/myogenin and MEF2 consensus sequences are indicated
below the mouse sequence (+ = conforms, - = differs).

(Figure 1), and since the distance between the 5’-E-box
and MEF2 site varies from 16 to 40 bp, the precise distances between the four MCK-SIE control elements may
not be functionally important. The MEF2 motif in all six
species conforms fully to the MEF2 consensus sequence
([G/T][C/T]TA[A/T]3 ATA[A/G][A/C/T]) [43]. In addition, a region located near the 5’-E-box contains partially
overlapping sequences that match perfectly with proven
MAF and AP-1 binding sites [44]. The clustering of these
motifs seems significant, since the combination of a paired
E-box and MEF2/AT-rich motif has been observed in
many muscle promoters, including the MCK 5’-enhancer
[45,46].
MR1 is required for high-level MCK gene expression in
differentiated skeletal muscle cells, and it contains a
highly active SIE

To address the function of MR1 in MCK gene expression,
the MR1 region was deleted from the entire 6.5-kb MCK
sequence (Figure 2A, constructs 1 and 2 [6.5MCKCAT
and 6.5MCKΔMR1-CAT]), and the effect of the deletion
was examined in differentiated skeletal myocytes (MM14).
To gauge the relative change in transcriptional activity
caused by the loss of MR1, we compared 6.5MCKΔMR1CAT to a construct that contains a deletion of the wellcharacterized MCK 5’-enhancer (Figure 2A, construct 4
[6.5MCKΔEnh-CAT]). Expression from each test plasmid
was normalized to the activity of a muscle-specific MCK

enhancer-driven alkaline phosphatase (AP) reference
construct.
Deletion of MR1 results in an approximately fivefold
lower transcriptional activity in differentiated MM14 cultures than that produced by the entire 6.5-kb MCK gene
construct (P < 0.01) (Figure 2A, constructs 1 and 2),
whereas deletion of the MCK gene 5’-enhancer results in
a greater than 10-fold decrease (P < 0.01).
To determine whether the MCK-SIE is critical for
MCK gene transcription, it was deleted from the
6.5MCK-CAT construct and the resulting 6.5MCKΔSIECAT was tested in differentiated skeletal muscle cultures
(Figure 2A, construct 3). The deleted construct exhibited
a 60% decrease in transcriptional activity in skeletal myocytes (P < 0.01), demonstrating that, in the context of the
6.5-kb MCK genomic sequence, the MCK-SIE is likely
responsible for much of the positive transcriptional activity of MR1.
MCK-SIE is active in differentiated skeletal muscle cells
when placed 5’ of the MCK proximal promoter

To facilitate further analysis of MR1 regulatory functions,
subsequent studies were carried out in the context of MR1
placed 5’ of the highly conserved MCK proximal promoter
(Figure 2B (MR1-proximal promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyl transferase (MR1-PP-CAT)), construct 2). This test
construct frees MR1 from transcriptional effects of the
highly active MCK 5’-enhancer, which could lead to

+1721

MR1

+3236

Page 4 of 19

+740

-358

-3349

A

-1256
-1050

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

1
5’-Enh

SIE

PP

ΔMR1
2

3
ΔSIE
4

B

+7

+1721
-358

MR1

PP
+7

+998
-358

MR1B

SIE
SI
E

PP

5’Enh

PP

+7

-1256

4

5

+7

+1721
-358

+998
+998

PP

MR1B

+904

3

+904

+740

SIE

-1050
-358

2

+904

PP
+740

1

+7

-358

Δ5’-Enh

Figure 2 MR1 is a positive regulator of MCK transcription. (A) MM14 skeletal myocytes were cotransfected with an MCK enhancer-alkaline
phosphatase (AP) reference plasmid and test gene plasmids containing the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) reporter gene driven by
the full-length 6.5-kb MCK construct (6.5MCK-CAT, #1), the 6.5-kb construct with MR1 deleted (6.5MCKΔMR1-CAT, #2), the 6.5-kb construct with
the MCK-SIE deleted (6.5MCKΔSIE-CAT, #3) or, for comparison, the 6.5-kb construct with the 5’-enhancer deleted (6.5MCKΔEnh-CAT, #4). Test
construct activities are represented as the average values of relative CAT over AP activity normalized to the activity of 6.5MCK-CAT. (B) MR1 is
composed of regions that promote transcription in MM14 cultures. Constructs containing the “full-length” MR1 (MR1-PP-CAT, #2), a construct
lacking the MCK-SIE (MR1ΔSIE-PP-CAT, #3) or just the MCK-SIE (SIE-PP-CAT, #4) were generated to test the functional activity of the MCK-SIE.
Activities of these test constructs were normalized to activities of the proximal promoter alone (PP-CAT, #1). The activity of the 5’-enhancer
(5’Enh-PP-CAT, #5) is provided for comparison. Each experiment was performed in at least twelve plates in three separate experiments, and
activities are averages of those experiments. Error bars represent ±1 standard deviation.

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

dampened effects of mutations or deletions within MR1.
Importantly, it also avoids potential confounding effects
due to cotranscriptional or posttranscriptional events,
such as altered splicing efficiency or altered elongation
efficiency, which could occur in conjunction with testing
MR1 function within its 3’ intron 1 location in the native
MCK gene. In agreement with the decreased activity
observed when MR1 is deleted from the 6.5-kb sequence
(Figure 2A), MR1-PP-CAT exhibits transcriptional activity
in skeletal myocyte cultures that is approximately threefold greater than that of the proximal promoter alone
(Figure 2B, compare constructs 1 and 2). MR1’s positive
activity when moved 5’ of the transcription start site also
indicates that it has the properties of an enhancer.
Since the MCK-SIE had the greatest potential for
explaining the positive activity of MR1 (Figure 2A), we
tested its capacity to act as an enhancer independent of
other MR1 sequences. Deletion of the MCK-SIE from
MR1 reduces transcriptional activity to a level similar to
that of the proximal promoter alone (Figure 2B, construct 3). Conversely, when the MCK-SIE was placed
directly upstream of the proximal promoter (Figure 2B,
MCK-SIE-PP-CAT, construct 4), a greater than 10-fold
increase in transcription (P < 0.01) relative to the MR1PP-CAT construct was observed. In fact, the MCK-SIE
synergizes with the proximal promoter, as does the 5’enhancer (Figure 2B, 5’Enh-PP-CAT, construct 5).
Two E-box motifs and a MEF2 site are required for full
transcriptional activity of the MCK-SIE in skeletal
myocytes

To determine the transcriptional activity of the MCK-SIE
conserved binding site motifs, the 5’- and 3’-E-boxes and
MEF2 motifs were subjected to both deletion and mutation analyses (Figure 3A) in the context of the MCK-SIEPP-CAT construct (Figure 2B, construct 4). In skeletal
myocytes, deletion or mutations of the 5’-E-box resulted
in approximately 30% reductions in transcriptional activity,
whereas deletion or mutations of the 3’-E-box resulted in
approximately 65% reductions (Figure 3B), and deletion of
both E-boxes caused a nearly 90% decrease in transcriptional activity. Deletion or mutations of the single MEF2
consensus motif also caused an approximately 90% reduction in transcriptional activity (Figure 3B). These data
imply that both E-boxes contribute to the MCK-SIE’s
transcriptional activity, but that the 3’-E-box provides
most of the activity. Since mutation of the MEF2 site leads
to about the same loss in activity as mutation of both Eboxes, and since E-box binding factors are known to
synergize with MEF2, it may be that the bulk of the MCKSIE’s transcription activity is derived from a single highly
active MEF2-MyoD/myogenin complex.
The possibility that other control elements may reside
in the MCK-SIE is raised by the highly conserved

Page 5 of 19

TGCTGAC[T/g]T[G/a]G sequence that begins several
base pairs 3’ of the 5’-E-box (Figure 1). The TGCTGA
portion is a perfect match to MAF half-sites [47,48],
and the TGACTTA sequence in the mouse MCK-SIE is
a perfect match to a fully functional noncanonical AP-1
site [49,50]. Deletion and mutations that should have
abolished the binding of either MAF or AP-1 (Figure
3A) had little to no effect on transcriptional activity
(Figure 3B). This does not negate the possibility that
MAF and/or AP-1 interactions within the MCK-SIE
region play a role in MCK gene expression in vivo, but
such interactions are not important for the MCK-SIE’s
transcriptional activity in differentiating skeletal myocyte
cultures.
Both MyoD and myogenin bind to the MCK-SIE in
differentiated skeletal myocytes

On the basis of the rapid onset of MCK expression during differentiation, the transcriptional activity of MR1 in
myocyte cultures (Figure 2B) and the presence of two
active E-box elements within this region (Figure 3B), it
seemed likely that MyoD and/or myogenin associate
with the MCK-SIE. ChIP analysis of differentiating skeletal myocyte cultures was thus employed to determine
whether the E-box pair recruits MyoD, myogenin or
both MRFs in vivo.
One caveat of ChIP data interpretation is that control
elements cannot be distinguished with respect to transcription factor binding when they bind the same factors
and are close enough that both sites will be present on
many of the same randomly sheared chromatin fragments.
This would certainly be the case for the MCK-SIE E-box
pair, where the separation is only 46 bp. Thus, primers
that flank the entire MCK-SIE were used to detect MyoDand myogenin-immunoprecipitated chromatin. This
issue is also pertinent to ChIP discrimination between
occupancy of the MCK-SIE E-box pair and other MCK
E-boxes with proven transcriptional activity. These are
centered at -1,175 and +1,152 within the MCK 5’-enhancer and at -246 within the proximal promoter [26]. Therefore, in addition to using primers that amplify the
MCK-SIE, primers for the 5’-enhancer were used as a
positive control, since this region is known to contain two
functional E-boxes that bind MyoD and myogenin
[17,51,52].
Three “negative” control primers were used to rule out
the possibility of cross-enrichment from factors binding
to non-MCK-SIE regions (Figure 4A). The first “negative”
control primer set amplifies intron 1 of the MAP/microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 4 (Mark4) gene. This
sequence is roughly 40-kb 3’ of the MCK-SIE on mouse
chromosome 19 and is within a 1-kb region that entirely
lacks the core E-box binding motif CAnnTG; thus it
should serve as a truly negative control for MyoD and

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

Page 6 of 19

A
5’-E-box
Consensus

3’-E-box

[C/G]N[A/G]2CA[C/G]2TG[C/T]2N[C/G]

Mus Wt

ccAGccCACCTGTCCCaa

ggAGGACAGGTGGCAGtg

Del

******------******

******------******

M1

******TG**CA******

******TG**CA******

M2

******GT**AC******

******GT**AC******

MAF half-site
Consensus

TGCTGA

AP1
TGACTTA

MEF2
[G/T][C/T]TA[A/T]3ATA[A/G][A/C/T
]

Mus Wt

AATGCTGACTTAGT

CATCTAAAAATAGCCA

Del

**-------*****

**----------****

M1

**CATCAGT*****

****CG****CG****

M2

**ACGACTG*****

****AT****AT****

B

MCK-SIE

Relative C
CAT activity

5’-E-Box

MAF/AP
1

3’-E-Box

MEF2

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
08
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Figure 3 Two E-boxes and a MEF2 site are critical for activity of the MCK-SIE. (A) Deletions and mutations tested in MCK-SIE. The currently
accepted consensus motifs for the E-box and MEF2 motifs are shown. Proven MAF half-site and AP-1 control element sequences are also
indicated. Stars indicate sequences that were experimentally proven to recruit the labeled factors and do not represent consensus binding
motifs. The wild-type mouse sequences of these elements within the MCK-SIE (Wt), the deletion sequences (Del) and two mutation sequences
(M1 and M2) used in this study are shown on successive lines. Base pair deletions are indicated as hyphens, point mutations are shown as
changed bases and asterisks indicate unchanged bases. (B) Mutational analysis of control elements within the MCK-SIE. The E-box, MAF/AP-1 and
MEF2 motifs in the MCK-proximal promoter-CAT (MCK-SIE-PP-CAT) (diagrammed with elements in their relative positions) were deleted (gray
bars) or subjected to two mutations (white bars) within core bases (Figure 2A) and were tested for transcriptional activity in differentiated MM14
skeletal myocyte cultures. The relative activities of these constructs were compared to the MCK-SIE-PP-CAT construct (scaled to equal 1.0) and
PP-CAT alone (black bars). Each construct was tested in twelve plates in three separate experiments, and activities shown are averages of those
experiments. Error bars represent ±1 standard deviation.

Enh
-3000 -2000

+7

+740

+1721

Page 7 of 19

-358

A

-1050

-1256

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

PP

-1000

+1

5’-Enh

+2000

+1000

Ex1/In1

+3000

SIE

Ex2

M4
Mark4
33.7-kb

In1

C

B

1
5’-Enh

D

PP
Ex1

2

MR1
SIE

3

4

5

6

7

Ex2

MEF2 80%
MEF2 85%

MEF2 ab1
0
ab1 ERANGE
ab1 MACS

1.5

ab2 ERANGE
ab2 MACS

1.5

MEF2 ab2

0

ChIP Signal (rpm)

1.5

MEF2 100%

Control
Mammalian
cons.

0

Figure 4 MyoD and myogenin are enriched at the MCK-SIE in skeletal myocytes. (A) Diagram of the 6.5-kb MCK regulatory region with the
three known active regulatory regions: the 5’-enhancer, PP, MR1 (white boxes), the MCK-SIE (light gray box) exons 1 and 2 (black boxes) and
other regions (gray), including the 33.7-kb Mark4 gene (located approximately 40 kb 3’ of the MCK-SIE and transcribed in the opposite direction).
E-box CAnnTG core motifs (arrowheads) occur throughout the 6.5-kb sequence. Among the thirty-five total E-boxes are two functional E-boxes
within the 5’-enhancer, one functional E-box within the proximal promoter and two E-box motifs within the MCK-SIE (longer arrows). The less
frequent MEF2 motifs (full diamonds) are found only in the 5’-enhancer and MCK-SIE and as a possible nonconsensus MEF2 site (open diamond)
in the proximal promoter. The chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) primer pairs (black lines) that span the 5’-enhancer sequence were used as
positive controls for MyoD and myogenin binding to functional E-boxes. Negative controls consist of genomic regions containing either no core
E-box motifs (region within the Mark4 intron 1 (M4, dagger)) or core E-box motifs with no proven transcriptional function (MCK gene exon 1/
intron 1 boundary (two E-boxes) and exon 2 (one E-box); see Results, section-5). (B) MyoD and myogenin bind MCK gene E-box motifs. ChIP
analyses using antibodies for MyoD, myogenin, MEF2 and control immunoglobulin G (IgG) were performed using chromatin from differentiated
MM14 cell myocytes. The graph shows data from one of three ChIP experiments that is representative of the enrichment detected at each
position by antibodies to myogenin (black bars), MyoD (gray bars) or MEF2 (white bars) over nonspecific rabbit IgG as determined by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) assay. Error bars represent ±1 standard deviation of triplicate samples. (C) Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) of MEF2 binding to the MCK-SIE MEF2 control element. Nuclear extracts from differentiated MM14 cultures were incubated
with a 32P-labeled probe containing the MCK-SIE-MEF2 sequence with no competitor (lane 1), wild-type MEF2 competitor (lane 2), two different
mutant MEF2 competitors (lanes 3 and 4), pan-MEF2 antibodies (lane 5), transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1)-specific antibodies (lane 6) or
nonspecific rabbit IgG (lane 7). Arrows indicate the MEF2-containing complex and free probe. (D) MEF2 ChIP-Seq occupancy at the 6.5-kb MCK
regulatory region in differentiated C2 C12 cells shows that MEF2 is present at all three control regions. The 6.5-kb region is shown in schematic at
the top (5’-enhancer, proximal promoter and MR1 are shown in white; MCK-SIE is shown in gray). Sequences that match the MEF2 canonical
motif (CTAWWWWTAG) at the 80%, 85% and 100% thresholds are mapped throughout the 6.5-kb region. The sequenced and mapped ChIP
signals (reads per million (rpm)) for the two pan-MEF2 antibodies 1 and 2 and the control (input DNA) are indicated as black histograms (scale
shown at the right). Two different ChIP-Seq region finders (Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq data and Enhanced Read Analysis of Gene
Expression) define the sequence range in which MEF2 is predicted to bind (see Materials and methods), and these are shown below each signal
track as black bars. Conservation across the regions is shown from the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Genome Browser plot of
phastCons scores for the 20 default placental mammals.

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

myogenin occupancy of the MCK-SIE. The second “negative” control primer pair spans the exon 1/intron 1
boundary and amplifies a 217-bp region located 690 bp
upstream of the MCK-SIE, 242 bp downstream of the
active promoter E-box and 1,149 bp downstream of the
active MCK 5’-enhancer right E-box (Figure 4A). The
mouse exon 1/intron 1 boundary region contains two
nonconserved E-boxes and also has four nonconserved
E-boxes located 52, 67, 97 and 310 bp downstream of its
3’-border. None of these E-boxes have been tested for
transcriptional activity, but they are likely to be transcriptionally inactive as they are not conserved in other mammals. Nevertheless, this would not preclude their
occupancy by MyoD/myogenin or their function in
mouse muscle cells; thus examining this subregion was
also of interest in itself. The third “negative” control primer pair spans a 209-bp region starting at exon 2 (Figure
4A). It contains one nonconserved E-box and two other
nonconserved E-boxes which are located 36 bp and 638
bp upstream of its 5’-border. MyoD/myogenin binding to
any of these exon 2 E-boxes would thus cause an enrichment that would be detected by the exon 2 primer pair.
Conversely, if MyoD and/or myogenin occupy the MCKSIE, and if the negative control regions are not occupied,
enrichments of the MCK-SIE and of the MCK 5’-enhancer (positive control) should be significantly greater than
those at any of the negative control regions.
Accordingly, ChIP analysis showed that antibodies for
both MyoD and myogenin enriched the 5’-enhancer several-fold over nonspecific immunoglobulin G (IgG) (Figure
4B), and both antibodies also enriched the MCK-SIE
region. In contrast, neither antibody enriched the exon 2
and Mark4 genomic regions significantly above nonspecific IgG. This demonstrates that MyoD and myogenin bind
neither to nonconserved, and presumably nonfunctional,
E-box motifs in the regions surrounding the MCK-SIE,
nor to chromatin regions that lack E-boxes. There is a
slight enrichment at the exon 1/intron 1 boundary. However, this could be caused by cross-enrichment due to
MyoD and myogenin occupancy of the nearby and functional proximal promoter E-box [26], the 5’-enhancer, the
MCK-SIE or any combination of these regions. Nevertheless, the enrichment due to MyoD and myogenin occupancy of the MCK-SIE region is probably not due to
spurious enrichment from amplification of longer sheared
chromatin fragments that include the 5’-enhancer or proximal promoter, because the enrichment signal from the
exon 1/intron 1 region would then be higher than that of
the MCK-SIE, and it is not. MyoD and myogenin thus
occupy proven functional E-boxes in the 5’-enhancer and
the MCK-SIE in differentiated skeletal myocytes, and they
do not appear to occupy E-boxes in regions flanking the
MCK-SIE. An additional consistent observation in these
studies is that myogenin exhibits an approximately twofold

Page 8 of 19

higher occupancy of the 5’-enhancer than MyoD, whereas
both MRFs exhibit equivalent occupancy of the MCK-SIE.
MEF2 interaction with the MCK-SIE in vitro and in vivo

As demonstrated in Figure 3B, the MEF2 site contributes
strongly to the transcriptional activity of the MCK-SIE
region. Since members of the MEF2 superfamily of transcription factors (MEF2A, MEF2B, MEF2C and MEF2D)
[53] have previously been shown to play important roles
in muscle gene transcription, we asked whether any of the
MEF2 family members were associated with the MCK-SIE
in vivo. In initial ChIP analysis, several different MEF2
antibodies unexpectedly failed to enrich the MCK-SIE or
even the 5’-enhancer (Figure 4B) (see Discussion). Furthermore, antibodies to octamer binding protein 1 (Oct-1) and
transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1), two factors
known to transactivate AT-rich motifs in muscle promoters [54,55] and known to be present in myocyte cultures,
also failed to precipitate the MCK-SIE when used in ChIP
assays (data not shown). This led us to question whether
MEF2 in our cell culture model was detectable by
immunoassays.
To establish that differentiated MM14 cultures contain
MEF2 protein, that MEF2 protein is recognized by the
pan-MEF2 antibody used in our ChIP study and that
MEF2 can indeed bind to the MCK-SIE, we analyzed
MEF2 binding by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA). 32P-labeled MCK-SIE-MEF2 sequence probes
were generated and incubated with MM14 nuclear
extracts. Gel electrophoresis with the MCK-SIE-MEF2
probe revealed a single intense band, which implied that
either a single or multiple factors of similar size were
bound to the MCK-SIE-MEF2 probe (Figure 4C). Wildtype competitor oligonucleotides completely abolished
this band, whereas two oligonucleotides containing different mutations of the MCK-SIE-MEF2 motif had no
effect. Furthermore, a partial supershift of the band was
caused when the probe was incubated with nuclear
extracts in the presence of a pan-MEF2 antibody, suggesting that the band of interest contains MEF2. The partial shift likely occurred because the entire complex
might not be fully and stably accessible by the antibody
to produce a consistent supershift. These results argue
that MEF2 proteins are present in the nuclei of differentiated MM14 muscle cells, that MEF2 is capable of binding to the MCK-SIE probe and that MEF2 antibodies,
which did not precipitate MCK-SIE-enriched sequences
in ChIP analysis, were capable of binding MEF2 oligonucleotide complexes in EMSA studies of similarly differentiated muscle cultures.
Since TEF-1 also binds AT-rich motifs in muscle gene
promoters and has been shown to bind the MCK 5’-enhancer [55], we asked whether TEF-1 binds to the MEF2
sequence in the MCK-SIE. Incubation with TEF-1-specific

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

antisera did not supershift or abolish the “MEF2 complex,”
whereas it did supershift a TEF-1-specific complex (data
not shown). A nonspecific IgG also failed to alter the mobility or intensity of the MEF2-specific band (Figure 4C). The
absence of detectable MEF2 binding in our ChIP study
(Figure 4) is therefore not likely to be due to competitive
in vivo occupancy of the MEF2 site by TEF-1.
As MEF2 occupancy of the MCK 5’-enhancer has
been reported in mouse embryos and in the B22 myogenic cell line following Brahma-related gene 1 and
MyoD induction [42], it seemed possible that unknown
differences between the myogenic states of the different
cell culture models might affect the ability to detect
MEF2 occupancy in the MCK locus. Fortunately, ChIPSeq analyses aimed toward identifying genome-wide
MEF2 binding events in terminally differentiated muscle
cells were being performed in parallel studies by the
Wold group (personal communication, B. Wold). We
therefore collaborated in analyzing the MCK locus.
Initial ChIP-Seq experiments in C2 C12 skeletal muscle
cells also failed to detect significant MEF2 ChIP signals
at the MCK locus or at several other MEF2 target loci,
thus suggesting that MEF2 might be inefficiently crosslinked to DNA under standard ChIP conditions. Since
members of the MADS family of transcription factors,
of which MEF2 is a member, often depend significantly
on protein-protein interactions with other DNA-bound
factors, and since the MyoD family of factors interact
with MEF2 through protein-protein interactions [56], we
reasoned that chromatin fixation conditions designed to
more efficiently stabilize these interactions might
improve ChIP detection (see Materials and methods).
Following the modified fixation procedure, a standard
sequencing readout from this material revealed distinct
MEF2 signals at the MCK-SIE and at the 5’-enhancer
(Figure 4D). These signals were very similar in biological
replicate chromatin samples that had been immunoenriched by MEF2 antibodies directed against nonoverlapping epitopes (data not shown). Enrichment over
background was more than 10-fold at both sites (P < 2e13 for Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq data (MACS)
and P < 8e-7 for Enhanced Read Analysis of Gene
Expression (ERANGE)), and no other site in the MCK
locus was significantly occupied, except for the dispersed
signals observed throughout the MCK proximal promoter sequence. Enrichment of MEF2 within the proximal
promoter, which contains no sequences that match the
canonical motif (although one with 80% similarity is present (Figure 4D)), could be due to any of several possibilities (see Discussion). The observed MEF2 ChIP-Seq
peaks overlap regions of high-sequence conservation
among placental mammals at the 5’-enhancer, the proximal promoter and the MCK-SIE regions as determined
by phastCons scores, which predict evolutionarily

Page 9 of 19

conserved elements using a 30-species vertebrate
sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree information
(Figure 4D).
MR1 contributes to MCK gene expression in slow- and
intermediate-twitch fiber types in adult mice

Previous investigations of MCK gene regulation in transgenic mice have suggested that the 5’-enhancer and the
proximal promoter are highly active in anatomical muscles
with predominantly fast-twitch fibers (type IIb and type
IId (also called type IIx or type IId/x fibers)) such as the
TA muscle. Conversely, the activity levels of the 5’-enhancer and the proximal promoter were at least 10-fold lower
in muscles from the same transgenic mice that contained
a high proportion of slow-twitch muscle fibers (type I) or
intermediate-twitch muscle fibers (type IIa) such as soleus
[26,27]. Since the endogenous levels of MCK protein in
fast vs. slow muscle fibers differ by only about threefold
[5], the previous transgenic studies implied that regulatory
regions in addition to the 5’-enhancer and proximal promoter are required for full MCK expression in slow-twitch
fibers. This led us to hypothesize that MR1 may contribute
to MCK expression in type I and type IIa fiber types. To
test this possibility, we generated transgenic mouse lines
containing either the 6.5-kb MCK genomic region driving
the b-galactosidase (b-gal) reporter gene (6.5MCK-b-gal)
or the same construct lacking MR1 (6.5MCKΔMR1-b-gal).
Adult transgenic mice were killed, and TA and soleus
muscles were dissected and cryosectioned. Sections were
then X-gal-stained to detect b-gal transgene expression.
To identify the specific fiber types expressing b-gal, we
adopted a method of visualizing the four distinct fiber
types on a single sample section by immunofluorescence
tagging of myosin heavy chain (MYHC) isotypes as
described by Gregorevic et al. [57] (see Discussion for
rationale of MYHC vs. histochemical fiber typing). Sister
sections were thus immunostained with monoclonal antibodies that recognize the MYHC isoforms found in slowtwitch muscle fibers (type I), intermediate-twitch muscle
fibers (type IIa) and fast-twitch muscle fibers (type IIb)
(Figures 5A and 5B). Type IId fibers were identified based
on the absence of immunostaining with all of the abovementioned monoclonal antibodies [58]. It should be noted
that the distribution of fiber twitch types assessed by
MYHC isotype expression within the anatomical muscles
examined among different transgenic lines was qualitatively similar (data not shown). Thus introduction of the
transgenes themselves did not alter the distribution of
fiber twitch types. Whether expression levels of the wildtype 6.5MCK-b-gal and 6.5MCKDMR1-b-gal transgenes
are differentially affected by the metabolic states within
individual muscle fiber types remains to be determined.
Comparisons between immunostained and X-gal-stained
sister cross-sections of the TA and soleus muscles of mice

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

Page 10 of 19

Figure 5 MR1 is important for MCK expression in slow- and intermediate-twitch skeletal muscle fibers. (A) Sister sections of tibialis
anterior (TA) and soleus muscles from mice carrying the 6.5MCK-b-gal or the 6.5ΔMR1-b-gal transgenes, immunostained with myosin heavy
chain (MYHC) fiber type-specific monoclonal antibodies (panels 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11) or activity stained for b-galactosidase (b-gal) expression
(panels 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12). Antibodies for different isoforms and fluorophore-labeled secondary antibodies mark the fiber types as follows:
slow-twitch fibers (type I), blue; intermediate-twitch fibers (type IIa), red; and fast-twitch fibers (types IIb and IId), green and black, respectively
(the black appearance of type IId fibers is due to the absence of any type 1, IIa, or IIb antibody binding). Purplish fibers contain both types I and
IIa MYHCs (see Figure 5B, soleus), and fibers with weak red or green staining probably contain mixtures of type IId (no color) + type IIa or type
IId + type IIb, respectively (see Figure 5B, TA). Sister sections were stained for b-gal expression (false colored gold). Bars are 0.5 mm. (B) Higher
magnification sections indicate differences in b-gal expression between fiber types in transgenic lines with and without MR1. Individual fibers,
outlined in white or black to show relative differences in X-gal staining between fiber types (type I = K, L and O; type IIa = C, D, G, I and J; type
IId = B, F, H and M; and type IIb = A and E), can be cross-referenced to b-gal expression in sister sections.

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

carrying the 6.5MCK-b-gal transgene showed b-gal
expression in all fiber types, but there was a clear difference in the distribution of X-gal staining intensities among
fiber types in the predominantly fast-twitch TA muscles
compared to the predominantly slow- and intermediatetwitch soleus muscles (Figure 5A, panels 2 and 4). As a
general rule in TA muscle, type IIb fibers exhibit greater
X-gal staining than type IId fibers, and type IIa fibers exhibit the least staining (Figure 5B, TA X-gal panel, fiber
staining intensities: A > B > C), whereas in the soleus, type
IId and type IIa fibers exhibit the greatest X-gal staining
and type I fibers stain the least (Figure 5B, soleus X-gal
panel, fiber staining intensities: H > I > K).
Interestingly, fibers that show similar MYHC expression
can also vary in X-gal staining intensity (compare TA
fibers C with D and soleus fibers I with J and K with L).
However, the overall trend found within the same transgenic mouse and even within the same anatomical muscles
is that the 6.5MCK-b-gal transgene is more active in individual fast-twitch muscle fibers than in intermediate- and
slow-twitch fibers. These b-gal/fiber-type staining patterns
were consistent among all mice tested (n = 7) in the single
6.5MCK-b-gal-transgenic line.
Four transgenic mouse lines that contain the 6.5-kb regulatory region lacking MR1 (6.5MCKΔMR1-b-gal) exhibit
a strikingly different b-gal expression profile. In the TA,
there is weaker relative X-gal staining in regions of the TA
that are dominated by type IIa fibers (Figure 5A; compare
panels 5, 6, 9 and 10 with panels 1 and 2). At higher magnification, this difference can be directly correlated with
low levels of X-gal staining in type IIa fibers (Figure 5B,
TA panels, fiber G and others) and reduced staining in
some type IId fibers (Figure 5B, TA panels, fiber F and
others). However, in the same TA muscle, type IIb fibers
(Figure 5, fiber E and others) stain intensely for b-gal. In
the soleus muscle, X-gal staining is relatively weak
throughout the section in comparison to similarly treated
TA muscle sections (Figure 5A, panels 7, 8, 11 and 12 vs.
panels 3 and 4). At higher magnification, both type I
and type IIa muscle fibers show very weak X-gal staining
(Figure 5B, soleus panels, fibers N, O and others), while
the few fibers that express b-gal are type IId fibers (Figure
5B, soleus panels, fiber M and others). These observations
were consistent among all mice tested (n = 7) from the
four independent 6.5MCKΔMR1-b-gal-transgenic lines.
This suggests that MR1 contributes strongly to the expression of MCK in type I and type IIa fibers, and perhaps
weakly in type IId fibers, but that MR1 is not absolutely
required for high-level MCK expression in type IIb fibers.
Expression levels from the wild-type 6.5MCK-b-gal
and 6.5MCKΔMR1-b-gal transgenes were also examined
in protein extracts from entire anatomical muscles containing different proportions of fast and slow fibers.
Extensor digitorum longus (EDL) muscles (primarily

Page 11 of 19

fast-twitch fibers) and soleus muscles (primarily slowtwitch and intermediate-twitch fibers) were dissected
from four or five mice each from the most highly active
lines carrying each transgene, and b-gal specific activity
was determined. In all mice from each transgenic line,
EDL extract activities were significantly higher than
those from the soleus. However, because absolute
expression levels typically differ between individual
transgenic mouse lines, owing to variable transgene integration sites and copy numbers [25-27], the b-gal-specific activity levels were then normalized for each line by
dividing the EDL levels by the soleus levels. The ratio
was three times higher in extracts from the
6.5MCKΔMR1-b-gal-transgenic mice (data not shown).
In combination with the much lower transgene expression levels observed within the individual type I and
type IIa fibers of 6.5MCKΔMR1-b-gal-transgenic mice
(Figure 5), the quantitative data are consistent with the
conclusion that the MR1 region plays a relatively more
important role in MCK gene expression in muscles containing slow and intermediate fiber types than in muscles containing primarily fast fibers.

Discussion
In this study, we characterized the MCK intronic region
MR1 [22] and found that it contains regulatory elements
that provide positive transcriptional activity in skeletal
muscle cells. Our results argue that MR1 is crucial for the
“full” activity of the 6.5-kb MCK regulatory region in differentiated skeletal muscle cultures (Figure 2), and they
recapitulate those of an earlier study that demonstrated
MR1’s ability to drive transcriptional activity in a positionindependent manner [22]. Additionally, we found that
MR1’s positive transcriptional activity is conveyed by a
highly conserved 95-bp sequence designated the MCK-SIE
(Figure 1). When separated from its flanking MR1 regions,
the MCK-SIE synergizes with the proximal promoter to
provide transcriptional activity equivalent to that of the
highly active MCK 5’-enhancer (Figure 2B) [22]. Interestingly, however, the MCK-SIE requires the 358-bp MCK
proximal promoter for its activity, whereas the 5’-enhancer
exhibits high activity with the 80-bp MCK basal promoter
as well as with the proximal promoter (data not shown).
The MCK-SIE’s high activity is largely due to the paired
E-box and MEF2 motifs, since their mutation or deletion
caused a significant decrease in transcription, while mutations affecting the AP-1/MAF half-site motifs did not
(Figure 3). Although a TRANSFAC database search of
the mouse MCK gene’s 1-kb MR1 region revealed many
possible transcription factor binding motifs, and although
many of these overlap with conserved sequences (Additional file 1, Figure S1), deletion of other conserved regions
did not disclose a correlation with positive transcriptional
activity (Additional file 1, Figure S1, and Additional file 2,

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

Figure S2). While it is also possible that some aspects of
MR1-mediated MCK expression are regulated by nonconserved control elements, as we have shown is the case for
Six4/5 and MAZ elements in the 5’-enhancer and proximal
promoter [24,32] and as has been shown for other genes
[59,60], pursuing this possibility did not seem as immediately fruitful as investigating the SIE’s E-box and MEF2
mechanisms. Nevertheless, our studies do not preclude
positive transcriptional contributions from other MR1 and
SIE sequences.
Several ChIP studies have indicated the ability of Ebox motifs in skeletal muscle gene promoters to recruit
the basic helix-loop-helix factors MyoD and myogenin,
and EMSA studies have proven E-box binding by Myf5,
MRF4 and E12/47 as well [45]. Analysis of early phases
of muscle differentiation also suggests that MyoD may
bind muscle gene promoters as a “pioneering” factor [3]
that facilitates histone acetylation [45]. As differentiation
progresses, MyoD is then replaced by myogenin at the
same regulatory regions. This was shown to be the case
for the MCK 5’-enhancer in E10.5 to E14.5 mouse limb
muscles [51]. This transition may be facilitated by
decreased levels of Suv39h1, a histone H3 lysine 9-specific methyltransferase that represses myogenin expression
via histone and MyoD methylation [61]. However, in
our ChIP studies of MM14 muscle cultures harvested
four days after the initiation of differentiation, a time at
which 90% of the myonuclei are in MYHC-positive cells,
both MyoD and myogenin were detected at the 5’enhancer as well as at the MCK-SIE (Figure 4B). These
data demonstrate that a rapid and complete MyoD-tomyogenin binding transition is not observed in the cell
culture system used in our study. However, it may be
informative that we found the ratio of myogenin to
MyoD enrichment of the 5’-enhancer to be consistently
greater than that of the MCK-SIE, where about equal
ChIP signals were detected. The biological relevance of
this difference in enrichment is not yet understood.
Our MCK-SIE ChIP data for differentiating MM14 cultures are generally consistent with ChIP-Seq studies that
have probed the entire genomic occupancy of MyoD in
differentiated mouse C2 C12 myocytes [52] in that both
studies detected enriched MyoD occupancy of the MCKSIE, proximal promoter and 5’-enhancer. Our data are
also consistent with a temporal ChIP-Seq data set showing
no MyoD or myogenin occupancy of the MCK-SIE in
replicating C2 C12 cells and highly enriched occupancy by
both factors in fully differentiated cultures (A. Kirilusha,
G. Kwan and B. Wold, personal communication). On the
basis of our mutagenesis studies, the MCK-SIE 3’-E-box
appears to be the more active site, since its deletion caused
a greater reduction of transcriptional activity (Figure 3B).
This might be attributed to the mouse 3’-E-box’s being a
closer match (12 of 14 bp) to the overall E-box consensus

Page 12 of 19

sequence than the 5’-E-box (11 of 14 bp) (Figure 1C).
Alternatively, the closer proximity of the 3’-E-box than the
5’-E-box to the MEF2 site may improve the synergistic
interactions between MyoD/myogenin and MEF2 and
may lead to greater activity of the 3’-E-box In either case,
it is not known whether one or both E-boxes preferentially
associate with MyoD or myogenin in vivo or whether this
might change under different physiological conditions.
Ideally, this question could be addressed by ChIP analysis,
but because the two E-boxes are only 46 bp apart, their
individual occupancies cannot be definitively resolved
on the basis of currently available data. Our MCK locusspecific MyoD/myogenin ChIP data also concur with the
global ChIP-Seq MyoD data [52] with respect to occupied
and unoccupied E-boxes in the sense that the strongly preferred sequence for occupied E-boxes in differentiated C2
C12 muscle cultures is CAG/cCTG. All of the occupied
E-boxes in our study conformed to this sequence, and no
unoccupied E-boxes within the MCK regions studied had
the preferred sequence. It is also worth emphasizing that
even though dozens of CAnnTG consensus E-boxes
occurred within the 6.5-kb MCK genomic region, and
while some of these occurred in clusters of two or three
E-boxes within a 100-bp region (Figure 4A), neither our
study nor the more comprehensive global ChIP-Seq study
(personal communication, B. Wold). detected significant
MyoD binding at the vast majority of these E-boxes. This
indicates that the mere presence of one or more nearby
E-box motifs within transcriptionally active muscle gene
promoters does not imply their functionality. Conversely,
since our laboratory has proven the function of E-boxes
within all three of the MCK genomic regions in which
ChIP and ChIP-Seq detected significant MyoD binding,
the data suggest that the detection of reproducible MyoD
ChIP peaks of this type in muscle genes is strongly indicative of transcriptional function of the associated E-boxes.
While the ChIP studies implicate MyoD and myogenin as
binding to the MCK-SIE and 5’-enhancer E-boxes, it is
important to point out that cell culture studies are not
necessarily indicative of the MRFs that occupy these
E-boxes in adult skeletal muscle fibers. In the latter context, it is likely that these E-boxes may be primarily occupied by MRF4, since it appears to be the predominant
MRF in adult skeletal muscle [62,63].
The MCK-SIE MEF2 site is also critical for transcriptional activity, as removing this sequence is even more deleterious than removing the individual E-boxes (Figure 3B).
Consistent with this, we found that MEF2 binds this
sequence in vitro by EMSA using nuclear extract from
MM14 myocytes (Figure 4C). Furthermore, ChIP-Seq studies of differentiated C2 C12 muscle cells identified enriched
MEF2 occupancy at both the 5’-enhancer and the MCK-SIE
(Figure 4D), and the fold enrichments at these sites relative
to the negative control were more than 10-fold. A diffuse

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

signal over the proximal promoter region was also
observed, and this signal may reflect either that binding to
a nonconsensus MEF2 site or that MEF2 association with
MyoD/myogenin bound to a proximal promoter E-box
located at -247 bp provides positive transcriptional activity
both in vitro and in vivo [25,27]. Alternatively, MEF2
enrichment at the proximal promoter may be due to the
secondary binding of MEF2 complexes formed at the 5’enhancer and/or the MCK-SIE physically contacting the
promoter. Such long-distance interactions of enhanceraffiliated factors with promoter DNA via cross-linking with
initiation complex proteins have been readily detected in
standard ChIP reactions during chromatin conformation
capture [64].
Overall, we conclude that MEF2 interacts in vivo with
the MCK-SIE complex. The strong dependency of MCKSIE function on the presence of the MEF2 control element (Figure 3B) also supports the hypothesis that MEF2
likely binds directly at this site. The functional synergy of
this MEF2 site with E-box control elements bound by
MyoD and myogenin is reminiscent of the behavior of an
analogous E-box pair and MEF2 site in the MCK 5’enhancer [23] and is consistent with a model of cobinding involving MEF2 and MRFs [46,56,65], although
simultaneous occupancy by both factors in vivo is
inferred and has not been directly measured.
Interestingly, all four isoforms of MEF2 (MEF2A,
MEF2B, MEF2C and MEF2D) are present in myocyte
cultures [53], but MEF2B is not present in adult mouse
muscle [66,67]. The MCK-SIE sequence does not predict
which, if any, MEF2 isoforms bind preferentially [53],
and the antibodies used in our ChIP assays cross-reacted
with all MEF2 isoforms. Thus, it is possible that the
MEF2 site may be occupied by any of the MEF2 isoforms
present in differentiated skeletal muscle cultures. It is
also plausible that the MEF2 site can be occupied by
other non-MEF2 factors that recognize AT-rich motifs.
For example, AT-rich motifs similar to the one found in
the MCK-SIE are known to bind nuclear factors such as
Oct-1, TEF-1 and MHox [24,51,55,68-72], and the MCK
5’-enhancer’s MEF2 and AT-rich motifs have been
shown to recruit MEF2, Oct-1 and TEF-1. In this regard,
even though the MCK 5’-enhancer and MCK-SIE contain
similar paired E-box/MEF2 motifs, the MCK-SIE fails to
bind TEF-1 by EMSA analysis (Figure 4C), whereas the
5’-enhancer MEF2 element binds TEF-1 [55]. Although
the functional consequences of this difference are
unknown, these data imply that the MEF2 site-mediated
transcriptional activity of the MCK-SIE and MCK 5’enhancer may differ in terms of their interactions with
non-MEF2 factors.
An intriguing facet of MR1’s regulatory function is the
discovery that it contains transcriptionally repressive
sequences flanking the highly positive MCK-SIE. These

Page 13 of 19

MR1 regions can repress the MCK-SIE’s activity via the
combined or individual effects of at least 15 highly conserved 9- to 24-bp sequences (Figure 2B and Additional
file 1, Figure S1, and Additional file 2, Figure S2). When
MR1 constructs containing individual deletions of these
motifs were tested in skeletal muscle cultures, most of
the deletions resulted in two- to fourfold increases in
transcriptional activity (Additional file 2, Figure S2), suggesting that these conserved regions act to repress transcriptional activity. The only deletion that resulted in a
significant decrease in activity overlapped the MEF2/
AT-rich motif within the MCK-SIE region (Additional
file 1, Figure S1, and Additional file 2, Figure S2). Interestingly, deletion F, which encompassed the MCK-SIE’s
conserved 5’-E-box, did not cause decreased activity
when tested in the context of the entire MR1 region
(Additional file 2, Figure S2), but did lead to decreased
activity in the context of the isolated MCK-SIE (Figure
3B). This may be due to the compensatory functions of
other control elements within the entire MR1.
Our studies have also begun to address the in vivo function of MR1 in MCK gene expression. Comparisons
between a transgenic mouse line that contains the 6.5-kb
sequence driving b-gal and several lines from which the
MR1 region has been deleted revealed differences in transgene expression that indicated a correlation between MR1
function and muscle fiber type. Transgenic lines expressing the 6.5MCKΔMR1-b-gal transgene expressed very
low levels of b-gal in slow- and intermediate-twitch fibers
(type I and type IIa), while expression levels in fast-twitch
fibers (type IIb and type IId) remained high (Figure 5).
Although only one wild-type 6.5MCK-b-gal-transgenic
line was derived in our own study, an independent transgenic study that employed the same 6.5-kb MCK genomic
sequence to express the transcriptional enhancer factor
domain family member 1 (TEAD1) transcription factor
demonstrated high-level transgene expression in the soleus
(slow- and intermediate-twitch muscle fibers) as well as in
EDL (fast-twitch muscle fibers) [73].
Our transgenic analysis of MCK gene regulation has
focused on correlations between transgene expression
levels and fiber types defined according to their MYHC
isotype expression profiles. Since MCK functions in an
energy transport pathway that is important for optimal
contractile function, it might also have been informative
to identify fiber types based on metabolic markers such
as succinate dehydrogenase and nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate levels that could be detected via
histochemical assays and then to correlate these fiber
types with transgene expression levels. This was not done
for purely technical reasons, as MYHC immunostaining
provided more precise distinctions between fiber types
and because the ability to detect four fiber types in a single cryosection facilitated correlations between fiber

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

types and b-gal levels in adjacent sections. Furthermore,
since the original investigators of muscle fiber types
based on MYHC immunostaining were very careful to
ascertain that individual fibers were designated as the
same fiber type by both the histochemical and immunostaining protocols [58], it seems likely that our study
would have reached similar conclusions regarding the
role of MR1 in MCK gene expression with either fibertyping technique.
There is clearly a functional relationship between Myhc
types and MCK gene expression patterns [6,74], but the
underlying basis of this regulatory linkage is not known.
In this regard, however, the distribution of MYHC isotypes in different anatomical muscle is not altered in
MCK-deficient mice; rather, the lack of MCK appears to
be compensated by an increase in mitochondrial creatine
kinase (CK) [75]. Recently, it has also been shown that
the expression patterns of myosin isoforms and enzymes
involved in muscle fiber energy metabolism can be
uncoupled by mutations that affect glycogen storage and
sarcoplasmic calcium release mechanisms [76]. These
reports suggest that MCK transgene expression would
not be anticipated to exhibit a strict correlation with
muscle fiber types as assessed solely by MYHC fiber typing. This possibility may partially explain why the MCKdriven b-gal levels observed in transgenic TA and soleus
muscles were not uniform among all fibers of each
MYHC-defined type (Figure 5B). These nonuniformities
in transgene expression within specific fiber types do not
appear to be regulated by MR1, since they are observed
in fibers carrying the intact 6.5-kb MCK genomic region
as well as in those in mice carrying the 6.5MCKΔMR1
transgene. Nevertheless, the MR1 region clearly plays an
important role in regulating the steady-state levels of
MCK gene expression in different anatomical muscles
and in different fiber types. In this regard, it has yet to be
determined whether MR1 or the MCK-SIE alone can
drive expression in slow- and intermediate-twitch muscle
fibers independently of the 5’-enhancer. It is also not
known which physiological signals impinge on the MCKSIE and on the flanking repressive regions within MR1.
Transgenic analysis of fiber type-specific muscle gene
expression has also been carried out with the MLC2v,
MLC1/3f, aldolase A and slow troponin I muscle genes
[7-10,14]. Similarly to our studies with MCK, E-boxes and
MEF2 control elements have been identified within their
key regulatory regions. In particular, the slow troponin I
SURE region contains the critical E-box, MEF2, and a
CACC motifs, which in isolation confer pan-muscle
expression. Interestingly, the inclusion of a more upstream
region within SURE, which contains a bicoid-like motif
that recruits the general transcription factor 3 (GTF3)/
muscle transcription factor II I repeat domain-containing
protein 1 (MusTRD1), restricts activity to slow-twitch

Page 14 of 19

muscle [11,14]. A related mechanism may modulate the in
vivo activity of the MCK-SIE, leading to the contribution
of MR1 to expression in slow-twitch fibers. However,
neither the bicoid-like motif (GTTAATCCG) [14] nor the
GTF3 consensus DNA binding sequence (GTC GA GATTAG BGA ) [11] is found in or immediately adjacent to the
MCK-SIE. In contrast, the fast-twitch activity of the MCK
5’-enhancer may be partially due to recruitment of the
Six4 transcription factor, since the MEF3 site in the aldolase A pM promoter is necessary but not sufficient to
drive transcription in some fast-twitch muscle fibers [77].
The contribution of multiple enhancer regions to the
expression of striated muscle genes in different fiber
types may be a common mechanism. For example, transgenic analysis has demonstrated that the troponin I (fast)
enhancer intronic regulatory element (TnIfast IRE), in
isolation, results in fast twitch fiber-specific expression in
the adult plantaris muscle, where TnIfast IRE elements
yield the highest levels of expression in type IIb fibers,
intermediate levels in type IId, very low levels in type IIa
fibers and no expression in type I fibers [16], while the
endogenous TnIfast gene is expressed at similar levels in
all fast-twitch fiber types [15]. The MCK gene MR1
region, although its activity contributes to expression in
slow and intermediate fibers, appears analogous to TnIfast IRE in that both regulatory regions provide relatively
restricted fiber-type expression patterns and both genes
require the contribution of multiple fiber-specific enhancers to achieve pan-skeletal muscle expression. The MCK
MR1 and 5’-enhancer regulatory regions thus appear to
share common mechanisms of transcription with several
fast- and slow-twitch muscle genes.

Conclusions
This study identifies a regulatory region within the MCK
gene’s intron 1 that plays a major transcriptional role in
slow- and intermediate-twitch muscle fibers. This activity
was shown in vitro to be dependent on the MCK-SIE
region, which contains a paired E-box and MEF2 motif.
Each motif was shown to be required for full MCK-SIE
transcriptional activity, and ChIP studies showed that
they recruit MyoD, myogenin and MEF2, respectively. It
was also shown that the MCK-SIE is flanked by repressive regulatory regions containing multiple different
negative control elements. The mechanisms and functional purposes of these remain to be determined.
Materials and methods
Sequence analysis

Sequences spanning the TATA box to exon 2 of the
MCK gene of Homo sapiens (human [AC005781.1]),
Felis catus (cat [GenBank: AC135221.3AC135221.3]),
Canis familiaris (dog [GenBank: AC137538.2]), Bos
taurus (bovine [GenBank: AC137535.2]), Sus scrofa (pig

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

[GenBank: AC139878.2]) and Mus musculus (mouse
GenBank: [AC118017.15]) were obtained from compiled
genomic sequences in the Entrez Genome Project database and subjected to sequence alignment using ClustalW [78]. The intron 1 sequences of both mouse and
human were independently analyzed for putative control
element motifs using Match http://www.gene-regulation.
com/cgi-bin/pub/programs/match/bin/match.cgi) (Contact B. Wold for specifics: http://woldb@caltech.edu, a
matrix search algorithm that scours the TRANSFAC
database of transcription factors and their experimentally proven binding sites. Parameters were set to select
for vertebrate-only matrices with a 90% core binding
similarity to broaden the rate of positive hits.

Page 15 of 19

aspirating the growth medium, rinsing once with saline G,
incubating for 2 minutes at room temperature in 15% glycerol 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acidbuffered saline, rinsing again with saline G and then adding 10 mL of differentiation medium (98.5% Ham’s F10C
nutrients + gentamicin, 1.5% horse serum and 1 μM insulin) [79]. Relative enzymatic activities of CAT and AP
were determined from extracts as described in previous
studies [25]. Since the MCK enhancer-AP reference plasmid is expressed only in differentiated muscle cells, it provides a control for plate-to-plate variability in transfection
efficiency and extent of muscle differentiation in skeletal
myocyte cultures.
ChIP assays

Plasmid constructs

A 6.5-kb construct of the mouse MCK gene (-3,349 to
+3,230) [37] was cloned upstream of the CAT reporter
gene 6.5MCK-CAT [26]. The 6.5MCKΔMR1-CAT construct was generated from the 6.5MCK-CAT construct by
introducing ClaI restriction sites 5’ and 3’ of MR1 (+740
and +1,724) using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, http://www.genomics.agilent.com/),
according to the manufacturer’s directions. MR1 was then
deleted by digestion of the plasmid with ClaI and religation
of the remaining vector. The 6.5MCKΔEnh-CAT construct
was generated by site-directed mutagenesis to delete the
MCK 5’-enhancer (-1,256 to -1,040).
The MR1 region was polymerase chain reaction-amplified from the existing 6.5-kb construct with primers containing the restriction sites SphI (5’) and BstI (3’). The
MR1 amplicon was cloned upstream of the proximal promoter by replacing the 5’-enhancer in the e-358-CAT
reporter construct [27] using SphI and BstI. The mouse
MCK PP region used in these studies extends from -358
to +7. All other deletions and mutations described in this
study were generated using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit.
Transient transfections and reporter gene assays

MM14 skeletal myoblasts were cultured as described previously [79]. Collagen-coated 100-mm dishes were inoculated with about 1 × 105 log phase cells/dish and were
allowed to proliferate under growth conditions (85%
Ham’s F10C nutrients + gentamicin, 15% horse serum and
2 ng/mL basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) added
at approximately 12-hour intervals) for about 24 hours.
Myoblasts were cotransfected using a standard calcium
phosphate method [23] at about 3 × 105 cells with test
constructs driving the expression of the CAT reporter
gene and an AP reference plasmid, which contains the 5’enhancer placed 5’ of the basal promoter sequence (-80 to
+7). Transfected MM14 cultures were induced to differentiate four hours after beginning the transfection by

ChIP assays were performed using a modification of the
Fast-ChIP method as described previously [32,80] with the
following nuances: 100-mm dishes were plated with about
1 × 105 log phase MM14 cells/dish and grown to near
confluence (about 4 × 106 cells/dish), then allowed to differentiate in proliferation medium without additional
bFGF for four to six days prior to harvesting. All cultures
contained more than 90% terminally differentiated myocytes as assessed by immunostaining a parallel culture
with the myosin-specific antibody MF-20. This procedure
produced more than 7 × 106 differentiated myonuclei per
100-mm dish. Cells were sonicated with 16 rounds of 15second pulses with 45 seconds of rest between pulses
(four minutes total) on a Model 100 Sonic Dismembrator
(Fisher Scientific, http://www.fishersci.com/) at the highest
setting. Antibodies used for immunoprecipitation
described in this study were as follows: anti-myogenin (M225) sc-576 X, anti-MyoD (M-318) sc-760 X, anti-MEF2A
(C-21) sc-313 and normal rabbit IgG sc-2027 (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, http://www.scbt.com/). The primers used
in ChIP analyses were MCK 5’-enhancer: 183 bp forward:
5’-GCCCATGTAAGGAGGCAAGGCC-3’, reverse: 5’CACCAGGGACAGGGTTATTTTTAGAGC-3’, MCK
exon 1/intron 1 boundary: 217 bp forward: 5’-GGGTCACCACCACCTCCACAG-3’, reverse: 5’-GCCTTGCAAGGAGGGGACACTTG-3’, MCK-SIE: 168 bp, forward: 5’CTTGAGGCCCAGAGCCTGGCTG-3’, reverse: 5’-GAG
ACCCAAAGCCCTTGAAGCTGCTAC-3’, MCK exon 2:
207 bp, forward: 5’-GTCCCAAAGGCCGCCACCATG-3’,
reverse: 5’-GGGTTGTCCACCCCAGTCTGG-3’ Mark4
gene region: 205 bp, forward: 5’-GGATGCCATGCCTGG
TGGCCAT-3’, reverse: 5’-GCCATGCAGCTTTCACGCAGAGG-3’.
EMSA

EMSA was carried out as previously described [32].
Nuclear extracts from differentiated skeletal muscle cultures were prepared as previously described [81] using a
cocktail of several protease inhibitors (P8340; Sigma, St.

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

Louis, MO, USA). Total protein in the extracts was quantitated by using the Bradford method [82]. Incubations
with antisera or unlabeled oligonucleotide competitors
were carried out at room temperature for 20 minutes
prior to the addition of probe. The 5’ to 3’ sequences of
the double-stranded probes or competitors with introduced mutations of the sequence underlined are MEF2
(MCK-SIE): AGGAGCATCTAAAAATAGCCACAAAG,
MEF2 (MCK-SIE)-M1: AGGAGCATCCGAAAACGGCCACAAAG and MEF2 (MCK-SIE)-M2: AGGAGCATCAT AAAAATGCCACAAAG.
Antibodies used for EMSA were anti-MEF2A (panMEF2, C-21) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-TEF-1
(BD Transduction Laboratories, http://www.bdbiosciences.com/home.jsp) and IgG normal rabbit sc-2027
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, http://www.scbt.com/).
ChIP-Seq assays

ChIP assays for MEF2 ChIP-Seq were performed according to the protocol described by Johnson et al. [83] with
the modifications described in the paragraph below. C2
C12 cells were grown at low density on Nunclon 14-cmdiameter plates (Fisher Scientific, http://www.fishersci.
com/) in 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS)/Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (#11965; Invitrogen http://
www.invitrogen.com/site/us/en/home.html with penicillin and streptomycin and passaged at no more than 50%
confluence. Upon reaching confluence, differentiation
was induced by switching to 2% horse serum/1 μM insulin/DMEM. After 60 hours of differentiation, the cells
were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde (Avantor Performance Materials, http://www.avantormaterials.com/)
and 0.025% glutaraldehyde (Polysciences, Inc. http://
www.polysciences.com/) for 10 minutes. A total of 2 ×
107 cells were fragmented to about 100 to 300 bp using
30-second, 12-W cycles on a Misonix 3000 sonicator
http://www.fishersci.com/ecomm/servlet/fsproductdetail?
aid = 2819374&storeId = 10652 for a total sonication
time of 15 minutes. The sheared chromatin was immunoprecipitated using 100 μL of sheep anti-mouse IgG
M280 beads (Invitrogen) and 5 μg of MEF2 monoclonal
antibody (clone B4) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology or
200 μL of sheep anti-rabbit IgG M280 beads and 10 μg of
MEF2 polyclonal antibody (clone H300) from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology. Illumina libraries for sequencing were
made using their ChIP-Seq library kit (Illumina, Inc.,
http://www.illumina.com/) as described by the manufacturer, except that a 10-cycle amplification was performed
before gel selection according to the method of Johnson
et al. (library 2) [83]. Library sequencing was performed
for 36 cycles on an Illumina Genome Analyzer (Illumina,
Inc.), and the resulting reads were mapped to the mouse
MM9 genome by using Bowtie software [84]. Mapped
reads that permitted up to two mismatches to the

Page 16 of 19

reference genome were displayed on the University of
California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Genome Browser. ChIPSeq signals were called using the ChIP-Seq module
within the ERANGE version 3.2 software package [85]
and were also mapped using the MACS peak caller [86].
Transgenic mice

The 6.5-kb MCK gene sequence and the sequence with
MR1 deleted were cloned upstream of the b-gal reporter
gene to generate the 6.5MCK-b-gal and 6.5MCKΔMR1b-gal constructs, respectively. DNA for microinjection
was prepared by enzymatic digestion to linearize the plasmids and gel-purified by freeze-and-squeeze columns
(Bio-Rad Laboratories, http://www.bio-rad.com/). Transgenic mice were produced using eggs from C57BL/6J ×
C3H crosses through the University of Washington
Transgenic Resource Program. Founders were crossed to
C57BL/6J to generate F1s. Lines of mice analyzed were
either F1s or the progeny of F1s (N2 or N3) that were
back-crossed with C57B/6J.
Dissections

Adult mice (1+ months) were killed according to methods approved by the University of Washington Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. TA and soleus
muscles were dissected and mounted in a 2:1 mixture of
optimal cutting temperature compound and 10% gum
tragacanth in cryomold cassettes. Cassettes were then
frozen in liquid nitrogen-cooled isopentane. Tissues
contained in blocks were cryosectioned at a thickness of
6 μM at -25°C using a Leica cryostat http://www.leicamicrosystems.com/, mounted onto glass slides at room
temperature and then stored at -80°C.
X-gal staining

Slides were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) for 15 minutes at 4°C and washed in
100 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.3), 2 mM MgCl 2 ,
0.01% sodium oxycholate and 0.02% Nonidet P-40 and
stained in a standard X-gal reagent solution [87] for 4
hours. After staining, slides were fixed for 15 minutes in
10% formalin and mounted in gelvatol (Sigma-Aldrich,
http://www.sigmaaldrich.com). Images were obtained
using a Zeiss Axiovert 200 microscope http://www.zeiss.
com/micro with a Zeiss AxioCam MRm camera (Zeiss),
and acquired using AxioVision software (Zeiss). Images
were then uniformly false-colored using Adobe PhotoShop
version 7 software (Adobe Systems, http://www.adobe.
com/).
Immunofluoresence

Monoclonal antibodies specific for myosin isoforms
MYHC1, MYHC2A and MYHC2B were produced from
cultures of hybridoma lines BA-D5, SC-71 and BF-F3,

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

respectively [58]. These antibodies stain type I, type IIa
and type IIb fibers, respectively. Cultures were grown to
high density in DMEM High Glucose (HyClone Laboratories, http://www.hyclone.com/) supplemented with
10% FBS (Gemini Bioproducts, http://www.gembio.com/
)) and penicillin-streptomycin (Sigma). Cultures were
then switched to serum-free medium and incubated for
two or three days. The medium was collected, centrifuged and filter-sterilized (0.22 μm Stericup; Millipore,
http://www.millipore.com/) and monoclonal antibodies
were concentrated by HiTrap column chromatography
(GE Healthcare Biosciences, http://www.gelifesciences.
com/). High-protein concentration fractions as determined by the Bradford method [82] were pooled and
dialyzed (Slide-A-Lyzer Dialysis Cassettes; Pierce Biotechnology, http://www.piercenet.com/), and then stored
at -20°C. Slides were treated with blocking buffer (1%
bovine serum albumin and 0.05% Tween 20 in PBS) and
incubated with about 10 μg/mL BA-D5, SC-71 and BFF3 for 1 hour, washed three times for five minutes in
blocking buffer and incubated with goat anti-mouse secondary antibodies IgG2b Alexa Fluor 350, IgG1 Alexa
Fluor 594 and IgM Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen) for 30
minutes. Slides were washed as before, rinsed in PBS
and mounted in gelvatol. Images were acquired as
described above.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. A six-species sequence alignment of
modulatory region 1 (MR1), which demonstrates the conserved
nineteen subregions throughout the region. The MR1 sequences of
six mammalian species (human, cat, dog, bovine, pig and mouse) were
aligned to reveal sequence conservation. Bases that are fully conserved
between the six species are highlighted in black, while those conserved
in three to five species are highlighted in gray. Gaps in the sequence
alignment are represented as hyphens. The 5’ and 3’ flanks of MR1, as
defined in this study, are marked with red right-angled arrows. Nineteen
conserved subregions (A-S, annotated by orange barbed lines) were
tested for transcriptional activity (see Additional file 2, Figure S2). The
two E-box elements, the MAF/activator protein 1 (AP-1) site and the
myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) consensus sequence investigated in
this study are outlined in green. The 1,081-bp MR1 region (+740 to
+1,721) extends slightly more 5’ and 3’ than the originally described
mouse MR1 sequence (+748 to -1,607) [29].
Additional file 2: Figure S2. The functional consequence of
individual deletions of the conserved 19 subregions throughout
MR1. (A) Conserved regions within MR1 (gray blocks in part A, gray bars
in part B) were deleted from MR1-proximal promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyl transferase (MR1-PP-CAT) and tested for transcriptional activity in
skeletal myocytes (gray bars). (B) MM14 cells were transiently transfected
with constructs containing each of the 19 different conserved motif
deletions, and cells were harvested as described in the Figure 2 legend.
Relative CAT activity was normalized with the MCK 5’-enhancer alkaline
phosphatase (AP) reference plasmid and compared to the intact MR1-PPCAT (black bar) and to the PP-CAT (white bar). Expression levels of MR1PP-CAT were scaled to equal 1.0. Asterisks indicate constructs that did
not result in a statistically significant change in transcriptional activity.

Page 17 of 19

Abbreviations
AP: alkaline phosphatase; bFGF: basic fibroblast growth factor; β-gal: βgalactosidase; BRG1: Brahma-related gene 1; CAT: chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase; ChIP: chromatin immunoprecipitation; ERANGE: Enhanced Read
Analysis of Gene Expression; KLF3: Krupple-like factor 3; Mark4: MAP/
microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 4 gene; MAZ: Myc-associated zinc
finger protein; MEF2: myocyte enhancer factor 2; MCK and MCK: muscle
creatine kinase gene and protein; MCK, MCK-SIE: MCK small intronic
enhancer; MR1: modulatory region 1; MYHC: myosin heavy chain; Oct-1:
octamer-binding protein; TA: tibialis anterior muscle.
Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Hauschka and Jeff Chamberlain laboratories at
the University of Washington, Q. Nguyen, D. Helterline, E. Nishiuchi, M.
Haraguchi, P. Gregorevic, B. Sharma, A. Zebari and J. Buskin, for their
technical assistance and useful comments. We thank members of the Wold
Lab at the California Institute of Technology, D. Trout, B. King, H. Amrhein, L.
Schaffer and I. Antoschken, for technical assistance, bioinformatics and/or
critical discussions. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health
(NIH) grant R01-0AR18860 (to SDH), NIH grant 1P01-NS046788 (to SDH), NIH
grant 5732-HD07183 Developmental Biology Training Grant (to PWLT) and
NIH grant T32-HL007312, Experimental Pathology of Cardiovascular Disease
(to CLH). KF is supported by a Graduate Research Fellowship from the
National Science Foundation and from the Beckman Foundation at the
California Institute of Technology; BJW received funding from NIH grant U54
HG004576.
Author details
Department of Biochemistry, 1705 NE Pacific St., University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 2Division of Biology and Beckman Institute, 1200 E.
California Blvd. California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

1

Authors’ contributions
PWLT carried out the sequence alignments; made the test gene constructs;
carried out the transfection assays, the ChIP analyses, the
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence assays; and drafted parts of
the manuscript describing Hauschka Lab data. KIFA conceived of the
redesign of the ChIP-Seq fixation, performed and analyzed MEF2 ChIP-Seq
and drafted portions of the manuscript describing Wold Lab data. CLH
carried out the EMSA study and helped to draft the manuscript. CLS
participated in the immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence assays.
APM participated in the transfection analyses. DLH carried out the whole
muscle extract transgene expression assays. JCA and REW prepared and
labeled the MYHC monoclonal antibodies and participated in the
immunohistochemistry assays. BJW conceived of the global ChIP-Seq
analysis of multiple myogenic transcription factors, participated in the design
and coordination of the MEF2 ChIP-Seq studies and drafted parts of the
manuscript describing the Wold Lab data. Together with PWLT, SDH
conceived of the overall study, participated in its design and coordination
between the two laboratories and played a major role in writing the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 5 January 2011 Accepted: 7 July 2011 Published: 7 July 2011
References
1. Welle S, Bhatt K, Thornton CA: Inventory of high-abundance mRNAs in
skeletal muscle of normal men. Genome Res 1999, 9:506-513.
2. Chamberlain JS, Jaynes JB, Hauschka SD: Regulation of creatine kinase
induction in differentiating mouse myoblasts. Mol Cell Biol 1985,
5:484-492.
3. Tapscott SJ: The circuitry of a master switch: Myod and the regulation of
skeletal muscle gene transcription. Development 2005, 132:2685-2695.
4. Lyons GE, Muhlebach S, Moser A, Masood R, Paterson BM, Buckingham ME,
Perriard JC: Developmental regulation of creatine kinase gene expression
by myogenic factors in embryonic mouse and chick skeletal muscle.
Development 1991, 113:1017-1029.

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Yamashita K, Yoshioka T: Profiles of creatine kinase isoenzyme
compositions in single muscle fibres of different types. J Muscle Res Cell
Motil 1991, 12:37-44.
Kushmerick MJ, Moerland TS, Wiseman RW: Mammalian skeletal muscle
fibers distinguished by contents of phosphocreatine, ATP, and Pi. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:7521-7525.
Wentworth BM, Donoghue M, Engert JC, Berglund EB, Rosenthal N: Paired
MyoD-binding sites regulate myosin light chain gene expression. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1991, 88:1242-1246.
Salminen M, Lopez S, Maire P, Kahn A, Daegelen D: Fast-muscle-specific
DNA-protein interactions occurring in vivo at the human aldolase A M
promoter are necessary for correct promoter activity in transgenic mice.
Mol Cell Biol 1996, 16:76-85.
Lupa-Kimball VA, Esser KA: Use of DNA injection for identification of slow
nerve-dependent regions of the MLC2s gene. Am J Physiol 1998, 274:
C229-235.
Esser K, Nelson T, Lupa-Kimball V, Blough E: The CACC box and myocyte
enhancer factor-2 sites within the myosin light chain 2 slow promoter
cooperate in regulating nerve-specific transcription in skeletal muscle. J
Biol Chem 1999, 274:12095-12102.
Vullhorst D, Buonanno A: Multiple GTF2I-like repeats of general
transcription factor 3 exhibit DNA binding properties. Evidence for a
common origin as a sequence-specific DNA interaction module. J Biol
Chem 2005, 280:31722-31731.
Rana ZA, Gundersen K, Buonanno A: The ups and downs of gene
regulation by electrical activity in skeletal muscles. J Muscle Res Cell Motil
2009, 30:255-260.
Issa LL, Palmer SJ, Guven KL, Santucci N, Hodgson VR, Popovic K, Joya JE,
Hardeman EC: MusTRD can regulate postnatal fiber-specific expression.
Dev Biol 2006, 293:104-115.
Calvo S, Vullhorst D, Venepally P, Cheng J, Karavanova I, Buonanno A:
Molecular dissection of DNA sequences and factors involved in slow
muscle-specific transcription. Mol Cell Biol 2001, 21:8490-8503.
Hallauer PL, Bradshaw HL, Hastings KE: Complex fiber-type-specific
expression of fast skeletal muscle troponin I gene constructs in
transgenic mice. Development 1993, 119:691-701.
Hallauer PL, Hastings KE: TnIfast IRE enhancer: multistep developmental
regulation during skeletal muscle fiber type differentiation. Dev Dyn
2002, 224:422-431.
Buskin JN, Hauschka SD: Identification of a myocyte nuclear factor that
binds to the muscle-specific enhancer of the mouse muscle creatine
kinase gene. Mol Cell Biol 1989, 9:2627-2640.
Donoviel DB, Shield MA, Buskin JN, Haugen HS, Clegg CH, Hauschka SD:
Analysis of muscle creatine kinase gene regulatory elements in skeletal
and cardiac muscles of transgenic mice. Mol Cell Biol 1996, 16:1649-1658.
Jaynes JB, Chamberlain JS, Buskin JN, Johnson JE, Hauschka SD:
Transcriptional regulation of the muscle creatine kinase gene and
regulated expression in transfected mouse myoblasts. Mol Cell Biol 1986,
6:2855-2864.
Jaynes JB, Johnson JE, Buskin JN, Gartside CL, Hauschka SD: The muscle
creatine kinase gene is regulated by multiple upstream elements,
including a muscle-specific enhancer. Mol Cell Biol 1988, 8:62-70.
Johnson JE, Gartside CL, Jaynes JB, Hauschka SD: Expression of a
transfected mouse muscle-creatine kinase gene is induced upon growth
factor deprivation of myogenic but not of nonmyogenic cells. Dev Biol
1989, 134:258-262.
Johnson JE, Wold BJ, Hauschka SD: Muscle creatine kinase sequence
elements regulating skeletal and cardiac muscle expression in
transgenic mice. Mol Cell Biol 1989, 9:3393-3399.
Amacher SL, Buskin JN, Hauschka SD: Multiple regulatory elements
contribute differentially to muscle creatine kinase enhancer activity in
skeletal and cardiac muscle. Mol Cell Biol 1993, 13:2753-2764.
Himeda CL, Ranish JA, Angello JC, Maire P, Aebersold R, Hauschka SD:
Quantitative proteomic identification of six4 as the trex-binding factor
in the muscle creatine kinase enhancer. Mol Cell Biol 2004, 24:2132-2143.
Nguyen QG, Buskin JN, Himeda CL, Fabre-Suver C, Hauschka SD: Transgenic
and tissue culture analyses of the muscle creatine kinase enhancer Trex
control element in skeletal and cardiac muscle indicate differences in
gene expression between muscle types. Transgenic Res 2003, 12:337-349.

Page 18 of 19

26. Nguyen QG, Buskin JN, Himeda CL, Shield MA, Hauschka SD: Differences in
the function of three conserved E-boxes of the muscle creatine kinase
gene in cultured myocytes and in transgenic mouse skeletal and cardiac
muscle. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:46494-46505.
27. Shield MA, Haugen HS, Clegg CH, Hauschka SD: E-box sites and a
proximal regulatory region of the muscle creatine kinase gene
differentially regulate expression in diverse skeletal muscles and cardiac
muscle of transgenic mice. Mol Cell Biol 1996, 16:5058-5068.
28. Mueller PR, Wold B: In vivo footprinting of a muscle specific enhancer by
ligation mediated PCR. Science 1989, 246:780-786.
29. Jaynes J: Transcriptional Regulation of the Mouse Muscle Creatine Kinase
Gene. Thesis Dissertation. University of Washington, Department of
Biochemistry; 1986.
30. Tamir Y, Bengal E: p53 protein is activated during muscle differentiation
and participates with MyoD in the transcription of muscle creatine
kinase gene. Oncogene 1998, 17:347-356.
31. Vincent CK, Gualberto A, Patel CV, Walsh K: Different regulatory sequences
control creatine kinase-M gene expression in directly injected skeletal
and cardiac muscle. Mol Cell Biol 1993, 13:1264-1272.
32. Himeda CL, Ranish JA, Hauschka SD: Quantitative proteomic identification
of MAZ as a transcriptional regulator of muscle-specific genes in skeletal
and cardiac myocytes. Mol Cell Biol 2008, 28:6521-6535.
33. Himeda CL, Ranish JA, Pearson RCM, Crossley M, Hauschka SD: KLF3
regulates muscle-specific gene expression and synergizes with SRF on
KLF binding sites. Molecular Cellular Biology (In Review) 2010.
34. Dunant P, Larochelle N, Thirion C, Stucka R, Ursu D, Petrof BJ, Wolf E,
Lochmuller H: Expression of dystrophin driven by the 1.35-kb MCK
promoter ameliorates muscular dystrophy in fast, but not in slow
muscles of transgenic mdx mice. Mol Ther 2003, 8:80-89.
35. Salva MZ, Himeda CL, Tai PW, Nishiuchi E, Gregorevic P, Allen JM, Finn EE,
Nguyen QG, Blankinship MJ, Meuse L, et al: Design of tissue-specific
regulatory cassettes for high-level rAAV-mediated expression in skeletal
and cardiac muscle. Mol Ther 2007, 15:320-329.
36. Eppenberger HM, Eppenberger M, Richterich R, Aebi H: The Ontogeny of
Creatine Kinase Isozymes. Dev Biol 1964, 10:1-16.
37. Cox GA, Cole NM, Matsumura K, Phelps SF, Hauschka SD, Campbell KP,
Faulkner JA, Chamberlain JS: Overexpression of dystrophin in transgenic
mdx mice eliminates dystrophic symptoms without toxicity. Nature 1993,
364:725-729.
38. Sternberg EA, Spizz G, Perry WM, Vizard D, Weil T, Olson EN: Identification
of upstream and intragenic regulatory elements that confer cell-typerestricted and differentiation-specific expression on the muscle creatine
kinase gene. Mol Cell Biol 1988, 8:2896-2909.
39. Polly P, Haddadi LM, Issa LL, Subramaniam N, Palmer SJ, Tay ES,
Hardeman EC: hMusTRD1alpha1 represses MEF2 activation of the
troponin I slow enhancer. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:36603-36610.
40. Wingender E: The TRANSFAC project as an example of framework
technology that supports the analysis of genomic regulation. Brief
Bioinform 2008, 9:326-332.
41. Wright WE, Binder M, Funk W: Cyclic amplification and selection of
targets (CASTing) for the myogenin consensus binding site. Mol Cell Biol
1991, 11:4104-4110.
42. Blackwell TK, Weintraub H: Differences and similarities in DNA-binding
preferences of MyoD and E2A protein complexes revealed by binding
site selection. Science 1990, 250:1104-1110.
43. Fickett JW: Quantitative discrimination of MEF2 sites. Mol Cell Biol 1996,
16:437-441.
44. van Dam H, Castellazzi M: Distinct roles of Jun: Fos and Jun: ATF dimers
in oncogenesis. Oncogene 2001, 20:2453-2464.
45. Berkes CA, Tapscott SJ: MyoD and the transcriptional control of
myogenesis. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2005, 16:585-595.
46. Molkentin JD, Black BL, Martin JF, Olson EN: Cooperative activation of
muscle gene expression by MEF2 and myogenic bHLH proteins. Cell
1995, 83:1125-1136.
47. Igarashi K, Itoh K, Motohashi H, Hayashi N, Matuzaki Y, Nakauchi H,
Nishizawa M, Yamamoto M: Activity and expression of murine small Maf
family protein MafK. J Biol Chem 1995, 270:7615-7624.
48. Toki T, Itoh J, Kitazawa J, Arai K, Hatakeyama K, Akasaka J, Igarashi K,
Nomura N, Yokoyama M, Yamamoto M, Ito E: Human small Maf proteins

Tai et al. Skeletal Muscle 2011, 1:25
http://www.skeletalmusclejournal.com/content/1/1/25

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.
62.
63.

64.
65.
66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

form heterodimers with CNC family transcription factors and recognize
the NF-E2 motif. Oncogene 1997, 14:1901-1910.
Miskimins R, Miskimins WK: A role for an AP-1-like site in the expression
of the myelin basic protein gene during differentiation. Int J Dev Neurosci
2001, 19:85-91.
Zimprich A, Kraus J, Woltje M, Mayer P, Rauch E, Hollt V: An allelic variation
in the human prodynorphin gene promoter alters stimulus-induced
expression. J Neurochem 2000, 74:472-477.
Ohkawa Y, Marfella CG, Imbalzano AN: Skeletal muscle specification by
myogenin and Mef2D via the SWI/SNF ATPase Brg1. Embo J 2006,
25:490-501.
Cao Y, Yao Z, Sarkar D, Lawrence M, Sanchez GJ, Parker MH, MacQuarrie KL,
Davison J, Morgan MT, Ruzzo WL, et al: Genome-wide MyoD binding in
skeletal muscle cells: a potential for broad cellular reprogramming. Dev
Cell 2010, 18:662-674.
Black BL, Olson EN: Transcriptional control of muscle development by
myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) proteins. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1998,
14:167-196.
Lakich MM, Diagana TT, North DL, Whalen RG: MEF-2 and Oct-1 bind to
two homologous promoter sequence elements and participate in the
expression of a skeletal muscle-specific gene. J Biol Chem 1998,
273:15217-15226.
Karasseva N, Tsika G, Ji J, Zhang A, Mao X, Tsika R: Transcription enhancer
factor 1 binds multiple muscle MEF2 and A/T-rich elements during fastto-slow skeletal muscle fiber type transitions. Mol Cell Biol 2003,
23:5143-5164.
Black BL, Molkentin JD, Olson EN: Multiple roles for the MyoD basic
region in transmission of transcriptional activation signals and
interaction with MEF2. Mol Cell Biol 1998, 18:69-77.
Gregorevic P, Meznarich NA, Blankinship MJ, Crawford RW, Chamberlain JS:
Fluorophore-labeled myosin-specific antibodies simplify muscle-fiber
phenotyping. Muscle Nerve 2008, 37:104-106.
Schiaffino S, Gorza L, Sartore S, Saggin L, Ausoni S, Vianello M, Gundersen K,
Lomo T: Three myosin heavy chain isoforms in type 2 skeletal muscle
fibres. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 1989, 10:197-205.
Kunarso G, Chia NY, Jeyakani J, Hwang C, Lu X, Chan YS, Ng HH,
Bourque G: Transposable elements have rewired the core regulatory
network of human embryonic stem cells. Nat Genet 42:631-634.
Schmidt D, Wilson MD, Ballester B, Schwalie PC, Brown GD, Marshall A,
Kutter C, Watt S, Martinez-Jimenez CP, Mackay S, et al: Five-vertebrate
ChIP-seq reveals the evolutionary dynamics of transcription factor
binding. Science 328:1036-1040.
Mal AK: Histone methyltransferase Suv39h1 represses MyoD-stimulated
myogenic differentiation. Embo J 2006, 25:3323-3334.
Rhodes SJ, Konieczny SF: Identification of MRF4: a new member of the
muscle regulatory factor gene family. Genes Dev 1989, 3:2050-2061.
Hinterberger TJ, Sassoon DA, Rhodes SJ, Konieczny SF: Expression of the
muscle regulatory factor MRF4 during somite and skeletal myofiber
development. Dev Biol 1991, 147:144-156.
Fullwood MJ, Ruan Y: ChIP-based methods for the identification of longrange chromatin interactions. J Cell Biochem 2009, 107:30-39.
Olson EN, Perry M, Schulz RA: Regulation of muscle differentiation by the
MEF2 family of MADS box transcription factors. Dev Biol 1995, 172:2-14.
Morisaki T, Sermsuvitayawong K, Byun SH, Matsuda Y, Hidaka K, Morisaki H,
Mukai T: Mouse Mef2b gene: unique member of MEF2 gene family. J
Biochem 1997, 122:939-946.
Molkentin JD, Firulli AB, Black BL, Martin JF, Hustad CM, Copeland N,
Jenkins N, Lyons G, Olson EN: MEF2B is a potent transactivator expressed
in early myogenic lineages. Mol Cell Biol 1996, 16:3814-3824.
Chang PS, Li L, McAnally J, Olson EN: Muscle specificity encoded by
specific serum response factor-binding sites. J Biol Chem 2001,
276:17206-17212.
Cserjesi P, Lilly B, Bryson L, Wang Y, Sassoon DA, Olson EN: MHox: a
mesodermally restricted homeodomain protein that binds an essential
site in the muscle creatine kinase enhancer. Development 1992,
115:1087-1101.
Cserjesi P, Lilly B, Hinkley C, Perry M, Olson EN: Homeodomain protein
MHox and MADS protein myocyte enhancer-binding factor-2 converge
on a common element in the muscle creatine kinase enhancer. J Biol
Chem 1994, 269:16740-16745.

Page 19 of 19

71. Gossett LA, Kelvin DJ, Sternberg EA, Olson EN: A new myocyte-specific
enhancer-binding factor that recognizes a conserved element associated
with multiple muscle-specific genes. Mol Cell Biol 1989, 9:5022-5033.
72. Amacher SL: Myocardiocyte regulatory elements and trans-acting factors
of the mouse muscle creatine kinase gene. University of Washington,
Biochemistry; 1993.
73. Tsika RW, Schramm C, Simmer G, Fitzsimons DP, Moss RL, Ji J:
Overexpression of TEAD-1 in transgenic mouse striated muscles
produces a slower skeletal muscle contractile phenotype. J Biol Chem
2008, 283:36154-36167.
74. Watchko JF, Daood MJ, LaBella JJ: Creatine kinase activity in rat skeletal
muscle relates to myosin phenotype during development. Pediatr Res
1996, 40:53-58.
75. Ventura-Clapier R, Kuznetsov AV, d’Albis A, van Deursen J, Wieringa B,
Veksler VI: Muscle creatine kinase-deficient mice. I. Alterations in
myofibrillar function. J Biol Chem 1995, 270:19914-19920.
76. Park SK, Gunawan AM, Scheffler TL, Grant AL, Gerrard DE: Myosin heavy
chain isoform content and energy metabolism can be uncoupled in pig
skeletal muscle. J Anim Sci 2009, 87:522-531.
77. Spitz F, Salminen M, Demignon J, Kahn A, Daegelen D, Maire P: A
combination of MEF3 and NFI proteins activates transcription in a
subset of fast-twitch muscles. Mol Cell Biol 1997, 17:656-666.
78. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, et al: Clustal W and
Clustal × version 2.0. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2947-2948.
79. Clegg CH, Linkhart TA, Olwin BB, Hauschka SD: Growth factor control of
skeletal muscle differentiation: commitment to terminal differentiation
occurs in G1 phase and is repressed by fibroblast growth factor. J Cell
Biol 1987, 105:949-956.
80. Nelson JD, Denisenko O, Sova P, Bomsztyk K: Fast chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:e2.
81. Dignam JD, Lebovitz RM, Roeder RG: Accurate transcription initiation by
RNA polymerase II in a soluble extract from isolated mammalian nuclei.
Nucleic Acids Res 1983, 11:1475-1489.
82. Bradford MM: A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of
microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye
binding. Anal Biochem 1976, 72:248-254.
83. Johnson DS, Mortazavi A, Myers RM, Wold B: Genome-wide mapping of in
vivo protein-DNA interactions. Science 2007, 316:1497-1502.
84. Trapnell C, Williams BA, Pertea G, Mortazavi A, Kwan G, van Baren MJ,
Salzberg SL, Wold BJ, Pachter L: Transcript assembly and quantification by
RNA-Seq reveals unannotated transcripts and isoform switching during
cell differentiation. Nat Biotechnol 2010, 28:511-515.
85. Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L, Wold B: Mapping and
quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nat Methods 2008,
5:621-628.
86. Zhang Y, Liu T, Meyer CA, Eeckhoute J, Johnson DS, Bernstein BE,
Nussbaum C, Myers RM, Brown M, Li W, Liu XS: Model-based analysis of
ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol 2008, 9:R137.
87. Sambrook JFE, Maniatis T: Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. 2 edition.
Cold Spring Harbor: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1989.
doi:10.1186/2044-5040-1-25
Cite this article as: Tai et al.: Differentiation and fiber type-specific
activity of a muscle creatine kinase intronic enhancer. Skeletal Muscle
2011 1:25.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
