<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>What is the phylogenetic signal limit from mitogenomes? The reconciliation between mitochondrial and nuclear data in the Insecta class phylogeny</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-315"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Gerard Talavera"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

What is the phylogenetic signal limit from
mitogenomes? The reconciliation between
mitochondrial and nuclear data in the Insecta
class phylogeny
Gerard Talavera1,2* and Roger Vila1*

Abstract
Background: Efforts to solve higher-level evolutionary relationships within the class Insecta by using mitochondrial
genomic data are hindered due to fast sequence evolution of several groups, most notably Hymenoptera,
Strepsiptera, Phthiraptera, Hemiptera and Thysanoptera. Accelerated rates of substitution on their sequences have
been shown to have negative consequences in phylogenetic inference. In this study, we tested several
methodological approaches to recover phylogenetic signal from whole mitochondrial genomes. As a model, we
used two classical problems in insect phylogenetics: The relationships within Paraneoptera and within
Holometabola. Moreover, we assessed the mitochondrial phylogenetic signal limits in the deeper Eumetabola
dataset, and we studied the contribution of individual genes.
Results: Long-branch attraction (LBA) artefacts were detected in all the datasets. Methods using Bayesian inference
outperformed maximum likelihood approaches, and LBA was avoided in Paraneoptera and Holometabola when
using protein sequences and the site-heterogeneous mixture model CAT. The better performance of this method
was evidenced by resulting topologies matching generally accepted hypotheses based on nuclear and/or
morphological data, and was confirmed by cross-validation and simulation analyses. Using the CAT model, the
order Strepsiptera was recovered as sister to Coleoptera for the first time using mitochondrial sequences, in
agreement with recent results based on large nuclear and morphological datasets. Also the HymenopteraMecopterida association was obtained, leaving Coleoptera and Strepsiptera as the basal groups of the
holometabolan insects, which coincides with one of the two main competing hypotheses. For the Paraneroptera,
the currently accepted non-monophyly of Homoptera was documented as a phylogenetic novelty for
mitochondrial data. However, results were not satisfactory when exploring the entire Eumetabola, revealing the
limits of the phylogenetic signal that can be extracted from Insecta mitogenomes. Based on the combined use of
the five best topology-performing genes we obtained comparable results to whole mitogenomes, highlighting the
important role of data quality.
Conclusion: We show for the first time that mitogenomic data agrees with nuclear and morphological data for
several of the most controversial insect evolutionary relationships, adding a new independent source of evidence
to study relationships among insect orders. We propose that deeper divergences cannot be inferred with the
current available methods due to sequence saturation and compositional bias inconsistencies. Our exploratory
analysis indicates that the CAT model is the best dealing with LBA and it could be useful for other groups and
datasets with similar phylogenetic difficulties.

* Correspondence: gerard.talavera@uab.cat; roger.vila@ibe.upf-csic.es
1
Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-UPF), Pg. Marítim de la Barceloneta 37,
08003 Barcelona, Spain
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Talavera and Vila; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

Background
From the seminal comprehensive study of Hennig [1], to
the impressive descriptive work of Kristensen [2,3], to the
increasingly common molecular approaches [4-14], Insecta
class systematics has been a challenging field of study.
Molecular phylogenies have become a powerful tool that
shed light on many parts of the Tree of Life. At the same
time, due to the increasing number of sequences and genomes published, methodological questions are broadly
explored by researchers in order to correctly and fully
infer evolutionary relationships and patterns. In fact, it is
widely accepted that many factors can influence final tree
topologies, not to mention supports. Among these factors,
we can cite 1) the quality of the sequences and the alignment; 2) the amount of phylogenetic information present
in the sequences; 3) the presence of evolutionary biases
that are not taken into account by most used evolutionary
models (compositional heterogeneity, heterotachy...); 4)
the use of markers whose evolution does not reflect the
species evolutionary history (paralogs, xenologs); 5) the
accuracy of the evolutionary model and the efficiency of
the tree search algorithm used for the study [15-19]. Thus,
different strategies in the analyses can often lead us to
arrive at mutually contradictory conclusions starting from
the same dataset. This seems to be particularly true when
comparing the studies of relationships among the main
taxonomic groups of Arthropoda [20-26]. Intra- and interordinal insect relationships are not an exception and
represent a ceaseless source of debate. They have been
commonly explored using different types of molecular
data: rDNA 18S and 28S, mitochondrial genes, complete
mitochondrial genomes, nuclear protein coding genes, the
presence of shared intron positions [12] or mitochondrial
gene rearrangements [27]. Among the most controversial
insect groups with regard to systematic position we can
mention the Strepsiptera, an order of obligate endoparasitic and morphologically derived insects. The most basal
relationships within the holometabolous and the paraneopteran insects are another example of long-debated
relationships.
Mitochondrial genomes have been successful in recovering intra-ordinal phylogenetic relationships concordant with other sources of data, with convincing levels of
support, such as in Diptera [28], Hymenoptera [29],
Orthoptera [30] and Nepomorpha (Heteroptera) [31].
Nevertheless, mitogenomes proved so far to be generally
inadequate to study inter-ordinal relationships of insects
and deeper levels of Arthropoda, frequently resulting in
strong incongruence with morphological and nuclear
data, poor statistical supports, and high levels of inconsistency among different methods [16,24-26,32]. Indeed,
comparative studies that contrast nuclear and mitochondrial datasets suggest that nuclear markers are better suited to deal with deep arthropod relationships, as the

Page 2 of 15

mitochondrial genome is on average more saturated,
biased, and generally evolves at a much faster rate than
the nuclear genome [33,34]. Thus, knowing the specific
limits for each set of mitogenomes analyzed, i.e. when
substitution rates result in saturation that distorts the
phylogenetic signal at deeper nodes, is crucial to assess
their usefulness in phylogenetics [35].
It is well known that arthropod mitochondrial genomes
present some anomalous characteristics, like very high
percentage of AT content, frequent gene rearrangements
[36] or accelerated evolutionary rates likely related to phenotypic changes in body size or to parasitic lifestyle [37],
all of which can limit their applicability in phylogenetic
reconstruction. These biases in the data can result in systematic errors when the evolutionary model used for phylogenetic inference does not take them into account.
Thus, homogeneous models of substitution or replacement where all sites evolve under the same substitution
process [38] and constantly through time [19,39] are not
adequate for Arthropoda. One of the most usual artefacts,
especially in deep relationships where mutational saturation exists [40], is the long-branch attraction (LBA), a systematic error where two or more branches tend to cluster
together producing false relationships [41]. Also, models
not accounting for heterogeneity in nucleotide composition among taxa [16] can lead to artefactually group unrelated taxa with similar base composition [42-45].
For all these reasons, artropods in general and insects in
particular, constitute an excellent model to tackle challenging questions of phylogenetic methodological interest.
Several strategies have been designed to minimize potential biases: 1) Increasing the taxon sampling as far as possible, although generally counteracted by the removal of
taxa with an evidently incorrect placement disturbing the
reconstruction. 2) Filtering genes in large phylogenomic
analyses to avoid paralogy problems and unexpected
effects of missing data [45-47]. 3) The use of more specific
substitution/replacement models. For example, matrices of
amino acid replacement have been designed for Arthropoda (MtArt) [48,49] and Pancrustacea (MtPan) [25]. 4)
Removing fast-evolving sites according to discrete gamma
category [40,50-52]. 5) Removing third codon position or
recoding them as purines and pyrimidines (RY-coding) in
DNA alignments [23,53] to reduce the effects of saturation. 6) Using a site-heterogeneous mixture model (CAT)
to allow flexible probabilities of the aminoacid replacement equilibrium frequencies, in order to minimise LBA
effects [38,54,55].
In this work, we test the performance of different phylogenetic methodological strategies, using mitochondrial
genomes of the Class Insecta as a model and including
long-branched problematic taxa within Hymenoptera,
Strepsiptera, Thysanoptera and Phthiraptera orders that
have been usually excluded from mitochondrial datasets.

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

We address controversial taxonomical questions at three
different levels of divergence, for which solid hypotheses
based on nuclear phylogenies and morphological data
exist. Our results show strong differences among the
methods tested in their power to resolve inter-ordinal
relationships. Using both real and simulated data (see
Additional file 1), we confirm the capacity of the siteheterogeneous mixture model (CAT) under a Bayesian
framework, currently implemented in software PhyloBayes [38,56], to substantially avoid the LBA artefacts.
We show for the first time that the reconciliation
between mitochondrial and previous nuclear and morphological knowledge is possible in the cases studied.

Results and Discussion
About the exploratory phylogenetic framework

After applying a variety strategies for phylogenetic inference, we compared the trees obtained to the most widely
accepted nuclear DNA and morphology-based hypotheses
for Holometabola and Paraneoptera systematics (Figure 1).
These hypotheses were carefully selected from bibliography based on a great variety of data sources. As a result,
we grouped the proposed relationships within Holometabola in two main hypotheses mainly disagreeing in the
position of the order Hymenoptera, and a single general
hypothesis for Paraneoptera, although this group has been
much less intensely studied.
Methodologies that produced topologies identical or
very similar to these hypotheses were considered better
than those that resulted in very different trees. We noticed
a strong susceptibility of our data to the type of analyses
performed, confirming once more the instability of phylogenies based on insect mitochondrial genomes. Indeed,
almost each approach resulted in a different topology and
only the Bayesian inference using the CAT model with
amino acid sequences (BI-AA-CAT) was able to obtain
trees fitting potentially correct hypotheses. A better performance of the CAT model was confirmed using simulations (Additional file 1; Figure S1). No differences were
observed between the MtRev and MtArt models in ML
trees for any dataset. Cross-Validation statistics were performed to test the fit of the replacement models for proteins MtRev and CAT to the data. A better fit of the CAT
model for Paraneoptera (mean score = 9.216 ± 12.038)
and Eumetabola (mean score = 5.75, SD = ± 32.3539),
and a similar fit for Holometabola (mean score = -0.055,
SD = ± 32.3539) were detected.
The site-heterogeneous mixture model CAT [38]
assumes the existence of distinct substitution processes,
which usually results in a better fit to the data than sitehomogeneous models based on empirical frequencies of
amino acid or nucleotide substitutions, like MtRev or
GTR [57-60]. In fact it has already been shown in other
taxonomical groups that the CAT model is very powerful

Page 3 of 15

to overcome LBA artefacts [45,54,61-63]. Thus, the use
of models accounting for compositional heterogeneity in
the replacement process seems to be more effective than
strategies focused on the removal of saturated positions
in the case of Insect mitogenomes. Combining the CAT
model with the use of amino acid sequences instead of
DNA, which should reduce saturation biases, under a
Bayesian framework produced the most satisfactory
results. The topologies resulting from the analyses with
different methods are discussed further on.
Holometabola phylogeny and the Strepsiptera problem

In our dataset for the Holometabola we included one
strepsipteran and taxa of the Hymenoptera usually
removed from mitochondrial analyses because of their
long branches. We observed strong discrepancies among
the methodologies used, ML-AA (Figure 2A), BI-DNA
(Figure 2B) and BI-AA-CAT (Figure 2C) (see methods for
details), confirming the difficulties introduced by such
groups. The Strepsiptera species Xenos vesparum [64]
appeared within Hymenoptera in the ML-AA tree, being
completely trapped by the longest branches of the hymenopterans. The same happened with BI-DNA, although in
that case, Xenos appeared in a more basal position within
the hymenopterans, apparently slightly reducing the LBA
effect. Finally when applying the BI-AA with the CAT
model the LBA was suppressed, revealing completely different positions for the very long branches of Hymenoptera clade and the Strepsiptera (Figure 2C). The topology
obtained in this case indicated a sister group relationship
between Strepsiptera and Coleoptera (the composite clade
being known as Coleopterida), and supported Diptera +
Lepidoptera (Mecopterida), which represents the first evidence that mitochondrial data supports these groups.
Since their discovery, Strepsiptera has been associated
with Diptera, Siphonaptera, Odonata, Ephemerida, Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera [65]. More recently, four different placements have been suggested as possibilities:
membership in the Coleoptera [66], sister group to the
Coleoptera [67,68], outside the Holometabola [2] and sister to Diptera [4,69]. Based on molecular studies of 18S
rDNA, Whiting et al [4] proposed the grouping of Diptera
+ Strepsiptera under the name Halteria. Chalwatzis et al
[70,71] reached similar conclusions about the relationships
between Diptera and Strepsiptera using a larger dataset of
18S rDNA sequences. Later, other authors [72-74] attributed that grouping to an artefact due to LBA, becoming
one of the best examples of LBA ever, called “the Strepsiptera problem”.
Further phylogenetic evidence using other nuclear data
contradicted the Halteria hypothesis, and supported associations between Strepsiptera and Coleoptera. Rokas et al
(1999) [75] pointed to an intron insertion in en class
homeoboxes of Diptera and Lepidoptera but not in

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

Page 4 of 15

HOLOMETABOLA

Sternorrhyncha

Diptera

Diptera

Lepidoptera

Lepidoptera

Coleoptera

Hymenoptera

Strepsiptera

Strepsiptera

Hymenoptera

Coleoptera

Cicadomorpha
Heteroptera

Hemiptera

PARANEOPTERA

Thysanoptera
Phthiraptera
Psocoptera

[14] McKenna & Farrell 2010 - Nuclear data
[83] Boudreaux 1979 - Morphological data
[89] Grimaldi & Engel 2005 - Morphological data
[13] Longhorn et al 2010 - Nuclear data
[84] Beutel & Gorb 2001 - Morphological data
(not resolving Hemiptera tricotomy)
[11] Wiegmann et al 2009 - Nuclear data
[77] Bonneton et al 2006 - Nuclear data
[5] Wheeler et al 2001 - Nuclear and morphological data
[79] Friedrich & Beutel 2010 - Morphological
[85] Krenn 2007 - Morphological data
(not including Sternorrhyncha and joining
data (parsimony analysis)
[79] Friedrich & Beutel 2010 - Morphological data
Thysanoptera-Psocodea)
[80] Beutel et al 2010 - Morphological data
(bayesian analysis)
[35] Kjer 2004 - Nuclear data
(not recovering Mecopterida)
[3] Kristensen 1999 - Morphological data
(not including Thysanoptera and Sternorrhycnha)
[9] Savard et al 2006 - Nuclear data
(not resolving Strepsiptera position)
(not including Strepsiptera)
[102] Hennig et al 1981 - Morphological data
[12] Krauss et al 2008 - Nuclear data
(not resolving Hymenoptera position)
(not including Strepsiptera)
[35] Kjer 2004 - Nuclear data
[8] Zdobnov and Bork 2007 - Nuclear data
(not including Strepsiptera and not resolving Diptera position)
(not including Strepsiptera)
[5] Wheeler et al 2001 & [4] Whiting et al 1997 - Nuclear and morphological data
[68] Kukalova-Peck 1993- Morphological data
(disagreeing in Strepsiptera position, which is
(not including Diptera and Lepidoptera)
proposed as Diptera’s sister)
[69] Whiting 2002 - Nuclear data
(disagreeing in Strepsiptera position,
Sternorrhyncha
which is proposed as Diptera’s sister)
Diptera
Phthiraptera
Lepidoptera

ML (Protein)
(MtRev and MtArt)

Thysanoptera

Hymenoptera

Sternorrhyncha
Cicadomorpha

Strepsiptera

(C20 and C60)

Heteroptera

Coleoptera

ML-CAT (Protein)

Hymenoptera

Psocoptera

Diptera
Lepidoptera
Hymenoptera

Phthiraptera
Thysanoptera

Strepsiptera

Sternorrhyncha

Hymenoptera

Sternorrhyncha
Cicadomorpha

Hymenoptera

Heteroptera

Hymenoptera

BI (Protein)

Psocoptera

Coleoptera
Sternorrhyncha
Diptera

BI (DNA 1st and
2nd position)

Lepidoptera
Hymenoptera
Strepsiptera

Phthiraptera
Thysanoptera
Cicadomorpha

Hymenoptera

Psocoptera

Diptera
Lepidoptera

BI (DNA 1st and
2nd position + RNA)

Heteroptera

Coleoptera

Sternorrhyncha

Coleoptera
Hymenoptera
Strepsiptera
Hymenoptera
Hymenoptera

Diptera

Phthiraptera
Thysanoptera
Cicadomorpha
Heteroptera
Psocoptera

Sternorrhyncha

Lepidoptera

BI (DNA + RNA site
specific rate model)

Phthiraptera

Coleoptera

Thysanoptera

Hymenoptera
Strepsiptera
Hymenoptera

Diptera
Lepidoptera

BI - CAT model (DNA)

Coleoptera

Cicadomorpha
Heteroptera
Psocoptera

Sternorrhyncha
Cicadomorpha
Heteroptera
Thysanoptera

Hymenoptera

Phthiraptera

Strepsiptera

Psocoptera

Diptera

Sternorrhyncha

Lepidoptera

BI - CAT model (Protein)

Hymenoptera

Cicadomorpha
Heteroptera
Thysanoptera

Strepsiptera

Phthiraptera

Coleoptera

Psocoptera

Figure 1 Phylogenetic strategies tested. Current knowledge on main holometabolan (two competing hypotheses) and paraneopteran
relationships, based on nuclear and morphological data. Topologies obtained with the phylogenetic strategies tested are represented below
(relationships matching the currently accepted hypotheses are highlighted in black)

Strepsiptera, Coleoptera or Hymenoptera, arguing that an
intron loss is an improbable event. Based on a different
approach, Hayward et al (2005) [76] used the structure of

the USP/RXR hormone receptors, which showed a strong
acceleration of evolutionary rate in Diptera and Lepidoptera, to reject the Halteria clade and to provide strong

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

Page 5 of 15

A)

B)

C)

Figure 2 Holometabola phylogenies. Holometabola phylogeny using A) ML-AA (2731 positions), B) BI-DNA (9536 positions) and C) BI-AA-CAT
(2731 positions). Values at nodes show bootstrap or posterior probabilities, and scale bar represents substitutions/site.

evidence for Mecopterida. Bonneton et al (2003, 2006)
[77,78], confirmed the USP/RXR approach of Hayward et
al and added the ecdysone receptor (ECR; NR1H1) to the
analysis, confirming a Mecopterida monophyletic group.

However, these two studies were not able to define clear
associations for Strepsiptera. Misof et al (2007) [10] published a large phylogeny of Hexapoda using 18S rDNA
and applying mixed DNA/RNA substitution models.

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

Although they recovered well-supported hexapod basal
relationships, they obtained very low resolution and
unclear relationships within Holometabola.
Recent molecular studies using extensive nuclear data
seemed to contradict the Halteria hypothesis again, recovering a close relationship between Coleoptera and Strepsiptera [11,13,14]. First, Wiegmann et al (2009) [11] used a
complete dataset of six nuclear protein coding genes
including all holometabolan orders. They recovered
Coleopterida and provided statistical evidence discarding
LBA effects. They found some conflicting signal using
individual genes like cad, which recovered Halteria, a
result that was attributed to LBA because this is a rapidly
evolving locus. Longhorn et al (2010) [13] used a total of
27 ribosomal proteins and tested several nucleotide-coding
schemes for 22 holometabolan taxa, including two strepsipteran species, where a majority of the schemes tested
recovered Coleopterida. McKenna and Farrell (2010) [14]
raised identical conclusions using a total of 9 nuclear
genes for 34 holometabolan taxa. Also, the Coleopterida
have been recently recovered when using large morphological datasets [79,80]. Thus, evidence supporting Coleopterida has grown in recent years, suggesting that the
phylogenetic placement of Strepsiptera has been definitely
identified.
In summary, classical and most recent morphological
and molecular studies based on nuclear data support the
Mecopterida and Coleopterida hypotheses. Until now no
mitochondrial evidence backed these hypotheses and our
results are the first to fully agree with the most generally
accepted point of view.
The Hymenoptera position and the basal splitting events
of Holometabola

Depending on algorithm conditions, we observed inconsistencies among analyses in the Hymenoptera position
(Figure 2). For example, the fact of using six gamma rate
categories instead of four in ML-AA, or simply performing
5000000 instead of 1000000 runs (each with chain stability
checked with Tracer) for BI-DNA, or assigning different
partitions for DNA, tRNA and rRNA produced alternative
results, either ((Diptera + Lepidoptera) Hymenoptera)
Coleoptera) or (Diptera + Lepidoptera) + (Coleoptera +
Hymenoptera) (not shown). Similar problems when using
mitochondrial data have been previously described by Castro and Dowton (2005, 2007) [81,82] regarding this question, namely inconsistencies depending on the ingroup
and outgroup selection and the analytical model. Overall,
they described a tendency in their analyses to group
Hymenoptera as sister taxa to Mecopterida, but they also
found Hymenoptera or Hymenoptera + Coleoptera as the
most basal lineages in some of their trees.
When using the BI-AA-CAT method our mitochondrial
overview suggests a sister relationship of Hymenoptera

Page 6 of 15

with Mecopterida, placing Coleopterida outside a clade
comprising the other examined holometabolan insects.
This result coincides with one of the classical morphological points of view [3,83,84], some nuclear evidence [77],
and with morphological and nuclear combined analyses
[4,5] that recovered Coleoptera at the base of Holometabola (but not Strepsiptera). A phylogeny inferred from 356
anatomical characters by Beutel et al (2010) [80] placed
Hymenoptera as the basal holometabolous insects and
recovered a paraphyletic Mecopterida, although these
groups were not strongly resolved. A morphological study
based on characters of the thorax contributed by Friedrich
and Beutel (2010) [79] offered two scenarios depending on
the phylogenetic algorithm used: Coleopterida as the most
basal group in the Bayesian analysis, but Hymeoptera as
the most basal when using parsimony. Several hypotheses
based on morphology situate hymenopterans as sister to
Mecopterida [85,86], grouping coleopterans with the basal
Endopterygota [see references in [87]], or with Neuroptera
(not present in our dataset) [2,3,5,84-90]. Also, based on
the analysis of wing characters, Kukalova-Peck & Lawrence (1993) [68] proposed an alternative phylogenetic
hypothesis consisting in a most basal position for the
Hymenoptera. Such discrepancies enhance the view that
morphological characters are rather useless in order to
determine the phylogenetic position of Hymenoptera
within the Holometabola [69].
Our results do not support the most recent molecular
studies based on nuclear data, all of them reporting Hymenoptera as the most basal holometabolan insects, for example, the phylogenomic results contributed by Savard et al
(2006) [9] using a total of 185 nuclear genes. Since these
authors were using emerging genome projects to assemble
and analyze all the genes, they only were able to use 8 taxa
with 4 orders of holometabolan insects represented (Diptera, Lepidoptera, Coleoptera and Hymenoptera). Their
phylogeny resulted in a supported Coleoptera sister to
Mecopterida clade, leaving Hymenoptera at the base.
Zdobnov and Boork (2007) [8] obtained the same conclusions in another phylogenomic approach, using 2302 single
copy orthologous genes for 12 genomes representing the
same 4 holometabolous insect groups. Based on a dataset
with similarly limited taxon sampling, and using the gain
of introns close to older pre-existing ones as phylogenetic
markers, Krauss et al (2008) [12] arrived to the same conclusion identifying 22 shared derived intron positions of
Coleoptera with Mecopterida, in contrast to none of
Hymenoptera with Mecopterida. Additionally, phylogenies
with a large number of markers and a complete taxon sampling also gave rise to the same conclusions [11,13,14].
Therefore, mitochondrial data under the CAT model
avoids obviously wrong relationships caused by LBA and
recovers one of the two main current hypotheses.
This hypothesis has been proposed mostly based on

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

morphological evidence and differs from most recent
nuclear and genomic results. This issue remains thus an
open question deserving deeper study.
Paraneoptera phylogeny and the position of Phthiraptera

For Paraneoptera we observed once more an array of
topological changes depending on the method used. In
ML-AA (Figure 3A), Sternorrhyncha was recovered as
paraphyletic with respect to Phthiraptera and Thysanoptera, which evidences the tendency of the method to join

Page 7 of 15

lineages according to relative branch length. Indeed, the
white flies clade (Sternorrhyncha: Aleyrodoidea) displays
a faster substitution rate than their relatives Daktulosphaira vitifoliae, Schizapis graminum and Pachypsylla
venusta, and it seems to attract other long-branched
clades: Phthiraptera and Thysanoptera. Using BI-DNA
(Figure 3B), the topology improved and grouped all Sternorrhyncha representatives, although a paraphyletic
Hemiptera remained. Only when using BI-AA-CAT
(Figure 3C) a topology with most long-branched taxa not

A)

B)

C)

Figure 3 Paraneoptera phylogenies. Paraneoptera phylogeny using A) ML-AA (3501 positions), B) BI-DNA (10202 positions) and C) BI-AA-CAT
(3501 positions). Values at nodes show bootstrap or posterior probabilities, and scale bar represents substitutions/site.

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

clustered and with a monophyletic Hemiptera was
recovered.
Classically, Hemiptera is divided in two suborders:
Homoptera and Heteroptera. Homoptera includes Sternorrhyncha and Auchenorrhyncha (Cicadomorpha +
Fulgoromorpha). However, according to inferred phylogenies from 18S rDNA, Euhemiptera (Heteropterodea
(Heteroptera + Coleorrhyncha) + Auchenorrhyncha)
were proposed as sister group of Sternorrhyncha, leaving
Homoptera as paraphyletic [91-93], which is currently
the most accepted hypothesis. Our mitochondrial analyses with BI-AA-CAT produced the same conclusions as
18S rDNA datasets. Thus, Euhemiptera was recovered as
a robust clade formed by Cicadomorpha plus Fulgoromorpha (a group known as Auchenorrhyncha) plus Heteropterodea, while Homoptera (Sternorrhyncha +
Cicadomorpha + Coleorrhyncha) was paraphyletic with
respect to the heteropteran Triatoma dimidiata, which
appeared in all the tested methods as sister to Cicadomorpha with high support. In this study we were not able
to test the Auchenorrhyncha paraphyly due to the lack of
a Fulgoromorpha genome when the analyses were
performed.
A sistergroup relationship between the Hemiptera and
Thysanoptera, jointly known as Condylognatha [94,95],
has been proposed based on morphological characters
and supported by 18S rDNA data [96]. Moreover, the
closest relatives of this group seem to be the Psocodea (=
‘Psocoptera’ + Phthiraptera). Although Homoptera paraphyly is fully accepted, at molecular level it has just been
tested with nuclear single-gene phylogenies and the full
Paraneoptera has never been studied with mitochondrial
genomes. There is a broad acceptance that Paraneoptera
is a monophyletic group of hemimetabolous insects,
comprising the Hemiptera, Thysanoptera, and Psocodea,
but the basal relationships within this group are quite
controversial. The Condylognatha proposal (Hemiptera +
Thysanoptera) was supported by several studies
[83,97-102], although spermatological characters [2],
fossil studies [103,104] and combined molecular and
morphological data [4] suggested an alternative sistergroup relationship between Psocodea and Thysanoptera.
Psocodea, however, is a fully accepted clade, even if the
two orders included have been proposed to be mutually
paraphyletic [96,105].
In our results, even using the AA-BI-CAT, which
seemed to eliminate LBA artefacts for other clades, the
basal Paraneoptera relationships were in contradiction
with the generally accepted hypotheses. Psocodea was not
monophyletic because Thysanoptera was recovered as the
closest to Phthiraptera, and consequently Condylognatha
is not supported. In fact, Thrips imaginis and the Phthiraptera genomes, were recovered as sister with high support in most of the methods tested. This result, although

Page 8 of 15

unexpected, cannot be readily dismissed as wrong and
deserves more scrutiny (see for example [106]).
Eumetabola: Assessing the limits of the
mitogenomic data

To try to understand what are the informative limits of the
insect mitochondrial genomes, we raised the global divergence in our dataset by joining Paraneoptera and Holometabola genomes. With ML-AA and BI-DNA, all long
branches grouped, a result obviously produced by LBA.
Although resolution improved when the BI-AA-CAT was
used, this method was not able to deal with the increased
divergence and the result was not satisfactory (Figure 4). A
tree with similar problems resulted when using the model
CAT-BP, optimized to reduce the effects of compositional
heterogeneity. Mainly, the hymenopterans remained
within the long-branched cluster, although successfully
including the short-branched Hymenoptera Perga condei
with their relatives. Generally, although some signal was
detected, this must be lower than the noise and considerable systematically erroneous relationships were recovered.
Given the observed inconsistencies when the divergence is increased in insects, we should question the utility of the Arthropoda mitogenomes to recover supraordinal phylogenetic information because of mutational
saturation, at least with the current methodological
offer.
Mitogenomic data have been used to successfully
address several phylogenetic questions within mammals
[107,108] and birds [53]. In both cases, however, relationships at the root level were not fully resolved, like
the basal relationships between paleognaths and neognaths in birds, and Theria (marsupials plus placentals)
versus Marsupionta (monotremes plus marsupials)
hypotheses in mammals. In an ecdysozoan mitogenomics study testing the affinities of the three Panarthropoda phyla and the Mandibulata vs. Myriochelata
hypothesis, Rota-Stabelli et al (2010) [60] also described
difficulties caused by LBA. They obtained reasonable
results only by removing rapidly evolving lineages and
appyling the CAT model. Within Arthropoda, Nardi et
al (2003) [22] presented an unexpected result based on
a mitogenomic phylogeny: the paraphyly of the hexapods. They found crustaceans as sister to Insecta, and
Collembola as sister to both. This result was discarded
by Delsuc et al (2003) [23], who tried to avoid saturation
and composition heterogeneity by recoding nucleotides
as purines (R) and pyrimidines (Y), recovering then a
monophyletic Hexapoda. Later, Cameron et al (2004)
[21] performed a detailed battery of analysis including
the major arthropod groups to test the hexapod monophyly. They removed hymenopteran and paraneopteran
genomes from the analysis due to their extreme divergences. Even so, they could not obtain a conclusion

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

Page 9 of 15

Figure 4 Eumetabola phylogeny. Eumetabola phylogeny obtained using BI-AA-CAT (3288 positions). Values at nodes show posterior
probabilities and scale bar represents substitutions/site.

about the relationships due to the strong topological
instability of the trees.
Cook et al (2005) [24] assessed the same question concluding that Crustacea and Hexapoda were mutually
paraphyletic, although not including unstable lineages
like Hymenoptera, the wallaby louse (Heterodoxus macropus) and others with long branches. Removing some
important lineages, may strongly affect the general topology and the inferred evolutionary history. Carapelli et al
(2007) [25] obtained the same conclusions by Cook et al
(2005) [24] when including several additional genomes in
the analysis and using a new model of amino acid replacement for Pancustracea, MtPan. They presented two
large phylogenies based on DNA and protein alignments
that supported a non-monophyletic Hexapoda, both
obtaining a higher likelihood score under MtPan than
when using MtArt or MtRev. However Carapelli et al did
not test as many strategies and combinations like others
did, in which case they would have probably arrived to
similar contradicting conclusions. Some of the relationships within the Insecta they recovered were in strong
disagreement with previous morphological and molecular

evidence. For example: 1) They recovered a supported
association between Strepsiptera and the Crustacean
Armillifer armillatus (Pentastomida), two problematic
yet clearly not related organisms sharing exceptional
rates of evolution. 2) Diptera was included in the polyneopteran insect lineage when using BI-DNA and as an
independent lineage from all the rest of the Insecta class
when using BI-AA with MtPan model. 3) The positions
of the orthropterans Gryllotalpa orientalis and Locusta
migratoria remained unclear in their analysis. 4) The plecopteran Pteronarcys was recovered outside the polyneopterans, clustering with the Diptera. All of these cases
were strongly supported by Bayesian posterior probabilities, but it is known that biases in deep phylogenies
might increase supports of incorrect relationships. They
attributed the non-monophyletic clade of Holometabola
to a biased sampling, lacking orders like Mecoptera,
Siphonaptera, Trichoptera or Neuroptera, but once more
they removed the Hymenoptera from the analyses. Timmermans et al (2007) [26] re-evaluated the Collembola
position using ribosomal protein gene sequences, which
resulted in the supported monophyly of Hexapoda for all

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

methodologies used (MP, ML and BI). They also found
the inconsistency between nuclear and mitochondrial
data when analyzing pancustracean relationships and
clearly claimed that “caution is needed when applying
mitochondrial markers in deep phylogeny”.
The limitations of the mitochondrial genome as phylogenetic marker were already pointed out by Curole and
Kocher (1999) [109], when an increasing number of
mitogenomes were sequenced and resulting phylogenies
conflicted with morphological and nuclear hypotheses in
the deep relationships of tetrapods and arthropods, as
well as in mammals [110]. Within Insecta, more than one
hundred mitogenomes are available now in GenBank/
DDBJ/EMBL and they have been used to successfully
resolve intra-ordinal relationships, such as in Diptera
[28], Hymenoptera [29], Orthoptera [30] and Nepomorpha (Heteroptera) [31]. We report the difficulties to work
on inter-ordinal relationships within Insecta, although
showing that they can be generally avoided by using the
BI-AA under the site-heterogeneous mixture model
(CAT). However, we conclude that divergences in mitochondrial sequences above super-order levels represent
an insurmountable problem for current methods. This
result is at least valid for Arthropoda mitochondrial genomes, but difficult to extrapolate to other groups of
organisms. We must remember some exceptional characteristics of the Insecta and Arthropoda in general, like
high AT-content, the parasitic life-styles present in some
groups or explosive radiation events in others. It is thus
possible that a more relaxed evolutionary process in
other metazoans allows for slightly deeper studies, and
the limits of each dataset should be independently
assessed.
Mitochondrial single genes reliability

Gene exclusion is one of the commonly used strategies to
improve phylogenies and we tried to better understand
the contribution of each mitochondrial gene to the phylogeny. Indeed, we found important variability in the phylogenetic signal of the different genes (Table 1). Five of the
thirteen genes were especially informative in the topology
resolution: cox1, nad1, cytb, nad2 and nad4. On the contrary atp6, atp8, cox2, cox3 and nad4L datasets produced
the most different topologies. According to scale-factor
values, nad1, nad3, nad4, nad5 and atp6 were the genes
with a global divergence closest to the whole mitochondrial genome. nad2, nad6, cox1, atp8 and cytb were the
outliers in this case, giving the most deviated values. For
both parameters, only nad1 and nad4 were among the
best genes. Interestingly, some of the genes, for example
cox1, performed very well regarding topology, but strongly
deviated in divergence. The opposite applies to atp6. The
unusually fast substitution rate of cox1 compared to the
mitochondrial mean (scale-factor = 2.0732) should be

Page 10 of 15

Table 1 Scale-factor and Robinson-Foulds distances for
individual mitochondrial genes
Scale-factor

Robinson-Foulds

nad1

1.1089

4

nad2

0.7142

5

nad3

0.9596

7

nad4

0.9771

6

nad5

0.9095

8

nad6

0.7075

8

nad4L

0.7822

10

cox1

2.0732

2

cox2

0.8565

8

cox3

1.1510

8

atp6

1.0279

9

atp8

0.6826

11

cytb

1.3414

4

The best values for each parameter and the five best-scored genes for
Robinson-Foulds are highlighted in bold.

highlighted because this is the most common mitochondrial marker in single gene studies of insects and it is
broadly used to infer molecular clocks in evolutionary
time-based studies. According to this result, cox1 seems to
be a highly variable gene in insects, which makes it very
suitable for the study of recent relationships and for DNA
barcoding studies of this group of organisms.
Considering topology resolution as a priority in systematic studies, we selected the five best-scored genes for
further comparisons with the whole genome. The phylogeny that resulted from their combined use reproduced a
very similar topology to that of the entire dataset in several
cases (Table 2). Thus, the resolution of the five gene combinations is comparable to that of a full genome, a result
that could be explained by the inclusion of noise by the
less informative genes. In conclusion, we suggest that the
use of a selection of the most suitable genes is a valid (and
simpler) strategy that produces results equivalent to the
use of the entire genome. In order to apply this strategy in
insect mitochondrial studies, we identify cox1, nad1, cytb,
nad2 and nad4 as the best genes for topology, and nad1,
nad3, nad4, nad5 and atp6 for branch lengths. We
emphasize the importance of deciding what aspect of the
mitogenome we want to estimate using a subset of genes,
whether topology or branch length, because some of these
genes (notoriously cox1) perform very well in one regard
and poorly in the other.

Conclusions
Although several innovative phylogenetic methods have
been developed to improve mitochondrial phylogenetic
trees in some groups of organisms, results have been
controversial in insects, leading to different conclusions
that most often disagree with more generally accepted

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

Page 11 of 15

Table 2 Scale-factor and Robinson-Foulds distance when
comparing five concatenated genes versus whole
genome in different datasets
Scale-factor

Robinson-Foulds

Paraneoptera

1.19471

1

Paraneoptera
(long-branched taxa excluded)

1.03562

1

Holometabola

1.26578

7

Holometabola
(long-branched taxa excluded)

0.58196

2

Eumetabola

0.79679

13

Eumetabola
(long-branched taxa excluded)

1.10733

4

relationships obtained from nuclear and morphological
data. Thus, insects constitute a perfect model to test different methodologies and to better understand phylogenetic inference behaviour. Here we tested a battery of
those strategies with three datasets of complete mitochondrial genomes of Insecta, including problematic taxa
usually excluded from the analyses, and we compared the
results with the current nuclear and morphological state
of knowledge. The results suggested that the use of
amino acid sequences instead of DNA is more appropriated at the inter-ordinal level and that the use of the
site-heterogeneous mixture model (CAT) under a Bayesian framework, currently implemented in the software
PhyloBayes, substantially avoids LBA artefacts. We show
that inferring phylogenies above the super-order level
constitutes the limit of the phylogenetic signal contained
in insect mitochondrial genomes for currently available
phylogenetic methods. For many of the relationships studied, we demonstrate for the first time that, with the
proper methodology, mitochondrial data supports the
most generally accepted hypotheses based on nuclear and
morphological data. Thus, we confirm the non-monophyly of Homoptera within Paraneoptera, and recover
Strepsiptera as a sister order to Coleoptera. In the basal
splitting events in Holometabola we recover the Hymenoptera-Mecopterida association, and Coleoptera +
Strepsiptera form a clade sister to the rest of Holometabola, which coincides with one of the two most accepted
hypotheses. Recovered basal relationships in Paraneoptera differ from the currently accepted hypothesis in the
position of Phthiraptera, which is recovered as sister to
Thysanoptera, resulting in a paraphyletic Psocodea. By
comparing single-gene to whole genome tree topologies,
we select the five genes best performing for deep Insect
phylogenetic inference. The combined used of these five
genes (cox1, nad1, cytb, nad2 and nad4) produces results
comparable to those of mitogenomes, and we recommend the prioritary use of these markers in future
studies.

Methods
Alignments

A total of 55 complete or almost complete Eumetabola
mitochondrial genomes (17 of Paraneoptera and 38 of
Holometabola) were downloaded from GenBank (Additional file 1: Table S1). Analyses were conducted using 3
datasets; 1) Holometabola, 2) Paraneoptera and 3) Eumetabola (Paraneoptera + Holometabola) in order to assess
phylogenetic behaviour in a higher divergence level.
Every gene was translated to protein according to the
arthropod mitochondrial genetic code and individually
aligned using Mafft 5.861 [111]. To produce the DNA
alignments, gaps generated in the protein alignment
were transferred to the non-aligned DNA sequences
using PutGaps software [112]. The resulting DNA and
protein alignments for each gene were concatenated
after removing problematic regions using Gblocks 0.91
[113] under a relaxed approach [15] with the next set of
parameters: “Minimum Number Of Sequences For A
Conserved Position” = 9, “Minimum Number Of
Sequences For A Flank Position” = 13, “Maximum
Number Of Contiguous Nonconserved Positions” = 8,
“Minimum Lenght Of A Block” = 10, “Allowed Gap
Positions” = “With Half”, and the kind of data was “by
codons” for DNA and “Protein” for the aminoacids.
tRNA and rRNA sequences were individually aligned
using ProbconsRNA 1.1 [114] and ambiguously aligned
regions removed with Gblocks with the same parameters
used for DNA. For the Paraneoptera dataset, both tRNALeu sequences from Aleurodicus dugesii were removed
because they were extremely long in comparison to the
rest and affected the alignment mechanism. For the
Holometabola dataset, the large subunit ribosomal RNA
sequence from Anophophora glabripennis, the tRNA-Met
from Ostrinia nubilalis and Ostrinia furnacalis, and the
tRNA-Trp from Cysitomia duplonata were unusually
short and were not included. All these fragments were
excluded from the Eumetabola dataset as well. Sequences
were concatenated, and gaps were used instead of the
removed RNAs and the few lacking coding genes.
Strategies for phylogenetic analysis

We tested several strategies for phylogenetic analyses on
the three datasets. These differed in the phylogenetic
algorithm, the treatment of saturation, and the use of different models of replacement: 1) Maximum likelihood on
protein alignments under the MtRev and MtArt models
(ML-AA); 2) Maximum likelihood on protein alignments
under Empirical profile mixture models (20 and 60 profiles) (ML-AA-CAT) [38,115] 3) Bayesian inference on
protein alignments under the MtRev model; 4) Bayesian
inference on DNA alignments including only first and
second codon positions for the 13 coding genes under
the GTR+I+G model (BI-DNA); 5) Bayesian inference on

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

DNA alignments including first and second codon positions of the 13 coding genes, plus 22 tRNA and 2 rRNA
[35] and under the GTR+I+G model; 6) Bayesian inference with a site specific rate model for all DNA + RNA
positions [35] 7) Bayesian inference under the CAT
model on DNA alignments including only first and second codon positions of the 13 coding genes; 8) Bayesian
inference under the CAT model of protein alignments
from the 13 coding genes (BI-AA-CAT) (Additional file
1: Table S2).
For maximum likelihood analyses, the software PhyML
2.4.4 [116] with the empirical MtRev model and six
gamma rate categories was used. PhyML-CAT applying
mixture models (C20 and C60) [115] was used when testing an alternative to empirical rate matrices in ML. For
Bayesian inference, we used MrBayes v. 3.1.2 [117] and
PhyloBayes 2.3 [38]. For MrBayes calculations in DNA
alignments we used two partitions (first and second position of every codon), the GTR+I+G model, and four
chains of 5.000.000 trees, sampling every 5000 generations.
When including coding genes + tRNA + rRNA, sequences
were partitioned in three independent partitions, one for
each sequence type. For MrBayes analyses on protein
alignments we used the MtRev model and four chains of
1.000.000 trees, sampling every 1000 generations, and
applied a burn-in of 10% generations. For PhyloBayes analyses we used the site-heterogeneous mixture model CAT
model for aminoacid sequences and the GTR-CAT model
for the nucleotide sequences, and we run two independent
chains of 5000 cycles, removing the first 1000 and sampling one point every five. For the site-specific rate model,
characters were divided into six discrete rate categories
using TreePuzzle [118] and partitioned in MrBayes from
fastest to slowest, following a similar approach than in
Kjer & Honeycutt [35]. Convergence of independent runs
was checked with the software Tracer v1.4.
For the whole Eumetabola dataset, the CAT-BP model
was tested, using the software nhPhylobayes v.023
[119,120]. This model is supposed to better account for
amino-acid compositional heterogeneity, because it allows
breakpoints along the branches of the phylogeny at which
the amino acid composition can change. The number of
components in the mixture were fixed to 120, according
to the previous CAT-based phylogeny for Eumetabola.
Four independent chains were run, and only two of them
converged after highly demanding computation. Taking
every tenth sampled tree, a 50% majority rule conseus tree
was computed using the converged chains.
To statistically compare the CAT model with the stardard site-homogeneus models, cross validation statistics
with PhyloBayes 3.3b were performed between the amino
acid models (MtRev and CAT), as described in Philippe
et al (2011) [121].

Page 12 of 15

Mitochondrial single genes reliability

In order to explore the contribution of each individual
gene to the concatenated tree, 13 single-gene phylogenies
from the Paraneoptera dataset were reconstructed with
BI-DNA excluding third codon positions. We scored
each single-gene resulting phylogeny based on RobinsonFoulds distances and relative scale-factor values [122]
using the complete mitochondrial tree as reference. The
5 best-scored genes were selected according to Robinson-Foulds distances and they were used to infer Paraneoptera, Holometabola and Eumetabola 5-gene
phylogenies. Again, Robinson-Foulds distances and relative scale-factor values were calculated. In the same way,
we also tested 5-gene performance when following a
common practice in mitochondrial phylogenies of
insects: the removal of rapidly evolving lineages with
branch lengths deviating from the mean of the reference
tree. To do that, taxa with a divergence to the root of the
tree higher than 0.5 substitutions/position for Paraneoptera and Holometabola datasets and higher than 0.6 substitutions/position for the Eumetabola were removed.
Thus, a total of 6 datasets were scored for the RobinsonFoulds distance and the scale-factor.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Additional Text, Figures and Tables. a) Table S1. List
of mitochondrial genomes used in the study. b) Table S2. Number of
characters in the final alignments for each phylogenetic reconstruction
method tested. c) Simulations methods. d) Simulations results and
discussion. d) Figure S1. Simulations. e) References.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank José Castresana for his contribution and helpful ideas in
designing the experiments and for comments on the manuscript, Cymon
Cox for help with the nhPhylobayes analysis, and three anonymous
reviewers for highly useful comments. Support for this research was
provided by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación project
CGL2007-60516/BOS and CGL2010-21226/BOS; and predoctoral fellowships
I3P-CPG-2006 and BES-2008-002054 to GT.
Author details
Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-UPF), Pg. Marítim de la Barceloneta 37,
08003 Barcelona, Spain. 2Departament de Genètica i Microbiologia,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Edifici C, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain.
1

Authors’ contributions
GT designed the experiments and analyzed the data. GT and RV contributed
in discussing and writing the paper. Both authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Received: 18 July 2011 Accepted: 27 October 2011
Published: 27 October 2011
References
1. Hennig W: Die Stammesgeschichte der Insekten Kramer, Frankfurt; 1969.
2. Kristensen NP: Phylogeny of extant hexapods. The insects of Australia: A
textbook for students and research workers Melbourne University Press; 1991.

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.
23.
24.

25.

Kristensen NP: Phylogeny of Endopterygote insects, the most successful
lineage of living organisms. European Journal of Entomology 1999,
96(3):237-253.
Whiting MF, Carpenter JC, Wheeler QD, Wheeler WC: The Stresiptera
problem: Phylogeny of the holometabolous insect orders inferred from
18S and 28S ribosomal DNA sequences and morphology. Systematic
Biology 1997, 46(1):1-68.
Wheeler WC, Whiting M, Wheeler QD, Carpenter JM: The phylogeny of the
extant hexapod orders. Cladistics 2001, 17(4):403-404.
Kjer KM: Aligned 18S and insect phylogeny. Systematic Biology 2004,
53(3):506-514.
Ogden TH, Whiting MF, Wheeler WC: Poor taxon sampling, poor character
sampling, and non-repeatable analyses of a contrived dataset do not
provide a more credible estimate of insect phylogeny: a reply to Kjer.
Cladistics 2005, 21(3):295-302.
Zdobnov EM, Bork P: Quantification of insect genome divergence. Trends
in Genetics 2007, 23:16-20.
Savard J, Tautz D, Richards S, Weinstock G, Gibbs R, Werren J, Tettelin H, M
Lercher M: Phylogenomic analysis reveals bees and wasps
(Hymenoptera) at the base of the radiation of Holometabolous insects.
Genome Research 2006, 16(11):1334-1338.
Misof B, Niehuis O, Bischoff I, Rickert A, Erpenbeck D, Staniczek A: Towards
an 18S phylogeny of hexapods: Accounting for group-specific character
covariance in optimized mixed nucleotide/doublet models. Zoology 2007,
110(5):409-429.
Wiegmann BM, Trautwein MD, Kim JW, Cassel BK, Bertone MA,
Winterton SL, Yeates DK: Single-copy nuclear genes resolve the
phylogeny of the holometabolous insects. BMC Biology 2009, 7:36.
Krauss V, Thümmler C, Georgi F, Lehmann J, Stadler PF, Eisenhardt C: Near
intron positions are reliable phylogenetic markers: an application to
holometabolous insects. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:821-830.
Longhorn SJ, Pohl HW, Vogler AP: Ribosomal protein genes of
holometabolan insects reject the Halteria, instead revealing a close
affinity of Strepsiptera with Coleoptera. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2010,
55(3):846-859.
McKenna DD, Farrell BD: 9-genes reinforce the phylogeny of
holometabola and yield alternate views on the phylogenetic placement
of Strepsiptera. PloS One 2010, 5(7):e11887.
Talavera G, Castresana J: Improvement of phylogenies after removing
divergent and ambiguously aligned blocks from protein sequence
alignments. Systematic Biology 2007, 56(4):564-577.
Hassanin A, Leger N, Deutsch J: Evidence for multiple reversals of
asymmetric mutational constraints during the evolution of the
mitochondrial genome of Metazoa, and consequences for phylogenetic
inferences. Systematic Biology 2005, 54(2):277-298.
Fitch WM, Markowit E: An improved method for determining codon
variability in a gene and its application to rate of fixation of mutations
in evolution. Biochemical Genetics 1970, 4(5):579-93.
Philippe H, Zhou Y, Brinkmann H, Rodrigue N, Delsuc F: Heterotachy and
long-branch attraction in phylogenetics. BMC Evol Biol 2005, 5:50.
Pagel M, Meade A: Modelling heterotachy in phylogenetic inference by
reversible-jump Markov chain Monte Carlo. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 2008, 363(1512):3955-3964.
Giribet G, Ribera C: A review of arthropod phylogeny: New data based
on ribosomal DNA sequences and direct character optimization.
Cladistics 2000, 16(2):204-231.
Cameron SL, Miller KB, D’Haese CA, Whiting MF, Barker SC: Mitochondrial
genome data alone are not enough to unambiguously resolve the
relationships of Entognatha, Insecta and Crustacea sensu lato
(Arthropoda). Cladistics 2004, 20(6):534-557.
Nardi F, Spinsanti G, Boore JL, Carapelli A, Dallai R, Frati F: Hexapod origins:
Monophyletic or paraphyletic? Science 2003, 299(5614):1887-1889.
Delsuc F, Phillips MJ, Penny D: Comment on “Hexapod origins:
Monophyletic or paraphyletic?”. Science 2003, 301(5639):1482.
Cook CE, Yue Q, Akam M: Mitochondrial genomes suggest that hexapods
and crustaceans are mutually paraphyletic. Proc Biol Sci 2005,
272(1569):1295-1304.
Carapelli A, Lio P, Nardi F, van der Wath E, Frati F: Phylogenetic analysis of
mitochondrial protein coding genes confirms the reciprocal paraphyly
of Hexapoda and Crustacea. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7(Suppl 2):S8.

Page 13 of 15

26. Timmermans M, Roelofs D, Mariën J, van Straalen NM: Revealing
pancrustacean relationships: Phylogenetic analysis of ribosomal protein
genes places Collembola (springtails) in a monophyletic Hexapoda and
reinforces the discrepancy between mitochondrial and nuclear DNA
markers. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2008, 8:83.
27. Boore JL, Collins TM, Stanton D, Daehler LL, Brown WM: Deducing the
pattern of arthropod phylogeny from mitochondrial-DNA
rearrangements. Nature 1995, 13:163-165.
28. Cameron SL, Lambkin CL, Barker SC, Whiting MF: A mitochondrial genome
phylogeny of Diptera: whole genome sequence data accurately resolve
relationships over broad timescales with high precision. Systematic
Entomology 2007, 32(1):40-59.
29. Cameron SL, Dowton M, Castro LR, Ruberu K, Whiting MF, Austin AD,
Diement K, Stevens J: Mitochondrial genome organization and phylogeny
of two vespid wasps. Genome 2008, 51(10):800-808.
30. Fenn J, Song H, Cameron SL, Whiting MF: A preliminary mitochondrial
genome phylogeny of Orthoptera (Insecta) and approaches to
maximizing phylogenetic signal found within mitochondrial genome
data. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2008, 49(1):59-68.
31. Hua JM, Li M, Dong P, Cui Y, Xie Q, Bu W: Phylogenetic analysis of the
true water bugs (Insecta: Hemiptera: Heteroptera: Nepomorpha):
evidence from mitochondrial genomes. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2009,
9:134.
32. Masta SE, Longhorn SJ, Boore JL: Arachnid relationships based on
mitochondrial genomes: Asymmetric nucleotide and amino acid bias
affects phylogenetic analyses. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2009,
50(1):117-128.
33. Burger G, Gray MW, Lang BF: Mitochondrial genomes: anything goes.
Trends in Genetics 2003, 19(12):709-716.
34. Lin C, Danforth B: How do insect nuclear and mitochondrial gene
substitution patterns differ? Insights from Bayesian analyses of
combined datasets. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2004, 30(3):686-702.
35. Kjer KM, Honeycutt RL: Site specific rates of mitochondrial genomes and
the phylogeny of eutheria. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2007, 7:8.
36. Shao R, Dowton M, Murrell A, Barker SC: Rates of gene rearrangement and
nucleotide substitution are correlated in the mitochondrial genomes of
insects. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20(10):1612-1619.
37. Castro LR, Austin AD, Dowton M: Contrasting rates of mitochondrial
molecular evolution in parasitic diptera and hymenoptera. Mol Biol Evol
2002, 19(7):1100-1113.
38. Lartillot N, Philippe H: A Bayesian mixture model for across-site
heterogeneities in the amino-acid replacement process. Molecular Biology
and Evolution 2004, 21(6):1095-1109.
39. Kolaczkowski B, Thornton J: Performance of maximum parsimony and
likelihood phylogenetics when evolution is heterogeneous. Nature 2004,
431:980-984.
40. Rodriguez-Ezpeleta N, Brinkmann H, Roure B, Lartillot N, Lang BF,
Philippe H: Detecting and overcoming systematic errors in genome-scale
phylogenies. Systematic Biology 2007, 56(3):389-399.
41. Felsenstein J: Cases in which parsimony or compatibility methods will be
positively misleading. Systematic Zoology 1978, 27(4):401-410.
42. Tarrío R, Rodriguez-Trelles F, Ayala F: Shared nucleotide composition
biases among species and their impact on phylogenetic reconstructions
of the drosophilidae. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18(8):1464-1473.
43. Rosenberg M, Kumar S: Heterogeneity of nucleotide frequencies among
evolutionary lineages and phylogenetic inference. Mol Biol Evol 2003,
20(4):610-621.
44. Rosenberg M, Kumar S: Taxon sampling, bioinformatics, and
phylogenomics. Systematic Biology 2003, 52(1):119-124.
45. Brinkmann H, Van der Giezen M, Zhou Y, Poncelin de Raucourt G,
Philippe H: An empirical assessment of long-branch attraction artefacts
in deep eukaryotic phylogenomics. Systematic Biology 2005, 54(5):743-757.
46. Philippe H, Delsuc F, Brinkmann H, Lartillot N: Phylogenomics. Annual
Review of Ecology, Evolution and Systematics 2005, 36:541-562.
47. Soria-Carrasco V, Valens-Vadell M, Pena A, Anton J, Amann R, Castresana J,
Rossello-Mora R: Phylogenetic position of Salinibacter ruber based on
concatenated protein alignments. Syst Appl Microbiol 2007, 30(3):171-179.
48. Abascal F, Posada D, Knight RD, Zardoya R: Parallel evolution of the
genetic code in arthropod mitochondrial genomes. PLoS Biology 2006,
4:711-718.

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

49. Abascal F, Posada D, Zardoya R: MtArt: a new model on amino acid
replacement for Arthropoda. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:1-5.
50. Ruiz-Trillo I, Riutort M, Littlewood DT, Herniou EA, Baguñà J: Acoel
flatworms: Earliest extant bilaterian metazoans, not members of
Platyhelminthes. Science 1999, 283(5409):1919-1923.
51. Brinkmann H, Philippe H: Archaea sister group of bacteria? Indications
from tree reconstruction artifacts in ancient phylogenies. Mol Biol Evol
1999, 16(6):817-825.
52. Burleigh J, Mathews S: Phylogenetic signal in nucleotide data from seed
plants: Implications for resolving the seed plant tree of life. American
Journal of Botany 2004, 91:1599-1613.
53. Harrison GL, McLenachan PA, Phillips MJ, Slack KE, Cooper A, Penny D: Four
new avian mitochondrial genomes help get to basic evolutionary
questions in the late Cretaceous. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21(6):974-983.
54. Lartillot N, Brinkmann H, Philippe H: Suppression of long-branch attraction
artefacts in the animal phylogeny using a site-heterogeneous model.
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2007, 7(Suppl 1):S4.
55. Roure B, Philippe H: Site-specific time heterogeneity of the substitution
process and its impact on phylogenetic inference. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2011, 11:17.
56. Lartillot N, Lepage T, Blanquart S: PhyloBayes 3: a Bayesian software
package for phylogenetic reconstruction and molecular dating.
Bioinformatics 2009, 25(17):2286-2288.
57. Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P, Pick K, Borchiellini C, Boury-Esnault N,
Vacelet J, Renard E, Houliston E, Quéinnec E, Da Silva C, Wincker P, Le
Guyader H, Leys S, Jackson DJ, Schreiber F, Erpenbeck D, Morgenstern B,
Wörheide G, Manuel M: Phylogenomics Revives Traditional Views on
Deep Animal Relationships. Current Biology 2009, 19(8):706-712.
58. Lartillot N, Philippe H: Improvement of molecular phylogenetic inference
and the phylogeny of Bilateria. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008,
363:1463-1472.
59. Sperling EA, Peterson KJ, Pisani D: Phylogenetic-signal dissection of
nuclear housekeeping genes supports the paraphyly of sponges and the
monophyly or Eumetazoa. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26(10):2261-2274.
60. Rota-Stabelli O, Kayal E, Gleeson D, Daub J, Boore JL, Telford MJ, Pisani D,
Blaxter M, Lavrov DV: Ecdysozoan mitogenomics: evidence for a common
origin of the legged invertebrates, the Panarthropoda. Genome Biology
and Evolution 2010, 2:425-440.
61. Baurain D, Brinkmann H, Philippe H: Lack of resolution in the animal
phylogeny: Closely spaced cladogeneses or undetected systematic
errors? Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:6-9.
62. Philippe H, Brinkmann H, Martinez P, Riutort M, Baguña J: Acoel flatworms
are not platyhelmintes: evidence from phylogenomics. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:
e717.
63. Delsuc F, Tsagkogeorga G, Lartillot N, Philippe H: Additional molecular
support for the new chordate phylogeny. Genesis 2008, 46(11):592-604.
64. Carapelli A, Vannini L, Nardi F, Boore JL, Beani L, Dallai R, Frati F: The
mitochondrial genome of the entomophagous endoparasite Xenos
vesparum (Insecta: Strepsiptera). Gene 2006, 376(2):248-259.
65. Whiting MF: Long-Branch Distraction and the Strepsiptera. Systematic
Biology 1998, 47(1):134-138.
66. Crowson RA: The biology of the Coleoptera London: Academic Press; 1981.
67. Kathirithamby J: Review of the order Strepsiptera. Systematic Entomology
1989, 14(1):41-92.
68. Kukalova-Peck J, Lawrence J: Evolution of the hind wing in coleoptera.
Canadian Entomologist 1993, 125:181-258.
69. Whiting MF: Phylogeny of the holometabolous insect orders: molecular
evidence. Zoologica Scripta 2002, 31:3-17.
70. Chalwatzis N, Baur A, Stetzer E, Kinzelbach R, Zimmermann F: Strongly
expanded 18S rRNA genes correlated with a peculiar morphology in the
insect order of Strepsiptera. Zoologica 1995, 98:115-126.
71. Chalwatzis N, Hauf J, Van de Peer Y, Kinzelbach R, Zimmermann F: 18S
ribosomal RNA genes of insects: Primary structure of the genes and
molecular phylogeny of the Holometabola. Annals of the Entomological
Society of America 1996, 89:788-803.
72. Hwang UW, Kim W, Tautz D, Friedrich M: Molecular phylogenetics at the
Felsenstein zone: Approaching the Strepsiptera problem using 5.8S and
28S rDNA sequences. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 1998,
9(3):470-480.
73. Carmean D, Crespi B: Do long branches attract flies? Nature 1995,
373:666-666.

Page 14 of 15

74. Huelsenbeck JP: Systematic Bias in Phylogenetic Analysis: Is the
Strepsiptera Problem Solved? Systematic Biology 1998, 47(3):519-537.
75. Rokas A, Kathirithamby J, Holland PW: Intron insertion as a phylogenetic
character: the engrailed homeobox of Strepsiptera does not indicate
affinity with Diptera. Insect Molecular Biology 1999, 8(4):527-530.
76. Hayward DC, Trueman JW, Bastiani MJ, Ball EE: The structure of the USP/
RXR of Xenos pecki indicates that Strepsiptera are not closely related to
Diptera. Development Genes and Evolution 2005, 215(4):213-219.
77. Bonneton F, Brunet FG, Kathirithamby J, Laudet V: The rapid divergence of
the ecdysone receptor is a synapomorphy for Mecopterida that clarifies
the Strepsiptera problem. Insect Molecular Biology 2006, 15(3):351-362.
78. Bonneton F, Zelus D, Iwema T, Robinson-Rechavi M, Laudet V: Rapid
divergence of the ecdysone receptor in Diptera and Lepidoptera
suggests coevolution between ECR and USP-RXR. Mol Biol Evol 2003,
20(4):541-553.
79. Friedrich F, Beutel RG: Goodbye Halteria? The thoracic morphology of
Endopterygota (Insecta) and its phylogenetic implications. Cladistics 2010,
26:1-34.
80. Beutel RG, Friedrich F, Hörnschemeyer T, Phol H, Hünefeld F, Beckmann F,
Meier R, Misof B, Whiting MF, Vilhelmsen L: Morphological and molecular
evidence converge upon a robust phylogeny of the megadiverse
Holometabola. Cladistics 2010, 26:1-15.
81. Castro LR, Dowton M: The position of the Hymenoptera within the
Holometabola as inferred from the mitochondrial genome of Perga
condei (Hymenoptera: Symphyta: Pergidae). Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution 2005, 34(3):469-479.
82. Castro LR, Dowton M: Mitochondrial genomes in the Hymenoptera and
their utility as phylogenetic markers. Systematic Entomology 2007,
32(1):60-69.
83. Boudreaux HB: Arthropod phylogeny with special reference to insects New
York: John Wiley & Sons; 1979.
84. Beutel R, Gorb S: Ultrastructure of attachment specializations of
hexapods, (Arthropoda): evolutionary patterns inferred from a revised
ordinal phylogeny. Journal Of Zoological Systematics And Evolutionary
Research 2001, 39:177-207.
85. Krenn HW: Evidence from mouthpart structure on interordinal
relationships in Endopterygota? Arthropod Systematics & Phylogeny 2007,
65(1):7-14.
86. Whiting M: Phylogeny of the Holometabolous Insects. Assembling the Tree
of Life Oxford University Press; 2004, 345-359.
87. Gullan PJ, Cranston PS: The Insects: An Outline Of Entomology (3rd Edition)
Wiley-Blackwell; 2004.
88. Hornschemeyer T: Phylogenetic significance of the wing-base of the
Holometabola (Insecta). Zoologica Scripta 2002, 31:17-29.
89. Grimaldi D, Engel M: Evolution of the insects Cambrigde University Press;
2005.
90. Beutel RG, Pohl H: Endopterygote systematics - where do we stand and
what is the goal (Hexapoda, Arthropoda)? Systematic Entomology 2006,
31(2):202-219.
91. Campbell BC, Steffen-Campbell JD, Sorensen JT, Gill RJ: Paraphyly of
Homoptera and Auchenorrhyncha inferred from 18S rDNA nucelotide
sequences. Systematic Entomology 1995, 20(3):175-194.
92. Sorensen JT, Campbell BC, Gill RJ, Steffen-Campbell JD: Non-Monophyly of
Auchenorrhyncha (Homoptera), Based Upon 18s rDNA Phylogeny - EcoEvolutionary and Cladistic Implications within Pre-Heteropterodea
Hemiptera (s.l) and a Proposal for New Monophyletic Suborders. PanPacific Entomologist 1995, 71(1):31-60.
93. Von Dohlen CD, Moran NA: Molecular Phylogeny of the Homoptera: A
Paraphyletic Taxon. Journal of Molecular Evolution 1995, 41:211-223.
94. Borner C: Zur Systematik der Hexapoden. Zool Anz 1904, 27:511-533.
95. Yoshizawa K, Saigusa T: Phylogenetic analysis of paraneopteran orders
(Insecta: Neoptera) based on forewing base structure, with comments
on monophyly of Auchenorrhyncha (Hemiptera). Systematic Entomology
2001, 26(1):1-13.
96. Johnson KP, Yoshizawa K, Smith VS: Multiple origins of parasitism in lice.
Proc Biol Sci 2004, 271(1550):1771-1776.
97. Kristensen NP: The phylogeny of hexapod orders a critical review of
recent accounts. Journal of Zoological Sytematics and Evolutionary Research
1975, 13(1):1-44.
98. Kristensen NP: Phylogeny of insect orders. Annual Review Of Entomology
1981, 26:135-157.

Talavera and Vila BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:315
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/315

99. Kristensen NP: The phylogeny of hexapod orders a critical review of
recent accounts. Journal of Zoological Sytematics and Evolutionary Research
1975, 13(1):1-44.
100. Kristensen NP: Phylogeny of insect orders. Annual Review Of Entomology
1981, 26:135-157.
101. Hamilton K: Morphology and evolution of the rhynchotan head (insecta,
hemiptera, homoptera). Canadian Entomologist 1981, 113(11):953-974.
102. Hennig W, Pont A, Schlee D: Insect phylogeny John Wiley & Sons; 1981.
103. Sharov AG: Basic arthropodan stock with special reference to insects
Pergamon Press, New York; 1966.
104. Sharov AG: The phylogenetic relations of the order Thysanoptera.
Entomol Obozr 1972, 51(4):854-858.
105. Murrell A, Barker SC: Multiple origins of parasitism in lice: phylogenetic
analysis of SSU rDNA indicates that the Phthiraptera and Psocoptera are
not monophyletic. Parasitol Res 2005, 97(4):274-80.
106. Shao R, Barker SC: The Highly Rearranged Mitochondrial Genome of the
Plague Thrips, Thrips imaginis (Insecta: Thysanoptera): Convergence of
Two Novel Gene Boundaries and an Extraordinary Arrangement of rRNA
Genes. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20(3):362-370.
107. Arnason U, Adegoke JA, Bodin K, Born EW, Esa YB, Gullberg A, Nilsson M,
Short RV, Xu X, Janke A: Mammalian mitogenomic relationships and the
root of the eutherian tree. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(12):8151-8156.
108. Phillips MJ, Penny D: The root of the mammalian tree inferred from
whole mitochondrial genomes. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2003,
28(2):171-185.
109. Curole J, Kocher T: Mitogenomics: digging deeper with complete
mitochondrial genomes. Trends Ecol Evol 1999, 14(10):394-398.
110. Springer M, de Jong W: Which mammalian supertree to bark up? Science
2001, 291:1709-1711.
111. Katoh K, Kuma K, Toh H, Miyata T: MAFFT version 5: improvement in
accuracy of multiple sequence alignment. Nucleic Acids Research 2005,
33(2):511-518.
112. Fitzpatrick D, Pentony M: PutGaps: DNA gapped file from Amino Acid
alignment.[http://bioinf.nuim.ie/software/putgaps].
113. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:540-552.
114. Do CB, Mahabhashyam MS, Brudno M, Batzoglou S: ProbCons: Probabilistic
consistency-based multiple sequence alignment. Genome Research 2005,
15(2):330-340.
115. Quant LS, Gascuel O, Lartillot N: Empirical profile mixture models for
phylogenetic reconstruction. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:2317-2323.
116. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fasta and accurate algorithm to estimate
phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Systematic Biology 2003,
52(5):696-704.
117. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(8):754-755.
118. Schmidt HA, Strimmer K, Vingron M, Von Haeseler A: TREE-PUZZLE:
maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis using quartets and parallel
computing. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:502-504.
119. Blanquart S, Lartillot N: A Bayesian compound stochastic process for
modeling nonstationary and nonhomogeneious sequence evolution. Mol
Biol Evol 2006, 23(11):2058-2071.
120. Blanquart S, Lartillot N: A site- and time-heterogeneous model of amino
acid replacement. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(5):842-858.
121. Philippe H, Brinkmann H, Copley RR, Moroz LL, Nakano H, Poustka AJ,
Wallberg A, Peterson KJ, Telford MJ: Acoelomorph flatworms are
deuterostomes related to Xenoturbella. Nature 2011, 470:255-258.
122. Soria-Carrasco V, Talavera G, Igea J, Castresana J: The K tree score:
quantification of differences in the relative branch length and topology
of phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2954-2956.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-315
Cite this article as: Talavera and Vila: What is the phylogenetic signal
limit from mitogenomes? The reconciliation between mitochondrial and
nuclear data in the Insecta class phylogeny. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2011 11:315.

Page 15 of 15

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
