<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Structural and evolutionary divergence of eukaryotic protein kinases in Apicomplexa</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-321"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Eric Talevich"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Structural and evolutionary divergence of
eukaryotic protein kinases in Apicomplexa
Eric Talevich1, Amar Mirza2 and Natarajan Kannan1,2*

Abstract
Background: The Apicomplexa constitute an evolutionarily divergent phylum of protozoan pathogens responsible
for widespread parasitic diseases such as malaria and toxoplasmosis. Many cellular functions in these medically
important organisms are controlled by protein kinases, which have emerged as promising drug targets for parasitic
diseases. However, an incomplete understanding of how apicomplexan kinases structurally and mechanistically
differ from their host counterparts has hindered drug development efforts to target parasite kinases.
Results: We used the wealth of sequence data recently made available for 15 apicomplexan species to identify the
kinome of each species and quantify the evolutionary constraints imposed on each family of apicomplexan kinases.
Our analysis revealed lineage-specific adaptations in selected families, namely cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK),
calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) and CLK/LAMMER, which have been identified as important in the
pathogenesis of these organisms. Bayesian analysis of selective constraints imposed on these families identified the
sequence and structural features that most distinguish apicomplexan protein kinases from their homologs in
model organisms and other eukaryotes. In particular, in a subfamily of CDKs orthologous to Plasmodium falciparum
crk-5, the activation loop contains a novel PTxC motif which is absent from all CDKs outside Apicomplexa. Our
analysis also suggests a convergent mode of regulation in a subset of apicomplexan CDPKs and mammalian
MAPKs involving a commonly conserved arginine in the aC helix. In all recognized apicomplexan CLKs, we find a
set of co-conserved residues involved in substrate recognition and docking that are distinct from metazoan CLKs.
Conclusions: We pinpoint key conserved residues that can be predicted to mediate functional differences from
eukaryotic homologs in three identified kinase families. We discuss the structural, functional and evolutionary
implications of these lineage-specific variations and propose specific hypotheses for experimental investigation. The
apicomplexan-specific kinase features reported in this study can be used in the design of selective kinase inhibitors.

Background
The parasitic protists which comprise the phylum Apicomplexa are responsible for human diseases of global
importance, such as malaria (caused by Plasmodium falciparum and other members of the Plasmodium genus),
cryptosporidiosis (Cryptosporidium species) and toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii), as well as the agricultural diseases babesiosis (Babesia bovis in cattle) and
coccidiosis (Eimeria tenella in chickens) [1]. In recent
years, understanding of the molecular biology and evolution of this phylum has improved dramatically; yet
effective treatments for these diseases are still elusive,

* Correspondence: kannan@bmb.uga.edu
1
Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

and there remains an urgent need for deeper research
into the basic biology of apicomplexans [2].
Several traits make these pathogens difficult to target
therapeutically. As eukaryotes, they share a number of
pathways with their mammalian and avian hosts; as
intracellular parasites, they have been observed to
quickly develop resistance to pharmaceutical treatments
[3]. The identification of distinctive protein features
which appear conserved across apicomplexan species,
but not in their hosts, however, will aid the search for
potential new targets for selective inhibition that are
more likely to be safe and effective [4]. As protein
kinases have been successfully targeted for inhibition in
cancer, this diverse protein superfamily warrants consideration as a target for parasitic diseases as well [2,5].

© 2011 Talevich et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Recent whole-genome sequencing efforts have targeted
a number of apicomplexan species [6-17]. Several analyses of protein kinases in these organisms, in particular,
have pointed out key signaling pathways [18-20],
instances of expansion and loss of kinase gene families
[21,22], and emergence of novel protein kinase families
[21,23,24], thus providing important insights into biological functions. These comparative studies have furthermore proposed hypotheses which have subsequently
been validated by functional and structural studies
[19,20,25,26].
The eukaryotic protein kinase (ePK) superfamily is
classified into several major groups, corresponding to
broad functional categories with distinguishing sequence
and structural features [27,28]. The presence of specific
ePK groups and families in a genome is a key indicator
of biological functions critical for an organism; likewise,
missing groups or families indicate functions less critical
for an organism’s survival and reproduction. These proteins, and the fundamental cell processes in which they
participate, are well characterized in humans and several
model organisms [28].
Previous efforts to perform detailed comparative analysis of apicomplexan kinases have largely focused on
the kinomes of individual species within the genera
Plasmodium, Toxoplasma and Cryptosporidium
[10,11,20,29-32]. Thus, there is no global overview of
the sequence and structural features that distinguish apicomplexan kinases collectively from their metazoan
counterparts.
Sequence data from 15 apicomplexan species and several crystallographic structures of a variety of apicomplexan protein kinases are now available. We can use
these data to perform a systematic comparison of protein kinases in apicomplexans and model eukaryotes to
identify broadly conserved orthologous groups and distinctive residue-level differences.
In this study we use a bioinformatics approach to
comprehensively analyze genomic and structural data
sets. We perform an exhaustive comparison of apicomplexan kinomes, providing broad coverage of the phylum. We also perform a quantitative, residue-level
analysis of the differences between kinases within the
Apicomplexa and those in model eukaryotes, in particular humans. We use a Bayesian method [33] to rigorously quantify sequence differences between
homologous protein kinases in apicomplexans and
other eukaryotes, and reveal contrastingly conserved
features that were not apparent previously. Where possible, we then place these sequence features in structural context to postulate specific hypotheses for
experimental testing.
Our specific findings include: (i) a detailed accounting
of the lineages in which the apicomplexan-specific

Page 2 of 20

kinase families FIKK and ROPK appear; (ii) a unique
apicomplexan-specific subfamily of cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDK), orthologous to P. falciparum crk-5, and
the motifs that distinguish it; (iii) a hypothesized
mechanism of activation by phosphorylation, resembling
that of MAP kinases, in a chromalveolate-specific subfamily of calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPK);
and (iv) a description of the adaptation of the substraterecognition and docking sites in the CLK kinase family
in a clade including apicomplexans and other chromalveolates, revealed by the co-evolution of a small set of
key residues.

Results and Discussion
We identified and classified the eukaryotic protein
kinases in a total of 17 genomes from 15 species, as well
as the solved apicomplexan ePK structures in the Protein Data Bank [34]. We used our classification to
broadly describe the conserved ePK families in the Apicomplexa and then performed a residue-level analysis of
the lineage-specific differences within several conserved
families: CDK, CDPK and CLK. We place our findings
in the context of the known evolutionary history of apicomplexans and their relatives.
Kinome classification and composition: Variations within
the Apicomplexa

Recent published evolutionary relationships of eukaryotes provide the basis for our genomic comparison
[35]. In this study we have chosen model organisms
representing major evolutionary splits — the emergence
of Chromalveolata (a proposed super-kingdom of plastid-containing eukaryotes [36]), Alveolata (the kingdom
comprising ciliates, dinoflagellates and apicomplexans
[37]), and Apicomplexa — to illuminate the origin and
divergence of the major ePK groups. For genomic comparison we use the parasitic dinoflagellate Perkinsus
marinus as an outgroup to the Apicomplexa, the photosynthetic diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana as an outgroup to the Alveolata, and the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae as an outgroup to the Chromalveolata.
Detailed kinase annotations are given for each genome
in Additional File 1.
Apicomplexan kinome sizes are comparable to those of
other unicellular protists

The number of ePKs identified in each of the surveyed
apicomplexan genomes varies, with the coccidians (Toxoplasma gondii, Neospora caninum and Eimeria tenella)
containing more ePKs than the haemosporidians (Plasmodium spp.), and the piroplasms (Babesia bovis and
Theileria spp.) containing fewer (Table 1). Cryptosporidium spp., the most basal group of apicomplexans considered here, contain a similar number of ePKs to
Plasmodium spp.

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Page 3 of 20

Table 1 Kinome sizes
Species

[39]. The pattern of genome compaction, occasionally
offset by lineage-specific expansions of specific gene
families, has been noted as a common mode of genomic
evolution in unicellular pathogens [40] and apicomplexans specifically [41,42]. Evidently, the ePKs have evolved
according to some of the same adaptive strategies as the
overall genomes of these parasites.

ePKs

Genes

Ratio

Plasmodium berghei

69

4904

1.41%

Plasmodium chabaudi

70

5131

1.36%

Plasmodium yoelii

62

5878

1.05%

Plasmodium knowlesi

65

5197

1.25%

Plasmodium vivax

65

5435

1.20%

Plasmodium falciparum

93

5491

1.69%

Theileria annulata

42

3793

1.11%

Survey of ePK major groups

Theileria parva
Babesia bovis

43
43

4035
3671

1.07%
1.17%

Toxoplasma gondii GT1

137

8102

1.69%

Toxoplasma gondii ME49

146

7993

1.83%

Toxoplasma gondii VEG

133

7846

1.70%

Neospora caninum

141

7082

1.99%

Eimeria tenella

90

8786

1.02%

Cryptosporidium hominis

65

3886

1.67%

Cryptosporidium parvum
Cryptosporidium muris

75
77

3805
3934

1.97%
1.96%

Perkinsus marinus

251

23654

1.06%

Thalassiosira pseudonana

140

11673

1.20%

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

116

5797

2.02%

We classified the kinases in each of the surveyed apicomplexans and model organisms according to a hierachical scheme based on seven major ePK groups,
enabling a direct comparison of the group composition
between kinomes (Figure 1). The CMGC and CAMK
groups are especially well conserved across eukaryotes,
indicating that the cell functions performed by these
proteins are fundamental and essential for eukaryotic
life. The casein kinase 1 group (CK1) is conserved in
at least one copy among all eukaryotes as well. The
tyrosine kinase (TK) and receptor guanylate cyclase
(RGC) groups are entirely missing from the Apicomplexa, which has previously been noted [24,43], as well
as the three outgroup genomes. There is an apparent
reduction, relative to the outgroup P. marinus and T.
pseudonana, of the cyclic-nucleotide-and calcium/
phospholipid-dependent kinases (AGC group) in most
of the Apicomplexa (Figure 1). The coccidians have
between 9 and 13 members of the AGC group, while
other apicomplexans have 3 to 5 AGC kinases; PKA is
the only AGC family that is found in every genome
(Additional File 1). The additional AGC members in
coccidians appear as 1-3 copies of several known
families, suggesting that AGCs were mostly lost in the
other lineages and conserved or slightly amplified in
coccidians, rather than a significant expansion in coccidians relative to the common ancestor. An even
more dramatic loss of kinase families along all lineages
is apparent in the STE group, which we discuss below.
The tyrosine-kinase-like group (TKL) shows greater
variation, appearing in some abundance in coccidians
and Plasmodium spp. but absent from piroplasms,
except for a single instance in T. annulata (Figure 1).
The “Other” group designation collects all the ePK
families that share the ePK fold and sub-domain architecture (unlike atypical protein kinases), but do not fall
cleanly into any of the recognized major ePK groups
found in the human kinome [28]. Many apicomplexan
kinases fall in the Other group (Figure 1), reflecting
their deep evolutionary divergence from humans, the
reference genome for the commonly accepted kinase
classification scheme [28]. Atypical protein kinases,
such as the ABC and RIO families, were excluded
from this analysis.

Total proteome and protein kinome sizes in each genome. Columns indicate
species name, the number of ePKs found using our method, the number of
protein-coding genes in each genome, and the calculated proportion of ePKs
in each genome for comparison. Atypical protein kinases are excluded from
all ePK counts.

Taken as a percentage of total genome size, the proportions of kinases in apicomplexans are generally
either comparable to the 2% observed in yeast and
humans [28], as seen in the coccidians and Cryptosporidium, or reduced, as in the piroplasms and Plasmodium (Table 1). (Note that the quality of genome
assemblies and gene model annotations varies, and
these differences can affect the number of genes and
kinases identified in each genome; the low kinase-togene ratios given for P. yoelii and E. tenella should
therefore be interpreted with caution.) There is no evidence of the striking overall expansion of kinases seen
in free-living ciliates such as Paramecium tetraulia
(ePKs 6.6% of the genome [38]), which form a sister
clade to Apicomplexa within the kingdom Alveolata.
Rather, the number of kinases appears to scale with
the total number of protein-coding genes in each genome, with small deviations.
Except for the coccidians and P. falciparum (which
each contain dramatic expansions of novel kinase
families, discussed below), the absolute number of
kinases in each apicomplexan genome is markedly
reduced relative to free-living eukaryotes (Table 1). The
piroplasm kinome sizes, for instance, are less than twice
the minimal kinome of 29 ePKs exhibited by another
obligate intracellular parasite, Encephalitozoon cuniculi

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Page 4 of 20

Figure 1 Kinome group composition. Composition of protein kinase major groups and selected apicomplexan-specific families (FIKK and
ROPK) in each of the surveyed genomes. The schematic species tree along the left edge is constructed from published sources [36,92-94], and
includes three outgroup kinomes for comparison: the dinoflagellate Perkinsus marinus, the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana, and the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In the stacked bar chart associated with each genome, block width indicates number of genes found belonging to
each major group of eukaryotic protein kinases; total bar width indicates total kinome size.

Conservation of cell-cycle-associated kinases (CMGC) in
chromalveolates

The CMGC group is named after four protein kinase
families it contains: cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK),
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), glycogen
synthase kinase (GSK), and cdc-like kinase (CLK, also
called LAMMER) [28]. These kinases are involved in
various aspects of cell cycle control, and are highly conserved throughout Eukaryota. Though apicomplexans, as
obligate parasites, are able to depend on their host for
survival, these signaling mechanisms for various aspects
of cell cycle control are retained. Their life cycles are
generally complex, often involving both a primary and a
secondary host, encysted phases, and sudden trigger of
reproduction and proliferation in response to some
chronological or external stimulus [44]. This seems to
suggest elaborate signaling and regulatory mechanisms,
and points toward specialization of CMGC kinases in
the Apicomplexa [21].
The most abundant family within the CMGC group is
CDK; it is found in 3-6 copies in each apicomplexan
genome, and 7-11 copies in the outgroup genomes
(Additional File 2). The CDC2 subfamily of CDK is

found in at least one copy in every genome, while some
species contain single instances of additional CDK
families. There are also 1-4 CDKs in each genome
which could not be classified into known subfamilies,
leaving open the possibility of lineage-specific adaptations in these unclassified copies. GSK occurs in 1-3
copies in each apicomplexan genome, and 1-5 in the
outgroup genomes (Additional File 2), reflecting an
essential and conserved role in cellular function. Likewise, MAPK and casein kinase IIa (CK2) are present in
a small number of copies in each of the apicomplexan
and other eukaryotic genomes surveyed. The MAPK
subfamily ERK7 is found in a single copy in every apicomplexan genome, while ERK1 is missing from Plasmodium spp. and the piroplasms. The RCK family,
comprising the MAK and MOK subfamilies, is present
in the three outgroup species but missing from the
Apicomplexa.
The CLK and SRPK families, and some subfamilies of
DYRK, are involved in phosphorylation of splicing factors such as SR proteins [45,46]. We found 2-4 DYRKs
in each apicomplexan genome (Additional File 2). The
most conserved subfamily of these, PRP4, was found in

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

1 copy in each genome except E. tenella. A plant-specific subfamily of DYRK, called DYRKP, was found only
in coccidians and the outgroups P. marinus and T. pseudonana. We found 1 copy of CLK in every surveyed
genome, and SRPK in 1 copy in all except P. marinus,
which has 3 copies.
The close relationship between CLK, SRPK and DYRK
can confound homology-based classification attempts.
However, the families can be distinguished by the presence of family-specific inserts [47] and by the replacement of the arginine in the kinase-conserved catalytic
“HRD” motif with threonine ("HTD”) in CLK and SRPK,
and cysteine ("HCD”) or alanine ("HAD”) in various
DYRK subfamilies [48]. The first comprehensive study
of an apicomplexan kinome [21] identified 4 putative
CLKs in P. falciparum, assigning the names PfCLK-1
through PfCLK-4. Our classification confirmed PfCLK-1
[EupathDB:PF14_0431] as a CLK (discussed in detail
below). PfCLK-4 [EupathDB:PFC0105w] has recently
been characterized as an SRPK [49]. We assigned
PfCLK-3 [EupathDB:PF11_0156] to the PRP4 subfamily
of DYRK, supported by the presence of the “HAD”
motif in the catalytic loop and homology with putative
PRP4 kinases in each of the other Plasmodium species.
Our classifier placed PfCLK-2 [EupathDB:PF14_0408] in
the CMGC group but did not find support for a more
specific family. The portion of the sequence in kinase
subdomain X, which is broadly conserved as the
“EHLAMMERILG” in CLKs [50], is “RFIYSIVSYIG” in
PfCLK-2 — there is no sequence identity except for the
C-terminal glycine. PfCLK-2 has the catalytic loop motif
“HCD”, characteristic of most DYRK subfamilies. The
protein sequence also contains long inserts in the catalytic domain in the same locations as those of SRPK. A
recent study of PfCLK-1 and PfCLK-2 [51] confirmed
SR protein phosphorylation activity and found that
PfCLK-1 is localized primarily to the nucleus of the cell,
like most CLKs, but PfCLK-2 is found in both the
nucleus and the cytoplasm, as has been observed in
SRPKs in other eukaryotes [52]. We suggest that this
protein is unique, with characteristics of both the SRPK
and DYRK families, and that the regulatory functions
suggested by typical CLK family members do not fully
describe the roles of PfCLK-2 in the cell. The corresponding ortholog group in OrthoMCL-DB [53]
[OrthoMCL:OG5_165485] is specific to the Plasmodium
genus, further evidence that PfCLK-2 and its orthologs
are paralagous to apicomplexan CLKs and have diverged
significantly.
Distribution of calcium signaling kinases (CAMK) in
Eukaryota

Calcium signaling plays an important role in eukaryotic
cell biology. Calcium ions serve as important second
messengers in signaling pathways, regulated by the

Page 5 of 20

calcium- and calmodulin-dependent kinase (CAMK)
group [29]. In apicomplexans, calcium signaling regulates motility and other processes associated with host
invasion [31].
There are multiple conserved CAMK members in
each surveyed genome, though we observed more variation in gene family sizes here than in the CMGC group.
We found 19-31 putative CAMK genes in each coccidian genome, 13-16 in Cryptosporidium spp., 11-13 in
Plasmodium spp. and 7 in each piroplasm (Figure 1).
The closely related dinoflagellate P. marinus has 69
putative CAMK genes, and the more distantly related
diatom T. pseudonana has 42. This points to a slight
overall reduction of CAMK and CAMK-like protein
kinases in coccidians, and more dramatic reductions in
the other apicomplexan lineages, relative to the dinoflagellate and diatom (Figure 1). This follows with the
overall conservation or reduction of total kinome sizes
in each of the genomes (Table 1).
The calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) family
within CAMK is of particular interest, as its role in
parasite invasion has been investigated recently by several teams [19,54,55]. Like plants and some other protists, apicomplexan genomes contain multiple members
of the CDPK family [31]. We found 6 CDPKs in P. falciparum, 5 in each of the other Plasmodium species, 4-5
in the piroplasms, 11-14 in the coccidians and 7-9 in
Cryptosporidium spp. In T. gondii and N. caninum there
were also 7-10 members of the CAMK group that could
not be classified into a known family. The greater number of CDPK copies and unclassified CAMKs in coccidians accounts for most of the apparent expansion of
the CAMK group in that lineage relative to other
apicomplexans.
Loss and divergence of STE kinase families in apicomplexan
lineages

The STE group includes a variety of kinases which participate in MAPK signaling cascades upstream from the
MAPK protein [28]. The key families in the group are
STE20 (MAP4K), STE11(MAPKKK/MAP3K) and STE7
(MAPKK/MEK), which form a phosphoryl signaling cascade terminating with the phosphorylation of a MAPK
on its activation loop at a conserved TxY motif [56].
This MAPK cascade is highly conserved in most eukaryotes, so it is surprising that the STE group has been
largely lost from the Apicomplexa, as has been noted
previously [21,57].
According to our analysis, the STE group is entirely
missing from the piroplasms, while in the Plasmodium
genus only P. knowlesi and P. vivax each retain a single
STE gene which could not be further classified into a
known STE family (Figure 1; Additional File 1). There
were also unclassified STEs in T. gondii strains GT1 and
ME49, E. tenella and Cryptosporidium spp. (Additional

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Page 6 of 20

File 1). We did not find any STEs in T. gondii strain
VEG.
The STE11 family was not found in any of the surveyed apicomplexan genomes. One STE20, showing closest resemblence to the FRAY subfamily (homologs of
human OSR1), was found in N. caninum; the other apicomplexans had none. STE7 instances appear in N.
caninum, C. hominis and C. parvum. For comparison,
Perkinsus marinus contains 1 instance of STE11 and
two instances of STE20, in the MST and PAKA subfamilies (homologs of human MST2 and PAK2, respectively) (Additional File 1). The ciliate Tetrahymena
thermophila has multiple representives of STE11,
STE20, STE7, and other STE families [58].
Features of the two MAPKs of P. falciparum illustrate
how apicomplexans can compensate for the lack of a
complete MAP signaling cascade. Pfmap-1 [EupathDB:
PF14_0294] was identified as a member of the ERK7
family of MAPK [21], and retains the conserved TxY
activation loop motif of most MAPKs. Pfmap-2
[EupathDB:PF11_0147], however, could not be assigned
to a known MAPK subfamily in earlier analyses [21,57]
or in ours. In Pfmap-2, the activation loop motif TxY is
replaced by TSH [59], and we also note a long insert of
about 26 amino acids in the activation loop N-terminal
to the TSH motif. Orthologs of Pfmap-2 identified in
OrthoMCL-DB [OrthoMCL:OG5_138034] appear in
each of the apicomplexan genomes surveyed here, and
also retain the long insert in the activation loop and a
TSH or TGH motif in place of TxY. Pfmap-2 has been
shown to be phosphorylated and activated by the kinase
Pfnek-1 [EupathDB:PFL1370w] [60], which is not a
member of the STE kinase group but in this case
appears to be nonetheless serving as a MAP kinase
kinase. As with Pfmap-2, orthologs of Pfnek-1 appear in
each of the surveyed apicomplexans [OrthoMCL:
OG5_129446]. The conservation patterns of these
kinases suggest that the observations made of P. falciparum’s unique MAPK signaling mechanisms can be
applied usefully to other apicomplexans.

the host cell surface [62]. A variety of functional
domains have also been discovered in the N-terminal
tail of the FIKK kinase domain, suggesting that the
kinase domain and export signal allow trafficking of
parasite proteins or other molecules to the host cell
membrane [23].
In addition to the 21 recognized FIKKs in P. falciparum [21,23], we found a single copy of FIKK in every
one of the surveyed apicompexan genomes except Theileria spp. and Babesia bovis (Figure 1). No homologs
were found outside the Apicomplexa. The apparent
absence of FIKK from the three piroplasm genomes is
particularly intriguing. To rule out the possibility that
this absence is simply the result of the FIKK gene model
having not been included in the available proteomic
sequences, we performed an additional search on the
full set of translated ORFs from the genomic DNA
sequence sets for these three species; again, no FIKK
genes were found. The parsimonious conclusion is that
the gene was lost along the piroplasmid evolutionary
branch. This loss suggests there may be some difference
in the physiology of piroplasmids that eliminates the
need for the FIKK protein in those species.
We note with some interest that, in the process of
entering a host cell, apicomplexans generally envelop
themselves in a parasitophorous vacuoule constructed
from the host cell membrane. (This is true of all of the
species surveyed here.) Unlike Plasmodium spp. and
most other apicomplexans, however, Babesia and Theileria species escape from their parasitophorous vacuole
shortly after entering the host erythrocyte [11,63].
Thereafter, the piroplasm interacts directly with the host
cell cytoplasm, rather than through the membrane of a
vacuole, potentially simplifying the signaling machinery
needed by the parasite. Piroplasms are also nonmotile
and show other reduced functions compared to other
apicomplexans [1]. However, more study of the role of
FIKKs and the interaction between the PVM and host
cell in apicomplexan species outside Plasmodium is
needed in order to refine this hypothesis.

FIKK, an apicomplexan-specific protein kinase family

ROPK family is specific to the coccidians

FIKK is a divergent protein kinase family initially identified in P. falciparum, named for a conserved four-residue motif in the kinase subdomain II [21]. Previous
studies have found 21 copies in P. falciparum and 6 in
P. reichenowi, but single instances in other Plasmodium
genomes, indicating rapid expansion along one branch
within the genus [23]. In P. falciparum, FIKK proteins
are generally exported to the host cell and often localized to the host cell membrane [61]. Recent work has
found that some P. falciparum FIKKs are targeted to
the Maurer’s clefts, which are formed from or in connection with the parasitophorous vacuole membrane
(PVM) as a transport mechanism and eventually reach

The rhoptries are a collection of vesicular organelles
within the apical complex, a distinguishing feature of
the Apicomplexa. They appear in all of the apicomplexans surveyed here [1]. During the invasion process, a
number of proteins contained in the rhoptries are
secreted through the apical complex into the parasitophorous vacuole, and in some cases the host cell cytosol
[64]. The rhoptry kinase family (ROPK) comprises the
protein kinases targeted to the rhoptry. ROPKs play a
major role in the infection mechanism of T. gondii [65];
they have been characterized in T. gondii and to a lesser
extent in N. caninum [24]. The sequences of ROPKs are
divergent from other ePKs, but most can still be

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

recognized by generic protein kinase search profiles [24].
Most rhoptry kinases appear to be catalytically inactive,
lacking at least one residue of the catalytic “KDD” triad
(the lysine and asparates normally conserved in ePK
subdomains II, VI and VII [27]), but kinase activity has
been demonstrated in ROP16 and ROP18 [24,66].
Recent structural studies of ROP2 and ROP8 revealed a
unique modification of the N-lobe of the kinase domain,
in particular, and suggested important functional roles
for these proteins, despite the absence of catalytic activity in these ROPKs [67].
We found the ROPK family only in the coccidian
clade (Figure 1). Proteins associated with the rhoptries
in other lineages appear to be unrelated to coccidian
ROPKs or any other ePK families.
Our analysis included three strains of T. gondii, corresponding to the three classes of virulence: GT1 (Type I,
high virulence), ME49 (Type II, intermediate virulence),
and VEG (Type III, non-virulent) [68]. The most dramatic difference in kinase counts between the three
strains of T. gondii appears in the ROPK family (Figure
1). We identified 40 ROPKs in T. gondii strain ME49,
but 29 in GT1 and VEG (Additional File 1). A simple
clustering of the sequences (data not shown) did not
reveal a clear separation of ME49 ROPK genes that
would indicate an expansion in ME49, so the discrepency may instead be due to losses in the other two
strains, or simply differences in the quality of genome
assembly and annotation.
Sequence and structural features contributing to
functional divergence

Our approach revealed several novel and distinct subfamilies within recognized ePK families. Within each
family, we then performed a phylogenetic analysis of the
protein sequences of kinase domains from apicomplexans and several diverse model organisms to identify
putative ortholog groups that include several apicomplexan species, but no metazoan species. (See Methods.)
Statistical analysis of the sequences using the CHAIN
program revealed distinctive sequence and structural
features which distinguish apicomplexan kinases from
their homologs in other eukaryotes. Specifically, we used
each identified apicomplexan-specific ortholog set as a
query against a larger “main” set of sequences representing the corresponding kinase family (CDK, CDPK and
CLK) taken from diverse eukaryotic species. CHAIN
uses a Bayesian MCMC procedure to concurrently (a)
partition the “main” set into a “foreground” of sequences
that share distinct residue motifs found in the query, a
“background” set of sequences that do not share those
motifs, and an “intermediate” set that shares only some
of the motifs; and (b) identify the alignment columns
defining the motifs that distinguish the foreground and

Page 7 of 20

background sets [33]. We then used PyMOL [69] and a
set of custom scripts leveraging Biopython [70] to map
the most significant residue patterns onto aligned protein structures for comparative structural analysis.
Here we describe three proposed instances of lineagespecific divergence of apicomplexan kinases, within the
CMGC and CAMK major groups, with an analysis of
the sequence motifs and evolutionary histories that
define them. Where crystallographic structures have
previously been solved, we map sequence motifs onto
the 3D structures to gain insight into possible regulatory
mechanisms.
Orthologs of Pfcrk-5 form a novel subfamily of cyclindependent kinases

While each apicomplexan kinome contains multiple
genes belonging to the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
family, we find a novel CDK subfamily which appears in
a single copy in 14 of the 17 apicomplexan genomes
surveyed, absent only from Cryptosporidium spp., and is
not found outside Apicomplexa. This subfamily comprises the orthologs of P. falciparum Pfcrk-5
[EupathDB:PFF0750w]. This ortholog group is equivalent to a group in OrthoMCL-DB [OrthoMCL:
OG5_150603], but with the addition of an ortholog we
identified in Theileria parva [Genbank:TP04_0791]. A
multiple sequence alignment of the subfamily kinase
domains, including accession numbers, is given in Additional File 3.
The subfamily is distinguished by a unique PTxC
motif in the activation loop (Pfcrk-5 positions 255-258),
which is strikingly conserved relative to other CDK
members in diverse eukaryotes, and absent from diverse
eukaryotic homologs, as determined by CHAIN analysis
(Figure 2; Additional File 4). In eukaryotic homologs,
the residues at the location of the PTxC motif are most
often histidine, glutamate and valine. The threonine in
position 254 is also found as either threonine (usually)
or serine (more rarely) in homologs; this site is equivalent to T160 in human Cdk2, where phosphorylation of
this residue dramatically increases CDK catalytic activity,
apparently stabilizing the substrate-binding site by forming a network of hydrogen bonds with surrounding side
chains [71].
While T254 is conserved in most CDKs across Eukaryota, the apicomplexan-conserved residues P255, T256
and C258 are strikingly different from those in CDKs of
other eukaryotes (Figure 2). In particular, T256 in this
subfamily appears most often as a glutamate in other
CDKs, including the closest-matching known CDK subfamily, CDC2, though it is not strongly conserved overall in eukaryotic CDKs. Given the similarity in chemical
properties between glutamate and phosphothreonine, it
is tempting to speculate that T256 is a phosphorylation

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Figure 2 CHAIN alignment of the CDK subfamily activation
loop. CHAIN alignment of the activation loop in the Pfcrk-5-like
CDK subfamily ("Foreground”) compared to the corresponding
region in a large set of diverse eukaryotic CDK sequences
("Background”). The kinase-conserved DFG and APE motifs bordering
the activation loop are indicated at the top, along with the
subfamily-conserved PTxC motif. An asterisk indicates the position of
the threonine observed to be phosphorylated in other CDKs,
conserved in both the foreground and background. The histogram
above each sequence set represents the differential levels of
conservation between the two sets at each position, using
logarithmic scaling. Dots above each alignment column indicate the
contrasting conservation pattern determined by CHAIN. Note that
the Apicomplexa (foreground, top) and Eukaryota (background,
bottom) sets have different conservation patterns. In the sequence
alignment itself, columns of the conserved pattern are colored
according to the consensus residue type. The consensus residue
types are listed below the alignment. Weighted residue frequencies
are shown in the following rows, in units of integer tenths (e.g. “9”
indicates conservation of 90-100%). The number of sequences in
each set are shown in parentheses. A complete CHAIN alignment of
these sequences is provided in Additional File 4.

site in this subset of apicomplexan CDKs. An alternative
hypothesis is that the residues in the PTxC motif may
provide contact points for the substrate, as has been
observed for the equivalent residues in the human
homolog Cdk2 [72]. Human Cdk2 belongs to the CDK

Page 8 of 20

subfamily CDK2, not CDC2, but contains the motif
HEVV in place of Pfcrk-5’s PTVC, as most CDC2s do.
In a solved structure of human Cdk2 [PDB:1QMZ], the
residue V164, equivalent to C258 in Pfcrk-5, is located
spatially between the bound substrate and the APE
motif. It is possible that C258 in Pfcrk-5 and its orthologs packs hydrophobically against the equivalent region
in this subfamily. This could also explain the co-conserved change of the APE motif to PLE (Figure 2). However, the absence of a solved 3D structure for any
member of this subfamily prevents further analysis of
the functional role of these residues. Although four
structures of apicomplexan CDKs have been published
[PDB:1V0O, PDB:1V0B, PDB:1OB3, PDB:2QKR], none
of them correspond to genes from the Pfcrk-5
subfamily.
To assess whether the members of this putative subfamily should instead be assigned to the known CDK
subfamily CDC2, we used CHAIN again to compare this
subfamily to sequences representing the CDC2 subfamily. The same distinguishing pattern of PTxC in the activation loop appears in this comparison as well
(Additional File 5). In P. falciparum, the CDKs Pfcrk-14 have all previously been annotated as “cdc2-related”
kinases, and have been characterized in previous studies
[73,74]. The canonical CDC2 in P. falciparum, as identified by our analysis, is protein kinase 5 [EupathDB:
MAL13P1.279], which has the more typical “HEVV”
motif in place of Pfcrk-5’s “PTVC”. Thus, the genes in
this apicomplexan-specific subfamily appear to be paralogous to the known CDC2 subfamily, and may therefore have unique functional roles.
Distinct subfamilies of CDK are sometimes named
after the conserved residue sequence in the cyclin-binding helix in the N-lobe of the kinase domain, known as
the PSTAIRE helix in CDKs or more generally as the
aC helix in protein kinases [71,73]. In the proposed
alveolate-specific subfamily the consensus sequence of
the aC motif is SCTTLRE, at Pfcrk-5 sequence positions
93-99 (Figure 3). It is not yet known whether Pfcrk-5 is
dependent on cyclin binding for activity, like PfPK5,
Pfmrk and Pfcrk-3, or independent, like PfPK6 [73,74].
None of these residues appear in the CHAIN pattern,
however, indicating that the individual residues at these
positions may occur in some non-apicomplexan CDKs
as well, and that this motif did not necessarily co-evolve
with the activation loop motif that characterizes this
apicomplexan-specific subfamily.
We also identify 5 large inserts in the kinase domain
which are conserved to varying degrees across all 14 apicomplexan species, but not found in any other known
subfamily of CDK. These inserts occur between subdomains I and II, III and IV, IV and V (in the coccidians),
VII and VIII (after the conserved PLE, corresponding to

Page 9 of 20

4
3
2
1
S
T
G
0
N

T RE

SCT

99

98

I

97

95

94

93

G
P

L
V

96

bits

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

C

weblogo.berkeley.edu

Figure 3 Logo of the CDK subfamily cyclin-binding motif. Logo of the aligned activation loop sequences in members of the Pfcrk-5-like CDK
subfamily, generated by WebLogo [95]. Letter height represents information content; large letters indicated residues conserved within the
subfamily.

APE in most ePKs, and extending over 100 amino acids
in Plasmodium spp.), and X and XI (an extension of the
CMGC insert, normally involved in substrate binding
[48]). The inserts appear to be hydrophilic, and are generally conserved at the sequence level within each
genus, but less clearly between different genera, indicating rapid evolution relative to the structurally conserved
portions of the kinase domain.
Features of a chromalveolate-specific CDPK subfamily
point to a MAPK-like mode of regulation

The CDPK family is characterized in green plants, and
instances of it are also recognized in some protists (specifically, chromalveolates), but there are none in metazoans
[29,75] — this observation by itself encourages study of
the CDPK family as a parasite-specific therapeutic target
in human diseases. Each apicomplexan genome contains
multiple CDPKs; we find and discuss a novel subfamily of
these here. The subfamily is found in all of the surveyed
apicomplexans as well as the dinoflagellate Perkinsus marinus, the ciliates Tetrahymena thermophila and Paramecium tetraulia, and the diatoms Thalassiosira pseudonana
and Phaeodactylum tricornutum, indicating that the subfamily is shared by a clade within the Chromalveolata. It
includes the P. falciparum protein PfCDPK5, which has
been shown to play a key regulatory role during the parasite’s blood stage [76]. The subfamily does not correspond
cleanly to OrthoMCL-DB groups, but contains some
members of the main CDPK group [OrthoMCL:
OG5_126600] as well as some small lineage-specific
groups (e.g. [OrthoMCL:OG5_170347]). Additional File 6
contains a multiple sequence alignment of the kinase
domains of all 76 identified subfamily members.
CHAIN analysis highlighted several key residues that
distinguish this subfamily from the larger set of chromalveolate CDPKs (Additional File 7), of which two are
most striking: an arginine in the aC helix, and a threonine or serine in the activation loop. The conservation

of these two residues within the subfamily, but not in
the broader CDPK family, suggests they have evolved
under a shared functional constraint. Notably, the structure of a member of the subfamily in C. parvum,
CpCDPK2 [EupathDB:cgd7_1840], has been solved in
complex with an inhibitor [PDB:3F3Z] and in apo form
[PDB:2QG5] [32]. The distinguishing residues numbered
according to the crystal structures of CpCDPK2 are R69
and T184. Guided by CHAIN analysis, we compared
these structures with that of another C. parvum CDPK
outside the subfamily, CpCDPK1 [EupathDB:cgd3_920,
PDB:3DFA], to understand the sequence and structural
basis for possible C. parvum CDPK functional
divergence.
We analyzed the structural interactions associated
with R69 and T184 in the two available crystal structures of CpCDPK2 [PDB:2QG5, PDB:3F3Z] (Figure 4).
In one of the CpCDPK2 structures [PDB:2QG5], R69
adopts two distinct conformations (Figure 4B-D). In
chain A, R69 is positioned to form a hydrogen bond to
the backbone of a residue (D66) at the aC helix N-terminus, while in chain D, R69 appears to form a 3.1Å
hydrogen bond to the backbone of the DFG motif glycine, located at the N-terminus of the activation segment. In chain B, R69 is oriented outward, in a solventexposed position. (While the CpCDPK2 structure is presented as three chains, the biological unit has not been
described.) B-factors and the different orientations of
this residue in each chain indicate that the R69 side
chain is flexible in this structure.
In the other CpCDPK2 structure [PDB:3F3Z], R69 is
oriented toward the side-chain of T184, separated by a
distance of 6.0Å. Previous reports show that threonine
autophosphorylation in the activation loop is prevalent
in apicomplexan CDPKs [30,54]. We therefore hypothesize that this threonine (T1842QG5,3F3Z) could also serve
as a phosphorylation site in the alveolate-specific CDPK
subfamily.

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Page 10 of 20

Figure 4 CDPK subfamily roles of aC helix arginine and activation-loop threonine. Structures of several different CDPKs in C. parvum,
demonstrating several proposed interactions for the aC helix arginine distinctive of an alveolate-specific CDPK subfamily. (A) A member of the
background set of CDPKs [PDB:3DFA] has a threonine (T50), shown in cyan, in position to form a hydrogen bond with an aspartate (D47), gray,
which caps the aC helix. This threonine corresponds to the subfamily-conserved arginine; however, the threonine here is not conserved in the
background set of CDPKs. (B) In a structure of a member of the CDPK subfamily [PDB:2QG5], the subfamily-conserved arginine (R69, cyan)
appears similarly positioned to interact with the aspartate (D66, blue) at the end of the aC helix, potentially stabilizing the cap. (C) Chain A of
the same structure shows the distinctive arginine oriented inward, capable of hydrogen-bonding with the kinase-conserved DFG motif (side
chains colored magenta). (D) In another structure of the same CDPK-subfamily protein [PDB:2QG5], the arginine is positioned toward a
subfamily-conserved threonine in the activation loop (T184), shown in cyan. The distance between the R69 and T184 side chains is 6Å, which
could accomodate a phosphate group attached to the threonine and a hydrogen bond between the phosphothreonine and the arginine.

Shared features of MAP kinases suggest a common
regulatory mechanism

To obtain additional insights into the role of R69 and
T184 in CpCDPK2 functions, we identified and analyzed
crystal structures of kinases that contain both an aC
arginine and an activation-loop threonine at positions
equivalent to CpCDPK2 R69 and T184, respectively. To
allow for the flexibility and variable length of the activation loop, we also examined positions adjacent to T184.
This revealed a large number of MAPK structures,
including human and mouse p38, where a aC-helix arginine (R67) and activation-loop threonine (T180) appear
to perform roles analogous to those proposed for R69
and T184 in CpCDPK2. In a crystal structure of p38a
[PDB:3NNX], R67 (equivalent to R69 in CpCDPK2)
hydrogen bonds with the glycine backbone of the DFG
motif at a distance of 2.8Å, in a manner analogous to
CpCDPK2. Another structure of p38a complexed with a
different inhibitor [PDB:3NNV] shows a similar interaction occurring at 3.2Å. In a structure of mouse p38a
[PDB:3PY3], phosphorylated on both a threonine (T180)
and a tyrosine (T182) in the activation loop, the aC
arginine (R67) coordinates with the phospho-threonine
(Additional File 8). Thus the conserved arginine functions as a switch: upon phosphorylation, the activationloop phospho-threonine interacts with the aC arginine,
promoting inter-domain closure and stabilizing the aC
helix in an active conformation [77]. An equivalent
mechanism has been described for p38g [PDB:1CM8] as
well [78].
The phosphorylated threonine in p38 corresponds to
the TxY motif which is conserved across MAPKs [56],
including JNK and ERK1. A sequence alignment of
CpCDPK2 and PfCDPK5 along with human p38, JNK1

and ERK1 (Additional File 9) shows that the CDPK subfamily-conserved threonine is centered on the MAPK
TxY motif. Another threonine, located 4 residues Cterminal to this site, is broadly conserved in both
MAPK and CDPK.
We draw parallels between the observed conformations of CpCDPK2 and p38. An analogous role for R69
and T184 in CpCDPK2 would suggest a regulatory
mechanism wherein phosphorylation of T184 leads to
kinase activation by repositioning R69 from a DFG-stabilizing or solvent-exposed orientation toward the activation loop, consequently moving the regulatory aC
helix in an active conformation.
In a paralogous C. parvum CDPK that does not
belong to the CpCDPK2 subfamily, CDPK1 [PDB:3DFA,
EupathDB:cgd3_920], the aC arginine is replaced by
T50, and the activation loop threonine by D165 (Figure
4A). Rather, the interactions described here are distinctive of the alveolate-specific subfamily of CDPKs including CpCDPK2. The minor expansion of the CDPK
family in chromalveolates has created an evolutionary
opportunity for certain copies of CDPK genes to subfunctionalize, adapting the additional regulatory role for
promoting phosphorylation-dependent inter-domain
closure.
Lineage-specific mechanisms of substrate recognition and
binding in CLK

Within the CLK family, we again find a residue pattern
that distinguishes chromalveolate CLKs from those in
all other eukaryotic lineages. This pattern appears in all
apicomplexans surveyed, as well as several dinoflagellates, ciliates, diatoms, and the brown alga Ectocarpus
siliculosus (Additional File 10). The phyletic distribution

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

of this set of co-conserved motifs points to an origin
near the base of Chromalveolata, prior to the emergence
of alveolates, and a deep evolutionary divergence
between chromalveolates and metazoans.
These chromalveolate CLKs are distinguished most
prominently by residues in the substrate-recognition
and docking sites (Additional File 11). Numbered
according to the representative P. falciparum protein
serine/threonine kinase 1 [EupathDB:PF14_0431], also
called PfLAMMER [79], the distinguishing residues
include Q739, L772 and R775 in the primary docking
site, N736 and S755 in the secondary substrate-recognition site, and the acidic residue D653 in the aE helix
(Figures 5, 6 and 7; discussed below). Taken together,
this set of amino acid differences represents a statistically significant partition between chromalveolate and
other eukaryotic CLK sequences.
A crystallographic structure of PfLAMMER is available
[PDB:3LLT], but has not been previously discussed in
detail. We compared this structure to two human CLK
homologs, Clk1 [PDB:1Z57, PDB:2VAG] and Clk2
[PDB:3NR9], as well as human SRPK1 [PDB:1WAK], to
predict structural and functional roles of the lineagespecific residues. A PyMOL script to visualize the structures of PfLAMMER, Clk2 and Clk3 is provided as
Additional File 12.
Mechanisms of substrate recognition, binding and
processive phosphorylation

The typical substrate of CLK is an SR protein, characterized by an N-terminal RNA-binding domain and an
unstructured C-terminal tail of varying length, called the
RS domain, which is enriched in arginine and serine,

Page 11 of 20

often occurring as “RS” dipeptide repeats [45]. The SR
proteins in a cell play multiple roles in spliceosome formation and mRNA splicing activity, including regulation
of alternative splicing [80,81]. CLKs are closely related
to SRPKs, which also phosphorylate the RS domain of
SR proteins. Both kinases are constitutively active, and
perform processive phosphorylation on the RS domain
of an SR protein substrate, proceeding in the carbonylto-amino direction along the substrate peptide [82].
However, differences in substrate binding and the extent
of RS domain phosphorylation between SRPK and CLK
allow interplay between these proteins to affect the
activity and subcellular localization of the SR protein in
a complementary fashion [83]. Thus, the complementary
regulation of SR proteins by CLK and SRPK has an
important functional impact on mRNA splicing in the
cell [49].
Substrate-recognition site Three residues responsible
for initial recognition of the substrate, Q739, L772 and
R775, are contrastingly conserved within the chromalveolate clade (Figure 5). In human Clk2, the equivalent
residues H346, T379 and E382 form the substraterecognition site, with the histidine interacting with the
substrate P - 2 residue (P indicates the phosphorylatable
residue), preferentially selecting for glutamate [47]. In
PfLAMMER the histidine is replaced by a glutamine; the
change in chemical properties suggests a different substrate preference for the protein. Additionally, in human
Clk2 the three conserved residues form hydrogen bonds
with each other and with a nearby F381 (Figure 5B); in
PfLAMMER, Q739 only potentially forms a hydrogen
bond with nearby residue T776, while L772 appears in

Figure 5 CLK docking site. Three contrastingly conserved residues involved in substrate recognition and docking in human Clk2 [PDB:3NR9]
and the P. falciparum CLK, PfLAMMER [PDB:3LLT]. (A) Global view of the docking site, illustrating the position of the substrate RS domain and
phosphorylation site. The contrastingly conserved resides are shown in cyan. (B) Human Clk2. A trio of constrastingly conserved residues (cyan),
along with a nearby phenylalanine (gray), form a network of hydrogen bonds. The conserved histidine (H346) is positioned to interact with the
substrate P-2 position. (C) In PfLAMMER, the three residues (cyan) are conserved as different types. A glutamine (Q739) replaces the histidine in
human Clk2 seen to interact with the substrate P-2 position. The hydrogen bonding network is different: A leucine (L772) replaces the threonine
seen in Clk2; an arginine (R775), corresponding to a glutamate in Clk2, is directed away from the other two conserved residues; and the
glutamine (Q739) instead forms a hydrogen bond with a nearby threonine.

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Page 12 of 20

Figure 6 CLK coordination of substrate-binding and catalytic regions. Interactions between key residues in the substrate-binding region
and the catalytic HTD motif are mediated by conserved residues in the activation loop. (A) Structural context of features in PfLAMMER
[PDB:3LLT], showing the activation loop in green and the catalytic loop in magenta. Conserved residues are displayed in “sticks” representation. A
contrastingly conserved asparagine, distinctive of chromalveolate CLKs, is indicated in cyan, and three other residues conserved throughout the
CLK family are shown in yellow. (B) In PfLAMMER, the distinctive asparagine (N736) forms hydrogen bonds with the CMGC-conserved arginine
(R741), the backbone of the alanine in the APE motif, the backbone of the threonine in the catalytic HTD motif, and, mediated by a water
molecule, a subfamily-conserved serine in the aF helix. (C) In human SRPK1, several of the hydrogen bonds formed by the glutamine Q513 are
analogous to those formed by the N736 in apicomplexans. (D) and (E) Two structures of human Clk1. In the unphosphorylated structure
[PDB:1Z57], left, the serine corresponding to PfLAMMER N736 (S341) and the adjacent CLK-conserved threonine (T342) are oriented in an “in”
conformation, interacting with the catalytic motif (HTD) but not with the conserved arginines (R343, R346). In the phosphorylated structure
[PDB:2VAG], right, the serine (pS341) and threonine (pT342) are flipped to an “out” conformation, breaking the interaction with the catalytic
motif. One arginine (R343) moves to occupy the area vacated by the phosphorylated serine S341, while the other (R346) now interacts with the
backbone of the phosphorylated serine. Phosphates are shown in orange. Images of PDB structures were rendered using PyMOL [69].

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Page 13 of 20

Figure 7 CLK b7-b8 hairpin insert and anchoring residues. Comparison of the residue interactions anchoring the b-hairpin insert to the
kinase C-lobe in solved structures of PfLAMMER [PDB:3LLT] and human Clk2 [PDB:3NR9]. (A) Both structures superimposed, with corresponding
key residues shown in “sticks” representation. The contrastingly conserved residue (from CHAIN analysis) is highlighted cyan: D653 in PfLAMMER,
Q266 in human Clk2. A residue of interest near the base of the hairpin insert, discussed in the text, is shown in yellow; its type is not strongly
conserved within apicomplexan CLKs. Two residues in the loop of the hairpin, colored green, are inserts in PfLAMMER relative to Clk2; they
appear anchored to the kinase C-lobe by interactions with a lysine, dark blue. (B) Human Clk2, showing side chains near the residues of interest.
A hydrogen bond appears between the aE-helix glutamine (cyan) and the backbone of a valine (yellow) near the base of the hairpin insert. (C)
In PfLAMMER, the two residues of interest, D653 (cyan) and T711 (yellow), do not interact directly; each instead forms several novel hydrogen
bonds with other nearby residues, shown in green and blue, corresponding to those shown in green and gray in the human Clk2 structure.

place of human T379, losing the bond (Figure 5C). The
E382 in Clk2 is replaced in PfLAMMER by R775, which
does not form hydrogen bonds with the nearby trio of
substrate-recognition residues but is instead oriented
outward, free to interact with other atoms, such as the
substrate (Figure 5C). The location of the residues L772
and R775 in the loop connecting the aF and aG helices,
in particular, is also significant because the aF-aG loop

is also involved in substrate binding; it is therefore likely
that the chromalveolate-specific variations observed in
this loop also contribute to a difference in substrate
recognition.
P+1 binding pocket As mentioned above, apicomplexan
CLKs have conserved lineage-specific residues located at
the substrate-binding pocket. One such residue is a the
chromalveolate-specific asparagine (N736) in the P+1

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

pocket. N736 is conserved as a glutamine in SRPKs, as a
serine in human Clk1 and Clk2, as a cysteine in GSK,
and as a valine in CDK [48]. These variations may contribute to the substrate specificity by subtly altering the
geometry of the P+1 pocket. Alternatively, the variation
observed at the P+1 pocket may reflect the unique
mode of allosteric coupling between the substrate-binding site and active site in CMGC kinases. Notably, both
the backbone and side-chain of N736 in PfLAMMER
are involved in hydrogen bonding to the backbone of
the catalytically important HTD motif (Figure 6B), while
in other CMGC kinases, the coupling between the P+1
pocket and catalytic site is largely mediated through
backbone hydrogen bonds (Figure 6C,D).
We used the program Coot [84] to examine N736 in
the structure of PfLAMMER and found that its backbone conformation lies in a disallowed region of the
Ramachandran plot, indicating that torsion-angle strain
occurs here. This position has been reported to be in a
strained position in SRPK1 and other CMGCs prior to
substrate binding; substrate binding relieves this strain,
highlighting the importance of this residue in the substrate binding mechanism [48]. It is also significant that
in one of the human Clk1 structures [PDB:2VAG] (Figure 6E), S341 (equivalent to N736 in PfLAMMER) and
T342 are phosphorylated, which dramatically alters the
geometry of the P+1 pocket and inactivates the kinase
[85]. This indicates that the P+1 pocket is conformationally malleable and can contribute to the unique
modes of allosteric regulation.
Proline-directed and processive phosphorylation The
CLK family, and related members of the CMGC group,
conserve several distinctive residues in the substratebinding site that contribute to the substrate specificity
of CMGC kinases. One such residue is the distinctive
CMGC-arginine [48] (R741 in Figure 6B) located at the
C-terminal end of the activation loop. The CMGC-arginine contributes to substrate specificity by creating a
favorable hydrophobic environment for a proline at the
P+1 position of the substrate. Specifically, the CMGCarginine caps the backbone carbonyl oxygen of a residue
(N736 in PfLAMMER) in the P+1 pocket that typically
hydrogen bonds to the backbone amide of a residue at
the P+1 position. Because proline lacks a backbone
amide, the capping of carbonyl oxygen by the CMGCarginine allows selective binding of substrates with proline at the P+1 position [72]. The presence of the
CMGC-arginine and the hydrogen bonds in the P+1
pocket of PfLAMMER (Figure 6C) suggest that chromalveolate CLKs, like other CMGC kinases [45,86], are
likely to be proline-directed.
PfLAMMER also conserves the P - 2 arginine (R738 in
Figure 6C), which in human CLKs and SRPKs contributes to the processive phosphorylation of substrates by

Page 14 of 20

stabilizing a phosphorylated serine or threonine at the P
- 2 position in the substrate [47,48]. This feature suggests that chromalveolate CLKs, like human and plant
CLKs and SRPKs, may processively phosphorylate substrates with phosphorylatable serine or threonine at the
P - 2 position. Indeed, a search for protein sequences
with an RNA-binding domain [Pfam:RRM_1] and “RS”
repeat regions identified at least three possible SR proteins in P. falciparum [EupathDB:PF10_0217, PFE0865c,
PFE0160c], each with orthologs in other apicomplexan
species [OrthoMCL:OG5_127971, OG5_128933,
OG5_127418].
Chromalveolate-specific features in the distal substraterecognition site

The CLK family, as it appears in all eukaryotes including
apicomplexans, has a characteristic b-hairpin insert in
the C-lobe between the b7 and b8 strands, which blocks
its SR protein substrate from docking in what is a distal
substrate-recognition groove in other CMGCs (such as
the MAP kinase p38) [47]. Blocking this docking interaction is critical for CLK substrate specificity, the primary means by which CLKs are regulated [47].
CHAIN analysis revealed a strikingly conserved
acidic residue (aspartate or glutamate) in the aE helix
of chromalveolate CLKs which in other eukaryotic
CLKs is generally a histidine or a glutamine. This difference is reflected in the anchoring of the b-hairpin
insert to the C-lobe of the kinase domain (Figure 7).
In PfLAMMER, the conserved acidic residue is D653;
the equivalent residue in human Clk2 [PDB:3NR9] is
Q266. In Clk2, the MAPK substrate-recognition groove
is occupied by a hydrophobic V318; Q266 stabilizes
the backbone of V318 in human Clk2 (Figure 7B). In
contrast, the distinctive D653 in PfLAMMER participates in a network of hydrogen bonds involving an
arginine in the b-hairpin insert; the V318 in Clk2 is
replaced by T711, which itself forms hydrogen bonds
with two other residues in the aE helix and at the
base of the insert, rather than with D653 (Figure 7C).
Together these changes appear to further stabilize the
beta-hairpin insert in P. falciparum by forming additional interactions. The changes also make the pocket
more hydrophilic relative to Clk2.
The b-hairpin insert is several residues longer in chromalveolate CLKs than in human Clk2. In the PfLAMMER structure [PDB:3LLT], the hairpin loop is also
anchored to the kinase C-lobe by a hydrogen bond
between a lysine (K843) in the C-lobe and the backbone
of the hairpin loop — this lysine, and consequently the
hydrogen bond, is not seen in human Clk2 (Figure 7A).
However, it is also possible that the interaction occurs
in the solved structure as a consequence of crystal packing, in which case there may be no functional significance in vivo.

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

These variations, along with the variations in the primary substrate-binding site, indicate that apicomplexan
and other chromalveolate CLKs have diverged from
their human counterparts and specifically recognize and
phosphorylate selected protein substrates.

Conclusions
We have used an approach based on evolutionary analysis to identify statistically distinct subfamilies of CDK
and CDPK in the Apicomplexa and Chromalveolata, and
explore the structural adaptations of CLK for substrate
binding among chromalveolates. We discussed the functional implications of these distinguishing variations,
confirmed and clarified previously published results
regarding protein kinases in apicomplexan species, and
proposed a set of new testable functional hypotheses,
which we hope will focus future experimental efforts.
This methodology has provided a means for identifying clade-specific sequence and structural features
which may be associated with functional specialization.
We presented three well-supported lineage-specific
groups of kinases that emerged from our analysis, supported by existing structural and functional data about
related proteins, and inferred additional functional
hypotheses and the mechanisms that might enable these
functions. Two of these sub-groups are members of the
CMGC kinase group, which is highly conserved across
Eukaryota, allowing strong homologies to be drawn
between extant species to reveal ancient divergences
along evolutionary branches. The third family, CDPK, is
largely specific to plastid-containing eukaryotes in the
Chromalveolata and Viridiplantae (but also found in
other protozoans), but is also relatively more highly
duplicated in each genome; the additional gene copies
enhanced the statistical support for a proposed subfamily. The public availability of whole-genome sequences
from diverse apicomplexan species likewise enabled the
detection of deeply conserved sequence patterns. The
work of the Structural Genomics Consortium [87] has
also been invaluable in providing structural evidence for
this neglected branch of protozoa.
Not every eukaryotic protein kinase family in apicomplexans yielded a distinctive feature set, however. Many
of the “Other” kinase families are difficult to classify
precisely; some are lineage-specific, and some have a
mix of sequence features shared by multiple kinase
families — the PfPK7 family, in fact, presents both problems [18]. The previously identified apicomplexan-specific families, FIKK and ROPK, are not strong
candidates for CHAIN analysis, either: Since all of the
species containing these families belong to the same
phylum, shared sequence features within a sub-clade are
likely to be the result of recent common ancestry rather
than functional constraints on their molecular evolution.

Page 15 of 20

Despite these limitations, the approach we have presented will be useful for further analysis of apicomplexans as additional whole-genome sequences and protein
kinase structures become available.
In the search for potential therapeutic targets for parasitic diseases, identification of these features and the
molecular mechanisms they represent could lead to
potential candidates for selective targeting. The taxonomic distribution of these novel protein features also
provides insight into the evolution of apicomplexans
and chromalveolates, lending support to the current
understanding of these species’ history.

Methods
Genome data sources

The protein complements of 17 complete genomes,
from 15 distinct apicomplexan species, were retrieved
from EupathDB [88]. The genomes of three non-apicomplexan species were also obtained for comparison
(Table 2).
To obtain a sequence set of all solved apicomplexan
ePK structures, the August 2011 release of PDBAA, the
protein sequence database derived from PDB, was
downloaded from NCBI. Phylum labels were added to
the sequence headers according to GI number using the
NCBI taxonomy data set, and sequences from the phylum Apicomplexa were selected.
Identification, classification and alignment of eukaryotic
protein kinases (ePKs) in selected genomes

We constructed a curated set of ePK family profiles
using previously annotated sequences from diverse
model organisms. The classification scheme is based on
the kinase groups and families described in previous
kinomic analyses [27,28,89]. Additional profiles for the
FIKK, ROPK and PfPK7 families were built from apicomplexan sequences with annotations supported by
experimental studies in published literature [21,24].
We used the MAPGAPS program with the curated
profile sets to identify, classify and align the protein
kinases in the genomic sequences, as well as the apicomplexan ePK structures in PDB. MAPGAPS selects
all sequences with a kinase domain containing key
motifs, assigns each sequence with a significant hit to
the best-matching family in the query profile, and accurately aligns each hit to the kinase consensus sequence,
capturing conserved motifs [90]. Fragmentary sequences
were then deleted.
Identification and classification of the ePKs in each
genome revealed certain families present in multiple
copies, providing enough data for further comparative
analysis. The sequence counts in this scan generally
agree with previously published kinome analyses, though
because these and most previous annotations are

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Page 16 of 20

Table 2 Genome sources
Genomes

Source

Plasmodium berghei ANKA, P. chabaudi AS, P. falciparum 3D7, P. knowlesi H, P. PlasmoDB v.8.0 [6-10,96]
vivax Salvador I, P. yoelii 17XNL
Babesia bovis T2Bo; Theileria annulata Ankara, T. parva Mugaga
Neospora caninum; Toxoplasma gondii GT1, ME49, VEG; Eimeria tenella
Houghton
Cryptosporidium hominis, C. muris, C. parvum Iowa II

CryptoDB v.4.5 [14-16]

Perkinsus marinus ATCC 50983

NCBI genome project 12737

Thalassiosira pseudonana CCMP1335

NCBI genome project 34119 [98,99]

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Kinbase (http://kinase.com/kinbase/), Saccharomyces Genome
Database (http://yeastgenome.org/)

produced by different computational methods there is
occasional disagreement over the classification of more
divergent sequences lacking clear orthologs in model
organisms.
Gene tree inference to find divergent apicomplexan
ortholog groups

Within each assigned ePK family, we concatenated the
three sequence sets (apicomplexan genomic; a profile of
sequences from model organisms including human; apicomplexan PDB sequences) and realigned the kinase
domains using MAPGAPS to prepare a sequence alignment for phylogenetic analysis. To infer a gene tree
from each of these alignments, we used RAxML with
the fast bootstrap and maximum likelihood tree estimation procedure [91], PROTGAMMAWAG model (WAG
amino acid substitution model with the rate heterogeneity), and 500 bootstrap replicates. We then used a custom script based on Biopython [70] to collapse branches
with less than 50% bootstrap support in the resulting
gene trees.
A resolved clade in the gene tree containing sequences
from a monophyletic group of species, in agreement
with the established species tree, indicates that the
genes are orthologous. We selected clades that contained sequences from several apicomplexan species, but
did not include any metazoan sequences, and with particular interest in clades containing PDB structures, for
further analysis.
Patterns of functional divergence

We queried related families of diverse sequences with
selected clusters using the CHAIN program [33]. For
each apicomplexan-specific cluster, we used the
sequences from each gene clade of interest (described
above) as the query set, and the sequences of diverse
eukaryotic species in the corresponding kinase family as
the main set, constructed from all kinase family members found in NCBI-nr. Both the query and main
sequence sets were aligned with MAPGAPS for
comparison.

PiroplasmaDB v.1.1 [11-13]
ToxoDB v.7.0 [97]

The Bayesian Pattern Partitioning Search (BPPS) procedure in CHAIN simultaneously identifies selective
constraints imposed on the foreground sequences, and
pulls any sequences from the background that share the
identified patterns in the query into the foreground, precisely defining a statistically supported family or subfamily if one exists [33].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Kinome annotations. Zip archive of hierarchical
kinase classifications for each gene in the kinomes of each
apicomplexan, plus P. marinus and T. pseudonana. Each file contains two
tab-separated columns listing each gene’s accession and kinase family
assignment. Accessions are taken from the sources listed in Table 2.
Additional file 2: CMGC kinase family sizes. Number of copies of each
conserved CMGC kinase family in each of the surveyed genomes.
Additional file 3: CDK-SCTTLRE subfamily FASTA alignment. Plaintext alignment of the kinase domains of the 14 sequences belonging to
proposed CDK subfamily ("SCTTLRE”), in FASTA format.
Additional file 4: CDK-SCTTLRE subfamily CHAIN alignment versus
the CDK family. Colorized sequence alignment and partition generated
by the CHAIN program, comparing the apicomplexan-specific subfamily
of CDKs to a diverse set of eukaryotic CDKs. CHAIN compares a given
“query” set (here, members of the putative subfamily) to a larger “main”
set (here, a diverse set of eukaryotic CDKs) and divides the main set into
3 partitions based on contrasting levels of residue conservation: a
“foreground” set of sequences with residue motifs matching the query, a
“background” which does not conserve the distinguishing motifs of the
foreground, and an “intermediate” which contains sequences that may
partially match both the foreground and background sequence motifs.
The alignment summary generated by CHAIN displays only the aligned
sequences in the query, but highlights the alignment columns according
to the conservation patterns defining each partition. The alignment
appears as three blocks, labeled “Intermediate”, “Background” and
“Foreground”, corresponding to those partitions. Above each block is a
histogram indicating residue conservation patterns unique to that
sequence set; dots above each column indicate which columns form the
distinguishing pattern. Thus, tall red bars above columns in the
“Foreground” block indicate residues that are strikingly conserved in the
foreground, but not in the background. The rows below each
“Background” and “Foreground” block indicate the conserved residue
types and their conservation levels within those sequence sets, in units
of 10%.
Additional file 5: CDK-SCTTLRE subfamily CHAIN alignment versus
the CDC2 subfamily. Colorized sequence alignment and partition
generated by the CHAIN program, comparing the apicomplexan-specific
subfamily of CDKs to eukaryotic CDC2 subfamily members.

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Additional file 6: CDPK subfamily FASTA alignment. Plain-text
alignment of the 76 kinase domain sequences belonging to the
proposed CDPK subfamily, in FASTA format.
Additional file 7: CDPK subfamily CHAIN alignment. Colorized
sequence alignment and partition generated by the CHAIN program,
comparing the lineage-specific subfamily of CDPKs to a large set of
chromalveolate CDPKs.
Additional file 8: CpCDPK2 and MAPK structure alignment for
PyMOL. PyMOL script to superimpose structures of CpCDPK2 and
phosphorylated mammalian p38a, a MAP kinase. The structures are
automatically downloaded from the wwPDB server and aligned within
PyMOL. Constrastingly conserved CpCDPK2 residues identified by CHAIN,
and the equivalents in p38a, are highlighted as sticks. The reader is
encouraged to explore nearby side chains and other features using the
built-in capabilities of PyMOL.
Additional file 9: Alignment of selected CDPK subfamily and MAPK
sequences. Annotated alignment of CDPK subfamily representatives
CpCDPK2 and PfCDPK5 with human MAPK sequences p38, JNK1 and
ERK1. GUIDANCE [100] was used to align the sequence segments,
calculate reliability scores, and generate the initial version of the figure,
to which we added further annotations.
Additional file 10: CLK family FASTA alignment. Plain-text alignment
of the kinase domains of 33 sequences belonging to a divergent clade
of CLK, in FASTA format.
Additional file 11: CLK family CHAIN alignment. Colorized sequence
alignment and partition generated by the CHAIN program, comparing
the apicomplexan-specific subfamily of CLKs to a diverse set of
eukaryotic CLKs.
Additional file 12: CLK family structure alignment for PyMOL.
PyMOL script to superimpose structures of PfLAMMER and human Clk2
and Clk3. Constrastingly conserved PfLAMMER residues identified by
CHAIN, and the equivalents in the human CLKs, are highlighted as sticks.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jessica C. Kissinger for valuable discussions related
to this project and a critical review of a draft of this manuscript. We also
thank the two anonymous reviewers for their detailed comments and advice
on this manuscript.
We acknowledge the important contributions of the Structural Genomics
Consortium in providing relevant crystal structures, many of which have
been made public prior to the publication of an accompanying journal
article. The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Pathogen Sequence Unit
generously provided pre-publication access to genomic sequences.
Funding for NK from the University of Georgia is acknowledged.
Author details
Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
2
Department of Biochemistry, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
NK designed and conceived the project. ET performed the bioinformatics
analyses. ET, AM and NK examined sequences and structural features and
wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 14 June 2011 Accepted: 2 November 2011
Published: 2 November 2011
References
1. Roos DS: Genetics. Themes and variations in apicomplexan parasite
biology. Science 2005, 309(5731):72-3.
2. Renslo AR, McKerrow JH: Drug discovery and development for neglected
parasitic diseases. Nature chemical biology 2006, 2(12):701-10.
3. Sibley LD: Intracellular parasite invasion strategies. Science 2004,
304(5668):248-53.

Page 17 of 20

4.

Hammarton T: The cell cycle of parasitic protozoa: potential for
chemotherapeutic exploitation. Progress In Cell Cycle Research 2003,
5:91-101, .
5. Doerig C, Abdi A, Bland N, Eschenlauer S, Dorin-Semblat D, Fennell C,
Halbert J, Holland Z, Nivez MP, Semblat JP, Sicard A, Reininger L: Malaria:
targeting parasite and host cell kinomes. Biochimica et biophysica acta
2010, 1804(3):604-12.
6. Hall N, Karras M, Raine JD, Carlton JM, Kooij TWa, Berriman M, Florens L,
Janssen CS, Pain A, Christophides GK, James K, Rutherford K, Harris B,
Harris D, Churcher C, Quail Ma, Ormond D, Doggett J, Trueman HE,
Mendoza J, Bidwell SL, Rajandream MA, Carucci DJ, Yates JR, Kafatos FC,
Janse CJ, Barrell B, Turner CMR, Waters AP, Sinden RE: A comprehensive
survey of the Plasmodium life cycle by genomic, transcriptomic, and
proteomic analyses. Science 2005, 307(5706):82-6.
7. Gardner MJ, Hall N, Fung E, White O, Berriman M, Hyman RW, Carlton JM,
Pain A, Nelson KE, Bowman S, Paulsen IT, James K, Eisen Ja, Rutherford K,
Salzberg SL, Craig A, Kyes S, Chan MS, Nene V, Shallom SJ, Suh B,
Peterson J, Angiuoli S, Pertea M, Allen J, Selengut J, Haft D, Mather MW,
Vaidya AB, Martin DMa, Fairlamb AH, Fraunholz MJ, Roos DS, Ralph Sa,
McFadden GI, Cummings LM, Subramanian GM, Mungall C, Venter JC,
Carucci DJ, Hoffman SL, Newbold C, Davis RW, Fraser CM, Barrell B:
Genome sequence of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum. Nature 2002, 419(6906):498-511.
8. Pain a, Böhme U, Berry aE, Mungall K, Finn RD, Jackson aP, Mourier T,
Mistry J, Pasini EM, Aslett Ma, Balasubrammaniam S, Borgwardt K, Brooks K,
Carret C, Carver TJ, Cherevach I, Chillingworth T, Clark TG, Galinski MR,
Hall N, Harper D, Harris D, Hauser H, Ivens A, Janssen CS, Keane T, Larke N,
Lapp S, Marti M, Moule S, Meyer IM, Ormond D, Peters N, Sanders M,
Sanders S, Sargeant TJ, Simmonds M, Smith F, Squares R, Thurston S,
Tivey aR, Walker D, White B, Zuiderwijk E, Churcher C, Quail Ma,
Cowman aF, Turner CMR, Rajandream Ma, Kocken CHM, Thomas aW,
Newbold CI, Barrell BG, Berriman M: The genome of the simian and
human malaria parasite Plasmodium knowlesi. Nature 2008,
455(7214):799-803.
9. Carlton JM, Adams JH, Silva JC, Bidwell SL, Lorenzi H, Caler E, Crabtree J,
Angiuoli SV, Merino EF, Amedeo P, Cheng Q, Coulson RMR, Crabb BS, Del
Portillo Ha, Essien K, Feldblyum TV, Fernandez-Becerra C, Gilson PR,
Gueye AH, Guo X, Kang’a S, Kooij TWa, Korsinczky M, Meyer EVS, Nene V,
Paulsen I, White O, Ralph Sa, Ren Q, Sargeant TJ, Salzberg SL, Stoeckert CJ,
Sullivan Sa, Yamamoto MM, Hoffman SL, Wortman JR, Gardner MJ,
Galinski MR, Barnwell JW, Fraser-Liggett CM: Comparative genomics of the
neglected human malaria parasite Plasmodium vivax. Nature 2008,
455(7214):757-63.
10. Carlton JM, Angiuoli SV, Suh BB, Kooij TW, Pertea M, Silva JC,
Ermolaeva MD, Allen JE, Selengut JD, Koo HL, Peterson JD, Pop M,
Kosack DS, Shumway MF, Bidwell SL, Shallom SJ, van Aken SE,
Riedmuller SB, Feldblyum TV, Cho JK, Quackenbush J, Sedegah M,
Shoaibi A, Cummings LM, Florens L, Yates JR, Raine JD, Sinden RE,
Harris Ma, Cunningham Da, Preiser PR, Bergman LW, Vaidya AB, van Lin LH,
Janse CJ, Waters AP, Smith HO, White OR, Salzberg SL, Venter JC, Fraser CM,
Hoffman SL, Gardner MJ, Carucci DJ: Genome sequence and comparative
analysis of the model rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium yoelii yoelii.
Nature 2002, 419(6906):512-9.
11. Brayton Ka, Lau AOT, Herndon DR, Hannick L, Kappmeyer LS, Berens SJ,
Bidwell SL, Brown WC, Crabtree J, Fadrosh D, Feldblum T, Forberger HA,
Haas BJ, Howell JM, Khouri H, Koo H, Mann DJ, Norimine J, Paulsen IT,
Radune D, Ren Q, Smith RK, Suarez CE, White O, Wortman JR, Knowles DP,
McElwain TF, Nene VM: Genome sequence of Babesia bovis and
comparative analysis of apicomplexan hemoprotozoa. PLoS pathogens
2007, 3(10):1401-13.
12. Pain A, Renauld H, Berriman M, Murphy L, Yeats Ca, Weir W, Kerhornou A,
Aslett M, Bishop R, Bouchier C, Cochet M, Coulson RMR, Cronin A, de
Villiers EP, Fraser A, Fosker N, Gardner M, Goble A, Griffths-Jones S,
Harris DE, Katzer F, Larke N, Lord A, Maser P, McKellar S, Mooney P,
Morton F, Nene V, O’Neil S, Price C, Quail Ma, Rabbinowitsch E,
Rawlings ND, Rutter S, Saunders D, Seeger K, Shah T, Squares R, Squares S,
Tivey A, Walker AR, Woodward J, Dobbelaere DaE, Langsley G,
Rajandream MA, McKeever D, Shiels B, Tait A, Barrell B, Hall N: Genome of
the host-cell transforming parasite Theileria annulata compared with T.
parva. Science 2005, 309(5731):131-3.

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

13. Gardner MJ, Bishop R, Shah T, de Villiers EP, Carlton JM, Hall N, Ren Q,
Paulsen IT, Pain A, Berriman M, Wilson RJM, Sato S, Ralph Sa, Mann DJ,
Xiong Z, Shallom SJ, Weidman J, Jiang L, Lynn J, Weaver B, Shoaibi A,
Domingo AR, Wasawo D, Crabtree J, Wortman JR, Haas B, Angiuoli SV,
Creasy TH, Lu C, Suh B, Silva JC, Utterback TR, Feldblyum TV, Pertea M,
Allen J, Nierman WC, Taracha ELN, Salzberg SL, White OR, Fitzhugh Ha,
Morzaria S, Venter JC, Fraser CM, Nene V: Genome sequence of Theileria
parva, a bovine pathogen that transforms lymphocytes. Science 2005,
309(5731):134-7.
14. Heiges M, Wang H, Robinson E, Aurrecoechea C, Gao X, Kaluskar N,
Rhodes P, Wang S, He CZ, Su Y, Miller J, Kraemer E, Kissinger JC: CryptoDB:
a Cryptosporidium bioinformatics resource update. Nucleic acids research
2006, , 34 Database: D419-22.
15. Xu P, Widmer G, Wang Y, Ozaki LS, Alves JM, Serrano MG, Puiu D,
Manque P, Akiyoshi D, Mackey AJ, Pearson WR, Dear PH, Bankier AT,
Peterson DL, Abrahamsen MS, Kapur V, Tzipori S, Buck GA: The genome of
Cryptosporidium hominis. Nature 2004, 431(7012):1107-12.
16. Abrahamsen MS, Templeton TJ, Enomoto S, Abrahante JE, Zhu G,
Lancto Ca, Deng M, Liu C, Widmer G, Tzipori S, Buck Ga, Xu P, Bankier AT,
Dear PH, Konfortov Ba, Spriggs HF, Iyer L, Anantharaman V, Aravind L,
Kapur V: Complete genome sequence of the apicomplexan,
Cryptosporidium parvum. Science 2004, 304(5669):441-5.
17. Bontell IL, Hall N, Ashelford KE, Dubey JP, Boyle JP, Lindh J, Smith JE: Whole
genome sequencing of a natural recombinant Toxoplasma gondii strain
reveals chromosome sorting and local allelic variants. Genome biology
2009, 10(5):R53.
18. Dorin D, Semblat JP, Poullet P, Alano P, Goldring JPD, Whittle C,
Patterson S, Chakrabarti D, Doerig C: PfPK7, an atypical MEK-related
protein kinase, reflects the absence of classical three-component MAPK
pathways in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.
Molecular microbiology 2005, 55:184-96.
19. Lourido S, Shuman J, Zhang C, Shokat KM, Hui R, Sibley LD: Calciumdependent protein kinase 1 is an essential regulator of exocytosis in
Toxoplasma. Nature 2010, 465(7296):359-62.
20. Tewari R, Straschil U, Bateman A, Böhme U, Cherevach I, Gong P, Pain A,
Billker O: The systematic functional analysis of Plasmodium protein
kinases identifies essential regulators of mosquito transmission. Cell host
& microbe 2010, 8(4):377-87.
21. Ward P, Equinet L, Packer J, Doerig C: Protein kinases of the human
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum: the kinome of a divergent
eukaryote. BMC Genomics 2004, 5:79.
22. Sargeant TJ, Marti M, Caler E, Carlton JM, Simpson K, Speed TP,
Cowman AF: Lineage-specific expansion of proteins exported to
erythrocytes in malaria parasites. Genome biology 2006, 7(2):R12.
23. Schneider AG, Mercereau-Puijalon O: A new Apicomplexa-specific protein
kinase family: multiple members in Plasmodium falciparum, all with an
export signature. BMC Genomics 2005, 6:30.
24. Peixoto L, Chen F, Harb OS, Davis PH, Beiting DP, Brownback CS,
Ouloguem D, Roos DS: Integrative genomic approaches highlight a
family of parasite-specific kinases that regulate host responses. Cell host
& microbe 2010, 8(2):208-18.
25. Dorin-Semblat D, Sicard A, Doerig C, Ranford-Cartwright L, Doerig C:
Disruption of the PfPK7 gene impairs schizogony and sporogony in the
human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Eukaryotic cell 2008,
7(2):279-85.
26. Merckx A, Echalier A, Langford K, Sicard A, Langsley G, Joore J, Doerig C,
Noble M, Endicott J: Structures of P. falciparum protein kinase 7 identify
an activation motif and leads for inhibitor design. Structure 2008,
16(2):228-38.
27. Hanks SK, Hunter T: The eukaryotic protein kinase superfamily: kinase
(catalytic) domain structure and classification. FASEB 1995, 9:576-596.
28. Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S: The protein
kinase complement of the human genome. Science 2002,
298(5600):1912-34.
29. Nagamune K, Sibley LD: Comparative genomic and phylogenetic analyses
of calcium ATPases and calcium-regulated proteins in the apicomplexa.
Molecular biology and evolution 2006, 23(8):1613-27.
30. Wernimont AK, Artz JD, Finerty P, Lin YH, Amani M, Allali-Hassani A,
Senisterra G, Vedadi M, Tempel W, Mackenzie F, Chau I, Lourido S,
Sibley LD, Hui R: Structures of apicomplexan calcium-dependent protein

Page 18 of 20

31.
32.

33.
34.

35.

36.

37.

38.
39.

40.
41.

42.

43.

44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

kinases reveal mechanism of activation by calcium. Nature structural &
molecular biology 2010, 17(5):596-601.
Billker O, Lourido S, Sibley L: Calcium-dependent signaling and kinases in
apicomplexan parasites. Cell host & microbe 2009, 5(6):612-622.
Artz J, Wernimont A, Allali-Hassani A, Zhao Y, Amani M, Lin YH, Senisterra G,
Wasney G, Fedorov O, King O, Roos A, Lunin V, Qiu W, Finerty P,
Hutchinson A, Chau I, von Delft F, MacKenzie F, Lew J, Kozieradzki I,
Vedadi M, Schapira M, Zhang C, Shokat K, Heightman T, Hui R: The
Cryptosporidium parvum Kinome. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:478.
Neuwald AF: The CHAIN program: forging evolutionary links to
underlying mechanisms. Trends in biochemical sciences 2007, 32(11):487-93.
Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H,
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic acids research
2000, 28:235-42.
Keeling PJ, Burger G, Durnford DG, Lang BF, Lee RW, Pearlman RE,
Roger AJ, Gray MW: The tree of eukaryotes. Trends in ecology & evolution
2005, 20(12):670-6.
Adl SM, Simpson AGB, Farmer MA, Andersen RA, Anderson OR, Barta JR,
Bowser SS, Brugerolle G, Fensome RA, Fredericq S, James TY, Karpov S,
Kugrens P, Krug J, Lane CE, Lewis LA, Lodge J, Lynn DH, Mann DG,
McCourt RM, Mendoza L, Moestrup O, Mozley-Standridge SE, Nerad TA,
Shearer CA, Smirnov AV, Spiegel FW, Taylor MFJR: The new higher level
classification of eukaryotes with emphasis on the taxonomy of protists.
The Journal of eukaryotic microbiology 2005, 52(5):399-451.
Joseph SJ, Fernández-Robledo JA, Gardner MJ, El-Sayed NM, Kuo CH,
Schott EJ, Wang H, Kissinger JC, Vasta GR: The Alveolate Perkinsus
marinus: biological insights from EST gene discovery. BMC Genomics
2010, 11:228.
Bemm F, Schwarz R, Förster F, Schultz J: A kinome of 2600 in the ciliate
Paramecium tetraurelia. FEBS letters 2009, 583(22):3589-92.
Miranda-Saavedra D, Stark MJR, Packer JC, Vivares CP, Doerig C, Barton GJ:
The complement of protein kinases of the microsporidium
Encephalitozoon cuniculi in relation to those of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:309.
Lawrence JG: Common themes in the genome strategies of pathogens.
Current opinion in genetics & development 2005, 15(6):584-8.
Templeton TJ, Iyer LM, Anantharaman V, Enomoto S, Abrahante JE,
Subramanian GM, Hoffman SL, Abrahamsen MS, Aravind L: Comparative
analysis of apicomplexa and genomic diversity in eukaryotes. Genome
research 2004, 14(9):1686-95.
Kuo CH, Kissinger JC: Consistent and contrasting properties of lineagespecific genes in the apicomplexan parasites Plasmodium and Theileria.
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2008, 8:108.
Martin DMa, Miranda-Saavedra D, Barton GJ: Kinomer v. 1.0: a database of
systematically classified eukaryotic protein kinases. Nucleic acids research
2009, , 37 Database: D244-50.
Striepen B, Jordan CN, Reiff S, van Dooren GG: Building the perfect
parasite: cell division in apicomplexa. PLoS pathogens 2007, 3(6):e78.
Colwill K, Feng LL, Yeakley JM, Gish GD, Cáceres JF, Pawson T, Fu XD:
SRPK1 and Clk/Sty protein kinases show distinct substrate specificities
for serine/arginine-rich splicing factors. The Journal of biological chemistry
1996, 271(40):24569-75.
Kojima T, Zama T, Wada K, Onogi H, Hagiwara M: Cloning of human PRP4
reveals interaction with Clk1. The Journal of biological chemistry 2001,
276(34):32247-56.
Bullock AN, Das S, Debreczeni JE, Rellos P, Fedorov O, Niesen FH, Guo K,
Papagrigoriou E, Amos AL, Cho S, Turk BE, Ghosh G, Knapp S: Kinase
domain insertions define distinct roles of CLK kinases in SR protein
phosphorylation. Structure (London, England: 1993) 2009, 17(3):352-62.
Kannan N, Neuwald AF: Evolutionary constraints associated with
functional specificity of the CMGC protein kinases MAPK, CDK, GSK,
SRPK, DYRK, and CK2alpha. Protein science: a publication of the Protein
Society 2004, 13(8):2059-77.
Dixit A, Singh PK, Sharma GP, Malhotra P, Sharma P: PfSRPK1, a novel
splicing-related kinase from Plasmodium falciparum. The Journal of
biological chemistry 2010, 285(49):38315-23.
Yun B, Farkas R, Lee K, Rabinow L: The Doa locus encodes a member of a
new protein kinase family and is essential for eye and embryonic
development in Drosophila melanogaster. Genes & Development 1994,
8(10):1160-1173.

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

51. Agarwal S, Kern S, Halbert J, Przyborski JM, Baumeister S, Dandekar T,
Doerig C, Pradel G: Two nucleus-localized CDK-like kinases with crucial
roles for malaria parasite erythrocytic replication are involved in
phosphorylation of splicing factor. Journal of cellular biochemistry 2011,
112(5):1295-310.
52. Fluhr R: Regulation of Splicing by Protein Phosphorylation. In Nuclear premRNA Processing in Plants, Volume 326 of Current Topics in Microbiology and
Immunology. Edited by: Reddy ASN, Golovkin M. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg; 2008:119-138.
53. Chen F, Mackey AJ, Stoeckert CJ, Roos DS: OrthoMCL-DB: querying a
comprehensive multi-species collection of ortholog groups. Nucleic acids
research 2006, , 34 Database: D363-8.
54. Wernimont AK, Amani M, Qiu W, Pizarro JC, Artz JD, Lin YH, Lew J,
Hutchinson A, Hui R: Structures of parasitic CDPK domains point to a
common mechanism of activation. Proteins 2010, 1-18.
55. Ojo KK, Larson ET, Keyloun KR, Castaneda LJ, Derocher AE, Inampudi KK,
Kim JE, Arakaki TL, Murphy RC, Zhang L, Napuli AJ, Maly DJ, Verlinde CLMJ,
Buckner FS, Parsons M, Hol WGJ, Merritt EA, Van Voorhis WC: Toxoplasma
gondii calcium-dependent protein kinase 1 is a target for selective
kinase inhibitors. Nature structural & molecular biology 2010, 17(5):602-7.
56. Nishida E, Gotoh Y: The MAP kinase cascade is essential for diverse signal
transduction pathways. Trends in biochemical sciences 1993, 18(4):128-31.
57. Srinivasan N, Krupa a: A genomic perspective of protein kinases in
Plasmodium falciparum. Proteins 2005, 58:180-9.
58. Eisen JA, Coyne RS, Wu M, Wu D, Thiagarajan M, Wortman JR, Badger JH,
Ren Q, Amedeo P, Jones KM, Tallon LJ, Delcher AL, Salzberg SL, Silva JC,
Haas BJ, Majoros WH, Farzad M, Carlton JM, Smith RK, Garg J, Pearlman RE,
Karrer KM, Sun L, Manning G, Elde NC, Turkewitz AP, Asai DJ, Wilkes DE,
Wang Y, Cai H, Collins K, Stewart BA, Lee SR, Wilamowska K, Weinberg Z,
Ruzzo WL, Wloga D, Gaertig J, Frankel J, Tsao CC, Gorovsky MA, Keeling PJ,
Waller RF, Patron NJ, Cherry JM, Stover NA, Krieger CJ, del Toro C, Ryder HF,
Williamson SC, Barbeau RA, Hamilton EP, Orias E: Macronuclear genome
sequence of the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila, a model eukaryote.
PLoS biology 2006, 4(9):e286.
59. Doerig C, Billker O, Pratt D, Endicott J: Protein kinases as targets for
antimalarial intervention: Kinomics, structure-based design, transmissionblockade, and targeting host cell enzymes. Biochimica et biophysica acta
2005, 1754(1-2):132-50.
60. Dorin D, Le Roch K, Sallicandro P, Alano P, Parzy D, Poullet P, Meijer L,
Doerig C: Pfnek-1, a NIMA-related kinase from the human malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum. European Journal of Biochemistry 2001,
268(9):2600-2608.
61. Nunes MC, Goldring JPD, Doerig C, Scherf A: A novel protein kinase family
in Plasmodium falciparum is differentially transcribed and secreted to
various cellular compartments of the host cell. Molecular microbiology
2007, 63(2):391-403.
62. Nunes MC, Okada M, Scheidig-Benatar C, Cooke BM, Scherf A: Plasmodium
falciparum FIKK Kinase Members Target Distinct Components of the
Erythrocyte Membrane. PloS one 2010, 5(7):e11747.
63. Shaw MK: Cell invasion by Theileria sporozoites. Trends in parasitology
2003, 19:2-6.
64. Bradley PJ, Ward C, Cheng SJ, Alexander DL, Coller S, Coombs GH, Dunn JD,
Ferguson DJ, Sanderson SJ, Wastling JM, Boothroyd JC: Proteomic analysis
of rhoptry organelles reveals many novel constituents for host-parasite
interactions in Toxoplasma gondii. The Journal of biological chemistry 2005,
280(40):34245-58.
65. Boothroyd JC, Dubremetz JF: Kiss and spit: the dual roles of Toxoplasma
rhoptries. Nature reviews Microbiology 2008, 6:79-88.
66. El Hajj H, Lebrun M, Arold ST, Vial H, Labesse G, Dubremetz JF: ROP18 is a
rhoptry kinase controlling the intracellular proliferation of Toxoplasma
gondii. PLoS pathogens 2007, 3(2):e14.
67. Qiu W, Wernimont AK, Tang K, Taylor S, Lunin V, Schapira M, Fentress S, Hui R,
Sibley LD: Novel structural and regulatory features of rhoptry secretory
kinases in Toxoplasma gondii. The EMBO journal 2009, 28(7):969-79.
68. Sibley LD, Ajioka JW: Population structure of Toxoplasma gondii: clonal
expansion driven by infrequent recombination and selective sweeps.
Annual review of microbiology 2008, 62:329-51.
69. Delano W: The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 1.4. 2011.
70. Cock PJA, Antao T, Chang JT, Chapman BA, Cox CJ, Dalke A, Friedberg I,
Hamelryck T, Kauff F, Wilczynski B, de Hoon MJL: Biopython: freely

Page 19 of 20

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.
76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

available Python tools for computational molecular biology and
bioinformatics. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2009, 25(11):1422-3.
Morgan DO: Cyclin-dependent kinases: engines, clocks, and
microprocessors. Annual review of cell and developmental biology 1997,
13:261-91.
Brown NR, Noble ME, Endicott JA, Johnson LN: The structural basis for
specificity of substrate and recruitment peptides for cyclin-dependent
kinases. Nature cell biology 1999, 1(7):438-43.
Doerig C, Endicott J, Chakrabarti D: Cyclin-dependent kinase homologues
of Plasmodium falciparum. International journal for parasitology 2002,
32(13):1575-85.
Doerig C: Protein kinases regulating Plasmodium proliferation and
development. In Molecular approaches to malaria. Edited by: Sherman IW.
Washington, D.C.: ASM Press; 2005:290-310.
Harper JF, Harmon A: Plants, symbiosis and parasites: a calcium signalling
connection. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 2005, 6(7):555-66.
Dvorin JD, Martyn DC, Patel SD, Grimley JS, Collins CR, Hopp CS, Bright aT,
Westenberger S, Winzeler E, Blackman MJ, Baker Da, Wandless TJ,
Duraisingh MT: A plant-like kinase in Plasmodium falciparum regulates
parasite egress from erythrocytes. Science 2010, 328(5980):910-2.
Ahn YM, Clare M, Ensinger CL, Hood MM, Lord JW, Lu WP, Miller DF,
Patt WC, Smith BD, Vogeti L, Kaufman MD, Petillo Pa, Wise SC, Abendroth J,
Chun L, Clark R, Feese M, Kim H, Stewart L, Flynn DL: Switch control
pocket inhibitors of p38-MAP kinase. Durable type II inhibitors that do
not require binding into the canonical ATP hinge region. Bioorganic &
medicinal chemistry letters 2010, 20(19):5793-8.
Bellon S, Fitzgibbon M, Fox T, Hsiao H: The structure of phosphorylated
P38 is monomeric and reveals a conserved activation-loop
conformation. Structure 1999, 1057-1065.
Li JL, Targett GA, Baker DA: Primary structure and sexual stage-specific
expression of a LAMMER protein kinase of Plasmodium falciparum.
International Journal for Parasitology 2001, 31(4):387-392.
Golovkin M, Reddy aS: An SC35-like protein and a novel serine/argininerich protein interact with Arabidopsis U1-70K protein. The Journal of
biological chemistry 1999, 274(51):36428-38.
Iriko H, Jin L, Kaneko O, Takeo S, Han ET, Tachibana M, Otsuki H, Torii M,
Tsuboi T: A small-scale systematic analysis of alternative splicing in
Plasmodium falciparum. Parasitology international 2009, 58(2):196-9.
Velazquez-Dones A, Hagopian JC, Ma CT, Zhong XY, Zhou H, Ghosh G,
Fu XD, Adams Ja: Mass spectrometric and kinetic analysis of ASF/SF2
phosphorylation by SRPK1 and Clk/Sty. The Journal of biological chemistry
2005, 280(50):41761-8.
Ngo JCK, Chakrabarti S, Ding JH, Velazquez-Dones A, Nolen B, Aubol BE,
Adams Ja, Fu XD, Ghosh G: Interplay between SRPK and Clk/Sty kinases
in phosphorylation of the splicing factor ASF/SF2 is regulated by a
docking motif in ASF/SF2. Molecular cell 2005, 20:77-89.
Emsley P, Cowtan K: Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics.
Acta crystallographica. Section D, Biological crystallography 2004, 60(Pt 12 Pt
1):2126-32.
Rodgers JT, Haas W, Gygi SP, Puigserver P: Cdc2-like kinase 2 is an insulinregulated suppressor of hepatic gluconeogenesis. Cell metabolism 2010,
11:23-34.
Nikolakaki E, Du C, Lai J, Giannakouros T, Cantley L, Rabinow L:
Phosphorylation by LAMMER protein kinases: determination of a
consensus site, identification of in vitro substrates, and implications for
substrate preferences. Biochemistry 2002, 41(6):2055-66.
Gileadi O, Knapp S, Lee WH, Marsden BD, Müller S, Niesen FH, Kavanagh KL,
Ball LJ, von Delft F, Doyle Da, Oppermann UCT, Sundström M: The
scientific impact of the Structural Genomics Consortium: a protein
family and ligand-centered approach to medically-relevant human
proteins. Journal of structural and functional genomics 2007, 8(2-3):107-19.
Aurrecoechea C, Brestelli J, Brunk BP, Fischer S, Gajria B, Gao X, Gingle A,
Grant G, Harb OS, Heiges M, Innamorato F, Iodice J, Kissinger JC,
Kraemer ET, Li W, Miller Ja, Nayak V, Pennington C, Pinney DF, Roos DS,
Ross C, Srinivasamoorthy G, Stoeckert CJ, Thibodeau R, Treatman C,
Wang H: EuPathDB: a portal to eukaryotic pathogen databases. Nucleic
acids research 2010, , 38 Database: D415-9.
Kannan N, Taylor SS, Zhai Y, Venter JC, Manning G: Structural and
functional diversity of the microbial kinome. PLoS biology 2007, 5(3):e17.

Talevich et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:321
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/321

Page 20 of 20

90. Neuwald AF: Rapid detection, classification and accurate alignment of up
to a million or more related protein sequences. Bioinformatics 2009,
25(15):1869-1875.
91. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(21):2688-90.
92. Kuo CH, Wares JP, Kissinger JC: The Apicomplexan whole-genome
phylogeny: an analysis of incongruence among gene trees. Molecular
biology and evolution 2008, 25(12):2689-98.
93. Pick C, Ebersberger I, Spielmann T, Bruchhaus I, Burmester T: Phylogenomic
analyses of malaria parasites and evolution of their exported proteins.
BMC evolutionary biology 2011, 11:167.
94. Xiao L, Sulaiman IM, Ryan UM, Zhou L, Atwill ER, Tischler ML, Zhang X,
Fayer R, Lal Aa: Host adaptation and host-parasite co-evolution in
Cryptosporidium: implications for taxonomy and public health.
International journal for parasitology 2002, 32(14):1773-85.
95. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia Jm, Brenner SE: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome research 2004, 14(6):1188-90.
96. Aurrecoechea C, Brestelli J, Brunk BP, Dommer J, Fischer S, Gajria B, Gao X,
Gingle A, Grant G, Harb OS, Heiges M, Innamorato F, Iodice J, Kissinger JC,
Kraemer E, Li W, Miller JA, Nayak V, Pennington C, Pinney DF, Roos DS,
Ross C, Stoeckert CJ, Treatman C, Wang H: PlasmoDB: a functional
genomic database for malaria parasites. Nucleic acids research 2009, , 37
Database: D539-43.
97. Gajria B, Bahl A, Brestelli J, Dommer J, Fischer S, Gao X, Heiges M, Iodice J,
Kissinger JC, Mackey AJ, Pinney DF, Roos DS, Stoeckert CJ, Wang H,
Brunk BP: ToxoDB: an integrated Toxoplasma gondii database resource.
Nucleic acids research 2008, , 36 Database: D553-6.
98. Armbrust EV, Berges Ja, Bowler C, Green BR, Martinez D, Putnam NH,
Zhou S, Allen AE, Apt KE, Bechner M, Brzezinski Ma, Chaal BK, Chiovitti A,
Davis AK, Demarest MS, Detter JC, Glavina T, Goodstein D, Hadi MZ,
Hellsten U, Hildebrand M, Jenkins BD, Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kröger N,
Lau WWY, Lane TW, Larimer FW, Lippmeier JC, Lucas S, Medina M,
Montsant A, Obornik M, Parker MS, Palenik B, Pazour GJ, Richardson PM,
Rynearson Ta, Saito Ma, Schwartz DC, Thamatrakoln K, Valentin K, Vardi A,
Wilkerson FP, Rokhsar DS: The genome of the diatom Thalassiosira
pseudonana: ecology, evolution, and metabolism. Science 2004,
306(5693):79-86.
99. Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP, Rayko E, Salamov A, Vandepoele K,
Beszteri B, Gruber A, Heijde M, Katinka M, Mock T, Valentin K, Verret F,
Berges Ja, Brownlee C, Cadoret JP, Chiovitti A, Choi CJ, Coesel S, De
Martino A, Detter JC, Durkin C, Falciatore A, Fournet J, Haruta M,
Huysman MJJ, Jenkins BD, Jiroutova K, Jorgensen RE, Joubert Y, Kaplan A,
Kröger N, Kroth PG, La Roche J, Lindquist E, Lommer M, Martin-Jézéquel V,
Lopez PJ, Lucas S, Mangogna M, McGinnis K, Medlin LK, Montsant A,
Oudot-Le Secq MP, Napoli C, Obornik M, Parker MS, Petit JL, Porcel BM,
Poulsen N, Robison M, Rychlewski L, Rynearson Ta, Schmutz J, Shapiro H,
Siaut M, Stanley M, Sussman MR, Taylor AR, Vardi A, von Dassow P,
Vyverman W, Willis A, Wyrwicz LS, Rokhsar DS, Weissenbach J, Armbrust EV,
Green BR, Van de Peer Y, Grigoriev IV: The Phaeodactylum genome
reveals the evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature 2008,
456(7219):239-44.
100. Penn O, Privman E, Ashkenazy H, Landan G, Graur D, Pupko T: GUIDANCE:
a web server for assessing alignment confidence scores. Nucleic acids
research 2010, , 38 Web Server: W23-8.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-321
Cite this article as: Talevich et al.: Structural and evolutionary
divergence of eukaryotic protein kinases in Apicomplexa. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:321.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
