<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Advancing standards for bioinformatics activities: persistence, reproducibility, disambiguation and Minimum Information About a Bioinformatics investigation (MIABi)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:S27. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S4-S27"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Tin Wee Tan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Tan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S27

PERSPECTIVE

Open Access

Advancing standards for bioinformatics activities:
persistence, reproducibility, disambiguation and
Minimum Information About a Bioinformatics
investigation (MIABi)
Tin Wee Tan1*, Joo Chuan Tong1,2, Asif M Khan1,3, Mark de Silva1, Kuan Siong Lim1, Shoba Ranganathan4,1*
From Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010)
Tokyo, Japan. 26-28 September 2010

Abstract
The 2010 International Conference on Bioinformatics, InCoB2010, which is the annual conference of the Asia-Pacific
Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) has agreed to publish conference papers in compliance with the proposed
Minimum Information about a Bioinformatics investigation (MIABi), proposed in June 2009. Authors of the conference supplements in BMC Bioinformatics, BMC Genomics and Immunome Research have consented to cooperate
in this process, which will include the procedures described herein, where appropriate, to ensure data and software persistence and perpetuity, database and resource re-instantiability and reproducibility of results, author and
contributor identity disambiguation and MIABi-compliance. Wherever possible, datasets and databases will be submitted to depositories with standardized terminologies. As standards are evolving, this process is intended as a
prelude to the 100 BioDatabases (BioDB100) initiative whereby APBioNet collaborators will contribute exemplar
databases to demonstrate the feasibility of standards-compliance and participate in refining the process for peerreview of such publications and validation of scientific claims and standards compliance. This testbed represents
another step in advancing standards-based processes in the bioinformatics community which is essential to the
growing interoperability of biological data, information, knowledge and computational resources.
Background
Over the past decade the volume of bioinformatics publications has grown tremendously. Within the scientific
community, there have been concerns about disappearing databases, lack of interoperability, incomplete disclosure, and general quality and integrity issues. Efforts
have been made to promote uniqueness and universality
in standardized identifiers including Life Science Identifiers (LSID) [1], Digital Object Identifiers (DOI) [2] and
* Correspondence: tinwee@bic.nus.edu.sg; shoba.ranganathan@mq.edu.au
1
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597
4
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences and ARC Centre of
Excellence in Bioinformatics, Macquarie University, Sydney NSW 2109,
Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

CrossRef [3], author and contributor identifiers [4] (e.g.
ResearcherID [5], Scopus Author Identifier [6], Open
Researcher & Contributor ID [7]); in checklists of minimum information reporting (such as the MIBBI project
[8]); and in the use of standard nomenclature, controlled
vocabularies and ontologies [9]. The ultimate goal would
be for the community to achieve a systematically organized, universally adopted and disciplined approach in
building and organizing the corpus of biological knowledge that is accurate, reliable, trustworthy, consistent
and persistent. The entire information infrastructure
endorsed and used by the community should be universally accessible, wholly interoperable, secure, robust, sustainable in perpetuity, backward compatible and where
possible, future proofed.

© 2010 Tan et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Tan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S27

Just like the Internet, where open standards backed by
implementable code and use-case exemplars are universally adopted, all actors and stakeholders in the process
of scientific discovery and publication must be involved
if we are to achieve bioinformatics standards of comparable universality. In our effort to advance standards for
bioinformatics activities, we have assembled a set of
publishers, editors, reviewers, authors, contributors,
database and resource administrators, programmers and
scientists who are involved in our annual International
Conference on Bioinformatics and the publication of
our conference supplements, as an exemplar of how
such a process for standardization can take place.
Through this multi-stakeholder effort, we hope that the
lessons learnt will be able to shed light on how we can
plan and coordinate a systematic approach and evaluate
them for possible extension to a wider community. The
aspects tested in this process are limited to the following, which we believe is sufficiently wide enough for
facilitating a larger effort to build 100 biological and
bioinformatics databases (BioDB100) which are standards-compliant:
a. Data and software persistence and the basis for perpetuity [10]
b. Re-instantiability and reproducibility [11]
c. Author and Contributor Identity Disambiguation
[12]
d. Minimum Information about a Bioinformatics
investigation (MIABi) as described in this report and as
harmonized with initiatives in MIBBI [8] and those of
the International Society for Biocuration (ISB) [13], specifically BioDBcore [14].
With this platform of standards-compliant databases,
we hope that it will lay the groundwork for studying
how we can implement increasingly standardized terminology, controlled vocabulary, standardized ontologies
and infrastructural and informational interoperability,
such as use of international computational grids [15]
and cloud computing as backend computing resources
for the maintenance and sustainability of knowledge
resources of ever-increasing sophistication.
Data and software repository

Software, datasets and databases described in the International Conference on Bioinformatics, InCoB2010 published in this conference supplement issue are required
to be deposited in distributed repositories which have
sufficient collective guarantee of perpetuity. As much as
all open source publicly available papers can be accessed
long after the publication date, the corresponding data,
datasets and software described should be just as easily
accessible for future researchers to reproduce, verify and
validate the claims and findings or otherwise, and hopefully to improve on them and advance the field. A

Page 2 of 7

deposition of material corresponding to each publication
with version control, unique identifiers, adequate
descriptors and metadata, should be managed and properly curated, as part and parcel of the publication process. Currently many journals have a section called
“supplementary material” where additional information
can be tagged along with the main publication. This
material, however, is generally unstructured or little
effort is made to establish metadata to describe the
content.
We propose that when databases are described in a
publication, a copy should be frozen, version-labelled
and dated for reference. Any subsequent updates with
fully described new features or errata can also be added
for supplementation of the initial deposited material.
Should the corresponding live database referenced in
the publication be discontinued, the original database
must be re-instantiable upon request by any reader
wishing to review the work, without undue administrative, operational or technical barriers, and wherever possible, future-proofed. Likewise, any Web service with its
computational or database backends should also be
similarly deposited in a re-instantiable form. A prototype system [10] is currently being worked on to implement as many stakeholder requests for features to be
added to the system to facilitate ease of deposition.
Deposited material with accompanying metadata will
be compliant with minimum information standards as
described below, as well as harmonized with those of
other initiatives, such as those in the MIBBI project [8]
and that of the International Biocuration Society [13],
its BioDBCore specification [14] and others.
Re-instantiability and reproducibility

To facilitate any research work that might require technical assistance for re-instantiability, we have developed
a virtual machine (VM) platform that can be used on
any current operating system to replay back an operating system image of the entire database, software application or Web service [11]. This platform is based on
Slax, a LiveCD-based Slackware distribution of the
Linux operating system which we have configured for
bioinformatics (BioSlax). Based on our success of this
re-instantiable platform on VMs (such as VMware’s virtual machine platform) running on any current operating systems, or on full hardware virtualization of cloud
computing platforms (such as the open source Citrix
Xen® Hypervisor for virtualization of operating systems
across a wide range of CPU architectures), we envisage
the possibility of full compliance to the requirement of
re-instantiability.
As more such stable, standards-based platforms of different operating systems can be achieved, on which our
authors can wrap their online services in re-instantiable

Tan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S27

forms that suit their specific requirements, our community can progress to a level of peer-review where the
reviewer does not need to take the data and the research
procedures solely on good faith. Our reviewers in the
peer-review process can selectively or comprehensively
take author-submitted data and subject them to as
much rigour as they wish in testing the validity of
claims made by the authors. Unlike wet-laboratory
experiments, where reviewers use their best judgement
to consider whether the experimental disclosure is sufficient for reproduction by any personal skilled in the art,
and where experiments require great time and expense
to be repeated during the review process, the rigour of
the review process for bioinformatics investigations can
reach a level where the author’s in silico experiments
can be selectively or completely reproduced, depending
on the computational power and resources available to
the reviewer. In this way, the veracity of the claims can
be tested and any queries be raised before the paper can
be approved for publication. Moreover, any doubtable
claims can be refuted or rebutted before publication.
Any software coding errors can be detected earlier, and
any database errors fixed before public release.
For example, suppose a piece of software is described
that runs on a particular operating system. The author
might be required to provide at least one form of the
software compliant with the re-instantiable operating
system, without requiring the end user or the reviewer
to carry out complex installation procedures and face
installation problems with dependencies on other components of software which need to be pre-installed
before the software to be published can work well. For
future proofing, the author may be required to wrap the
software together with a compatible operating system,
fully configured to be re-instantiable on a virtual
machine that may be emulated on a wider set of compatible operating systems and hardware.
Supporting grid and cloud computing infrastructure

To support such re-instantiable operating systems containing datasets, databases, web-resources, pre-compiled
software applications, and version control of each deposited digital object, as well as the metadata describing
what is stored, large data storage platforms have to be
procured. Uniquely labeled versions and copies must be
widely distributed to ensure minimized risk of data loss
and to avoid confusion. To support the ability of
reviewers to assess the assertions of authors and to validate the results pre-publication, and for readers to
reproduce the in silico experiments described by the
authors, high performance computing infrastructure
needs to be in place where datasets and software applications are co-located in a grid infrastructure or virtualized in a cloud computing environment. Moreover,

Page 3 of 7

there is a trend to document the scientific process for in
silico e-science and encapsulate multiple steps of a long
workflow into concise machine readable workflow integration systems including popular efforts such as
Taverna [16] and Galaxy [17]. These workflows together
with their orchestration engines, need grid and cloud
computing infrastructure in order to be used by the
publication process which we are implementing in the
MIABi effort and the BioDB100 testbed. We are currently discussing with colleagues in the virtual organizations of OpenScienceGrid.org and EUAsiaGrid for einfrastructure support. The issues faced in such a test
implementation will be documented and analysed for its
feasibility for wider scale deployment.
Author disambiguation

Author names, particularly Asian author names, for various reasons, have a high degree of convergence. Higher
populations of people using a smaller set of common
family or surnames, often result in author name ambiguities. Despite the emergence of author identifier systems such as Researcher ID from Thomson Reuters [5]
and Scopus Author ID from Elsevier [6], Open
Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID) [7] and many
others, universal, unique and unambiguous author identifier for author disambiguation remains elusive [18].
For our BioDB100 testbed, we propose that our
authors use a self-editable author identifier with a protocol to equivalence synonymous identifiers on a neutral
non-publisher-specific platform. Where an author may
end up with several author identifiers on different systems, we provide an equivalencing mechanism, making
all of them synonymous, tracing back different author
identifiers to its unique owner. Any duplicate claims can
also undergo a dispute resolution mechanism to resolve
competing claims of ownership over identifiers or the
papers associated with author identifiers. Erroneous
author identifier labels, tagged to a publication, can also
lend themselves to a protocol for de-convolution. Two
or more authors with exactly the same name label on
different publications can be disambiguated. The same
author with different name labels on a publication, due
to printing errors, or due to transliteration or translational ambiguity, can also apply disambiguation using
such a system. A prototype system [3] (based on the distributed Internet domain name system) is currently
being established with user-friendly interfaces to test
usability and to develop machine-resolvable author disambiguation requests. By validating the corresponding
authors in our conference supplements and in the
BioDB100 initiative, we combine the self-assertion of
the author identifier system with an external validation
mechanism, thus providing support for the hybridasserted identity model of Bilder [19].

Tan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S27

Using this protocol, publication tags such as PubMed
identifiers or DOI handles can be associated by the
author directly to the set of equivalent author identifiers
and author labels. There is now hope for a person who
has changed names, in the case of women changing
family names upon marriage, or of name order changes,
for instance a fictitious Vivian George who previously
used George Vivian or G. Vivian because this was the
country convention in India (family or father’s or village
name abbreviated into an initial), now decides to switch
to V. George because he is based in the US, where last
names come last. There is also a linking mechanism for
authors who have changed fields, as well as those who
are victims of errors of author identifier systems, such
as those giving the same author more than one identifier
because of the best guess attempt by an automated system that failed to determine that two papers were published by the same person, and because of time,
geographic distance, differences in affiliation or disparate
fields of study, they were given two different unique
author identifiers.
Minimum Information about a Bioinformatics
Investigation (MIABi)

In 2001, efforts to compare microarray experiments
eventually led to a standardization known as the Minimum Information about Microarray Experiments
(MIAME) [20]. Since then, many other minimum information standards have appeared, now coordinated by
the project on Minimum Information about a Biological
or Biomedical Investigation (MIBBI) [8]. We would like
to draw the community’s attention to the Minimum
Information about a Bioinformatics investigation
(MIABi) initiative, which specifies, through a series of
documentation modules, the minimum information that
should be provided for a bioinformatics investigation.
Developed through a joint effort by the Asia-Pacific
Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) (http://www.apbionet.org/) and the wider bioinformatics community [21],
the MIABi initiative arises from a response to the growing need for transparency, provenance and scientific
reproducibility amongst the bioinformatics and computational biology community. Currently, it is increasingly
common for computational tools to be applied to ever
larger datasets in order to generate output with little
commensurate effort to review objectively the quality of
the process undertaken, or the quality of the input data,
analytical process, or the conclusions drawn. MIABi
plays a key role in at least one of the steps taken to prevent any decline in the overall value of the scientific
publications in bioinformatics and computational biology. It also aims at “minimizing the reporting requirements while maximizing the information available to
those interpreting the results” of a bioinformatics

Page 4 of 7

database, resource, software application or algorithm,
analysis or in silico experiment.
The guidelines (see Additional File 1) cover the Minimum Information About a Bioinformatics i) algorithm,
ii) analysis, iii) database or resource, iv) software, and v)
Web server. The MIABi scope and workflow is shown
in Figures 1 and 2. This MIABi compliance will require,
firstly, for authors to be issued with unique author identifiers (http://aid.apbionet.org/) for identity disambiguation and accountability purposes. Authors with multiple
identifiers issued by various publishers (e.g. Scopus
author ID, ResearcherID) as mentioned above, can now
be resolved to a unique individual through cross-referencing and synonymization of these identifiers. Secondly, it will require deposition of scientific datasets
through a central portal (e.g. http://docid.apbionet.org/)
for persistence, provenance, accessibility and reproducibility. All databases, datasets and codes cited in papers
published through such processes may be mandated to
be archived in this way, supported by distributed repository nodes, such as that of the Asian Bioinformation
Center initiative and the nascent e-Science Collaboration between Asia-Pacific and Europe (eSCAPE). Moreover, a database on a pre-configured operating system
(OS) such as BioSlax (http://www.bioslax.com) can also
be archived as an image and stored at such repositories.
Should the original database server be unavailable, the
database-OS image can be dynamically re-instantiated
on demand via a cloud computing virtualized platform.
Other activities in bioinformatics such as phylogenetic
analysis, which has already been initiated by the Minimum Information About a Phylogenetic Analysis
(MIAPA) group [22] or for the curation of databases
[14], which is being initiatied by the International
Society for Biocuration [13], may be referenced, integrated or unified, wherever appropriate. By following the
general trend in the bioscience community for the standardization of reporting, MIABi will be registered with
the MIBBI Project [8], so as to promote and coordinate
the development, management and harmonization of
Minimum Information (MI) specifications from across
the biological and biomedical sciences.
In keeping with the acceptable processes in the development and growing adoption of MI standards, MIABi
aims to be as applicable as possible to a wide range of
computational technologies.
Currently, the full MIABi document is divided into
five sections: i) algorithm, ii) analysis, iii) database or
resource, iv) software, and v) Web server (Figure 2).
Each section is subdivided as follows: 1) scope of the MI
for the subject bioinformatics investigation; 2) purpose
and the MI for the subject bioinformatics investigation,
including reproducibility, reusability, and validation of
claims as published in scientific publications; 3)

Tan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S27

Page 5 of 7

Figure 1 Content overview in MIABi. The sections and sub-sections of the full MIABi document are set out.

protection of intellectual property for the subject bioinformatics investigation conforming to MIABi standards
and 4) content of the subject MI, including general
descriptions, input data and parameters, output data,
workflow of process, regression testing, performance
and scalability, and provenance, where applicable. For
the MIABi for databases (MIABi-DB), we are working
with the International Biocuration Society on harmonization of our schema with their BioDBcore checklists
[14, personal communication with P Gaudet, S-A Sansone and Biocuration team members].

Standardization of terminologies
At its current incarnation, MIABi will not mandate all
dataset or database submissions to be fully compliant
with standard nomenclature, controlled vocabularies and
standard ontologies, for the practical reason that many
scientific communities may not be ready to agree to the
standardization process or competing standards or that
there are no standard terminologies in many rapidly
growing fields. Nevertheless, it is our hope that where
communities are ready, they should be able to build
their vocabularies, formulate their field-specific ontologies, and develop consistent processes for their updates
and provide the semantic platform for building consistent terminologies that pertain to that field. Once this is
done, any terminology inconsistency between fields and

subfields can be addressed, and any collision of terminology de-collided or disambiguated. In a decontextualised state, similar or identical terms create confusion
for reasoning engines or natural language processing.
Perhaps a universal terminology deconvolution engine
might help, very much like a scaled-up version of Wikipedia’s disambiguation system.

Discussion
Through our effort to implement MIABi standards and
to test it on real world databases in the BioDB100 project, we hope that in the conceivable future, a research
publication in bioinformatics will not only consist of the
typical paper, but also as a matter of common practice,
include deposited and quality-controlled metadata about
the research process; in addition, any database, software
or datasets arising from the publication shall be accessible from a globally distributed repository in a standardscompliant form, ready for reproducibility of the published results and for reusability in future research (with
due consideration to the copyright owners and the
authors).
From the outcome of the key issues covered in this
standardization deployment project, we hope that sufficient lessons will be learnt such that we can create a
community of researchers and stakeholders who are
open to the standardization process, and attain a set of

Tan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S27

Figure 2 The MIABi workflow. Pre-publication and post-publications sections of the workflow are elaborated.

Page 6 of 7

Tan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S27

implementable standards and procedures. The process
of developing policy and procedural protocols that
derive from this endeavour will hopefully be sufficiently
robust for us to test on a standards-compliant set of
biological databases which the APBioNet plans to initiate as the BioDB100 project. This set of the first 100
biological databases contributed by our Asia-Pacific
community and beyond, can then be used as a basis for
informed debate and discussion, and may eventually
serve as an exemplar towards the wider standardization
of bioinformatics activities.

Additional materail
Additional File 1: MIABi Reporting guidelines for a bioinformatics
investigation (MIABi version 1.01).

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the helpful discussions, advice and assistance of
Pascale Gaudet, President, International Society for Biocuration (ISB) and
Susanna-Assunta Sansone, co-founder, Minimum Information for Biological
and Biomedical Investigations (MIBBI), especially their facilitation in
introducing us to the efforts of the BioDBcore working group.
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 11
Supplement 4, 2010: Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010): Computational Biology. The full contents of the supplement are
available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11?issue=S4.
Author details
1
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597. 2Institute for
Infocomm Research, 1 Fusionopolis Way, #21-01 Connexis South Tower,
Singapore 138632. 3Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences,
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Maryland MD21205, USA.
4
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences and ARC Centre of
Excellence in Bioinformatics, Macquarie University, Sydney NSW 2109,
Australia.

Page 7 of 7

13. International Society for Biocuration (ISB) and their International
Biocuration Conference series. [http://biocurator.org].
14. BioDBCore Working Group: [http://biocurator.org/biodbcore.shtml].
15. EUAsiaGrid: a European Commission R&D Framework Programme FP7 eInfrastructure project entitled “Towards a common e-Science
infrastructure for the European and Asian Grids”. [http://www.euasiagrid.
org].
16. Oinn T, Greenwood M, Addis M, Alpdemir MN, Ferris J, Glover K, Goble C,
Goderis A, Hull D, Marvin D, Li P, Lord P, Pocock MR, Senger M, Stevens R,
Wipat A, Wroe C: Taverna: lessons in creating a workflow environment
for the life sciences. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience
2006, 18:1067-1100, doi:10.1002/cpe.993.
17. Goecks J, Nekrutenko A, Taylor J, The Galaxy Team: Galaxy: a
comprehensive approach for supporting accessible, reproducible, and
transparent computational research in the life sciences. Genome Biol.
2010, 11(8):R86.
18. Bourne PE, Fink JL: I am not a scientist, I am a number. PLoS Comput Biol
2008, 4:e1000247.
19. Bilder G: Author identity, the shape of the problem. STM Innovations,
London; 2009, Available at http://www.stm-assoc.org/
2009_12_04_Innovations_Bilder_CrossRef_Contributor_ID.pdf Date accessed:
21 Oct. 2010.
20. Brazma A, Hingamp P, Quackenbush J, Sherlock G, Spellman P, Stoeckert C,
Aach J, Ansorge W, Ball CA, Causton HC, Gaasterland T, Glenisson P,
Holstege FC, Kim IF, Markowitz V, Matese JC, Parkinson H, Robinson A,
Sarkans U, Schulze-Kremer S, Stewart J, Taylor R, Vilo J, Vingron M:
Minimum information about a microarray experiment (MIAME)-toward
standards for microarray data. Nat. Genet 2001, 29:365-371.
21. Ranganathan S, Eisenhaber F, Tong JC, Tan TW: Extending Asia Pacific
bioinformatics into new realms in the ”-omics” era. BMC Genomics 2009,
10(Suppl 3):S1.
22. Leebens-Mack J, Vision T, Brenner E, Bowers JE, Cannon S, Clement MJ,
Cunningham CW, dePamphilis C, deSalle R, Doyle JJ, Eisen JA, Gu X,
Harshman J, Jansen RK, Kellogg EA, Koonin EV, Mishler BD, Philippe H,
Pires JC, Qiu YL, Rhee SY, Sjölander K, Soltis DE, Soltis PS, Stevenson DW,
Wall K, Warnow T, Zmasek C: Taking the first steps towards a standard for
reporting on phylogenies: Minimum Information About a Phylogenetic
Analysis (MIAPA). OMICS 2006, 10:231-237.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S4-S27
Cite this article as: Tan et al.: Advancing standards for bioinformatics
activities: persistence, reproducibility, disambiguation and Minimum
Information About a Bioinformatics investigation (MIABi). BMC Genomics
2010 11(Suppl 4):S27.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 2 December 2010
References
1. The LSID (Life Sciences Identifier) Project: [http://lsids.sourceforge.net].
2. The Digital Object Identifier system: [http://www.doi.org/].
3. CrossRef:[http://www.crossref.org].
4. Warner S: Author Identifiers in Scholarly Repositories. J. Digital Information
2010, 11:1, Available at: http://journals.tdl.org/jodi/article/view/752. Date
accessed: 21 Oct. 2010.
5. Researcher ID: [http://www.researcherid.com].
6. Scopus Author Identifier: [http://www.info.scopus.com/].
7. Open Researcher Contributor Identification Initiative (ORCID): [http://www.
orcid.org].
8. Taylor CF, Field D, Sansone S-A, Aerts J, et al: Promoting coherent
minimum reporting guidelines for biological and biomedical
investigations: the MIBBI project. Nature Biotechnol. 2008, 26(8):889-896.
9. The Gene Ontology Consortium: Gene ontology: tool for the unification
of biology. Nat. Genet. 2000, 25(1):25-9.
10. APBioNet Document Identification System: [http://docid.apbionet.org].
11. BioSLAX bioinformatics liveCD suite and its methods for instantiation.
[http://www.bioslax.com].
12. APBioNet Author Identification System: [http://aid.apbionet.org/].

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
