<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>DeltaProt: a software toolbox for comparative genomics</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:573. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-573"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Steinar Thorvaldsen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Thorvaldsen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/573

SOFTWARE

Open Access

DeltaProt: a software toolbox for comparative
genomics
Steinar Thorvaldsen1*, Tor Flå1, Nils P Willassen2

Abstract
Background: Statistical bioinformatics is the study of biological data sets obtained by new micro-technologies by
means of proper statistical methods. For a better understanding of environmental adaptations of proteins,
orthologous sequences from different habitats may be explored and compared. The main goal of the DeltaProt
Toolbox is to provide users with important functionality that is needed for comparative screening and studies of
extremophile proteins and protein classes. Visualization of the data sets is also the focus of this article, since
visualizations can play a key role in making the various relationships transparent. This application paper is intended
to inform the reader of the existence, functionality, and applicability of the toolbox.
Results: We present the DeltaProt Toolbox, a software toolbox that may be useful in importing, analyzing and
visualizing data from multiple alignments of proteins. The toolbox has been written in MATLAB™ to provide an
easy and user-friendly platform, including a graphical user interface, while ensuring good numerical performance.
Problems in genome biology may be easily stated thanks to a compact input format. The toolbox also offers the
possibility of utilizing structural information from the SABLE or other structure predictors. Different sequence plots
can then be viewed and compared in order to find their similarities and differences. Detailed statistics are also
calculated during the procedure.
Conclusions: The DeltaProt package is open source and freely available for academic, non-commercial use. The
latest version of DeltaProt can be obtained from http://services.cbu.uib.no/software/deltaprot/. The website also
contains documentation, and the toolbox comes with real data sets that are intended for training in applying the
models to carry out bioinformatical and statistical analyses of protein sequences.
Equipped with the new algorithms proposed here, DeltaProt serves as an auxiliary analysis tool capable of
visualizing and comparing orthologus protein sequences. The framework of the algorithms also enables easy
incorporation of extra information on structure, if such data is available.

Background
Does life existing in extreme environments favour particular amino acids in its proteins, and can this preference
be interpreted in terms of the physicochemical properties
of these amino acids? Comparative bioinformatics [1] is
an emerging field in which the information produced
from sequence alignments is analyzed to find out more
about the essential properties of proteins in diverse living
systems. The success of genome technologies depends
heavily on the correct statistical analyses of genomic
data, and the new interdisciplinary area of statistical
* Correspondence: steinar.thorvaldsen@uit.no
1
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Tromsø, 9037
Tromsø, Norway
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

bioinformatics aims to modify available classical and
nonclassical statistical methods and develop new methodologies. To explore and analyze the flow of experimental data from molecular biology requires efficient flexible
data structures and statistical tools designed with the particular challenges of high-throughput data in mind. Statistical bioinformatics deals particularly with questions of
modelling, handling and interpretation of this type of
data, especially for modern molecular and post-genomic
biology.
The novelty of analytical methods used in statistical
bioinformatics and the special nature of the data generated by genome technologies, require the development of
new software tools. There is a need for computationally
powerful and open/expandable tools, which at the same

© 2010 Thorvaldsen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Thorvaldsen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/573

time should be easy to use. DeltaProt was designed as a
Matlab™ [2] companion with a set of functions and algorithms for modelling multiple alignments of proteins
using a range of methods. The approach has been successfully applied in research on extremophilic organisms
[3-6], and is of special relevance for membrane proteins
since it is very difficult to obtain structural models of this
important class. This is done by applying comparative
statistical methods to comparisons of extremophile proteins versus orthologous genes from organisms of normal
(e.g. mesophilic) habitats. Statistical analyses are best at
distinguishing valid conclusions from random noise.
The information stored in protein sequences can be analyzed at different levels. Features of proteins that can be
obtained as a single numerical value, such as volume or
amino acid composition, can be easily compared across
large numbers of genomes using statistical methods. Additionally, multiple variants of a gene can be compared
between genomes by direct alignment to identify substitution patterns. All genes extracted from two or more
genomes provide a further level at which comparisons can
be carried out. Regardless of the method used, visual
representation of the results becomes essential to display
and interpret the findings.
This paper is organized as follows: The implementation
section presents the toolbox in more detail by describing
the main ideas and capabilities that are integrated into it.
This is followed by the results and discussion sections,
which summarise the functionality of the software by
means of application examples. Figure 1 shows an overview of the workflow. General remarks and future work
are also discussed here. The final section of the paper
contains a summary of the conclusions.

Implementation
Here we describe the organization and capabilities of the
toolbox, highlighting its key features. This tool provides
several methods of comparative analyses, and enables
computational scientists to study sequence alignments
by rapidly prototyping new algorithms and performing
computational experiments. DeltaProt provides access to
implementation details and encourages modification and
extension of capabilities.
The toolbox is distributed in the standard Matlab language, making it compatible with multiple platforms
(Windows, Mac, Linux and Unix). DeltaProt requires at
least Matlab™ R14 (2005). Some functions require the
Matlab™ Statistics Toolbox. The installation of the package consists of unpacking a compressed file to the
desired location. No manual compilation is necessary.
The computational requirements are heavily dependent
on the size of the data set. Generally, the toolbox only
requires high numerical processing capabilities due to a
large data set, for example if whole proteomes consisting

Page 2 of 7

A.

Alignment(s) of protein sequences
with assigned phenotype group

B.

Structure known?
Yes

No
C. Predict structure with e.g. SABLE

D.

E. Calculate, test
and plot
frequencies and
compositional
changes;
e.g. Figure 3

Alignment(s) with assigned structure.
Input to DeltaProt

F. Compute similarity
between the
sequences

H. Read properties
from file.
Compute property data
for each sequence.

G. Calculate, test and
plot substitutions;
e.g. Figure 4.

I. Calculate, test and
plot significant changed
properties; e.g. Figure 5

Figure 1 Flowchart illustrating data use and toolbox functions.
The current version of DeltaProt will handle the process D-I.
Analyses may be carried out with various structural constraints
imposed on the molecules such as Alpha helixes, Beta sheets, loops,
core or surface.

of more than 1000 alignments, each with 10 sequences,
are to be processed.
DeltaProt is supported by a short user manual and a
complete webpage with examples, the purpose of which
is to facilitate the use of the software for new users. The
modular, open-source nature of the software allows
users to understand how results are calculated and to
add additional functionalities to customized solutions
for their own sequence analysis.
Import of data

The protein sequences must be aligned by using one of
the available alignment programs prior to import into
and analysis by DeltaProt. DeltaProt may read alignments in standard FASTA file format. Each alignment
may also contain extra information on the secondary
structure of the amino acids and the accessible surface
area (ASA), either obtained from a template structure
[7], or from a sequence based prediction program like
SABLE [8,9]. Figure 2 shows a window of a typical input
file. DeltaProt does not provide any Matlab functions
that can help users to create a valid input file containing
extra information from the structure predictor. This has
to be done manually or by modifying the Python script
we have included with the toolbox.

Results and Discussion
This section outlines the algorithms and performance of
the different modules of DeltaProt by considering

Thorvaldsen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/573

Page 3 of 7

Figure 2 Input of data. Input of alignment data from three phenotypic groups in the standard Fasta file format. 2D and 3D contain attached
information on secondary structure (2D) and the accessible surface area (3D) of the sites.

several illustrative examples of results. Throughout the
rest of this paper, we will demonstrate the use of DeltaProt by applying it to a dataset of 65 membrane proteins
from six microbial genomes [4]. Users only need to
define their sequence data via simple and compact input
files. Advanced users can ‘tweak’ many configuration
settings in order to fine-tune for the different data sets.
In DeltaProt we present statistical methods and trendtests which are useful when the protein sequences in
the alignments can be divided into two or more groups
based on known phenotypic traits of the host organism,
such as preference of optimal growth temperature
(mesophile, intermediate, psychrophile) or environmental metagenomic samples. The phenotypic group is
assumed to be an ordinal stochastic variable in the statistical model.
The toolbox consists of a set of statistical routines. We
consider both the amino acid sequence compositions and
the substitution patterns to determine whether there are
underlying trends that explain the observed variation
between the phenotypic groups being analyzed. More
than 80 different physicochemical properties of the amino
acid [10,11] may also be applied in order to reduce the
sequence alphabet to measurements. Each situation is
analyzed by appropriate statistical methods. The differences between the phenotypic groups may also be compared graphically. Amino acid composition, substitution
patterns and physiochemical properties along the
sequences may all be visualized. The statistical models
have a very flexible design, and principles like pooling the
data to reduce variability by measuring the average
instead of the individuals, and blocking to reduce the
effect of some varying factor that are identifies but uninteresting, may be applied. In cases where data from several different taxonomic orders are available, this
information can be utilized, by a stratified blocking
approach, where the biological order is included in the

model. The stratification of the subjects into disjoint sets
increases the power of the test to detect association,
because like subjects are compared to like subjects.
The approach assumes statistical independence among
the sequence samples in each group at each strata, but it
may in certain cases, be modified to treat phylogenetically dependent sequences within the groups. When
there are multiple dependent samples in a group, we
compute the mean values in each group at each stratum
and apply the statistical test to the means as representative observations.
Both common and more specialized types of nonparametric statistical models [12] are contained in the
toolbox, and the models have found good applications
in comparative genomics. In Tables 1 and 2 an overview
of the available models are briefly presented.
Composition

We can examine the change in composition of each
amino acid in different phenotypic groups. The amino
acids may also be joined in many ways based on common characteristics. Based on charge distribution, one
can divide them into four main categories: negatively
charged (D and E), positively charged (K and R),
uncharged polar (C, S, T, Y, N, Q, W and H) and hydrophobic (G, A, V, L, I, F, P and M). The frequency of
each amino acid (or other categories) may be analysed
by a standard one-way Anova test for data from two

Table 1 Statistical models and tests available in
DeltaProt for one protein alignment
Groups

Composition

Substitutions

Properties

2

Two-way Anova

Mantel-Haenszel

Linear regression

>2

Linear regression

_

Linear regression

Sequence data from several taxonomic orders may be utilized as strata in the
statistical analysis.

Thorvaldsen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/573

Page 4 of 7

Table 2 Statistical models and tests available in
DeltaProt to detect common trends in several protein
alignments

over all sites where x ≠ y. This accumulated SP-matrix
contains the occurrence of all position-specific pairings
of residues. Furthermore, we may calculate the accumu-

Groups

Composition

Substitutions

Properties

2

Cumulative MannKendall
Wilcoxon paired§

Fisher’s exact
Chi-square§

Cumulative MannKendall
Wilcoxon paired§

lated SP-matrix between two groups M and P, N ( M,P ) ,
x ,y

Cumulative MannKendall

_

Cumulative MannKendall

>2

§
Tests that should be used if we may not assume statistical independence
within each group because of horizontal gene transfer and recombination
events. These tests are applied on mean values of each group.

groups or linear regression in the case of three or more
groups. In addition to temperature, taxonomic order
may also be included as the second factor in a stratified
model, and two-way Anova (two groups) or regression
with dummy variables (with three or more groups)
applied. Several proteins may also be analysed to look
for common trends. Figure 3 presents a plot of compositional changes observed in our dataset of 65 protein
families.
Substitutions

In a comparative study of aligned sequences it is also
natural to look for amino acid directional biases in substitutions between two phenotypic groups. We illustrate
this type of statistical design with an example. A Substitution Pair (SP) is defined as a pair of two amino acids,
(x M ,y P ), where residue x of a sequence in mesophilic
group M is converted to residue y in a sequence of the
psychrophilic group P. For a given pair of amino acids,
the “forward” substitution refers to the mesophilic(M)®
psychrophilic(P) direction, and the process may be
called cold adaptation. The SP-matrix is the count, nx,y,
of all such pairs observed in the alignment by summing

Figure 3 Composition. Comparison of the mean amino acid
compositional changes calculated on the basis of 65 orthologous
membrane proteins [4] observed in the direction from the
mesophile to the psychrophile group. Error bars represent the
empirical standard deviations. By the cumulative Mann-Kendall
trend test the amino acids A, R, N, Q, I, K, T and V have a significant
change (p-values < 0.05).

as well as within one group M, N ( M, M) , where there is
x ,y
no direction. We count by the Jones-method [13],
where the sequences with highest identity between the
groups are paired and observed amino acid exchanges
are tallied in a matrix. The cumulative numbers are
found by forming the maximum number of sequence
pairs, where each sequence is involved only once to
avoid oversampling of the data. Figure 4 presents a plot
of all substitutions between two temperature-defined
groups.
A natural question to address is whether there are
over- or under-representations of amino acid substitutions between the two temperature groups compared to
a random model. The number of substitutions of residue xM ® yP may be compared relative to several relevant background models (control data) [cf. [4,14]]. For
this purpose 2×2 contingency tables may be constructed
for each SP of amino acids. In Table 3 the number of
forward substitutions (M®P) is compared versus the
number of background substitutions (M® M). A constant reoccurring problem in statistics is the analysis of
2×2 contingency tables, and there has been a lot of
research and debate on this topic [15]. We apply an

Figure 4 Substitutions. Visualization of the number of pairwise
substitutions observed in a comparison of 65 orthologous
membrane proteins [4] between two groups. The size and colour of
each marker indicates the magnitude of the substitution (see
colour-bar). A tilde (~) indicates deletion/insertion. Favoured
substitutions with p-values < 0.05 in the Replaced (mesophile)
®Replacement (psychrophile) direction are marked with upwardpointing triangles, and the non-favoured substitutions with p-values
< 0.05 are marked with downward-pointing triangles.

Thorvaldsen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/573

Page 5 of 7

Table 3 Substitutions of amino acid x® y
Substitutions of x:

y

Not y

Adaptation M®P:

N ( M,P )
x ,y
89

N ( M,P ) y
x ,non −
1754

Background M®M:

N ( M, M)
x ,y

)
N ( M, M− y
x ,non

14

514

A 2×2 table summarizing counts of the SP-matrix for one particular
substitution x®y, together with its background. The numerical example in
bold is for the substitution A®I of the same data as in Figure 4, with p-value
= 0.025 by Fisher’s exact test.

updated version of Fisher’s exact test based on the midp-value adjustment for discreteness [16,17] as it is less
conservative than standard exact methods, yet usually
approximates well the desired error probabilities.
The statistical approach above, assumes pairwise independence among the sequence samples (and species) in
each temperature group. This is not the case in the presence of underlying phylogenetic processes with horizontal gene transfer and recombination. Hence, we may
need to modify the approach to treat each temperature
group as one observation. Instead of computing the
cumulative SP-matrix, we compute the average countings n x ,y in the representative SP-matrix:
( M, P )

n x ,y

=

1
G MP

∑n

x ,y ,

x≠y

where G MP is the number of ordered pairs of
sequences in the two groups. This use of the group
sample mean may also remove some of the random
genetic drift in the data.
To be able to detect additional substitution biases, we
can also pool the substitution data that share the same
outcome in the psychrophilic population, e.g. we study
the substitutions x ® aa, where x may be any amino
acid and aa is given.

for common adaptive trends, Y can be described by a
regression model of the form:
Y =  0 + 1 ⋅ X + e

where e is the error term. We may include data from
several protein families in this model and analyze the
final model by applying non-parametric regression based
on cumulative Mann-Kendall statistics [5,12]. Figure 5
shows the ranked distribution of estimated slope coefficients b1 for the data set of 65 protein families.
DeltaProt may also be used to analyze a single protein
family, by ordinary linear regression. Often there are
more sequence data available when we consider just one
particular protein. If the data sequences originate from
several taxonomic orders of the host organism, this information may be utilized to build a stratified approach. By
this method, taxonomic order is included in the regression model as a dummy (or indicator) variable to take
into account possible differences due to taxonomy. A linear regression model based on a common trend for all
taxonomic orders (parallelism) has the form:
Y =  0 + 1 ⋅ X +

∑ I

s s

+e

All s

where b0 is the intercept term of the baseline taxonomic order, and b s are the additional strata-specific
intercept term for dummy variable Is.
False discovery rate

DeltaProt creates an output of summary statistics. These
summary statistics include mean, standard deviation and
p-values from the comparative tests. When tests of multiple hypotheses are carried out, the significance levels

Regression based on properties

In our case we are basically modeling discrete categorical data. However, the amino acids have many different
physicochemical properties, and the amino acid alphabet
can be efficiently reduced to univariate measurement
data based on the physicochemical properties of each
acid, one at a time. The mean property value Y is computed for each protein sequence and analyzed by regression, with the phenotypic traits of the host organism as
the predictor variable X. The phenotypes may be
grouped in an ordinal stochastic variable, i.e. preference
of optimal growth temperature given as mesophile(X =
1), intermediate(X = 2), and psychrophile(X = 3) [5].
In the case where we have alignments from several
protein families from a set of genomes and wish to look

Figure 5 Slope coefficients. The ranked distribution of slope
coefficients for change of hydrophobicity at the predicted surface
[8,9] of 65 membrane proteins [4] as estimated from the regression
model. Each of the alignments consists of 6 sequences from 3
phenotypic groups. Computed p-value = 0.00003 from the
cumulative Mann-Kendall trend test.

Thorvaldsen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/573

should be adjusted to account for the increased probability of false positives. For multiple test correction, the
False Discovery Rate analysis (FDR) of Benjamini and
Yekutieli [18] may be applied.
Limitations

The code for running DeltaProt is entered through a
command line interface (CLI) to Matlab, and some key
input such as the phenotypic group assignment of the
sequences in the alignment(s) must be hard-coded in the
source code. Biologists are often unfamiliar with programming computers and interacting with CLIs, and
eventually a graphical user interface (GUI), may facilitate
the practical use of the software. The approach we use is
also suitable for high-throughput sequence analysis
through the CLI. Therefore, for large datasets it would be
useful to develop a more automatic manner to handle the
whole process, from aligning sequences to statistical analysis. We have not ported our application to other similar
software platforms like Octave, Scilab or R. With respect
to future work on the software, it would also be useful to
include analyses of DNA-sequences with physicochemical properties of nucleotides [19,20].
Similar software

The well known program WebLogo [21] generates a graphical representation of an amino acid or nucleic acid
multiple sequence alignment, where each logo consists of
stacks of symbols, one stack for each position in the
sequence. WebLogo contains no statistical analysis, however Blogo [22] is the same kind of web-based tool that
detects and displays statistically significant position-specific sequence bias with reduced background noise. Some
other toolboxes have been developed in Matlab for bioinformatic-related analyses. These include MBEToolbox
[23,24] and the bioinformatics toolbox developed by
Mathworks [2]. MBEToolbox can aid in the exploration,
interpretation and visualization of data in molecular biology and evolution. It includes statistical and sequence
manipulation functions relevant to molecular evolution,
phylogeny inference, and relevant graphic plots. The
bioinformatics toolbox from Mathworks offers a wide
range of general bioinformatics functions, including
molecular evolution.
DeltaProt provides a range of specialised methods which
are more relevant to comparative genomics than those
included in either of the other projects, and as such it
makes a contribution to the bioinformatics analyses that
can be performed in the Matlab environment. It may be
used to examine if physicochemical differences between
proteins may be related to differences in the environment
of the source organisms rather than to phylogeny.

Page 6 of 7

Conclusions
Multiple alignments play a key role in bioinformatics,
and provide a very rich set of interesting statistical and
data-analysis problems. Addressing these problems will
require both development of effective statistical methods and distribution of the implementation of those
methods to biologists generating the data. Here we
have presented DeltaProt, a toolbox for statistical and
visual analyses of alignments from the domain of comparative molecular biology, and we believe that it may
provide a good software environment in which to carry
out some of this research related to extremophilic
organisms. These are organisms that are able to tolerate and thrive in extreme conditions with respect to
for example salt, pH, toxic chemicals, radiation, starvation, pressure and temperature. Adaptation to multiple
extreme environments (polyextremophiles) makes
untangling and isolating the adaptive mechanism(s) to
a particular environment even more difficult. Statistical
bioinformatics accounts for the inherent variation
found in biological data that is generated as part of the
bioinformatics investigation, and aims to statistically
identify those significant changes in data that answer
biological questions. DeltaProt is fully accessible within
Matlab and capable of analyzing orthologous protein
sequences in seconds. The toolbox is able to handle a
large quantity of multiple-aligned sequences in order
to look for common adaptive trends at the molecular
level. Users can control extra structural attributes, as
well as drawing details, to get sufficiently customized
output.
Availability and requirements
Project name: DeltaProt, a Matlab toolbox for comparative genomics
Project homepage: The toolbox can be downloaded
from the following websites, which also offer documentation (installation instructions, manual and tutorial):
http://www.math.uit.no/bi/deltaprot/ or http://services.
cbu.uib.no/software/deltaprot/
Operating systems: Cross-platform (dependent on
Matlab availability, tested on Windows and Mac).
Programming language: Matlab versions 7.1-7.10
(2010a) is required.
Other requirements: Matlab Statistical Toolbox.
License: The toolbox can be obtained and used for free
for academic purposes, and is under the creative commons license. The conditions of the license can be found
on: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: Following
the previous license.

Thorvaldsen et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/573

Acknowledgements
We thank Bjørn Altermark, Erik Hjerde and Chris Fenton for their assistance
in data acquisition. The present study was supported by the National
Program for Research in Functional Genomics in Norway (FUGE) in The
Research Council of Norway.
Author details
1
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Tromsø, 9037
Tromsø, Norway. 2Norwegian Structural Biology Centre, University of Tromsø,
9037 Tromsø, Norway.
Authors’ contributions
ST designed and implemented the software. TF and NPW initiated and
supervised the project. ST wrote the manuscript, and all authors have read
and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Page 7 of 7

20. Friedel M, Nikolajewa S, Suhnel J, Wilhelm T: DiProDB: a database for
dinucleotide properties. Nucleic Acids Research 2009, 37(Sp Iss):D37-D40.
21. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: A sequence logo
generator. Genome Research 2004, 14:1188-1190.
22. Li W, Yang B, Liang S, Wang Y, Whiteley C, Cao Y, Wang X: BLogo: A tool
for visualization of bias in biological sequences. Bioinformatics 2008,
24(19):2254-2255.
23. Cai JJ, Smith DK, Xia X, Yuen KY: MBEToolbox: a Matlab toolbox for
sequence data analysis in molecular biology and evolution. BMC
Bioinformatics 2005, 6:64.
24. Cai JJ, Smith DK, Xia X, Yuen KY: MBEToolbox 2.0: An enhanced version of
a MATLAB toolbox for Molecular Biology and Evolution. Evolutionary
Bioinformatics 2006, 2:179-182.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-573
Cite this article as: Thorvaldsen et al.: DeltaProt: a software toolbox for
comparative genomics. BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:573.

Received: 25 June 2010 Accepted: 23 November 2010
Published: 23 November 2010
References
1. Ussery DW, Wassenaar TM, Borini S: Computing for comparative microbial
genomics. Springer; 2009.
2. Matlab. The MathWorks, Inc. Natick, MA (US); [http://www.mathworks.com].
3. Altermark B, Thorvaldsen S, Moe E, Smalås AO, Willassen NP: Sequence
comparison and environmental adaptation of a bacterial endonuclease.
Computational Biology and Chemistry 2007, 31(3):163-172.
4. Thorvaldsen S, Hjerde E, Fenton C, Willassen NP: Molecular
characterization of cold adaptation based on ortholog protein
sequences from Vibrionaceae species. Extremophiles 2007, 11(5):719-732.
5. Thorvaldsen S, Ytterstad E: Environmental adaptation of proteins:
Regression models with simple physicochemical properties.
Computational Biology and Chemistry 2009, 33(5):351-356.
6. Siglioccolo A, Bossa F, Pascarella S: Structural adaptation of serine
hydroxymethyltransferase to low temperatures. International Journal of
Biological Macromolecules 2010, 46(1):37-46.
7. Fraczkiewicz R, Braun W: Exact and efficient analytical calculation of the
accessible surface areas and their gradients for macromolecules. J Comp
Chem 1998, 19(3):319-333.
8. Adamczak R, Porollo A, Meller J: Accurate Prediction of Solvent Accessibility Using Neural Networks Based Regression. Proteins: Structure,
Function and Bioinformatics 2004, 56:753-767.
9. Adamczak R, Porollo A, Meller J: Combining Prediction of Secondary
Structure and Solvent Accessibility in Proteins. Proteins: Structure, Function
and Bioinformatics 2005, 59:467-75.
10. Gromiha MM, Oobatake M, Sarai A: Important amino acid properties for
enhanced thermostability from mesophilic to thermophilic proteins.
Biophysical Chemistry 1999, 82(1):51-67.
11. Kawashima S, Ogata H, Kanehisa M: AAindex: Amino Acid Index Database.
Nucleic Acids Research 1999, 27(1):368-369.
12. Kendall MG, Gibbons JD: Rank Correlation Methods. Edward Arnold;, 5
1990.
13. Jones DT, Taylor WR, Thornton JM: The rapid generation of mutation data
matrices from protein sequences. Computer Applications in the Biosciences
1992, 8(3):275-282.
14. Chakravarty S, Varadarajan R: Elucidation of factors responsible for
enhanced thermal stability of proteins: A structural genomics based
study. Biochemistry 2002, 41(25):8152-8161.
15. Agresti A: Exact inference for categorical data: recent advances and
continuing controversies. Statistics in Medicine 2001, 20(17-18):2709-2722.
16. Andres AM, Quevedo MJS, Mato AS: Fisher’s mid-p-value arrangement in
2×2 comparative trials. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 1998,
29(1):107-115.
17. Agresti A: Categorical Data Analysis. John Wiley & Sons;, 2 2002.
18. Benjamini Y, Yekutieli D: The control of the false discovery rate in
multiple testing under dependency. Ann Stat 2001, 29(4):1165-1188.
19. Florquin K, Saeys Y, Degroeve S, Rouze P, Van de Peer Y: Large-scale
structural analysis of the core promoter in mammalian and plant
genomes. Nucleic Acids Research 2005, 33(13):4255-4264.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
