<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The complete genome sequence of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis FRC41 isolated from a 12-year-old girl with necrotizing lymphadenitis reveals insights into gene-regulatory networks contributing to virulence</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-728"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Eva Trost"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The complete genome sequence of
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis FRC41
isolated from a 12-year-old girl with necrotizing
lymphadenitis reveals insights into generegulatory networks contributing to virulence
Eva Trost1,2, Lisa Ott3, Jessica Schneider1,2,4, Jasmin Schröder1, Sebastian Jaenicke4, Alexander Goesmann4,
Peter Husemann5, Jens Stoye5, Fernanda Alves Dorella6, Flavia Souza Rocha6, Siomar de Castro Soares6,
Vívian D’Afonseca6, Anderson Miyoshi6, Jeronimo Ruiz7, Artur Silva8, Vasco Azevedo6, Andreas Burkovski3,
Nicole Guiso9, Olivier F Join-Lambert10, Samer Kayal11, Andreas Tauch1*

Abstract
Background: Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis is generally regarded as an important animal pathogen that rarely
infects humans. Clinical strains are occasionally recovered from human cases of lymphadenitis, such as
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 that was isolated from the inguinal lymph node of a 12-year-old girl with necrotizing
lymphadenitis. To detect potential virulence factors and corresponding gene-regulatory networks in this human
isolate, the genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis FCR41 was determined by pyrosequencing and functionally
annotated.
Results: Sequencing and assembly of the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 genome yielded a circular chromosome with
a size of 2,337,913 bp and a mean G+C content of 52.2%. Specific gene sets associated with iron and zinc
homeostasis were detected among the 2,110 predicted protein-coding regions and integrated into a generegulatory network that is linked with both the central metabolism and the oxidative stress response of FRC41.
Two gene clusters encode proteins involved in the sortase-mediated polymerization of adhesive pili that can
probably mediate the adherence to host tissue to facilitate additional ligand-receptor interactions and the delivery
of virulence factors. The prominent virulence factors phospholipase D (Pld) and corynebacterial protease CP40 are
encoded in the genome of this human isolate. The genome annotation revealed additional serine proteases,
neuraminidase H, nitric oxide reductase, an invasion-associated protein, and acyl-CoA carboxylase subunits involved
in mycolic acid biosynthesis as potential virulence factors. The cAMP-sensing transcription regulator GlxR plays a
key role in controlling the expression of several genes contributing to virulence.
Conclusion: The functional data deduced from the genome sequencing and the extended knowledge of virulence
factors indicate that the human isolate C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is equipped with a distinct gene set promoting
its survival under unfavorable environmental conditions encountered in the mammalian host.

* Correspondence: tauch@cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de
1
Institut für Genomforschung und Systembiologie, Centrum für
Biotechnologie, Universität Bielefeld, Universitätsstraße 27, D-33615 Bielefeld,
Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Trost et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

Background
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis is generally regarded
as an important animal pathogen and the etiological agent
of a disease that is commonly called caseous
lymphadenitis [1,2]. This bacterium is predominantly isolated from sheep and goats (biovar ovis), but has been
recognized also in other animals, including horses and cattle (biovar equi) [1]. The importance of caseous lymphadenitis varies greatly around the world, but this disease is
found in all major sheep and goat production areas [2]. C.
pseudotuberculosis is a significant cause of morbidity in
sheep and goats, and caseous lymphadenitis in these animals resulted in economic losses, for instance in wool,
milk and meat production [2,3]. C. pseudotuberculosis is a
facultative intracellular pathogen that is able to survive
and grow in macrophages, thus escaping the immune
response of the host [1,4]. A close phylogenetic relationship between C. pseudotuberculosis and Corynebacterium
ulcerans was proposed as both species are unique among
the corynebacteria in producing phospholipase D. The
sphingomyelin-degrading enzyme is regarded as the major
virulence factor for C. pseudotuberculosis [5,6]. This exotoxin promotes the hydrolysis of ester bonds in sphingomyelin in mammalian cell membranes and contributes to
the spread of the bacterium from the initial site of infection to secondary sites within the host.
Although infections due to C. pseudotuberculosis are
predominantly observed in sheep and goats, infections
due to this pathogen also occur in humans [7,8]. The
number of human infections is rare, but it might be
underestimated as corynebacteria are often considered
as skin contaminants in clinical specimens [9]. Published
cases of human infections by C. pseudotuberculosis
usually presented as suppurative lymphadenitis [7,8],
with the exception of one case of eosinophilic pneumonia [10]. Most patients revealed a classical risk exposure
of close contact with animals, in particular with sheep.
C. pseudotuberculosis infects humans via superficial
wounds, forming abscesses in the regional draining
lymph nodes after an incubation period ranging from
weeks to months. In most of the published cases, antibiotic treatment alone was unsuccessful and the antimicrobial therapy was therefore supplemented by surgical
interventions [7,8]. The general problem in achieving an
effective treatment of C. pseudotuberculosis infections in
humans and animals is probably related to the facultative intracellular lifestyle of this bacterium, as it can survive and multiply in macrophages [4]. The cell death
and subsequent release of the pathogen lead to necrotic
lesions and the formation of thick collagen capsules that
cannot be penetrated by antibiotics [11].
In the present study, we characterize the genome of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 that was isolated from the
inguinal lymph node of a 12-year-old French girl with

Page 2 of 17

necrotizing lymphadenitis [12]. This patient had no
underlying disease or predisposing conditions. The diagnosis of necrotizing lymphadenitis was supported by 16
S rDNA gene sequencing, a taxonomic classification of
the bacterial isolate and Western blot assays revealing
the presence of phospholipase D in the patient’s serum.
The patient relapsed many times despite a surgical drainage and an adapted antimicrobial treatment, although
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 turned out to be highly
susceptible to a wide range of antibiotics in vitro. However, the patient recovered after a broad spectrum intravenous antimicrobial therapy with imipenem-cilastatin,
rifampin and ofloxacin for four months, followed by an
oral therapy with rifampin and ofloxacin for six months
[12]. Here, we report the functional annotation of the
complete genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41, the detection of potential virulence factors and
the deduced gene-regulatory networks controlling their
expression.

Results and discussion
Pyrosequencing and annotation of the C.
pseudotuberculosis FRC41 genome

The DNA sequence of the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41
chromosome was determined by a whole-genome shotgun
approach using pyrosequencing. A quarter of a sequencing
run with the Genome Sequencer FLX Instrument yielded
286,938 reads and 94,447,635 bases that were assembled
into ten large contigs (≥ 500 bases) and one small contig
(313 bases), indicating a very low number of repetitive
sequences in the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 genome. A
search for repetitive DNA elements in the complete genome sequence revealed the absence of insertion sequences
in C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41, whereas the small contig
was present in three tandem copies in the assembled chromosome (data not shown). The remaining gaps were
closed by a PCR strategy that was supported by the related
reference contig arrangement tool r2cat [13], using the
Corynebacterium diphtheriae NCTC 13129 genome
sequence as a reference [14]. The final assembly of the
DNA sequences yielded a circular chromosome with a size
of 2,337,913 bp and a mean G+C content of 52.2% (Figure
1A). Considering the final size of the C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 chromosome, a 40-fold coverage was initially
obtained by pyrosequencing.
The annotation of the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41
genome sequence was performed with the GenDB software system [15] and resulted in the detection of 2,110
protein-coding regions. Furthermore, 49 tRNA genes
were predicted by the tRNAscan-SE program [16] and
four rrn operons were detected on the leading strands
of the chromosome (Figure 1B). A plot of the calculated
G/C skew [(G-C)/(G+C)] indicated a bi-directional replication mechanism of the C. pseudotuberculosis

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

Page 3 of 17

Figure 1 Annotation and analysis of the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 genome sequence. (A), Plot of the annotated C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 chromosome. The circles represent from the outside: circle 1, DNA base position [kb]; circle 2, protein-coding regions transcribed
clockwise; circle 3, protein-coding regions transcribed anticlockwise; circle 4, G/C skew plotted using a 10-kb window; circle 5, G+C content
plotted using a 10-kb window. The protein-coding regions are coloured according to their functional classification into the Clusters of
Orthologous Groups of proteins [111]. (B), Architecture imparting sequences in the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 chromosome. The distribution of
the octamers G(A/T/C)GGGGGA and (T/C)GGGGGAG on the leading and lagging strands is shown. The origin of replication (oriC) is marked. The
deduced dif locus is located at around 1.1 Mbp of the chromosomal map. The 28-bp sequence of the predicted dif region is shown. The
location of the four rRNA operons (rrnA-rrnD) on the leading strands is indicated. (C), Synteny between the chromosomes of C.
pseudotuberculosis FRC41 and C. diphtheriae NCTC 13129. The X-Y plot is composed of dots forming syntenic regions between both
chromosomes. The dots represent predicted C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 proteins having an orthologue in the genome of C. diphtheriae NCTC
13129 with co-ordinates corresponding to the position of the respective coding region in each genome sequence and indicated in kb.
Orthologous proteins were detected by reciprocal best BLASTP matches.

chromosome (Figure 1A). According to the presence
and distribution of six conserved DnaA boxes, the oriC
is located downstream of the dnaA coding region [17].
The G/C skew and the biased distribution of architecture imparting sequences (AIMS) on the leading and
lagging strands indicated the presence of a dif region
[18] at the expected position of 180° from oriC, dividing
the chromosome of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 into
two replichores of similar size (Figure 1B). Synteny analysis by reciprocal best matches with BLASTP [19]
revealed a highly conserved order of orthologous genes
between the chromosomes of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 and C. diphtheriae NCTC 13129 (Figure 1C),
which is consistent with the close phylogenetic relationship of both species [1] and the observation that genetic
rearrangements are rare in the genomes of species
belonging to the main lineage of the genus Corynebacterium [20,21]. The calculated reciprocal best BLASTP
hits [19] were used also to compare the predicted

proteome of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 with the complete set of proteins encoded in the genome of
C. diphtheriae NCTC 13129 [14]. This comparative content analysis at the proteome level revealed that 1610
proteins (76.3%) of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 share a
homologue in the genome of C. diphtheriae NCTC
13129 (data not shown). The characteristic features of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 are apparently based on a
distinct gene set, defining its lifestyle and pathogenicity,
such as the pld gene encoding phospholipase D [22]. In
the following sections, we describe a collection of relevant genes contributing to the lifestyle and pathogenicity
of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 and deduce their integration into a transcriptional gene-regulatory network.
The transcriptional regulatory repertoire of C.
pseudotuberculosis FRC41

The repertoire of candidate transcription regulators
encoded in the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 genome

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

was deduced from the functional genome annotation
taking into account the comprehensive knowledge of
the reconstructed gene-regulatory network of Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032 [23]. A collection
of 83 genes encoding DNA-binding transcription regulators, sigma factors and response regulators of twocomponent systems can be regarded as the minimal regulatory repertoire of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41
(Figure 2). This set of candidate transcription regulators
represents 3.9% of the predicted protein-coding genes of
the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 genome. This value is
in agreement with previous observations that less than
10% of the total number of predicted proteins are associated with transcriptional regulatory processes in
bacteria [24] and is in the range known from other
pathogenic corynebacteria, such as C. diphtheriae and
Corynebacterium jeikeium [25]. The collection of potential transcription regulators was grouped into regulatory
protein families according to their amino acid sequence
similarities and domain organizations [26]. This bioinformatic classification assigned the candidate transcription regulators to 31 regulatory protein families, with
one regulator (cpfrc_01413) remaining unclassified. The
regulatory protein families detected in C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 vary significantly in their number of

Page 4 of 17

representatives (Figure 2). The largest family of DNAbinding transcription regulators is TetR with 11 members, followed by GntR with 5 proteins. The TetR family
of transcription regulators is widely distributed among
bacterial species [27] and is also the most prevalent
group of regulatory proteins in other corynebacteria
[25]. It is noteworthy that the detected collection of
transcription regulators includes only 23 out of the 24
proteins that hitherto constituted the core of DNAbinding transcription regulators in corynebacteria, as C.
pseudotuberculosis FRC41 lacks a gene for an orthologue
of the conserved TetR regulator MfsR (Cg0454) [23,25].
The knowledge of the transcriptional regulatory repertoire of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 was combined
with regulons contributing to virulence by bioinformatic
motif searches for DNA-binding sites of prominent regulatory proteins.
Iron regulation in physiology and virulence of C.
pseudotuberculosis

For most bacteria, iron is essential as a cofactor for
proteins involved in important cellular functions, such
as DNA biosynthesis and respiration [28]. Thus, iron
acquisition is a vital function for bacterial survival. As
iron limitation is a common strategy by which a

Figure 2 Classification of the predicted transcriptional regulatory repertoire of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 into regulatory protein
families. The number of candidate transcription regulators assigned to a regulatory protein family is shown.

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

mammalian host suppresses bacterial growth, iron has
a decisive role in infectious diseases. On the one hand,
pathogenic bacteria have to compete for iron in the
host so that they can multiply and establish a successful infection. On the other hand, they must regulate
iron metabolism to prevent excess iron that can initiate the generation of toxic oxygen radicals from normal products of metabolism by Fenton chemistry.
Bacteria have solved the problem of iron acquisition
and homeostasis by encoding a variety of high-affinity
uptake systems that are tightly regulated at the transcriptional level [28]. The fagCBA-fagD genes of

Page 5 of 17

C. pseudotuberculosis, for instance, encode an iron
uptake system that is regulated by iron in vitro [29]. A
fag mutant showed a reduced virulence in a goat
model of caseous lymphadenitis when compared with a
wild-type control, although no defect in iron utilization
by the mutant strain was determined [29]. As the
expression of the fagABCD genes contributed to the
virulence of C. pseudotuberculosis from animal sources,
the complete genome sequence of FRC41 was screened
for the presence of these genes, additional iron uptake
systems and the responsible transcription regulator
(Figure 3).

Figure 3 Regulons involved in iron regulation of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41. The DtxR and RipA regulons controlling iron homeostasis
and the respective gene-regulatory interactions were deduced from a genome-scale network transfer approach [114] and the combined use of
hidden Markov models and position weight matrices [74]. The assignment of the transcription regulators into the regulatory protein families of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is indicated. Predicted DNA-binding sites are listed by sequence and are shown as black boxes, regulated target
genes are shown as arrows and coloured as follows: grey, regulatory gene; yellow, gene involved in iron uptake and iron storage; orange, gene
involved in central metabolism; red, gene contributing to the oxidative stress response. The highly conserved coregulation of the hmuO gene by
DtxR and the response regulators HrrA and ChrA in corynebacteria is indicated [23]. The 19-bp consensus sequence of the DtxR-binding site of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is shown as DNA sequence logo. The 16 predicted DNA-binding sites of DtxR were used as input data for the
WebLogo tool [115].

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

The dtxR gene of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41
encodes a homologue of the diphtheria toxin repressor
DtxR that is activated by iron and controls a complex
gene-regulatory network involved in iron homeostasis in
corynebacteria [30,31]. The detection of a putative
DtxR-binding site in the fagA-fagD intergenic region
supports the previously observed differential expression
pattern of the fagABC operon in vitro [29]. We combined the functional annotation of the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 genome sequence with a bioinformatic
motif search for DtxR-binding sites using a hidden Markov model and a position weight matrix with input data
from the DtxR regulon of C. glutamicum [31]. In this
way, additional genes were assigned to the DtxR regulon
of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41, including several gene
clusters involved in the utilization of various host compounds as iron sources (Figure 3). One gene region
revealed similarity to the hemin utilization system HmuTUV from C. diphtheriae [32]. The corresponding
hemin binding protein HtaA is probably associated with
the cell envelope and involved in the utilization of heme
iron [33]. Two gene clusters assigned to the DtxR regulon of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 include htaA-like
genes (htaD and htaF) that are associated with genes
encoding membrane proteins (htaE and htaG), suggesting a role of these clusters in the acquisition of iron
from the host (Figure 3). The hmuO gene of the DtxR
regulon encodes heme oxygenase that releases iron from
the protoporphyrin ring of heme and facilitates the
acquisition of iron from heme and hemoglobin [34].
Because of the potential toxicity of both, iron and heme,
the expression of hmuO in C. diphtheriae is under complex control, comprising the iron-responsive repressor
DtxR and the heme-dependent activators ChrA and
HrrA that are part of the two-component signal transduction systems ChrA-ChrS and HrrA-HrrS [35,36]. A
BLAST search across the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41
genome revealed two response regulators that share
similarity with ChrA and HrrA. As the hrrA gene of C.
pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is part of the DtxR regulon, a
complex hierarchical control of hmuO gene expression
might be established in this bacterium (Figure 3).
Iron acquisition can moreover involve the synthesis
and secretion of high-affinity iron chelators, termed
siderophores, which are synthesized by nonribosomal
peptide synthetases or by biosynthesis pathways independent of these multimodular enzymes [37,38]. The
genome of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 contains two
DtxR-regulated gene clusters that are probably associated with pathways for siderophore biosynthesis independent of nonribosomal peptide synthetases (Figure 3).
The ciu locus comprises the ciuABCD (ABC-type transporter), ciuE (siderophore biosynthesis-related protein)
and ciuF (putative efflux protein) genes. The predicted

Page 6 of 17

product of the ciuE gene is similar to aerobactin biosynthesis enzymes [39]. The expression of the ciuA gene
encoding the lipoprotein receptor of the ABC transport
system has been detected in vivo by a reporter transposon system [40]. The ciu gene region detected in the
genome of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is similar to the
ciu gene locus from C. diphtheriae NCTC 13129, with
the exception that it lacks the ciuG gene, encoding a
protein of unknown function [41].
The second DtxR-regulated gene cluster related to
siderophore biosynthesis and excretion includes four
genes probably constituting the biosynthesis pathway
(ogs, ocd, odc and tsb), a gene encoding an efflux protein (mdtK) and four genes encoding an ABC-type
transporter (stsABCD) (Figure 3). Ornithine cyclodeaminase (ocd) and ornithine decarboxylase (odc) as well
as monooxygenase (ogs) and synthetase (tsb) functions
encoded in this gene cluster are components of widely
distributed routes for siderophore biosynthesis [39].
Additional DtxR-binding sites were detected in front of
ftn (ferritin) and fas (fatty acid synthase) and the
sdhCAB (succinate dehydrogenase) operon that are
also part of the DtxR regulon in C. glutamicum
[31,42]. Ferritins act primarily in iron storage and are
thus central to the natural regulation of iron in the
bacterial cell [28].
Furthermore, the ripA gene encoding a DNA-binding
transcription regulator of the AraC protein family was
assigned to the DtxR regulon of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 (Figure 3). The expression of the orthologous
ripA gene from C. glutamicum is also controlled directly
by DtxR [42]. Under iron limitation, the RipA protein
acts as a repressor of genes coding for iron proteins in
C. glutamicum [42]. Candidate RipA-binding sites were
detected by bioinformatic pattern searches in the genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 in front
of the acn (aconitase) gene and upstream of the sdhCAB
(succinate dehydrogenase) and cydABDC operons (cytochrome bd-type menaquinol oxidase and ABC-type
transporter), thereby linking the availability of iron with
the expression of genes in the citrate cycle and the
respiratory energy metabolism of C. pseudotuberculosis.
Due to its high oxygen affinity, the cytochrome bd oxidase is used in many bacteria under microaerobic
growth conditions [43]. Additional RipA-binding sites
were detected in front of the katA (catalase) gene and in
the dps-fpg1 (DNA protection during starvation protein,
formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase) intergenic
region, integrating protective functions into the RipA
regulon (Figure 3). Dps-like proteins effectively protect
DNA against oxidizing agents by nonspecific DNA-binding and physical sequestration that limits DNA accessibility to detrimental factors [44]. They also act as
iron-binding and storage proteins and catalyze the

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

oxidation of ferrous iron to ferric iron by H2O2, which
prevents the formation of hydroxyl radicals by the Fenton reaction [45]. The lsr2 gene of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 encodes the multifunctional histone-like protein
and transcription regulator Lsr2 (Figure 2) that shares a
number of physical properties with Dps-like proteins
and the ability to bind DNA sequences with little specificity [46]. Like Dps, the Lsr2 protein may physically
protect corynebacterial DNA against reactive oxygen
intermediates [47]. Formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase is a primary participant in the repair of DNA
lesions caused by oxidative damage [48]. A second gene
(fpg2) encoding formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase
was detected in the genome of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41, but the upstream region of fpg2 apparently lacks
a RipA-binding site. Catalase is another important protective component in the bacterial oxidative stress
response which is involved in the detoxification of H2O2
[49]. Hence, the gene composition of the DtxR-RipA
gene-regulatory network revealed the interdependence
of iron metabolism and oxidative stress response and
the regulatory connection between distinct physiological
functionalities of the corynebacterial cell, including an
important role in virulence of C. pseudotuberculosis.
Manganese and zinc regulation in physiology and
virulence of C. pseudotuberculosis

Peroxynitrite and other reactive nitrogen and oxygen
intermediates are produced by macrophages as part of
their antimicrobial response [50]. Consequently, many
pathogenic bacteria have evolved protection mechanisms
against these reactive nitrogen and oxygen intermediates
that have potent antimicrobial activity [51]. Four genes
encoding protective enzymes probably involved in corresponding detoxification reactions were identified in the
genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41,
including alkyl hydroperoxide reductase (ahpCD), manganese-dependent superoxide dismutase (sodA) and copper, zinc-dependent superoxide dismutase (sodC). A
bioinformatic pattern search with actinobacterial OxyRbinding sites as input data revealed that these genes are
most likely under transcriptional control by OxyR (Figure 4A). The oxyR gene of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41
is linked to the ahpCD genes and its gene product may
act as a repressor of gene expression [52]. AhpC is a
member of a large family of peroxidases that contribute
to the antioxidant defense in bacteria [53]. The AhpC
protein directly reduces peroxides and is in turn
reduced by AhpD [54]. The mycobacterial AhpC protein
also catalyzes the rapid conversion of peroxynitrite to
nitrite to avoid the formation of deleterious nitrogen
dioxide and hydroxyl radicals [55]. Superoxide dismutase converts superoxide anions into molecular oxygen
and H 2 O2 , the latter being broken in turn to H2 O by

Page 7 of 17

the enzymatic activity of catalase [56]. Superoxide dismutases were classified into three evolutionarily distinct
families according to the type of metal cofactors. Most
bacteria possess either a manganese-dependent (MnSOD) or an iron-dependent (Fe-SOD) superoxide
dismutase in their cytoplasm, while secreted copper,
zinc-dependent superoxide dismutases (Cu,Zn-SODs)
have been detected in pathogenic or endosymbiontic
bacteria [57]. The genome of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 encodes two types of superoxide dismutases, a
cytoplasmic Mn-SOD (SodA) and a secreted Cu,ZnSOD (SodC) that is characterized by a lipobox motif
and may be anchored in the cell membrane [58]. The
extracellular location of SodC suggests that it may protect the surface of C. pseudotuberculosis cells against
superoxide generated externally by the mammalian host
cells. Likewise, the mycobacterial SodC protein contributes to the resistance of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
against oxidative burst products generated by activated
macrophages [59,60]. The protective activity of Cu,ZnSODs has been associated with virulence in many bacteria, such as Neisseria meningitidis and Haemophilus
ducreyi [61,62]. However, further experimental work is
necessary to elucidate which protective enzyme contributes to the virulence of C. pseudotuberculosis.
As manganese and zinc ions are apparently involved as
cofactors in the oxidative stress response of pathogens, the
corresponding regulons involved in metal ion uptake were
identified in the genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 (Figure 4B). The uptake of manganese in C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is mediated by a typical manganese
ABC-type transport system (mntABCD) that is negatively
controlled at the transcriptional level by the metalloregulator MntR (Figure 4B). The manganese ABC transporter is
composed of: a lipoprotein receptor (MntA), anchored to
the cell membrane and functioning as an extracellular
cation-binding protein; a cytoplasmic ATP-binding protein
(MntB); and two integral membrane proteins (MntC and
MntD) that mediate the cation flux [63]. A homologous
gene cluster and its manganese-dependent transcriptional
control by the metalloregulator MntR have been examined
in the genome of C. diphtheriae [64]. The uptake of zinc
ions in C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is probably mediated
by two ABC transport systems (znuB1C1A1 and znuB2A2C2), as both gene regions are specified by the presence of Zur-binding sites (Figure 4C). The Zur protein is
a metalloregulator of the ferric uptake regulator (FUR)
family of DNA-binding transcription regulators [65,66].
The znu ABC transporter genes are key components of
actinobacterial Zur regulons and their expression is generally repressed by Zur in a zinc-dependent manner [66].
Zinc resistance might be facilitated in C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 by the ArsR-type transcription regulator Znr
that probably controls the expression of the czcE gene

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

Page 8 of 17

Figure 4 Regulons involved in the oxidative stress response and in zinc and manganese regulation of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41. (A),
The OxyR regulon controlling the oxidative stress response. (B), The MntR operon controlling the uptake of manganese. (C), The Zur regulon
controlling zinc metabolism. The assignment of the transcription regulators into the regulatory protein families of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is
indicated. The regulatory interactions were deduced from a genome-scale network transfer approach [114] and the combined use of a hidden
Markov model and a position weight matrix [74]. Predicted DNA-binding sites are shown as black boxes and indicated by DNA sequence. The
regulated target genes are shown as arrows and coloured as follows: grey, regulatory gene; red, gene contributing to the oxidative stress
response; dark blue, gene involved in maganese uptake; light blue, gene involved in zinc metabolism.

encoding a cobalt/zinc/cadmium efflux system [23,67,68].
The yciC gene coding for a putative P-loop GTPase of the
COG0523 protein family is also part of the Zur regulon in
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 (Figure 4C). The YciC protein may function as a metallochaperone/insertase to
enable the in vivo assembly of zinc-containing proteins
under environmental conditions of zinc deficiency [69].
Moreover, the genome-wide motif search for Zurbinding sites in C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 detected
three genes (cpfrc_00168, cpfrc_00313, cpfrc_02059)
encoding proteins with a carboxy-terminal sorting
(LPxTG) signal that is generally used by Gram-positive
bacteria to anchor proteins to the cell wall [70]. The
Cpfrc_00168 protein contains two CnaB-like domains
that may be involved in the positioning of a ligand binding domain away from the corynebacterial cell surface
and is encoded adjacent to a putative sialoprotein-binding protein. The secreted proteins Cpfrc_00313 and
Cpfrc_02059 contain actinobacterial surface-anchored
protein domains for their covalent attachment to the
cell wall [56]. The Cpfrc_00313 protein is encoded next
to the components of a transporter and may act
together with the Cpfrc_00314 protein as a substrate
receptor for this system. Hence, the reconstruction of
regulons participating in metal ion uptake of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 led to the detection of genes that

may fulfill novel functions in sensing the presence of
zinc in the environment.
Genes encoding adhesive pili in C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41

The complete set of predicted protein-coding regions of
C. pseudotuberculosis FCR41 was subsequently screened
for the presence of further proteins containing a typical
sorting signal. This approach revealed ten additional
proteins without any conserved domain organization
[56] that were annotated as hypothetical proteins with
LPxTG motif and, more interestingly, six proteins showing similarity to subunits of adhesive pili from
C. diphtheriae NCTC 13129 (Figure 5). The corresponding coding regions are organized in two gene clusters
that include sortase genes involved in the process of
pilus polymerization [71,72]. The housekeeping sortase
gene (cpfrc_02014; srtD) of C. pseudotuberculosis
FCR41, necessary for the cell wall anchoring of pilin
monomers and pilus polymers [73], is located elsewhere
in the chromosome. The adhesive pili of C. pseudotuberculosis FCR41 consist of major pilin subunits (SpaA,
SpaD), minor pilin subunits (SpaB, SpaE) and tip proteins (SpaC, SpaF) that are characterized by conserved
amino acid motifs (Figure 5). The function of the
hypothetical proteins SpaX and SpaY encoded in the

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

Page 9 of 17

Figure 5 Gene regions encoding adhesive pili of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41. The gene clusters involved in the synthesis of adhesive (Spalike) pili of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 are shown. The gene clusters encode sortases required for the assembly of the pilus (blue), major pilins
(red), minor pilins (yellow), pilus tip proteins (green), and proteins of unknown function (grey). The detected sorting (LPxTG) signals are indicated.
Specifically marked in the major pilin proteins are the characteristic pilin boxes (blue) and E-boxes (white). The predicted binding of the
transcription regulator GlxR in the spaA-srtB intergenic region is shown.

spa gene regions of C. pseudotuberculosis FCR41 is currently unknown. According to alkaline phosphatase
(phoZ) gene fusions generated with a reporter transposon system in C. pseudotuberculosis, at least the SpaABC
pilus is expressed in this species [1]. The spaABC gene
cluster contains a putative DNA-binding site for the
cAMP-sensing transcription regulator GlxR in the spaAsrtB intergenic region (Figure 5), thereby connecting the
expression of pilus genes with a global gene-regulatory
network in C. pseudotuberculosis [74,75]. The adhesive
pili of C. diphtheriae NCTC 13129 are covalently
anchored to the cell wall and can mediate the initial
adhesion to host tissues and other bacterial cells [76].
The adherence of C. diphtheriae to pharyngeal epithelial
cells is mediated also by the minor pilin of the adhesive
pilus, as this pilin subunit is covalently anchored to the
cell wall and can provide tight contact between the bacterial cell and the host tissue in the absence of a pilus
shaft [77]. Considering a similar functioning of the predicted SpaABC and SpaDEF pilus proteins from C. pseudotuberculosis, either a complete pilus structure or the
minor pilins SpaB and SpaE can probably make the
initial contact with host cell receptors to enable additional ligand-receptor interactions and to facilitate the
efficient delivery of virulence factors and intracellular
invasion.
Candidate virulence factors of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 and their integration into a gene-regulatory
network

The observation that adhesive pili promote the adherence of C. diphtheriae to host tissue suggests that the
SpaABC and SpaDEF pili from C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 can be regarded as potential virulence factors
[77]. To extend the view on proteins contributing to the
pathogenicity of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41, the

genome sequence was screened for further candidate
genes encoding virulence factors (Table 1). The major
virulence factor of C. pseudotuberculosis is the sphingomyelin-degrading phospholipase D that facilitates the
persistence and spread of the bacterium within the host
[5,6]. The expression of the pld gene is regulated by
multiple environmental stimuli, including heat, and
plays a role in the reduction of macrophage viability following infection [78,79]. The secreted corynebacterial
protease CP40 was detected previously as a protective
antigen of C. pseudotuberculosis and shown to be of the
serine protease type, although BLAST searches revealed
homology to endoglycosidases [80]. The extracellular
CP40 enzyme may contribute to the virulence of
C. pseudotuberculosis by its proteolytic activity, but the
enzymatic activity of CP40 was not detectable in culture
supernatants [80]. However, vaccination of sheep with
this antigen resulted in protection against infection with
C. pseudotuberculosis, probably by affecting directly the
function of the CP40 protein and indirectly the growth
of the pathogen [11]. The genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 revealed three additional genes
encoding secreted proteases, including two subtilisinlike serine proteases and one trypsin-like serine protease
(Table 1). Extracellular proteases may exhibit a wide
range of pathogenic potentials when interacting with the
defense mechanisms and tissue components of the host.
Redundant enzymatic systems are moreover suitable to
promote the survival of pathogens under unfavorable
environmental conditions encountered in the infected
host [81]. The genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 also encodes a secreted protein of the SGNHhydrolase subfamily (Table 1). SGNH-hydrolases are a
diverse family of lipases and esterases which are known
to act as virulence factors in other bacteria, such as
Streptomyces scabies, the causal agent of the potato scab

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

Page 10 of 17

Table 1 Candidate determinants contributing to virulence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41
Identifier

Gene

Predicted protein function

cpfrc_00029

pld

phospholipase D (sphingomyelin-degrading enzyme)

cpfrc_01895

cpp

corynebacterial protease CP40 (serine protease)

cpfrc_00397

-

secreted subtilisin-like serine protease

cpfrc_01634

-

secreted subtilisin-like serine protease

cpfrc_00562

-

secreted trypsin-like serine protease

cpfrc_00536

-

secreted SGNH-hydrolase

cpfrc_00386

nanH

neuraminidase H (sialidase)

cpfrc_01079
cpfrc_00594

rpfI
rpfA

resuscitation-promoting factor interacting protein (D,L-endopeptidase)
resuscitation-promoting factor A (muralytic enzyme)

cpfrc_00679

rpfB

resuscitation-promoting factor B (muralytic enzyme)

cpfrc_00128

nor

nitric oxide reductase

cpfrc_00565

nrpS1

nonribosomal peptide synthetase 1

cpfrc_01801

nrpS2

nonribosomal peptide synthetase 2

cpfrc_00492

dtsR1

acetyl-CoA carboxylase b-subunit involved in fatty acid synthesis

cpfrc_00491

dtsR2

acyl-CoA carboxylase b-subunit involved in mycolic acid synthesis

cpfrc_01953

accD3

acyl-CoA carboxylase b-subunit involved in mycolic acid synthesis

disease [56]. Further experimental studies are required
to elucidate whether the expression of the secreted
enzymes promotes the virulence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41.
Another candidate virulence factor of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is the extracellular neuraminidase NanH
(Table 1). Neuraminidases, or sialidases, belong to a
class of glycosyl hydrolases that catalyze the removal of
terminal sialic acid residues from a variety of glycoconjugates and can contribute to the recognition of sialic
acids exposed on host cell surfaces [82,83]. The homologous counterpart of NanH was recently characterized in
C. diphtheriae KCTC3075 and shown to be a protein
containing neuraminidase and trans-sialidase activities
[84]. Trans-sialidases located on the bacterial cell surface can be used for the decoration of sugar moiety
acceptors with sialic acid to enable the invasion of hosts
under certain conditions. The trans-sialidase activity is
of importance for many pathogenic bacteria and the
corresponding proteins are therefore considered potential virulence factors [82]. Iron limitation reduced the
number of sialic acid residues on the surface of C.
diphtheriae cells and their adhesive properties, indicating that the expression of dissimilar virulence determinants is coordinately controlled by a gene-regulatory
system [85]. By bioinformatic pattern searches, a GlxRbinding site was detected in the upstream region of the
nanH gene of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41, suggesting
that the cAMP-sensing transcription regulator GlxR
might be involved in the control of this virulence factor
gene (Figure 6).
Likewise, a DNA-binding site for GlxR was detected in
front of the rpfI gene encoding an invasion-associated
protein that is involved in cell surface organization and

adhesion of corynebacteria [86]. The homologue of RpfI
in M. tuberculosis (named RipA) revealed endopeptidase
activity and interacts with the resuscitation-promoting
factor RpfB, representing a peptidoglycan glycosidase
[86,87]. Two genes (rpfA and rpfB) encoding resuscitation-promoting factors are present in the genome of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 (Table 1). Important roles
in pathogenesis for peptidoglycan hydrolytic enzymes
have been proposed [88] and an analogous system combining the activities of a muramidase and an endopeptidase contributed to the virulence of Listeria
monocytogenes [89]. As previously demonstrated in
C. glutamicum [74,90], the expression of rpfI, rpfA and
rpfB in C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is probably under
complex control by three regulatory proteins, GlxR,
RamB and RamA (Figure 6).
Another potential virulence factor of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is represented by the nor gene encoding
nitric oxide reductase (Table 1). This enzyme is generally involved in the detoxification of nitric oxide and
consequently necessary for the long-term persistence of
pathogens in macrophages [91]. The toxic properties of
nitric oxide are used by the host immune system to kill
or slow down the growth of pathogenic bacteria [51].
Interestingly, the expression of the nor gene was not
induced upon the infection of macrophages by animal
C. pseudotuberculosis [4]. As the expression of nor is
typically activated by a transcription regulator in
response to the presence of nitric oxide [92], the regulatory pattern of nor transcription and its contribution to
the protection against nitric oxide remains unclear.
The previous search for macrophage-induced genes of
animal C. pseudotuberculosis by means of a cloned promoter library provided two gene tags showing significant

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

Page 11 of 17

Figure 6 Regulatory interactions involved in the control of potential virulence factors of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41. Transcription
regulators controlling the expression of candidate virulence factors are shown. The regulatory interactions were deduced from a genome-scale
network transfer approach [114] and the combined use of a hidden Markov model and a position weight matrix [74]. The assignment of the
transcription regulators into the regulatory protein families of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is indicated. Predicted DNA-binding sites of RamA and
RamB are shown as white boxes and predicted DNA-binding sites of GlxR as black boxes. Regulated target genes are shown as arrows and
coloured as follows: grey, regulatory gene; yellow, gene involved in iron storage; orange, gene of central metabolism or fatty acid/mycolic acid
biosynthesis; violet, gene involved in the resuscitation process; light green, gene involved in the assembly of adhesive pilus; dark green, other
potential virulence factor gene. The 16-bp consensus sequence of the GlxR-binding site of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is shown as DNA
sequence logo. The 17 predicted DNA-binding sites of GlxR were used as input data for the WebLogo tool [115].

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

induction rates in macrophages [4]. The nucleotide
sequence of the respective gene tags revealed similarity
to nonribosomal peptide synthetases (44-fold induction)
and to the b-subunit of acyl-CoA carboxylases (24-fold
induction), respectively. The genome sequence of C.
pseudotuberculosis FRC41 encodes two nonribosomal
peptide synthetases, NrpS1 and NrpS2 (Table 1). These
modular enzymes are used by microorganisms to participate in the synthesis of many secondary metabolites,
including for instance siderophores and antibiotics [93].
As both nrpS genes were not assigned to the iron-responsive DtxR regulon of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 and
siderophore biosynthesis is carried out by alternative
pathways independent of nonribosomal peptide synthetases, a physiological role in iron metabolism of the two
proteins cannot be deduced from the current data. However, the strong upregulation of gene expression in
macrophages points toward a protective or toxic function
during the infection of at least one nonribosomal peptide
synthetase [4]. A role in virulence of a secondary metabolite produced by a nonribosomal peptide synthetase has
been demonstrated in Streptomyces acidiscabies. This
phytopathogen produces thaxtomin A which is necessary
for the infection of potato tubers [94].
Three genes coding for b-subunits of acyl-CoA carboxylases are present in the genome of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 (Table 1). These genes are located in
highly conserved regions of corynebacterial genomes
and are essential for either fatty acid synthesis (dtsR1)
or mycolic acid synthesis (dtsR2 and accD3) [95]. The
acetyl-CoA carboxylase of C. glutamicum consists of the
biotinylated a-subunit AccBC, the b-subunit AccD1
(DtsR1) and the small AccE protein. The acyl-CoA carboxylase involved in mycolic acid synthesis of C. glutamicum consists of the two b-subunits AccD2 and
AccD3 (DtsR2 and AccD3) in addition to AccBC and
AccE [95,96]. The expression of the respective genes in
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 is probably controlled by
the global transcription regulator GlxR (Figure 6), providing hints that this regulatory protein has a key function in connecting both the central metabolism and the
expression of candidate virulence factors in this pathogenic bacterium. Mycolic acids, which are long-chain aalkyl-b-hydroxy fatty acids, are important components
of the corynebacterial cell wall [97] and probably associated with the pathogenicity of C. pseudotuberculosis
[98]. They can provide a thick layer at the outer surface
of the cell that protects the bacterium from antibiotics
and the host’s immune system [99]. Moreover, the noncovalently bound trehalose dimycolate is a well-established immunostimulatory compound with toxic
properties [97]. Variations in the amount of mycolic
acids and differences in other cell surface properties
provide a basis for explaining the aggregation capacity

Page 12 of 17

of C. pseudotuberculosis in suspension, the strong aggregation within macrophages, the formation of thick
capsules after the release of the pathogen from macrophages [11], and the occurrence of virulent and attenuated strains [98].

Conclusions
The complete genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 of human origin provides detailed insights into
the gene repertoire contributing to the virulence of this
bacterium that was isolated from a rare case of necrotizing lymphadenitis [12]. By combining in silico data
obtained from the genome annotation with previous
experimental knowledge, occasional observations on
genes that affect the virulence of C. pseudotuberculosis
were integrated into a global view on the pathogenicity
of this species. The reconstruction of the DtxR regulon
for instance provides a comprehensive set of genes
involved in the acquisition of iron and extends the
initial observation that a fagB mutant was not impaired
in iron uptake [29]. A systematic mutational characterization of the newly detected iron transporters and siderophore biosynthesis gene clusters may help to dissect
the contribution of each system to the virulence of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41. It is very likely that the
ciu siderophore biosynthesis and transport system may
complement the uptake of iron by the FagABCD transporter under certain environmental conditions, as the
ciuA gene was shown earlier to be expressed in C. pseudotuberculosis [1]. Likewise, a reporter transposon system indicated that a gene coding for a fimbrial subunit
is expressed during growth of C. pseudotuberculosis in
standard medium [40]. As the genome sequence of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 revealed two gene clusters
encoding adhesive pili, it is interesting to examine how
the respective pilin monomers or pilus polymers contribute to the adherence of C. pseudotuberculosis to host
tissue and how their expression is controlled. We
detected a DNA-binding site for the cAMP-sensing
transcription regulator GlxR in the spaA-srtB intergenic
region, whereas the iron-responsive regulator DtxR was
proposed to control the assembly of pilin subunits in
C. diphtheriae NCTC 13129 [100]. Another previous
study provided two DNA sequence tags for macrophage-induced genes [4] that were linked to the nonribosomal peptide synthetase genes nrpS1 and nrpS2 and
to the acyl-CoA carboxylase subunit genes dtsR1, dtsR2
and accD3 by means of the genome sequence of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41. The detection of the latter
genes is consistent with the observation that the cell
surface of C. pseudotuberculosis is an important factor
contributing to virulence [98]. Future work should compare the knowledge deduced from the genome sequence
of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 with the genetic

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

information generated from other human isolates or animal pathogens of the different biovars [101], or even
extend the genome comparison to the pangenomic level.
This global comparative approach with a larger set of
sequenced genomes may provide comprehensive insights
into the distinctive features of each biovar or strain. As
the currently available commercial vaccines are unable
to fully protect susceptible animals [102,103], the
extended knowledge of potential virulence factors and
novel antigens of C. pseudotuberculosis might be helpful
for the design of more effective vaccines and molecular
diagnostics to control caseous lymphadenitis in sheep
and goats to reduce thereby the occupational risk exposure for humans.

Methods
Bacterial strain and growth conditions

C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 was isolated from the inguinal lymph node of a 12-year-old French girl with necrotizing lymphadenitis [12]. The taxonomic identification
of this clinical isolate was recently confirmed using multiplex PCR and the nucleotide sequence of the pld gene
(N. Guiso, unpublished data). C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41 was routinely grown in brain-heart-infusion (BHI)
broth or on Columbia agar with sheep blood at 37°C.
Preparation of chromosomal DNA for genome sequencing

The preparation of chromosomal DNA from C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 was performed as follows: 50-ml aliquots of cultures grown for 48-72 h were centrifuged at
4°C and 2,000 × g for 20 min. The cell pellets were
resuspended in 0.6 ml Tris/NaCl buffer [10 mM Tris
(pH 7.0), 10 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 300 mM NaCl] and
transferred to VK01 Precellys lysing tubes. The cells
were lysed by means of a Precellys 24-Dual Tissue
Homogenizer, using two cycles of 6,500 rpm for 15 sec
with an interval of 30 sec. The chromosomal DNA was
purified by phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1)
extraction and precipitated with ethanol. The DNA concentration was determined with a Tecan Infinite 200
Microplate Reader.
Sequencing of the C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 genome

A total of 5 μg of purified chromosomal DNA was used
for constructing a single-stranded template DNA library.
The DNA concentration of the library was measured by
using the Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Kit. The preparation
of the single-stranded template DNA library and DNA
sequencing were performed according to manufacturer’s
protocols (Roche Applied Science). The sequencing of
C. pseudotuberculosis DNA was carried out with the
Genome Sequencer FLX Instrument and Titanium
chemistry (Roche Applied Science). The sequence data
were assembled with the GS de novo Assembler

Page 13 of 17

Software (Version 2.3). According to the 454 Newbler
Metrics file, 286,938 reads representing 94,447,635 bases
were assembled. Using the default cutoff of 500 bases
for the size classification of the contigs, ten large contigs
(≥ 500 bases) and one small contig (313 bases) were
obtained to give a total size of 2,319,243 bases. The gap
closure process was supported by the related reference
contig arrangement tool r2cat, using the C. diphtheriae
NCTC 13129 genome sequence as a reference [13]. The
remaining gaps in the genome sequence were closed by
PCR with Phusion hot start high-fidelity DNA polymerase (Finnzymes) and genomic template DNA. All primers used in this study were synthesized by Metabion.
The PCR assays were carried out with a TProfessional
PCR thermocycler (Biometra) according to standard
protocols (Finnzymes). The amplified DNA fragments
linking the individual contigs were sequenced by IIT
Biotech. All DNA sequences were uploaded into the
Consed program [104] to generate the complete genome
sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41.
Bioinformatic analysis of the complete genome sequence

The assembled sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41
was uploaded into the bacterial genome annotation system GenDB [15]. The annotation of the complete genome sequence was performed as described previously
[105], followed by manual curation. Analyses of the predicted gene content and the metabolic properties of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 were accomplished by the
computer programs EDGAR [19] and CARMEN [106].
The synteny between the genomes of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 and C. diphtheriae NCTC 13129 was calculated by the EDGAR software [19]. The origin of
chromosomal DNA replication was predicted with the
Ori-Finder tool [17]. The genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 has been deposited in the GenBank database with accession number CP002097.
Bioinformatic analysis of the regulatory repertoire

The detection of the transcriptional regulatory repertoire of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 was performed by
a combined bioinformatic approach using several tools
and programs [26]. Proteins containing putative DNAbinding domains were detected by means of the HMM
library and genome assignments server Superfamily version 1.75 [107]. To identify among the set of potential
DNA-binding proteins those representing transcription
regulators, hidden Markov model (HMM) profiles of
regulatory protein families were downloaded from the
Pfam database version 24.0 [108] and used for searches
against the predicted C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 proteins by applying the HMMsearch module of the profile
hidden Markov model software HMMER [109]. Moreover, the helix-turn-helix (HTH) recognition tool [110]

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

integrated in the GenDB platform was applied to scan
the putative DNA-binding transcription regulators for
the presence of HTH motifs. The classification of
C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 proteins into Clusters of
Orthologous Groups of proteins [111] during genome
annotation provided further indications on the role of
the predicted proteins in transcriptional regulation. The
genome-wide search was extended by using data on
known transcription regulators from C. glutamicum
[23]. A validation step was included by performing
BLASTP [112] searches against the NCBI protein database and evaluating results generated with the Conserved Domain Search program [56]. During the final
step of data analysis, the DNA-binding transcription
regulators of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 were grouped
into regulatory protein families [23,26].
The detection of DNA-binding sites in the genome
sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis FRC41 followed a
combined workflow, using both position weight matrices
and hidden Markov models [74]. The programs PoSSuMsearch [113] and HMMsearch [109] were applied to scan
the complete genome sequence of C. pseudotuberculosis
FRC41. As HMMsearch does not support searching in
both directions of a double strand, scanning of the
reverse complementary DNA sequence was implemented. PoSSuMsearch was configured for lazy probability
evaluation [113]. The comprehensive set of validated
DNA-binding sites sequences from C. glutamicum was
downloaded from the reference database CoryneRegNet
[114] and used as input for PoSSuMsearch and
HMMsearch. The respective gene-regulatory network
transfer between C. glutamicum and other corynebacteria
on the genome-scale was described previously [114]. Evalue cut-offs were used as described for the genomewide pattern recognition approach in C. glutamicum
[75]. Sequence logos of the detected DNA-binding sites
were generated with WebLogo version 2.8.2 [115].
Acknowledgements
ET and JSchn acknowledge the receipt of scholarships which are embedded
into the Cluster Industrial Biotechnology CLIB2021 and financed by Bielefeld
University and the Ministry of Innovation, Science, Research and Technology
of North Rhine-Westphalia. LO and AB were supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft in frame of SFB 796 (project B5). The valuable
contribution of the CeBiTec sequencing team (A. Albersmeier, K. Brinkrolf, S.
Schatschneider, R. Szczepanowski, P. Viehoever, A. Winkler) to this genome
project is gratefullly acknowledged. The authors thank the sequencing team
from IIT Biotech for the help during the gap closure process.
Author details
Institut für Genomforschung und Systembiologie, Centrum für
Biotechnologie, Universität Bielefeld, Universitätsstraße 27, D-33615 Bielefeld,
Germany. 2CLIB Graduate Cluster Industrial Biotechnology, Centrum für
Biotechnologie, Universität Bielefeld, Universitätsstraße 27, D-33615 Bielefeld,
Germany. 3Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Staudtstraße 5, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany.
4
Bioinformatics Resource Facility, Centrum für Biotechnologie, Universität
Bielefeld, Universitätsstraße 27, D-33615 Bielefeld, Germany. 5AG
1

Page 14 of 17

Genominformatik, Technische Fakultät, Universität Bielefeld, Universitätsstraße
25, D-33615 Bielefeld, Germany. 6Laboratório de Genética Celular e
Molecular, Departamento de Biologia Geral, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antonio Carlos 6627, Pampulha,
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. 7Cellular and Molecular Parasitology Laboratory,
Rene Rachou Research Center, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil. 8Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal
do Pará, Rua Augusto Corrêa, 01 - Guamá, Belém, PA, Brazil. 9Institut Pasteur,
Unité de Prévention et Thérapies Moléculaires des Maladies Humaines,
National Centre of Reference of Toxigenic Corynebacteria, 25 rue du Dr.
Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France. 10Medical Faculty, University Paris
Descartes, Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, Department of Microbiology,
147 rue de Sèvres, 75015 Paris, France. 11Medical Faculty, University Rennes
1, Hospital Pontchaillou, Department of Microbiology, 2 rue Henri le Guilloux,
35000 Rennes, France.
Authors’ contributions
ET sequenced and annotated the FRC41 genome and prepared the
manuscript. JSchn implemented and maintained the GenDB project for
annotation. JSchr participated in the gene-regulatory network analysis. SJ
and AG provided bioinformatic support. PH and JSt participated in the gap
closure process. FAD and FSR purified the genomic DNA. LO, SCS, VD, AM,
JR and AS participated in data evaluation. NG performed the taxonomic
classification of FRC41. OFJL and SK discovered FRC41 and provided the
isolate for the sequencing project. VA, AB and AT supervised the project. All
authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
Received: 8 September 2010 Accepted: 30 December 2010
Published: 30 December 2010
References
1. Dorella FA, Pacheco LG, Oliveira SC, Miyoshi A, Azevedo V: Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis: microbiology, biochemical properties, pathogenesis
and molecular studies of virulence. Vet Res 2006, 37:201-218.
2. Baird GJ, Fontaine MC: Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis and its role in
ovine caseous lymphadenitis. J Comp Pathol 2007, 137:179-210.
3. Paton MW, Rose IR, Hart RA, Sutherland SS, Mercy AR, Ellis TM, Dhaliwal JA:
New infection with Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis reduces wool
production. Aust Vet J 1994, 71:47-49.
4. McKean S, Davies J, Moore R: Identification of macrophage induced
genes of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis by differential fluorescence
induction. Microbes Infect 2005, 7:1352-1363.
5. McNamara PJ, Bradley GA, Songer JG: Targeted mutagenesis of the
phospholipase D gene results in decreased virulence of Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis. Mol Microbiol 1994, 12:921-930.
6. Songer JG: Bacterial phospholipases and their role in virulence. Trends
Microbiol 1997, 5:156-161.
7. Bregenzer T, Frei R, Ohnacker H, Zimmerli W: Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis infection in a butcher. Clin Microbiol Infect 1997,
3:696-698.
8. Peel MM, Palmer GG, Stacpoole AM, Kerr TG: Human lymphadenitis due to
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis: report of ten cases from Australia
and review. Clin Infect Dis 1997, 24:185-191.
9. Funke G, von Graevenitz A, Clarridge JE, Bernard KA: Clinical microbiology
of coryneform bacteria. Clin Microbiol Rev 1997, 10:125-159.
10. Keslin MH, McCoy EL, McCusker JJ, Lutch JS: Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis. A new cause of infectious and eosinophilic
pneumonia. Am J Med 1979, 67:228-231.
11. Walker J, Jackson HJ, Eggleton DG, Meeusen EN, Wilson MJ, Brandon MR:
Identification of a novel antigen from Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis that protects sheep against caseous lymphadenitis.
Infect Immun 1994, 62:2562-2567.
12. Join-Lambert OF, Ouache M, Canioni D, Beretti JL, Blanche S, Berche P,
Kayal S: Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis necrotizing lymphadenitis in
a twelve-year-old patient. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2006, 25:848-851.
13. Husemann P, Stoye J: r2cat: synteny plots and comparative assembly.
Bioinformatics 2010, 26:570-571.
14. Cerdeno-Tarraga AM, Efstratiou A, Dover LG, Holden MT, Pallen M,
Bentley SD, Besra GS, Churcher C, James KD, De Zoysa A, et al: The
complete genome sequence and analysis of Corynebacterium diphtheriae
NCTC13129. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:6516-6523.

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

15. Meyer F, Goesmann A, McHardy AC, Bartels D, Bekel T, Clausen J,
Kalinowski J, Linke B, Rupp O, Giegerich R, Pühler A: GenDB-an open
source genome annotation system for prokaryote genomes. Nucleic Acids
Res 2003, 31:2187-2195.
16. Lowe TM, Eddy SR: tRNAscan-SE: a program for improved detection of
transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:955-964.
17. Gao F, Zhang CT: Ori-Finder: a web-based system for finding oriCs in
unannotated bacterial genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:79.
18. Hendrickson H, Lawrence JG: Mutational bias suggests that replication
termination occurs near the dif site, not at Ter sites. Mol Microbiol 2007,
64:42-56.
19. Blom J, Albaum SP, Doppmeier D, Pühler A, Vorhölter FJ, Zakrzewski M,
Goesmann A: EDGAR: a software framework for the comparative analysis
of prokaryotic genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:154.
20. Ventura M, Canchaya C, Tauch A, Chandra G, Fitzgerald GF, Chater KF, van
Sinderen D: Genomics of Actinobacteria: tracing the evolutionary history
of an ancient phylum. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2007, 71:495-548.
21. Trost E, Götker S, Schneider J, Schneiker-Bekel S, Szczepanowski R, Tilker A,
Viehoever P, Arnold W, Bekel T, Blom J, et al: Complete genome sequence
and lifestyle of black-pigmented Corynebacterium aurimucosum ATCC
700975 (formerly C. nigricans CN-1) isolated from a vaginal swab of a
woman with spontaneous abortion. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:91.
22. Yozwiak ML, Songer JG: Effect of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis
phospholipase D on viability and chemotactic responses of ovine
neutrophils. Am J Vet Res 1993, 54:392-397.
23. Schröder J, Tauch A: Transcriptional regulation of gene expression in
Corynebacterium glutamicum: the role of global, master and local
regulators in the modular and hierarchical gene regulatory network.
FEMS Microbiol Rev 2010, 34:685-737.
24. Rodionov DA: Comparative genomic reconstruction of transcriptional
regulatory networks in bacteria. Chem Rev 2007, 107:3467-3497.
25. Brinkrolf K, Brune I, Tauch A: The transcriptional regulatory network of the
amino acid producer Corynebacterium glutamicum. J Biotechnol 2007,
129:191-211.
26. Brune I, Brinkrolf K, Kalinowski J, Pühler A, Tauch A: The individual and
common repertoire of DNA-binding transcriptional regulators of
Corynebacterium glutamicum, Corynebacterium efficiens, Corynebacterium
diphtheriae and Corynebacterium jeikeium deduced from the complete
genome sequences. BMC Genomics 2005, 6:86.
27. Ramos JL, Martinez-Bueno M, Molina-Henares AJ, Teran W, Watanabe K,
Zhang X, Gallegos MT, Brennan R, Tobes R: The TetR family of
transcriptional repressors. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2005, 69:326-356.
28. Andrews SC, Robinson AK, Rodriguez-Quinones F: Bacterial iron
homeostasis. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2003, 27:215-237.
29. Billington SJ, Esmay PA, Songer JG, Jost BH: Identification and role in
virulence of putative iron acquisition genes from Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2002, 208:41-45.
30. Oram DM, Avdalovic A, Holmes RK: Analysis of genes that encode DtxRlike transcriptional regulators in pathogenic and saprophytic
corynebacterial species. Infect Immun 2004, 72:1885-1895.
31. Brune I, Werner H, Hüser AT, Kalinowski J, Pühler A, Tauch A: The DtxR
protein acting as dual transcriptional regulator directs a global
regulatory network involved in iron metabolism of Corynebacterium
glutamicum. BMC Genomics 2006, 7:21.
32. Drazek ES, Hammack CA, Schmitt MP: Corynebacterium diphtheriae genes
required for acquisition of iron from haemin and haemoglobin are
homologous to ABC haemin transporters. Mol Microbiol 2000, 36:68-84.
33. Allen CE, Schmitt MP: HtaA is an iron-regulated hemin binding protein
involved in the utilization of heme iron in Corynebacterium diphtheriae. J
Bacteriol 2009, 191:2638-2648.
34. Schmitt MP: Utilization of host iron sources by Corynebacterium
diphtheriae: identification of a gene whose product is homologous to
eukaryotic heme oxygenases and is required for acquisition of iron from
heme and hemoglobin. J Bacteriol 1997, 179:838-845.
35. Schmitt MP: Transcription of the Corynebacterium diphtheriae hmuO gene
is regulated by iron and heme. Infect Immun 1997, 65:4634-4641.
36. Bibb LA, Kunkle CA, Schmitt MP: The ChrA-ChrS and HrrA-HrrS signal
transduction systems are required for activation of the hmuO promoter
and repression of the hemA promoter in Corynebacterium diphtheriae.
Infect Immun 2007, 75:2421-2431.

Page 15 of 17

37. Crosa JH, Walsh CT: Genetics and assembly line enzymology of
siderophore biosynthesis in bacteria. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2002,
66:223-249.
38. Miethke M, Marahiel MA: Siderophore-based iron acquisition and
pathogen control. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2007, 71:413-451.
39. Challis GL: A widely distributed bacterial pathway for siderophore
biosynthesis independent of nonribosomal peptide synthetases.
Chembiochem 2005, 6:601-611.
40. Dorella FA, Estevam EM, Pacheco LG, Guimaraes CT, Lana UG, Gomes EA,
Barsante MM, Oliveira SC, Meyer R, Miyoshi A, Azevedo V: In vivo
insertional mutagenesis in Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis: an
efficient means to identify DNA sequences encoding exported proteins.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72:7368-7372.
41. Kunkle CA, Schmitt MP: Analysis of a DtxR-regulated iron transport and
siderophore biosynthesis gene cluster in Corynebacterium diphtheriae. J
Bacteriol 2005, 187:422-433.
42. Wennerhold J, Krug A, Bott M: The AraC-type regulator RipA represses
aconitase and other iron proteins from Corynebacterium under iron
limitation and is itself repressed by DtxR. J Biol Chem 2005,
280:40500-40508.
43. Kana BD, Weinstein EA, Avarbock D, Dawes SS, Rubin H, Mizrahi V:
Characterization of the cydAB-encoded cytochrome bd oxidase from
Mycobacterium smegmatis. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:7076-7086.
44. Martinez A, Kolter R: Protection of DNA during oxidative stress by the
nonspecific DNA-binding protein Dps. J Bacteriol 1997, 179:5188-5194.
45. Zhao G, Ceci P, Ilari A, Giangiacomo L, Laue TM, Chiancone E, Chasteen ND:
Iron and hydrogen peroxide detoxification properties of DNA-binding
protein from starved cells. A ferritin-like DNA-binding protein of
Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:27689-27696.
46. Gordon BR, Li Y, Wang L, Sintsova A, van Bakel H, Tian S, Navarre WW,
Xia B, Liu J: Lsr2 is a nucleoid-associated protein that targets AT-rich
sequences and virulence genes in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:5154-5159.
47. Colangeli R, Haq A, Arcus VL, Summers E, Magliozzo RS, McBride A,
Mitra AK, Radjainia M, Khajo A, Jacobs WR, et al: The multifunctional
histone-like protein Lsr2 protects mycobacteria against reactive oxygen
intermediates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:4414-4418.
48. Zaika EI, Perlow RA, Matz E, Broyde S, Gilboa R, Grollman AP, Zharkov DO:
Substrate discrimination by formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase: a
mutational analysis. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:4849-4861.
49. Hassett DJ, Cohen MS: Bacterial adaptation to oxidative stress:
implications for pathogenesis and interaction with phagocytic cells.
Faseb J 1989, 3:2574-2582.
50. Nathan C, Shiloh MU: Reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates in the
relationship between mammalian hosts and microbial pathogens. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:8841-8848.
51. Zahrt TC, Deretic V: Reactive nitrogen and oxygen intermediates and
bacterial defenses: unusual adaptations in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Antioxid Redox Signal 2002, 4:141-159.
52. Storz G, Tartaglia LA: OxyR: a regulator of antioxidant genes. J Nutr 1992,
122:627-630.
53. Wood ZA, Schroder E, Robin Harris J, Poole LB: Structure, mechanism and
regulation of peroxiredoxins. Trends Biochem Sci 2003, 28:32-40.
54. Guimaraes BG, Souchon H, Honore N, Saint-Joanis B, Brosch R, Shepard W,
Cole ST, Alzari PM: Structure and mechanism of the alkyl
hydroperoxidase AhpC, a key element of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis
defense system against oxidative stress. J Biol Chem 2005,
280:25735-25742.
55. Bryk R, Griffin P, Nathan C: Peroxynitrite reductase activity of bacterial
peroxiredoxins. Nature 2000, 407:211-215.
56. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Derbyshire MK, DeWeese-Scott C,
Gonzales NR, Gwadz M, Hao L, He S, Hurwitz DI, Jackson JD, et al: CDD: a
conserved domain database for interactive domain family analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D237-240.
57. Merkamm M, Guyonvarch A: Cloning of the sodA gene from
Corynebacterium melassecola and role of superoxide dismutase in
cellular viability. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:1284-1295.
58. Babu MM, Priya ML, Selvan AT, Madera M, Gough J, Aravind L, Sankaran K:
A database of bacterial lipoproteins (DOLOP) with functional
assignments to predicted lipoproteins. J Bacteriol 2006, 188:2761-2773.

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

59. Dussurget O, Stewart G, Neyrolles O, Pescher P, Young D, Marchal G: Role
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis copper-zinc superoxide dismutase. Infect
Immun 2001, 69:529-533.
60. Piddington DL, Fang FC, Laessig T, Cooper AM, Orme IM, Buchmeier NA:
Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase of Mycobacterium tuberculosis contributes
to survival in activated macrophages that are generating an oxidative
burst. Infect Immun 2001, 69:4980-4987.
61. Wilks KE, Dunn KL, Farrant JL, Reddin KM, Gorringe AR, Langford PR, Kroll JS:
Periplasmic superoxide dismutase in meningococcal pathogenicity. Infect
Immun 1998, 66:213-217.
62. San Mateo LR, Toffer KL, Orndorff PE, Kawula TH: Neutropenia restores
virulence to an attenuated Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase-deficient
Haemophilus ducreyi strain in the swine model of chancroid. Infect
Immun 1999, 67:5345-5351.
63. Papp-Wallace KM, Maguire ME: Manganese transport and the role of
manganese in virulence. Annu Rev Microbiol 2006, 60:187-209.
64. Schmitt MP: Analysis of a DtxR-like metalloregulatory protein, MntR, from
Corynebacterium diphtheriae that controls expression of an ABC metal
transporter by an Mn(2+)-dependent mechanism. J Bacteriol 2002,
184:6882-6892.
65. Lee JW, Helmann JD: Functional specialization within the Fur family of
metalloregulators. Biometals 2007, 20:485-499.
66. Schröder J, Jochmann N, Rodionov DA, Tauch A: The Zur regulon of
Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:12.
67. Grover A, Sharma R: Identification and characterization of a major Zn(II)
resistance determinant of Mycobacterium smegmatis. J Bacteriol 2006,
188:7026-7032.
68. Riccardi G, Milano A, Pasca MR, Nies DH: Genomic analysis of zinc
homeostasis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2008,
287:1-7.
69. Haas CE, Rodionov DA, Kropat J, Malasarn D, Merchant SS, de CrecyLagard V: A subset of the diverse COG0523 family of putative metal
chaperones is linked to zinc homeostasis in all kingdoms of life. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10:470.
70. Navarre WW, Schneewind O: Surface proteins of gram-positive bacteria
and mechanisms of their targeting to the cell wall envelope. Microbiol
Mol Biol Rev 1999, 63:174-229.
71. Ton-That H, Schneewind O: Assembly of pili in Gram-positive bacteria.
Trends Microbiol 2004, 12:228-234.
72. Ton-That H, Marraffini LA, Schneewind O: Sortases and pilin elements
involved in pilus assembly of Corynebacterium diphtheriae. Mol Microbiol
2004, 53:251-261.
73. Swaminathan A, Mandlik A, Swierczynski A, Gaspar A, Das A, Ton-That H:
Housekeeping sortase facilitates the cell wall anchoring of pilus
polymers in Corynebacterium diphtheriae. Mol Microbiol 2007, 66:961-974.
74. Kohl TA, Baumbach J, Jungwirth B, Pühler A, Tauch A: The GlxR regulon of
the amino acid producer Corynebacterium glutamicum in silico and in
vitro detection of DNA binding sites of a global transcription regulator. J
Biotechnol 2008, 135:340-350.
75. Kohl TA, Tauch A: The GlxR regulon of the amino acid producer
Corynebacterium glutamicum: Detection of the corynebacterial core
regulon and integration into the transcriptional regulatory network
model. J Biotechnol 2009, 143:239-246.
76. Mandlik A, Das A, Ton-That H: The molecular switch that activates the cell
wall anchoring step of pilus assembly in gram-positive bacteria. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:14147-14152.
77. Mandlik A, Swierczynski A, Das A, Ton-That H: Corynebacterium diphtheriae
employs specific minor pilins to target human pharyngeal epithelial
cells. Mol Microbiol 2007, 64:111-124.
78. McKean SC, Davies JK, Moore RJ: Probing the heat shock response of
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis: the major virulence factor,
phospholipase D, is downregulated at 43 degrees C. Res Microbiol 2007,
158:279-286.
79. McKean SC, Davies JK, Moore RJ: Expression of phospholipase D, the
major virulence factor of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis, is
regulated by multiple environmental factors and plays a role in
macrophage death. Microbiology 2007, 153:2203-2211.
80. Wilson MJ, Brandon MR, Walker J: Molecular and biochemical
characterization of a protective 40-kilodalton antigen from
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis. Infect Immun 1995, 63:206-211.

Page 16 of 17

81. Dubin G: Extracellular proteases of Staphylococcus spp. Biol Chem 2002,
383:1075-1086.
82. Mattos-Guaraldi AL, Duarte Formiga LC, Pereira GA: Cell surface
components and adhesion in Corynebacterium diphtheriae. Microbes Infect
2000, 2:1507-1512.
83. Vimr ER, Kalivoda KA, Deszo EL, Steenbergen SM: Diversity of microbial
sialic acid metabolism. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2004, 68:132-153.
84. Kim S, Oh DB, Kwon O, Kang HA: Identification and functional
characterization of the NanH extracellular sialidase from
Corynebacterium diphtheriae. J Biochem 2010, 147:523-533.
85. Moreira Lde O, Andrade AF, Vale MD, Souza SM, Hirata R Jr, Asad LM,
Asad NR, Monteiro-Leal LH, Previato JO, Mattos-Guaraldi AL: Effects of iron
limitation on adherence and cell surface carbohydrates of
Corynebacterium diphtheriae strains. Appl Environ Microbiol 2003,
69:5907-5913.
86. Ott L, Holler M, Gerlach RG, Hensel M, Rheinlaender J, Schaffer TE,
Burkovski A: Corynebacterium diphtheriae invasion-associated protein
(DIP1281) is involved in cell surface organization, adhesion and
internalization in epithelial cells. BMC Microbiol 2010, 10:2.
87. Kana BD, Mizrahi V: Resuscitation-promoting factors as lytic enzymes for
bacterial growth and signaling. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2010,
58:39-50.
88. Boneca IG: The role of peptidoglycan in pathogenesis. Curr Opin Microbiol
2005, 8:46-53.
89. Lenz LL, Mohammadi S, Geissler A, Portnoy DA: SecA2-dependent
secretion of autolytic enzymes promotes Listeria monocytogenes
pathogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:12432-12437.
90. Jungwirth B, Emer D, Brune I, Hansmeier N, Pühler A, Eikmanns BJ, Tauch A:
Triple transcriptional control of the resuscitation promoting factor 2
(rpf2) gene of Corynebacterium glutamicum by the regulators of acetate
metabolism RamA and RamB and the cAMP-dependent regulator GlxR.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2008, 281:190-197.
91. Luthra A, Malik SS, Ramachandran R: Cloning, purification and
comparative structural analysis of two hypothetical proteins from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis found in the human granuloma during
persistence and highly up-regulated under carbon-starvation conditions.
Protein Expr Purif 2008, 62:64-74.
92. Tucker NP, D’Autreaux B, Studholme DJ, Spiro S, Dixon R: DNA binding
activity of the Escherichia coli nitric oxide sensor NorR suggests a
conserved target sequence in diverse proteobacteria. J Bacteriol 2004,
186:6656-6660.
93. Donadio S, Monciardini P, Sosio M: Polyketide synthases and
nonribosomal peptide synthetases: the emerging view from bacterial
genomics. Nat Prod Rep 2007, 24:1073-1109.
94. Healy FG, Wach M, Krasnoff SB, Gibson DM, Loria R: The txtAB genes of the
plant pathogen Streptomyces acidiscabies encode a peptide synthetase
required for phytotoxin thaxtomin A production and pathogenicity. Mol
Microbiol 2000, 38:794-804.
95. Gande R, Dover LG, Krumbach K, Besra GS, Sahm H, Oikawa T, Eggeling L:
The two carboxylases of Corynebacterium glutamicum essential for fatty
acid and mycolic acid synthesis. J Bacteriol 2007, 189:5257-5264.
96. Gande R, Gibson KJ, Brown AK, Krumbach K, Dover LG, Sahm H,
Shioyama S, Oikawa T, Besra GS, Eggeling L: Acyl-CoA carboxylases (accD2
and accD3), together with a unique polyketide synthase (Cg-pks), are
key to mycolic acid biosynthesis in Corynebacterianeae such as
Corynebacterium glutamicum and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. J Biol Chem
2004, 279:44847-44857.
97. Chami M, Andreau K, Lemassu A, Petit JF, Houssin C, Puech V, Bayan N,
Chaby R, Daffe M: Priming and activation of mouse macrophages by
trehalose 6,6’-dicorynomycolate vesicles from Corynebacterium
glutamicum. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2002, 32:141-147.
98. Hard GC: Electron microscopic examination of Corynebacterium ovis. J
Bacteriol 1969, 97:1480-1485.
99. Takayama K, Wang C, Besra GS: Pathway to synthesis and processing of
mycolic acids in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2005,
18:81-101.
100. Yellaboina S, Ranjan S, Chakhaiyar P, Hasnain SE, Ranjan A: Prediction of
DtxR regulon: identification of binding sites and operons controlled by
Diphtheria toxin repressor in Corynebacterium diphtheriae. BMC Microbiol
2004, 4:38.

Trost et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:728
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/728

Page 17 of 17

101. D’Afonseca V, Prosdocimi F, Dorella FA, Pacheco LG, Moraes PM, Pena I,
Ortega JM, Teixeira S, Oliveira SC, Coser EM, et al: Survey of genome
organization and gene content of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis.
Microbiol Res 2010, 165:312-320.
102. D’Afonseca V, Moraes PM, Dorella FA, Pacheco LG, Meyer R, Portela RW,
Miyoshi A, Azevedo V: A description of genes of Corynebacterium
pseudotuberculosis useful in diagnostics and vaccine applications. Genet
Mol Res 2008, 7:252-260.
103. Dorella FA, Pacheco LG, Seyffert N, Portela RW, Meyer R, Miyoshi A,
Azevedo V: Antigens of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis and
prospects for vaccine development. Expert Rev Vaccines 2009, 8:205-213.
104. Gordon D, Abajian C, Green P: Consed: a graphical tool for sequence
finishing. Genome Res 1998, 8:195-202.
105. Tauch A, Kaiser O, Hain T, Goesmann A, Weisshaar B, Albersmeier A, Bekel T,
Bischoff N, Brune I, Chakraborty T, et al: Complete genome sequence and
analysis of the multiresistant nosocomial pathogen Corynebacterium
jeikeium K411, a lipid-requiring bacterium of the human skin flora. J
Bacteriol 2005, 187:4671-4682.
106. Schneider J, Vorhölter FJ, Trost E, Blom J, Musa YR, Neuweger H,
Schatschneider S, Tauch A, Goesmann A: CARMEN: In silico reconstruction
of organism-specific metabolic networks using SBML. Genet Mol Res 2010,
9:1660-1672.
107. Gough J, Karplus K, Hughey R, Chothia C: Assignment of homology to
genome sequences using a library of hidden Markov models that
represent all proteins of known structure. J Mol Biol 2001, 313:903-919.
108. Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, et al: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D211-222.
109. Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:755-763.
110. Dodd IB, Egan JB: Improved detection of helix-turn-helix DNA-binding
motifs in protein sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18:5019-5026.
111. Tatusov RL, Galperin MY, Natale DA, Koonin EV: The COG database: a tool
for genome-scale analysis of protein functions and evolution. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000, 28:33-36.
112. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
113. Beckstette M, Homann R, Giegerich R, Kurtz S: Fast index based algorithms
and software for matching position specific scoring matrices. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:389.
114. Baumbach J, Wittkop T, Kleindt CK, Tauch A: Integrated analysis and
reconstruction of microbial transcriptional gene regulatory networks
using CoryneRegNet. Nat Protoc 2009, 4:992-1005.
115. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14:1188-1190.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-728
Cite this article as: Trost et al.: The complete genome sequence of
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis FRC41 isolated from a 12-year-old
girl with necrotizing lymphadenitis reveals insights into gene-regulatory
networks contributing to virulence. BMC Genomics 2010 11:728.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
