<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>How 5000 independent rowers coordinate their strokes in order to row into the sunlight: Phototaxis in the multicellular green alga Volvox</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010 8:103. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-103"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Noriko Ueki"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

How 5000 independent rowers coordinate their
strokes in order to row into the sunlight:
Phototaxis in the multicellular green alga Volvox
Noriko Ueki1,2, Shigeru Matsunaga2,3, Isao Inouye2, Armin Hallmann1*

Abstract
Background: The evolution of multicellular motile organisms from unicellular ancestors required the utilization of
previously evolved tactic behavior in a multicellular context. Volvocine green algae are uniquely suited for studying
tactic responses during the transition to multicellularity because they range in complexity from unicellular to
multicellular genera. Phototactic responses are essential for these flagellates because they need to orientate
themselves to receive sufficient light for photosynthesis, but how does a multicellular organism accomplish
phototaxis without any known direct communication among cells? Several aspects of the photoresponse have
previously been analyzed in volvocine algae, particularly in the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas.
Results: In this study, the phototactic behavior in the spheroidal, multicellular volvocine green alga Volvox
rousseletii (Volvocales, Chlorophyta) was analyzed. In response to light stimuli, not only did the flagella waveform
and beat frequency change, but the effective stroke was reversed. Moreover, there was a photoresponse gradient
from the anterior to the posterior pole of the spheroid, and only cells of the anterior hemisphere showed an
effective response. The latter caused a reverse of the fluid flow that was confined to the anterior hemisphere. The
responsiveness to light is consistent with an anterior-to-posterior size gradient of eyespots. At the posterior pole,
the eyespots are tiny or absent, making the corresponding cells appear to be blind. Pulsed light stimulation of an
immobilized spheroid was used to simulate the light fluctuation experienced by a rotating spheroid during
phototaxis. The results demonstrated that in free-swimming spheroids, only those cells of the anterior hemisphere
that face toward the light source reverse the beating direction in the presence of illumination; this behavior results
in phototactic turning. Moreover, positive phototaxis is facilitated by gravitational forces. Under our conditions, V.
rousseletii spheroids showed no negative phototaxis.
Conclusions: On the basis of our results, we developed a mechanistic model that predicts the phototactic
behavior in V. rousseletii. The model involves photoresponses, periodically changing light conditions, morphological
polarity, rotation of the spheroid, two modes of flagellar beating, and the impact of gravity. Our results also
indicate how recently evolved multicellular organisms adapted the phototactic capabilities of their unicellular
ancestors to multicellular life.

Background
The ability of motile organisms to sense changes in
external parameters is crucial in finding the best environmental conditions. These tactic responses were
already developed in early single-celled life. When multicellular motile organisms evolved from unicellular life,
previous achievements like tactic behavior had to be
* Correspondence: armin.hallmann@gmx.de
1
Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology of Plants, University of
Bielefeld, Universitätsstr. 25, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany

modified to fulfill the requirements of multicellularity
[1-4]. The volvocine green algae, a group of species closely related to the “genus” Volvox within the order Volvocales (Chlorophyta), represent an excellent set of
organisms for analyzing (photo)tactic responses during
evolution of multicellularity [4-6]. This group of algae
spans the full range of complexity from unicellular genera, such as Chlamydomonas, to colonial genera, such as
Eudorina, to multicellular genera, such as Volvox [5].

© 2010 Ueki et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Phylogenetic analyses indicate that multicellularity
evolved much more recently in volvocine green algae
than in any other group [7]. Phylogenetic analyses of the
order Volvocales also revealed a polyphyletic origin of
the “genus” Volvox [5,8-13]. A few species of this genus,
including Volvox rousseletii, form a small but robust
monophyletic group, which is called the section Volvox
[10,12,14-16]. All other species of the genus Volvox
(with the exclusion of the section Volvox) and the genera Eudorina and Pleodorina constitute another, much
larger monophyletic group, the Eudorina group [16,17]
(see Additional File 1 for details).
All volvocine algae are flagellates that are dependent
on phototactic behavior because they require sufficient
light for photosynthesis and therefore need to orientate
themselves in an efficient manner (for review, see [18]).
For this, each (somatic) cell of each volvocine alga has
two flagella for locomotion and an eyespot apparatus for
light perception. The photoreceptors involved in the
photoresponse have been identified both in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii [19-22] and Volvox carteri [23,24].
These photoreceptors are integral parts of a primordial
visual system, forming, with the pigmented eyespot, a
functional eye, which seems to share the same ultrastructure and physiology in both the unicellular Chlamydomonas and the multicellular Volvox [5,25-28].
In fact, the somatic cells of Volvox and its relatives are
called “Chlamydomonas-like” in countless publications
particularly due to the similarity of their eyes (and due
to the presence of two flagella). Volvox, however, is
much more than a multicellular version of Chlamydomonas. To allow for effective forward swimming and
phototaxis, multicellular organization created two major
requirements: (1) the appropriate arrangement and
orientation of the biflagellated cells and (2) the coordination of cell behaviors.
Initially, a spherically symmetric arrangement and
orientation of identical biflagellated cells might appear
to be an ideal configuration for a multicellular organism.
A hypothetical 5000-celled, spheroidal Chlamydomonas,
however, would not be able to display any effective
motility, not to mention phototaxis [29]. Forward swimming would be impossible because each cell in such a
spherical surface monolayer would have a counterpart
on the opposite side of the spheroid with flagella pointing in the opposite direction, and therefore the flagellar
forces generated by opposing cells would neutralize each
other. Because Volvox is actually a spheroidal organism,
questions arise as to how it actually swims forward and
what is different from the swimming motion of Chlamydomonas. Although Chlamydomonas and Volvox swim
forward and rotate simultaneously, they have to do it in
a very different manner owing to their different geometries and complexities. Chlamydomonas swims toward

Page 2 of 21

the cellular anterior with a breaststroke-like motion and
rotates counterclockwise (as viewed from behind the
cell) about the cellular anterior-posterior axis [30-35]. It
switches between nearly straight-ahead swimming with
synchronous beating and abrupt large reorientations
with asynchronous flagellar beating, which has been
described as a eukaryotic version of the “run-andtumble” motion of peritrichously flagellated bacteria
[36]. Because the Chlamydomonas cell rolls around its
longitudinal cell axis during helical forward swimming,
its eye receives a sinusoidally modulated light signal. In
addition to phototaxis, Chlamydomonas also shows
photophobic responses [34,35,37,38]. The photophobic
response is caused by a switch in the flagellar waveform,
whereas phototaxis is caused by changing the balance of
beating between the two flagella [39-41].
In the spheroidal colonial and multicellular volvocine
species, the cellular anterior-posterior axis is different
from the anterior-posterior axis of the whole organism.
The effective strokes of both flagella beat in the same or
almost the same direction toward the posterior pole of
the spheroid, and they beat in parallel planes pushing
the spheroid in the posterior-anterior direction [42-44].
This type of beating is indispensable for the effective
forward swimming of spheroidal colonial and multicellular flagellates; it evolved together with the transition
from unicellularity to multicellularity and is caused by
the rotation of the basal bodies that underlie the flagella
and determine their orientations [6,8,42,45]. The net
effective propulsion generated by the effective strokes is
not directed exactly parallel to the posterior-anterior
axis of the spheroid and therefore results in rotation
during forward swimming [29,44,46]; this characteristic
forward rolling motion is also reflected in the name of
the Volvox genus (Latin for “fierce roller”) [47]. The
arrangement, orientation, and beating direction of the
biflagellated cells, however, explain only the reason that
Volvox can swim forward but not its phototactic
behavior.
For more than 100 years, scientists have studied the
swimming behavior and phototaxis in multicellular (and
colonial) volvocine algae (e.g., [29,46,48-61]). A key
question in these studies on the phototactic behavior in
multicellular volvocine algae was always how the coordination among their cells works. A cell-to-cell communication network among somatic cells that serves as the
basis for the coordination of phototactic behavior seems
to be rather obvious. Indeed, several species of the
genus Volvox possess a network of cytoplasmic bridges
even at the adult stage, which could allow for signal
transduction between cells. However, amazingly, the
multicellular volvocine algae are able to accomplish
phototactic swimming without any known direct communication among cells [49,62,63]. This lack of

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

communication becomes clear in species of the genus
Volvox that lack any intercellular connections in adults
(e.g., V. carteri); these species are well coordinated and
swim toward the light, just as those with connections
do. Likewise, individuals from species with cytoplasmic
connections (e.g., V. globator) that had their connections
microsurgically disrupted still showed phototactic behavior [49,62,63]. These observations bring up the question: How does the coordination of phototactic behavior
work without direct communication among cells?
A change in the swimming direction in colonial and
multicellular volvocine algae results from changes in the
flagellar activity of cells in different portions of
the spheroid. For V. aureus and V. carteri (both from
the Eudorina group), fluid streamlines at the anterior
pole were shown to stop transiently upon illumination,
suggesting that cells at the anterior pole are responsible
for the photoresponses [53-55,64]. Earlier, Fritsch [65]
reported that cells at the anterior pole of the spheroid
have larger eyespots than those at the posterior pole,
which supported the idea of more sensitive eyes at the
anterior pole [29,55]. Sakaguchi and colleagues [54,55]
concluded that minor changes in the behavior of cells at
the anterior pole (of V. carteri and V. aureus) that come
into or out of an illumination beam path during the
spheroid’s swimming with rotation cause both positive
and negative phototaxis.
Previously, two competing models for positive phototactic steering in Volvox had been proposed. In the “variable beat frequency model” [48,52-55] the cells at the
anterior pole reduce their beat frequency as the light
intensity changes as cells rotate from the shaded side to
the one in the light. In addition, they increase their beat
frequency as they rotate from the illuminated side to the
one in the dark. In the “variable beat direction model”
[46], the cells change their flagellar beat direction when
the cells rotate from the shaded side to the one in the
light and also when they rotate from the illuminated side
to the one in the dark. On the dark side, the flagella beat
along the anterior-posterior axis toward the posterior
pole of the spheroid, whereas on the illuminated side, the
flagella beat laterally. Hoops et al. [57] tested both models in V. carteri, and their results supported the variable
beat frequency model while being inconsistent with the
variable beat direction model for phototactic turning.
A recent mathematical theory and measurements in V.
carteri suggest that colony rotation and photoresponsive
kinetics have evolved to be mutually tuned and optimized for phototaxis [61].
In the present study, the phototactic behavior in the
spheroidal, multicellular volvocine green alga V. rousseletii (section Volvox), one of the fastest swimmers
among all volvocine green algae, was analyzed to
address the question of how a multicellular organism

Page 3 of 21

accomplishes phototactic swimming without any known
direct communication among cells. To our knowledge,
this is the first detailed description of phototactic behavior in a species within the section Volvox.
In response to light stimuli, not only was the beat frequency in cells on the anterior hemisphere changed, but
also the beat direction was reversed. Moreover, the flagella waveform changed when the cells reversed the
beat direction in response to changes in light intensity.
The pulsed illumination of somatic cells at the anterior
pole demonstrated that V. rousseletii quickly responds
to changing light conditions with a reversal of the beating direction. We show that positive phototaxis is
assisted by gravitational forces and that there is no
negative phototaxis in V. rousseletii (under our experimental conditions). Finally, we present a model for positive phototactic steering in Volvox rousseletii that is
consistent with both our results and those of previously
published studies.

Results
Phylogenetic analysis of Volvox rousseletii strain MI01

The wild-type Volvox rousseletii strain MI01 was isolated in 1998 from the Machi-ike pond in Oh-gata, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki, Japan. A phylogenetic analysis of this
strain was made to confirm its identity, place it accurately within the phylogenetic tree, and confirm that it
belongs to the section Volvox. The analysis was based
on cDNA fragments of chloroplast genes (psaA, psaB
and rbcL) and an internal transcribed spacer sequence
(ITS2) from 47 volvocine species [11,16,17,66-70]. The
background and procedures of the phylogenetic analysis
are described in Additional File 2. Detailed information
for the cDNA sequences (e.g., source species and/or
strains, abbreviations, accession numbers and references)
is described in Additional File 3. The alignments that
were performed are shown in Additional Files 4, 5 and
6, and the sequence identity calculations are described
in Additional Files 7, 8, 9 and 10. A consensus tree
based on 30,000 resampled data sets for the psaA, psaB
and rbcL cDNA fragments (10,000 data sets from each)
is shown in Additional File 1, together with some phylogenetic commentary. The phylogenetic tree indicates
polyphyly of the genus Volvox, which is consistent with
several previous studies [10,12,16,17]. The species V.
barberi, V. globator and V. rousseletii appear on the
same branch, which corresponds to the monophyletic
section Volvox [5,14,16,17]. The species used in this
study, Volvox rousseletii strain MI01, appears next to
the Volvox rousseletii UTEX 1862 strain.
Polarity of the V. rousseletii spheroid

An adult V. rousseletii alga consists of a spherical surface monolayer of ~5000 small biflagellate, terminally

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

differentiated somatic cells and 1-20 asexual reproductive cells (the number greatly depends on environmental
conditions). The cells are regularly positioned in a transparent spheroid of a glycoprotein-rich extracellular
matrix, and this spheroid displays a distinctive morphological polarity along its anterior-posterior axis. The
whole organism view shows that the spheroid is somewhat more enlarged along the anterior-posterior axis
than along the equatorial axis (Figure 1c). In embryogenesis, mature asexual reproductive cells, which are
located in the posterior hemisphere, undergo embryonic
cleavage divisions, with the characteristic cleavage pattern of the embryo establishing the polarity of the
organism. The fully cleaved embryo is inside out and
must turn right side out in a gastrulation-like process
called inversion [5]. Next, the juvenile spheroids within
the adult increase in size by depositing large quantities
of extracellular matrix and finally hatch from their parent. The juvenile spheroids are always located within the

Page 4 of 21

posterior hemisphere due to the position of the original
reproductive cells (Figure 1c). The juvenile spheroids
cause the posterior hemisphere to be denser than the
anterior hemisphere [71,72], with a likely contribution
by the closer spacing of somatic cells on the posterior
hemisphere (see next paragraph). This anisotropic mass
distribution ensures that the spheroids always sink with
their posterior pole first.
Only volvocine algae in the section Volvox, to which
V. rousseletii belongs, retain robust cytoplasmic bridges
even in the adult [5,14]. An extensive network of these
characteristic cytoplasmic bridges makes the somatic
cells appear stellate when viewed from their flagellar
ends (Figs. 1a, 1 to 4, and 1b, 1 to 4) and bell-shaped
when viewed from the side (shown schematically in
Figs. 2i to 2l). The somatic cells at the anterior pole are
larger than those at the posterior pole, and the cell-tocell distances at the anterior pole are also larger (Figure
1, a1 and 1, b1). Owing to the transparent extracellular

Figure 1 Organismal polarity of V. rousseletii. (a)1 Closeup view of somatic cells at the anterior pole (see frame in Figure 1c). (a)2-(a)4
Individual somatic cells from the anterior pole at high magnification. (b)1, Closeup view of somatic cells at the posterior pole (see frame in
Figure 1c). (b)2-(b)4 Individual somatic cells from the posterior pole at high magnification. (c) The swimming direction of V. rousseletii along its
posterior-anterior axis is indicated by a white arrow. The progeny are within the posterior hemisphere. The polar diameter of the spheroid is
always greater than the equatorial diameter. The frames indicate the areas shown in (a)1 and (b)1. (d) The diameter of the eyespots was plotted
against the linear distances between the respective somatic cells and the anterior pole (n = 24). (e) Size of the eyespot surface area at the
anterior and posterior poles (n = 15). (f) Size of the protoplast surface area at the anterior and posterior poles (n = 60). (g) Distance between
protoplasts at the anterior and posterior poles (n = 250). (e)-(g) Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the y-value. (d)-(g) The sizes and
distances were calculated from the photomicrographs.

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Page 5 of 21

matrix, the outer edge of each somatic cell is indistinct;
therefore, we measured the protoplast surface areas and
distances between protoplasts. When compared with
the posterior pole, the protoplast surface areas and the
distances between protoplasts at the anterior pole were
1.8-fold larger (Figure 1f) and 2.3-fold longer (Figure
1g), respectively. The decrease in cell distances along
the anterior-posterior axis also becomes apparent in the
view of the whole spheroid (Figure 1c), and as mentioned above, this closer spacing of somatic cells on the
posterior hemisphere might contribute to the higher
density of the posterior hemisphere. The somatic cells
at the anterior pole have large eyespots (~3.6-μm diameter) that face toward the posterior pole (Figure 1a, 1
to 4). The diameter of the eyespots decreased continuously along the anterior-posterior axis (Figure 1d). Cells
at the posterior pole have either a tiny or an undetectable eyespot. Those eyespots that are present do not
face in the same direction (Figure 1b, 1 to 4). A comparison of the eyespot surface areas of cells at the anterior pole with those at the posterior pole highlights
these differences in eyespot size; the surface areas at the
anterior pole are ~80-fold larger than those at the posterior pole (Figure 1e), indicating that the cells at the
anterior pole possess the highest light sensitivity and
that the sensitivity decreases continuously along the
anterior-posterior axis toward the posterior pole. The
cells at the posterior pole are light-insensitive and
essentially blind.

Figure 2 Flagellar strokes and flagellar waveforms of the
normal and reverse beating mode. The flagellar activity of
somatic cells before and after light stimulation. Light gray arrows
indicate the direction of the effective flagellar strokes. (a) Time scale.
(b) and (c) Dark-field images of somatic cells close to the anterior
pole (see Figure 2d). Both images show the same cells (exposure
time, 0.004 s). (b) The flagellar activity before the light was turned
on (normal beating mode). (c) The flagellar activity immediately (1.0
s) after the light was turned on (light intensity: 20.8 μmol m-2 s-1).
The flagella showed the reverse beating mode. (d) The frame
indicates the analyzed area relative to the spheroid, and the black
arrow indicates the spheroid’s inherent moving direction. (e) and (f)
Stylized representation of the recorded flagellar strokes of somatic
cells before and immediately (1.0 s) after light stimulation. (g) and
(h) Frames from high-speed captured microvideographs of the
same somatic cell. The viewing angle is almost perpendicular to the
bending plane of the flagella. (g) Normal beating mode (before
light stimulation). (h) Reverse beating mode immediately (0.1 s)
after light stimulation. (i) and (j) Superimposed flagellar waveforms
derived from successive stop-motion, high-speed video frames of
the cell shown in (g) and (h) that show complete stroke. Only one
flagellum is shown. (i) Normal beating mode. (j) Reverse beating
mode. (k) and (l) Superimposed flagellar waveforms of both flagella
of a somatic cell in normal beating mode. To allow for the
simultaneous tracing of both flagella, the viewing angle is almost
parallel to the bending plane of the flagella. The interval between
the flagellar traces in (k) and (l) is only 0.13 s.

Efficiency of phototactic movements as a function of light
intensity

The phototactic movements of the V. rousseletii spheroids were analyzed in vertical (setup A, Figure 3a) and
horizontal directions (setup B, Figure 3b) under continuous unidirectional illumination with a broad range of
intensities spanning approximately eight orders of magnitude (Figure 3c). For the calculation of the photoaccumulation index (PI), the observation chamber was
divided into six (setup A) or three (setup B) areas, with
area 1 closest to the light source.
An example of the calculation of the PI for all areas at
0.16 μmol m -2 s -1 in setup A is shown in Figure 3d.
When the light is on, the PI for area 1 remains relatively
constant for ~5 s and then increases continuously. The
initial delay is caused by a reduction in swimming speed
after the dark-light switch (see below sections “Swimming speed after a dark-light switch as a function of
light intensity” and “Swimming speed after light stimulation as a function of the swimming direction”). The PI
for area 1 reaches its maximum after ~25 s, whereas the
PI of the other areas decreases in return. The PI for
area 2 increased temporarily because the spheroids have
to cross this area to reach area 1. In Figures 3e to 3h,

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Page 6 of 21

Figure 3 Quantification of the phototactic movements depending on the applied light intensity. (a) and (b) The viewing direction, the
direction of the light vector and the direction of the gravity vector is indicated. (a) In the vertical setup A, the direction of the light vector is
identical to the direction of the gravity vector. The observation chamber was divided into six areas with area 1 being closest to the light source.
(b) In the horizontal setup B, the direction of the light vector is perpendicular to the direction of the gravity vector. The observation chamber
was divided into three areas with area 1 being closest to the light source. (c) Schematic representation of the light intensities used in setups A
and B. (d)-(h) Phototactic movements were quantified by calculating the photoaccumulation index (PI). The higher the PI value, the stronger the
photoaccumulation. (d) The PI was calculated separately for each area (setup A) and was plotted against the time after the light was turned on
(light intensity: 0.16 μmol m-2 s-1). (e) The PI for area 1 in setup A was plotted against the time after the light was turned on using eight
different light intensities. (f) The PI for area 1 in setup A was plotted against the different light intensities. Seven different times were analyzed
separately at intervals of 5 s. (g) The PI for area 1 in setup B was plotted against the time after the light was turned on using 17 light intensities.
(h) The PI for area 1 in setup B was plotted against the different light intensities. Three different times were analyzed separately at intervals of 10
s. (d)-(h) The color assignment is indicated. Error bars refer to the standard deviation of the y-value (n = 3).

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

only the results for area 1 are shown because they sufficiently describe the photoaccumulation.
In the vertical setup A, light intensities of 0.016 μmol
m-2 s-1 or above resulted in the same phototactic behavior
as described above (Figure 3e and 3f). Remarkably, high
light intensities of up to 457 μmol m -2 s-1 also yielded
strong positive phototaxis, with the spheroids accumulating in area 1 within ~25 s. Even very low light intensities
(0.00016 μmol m-2 s-1) resulted in a small increase of the
PI. The photoaccumulation in the horizontal setup B (Figure 3g and 3h) was essentially the same as in the vertical
setup. In contrast, very low light intensities (i.e., 0.0016
μmol m-2 s-1 or below) had no significant effect. The lower
sensitivity at low light intensities in setup B compared with
setup A seemed to be caused by the facilitating effects of
gravity on phototaxis (see sections “Swimming speed after
light stimulation as a function of the swimming direction”
and “Gravity facilitates positive phototaxis” in the Discussion), which might not be observed in setup B due to the
dimensions of the observation chamber combined with
the direction of the light vector. At light intensities
between 0.005 and 0.16 μmol m-2 s-1, the PIs at 10, 20, or
30 s after the light is switched on increase with increasing
light intensity (Figure 3h), such that the higher the intensity, the earlier the spheroids reach the light source. There
is no further increase in PI at intensities above 0.16 μmol
m -2 s -1 (Figure 3h). As in setup A, even the high light
intensities (up to 520 μmol m-2 s-1) produce a strong positive phototaxis. These results indicate that there is no
negative phototaxis in V. rousseletii (under the conditions
of this study).
Efficiency of phototactic movements after a longer dark
period

To determine whether the length of the dark period
before the light stimulus influences the phototactic
movements, light-adapted spheroids were kept in the
dark for 0 to 90 min and subsequently subjected to a
photoaccumulation assay (Table 1). These results
demonstrated that longer dark periods reduced the efficiency of the phototactic movements, decreasing continuously from 100% to ~65% within an hour in the
dark. Periods of darkness longer than 1 hour, however,
did not result in any further decrease of significance.
Swimming speed after a dark-light switch as a function of
light intensity

To determine the swimming speed of individual spheroids
after a dark-light switch, the tracks of the spheroids were
recorded as shown in Figure 4a. The speed of individual
spheroids was determined at 1-s intervals from 1 s before
to 4 s after the dark-light switch. Eight different light
intensities, spanning approximately eight orders of magnitude, were analyzed separately, and the relative swimming

Page 7 of 21

Table 1 Reduced efficiency of the phototactic movements
after a longer dark period
Period of Darkness Before Illumination Spheroids in Area 1* SD
(min)
(%)
(%)
0

100

2.5

0-10

97.3

3.1

10-20

86.5

8.7

20-30
30-40

87.7
84.5

3.3
1.3

40-50

81.5

4.1

50-60

67.2

11.7

60-70

65.2

6.1

70-80

63.8

11.1

80-90

61.9

13.6

*The duration of the photoaccumulation assay was 30 s (n = 3 for each time
period). The number of light-adapted spheroids accumulated in area 1 (setup
B, Figure 3b) was set to 100%. These light-adapted spheroids correspond to 0
min in the dark. The light intensity during both the light adaptation and the
photoaccumulation assay was 2.08 μmol m-2 s-1.

speed of the spheroids was plotted against the time after
the light was turned on (Figure 4b). A dark-light switch
using low light intensities (i.e., between 0.00016 and 0.016
μmol m-2 s-1) caused a speed reduction to ~70% relative to
the swimming speed immediately before light stimulation.
Higher light intensities (i.e., between 0.16 and 457 μmol
m-2 s-1) caused a speed reduction to 35% to 45% (Figure
4b). These speed reductions occurred within 1 s of the
onset of illumination, and the former speed before the
onset of darkness was recovered in ~3 to 4 s. This temporary speed reduction reflects a brief photophobic response
of the organism. Overall, the results with all intensities
indicate that the higher the light intensity, the stronger the
speed reduction.
The absolute swimming speed of recently hatched
spheroids in the dark (setup A, Figure 3a) was determined to be ~880 μm s-1 (SD 270 μm s-1, n = 50) in an
upward direction and 1060 μm s-1 (SD 440 μm s-1, n =
50) in a horizontal direction. In contrast, Solari and
coworkers [73,74] reported an upward swimming speed
of ~500 μm s-1 (up to ~590 μm s-1) for V. rousseletii.
These differences may be due to different culture conditions and a different experimental setup, particularly
with respect to the dimensions of the observation chamber. In our experiments, the spheroids were only able to
swim along the x- and y-axes but not the z-axis, which
extended only 0.1 cm. Solari et al. used a chamber that
extended 1 cm along the z-axis, allowing movements
along this axis that may account for the lower values for
the upward swimming speed (y-axis).
Swimming speed after light stimulation as a function of
the swimming direction

To investigate the swimming speed of individual spheroids after a dark-light switch relative to the swimming

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Page 8 of 21

Figure 4 Swimming speed of V. rousseletii spheroids after a dark-light switch, depending on the light intensity. (a) An example of the
tracks of the spheroids in the observation chamber (vertical setup A, Figure 3a). The position of each spheroid was recorded every 0.1 s starting
at 1 s before the dark-light switch. The color of the position marks changed every second as indicated. The yellow arrows indicate the light
source (unidirectional illumination). (b) The relative swimming speed of spheroids was plotted against the time after the light was turned on
(vertical setup A, Figure 3a). The swimming speed immediately before light stimulation was set to 100%. A total of eight different light intensities
were analyzed separately, and the color assignment is indicated. In addition, the average values for all intensities are given (bold red line). Error
bars refer to the standard deviation of the y-value (n = 20).

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

direction just before the light (2.1 μmol m -2 s -1 ) was
turned on, setup A (Figure 3a) was used, and the spheroids were tracked as described above (Figure 4a). In
each track, a line between the spheroid’s position 1 s
before the dark-light switch and its position right at the
dark-light switch was drawn. The angle between each of
these lines and the direction of the light vector was
determined, and the angles were assigned to sectors a-i
(see legend in Figure 5a). The speed of each spheroid
was determined at 1-s intervals from 1 s before to 4 s
after the onset of illumination. For each swimming
direction in the dark (a-i), the relative swimming speed
of the spheroids was plotted against the time after the
onset of illumination (Figure 5a). The dark-light switch
caused a speed reduction, regardless of the directions in
which the spheroids were swimming immediately before
the dark-light switch. This result is even true for direction a, in which the spheroids had already swum to the
light source by chance as the light was turned on. There
were, however, sector-dependent differences in speed
reduction. For sectors a-c, speed was reduced to ~30%
to 45% compared with the swimming speed immediately
before light stimulation, and for sectors d to i, it was
reduced to ~50% to 60% (Figure 5a). These sectordependent differences become even clearer when the
absolute swimming speeds are represented in a sectorwise manner (Figure 5b). There is already a sector
dependency of the absolute swimming speed before the
onset of illumination (0 s, Figure 5b), indicating that
spheroids swim ~1.5 times faster to the bottom than to
the top. This sector-dependency remained when the
light was switched on, and the absolute speed was
promptly reduced (1 s, Figure 5b). Interestingly, the sector dependency persists when the spheroids accelerate
to their previous speed (2-4 s, Figure 5b). Consequently,
the deceleration and acceleration of spheroids after a
dark-light switch is independent from the swimming
direction relative to the light source immediately before
the onset of illumination, but it is influenced by gravitational force.
The analysis of the course of the tracks also made the
impact of gravity apparent. Tracks from vertical setup A
(Figure 3a) showed that the immediate speed reduction
after the dark-light switch was accompanied by a change
in the moving direction toward the bottom (Figure 5c).
This sinking takes ~2 s, and the spheroids drop by
~0.45 mm (SD 0.15 mm, n = 20) before they accelerate
and swim to the light source. This temporary sinking is
indicative of the brief photophobic response of the
organism after the dark-light switch. Tracks from horizontal setup B (Figure 3b) also show an immediate
speed reduction after the dark-light switch with subsequent acceleration as the spheroids swim to the light
source (Figure 5d). Owing to the dimensions of the

Page 9 of 21

observation chamber (0.1 cm in the vertical direction)
and the viewing direction (antiparallel to the gravitational force), the sinking characteristic is not seen in the
horizontal setup B (Figure 5d).
Fluid streamlines before and after a dark-light switch

Visualization of fluid streamlines in a suspension of
polystyrene beads [53] allowed the analysis of flagellar
activity of V. rousseletii spheroids before and after a
dark-light switch (Figure 6). In the dark, organisms that
were gently trapped between a cover glass and a glass
slide produced fluid streamlines in the anterior-posterior
direction along the surface of the spheroid (Figures 6a
and 6d). These streams resulted in forward swimming
along the posterior-anterior axis in free-swimming
spheroids. Exposure of the spheroids to illumination (2.1
μmol m-2 s-1) caused a transient stop of the streams in
front of the spheroid and a reversal of the fluid streamlines along the anterior hemisphere. In contrast, the
fluid streamlines along the posterior hemisphere showed
no significant change (Figure 6b). The particle velocities
along the anterior hemisphere were lower in the
reversed direction (Figure 6e) than in the anteriorposterior direction in the dark (Figure 6d). The reversal
of the fluid streamlines indicates a reversed beating
direction of flagella because the streamline pattern cannot be explained by a simple stop of flagellar beating as
has been observed in V. carteri [54,55]. The reversal of
the fluid streamlines lasts for 2 to 3 seconds immediately after the dark-light switch. The initial anterior-posterior fluid streamlines are then reestablished.
These results are consistent with the speed reduction
and sinking of the spheroids after a dark-light switch
described above and support the existence of a photoresponsive gradient from the anterior to the posterior pole
of the spheroid, with the highest responses at the anterior and no response at the posterior.
Flagellar strokes and flagellar waveforms before and after
light stimulation

Direct observation of flagellar activity by dark-field
microscopy allowed an analysis of the cellular basis of
the reversal of the fluid streamlines (Figures 2a-f). The
flagellar activity was recorded 1 s before and 1 s after
light stimulation with an exposure time of 0.004 s (Figure 2a). In the dark, the flagella of all somatic cells beat
with a ciliary-type, asymmetrical motion, which we refer
to as the normal beating mode (Figures 2b and 2e). This
mode consists of an effective stroke in the anteriorposterior direction and a recovery stroke in the opposite
direction. After the light stimulus, the cells within the
anterior hemisphere completely reverse the flagellar
beating direction, which we refer to as the reverse beating mode (Figures 2c and 2f). Though the effective

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Page 10 of 21

Figure 5 Swimming speed after a dark-light switch, depending on the swimming direction. (a) The relative swimming speed of the
spheroids was plotted against the time after the light was turned on (vertical setup A). The swimming speed immediately before light
stimulation was set to 100%. The swimming direction relative to the light source immediately before light stimulation was recorded and
assigned to different sectors (a-i), and the color assignment is indicated. Each sector was analyzed separately. In addition, the average values for
all directions are given (bold red line). Error bars refer to the standard deviation of the y-value (n = 20). (b) The swimming direction relative to
the light source immediately before light stimulation was recorded and assigned to different sectors (gray arrows, a-i). The absolute swimming
speed of the spheroids is shown for 0-4 s after the light was turned on (vertical setup A). All swimming speeds were plotted against the
swimming direction immediately before light stimulation. The color assignment, the direction of the light vector, and the direction of the gravity
vector are indicated. Reading from the inside outward, the gray concentric circles indicate 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.4, and 1.6 mm s-1. (c) and
(d) The typical tracks of spheroids after a dark-light switch. The tracks were aligned relative to the moment of the dark-light switch (vertical
lines), and the indicated color assignment reflects the time before and after the dark-light switch. (c) Tracks from vertical setup A, with the
sinking depth of spheroids right after the dark-light switch indicated (in mm). (d) Tracks from horizontal setup B. (a)-(d) The yellow arrows
indicate the light source. The light intensity was 2.1 μmol m-2 s-1 (intensities up to 457 μmol m-2 s-1 produced the same results).

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Page 11 of 21

Figure 6 Fluid streamlines around a V. rousseletii spheroid before and after light stimulation. The fluid streamlines using polystyrene
beads were visualized and taken with long exposure times. (a) An exposure time of 0.3 s at 1 to 0.7 s before the light was turned on. (b) An
exposure time of 0.3 s at 1 to 1.3 s after the light was turned on. (c) Time scale. (d) Closeup of a region near the anterior pole (see blue frame
in a). An exposure time of 1.4 s at 1.4 to 0 s before the light was turned on. (e) Closeup of a region near the anterior pole (see blue frame in b).
An exposure time of 1.4 s at 0 to 1.4 s after the light was turned on. Red arrows highlight the main streamlines, and green arrows in (a) and (b)
indicate the inherent moving direction of the spheroid along the posterior-anterior axis. Light stimulation was performed with green light (2.1
μmol m-2 s-1). The infrared light used for dark-field micrography was inactive for phototaxis. (a), (b), (d) and (e) show the same spheroid.

stroke is then in the posterior to anterior direction, the
cells still beat with a ciliary-type motion. The reverse
beating mode of cells on the anterior hemisphere lasts
for 2 to 3 seconds, after which the cells switch back to
the normal beating mode with the flagellar strokes and
waveforms before light stimulation are completely identical to those 2 to 3 seconds after light stimulation. This
result is consistent with the observed fluid streamlines
after a dark-light switch as described above. The

temporary reversal of the beating direction reflects a
brief photophobic response at the cellular level.
High-speed microvideography was used to examine
the flagellar strokes and waveforms of individual somatic
cells more closely. Frames from the captured high-speed
videos of a somatic cell on the anterior hemisphere
show the normal beating mode (in the dark; Figure 2g)
and the reverse beating mode (0.1 s after light stimulation; Figure 2h). The superimposed flagellar waveforms

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

show the complete stroke cycles of one flagellum in the
normal (Figure 2i) and the reverse (Figure 2j) beating
modes. The reverse beating mode is only transient, with
the somatic cells returning to their normal beating
mode after adaptation to the light, which occurs after
approximately 2 to 3 seconds. Cells in the normal beating mode show a typical base-to-tip, ciliary-type motion.
The stroke area has a wide spread, and the tip of the flagellum describes a relatively wide arc during its effective
stroke (Figure 2i). One stroke takes ~45 ms (frequency
22 Hz [SD 6 Hz, n = 15]) in the normal beating mode.
In the reverse beating mode, one stroke takes ~25 ms
(frequency 40 Hz [SD 9 Hz, n = 15]), and the cells also
show a ciliary-type motion. There is, however, less
bending close to the base of the flagellum and a much
smaller stroke area, such that the tip of the flagellum
describes only a small arc during its effective stroke
(Figure 2j).
The description of flagellar waveforms requires that
the angle of view be essentially perpendicular to the
bending plane of the flagella. From this angle of view,
only the beat of one flagellum, the one closest to the
observer’s eye, can be described properly. To observe
both flagella of a cell at the same time, the angle of view
was changed so that it was almost parallel to the bending plane of the flagella (Figures 2k and 2l). The beating
direction of the two flagella of a somatic cell is roughly
parallel, and the effective strokes are generally directed
toward the posterior pole. There is no evidence for any
spatial or temporal coordination between the two flagellar beat cycles of a somatic cell, which is indicative of
the asymmetrical, ciliary-type beating or between the
beat cycles of the neighboring somatic cells. An example
of the strokes of a single somatic cell in the normal
beating mode is shown in Figures 2k and 2l. The strokes
of the two flagella shown in Figure 2l were recorded
only 0.13 s after the strokes in Figure 2k without any
changes in light or other conditions. A comparison of
these strokes not only illustrates the asynchronous and
asymmetrical beating of the flagella but also documents
the three-dimensional component of the strokes. Beat
cycles that were somewhat out of the normal bending
plane were repeatedly observed, which may be a matter
of slightly variable fluid resistance due to microturbulences caused by flagella from other cells.
Simulation of phototactic swimming with a periodically
changing light intensity due to the rotation of the
spheroid

A Volvox rousseletii spheroid always swims along its
posterior-anterior axis while rotating about its posterioranterior axis in a counterclockwise direction (as viewed
from behind the spheroid). Spheroids make one complete counterclockwise rotation approximately every 1 to

Page 12 of 21

3 seconds (Figure 7a), with smaller (younger) spheroids
rotating faster than larger (older) spheroids. The eyespots of somatic cells are highly directional optical
devices that guide the organism to places where the
light conditions are optimal for photosynthetic growth.
The light signals change periodically during phototactic
swimming due to the rotation of the spheroid and the
directivity of the eyespot with its layers of carotenoidfilled granules below the photoreceptors in the plasma
membrane [28] (Figure 7c). The periodically changing
light signals of a rotating spheroid during phototaxis
were simulated using a rotating filter system (Figure 7b),
and fluid streamlines from three regions at the anterior
pole were analyzed (Figure 7a). The construction of the
rotating filter system was based on previous results on
the directivity of photoreception in the unicellular alga
Chlamydomonas [75] (Figures 7d and 7e), which corresponds to the situation in somatic cells on the anterior
hemisphere of a Volvox spheroid (Figure 7d, blue line)
as viewed from the flagellar end of the cells (Figure 7d,
inset). The filter combinations and cutting of the filters
were calculated to match the plot of the tangential electric energy density [75] at the plasma membrane overlaying the carotenoid-filled granules of the eyespot
(Figure 7e), and the rotating filter system was constructed using the parameters given in Figure 7b. Our
simulation of a spheroid swimming with rotation
matches the in vivo situation in somatic cells very well
(Figure 7d, red line). Spheroids were gently trapped
between a coverglass and a glass slide, and fluid streamlines were visualized using polystyrene beads. After a
dark-light switch, the light intensity was changed periodically (1.2-s intervals) with peaks in the intensity. The
relative length of the tracks of polystyrene beads
decreased sharply within ~300 ms after the dark-light
switch (Figures 7f-h), and this period of minimal bead
movement persisted for ~2.5 s, even though two peaks
in light intensity occurred during this time (Figure 7i).
These peaks only caused a few changes in the length of
the tracks in regions 1 and 2 (Figures 7f and 7g). After
this delayed reaction, which is consistent with the speed
reduction and sinking of spheroids after a dark-light
switch described above, the relative length of the bead
tracks in all analyzed regions at the anterior pole changed with the same frequency as the fluctuations in the
light intensity (Figures 7f-i). The minimal length of the
tracks lagged behind the peaks in light intensity by ~300
ms. Interestingly, when the light was turned off after the
periodical light pulses, the relative length of the bead
tracks persisted at the maximal level (Figures 7f-i).
Although the bead tracks were generally longer in
region 2 (Figure 7a and 7g), which is closer to the
spheroid than regions 1 and 3, the results from all three
regions were quite similar.

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Page 13 of 21

Figure 7 Simulation of phototactic swimming using a rotating filter system. (a) Illustration of the counterclockwise rotation as viewed from
behind the spheroid of a swimming spheroid. The black arrows indicate the swimming direction. The fluid streamlines were analyzed from
regions 1-3. (b) Experimental setup of the simulation. Filter 1 (F1): 74% transmissivity (T), 2 × 14° = 28° sector cutout; Filter 2 (F2): 74% (T), 2 ×
25° = 50° sector cutout; Filter 3 (F3): 41% T, 2 × 55° = 110° sector cutout. The sandwich construction results in T1 = 100% (gap, no filter), with T2
= 74% (F1), T3 = 55% (F1 + F2), and T4 = 23% (F1 + F2 + F3). (c) Schematic representation of the changing light conditions in the eye during
rotation. (d) Directivity of the eye viewed from the flagellar end of the cell. The blue line is a polar plot of tangential electric energy density at
the plasma membrane overlaying the eyespot [75]. a is the half-beam width, which is the angle between the half-maximum directivities of the
eye. The red line reflects the result from (e). (e) The blue line represents the linear plot of tangential electric energy density. Owing to the
reflection symmetry, only 0° to 180° is shown. Filter combinations and the cutting of filters were calculated to match the blue line, with the
most appropriate combination shown as a red line. (f)-(h) Relative length of the tracks of polystyrene beads analyzed in regions 1 to 3 using the
setup shown in (b). Vertical, dotted gray lines indicate the approximate minimal length of the tracks ~300 ms after the maximum light intensity.
(i) The light intensity was recorded by an oscilloscope. The red vertical lines in (f)-(i) indicate the maximum light intensity.

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Reaction time after light stimulation

The reaction time of somatic cells at the anterior pole
was calculated from high-speed microvideographs after
a dark-light switch (Figures 2g and 2h) and from darkfield microscopy with pulsed illumination (Figure 7).
High-speed microvideography demonstrated that the
flagella begin to reverse the beating direction after a
dark-light switch after ~100 ms (SD 25 ms, n = 5). The
transition from the normal beating mode to the reverse
beating mode takes ~30 ms (SD 10 ms, n = 5). Thus,
the period of time spanning the start of the light stimulation to the completion of the reversed beating direction is ~100 to 160 ms. In the above experiments with
periodically changing light intensities, the minimum of
the fluid streamlines lagged behind the peaks in light
intensity by ~300 ms (Figures 7f-i). Owing to the reaction time of ~100 to 160 ms, the reversed flagella need
~140 to 200 ms for their fluid streamlines to reach their
minimum.

Discussion
In this study, we investigated key parameters of phototactic behavior in the spheroidal, multicellular volvocine
green alga Volvox rousseletii, one of the fastest swimmers among all volvocine green algae. This is the first
detailed description of phototactic behavior in a species
within the Volvocales section Volvox.
Light-induced reversal of the ciliary-type beating in
Volvox rousseletii

The reversal of the ciliary-type beating of the flagella
shown in this study (Figure 2) has not yet been
observed in other plants or green algae, but it has been
reported for ciliates [76,77] and some metazoa [78,79].
In particular, the ciliate Paramecium caudatum has
been widely known for its avoidance reaction, which is
a sudden change in the swimming direction of the cell
mediated by a transient reversal of its ciliary activity
[80]. In Paramecium, the orientation of ciliary beating is
controlled by the concentration of intracellular calcium
[81-84]. Calcium is also well known for its role in the
light-dependent responses of the unicellular Chlamydomonas, the best-studied volvocine alga with respect to
flagellar activity and photoresponses [30,39,40,58,85-97].
The molecular mechanisms of light perception signal
transduction and the control of flagellar beating identified in Chlamydomonas most likely are not specific to
this species and instead are quite similar in all volvocine
algae, given their close phylogenetic relationships. There
are significant differences, however, in the mode of flagellar beating within the volvocine algae. Although the
normal beating mode is a ciliary-type, asymmetrical
motion, the light-induced flagellar beating pattern varies. Chlamydomonas responds with a flagellar-type,

Page 14 of 21

symmetrical beating, Volvox aureus [54] and V. carteri
[55] respond with a cessation of flagellar beating, and V.
rousseletii responds with a ciliary-type, asymmetrical
beating in a reversed direction (Figure 2). These striking
differences within the genus Volvox probably substantiate the polyphyletic origin of this genus. Phylogenetically, V. aureus and V. carteri belong to clade A within
the Eudorina group [16,17], whereas V. rousseletii
belongs to section Volvox [10,12,14-16] (see Additional
File 1). Therefore, the light-induced ciliary-type, asymmetrical beating in a reversed direction might be characteristic of those species belonging to the section
Volvox. The reversal of the beating direction in lightinduced cells should allow for faster changes in the
swimming direction of the organism and better maneuverability compared with a simple cessation of flagellar
beating in light-induced cells. Thus, V. rousseletii should
outperform V. aureus and V. carteri in phototaxis
merely because of its enhanced steering ability, not to
mention its faster swimming speed. This assumption
still requires experimental verification.
Gravity facilitates positive phototaxis

In addition to the flagellar forces, gravitational forces
participate in phototaxis. Whenever a V. rousseletii
spheroid slows down or stops swimming, gravity causes
the spheroid to sink toward the bottom with its posterior pole first (see sections “Polarity of the V. rousseletii
spheroid” and “Swimming speed after light stimulation
as a function of the swimming direction” and Figure 5c).
Even during normal swimming, gravity pulls on the posterior hemisphere more as a result of an anisotropic
mass distribution caused by the denser daughter spheroids and probably by the closer spacing of somatic cells
within the posterior hemisphere. This gravity effect has
been quantitatively measured through biophysics in
other species of the genus Volvox, which was referred to
as “bottom-heaviness” [71,72]. Thus, through gravity,
the posterior-anterior axis tends to become oriented in
the opposite direction of the gravity vector such that the
anterior pole tends to be on top. In the natural habitat,
the sun, which serves as the light source, essentially
shines from above, resulting in the direction of the light
vector being roughly the same as that of the gravity vector. Therefore, gravity facilitates positive phototaxis
because it brings the spheroids into the optimal orientation to swim toward the light source.
Even in the unicellular relative Chlamydomonas, cells
with immobilized flagella sediment with their anterior
ends pointing up [98,99] because the posterior chloroplast-containing part of the cell body is denser than the
anterior flagella-bearing part [100].
Thus, the utilization of gravity to ensure that the anterior end is always oriented toward the top while sinking

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Page 15 of 21

seems to be a clear evolutionary advantage for all of the
phototrophic and positively phototactic volvocine algae.

the flagella, the significance of these models may be
limited.

Previous models on organismal steering in the genus
Volvox

Mechanisms for phototactic steering in Volvox rousseletii:
A model

In several earlier publications, observations in connection with phototaxis were combined to get an overall
picture of how phototaxis works in Volvox. These
descriptions and models of the swimming behavior in
Volvox refer to the cells at the anterior hemisphere of
the spheroid as being a crucial factor in phototactic
steering and in its rotation during forward swimming to
bring certain cells into or out of the light
[46,50,52-55,101]. There had been different explanations
as to how the individual cells on the anterior hemisphere change their flagellar activity in response to different light stimuli. Thus, the two above-mentioned
competing models emerged, which were the variable
beat frequency model [48,52-55,57] and the variable
beat direction model [46]. A more recent report analyzed both models and suggested the variable beat frequency model was the best description of phototactic
turning in Volvox carteri [57]. This model is supported
by the decrease of both the rate of progression and the
rotation of V. carteri spheroids in the presence of illumination [57]. In addition, the fluid streamlines near the
anterior pole of V. carteri [55] and V. aureus [52-54]
spheroids stopped upon illumination. The researchers,
however, did not monitor flagellar beating directly but
drew conclusions from the behavior of those spheroids
exposed to light stimuli. In 2006, Nozaki et al. [17]
assigned the phylogenetic position of the species V. carteri and V. aureus to clade A in the Eudorina group
(see Additional File 1).
The variable beat direction model [46] is supported by
the following quite contrary, indirect observation: Mast
[46] determined that the rate of progression of an unidentified species of the genus Volvox decreased after
illumination while its rate of rotation increased. Mast’s
drawings and descriptions, however, indicated that the
observed Volvox species belonged to the section Volvox
[17]. Hoops et al. [57] tried but unfortunately could not
replicate the step-up and step-down illumination experiments with Volvox rousseletii and Volvox capensis, both
of which belong to the section Volvox. Therefore, Hoops
et al. [57] concluded that a (re-)analysis of phototactic
steering in the spheroids of the section Volvox is
important.
The phylogenetic differences between the investigated
species may indicate that there are differences in phototactic mechanisms that originally led to the two different models. Because the above models are based on
experiments that do not include direct observations of
flagella due to the small size and rapid movement of

On the basis of the above and our own observations, we
developed a mechanistic model that predicts the phototactic behavior in V. rousseletii. At the organismal level,
we have shown that V. rousseletii spheroids respond to
a sudden change in light intensity with a momentary
photophobic response, reducing their speed rapidly for
~2 s and causing a gravitational sinking of the spheroids
(Figures 4b and 5). They then accelerate quickly and
obtain their original swimming speed while turning
phototactically toward the light source (Figure 5). In this
response, not all flagellated somatic cells of the spheroid
participate in the same way. There is a photoresponsive
gradient from anterior to posterior, with the highest
light sensitivity at the anterior pole of the spheroid and
no response to light at the posterior pole (Figure 6).
This gradient is reflected by an eyespot gradient in
which the cells with the largest and most light-sensitive
eyespots are located at the anterior pole and the cells
with the smallest, even nonexistent, and blind eyespots
are located at the posterior pole (Figure 1). After a
change in light intensity, only cells in the anterior hemisphere with an adequately sized eyespot perceive the
change in light intensity and switch transiently from the
normal beating mode to a reverse beating mode (Figure
2), which is reflected by a momentary photophobic
response at the cell level. The switch in the beating
direction generates a force in the opposite direction on
the anterior hemisphere, while cells on the posterior
hemisphere still beat in the normal beating mode, causing a deceleration of the spheroid. The subsequent
acceleration and phototactic turn toward the light
source is complicated by the rotation of the spheroids in
a counterclockwise direction as they swim along their
posterior-anterior axis (Figure 7a). In addition, the eyes
of the somatic cells show a strong directivity (Figure
7d). Because the flagellar reaction cannot be observed in
free swimming and rotating spheroids, the situation was
simulated by holding the spheroid in place while the
illumination was changed periodically (Figures 7f-i).
Thus, the individual somatic cells of the anterior hemisphere are in the same situation as the corresponding
somatic cells of a free swimming, rotating spheroid,
which is illuminated on the side. The somatic cells of
the anterior hemisphere respond quickly and periodically by reversing the direction of the flagellar beat
(Figs. 2 and 7). In a free swimming, rotating spheroid,
the local reversal of the beating direction causes an
unbalanced force between the illuminated and the
shaded side of the spheroid. As a result, the spheroid

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

turns toward the light source. This mechanism does not
require any communication between the cells because
the flagellar responses of the somatic cells are coordinated only via the environmental factors of the position
of the light source combined with the effects of gravity.
One final point that should be mentioned is that while
each individual somatic cell has a forward and a reverse
gear (Figure 2), the whole organism only has a forward
gear, such that it can only swim in a posterior to anterior direction (Figure 6) but can turn easily.
The main components of our model of phototactic
movements in V. rousseletii are illustrated in Figure 8,
and the following conclusions summarize the relevant
aspects.

Conclusions
On the basis of all results presented herein, we developed a mechanistic model that predicts phototactic
behavior in Volvox rousseletii and shows how this multicellular organism achieves coordination among its individual biflagellated cells without direct communication
between these cells.
The model encompasses the 10 following points:
1. The V. rousseletii spheroids (under the conditions
of this study) show only positive phototaxis but not
negative phototaxis, even at high light intensities
(Figure 3).
2. Spheroids swim along the posterior-anterior axis
and simultaneously rotate about this axis in a counterclockwise direction, with one turn every 1 to 3
seconds (Figure 7a).
3. The spheroid has a distinctive morphological
polarity along the anterior-posterior axis, with only
the somatic cells at the anterior pole having large
eyespots (~3.6-μm diameter) and a continuous
decrease in the eyespot size toward the posterior
pole (Figure 1).
4. The spheroids show a strong photoresponse gradient from the anterior to the posterior pole, and only
cells in the anterior hemisphere show an effective
light response (Figure 6).
5. In response to light stimuli, the somatic cells of
the anterior hemisphere can reverse and recover
their flagellar beating mode quickly, within ~100-160
ms (Figure 2).
6. The flagella show a ciliary-type, asymmetrical
beating in both directions, but the flagella waveform
and beat frequencies are different (Figure 2).
7. Gravity facilitates positive phototaxis due to the
anisotropic mass distribution with the posterior of
the spheroid being heavier than the anterior that
results in the anterior, which contains the larger

Page 16 of 21

eyespots, always facing the top, where the light
source normally is located (Figures 8a-c).
8. A sudden increase in light intensity causes the
somatic cells of the anterior hemisphere to show a
photophobic reaction for ~2 s, with an accompanying transient reversal of the ciliary activity (Figures
2c and 2h; Figure 6b), causing a deceleration and
sinking of the spheroid (Figures 4, 5, and 8b).
9. During phototactic swimming, only somatic cells
of the anterior hemisphere with eyespots pointing
toward the light source reverse the beating direction
in the presence of illumination, resulting in a turn
toward the light source (Figures 2, 6, 7, and 8c).
10. The coordination of the spheroid’s individual
biflagellated cells during phototactic swimming
occurs via environmental factors (e.g., the position
of the light source and the effects of gravity) without
any direct communication between the cells.
On the basis of our model of phototactic movements
of the multicellular alga V. rousseletii, and taking into
account previous considerations by Hoops [29] and Kirk
[6], we conclude that the following evolutionary innovations were required to allow for phototactic movements
after the transition from a unicellular Chlamydomonaslike ancestor to the multicellular V. rousseletii:
1. Both flagella of all cells must beat in essentially
the same direction rather than the previously used
breaststroke.
2. An extracellular matrix must hold all cells of the
multicellular organism in the appropriate places on
the surface of a spheroid.
3. The multicellular organism must not consist of
identical cells and requires a distinctive morphological polarity, the flagella of all cells must beat toward
the posterior, and the anterior cells must show a
stronger light sensitivity, mediated through larger
eyespots, than posterior cells.
4. The flagellar beating must cause rotation of the
spheroid instead of rotation of the cell.
5. Light stimuli must cause a transient ciliary-type,
asymmetrical beating in the reverse direction instead
of a flagellar-type, symmetrical beating.
More work is clearly necessary, however, to confirm
these evolutionary considerations.

Methods
Strain and culture conditions

The wild type Volvox rousseletii strain MI01 was grown
in VT [102,103] or VTAC [104,105] medium at 20°C in
a 10 h dark/14 h cycle under cool fluorescent white

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

Page 17 of 21

Figure 8 Schematic representation of the phototactic movements in V. rousseletii. (a) Straight-ahead swimming in the dark. (b) A sudden
dark-light switch causes the flagellar beating to reverse in the anterior hemisphere and the deceleration of the spheroid’s forward movement
(photophobic response). (c) After approximately 2 seconds, only cells on the illuminated side of the anterior hemisphere of the rotating spheroid
show the reversed flagellar beating direction, resulting in an acceleration of the spheroid’s forward movement and turning toward the light
source. Gravity assists the phototactic movements because it pulls more on the posterior hemisphere due to an anisotropic mass distribution
caused by the denser daughter spheroids within the posterior hemisphere and probably also by the closer spacing of the somatic cells in the
posterior hemisphere. (d) Time scale.

light at an average of 30-40 μmol photons m -2 s -1 of
photosynthetically active radiation.
Analysis of photomovements and tracking of Volvox
spheroids

An observation chamber with internal dimensions of
10 × 10 × 1 mm was constructed as follows: (1) an
acrylic cuvette (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) was
cut into slices with a 1-mm thickness, (2) a slice of
the cuvette was glued onto a standard glass slide, and
(3) the chamber was filled with a suspension of algae
and covered with a coverglass, which was held in
place by the adhesion force of water. The observation
chamber contained 20-60 spheroids when it was used
in the vertical orientation (Figure 3a) and 50-80 spheroids when in the horizontal orientation (Figure 3b).
For observation in the vertical orientation (Figure 3a),
the chamber was mounted upright on a stand and illuminated with a slide projector (Master Auto Lux-H;
Rikagaku Seiki, Tokyo, Japan), and the movement of

spheroids was recorded with a charge-coupled device
(CCD) camera (XC-77; Sony, Tokyo, Japan) equipped
with a C-mount macroscopic lens (Cine-Nikkor 1: 1.8,
f = 25 mm; Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). For observation in
the horizontal orientation (Figure 3b), the observation
chamber was monitored using the CCD camera (XC77; Sony) on a standard inverted microscope (TMS-F;
Nikon). A phototactically neutral field illumination
was achieved with a long-pass filter (l T >750 nm,
LX902 AcryFilter IR; Mitsubishi Rayon, Tokyo, Japan),
which lets infrared light through but filters out all
visible light. For the analysis of photomovement, the
observation chamber was illuminated from the direction that was being tested (Figures 3a and 3b) using a
continuous-output 500-W Xenon short-arc lamp
(Ushio Electric, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with an interference filter for microscopic phase contrast illumination (GIF, lT (max): 540 nm, spectral width [full width
at half maximum]: 41 nm; Nikon), which results in
green light.

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

The influence of light intensity on photomovements
was analyzed using the 500-W Xenon short-arc lamp
and a set of neutral density (ND) filters (ND1, ND3,
ND10, ND20, and ND40; Hoya Corporation, Tokyo,
Japan). Eight different light intensities (0.00017 μmol m2 -1
s , 0.0017 μmol m-2 s-1, 0.017 μmol m-2 s-1, 0.16 μmol
m-2 s-1, 2.18 μmol m-2 s-1, 19.59 μmol m-2 s-1, 191 μmol
m-2 s-1 and 457 μmol m-2 s-1) were used in the experiments with the vertically oriented observation chamber,
and 17 different light intensities (0.00052 μmol m-2 s-1,
0.00156 μmol m-2 s-1, 0.0052 μmol m-2 s-1, 0.0156 μmol
m -2 s -1 ,0.052 μmol m -2 s -1 , 0.156 μmol m -2 s -1 , 0.52
μmol m-2 s-1, 1.04 μmol m-2 s-1, 1.56 μmol m-2 s-1, 2.08
μmol m-2 s-1, 5.2 μmol m-2 s-1, 10.4 μmol m-2 s-1, 15.6
μmol m-2 s-1 , 20.8 μmol m-2 s-1, 52 μmol m-2 s-1, 208
μmol m -2 s-1 and 520 μmol m-2 s -1 ) were used in the
experiments with the horizontally oriented observation
chamber.
Phototactic movements were quantified by calculating
the PI using the formula PI = (B - A) × 100/(100 - A),
in which A is the percentage of spheroids located in the
investigated area (e.g., area 1) at the moment when the
light was turned on (0 s) and B is the percentage of
spheroids located in the same area at the respective
time after the light was turned on. A high PI reflects a
strong photoaccumulation within the given area.
Where applicable, individual images of recorded
photomovements were analyzed with respect to the relative distribution of the spheroids in the chamber, the
direction of the movements and the velocity of the
movements using the NIH Image version 1.62 software
[106].
Recording of fluid streamlines

The fluid streamlines generated by flagella were visualized and recorded according to the method of Hand
and Haupt [53], with minor modifications. Briefly, ~40
μl of a suspension of individual Volvox spheroids in
VT medium was pipetted onto a glass slide, and then
1-5 μl of an aqueous suspension of polystyrene beads
(1-μm diameter; Polysciences, Warrington, PA, USA)
were added. Two layers of standard vinyl tape were
used as spacers between the slide and the coverglass to
avoid crushing the spheroids, and the samples were
analyzed on an inverted TMS-F microscope (Nikon).
Infrared light was used for dark-field illumination, and
green light was used for the stimulation of photomovements as described above. The tracks of the polystyrene beads were recorded with a CCD camera (C5985;
Hamamatsu Photonics, Hamamatsu, Japan). Both the
moving direction and speed of the fluid streamlines
were calculated from the tracks of the polystyrene
beads on the images.

Page 18 of 21

Construction and use of a rotating filter system for
pulsed light stimulation

A rotating filter system for pulsed light stimulation was
constructed on the basis of the data of Foster and
Smyth [28,75] using three 2-mm thick acrylic filters, F1
(#700; Sumitomo Chemical, Tokyo, Japan), F2 (#700,
Sumitomo Chemical), and F3 (#702; Sumitomo Chemical), with transmissivities for green light of 74.4%,
74.4%, and 40.77%, respectively. Sectors of 28° (F1), 50°
(F2) and 110° (F3) were cut out from the filters as calculated in Figure 7e, and the sandwich construction was
mounted reflection-symmetrically on a DC servomotor
as shown in Figure 7b. The sandwich construction
resulted in four different transmissivities: T1 = 100%
(gap, no filter); T2 = 74% (F1), T3 = 55% (F1 + F2), and
T4 = 23% (F1 + F2 + F3). The filter system was rotated
at 0.83 rps (49.8 rpm). The rotating filter system was
placed into the light path of the green light that was
used to stimulate the photomovements. The oscillating
light intensity was recorded by a silicon photodiode sensor (S1336-8BQ; Hamamatsu Photonics) connected to
an oscilloscope (Tektronix, Beaverton, OR); the highest
recorded light intensity (28 μmol m -2 s -1 ) was set to
100%.
Analysis of flagellar waveforms

Flagellar waveforms were analyzed both with the CCD
camera on the TMS-F microscope as described above
using a long-pass filter with lT >610 nm for field illumination, and by high-speed microvideography as reported
by Inouye and Hori [107]. In the latter case, flagellar
activity (at 20°C) was filmed at 200 frames per second
using an MHS-200 high-speed video system (NAC
Image Technology, Simi Valley, CA) attached to an
Optiphoto light microscope (Nikon). The built-in strobe
light of the high-speed video system was used to illuminate the field of view. Because the strobe light is indispensable for high-speed microvideography, the normal
beating mode was recorded either right at the moment
when the dark-adapted spheroids were illuminated with
the strobe light, which corresponded to beating in the
dark as the cells had no time to react, or after 10 s of
illumination with the strobe light, which was several seconds after cells had adapted to the light.
Analysis of eyespot sizes

The spheroids were flattened gently by placing a suspension of algae between a slide (without vinyl tape spacers)
and a coverglass. The flattened spheroids were observed
with bright-field illumination using an upright compound microscope (BHS; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The
digital images were analyzed using NIH Image software
to calculate the eyespot size, defined as the largest

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

diameter of the eyespots, and to determine the linear
distance between a given eyespot and the anterior pole
[106]. The anterior pole of the spheroid was identified
as described earlier [5].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Phylogenetic relationship between Volvox
rousseletii MI01 and other volvocine algae. This analysis is based on a
combined data set of the psaA, psaB, and rbcL cDNA fragments from 47
volvocine species and/or strains. The unrooted tree was calculated by
the neighbor-joining method using the PHYLIP software.
Additional file 2: Description of the phylogenetic analysis of the
Volvox rousseletii strain MI01 that was utilized in this study. The
Volvox rousseletii strain MI01 utilized in this study was subjected to a
molecular phylogenetic analysis. To do so, certain DNA fragments that
were used in the phylogenetic analyses of other volvocine algae were
cloned and sequenced, which included the chloroplast genes encoding
the photosystem I P700 chlorophyll a apoprotein A1 (psaA), the
photosystem I P700 chlorophyll a apoprotein A2 (psaB), ribulose
bisphosphate carboxylase (rbcL) and the internal transcribed spacer
sequence 2 (ITS2).
Additional file 3: List of species, strains, abbreviations, accession
numbers, and references for the psaA, psaB, rbcL and ITS2
sequences from volvocine species.
Additional file 4: Sequence alignment of psaA cDNA fragments
from several volvocine species.
Additional file 5: Sequence alignment of psaB cDNA fragments
from several volvocine species.
Additional file 6: Sequence alignment of rbcL cDNA fragments from
several volvocine species.
Additional file 7: Comparison of psaA sequences from several
volvocine species.
Additional file 8: Comparison of psaB sequences from several
volvocine species.
Additional file 9: Comparison of rbcL sequences from several
volvocine species.
Additional file 10: Comparison of ITS2 sequences from several
volvocine species.

Abbreviations
F: filter; n: sample size; PI: photoaccumulation index; SD: standard deviation;
T: transmissivity.
Acknowledgements
We thank Takeshi Nakayama and other members of the Inouye lab, as well
as Terumitsu Hori (sadly now deceased) and members of his lab, for their
useful discussions and technical suggestions. We also acknowledge a useful
discussion with Hisayoshi Nozaki. Finally, we thank Kordula Puls and Mina
Nomizu for their technical assistance. This work was supported in part by a
grant from the Toyobo Biotechnology Foundation and by a JSPS
Postdoctoral Fellowship for Research Abroad (both to NU).
Author details
1
Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology of Plants, University of
Bielefeld, Universitätsstr. 25, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany. 2Institute of Biological
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8577 Japan. 3The
Promotion Center for Research and Education, Graduate University for
Advanced Studies (Sokendai), Hayama, Kanagawa, 240-0193 Japan.
Authors’ contributions
NU performed experiments and analyzed data. SM designed experiments,
performed experiments, and contributed reagents and materials. II designed

Page 19 of 21

experiments and coordinated the first phase of the research project. AH
(corresponding author) evaluated the data, coordinated the second phase of
the research project, constructed the figures and wrote the paper. All of the
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 10 May 2010 Accepted: 27 July 2010 Published: 27 July 2010
References
1. Szathmáry E, Smith JM: The major evolutionary transitions. Nature 1995,
374:227-232.
2. Bonner JT: The origins of multicellularity. Integr Biol 1998, 1:27-36.
3. Grosberg RK, Strathmann R: The evolution of multicellularity: a minor
major transition? Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2007, 38:621-654.
4. Prochnik SE, Umen J, Nedelcu A, Hallmann A, Miller SM, Nishii I, Ferris P,
Kuo A, Mitros T, Fritz-Laylin LK, Hellsten U, Chapman J, Simakov O,
Rensing SA, Terry A, Pangilinan J, Kapitonov V, Jurka J, Salamov A,
Shapiro H, Schmutz J, Grimwood J, Lindquist E, Lucas S, Grigoriev IV,
Schmitt R, Kirk D, Rokhsar DS: Genomic analysis of organismal complexity
in the multicellular green alga Volvox carteri. Science 2010, 329:223-226.
5. Kirk DL: Volvox: molecular-genetic origins of multicellularity and cellular
differentiation 1998.
6. Kirk DL: A twelve-step program for evolving multicellularity and a
division of labor. BioEssays 2005, 27:299-310.
7. Herron MD, Hackett JD, Aylward FO, Michod RE: Triassic origin and early
radiation of multicellular volvocine algae. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:3254-3258.
8. Hoops HJ: Somatic cell flagellar apparatuses in two species of Volvox
(Chlorophyceae). J Phycol 1984, 20:20-27.
9. Larson A, Kirk MM, Kirk DL: Molecular phylogeny of the volvocine
flagellates. Mol Biol Evol 1992, 9:85-105.
10. Nozaki H, Itoh M, Sano R, Uchida H, Watanabe MM, Kuroiwa T:
Phylogenetic relationships within the colonial Volvocales (Chlorophyta)
inferred from rbcL gene sequence data. J Phycol 1995, 31:970-979.
11. Coleman AW: Phylogenetic analysis of “Volvocaceae” for comparative
genetic studies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:13892-13897.
12. Nozaki H, Ohta N, Takano H, Watanabe MM: Reexamination of
phylogenetic relationships within the colonial Volvocales (Chlorophyta):
an analysis of atpB and rbcL gene sequences. J Phycol 1999, 35:104-112.
13. Nozaki H, Takahara M, Nakazawa A, Kita Y, Yamada T, Takano H, Kawano S,
Kato M: Evolution of rbcL group IA introns and intron open reading
frames within the colonial Volvocales (Chlorophyceae). Mol Phylogenet
Evol 2002, 23:326-338.
14. Smith GM: A comparative study of the species of Volvox. Trans Am
Microsc Soc 1944, 63:265-310.
15. Nozaki H, Ito M, Sano R, Uchida H, Watanabe MM, Takahashi H, Kuroiwa T:
Phylogenetic analysis of Yamagishiella and Platydorina (Volvocaceae,
Chlorophyta) based on rbcL gene sequences. J Phycol 1997, 33:272-278.
16. Nozaki H: Origin and evolution of the genera Pleodorina and Volvox
(Volvocales). Biologia (Bratisl) 2003, 58:425-431.
17. Nozaki H, Ott FD, Coleman AW: Morphology, molecular phylogeny and
taxonomy of two new species of Pleodorina (Volvoceae, Chlorophyceae).
J Phycol 2006, 42:1072-1080.
18. Häder DP, Lebert M: Photoorientation in photosynthetic flagellates.
Methods Mol Biol 2009, 571:51-65.
19. Nagel G, Ollig D, Fuhrmann M, Kateriya S, Musti AM, Bamberg E,
Hegemann P: Channelrhodopsin-1: a light-gated proton channel in
green algae. Science 2002, 296:2395-2398.
20. Sineshchekov OA, Jung KH, Spudich JL: Two rhodopsins mediate
phototaxis to low- and high-intensity light in Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:8689-8694.
21. Suzuki T, Yamasaki K, Fujita S, Oda K, Iseki M, Yoshida K, Watanabe M,
Daiyasu H, Toh H, Asamizu E, Tabata S, Miura K, Fukuzawa H, Nakamura S,
Takahashi T: Archaeal-type rhodopsins in Chlamydomonas: model
structure and intracellular localization. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2003, 301:711-717.
22. Nagel G, Szellas T, Huhn W, Kateriya S, Adeishvili N, Berthold P, Ollig D,
Hegemann P, Bamberg E: Channelrhodopsin-2, a directly light-gated
cation-selective membrane channel. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:13940-13945.

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

23. Zhang F, Prigge M, Beyriere F, Tsunoda SP, Mattis J, Yizhar O, Hegemann P,
Deisseroth K: Red-shifted optogenetic excitation: a tool for fast neural
control derived from Volvox carteri. Nat Neurosci 2008, 11:631-633.
24. Kianianmomeni A, Stehfest K, Nematollahi G, Hegemann P, Hallmann A:
Channelrhodopsins of Volvox carteri are photochromic proteins that are
specifically expressed in somatic cells under control of light,
temperature, and the sex inducer. Plant Physiol 2009, 151:347-366.
25. Dieckmann CL: Eyespot placement and assembly in the green alga
Chlamydomonas. BioEssays 2003, 25:410-416.
26. Schmidt M, Gessner G, Luff M, Heiland I, Wagner V, Kaminski M, Geimer S,
Eitzinger N, Reissenweber T, Voytsekh O, Fiedler M, Mittag M, Kreimer G:
Proteomic analysis of the eyespot of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
provides novel insights into its components and tactic movements. Plant
Cell 2006, 18:1908-1930.
27. Hegemann P: Algal sensory photoreceptors. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2008,
59:167-189.
28. Kreimer G: The green algal eyespot apparatus: a primordial visual system
and more? Curr Genet 2009, 55:19-43.
29. Hoops HJ: Motility in the colonial and multicellular Volvocales: structure,
function, and evolution. Protoplasma 1997, 199:99-112.
30. Ringo DL: Flagellar motion and fine structure of the flagellar apparatus
in Chlamydomonas. J Cell Biol 1967, 33:543-571.
31. Feinleib MEH, Curry GM: The relationship between stimulus intensity and
oriented phototactic response (topotaxis) in Chlamydomonas. Physiol
Plant 1971, 25:346-352.
32. Rüffer U, Nultsch W: High-speed cinematographic analysis of the
movement of Chlamydomonas. Cell Motil 1985, 5:251-263.
33. Rüffer U, Nultsch W: Comparison of the beating of cis- and trans-flagella
of Chlamydomonas cells held on micropipettes. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton
1987, 7:87-93.
34. Rüffer U, Nultsch W: Flagellar photoresponses of Chlamydomonas cells
held on micropipettes: I. Change in flagellar beat frequency. Cell Motil
Cytoskeleton 1990, 15:162-167.
35. Rüffer U, Nultsch W: Flagellar photoresponses of Chlamydomonas cells
held on micropipettes: II. Change in flagellar beat pattern. Cell Motil
Cytoskeleton 1991, 18:269-278.
36. Polin M, Tuval I, Drescher K, Gollub JP, Goldstein RE: Chlamydomonas
swims with two “gears” in a eukaryotic version of run-and-tumble
locomotion. Science 2009, 325:487-490.
37. Takahashi T, Yoshihara K, Watanabe M, Kubota M, Johnson R, Derguini F,
Nakanishi K: Photoisomerization of retinal at 13-ene is important for
phototaxis of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii: simultaneous measurements
of phototactic and photophobic responses. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1991, 178:1273-1279.
38. Rüffer U, Nultsch W: Flagellar coordination in Chlamydomonas cells held
on micropipettes. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 1998, 41:297-307.
39. Hyams JS, Borisy GG: Isolated flagellar apparatus of Chlamydomonas:
characterization of forward swimming and alteration of waveform and
reversal of motion by calcium ions in vitro. J Cell Sci 1978, 33:235-253.
40. Bessen M, Fay RB, Witman GB: Calcium control of waveform in isolated
flagellar axonemes of Chlamydomonas. J Cell Biol 1980, 86:446-455.
41. Witman GB: Chlamydomonas phototaxis. Trends Cell Biol 1993, 3:403-408.
42. Gerisch G: Die Zelldifferenzierung bei Pleodorina californica Shaw und
die Organisation der Phytomonadinenkolonien. Arch Protistenkd 1959,
104:292-358.
43. Hoops HJ, Floyd GL: Ultrastructure and development of the flagellar
apparatus and flagellar motion in the colonial green alga Astrephomene
gubernaculifera. J Cell Sci 1983, 63:21-41.
44. Hoops HJ: Flagellar, cellular and organismal polarity in Volvox carteri. J
Cell Sci 1993, 104:105-117.
45. Greuel BT, Floyd GL: Development of the flagellar apparatus and flagellar
orientation in the colonial green alga Gonium pectorale (Volvocales). J
Phycol 1985, 21:358-371.
46. Mast SO: Reactions to light in Volvox, with special reference to the
process of orientation. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav
Physiol 1926, 4:637-658.
47. Linnaeus C: Systema naturae. Regnum animale. Stockholm , 10 1758.
48. Holmes SJ: Phototaxis in Volvox. Biol Bull 1903, 4:319-326.
49. Mast SO: Light reactions in lower organisms. II. Volvox globator. J Comp
Neurol Psychol 1907, 17:99-180.

Page 20 of 21

50. Mast SO: Light and the behavior of organisms New York: J. Wiley & Sons, 1
1911.
51. Mast SO: The process of orientation in the colonial organism, Gonium
pectorale, and a study of the structure and function of the eye-spot. J
Exp Zool 1916, 20:1-17.
52. Huth K: Bewegung und Orientierung bei Volvox aureus Ehrb. I.
Mechanismus der phototaktischen Reaktion. Z Pflanzenphysiol 1970,
62:436-450.
53. Hand WG, Haupt W: Flagellar activity of the colony members of Volvox
aureus Ehrbg. during light stimulation. J Protozool 1971, 18:361-364.
54. Sakaguchi H, Tawada K: Temperature effect on the photo-accumulation
and phobic response of Volvox aureus. J Protozool 1977, 24:284-288.
55. Sakaguchi H, Iwasa K: Two photophobic responses in Volvox carteri. Plant
Cell Physiol 1979, 20:909-916.
56. Sakaguchi H: Effect of external ionic environment on phototaxis of
Volvox carteri. Plant Cell Physiol 1979, 20:1643-1651.
57. Hoops HJ, Brighton MC, Stickles SM, Clement PR: A test of two possible
mechanisms for phototactic steering in Volvox carteri (Chlorophyceae). J
Phycol 1999, 35:539-547.
58. Braun FJ, Hegemann P: Two light-activated conductances in the eye of
the green alga Volvox carteri. Biophys J 1999, 76:1668-1678.
59. Ebnet E, Fischer M, Deininger W, Hegemann P: Volvoxrhodopsin, a lightregulated sensory photoreceptor of the spheroidal green alga Volvox
carteri. Plant Cell 1999, 11:1473-1484.
60. Solari CA, Ganguly S, Kessler JO, Michod RE, Goldstein RE: Multicellularity
and the functional interdependence of motility and molecular transport.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:1353-1358.
61. Drescher K, Goldstein RE, Tuval I: Fidelity of adaptive phototaxis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:11171-11176.
62. Meyer A: Die Plasmaverbindung und die Membranen von Volvox
globator, aureus und tertius, mit Rücksicht auf die thierischen Zellen. Bot
Zeitg 1896, 54:187-217.
63. Hoops HJ, Nishii I, Kirk DL: Cytoplasmic bridges in Volvox and its relatives.
Cell-Cell Channels Georgetown, Texas: Eurekah.comBaluska F, Volkmann D,
Barlow PW 2005, 1-20.
64. Schletz K: Phototaxis bei Volvox. Pigmentsysteme der
Lichtrichtungsperzeption. Z Pflanzenphysiol 1976, 77:189-211.
65. Fritsch FE: The structure and reproduction of the algae. Vol. 1: Introduction,
Chlorophyceae, Xanthophyceae, Chrysophyceae, Bacillariophyceae,
Cryptophyceae, Dinophyceae, Chloromonadineae, Euglenineae, colourless
flagellata Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press 1935.
66. Coleman AW, Suarez A, Goff LJ: Molecular delineation of species and
syngens in volvocacean green algae (Chlorophyta). J Phycol 1994,
30:80-90.
67. Mai JC, Coleman AW: The internal transcribed spacer 2 exhibits a
common secondary structure in green algae and flowering plants. J Mol
Evol 1997, 44:258-271.
68. Coleman AW, Mai JC: Ribosomal DNA ITS-1 and ITS-2 sequence
comparisons as a tool for predicting genetic relatedness. J Mol Evol 1997,
45:168-177.
69. Coleman AW, Preparata RM, Mehrotra B, Mai JC: Derivation of the
secondary structure of the ITS-1 transcript in Volvocales and its
taxonomic correlations. Protist 1998, 149:135-146.
70. Nozaki H, Misawa K, Kajita T, Kato M, Nohara S, Watanabe MM: Origin and
evolution of the colonial Volvocales (Chlorophyceae) as inferred from
multiple, chloroplast gene sequences. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2000,
17:256-268.
71. Pedley TJ, Kessler JO: Hydrodynamic phenomena in suspensions of
swimming microorganisms. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 1992, 24:313-358.
72. Drescher K, Leptos KC, Tuval I, Ishikawa T, Pedley TJ, Goldstein RE: Dancing
Volvox: Hydrodynamic bound states of swimming algae. Phys Rev Lett
2009, 102:168101.
73. Solari CA, Michod RE, Goldstein RE: Volvox barberi, the fastest swimmer of
the Volvocales (Chlorophyceae). J Phycol 2008, 44:1395-1398.
74. Solari CA, Kessler JO, Michod RE: A hydrodynamics approach to the
evolution of multicellularity: flagellar motility and germ-soma
differentiation in volvocalean green algae. Am Nat 2006, 167:537-554.
75. Foster KW, Smyth RD: Light antennas in phototactic algae. Microbiol Rev
1980, 44:572-630.

Ueki et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:103
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/103

76. Nakamura S, Tamm SL: Calcium control of ciliary reversal in ionophoretreated and ATP-reactivated comb plates of ctenophores. J Cell Biol 1985,
100:1447-1454.
77. Tamm SL, Terasaki M: Visualization of calcium transients controlling
orientation of ciliary beat. J Cell Biol 1994, 125:1127-1135.
78. Mackie GO, Spencer AN, Strathmann R: Electrical activity associated with
ciliary reversal in an echinoderm larva. Nature 1969, 223:1384-1385.
79. Galt CP, Mackie GO: Electrical correlates of ciliary reversal in Oikopleura. J
Exp Biol 1971, 55:205-212.
80. Naitoh Y, Eckert R: The control of ciliary activity in protozoa. Cilia and
flagella London: Academic PressSleigh MA 1974, 305-352.
81. Naitoh Y, Eckert R: Ionic mechanisms controlling behavioral responses of
Paramecium to mechanical stimulation. Science 1969, 164:963-965.
82. Naitoh Y, Eckert R, Friedman K: A regenerative calcium response in
Paramecium. J Exp Biol 1972, 56:667-681.
83. Nakaoka Y, Ooi H: Regulation of ciliary reversal in triton-extracted
Paramecium by calcium and cyclic adenosine monophosphate. J Cell Sci
1985, 77:185-195.
84. Naitoh Y, Kaneko H: Reactivated triton-extracted models of Paramecium:
modification of ciliary movement by calcium ions. Science 1972,
176:523-524.
85. Stavis RL, Hirschberg R: Phototaxis in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. J Cell
Biol 1973, 59:367-377.
86. Stavis RL: The effect of azide on phototaxis in Chlamydomonas reinhardi.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1974, 71:1824-1827.
87. Schmidt JA, Eckert R: Calcium couples flagellar reversal to
photostimulation in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Nature 1976, 262:713-715.
88. Litvin FF, Sineshchekov OA, Sineshchekov VA: Photoreceptor electric
potential in the phototaxis of the alga Haematococcus pluvialis. Nature
1978, 271:476-478.
89. Nultsch W: Effect of external factors on phototaxis of Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii. III. Cations. Arch Microbiol 1979, 123:93-99.
90. Kamiya R, Witman GB: Submicromolar levels of calcium control the
balance of beating between the two flagella in demembranated models
of Chlamydomonas. J Cell Biol 1984, 98:97-107.
91. Omoto CK, Brokaw CJ: Bending patterns of Chlamydomonas flagella: II.
Calcium effects on reactivated Chlamydomonas flagella. Cell Motil 1985,
5:53-60.
92. Harz H, Hegemann P: Rhodopsin-regulated calcium currents in
Chlamydomonas. Nature 1991, 351:489-491.
93. Horst CJ, Witman GB: ptx1, a nonphototactic mutant of Chlamydomonas,
lacks control of flagellar dominance. J Cell Biol 1993, 120:733-741.
94. Beck C, Uhl R: On the localization of voltage-sensitive calcium channels
in the flagella of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. J Cell Biol 1994,
125:1119-1125.
95. Pazour GJ, Sineshchekov OA, Witman GB: Mutational analysis of the
phototransduction pathway of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. J Cell Biol
1995, 131:427-440.
96. Yoshimura K, Shingyoji C, Takahashi K: Conversion of beating mode in
Chlamydomonas flagella induced by electric stimulation. Cell Motil
Cytoskeleton 1997, 36:236-245.
97. Okita N, Isogai N, Hirono M, Kamiya R, Yoshimura K: Phototactic activity in
Chlamydomonas ’non-phototactic’ mutants deficient in Ca2+-dependent
control of flagellar dominance or in inner-arm dynein. J Cell Sci 2005,
118:529-537.
98. Kam V, Moseyko N, Nemson J, Feldman LJ: Gravitaxis in Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii: characterization using video microscopy and computer
analysis. Int J Plant Sci 1999, 160:1093-1098.
99. Yoshimura K, Matsuo Y, Kamiya R: Gravitaxis in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
studied with novel mutants. Plant Cell Physiol 2003, 44:1112-1118.
100. Kessler JO: The external dynamics of swimming microorganisms. Prog
Phycol Res 1986, 4:257-307.
101. Huth K: Bewegung und Orientierung bei Volvox aureus Ehrb. II.
Richtungsabweichung bei taktischen Reaktionen. Z Pflanzenphysiol 1970,
63:344-351.
102. Provasoli L, Pintner IJ: Artificial media for fresh-water algae: problems and
suggestions. The Ecology of Algae, a symposium held at the Pymatuning
Laboratory of Field Biology on June 18 and 19, 1959 Pittsburgh, PA: The
Pymatuning Symposia in Ecology, Special Publication No. 2., University of
PittsburghTryon CA, Hartman RT , 1 1959, 84-96.

Page 21 of 21

103. Watanabe MM, Nozaki H: NIES-collection: List of strains. Microalgae and
protozoa Tsukuba, Japan: National Institute for Environmental Studies, 4
1994.
104. Nozaki H, Kuroiwa H, Mita T, Kuroiwa T: Pleodorina japonica sp. nov.
(Volvocales, Chlorophyta) with bacteria-like endosymbionts. Phycologia
1989, 28:252-267.
105. Kasai F, Kawachi M, Erata M, Watanabe MM: NIES-collection: List of strains.
Microalgae and protozoa Tsukuba, Japan: National Institute for
Environmental Studies, 7 2004.
106. Rasband WS, Bright DS: NIH Image: a public domain image processing
program for the Macintosh. Microbeam Anal Soc J 1995, 4:137-149.
107. Inouye I, Hori T: High-speed video analysis of the flagellar beat and
swimming patterns of algae: possible evolutionary trends in green
algae. Protoplasma 1991, 164:54-59.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-103
Cite this article as: Ueki et al.: How 5000 independent rowers
coordinate their strokes in order to row into the sunlight: Phototaxis in
the multicellular green alga Volvox. BMC Biology 2010 8:103.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
