<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Papillomavirus E5: the smallest oncoprotein with many functions</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140. doi:10.1186/1476-4598-10-140"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content="Cell transformation; Growth factor receptors; Immune escape; Oncogene; Papillomaviruses; E5 oncoprotein; Animal models"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Aldo Venuti"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

REVIEW

Open Access

Papillomavirus E5: the smallest oncoprotein with
many functions
Aldo Venuti1, Francesca Paolini1, Lubna Nasir2, Annunziata Corteggio3, Sante Roperto3, Maria S Campo4 and
Giuseppe Borzacchiello3*

Abstract
Papillomaviruses (PVs) are established agents of human and animal cancers. They infect cutaneous and mucous
epithelia. High Risk (HR) Human PVs (HPVs) are consistently associated with cancer of the uterine cervix, but are
also involved in the etiopathogenesis of other cancer types. The early oncoproteins of PVs: E5, E6 and E7 are
known to contribute to tumour progression. While the oncogenic activities of E6 and E7 are well characterised, the
role of E5 is still rather nebulous. The widespread causal association of PVs with cancer makes their study
worthwhile not only in humans but also in animal model systems. The Bovine PV (BPV) system has been the most
useful animal model in understanding the oncogenic potential of PVs due to the pivotal role of its E5 oncoprotein
in cell transformation. This review will highlight the differences between HPV-16 E5 (16E5) and E5 from other PVs,
primarily from BPV. It will discuss the targeting of E5 as a possible therapeutic agent.
Keywords: Cell transformation, Growth factor receptors, Immune escape, Oncogene, Papillomaviruses, E5 oncoprotein, Animal models

Introduction
PVs are established agents of human and animal cancers
[1]. They infect cutaneous and mucous epithelia inducing benign tumours which usually regress. Occasionally, the tumours progress to malignancy. Over 120
types of HPVs have been identified so far and among
these 15 have been defined as HR HPVs. These are consistently associated with cancer. Genital HPVs are sexually transmitted and HR genital HPVs are a necessary
factor in the development of almost all cases of cervical
cancer. HPV-16 and -18 are the viruses most frequently
associated with cancer of the uterine cervix (CxCa) [2].
CxCa is the second most common cancer in women
worldwide killing about 0.25 million women per year.
However, in economically developed countries the rate
of CxCa is dramatically reduced due to screening program based on exfoliative cervical cytology (PAP
smears).Vaccines to prevent HR HPV infection are available, although their use should be implemented along
with screening programmes to further reduce the
* Correspondence: borzacch@unina.it
3
Department of Pathology and Animal health, University of Naples Federico
II, Naples, Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

incidence of such cancer [3]. HR HPVs are also involved
in the etiopathogenesis of other anogenital cancer [4].
Furthermore HPV, particularly HR HPV-16 is strongly
associated to oral squamous cell carcinoma and other
potentially malignant oral lesions [5]. Growing evidence
also suggests that HR HPV-16 is involved in the etiopathogenesis of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, suggesting that HPV vaccines should be also
considered for prevention of this type of cancer [5,6].
Additionally, HPVs may be involved in the etiopathogenesis of others cancer types, including tumours of the
upper respiratory tract, eye, esophagus, non-small-cell
lung cancers [7-10]. The presence of HPV-16 has been
reported also in colorectal carcinoma [11], breast cancer
[12] and urinary bladder carcinoma [13]. Recently, HPV
DNA has been associated also with prostatic tumours
[14]. The widespread causal association of PVs with cancer makes their study worthwhile not only in humans
but also in animal model systems which often provide
new and profitable avenues of research [15]. The BPV
system has been one of the most useful animal models
in understanding the oncogenic potential of PVs.
Furthermore, the mechanisms by which BPV induces
tumors are an outstanding model to better understand

© 2011 Venuti et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

the pathogenesis of other cancer types. The importance
of the role of HPV in cancer etiology and development
has been recognized by the assignment of the 2008
Nobel Prize for Medicine to Prof. Harald zur Hausen
who firstly observed that infection with HPVs is responsible for CxCa development. The genome of PVs is a
double stranded circular DNA roughly divided into
three parts: the E region coding for early proteins (E1E7) responsible for the pathogenicity of the virus; the L
region coding for late structural proteins (L1, L2) and a
non coding region which contains the cis-elements
necessary for replication and transcription of the viral
genome. Both in vivo and in vitro studies have pointed
to E6 and E7 as the main HPV oncogenes, whereas E5
is the major oncogene of BPV. The E6 oncoprotein
interacts with the cellular tumour suppressor p53 [16]
and directs its degradation [17]. The primary target of
the E7 oncoprotein is the retinoblastoma (Rb) proteins,
the inactivation of which leads to tumour progression
[18]. Both E6 and E7 also interact with many others cellular factors inducing genomic instability, tumour progression and immune evasion [18].
While the oncogenic activities of E6 and E7 are well
characterised, the role of E5 is still rather nebulous.
However, recent studies have highlighted the important
role of this oncoprotein in cell transformation, tumourigenesis and immune modulation, thus implicating E5 in
pivotal steps of carcinogenesis. Because of the perceived
growing role of E5 in infection establishment and in cell
transformation, it is worth considering the most salient
features of the oncoprotein. This review will focus on
the activities of E5, in particular from HPV-16, and
from BPV. Targeting E5 as a possible therapeutic agent
will also be briefly discussed.

HPV E5
E5 and the evolution of HPVs

HPVs have been classified into five genera (Alpha-, Beta-,
Gamma-, Mu- and Nu-PVs), but not all HPV genera code
for an E5 protein [19]. For instance aHPVs encode and
express E5 but b HPVs do not. A phylogenetic analysis of
known genital HPV types (derived using a Bayesian methodology, with notation of carcinogenic risk levels assigned
by the large case-control study conducted by the International Agency for Research on Cancer [20]), suggested
that at least 3 ancestral papillomaviruses are responsible
for the current heterogeneous group of genital HPVs. The
three major groups that emerged include alpha papillomavirus species and interestingly all carcinogenic types derive
from a common ancestor and can code for an E5 protein,
whereas the other HPVs either lack a definable E5 ORF
(Open Reading Frame) or a translation start codon for E5.
As notable exceptions, 10 types which cause benign venereal warts, can also code for an E5 protein. In addition,

Page 2 of 18

16E5 variants with the greatest mitogenic activity in vitro
[21] are most frequently detected in the population and
most commonly associated with cervical lesions.
The HPV E5 ORF itself has been classified into four different groups: alpha, beta, gamma and delta [22], which
correlate with different clinical manifestations, in particular with oncogenic potential [23]. Thus, the E5-alpha protein is encoded by HR aHPV, whereas the E5-gamma and
E5-delta proteins are encoded by low-risk genital HPVs
[24]. The phylogenetic analysis suggests that E5 must give
some advantage to the virus expressing it and variants of
this protein appear to increase the likelihood of oncogenic
transformation following persistent infections. However,
the E5 ORF is absent in the genome of many HPVs, such
as beta-, gamma- and mu-HPVs, indicating that the protein is not essential for the life cycle of these viruses but
rather can give some ADDED VALUE to favour infection
and transformation (Figure 1). The HPV E5 ORF is
expressed during the early phases of the viral life cycle but
only as the fourth ORFs on polycistronic transcripts. Since
HPVs are thought to use a leaky ribosome-scanning
mechanism to translate proteins from polycistronic
mRNAs, little E5 protein is likely to be synthesized from
these transcripts. In contrast, on epithelial-cell differentiation, E5 is expressed as the second ORFs of late transcripts. It is therefore likely that E5 is synthesized highly in
differentiating suprabasal epithelial cells [25] (Figure 1). In
agreement, the BPV-1 E5 protein was detected at a low
uniform level in basal layers and at a higher level in the
uppermost layers of stratified squamous epithelium in
papillomas productively replicating BPV-1 [26]. In addition, E5 was also shown to be expressed in basal and
suprabasal layers of BPV4-induced papillomas [27] and of
HPV-16 induced cervix lesions [28].
In contrast to the highly transforming BPV-1 E5, the
HPV E5 proteins display weak transforming activity in
vitro (Table 1). Experiments with HPV-6 provided the
first evidence that a HPV E5 protein had transforming
activity in mammalian cells, as expression of HPV-6 E5
in established murine fibroblasts lead to anchorage independent growth [29]. Later it was shown that also 16E5
induces anchorage independence, more efficient growth
in low serum and tumorigenic transformation of murine
keratinocytes and fibroblasts [30-32]. In addition, the
acute expression of 16E5 stimulates cellular DNA synthesis in primary human keratinocytes, and in cooperation
with E7, induces proliferation of primary rodent cells
[33-36]. The transforming activity of E5 from HPV-59
and rhesus papillomavirus has been demonstrated in
various cell types and assays [37,38].
Structure and cell interaction

16E5 is 83 amino acid long. The detection of this protein has proved very difficult given its extreme

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

Page 3 of 18

Figure 1 E5 can improve HPV activity by altering host factors controlling the viral replication/persistence. A schematic view of the
papillomavirus life cycle highlighting the expression of the HPV genes, which is tightly regulated and strictly linked to epithelial differentiation.
E5 could contribute to a successful infection by inducing loss of surface MHC I expression in the infected basal cells preventing presentation of
viral antigens to effector T-cells and thus, in addition to other mechanisms of immune avoidance, such as lack of inflammation, contributing to
evasion of immune surveillance. Expression of E5 in the basal/suprabasal layers of the epithelium would lead to sustained cell proliferation to
favour virus-infected cells, but extinction of its expression in the more superficial layers would permit cell differentiation and virion production. If
E5 expression proceeds beyond early lesional stages, keratinocyte differentiation and immunological removal of infected cells would not take
place and the lesion would be at greater risk for neoplastic progression. E5 actions on host factors controlling viral replication/persistence are
indicated. Dashed dots indicate low levels of E5 gene expression.

hydrophobicity, membrane localisation and very low
levels of expression. For these reasons expression of E5
is often inferred from the presence of E5 mRNA. 16E5
has been detected by immunohistochemistry by Chang
et al. [28] in low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions
(LSILs), in high-grade SILs, CIN (cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia) and paradoxically in cancer lesions although
often this gene is deleted during viral integration into
the host genome. Amino acid sequence analyses of 16E5
suggest it comprises 3 anchor-like a-helices (residues 830, 37-52 and 58-76), with only the first being long
enough to span a lipid bilayer.
When over-expressed, 16E5 is present in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), in the nuclear envelope and in
the Golgi apparatus (GA) [39], whereas at a more physiological level of expression, as shown in primary
human foreskin keratinocytes, it localizes almost exclusively to the ER and to lesser extent to GA and early
endosomes [40]. Recently, it was reported that in
HaCaT cells about 10% of total 16E5 can localize to
plasma membrane with intracellular amino terminus
and extracellular carboxyl-terminus. This observation
suggests a fusogenic role of 16E5 with the induction of
cell-cell fusion and the formation of binucleated HaCaT
cells [41-43]. In contrast, other authors report the presence of 16E5 protein only in the ER of COS and ectocervical cells in the opposite orientation: intraluminal
amino-terminus and cytoplasmic carboxyl-terminus [44].
The cytoplasmic localization of the C terminus is further

strengthened by the reported interaction of 10 amino
acids at the C terminus of 16E5 with karyopherin b3
(KNb3) [45], an abundant cellular protein localized
mainly in the cytoplasm [46,47]. An explanation for
these contrasting data is the possible presence of 16E5
in the plasma membrane as a consequence of the overexpression of 16E5 by the adenovirus vector system
used in HaCaT cells. In agreement, when BPV-1 E5 is
expressed at very high levels, such as in baculovirusinfected cells, it is detectable on the plasma membrane
in addition to the ER and GA [48].
16E5 self-associates in vitro [49] and in vivo [40,50]
and this oligomerization takes part mostly by hydrophobic interaction. The reported disulfide bonding [40]
appears less likely because models of 16E5 membrane
topology predict the localization of all six cysteine residues within the lipid bilayer [21,51] rendering cysteine
dimerization more difficult.
E5 and cell transformation

E5 interacts with a number of cellular proteins and
these interactions are deemed important for the biological activity of the protein in cell transformation and evasion of the immune response. Thus the first
transmembrane domain of 16E5 and HPV-31E5 interacts directly with the heavy chain component of the
MHC I (Major Histocompatibility Complex class I) via
the leucine pairs present in this region; interestingly this
same transmembrane domain interacts with a chaperone

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

Page 4 of 18

Table 1 Comparison of function of HPV E5 proteins with
BPV E5 proteins
E5

LR HPV-6 HR HPV-16 BPV-1 BPV-4

FF

n.e.

-

+

SI

n.e.

+

+

+

AI

+

+

+

+
n.e.

Koilocytosis
PDGFbR activation
EGF-R activation
V-ATPase binding

+

+

+

n.e.

n.e.

-

+

n.e.

+

+

+

n.e.
+

+

+

+

Gap-j inhibition

n.e.

+

+

+

PI3-K activation

n.e.

+

+

n.e.

c-Src activation
Cyclin-cdk2 activation
MHC I down-regulation

-

-

+

+

n.e.

+

+

++

cell-cell fusion to occur, indicating that E5 cannot
induce cell-cell fusion through an interaction with
another protein (receptor) on a neighbouring cell, but
rather forms E5-E5 dimers or complexes containing at
least two 16E5 molecules. These findings provide important insight into how the fusogenic process is mediated
[41].
E5 of HR HPV by itself can induce morphological and
chromosomal changes that frequently accompany the
progression of normal cells to cancerous cells. Increased
nuclear size, increased DNA content and tetraploidy are
characteristic of LSIL [59,60]. All of these morphological
changes have been detected in cell expressing 16E5 and,
in particular, the aberrant nuclei formation seems to be
due to endoreplication rather than a consequence of
cell-cell fusion and failed cytokinesis [43]. Many of these
changes are criteria used in the clinical detection of cervical cancer precursors in screening Pap tests [61].
Other morphological changes, such as the presence of
binucleated cells, increased DNA content and polyploidy
[62], are not used in the diagnosis of precancerous
lesions despite being less subjective because they require
larger amounts of material, time, and expenses.

+

+

+

+

KNb3 binding

n.e.

+

n.e.

n.e.

TRAIL pathway inhibition

n.e.

+

n.e.

n.e.

+

+

-

n.e.

n.e.

+

n.e.

n.e.

PGE2 R expression

n.e.

+

n.e.

n.e.

Cellular zinc imbalance

n.e.

+

n.e.

n.e.

ER Stress pathway inhibition

-

+

n.e.

n.e.

Cellular fusion

-

+

n.e.

n.e.

HPV E5 interaction with host cell

P21 inibition

+

+

n.e.

n.e.

HPVs infect stratified epithelia, and their whole life
cycle is inextricably linked to keratinocyte differentiation
and, in order to establish a persistent infection, HPVs
have evolved to overcome many “obstacles":
a) The stratified epithelium is associated with continuous cellular turnover and desquamation of the terminally differentiated keratinocytes, thus maintenance of the
papillomavirus within the tissue requires the infection of
basal epithelial cells and the propagation of these
infected cells.
b) Papillomaviruses use the cellular machinery for
their replication and need to maintain cell division
together with a delayed but not completely inhibited differentiation. HPV infected keratinocytes with imbalanced DNA synthesis/differentiation are forced to
apoptosis by the cellular control mechanism.
c) To establish persistent infection HPV must fight or
evade immune-surveillance.
It is clear that the timely and epithelial differentiationdependent expression of all E proteins is essential to
favour viral replication and in turn to overcome the
above mentioned obstacles. The “E5 added value” will
be highlighted in the following paragraphs.

MAPK activation
ETA activation

FF: focus formation; SI: serum independence; AI: anchorage independence. +:
presence of function; -: absence of function; n.e.: not established.

of MHC I, Bap31 [52,53]. A region within the second
helix (residues 41-54) may be the binding site for the 16
kDa pore sub-unit of vacuolar-ATPase (V-ATPase) [54],
although others claim this is located between residues
54-78 [55].
E5 is a weak transforming protein in vitro and its
effects are seen best when in co-operation with the
other viral oncoproteins: 16E5 together with E6 can
induce the formation of koilocytes, large cells with
cleared cytoplasm and pyknotic nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli, a well known morphological marker of
HPV infection [56]. The development of koilocytotic
vacuoles may be linked to the E5-induced relocalization
of calpactin I to the perinuclear region promoting perinuclear membrane fusion [57]. Hu et al. [43] confirmed
previous reports describing the oncogenic capacity of
16E5 [30,58] and offered mechanistic insights into how
E5 expression brings about morphological changes in
the cervical epithelium. Further, by identifying endoreplication as the mechanism by which the aberrant nuclei
form and increased DNA synthesis arises, there is now a
biological process that can be targeted to inhibit oncogenesis [43]. Fusogenic 16E5 is expressed on the plasma
membrane of cells and both cells must express E5 for

E5, growth factors and cell cycling

HPV infection is thought to take place when epithelial
basal cells are directly exposed to the virus during
microinjuries [63]. Infection of epithelial stem cells,
which have the capacity for self-renewal, can ensure

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

long term maintenance of the viral genome. During the
productive stage of the HPV life cycle, the early viral
proteins are expressed, maintaining 50-100 copies of
episomal DNA per cell by synchronous replication with
host cell DNA [64-66]. The demonstrated ability of
16E5 to enhance ligand-dependent activation of the
EGF-R [56,58-60] (Figure 2) and to stimulate EGFdependent proliferation of cultured human keratinocytes
[33,35,58] suggests that 16 E5 may play a major role in
expanding populations of HPV-16-infected basal keratinocytes in vivo by enhancing ligand-dependent EGF-R
activation. Confirmation of this E5 activity comes from
a study on 16E5 transgenic mice showing that functional
EGF-R is required for the induction of epidermal hyperplasia and formation of spontaneous skin tumours [67].
16E5 oncoprotein binds and inhibits the activity of the
16 kDa subunit of V-ATPase, altering the endosomal
acidification and degradation of EGF-R [34,68] thus
enhancing its recycling to the plasma membrane. 16E5
can also delay EGF-R degradation by interfering with
membrane trafficking and the fusion of early and late

Page 5 of 18

endosomes [69]. Recently, 16E5 was shown to form a
complex with KNb3 which is localized mainly in the
cytoplasm near the nuclear envelope [45]. It has been
suggested that a KNb3/16E5 complex plays an important role in vesicle trafficking, reinforcing the hypothesis
that E5 has a central role in altering protein trafficking
inside the cell. The EGF-R signalling pathway can be
activated by 16E5 through either EGF-dependent or
EGF-independent processes. 16E5 activates mitogenactivated protein kinase (MAPK) p38 and ERK1/2 in
human keratinocytes in an EGF-independent manner
[70]. Two different pathways, a receptor tyrosin kinasemediated pathway and a protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent pathway, are involved in the MAPK activation
[71,72] which increases the transcription of c-fos and cjun [33,73,74], forcing the cells through the cell cycle
and stimulating transcription of the viral oncogenes E6
and E7. In contrast with EGF-R data, less is know about
the role of the interaction of 16E5 with other ErbB
family members such as ErbB2 or ErbB4 receptor
[28,75-77].

Figure 2 HPV 16 E5 enhances growth factor signalling pathways. Activation of EGF-R and the downstream Ras-Raf-MAP kinase pathway or
PI3K-Akt pathway leads to altered cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and anti-apoptosis. The last two functions are further enhanced by the E5induced upregulation of COX-2 expression. COX-2 expression inhibits hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis and induces PGE2 secretion that
activates EP4 receptor. This, in turn, causes cAMP production, activating PKA; PKA contributes to E5-induced expression of EP4 by enhancing
CREB binding to variant CRE of the EP4 promoter. PKA influences also apoptosis through the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation of BAX. Finally,
E5 protein enhances cell proliferation through downregulation of tumor suppressor p21/p27 and through up-regulation of G protein-coupled
endothelin receptor (ETA)/ET1 autocrine loop. Dotted arrow shafts indicate uncertain pathways. The possible cross-talking between ETAR and
EGFR pathway through Src protein is also indicated.

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

16E5 is also capable of interacting with, and enhancing the signalling of, different classes of growth factor
receptors like the G protein-coupled endothelin receptor
(ETA) [36]. In growth factor-starved keratinocytes 16E5
enhances the mitogenic activity of endothelin-1 (ET-1)
the specific ligand of ETA (Figure 2). Interestingly it was
reported that the mitogenic activity of ET-1 may lead to
the chronic stimulation of keratinocyte proliferation
observed in psoriasis, an inflammatory/proliferative disorder of the skin, suggesting an important role for ET-1
in epithelial proliferation [78]. Furthermore cross-talking
between ET A R and EGF-R pathways would have an
amplifying effect on cell proliferation [79].
In contrast to the activation of EGF-R, 16E5 can
down-modulate the keratinocyte growth factor receptor/
fibroblast growth factor receptor 2b (KGF-R/FGF-R2b),
through reduction of transcripts and protein with alteration of the receptor endocytic trafficking. This causes a
decrease in the growth response to the receptor ligands,
suggesting that 16E5 might have a role on HPV infection by perturbing the KGFR-mediated physiological
behaviour of confluent keratinocytes committed to differentiation [80]. Thus, 16E5 could exert two opposite
effects, both related to virus replication: (a) increasing
the growth of the most basal undifferentiated cells by
up-regulating the EGF-R pathway and (b) decreasing the
physiological proliferation/differentiation of the suprabasal keratinocytes by down-modulation of KGFR expression and signalling.
16E5 can also down-regulate the expression of tumour
suppressor p21 and p27, both of which are cyclindependent protein kinase inhibitors (CKIs), thus causing
cell cycle progression and DNA synthesis (S-phase) (Figure 2). The p21Wafl/Sdil/Cipl down-regulation is at transcriptional level [81] whereas that of p27Kip1, one of the
most abundant CKIs, is through reduction of the halflife of p27Kip1 protein [82].
Other biological activities of 16E5 contribute to the
proliferation of the infected cells, such as the interference with cell-cell communication and alteration of
adherence and cell motility. The ability of 16E5 to inhibit gap junction-mediated communication between
epithelial cells in monolayer [83] and in raft cultures
[84] by interfering with connexin 43 may render the
transformed cells more insensitive to homeostatic
growth control signals from adjacent normal cells.
E5 and apoptosis

Due to the integration of HR HPV genome during
malignant progression, the E5 gene is not expressed in
cervical tumours but both 16/18 E5 mRNA and protein
have been detected in anogenital LSIL [85,86] supporting the possibility that E5 plays a role in early steps of
HPV infection to protect infected cells from apoptosis.

Page 6 of 18

Indeed, it has been proposed that inhibition of death
receptor-mediated apoptosis in human keratinocytes,
needed to prevent apoptosis at early stages of viral infection, is a primary function of the HR HPV E5 protein.
16E5 impairs tumor necrosis factor ligand (FasL) and
Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL)-mediated apoptosis in HaCaT cells by: (a)
downregulating the total amount of Fas receptor and
reducing Fas surface location; and (b) altering the formation of Death-Inducing Signalling Complex (DISC)
triggered by TRAIL [87]. Raft cultures of 16E5-expressing keratinocytes were completely protected from FasLor TRAIL-induced cell death [88]. Likewise, when UV
radiation was used to induce stress, E5-expressing
human keratinocytes were protected from apoptosis
[89]. In contrast, 16E5 sensitizes human keratinocytes to
apoptosis induced by osmotic stress, perhaps due to cell
membrane modifications caused by this strongly hydrophobic molecule [90].
E5 and ER stress pathway

The presence of viral proteins may activate cellular
defence mechanisms and in particular the ER stress
response. 16E5 can suppress three key proteins of the
ER stress pathway: cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), XBP-1
and IRE1a. As it was suggested for other viruses, the
down-regulation of these proteins can favour viral persistence [91] which is a major contributory factor to the
development of cancer by high-risk HPVs [92]. The
inhibition of the ER stress pathway by E5 seems to be
limited to the high risk types (Table 1); HPV-6b E5 is
unable to alter XBP-1 [93] and increased levels of COX2 were reported in recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
(RRP) lesions caused by low-risk HPV type 6b and 11
[94,95]. 16E5 is also able to lower COX-2 expression in
cells co-expressing E6/E7, suggesting that it might exert
similar activity during viral replication.
However, in different cell systems and clinical conditions the same viral early genes seem to exert opposite
effects such as the induction of COX-2 expression in
spontaneously immortalized HaCaT and cervical cancer
lines C33A and SiHa [96,97]. It is possible that the different cell origin, immortalization and transformation
status, and the relative expression of the HPV early proteins account for these contrasting data. Nevertheless
the reported consistent down-regulation of ER stress
response genes by 16E5 in primary genital keratinocytes
leads to speculation that this ER stress pathway inhibition is an event favourable to viral replication and persistence [98].
Finally, 16E5 may induce expression of one of the
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) receptor in cervical cancer cells
by stimulating the binding of CREB to a variant CRE
site in the promoter of EP4 gene [99] (Figure 2). EP4

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

pathway activates protein-kinase A which mediates ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated Bax degradation, inducing
antiapoptotic effects. Activation of EP4 by 16E5
increases anchorage-independent colony formation and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression,
leading to speculation that al least in some tumours E5
is involved in tumour growth, angiogenesis and metastasis by inducing inflammatory cell signalling pathways.
HPV E5 and immune evasion

Cervical carcinogenesis is a multi-step process which
starts with viral infection; one of the steps is persistence
of viral infection. At least three major factors may
favour papillomavirus persistence: the virus life cycle
takes place away from dermal immune cells [100], the
virus does not cause cell lysis and therefore no or weak
inflammatory response [100], and, finally, the viral proteins actively fight the immune response [101]. The E6
and E7 proteins play an important role in this fight but,
once again, the E5 protein seems to add help to the
virus by down-regulating MHC/HLA class I. MHC class
I is much reduced on the cell surface and accumulates
in the GA in cells expressing 16E5 [102]. The arrest of
MHC class I in the GA is due to E5-induced alkalinisation of the endomembrane compartments [103], following 16E5-16 k subunit c interaction, and to the direct
interaction of E5 with the heavy chain of the MHC class
I complex [53,104]. These conclusions have been
reached in cultured HaCaT cells and W12 cell line, and
in vivo in the bovine model [105]. The functional effect
of the decreased expression of HLA is a reduction of
the recognition by CD8+ T cells in vitro [106].
Furthermore consistent with its role in the alkalinization of endosomes, 16E5 can prevent the endosomal
breakdown of the invariant chain, a chaperone important in the maturation of HLA class II, leading to inhibition of expression of surface HLA class II [107].
Inhibition of HLA class I transport by 16E5, in contrast to inhibition by BPV E5, is reversible by interferon
(IFN) treatment. IFN is sufficient to overcome the inhibitory effect on MHC transport in presence of low levels
of 16E5. However, in oncogenic HPV infections, E6 and
E7 can inhibit the type I IFN pathway [108-110], thus
preventing the IFN-mediated release of E5-induced
blockage of HLA class I traffic.
Although an efficient mechanism to avoid cytoxic T
lymphocytes (CTL)-mediated immune clearance, the
reduction or absence of surface MHC class I renders
cells more susceptible to Natural Killer (NK) cell attack.
Human NK cells express multiple receptors that interact
with HLA class I molecules, including killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) that predominantly
recognize classical HLA class I, including HLA-C, and
the C type lectin superfamily of receptors that

Page 7 of 18

specifically interact with the nonclassical class I molecule HLA-E. Recognition of the class I molecules by
their inhibitory receptors inhibits NK-mediated cell
lysis, which would occur in the absence of HLA-C/E.
Thus to efficiently evade immunosurveillance, HPV has
to selectively down-regulates the HLA class I molecules.
Indeed 16E5 selectively inhibits surface expression of
HLA-A and HLA-B without affecting either synthesis or
transport to the cell surface of HLA-C/E [97,100,101].
In this way HPV-16 is potentially capable of avoiding
both CTL and NK cell killing.
The bridging of innate and adaptive immune
responses can also be affected by E5 via the inhibition
of CD1d-mediated cytokine production that would
otherwise occurs upon interaction between cell surface
CD1d and iNKT cells [111].
It was reported that interactions between 16E5 and
calnexin interfere with modification of HLA class I HCs
and results in heavy-chain retention in the ER [51].
Since the synthetic pathways for CD1d and HLA class I
HCs are similar, this E5-calnexin interaction may alter
CD1d trafficking. Indeed, interactions between 16E5 and
calnexin do not appear to interrupt all of the functions
of calnexin, but just enough to coopt the cellular cytosolic proteolytic pathway and degrade CD1d. Thus E5
inhibits the CD1d-mediated innate and adaptive
immune pathways early in HPV infection.
Finally, the reported novel association of HPV-16 and
HPV-31 E5 with Bap31 and A4 can also have an effect
on immune escape [52]. Bap31 is a chaperone involved
in quality control of, for instance, MHC molecules; A4
is a putative ion channel protein of the endoplasmic
reticulum. E5 and Bap31 physically interact and colocalise in perinuclear structures and it was demonstrated
that this binding correlates with the ability to retain the
proliferative capacity of infected keratinocytes following
differentiation. E5 also binds and colocalises with A4
independently of Bap31, however the biological significance of this interaction remains to be established.
Interestingly 16E5 first transmembrane domain which
binds MHC heavy chain shows homology with the third
transmembrane domain of Bap31 [53]. Therefore it is
possible that membrane-bound 16E5 displaces Bap31
from MHC I, maybe taking advantage of its own interaction with Bap31, and thus retains MHC I in the ER/
GA.
Thus immune escape mediated by E5 seems to be a
complex process, perhaps evolved to impact on different
pathways regulating the intracellular trafficking of
immunosurveillance molecules by general not-specific
mechanisms, such as endosomal alkalization, and specific ones, such as binding to MHC I heavy chain and
chaperones such as calnexin, invariant chain or Bap31.
It remains to be seen if E5 expression causes immune

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

escape also in vivo. An inverse correlation exists
between expression of 16E5 and presence of surface
MHC I in the W12 keratinocyte line derived from a
CIN I biopsy [106], and in a small panel of naturally
occurring CIN lesions (Campo, unpublished observations). Additionally, again in a limited number of samples, an association has been reported between
decreased CD1d immunoreactivity and progression of
cervical neoplastic lesions with statistical significance (P
= 0.0001) [111].
Cell transformation pathways alternative to E5

Beta-HPVs do not code for an E5 protein. Considering
the ubiquitous presence of beta-HPVs in the healthy
population with almost no associated pathologies, the
lack of E5 ORF in these HPV could represent a factor
hampering the fully replicative cycle of these viruses.
Moreover, some beta-HPVs are detected together with
HPV-3 or related genotypes [112], and such a co-detection with E5-encoding HPVs suggests that beta-HPVs
benefit from E5 delivered by the co-infecting HPV
[113]. In human pathology there is a rare, autosomal
recessive genodermatosis associated with a high risk of
skin carcinoma, Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis (EV),
characterized by abnormal susceptibility to infection by
beta HPVs. Genetic analysis led to the identification of
two adjacent genes (EVER1 and EVER2), the mutation
of which segregates with the disease [114]. This extraordinarily high sensitivity to infections by cutaneous betaHPVs in otherwise-healthy individuals carrying a mutation in one of the EVER genes suggests that in humans
a natural EVER-based barrier exists, which protects the
host from PVs. The EVER proteins are crucial for the
functional integrity of the EVER/ZnT-1 complex
[115,116] responsible for maintaining a low level of free
zinc, modulating the activity of the AP-1 transcription
factors needed for viral genome expression. It has been
proposed that a cellular zinc imbalance constitutes an
important, perhaps even a crucial, step in the HPV life
cycle. It seems that breaking the barrier to cellular zinc
balance is an important element of the pathogenesis of
both alpha- and beta-HPVs, and the main difference
between these two groups would be a mechanism
employed to achieve the same goal. Beta-HPVs are
defective for this zinc imbalance, an important growthpromoting function performed by E5 of alpha-HPVs,
and inactivation of EVER proteins may compensate for
the missing viral function [117]. Indeed the transmembrane viral 16E5 and cellular EVER proteins interact
both with the zinc transporter ZnT1, and are likely to
modulate zinc homeostasis [115,117]. The disruption of
the cellular zinc-transporting complex achieved during
the long co-evolution of HPV and the human species by
two completely unrelated strategies underlines the

Page 8 of 18

general importance of the cellular zinc (im)balance in
the papillomavirus life cycle and the central role played
by E5.
In the absence of E5, beta-papillomaviruses have
evolved a mechanism to escape immunosurveillance
independent of E5. Indeed the E6 and E7 oncoproteins
of cutaneous HPV-38 interfere with the interferon pathway. Expression of the two viral proteins in HaCaT keratinocytes led to a decrease of MHC I levels. This
down-regulation was associated with a reduction of
expression of MHC I heavy chain, of the peptide chaperone TAP and of the STAT-1 downstream effector
IRF-1 [118]. Thus, at least for some (high risk?) beta
papillomavirus other E5-unrelated mechanisms take part
in the process of viral replication and avoidance of
immune control.
HPV E5 and carcinogenesis

HPV E5 proteins are not thought to play a role in the
later steps of malignant progression because in high-risk
HPV infections that progress to cancer the viral DNA
typically integrates into the host genome often resulting
in the loss of the E2 and E5 genes [65]. However in contrast to other high-risk HPVs, HPV-16 DNA can exist in
integrated, episomal or integrated and episomal form in
malignant lesions of the cervix. In one study about 60%
of HPV-16-positive cervical cancer expressed the 16E5
protein [28] and recent reports suggest that these
tumours with episomal HPV-16 may have a more
aggressive behaviour (Venuti, unpublished data). Nevertheless, the fact that a substantial proportion of the
tumours do not express E5 indicates that the protein is
not essential for HPV-16 mediated tumour progression.
Although 16E5 may not contribute to malignant progression, there is evidence that if E5 expression proceeds
beyond early lesional stages, keratinocyte differentiation
and immunological removal of infected cells does not
take place increasing the likelihood of subsequent oncogenic transformation.
The presence of an E5 gene in all HR HPVs [23] and
the detection of E5 variants with higher codon usage in
high grade lesions [119] point to an important role of
E5 during PV-induced pathogenesis. This assumption is
further strengthen by studies on transgenic animals: (a)
Transgenic mice expressing only HPV-16 E6 and E7
oncogenes in the basal epithelium develop fewer
tumours than those arising in transgenic mice expressing HPV-16 E5, E6 and E7 genes [120] (b) Mice transgenic for 16E5 (without HPV 16 E6 and E7) develop
skin tumours with high frequency [67].
One or more of the demonstrated biological activities
of 16E5 may be responsible for early post-infection
events enhancing the probability of subsequent carcinogenesis. Indeed viral persistence is considered to be an

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

important factor in the neoplastic progression of a premalignant lesion [65]. The 16E5-induced down regulation of MCH I [104] and MHC II [107], resulting in the
infected cell evading immunosurveillance, may increase
the duration and size of the HPV infection raising the
probability that some infected cells will become transformed. The expansion of infected cells may also be
favoured by 16E5-induced DNA synthesis in differentiating keratinocytes [121] and by 16E5-enhanced liganddependent activation of EGF-R [56,58-60]. Furthermore
the ability of 16E5 to inhibit gap-junction-mediated
intercellular communication via connexin 43 interaction
may render the infected cells more insensitive to
homeostatic growth control signals from adjacent, noninfected cells [83,84]. 16E5 induction of cell fusion may
represent another critical event in the early stage of
HPV-associated cervical cancer [41-43]. Thus, HR HPVs
E5 is involved in the very early stage of carcinogenesis
by prolonging the life and expanding the pool of the
infected cells from which cancer may arise as a stochastic event. Finally E5 can be also involved in negative
selection of cells harboring episomal virus and in turn
favoring the selection of cells with integrated virus. Episome loss, associated with induction of antiviral
response genes, could be a key event in the spontaneous
selection of cervical keratinocytes containing integrated
HPV16. Microarray analysis showed that episome loss
was closely associated with endogenous activation of
antiviral response genes that are also inducible by type I
IFN pathway [122]. Recently this activation of the antiviral state was shown to be induced by 16E5 through
the stimulation of IRF-1 and IFN-b [123]. In this scenario cervical carcinogenesis requires not only HR HPV
integration, but also loss of inhibitory (E2 expression)
episomes by the E5-induced establishment of an antiviral state that may accelerate episomal clearance.

BPV E5
BPV E5 is the best characterized of the E5 proteins and
has provided the blueprint for investigations into HPV
E5. E5 is the major BPV oncoprotein, only 44 amino
acid in BPV type 1 (BPV-1) and 42 in BPV type 4 (BPV4) [124-127]. Both proteins can be divided into two distinct domain: an amino-terminal domain which makes
up the majority of the protein and consists of strongly
hydrophobic leucine-rich membrane-spanning amino
acid residues with a single hydrophilic amino acid at
position 17 (glutamine in BPV-1 E5 and asparagine in
BPV-4 E5), and a short hydrophilic carboxyl-terminal
domain[125,128]. Both E5 proteins localize in the endomembrane compartments of the GA, ER and plasma
membrane. It has been suggested for BPV-1 E5 that
helix-helix hydrophobic contacts within the TM domain
play a critical role in functional dimer assembly and that

Page 9 of 18

the cystein-containing motif functions as additional
dimer stabilization [129-131].
Cell transformation by BPV E5

Despite their structural similarity, BPV-1 and BPV-4 E5
differ in the ways they achieve cell transformation, likely
reflecting the different origin of the cells hosting the
two viruses. BPV-1 infects fibroblasts and skin keratinocytes giving rise to fibropapillomas, whereas BPV-4
infects solely the epithelial cells of the mucous epithelium of the upper gastrointestinal tract [132]. Thus,
while expression of BPV-1 E5 by itself is sufficient to
fully transform mouse and primary human fibroblast
cells [133,134], BPV-4 E5 contributes to the transformed
phenotype of primary cells by conferring anchorage
independent growth, growth in low serum, focus formation and increased cell motility but only in the presence
of the other viral oncoproteins, resembling in this
respect 16E5 (Table 1) [127,135,136]. For both proteins
the hydrophobic domain, the hydrophilic residues at
position 17 and the hydrophilic C-terminal tail are critical for their transforming activities [135,137].
BPV-1 E5 induces tumourigenic cell transformation by
strongly and specifically binding to its cellular target,
Platelet Derived Growth Factor Receptor b receptor
(PDGFb-R) tyrosine kinase in a ligand-independent
manner [138-141]. The PDGFb-R is a transmembrane
protein which is normally activated by binding of its
ligand PDGF. BPV-1 E5 can bind as a dimer to two
monomers of the PDGFb-R [140,142,143], inducing
receptor dimerisation which in turn causes trans-phosphyorylation of specific tyrosine kinase residues within
the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor resulting in
mitogenic signalling [144]. Studies using PDGFb-R
kinase inhibitors show that maintenance of transformation by BPV-1 E5 requires sustained PDGFb-R activation [145,146].
BPV-1 E5 interacts with the PDGFb-R via its transmembrane domain [141,142,147], unlike the natural
ligand PDGF which binds the receptor via its ligand
binding domain Extensive characterisation of E5 demonstrates that there are essentially four residues important
for PDGFb-R binding and activation. These are the
transmembrane glutamine (Gln17) important for both
dimerisation of E5 and for its interaction with PDGFbR; the aspartic acid (Asp 33) residue at the juxtamembrane region which provides a negative charge required
for receptor interaction and two terminal cysteine residues (Cys37, Cys39) essential for homodimerisation of
E5 [125,137,145,148,149]. Interestingly, these four residues are conserved among the E5 proteins of fibropapillomaviruses [150] whereas other residues within the
transmembrane region are less well conserved. Mutagenesis studies have demonstrated that BPV-1 E5 can

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

tolerate a surprising number of mutations and that the
maintenance of the hydrophobic nature of E5 and the
conserved residues is enough to confer transforming
activity [151-155].
Mutational analyses of the receptor itself have identified key residues important for function. The PDGFb-R
is as single span type I transmembrane receptor with
three domains: an amino terminal domain which binds
its receptor, a short membrane spanning region and an
intracellular kinase domain. Two residues appear to be
important for E5 interaction and transformation activity:
a threonine 513 in the transmembrane domain is
required for H bonding with Gln17 residue of the E5
protein and lysine at 499 in the juxtamembrane region
with Asp33 in the E5 protein [156-158]. An important
feature of BPV-1 E5 mediated PDGFb-R activation is
that activation occurs independently of PDGF since E5
can constitutively activate PDGFb-R deletion mutants
that lack the extracellular ligand-binding domain
[141,159].
The interaction between BPV-1 E5 and PDGFb-R is
highly specific. At physiological levels, E5 is able to
interact with PDGFb-R but not with other tyrosine
kinase receptors including insulin receptors, basic fibroblast growth factor receptor or insulin-like growth factor
receptors, however at higher levels E5 can interact with
additional receptors [140,144]. E5 cannot bind the
PDGF a receptor, a closely related receptor to the
PDGFb-R whilst both of these receptors can be activated
by PDGF [140-144]. The specificity is thought to be
conferred by the transmembrane domain [159].
Most of the studies on BPV E5 and PDGFb-R activation have been performed in vitro. Borzacchiello et al
(2006) have shown that BPV-2 E5 interacts with and
activates the PDGFb-R in vivo in bovine urinary bladder
cancers (Figure 3). Moreover, the binding of E5 to
PDGFb-R induces the activation of different signal
transduction pathways: PDGFb-R and phosphoinositide
3 kinase (PI3K) physically interact as do PDGFb-R and
the Grb2-Sos complex. PI3K-Akt and Grb2-Sos-Ras signals are all potentiated in cancer, but, as in in vitro
models, the levels of Erk and Mek proteins are not significantly overexpressed [160-162] (Figure 4). BPV E5 is
able to activate c-src, a non receptor tyr kinase, but not
the closely related c-Fyn and PI3K [163]. The activation
of the latter is necessary but not sufficient to induce cell
transformation independently of PDGFb-R signalling
[163,164]. Unlike BPV-1 E5, BPV-4 E5 induces transformation of established cells independently from the constitutive activation of tyrosine kinase growth receptors
(Table 1) [165]. Cell transformation by BPV-4 E5 (either
of established cells by itself or of primary cells in cooperation with other viral oncoproteins) is achieved
through transactivation of the cyclin A gene promoter,

Page 10 of 18

increased cyclin A expression and cyclin A-associated
kinase activity, and inhibition of the negative regulator
of cell cycle, p27Kip1 [135,166-168]. Mutational analyses
of BPV-4 E5 have demonstrate that, as is the case for
BPV-1 E5, the residue at position 17 and the hydrophilic
C-terminal tail are critical for its transforming activities
[135]. Thus both mutation of Asp 17 and deletion of
the C-terminus hydrophilic domain completely abrogate
cell transformation and E5 ability to activate the cyclin
A pathway [135].
Down-regulation of MHC expression

The down-regulation of surface MHC I and retention of
the MHC I complex in the GA were first shown in cells
expressing BPV-4 E5 [169] and then confirmed for
other E5 proteins both from BPV and HPV. BPV E5
interferes with MHC I biosynthesis at multiple steps:
transcriptional inhibition of the MHC class I heavy
chain gene, degradation of the heavy chain and physical
interaction with any residual heavy chain [169,170].
Only the physical interaction with heavy chain is shared
with 16E5 [99]. Moreover, in the case of BPV-4 E5 the
down-regulation of surface MHC I is irreversible, as
interferon cannot restore the transport of the MHC I
complex to the cell surface [128], while this is not the
case for 16E5. This may reflect the fact that E5 is a
“stronger” protein in BPV than in HPV.
In any event, the finding of MHC down-regulation by
E5 has proved of great importance since it defined a
new biological activity shared by both BPV and HPV E5
(Table 1), which allows the infected cell not to be effectively recognised by cytotoxic CTL [106].
BPV E5: other biological activities

BPV E5 interacts with the 16 kDa protein, a component
of the V-ATPase [147,171]. In the case of BPV-1 E5,
this protein association exists as a tri-component complex, which contains also PDGFb-R molecules. Mutational analyses have demonstrated that glutamic acid
143 in the transmembrane domain of the 16 kDa protein and glutamine 17 in the transmembrane domain of
BPV-1 E5 are essential for E5-16 kDa stable association
[172]. The binding of the E5 with 16 kDa perturbs the
correct assembly of V-ATPase and H+ pumping, with
persistent alkalinization of the GA and endosomal vesicles [103] and may lead, directly or indirectly, to a
marked loss of cell-cell communication through downregulation of gap junctions (Table 1) [101,173], rendering the transformed cells more insensitive to homeostatic growth control signals from adjacent normal cells.
However, in the case of HPV-16 inhibition of gap junction intercellular communication has been attributed to
the interaction of E5 with connexin 43 [84]. E5-expressing bovine urinary bladder tumours show activated

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

Page 11 of 18

Figure 3 BPV E5 and PDGFb-receptor co-precipitate and co-localize in bovine urinary bladder carcinoma. A. Co-immunoprecipitation of
the PDGFb-receptor with E5 antiserum. Tissue lysates were immunoprecipitated with the anti E5 antibody and the immunoblot was analyzed
with the anti- PDGFb-receptor antibody. Lanes 1-3 are BPV-2 positive bovine urinary bladder cancer samples, T1, T2, T3. Lane 4 is BPV-2 DNA
positive normal bovine bladder mucosa, N1. B. Coimmunoprecipitation of the E5 oncoprotein with the PDGFb-receptor antiserum. The arrow
indicates the E5 oncoprotein and its estimated kDa weight. In a parallel blot, the same amount of lysate was probed with an antibody to b-actin
to control for the quantity of protein (bottom panel) C. Colocalization (yellow) of PDGFb-receptor (red) and E5 (green) in bovine neoplastic
urothelium. The white arrows indicate a juxtanuclear position of E5 and PDGFb-receptor (reproduced with permission from Borzacchiello et al.,
Oncogene 2006).

calpain 3, suggesting a possible involvement of this protein in urothelial carcinogenesis [174].
Targeting HPV-16 E5 for cervical treatment

16E5 activates many different cellular pathways involved
mostly in the early stage of cervical carcinogenesis

[175]. Different studies have pointed out the possibility
of E5 targeting for CaCx therapy. In animal studies,
16E5 delivered by an adenovirus vector reduces the
growth of tumours and the E5 vaccine induces protection against tumours through CD8 + cytotoxic T cells
(CTLs) [176]. The same research group has further

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

Page 12 of 18

Figure 4 Model of cellular events during cell transformation mediated by BPV-1 E5. E5 binds to the transmembrane domain of PDGFb-R
and induces receptor dimerisation and autophosphorylation. The activated receptor can recruit p85-PI3K that activates the AKT and JNK
pathway. PDGFbR stimulation of a PI3K-AKTpathway leads to increased expression of cyclin D3. Recruitment of Sos1-GRB2 complex to p-PDGFbR
may activate Ras, although the downstream MAPK pathway is not activated; therefore Ras may activate PI3-K pathway. The SHP2-p66Shc
complex bound to the activated PDGFb-R may be recruited and inactivates p190BRhoGAP, resulting in activation of a Rho family GTPase, Rho A
and its downstream effector ROCK inducing focus formation. E5 is able to interact with c-src in late endosomal and trans-Golgi compartment,
thus resulting in c-src constitutively activation. E5 interacts with the C-terminus of MHC I heavy chain and causes the retention of MHC I in the
Golgi apparatus, thus preventing its transport to the cell surface. E5 perturbs the physiological activity of the V-ATPase by inhibiting the correct
assembly of V-ATPase and H+ pumping, thus inducing persistent alkalinization of the Golgi and endosomes vescicles.

demonstrated that the stimulating epitope was an E5
peptide (aminoacids 25-33) and vaccination with this
peptide carrying CpG oligonucleotides reduced tumour
growth [177]. 16E5 modulates different cellular pathways and the targeting of these relevant pathways may
lead in a near future to a possible therapeutic approach.
In addition, E5 is more consistently expressed in the
early stage of viral infection and in precancerous lesions
[178], and therefore E5 or E5 altered pathways could be
targeted to cure the infection and to prevent precancerous lesions from progressing into invasive cancers. 16E5
interacts with many different pathways including upregulation of growth factor signalling, induction of inflammatory cell signalling, angiogenesis and antiapoptosis
(Figure 2). Furthermore E5 participates in malignant
transformation by supplementing (added value) the roles
of E6 and E7. All these E5-induced signalling pathways
(Figure 2) or E5 itself can be addressed by therapies
already utilised against the other HPV oncogenes such
as radioimmunotherapy, oncolytic adenoviruses [179],

gene silencing using short interfering RNA (siRNA)
[180] and others, which have been originally used to target the E5-upregulated pathways. EGF-R, COX-2 or ET1
inhibitors should be useful in controlling E5 activity in
the precancerous lesions as well as other small molecules interfering with downstream molecules. Finally, E5
may be considered a viroporin, like the VP4 of SV40
[181] and, therefore, susceptible of therapy by compounds that affect similar structures produced by other
viruses. Indeed amantidine, amiloride, long-alkyl-chain
iminosugar derivatives and new compounds seem to
affect, to various extent, the activity of the 16E5 protein
in vitro (A. Macdonald, personal communication, 11
DNA TV Meeting, Trieste, Italy, 2011)

Conclusions
The main activities of E5 can be resumed as follows:
Although E6 and E7 provide the primary transforming
activities of HR HPVs, E5 can augment their function
and contribute to tumour progression:

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

When expressed alone, HPV E5 has weak transforming activity.
In transgenic mouse models, 16E5 expression in the
skin produces epithelial hyperproliferation with spontaneous tumour formation, whereas in estrogen-treated
mice, expression of E5 alone can induce cancers [182],
suggesting a role for E5 as a true oncoprotein.
The presence in HPV 16-positive cervical tumours of
viral episomes in addition to viral integrants leads to the
hypothesis that there are multiple pathways to HPV
induced tumourigenesis see above. Beside the basic
hypothesis of high-level expression of E6 and E7 consequent to the abrogation of the repressive effects of E2
due to the loss of the E2 gene during integration,
another pathway can be active in cells that still maintain
viral episomes, in which E5 would augment the activity
of E6 and E7. The expression of E5 is increased on differentiation to promote proliferation of differentiated
cells and productive viral replication.
The localization of HPV E5 to the endoplasmic reticulum suggests its activity may be related to the trafficking
of cytoplasmic membrane proteins through this cellular
compartment, in particular of growth factor receptors
and of molecules involved in immune control.
There are multiple documented intracellular binding
targets for 16E5 such as the EGF receptor family member ErbB4 [77], the 16-kDa subunit of the vacuolar H
+
-ATPase [39,55], the heavy chain of HLA type I [104],
calnexin [51], the zinc transporter ZnT-1, the EVER1
and EVER2 transmembrane channel-like proteins
[115,117] the nuclear import receptor family member
KNb3 [45], BAP31 and A4 [44,52] (Figure 2).
However the role of 16E5 in carcinogenesis seems to
be limited to the early stages of cervical carcinogenesis
because the E5 gene is frequently deleted when the
HPV genome is integrated during malignant progression
[28,68,183]. Nevertheless, the expression of 16E5 as
detected by immunohistochemistry, was reported in
approximately 80, 90 and 60% of HPV 16-infected
LSILs, high-grade SILs and cervical carcinomas, respectively [28]. Furthermore data from a limited number of
patients were presented at the 1st International Workshop on E5 Oncogene [184] suggesting that E5 expression may lead to a worse response to treatment with
taxanes (Venuti, unpublished data). Therefore, targeting
E5 which is frequently expressed in earlier stages of
malignant transformation may be a rational approach
for preventing premalignant lesions from progressing
into invasive cervical cancers [175]. The recent successful eradication of HPV-induced tumours in mice by
anti-E5 vaccination [176] indicates that E5 can be used
in immunotherapy. The neutralization of E5 or of E5induced signalling pathways, therefore, whether immunological or chemical, could be advantageous

Page 13 of 18

particularly in HPV infections and pre-cancerous lesions
where there are no treatments available.
List of abbreviations used
HR: High Risk; PV: Papillomavirus; 16E5: HPV-16 E5; CxCa: cancer of the
uterine cervix; PAP test: Papanicolau test; E: early proteins; L: late structural
proteins; ORF: open reading frame; LSIL: low grade squamous intraepithelial
lesions; CIN: cervical intraepithelial neoplasia; GA: Golgi apparatus; ER:
endoplasmic reticulum; KNβ3: karyopherin β3; MHC I: Major
histocompatibility complex class I; MHC II: Major histocompatibility complex
class II; HLA: human leukocyte antigen; CTL: cytotoxic T Lymphocyte; EGF-R:
epidermal growth factor receptor; NK: natural killer; MAPK: mitogen-activated
protein kinase; PKC: protein kinase C; ETA: endothelin receptor; ET-1:
endothelin-1; CKI: cyclin-dependent protein kinase inhibitors; TRAIL: Tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand; DISC: Death-Inducing
Signalling Complex; FasL: Tumor necrosis factor ligand superfamily member;
COX-2: cyclooxygenase 2; PGE2: Prostaglandin E2 receptor; XBP-1: X-boxbinding protein 1; IRE: Serine/threonine-protein kinase/endoribonuclease
IRE1; IFN: interferon; CREB: Cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein;
PDGFβ-R: Platelet Derived Growth Factor Receptor β subunit receptor; PI3K:
phosphoinositide3 kinase; V-ATPase: vacuolar H+-ATPase.
Acknowledgements
MSC thanks Cancer Research UK for its continuous support throughout her
career. This work was supported by grant PRIN - Ministero dell’Istruzione,
Università e Ricerca Scientifica (MIUR) protocol number 2008LTY389. AV and
FP thanks Lega Italiana Lotta Tumori (LILT) for supporting their researches.
Author details
1
Laboratory of Virology, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy. 2Institute
of Infection Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK.
3
Department of Pathology and Animal health, University of Naples Federico
II, Naples, Italy. 4University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.
Authors’ contributions
All authors have contributed equally to the paper. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 28 July 2011 Accepted: 11 November 2011
Published: 11 November 2011
References
1. IARC Working Group: Human papillomaviruses. Lyon, International Agency
for research on cancer; 199564.
2. Walboomers JM, Jacobs MV, Manos MM, Bosch FX, Kummer JA, Shah KV,
Snijders PJ, Peto J, Meijer CJ, Muñoz N: Human papillomavirus is a necessary
cause of invasive cervical cancer worldwide. J Pathol 1999, 189:12-19.
3. Frazer IH: Prevention of cervical cancer through papillomavirus
vaccination. Nat Rev Immunol 2004, 4:46-54.
4. Parkin DM, Bray F: Chapter 2: The burden of HPV-related cancers. Vaccine
2006, 24:11-25.
5. Syrjänen S, Lodi G, von Bültzingslöwen I, Aliko A, Arduino P, Campisi G,
Challacombe S, Ficarra G, Flaitz C, Zhou HM, Maeda H, Miller C, Jontell M:
Human papillomaviruses in oral carcinoma and oral potentially
malignant disorders: a systematic review. Oral Dis 2011, 17:58-72.
6. Klozar J, Tachezy R, Rotnáglová E, Koslabová E, Saláková M, Hamsíková E:
Human papillomavirus in head and neck tumors: epidemiological,
molecular and clinical aspects. Wien Med Wochenschr 2010, 160:305-309.
7. Zafer E, Ergun MA, Alver G, Sahin FI, Yavuzer S, Ekmekci A: Detection and
typing of human papillomavirus in non-small cell lung cancer. Respiration
2004, 71:88-90.
8. Gillison ML: Human papillomavirus-associated head and neck cancer is a
distinct epidemiologic, clinical, and molecular entity. Semin Oncol 2004,
31:744-754.
9. Syrjänen KJ: HPV infections in benign and malignant sinonasal lesions. J
Clin Pathol 2003, 56:174-181.

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

10. zur Hausen H: Yohei Ito Memorial Lecture: Papillomaviruses in human
cancers. Leukemia 1999, 13:1-5.
11. Audeau A, Han HW, Johnston MJ, Whitehead MW, Frizelle FA: Does human
papilloma virus have a role in squamous cell carcinoma of the colon
and upper rectum? Eur J Surg Oncol 2002, 28:657-660.
12. Damin AP, Karam R, Zettler CG, Caleffi M, Alexandre CO: Evidence for an
association of human papillomavirus and breast carcinomas. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 2004, 84:131-137.
13. Shigehara K, Sasagawa T, Kawaguchi S, Nakashima T, Shimamura M,
Maeda Y, Konaka H, Mizokami A, Koh E, Namiki M: Etiologic role of human
papillomavirus infection in bladder carcinoma. Cancer 2011,
117:2067-2076.
14. Martinez-Fierro ML, Leach RJ, Gomez-Guerra LS, Garza-Guajardo R, JohnsonPais T, Beuten J, Morales-Rodriguez IB, Hernandez-Ordoñez MA, CalderonCardenas G, Ortiz-Lopez R, Rivas-Estilla AM, Ancer-Rodriguez J, RojasMartinez A: Identification of viral infections in the prostate and
evaluation of their association with cancer. BMC Cancer 2010, 10:326.
15. Borzacchiello G, Roperto F, Nasir L, Campo MS: Human papillomavirus
research: do we still need animal models? Int J Cancer 2009, 125:739-740.
16. Werness BA, Levine AJ, Howley PM: Association of human papillomavirus
types 16 and 18 E6 proteins with p53. Science 1990, 248:76-79.
17. Scheffner M, Werness BA, Huibregtse JM, Levine AJ, Howley PM: The E6
oncoprotein encoded by human papillomavirus types 16 and 18
promotes the degradation of p53. Cell 1990, 63:1129-1136.
18. Moody CA, Laimins LA: Human papillomavirus oncoproteins: pathways to
transformation. Nat Rev Cancer 2010, 10:550-560.
19. Bernard HU, Burk RD, Chen Z, van Doorslaer K, Hausen H, de Villiers EM:
Classification of papillomaviruses (PVs) based on 189 PV types and
proposal of taxonomic amendments. Virology 2010, 401:70-79.
20. Muñoz N, Bosch FX, de Sanjosé S, Herrero R, Castellsagué X, Shah KV,
Snijders PJ, Meijer CJ, International Agency for Research on Cancer
Multicenter Cervical Cancer Study Group: Epidemiologic classification of
human papillomavirus types associated with cervical cancer. N Engl J
Med 2003, 348:518-527.
21. Nath R, Mant CA, Kell B, Cason J, Bible JM: Analyses of variant human
papillomavirus type-16 E5 proteins for their ability to induce
mitogenesis of murine fibroblasts. Cancer Cell Int 2006, 6:19-27.
22. Bravo IG, Alonso A: Mucosal human papillomaviruses encode four
different E5 proteins whose chemistry and phylogeny correlate with
malignant or benign growth. J Virol 2004, 78:13613-13626.
23. Schiffman M, Herrero R, Desalle R, Hildesheim A, Wacholder S,
Rodriguez AC, Bratti MC, Sherman ME, Morales J, Guillen D, Alfaro M,
Hutchinson M, Wright TC, Solomon D, Chen Z, Schussler J, Castle PE,
Burk RD: The carcinogenicity of human papillomavirus types reflects viral
evolution. Virology 2005, 337:76-84.
24. Garcia-Vallve S, Alonso A, Bravo IG: Papillomaviruses: different genes have
different histories. Trends Microbiol 2005, 13:514-521.
25. Longworth MS, Laimins LA: Pathogenesis of human papillomaviruses in
differentiating epithelia. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2004, 68:362-372.
26. Burnett S, Jareborg N, DiMaio D: Localization of bovine papillomavirus
type 1 E5 protein to transformed basal keratinocytes and permissive
differentiated cells in fibropapilloma tissue. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992,
89:5665-5669.
27. Araibi EH, Marchetti B, Ashrafi GH, Campo MS: Downregulation of major
histocompatibility complex class I in bovine papillomas. J Gen Virol 2004,
85:2809-2814.
28. Chang JL, Tsao YP, Liu DW, Huang SJ, Lee WH, Chen SL: The expression of
HPV- 16 E5 protein in squamous neoplastic changes in the uterine
cervix. J Biomed Sci 2001, 8:206-213.
29. Chen SL, Mounts P: Transforming activity of E5a protein of human
papillomavirus type 6 in NIH 3T3 and C127 cells. J Virol 1990,
64:3226-3233.
30. Leechanachai P, Banks L, Moreau F, Matlashewski G: The E5 gene from
human papillomavirus type 16 is an oncogene which enhances growth
factor-mediated signal transduction to the nucleus. Oncogene 1992,
7:19-25.
31. Leptak C, Ramon y Cajal S, Kulke R, Horwitz BH, Riese DJ, Dotto GP,
DiMaio D: Tumorigenic transformation of murine keratinocytes by the E5
genes of bovine papillomavirus type 1 and human papillomavirus type
16. J Virol 1991, 65:7078-7083.

Page 14 of 18

32. Pim D, Collins M, Banks L: Human papillomavirus type 16 E5 gene
stimulates the transforming activity of the epidermal growth factor
receptor. Oncogene 1992, 7:27-32.
33. Bouvard V, Matlashewski G, Gu ZM, Storey A, Banks L: The human
papillomavirus type 16 E5 gene cooperates with the E7 gene to
stimulate proliferation of primary cells and increases viral gene
expression. Virology 1994, 203:73-80.
34. Straight SW, Herman B, McCance DJ: The E5 oncoprotein of human
papillomavirus type 16 inhibits the acidification of endosomes in human
keratinocytes. J Virol 1995, 69:3185-3192.
35. Valle FG, Banks L: The human papillomavirus (HPV)-6 and HPV-16 E5
proteins co-operate with HPV-16 E7 in the transformation of primary
rodent cells. J Gen Virol 1995, 76:1239-1245.
36. Venuti A, Salani D, Poggiali F, Manni V, Bagnato A: The E5 oncoprotein of
human papillomavirus type 16 enhances endothelin-1-induced
keratinocyte growth. Virology 1998, 248:1-5.
37. Ghai J, Ostrow RS, Tolar J, McGlennen RC, Lemke TD, Tobolt D, Liu Z,
Faras AJ: The E5 gene product of rhesus papillomavirus is an activator of
endogenous Ras and phosphatidylinositol-3’-kinase in NIH 3T3 cells. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:12879-12884.
38. Rho J, de Villiers EM, Choe J: Transforming activities of human
papillomavirus type 59 E5, E6 and E7 open reading frames in mouse
C127 cells. Virus Res 1996, 44:57-65.
39. Conrad M, Bubb VJ, Schlegel R: The human papillomavirus type 6 and 16
E5 proteins are membrane-associated proteins which associate with the
16-kilodalton pore-forming protein. J Virol 1993, 67:6170-6178.
40. Disbrow GL, Sunitha I, Baker CC, Hanover J, Schlegel R: Codon optimization
of the HPV-16 E5 gene enhances protein expression. Virology 2003,
311:105-114.
41. Hu L, Ceresa BP: Characterization of the plasma membrane localization
and orientation of HPV16 E5 for cell-cell fusion. Virology 2009,
393:135-143.
42. Hu L, Plafker K, Vorozhko V: Human papillomavirus E5 induces binucleated cell formation by cell-cell fusion. Virology 2009, 384:125-134.
43. Hu L, Potapova TA, Li S: Expression of HPV16 E5 produces enlarged
nuclei and polyploidy through endoreplication. Virology 2010,
405:342-351.
44. Krawczyk E, Suprynowicz FA, Sudarshan SR, Schlegel R: Membrane
orientation of the human papillomavirus type 16 E5 oncoprotein. J Virol
2010, 84:1696-1703.
45. Hanover JA, Schlegel R, Suprynowicz FA: Karyopherin β3: a new cellular
target for the HPV-16 E5 oncoprotein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008,
371:684-688.
46. Deane R, Schäfer W, Zimmermann HP, Mueller L, Goörlich D, Prehn S,
Ponstingl H, Bischoff FR: Ran-binding protein 5 (RanBP5) is related to the
nuclear transport factor importin-beta but interacts differently with
RanBP1. Mol Cell Biol 1997, 17:5087-5096.
47. Yaseen NR, Blobel G: Cloning and characterization of human karyopherin
β3. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:4451-4456.
48. Burkhardt A, Willingham M, Gay C, Jeang KT, Schlegel R: The E5
oncoprotein of bovine papillomavirus is oriented asymmetrically in
Golgi and plasma membranes. Virology 1989, 170:334-339.
49. Yang DH, Wildeman AG, Sharom FJ: Overexpression, purification, and
structural analysis of the hydrophobic E5 protein from human
papillomavirus type 16. Protein Expr Purif 2003, 30:1-10.
50. Gieswein CE, Sharom FJ, Wildeman AG: Oligomerization of the E5 protein
of human papillomavirus type 16 occurs through multiple hydrophobic
regions. Virology 2003, 313:415-426.
51. Gruener M, Bravo IG, Momburg F, Alonso A, Tomakidi P: The E5 protein of
the human papillomavirus type 16 down-regulates HLA-I surface
expression in calnexin expressing but not in calnexin-deficient cells. Virol
J 2007, 4:116-130.
52. Regan JA, Laimins LA: Bap31 is a novel target of the human
papillomavirus E5 protein. J Virol 2008, 82:10042-10051.
53. Cortese MS, Ashrafi GH, Campo MS: All four di-leucine motifs in the first
hydrophobic domain of the E5 oncoprotein of human papillomavirus
type 16 are essential for surface MHC class I downregulation activity
and E5 endomembrane localization. Int J Cancer 2010, 126:1675-1682.
54. Adam JL, Briggs MW, McCance DJ: A mutagenic analysis of the E5 protein
of human papillomavirus type 16 reveals that E5 binding to the

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.
64.
65.
66.

67.

68.
69.
70.

71.

72.
73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

vacuolar H+-ATPase is not sufficient for biological activity, using
mammalian and yeast expression systems. Virology 2000, 272:315-325.
Rodriguez MI, Finbow ME, Alonso A: Binding of human papillomavirus 16
E5 to the 16 kDa subunit c (proteolipid) of the vacuolar H+-ATPase can
be dissociated from the E5-mediated epidermal growth factor receptor
overactivation. Oncogene 2000, 19:3727-3732.
Krawczyk E, Suprynowicz FA, Liu X, Dai Y, Hartmann DP, Hanover J,
Schlegel R: Koilocytosis: a cooperative interaction between the human
papillomavirus E5 and E6 oncoproteins. Am J Pathol 2008, 173:682-688.
Krawczyk E, Suprynowicz FA, Hebert JD, Kamonjoh CM, Schlegel R: The
human papillomavirus type 16 E5 oncoprotein translocates calpactin I to
the perinuclear region. J Virol 2011, 85:10968-10975.
Straight SW, Hinkle PM, Jewers RJ, McCance DJ: The E5 oncoprotein of
human papillomavirus type 16 transforms fibroblasts and effects the
downregulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor in
keratinocytes. J Virol 1993, 67:4521-4532.
Mittal KR, Chan W, Demopoulos RL: Sensitivity and specificity of various
morphological features of cervical condylomas. Arch Pathol Lab Med
1990, 114:1038-1041.
Prasad CJ, Sheets E, Selig AM, McArthur MC, Crum CP: The bi-nucleated
squamous cell: histologic spectrum and relationship to low-grade
squamous intraepithelial lesions. Mod Pathol 1993, 6:313-317.
Wright TC, Gatscha RM, Luff RD, Prey MU: Epithelial cell abnormalities:
squamous. In The Bethesda System for Reporting Cervical Cytology.. 2 edition.
Edited by: Solomon D, Nayar R. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2004:89-123.
Olaharski AJ, Sotelo R, Solorza-Luna G, Gonsebatt ME, Guzman P, Mohar A,
Eastmond DA: Tetraploidy and chromosomal instability are early events
during cervical carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 2006, 27:337-343.
Egawa K: Do human papillomaviruses target epidermal stem cells?
Dermatology 2003, 207:251-254.
McMurray HR, Nguyen D, Westbrook TF, McAnce DJ: Biology of human
papillomaviruses. Int J Exp Pathol 2001, 82:15-33.
zur Hausen H: Papillomaviruses and cancer: from basic studies to clinical
application. Nat Rev Cancer 2002, 2:342-350.
Fehrmann F, Laimins LA: Human papillomaviruses: targeting
differentiating epithelial cells for malignant transformation. Oncogene
2003, 22:5201-5207.
Genther Williams SM, Disbrow GL, Schlegel R, Lee D, Threadgill DW,
Lambert PF: Requirement of epidermal growth factor receptor for
hyperplasia induced by E5, a high-risk human papillomavirus oncogene.
Cancer Research 2005, 65:6534-6542.
DiMaio D, Mattoon D: Mechanism s of cell transformation by
papillomavirus E5 proteins. Oncogene 2001, 20:7866-7873.
Thomsen P, van Deurs B, Norrild B, Kayser L: The HPV16 E5 oncogene
inhibits endocytic trafficking. Oncogene 2000, 19:6023-6032.
Crusius K, Rodriguez I, Alonso A: The human papillomavirus type 16 E5
protein modulates ERK1/2 and p38 MAP kinase activation by an EGFRindependent process in stressed human keratinocytes. Virus Genes 2000,
20:65-69.
Crusius K, Auvinen E, Alonso A: Enhancement of EGF- and PMA-mediated
MAP kinase activation in cells expressing the human papillomavirus
type 16 E5 protein. Oncogene 1997, 15:1437-1444.
Gu Z, Matlashewski G: Effect of human papillomavirus type 16 oncogenes
on MAP kinase activity. J Virol 1995, 69:8051-8056.
Chen SL, Huang CH, Tsai TC, Lu KY, Tsao YP: The regulation mechanism of
c-jun and junB by human papillomavirus type 16 E5 oncoprotein. Arch
Virol 1996, 141:791-800.
Chen SL, Lin YK, Li LY, Tsao YP, Lo HY, Wang WB, Tsai TC: E5 proteins of
human papillomavirus types 11 and 16 transactivate the c-fos promoter
through the NF1 binding element. J Virol 1996, 70:8558-8563.
Crusius K, Auvinen E, Steuer B, Gaissert H, Alonso A: The human
papillomavirus type 16 E5-protein modulates ligand-dependent
activation of the EGF receptor family in the human epithelial cell line
HaCaT. Exp Cell Res 1998, 241:76-83.
Hwang ES, Nottoli T, Dimaio D: The HPV16 E5 protein: expression,
detection, and stable complex formation with transmembrane proteins
in COS cells. Virology 1995, 211:227-233.
Chen SL, Lin ST, Tsai TC, Hsiao WC, Tsao YP: ErbB4 (JM-b/CYT-1)-induced
expression and phosphorylation of c-Jun is abrogated by human
papillomavirus type 16 E5 protein. Oncogene 2007, 26:42-53.

Page 15 of 18

78. Simeone P, Teson M, Latini A, Carducci M, Venuti A: Endothelin-1 could be
one of the targets of psoriasis therapy. Br J Dermatol 2004, 151:1273-1275.
79. Bagnato A, Loizidou M, Pflug BR, Curwen J, Growcott J: Role of the
endothelin axis and its antagonists in the treatment of cancer. Br J
Pharmacol 2011, 163:220-233.
80. Belleudi F, Leone L, Purpura V, Cannella F, Scrofani C, Torrisi MR: HPV16 E5
affects the KGFR/FGFR2b-mediated epithelial growth through alteration
of the receptor expression, signalling and endocytic traffic. Oncogene
2011.
81. Tsao YP, Li LY, Tsai TC, Chen SL: Human papillomavirus type 11 and 16 E5
represses p21(WafI/SdiI/CipI) gene expression in fibroblasts and
keratinocytes. J Virol 1996, 70:7535-7539.
82. Pedroza-Saavedra A, Lam EW, Esquivel-Guadarrama F, GutierrezXicotencatl L: The human papillomavirus type 16 E5 oncoprotein
synergizes with EGFreceptor signalling to enhance cell cycle progression
and the down-regulation of p27(Kip1). Virology 2010, 400:44-52.
83. Oelze I, Kartenbeck J, Crusius K, Alonso A: Human papillomavirus type 16
E5 protein affects cell-cell communication in an epithelial cell line. J Virol
1995, 69:4489-4494.
84. Tomakidi P, Cheng H, Kohl A, Komposch G, Alonso A: Connexin 43
expression is downregulated in raft cultures of human keratinocytes
expressing the human papillomavirus type 16 E5 protein. Cell Tissue Res
2000, 301:323-327.
85. Stoler MH, Rhodes CR, Whitbeck A, Wolinsky SM, Chow LT, Broker TR:
Human papillomavirus type 16 and 18 gene expression in cervical
neoplasias. Hum Pathol 1992, 23:117-128.
86. Kell B, Jewers RJ, Cason J, Pakarian F, Kaye JN, Best JM: Detection of E5
oncoprotein in human papillomavirus type 16-positive cervical scrapes
using antibodies raised to synthetic peptides. J Gen Virol 1994,
75:2451-2456.
87. Kabsch K, Alonso A: The human papillomavirus type 16 E5 protein
impairs TRAIL- and FasL-mediated apoptosis in HaCaT cells by different
mechanisms. J Virol 2002, 76:12162-12172.
88. Kabsch K, Mossadegh N, . Kohl A, Komposch G, Schenkel J, Alonso A,
Tomakidi P: The HPV-16 E5 protein inhibits TRAIL- and FasL-mediated
apoptosis in human keratinocyte raft cultures. Intervirology 2004, 47:48-56.
89. Zhang B, Spandau DF, Roman A: E5 protein of human papillomavirus
type 16 protects human foreskin keratinocytes from UV B-irradiationinduced apoptosis. J Virol 2002, 76:220-231.
90. Kabsch K, Alonso A: The human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) E5
protein sensitizes human keratinocytes to apoptosis induced by osmotic
stress. Oncogene 2002, 21:947-953.
91. Tardif KD, Mori K, Kaufman RJ, Siddiqui A: Hepatitis C virus suppresses the
IRE1-XBP1 pathway of the unfolded protein response. J Biol Chem 2004,
279:17158-17164.
92. Schiffman M, Castle PE: The promise of global cervical-cancer prevention.
N Engl J Med 2005, 353:2101-2104.
93. Condjella R, Liu X, Suprynowicz F, Yuan H, Sudarshan S, Dai Y, Schlegel R:
The canine papillomavirus E5 protein signals from the endoplasmic
reticulum. J Virol 2009, 83:12833-12841.
94. Wu R, Abramson AL, Shikowitz MJ, Dannenberg AJ, Steinberg BM:
Epidermal growth factor-induced cyclooxygenase-2 expression is
mediated through phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, not mitogen-activated
protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase, in recurrent
respiratory papillomas. Clin Cancer Res 2005, 11:6155-6161.
95. Wu R, Coniglio SJ, Chan A, Symons MH, Steinberg BM: Up-regulation of
Rac1 by epidermal growth factor mediates COX-2 expression in
recurrent respiratory papillomas. Mol Med 2007, 13:143-150.
96. Subbaramaiah K, Dannenberg AJ: Cyclooxygenase-2 transcription is
regulated by human papillomavirus 16 E6 and E7 oncoproteins:
evidence of a corepressor/coactivator exchange. Cancer Res 2007,
67:3976-3985.
97. Kim SH, Oh JM, No JH, Bang YJ, Juhnn YS, Song YS: Involvement of
NFkappaB and AP-1 in COX-2 upregulation by human papillomavirus 16
E5 oncoprotein. Carcinogenesis 2009, 30:753-757.
98. Sudarshan SR, Schlegel R, Liu X: The HPV-16 E5 protein represses
expression of stress pathway genes XBP-1 and COX-2 in genital
keratinocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2010, 399:617-622.
99. Oh JM, Lee YI, Song YS, Kim WH, Juhnn YS: Human papillomavirus E5
protein induces expression of the EP4 subtype of prostaglandin E2

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

100.
101.
102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.
114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

receptor in cyclic AMP response element-dependent pathways in
cervical cancer cells. Carcinogenesis 2009, 30:141-149.
Stanley MA, Pett MR, Coleman N: HPV: from infection to cancer. Biochem
Soc Trans 2007, 35:1456-1460.
O’Brien PM, Campo MS: Evasion of host immunity directed by
papillomavirus encoded proteins. Virus Res 2002, 1:103-118.
Ashrafi GH, Haghshenas MR, Marchetti B, O’Brien PM, Campo MS: The E5
protein of human papillomavirus type 16 selectively down-regulates
surface HLA class. Int J Cancer 2005, 113:276-283.
Schapiro F, Sparkowski J, Adduci A, Schlegel R, Grinstein S: Golgi
alkalinization by the papillomavirus E5 oncoprotein. J Cell Biol 2000,
148:305-315.
Ashrafi GH, Haghshenas M, Marchetti B, Campo MS: E5 protein of human
papillomavirus 16 downregulates HLA class I and interacts with the
heavy chain via its first hydrophobic domain. Int J Cancer 2006,
119:2105-2112.
Araibi EH, Marchetti B, Dornan ES, Ashrafi GH, Dobromylskyj M, Ellis SA,
Campo MS: The E5 oncoprotein of BPV-4 does not interfere with the
biosynthetic pathway of non-classical MHC class I. Virology 2006,
353:174-183.
Campo MS, Graham SV, Cortese MS, Ashrafi GH, Araibi EH, Dornan ES,
Miners K, Nunes C, Man S: HPV-16 E5 down-regulates expression of
surface HLA class I and reduces recognition by CD8 T cells. Virology 2010,
407:137-142.
Zhang B, Li P, Wang E, Brahmi Z, Dunn KW, Blum JS, Roman A: The E5
protein of human papillomavirus type 16 perturbs MHC class II antigen
maturation in human foreskin keratinocytes treated with interferon-γ.
Virology 2003, 310:100-108.
Barnard P, Payne E, McMillan N: The human papillomavirus E7 protein is
able to inhibit the antiviral and anti-growth functions of interferon α.
Virology 2000, 277:411-419.
Lee SJ, Cho YS, Cho MC, Shim JH, Lee KA, Ko KK, Choe YK, Park SN,
Hoshino T, Kim S, Dinarello CA, Yoon DY: Both E6 and E7 oncoproteins of
human papillomavirus 16 inhibit IL-18-induced IFN-gamma production
in human peripheral blood mononuclear and NK cells. J Immunol 2001,
167:497-504.
Ronco LV, Karpova AY, Vidal M, Howley PM: Human papillomavirus 16 E6
oncoprotein binds to interferon regulatory factor-3 and inhibits its
transcriptional activity. Genes Dev 1998, 12:2061-2072.
Miura S, Kawana K, Schust DJ, Fujii T, Yokoyama T, Iwasawa Y, Nagamatsu T,
Adachi K, Tomio A, Tomio K, Kojima S, Yasugi T, Kozuma S, Taketani Y:
CD1d, a sentinel molecule bridging innate and adaptive immunity, is
downregulated by the human papillomavirus (HPV) E5 protein: a
possible mechanism for immune evasion by HPV. J Virol 2010,
84:11614-11623.
Obalek S, Favre M, Szymanczyk J, Misiewicz J, Jablonska S, Orth G: Human
papillomavirus (HPV) types specific of epidermodysplasia verruciformis
detected in warts induced by HPV3 or HPV3-related types in
immunosuppressed patients. J Investig Dermatol 1992, 98:936-941.
Orth G: Genetics of epidermodysplasia verruciformis: insights into host
defense against papillomaviruses. Semin Immunol 2006, 18:362-374.
Ramoz N, Rueda LA, Bouadjar B, Montoya LS, Orth G, Favre M: Mutations in
two adjacent novel genes are associated with epidermodysplasia
verruciformis. Nat Genet 2002, 32:579-581.
Lazarczyk M, Pons C, Mendoza JA, Cassonnet P, Jacob Y, Favre M:
Regulation of cellular zinc balance as a potential mechanism of EVERmediated protection against pathogenesis by cutaneous oncogenic
human papillomaviruses. J Exp Med 2008, 205:35-42.
Palmiter RD, Findley SD: Cloning and functional characterization of a
mammalian zinc transporter that confers resistance to zinc. EMBO J 1995,
14:639-649.
Orth G: Host defenses against human papillomaviruses: lessons from
epidermodysplasia verruciformis. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2008,
321:59-83.
Cordano P, Gillan V, Bratlie S, Bouvard V, Banks L, Tommasino M,
Campo MS: The E6 E7 oncoproteins of cutaneous human papillomavirus
type 38 interfere with the interferon pathway. Virology 2008, 377:408-418.
Bible JM, Mant C, Best JM, Kell B, Starkey WG, Shanti Raju K, Seed P,
Biswas C, Muir P, Banatvala JE, Cason J: Cervical lesions are associated
with human papillomavirus type 16 intratypic variants that have high

Page 16 of 18

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.
133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

transcriptional activity and increased usage of common mammalian
codons. J Gen Virol 2000, 81:1517-1527.
Riley RR, Duensing S, Brake T, Münger K, Lambert PF, Arbeit JM: Dissection
of human papillomavirus E6 and E7 function in transgenic mouse
models of cervical carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 2003, 63:4862-4871.
Genther SM, Sterling S, Duensing S, Münger K, Sattler C, Lambert PF:
Quantitative role of the human papillomavirus type 16 E5 gene during
the productive stage of the viral life cycle. J Virol 2003, 77:2832-2842.
Pett MR, Herdman MT, Palmer RD, Yeo GS, Shivji MK, Stanley MA,
Coleman N: Selection of cervical keratinocytes containing integrated
HPV16 associates with episome loss and an endogenous antiviral
response. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:3822-3827.
Muto V, Stellacci E, Lamberti AG, Perrotti E, Carrabba A, Matera G,
Sgarbanti M, Battistini A, Liberto MC, Focà A: Human papillomavirus type
16 E5 protein induces expression of beta interferon through interferon
regulatory factor 1 in human keratinocytes. J Virol 2011, 85:5070-5080.
Schiller JT, Vass WC, Vousdan KH, Lowy DR: The E5 open reading frame of
bovine papillomavirus type 1 encodes a transforming gene. J Virol 1986,
57:1-6.
Schlegel R, Wade-Glass M, Rabson MS, Yang YC: The E5 transforming gene
of bovine papillomavirus encodes a small hydrophobic polypeptide.
Science 1986, 233:464-467.
Burkhardt A, DiMaio D, Schlegel R: Genetic and biochemical definition of
the bovine papillomavirus E5 transforming protein. EMBO J 1987,
8:2381-2385.
Pennie WD, Grindlay GJ, Cairney M, Campo MS: Analysis of the
transforming functions of bovine papillomavirus type 4. Virology 1993,
19:614-620.
Marchetti B, Ashrafi GH, Tsirimonaki E, O’Brien PM, Campo MS: The bovine
papillomavirus oncoprotein E5 retains MHC class I molecole in the Golgi
apparatus and prevents their transport to the cell surface. Oncogene
2002, 21:7808-7816.
King G, Oates J, Patel D, van den Berg HA, Dixon AM: Towards a structural
understanding of the smallest known oncoprotein: Investigation of the
bovine papillomavirus E5 protein using solution-state NMR. Biochim
Biophys Acta 2011, 1808:1943-1501.
Windisch D, Hoffmann S, Afonin S, Vollmer S, Benamira S, Langer B, Bürck J,
Muhle-Goll C, Ulrich AS: Structural role of the conserved cysteines in the
dimerization of the viral transmembrane oncoprotein E5. Biophys J 2010,
99:1764-1772.
Oates J, Hicks M, Dafforn TR, DiMaio D, Dixon AM: In vitro dimerization of
the bovine papillomavirus E5 protein transmembrane domain.
Biochemistry 2008, 47:8985-8992.
Campo MS, Moar MH, Jarret WFH, Laird HM: A new papillomavirus
associated with alimentary cancer in cattle. Nature 1980, 286:180-182.
Bergman P, Ustav M, Sedman J, Moreno-Lopéz J, Vennström B,
Pettersson U: The E5 gene of bovine papillomavirus type 1 is sufficient
for complete oncogenic transformation of mouse fibroblasts. Oncogene
1988, 2:453-459.
Petti LM, Ray FA: Transformation of mortal human fibroblasts and
activation of a growth inhibitory pathway by the bovine papillomavirus
E5 oncoprotein. Cell growth differ 2000, 11:395-408.
O’Brien V, Ashrafi GH, Grindlay GJ, Anderson R, Campo MS: A Mutational
Analysis of the Transforming Functions of the E8 Protein of Bovine
Papillomavirus Type 4. Virology 1999, 255:385-394.
Tsirimonaki E, Ullah R, Marchetti B, Ashrafi GH, McGarry L, Ozanne B,
Campo MS: Similarities and differences between the E5 oncoproteins of
bovine papillomaviruses type 1 and type 4: cytoskeleton, motility and
invasiveness in E5-transformed bovine and mouse cells. Virus Res 2006,
115:158-168.
Horwitz BH, Settleman J, Prakash SS, DiMaio D: Structure, activity, and
regulation of the bovine papillomavirus E5 gene and its transforming
protein product. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1989, 144:143-151.
Petti L, Nilson LA, DiMaio D: Activation of the platelet-derived growth
factor receptor by the bovine papillomavirus E5 transforming protein.
EMBO J 1991, 10:845-855.
Nilson LA, DiMaio D: Platelet-derived growth factor receptor can mediate
tumorigenic transformation by the bovine papillomavirus E5 protein.
Mol Cell Biol 1993, 13:4137-4145.
Goldstein DJ, Li W, Wang LM: The bovine papillomavirus type 1 E5
transforming protein specifically binds and activates the beta-type

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.
150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

156.

157.

158.

receptor for the platelet-derived growth factor but not other related
tyrosine kinase-containing receptors to induce cellular transformation. J
Virol 1994, 68:4432-4441.
Drummond-Barbosa DA, Vaillancourt RR, Kazlauskas A, DiMaio D: Ligandindependent activation of the platelet-derived growth factor beta
receptor: requirements for bovine papillomavirus E5-induced mitogenic
signalling. Mol Cell Biol 1995, 15:2570-2581.
Cohen BD, Goldstein DJ, Rutledge L, Vass WC, Lowy DR, Schlegel R,
Schiller JT: Transformation-specific interaction of the bovine
papillomavirus E5 oncoprotein with the platelet-derived growth factor
receptor transmembrane domain and the epidermal growth factor
receptor cytoplasmic domain. J Virol 1993, 67:5303-5311.
Petti L, DiMaio D: Stable association between the bovine papillomavirus
E5 transforming protein and activated platelet-derived growth factor
receptor in transformed mouse cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992,
89:6736-6740.
Petti L, DiMaio D: Specific interaction between the bovine papillomavirus
E5 transforming protein and the beta receptor for platelet-derived
growth factor in stably transformed and acutely transfected cells. J Virol
1994, 68:3582-3592.
Klein O, Kegler-Ebo D, Su J, Smith S, DiMaio D: The bovine papillomavirus
E5 protein requires a juxtamembrane negative charge for activation of
the platelet-derived growth factor beta receptor and transformation of
C127 cells. J Virol 1999, 73:3264-3272.
Lai CC, Edwards AP, DiMaio D: Productive interaction between
transmembrane mutants of the bovine papillomavirus E5 protein and
the platelet-derived growth factor beta receptor. J Virol 2005,
79:1924-1929.
Goldstein DJ, Andresson T, Sparkowski JJ, Schlegel R: The BPV-1 E5 protein,
the 16 kDa membrane pore-forming protein and the PDGF receptor
exist in a complex that is dependent on hydrophobic transmembrane
interactions. EMBO J 1992, 11:4851-4859.
Klein O, Polack GW, Surti T, Kegler-Ebo D, Smith SO, DiMaio D: Role of
glutamine 17 of the bovine papillomavirus E5 protein in platelet-derived
growth factor beta receptor activation and cell transformation. J Virol
1998, 72:8921-8932.
Surti T, Klein O, Aschheim K, DiMaio D, Smith SO: Structural models of the
bovine papillomavirus E5 protein. Proteins 1998, 33:601-612.
Kulke R, DiMaio D: Biological properties of the deer papillomavirus E5
gene in mouse C127 cells: growth transformation, induction of DNA
synthesis, and activation of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor.
J Virol 1991, 65:4943-4949.
Horwitz BH, Burkhardt AL, Schlegel R, DiMaio D: 44-amino-acid E5
transforming protein of bovine papillomavirus requires a hydrophobic
core and specific carboxyl-terminal amino acids. Mol Cell Biol 1988,
8:4071-4078.
Horwitz BH, Weinstat DL, DiMaio D: Transforming activity of a 16-aminoacid segment of the bovine papillomavirus E5 protein linked to random
sequences of hydrophobic amino acids. J Virol 1989, 63:4515-4519.
Meyer AN, Xu Y-F, Webster MK, Smith AE, Donoghue DJ: Cellular
transformation by a transmembrane peptide: structural requirements for
the bovine papillomavirus E5 oncoprotein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994,
91:4634-4638.
Kulke R, Horwitz BH, Zibello T, DiMaio D: The central hydrophobic domain
of the bovine papillomavirus E5 transforming protein can be
functionally replaced by many hydrophobic amino acid sequences
containing a glutamine. J Virol 1992, 66:505-511.
Mattoon D, Gupta K, Doyon J, Loll PJ, DiMaio D: Identification of the
transmembrane dimer interface of the bovine papillomavirus E5 protein.
Oncogene 2001, 20:3824-3834.
Nappi VM, Petti LM: Multiple transmembrane amino acid requirements
suggest a highly specific interaction between the bovine papillomavirus
E5 oncoprotein and the platelet-derived growth factor beta receptor. J
Virol 2002, 76:7976-7986.
Nappi VM, Schaefer JA, Petti LM: Molecular examination of the
transmembrane requirements of the platelet-derived growth factor beta
receptor for a productive interaction with the bovine papillomavirus E5
oncoprotein. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:47149-47159.
Petti LM, Reddy V, Smith SO, DiMaio D: Identification of amino acids in
the transmembrane and juxtamembrane domains of the platelet-

Page 17 of 18

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

derived growth factor receptor required for productive interaction with
the bovine papillomavirus E5 protein. J Virol 1997, 71:7318-7327.
Staebler A, Pierce JH, Brazinski S Heidaran MA, Li W, Schlegel R,
Goldstein DJ: Mutational analysis of the beta-type platelet-derived
growth factor receptor defines the site of interaction with the bovine
papillomavirus type 1 E5 transforming protein. J Virol 1995, 69:6507-6517.
Corteggio A, Urraro C, Roperto S, Roperto F, Borzacchiello G:
Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase-AKT pathway, phospho-JUN and phosphoJNK expression in spontaneously arising bovine urinary bladder
tumours. J Comp Pathol 2010, 143:173-178.
Corteggio A, Di Geronimo O, Roperto S, Roperto F, Borzacchiello G:
Activated platelet-derived growth factor β receptor and Ras-mitogenactivated protein kinase pathway in natural bovine urinary bladder
carcinomas. Vet J 2011.
Petti LM, Ricciardi EC, Page HJ, Porter KA: Transforming signals resulting
from sustained activation of the PDGFbeta receptor in mortal human
fibroblasts. J Cell Sci 2008, 121:1172-1182.
Suprynowicz FA, Baege A, Sunitha I, Schlegel R: c-Src activation by the E5
oncoprotein enables transformation independently of PDGF receptor
activation. Oncogene 2002, 21:1695-1706.
Suprynowicz FA, Sparkowski J, Baege A, Schlegel R: E5 oncoprotein
mutants activate phosphoinositide 3-kinase independently of plateletderived growth factor receptor activation. J Biol Chem 2000,
275:5111-5119.
Grindlay GJ, Campo MS, O’Brien V: Transactivation of the cyclin A
promoter by bovine papillomavirus type 4 E5 protein. Virus Res 2005,
108:29-38.
O’Brien V, Campo MS: BPV-4 E8 transforms NIH3T3 cells, up-regulates
cyclin A and cyclin A-associated kinase activity and de-regulates
expression of the cdk inhibitor p27Kip1. Oncogene 1998, 17:293-301.
O’Brien V, Grindlay GJ, Campo MS: Cell transformation by the E5/E8
protein of bovine papillomavirus type 4. p27(Kip1), Elevated through
increased protein synthesis is sequestered by cyclin D1-CDK4
complexes. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:33861-33868.
Zago M, Campo MS, O’Brien V: Cyclin A expression and growth in
suspension can be uncoupled from p27 deregulation and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase activity in cells transformed by bovine
papillomavirus type 4 E5. J Gen Virol 2004, 85:3585-3595.
Ashrafi GH, Tsirimonaki E, Marchetti B, O’Brien PM, Sibbet GJ, Andrew L,
Campo MS: Down-regulation of MHC class I by bovine papillomavirus E5
oncoproteins. Oncogene 2002, 2:248-259.
Ashrafi GH, Brown DR, Fife KH, Campo MS: Down-regulation of MHC class
I is a property common to papillomavirus E5 proteins. Virus Res 2006,
120:208-211.
Faccini AM, Cairney M, Ashrafi GH, Finbow ME, Campo MS, Pitts JD: The
bovine papillomavirus type 4 E8 protein binds to ductin and causes loss
of gap junctional intercellular communication in primary fibroblasts. J
Virol 1996, 70:9041-9045.
Andresson T, Sparkowski J, Goldstein DJ, Schlegel R: Vacuolar H(+)-ATPase
mutants transform cells and define a binding site for the papillomavirus
E5 oncoprotein. J Biol Chem 1995, 270:6830-6837.
Ashrafi GH, Pitts JD, Faccini AM , McLean P, O’Brien V, Finbow ME,
Campo S: Binding of bovine papillomavirus type 4 E8 to ductin (16K
proteolipid), down-regulation of gap junction intercellular
communication and full cell transformation are independent events. J
Gen Virol 2000, 81:689-694.
Roperto S, De Tullio R, Raso C, Stifanese R, Russo V, Gaspari M,
Borzacchiello G, Averna M, Paciello O, Cuda G, Roperto F: Calpain3 is
espresse in a proteolitically active form in papillomavirus-associated
urothelial tumours of the urinary bladder in cattle. PLos One 2010, 5:
e10299.
Kim MK, Kim HS, Kim SH, Oh JM, Han JY, Lim JM, Juhnn YS, Song YS:
Human papillomavirus type 16 E5 oncoprotein as a new target for
cervical cancer treatment. Biochem Pharmacol 2010, 80:1930-1935.
Liu DW, Tsao YP, Hsieh CH, Hsieh JT, Kung JT, Chiang CL, Huang SJ,
Chen SL: Induction of CD8 T Cells by Vaccination with Recombinant
Adenovirus Expressing Human Papillomavirus Type 16 E5 Gene Reduces
Tumor Growth. J Virol 2000, 74:9083-9089.
Chen YF, Lin CW, Tsao YP, Chen SL: Cytotoxic-T-lymphocyte human
papillomavirus type 16 E5 peptide with CpG-oligodeoxynucleotide can
eliminate tumor growth in C57BL/6 mice. J Virol 2004, 78:1333-1343.

Venuti et al. Molecular Cancer 2011, 10:140
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/10/1/140

Page 18 of 18

178. Lorenzon L, Mazzetta F, Venuti A, Frega A, Torrisi MR, French D: In vivo
HPV 16 E5 mRNA: Expression pattern in patients with squamous intraepithelial lesions of the cervix. J Clin Virol 2011, 52:79-83.
179. Wang W, Sima N, Kong D, Luo A, Gao Q, Liao S, Liao S, Li W, Han L,
Wang J, Wang S, Lu Y, Wang D, Xu G, Zhou J, Meng L, Ma D: Selective
targeting ofHPV-16 E6/E7 in cervical cancer cells with a potent oncolytic
adenovirus and its enhanced effect with radiotherapy in vitro and vivo.
Cancer Lett 2010, 291:67-75.
180. Jonson AL, Rogers LM, Ramakrishnan S, Downs LS Jr: Gene silencing with
siRNA targeting E6/E7 as a therapeutic intervention in a mouse model
of cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol 2008, 111:356-364.
181. Raghava S, Giorda KM, Romano FB, Heuck AP, Hebert DN: The SV40 late
protein VP4 is a viroporin that forms pores to disrupt membranes for
viral release. PLoS Pathog 2011, 7:e1002116.
182. Maufort JP, Shai A, Pitot HC, Lambert PF: A role for HPV16 E5 in cervical
carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 2010, 70:2924-2931.
183. Schwarz E, Freese UK, Gissmann L, Mayer W, Roggenbuck B, Stremlau A, zur
Hausen H: Structure and transcription of human papillomavirus
sequences in cervical carcinoma cells. Nature 1985, 314:111-114.
184. Borzacchiello G, Roperto F, Campo MS, Venuti A: 1st International
Workshop on Papillomavirus E5 Oncogene-A report. Virology 2010,
408:135-137.
doi:10.1186/1476-4598-10-140
Cite this article as: Venuti et al.: Papillomavirus E5: the smallest
oncoprotein with many functions. Molecular Cancer 2011 10:140.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
