<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Data mining approach identifies research priorities and data requirements for resolving the red algal tree of life</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:16. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-16"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Heroen Verbruggen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Data mining approach identifies research
priorities and data requirements for resolving the
red algal tree of life
Heroen Verbruggen1*, Christine A Maggs2, Gary W Saunders3, Line Le Gall4, Hwan Su Yoon5, Olivier De Clerck1

Abstract
Background: The assembly of the tree of life has seen significant progress in recent years but algae and protists
have been largely overlooked in this effort. Many groups of algae and protists have ancient roots and it is unclear
how much data will be required to resolve their phylogenetic relationships for incorporation in the tree of life. The
red algae, a group of primary photosynthetic eukaryotes of more than a billion years old, provide the earliest fossil
evidence for eukaryotic multicellularity and sexual reproduction. Despite this evolutionary significance, their
phylogenetic relationships are understudied. This study aims to infer a comprehensive red algal tree of life at the
family level from a supermatrix containing data mined from GenBank. We aim to locate remaining regions of low
support in the topology, evaluate their causes and estimate the amount of data required to resolve them.
Results: Phylogenetic analysis of a supermatrix of 14 loci and 98 red algal families yielded the most complete red
algal tree of life to date. Visualization of statistical support showed the presence of five poorly supported regions.
Causes for low support were identified with statistics about the age of the region, data availability and node
density, showing that poor support has different origins in different parts of the tree. Parametric simulation
experiments yielded optimistic estimates of how much data will be needed to resolve the poorly supported
regions (ca. 103 to ca. 104 nucleotides for the different regions). Nonparametric simulations gave a markedly more
pessimistic image, some regions requiring more than 2.8 105 nucleotides or not achieving the desired level of
support at all. The discrepancies between parametric and nonparametric simulations are discussed in light of our
dataset and known attributes of both approaches.
Conclusions: Our study takes the red algae one step closer to meaningful inclusion in the tree of life. In addition
to the recovery of stable relationships, the recognition of five regions in need of further study is a significant
outcome of this work. Based on our analyses of current availability and future requirements of data, we make clear
recommendations for forthcoming research.

Background
Several approaches can be taken to resolving the tree of
life, the most effective often depending on the nature of
the specific project and the availability of previously collected data. Whereas only one or a few loci are required
to resolve the relationships among a set of recently
diverged species, much larger amounts of comparative
data are needed to reconstruct ancient branches of the
tree of life. An important source of molecular data for
probing deep into evolutionary time comes from
* Correspondence: heroen.verbruggen@ugent.be
1
Phycology Research Group and Center for Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281, building S8, 9000 Ghent, Belgium

genomic studies (whole genome sequences and EST
libraries). For resolving branches of intermediate age,
targeted PCR amplification and sequencing of multiple
genes is often preferred. More often than not, some
DNA data relevant to a given problem are available on
public databases (e.g., GenBank) and not all projects
require newly generated data. Mining data repositories
to construct comprehensive phylogenetic trees is one of
the foci of contemporary research [1-4].
During the past decade, major progress has been made
in assembling the tree of life, using a range of
approaches. At one end of this spectrum, genome-scale
phylogenetics have been applied to resolve the ancient

© 2010 Verbruggen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

evolutionary relationships between the major groups of
eukaryotes [5-7]. Such studies are based on large
amounts of DNA data for a small set of species. At the
other extreme, phylogenetic trees including almost all
extant species have been assembled for some well-studied groups such as mammals [8]. Most projects, however, are situated in between these extremes and
attempt to infer the relationships among representatives
of families or orders based on a handful of loci [9,10].
It has been shown that the amount of data available to
infer a phylogenetic tree will affect its accuracy and the
statistical confidence in its branching pattern. Theoretical and empirical studies have shown that both the
length of the sequence alignment and the number and
selection of taxa are important in this respect [11-16]. If
a large number of lineages diverged from each other in
a short period of time, phylogenetic reconstruction
becomes notoriously difficult because there has been little time for base substitutions to accumulate between
the subsequent cladogenesis events and different genes
are more likely to have discordant phylogenetic histories
[17-19]. If such rapid radiations occurred in ancient
times, phylogenetic reconstruction is further hindered
because the signal about the radiation that was left in
the DNA is more likely to be overwritten and masked
by substitutions occurring during the long time span
between the radiation and the present [19,20]. Complementary to the research into the effects of data availability on the accuracy of phylogenetic inference, various
studies have attempted to estimate the amount of data
needed to reconstruct difficult phylogenetic problems,
most often using simulation approaches [21-26].
In general, the phylogenetic relationships among algae
and other unicellular eukaryotes (protists) have been
investigated in much less detail than those of more conspicuous organisms like birds, mammals and higher
plants. The present study focuses on red algae, which
were specifically listed as an under-studied group in the
report of a recent workshop on the future of the NSFsponsored AToL project [27]. The red algae or Rhodophyta form one of the three major lineages of primary
photosynthetic organisms that evolved after the enslavement of a cyanobacterium in a eukaryote cell to form a
chloroplast more than 1.5 billion years ago [28,29] and
the earliest fossil evidence for multicellular eukaryotic
life, Bangiomorpha from the 1,200 Ma Hunting formation, is thought to be a red alga [30].
The Rhodophyta contain the accessory pigments phycocyanin and phycoerythrin [31]. Their cytoplasm contains floridean starch grains and adjacent cells are linked
by protoplasmic connections in which proteinaceous
plugs are formed [32]. Perhaps the most striking red
algal feature is the complete lack of 9 + 2 microtubule
structures such as flagella and centrioles [32,33]. The

Page 2 of 15

red algae are currently credited with about 6000 species
in ca. 700 genera [34]. They are mostly marine, with
some freshwater genera and one class of volcano-loving
extremophiles, the Cyanidiophyceae. The great majority
of red algae are multicellular, with an enormous range
of morphologies. Their life histories are complex and in
the majority of lineages an additional zygote amplification stage results in large numbers of spores from a single fertilization.
Red algal systematics has seen many improvements
over the past decades. Starting from a classification
based on morphological and reproductive features half a
century ago [35], a series of ultrastructural investigations
and life-cycle analyses has progressively refined the ordinal classification. Over the past two decades, DNA
sequence data has brought additional resolution to the
higher-level classification. The earliest two attempts at
reconstructing a red algal tree of life based on single
genes (18S rDNA and rbcL) were published back-toback in PNAS in 1994 [36,37] and indicated the paraphyly of the Bangiophyceae, which was confirmed and
detailed in later work [38,39]. A series of single- and
multi-gene phylogenetic studies by Saunders and coworkers provided increasingly detailed and taxonomically important overviews of relationships among florideophyte orders, culminating with the proposal of a
series of new subclasses [40-44]. However, despite intensive effort, a lack of resolution of the relationships
among florideophyte clades has remained and there is as
yet no comprehensive phylogeny of the red algae.
The first goal of this study was to generate a comprehensive red algal tree of life at the family level based on
currently available data. Our approach consists of
mining the DNA data in GenBank to construct a supermatrix and analyzing this matrix with model-based phylogenetic inference techniques. Our second goal was to
locate well- and poorly supported regions in the topology, evaluate the possible causes of the remaining poorly
supported relationships, and formulate future research
priorities based on this information. We approached this
goal by identifying poorly supported regions with a simple visualization technique and calculating several statistics pertaining to data availability and the difficulty of
resolving poorly supported regions. Finally, the amount
of data needed to resolve the poorly supported regions
is estimated with parametric and nonparametric simulation experiments.

Results
Dataset and model selection

Data mined from GenBank in combination with a small
number of new sequences allowed us to construct a
supermatrix consisting of 98 OTUs and 14 loci (19,799
characters). The supermatrix was 34% complete in a

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

locus × OTU context and 35% in a character × OTU
context and included all but six of the extant red algal
families (Blinksiaceae, Catenellopsidaceae, Corynocystaceae, Crossocarpaceae, Pseudoanemoniaceae, Rissoellaceae). Figure 1 graphically represents the matrix and
clearly highlights four strongly represented loci (EF2,
18S, 28S, rbcL). Even though the remaining ten loci
were poorly represented, their availability was concentrated in a fixed set of OTUs (Bangiaceae, Compsopogonaceae, Cyanidiaceae, Galdieriaceae, Gigartinaceae,
Gracilariaceae, Palmariaceae, Porphyridiaceae, Rhodochaetaceae, Stylonemataceae, Thoreaceae), largely as a
consequence of a previous study of these taxa [39].
Our model selection approach showed the importance
of partitioning the data to allow differences in substitution processes among data partitions to be captured
with composite models of sequence evolution. Of the
thirteen potential partitioning strategies that were evaluated, the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) selected
one that consisted of 8 partitions (plastid ribosomal loci,
nuclear ribosomal loci, 1st, 2nd and 3rd codon position
of nuclear genes, and 1st, 2nd and 3rd codon position
of organelle genes) (Additional file 1). The second order
Akaike Information Criterion (AICc), on the other hand,
selected a more complex strategy consisting of 13 partitions (23S rDNA, 16S rDNA, 28S rDNA, 18S rDNA,
1st, 2nd and 3rd positions of nuclear genes, 1st, 2nd
and 3rd codon positions of plastid genes, and 1st, 2nd
and 3rd codon positions of mitochondrial genes) (Additional file 1). As reasoned in the Discussion, we have
run our ML searches with the less complex strategy and
our Bayesian inferences with the more complex one.
Phylogenetic results

The phylogenetic tree obtained with Bayesian inference
and its correspondence to the current classification of
red algae are shown in Figure 2. Although most of the
relationships in our tree correspond to results of previous studies, the phylogeny in Figure 2 represents the
most complete red algal tree of life published to date.
The ML tree is consistent with the Bayesian tree except
in some poorly supported regions (Additional file 2).
The approximately unbiased (AU) test shows that the BI
tree is not significantly less likely than the ML tree
(Table 1).
The phylogenetic tree matches the current red algal
classification very well, largely because the latter derives
from previous molecular studies [39,42,45]. It is noteworthy that all classes, subclasses and most orders are
monophyletic in our tree. Only two out of 33 orders
were non-monophyletic (Ceramiales and Gigartinales).
We used the AU test to evaluate whether trees in which
the non-monophyletic orders are forced to be monophyletic have significantly lower likelihoods than the
inferred ML tree. The AU test resulted in a 95%

Page 3 of 15

confidence set of 33 trees, including the tree in which
Ceramiales were monophyletic and the tree in which
Gigartinales were monophyletic (Table 1).
Statistical support, measured as bootstrap values, is
shown in Figure 2 with a color gradient from black
(high support) to orange (low support). In general, the
tree is well-supported, especially when compared to previous studies with lower gene sampling. Most importantly, large parts of the backbone of the tree are
recovered with maximum statistical support (PP = 1.00,
BV = 100). Nonetheless, there are several regions in the
tree where support is insufficient to allow firm conclusions. This is most pronounced in the boxed regions in
Figure 2, indicated with letters A through E. Although
there are other clades with low support in the tree, we
will focus on these boxed regions because they represent
the most significant gaps in our knowledge about the
red algal tree of life. We used the AU test to evaluate
the possibility that the regions represent hard polytomies, i.e. polyfurcations stemming from multiple, virtually instantaneous speciation events. This possibility
was rejected with high significance for each of the five
regions: none of the trees with hard polytomies was
contained in the 95% confidence set (Table 1).
Present data availability

Because resolving the five poorly supported regions will
be among the future research priorities, we have summarized the present level of data availability for each of
them and estimated the difficulty of resolving them
based on a number of simple statistics and with simulation studies.
The most ancient unsupported region (region A), with
an estimated late Mesoproterozoic to early Neoproterozoic age [29], has the highest data availability (Table 2,
Additional file 3) because it has been targeted previously
with broad gene sampling [39]. Even though the old age
of this region may pose problems, the intermediate node
density may facilitate its resolution. Regions B and C are
of intermediate age (likely Neoproterozoic). Current
data availability for these regions is meager to poor but
their intermediate node densities indicate that these
regions may not be very difficult to resolve with confidence. Data availability for the last two regions (D & E)
is poor, but data overlap among the few sampled loci is
fairly high. Based on their relatively recent age (likely
Paleozoic) one may anticipate that these regions are
relatively easy to resolve with confidence but this may
be hampered by their high node density.
Future data requirements

Simulation studies were carried out to estimate the
amount of data that will be needed to confidently
resolve each poorly supported region. Figure 3 shows
how the average bootstrap support of branches in the
regional trees increases as a function of alignment

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 Data availability matrix. Graphical representation of our concatenated alignment, showing the availability of sequence data. The
color of column and row headers indicate the amount of data available for that column or row. Green indicates high data availability, red
indicates low data availability and yellow/orange represents intermediate data availability. The matrix density is 34% in a locus × OTU context
and 35% in a character × OTU context. Numbers in cells indicate length of sequence in alignment, which may include gaps and/or exclude
ambiguously aligned regions. Figure generated with the gDAM software http://www.phycoweb.net.

length. In order to derive the alignment length
required to resolve a region, one must first define the
level of bootstrap support the average node should
have for the region to be considered resolved. We have
added a dashed line at 80% bootstrap support for illustrative purposes. Subsequently, the estimated alignment length required to resolve the region to that level
of bootstrap support can be deduced by seeing where

the dashed line crosses the line fitted through the data
points and reading the corresponding value on the xaxis. It is immediately obvious that the parametric and
non-parametric simulation types yielded widely divergent results. Parametrically simulated datasets always
resulted in much better resolved trees than nonparametrically generated datasets (blue vs. orange lines). As
a consequence, the estimated alignment length

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

Table 1 Likelihood based topological tests
lnL

BV

PAU

Bayesian tree

-185,594.97

0%

-185,607.63

5%

0.186

Gigartinales

-185,635.98

0%

0.574

region A

-185,622.35

0%

< 0.001

region B
region C

-185,678.38
-185,818.04

0%
0%

< 0.001
< 0.001

region D

-185,686.91

0%

0.001

region E

-185,708.05

0%

< 0.001

results and only the results of the analysis with three
spectral partitions are shown in Additional file 4.

0.403

Ceramiales

Page 5 of 15

Various alternative topologies are compared to the ML topology using an AU
test. For each alternative topology (rows of the table), the lnL of the
alternative topology is given along with the percentage of occurrences of the
alternative topology in the unconstrained bootstrap analysis (BV), and the Pvalue of the AU test on a larger set of trees. On the first data line, the
Bayesian tree is compared to the ML tree. In this case, the null hypothesis of
the AU test is that the ML tree is not significantly more likely than the BI tree.
In the middle part of the table, each of the non-monophyletic orders is listed
along with the lnL of the topology in which the order is constrained to be
monophyletic. In this case, the null hypothesis of the AU test is that
unconstrained and constrained topologies are equally likely. In the bottom
part of the table, the possibility that the poorly resolved regions represent
hard polytomies is tested. The listed lnL are for the trees in which one of the
poorly resolved region was collapsed, and in this case the null hypothesis of
the AU test is that uncollapsed and collapsed topologies are equally likely.
The lnL of the unconstrained, uncollapsed topology is -185,569.97.

required for resolution of a region is small if one
attaches more importance to the parametric simulation
results (blue line) and much larger if one chooses to
use the nonparametric simulation results (orange line).
Missing data in the nonparametrically resampled alignments is among the many causes that may be at the
base of this discrepancy (see Discussion). In order to
estimate the effect of missing data, the parametric
simulations were repeated with the same amount of
missing data present in the nonparametric datasets.
These results (gray line) are intermediate between
those of the other two simulation types.
Spectral partitioning

In order to evaluate whether the signal between natural
data subdivisions (gene type, genome and locus) is in
conflict, we investigated whether these natural data subdivisions corresponded to spectral partitions. Spectral
partitioning subdivides characters in an alignment into a
prespecified number of clusters based on character compatibility [46]. Characters in the same cluster are more
phylogenetically compatible with each other than they
are to characters in different clusters. Our results suggest that there is no strong correspondence between the
spectral partitions and the natural data subdivisions
(Additional file 4). In contrast, our results show that the
amount of conflict between characters within the natural subdivisions exceeds the amount of conflict among
natural subdivisions in the majority of cases (exceptions
will be mentioned in the discussion). Spectral partitioning into different numbers of clusters yielded similar

Discussion
We have reconstructed a red algal tree of life at the
family level based primarily on data mined from GenBank. Our principal goal in reconstructing this tree was
to identify the well-resolved parts and the remaining
uncertainties in the tree, the latter engendering a better
knowledge about the gaps in currently available data
and leading to clearly defined research priorities for
future efforts to resolve the red algal tree of life.
Improved red algal Tree of Life

As one would anticipate, the tree we obtained was more
complete and better resolved than those of most previous studies with lower gene and taxon sampling. This
is likely to be due to two factors. First, a considerably
larger amount of data is used in this study, both in
terms of taxon and gene sampling. Second, we have
carefully selected models of sequence evolution that can
capture various complexities of the sequence data by
allowing different model parameter values for different
data partitions. It has been well established that appropriately partitioned models of sequence evolution yield a
better fit to empirical datasets than simple models
[47-49] and simulation experiments have shown that
phylogenetic analysis with suitably partitioned models
results in more accurate trees [50]. For our dataset, the
Akaike selection criterion recommended finer subdivision of the data (13 partitions) than the Bayesian information criterion (8 partitions). We have chosen to use
the more complex model for Bayesian phylogenetic
inference and the less complex model for ML searches.
Although somewhat arbitrary, this choice is endorsed by
theoretical studies showing that whereas BI is sensitive
to underparametrization [51], ML optimization is more
liable to suffer from overparametrization [52,53]. Specifically, Bayesian analyses using overly simple models tend
to yield overly high posterior probabilities [51], which is
undesirable considering that we aim for a realistic
assessment of uncertainties in our red algal tree of life.
Causes of remaining uncertainties

Despite the fact that our phylogeny is better resolved
than many previous trees, it clearly shows that a lot of
work remains to be done to resolve the red algal tree of
life. Using a simple visualization technique that maps
bootstrap support on the tree as colors along a color
gradient, five poorly supported regions of the tree could
be readily identified (Figure 2). Poor resolution in phylogenetic trees can have several potential causes. The first
possibility is that several speciation events have occurred
virtually simultaneously. In this case, the biologically
correct phylogeny contains hard polytomies. This does

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

Page 6 of 15

Figure 2 Red algal tree of life with current taxonomic classification. The tree was reconstructed using Bayesian phylogenetic inference of
DNA data mined from GenBank (Figure 1). Branch colors indicate statistical support of the clades: whereas black branches are strongly
supported, the orange parts of the tree are poorly resolved. Intermediate colors represent intermediate support (see gradient legend). Five
poorly supported regions are indicated with gray boxes (A-E). Numbers at nodes indicate branch support given as bootstrap values from
maximum likelihood analysis before the vertical bar and Bayesian posterior probabilities after the vertical bar. Values are only shown if they
exceed 50 and 0.95, respectively.

not seem to be the case for the poorly supported
regions in our red algal tree because our AU test
strongly rejects the topologies in which the poorly supported regions were collapsed. In this context it is
important to note that each one of our tests focuses on
an entire region being a hard polytomy. So the test only
rejects the possibility that the entire region is a hard
polytomy, but it is still possible that smaller hard polytomies exist within a region.

If not a result of biological reality, the poorly resolved
regions must follow from inadequacy of the dataset or
failure of the phylogenetic methods. Many studies have
shown that inappropriate inference methods can fail to
recover the correct phylogenetic tree from DNA
sequences [54-57]. We have taken some precautions to
avoid problems of this nature. First, we have used inference methods that make explicit use of models of
sequence evolution because these are known to

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

Page 7 of 15

Table 2 Data availability, relative age and node density of poorly supported regions
informative loci

data overlap

relative age

node density

region A

9 ® 64.3%

100%

0.88 - 0.97

0.529

region B
region C

4 ® 28.6%
7 ® 50.0%

83.3%
60.3%

0.35 - 0.53
0.33 - 0.53

0.449
0.548

region D

5 ® 35.4%

57.5%

0.34 - 0.43

0.787

region E

3 ® 21.4%

75.8%

0.14 - 0.25

1.000

The four statistics presented in this table describe the current data availability for each of the five poorly supported regions and the relative difficulty of resolving
them. The proportion of potentially informative loci and the data overlap among potentially informative loci measure current data availability. Potentially
informative loci are those that are present for more than three of the OTUs in the matrix. Data overlap is given as the average relative edge weight in the
intersection graph of informative loci (see methods). The relative age and node density may indicate how difficult resolving the region will be. The relative age
represents how ancient the region is, on a scale from zero (the present) to one (the root of our tree). The node density index is proportional to the number of
nodes that need to be resolved per time unit (see methods). The partial data availability matrices for each region can be found in Additional file 3.

outperform alternative techniques under a wide range of
conditions [56]. Second, we have accounted for various
complexities in our composite dataset by carrying out
extensive model selection procedures and performing
phylogenetic analyses with models that show a good fit
to the data.
The last possible cause for the poorly supported
regions option is that the dataset is inadequate for resolving them. Two main factors can contribute to failure of
a dataset to resolve a phylogeny: conflict in the data and
lack of information in the data. Conflicting signals most
commonly occur between genome partitions or between
individual genes. However, this does not appear to be
the case in our dataset because spectral partitions based
on site compatibility do not correspond to natural partitions. This lack of correspondence indicates that conflict
between natural data subdivisions (gene type, genome
and locus) is smaller than the conflict between sites
within each of the natural subdivisions. The information
content of a phylogenetic data matrix depends on the
number of characters, the number of taxa and the

phylogenetic informativeness of each site [13,58-60].
Because the taxon sampling of our study is nearly complete at the family level, the number of characters and
the amount of missing data in our DNA matrix (Figure
1) are more likely to be at the base of the poor resolution. To examine this in more detail and estimate how
much data would be necessary to resolve the poorly
supported regions, we have calculated several statistics
and carried out simulation studies.
Future data requirements

The current data availability statistics, along with the
relative age and the node density of each poorly supported region permit more insight into the possible
causes of the lack of resolution and, along with the
results from the simulation experiments, allow us to
make more specific recommendations. For this discussion, we will consider an average bootstrap value of 80%
(dashed line in Figure 3) acceptable support.
Region A consists of the relationships between a few
classes near the base of the red algal tree. Despite having the highest proportion of potentially informative loci

Figure 3 Estimated data requirement for resolving the five poorly supported regions. Each graph shows how average bootstrap support
increases as a function of alignment length for three types of simulations: nonparametric resampling of the empirical alignment (orange),
parametric simulation of data (blue) and parametric simulation followed by introduction of missing data (gray). The approximate amount of data
required to resolve a region can be derived for each simulation type by specifying a desired level of bootstrap support (e.g., the dashed line
drawn at 80) and deducing the corresponding alignment length on the x-axis. Note that the x-axis uses a logarithmic scale. The lines connect
the means of the five values of each condition.

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

of all regions and maximal data overlap, the relationships among these classes have not been resolved confidently [39]. This is probably due to a combination of
the intermediate node density in this region and its age.
Resolution of the ancient relationships among the
lineages in this region of the tree will require the generation of large amounts of additional data. Parametric
simulations require almost 10,000 sites to reach acceptable support and nonparametric resampling suggests that
almost 284,000 sites will be needed.
Region B encompasses the order-level relationships of
the Nemaliophycidae. Maximum likelihood and Bayesian
trees differed in some of these relationships and some of
the nodes in Figure 2 that were poorly supported in ML
bootstrap analyses did receive high posterior probabilities in the Bayesian analysis. As mentioned above, different partitioning strategies were used for our ML and
Bayesian analyses, which may have caused the discrepancy. The number of potentially informative loci is
remarkably low for this region. Given the relatively low
node density and intermediate age of this region, one
would expect that this region would not be too difficult
to resolve. Parametric simulations confirm this: they
suggest that ca. 1,950 sites should suffice to achieve
acceptable support. This is in stark contrast with the
nonparametric resampling method, which never reached
the 80% threshold. The spectral partitioning results offer
some initial insights into why the nonparametric results
are so pessimistic. The 16S and 23S genes have a markedly different spectral composition than the other loci,
and the contrast is especially strong if 16S and 23S are
compared to 18S (Additional file 4). Remarkably, this
effect is no longer apparent when comparing the spectral composition of genomes: nuclear and plastid genomes show a similar spectral composition.
Region C consists of the apparently sudden radiation of
lineages at the base of the Rhodymeniophycidae. Even
though the statistics in Table 2 indicate an intermediate
node density, the fact that most nodes are situated close to
the beginning of the epoch spanned by this region and
only a few are near the end of the epoch gives us reason to
believe that region C represents a rapid radiation. This
region also features the most pronounced differences
between the maximum likelihood and Bayesian trees. As
was the case for region B, Bayesian support values are
high (PP > 0.95) for a handful of nodes in region C that
were not present or very weak in the set of ML bootstrap
trees. Other studies have also indicated the sensitivity of
relationships in this region to methodology, gene and
taxon sampling [40,43,44]. A further discussion of these
results is beyond the scope of this paper - for now, it suffices to conclude that there is considerable uncertainty
about the relationships in region C, which should form a
future research priority. The combination of the large

Page 8 of 15

number of lineages emanating in this region, its old age
(probably Neoproterozoic) and the substantial previous
effort that has not led to a solid understanding of its evolution may suggest that this region will be a tough one to
resolve. Nonetheless, parametric simulations required only
ca. 1,800 sites to achieve acceptable support. Nonparametric resampling reached the 80% threshold at ca. 83,000
nucleotides.
Region D encompasses the relationships among some
subgroups of the Gigartinales. Data availability and data
overlap are currently insufficient to resolve this region,
probably due to the relatively high node density. The
parametric simulation results confirm the difficult nature of this region: 2,150 sites were required to resolve it
to an average bootstrap support of 80%. This requirement is higher than that of regions B and C, which are
both considerably older. Nonparametric simulations did
not reach the 80% threshold.
Region E represents a relatively recent radiation of
gigartinalean families. The combination of low data
availability and high node density is probably responsible for the lack of resolution in this region. Our spectral
partitioning results also suggest that conflict may be
present between the signal contained in the 18S rDNA
alignment and that of the 28S rDNA dataset (Additional
file 4). Even though parametric simulations suggest that
this is a relatively easy region to resolve (ca. 990 nucleotides), our nonparametric resampling did not reach
acceptable levels of support.
From these summaries it can be concluded that the
five poorly supported regions stem from a diversity of
causes and that resolving them will likely require different kinds of datasets. It is also clear that the amount of
data that will be needed to resolve each of the regions is
still difficult to estimate due to the large differences
between the parametric and nonparametric simulation
results. This will be discussed in more detail in the next
section. Irrespective of the exact data requirements, it is
clear that more data are needed to resolve the red algal
tree of life and that a dual approach will be best suited
to address the variety of phylogenetic questions in the
five unresolved regions. First, high-throughput genomics
efforts will be needed to resolve region A and perhaps
region B. Such efforts could consist of organelle genome
sequencing, EST data generation or a combination of
both. Second, the relationships in regions C, D and E
require generating large multi-locus datasets for a broad
selection of Rhodymeniophycideae for which targeted
PCR amplification may be preferable to high-throughput
genomics because of the large number of taxa involved
and lower estimated data requirements. In addition to
resolving the poorly supported regions in our tree, generating data for the six families absent from our tree
should be a research priority.

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

Limitations of simulation approach

Several studies have used simulation experiments to
estimate the amount of data needed to resolve phylogenetic questions. Both parametric [26,61] and nonparametric [22,62,63] approaches have been used widely.
Our results clearly demonstrate some limitations of this
approach. Without exception, the nonparametric simulations suggested a markedly more pessimistic image of
data requirement than the parametric simulations. Several elements of the experimental design are likely to
have an appreciable contribution to the difference
between our parametric and nonparametric simulation
results.
First, the simple model of sequence evolution used in
the simulations yields alignments that are not as complex as empirical data matrices. As a consequence, parametrically simulated datasets produce higher support
values because the ML inference uses the true model.
More biological realism can be added to parametric
simulations by incorporating gene tree heterogeneity
[61] or using highly complex models of sequence evolution [64].
Second, the nonparametric approach used here has
the disadvantage that no genuinely new data are added
to the data matrix when it is resampled beyond the original alignment length. This will lead to a more pronounced effect of signal present in the dataset but
nodes for which there is little signal or for which there
are equal amounts of conflicting signal can be expected
to remain unresolved when no effectively new data are
added. This effect thus depends on the amount of data
present in the original alignment. In our case, the length
of the regional alignments decreases in this order: A >
C > B > D > E. Thus, all regions for which the 80% support threshold is not reached (B, D, E) start out with
relatively small alignments. Resolving the effect of this
issue requires extra theoretical work.
Third, missing data present in the empirical data that
are resampled in the nonparametric simulations can be
expected to reduce bootstrap support to some extent. It
is important to note that our regional alignments have
much less missing data than our global data matrix
because only the potentially informative loci are
included in them. Our parametric simulations with the
same distribution of missing data than the original
regional alignments show that missing data in our regional alignments has an effect, yet it explains only a small
fraction of the difference between parametric and nonparametric simulations (Figure 3).
In conclusion, it is evident that the alignment lengths
suggested by parametric simulation are too optimistic
and those of nonparametric simulations too pessimistic.
For that reason, we have interpreted their respective
predictions as lower and upper bounds on future data

Page 9 of 15

requirements. The predictions of the parametric simulations have the advantage that they can be more directly
compared between regions to evaluate the relative difficulty of resolving them with a certain degree of bootstrap support.
Complementary strategies

In addition to generating supplementary data, further
improvements of the experimental design and analysis
techniques could also contribute to the robustness of
results. First, the assumption of character independence
can be relaxed by using special models of sequence evolution inspired by specific characteristics of the studied
molecule such as RNA secondary organization, codon
structure and across-site process heterogeneity [65-69].
Second, restricting analyses to subsets of the tree
requires less data exclusion because there is less alignment ambiguity and may allow more accurate estimation of model parameters relevant to that region of the
tree. Mishler’s compartmentalization approach could be
useful in this context because it allows combining phylogenetic insights at various levels in a global phylogeny
[70,71]. Third, resolving ancient phylogenetic relationships can benefit from techniques that improve the signal-to-noise ratio in phylogenetic datasets, for example
by selective removal of fast-evolving sites [72]. Given
that the red algae are more than a billion years old, all
five unresolved regions could be classified as ancient.
Finally, it is worth noting that certain aspects of experimental design can also affect tree inference. Taxon sampling is especially relevant here. In this context, our
analysis may suffer to some extent from the use of
families as OTUs. This approach leads to relatively long
external branches, which may result in lower internal
support values. Increasing the taxon sampling within
each family can easily solve this.
Taxonomic perspectives

Finally, the resolution of the red algal tree of life will
engender a better, more natural classification of the red
algae. Even though the present classification closely
matches our molecular phylogeny, two currently recognized orders were non-monophyletic in our tree. It
must be noted, however, that the component lineages of
these orders are situated in the poorly supported regions
and that monophyly of the orders is not rejected with
statistical confidence (Table 1). Nonetheless, the nonmonophyly of the orders in question could be anticipated from previous work. The inclusion of the Inkyuleeaceae in the Ceramiales has been questioned in
several studies [73,74]. The non-monophyly of the Gigartinales is also not surprising. Years of controversy
regarding the distribution of families between this order
and the Cryptonemiales resulted in a surrender tactic in
which Kraft and Robins [75] simply merged the two
orders considering this the best step forward for a total

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

re-evaluation of this complex. Since that time multiple
discordant elements have been moved out to other or
new orders in an effort to render a monophyletic Gigartinales, a task that continues to this day [43,76].

Conclusions
Fifteen years of molecular phylogenetic research have
changed radically our perspectives on red algal relationships at all taxonomic levels. These foundation studies
have either had limited taxonomic objectives or were
based on one or only a few genetic regions. The present
data mining effort was initiated to take this area of
study to the next level, one encompassing analyses of a
supermatrix containing many loci and nearly all red
algal families. In doing this we have confirmed many of
the earlier findings, but have more critically highlighted
five regions of low resolution and provided insights as
to future directions to resolve these conundrums. More
specifically, we have shown that the currently unresolved
regions stem from a diversity of causes and that resolving them will require different approaches. We propose
a dual approach consisting of high-throughput genomic
data to resolve the two most difficult phylogenetic problems (regions A and B) and the development of targeted multi-locus datasets of to resolve the remaining
problems in the Rhodymeniophycidae (regions C-E).
The present study illustrates how data mining
approaches can guide the design of projects aimed at
reconstructing the tree of life and will hopefully provide
our colleagues and us with the necessary groundwork to
move this objective forward.
Methods
Dataset composition

All available red algal DNA sequences were acquired
from GenBank release 160 and stored in a local database. EST data and sequences longer than 5000 bases
were excluded. Ribosomal RNA and protein-coding
genes from complete organelle genomes were added
back as separate entries. Sequences belonging to the
fourteen target loci (Figure 1) were extracted and stored
in separate databases (one for each locus). The sequence
extraction process consisted of three steps. A first set of
sequences belonging to the loci of interest was extracted
based on a database of accession numbers that was generated in the framework of a literature survey and metaanalysis [45]. Second, annotations and keywords in the
description of these entries were subsequently used to
extract a second set of entries from the local database.
The assignment of these sequences to the loci was double-checked with BLAST scores. A third set of entries
was extracted by performing BLAST searches of
sequences annotated in the previous steps against the
remainder of red algal sequences in the local GenBank

Page 10 of 15

database for each target locus separately. Sequences
yielding high BLAST scores were added to the appropriate files after manual screening of the annotations.
Additional sequence data were generated following previously published protocols and added to the databases
[44,77,78]. Newly generated sequences are indicated
with an asterisk in the data matrix (Additional file 5).
After introns had been removed from the sequences,
they were given a quality score corresponding to their
length minus the number of ambiguous base calls. The
highest-scoring sequences of each red algal family were
selected. For a few families of doubtful status, we refined
the classification and used intrafamilial groupings as
OTUs. The taxonomic database used for this purpose
was based on a recent classification scheme [79], with
some minor modifications to add extra taxonomic levels
within certain families and reflect recent work
[74,80-82]. The highest-scoring sequences (see Additional file 5) were stored in fasta files and aligned by
eye. Gap-rich and ambiguous regions were discarded.
The fourteen resulting alignments were concatenated
into a single supermatrix. Alignments of individual loci
and the supermatrix will be made available through
TreeBase [4] and at http://www.phycoweb.net.
Model selection

A suitable partitioning strategy and partition-specific
substitution models were selected in a multi-step process illustrated in Additional file 1. Initially, base frequencies of different genes and codon positions were
visualized to obtain a gross idea of base frequency differences among potential data partitions. This preliminary
information and knowledge about the genomic compartment of the loci led us to identify thirteen partitioning
strategies for further consideration (more details in
Results). Subsequently, a suitable partitioning strategy
and partition-specific models of sequence evolution
were selected using the Bayesian Information Criterion
(BIC). This selection procedure consisted of three steps.
For the purpose of model selection, a guide tree was
obtained by carrying out a second-level ML search on
the unpartitioned dataset with a HKY + Γ8 model with
TreeFinder [83]. The first step of the procedure was to
optimize the likelihood of the dataset for thirteen partitioning strategies, assuming the guide tree and separate
HKY + Γ8 models for each partition. The six best-scoring partitioning strategies were retained for further analysis. In the second step, models of sequence evolution
were selected for individual partitions using the BIC.
For each partition present in the six retained partitioning strategies, six different nucleotide substitution models were evaluated (F81, F81 + Γ 8 , HKY, HKY + Γ 8 ,
GTR, GTR + Γ8). The likelihood of observing the data
of each partition was optimized under these models,
assuming the guide tree pruned to the taxa present in

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

the partition. In the third step, the six partitioning strategies retained in the first step were re-tested, this time
applying the best scoring model of sequence evolution
identified in the second step to the partitions. Both the
BIC and the second order Akaike Information Criterion
(AICc) were evaluated during this step. All likelihood
optimizations and information criterion computations
were carried out with TreeFinder.
Bayesian phylogenetic inference

The phylogenetic relationships among taxa were inferred
using Bayesian inference (BI) and maximum likelihood
searches (ML). Bayesian phylogenetic inference was carried out with MrBayes v.3.1.2 [84]. The analysis used
the composite model selected with the AICc, with all
parameters unlinked among partitions. Partition rates
were allowed to vary under a flat Dirichlet prior. Five
runs of four incrementally heated chains were run in
parallel (temperature increment = 0.5). The chains were
run for 35 million generations, with a sample frequency
of 1000. MrBayes’ default priors, proposal probabilities
and other settings were used. Convergence of the runs
was assessed by visual examination of parameter traces
and marginal densities using Tracer v.1.4 [85]. An
appropriate burn-in value was determined using the
automated method proposed by Beiko et al. [86]. Their
method was applied to each run individually, with a sliding window of 1000 samples, yielding five different
burn-in values. Because two out of the five runs converged onto suboptimal likelihoods and a third run
yielded low effective sample sizes (ESS) for a subset of
parameters despite convergence of the likelihood, the
posterior distribution of trees was summarized from the
MCMC output of the remaining two runs using the
highest burn-in value obtained across the two runs in
question.
Maximum likelihood searches

Maximum likelihood analyses were carried out with
TreeFinder. This software allows tree searches under
complex (partitioned) models within reasonable time by
implementing fast tree search heuristics, with the tradeoff that searches can get stuck on local likelihood
optima. To achieve a more expansive coverage of tree
space, tree searches were started from a multitude of
start trees. The search procedure consisted of three
rounds of ML searches from different start trees. First,
100 start trees were generated by randomly modifying
the guide tree used for model selection by a number of
nearest neighbor interchange (NNI) steps. The amount
of change from the guide tree was 200 and 500 NNI
steps (50 replicates each). ML tree searches were carried
out from each of these start trees. Out of the set of
resulting ML trees, the three with the highest likelihood
were retained for a second round of NNI modifications
(100 NNI steps, 30 replicates). ML searches starting

Page 11 of 15

from the new set of start trees were carried out and the
three highest-scoring trees were used for a last round of
NNI modifications (20 and 50 NNI steps, 20 replicates
each). The tree with the highest likelihood resulting
from the last round of analyses was selected as the ML
tree. All analyses used the composite model selected
with the BIC, but parameter estimates were re-optimized during the ML search. The second-level tree
search was used and partition rates were optimized
under the proportional model. Branch support was calculated by non-parametric bootstrapping (1000 replicates). Bootstrap replicates were started from the ML
tree.
Topological hypothesis testing

The presence of a few non-monophyletic orders in our
phylogenetic tree prompted us to evaluate the statistical
significance of this non-monophyly. Similarly, we
wanted to evaluate the statistical significance of differences between the ML and BI tree and of trees in which
poorly resolved regions were collapsed into a hard polytomy. We used the approximately unbiased (AU) test,
which is based on nonparametric resampling using the
likelihood criterion, to identify a 95% confidence set of
trees from a larger set of trees. The large set of trees we
used in this analysis included the ML tree, the eight
alternative topologies from Table 1, and the ML trees of
1000 bootstrap searches.
The alternative topologies were inferred as follows.
The Bayesian tree was taken from the BI described
above. For each of the non-monophyletic orders, we
inferred a ML tree in which the order was constrained
to be monophyletic. For each of the poorly resolved
regions (see below), we constructed a tree in which the
region in question was collapsed and subjected this tree
to likelihood optimization. For all trees, site-specific
likelihoods were calculated with TreeFinder [83]. Subsequently, the AU test was performed with CONSEL v.0.1i
[87], using default settings. We verified whether each of
the eight alternative topologies was present in the 95%
confidence set.
Characterization of poorly supported regions

In order to identify future research priorities, we aimed
to (1) identify poorly supported regions of the phylogenetic tree, (2) summarize the current data availability for
the taxa in question and (3) estimate how hard it may
be to resolve the poorly supported regions.
Branch support (ML bootstrap values) was visualized
with TreeGradients v.1.04, allowing straightforward
visual identification of poorly supported regions [88]. By
plotting ML bootstrap values on the Bayesian phylogenetic tree, regions featuring poor support can result
either from genuinely low bootstrap support or from
disagreement between Bayesian and ML results, both of
which are undesirable.

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

First, we tested the possibility that the poorly supported regions represent hard polytomies. For each
poorly supported region, we constructed a tree in which
the region in question was collapsed. These trees were
included in an AU test to verify whether they are
included in the 95% confidence set of trees (see previous
section). If a collapsed tree is not included in the 95%
confidence interval, its likelihood is significantly lower
than that of the uncollapsed tree, which can be taken as
an indication that the unsupported region does not
represent a hard polytomy [22].
For further, more detailed analyses, the well-supported
lineages emanating from them were identified and designated as OTUs. We constructed a partial data availability matrix for each poorly supported region. This
involved the generation of consensus sequences for
OTUs consisting of more than one red algal family.
From this matrix, we calculated the fraction of potentially informative loci currently available for analyzing
the relationships among the OTUs of interest. A potentially informative locus is defined as a locus that is present for at least four OTUs of interest. The fraction of
potentially informative loci is simply calculated as the
number of potentially informative loci divided by the
total number of loci considered in this study (14). The
number of potentially informative loci alone is not
always a good indicator of data availability because there
also has to be sufficient taxon overlap between loci to
yield resolved trees. For that reason, we calculated a statistic representing the amount of taxon overlap between
the potentially informative loci. This was done by creating an intersection graph of the potentially informative
loci [89]. The edges connecting different loci were
weighted by the number of taxa shared between them,
divided by the total number of taxa. The statistic we
will report as a measure of data overlap is the mean
edge weight of the intersection graph. It is important to
note that only potentially informative loci were used to
construct the graphs and calculate the statistics.
In an attempt to further quantify how difficult it may
be to resolve the poorly supported regions, two additional statistics were calculated. First, the relative age of
the regions was inferred by fitting a relaxed molecular
clock model. We fit a lognormal model of rate evolution
with PhyloBayes [90], based on the Bayesian phylogenetic tree, a dataset consisting of the four most densely
sampled loci (EF2, 18S rDNA, 28S rDNA &rbcL), and
giving the root node an arbitrary age of 1. Second, we
calculated the node density for each region. Our index
of node density consisted of the number of nodes that
would need to be present in the region for it to be fully
bifurcating, divided by the time span of the region and
rescaled so that the region with the highest node density
had a value of 1. Our node density index is proportional

Page 12 of 15

to the rate of cladogenesis in the region, with high
values indicating fast cladogenesis, making the region in
question more difficult to resolve.
Future data requirements

We carried out a set of simulation studies to estimate
how much data will be needed to resolve the poorly
supported regions. Our approach consisted of both nonparametric and parametric bootstrapping using alignments of different lengths and evaluation of the
resolution of resulting trees as a function of alignment
length. The following analyses were carried out for each
region separately.
First, a subalignment and a subtree of the region were
generated by treating the well-supported lineages emanating from the poorly supported region as OTUs. If
lineages emanating from the region comprised multiple
taxa, the entire clade was replaced with a single branch.
The length of this branch was set to be the average path
length between the ancestral node and each of the descendent leaf nodes. All subtrees were strictly bifurcating
but typically included some very short internal branches.
In the regional alignments, OTUs containing multiple
taxa were represented by majority-rule consensus
sequences. Regional alignments were reduced to the set
of potentially informative loci. One outgroup sequence
was included with each regional alignment. This
sequence belonged to the sister group of the poorly supported region. If the sister group contained multiple
taxa, a consensus sequence was used as explained above.
For both the nonparametric and parametric
approaches, sequence alignments of different lengths
between 102 and 106 nucleotides were generated, with
100 replicate alignments per alignment length. For the
nonparametric approach, the regional alignment was
resampled with replacement until the desired alignment
length was reached. For the parametric approach, alignments of the desired length were generated by simulating sequence evolution along the regional subtrees
under a GTR + I + Γ4 model with Seq-Gen v.1.3.2 [91].
The parameters used for the simulation were obtained
by optimizing a GTR + I + Γ4 model for the complete
alignment and ML tree with RAxML [92]. A third set of
simulations aims to introduce extra realism in the parametric simulations by introducing missing data. Missing
data was introduced in the same amount and distribution among sites and taxa as in the empirical
alignments.
All alignments were subjected to ML phylogenetic
inference in RAxML, using a GTR + I + Γ4 model. We
summarized the 100 resulting ML trees per condition
by constructing a strictly bifurcating majority rule consensus tree (i.e. without a lower limit on clade presence).
The average bootstrap value on the majority rule consensus tree was plotted as a function of alignment

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

length to evaluate how data availability affects tree resolution. All simulations were repeated five times, thus
yielding five average bootstrap values per condition to
have an idea of the spread of the results. The entire
simulation experiment amounted to ML analysis of
67,500 random alignments (5 regions · 3 simulation
types · 9 alignment lengths · 100 replicates · 5 repetitions) and was carried out on Ghent University’s central
HPC facility.
Spectral partitioning

We examined potential conflicts in phylogenetic signal
between natural data subdivisions by comparing them to
spectral partitions. The natural subdivisions we used
were gene type (coding for protein or ribosomal RNA),
genome (nuclear, mitochondrial or plastid) and locus
(16S, 18S, 23S, 28S, EF2, cox1, psaA, psaB, psbA, psbC,
psbD, rbcL, rbcS &tufA). Spectral partitioning is a technique that partitions alignments based on character
compatibility. More specifically, it clusters the characters
with the highest average pairwise compatibility, so that
characters in each cluster are more compatible with
each other than they are with characters in the other
clusters [46]. If the relative contribution of spectral partitions differs strongly between gene types, genomes or
loci, this can be taken as evidence for conflict between
them. If, on the other hand, similar proportions are
found, the conflict within the natural data partitions
exceeds the conflict between them, indicating that the
different natural partitions contain similar phylogenetic
signal.
We applied spectral partitioning to each of the regional subalignments separately. Analyses were run on a
web server [93] using the fractional compatibility scoring procedure. Each subalignment was analyzed four
times to allow spectral partitioning into two, three, four
and five clusters. The contribution of the different spectral partitions to each of the natural data subdivisions
was assessed by plotting the fraction of sites belonging
to the different spectral partitions for each of the natural
data subdivisions. Phylogenetically uninformative sites
were not included in these calculations.
Additional file 1: Model selection procedure. Illustration of the model
selection procedure, including results.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1016-S1.PDF ]
Additional file 2: Maximum likelihood phylogeny. Tree inferred from
the 14-locus data matrix using ML inference, with ML bootstrap values at
internal nodes.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1016-S2.PDF ]
Additional file 3: Partial data availability matrices for five poorly
supported regions. Four statistics describing current data availability
and the relative difficulty of resolving the region are given below the

Page 13 of 15

matrices (see also Table 2 in main paper). The proportion of potentially
informative loci and the data overlap among potentially informative loci
measure current data availability. Potentially informative loci are those
that are present for more than three of the OTUs in the matrix. Data
overlap is given as the average relative edge weight in the intersection
graph of informative loci (see methods). The relative age and node
density may indicate how difficult resolving the region will be. The
relative age represents how ancient the region is, on a scale from zero
(the present) to one (the root of our tree). The node density index is
proportional to the number of nodes that need to be resolved per time
unit (see methods).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1016-S3.PDF ]
Additional file 4: Spectral partitioning. The five regional
subalignments were subjected to spectral partitioning, a technique that
partitions alignments based on character compatibility, the sites most
compatible with each other ending up in the same partition. In order to
identify potential data conflict between gene types (protein and rDNA),
genomes (mitochondrial, nuclear and plastid) and individual loci, we
plotted the relative contribution of each spectral partition for each gene
type, genome and locus. If the relative contribution of spectral partitions
differs strongly between gene types, genomes or loci, this can be taken
as evidence for conflict between them. If, on the other hand, similar
proportions are found, the conflict within them exceeds the conflict
between them, indicating that the different gene types, genomes and
loci contain similar phylogenetic signal. Note that the spectral partitions
are calculated for each region separately and spectral partitions should
thus not be compared between regions as any given site may have
been assigned to different partitions for different regions.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1016-S4.PDF ]
Additional file 5: Data matrix with GenBank accession numbers. List
of sequences included in our alignment, with Genbank accession
numbers and the species from which they originated.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1016-S5.PDF ]

Acknowledgements
HV is a post-doctoral fellow of the Research Foundation - Flanders. Analyses
were carried out on the KERMIT cluster (inference of red algal tree) and the
central HPC facility at Ghent University (simulation experiments). We thank
Wim Gillis for IT support and all who have deposited red algal sequences in
Genbank over the years. Sequence data generated by GWS and LLG were
funded by the Canadian Barcode of Life Network from Genome Canada
through the Ontario Genomics Institute, the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada, and other sponsors listed at http://
www.BOLNET.ca, the Canada Research Chair Program, Canada Foundation
for Innovation, and New Brunswick Innovation Fund. We thank Chuck
Amsler and the NSF Office of Polar Programs (OPP-9814538) for acquiring
Gainia.
Author details
1
Phycology Research Group and Center for Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281, building S8, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
2
School of Biological Sciences, Queen’s University Belfast, Medical Biology
Centre, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7BL, UK. 3Centre for Environmental
Molecular Algal Research Department of Biology, University of New
Brunswick, Fredericton, NB E3B 5A3, Canada. 4Muséum National d’Histoire
Naturelle, UMR 7138, CP #39, 57 rue Cuvier, 75231 Cedex 05 Paris, France.
5
Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, 180 McKown Point Road, West
Boothbay Harbor, ME 04575, USA.
Authors’ contributions
HV and ODC conceived of the study. GWS and LLG generated sequence
data. HV assembled data and performed phylogenetic analyses. HV, CAM

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

and GWS wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 7 September 2009
Accepted: 20 January 2010 Published: 20 January 2010
References
1. McMahon MM, Sanderson MJ: Phylogenetic supermatrix analysis of
GenBank sequences from 2228 papilionoid legumes. Syst Biol 2006,
55:818-836.
2. Sanderson MJ, Boss D, Chen D, Cranston KA, Wehe A: The PhyLoTA
browser: Processing GenBank for molecular phylogenetics research. Syst
Biol 2008, 57:335-346.
3. Bininda-Emonds ORP, (Ed): Phylogenetic supertrees: Combining
information to reveal the tree of life. Dordrecht: Kluwer 2004.
4. Piel WH: TreeBASE: A database of phylogenetic knowledge. 2009http://
www.phylo.org/treebase.
5. Burki F, Shalchian-Tabrizi K, Minge M, Skjaeveland A, Nikolaev SI,
Jakobsen KS, Pawlowski J: Phylogenomics reshuffles the eukaryotic
supergroups. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e790.
6. Hampl V, Hug L, Leigh JW, Dacks JB, Lang BF, Simpson AGB, Roger AJ:
Phylogenomic analyses support the monophyly of Excavata and resolve
relationships among eukaryotic supergroups. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:3859-3864.
7. Yoon HS, Grant J, Tekle Y, Wu M, Chaon B, Cole J, Logsdon J, Patterson D,
Bhattacharya D, Katz L: Broadly sampled multigene trees of eukaryotes.
BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:14.
8. Bininda-Emonds ORP, Cardillo M, Jones KE, MacPhee RDE, Beck RMD,
Grenyer R, Price SA, Vos RA, Gittleman JL, Purvis A: The delayed rise of
present-day mammals. Nature 2007, 446:507-512.
9. James TY, Kauff F, Schoch CL, Matheny PB, Hofstetter V, Cox CJ, Celio G,
Gueidan C, Fraker E, Miadlikowska J, et al: Reconstructing the early
evolution of Fungi using a six-gene phylogeny. Nature 2006, 443:818-822.
10. Bouchenak-Khelladi Y, Salamin N, Savolainen V, Forest F, Bank van der M,
Chase MW, Hodkinson TR: Large multi-gene phylogenetic trees of the
grasses (Poaceae): Progress towards complete tribal and generic level
sampling. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2008, 47:488-505.
11. Graybeal A: Is it better to add taxa or characters to a difficult
phylogenetic problem?. Syst Biol 1998, 47:9-17.
12. Mossel E, Steel M: How much can evolved characters tell us about the
tree that generated them?. Mathematics of evolution and phylogeny Oxford
University PressGashchak SP 2005, 384-412.
13. Zwickl DJ, Hillis DM: Increased taxon sampling greatly reduces
phylogenetic error. Syst Biol 2002, 51:588-598.
14. Jian S, Soltis PS, Gitzendanner MA, Moore MJ, Li R, Hendry TA, Qiu Y-L,
Dhingra A, Bell CD, Soltis DE: Resolving an ancient, rapid radiation in
Saxifragales. Syst Biol 2008, 57:38-57.
15. Hedtke SM, Townsend TM, Hillis DM: Resolution of phylogenetic conflict
in large data sets by increased taxon sampling. Syst Biol 2006, 55:522-529.
16. Poe S, Swofford DL: Taxon sampling revisited. Nature 1999, 398:299-300.
17. Donoghue MJ, Sanderson MJ: The suitability of molecular and
morphological evidence in reconstructing plant phylogeny. Molecular
systematics of plants New York: Chapman and HallSoltis PS, Soltis DE, Doyle
JJ 1992, 340-368.
18. Wiens JJ, Kuczynski CA, Smith SA, Mulcahy DG, Sites JW, Townsend TM,
Reeder TW: Branch lengths, support, and congruence: testing the
phylogenomic approach with 20 nuclear loci in snakes. Syst Biol 2008,
57:420-431.
19. Whitfield JB, Lockhart PJ: Deciphering ancient rapid radiations. Trends Ecol
Evol 2007, 22:258-265.
20. Weisrock DW, Harmon LJ, Larson A: Resolving deep phylogenetic
relationships in salamanders: Analyses of mitochondrial and nuclear
genomic data. Syst Biol 2005, 54:758-777.
21. Walsh HE, Kidd MG, Moum T, Friesen VL: Polytomies and the power of
phylogenetic inference. Evolution 1999, 53:932-937.
22. Fishbein M, Hibsch-Jetter C, Soltis DE, Hufford L: Phylogeny of Saxifragales
(Angiosperms, Eudicots): Analysis of a rapid, ancient radiation. Syst Biol
2001, 50:817-847.
23. Poe S, Chubb AL: Birds in a bush: Five genes indicate explosive evolution
of avian orders. Evolution 2004, 58:404-415.

Page 14 of 15

24. Saitou N, Nei M: The number of nucleotides required to determine the
branching order of three species, with special reference to the humanchimpanzee-gorilla divergence. J Mol Evol 1986, 24:189-204.
25. Lecointre G, Philippe H, Van Le HL, Le Guyader H: How many nucleotides
are required to resolve a phylogenetic problem? The use of a new
statistical method applicable to available sequences. Mol Phylogenet Evol
1994, 3:292-309.
26. Wortley AH, Rudall PJ, Harris DJ, Scotland RW: How much data are needed
to resolve a difficult phylogeny? Case study in Lamiales. Syst Biol 2005,
54:697-709.
27. Bhattacharya D, Weller S: Where to next with the tree of life?. 2008,
22http://dblab.rutgers.edu/atol/index.htm.
28. Rodríguez-Ezpeleta N, Brinkmann H, Burey SC, Roure B, Burger G,
Loffelhardt W, Bohnert HJ, Philippe H, Lang BF: Monophyly of primary
photosynthetic eukaryotes: Green plants, red algae, and glaucophytes.
Curr Biol 2005, 15:1325-1330.
29. Yoon HS, Hackett JD, Ciniglia C, Pinto G, Bhattacharya D: A molecular
timeline for the origin of photosynthetic eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21:809-818.
30. Butterfield NJ: Bangiomorpha pubescens n. gen., n. sp.: implications for
the evolution of sex, multicellularity, and the Mesoproterozoic/
Neoproterozoic radiation of eukaryotes. Paleobiol 2000, 26:386-404.
31. Gantt E: Pigmentation and photoacclimation. Biology of the red algae
Cambridge: Cambridge University PressCole KM, Sheath RG 1990, 203-219.
32. Pueschel CM: Cell structure. Biology of the red algae Cambridge: Cambridge
University PressCole KM, Sheath RG 1990, 7-41.
33. Ragan MA, Gutell RR: Are red algae plants?. Bot J Linnean Soc 1995,
118:81-105.
34. Guiry MD, Guiry GM: AlgaeBase. World-wide electronic publication.
2008http://www.algaebase.org.
35. Kylin H: Die Gattungen der Rhodophyceen Lund: C.W.K. Gleerups Förlag 1956.
36. Ragan MA, Bird CJ, Rice EL, Gutell RR, Murphy CA, Singh RK: A molecular
phylogeny of the marine red algae (Rhodophyta) based on the nuclear
small-subunit rRNA gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994, 91:7276-7280.
37. Freshwater DW, Fredericq S, Butler BS, Hommersand MH, Chase MW: A
gene phylogeny of the red algae (Rhodophyta) based on plastid rbc L.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994, 91:7281-7285.
38. Müller KM, Oliveira MC, Sheat RG, Bhattacharya D: Ribosomal DNA
phylogeny of the Bangiophycidae (Rhodophyta) and the origin of
secondary plastids. Am J Bot 2001, 88:1390-1400.
39. Yoon HS, Müller KM, Sheath RG, Ott FD, Bhattacharya D: Defining the
major lineages of red algae (Rhodophyta). J Phycol 2006, 42:482-492.
40. Harper JT, Saunders GW: Molecular systematics of the Florideophyceae
(Rhodophyta) using nuclear large and small subunit rDNA sequence
data. J Phycol 2001, 37:1073-1082.
41. Saunders GW, Chiovitti A, Kraft GT: Small-subunit rDNA sequences from
representatives of selected families of the Gigartinales and
Rhodymeniales (Rhodophyta). 3. Delineating the Gigartinales sensu
stricto. Can J Bot 2002, 82:43-74.
42. Saunders GW, Hommersand MH: Assessing red algal supraordinal
diversity and taxonomy in the context of contemporary systematic data.
Am J Bot 2004, 91:1494-1507.
43. Withall RD, Saunders GW: Combining small and large subunit ribosomal
DNA genes to resolve relationships among orders of the
Rhodymeniophycidae (Rhodophyta): recognition of the Acrosymphytales
ord. nov. and Sebdeniales ord. nov. Eur J Phycol 2006, 41:379-394.
44. Le Gall L, Saunders GW: A nuclear phylogeny of the Florideophyceae
(Rhodophyta) inferred from combined EF2, small subunit and large
subunit ribosomal DNA: Establishing the new red algal subclass
Corallinophycidae. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007, 43:1118-1130.
45. Maggs CA, Verbruggen H, De Clerck O: Molecular systematics of red
algae: building future structures on firm foundations. Unravelling the
algae: the past, present, and future of algal systematics Taylor and
FrancisBrodie J, Lewis J 2007, 103-121.
46. Chen D, Burleigh GJ, Fernandez-Baca D: Spectral partitioning of
phylogenetic data sets based on compatibility. Syst Biol 2007, 56:623-632.
47. Brandley MC, Schmitz A, Reeder T: Partitioned Bayesian analyses, partition
choice, and the phylogenetic relationships of scincid lizards. Syst Biol
2005, 54:373-390.

Verbruggen et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/16

48. Shapiro B, Rambaut A, Drummond AJ: Choosing appropriate substitution
models for the phylogenetic analysis of protein-coding sequences. Mol
Biol Evol 2006, 23:7-9.
49. Verbruggen H, Theriot EC: Building trees of algae: some advances in
phylogenetic and evolutionary analysis. Eur J Phycol 2008, 43:229-252.
50. Brown JM, Lemmon AR: The importance of data partitioning and the
utility of Bayes factors in Bayesian phylogenetics. Syst Biol 2007,
56:643-655.
51. Huelsenbeck JP, Rannala B: Frequentist properties of Bayesian posterior
probabilities of phylogenetic trees under simple and complex
substitution models. Syst Biol 2004, 53:904-913.
52. Kalbfleisch JD, Sprott DA: Application of likelihood methods to models
involving large numbers of parameters. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society Series B (Methodological) 1970, 32:175-208.
53. Yang Z: Computational molecular evolution Oxford: Oxford University Press
2006.
54. Huelsenbeck JP: Performance of phylogenetic methods in simulation. Syst
Biol 1995, 44:17-48.
55. Hillis DM, Huelsenbeck JP, Cunningham CW: Application and accuracy of
molecular phylogenies. Science 1994, 264:671-677.
56. Swofford DL, Waddell PJ, Huelsenbeck JP, Foster PG, Lewis PO, Rogers JS:
Bias in phylogenetic estimation and its relevance to the choice between
parsimony and likelihood methods. Syst Biol 2001, 50:525-539.
57. Gaut BS, Lewis PO: Success of maximum likelihood phylogeny inference
in the four-taxon case. Mol Biol Evol 1995, 12:152-162.
58. Rokas A, Carroll SB: More genes or more taxa? The relative contribution
of gene number and taxon number to phylogenetic accuracy. Mol Biol
Evol 2005, 22:1337-1344.
59. Goldman N: Phylogenetic information and experimental design in
molecular systematics. Proc Roy Soc B - Biol Sci 1998, 265:1779-1786.
60. Townsend JP: Profiling phylogenetic informativeness. Syst Biol 2007,
56:222-231.
61. Spinks P, Thomson R, Lovely G, Shaffer HB: Assessing what is needed to
resolve a molecular phylogeny: simulations and empirical data from
emydid turtles. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:56.
62. de Queiroz A, Lawson R, Lemos-Espinal JA: Phylogenetic relationships of
North American garter snakes (Thamnophis) based on four
mitochondrial genes: How much DNA sequence is enough?. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2002, 22:315-329.
63. DeFilippis VR, Moore WS: Resolution of phylogenetic relationships among
recently evolved species as a function of amount of DNA sequence: An
empirical study based on woodpeckers (Aves: Picidae). Mol Phylogenet
Evol 2000, 16:143-160.
64. Holder MT, Zwickl DJ, Dessimoz C: Evaluating the robustness of
phylogenetic methods to among-site variability in substitution
processes. Phil Trans Roy Soc B - Biol Sci 2008, 363:4013-4021.
65. Schöniger M, Von Haeseler A: A stochastic model for the evolution of
autocorrelated DNA sequences. Mol Phylogenet Evol 1994, 3:240-247.
66. Telford MJ, Wise MJ, Gowri-Shankar V: Consideration of RNA secondary
structure significantly improves likelihood-based estimates of phylogeny:
examples from the bilateria. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:1129-1136.
67. Muse SV, Gaut BS: A likelihood approach for comparing synonymous and
nonsynonymous nucleotide substitution rates, with application to the
chloroplast genome. Mol Biol Evol 1994, 11:715-724.
68. Yang ZH, Nielsen R: Mutation-selection models of codon substitution and
their use to estimate selective strengths on codon usage. Mol Biol Evol
2008, 25:568-579.
69. Lartillot N, Philippe H: A Bayesian mixture model for across-site
heterogeneities in the amino-acid replacement process. Mol Biol Evol
2004, 21:1095-1109.
70. Mishler BD: Cladistic analysis of molecular and morphological data. Am J
Phys Antrop 1994, 94:143-156.
71. Mishler BD: The logic of the data matrix in phylogenetic analysis.
Parsimony, phylogeny, and genomics Oxford: Oxford University PressAlbert
VA 2005, 57-70.
72. Waddell PJ, Cao Y, Hauf J, Hasegawa M: Using novel phylogenetic
methods to evaluate mammalian mtDNA, including amino acid invariant
sites LogDet plus site stripping, to detect internal conflicts in the data,
with special reference to the positions of hedgehog, armadillo, and
elephant. Syst Biol 1999, 48:31-53.

Page 15 of 15

73. Choi HG, Kraft GT, Saunders GW: Nuclear small-subunit rDNA sequences
from Ballia spp. (Rhodophyta): proposal of the Balliales ord. nov.,
Balliaceae fam. nov., Ballia nana sp nov and Inkyuleea gen. nov
(Ceramiales). Phycologia 2000, 39:272-287.
74. Choi HG, Kraft GT, Kim HS, Guiry MD, Saunders GW: Phylogenetic
relationships among lineages of the Ceramiaceae (Ceramiales,
Rhodophyta) based on nuclear small subunit rDNA sequence data. J
Phycol 2008, 44:1033-1048.
75. Kraft GT, Robins PA: Is the order Cryptonemiales (Rhodophyta)
defensible?. Phycologia 1985, 24:67-77.
76. Saunders GW, Kraft GT: Small-subunit rRNA gene sequences from
representatives of selected families of the Gigartinales and
Rhodymeniales (Rhodophyta). 1. Evidence for the Plocamiales ord. nov.
Can J Bot 1994, 72:1250-1263.
77. Harper JT, Saunders GW: A re-classification of the Acrochaetiales based
on molecular and morphological data, and establishment of the
Colaconematales ord. nov. (Florideophyceae, Rhodophyta). Eur J Phycol
2002, 37:463-476.
78. Saunders GW: Applying DNA barcoding to red macroalgae: a preliminary
appraisal holds promise for future applications. Phil Trans Roy Soc B - Biol
Sci 2005, 360:1879-1888.
79. Schneider CJ, Wynne MJ: A synoptic review of the classification of red
algal genera a half century after Kylin’s “Die Gattungen der
Rhodophyceen”. Bot Mar 2007, 50:197-249.
80. Le Gall L, Dalen JL, Saunders GW: Phylogenetic analyses of the red algal
order Rhodymeniales supports recognition of the Hymenocladiaceae
fam. nov., Fryeellaceae fam. nov., and Neogastroclonium gen. nov. J
Phycol 2008, 44:1556-1571.
81. West JA, Scott JL, West KA, Karsten U, Clayden SL, Saunders GW:
Rhodachlya madagascarensis gen. et sp. nov.: a distinct acrochaetioid
represents a new order and family (Rhodachlyales ord. nov.,
Rhodachlyaceae fam. nov.) of the Florideophyceae (Rhodophyta).
Phycologia 2008, 47:203-212.
82. Le Gall L, Payri CE, Bittner L, Saunders GW: Multigene phylogenetic
analyses support recognition of the Sporolithales ord. nov. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2010, 54:302-305.
83. Jobb G, von Haeseler A, Strimmer K: TREEFINDER: a powerful graphical
analysis environment for molecular phylogenetics. BMC Evol Biol 2004,
4:18.
84. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
85. Rambaut A, Drummond AJ: Tracer. 2007http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk/tracer.
86. Beiko RG, Keith JM, Harlow TJ, Ragan MA: Searching for convergence in
phylogenetic Markov chain Monte Carlo. Syst Biol 2006, 55:553-565.
87. Shimodaira H, Hasegawa M: CONSEL: for assessing the confidence of
phylogenetic tree selection. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:1246-1247.
88. Verbruggen H: TreeGradients. 2009http://www.phycoweb.net.
89. Sanderson MJ, Ané C, Eulenstein O, Férnandez-Baca D, Kim J,
McMahon MM, Piaggio-Talice R: Fragmentation of large data sets in
phylogenetic analyses. Reconstructing evolution: New mathematical and
computational advances Oxford: Oxford University PressGascuel O, Steel M
2007, 199-216.
90. Lartillot N, Blanquart S, Lepage T: PhyloBayes. 2009http://megasun.bch.
umontreal.ca/People/lartillot/www/download.html.
91. Rambaut A, Grassly NC: Seq-Gen: An application for the Monte Carlo
simulation of DNA sequence evolution along phylogenetic frees. Comp
Appl Biosc 1997, 13:235-238.
92. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
93. Chen D, Burleigh GJ, Fernandez-Baca D: Spectral partitioning of
phylogenetic datasets - web computation. 2009http://pilin.cs.iastate.edu/
public/spectral/webcomp.html.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-16
Cite this article as: Verbruggen et al.: Data mining approach identifies
research priorities and data requirements for resolving the red algal
tree of life. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:16.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
