<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Stress response regulators identified through genome-wide transcriptome analysis of the (p)ppGpp-dependent response in Rhizobium etli</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17. doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-2-r17"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Maarten Vercruysse"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

RESEARCH

Open Access

Stress response regulators identified through
genome-wide transcriptome analysis of the (p)
ppGpp-dependent response in Rhizobium etli
Maarten Vercruysse, Maarten Fauvart, Ann Jans, Serge Beullens, Kristien Braeken, Lore Cloots, Kristof Engelen,
Kathleen Marchal and Jan Michiels*

Abstract
Background: The alarmone (p)ppGpp mediates a global reprogramming of gene expression upon nutrient
limitation and other stresses to cope with these unfavorable conditions. Synthesis of (p)ppGpp is, in most bacteria,
controlled by RelA/SpoT (Rsh) proteins. The role of (p)ppGpp has been characterized primarily in Escherichia coli
and several Gram-positive bacteria. Here, we report the first in-depth analysis of the (p)ppGpp-regulon in an aproteobacterium using a high-resolution tiling array to better understand the pleiotropic stress phenotype of a
relA/rsh mutant.
Results: We compared gene expression of the Rhizobium etli wild type and rsh (previously rel) mutant during
exponential and stationary phase, identifying numerous (p)ppGpp targets, including small non-coding RNAs. The
majority of the 834 (p)ppGpp-dependent genes were detected during stationary phase. Unexpectedly, 223 genes
were expressed (p)ppGpp-dependently during early exponential phase, indicating the hitherto unrecognized
importance of (p)ppGpp during active growth. Furthermore, we identified two (p)ppGpp-dependent key regulators
for survival during heat and oxidative stress and one regulator putatively involved in metabolic adaptation, namely
extracytoplasmic function sigma factor EcfG2/PF00052, transcription factor CH00371, and serine protein kinase PrkA.
Conclusions: The regulatory role of (p)ppGpp in R. etli stress adaptation is far-reaching in redirecting gene
expression during all growth phases. Genome-wide transcriptome analysis of a strain deficient in a global regulator,
and exhibiting a pleiotropic phenotype, enables the identification of more specific regulators that control genes
associated with a subset of stress phenotypes. This work is an important step toward a full understanding of the
regulatory network underlying stress responses in a-proteobacteria.

Background
Rhizobium etli is a soil-dwelling a-proteobacterium that
infects the roots of its leguminous host plant Phaseolus
vulgaris, the common bean plant, in order to establish a
nitrogen-fixing symbiosis [1-4]. Like most microorganisms in nature, R. etli primarily resides in a non-growing
state in the soil, where it is confronted with diverse and
stressful conditions, such as non-optimal temperatures
and pH levels, near-starvation conditions and competition with other microbial populations [5]. Although
growth is restricted, long periods of inactivity are
* Correspondence: jan.michiels@biw.kuleuven.be
Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, Katholiek Universiteit Leuven,
Kasteelpark Arenberg 20, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium

sporadically interrupted by proliferation. This cycle of
growth and starvation has been likened to a feast and
famine lifestyle [6].
Sophisticated regulatory networks allow bacteria to
sense and respond to a variety of environmental stresses
to rapidly adjust their cellular physiology for survival.
These networks comprise transcriptional regulators, sigma
factors, proteases and small non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs)
that interact in a complex manner in order to control the
metabolic changes needed for adaptation [5]. The stringent response is a widespread global regulatory system,
activated in response to various unfavorable growth conditions, and mediated by guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp)
and guanosine pentaphosphate (pppGpp), collectively
referred to as (p)ppGpp [7]. This alarmone coordinates

© 2011 Vercruysse et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

entrance into the non-growing state by inducing a general
reprogramming of gene regulation, thereby downregulating cellular processes needed for growth and upregulating
processes needed for survival. As a result, the available
resources are diverted from growth to allow adaptation of
the cell to the non-growing state [8,9]. The central role of
this alarmone in the general stress response during the
stationary phase is also illustrated by the increased sensitivity of (p)ppGpp-deficient mutants in various species to
diverse stress factors [10]. Therefore, studying the (p)
ppGpp regulon may be useful to identify novel regulators
involved in the stress adaptation.
In Escherichia coli, the stress-induced alarmone production depends on two enzymes: RelA and SpoT [7].
When amino acids are limiting, uncharged tRNAs that
bind ribosomes stimulate the ribosome-associated RelA
to synthesize (p)ppGpp. Subsequent recovery when conditions are favorable again requires degradation of the
alarmone, which is catalyzed by SpoT. SpoT is a bifunctional enzyme that can also synthesize (p)ppGpp in
response to carbon, iron, phosphorus and fatty acid scarcity. Having two (p)ppGpp synthetases/hydrolases
appears to be an exclusive feature of the g-subdivision of
the proteobacteria, as Gram-positive bacteria and most
other Gram-negative bacteria, including R. etli, possess
only a single RelA/SpoT homolog - usually referred to as
Rel or Rsh - that displays both activities [10]. Most
Gram-positive species additionally encode small proteins
that consist solely of a synthetase domain [11].
(p)ppGpp primarily regulates gene transcription
[12,13]. Several models have been proposed to accommodate the effects of (p)ppGpp on transcription. One of
these models, the affinity model, argues for an increase
in the availability of free RNA polymerase (RNAP) with
increasing (p)ppGpp levels. As this alarmone binds near
the active site of RNAP, the stability of the ribosomal
RNA (rrn) open complexes decreases. Consequently, (p)
ppGpp will induce promoters with low RNAP affinity,
such as cell maintenance and stress response genes
[14,15]. In another model, the s factor competition
model, the binding affinity of alternative sigma factors
increases with increasing (p)ppGpp-levels compared to
the housekeeping sigma factor s 70 . This results in a
decrease of s70-bound RNAP and a downregulation of
growth-related promoters that are dependent on high
concentrations of s70-bound RNAP for maximal expression [10,12,16]. In addition to regulating sigma factor
activity, (p)ppGpp is also required for sigma factor
expression, as is the case for the stationary phase sigma
factor sS, the heat shock sigma factor sH and the sigma
factor controlling nitrogen metabolism, s54 , in E. coli
[17,18]. Hence, these models for gene regulation of (p)
ppGpp should be considered as working in concert.
Finally, the recently identified cofactor DksA was

Page 2 of 19

demonstrated to stabilize binding of RNAP to (p)
ppGpp, resulting in enhanced repression or stimulation
of transcription in E. coli. However, the interaction
between (p)ppGpp and DksA appears to be more complex as both factors also have independent and opposing
effects on gene expression in E. coli [13,19,20].
In agreement with (p)ppGpp’s central role in stress
adaptation, the alarmone was shown to be crucial in
many complex physiological processes such as biofilm
formation by Listeria monocytogenes, E. coli and Streptococcus mutans, development of multicellular fruiting
bodies in Myxococcus xanthus and development of competence in Bacillus subtilis [10]. In addition, a fast growing number of reports demonstrate (p)ppGpp to be
important during host interactions in diverse pathogens
such as Vibrio cholerae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Legionella pneumophila, Francisella novicida, Enterococcus
faecalis and Streptococcus pneumoniae [21-24]. Furthermore, various transcriptome studies showed that the
alarmone (p)ppGpp is situated high up in the hierarchy
of interconnected regulators in E. coli, controlling the
expression and/or function of many other regulators
such as Lrp, the cAMP receptor protein CRP, the integration host factor IHF, the flagellar master regulator
FlhDC, the redox status sensing regulator ArcA and the
morphogene BolA [6,8,18,25,26].
(p)ppGpp also affects key aspects of the symbiosis
between rhizobia and their leguminous host plants. In
Sinorhizobium meliloti, a rsh mutant is defective in
nodulation of Medicago sativa and overproduces the
exopolysaccharide succinoglycan, which is crucial for
root infection [27]. In R. etli, (p)ppGpp controls the
physiological adaptation of the bacterium to the endosymbiotic state [28,29]. Although the rsh mutant induces
nodulation, the bacteroids are morphologically different
compared to the wild type, and nitrogen fixation activity
is drastically reduced. Several nitrogen fixation and
quorum-sensing genes, essential for symbiosis, were
shown to be part of the alarmone regulon, including the
symbiotic sN that is required for expression of nitrogen
fixation genes [29]. Recently, a detailed phenotypic analysis of the rsh (previously referred to as relA or relRet)
mutant showed a prominent role for the alarmone in
the general stress response of R. etli during free-living
growth and symbiosis [30].
In order to obtain new insights into the molecular
basis of adaptation of R. etli to unfavorable growth conditions, we performed a genome-wide transcriptome
analysis to compare global gene expression between the
wild type and a rsh mutant during different free-living
growth phases.
This study is the first in-depth analysis of (p)ppGppdependent gene regulation in an a-proteobacterium,
revealing notable differences from the well-studied role

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

of (p)ppGpp in E. coli. Of the many detected (p)ppGpp
targets that may contribute to the observed stress phenotypes of the rsh mutant, we performed a phenotypic
analysis of three specific previously uncharacterized regulators, that is, sigma factor EcfG2/PF00052, DNA-binding transcription factor CH00371 and serine kinase
PrkA/CH02817. Our results show that the stress phenotypes of mutants lacking EcfG2 or CH00371 correspond
to a subset of the rsh mutant phenotypes, while PrkA
may be involved in metabolic adaptation. In addition,
we identified several upstream and downstream elements in the stress response pathways of these three
novel (p)ppGpp-dependent regulators, providing added
detail to the complex picture of the role of (p)ppGpp in
R. etli.

Results and Discussion
Experimental design of the transcriptome analysis

Previously, we reported on the crucial role of (p)ppGpp
during symbiosis and free-living growth in R. etli
CNPAF512 using a rsh mutant [29,30]. Based on these
findings, we decided to carry out a transcriptome analysis to characterize to what extent (p)ppGpp deficiency
affects gene expression in R. etli. The intracellular (p)
ppGpp content of the R. etli wild type, rsh mutant and
complemented rsh mutant was determined previously
[29], showing the rsh mutant to be (p)ppGpp-deficient.
However, due to the sensitivity of the assay, the presence of trace amounts of (p)ppGpp in the rsh mutant,
possibly resulting from the presence of an as yet unidentified synthetase gene, cannot be ruled out.
At the time of the experimental setup, only the genomic DNA sequence of R. etli CFN42 was available [31].
Therefore, a custom whole-genome microarray for R.
etli CFN42 as well as a CFN42-derived rsh mutant was
constructed. Phenotypic analysis of this mutant showed
that a lack of (p)ppGpp results in an extended lag phase
in different media, an altered morphology and a 75%
reduction of nitrogen fixation activity in plants inoculated with the CFN42 rsh mutant compared to the wild
type (data not shown). All phenotypes could be fully
complemented by providing rsh of CNPAF512 in trans
and are in agreement with our previously published rsh
mutant analyses [29,30].
To determine the role exerted by the alarmone (p)
ppGpp in the regulation of transcription during free-living growth and growth arrest of R. etli, total RNA samples were taken at three different time points
corresponding to early and late exponential and stationary phase, respectively (Additional file 1).
Global overview of gene expression

The R. etli CFN42 genome contains 6,030 annotated protein-encoding genes, 67 pseudo genes, 3 rRNA operons

Page 3 of 19

and 50 tRNA genes. Recently, we described an additional
89 ncRNA genes [32]. In both the wild type and rsh
mutant, over 97% (or (683 + 870)/1,593) of proteinencoding genes that are transcribed above the detection
limit (see Materials and methods) during early exponential growth are also expressed during late exponential
growth. In addition, numerous genes are induced in the
course of growth, as 20% (or (157 + 227)/1,937) of the
genes expressed in late exponential phase are not transcribed during early growth (Figure 1).
We identified a large number of differentially
expressed genes during exponential and stationary
phase, both (p)ppGpp-dependent and independent, the
former being consistent with the role of rsh as a global
regulator described in other species [33-35]. The extent
of differential expression is illustrated by the ratio/intensity MA plots in Additional file 2. Alarmone dependency
was determined by comparing gene expression of the
wild type and rsh mutant during each of the three
sampled growth phases (Figure 2a). A total of 834 (p)
ppGpp-dependent genes with an expression ratio of at
least two-fold were found. Approximately half of these
genes (520) were expressed exclusively during stationary

Wild type
Early exponential phase

Late exponential phase

683

38
2

870

157
227

368
Stationary phase

rsh mutant
Early exponential phase

Late exponential phase

608

4
0

473

529
491

218
Stationary phase
Figure 1 Detectable gene expression overview. The number of
genes expressed above the detection threshold in each condition
and the overlap between the different conditions are shown in
Venn diagrams. Upper and lower diagrams represent expression in
the wild type and rsh mutant, respectively.

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

Page 4 of 19

reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR; see
Materials and methods). For each gene, expression during early exponential phase and stationary phase in the
wild type and rsh mutant was measured so that three
different ratios could be plotted versus the respective
ratios obtained by microarray analysis (Figure 3), showing the array data to be in good agreement with the RTqPCR data.
The effect of (p)ppGpp on global gene expression during
stationary phase

phase and only a minority (36) were found to be (p)
ppGpp-dependent during all growth conditions.
By comparing expression in the wild type during stationary and early exponential phase, we identified 657
stationary phase genes (Figure 2b), representing 11% (or
657/6,030) of the annotated protein-coding genes. The
overlap of (p)ppGpp-dependent genes and stationary
phase genes shows that just over half (57% or (229 +
144)/657) of stationary phase genes are (p)ppGppdependent. Because 61% (or 229/373) of these were
upregulated (Figure 2b), the alarmone (p)ppGpp seems
to have a primarily inducing role in R. etli. A comparable number of (p)ppGpp-dependent genes were found
in other bacteria: 490 (11%) of all genes in E. coli and
194 (6%) in Corynebacterium glutamicum after (p)
ppGpp-induction by serine hydroxymate [18,34], 589
genes (7%) upon induction of (p)ppGpp synthesis in
Streptomyces coelicolor [35] and 373 (18%) of all genes
after treatment with mupirocin in Streptococcus pneumoniae [23].
The microarray data were confirmed by analyzing the
expression levels of 14 representative genes using

6

qPCR

Figure 2 (p)ppGpp-dependent gene expression. (a) Venn
diagram of all differentially expressed (p)ppGpp-dependent genes
during early exponential phase, late exponential phase and
stationary phase. (b) Venn diagram of all genes expressed during
stationary phase (large ellipse). The overlap with (p)ppGppdependent genes (see (a)) shows all (p)ppGpp-dependent stationary
phase genes (small ellipse). Upwards and downwards oriented
arrows indicate gene induction and repression, respectively.

During stationary phase in E. coli, the alarmone (p)
ppGpp induces a downregulation of processes involved
in cell growth, such as DNA replication and translation,
and an upregulation of specific metabolic pathways to
cope with certain nutrient deficiencies as well as general
stress responses to protect the cell against immediate
and future harmful conditions. In order to better understand the role of (p)ppGpp in the global reprogramming
of R. etli’s transcriptome, we compared the expression
of wild type and rsh mutant during stationary phase. As
samples were taken approximately 6 hours after growth
arrest, the observed differences in expression include
both direct and indirect effects caused by a lack of alarmone. Of the 663 differentially expressed genes, 292 and

ecfG2
prkA

4

2
CH371

0

Array
prkA

-2
ecfG2

-4

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Figure 3 RT-qPCR validation of the microarray data. Expression
of 14 genes was determined using RT-qPCR for the wild type and
rsh mutant in early exponential phase and stationary phase. The
log2-transformed mean values of two biological replicates were
used to report three different fold changes for each gene (Y-axis)
compared to the respective microarray fold changes (X-axis). See
Additional file 6 for a complete list of the plotted fold change
values. Red dots, wild type stationary phase versus early exponential
phase. Blue diamonds, wild type versus rsh mutant in stationary
phase. Green squares, wild type versus rsh mutant in exponential
phase. The fold changes for ecfG2/PF00052, CH00371 and prkA/
CH02817 are indicated.

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

Page 5 of 19

371 were upregulated and downregulated, respectively,
in the wild type compared to the rsh mutant (Figure
2a). These genes were further grouped based on predicted functional role and category (Additional file 3).
An overview of the functional categories (Figure 4a)
shows the mutant to be less well adapted to the nongrowing lifestyle as more growth-associated genes,
involved in cell wall biosynthesis, energy production and
intracellular trafficking and secretion, are induced in the
mutant. Notably, the replication and recombination
category is strongly represented in the mutant due to
the high number of insertion sequence (IS)-related
genes that show expression. An equal number of genes
with unknown function were up- and downregulated. In
the following paragraphs, selected functional categories,
primarily focused on regulation and possible links with
the pleiotropic stress phenotype, will be discussed in
more detail.
Transcriptional regulators and signal transduction

The link between changes in extracellular conditions and
concomitant adaptation of genome expression involves a
combination of sensors, transporters, phosphorylation cascades and the modulation of transcription factors [36].
Most of these belong to the ‘transcription’ and ‘signal

(a)

transduction’ categories, of which 29 and 26 genes are differentially expressed, respectively, in the wild type compared to the (p)ppGpp-deficient mutant at onset of
growth arrest (Additional file 3).
By clustering the differentially expressed genes of
these two categories, we identified two main groups
(Figure 5). The first group contains genes that are under
negative (p)ppGpp control during primarily the stationary phase and include the LysR transcriptional regulators nocR and nodD3, the two-component sensor kinase
virA and two diguanylate cyclases, PD00137 and
PE00107. The second group contains genes that are
under positive (p)ppGpp control during primarily the
stationary phase, encoding among others the transcriptional regulators RirA and BolA-like CH02287, the
CarD-like regulator CH04025, the two-component
response regulators CH02556 and CH03335, and the Nacyl-L-homoserine lactone (AHL) synthase CinI.
Several of these transcriptional regulators have previously been shown to play a role in the adaptation to
adverse conditions in other species and can partly
explain the pleiotropic stress phenotype of the rsh
mutant. In E. coli, BolA controls expression of a number
of cell wall proteins, is partially responsible for the

Wild type vs rsh mutant stationary phase

(b)

Wild type vs rsh mutant early exponential phase

Amino acid transport
and metabolism
Carbohydrate transport
and metabolism
Cell motility
Cell wall/membrane
biogenesis
Energy conversion
and production
Nucleotide transport
and metabolism
Intracellular tracking
and secretion
Replication, recombination
and repair
Secondary metabolites biosynthesis,
transport and catabolism
Signal transduction
mechanisms
Transcription
Translation
Posttranslational modiﬁcation,
protein turnover, chaperones
Number of genes 60

20
40
Downregulated

0

20
Upregulated

30

20
10
Downregulated

0

10
20
Upregulated

Figure 4 Differentially expressed genes grouped by functional categories. Up- and downregulated (wild type versus rsh mutant) genes are
indicated by red and green bars, respectively, representing the number of genes per functional category. Functional categories of the RhizoBase
database were used [92]. (a) Stationary phase data of wild type versus rsh mutant. (b) Early exponential data of wild type versus rsh mutant.

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

level of (p)ppGpp in order to regulate iron homeostasis
in the cell as reported in E. coli and B. subtilis [39,40].
Since iron plays a crucial role in the oxidative stress
response, incomplete iron sequestration may also contribute to the increased oxidative stress sensitivity of the
rsh mutant [30,41]. Other regulators under positive (p)
ppGpp control include two members of the cold shock
protein family (CspA3, CspA4), a putative member of
the UspA family (CH01233), the SOS response regulator
LexA and the two-component regulator TcrX. TcrX is
orthologous to PhyR of Methylobacterium extorquens,
which regulates many stress response genes and was
shown to play a role in the osmotic stress response in R.
etli as well [42,43].

Stat.

Late exp.

Early exp.

Stat.

Late exp.

Early exp.

Wild type
nodD3
PE00107
virA
PA00032
CH03861
PC00046
CH02977
PD00137
PC00110
PD00067
PD00176
nocR
CH00455
PF00052
PF00057
prkA
CH00630
CH01233
CH02556
CH00371
PD00109
CH00678
rirA
CH04025
CH00713
CH01551
CH00030
CH00966
PF00155
CH00453
cinI
tcrX
CH03335
cspA4
ctrA
PE00434
CH02645
CH03208
CH02287
rpoE4

Page 6 of 19

rsh mutant

1

Sigma factors

2
2
1
0
-1
-2

Figure 5 Clustering of differentially expressed signal
transduction and transcription-related genes. The heat map
visualizes the expression profiles of all differentially expressed genes
belonging to the transcription category and signal transduction
category in the wild type and rsh mutant during stationary phase.
The expression values in each row were standardized by subtraction
of the mean and division by the standard deviation and
hierarchically clustered. Expression values are reflected by red-green
coloring as indicated. Genes showing similar expression patterns are
grouped as follows: group 1, genes under negative (p)ppGpp
control during stationary phase; group 2, genes under positive (p)
ppGpp control during stationary phase. Exp., exponential; Stat.,
stationary.

coccoid morphology of stationary phase cells and is also
expressed in a (p)ppGpp-dependent manner, being
under control of RpoS [5,18,33]. Reduced BolA levels
may therefore contribute to the altered morphology of
the R. etli rsh mutant. Furthermore, expression of the
global iron-responsive regulator RirA that controls the
synthesis of heme, FeS-clusters and bacterioferritin in
rhizobia, is under positive (p)ppGpp control as well
[37,38]. Accordingly, expression of bacterioferritin (bfr)
was positively upregulated in the R. etli wild type, suggesting that (p)ppGpp contributes to iron homeostasis.
Conversely, a lack of iron may cause an increase in the

R. etli CFN42 possesses 23 sigma factors that determine
the promoter specificity of the RNAP holoenzyme by
binding to the core enzyme. Therefore, differential
expression and/or activity of sigma factors can redirect
global gene expression. During exponential growth,
transcription is largely under control of the housekeeping sigma factor s 70 as its binding affinity for RNAP
and intracellular concentration are much higher compared to the other sigma factors. These alternative
sigma factors have specific regulons and will redirect
transcription upon unfavorable conditions. Bacteria like
R. etli that have a complex lifestyle or encounter diverse
environmental conditions usually display an increased
number of sigma factors [5,44].
Upon transition to stationary phase, the reversible
switch to a less s70-dominated expression in E. coli is
accomplished not solely by (p)ppGpp but also by DksA
and the anti-s 70 factor Rsd. In R. etli, expression of
dksA is reduced over eight-fold in stationary phase compared to early exponential phase in a (p)ppGpp-independent manner. The role of DksA in a-proteobacteria
is so far unknown. Furthermore, no Rsd homolog is
found in R. etli or other other a-proteobacteria. R. etli
may compensate for the lack of a specific anti-s70 factor, as we observed a (p)ppGpp-independent drop in
expression of the housekeeping sigma factor sigA to
below the detection limit while expression in E. coli of
s70 remains constant during stationary phase.
Of all the alternative sigma factors, only the extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factor PF00052 was upregulated at least two-fold during stationary phase
compared to early exponential phase in the wild type.
The ECF sigma factor rpoE4 is expressed at the same
level during all conditions in the wild type, but dropped
below the expression threshold during stationary phase
in the rsh mutant. Consequently, two ECF sigma factors,
PF00052 and rpoE4, were upregulated over two-fold in
the wild type compared to the rsh mutant during stationary phase (Figure 5). In E. coli, only the level of the

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

stationary phase sigma factor rpoS (sS) increases with
(p)ppGpp concentration and plays a crucial role as global regulator in the (p)ppGpp-dependent stress response
[45,46]. In contrast, ε- and a-proteobacteria, including
R. etli, lack such a stationary phase sigma factor and, so
far, it is unclear which system takes over this function.
Our data suggest that both PF00052 and RpoE4 may
be important sigma factors in R. etli adaptation to stationary phase and possibly fulfill a role similar to RpoS
in E. coli. First, both sigma factors are expressed during
stationary phase. Second, both sigma factors are the
most highly upregulated (p)ppGpp-dependent alternative
sigma factors during stationary phase. Third, both share
considerable sequence similarity and were recently classified in a group of proposed general stress response
sigma factors that is exclusively found in a-proteobacteria [47]. Fourth, it was recently shown in R. etli that
RpoE4 regulates gene expression in response to several
stress conditions including oxidative, saline and osmotic
stress. Fifth, we found that PF00052 is also involved in
the (p)ppGpp-dependent stress response and is in part
functionally redundant with RpoE4 (see below).
Transcriptome analysis of an R. etli rpoE4 mutant and
overexpression strain revealed 98 genes to be regulated
by this sigma factor [42]. Since transcription of rpoE4 is
(p)ppGpp-dependent, we investigated to what extent the
reported RpoE4 regulon is (p)ppGpp-dependent. In total,
60 of the 98 genes belonging to the reported regulon are
differentially expressed in our data (Additional file 4). Of
these genes, 82% are (p)ppGpp-dependent and 92% are
up- or downregulated during stationary phase compared
to early exponential phase in the wild type. Upon rpoE4
overexpression, 74% of the reported upregulated genes
were found to be (p)ppGpp-dependent.
Considering the RpoE4-regulated genes, all 16 genes
predicted to encode proteins associated with cell envelope biogenesis are also (p)ppGpp-dependent. Similarly,
E. coli’s sole ECF sigma factor, sE, regulates many genes
involved in the biogenesis and stress response of the cell
envelope [48,49]. Other RpoE4 and (p)ppGpp-dependent
genes include a putative Mn-catalase (CH00462), a putative pyridoxine-phosphate oxidase (CH03474), an alphaglucoside ABC transporter (algE), and a CarD-like transcriptional regulator (CH04025). The latter is a crucial
regulator in Mycobacterium tuberculosis that is upregulated in response to oxidative stress, DNA damage and
starvation [48,49]. The above suggests that the pleiotropic stress phenotype of the R. etli rsh mutant can be
explained, at least in part, by downregulation of (p)
ppGpp-dependent sigma factors that play a crucial role
in orchestrating the stress response.
Non-coding RNAs

Our data indicate that (p)ppGpp controls expression of
many protein-coding genes. In addition, we identified 33

Page 7 of 19

alarmone-dependent ncRNAs expressed during stationary phase. Of these, 28 were positively regulated by (p)
ppGpp, including one glycine riboswitch, 17 novel
ncRNAs, 4 previously identified but uncharacterized
ncRNAs, and the 6 well characterized ncRNAs (6S
RNA, tmRNA, signal recognition particle 4.5S RNA,
RNase P, and ctRNA of plasmids p42d and p42e) (Additional file 5). Only five ncRNAs, all novel, were negatively regulated by (p)ppGpp.
So far, no ncRNAs have been reported to be (p)
ppGpp-dependent in any organism. However, in recent
years, an increasing number of ncRNAs have been
found to be regulated by alternative sigma factors in E.
coli, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, L.
monocytogenes, B. subtilis and S. coelicolor [50-53].
Therefore, the (p)ppGpp-dependent ncRNAs of R. etli
could be regulated by alternative sigma factors as well.
Additionally, ncRNAs can also regulate sigma factors, as
is the case for sS in E. coli whose translation is regulated by DsrA and RprA [50-53].
The level of 6S RNA was almost 14-fold lower in the
alarmone-deficient mutant during stationary phase in R.
etli. This is unlike in E. coli, where 6S RNA is not under
(p)ppGpp control either in vitro or in vivo [54,55]. However, 6S RNA transcription appears to be complexly
regulated in E. coli as several stress regulators, such as
Fis, H-NS, Lrp and StpA, were shown to be inhibitors
under in vitro conditions [55]. Recently, transcriptional
analysis of a 6S RNA-deficient mutant showed 273
genes to be differentially expressed during stationary
phase. Surprisingly, loss of 6S RNA in E. coli also
resulted in an increase of the basal (p)ppGpp level
mediated by an altered activity of SpoT and not RelA
[56]. Therefore, 6S RNA is clearly embedded in stationary phase adaptation, although its association with (p)
ppGpp in R. etli and E. coli may differ.
Expression of bacterial RNase P and tmRNA was
almost 13- and 6-fold downregulated, respectively, in
the R. etli rsh mutant compared to the wild type.
Although the synthesis and processing of tRNA is
expected to be downregulated during growth arrest, 38%
of the tRNAs were upregulated in the wild type during
stationary phase compared to early exponential phase
and 56% of the tRNAs were upregulated in an alarmone-dependent manner. The upregulation of bacterial
RNase P during stationary phase in an alarmone-dependent manner is in line with the unexpected upregulation
of several tRNAs as RNase P is required to process the
5’ end of precursor tRNAs. Expression of tmRNA is also
upregulated in R. etli. This alarmone-dependence of
tmRNA expression has not been reported in E. coli,
although a lack of 6S RNA results in a three-fold higher
expression of the SmpB protein, which acts together
with tmRNA [56]. However, the expression level of

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

tmRNA was not reported. Interestingly, the 6S RNA
mutation is compensated for by an increase of the basal
(p)ppGpp level, which indicates that the tmRNA/SmpB
system might be alarmone-dependent in E. coli also.
Still, (p)ppGpp is not needed for mRNA cleavage in the
A site of the ribosome by tmRNA [57]. In contrast, both
tmRNA and smpB of Streptococcus pyogenes were
shown to be upregulated in a relA-independent amino
acid starvation response [58].
Translational apparatus

In addition to inducing general stress and nutrient
scavenging regulons, the accumulation of (p)ppGpp
upon growth arrest in E. coli is characterized by a stringent downregulation of expression of the translational
apparatus as a mechanism to fine-tune the metabolically
expensive process of protein synthesis according to the
growth state of the cell [9,59]. As expected, during the
stationary phase all 56 genes encoding ribosomal proteins were downregulated in the R. etli wild type compared to the exponential phase. However, nearly all (53
out of 56) of these were downregulated in the rsh
mutant as well. Although this (p)ppGpp-independent
downregulation is in conflict with the established E. coli
paradigm of the stringent response, a similar response
was described in a rel mutant of Corynebacterium glutamicum upon addition of serine hydroxamate [9,34,59].
Therefore, the difference in transcriptional regulation of
ribosomal protein expression during growth arrest suggests that the stringent response in R. etli may deviate
from the classical model in E. coli.
Other genes encoding parts of the translational
machinery that were positively regulated by (p)ppGpp in
R. etli include the homolog of E. coli yhbH (CH00406)
and two EF-Tu elongation factors (tufA, tufB). In E. coli,
YhbH is involved in the temporary storage or dimerization of ribosomes during stationary phase. This process
was shown to contribute to the survival of E. coli [28].
In accordance with our data, the YhbH ortholog of B.
subtilis (yvyD) is also under positive (p)ppGpp control
[60]. However, in contrast to the positive (p)ppGppdependent regulation of tufA and tufB in R. etli, TE-Tu
factors in E. coli and B. subtilis were previously shown
to be under negative control of (p)ppGpp [8,60]. Interestingly, translation factors such as TE-Tu are GTPases
that can bind (p)ppGpp and associate with the ribosome, indicating that they may have a downstream role
in (p)ppGpp-dependent gene regulation [13].
Post-translational modification, repair and recombination

The (p)ppGpp-dependent stress adaptation during stationary phase involves 20 genes belonging to the posttranslational modification category, of which 15 were
positively regulated. These include several components
of the ATP-dependent Clp protease system, such as
clpX, clpP2, clpP3, clpA and clpS, as well as the ATP-

Page 8 of 19

dependent proteases lon and ftsH [61]. These proteases
allow cells to cope with misfolded or denatured proteins, the abundance of which increases during stress
conditions, such as heat stress, in order to prevent protein aggregation and to enable recycling of amino acids
[5]. A similar (p)ppGpp-dependent regulation was
observed for clpA in E. coli as well as clpP1 and clpC in
C. glutamicum [33,34]. Thus, the (p)ppGpp-dependent
increase of tmRNA in R. etli correlates with the increase
in proteases as the Clp system and Lon are needed to
degrade tmRNA-tagged polypeptides in E. coli [62].
Proteases and chaperones are also involved in regulating transcriptional regulators and other growth-phase
regulated proteins, such as RpoS, Dps and GlnA in E.
coli [63]. Therefore, by controlling proteolysis, the alarmone (p)ppGpp mediates the cellular reprogramming of
R. etli at the post-transcriptional level as well. Other
positively controlled genes include the probable serine
protease CH01273, the small heat shock protein
PF00472 as well as genes required to cope with oxidative stress, such as osmC and grlA.
Rather unexpectedly, very few genes of the repair and
recombination category were under positive stringent
control. However, several IS-related genes were negatively controlled by (p)ppGpp, including 47 transposases,
one resolvase, and one integrase. Therefore, these data
suggest that the alarmone may assist in repressing insertional activity and mobility of IS-related elements.
Other processes

The impact of (p)ppGpp as a global regulator of transcription is further illustrated by its control of genes
involved in diverse cellular processes. In E. coli, the alarmone plays a central role in restructuring metabolism
upon nutrient starvation and growth arrest, thereby
increasing the range of active metabolic pathways and
nutrient scavenging potential [33]. In R. etli, the alarmone likely has a similar role in metabolism as differential gene expression was detected for 22 genes involved
in amino acid metabolism, 41 genes in carbohydrate
metabolism, 9 in lipid metabolism and 22 in energy
production.
(p)ppGpp was shown in E. coli to induce amino acid
biosynthesis pathways depending on the availability of
limiting amino acids. However, compared to exponential
phase, no clear upregulation during stationary phase of
one or more specific amino acid pathways was found in
the R. etli wild type. Only a few genes involved in
amino acid metabolism were positively controlled by (p)
ppGpp (phhA, cysE1, glnA2, trpE). In addition, 13 amino
acid synthesis genes (trpF, trpA, hisB, asnB, aroQ1,
aroF, ilvI, aatA, lysC, argG2, tyrA, leuD, asd) along with
the P-II regulator glnB, which regulates glutamine
synthetase in response to nitrogen levels, were downregulated in a (p)ppGpp-independent manner during

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

stationary phase compared to exponential phase. Therefore, during stationary phase, amino acid biosynthesis in
R. etli is downregulated rather than upregulated as in E.
coli.
Several genes encoding key enzymes of carbohydrate
metabolism were induced by (p)ppGpp, including the
transaldolase tal of the pentose pathway, glgC involved
in starch and sucrose metabolism, the glycolytic gene
fbaB and the gene encoding trehalose-6-phophatase,
otsB. These genes were also shown to be under positive
control by (p)ppGpp in E. coli upon amino acid starvation [33]. FbaB is a fructose-bisphosphate aldolase
whose reaction product can exert feedback control on
the glycolytic flux and is also required for ribosome
recycling during carbon starvation [6]. Moreover, OtsB
produces the disaccharide trehalose from trehalose-6phosphate, which is produced by OtsA using UDP-glucose and glucose-6-phosphate. Not only is trehalose an
energy and carbon source, it also stabilizes and protects
proteins and membranes from dehydration, oxidation
and cold [64]. Recently, it was shown that all three trehalose synthesis pathways known to date are present in
S. meliloti. However, only the OtsA pathway is important for osmo-inducible trehalose synthesis [65]. In R.
etli, overexpressing otsA improves symbiotic efficiency
and drought tolerance of its host P. vulgaris [66]. During
stationary phase, otsA and otsB have a different expression pattern; otsB is induced by (p)ppGpp while otsA is
constitutively expressed in the wild type but under negative (p)ppGpp control upon growth arrest. It is possible
that this (p)ppGpp-dependent regulation of trehalose
synthesis contributes to the previously observed
increased sensitivity of the rsh mutant to osmotic stress
[30].
The link between the stringent response and the available carbon sources remains unclear. In E. coli, the (p)
ppGpp synthetase/hydrolase SpoT interacts with acyl
carrier proteins (ACPs) of fatty acid metabolism [67]. R.
etli contains four acyl carrier proteins, of which only
two (acpP, acpXL) were expressed during growth and
downregulated upon growth arrest independently of (p)
ppGpp. In contrast to E. coli, no clear (p)ppGpp-dependent regulation of lipid metabolism genes was observed.
Also, most of the nucleotide biosynthesis genes are
downregulated during stationary phase compared to
exponential phase in the wild type, reflecting the
decreased need for nucleotides. Only six nucleotide biosynthesis genes were found to be under control of (p)
ppGpp in R. etli. This is in accordance with the
observed (p)ppGpp-independent downregulation of ribosomal proteins.
As well as regulating R. etli’s biosynthetic potential, (p)
ppGpp also controls its transport capacity during stationary phase. Twenty-one genes related to ABC

Page 9 of 19

transporters were under positive (p)ppGpp control, such
as potF, dppA, proX, aglK, and gguB, while 12 were
repressed. Most of these transporters allow for the
uptake of amino acids, peptides and monosaccharides.
In addition, two secretion-associated genes (secB and
pilA) were upregulated and seven genes involved in type
IV secretion were downregulated (virB1a, 2a, D4, B6a,
B8a, B8d, B10). Interestingly, the pilin subunit pilA was
the most highly expressed protein-encoding gene in R.
etli during stationary phase.
Energy production drops during the stationary phase
as more than 25 genes predicted to be involved in oxidative phosphorylation were downregulated compared
to exponential phase in the wild type. In contrast to E.
coli, 76% of the differentially expressed genes that
belong to the energy production category, 95 in total,
are not under (p)ppGpp control [33]. During free-living
growth, R. etli uses cytochrome aa3 terminal oxidases,
encoded by ctaCDGE, coxPONM and CH00981CH00985 [31,68]. The ctaCDGE terminal oxidase was
downregulated during stationary phase in both the wild
type and the rsh mutant. On the other hand, the coxPONM alternative terminal oxidase was upregulated
during stationary phase in the wild type but not in the
rsh mutant. The third probable terminal oxidase was
not expressed. Therefore, the alternative terminal oxidase coxPONM is likely to play an important role during
(p)ppGpp-dependent stationary phase adaptation.
In addition to the decrease in energy production, flagellum synthesis and motility is also downregulated during stationary phase, reflecting that it is a highly energy
demanding process. In E. coli, flagellar genes are under
positive (p)ppGpp control [18,19,69]. Similarly in R. etli,
(p)ppGpp positively regulates flagellar gene expression.
However, this regulation occurs primarily during the
exponential phase instead of the stationary phase, as 25
of the 35 flagellar genes were expressed above threshold
during the exponential phase compared to 10 during the
stationary phase. Of the latter, three flagellar hookrelated genes (flgD, flgE, flgL) and two flagellin synthesis
regulators (flaF, flbT) were upregulated in the wild type
compared to the rsh mutant [70]. FlgD forms a scaffold
on which the hook subunit FlgE polymerizes on the
envelope-embedded rod to form the flexible hook structure. FlgL is a junction protein connecting the rigid flagellar filament. In short, (p)ppGpp regulates several
crucial flagellar genes in R. etli.
The effect of (p)ppGpp on global gene expression during
early exponential phase

By comparing the expression data of the wild type and
rsh mutant during early exponential growth, we identified 203 differentially expressed genes, of which 59 were
under positive stringent control and 144 under negative

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

motility genes were upregulated by (p)ppGpp, such as
three of the four basal-body rod proteins (flgBCG), one of
the three flagellar switch proteins that interact with the
chemotaxis system (fliN) and three chemotaxis proteins
(motA, cheW5, cheY1). Therefore, (p)ppGpp has a similarly inducing role on flagellar genes during growth as
observed upon growth arrest. A swimming test on 0.2%
agar plates corroborates this observation (Figure 6). The
(p)ppGpp-deficient mutant showed reduced swimming
activity compared to the wild type, a phenotype that
could be partially complemented by providing the rsh
gene in trans. Hence, the alarmone is required for optimal motility, as was also previously reported for E. coli
[19,69].
Remarkably, in addition to growth-related genes, many
post-translational modification genes were under negative stringent control in the rsh mutant. These comprise
numerous chaperones, including the three major ones,
tig, dnaK and groEL-groES, involved in folding of new
proteins as well as in proper assembly of unfolded proteins and refolding of misfolded proteins generated
under stress conditions [74]. DnaK is also involved in
chromosomal DNA replication and is part of the osmotic stress response, in addition to osmC [74]. Other
upregulated heat shock proteins in the rsh mutant
include four peptidases (hslV, lon, traF, htpX2) and one
protease (ftsH). Although exponentially growing cells are
considered to be less stressed, this increased expression
of many heat shock proteins in actively growing cells in
the absence of (p)ppGpp might indicate a defect or disruption in protein homeostasis, rather then merely an
increase in translational activity. Therefore, this stress
response during growth is in accordance with increased
stress sensitivity of the rsh mutant as observed previously [30].
4.5
1 Day
2 Days
3 Days

4.0

Halo diameter (cm)

stringent control. This is surprising as transcription during the exponential phase of a (p)ppGpp-deficient
mutant and the wild type is generally thought to be very
similar. The alarmone is considered to be a stationary
phase or growth arrest-specific messenger that switches
the cellular metabolism to a non-growing state. During
favorable growth conditions, (p)ppGpp is produced at a
low basal level and rapidly accumulates in response to
growth-perturbing conditions. Furthermore, during the
exponential phase, a (p)ppGpp-deficient mutant of E.
coli is phenotypically very similar to the wild type,
although a decreased growth phase-independent thermotolerance has been reported [71]. However, to the
best of our knowledge, to this date no detailed comparison of global transcription during exponential growth
has been described for a wild type and relA spoT mutant
of E. coli, which serves as the stringent response model
organism. Still, it was recently shown that almost 300
genes were differentially expressed in an rpoS mutant of
E. coli during exponential growth, even though RpoS is
known as the stationary phase sigma factor [72]. This
would suggest that a difference in expression during
logarithmic growth in a (p)ppGpp-deficient mutant
could be expected as (p)ppGpp regulates the expression
and activity of RpoS in E. coli. Moreover, a major difference in expression during growth in the absence of (p)
ppGpp was also previously observed in M. tuberculosis
and C. glutamicum [34,73]. Our data are in agreement
with these reports, showing that the low basal level of
(p)ppGpp is functionally relevant during active growth.
This additional function is also in agreement with the
observed increase in sensitivity to several acute and
chronic stresses of a R. etli rsh mutant during exponential growth [30].
A comparison of the (p)ppGpp-dependent genes during early exponential phase and stationary phase showed
that only 50 genes were differentially expressed in both
states. Of this fraction, only half of the genes showed
similar positive or negative control during both phases.
This suggests that the function of (p)ppGpp differs during active growth and growth arrest, possibly through
involvement of other regulators. To further understand
the impact and role of the alarmone during exponential
growth, we again grouped the up- and downregulated
genes in functional categories (Figure 4b). As 71% of
these genes were under negative (p)ppGpp regulation,
the alarmone plays a primarily repressing role during
logarithmic growth, in contrast to the observed predominantly inducing role upon growth arrest. For example,
the alarmone induces 19 transporters during stationary
phase while it represses 12 during early exponential
phase. Other genes under negative (p)ppGpp control
include 10 conjugal transfer proteins, 5 IS-related transposases and 26 ribosomal proteins. In contrast, nine

Page 10 of 19

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0

Wild type

rsh mutant

rsh mutant + compl.

Figure 6 Swimming motility test. Swimming halo diameter
observed on 0.2% agar TY plates on three consecutive days for wild
type, rsh mutant and complemented rsh mutant. The mean values
and standard deviation of five biological replicates are shown. The
differences over time are statistically significant between the
different strains (P < 0.001).

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

Functional analysis of three (p)ppGpp-dependent
regulators

To gain insight into the (p)ppGpp-controlled adaptation
of R. etli to the stationary phase and diverse stresses as
previously reported [30], we selected three different
types of previously uncharacterized regulators based on
their strongly (p)ppGpp-dependent expression during
stationary phase and belonging to the group of transcriptional regulators (ecfG2, phrR) or signal transduction (prkA). The microarray expression patterns of these
regulators were confirmed using RT-qPCR (Figure 3). A
phenotypical analysis was performed on the corresponding knockout strains to determine the regulators’ contribution to the (p)ppGpp-regulated stress response.
Extracytoplasmic function sigma factor PF00052 or EcfG2

R. etli PF00052 is the most highly upregulated alternative sigma factor during stationary phase in the wild
type and upregulated over two-fold compared to the rsh
mutant. Analysis of the PF00052 knockout mutant
showed decreased survival following oxidative stress,
approximately three orders of magnitude lower compared to the wild type (Figure 7). In accordance, the rsh
mutant also displays an increased oxidative stress phenotype [30]. In contrast to the rsh mutant, however, the
PF00052 mutant does not show a decreased viability
after osmotic or heat shock.
Recently, a comprehensive phylogenetic analysis classified the ECF sigma factor family into 43 groups supported by domain architecture, genomic context
conservation and potential targets [47]. R. etli contains

10

Log (CFU/ml)

8
6
4
2
0

Wild type

ecfG2
mutant

rpoE4
mutant

N.D.
N.D.
ecfG2 rpoE4 CH00371
mutant
mutant

Figure 7 Stress survival of (p)ppGpp-dependent regulator
mutants. Survival of the wild type, ecfG2 mutant, rpoE4 mutant,
ecfG2-rpoE4 mutant and CH00371 mutant was determined by
plating on TY medium after stress treatment and is shown as the
mean log(colony forming units (CFU)/ml) of three biological
replicates with error bars corresponding to standard deviations.
Light gray bars represent control samples incubated at 30°C for the
same time period as test samples. Dark gray bars represent samples
incubated for 30 minutes in the presence of 10 mM H2O2 at 30°C.
Black bars represent samples incubated for 30 minutes at 45°C. N.D.,
no colonies detected.

Page 11 of 19

18 ECF sigma factors, of which three (rpoE4, sigK and
PE00004), in addition to PF00052, were expressed during growth arrest as well. RpoE4 and PF00052 are 42%
identical and both belong to theECF15/EcfG group,
which exclusively contains a-proteobacterial ECFs, such
as EcfG1 of Methylobacterium extorquens, RpoE2 of S.
meliloti and SigT of C. crescentus. This group of proposed general stress response sigma factors is characterized by a conserved genomic context that encodes an
EcfG-like sigma factor, a cytoplasmic NepR-like antisigma factor, a PhyR-like response regulator and a sensor histidine kinase. When the latter perceives a signal,
it phosphorylates the regulator, which in turn binds to
the anti-sigma factor, thereby releasing the sigma factor
and initiating a signal transduction cascade [47]. In case
of R. etli rpoE4, an anti-sigma factor (CH03274) and a
sensor/regulator (tcrXY or CH03275-CH03276) are
found upstream of rpoE4, and tcrX is transcribed in a
strongly (p)ppGpp-dependent way (Additional file 3).
Though PF00052 is also a member of the EcfG group, a
similar genomic context was not recognized. Several
other a-proteobacteria also have two EcfG representatives, one that is present in the conserved genomic context while the other is not - for example, S. meliloti
1021 and Agrobacterium tumefaciens str. C58 [47]. A
revised ECF nomenclature has been proposed [47] and
has recently been adopted for EcfG-like ECF sigma factors in M. extorquens [43] and Bradyrhizobium japonicum [75]. Accordingly, we will hereafter refer to
PF00052 as EcfG2.
Due to the high similarity between RpoE4 and EcfG2,
we also analyzed the stress sensitivity of an rpoE4
mutant. This revealed a decrease in survival of one
order of magnitude upon oxidative and heat stress compared to the wild type (Figure 7). Hence, the rpoE4
mutant exhibits an oxidative stress phenotype less severe
than the ecfG2 mutant but, in contrast to the latter, a
significant heat stress phenotype. This suggests that
RpoE4 and EcfG2 control expression of, at least in part,
non-overlapping sets of target genes. To determine if
both sigma factors function completely independently in
these stress responses, an rpoE4-ecfG2 double mutant
was constructed. After heat or oxidative stress treatment, the double mutant showed higher sensitivity than
either of the single mutants separately (Figure 7). Moreover, survival of the double mutant is even lower than
expected based upon the respective phenotypes of the
single mutants, indicating a synergistic effect. Hence, we
conclude that both sigma factors have partially overlapping functions in the (p)ppGpp-mediated stress response
of R. etli to the tested stress conditions.
R. etli has two heat shock sigma factors that may contribute to the observed heat stress phenotype. RpoH1
was shown to be the main heat shock sigma factor,

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

though a more complete response requires RpoH2 [76].
The promoter region of both sigma factors contains an
EcfG-like binding site.
Recently, expression of R. etli rpoH2 was shown to be
under positive control of RpoE4, while expression of
rpoH1 is not [42]. To determine whether either or both
rpoH sigma factors are regulated by EcfG2, their expression was analyzed by qPCR. The expression level of
rpoH1 was not altered in the ecfG2 mutant compared to
the wild type, while the transcription level of rpoH2 was
reduced by approximately 25%. In the rpoE4-ecfG2 double mutant, expression of rpoH2 was reduced over 100fold, confirming its RpoE4-dependency (data not shown).
In contrast, the level of rpoH1 was upregulated over 2.5fold in the double mutant. This increase is more likely a
way to compensate for the impaired heat shock response,
rather than a negative control of its expression.
Partial redundancy of EcfG-like sigma factors may
occur in other a-proteobacteria as well. In S. meliloti,
two EcfG-like proteins are encoded by rpoE2 and rpoE5.
RpoE2 was previously reported to regulate many stress
response genes during stationary phase. In agreement
with our observations, an S. meliloti rpoE2 mutant
showed increased sensitivity to H2O2 during stationary
phase and rpoE5 is upregulated under heat stress
[77,78].
Putative transcriptional regulator CH00371 or PhrR

CH00371 encodes a putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator of unknown function belonging to the
xenobiotic response element family. Expression of this
gene is under positive (p)ppGpp-control during all
growth phases, although most pronounced upon growth
arrest. CH00371 is 80% identical to PhrR, a putative
repressor protein of S. meliloti. This regulator was
shown to be induced by low pH, hence designated PhrR
for pH-regulated [79]. In order to investigate whether
CH00371 plays a role in the acid stress response, growth
of the R. etli wild type and CH00371 mutant was examined at pH levels ranging from pH 3.5 to 10. No growth
difference was observed, either at acidic or basic pH
(data not shown). In addition to low pH, oxidative stress
agents and heat shock at neutral pH induce phrR in S.
meliloti as well. Therefore, survival of the CH00371
mutant was determined under oxidative stress and after
heat shock. Compared to the wild type, survival
decreased by over four orders of magnitude upon oxidative shock following exposure to hydrogen peroxide
(Figure 7). No survival was observed after heat treatment. Moreover, a plate assay demonstrated growth
inhibition of a CH00371 mutant on medium containing
H2O2 but not in the presence of the superoxide generators menadione and paraquat, nor of the organic hydroperoxide producer cumene hydroperoxide (data not
shown).

Page 12 of 19

In order to identify downstream elements in the regulatory cascade mediated by CH00371 during R. etli
growth arrest, we carried out qPCR expression analysis
of a selection of genes presumed to be associated with
the oxidative and heat stress responses (Additional file
6). These candidate target genes were selected based on
a literature search and sequence analysis. Several of
these genes were downregulated. recA, a key regulator
of the SOS response involved in DNA repair, and osmC,
an osmotically induced peroxidase, were 70% and 30%
downregulated in the CH00371 mutant compared to the
wild type, respectively. The superoxide dismutase sodC
was downregulated by 20%. Surprisingly, expression of
katG was not significantly altered despite the oxidative
stress phenotype. However, the expression level of katG
was very low. This may indicate that KatG primarily
exerts its function upon induction by oxidative shock. In
addition, oxidative homeostasis is likely impaired in the
CH00371 mutant as 14 genes related to oxidative stress
resistance, such as gshB, sufBCD and cysK, showed
increased expression of over 25% compared to the wild
type. Interestingly, four genes of the EcfG2-RpoE4-regulon (CH00600, CH01778, CH01802 and CH02172) were
also downregulated over 25%, possibly contributing to
the observed heat stress phenotype.
Furthermore, the expression level of CH00371 was not
altered in the ecfG2 mutant and ecfG2 rpoE4 double
mutant compared to the wild type, nor vice versa (data
not shown). Hence, these novel regulators exert their
role in the observed stress phenotypes of the respective
mutants independently of each other.
Putative serine kinase CH02817 or PrkA

CH02817 or prkA is upregulated over 27-fold in the
wild type compared to the rsh mutant during stationary
phase, making it the most strongly (p)ppGpp-induced
gene detected in our array. This was confirmed by RTqPCR (Figure 3). PrkA belongs to the PrkA family of
serine protein kinases and is highly conserved, with
homologs in many eubacteria and archae suggesting a
conserved function. E. coli and B. subtilis PrkAs were
shown to phosphorylate serine residues of proteins
[80,81] and display 66% and 34% identity with the R. etli
ortholog, respectively. Protein phosphorylation usually
changes the function of the target by modulating its
activity, its localization or interaction with other proteins, thereby converting extracellular signals into cellular responses, such as adaptation of the central
metabolism, production of secondary metabolites and
pathogenicity [82]. Although the specific regulatory
function of PrkA remains unknown, the B. subtilis
ortholog was shown to be an important inner spore coat
protein under control of the developmental sigma factor
sE [83]. Furthermore, prkA is part of a highly conserved
gene cluster together with the two downstream genes

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

Page 13 of 19

CH02816 and CH02815. This suggests that prkA is
likely the first gene of a three-gene operon in R. etli
(Figure 8a), which we confirmed by RT-PCR (data not
shown). The second operon gene encodes a protein containing a von Willebrand Factor type A domain and the
third encodes a SpoVR-like protein. So far, these genes
have not been functionally characterized.
To determine the function of prkA in R. etli, we constructed a non-polar deletion mutant. A phenotypical
analysis of this mutant, including survival during stationary phase, osmotic stress, oxidative stress and heat
stress, revealed no clear stress phenotype. Therefore,
PrkA does not seem to play a crucial role in the stress
response of R. etli. This is rather unexpected given the
high level of (p)ppGpp-dependency and strong induction
under stress conditions in other organisms. In E. coli
and S. Typhimurium, the prkA homolog, annotated as
yeaG, was also shown to be highly upregulated by (p)
ppGpp upon entry into stationary phase as part of the
RpoS regulon [81]. In addition, yeaG is upregulated by
Lrp during stationary phase in E. coli [45,46]. Other

(a)
2,940,000
XhoI

2,937,000
BamHI

CH02819 CH02817/prkA CH02816

-glucuronidase activity

(b)
10
9

2,934,000

CH02815

cjaJ

3

x10

Early exp.
Late exp.
Early stat.
Late stat.

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Wild type

rsh
mutant

prkA
mutant

ntrC
mutant

rpoN1
mutant

Figure 8 prkA genomic context and expression analysis. (a) R.
etli prkA is the first gene of a three-gene operon. Open reading
frames are represented by right facing arrows, genomic coordinates
are indicated above. Restriction sites for the deletion insertion of
the prkA mutant are depicted by downwards facing triangles, and
primer sites for RT-PCR used to determine prkA operon structure are
depicted by left and right facing triangles. (b) Expression of prkAgusA transcriptional reporter fusion was monitored in different R. etli
mutant backgrounds during growth in AMS succinate. The strains
were the wild type R. etli CFN42, rsh mutant, prkA mutant, ntrC
mutant and rpoN1 mutant. Expression levels are shown in Miller
units and are the means of three biological replicates with error
bars representing the standard deviation. Exp., exponential; Stat.,
stationary.

stress conditions were also reported to induce yeaG
expression, such as acid and osmotic stress in E. coli
and sublethal concentrations of polymyxin in S. Typhimurium [6].
Additionally, PrkA was postulated to be involved in
nitrogen metabolism or the nitrogen starvation response
in E. coli based on its potential association with NtrCB
and GlnP [46,84]. To examine the transcriptional regulation of prkA in R. etli, we monitored expression of a
transcriptional prkA-gusA promoter fusion in various
genetic backgrounds (Figure 8b). b-Glucuronidase activity was measured during exponential and stationary
phase under the same conditions used for microarray
sampling, confirming that the expression of prkA is
highly upregulated upon growth arrest in the wild type
and positively controlled by (p)ppGpp. Moreover,
increased expression of prkA was observed in a prkA
mutant, indicating that prkA is negatively autoregulated.
Expression of prkA was also shown to be regulated by
NtrC and RpoN1. NtrC is a transcriptional regulator
involved in nitrogen assimilation and growth in nitrogen-limited conditions, as well as a member of the sNdependent activator family [85]. RpoN1 codes for the
main sN operating under free-living growth conditions
in R. etli [86]. In the rpoN1 mutant background, prkA
showed an even stronger downregulation than in the rsh
mutant during stationary phase, showing prkA transcription to be strongly s N -dependent. Because NtrC is a
common activator of s N -dependent genes, a similar
downregulation of prkA in the ntrC mutant was
expected. However, no downregulation of prkA was
observed during growth and early stationary phase in
the ntrC mutant. Instead, prkA was highly upregulated
during late stationary phase compared to the wild type,
suggesting that prkA is under negative control of NtrC.
To further analyze the role of PrkA in cellular metabolism, we compared growth of the wild type and prkA
mutant on 384 different nitrogen sources using glucose
as the sole carbon source. Even though transcriptional
control of prkA expression by rpoN1 suggests an involvement for PrkA in nitrogen metabolism, no growth
defects were detected. Therefore, the specific function of
this highly conserved protein in the (p)ppGpp regulon
remains to be identified.

Conclusions
Analysis of growth phase-specific gene expression of the
R. etli wild type and rsh mutant has provided insight
into the (p)ppGpp regulon of R. etli, providing the first
genome-wide view of the stringent response in an aproteobacterium. Our results indicate that (p)ppGpp
functions as a global regulator, with primarily an inducing role, in the adaptation to a non-growing lifestyle as
shown by the extensive differential expression of genes

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

Page 14 of 19

belonging to all functional categories. Moreover, we
showed both similarities and differences to its role in E.
coli and other bacteria, reflecting the merit of investigating a well-studied regulatory response in species more
distantly related to typical model organisms. Surprisingly,
even though (p)ppGpp is considered to be a growtharrest specific messenger, we identified a significant number of (p)ppGpp-dependent genes during early exponential phase as well, suggesting functional relevance of the
low basal level of (p)ppGpp during active growth in R.
etli. Additionally, the genome-wide transcriptome analysis of a strain deficient in a global regulator, and exhibiting a pleiotropic phenotype, enabled us to identify
diverse regulators that control genes associated with a
subset of stress phenotypes. The phenotypic analysis of
three novel downstream regulators during stationary
phase, that is, ecfG2, CH00371, and prkA, allowed us to
obtain additional insight into the intricate regulatory role
of this stress alarmone (Figure 9). Added detail to the
complex picture of (p)ppGpp-dependent regulation of
gene expression in R. etli was further provided by

identifying several up- and downstream elements in the
signal transduction cascades of these regulators. We conclude that (p)ppGpp is situated high up in the hierarchy
of cellular gene regulation of R. etli, orchestrating its
adaptation to growth stage or extracellular conditions
through specific downstream regulators to control
expression of a variety of target genes.

Materials and methods
Bacterial strains and growth conditions

The bacterial strains and plasmids used for this work
are listed in Additional file 7. R. etli CFN42 strains were
cultured in minimal AMS or complex TY medium at
30°C when used for RNA isolation or stress tests,
respectively [29,87]. AMS medium was supplemented
with 10 mM NH4Cl and 10 mM succinate unless otherwise indicated. E. coli strains were grown at 37°C in LB
medium. In order to study gene expression during different growth phases in AMS medium, samples were
taken based on optical density (OD) readings of OD600
= 0.3, OD 600 = 0.7, and 6 hours after reaching the

Transcriptional regulators &
signal transduction 33 25
Amino acid transport &
metabolism
14
8
Carbohydrate transport
& metabolism 23 18

Cell morphology

PF00052 / EcfG2

CH00371

Energy production &
conversion
7 15
Posttranslational
modiﬁcation
15

4

2

PrkA
RpoN1

non-coding
RNA

28

Heat stress

Metabolism

5

(p)ppGpp
Cell motility

Oxidative stress

RpoE4 / EcfG1

Osmotic stress

5

Symbiosis
Other processes 225 276
Figure 9 The (p)ppGpp regulon of R. etli. The extensive impact of (p)ppGpp on gene expression of R. etli is illustrated by the number of upand downregulated genes grouped according to functional categories. The remaining categories are combined as ‘Other processes’. The rsh
mutant is unable to synthesize (p)ppGpp and has a pleiotropic phenotype, such as an altered morphology, increased stress sensitivity and
impaired symbiosis. As a global regulator, the regulon of (p)ppGpp is multilayered. Further insight into the (p)ppGpp-dependent stress response
was obtained by the identification and subsequent characterization of three different regulators that are under strong positive regulation of (p)
ppGpp during stationary phase. EcfG2/PF00052 and RpoE4, both ECF sigma factors, are partly functionally redundant for survival under heat
stress and oxidative stress. The transcription factor CH00371 is also involved in survival during both heat and oxidative stress. PrkA, a serine
kinase, likely plays a role in the (p)ppGpp-dependent adaptation of the cellular metabolism. Its transcription is positively controlled by RpoN1
and negatively autoregulated.

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

maximum optical density (OD)600 , representing early
exponential, late exponential and stationary phase,
respectively [32]. Antibiotics were supplied at the following final concentrations (in μg-1 ml): ampicillin, 100;
gentamicin, 50; kanamycin, 25; spectinomycin, 50; nalidixic acid, 15; neomycin, 60; and tetracycline, 1 (E. coli)
or 0.1 (R. etli).
Mutant construction

The R. etli CFN42 rsh mutant was constructed by insertion of an Sp R cassette, obtained from pHP45ΩSp, as
described previously for R. etli CNPAF512 [29]. The
ecfG2 and CH00371 mutants were constructed by first
amplifying a 2.5-kb and a 1.9-kb fragment, respectively,
using Pfx DNA polymerase and primers (CACCG
CGGCCGCGGGTTT AAGGGGATAAATT and ACT
GGCGGCCGCAAG GGCCGATCGAGATCCAC in the
case of ecfG2; CACCGCGGCCGCAGCTGC AGGATCT
TATGGGAATA and ACTGGCGGCCGCCGACGACCAGATCCTGAT CGC in the case of CH00371) that
carried NotI recognition sites at their 5’ ends (shown in
italics). These fragments were subsequently cloned into
pUC18Not, and a KmR cassette flanked by transcription
termination signals, obtained from pHP45ΩKm, was
inserted in the HindIII and EcoRV site of CH00371 and
ecfG2, respectively. From these plasmids, the corresponding NotI fragments were cloned into the suicide
plasmid pJQ200uc1. For construction of the rpoE4ecfG2 double mutant, an ecfG2::ΩSp suicide construct
was obtained as described for the ecfG2 mutant above,
replacing the KmR cassette with a SpR cassette.
The non-polar prkA mutant was constructed by
amplifying a 3.6-kb fragment using Pfx DNA polymerase
and primers (CACCGTTAACTCGACAGGAAAAGGTAG AGC and CACCGTTAACTACTCG TCAAGAAGGAGGCT) that carried HpaI recognition sites at their 5’
ends (shown in italics). This fragment was cloned into
pCR4Blunt-TOPO (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). A
fragment of 1.2 kb was removed from prkA by digesting
with BamHI and XhoI (Figure 8a) and the construct was
ligated after blunting, creating a deletion in prkA. An
HpaI fragment was removed form this construct and
cloned into the SmaI site of pJQ200uc1.
Finally, these suicide constructs were used for sitedirected mutagenesis of the respective genes following
triparental conjugation as described previously [88]. The
obtained mutants were verified by Southern blot
hybridization.
RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis for microarray
detection

RNA was isolated as described previously [32]. Briefly,
the RNA content of bacterial cultures was stabilized
using a phenol:ethanol solution. Pellets were frozen in

Page 15 of 19

liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Total RNA was
extracted using the TRIzol Plus RNA Purification kit
(Invitrogen). DNA contamination was removed by
TURBO DNase (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA)) and afterwards checked by PCR (45 cycles). To increase RNA
yields and account for experimental variation, RNA
from six different cultures was pooled. RNA integrity
was analyzed using Experion RNA StdSens Chips
(Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA) before and after precipitation. All samples had an RNA Quality Indicator value of
10. RNA quantity and purity was assessed using the
NanoDrop ND-1000. The A260/A280 ratio and A260/
A230 ratio of all samples were ≥2.
cDNA was synthesized using random decamers
(Ambion) and the SuperScript Double-Stranded cDNA
Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
High-density microarray design and data preprocessing

A whole-genome tiling array covering the entire R. etli genome sequence was used (see GEO GPL9409) and the data
were analyzed as described previously [32]. Samples were
hybridized and scanned by NimbleGen. The data were
deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
and can be accessed through accession numbers [GEO:
GSE23961], [GEO:GSM462173], [GEO:GSM462178],
[GEO:GSM462180], [GEO:GSM590285], [GEO:GSM
590286] and [GEO:GSM590287].
Differentially expressed genes were identified based on
a standard deviation cutoff. These genes were considered induced or repressed if the absolute expression
ratio was ≥2 (log 2 ≥1). This threshold is cogent since
most regulatory responses in nature appear to function
using low level changes as a kind of energy saving solution [89]. Hierarchical clustering was performed using
the software package R.
RT-(q)PCR

Expression levels were determined by RT-qPCR using
SYBR Green, as described previously [32]. In short, primers were designed using Primer Express 3.0. Pooled
total RNA (2 μg) of each growth condition (early/late
exponential phase, stationary phase) was reverse transcribed to single-stranded cDNA using the SuperScript
VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). DNA contamination of
the RNA samples was checked by PCR (45 cycles)
before RT. cDNA (40 ng) was used in each reaction. All
reactions were performed in triplicate.
The microarray data were validated by determining the
expression levels of 14 representative genes: flaCh1, potF,
rpsH, flgB, rplR, otsA, aglE, a serine tRNA (CH01348), and
genes encoding a chaperonin GroEL (CH00828), the
sigma 54 modulation protein (CH00406), a permease

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

protein of the Nod factor ABC transporter family
(PD00277), the serine protein kinase prkA/CH02817, the
transcriptional regulator CH00371 and the ECF sigma factor ecfG2/PF00052. The log2 ratios of the array data were
compared to the log 2 ratios of the qPCR results. 16S
rRNA was not used as a reference gene as the level of
mRNA/rRNA fluctuates during growth and the expression
of rRNA is controlled by (p)ppGpp. New reference genes
were identified using the geNorm algorithm in order to
normalize the qPCR data [90]. Based on the microarray
data, five genes were chosen that were relatively stable
across all samples and assumed not to be co-regulated.
These candidate reference genes were greA, cinRa, tatA,
and genes encoding a zinc binding protein (CH00586) and
a hypothetical protein (CH01579). 16S rRNA was included
for comparison. Using geNorm, we determined repBa2
and tatA to be the most stable reference genes as they
have the lowest gene expression stability values M (Figure
S3a in Additional file 8). Consequently, a gene expression
normalization factor could be calculated for each sample
using the most stable genes. By plotting the pairwise variation V between two sequential normalization factors containing an increasing number of genes, we determined
that the three best reference genes were an optimal number of reference genes for normalization (Figure S3b in
Additional file 8). Although V2/3, the pairwise variation
between the normalization factors calculated by the two
and three most stable genes, is strictly higher then the proposed 0.15 cutoff value of Vandesompele et al. [90], the
difference is very small and the pairwise variation
decreases only slightly by taking an additional fourth reference gene. Therefore, the normalization factor would not
significantly change if more internal control genes were to
be included. Also, the degree of resolution does not
require a fourth reference gene.
RT-PCR was performed on cDNA samples (40 ng) of
stationary phase to determine the operon organization
of prkA. The primers were designed accordingly (Additional file 6). Taq DNA polymerase was used in the
PCR reactions (35 cycles).

Page 16 of 19

Stress and stationary phase survival

To study stress survival, wild-type and mutant cells from
a freshly grown culture on a MM79 agar plate were
resuspended in 10 mM MgSO4 at an OD600 of approximately 0.5. For each regulator, two independently constructed mutants were analyzed in order to exclude the
involvement of secondary mutations. To test heat stress
survival, 1 ml of each sample was incubated at 45°C for
30 minutes. In case of oxidative stress, 0.1 ml of 100
mM H2O2 was added to 0.9 ml of each sample for 30
minutes or 1 hour while for osmotic stress 0.5 ml of 5
M NaCl was added to 0.5 ml of sample. Samples were
plated on TY agar containing nalidixic acid using the
Eddy Jet spiral plater (IUL Instruments, Barcelona,
Spain). Control samples were incubated without the
stress agent at 30°C and the colony forming units (CFU)
were determined at the same time point as the stressed
samples. The total number of CFU per ml was determined after 3 days of incubation at 30°C using the Flash
and Go automated colony counter (IUL Instruments).
All experiments were repeated at least two times using
three independent biological replicates.
To assess long-term survival, pellets of overnight cultures of wild-type and mutant strains were washed and
resuspended in 10 mM MgSO 4 at an OD 600 of 0.5. A
volume of 100 ml of AMS medium (10 mM NH4Cl and
succinate) was inoculated with 1 ml of cell suspension
and incubated at 30°C for 2 weeks. Samples of 1 ml
were removed at the indicated time points and subjected
to viable cell counts as described above.
Swimming test

To study swimming activity, TY plates containing 0.2%
agar were spot inoculated with cultures in exponential
phase and incubated at 30°C in a closed container as
described previously [91]. Each strain was tested fivefold in two independent experiments. The swimming
halo diameter was measured after one, two and three
days.
Growth analysis

Construction of prkA-gusA promoter fusion and bglucuronidase assay

The prkA-gusA reporter fusion was constructed by first
amplifying the 400 bp upstream of prkA by PCR using
Pfx DNA polymerase and primers (ACTG AAGCTTT
CTGCGGTTCGCCTATCGCA and ACTGTCTAGA
AGCGCCGGAAG CGTATGATC) that carried a HindIII and XbaI recognition site at their 5’ end (shown in
italics), respectively. This promoter fragment was cloned
into pFAJ1703 after digestion with HindIII and XbaI,
thereby flanking the promoterless 5’ end of gusA. Quantitative analysis of GusA activity was carried out as
described previously [29].

Biolog Phenotype Microarray panels PM3/6/7/8 were
used to test growth on nitrogen sources and PM10 was
used to test pH susceptibility (Biolog, Hayward, CA,
USA). AMS medium was inoculated (1:1,000) with overnight cultures of R. etli strains, washed and the OD600
was corrected to approximately 0.5. No NH 4 Cl was
added in case of PM3/6/7/8. The Biolog redox indicator
dye Mix A was added to the medium (1:100). The
microplates were loaded with 100 μl in each well and
incubated for 7 days at 30°C. Dye reduction was monitored every 12 h by measuring the OD 570 using a
Synergy Mx Microplate Reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT,
USA).

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

Additional material

Page 17 of 19

2.
3.

Additional file 1: Figure S1. Growth curve of R. etli CFN42 in AMS
medium. (a) Optical density (OD) readings during growth of the wild
type and rsh mutant shown in green and red, respectively. The arrows
indicate the time points of sampling. (b) Colony forming units (CFU)
during growth of the wild type and rsh mutant.
Additional file 2: Figure S2. MA plots comparing transcriptome
data. Scatter plots of the microarray data that plot the distribution of the
log2 intensity ratio (M-value) versus the log2 average intensity (A-value).
Differentially expressed genes that are upregulated or downregulated are
shown in red or green, respectively. The number of genes with a growth
phase or (p)ppGpp-dependent expression profile are indicated by
histogram bars at the right of the MA plot. (a) Wild type compared to
rsh mutant in stationary phase. (b) Wild type compared to rsh mutant in
exponential phase.
Additional file 3: Table S1. The differentially expressed genes during
stationary phase and exponential phase in the wild type compared to
the rsh mutant.

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

9.

Additional file 4: Table S2. The RpoE4-regulated genes according to
Martinez-Salazar et al. (2009) that were found to be alarmone-dependent
in this study [42].

10.

Additional file 5: Table S3. The alarmone-dependent ncRNAs.

11.

Additional file 6: Table S4. The RT-qPCR fold changes compared to
array fold changes and qPCR primers.

12.

Additional file 7: Table S5. The bacterial strains and plasmids used in
this study.

13.

Additional file 8: Figure S3. RT-qPCR identification of stable
endogenous genes. (a) Determining the most stable reference genes
using the average expression stability value M of the remaining reference
genes during a stepwise exclusion of the least stable internal control
gene. The genes are ranked according to increasing expression stability.
At the left are the least stable genes and at the right are the most stable
ones. (b) Determining the optimal number of reference genes using the
pairwise variation V between two sequential normalization factors
containing an increasing number of genes with 0.15 as a proposed
cutoff value by Vandesompele et al. [90].

14.

Abbreviations
CFU: colony forming units; ECF: extracytoplasmic function; IS: insertion
sequence; ncRNA: non-coding RNA; OD: optical density; ppGpp: guanosine
tetraphosphate; pppGpp: guanosine pentaphosphate; RNAP: RNA
polymerase; rrn: ribosomal RNA; RT-qPCR: reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction.
Acknowledgements
MV is indebted to the Institute for the Promotion of Innovation through
Science and Technology in Flanders (IWT-Flanders). This work was supported
by grants from the Research Council of the KU Leuven (GOA/011/2008) and
from the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders (G.0637.06 and G.0412.10).
Authors’ contributions
MV carried out the experiments and bioinformatics analysis. MV, MF, KB, and
JM conceived the study and contributed to the interpretation of the data.
LC, KE, and KM performed and contributed to the microarray data
normalization and processing. MV, MF and JM were involved in drafting the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 19 November 2010 Revised: 1 February 2011
Accepted: 16 February 2011 Published: 16 February 2011
References
1. Fauvart M, Michiels J: Rhizobial secreted proteins as determinants of host
specificity in the rhizobium-legume symbiosis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2008,
285:1-9.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

Gibson KE, Kobayashi H, Walker GC: Molecular determinants of a
symbiotic chronic infection. Annu Rev Genet 2008, 42:413-441.
Masson-Boivin C, Giraud E, Perret X, Batut J: Establishing nitrogen-fixing
symbiosis with legumes: how many rhizobium recipes? Trends Microbiol
2009, 17:458-466.
Downie JA: The roles of extracellular proteins, polysaccharides and
signals in the interactions of rhizobia with legume roots. FEMS Microbiol
Rev 2010, 34:150-170.
Navarro Llorens JM, Tormo A, Martinez-Garcia E: Stationary phase in gramnegative bacteria. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2010, 34:476-495.
Tani TH, Khodursky A, Blumenthal RM, Brown PO, Matthews RG: Adaptation
to famine: a family of stationary-phase genes revealed by microarray
analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:13471-13476.
Potrykus K, Cashel M: (p)ppGpp: Still Magical? (*). Annu Rev Microbiol 2008,
62:35-51.
Chang DE, Smalley DJ, Conway T: Gene expression profiling of Escherichia
coli growth transitions: an expanded stringent response model. Mol
Microbiol 2002, 45:289-306.
Traxler MF, Chang DE, Conway T: Guanosine 3’,5’-bispyrophosphate
coordinates global gene expression during glucose-lactose diauxie in
Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:2374-2379.
Braeken K, Moris M, Daniels R, Vanderleyden J, Michiels J: New horizons for
(p)ppGpp in bacterial and plant physiology. Trends Microbiol 2006,
14:45-54.
Wolz C, Geiger T, Goerke C: The synthesis and function of the alarmone
(p)ppGpp in firmicutes. Int J Med Microbiol 2010, 300:142-147.
Magnusson LU, Farewell A, Nystrom T: ppGpp: a global regulator in
Escherichia coli. Trends Microbiol 2005, 13:236-242.
Srivatsan A, Wang JD: Control of bacterial transcription, translation and
replication by (p)ppGpp. Curr Opin Microbiol 2008, 11:100-105.
Barker MM, Gaal T, Josaitis CA, Gourse RL: Mechanism of regulation of
transcription initiation by ppGpp. I. Effects of ppGpp on transcription
initiation in vivo and in vitro. J Mol Biol 2001, 305:673-688.
Gummesson B, Magnusson LU, Lovmar M, Kvint K, Persson O, Ballesteros M,
Farewell A, Nystrom T: Increased RNA polymerase availability directs
resources towards growth at the expense of maintenance. EMBO J 2009,
28:2209-2219.
Jishage M, Kvint K, Shingler V, Nystrom T: Regulation of sigma factor
competition by the alarmone ppGpp. Genes Dev 2002, 16:1260-1270.
Bernardo LM, Johansson LU, Solera D, Skarfstad E, Shingler V: The
guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp) alarmone, DksA and promoter
affinity for RNA polymerase in regulation of sigma-dependent
transcription. Mol Microbiol 2006, 60:749-764.
Durfee T, Hansen AM, Zhi H, Blattner FR, Jin DJ: Transcription profiling of
the stringent response in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2008, 190:1084-1096.
Aberg A, Fernandez-Vazquez J, Cabrer-Panes JD, Sanchez A, Balsalobre C:
Similar and divergent effects of ppGpp and DksA deficiencies on
transcription in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2009, 191:3226-3236.
Dalebroux ZD, Yagi BF, Sahr T, Buchrieser C, Swanson MS: Distinct roles of
ppGpp and DksA in Legionella pneumophila differentiation. Mol Microbiol
2010, 76:200-219.
Dean RE, Ireland PM, Jordan JE, Titball RW, Oyston PC: RelA regulates
virulence and intracellular survival of Francisella novicida. Microbiology
2009, 155:4104-4113.
Yan X, Zhao C, Budin-Verneuil A, Hartke A, Rince A, Gilmore MS, Auffray Y,
Pichereau V: The (p)ppGpp synthetase RelA contributes to stress
adaptation and virulence in Enterococcus faecalis V583. Microbiology 2009,
155:3226-3237.
Kazmierczak KM, Wayne KJ, Rechtsteiner A, Winkler ME: Roles of rel in
stringent response, global regulation and virulence of serotype 2
Streptococcus pneumoniae D39. Mol Microbiol 2009, 72:590-611.
Dalebroux ZD, Svensson SL, Gaynor EC, Swanson MS: ppGpp conjures
bacterial virulence. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2010, 74:171-199.
Aviv M, Giladi H, Schreiber G, Oppenheim AB, Glaser G: Expression of the
genes coding for the Escherichia coli integration host factor are
controlled by growth phase, rpoS, ppGpp and by autoregulation. Mol
Microbiol 1994, 14:1021-1031.
Lemke JJ, Durfee T, Gourse RL: DksA and ppGpp directly regulate
transcription of the Escherichia coli flagellar cascade. Mol Microbiol 2009,
74:1368-1379.

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

27. Wells DH, Long SR: The Sinorhizobium meliloti stringent response affects
multiple aspects of symbiosis. Mol Microbiol 2002, 43:1115-1127.
28. Calderon-Flores A, Du Pont G, Huerta-Saquero A, Merchant-Larios H, ServinGonzalez L, Duran S: The stringent response is required for amino acid
and nitrate utilization, nod factor regulation, nodulation, and nitrogen
fixation in Rhizobium etli. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:5075-5083.
29. Moris M, Braeken K, Schoeters E, Verreth C, Beullens S, Vanderleyden J,
Michiels J: Effective symbiosis between Rhizobium etli and Phaseolus
vulgaris requires the alarmone ppGpp. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:5460-5469.
30. Braeken K, Fauvart M, Vercruysse M, Beullens S, Lambrichts I, Michiels J:
Pleiotropic effects of a rel mutation on stress survival of Rhizobium etli
CNPAF512. BMC Microbiol 2008, 8:219.
31. Gonzalez V, Santamaria RI, Bustos P, Hernandez-Gonzalez I, Medrano-Soto A,
Moreno-Hagelsieb G, Janga SC, Ramirez MA, Jimenez-Jacinto V, ColladoVides J, Davila G: The partitioned Rhizobium etli genome: genetic and
metabolic redundancy in seven interacting replicons. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2006, 103:3834-3839.
32. Vercruysse M, Fauvart M, Cloots L, Engelen K, Thijs IM, Marchal K, Michiels J:
Genome-wide detection of predicted non-coding RNAs in Rhizobium etli
expressed during free-living and host-associated growth using a highresolution tiling array. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:53.
33. Traxler MF, Summers SM, Nguyen HT, Zacharia VM, Hightower GA, Smith JT,
Conway T: The global, ppGpp-mediated stringent response to amino
acid starvation in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 2008, 68:1128-1148.
34. Brockmann-Gretza O, Kalinowski J: Global gene expression during
stringent response in Corynebacterium glutamicum in presence and
absence of the rel gene encoding (p)ppGpp synthase. BMC Genomics
2006, 7:230.
35. Hesketh A, Chen WJ, Ryding J, Chang S, Bibb M: The global role of ppGpp
synthesis in morphological differentiation and antibiotic production in
Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). Genome Biol 2007, 8:R161.
36. Martinez-Antonio A, Collado-Vides J: Identifying global regulators in
transcriptional regulatory networks in bacteria. Curr Opin Microbiol 2003,
6:482-489.
37. Todd JD, Sawers G, Rodionov DA, Johnston AW: The Rhizobium
leguminosarum regulator IrrA affects the transcription of a wide range of
genes in response to Fe availability. Mol Genet Genomics 2006,
275:564-577.
38. Singleton C, White GF, Todd JD, Marritt SJ, Cheesman MR, Johnston AW, Le
Brun NE: Heme-responsive DNA binding by the global iron regulator Irr
from Rhizobium leguminosarum. J Biol Chem 2010, 285:16023-16031.
39. Vinella D, Albrecht C, Cashel M, D’Ari R: Iron limitation induces SpoTdependent accumulation of ppGpp in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 2005,
56:958-970.
40. Miethke M, Westers H, Blom EJ, Kuipers OP, Marahiel MA: Iron starvation
triggers the stringent response and induces amino acid biosynthesis for
bacillibactin production in Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 2006, 188:8655-8657.
41. Dombrecht B, Heusdens C, Beullens S, Verreth C, Mulkers E, Proost P,
Vanderleyden J, Michiels J: Defence of Rhizobium etli bacteroids against
oxidative stress involves a complexly regulated atypical 2-Cys
peroxiredoxin. Mol Microbiol 2005, 55:1207-1221.
42. Martinez-Salazar JM, Salazar E, Encarnacion S, Ramirez-Romero MA, Rivera J:
Role of the extracytoplasmic function sigma factor RpoE4 in oxidative
and osmotic stress responses in Rhizobium etli. J Bacteriol 2009,
191:4122-4132.
43. Francez-Charlot A, Frunzke J, Reichen C, Ebneter JZ, Gourion B, Vorholt JA:
Sigma factor mimicry involved in regulation of general stress response.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:3467-3472.
44. Balleza E, Lopez-Bojorquez LN, Martinez-Antonio A, Resendis-Antonio O,
Lozada-Chavez I, Balderas-Martinez YI, Encarnacion S, Collado-Vides J:
Regulation by transcription factors in bacteria: beyond description. FEMS
Microbiol Rev 2009, 33:133-151.
45. Ibanez-Ruiz M, Robbe-Saule V, Hermant D, Labrude S, Norel F: Identification
of RpoS (sigma(S))-regulated genes in Salmonella enterica serovar
typhimurium. J Bacteriol 2000, 182:5749-5756.
46. Weber H, Polen T, Heuveling J, Wendisch VF, Hengge R: Genome-wide
analysis of the general stress response network in Escherichia coli:
sigmaS-dependent genes, promoters, and sigma factor selectivity. J
Bacteriol 2005, 187:1591-1603.
47. Staron A, Sofia HJ, Dietrich S, Ulrich LE, Liesegang H, Mascher T: The third
pillar of bacterial signal transduction: classification of the

Page 18 of 19

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.
54.
55.

56.

57.

58.
59.
60.

61.

62.
63.

64.
65.

66.

67.

68.
69.

70.
71.

72.

extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factor protein family. Mol Microbiol
2009, 74:557-581.
Kanehara K, Ito K, Akiyama Y: YaeL (EcfE) activates the sigma(E) pathway
of stress response through a site-2 cleavage of anti-sigma(E), RseA.
Genes Dev 2002, 16:2147-2155.
Hayden JD, Ades SE: The extracytoplasmic stress factor, sigmaE, is
required to maintain cell envelope integrity in Escherichia coli. PLoS One
2008, 3:e1573.
Papenfort K, Pfeiffer V, Mika F, Lucchini S, Hinton JC, Vogel J: SigmaEdependent small RNAs of Salmonella respond to membrane stress by
accelerating global omp mRNA decay. Mol Microbiol 2006, 62:1674-1688.
Guisbert E, Rhodius VA, Ahuja N, Witkin E, Gross CA: Hfq modulates the
sigmaE-mediated envelope stress response and the sigma32-mediated
cytoplasmic stress response in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2007,
189:1963-1973.
Swiercz JP, Hindra , Bobek J, Haiser HJ, Di Berardo C, Tjaden B, Elliot MA:
Small non-coding RNAs in Streptomyces coelicolor. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:7240-7251.
Saito S, Kakeshita H, Nakamura K: Novel small RNA-encoding genes in the
intergenic regions of Bacillus subtilis. Gene 2009, 428:2-8.
Hsu LM, Zagorski J, Wang Z, Fournier MJ: Escherichia coli 6S RNA gene is
part of a dual-function transcription unit. J Bacteriol 1985, 161:1162-1170.
Neusser T, Gildehaus N, Wurm R, Wagner R: Studies on the expression of
6S RNA from E. coli: involvement of regulators important for stress and
growth adaptation. Biol Chem 2008, 389:285-297.
Neusser T, Polen T, Geissen R, Wagner R: Depletion of the non-coding
regulatory 6S RNA in E. coli causes a surprising reduction in the
expression of the translation machinery. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:165.
Garza-Sanchez F, Gin JG, Hayes CS: Amino acid starvation and colicin D
treatment induce A-site mRNA cleavage in Escherichia coli. J Mol Biol
2008, 378:505-519.
Steiner K, Malke H: relA-Independent amino acid starvation response
network of Streptococcus pyogenes. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:7354-7364.
Paul BJ, Ross W, Gaal T, Gourse RL: rRNA transcription in Escherichia coli.
Annu Rev Genet 2004, 38:749-770.
Eymann C, Homuth G, Scharf C, Hecker M: Bacillus subtilis functional
genomics: global characterization of the stringent response by
proteome and transcriptome analysis. J Bacteriol 2002, 184:2500-2520.
Vera A, Aris A, Carrio M, Gonzalez-Montalban N, Villaverde A: Lon and ClpP
proteases participate in the physiological disintegration of bacterial
inclusion bodies. J Biotechnol 2005, 119:163-171.
Keiler KC: Physiology of tmRNA: what gets tagged and why?. Curr Opin
Microbiol 2007, 10:169-175.
Weichart D, Querfurth N, Dreger M, Hengge-Aronis R: Global role for ClpPcontaining proteases in stationary-phase adaptation of Escherichia coli. J
Bacteriol 2003, 185:115-125.
Elbein AD, Pan YT, Pastuszak I, Carroll D: New insights on trehalose: a
multifunctional molecule. Glycobiology 2003, 13:17R-27R.
Flechard M, Fontenelle C, Blanco C, Goude R, Ermel G, Trautwetter A:
RpoE2 of Sinorhizobium meliloti is necessary for trehalose synthesis and
growth in hyperosmotic media. Microbiology 2010, 156:1708-1718.
Suarez R, Wong A, Ramirez M, Barraza A, Orozco Mdel C, Cevallos MA,
Lara M, Hernandez G, Iturriaga G: Improvement of drought tolerance and
grain yield in common bean by overexpressing trehalose-6-phosphate
synthase in rhizobia. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2008, 21:958-966.
Battesti A, Bouveret E: Acyl carrier protein/SpoT interaction, the switch
linking SpoT-dependent stress response to fatty acid metabolism. Mol
Microbiol 2006, 62:1048-1063.
Bott M, Preisig O, Hennecke H: Genes for a second terminal oxidase in
Bradyrhizobium japonicum. Arch Microbiol 1992, 158:335-343.
Magnusson LU, Gummesson B, Joksimovic P, Farewell A, Nystrom T:
Identical, independent, and opposing roles of ppGpp and DksA in
Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2007, 189:5193-5202.
Chevance FF, Hughes KT: Coordinating assembly of a bacterial
macromolecular machine. Nat Rev Microbiol 2008, 6:455-465.
Yang X, Ishiguro EE: Temperature-sensitive growth and decreased
thermotolerance associated with relA mutations in Escherichia coli. J
Bacteriol 2003, 185:5765-5771.
Dong T, Kirchhof MG, Schellhorn HE: RpoS regulation of gene expression
during exponential growth of Escherichia coli K12. Mol Genet Genomics
2008, 279:267-277.

Vercruysse et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R17
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R17

73. Dahl JL, Kraus CN, Boshoff HI, Doan B, Foley K, Avarbock D, Kaplan G,
Mizrahi V, Rubin H, Barry CE: The role of RelMtb-mediated adaptation to
stationary phase in long-term persistence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:10026-10031.
74. Hoffmann A, Bukau B, Kramer G: Structure and function of the molecular
chaperone Trigger Factor. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010, 1803:650-661.
75. Gourion B, Sulser S, Frunzke J, Francez-Charlot A, Stiefel P, Pessi G,
Vorholt JA, Fischer HM: The PhyR-sigma(EcfG) signalling cascade is
involved in stress response and symbiotic efficiency in Bradyrhizobium
japonicum. Mol Microbiol 2009, 73:291-305.
76. Martinez-Salazar JM, Sandoval-Calderon M, Guo X, Castillo-Ramirez S,
Reyes A, Loza MG, Rivera J, Alvarado-Affantranger X, Sanchez F, Gonzalez V,
Davila G, Ramirez-Romero MA: The Rhizobium etli RpoH1 and RpoH2
sigma factors are involved in different stress responses. Microbiology
2009, 155:386-397.
77. Sauviac L, Philippe H, Phok K, Bruand C: An extracytoplasmic function
sigma factor acts as a general stress response regulator in Sinorhizobium
meliloti. J Bacteriol 2007, 189:4204-4216.
78. Flechard M, Fontenelle C, Trautwetter A, Ermel G, Blanco C: Sinorhizobium
meliloti rpoE2 is necessary for H(2)O(2) stress resistance during the
stationary growth phase. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2009, 290:25-31.
79. Reeve WG, Tiwari RP, Wong CM, Dilworth MJ, Glenn AR: The transcriptional
regulator gene phrR in Sinorhizobium meliloti WSM419 is regulated by
low pH and other stresses. Microbiology 1998, 144:3335-3342.
80. Fischer C, Geourjon C, Bourson C, Deutscher J: Cloning and
characterization of the Bacillus subtilis prkA gene encoding a novel
serine protein kinase. Gene 1996, 168:55-60.
81. Tagourti J, Landoulsi A, Richarme G: Cloning, expression, purification and
characterization of the stress kinase YeaG from Escherichia coli. Protein
Expr Purif 2008, 59:79-85.
82. Masters M, Blakely G, Coulson A, McLennan N, Yerko V, Acord J: Protein
folding in Escherichia coli: the chaperonin GroE and its substrates. Res
Microbiol 2009, 160:267-277.
83. Eichenberger P, Jensen ST, Conlon EM, van Ooij C, Silvaggi J, GonzalezPastor JE, Fujita M, Ben-Yehuda S, Stragier P, Liu JS, Losick R: The sigmaE
regulon and the identification of additional sporulation genes in Bacillus
subtilis. J Mol Biol 2003, 327:945-972.
84. Erickson KD, Detweiler CS: The Rcs phosphorelay system is specific to
enteric pathogens/commensals and activates ydeI, a gene important for
persistent Salmonella infection of mice. Mol Microbiol 2006, 62:883-894.
85. Andres Leon E, Ezkurdia I, Garcia B, Valencia A, Juan D: EcID. A database
for the inference of functional interactions in E. coli. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, 37:D629-635.
86. Michiels J, Moris M, Dombrecht B, Verreth C, Vanderleyden J: Differential
regulation of Rhizobium etli rpoN2 gene expression during symbiosis
and free-living growth. J Bacteriol 1998, 180:3620-3628.
87. Michiels J, Vande Broek A, Vanderleyden J: Molecular cloning and
nucleotide sequence of the Rhizobium phaseoli recA gene. Mol Gen Genet
1991, 228:486-490.
88. D’Hooghe I, Michiels J, Vlassak K, Verreth C, Waelkens F, Vanderleyden J:
Structural and functional analysis of the fixLJ genes of Rhizobium
leguminosarum biovar phaseoli CNPAF512. Mol Gen Genet 1995,
249:117-126.
89. Wren JD, Conway T: Meta-analysis of published transcriptional and
translational fold changes reveals a preference for low-fold inductions.
OMICS 2006, 10:15-27.
90. Vandesompele J, De Preter K, Pattyn F, Poppe B, Van Roy N, De Paepe A,
Speleman F: Accurate normalization of real-time quantitative RT-PCR
data by geometric averaging of multiple internal control genes. Genome
Biol 2002, 3:RESEARCH0034.
91. Braeken K, Daniels R, Vos K, Fauvart M, Bachaspatimayum D,
Vanderleyden J, Michiels J: Genetic determinants of swarming in
Rhizobium etli. Microb Ecol 2008, 55:54-64.
92. RhizoBase. [http://genome.kazusa.or.jp/rhizobase/].
doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-2-r17
Cite this article as: Vercruysse et al.: Stress response regulators identified
through genome-wide transcriptome analysis of the (p)ppGppdependent response in Rhizobium etli. Genome Biology 2011 12:R17.

Page 19 of 19

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
