<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Delineation of the Pasteurellaceae-specific GbpA-family of glutathione-binding proteins</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59. doi:10.1186/1471-2091-12-59"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Bjorn Vergauwen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Delineation of the Pasteurellaceae-specific GbpAfamily of glutathione-binding proteins
Bjorn Vergauwen*, Ruben Van der Meeren, Ann Dansercoer and Savvas N Savvides

Abstract
Background: The Gram-negative bacterium Haemophilus influenzae is a glutathione auxotroph and acquires the
redox-active tripeptide by import. The dedicated glutathione transporter belongs to the ATP-binding cassette
(ABC)-transporter superfamily and displays more than 60% overall sequence identity with the well-studied
dipeptide (Dpp) permease of Escherichia coli. The solute binding protein (SBP) that mediates glutathione transport
in H. influenzae is a lipoprotein termed GbpA and is 54% identical to E. coli DppA, a well-studied member of family
5 SBP’s. The discovery linking GbpA to glutathione import came rather unexpectedly as this import-priming SBP
was previously annotated as a heme-binding protein (HbpA), and was thought to mediate heme acquisition.
Nonetheless, although many SBP’s have been implicated in more than one function, a prominent physiological role
for GbpA and its partner permease in heme acquisition appears to be very unlikely. Here, we sought to
characterize five representative GbpA homologs in an effort to delineate the novel GbpA-family of glutathionespecific family 5 SBPs and to further clarify their functional role in terms of ligand preferences.
Results: Lipoprotein and non-lipoprotein GbpA homologs were expressed in soluble form and substrate specificity
was evaluated via a number of ligand binding assays. A physiologically insignificant affinity for hemin was
observed for all five GbpA homologous test proteins. Three out of five test proteins were found to bind
glutathione and some of its physiologically relevant derivatives with low- or submicromolar affinity. None of the
tested SBP family 5 allocrites interacted with the remaining two GbpA test proteins. Structure-based sequence
alignments and phylogenetic analysis show that the two binding-inert GbpA homologs clearly form a separate
phylogenetic cluster. To elucidate a structure-function rationale for this phylogenetic differentiation, we determined
the crystal structure of one of the GbpA family outliers from H. parasuis. Comparisons thereof with the previously
determined structure of GbpA in complex with oxidized glutathione reveals the structural basis for the lack of
allocrite binding capacity, thereby explaining the outlier behavior.
Conclusions: Taken together, our studies provide for the first time a collective functional look on a novel,
Pasteurellaceae-specific, SBP subfamily of glutathione binding proteins, which we now term GbpA proteins. Our studies
strongly implicate GbpA family SBPs in the priming step of ABC-transporter-mediated translocation of useful forms of
glutathione across the inner membrane, and rule out a general role for GbpA proteins in heme acquisition.
Keywords: glutathione, GbpA, HbpA, DppA, solute-binding protein, SBP, ABC transporter

Background
ATP-binding cassette (ABC)-transporters exist in all
three kingdoms of life and transport a large variety of
substrates across biological membranes. In addition to
their well-documented role in solute transport, a diversity of sensory functions have been assigned that
* Correspondence: Bjorn.Vergauwen@ugent.be
Unit for Structural Biology, Laboratory for Protein Biochemistry and
Biomolecular Engineering (L-ProBE), Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium

implicate ABC-transporters in the maintenance of cell
integrity, responses to environmental stresses, cell-tocell communication and cell differentiation and in
pathogenicity. Based on the direction of transport, ABC
transporters can be classified as either exporters or
importers. Both classes are characterized by the coupling
of two nucleotide-binding domains (NBD) and two
transmembrane domains (TMD). In the case of ABC
importers, which are found exclusively in prokaryotes, a
fifth domain, termed the solute binding protein (SBP), is

© 2011 Vergauwen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

part of the functional unit [1]. SBPs bind their ligands
with high affinity and deliver them to the permease unit
(the TMDs), where the substrate is released into the
translocation pore upon ATP binding and hydrolysis in
the NBDs [2,3]. SBPs are located in the periplasm of
Gram-negative bacteria, or lipid-anchored to the cell
wall, or fused to the TMD in the case of Gram-positive
bacteria and Archaea [4]. Although SBPs of Gram-negative bacteria exist predominantly as stand-alone periplasmic proteins, they are sometimes connected in a
fusion protein with the TMD [4] or observed lipidanchored to the inner membrane [5,6]. The physiological relevance of the immobilized versions of SBPs
remains largely unaddressed in the literature.
Based on sequence homology analyses, the bacterial
SBP superfamily has been classified into 8 clusters, with
cluster 5 comprising dipeptide binders (DppA family),
oligopeptide binders (OppA family) and nickel specific
SBP’s (NikA family) [7]. Continuous family updates by
the Transporter Classification Database http://www.tcdb.
org has now led to a cluster 5 SBPs containing up to 27
different subfamilies that are associated with translocation cargos as diverse as - in addition to di-and oligo-apeptides and nickel substrates - antimicrobial peptides,
δ-aminolevulinic acid, heme, plant opines, carbohydrates, the osmoprotective proline betaine, and the
metal-chelater ethylene diamine tetraacetate. The most
recent addition to the SBP family is termed GbpA
(TCID: 3.A.1.5.27), a lipoprotein from Haemophilus
influenzae, which binds reduced (GSH) and oxidized
(GSSG) forms of glutathione to prime the dipeptideDppBCDF ABC-transporter for glutathione translocation
across the inner membrane [8]. Structural studies of the
highly homologous GbpA from H. parasuis in complex
with GSSG have revealed structural features that typify
cluster 5 SBPs, namely, a pear-shaped, two-domain a/bfold that collapses about the hinge region connecting
the N-and C-terminal domains to sandwich the molecular cargo, in this case a single GSSG molecule [8]. In the
absence of ligand, SBP’s are flexible with the two
domains rotating around the hinge and existing largely
in the open conformation with both domains separated.
Substrate binding induces the closed conformation, and
the ligand is trapped at the interface between the two
domains, according to what has been termed the “Venus
Fly-trap” mechanism [9]. The structural analysis of
GbpA in complex with GSSG has identified many specific interactions between GSSG and its cognate SBP that
may be helpful in the delineation of the entire GbpA
family [8]. The discovery that GbpA mediates glutathione transport in H. influenza came as a complete
surprise as this protein was previously thought to be a
heme-binding protein, accordingly annotated HbpA, and
was implicated as a binding-platform for heme [5,10].

Page 2 of 10

Nonetheless, GbpA does bind hemin, albeit weakly with
an apparent Kd of 655 μM [8], and a possible role for
GbpA and DppBCDF in heme acquisition has been
described [10,11]. In this regard, GbpA presents itself as
a good example of the high degree of substrate promiscuity especially common among cluster 5 SBPs [12-15].
In light of our recent report on the functional reannotation of HbpA to GbpA [8], the present study was
designed to elucidate further and refine this emerging
SBP subfamily of glutathione-binding proteins and to
clarify the roles of such proteins in glutathione and
heme acquisition. GbpA homologs were identified
employing BLAST and their clustering in the novel
GbpA family was established based on structure-based
motif fingerprinting. To ascertain the GbpA family functionally, we subsequently explored the ligand preferences of five representative GbpA homologous proteins.
As the GbpA from H. influenzae is lipidated in vivo, we
also incorporated in our test protein set GbpA homologous sequences that were not preceded by a peptidase II
modifiable leader peptide, thereby providing the opportunity to uncover lipidation-dependent functional
effects. Our studies indicate that GbpA family members
are exclusively found in the Gram-negative Pasteurellaceae, where they have evolved by gene duplication from
a canonical DppA sequence to prime the transport of
physiologically useful forms of glutathione. Our data on
the other hand do not support a general role for GbpA
family proteins in heme acquisition. Finally, a phylogentically distinct cluster of GbpA homologues was identified, which appears to lack binding capacity not only for
glutathione and other peptide ligands, but heme as well,
thus casting a new twist in the possible substrate preferences of GbpA-like proteins.

Results and Discussion
In order to delineate the GbpA family of SBP proteins
and to identify GbpA homologs with signal peptidase
II modifiable leader peptides, we BLASTed the GbpAHi
sequence against all available microbial databases in
June 2011 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sutils/genom_table.cgi. We found GbpA homologs in 13 different
species, all of which belong to the Pasteurellaceae, and
more than half of these sequences (belonging to 7 species) were predicted lipoproteins by the LipoP 1.0 server http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/LipoP/. A survey of
the top 100 homologs furthermore uncovered a number of established and predicted DppA proteins as well
as several Pasteurellaceae-unique sequences that on
first sight neither belong to the DppA-family, nor to
the GbpA-family and that are all annotated as hemebinding proteins (HbpA). We will refer to these proteins with the affiliation HbpA2. These HbpA2
sequences were found in 3 species, H. parasuis, M.

Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

haemolyticus, and A. pleuropneumoniae, all of which
also contained a GbpA. The identified GbpA, DppA,
and HbpA2 proteins share at least 50% sequence identity, with the GbpA/HbpA2 couples being the closest
relatives (all exceeding 60% sequence identity) and the
DppA/HbpA2 couples having the most distant relationship. A phylogentic analysis using the Geneious
5.3.4 package http://www.geneious.com led to a striking delineation of these homologs into three clades, as
supported by bootstrap resampling (Figure 1). Interestingly, most DppA proteins homologous to GbpAHi are
also found within the Pasteurellaceae, strongly suggesting that glutathione-specific GbpA proteins evolved
paralogously in the Pasteurellaceae lineage from their
canonical DppA dipeptide-binder. High-resolution
crystal structures of liganded GbpA (in complex with
GSSG) and DppA (in complex with glycylleucine)
representatives have uncovered key ligand contact residues that provide family-specific signature sequences
[8,16]. We highlighted such sequence fingerprints in a
cut-and-spliced version of a hierarchical clusteringbased multiple sequence alignment http://multalin.

Page 3 of 10

toulouse.inra.fr/multalin/ of the GbpAs’ BLAST top
100 homologs shown in Figure 2. This analysis correlates strongly with the three clade separation, and
reveals a strict conservation of 13 out of 18, and 8 out
of 10 of the active site residues in the demarcated
GbpA and DppA clade, respectively. Furthermore, Figure 2 highlights the versatility of the dpp-fold whereby
a handful of key mutations on either side of the binding interface has led to a ligand-preference switch
from a dipeptide to a disulfide bridge containing hexapeptide. Accordingly, the signature sequence for the
GbpA family is more extended and comprises more
residues than that of the DppA family.
Interestingly, the HbpA2 clade diverged significantly
from both the GbpA and DppA signature sequences. In
fact, some of the strictly conserved residues that contact
the ligand’s charged N- and C-termini in either the
GbpA or the DppA family are replaced by physicochemically dissimilar residues in the HbpA2 sequences
thereby virtually disrupting critical ligand-stabilizing salt
bridges (In case of GbpA-GSSG binding, Arg33 substituted by a Thr, and Asp432 substituted by an Arg; in

Figure 1 Phylogenetic analyses of the top 100 GbpA homologs found in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
microbial protein database reveal three distinct branches, clustering GbpA SBP’s, canonical DppA proteins, and HbpA2 SBP’s. The
phylogenetic tree was generated using the neighbor-joining tree construction method with Jukes-Cantor distances within the Geneious 5.3.4.
software program and no outgroup was selected. Bootstrap resampling was conducted with 100 replicates by PhyML 3.0 [30] and support
values for the three main nodes are provided. Representative sequences are shown by their NCBI Reference Sequence identifier.

Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2 Cut-and-spliced version of a hierarchical clustering-based multiple sequence alignment of the top-100 GbpA homologs
found in the NCBI microbial protein database reveal invariant signature sequences for the GbpA and DppA subfamily. Green-boxed
residues of GbpA family members are ligand-interacting residues identified from the GSSG/GbpAHp complex crystal structure (pdb id. 3M8U).
Purple-boxed residues of DppA family members interact with the dipeptide allocrite in the E. coli DppA/glycylleucine complex structure (pdb id.
1DPP). Sequence names are NCBI Reference Sequence identifiers. The numbering on the top corresponds to the GbpAHp sequence, while the
numbering at the bottom refers to the DppA sequence of E. coli.

case of DppA-dipeptide binding, Asp408 substituted by
an Arg). The ligand specificity of the HbpA2 clade is
therefore difficult to predict, but it is highly unlikely
that glutathione or dipeptides are the natural molecular
cargos. Given the auxotrophic nature of Pasteurellaceae
for heme and the fact that the dpp-architecture is a proven hemin-binding scaffold (E. coli DppA binds hemin
with a 10 μM affinity [14] and also GbpAHi displays an,
albeit low, affinity for hemin [8]) it is tempting to speculate that HbpA2 proteins may play a role in heme
transport.

To document the heme-binding characteristics of the
GbpA family, to verify the role of the posttranslational
1,2-diacylglycerol-modification of GbpA proteins in
terms of glutathione and heme binding, and to establish
the ligand-preferences of the HbpA2 family, we selected
in addition to GbpA Hi yet another GbpA lipoprotein
(from A. pleuropneumoniae, GbpAAp), 2 non-lipoprotein
GbpA’s (GbpAHp and GbpAPm from H. parasuis and P.
multocida, respectively), and 2 HbpA2 proteins
(HbpA2Hp and HBPA2Ap from H. parasuis and A. pleuropneumoniae, respectively), for further study.

Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

In a previous report, we had employed a hemin-binding assay based on native-PAGE to show that GbpA Hi
has a physiologically irrelevant affinity for hemin [8]. To
probe heme-binding among our protein test panel, the
purified recombinant soluble forms of the test proteins
were subjected to our native-PAGE-based assay in the
presence and absence of 0.5 mM hemin (Figure 3). As
this hemin concentration approaches its Kd-value, the
GbpAHi band splits up, with about half of it migrating
faster because of complexation with hemin (as judged
by visual inspection (red-brownish bands) and hemestaining with 2,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine/H 2 O 2 ).
Although all tested proteins displayed the split migration pattern, the fraction of the faster running hemincomplexed bands is much lower compared to that of
GbpA Hi and therefore indicative of an extremely low
affinity for hemin. These results strongly suggest that
heme-binding is not a general feature of the GbpA and
HbpA2 family. Notably, the second best binder of
hemin is GbpA Ap , the other lipoprotein in our test
panel.
A fluorescence-based thermal shift assay (Thermofluor assay [17]) was subsequently employed to screen
for potential allocrites. The set of putative ligands
amounted to 15 different ligands comprising of glutathione, some of its derivatives, and already established allocrites of the type 5 SBP superfamily such as
di- and tripeptides, δ-aminolevulinic acid, nickel, and
proline-betaine. The temperature-induced changes in
relative fluorescence of 100 μg of test protein as a
function of candidate ligands at 1 mM were recorded
and those ligands that significantly affected the transition midpoint temperature (T m ) of the apo-form
(threshold was set at 1.5°C) are shown in Table 1 as a
function of the corresponding ΔT m -values (apparent
Tm-differences in °C for the ligand-protein complexes
relative to the uncomplexed proteins). Our analysis
revealed an affinity of all tested GbpA proteins for
(ranked according to descending ΔTm): GSSG > GSH
> S-methylglutathione ≅ glutathione-cysteine disulfide.

Figure 3 Characterization of the hemin-binding properties of
GbpA and HbpA2 family members. Native-PAGE analysis of 10 μg
test protein in the absence (-) or the presence (+) of 0.5 mM hemin.
The faster migrating band for each test protein in the presence of
hemin represented the hemin/protein complex as verified by hemestaining (see Materials).

Page 5 of 10

In addition, GbpA Hp and GbpA Pm also showed a
minor but significant T m -shift in the presence of the
bulky S-alkylated glutathione derivatives, S-hexylglutathione and S-decylglutathione. Although certain Smodifications were tolerated, fragments of glutathione
such as g-glutamylcysteine or cysteinylglycine or a
slightly elongated form of glutathione (homoglutathione) did not influence the melting behavior of any
of the tested proteins, showing that the GbpA family
carries a specificity for the glutathione backbone. Interestingly, in contrast to the notion that increasingly
bulkier S-alkylations abrogate binding, the disulfide of
glutathione with another glutathione molecule or with
cysteine appear to be good allocrites for the entire
GbpA family, strongly suggesting that the GbpA-fold
evolved to bind these types of glutathione derivatives
in vivo. This observation makes sense as many Pasteurellaceae are glutathione as well as cysteine auxotrophs
and glutathione-cysteine disulfide reaches levels similar
to those of glutathione in human plasma (up to 10 μM
[18]).
Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) was subsequently used to determine the equilibrium dissociation
constants for the interaction of our GbpA proteins with
GSSG, GSH, and S-me-GSH. Typical ITC thermograms,
showing the raw and integrated data for the interaction
of GbpAHp with these allocrites are shown in Figure 4,
and all respective calculated Kd-values are summarized
in Table 2. Except for GbpAHp, the ranking of binding
strength according to the thermal shift ΔTm-values was
recapitulated by the ITC-derived K d -values. Notably,
affinities for the natural allocrites, GSSG and GSH, varied 200-fold, and for the artificial ligand S-me-GSH ~
400-fold among the selected GbpA-family members,
with GbpAHi being the worst binder for all tested putative ligands. Interestingly, GbpA from H. influenzae,
which naturally exists in a membrane anchored form,
takes a unique position within the GbpA-family as the
best binder of hemin, and the worst binder of glutathione. On the other hand, the soluble form of the
predicted lipoprotein GbpA from A. pleuropneumoniae
displays affinities for the tested glutathione derivatives
that are similar to the two non-lipoprotein GbpA’s (see
Table 2). Therefore, membrane-anchoring of GbpA proteins appears not to impose any functional implications.
Interestingly, the best hemin-binders from our test proteins were the lipoprotein GbpAs (Figure 3), amongst
which the one of H. influenzae was shown to be biologically significant for heme acquisition [10,11]. Therefore,
membrane-anchoring may influence the role of GbpAs
in heme acquisition by increasing their intrinsic affinity
for hemin. Nonetheless, GbpA-mediated heme import
appears to be of minor importance under laboratory
conditions as yet another family 5 SBP, the antimicrobial

Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

Page 6 of 10

Table 1 Summary of results obtained from thermal shift assays for the identification of GbpA- and HbpA2-family
ligands out of a test set of typically family 5 SBP allocrites.
GbpAHi

GbpAAp

GbpAHp

GbpAPm

HbpA2Hp

HbpA2Ap

Tm (°C)a
GSSG

17.5

14.0

16.0

20.5

-

-

GSH
S-methylglutathione

12.5
10.5

11.0
7.5

14.0
11.5

13.0
11.5

-

-

S-nitrosoglutathione

7.0

6.5

9.5

12.0

-

-

glutathione cysteine disulfide

10.0

6.0

7.0

12.0

-

-

S-hexylglutathione

-

-

4.5

6.5

-

-

S-decylglutathione

-

-

2.5

3.0

-

-

homoglutathione
g-glutamylcysteine
cysteinylglycine
glycylleucine
glycylglycylcysteine
δ-aminolevulinic acid
proline-betaine
nickel}

-

-

-

-

-

-

a
Interacting ligands are identified by means of the respective ΔTm-values, the apparent Tm-differences in °C for the ligand-protein complexes relative to the
uncomplexed proteins. A negative sign indicates ligands for which the ΔTm is smaller than 1.5°C.

peptide binder SapA, has recently been shown to be
essential for heme utilization by iron-starved nontypeable H. influenzae cells [19].
The lack of conservation of consensus sequence fingerprints important for ligand-binding by GbpA- and

DppA-family proteins (Figure 2) had already suggested
that the HbpA2 proteins in our test set would fail to
bind the glutathione- and dipeptide-types of ligands.
Indeed, our thermofluor analyses showed that none of
the two HbpA2 proteins under study were able to

Figure 4 Determination of the affinity constant of GbpAHp for three different glutathione forms: the oxidized (GSSG), the reduced
(GSH), and an S-derivatized form (S-me-GSH). Isothermal titration data for the titration of GbpAHp with either GSSG, GSH, or S-me-GSH in 10
mMTris-HCl, pH 7.4. The upper panels show the calorimetric titrations for 10-μl injections with 300 s between injections. The lower panels
represent the integrated heat values (from the upper panels) as a function of the protein/ligand molar ratio in the cell. The solid line represents
the best fit of the single-site model to the experimental points.

Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

Page 7 of 10

Table 2 Summary of the dissociation constants for the
interaction of our GbpA-family test set with the
physiologically relevant glutathione forms (GSSG and
GSH), and the artificial S-methylglutathione (S-me-GSH)
as determined by ITC at 37°C.
GbpAHia

GbpAAp

GbpAHp

GbpAPm

Kd (μM)
GSSG
GSH

12.9 ± 0.3 0.33 ± 0.05
56.4 ± 3.0 1.58 ± 0.2

S-methylglutathione

212 ± 17

2.1 ± 0.2
1.9 ± 0.1

0.15 ± 0.03
0.26 ± 0.05

1.17 ± 0.05 0.90 ± 0.07 0.55 ± 0.04

a

Values were taken from ref. [8].

interact with any of the tested type 5 SBP superfamily
allocrites (Table 1). Because of the possibility that the
HbpA2 proteins would co-purify with their natural
ligands, as observed for some other structurally characterized SBP’s, such as e. g. the cysteine-complexed CjaA
from Campylobacter jejuni [20] or the oligopeptide-binder AppA from Bacillus subtilis in complex with a nonapeptide [21], we sought to determine the crystal
structure of HbpA2Hp hoping to elucidate an interaction
with a possible ligand. The crystal structure of HbpA2Hp
was determined to 2.0 Å resolution by maximum-likelihood molecular replacement (Figure 5; additional file 1,
Table S1). The structure reveals the two-lobe a/b-fold
architecture and b-strand topology typical for SBP-like
proteins, and is essentially identical to that of the structurally characterized GbpA and DppA proteins. Crystallographic refinement and exhaustive examination of
residual difference electron density maps failed to provide any evidence for a bound ligand to HbpA2. Moreover, the N- and C-terminal domains were opened by
about 33 degrees with respect to the GSSG-bound
GbpA and glycylleucine-bound DppA reported previously [8,16] (Figure 5A), again indicating we crystallized apo-HbpA2Hp. Importantly, the crystal structure of
HbpA2Hp offers an explanation for its inability to bind
peptide-like ligands. Figure 5B shows a structural superposition of residues of the GbpA ligand-binding site
with only those corresponding residues in HbpA2Hp of
which the physicochemical properties are significantly
different as revealed by our sequence alignments (Figure
2). This analysis focuses on the C-terminal lobe, because
it comprised the majority of the ligand-interacting residues as shown by the GbpAHp -GSSG complex [8] (13
out of 18 interactions), and due to the fact that it is
believed to drive formation of the SBP-ligand-encounter
complex [22]. Out of the 13 GSSG-contacting residues,
3 were not strictly conserved in HbpA2 Hp, i.e. A380P,
S430T, and D432R. All of these residues appear to be
critical for GSSG-binding by GbpAHp: the peptide-nitrogen of A380 hydrogen-bonds with the carbonyl oxygen
of GlyI of one of the glutathione legs (GS-I); the D432

Figure 5 Structure of HbpA2 from H. parasuis. (A) Ribbon
diagram showing an overlay of GSSG-complexed GbpA (PDB id.
3M8U; gray) with HbpA2 from H. parasuis (PDB id. 3TPA; blue). The
structures were superposed with respect to their C-terminal
domains. HbpA2 shows a conformation that opens the cleft
between the N- and C-terminal domains about 30° relative to its
ligand-complexed paralogous counterpart. GSSG is depicted in
atom-colored sticks. (B) Key binding residues of the GbpA Cterminal domain to accommodate GSSG (shown in atom-colored
gray sticks) are replaced in HbpA2 by counterparts (shown in atomcolored blue sticks) that are incompatible with binding peptide-like
allocrites. Residue numbering is according to PDB id. 3M8U. Some
key interactions are depicted as black dashed lines. For clarity some
interactions have been omitted. The figure was created with PyMOL
(The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Schrödinger, LLC).

side chain carboxylate forms a salt bridge with the
amino terminus of GS-I as well as H-bonds with the
side chain hydroxyl groups of Y138 and Y521 thereby
positioning these residues for favorable hydrophobic
interactions, the side chain of S430 is involved in Hbonding with both the carboxylate- and amino-groups
of the g-glutamyl-moiety of GS-I [8]. The structural
superposition in Figure 5B shows that S430 and D432 in
the HbpA2Hp structure occupy the exact same position
as the corresponding active site residues in GbpAHp. At

Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

the same time, A380 takes a slightly different position
which would be expected due to the elimination of the
special structural role of a proline residue in maintaining loop structure at this position. Our structural analysis offers direct evidence that the A380P, S430T, and
D432R substitutions would be grossly incompatible with
GSH and GSSG binding as they would abolish electrostatic, H-bonding and hydrophobic interactions contributions critical for binding of such ligands. A similar
analysis, this time against E. coli DppA, shows that R415
in HbpA2Hp takes the exact same position as the active
site residue D408 in E. coli DppA, a residue that makes
a salt-bridge with the amino-terminus of the bound
dipeptide ligand. Thus, R415 would prevent dipeptide
ligand binding. Finally, we note that the inability of the
HbpA2 proteins to interact with either glutathione or
dipeptides is correlated by looking at the interspecies
occurrence: 2 out of 3 species with HbpA2 genes also
carry genes for both a GbpA and a DppA family
member.

Conclusions
We here have provided a biochemical and phylogenetic
delineation of the GbpA-family of glutathione-binding
proteins. We showed that the GbpA proteins likely
evolved exclusively within the Pasteurellaceae lineage by
gene duplication from an already present dipeptidebinding protein, DppA, thereby explaining our previously reported functional annotation of GbpA proteins
as periplasmic binding proteins that prime glutathione
import to the cytoplasm via the cognate Dpp-ABC
transporter [8]. GbpA proteins are specific for the glutathione backbone, but can tolerate S-modifications to
different extends. This slightly promiscuous behavior
probably resulted from the evolutionary tailoring of the
GbpA scaffold to also accommodate useful disulfides of
glutathione, such as GSSG and glutathione cysteine disulfide. Although GbpA proteins were formerly known as
heme-binding proteins, an important implication of our
work concerns the awareness that they clearly do not
have a general role in heme acquisition. Apart from
GbpA and/or DppA representatives, some Pasteurellaceae also carry the genetic information for a close,
although phylogenetically distinct homolog, which we
have termed HbpA2 in the present paper. Because we
were unable to identify a molecular interaction partner
for these paralogous HbpA2 proteins, their in vivo role
will have to await further study. In any case, the current
annotation as “heme-binding protein or HbpA” for
HbpA2-family members is clearly inaccurate and databases should be rectified accordingly (e.g family 5 SBP
with no known function).

Page 8 of 10

Methods
Strains

Wild-type strain H. influenzae Rd was purchased from the
American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, Va.). The P.
multocida and A. pleuropneumoniae clinical isolates used
in this study were a kind gift of Dr. Mario Vaneechoutte
(Deptartment of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology, and
Immunology, University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium). The
H. parasuis strain used in this study was isolated from the
nasal cavity of a clinically healthy pig and was kindly provided by Dr. Filip Boyen (Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and Avian Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium).
Production and purification of recombinantSBP’s

The construction of the expression plasmids pETGbpAHi and pET-GbpAHp is described in ref. [8]. The
remaining proteins in this study were overexpressed
using similarly constructed plasmids also based on the
pET20b vector template. The leader peptides of the
respective proteins were predicted using the SignalP 3.0
server http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/ and the
LipoP 1.0 server http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/LipoP/
and replaced by the PelB leader peptide provided by the
pET20b plasmid. In case of the A. pleuropneumoniae
gbpA gene sequence, the codon that translates to the Nterminal Cys was furthermore replaced by the Met
codon. Therefore the mature proteins started at positions 23, and 22 for the P. multocida, and A. pleuropneumoniae GbpA family members, respectively, and at
positions 19, and 21 for the HbpA2 SBP’s of H. parasuis, and A. pleuropneumoniae, respectively. All test protein coding sequences were extended with a his-tag to
facilitate purification. The respective genes were PCRamplified using forward and reverse primers (5’ to 3’),
respectively - with the cloning (restriction) site underlined and identified between brackets: GbpA Pm
(CCATGGATAATAAAACCTTTATTAACTGC [NcoI],
GCGGCCGCATCCGCTAACTTAGTGC
[NotI]);
GbpA Ap
(CCATGGATGATAAAAATGCGGACG
[NcoI], GCGGCCGCGTCGGCTAATTTTGTACCG
[NotI]); HbpA2Hp (GATATCTCGGCACCGACAAATACATTG [EcoRV], CTCGAGTTAAGGCTTCAGACTTACGCCAT [XhoI]); HbpA2 Ap (CCATGGCAGCGC
CGGCACATACTTTAG [NcoI], GCGGCCGCTTC
CGTTAGACTCACATTATAG [NotI]).
The proteins were expressed in E. coli and purified
using a three-step chromatographic protocol (IMAC,
followed by anion-exchange, and size-exclusion chromatography) as described in ref. [8]. The concentration of
purified proteins was determined by the Bio-Rad Protein
Assay with bovine serum albumin as the standard.

Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

Native PAGE heme-binding gel shift assay

Hemin stock solutions were prepared by dissolving
bovine hemin chloride (Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM
NaOH prior to 10-fold dilution in double distilled
water. These solutions were then neutralized to pH 7.5
using HCl and filtered through a Millex-GP 0.22 μm filter unit (Millipore). Stock concentrations were determined spectrophotometrically (ε385 = 58,400 M-1 cm-1),
and the solutions were used within a day after preparation. Purified test protein (10 μg) was incubated with 0.5
mM hemin or water alone for 45 min at room temperature and subjected to native PAGE as described previously [8]. Hemin-complexed bands were visualized ingel by their intrinsic peroxidase activity using 2,3’,5,5’tetramethylbenzidine and H2O2 [23]. The hemin-complexed protein species migrated faster compared to the
apo-forms as was already described for other heminbinding proteins [8,19,24].
Thermal denaturation assays

Thermofluor thermal shift assays were conducted in a
C1000 thermal cycler equipped with a CFX96 optical reaction module (Bio-Rad). The microplate wells were loaded
with 25-μL solutions, containing 100 μg test protein, 2 ×
Sypro orange (Molecular Probes), and 1 mM of the test
chemicals in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. The plates were
sealed with Microseal B film (Bio-Rad) and heated from
30°C to 90°C at a rate of 2°C per min. The unfolding reactions were followed by simultaneously monitoring the
relative fluorescence (FRET settings) using the chargecoupled device camera. The inflection point of the fluorescence versus-temperature curves was identified by plotting
the first derivative over the temperature, and the minima
were referred to as the melting temperatures (Tm).
Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)

Experiments were carried out using a VP-ITC MicroCalorimeter (MicroCal) at 37°C, and data were analyzed
using the Origen ITC analysis software package supplied
by MicroCal. Purified test proteins were dialyzed overnight against 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, at 4°C. The
resultant dialysis buffer was then used to dissolve the
test compounds. Protein concentrations were measured
spectrophotometrically using the respective theoretical
extinction coefficients at 280 nm as calculated from the
mature protein sequences at http://web.expasy.org/protparam/. GSSG concentrations were determined by the
absorbance change at 340 nm resulting from the glutathione reductase-catalyzed NADPH-dependent conversion of GSSG to 2GSH (ε 340 = 6,200 M -1 cm-1 ). GSH
concentrations were determined by the reaction with
Ellman’s reagent (ε412 = 14,000 M-1 cm-1). All solutions
were degassed prior to use. Titrations were always

Page 9 of 10

preceded by an initial injection of 3 μL and were carried
out using 10-μL injections applied 300 s apart. The sample was stirred at a speed of 400 rpm throughout. Test
compounds were always injected into the HbpA-containing sample cell. The heats of dilution were negligibly
small for the titration of each ligand into buffer; hence
the raw data needed no correction. The thermal titration data were fit to the one binding site model to
determine the dissociation constant, Kd. Several titrations were performed to evaluate reproducibility.
Crystallization and structure determination of HbpA2
from H. Parasuis

Crystallization of HbpA2Hp (10 mg/mL in 10 mMTrisHCl pH 8.0, 100 mMNaCl) was screened using a Mosquito crystallization robot (TTP LabTech) based on 200
nL crystallization droplets (100-nL protein sample and
100-nL crystallization condition) equilibrated in sittingdrop geometry over 25-μL reservoirs containing a given
crystallization condition. This led to the development of
already well-formed rod-shaped crystals in condition 39
of the Hampton Research Index screen (0.1 M HEPES
pH 7.0,30% v/v jeffamine ED-2001). This condition was
optimized using a bigger “sitting-drop” geometry as follows. Crystallization droplets consisting of 1-μL protein
sample and 1 μL 0.1 M HEPES pH 7.0, 30% v/v jeffamine
ED-2001, were equilibrated against 0.75-mL reservoir
solution containing 5-20% wt/v saturated ammonium
sulfate. Diffraction quality crystals of HbpA2 Hp grew
overnight as clusters of easy separable crystalline rods
(measuring 0.05 × 0.05 × 0.2 mm). For data collection
under cryogenic conditions (100 K), single crystals were
flash cooled with the help of a nylon loop directly in
liquid nitrogen after a very brief incubation (typically <
30 s) in cryoprotecting solution containing 0.1 M HEPES
pH 7.0, 30% v/v jeffamine ED-2001, and 20% v/v glycerol.
The structure of HbpA2 from H. parasuis was determined by maximum-likelihood molecular replacement as
implemented in the program suite PHASER [25]. The
search model was prepared from the structure of
H. parasuis GbpA in complex with GSSG [8] using the
program Chainsaw [26], based on structure-based
sequence alignments. The final search model contained
alanines at all nonconserved positions and was stripped
from all solvent molecules and ligand. The best solution
was obtained in a combined search strategy whereby we
searched for the C-terminal domain first. Inspection of
electron density maps calculated with Fourier coefficients
2Fo-Fc, MR, ac, MR confirmed the solution as evidenced by
extra density for missing structural elements and side
chains. Model (re)building was carried out via a combination of automated methods as implemented in the PHENIX suite [27] and manual adjustments using the

Vergauwen et al. BMC Biochemistry 2011, 12:59
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2091/12/59

program COOT [28]. Crystallographic refinement and
structure validation was carried out using PHENIX and
Buster [27,29].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1. X-ray data collection and refinement
statistics for HbpA2 of H. parasuis.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Grant 3G020506 to BV and Grant 3G064307 to
SNS via the Research Foundation Flanders, Belgium (FWO). BV and RVDM are
postdoctoral and predoctoral research fellows of the FWO, respectively. We
thank the Swiss Light Source (Villigen, Switzerland) for synchrotron
beamtime allocation and the staff of beamline PXIII for technical support.
We express our gratitude to Annelies Van Raemdonck for excellent technical
assistance.
Authors’ contributions
BV designed the study and was involved in all experimental aspects of the
work. AD contributed to recombinant protein production. RVdM and SNS
carried out crystallographic studies. BV and SNS supervised the work and
wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 12 September 2011 Accepted: 16 November 2011
Published: 16 November 2011
References
1. Higgins CF: ABC transporters: from microorganisms to man. Annu Rev Cell
Biol 1992, 8:67-113.
2. Wen PC, Tajkhorshid E: Conformational Coupling of the NucleotideBinding and the Transmembrane Domains in ABC Transporters. Biophys J
2011, 101:680-690.
3. Oldham ML, Chen J: Crystal structure of the maltose transporter in a
pretranslocation intermediate state. Science 2011, 332:1202-1205.
4. van der Heide T, Poolman B: ABC transporters: one, two or four
extracytoplasmic substrate-binding sites? EMBO Rep 2002, 3:938-943.
5. Hanson MS, Slaughter C, Hansen EJ: The hbpA gene of Haemophilus
influenzae type b encodes a heme-binding lipoprotein conserved
among heme-dependent Haemophilus species. Infect Immun 1992,
60:2257-2266.
6. Wyszynska A, Tomczyk K, Jagusztyn-Krynicka EK: Comparison of the
localization and post-translational modification of Campylobacter coli
CjaC and its homolog from Campylobacter jejuni, Cj0734c/HisJ. Acta
Biochim Pol 2007, 54:143-150.
7. Tam R, Saier MH Jr: Structural, functional, and evolutionary relationships
among extracellular solute-binding receptors of bacteria. Microbiol Rev
1993, 57:320-346.
8. Vergauwen B, Elegheert J, Dansercoer A, Devreese B, Savvides SN:
Glutathione import in Haemophilus influenzae Rd is primed by the
periplasmic heme-binding protein HbpA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:13270-13275.
9. Mao B, Pear MR, McCammon JA, Quiocho FA: Hinge-bending in Larabinose-binding protein. The “Venus’s-flytrap” model. J Biol Chem 1982,
257:1131-1133.
10. Morton DJ, Madore LL, Smith A, Vanwagoner TM, Seale TW, Whitby PW,
Stull TL: The heme-binding lipoprotein (HbpA) of Haemophilus
influenzae: role in heme utilization. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2005, 253:193-199.
11. Morton DJ, Seale TW, Bakaletz LO, Jurcisek JA, Smith A, VanWagoner TM,
Whitby PW, Stull TL: The heme-binding protein (HbpA) of Haemophilus
influenzae as a virulence determinant. Int J Med Microbiol 2009,
299:479-488.
12. Berntsson RP, Doeven MK, Fusetti F, Duurkens RH, Sengupta D, Marrink SJ,
Thunnissen AM, Poolman B, Slotboom DJ: The structural basis for peptide
selection by the transport receptor OppA. EMBO J 2009, 28:1332-1340.

Page 10 of 10

13. Eswarappa SM, Panguluri KK, Hensel M, Chakravortty D: The yejABEF
operon of Salmonella confers resistance to antimicrobial peptides and
contributes to its virulence. Microbiology 2008, 154:666-678.
14. Letoffe S, Delepelaire P, Wandersman C: The housekeeping dipeptide
permease is the Escherichia coli heme transporter and functions with
two optional peptide binding proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:12891-12896.
15. Dasgupta A, Sureka K, Mitra D, Saha B, Sanyal S, Das AK, Chakrabarti P,
Jackson M, Gicquel B, Kundu M, Basu J: An oligopeptide transporter of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis regulates cytokine release and apoptosis of
infected macrophages. PLoS One 2010, 5:e12225.
16. Dunten P, Mowbray SL: Crystal structure of the dipeptide binding protein
from Escherichia coli involved in active transport and chemotaxis. Protein
Sci 1995, 4:2327-2334.
17. Pantoliano MW, Petrella EC, Kwasnoski JD, Lobanov VS, Myslik J, Graf E,
Carver T, Asel E, Springer BA, Lane P, Salemme FR: High-density
miniaturized thermal shift assays as a general strategy for drug
discovery. J Biomol Screen 2001, 6:429-440.
18. Kleinman WA, Richie JP Jr: Status of glutathione and other thiols and
disulfides in human plasma. Biochem Pharmacol 2000, 60:19-29.
19. Mason KM, Raffel FK, Ray WC, Bakaletz LO: Heme utilization by
nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae is essential and dependent on Sap
transporter function. J Bacteriol 2011, 193:2527-2535.
20. Muller A, Thomas GH, Horler R, Brannigan JA, Blagova E, Levdikov VM,
Fogg MJ, Wilson KS, Wilkinson AJ: An ATP-binding cassette-type cysteine
transporter in Campylobacter jejuni inferred from the structure of an
extracytoplasmic solute receptor protein. Mol Microbiol 2005, 57:143-155.
21. Levdikov VM, Blagova EV, Brannigan JA, Wright L, Vagin AA, Wilkinson AJ:
The structure of the oligopeptide-binding protein, AppA, from Bacillus
subtilis in complex with a nonapeptide. J Mol Biol 2005, 345:879-892.
22. Sooriyaarachchi S, Ubhayasekera W, Park C, Mowbray SL: Conformational
changes and ligand recognition of Escherichia coli D-xylose binding
protein revealed. J Mol Biol 2010, 402:657-668.
23. Thomas PE, Ryan D, Levin W: An improved staining procedure for the
detection of the peroxidase activity of cytochrome P-450 on sodium
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gels. Anal Biochem 1976, 75:168-176.
24. Pedroche J, Yust MM, Lqari H, Megias C, Giron-Calle J, Alaiz M, Millan F,
Vioque J: Chickpea pa2 albumin binds hemin. Plant Sci 2005,
168:1109-1114.
25. McCoy AJ, Grosse-Kunstleve RW, Adams PD, Winn MD, Storoni LC, Read RJ:
Phaser crystallographic software. J Appl Crystallogr 2007, 40:658-674.
26. Stein N: CHAINSAW: a program for mutating pdb files used as templates
in molecular replacement. Journal of Applied Crystallography 2008,
41:641-643.
27. Adams PD, Afonine PV, Bunkoczi G, Chen VB, Davis IW, Echols N, Headd JJ,
Hung LW, Kapral GJ, Grosse-Kunstleve RW, et al: PHENIX: a comprehensive
Python-based system for macromolecular structure solution. Acta
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2010, 66:213-221.
28. Emsley P, Cowtan K: Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics.
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2004, 60:2126-2132.
29. Blanc E, Roversi P, Vonrhein C, Flensburg C, Lea SM, Bricogne G:
Refinement of severely incomplete structures with maximum likelihood
in BUSTER-TNT. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2004, 60:2210-2221.
30. Guindon S, Dufayard JF, Lefort V, Anisimova M, Hordijk W, Gascuel O: New
algorithms and methods to estimate maximum-likelihood phylogenies:
assessing the performance of PhyML 3.0. Syst Biol 2010, 59:307-321.
doi:10.1186/1471-2091-12-59
Cite this article as: Vergauwen et al.: Delineation of the Pasteurellaceaespecific GbpA-family of glutathione-binding proteins. BMC Biochemistry
2011 12:59.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
