<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A novel reporter of notch signalling indicates regulated and random notch activation during vertebrate neurogenesis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2011, 9:58. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-58"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Filipe Vilas-Boas"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A novel reporter of notch signalling indicates
regulated and random notch activation during
vertebrate neurogenesis
Filipe Vilas-Boas1,2†, Rita Fior1†, Jason R Swedlow3, Kate G Storey3* and Domingos Henrique1,2*

Abstract
Background: Building the complex vertebrate nervous system involves the regulated production of neurons and
glia while maintaining a progenitor cell population. Neurogenesis starts asynchronously in different regions of the
embryo and occurs over a long period of time, allowing progenitor cells to be exposed to multiple extrinsic signals
that regulate the production of different cell types. Notch-mediated cell-cell signalling is one of the mechanisms
that maintain the progenitor pool, however, little is known about how the timing of Notch activation is related to
the cell cycle and the distinct modes of cell division that generate neurons. An essential tool with which to
investigate the role of Notch signalling on cell by cell basis is the development a faithful reporter of Notch activity.
Results: Here we present a novel reporter for Notch activity based on the promoter of the well characterised Notch
target chick Hes5-1, coupled with multiple elements that confer instability, including a destabilized nuclear Venus
fluorescent protein and the 3’ untranslated region (UTR) of Hes5-1. We demonstrate that this reporter faithfully
recapitulates the endogenous expression of Hes5-1 and that it robustly responds to Notch activation in the chick
neural tube. Analysis of the patterns of Notch activity revealed by this reporter indicates that although Notch is most
frequently activated prior to mitosis it can be activated at any time within the cell cycle. Notch active progenitors
undergoing mitosis generate two daughters that both continue to experience Notch signalling. However, cells
lacking Notch activity before and during mitosis generate daughters with dissimilar Notch activity profiles.
Conclusions: A novel Notch reporter with multiple destabilisation elements provides a faithful read-out of
endogenous Notch activity on a cell-by-cell basis, as neural progenitors progress through the cell cycle in the chick
neural tube. Notch activity patterns in this cell population provide evidence for distinct Notch signalling dynamics
underlying different cell division modes and for the involvement of random initiation of Notch signalling within the
neuroepithelium. These findings highlight the importance of single-cell analysis in the study of the complexity of Notch
activity and provide new insights into the mechanisms underlying cell fate decisions in neural progenitors.

Background
Regulated neuron production is critical during the
generation of the vertebrate nervous system. To produce
the correct number and types of neurons, a population
of proliferating progenitors is maintained throughout
neurogenesis and several mechanisms operate to
* Correspondence: k.g.storey@dundee.ac.uk; henrique@fm.ul.pt
† Contributed equally
1
Instituto de Medicina Molecular and Instituto de Histologia e Biologia do
Desenvolvimento, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Av
Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal
3
Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

regulate their differentiation. Upon division, a neural
progenitor can either give rise to two new progenitors
(P-P) or two neurons (N-N), in a so-called symmetrical
division, or to another progenitor and a neuron (P-N,
asymmetrical division). The outcome of these divisions
is controlled by both intrinsic and extrinsic cues
(reviewed in [1]), and a correct balance must be
achieved to allow a steady production of neurons while
at the same time ensuring that enough progenitors are
maintained to sustain the whole neurogenesis process.
Notch signalling is one of the extrinsic mechanisms that
regulate this process and it is required to maintain a
population of neural progenitors throughout

© 2011 Vilas-Boas et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

neurogenesis [2]. However, it remains unclear how
Notch activity performs this function, i.e. whether progenitors experiencing Notch signals will adopt a P-P or
P-N division mode in order to control the rate of
neurogenesis.
During neurogenesis, cells committed to differentiation
express Notch ligands and activate Notch signalling in
neighbouring progenitors to prevent their differentiation,
in a process called lateral inhibition ([3-5], reviewed in
[2]). However, this inhibition is only temporary and various mechanisms collude to terminate Notch signalling
in neural progenitors (reviewed in [6]); a step that might
be required to allow these cells to reset their potential
and enter another round of cell fate-decision. Indeed,
permanent Notch activation freezes neural progenitors in
an undifferentiated state, and neurogenesis only progresses when these cells are released from Notch signalling [7,8]. This implies that Notch activity in neural
progenitors is highly dynamic and that cells might experience several rounds of Notch activity before becoming
committed to differentiation. This view is supported by
the observed fluctuations in Notch signalling, detected
with a luciferase-based reporter in cultured neural progenitors [9]. However, in contrast to cells in the presomitic mesoderm (reviewed in [10-12]), neural progenitors
are not synchronized, and have different levels of Notch
activity that are reflected by varying levels of expression
of Notch target genes [9,13,14].
The heterogeneity in the neural progenitor population,
together with the dynamic nature of Notch signalling,
have made it difficult to monitor Notch activity and
study its relationship to the behaviour of individual
cells, as they progress through the cell cycle and
undergo neurogenesis. To address this, it is therefore
important to develop faithful reporters for Notch signalling that can be used in time-lapse imaging; such reporters must allow detection of Notch activity from its
onset and also reveal when the signalling process is
switched-off to allow neurogenesis progression. To date
most green fluorescent protein (GFP)-based Notch
reporter systems used in the nervous system include the
reporter protein and its messenger ribonucleic acid
(mRNA) but do not contain protein and/or mRNA
degradation signals [8,15-27]. For this reason, GFP was
reported in the majority of cases to perdure in cells long
after Notch signalling was extinguished. A Notch reporter with short-lived features based on a highly unstable
form of luciferase has been described [28] and used to
monitor Notch activity with higher accuracy in the
developing nervous system [9]. However, single-cell
resolution is poor with luciferase detection systems and
does not allow visualization of cellular interactions or a
precise correlation of Notch activity with cell cycle
dynamics.

Page 2 of 16

Previous Notch reporters have been generated using
synthetic promoters - minimal promoters coupled to
tandem repeats of CBF1/Suppressor of Hairless/Lag-1
(CSL) binding sites [8,16,23,27] - or using promoters of
Notch target genes [15,17-22,24-29]. Since the synthetic
CSL promoter does not reflect all Notch activity in the
developing embryo [16], promoters of Notch target
genes appear to be better choices. Among the known
targets, Hes1 expression shows little overlap with Notch
activity in the neural tube and its transcription in the
developing neuroepithelium is unaffected by inactivation
of the Notch pathway [30,31]. In contrast, Hes5 transcription is severely reduced in Notch mutants [30,31]
and its promoter is directly regulated by Notch [32],
indicating that Hes5 is a bona fide target of Notch activity in the developing nervous system.
In this paper, we describe the design, validation and
application of a new Notch reporter system, based on
the chick Hes5 promoter coupled to a short-lived fluorescent protein and post-transcriptional regulation signals. We show that the expression of this reporter
mimics endogenous Notch activity in the neuroepithelium, providing a faithful read-out of Notch signalling.
We have used this new reporter to monitor Notch activity in individual neural progenitors of the developing
chick spinal cord. Our data suggest that the onset of
Notch activity can be a random event and indicate a
link between the neural progenitors’ fate and patterns of
Notch activity.

Results
Design of a novel reporter of Notch activity

To generate a reporter system able to monitor Notch
activity during neurogenesis, a promoter that responds
positively to Notch signalling in the developing nervous
system must be linked to a complementary deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA) encoding a reporter protein whose
detection reflects the promoter’s transcriptional activity.
The chicken genome contains three Hes5 genes clustered in a 20 Kbp region on chromosome 21, all of
which respond to Notch signalling [14]. This gene cluster is close to the Pank4 gene, which also flanks the single Hes5 gene in the mouse and human genomes [14].
In the chick, Hes5-1 is the gene located nearest to
Pank4, and has the highest homology to mouse Hes5
(Additional file 1. Fig S1A, B), being expressed in progenitors within the ventricular zone of the neural tube
[14]. Moreover, its promoter is highly similar to the
human and mouse Hes5 promoter (53% and 58% identity, respectively, over the most proximal 400 nucleotides), containing several putative CSL-binding sites
(CBS), with two highly conserved CBS in the most proximal region (Additional file 1. Fig S1C). We therefore
chose a DNA fragment from the region immediately

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

upstream of the predicted transcription initiation site of
Hes5-1 to be used as the promoter in the Notch reporter system.
To visualize transcriptional activity mediated by the
Hes5-1 promoter, a two kilobase pair DNA fragment
upstream of the Hes5-1 translation start site was linked
to a cDNA encoding VNP [33]. The fusion protein contains the fluorescent protein Venus - a derivative of
enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) with fast
maturation and increased brightness [34] -, a nuclear
localization signal (NLS) to facilitate single-cell analysis
and, finally, a PEST sequence from the mouse ornithine
decarboxylase protein that confers fast degradation to
the fusion protein [35]. We also included the 3’ untranslated region (UTR) of the Hes5-1 mRNA in the reporter
construct, because the presence of this element further
decreases the time during which the reporter is active
(see below). In addition, to ensure that a poly(A) tail is
present in the mRNA, we included a rabbit b -globin
polyadenylation signal downstream of the 3’UTR. The
final reporter construct (PHes5-1-VNP-3’UTRHes5-1-poly
(A)) will be referred in this paper as pHes5-VNP (Figure
1A). We built also a control construct in which the
Hes5-1 promoter is replaced by the constitutively active
cytomegalovirus-actin-globin (CAG) hybrid promoter
[36] - this construct (pCAG-VNP-3’UTRHes5-1-poly(A))
will be referred as pCAG-VNP (Figure 1B).

Page 3 of 16

Expression of pHes5-VNP recapitulates the endogenous
Hes5-1 expression

To determine if reporter expression driven by the Hes51 promoter is able to mimic the endogenous pattern of
Hes5-1 transcription, the pHes5-VNP and pCAG-VNP
constructs were electroporated separately into the chick
embryonic neural tube, and expression of VNP mRNA
driven by each construct was compared with Hes5-1
mRNA expression. Embryos were harvested 48 h after
electroporation and the presence of VNP and Hes5-1
mRNAs were analysed by in situ hybridization in sections (Figure 2A-C). These data show that VNP mRNA
transcription driven by the Hes5-1 promoter is restricted
to the ventricular zone and resembles the endogenous
Hes5-1 expression pattern (Figure 2, compare A with C).
In contrast, VNP mRNA transcription driven by a constitutive promoter (pCAG-VNP) occurs not only in the
ventricular zone but also in the mantle layer (Figure
2B), showing that the specific activity of pHes5-VNP in
neural progenitors is not an artefact of the electroporation procedure. To confirm further that pHes5-VNP
expression occurs in cells that transcribe the Hes5-1
gene, double in situ hybridization for VNP and Hes5-1
(using a probe for the coding region and excluding the
3’UTR) was performed. Confocal analysis shows
co-expression of the two mRNAs within the same cells,
confirming that the reporter driven by the Hes5-1

Figure 1 Schematic representation of various reporter plasmid constructs generated and electroporated in the chick neural tube. (A)
pHes5-VNP, Notch reporter. (B) pCAG-VNP, reporter control. (C) pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR, reporter control without the 3’UTR of Hes5-1. (D) pCAG-VNPΔ20,
reporter control with 20 bp missing from the 3’UTR of Hes5-1. (E) pCAG-CherryNLS electroporation control.

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Expression of the pHes5-VNP reporter mimics Hes5-1 mRNA expression. (A-E) Following electroporation of pHes5-VNP, VNP mRNA
can be detected only in the ventricular zone of the neural tube (C) similar to Hes5-1 mRNA (A) and is only detected in cells that also express
Hes5-1 (D, E). In contrast, VNP mRNA expressed from pCAG-VNP is present not only in cells of the ventricular zone but also in the mantle layer
(B). (F-I) VNP protein expression driven by pHes5-VNP is detected in cells that are mitotically active (H) or in S-phase, as detected by BrdU
incorporation (I), similar to what is observed for Hes5-1 mRNA expression (F, G). Arrows in (E-I) identify cells co-labelled with the analysed
markers. (J) Under conditions where low levels of reporter plasmids are electroporated (see Methods), VNP protein expressed from pHes5-VNP is
restricted to neural progenitors, as virtually no co-expression with the HuC/D neuronal marker can be detected 24 h after electroporation.
Dashed lines in (F-J) delineate the lumen of the neural tube.

promoter is active only in neural progenitors (Figure 2D,
E). As observed for Hes5-1 mRNA (Figure 2F, G), VNP
protein is expressed in proliferating cells during mitosis
(Figure 2H) and during S-phase (labelled with a short 5bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU) pulse, Figure 2I).
Furthermore, at 24 h after electroporation 99% of VNPexpressing cells do not co-express the early neuronal
marker HuC/D [37] (4086 VNP+ cells, 143 sections, 4
embryos) (Figure 2J), indicating that VNP does not perdure in neural progenitors once these cells commit to
differentiation.
Taken together, these results indicate that VNP
expression driven by the Hes5-1 promoter faithfully
recapitulates the expression of the endogenous Hes5-1
gene in neural progenitors and may therefore report
Notch activity in this context.
pHes5-VNP provides a read-out for Notch activity

To test the responsiveness of the pHes5-VNP reporter
to Notch signalling, we monitored the appearance of
VNP in conditions where the Notch pathway is ectopically activated in the chick neural tube. With this aim, a
group of embryos was co-electroporated with 3 plasmids: pHes5-VNP, pCAG-NICD (a plasmid driving constitutive expression of the Notch intracellular domain)
and pCAG-CherryNLS (encoding a nuclear form of a
red fluorescent protein driven by the constitutive CAG
promoter, allowing visualization of the nucleus of all

electroporated cells, Figure 1E) (Figure 3A-F). As a control, another set of embryos was co-electroporated with
pHes5-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS, but without pCAGNICD (Figure 3G-J).
After electroporation, the fluorescent signal in the
neural tube was observed in ovo over time, starting at 4
hours. At this time, VNP reporter expression is detected
only in embryos where NICD is ectopically expressed.
VNP expression increases strongly with time and, at 24
h, embryos show very high levels of expression in the
electroporated neural tube (Figure 3A-C), similar to
what is observed when Hes5-1 mRNA expression is analysed under similar conditions [14]. In contrast, the
group of embryos without ectopic Notch activation
shows very weak VNP expression at 4 hours (data not
shown), and the levels present at 24 h are much reduced
in comparison with those elicited by NICD overexpression (Figure 3G).
To quantify the percentage of electroporated cells
expressing the reporter in each condition, we compared
the number of VNP- and CherryNLS-expressing cells in
sectioned embryos, 24 h after electroporation. Without
ectopic Notch activation, 31.7% ± 8.1% of the electroporated cells (CherryNLS+) co-express VNP (n = 806 cells,
19 sections, 3 embryos) (Figure 3H-K). This figure is
similar to the number of cells that express endogenous
Hes5-1 mRNA in the developing spinal cord of embryonic day 3 (E3) embryos (31.0% ± 6.1%; 20444 cells, 51

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

Page 5 of 16

reporter responds to ectopic Notch activity and suggests
that in the absence of pCAG-NICD, reporter activity
reflects endogenous Notch signalling. To confirm that
reporter expression in the absence of ectopic Notch
activity reflects endogenous Notch signalling, we
repeated the previous experiment, but in this case
quenching endogenous Notch signalling in all electroporated cells by co-electroporating pCAG-CSLDN (a plasmid driving constitutive expression of a dominant
negative form of CSL). Misexpression of CSLDN has
previously been shown to down-regulate endogenous
Hes5-1 expression [14]. When Notch signalling is abolished in electroporated cells, no VNP reporter expression can be detected 24 hours post electroporation (14/
14 embryos, 2 independent experiments) (Figure 4, compare H-J with A-C). In addition, pCAG-CSLDN expression results in reduced Hes5-1 transcription and
increased Delta1 expression (Figure 4, compare K-N
with D-G), as expected when Notch signalling is blocked
in the neural tube [14]. Similar results are obtained
when embryos are harvested 8 hours post electroporation, when all electroporated cells are still in the ventricular zone of the neural tube (12/12 embryos, 2
independent experiments) (data not shown). Altogether,
these results confirm that the reporter system using the
Hes5-1 promoter responds effectively and specifically to
Notch signalling activity in the chick embryonic neural
tube.
The presence of the 3’UTR of Hes5-1 reduces expression
of reporter protein

Figure 3 Notch reporter’s response to ectopic Notch signalling.
(A-C, G) In vivo time course analysis of fluorescence intensity in
embryos co-electroporated with pHes5-VNP, pCAG-CherryNLS and
pCAG-NICD (A-C), or pHes5-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS (G), shows
that VNP expression is higher in the presence of NICD. (D-F, H-J)
Analysis of transverse sections of embryos electroporated with
pHes5-VNP, pCAG-CherryNLS and pCAG-NICD (D-F), or pHes5-VNP
and pCAG-CherryNLS (H-J) and harvested 24 hours post transfection,
reveals that in the presence of NICD virtually all electroporated cells
express VNP. (K) Chart showing the percentage of electroporated
cells (CherryNLS+) expressing VNP under the Hes5-1 promoter in the
absence (31.7%) or presence (~100%) of NICD.

sections, 5 embryos), suggesting that in the absence of
ectopic Notch activation, VNP expression reflects endogenous Notch activity on the Hes5-1 promoter present
in the electroporated plasmid. By contrast, when pCAGNICD is co-electroporated with pHes5-VNP, virtually all
electroporated cells express the VNP reporter (101.40%
± 2.36%, n = 1125 cells, 17 sections, 3 embryos) (Figure
3D-F,3K). These results show that the pHes5-VNP

Several mechanisms may restrain the duration of Notch
activity in neural progenitors, including post-transcriptional regulation of mRNA turnover by control elements
in the 3’UTR, as shown for the modulation of xHairy2
expression during somitogenesis in the frog [17]. To
evaluate if the 3’UTR of Hes5-1 mRNA contributes to
the post-transcriptional regulation of reporter expression, we built a derivative of the pCAG-VNP vector
without the 3’UTR of Hes5-1, named pCAGVNPΔ3UTR (Figure 1C). Both plasmids contain the
same constitutive promoter driving VNP expression in
all electroporated cells. We then compared the levels of
VNP expression elicited by the two vectors in the chick
neural tube. Each vector was co-electroporated with
pCAG-CherryNLS as a control for electroporation efficiency. Embryos were collected 24 hours later and both
red and yellow fluorescence intensities were analysed in
whole embryos and after sectioning.
Our results show a strong increase of VNP expression
in embryos electroporated with pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR
(Figure 5A-C), when compared to embryos electroporated with pCAG-VNP (Figure 5D-F). Quantification of
fluorescence intensities in neural tube sections shows

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

Page 6 of 16

Figure 4 Notch reporter’s response to absence of endogenous Notch signalling. (A-N) Analysis of transverse sections of embryos
electroporated with pHes5-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS (A-G), or pHes5-VNP, pCAG-CherryNLS and pCAG-CSLDN (H-N), and harvested 24 hours
post transfection, reveals that cells where Notch signalling is abolished by misexpression of CSLDN do not express VNP. Reduction of Notch
signalling in embryos electroporated with CSLDN was confirmed by observation of down-regulation of Hes5-1 (K-L) and up-regulation of Delta1
(M-N) expression. (A-C), (D-E) and (F-G) correspond to three consecutive slides of one representative embryo and (H-J), (K-L) and (M-N)
correspond to three consecutive slides of another embryo. The right side of the neural tube is electroporated on all images shown.

that electroporation with pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR results in a
99.1% increase with respect to pCAG-VNP (p-value =
0.0001, t-test, 32 sections, total of 4 embryos in 2 independent experiments) (Figure 5J). These results show
that the presence of the Hes5-1 3’UTR in the pCAGVNP vector strongly reduces the levels of reporter
expression, most likely by decreasing the half-life of the
VNP mRNA or by preventing translation of the reporter
protein.
Sequence alignment of the 3’UTRs of mouse Hes5,
human Hes5 and chick Hes5-1 shows only very few conserved regions, the longest spanning 20 bp (Additional
file 2. Fig S2). This region contains a sequence (cTATGATa) that resembles a K-box sequence present in Drosophila Enhancer of Split gene transcripts (consensus
sequence cTGTGATa), which has been reported to be a
binding site for specific microRNAs [38,39]. To test if
this conserved region is responsible for the post-transcriptional regulatory activity of the Hes5-1 3’UTR, we
deleted it from pCAG-VNP and compared the levels of
VNP expression elicited by this construct (pCAGVNPΔ20 (Figure 1D)) to that of pCAG-VNP and
pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR. The pCAG-CherryNLS vector was
again used as a control for electroporation efficiency
and embryos were harvested 24 h after electroporation

(Figure 5G-I). Fluorescence intensities were quantified
in cryostat sections. Comparison between cells electroporated with pCAG-VNPΔ20 or pCAG-VNP reveals
that removal of the 20 bp sequence from the Hes5-1
3’UTR leads to an eight-fold increase of fluorescence
levels (p-value = 0.0016, t-test, 32 sections, total of 4
embryos in 2 independent experiments), although still
reduced in comparison to the fluorescence intensity of
embryos electroporated with pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR (Figure
5J). This implies that the 20 bp conserved sequence has
a significant contribution to the activity of the Hes5-1
3’UTR in the post-transcriptional regulation of linked
mRNAs, although other regulatory elements must be
present in the Hes5-1 3’UTR and contribute to the same
end. Together, these results reveal that the Hes5-1
3’UTR is important to modulate the expression of the
Notch reporter and its inclusion in the final construct is
therefore crucial to provide a more faithful read-out of
the dynamic nature of Notch signalling.
Live-imaging of pHes5-VNP reveals distinct behaviours of
Notch activity in sibling cells

The rigorous validation experiments described above
establish that the Hes5-1 promoter provides a highly
accurate read-out of Notch signalling activity, and that

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

Figure 5 Effect of Hes5-1 3’UTR on the expression of the VNP
reporter protein. (A-I) Analysis of VNP and CherryNLS expression in
sections of embryos co-electroporated with either pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR
and pCAG-CherryNLS (A-C), pCAG-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS (D-F),
or pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR20 and pCAG-CherryNLS (G-I), shows that the
presence of the 3’UTR of Hes5-1 diminishes the expression of VNP
and that the conserved 20 bp region in the 3’UTRs of Hes5 genes
has a significant contribution to this effect. DAPI (blue) was used for
nuclear counterstaining in C, F and I. (J) Chart showing the
percentage of VNP expression from the different reporter constructs
relative to that of pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR. Statistical analysis was done
using t-test; *p-value < 0.002; **p-value < 0.0002.

the fluorescent VNP protein is a suitable reporter of
promoter activation. We next used this reporter system
to monitor Notch activity in embryonic neural progenitors, using slices of electroporated embryos cultured in
chemically defined serum-free conditions for up to 72
hours [40]. Using these conditions, neural progenitors
proliferate, show clear interkinetic nuclear movement
and display the ability to give rise to differentiated

Page 7 of 16

progeny [40]. Embryos were co-electroporated with the
pHes5-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS vectors, so that electroporated cells could be permanently traced by red
fluorescence, while VNP expression reflected the
dynamics of Notch signalling. In separate control experiments, another group of embryos was co-electroporated
with pCAG-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS plasmids. In
this case, expression of VNP and CherryNLS is driven
by the same constitutive promoter. After electroporation, slices from both groups of embryos were prepared
and cultured together in the same Petri dish. Fluorescent images were taken at 7 or 10 minute intervals,
using a wide-field DeltaVision imaging system as
described previously [40]. Slices were incubated for up
to 48 hours and imaging started at either 4 or 12 hours
after electroporation. Images were processed and analysed as described in Methods. From 36 embryos electroporated with pHes5-VNP in 12 independent
experiments, 704 VNP-expressing cells were analysed in
36 embryonic slices. We did prospective and retrospective studies in individual cells aiming at identifying cell
divisions and thereby defining cell lineages. From the
704 VNP-expressing cells, we have defined 175 lineages,
each one containing only one of the 704 VNP-expressing cells, with VNP expression occurring before and/or
after mitosis. The remaining 529 VNP-expressing cells
were excluded from further analyses since we could not
identify the previous cell division or the next, as they
became out of focus or the time-lapse imaging ended
before mitosis could be observed. Thus, from this analysis, we could identify 175 lineages of VNP-expressing
cells and monitor their behaviour for different periods
of time.
To correlate the timing of the onset of Notch activity
in relation to the cell cycle, we analysed lineages where
de novo pHes5-VNP expression could be clearly monitored (Figure 6 and 7). From the 175 VNP-expressing
lineages, we could not observe de novo pHes5-VNP
expression in 145 lineages, as these moved into the imaging planes already expressing VNP, or expressed it
since the beginning of the imaging due to Notch activation soon after electroporation. We analysed instead 30
cell lineages where the timing of the onset of Notch
activity could be clearly determined.
When correlated with cell cycle phase, these 30
lineages could be classified into two groups: one where
Notch activation occurs before mitosis and another
where activation occurs after cell division. In some
cases, two mitotic events were observed within the same
cellular lineage and each was analysed as a separate
lineage.
In the first group, we observed that the onset of
Notch activity occurs in a wide range of times before
mitosis, from 1 to 27 h (24 lineages, Figure 6A, A’ and

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

Figure 7A. See also Additional file 3. Fig S3 and Additional file 4. Movie S4). In the majority of these cells
(21/24), the VNP reporter is still detected in both
daughter cells after cytokinesis and VNP expression is
similar between siblings, suggesting that both cells
experience Notch activity (Figure 6A, A’). In four of
these lineages, we could observe that the two daughter
cells divided again during the observation period (data
not shown), revealing their progenitor character.
In the second group, containing cells in which the
onset on Notch activity occurs after mitosis (11
lineages), we observed that in the majority of cases (10/
11), Notch is activated in only one of the two sibling
cells, an event that may occur at different times after
cytokinesis, from 4 to 12 h (Figure 6B, B’ and Figure
7A. See also Additional file 5. Fig S5 and Additional file
6. Movie S6). However, in one cell lineage we could
detect Notch activation in the two daughter cells after
mitosis, although with different onset times: one cell
activating Notch 6 h after mitosis and the other 7 h
later (Figure 6C, C’ and Figure 7A. See also Additional
file 7. Fig S7 and Additional file 8. Movie S8). These
findings suggest that progenitors in which Notch is
inactive during mitosis give rise to daughter cells with
different potential to activate Notch signalling, or that
activation of Notch signalling in this context is random
(depending on their chances to contact a ligand-expressing cell). Overall, given that the average cell cycle
length in chick neural progenitors is 16 hours [40], our
results show that Notch signalling can be activated in
different phases of the cell cycle and at a wide range of
times.
We have also analysed Notch activity patterns generated by this reporter to elucidate the duration of signalling and its termination. A not infrequent event
following transfection of chick embryos is plasmid loss
[41,42] and this might limit the use of the reporter as
an indicator of Notch activity downregulation in neural
progenitors, as cessation of promoter activity cannot be
easily distinguished from plasmid loss. We assessed this
by following electroporated cells where CherryNLS and
VNP are driven by the CAG constitutive promoter. Our
results show that while the stable CherryNLS protein
persists for a long time in electroporated cells, VNP
levels driven by the same constitutive promoter decrease
more rapidly, after the initial post-electroporation
increase (Figure 7B, B’. See also Additional file 9. Fig S9
and Additional file 10. Movie S10). Such decrease in
VNP expression must be due to plasmid dilution and
loss from electroporated cells, followed by degradation
of the remaining unstable VNP mRNA and VNP protein, while the more stable CherryNLS perdures. This
finding therefore precludes the routine use of plasmid
electroporation as an assay to monitor the termination

Page 8 of 16

of Notch signalling using our reporter system. However,
we did observe some cells where reduction of Notch
activity is followed by a new transcriptional activation of
the reporter, allowing us to exclude that the previous
downregulation was due to plasmid loss. These cells
were included in our analysis of Notch activation events
and reveal that Notch signalling dynamics can be captured using this reporter. Altogether, these results show
that the electroporation-based reporter assay is suitable
for the analysis of patterns of Notch activation in neural
progenitors, and that the timing of onset of this activity
can be correlated to the behaviour of neural progenitors
after division.

Discussion
In this study we describe the development and validation of a new Notch signalling reporter and demonstrate
that this provides a faithful read-out of Notch activity
onset in neural progenitors. Using this reporter we
reveal dynamic alterations in Notch activity during the
neural progenitor cell cycle and show that the pathway
can be initiated at different phases of the cycle. Our
findings indicate that when Notch activity is present at
mitosis, the two daughter cells maintain similar Notch
activity levels, while absence of Notch activity during
mitosis correlates with divergent patterns of Notch signalling in sibling cells that may indicate the adoption of
different cell fates.
pHes5-VNP reporter is a faithful read-out of Notch
activity

The Notch reporter system used in this work employs a
modified form of the fluorescent protein Venus as a
reporter, containing an additional nuclear localization
signal to allow single-cell resolution and quantification
of fluorescence intensities, and a PEST domain to confer
a short half-life to the fusion protein. A similar VenusPEST fusion protein was shown to be able to report cyclic expression of Lfng in the presomitic mesoderm of
mouse embryos [29]. In addition, the 3’UTR of Hes5-1
mRNA was also included in the final transcript encoding VNP, as we showed that it contributes to temporal
regulation of the reporter.
To drive expression of the reporter protein, the promoter of Hes5-1 was used and its behaviour in the chick
embryo assessed by in ovo electroporation. Analysis of
neuroepithelium electroporated with the pHes5-VNP
plasmid revealed that VNP expression occurs specifically
in neural progenitors at the ventricular zone. This
expression is induced by ectopic Notch signalling and
abolished when endogenous Notch signalling is
quenched, thereby confirming that the pHes5-VNP
reporter provides an accurate read-out of Notch activation. Moreover, virtually no VNP-expressing cells show

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

Page 9 of 16

Figure 6 Monitoring of Notch activity in embryos electroporated with pHes5-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS. (A, B, C) Neural tube slices of
embryos transfected with pHes5-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS were imaged in a wide-field microscope. The selected images in (A) show that
Notch activity is detected before and during mitosis, with the two daughter cells containing similar levels of Notch activity. In (B), Notch activity
is detected after mitosis in only one of the two daughter cells, while in (C) Notch becomes active after mitosis in both daughter cells, but at
different times. Images presented are from maximum intensity projections. (A’, B’, C’) Charts showing the pHes5-VNP fluorescence intensities of
the (A, B, C) cell lineages along time, with mitosis as a reference point. Arrows in (A’, B’, C’) indicate the onset of Notch activity.

co-expression of the early neuronal marker HuC/D,
indicating that VNP does not perdure in neural progenitors once these cells commit to differentiation.
Together, these experiments indicate that the pHes5VNP reporter is adequate to monitor Notch signalling
activity during embryonic neurogenesis.

Post-transcriptional regulation by the 3’UTR of Hes5-1

We have also investigated whether the Hes5-1 3’UTR
could affect post-transcriptional mRNA turnover,
thereby contributing to regulate Hes5-1 expression during neurogenesis. Our results show that the presence of
Hes5-1 3’UTR in the final mRNA encoding VNP leads

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

Page 10 of 16

Figure 7 Different onset times of Notch activity and monitoring of embryos electroporated with pCAG-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS. (A)
Chart showing the distribution of Notch activation events in different cell lineages, indicating a wide-range of times for the onset of Notch
activity during the cell cycle: 27 h to 1 h before mitosis (24 lineages), 4 h to 12 h after mitosis in only one daughter cell (10 lineages), and 6 h
and 13 h after mitosis in the two daughter cells (1 lineage). Note that the sum of the number of lineages represented in the chart (35) is larger
than the number of cell lineages analysed in this study (30 lineages). This is due to analysing as two separate lineages the same cellular lineage
in which two mitotic events could be observed. (B) Neural tube of embryos transfected with pCAG-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS and imaged in a
wide-field microscope. An increase in VNP expression is detected soon after transfection followed by a rapid decrease of fluorescence intensity
indicative of plasmid loss. In contrast, CherryNLS expression increases after transfection and persists for a longer period due to its lower
instability. Images are from maximum intensity projections. (B’) Chart showing the fluorescence intensities of a typical cell lineage in embryos
electroporated with pCAG-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS.

to a drastic reduction in the expression levels of this
protein, indicating that the 3’UTR contains signals that
limit the mRNA’s half-life or that restrict its translation.
Furthermore, we have identified a highly conserved
region present in the 3’UTRs of Hes5 genes that contributes to the observed reduction in VNP expression,
although other regions of the 3’UTR must also be
involved in this process, as the 3’UTR without this
highly conserved region still leads to a reduction of
VNP expression, albeit smaller. We thus propose that
the 3’UTR of Hes5-1 is implicated in the post-transcriptional regulation of its mRNA, and this sequence was
included in the pHes5-VNP Notch reporter to allow it
to better reflect Notch activity. It is interesting to note
that despite the inclusion of instability elements this
reporter did not exhibit the very short timeframe (2-3
h) oscillations observed in mouse neural progenitors
expressing a Hes1-driven luciferase reporter that

included an ubiquitination sequence [9]. This may not
be apparent in our assay, which is characterised by varied levels of plasmid transfection, or may indicate an
underlying regulatory difference.
Live-imaging of pHes5-VNP provides new insights into
the mechanisms underlying cell fate decisions in neural
progenitors

Previous work in different animal models has suggested
regulated Notch activity during the cell cycle of neural
progenitors [43-46]. In the developing zebrafish retina,
live-imaging analysis of Her4 reporter expression has
revealed a preferential activation of Notch when the
nucleus of the cell is moving apically before mitosis
[44]. In different neural tissues of the developing chick,
including retina, spinal cord and brain, mRNAs encoding the Notch1 receptor and its target Hes5-1 were also
found preferentially at the apical surface of the tissue

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

where mitosis occurs, but not at high levels in cells
undergoing S-phase [43,45]. However, the distribution
of the active intracellular domain of the Notch receptor
between the different cell cycle phases varies between
different mouse neural tissues. In the developing brain,
NICD was detected in neural progenitors in S-phase,
but not in mitosis [46]. Conversely, in the developing
retina, NICD was reported to be present in the apical,
but not basal region [44]. In addition, in the developing
mouse spinal cord, NICD was found throughout the apical-basal axis, with the exception of the ventricular surface of the neural tube [47]. These observations suggest
that Notch activity might be regulated during the cell
cycle of neural progenitors in a tissue- and species-specific manner. However, these studies have investigated
the overall population, overlooking how Notch activity
is regulated in individual cells over time.
In the present study, we have analysed how Notch
activity correlates with cell cycle phases of individual
cell lineages in the developing chick spinal cord. Analysis of individual cell lineages transfected with the
pHes5-VNP reporter allowed us to monitor the onset of
VNP reporter activity, using the moment when cells
enter mitosis as a time reference. Our data reveals that
Notch activity can be triggered between 1 to 27 h
before cell division, or 4 to 12 h after, but not at the
moment of mitosis, agreeing with previous findings
showing NICD detection throughout the apical-basal
axis of the developing mouse spinal cord but not adjacent to the lumen of the tube [47]. Although these
observations indicate that the onset of Notch activity
does not occur in cells undergoing mitosis in the developing spinal cord, we could clearly detect expression of
endogenous Hes5-1 mRNA and pHes5-VNP reporter in
neural progenitors undergoing mitosis. This suggests
that Hes5-1 continues to be expressed after the disappearance of NICD from the nucleus of the cell. Our
high resolution images have also shown expression of
Hes5-1 mRNA in neural progenitors undergoing Sphase. Overall, our results indicate that the pathway can
be activated in different phases of the cell cycle and at a
wide range of times. These findings imply that Notch
activity in neural progenitors is not restricted to a specific cell cycle phase and favour a model in which activation of Notch during neurogenesis is a random event,
depending on chance encounters with ligand-expressing
newborn neurons, while they are still in the ventricular
zone of the neural tube.
Our results revealed a preferential activation of Notch
in progenitors about to enter mitosis (Figure 7A), consistent with previous observations in the zebrafish retina,
indicating that Notch activity seems to occur mostly
when the nucleus of neural progenitors is moving apically [44]. Our results also agree with previous findings

Page 11 of 16

revealing heterogeneous fluctuations of Notch activity
from cycle to cycle and from cell to cell [9], as this
variability might reflect random events of Notch activation, but spaced in time and dependent on contact with
ligand-expressing neighbouring cells.
In addition to revealing that Notch activation can
occur at any time in the cell cycle, our experiments also
show that when activation occurs before progenitor division, both daughter cells keep similar levels of Notch
activity (Figure 8A), suggesting that they adopt the same
developmental fate. We were able to confirm this in a
subset of lineages in which we were able to monitor
their development for a longer time. This suggestion is
also supported by the higher number of progenitors in
which Notch activation occurs before as opposed to
after mitosis, which correlates well with the higher number of P-P compared to P-N divisions at similar stages
in chick spinal cord development [40].
In contrast, when Notch activity begins after cell division, this frequently occurs in only one of the two
daughter cells (Figure 8B), suggesting that these siblings
now follow distinct developmental paths and might be
born from a P-N division. In only one cell lineage we
observed Notch activity onset occurring in two newborn
siblings, although the time at which the reporter is activated differed by 7 h between the two cells (Figure 8C).
Even in this case, therefore, the absence of Notch activity during cell division is correlated with different outcomes in the two sister cells.
Although we could not determine the final fate of
daughter cells in all reporter-expressing lineages, our
results suggest a correlation between the moment of the
cell cycle when Notch is initially activated and the mode
of division that follows. When a progenitor contacts a
ligand-expressing neuron before mitosis, the ensuing
Notch activity may restrict the neurogenic potential of
the cell and lead to an obligatory P-P division. If, by
chance, the progenitor does not contact a ligand-expressing cell when preparing for mitosis, the absence of
Notch activity allows the progenitor to increase neurogenic competence, due to the unrestrained activity of
proneural genes, and enter a neuron-producing division
(P-N or N-N).
An interesting question raised by this model is how
these neurogenic progenitors end up dividing symmetrically (N-N division) or asymmetrically (P-N division).
The decision might be purely random, with neither of
the two daughter cells receiving signals from neighbouring cells and so becoming neurons, or with one of the
daughters becoming exposed, by chance, to a ligandexpressing neuron in the neighbourhood (thus acquiring
a P fate), while the sister cell remains Notch-free and
becomes a neuron. The two sister cells might also
encounter a ligand-expressing neuron at different times,

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

Page 12 of 16

Figure 8 Scheme illustrating different timings of Notch activation in cell lineages of the vertebrate neuroepithelium. (A) When Notch is
active during mitosis, the two daughter cells are born under the influence of its activity and might lead to both siblings acquiring similar fates.
(B,C) When Notch becomes active after mitosis, this frequently occurs in only one of the two daughter cells (B), but it can also occur in both
siblings, although at different times (C), suggesting that these cells follow distinct developmental paths. Thus, the timing of Notch activity in
relation to mitosis might be a factor that distinguishes between the different fates of daughter cells.

with both cells ending up activating Notch and acquiring a similar P fate. This might underlie the observed
behaviour of the two sister cells that showed Notch activation with a 7-hour difference. However, this was
observed only once, a finding that does not favour a
simple random mechanism, as a higher number of sister
cells with random times of Notch activation would be
expected. An alternative mechanism to explain differential Notch activation in sister cells might involve classical Notch-mediated lateral inhibition between two
daughter cells with equivalent neurogenic potential
which employ competitive Notch signalling between
them to acquire distinct fates (N or P), as has been
described in the AC-VU decision in Caenorhabditis elegans [48]. Importantly, these two possibilities are not
mutually exclusive. At early stages sister cells can separate quickly within the neuroepithelium and Notch activation may be random, while later on when individual
neural progenitors move less in the anterior-posterior
(A-P) and in the dorsal-ventral (D-V) axes interactions
with sibling cells may come to predominate. The occurrence of N-N divisions, where none of the sister cells
activate Notch, might arise from progenitors in which
the levels of proneural gene expression are so high that
this restrains both sibling cells from exchanging signals
after cell division.
An additional influence that may bias Notch signalling
between siblings involves the differential inheritance of
apical and basal cell components determined by the
cleavage plane orientation (reviewed in [1]). Progenitor
divisions with cleavage planes that bisect polarized cell
fate determinants might lead to symmetric N-N divisions, whereas cells with cleavage planes that bypass
polarized cell fate determinants might lead to their
asymmetric distribution between the two daughter cells,

imposing a bias on how these will respond to Notch
activating signals from neighbouring cells. In this scenario, the postulated determinants might either promote
the ability of one daughter cell to activate Notch or
inhibit Notch activation in the other sibling.

Conclusions
In this study, we describe a novel Notch signalling
reporter with features that allow tracking of dynamic
changes in Notch activity with high resolution in single
cells. Using this Notch reporter, we have monitored the
timing of Notch activation throughout the cell cycle and
provide new insights into the mechanisms underlying
cell fate decisions in neural progenitors. This work highlights the importance of single cell analysis to study the
complexity of Notch activity and neural cell fate
decisions.
Methods
Plasmid constructs

To generate the pHes5-VNP reporter, a region of
around 2Kbp upstream of the Hes5-1 coding region was
amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from
genomic DNA (Primers were 5’-CCGCTCGAGGCACACTAGGGACACTCCAGGG-3’ and 5’-CATTATCCGAGAGCTGCTGTCAGC-3’) and fused in frame to
Venus-NLS-PEST (VNP) [33]. The 3’UTR of Hes5-1,
amplified from an expressed sequence tag (EST) clone
(GenBank Acc: BU224462, with primers 5’-CTAGTCTAGAGCCAAGAGCACGCTCACCATCAC-3’ and 5’CATTATCCGAGAGCTGCTGTCAGC-3), was then
added to the PHes5-1VNP cassette, followed by the rabbit
b-globin polyadenylation signal to generate the final
P Hes5-1 VNP3’UTR Hes5-1 poly(A) cassette. The Notch
reporter control pCAG-VNP was generated by

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

amplifying the VNP3’UTR Hes5-1 cassette from the
pHes5-VNP reporter and subcloning into pCAGGS,
maintaining the Hes5-1 Kozak sequence. pCAGVNPΔ3UTR was obtained by subcloning VNP into
pCAGGS. To generate pCAG-VNPΔ20, VNP3’UTRHes5-1
was amplified by PCR in two fragments, which were
then rejoined, leaving a 20 bp gap corresponding to the
region where the putative K-box was found, and cloned
into pCAGGS. pCAG-CherryNLS was cloned by annealing two complementary oligonucleotides corresponding
to the Simian Virus 40 (SV40) Nuclear Localization Signal (NLS) previously used to generate VNP [33] and fusing to mCherry [49] in pCAGGS. A constitutively
expressed active form of Notch (pCAG-NICD) was constructed by inserting a 2.6K bp DNA fragment from
CNIC [50], digested with NotI (Fermentas, St. Leon-Rot,
Germany), into pCAGGS. A constitutively expressed
dominant negative form of CSL (pCAG-CSLDN) was
constructed by inserting a 1.5Kbp DNA fragment from
pCIG-dnSuH (kindly provided by Andy McMahon, The
Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 1059, Cambridge MA, 02138, USA), digested with XhoI/ClaI (Fermentas), into a modified form of pCAGGS containing
the pBlueScript KS II (Stratagene, Santa Clara, CA,
USA) polylinker (Bekman, E. and Henrique, D., unpublished). Detailed cloning procedures are available upon
request.
Embryo electroporation

For all analyses, with the exception of live-imaging
experiments and Figure 2J, super-coiled plasmids encoding VNP were injected into the neural tube of chicken
embryos staged HH11-HH13 (Hamburger and Hamilton
stages [51]) (fertilized eggs provided by Sociedade Agrícola Quinta da Freiria, S.A., Roliça, Portugal and Winter
Farm, Hertfordshire, UK) at a concentration of 1 μg/μl
in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Sigma, Steinheim,
Germany). In some cases, pCAG-CherryNLS DNA was
co-injected at a concentration of 0.2 or 1 μg/μl and
pCAG-NICD or pCAG-CSLDN were injected at concentrations of 1 to 2 μg/μl. Platinum electrodes (CUY613P5,
NEPA GENE, Ichikawa, Japan), distanced 4 mm apart,
were placed parallel to the neural tube under the vitelline membrane. Using an Electro Square Porator™
ECM830 (BTX, Holliston, MA, USA), 4 pulses of 30V
were applied for 50 ms. Embryos were incubated for 8
h, 24 h or 48 h and then harvested and fixed overnight
in 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma) in PBS at 4°C.
For live-imaging experiments and in the experiments
shown in Figure 2J, super-coiled DNA encoding VNP
was injected into the neural tube of chicken embryos
staged HH8-HH11 at a concentration of 0.6 μg/μl in
PBS. pCAG-CherryNLS was co-injected at a concentration of 0.06 μg/μl. Gold plated electrodes (Genetrode

Page 13 of 16

512, BTX), distanced 4 mm apart, were placed parallel
to the neural tube above the vitelline membrane and
few drops of PBS were added. Electroporation was done
with three pulses of 10V for 50 ms. For sectioning of
fixed tissue shown in Figure 2J, embryos were incubated
at 38°C for 24 h and then harvested and processed as
described above. For live-imaging experiments, embryos
were incubated at 38°C for 4 h or 12 h and then harvested and processed as described below.
Embryo slice preparation, culture and imaging

After harvesting, one embryonic slice from each electroporated embryo was prepared, cultured for live-imaging
and imaged as described in [40], with modifications.
Embryo slices were cultured in serum-free medium with
chemically defined supplements: Neurobasal medium
without phenol red (Gibco, Paisley, UK), supplemented
with B-27 (Gibco) to a final 1X concentration with Lglutamine (Gibco) and gentamycin (Invitrogen, Paisley,
UK). Slices were imaged on a wide-field DeltaVision
Spectris microscope workstation (Applied Precision,
Issaquah, WA, USA) in a humidified chamber kept at
37°C. Images were captured using a 40x oil objective
lens (1.35NA, Olympus, Hamburg, Germany). Thirty
optical sections (50-100 ms exposure time, 512x512 pixels, binning = 2), spaced by 1.5 μm, were imaged at 7 or
10min intervals for up to 48 h. The point-visiting function in the SoftWorX software (Applied Precision)
allowed up to nine slices to be imaged during each
experiment. Slices electroporated with the Notch reporter pHes5-VNP were imaged simultaneously with slices
electroporated with the pCAG-VNP control. After
image acquisition the data was deconvolved as described
[40].
Measurement of fluorescence intensities from liveimaging experiments

Analysis of deconvolved data acquired from live-imaging
experiments using the DeltaVision Spectris workstation
was performed using SoftWorX, Omero (http://www.
openmicroscopy.org/site/products/omero), ImageJ
(http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij), and Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA). Individual cells were manually identified in Omero in maximum intensity projections
generated in SoftWorX. Cells that expressed VNP and
divided during the imaging period were selected for
further analysis in non-projected deconvolved data.
These cells were manually tracked in Omero by identifying the Z plane presenting the highest fluorescence
intensity at each time point. A circle of defined size was
then delineated in each nucleus in the chosen Z plane,
and the levels of red and yellow fluorescence were quantified in Omero by measuring the mean fluorescent
intensities in the outlined nucleus area of the selected

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

frames. This process was repeated for each time frame
and the levels of CherryNLS and VNP expression were
plotted against time in Microsoft Excel, covering at least
one mitotic event, thereby allowing the definition of cell
lineages with different VNP expression patterns. Still
images and movies presented correspond to maximum
intensity projections generated in SoftWorX and converted to TIFF and AVI files in ImageJ.
Measurement of fluorescence intensities from the studies
of the Hes5-1 3’UTR

Images of embryonic sections were used to quantify
VNP expression in embryos electroporated with pCAGVNP, pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR and pCAG-VNPΔ20. Areas
where the neural tube showed extensive and homogeneous signal for CherryNLS were selected. Mean fluorescence intensities of both red (CherryNLS) and yellow
(VNP) channels were quantified in ImageJ and the background signal was subtracted. To normalize VNP
expression to the electroporation efficiency (measured
by CherryNLS expression), the ratio of yellow/red fluorescence intensities was obtained. Relative fluorescence
intensities of embryos electroporated with pCAGVNPΔ3UTR, pCAG-VNP or pCAG-VNPΔ20 were compared to the intensity of embryos electroporated with
pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR.
In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry

For hybridization on cryostat sections, fixed embryos
were cryoprotected in 30% sucrose (Sigma) in PBS,
embedded in a solution containing 7.5% gelatine
(Sigma) and 15% sucrose in PBS, frozen and cryosectioned (12 μm). Hybridization on cryostat sections was
done as previously described [52], with modifications.
Double in situ hybridization on cryostat sections was
done with Digoxigenin (Dig)- and Fluorescein (Fluo)labeled RNA probes. The Dig-labeled probe was first
detected with Alkaline Phosphatase (AP)-conjugated
anti-Dig antibody (1:2000, Roche, Mannheim, Germany)
and developed with Fast Red substrate (Roche). After
washing in PBS, sections were blocked and incubated
with Horseradish Peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated antiFluo antibody (1:1000, Roche), followed by fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC)-Tyramide amplification, as recommended by the manufacturer (TSA™-Plus Fluorescein
System Kit, PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA). When in
situ hybridizations were performed to detect VNP
mRNA, the electroporated plasmids were removed with
DNAseI (Roche) to prevent recognition of DNA by the
RNA probe [53]. To generate VNP or Hes5-1 coding
region probes, Venus-NLS-PEST [33] or Hes5-1 coding
region [14] were subcloned in pBlueScript KS II and
used to transcribe the RNA probes. Additionally, Hes5-1
and Delta1 [4] probes were also transcribed from

Page 14 of 16

templates generated by PCR and containing the respective coding regions. For BrdU treatment, 100 μL (12.5
mg/mL, Sigma) were applied onto embryonic day 4 (E4)
chick embryos, which were harvested and fixed 30 minutes later. Antigen retrieval for BrdU treated embryos
was done using HCl 2N (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany)
for 30 minutes at 37°C. Primary antibodies used were
mouse anti-BrdU (1:1000, Sigma) and mouse anti-HuC/
D (1:500, Molecular Probes, Invitrogen). Detailed protocols are available upon request. Images were taken with
a DC350F camera (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) on the
fluorescent microscope DM5000B (Leica), with the DeltaVision Spectris workstation, or with the Carl Zeiss 510
confocal microscope (Zeiss, Welwyn Garden City, UK).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Comparison of HES5 protein and promoter
sequences. (A, B) Analysis of sequence similarity between the different
HES5 proteins (A), and the corresponding phylogenetic tree (B), shows
that among all three chick HES5 proteins, HES5-1 has the highest degree
of homology with mammalian HES5. (C) Sequence alignment of the
proximal 400 bp promoter regions of several Hes5-like genes. Shaded
areas represent regions of homology and highlight several conserved
regions, such as TATA box, CCAAT box and CSL binding sites. The two
identified high-affinity CSL-binding sites have been previously reported
to be essential for Notch-mediated promoter activity [15,22,26,54]. The
Hes5-1 promoter has the highest homology to mammalian Hes5
promoters and was included in the pHes5-VNP reporter.
Additional file 2: Comparison of Hes5 3’UTR sequences. (A)
Comparison of 3’UTR sequences from cHes5-1, mHes5 and hHes5. Shaded
areas represent regions of homology. The 20 bp region deleted to
generate pCAG-VNPΔ3UTR20 is identified.
Additional file 3: Behavior of cells with Notch reporter activity prior
to mitosis. Selected set of images taken at 1 hour intervals from neural
tube slices of embryos electroporated with pHes5-VNP and pCAGCherryNLS and imaged in a wide-field microscope. This selected set of
images refers to the cell described in Figure 6A showing Notch activity
starting before mitosis, with the two daughter cells being born in the
presence of similar levels of Notch activity. Images presented are from
maximum intensity projections.
Additional file 4: Behavior of cells with Notch reporter activity prior
to mitosis. This movie refers to cell depicted in Figure 6A and Additional
file 3. Blue dots identify the analysed cell lineage. The basal side of the
neural tube is left, apical is right.
Additional file 5: Notch activation after mitosis in only one
daughter cell. Selected set of images taken at 1 hour intervals from
neural tube slices of embryos electroporated with pHes5-VNP and pCAGCherryNLS and imaged in a wide-field microscope. This selected set of
images refers to the cell described in Figure 6B showing Notch activity
starting after mitosis in only one of the two daughter cells. Images
presented are from maximum intensity projections.
Additional file 6: Notch activation after mitosis in only one
daughter cell. This movie refers to cell depicted in Figure 6B and
Additional file 5. Blue dots identify the analysed cell lineage. The basal
side of the neural tube is left, apical is right.
Additional file 7: Notch activation after mitosis at different times in
daughter cells. Selected set of images taken at 1 hour intervals from
neural tube slices of embryos electroporated with pHes5-VNP and pCAGCherryNLS and imaged in a wide-field microscope. This selected set of
images refers to the cell described in Figure 6C showing Notch activity
starting after mitosis in both daughter cells, but at different times.
Images presented are from maximum intensity projections.

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

Additional file 8: Notch activation after mitosis at different times in
daughter cells. This movie refers to cell depicted in Figure 6C and
Additional file 7. Blue dots identify the analysed cell lineage. The basal
side of the neural tube is left, apical is right.

Page 15 of 16

6.
7.

Additional file 9: Differential protein stability is evident on
comparison of VNP and CherryNLS expression. Selected set of images
taken at 1 hour intervals from neural tube slices of embryos
electroporated with pCAG-VNP and pCAG-CherryNLS and imaged in a
wide-field microscope. This selected set of images refers to the cell
described in Figure 7B. Images presented are from maximum intensity
projections.

8.

Additional file 10: Differential protein stability is evident on
comparison of VNP and CherryNLS expression. This movie refers to
cell depicted in Figure 7B and Additional file 9. Blue dots identify the
analysed cell lineage. The basal side of the neural tube is left, apical is
right.

11.

Acknowledgements and Funding
We thank Arwen Wilcock for assistance with DeltaVision imaging and IMM’s
Bioimaging and Information Systems units for technical support on data
analysis. We would also like to acknowledge Fernando Giraldez for critical
reading of the manuscript. We thank Ueli Schibler for VNP, Hisato Kondoh
for CNIC, Andy McMahon for pCIG-dnSuH, Roger Tsien for mCherry and Junichi Miyazaki for pCAGGS.
KGS research was funded by Wellcome Trust Programme, grant 083611/Z/07/Z.
FVB, RF and DH research was funded by Fundação para a Ciência e a
Tecnologia, grant PTDC/SAU-OBD/75106/2006. Filipe Vilas-Boas and Rita Fior are
supported by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia individual fellowships.
The funders had no role in study design; data collection, analysis, and
interpretation; decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Author details
Instituto de Medicina Molecular and Instituto de Histologia e Biologia do
Desenvolvimento, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Av
Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal. 2Champalimaud Neuroscience
Programme at Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Rua da Quinta Grande, 6,
2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal. 3Division of Cell and Developmental Biology,
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1
5EH, UK.
1

9.
10.

12.
13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

Authors’ contributions
FVB and RF participated in the design of the study, generation of plasmid
constructs, chick embryo electroporations, in situ hybridizations,
immunohistochemistry, sequence alignments and analysis, and drafted the
manuscript. FVB also performed the live-imaging experiments, measurement
of fluorescence intensities and data analysis. JRS provided technical expertise
in live-imaging experiments and data analysis. KGS and DH conceived the
study, participated in its design and coordination, and wrote the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

25.

Received: 26 July 2011 Accepted: 31 August 2011
Published: 31 August 2011

26.

References
1. Gotz M, Huttner WB: The cell biology of neurogenesis. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 2005, 6:777-788.
2. Louvi A, Artavanis-Tsakonas S: Notch signalling in vertebrate neural
development. Nat Rev Neurosci 2006, 7:93-102.
3. Chitnis A, Henrique D, Lewis J, Ish-Horowicz D, Kintner C: Primary
neurogenesis in Xenopus embryos regulated by a homologue of the
Drosophila neurogenic gene Delta. Nature 1995, 375:761-766.
4. Henrique D, Adam J, Myat A, Chitnis A, Lewis J, Ish-Horowicz D: Expression
of a Delta homologue in prospective neurons in the chick. Nature 1995,
375:787-790.
5. Henrique D, Hirsinger E, Adam J, Le Roux I, Pourquie O, Ish-Horowicz D,
Lewis J: Maintenance of neuroepithelial progenitor cells by Delta-Notch
signalling in the embryonic chick retina. Curr Biol 1997, 7:661-670.

23.

24.

27.

28.

29.

Fior R, Henrique D: “Notch-Off": a perspective on the termination of
Notch signalling. Int J Dev Biol 2009, 53:1379-1384.
Mizutani K, Saito T: Progenitors resume generating neurons after
temporary inhibition of neurogenesis by Notch activation in the
mammalian cerebral cortex. Development 2005, 132:1295-1304.
Mizutani K, Yoon K, Dang L, Tokunaga A, Gaiano N: Differential Notch
signalling distinguishes neural stem cells from intermediate progenitors.
Nature 2007, 449:351-355.
Shimojo H, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R: Oscillations in notch signaling
regulate maintenance of neural progenitors. Neuron 2008, 58:52-64.
Dequeant ML, Pourquie O: Segmental patterning of the vertebrate
embryonic axis. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:370-382.
Kageyama R, Masamizu Y, Niwa Y: Oscillator mechanism of Notch
pathway in the segmentation clock. Dev Dyn 2007, 236:1403-1409.
Lewis J, Hanisch A, Holder M: Notch signaling, the segmentation clock,
and the patterning of vertebrate somites. J Biol 2009, 8:44.
Baek JH, Hatakeyama J, Sakamoto S, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R: Persistent
and high levels of Hes1 expression regulate boundary formation in
the developing central nervous system. Development 2006,
133:2467-2476.
Fior R, Henrique D: A novel hes5/hes6 circuitry of negative regulation
controls Notch activity during neurogenesis. Dev Biol 2005, 281:318-333.
Basak O, Taylor V: Identification of self-replicating multipotent
progenitors in the embryonic nervous system by high Notch activity
and Hes5 expression. Eur J Neurosci 2007, 25:1006-1022.
Souilhol C, Cormier S, Monet M, Vandormael-Pournin S, Joutel A, Babinet C,
Cohen-Tannoudji M: Nas transgenic mouse line allows visualization of
Notch pathway activity in vivo. Genesis 2006, 44:277-286.
Davis RL, Turner DL, Evans LM, Kirschner MW: Molecular targets of
vertebrate segmentation: two mechanisms control segmental expression
of Xenopus hairy2 during somite formation. Dev Cell 2001, 1:553-565.
Placantonakis DG, Tomishima MJ, Lafaille F, Desbordes SC, Jia F, Socci ND,
Viale A, Lee H, Harrison N, Tabar V, Studer L: BAC transgenesis in human
embryonic stem cells as a novel tool to define the human neural
lineage. Stem Cells 2009, 27:521-532.
Tomishima MJ, Hadjantonakis AK, Gong S, Studer L: Production of green
fluorescent protein transgenic embryonic stem cells using the GENSAT
bacterial artificial chromosome library. Stem Cells 2007, 25:39-45.
Imayoshi I, Sakamoto M, Yamaguchi M, Mori K, Kageyama R: Essential roles
of Notch signaling in maintenance of neural stem cells in developing
and adult brains. J Neurosci 2010, 30:3489-3498.
Zhang N, Gridley T: Defects in somite formation in lunatic fringe-deficient
mice. Nature 1998, 394:374-377.
Lamar E, Kintner C: The Notch targets Esr1 and Esr10 are differentially
regulated in Xenopus neural precursors. Development 2005,
132:3619-3630.
Hansson EM, Teixeira AI, Gustafsson MV, Dohda T, Chapman G, Meletis K,
Muhr J, Lendahl U: Recording Notch signaling in real time. Dev Neurosci
2006, 28:118-127.
Ohtsuka T, Imayoshi I, Shimojo H, Nishi E, Kageyama R, McConnell SK:
Visualization of embryonic neural stem cells using Hes promoters in
transgenic mice. Mol Cell Neurosci 2006, 31:109-122.
Nelson BR, Gumuscu B, Hartman BH, Reh TA: Notch activity is
downregulated just prior to retinal ganglion cell differentiation. Dev
Neurosci 2006, 28:128-141.
Yeo SY, Kim M, Kim HS, Huh TL, Chitnis AB: Fluorescent protein expression
driven by her4 regulatory elements reveals the spatiotemporal pattern
of Notch signaling in the nervous system of zebrafish embryos. Dev Biol
2007, 301:555-567.
Kohyama J, Tokunaga A, Fujita Y, Miyoshi H, Nagai T, Miyawaki A, Nakao K,
Matsuzaki Y, Okano H: Visualization of spatiotemporal activation of Notch
signaling: live monitoring and significance in neural development. Dev
Biol 2005, 286:311-325.
Masamizu Y, Ohtsuka T, Takashima Y, Nagahara H, Takenaka Y, Yoshikawa K,
Okamura H, Kageyama R: Real-time imaging of the somite segmentation
clock: revelation of unstable oscillators in the individual presomitic
mesoderm cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:1313-1318.
Aulehla A, Wiegraebe W, Baubet V, Wahl MB, Deng C, Taketo M,
Lewandoski M, Pourquie O: A beta-catenin gradient links the clock and
wavefront systems in mouse embryo segmentation. Nat Cell Biol 2008,
10:186-193.

Vilas-Boas et al. BMC Biology 2011, 9:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/58

30. de la Pompa JL, Wakeham A, Correia KM, Samper E, Brown S, Aguilera RJ,
Nakano T, Honjo T, Mak TW, Rossant J, Conlon RA: Conservation of the
Notch signalling pathway in mammalian neurogenesis. Development
1997, 124:1139-1148.
31. Lutolf S, Radtke F, Aguet M, Suter U, Taylor V: Notch1 is required for
neuronal and glial differentiation in the cerebellum. Development 2002,
129:373-385.
32. Nishimura M, Isaka F, Ishibashi M, Tomita K, Tsuda H, Nakanishi S,
Kageyama R: Structure, chromosomal locus, and promoter of mouse
Hes2 gene, a homologue of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split.
Genomics 1998, 49:69-75.
33. Nagoshi E, Saini C, Bauer C, Laroche T, Naef F, Schibler U: Circadian gene
expression in individual fibroblasts: cell-autonomous and self-sustained
oscillators pass time to daughter cells. Cell 2004, 119:693-705.
34. Nagai T, Ibata K, Park ES, Kubota M, Mikoshiba K, Miyawaki A: A variant of
yellow fluorescent protein with fast and efficient maturation for cellbiological applications. Nat Biotechnol 2002, 20:87-90.
35. Li X, Zhao X, Fang Y, Jiang X, Duong T, Fan C, Huang CC, Kain SR:
Generation of destabilized green fluorescent protein as a transcription
reporter. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:34970-34975.
36. Niwa H, Yamamura K, Miyazaki J: Efficient selection for high-expression
transfectants with a novel eukaryotic vector. Gene 1991, 108:193-199.
37. Marusich MF, Furneaux HM, Henion PD, Weston JA: Hu neuronal proteins
are expressed in proliferating neurogenic cells. J Neurobiol 1994,
25:143-155.
38. Lai EC, Tam B, Rubin GM: Pervasive regulation of Drosophila Notch target
genes by GY-box-, Brd-box-, and K-box-class microRNAs. Genes Dev 2005,
19:1067-1080.
39. Lai EC, Burks C, Posakony JW: The K box, a conserved 3’ UTR sequence
motif, negatively regulates accumulation of enhancer of split complex
transcripts. Development 1998, 125:4077-4088.
40. Wilcock AC, Swedlow JR, Storey KG: Mitotic spindle orientation
distinguishes stem cell and terminal modes of neuron production in the
early spinal cord. Development 2007, 134:1943-1954.
41. Daudet N, Lewis J: Two contrasting roles for Notch activity in chick inner
ear development: specification of prosensory patches and lateral
inhibition of hair-cell differentiation. Development 2005, 132:541-551.
42. Neves J, Parada C, Chamizo M, Giraldez F: Jagged 1 regulates the
restriction of Sox2 expression in the developing chicken inner ear: a
mechanism for sensory organ specification. Development 2011,
138:735-744.
43. Cisneros E, Latasa MJ, Garcia-Flores M, Frade JM: Instability of Notch1 and
Delta1 mRNAs and reduced Notch activity in vertebrate neuroepithelial
cells undergoing S-phase. Mol Cell Neurosci 2008, 37:820-831.
44. Del Bene F, Wehman AM, Link BA, Baier H: Regulation of neurogenesis by
interkinetic nuclear migration through an apical-basal notch gradient.
Cell 2008, 134:1055-1065.
45. Murciano A, Zamora J, Lopez-Sanchez J, Frade JM: Interkinetic nuclear
movement may provide spatial clues to the regulation of neurogenesis.
Mol Cell Neurosci 2002, 21:285-300.
46. Tokunaga A, Kohyama J, Yoshida T, Nakao K, Sawamoto K, Okano H:
Mapping spatio-temporal activation of Notch signaling during
neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing mouse brain. J
Neurochem 2004, 90:142-154.
47. Del Monte G, Grego-Bessa J, Gonzalez-Rajal A, Bolos V, De La Pompa JL:
Monitoring Notch1 activity in development: evidence for a feedback
regulatory loop. Dev Dyn 2007, 236:2594-2614.
48. Wilkinson HA, Fitzgerald K, Greenwald I: Reciprocal changes in expression
of the receptor lin-12 and its ligand lag-2 prior to commitment in a C.
elegans cell fate decision. Cell 1994, 79:1187-1198.
49. Shaner NC, Campbell RE, Steinbach PA, Giepmans BN, Palmer AE, Tsien RY:
Improved monomeric red, orange and yellow fluorescent proteins
derived from Discosoma sp. red fluorescent protein. Nat Biotechnol 2004,
22:1567-1572.
50. Wakamatsu Y, Maynard TM, Jones SU, Weston JA: NUMB localizes in the
basal cortex of mitotic avian neuroepithelial cells and modulates
neuronal differentiation by binding to NOTCH-1. Neuron 1999, 23:71-81.
51. Hamburger V, Hamilton HL: A series of normal stages in the development
of the chick embryo. J Morphol 1951, 88:49-92.

Page 16 of 16

52. Myat A, Henrique D, Ish-Horowicz D, Lewis J: A chick homologue of
Serrate and its relationship with Notch and Delta homologues during
central neurogenesis. Dev Biol 1996, 174:233-247.
53. Arede N, Tavares AT: Modified whole-mount in situ hybridization
protocol for the detection of transgene expression in electroporated
chick embryos. PLoS One 2008, 3:e2638.
54. Ong CT, Cheng HT, Chang LW, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R, Stormo GD,
Kopan R: Target selectivity of vertebrate notch proteins. Collaboration
between discrete domains and CSL-binding site architecture determines
activation probability. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:5106-5119.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-58
Cite this article as: Vilas-Boas et al.: A novel reporter of notch signalling
indicates regulated and random notch activation during vertebrate
neurogenesis. BMC Biology 2011 9:58.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
