<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The advantages and disadvantages of horizontal gene transfer and the emergence of the first species</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:1. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-1"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Aaron A Vogan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

RESEARCH

Open Access

The advantages and disadvantages of horizontal
gene transfer and the emergence of the first
species
Aaron A Vogan, Paul G Higgs*

Abstract
Background: Horizontal Gene Transfer (HGT) is beneficial to a cell if the acquired gene confers a useful function,
but is detrimental if the gene has no function, if it is incompatible with existing genes, or if it is a selfishly
replicating mobile element. If the balance of these effects is beneficial on average, we would expect cells to evolve
high rates of acceptance of horizontally transferred genes, whereas if it is detrimental, cells should reduce the rate
of HGT as far as possible. It has been proposed that the rate of HGT was very high in the early stages of
prokaryotic evolution, and hence there were no separate lineages of organisms. Only when the HGT rate began to
fall, would lineages begin to emerge with their own distinct sets of genes. Evolution would then become more
tree-like. This phenomenon has been called the Darwinian Threshold.
Results: We study a model for genome evolution that incorporates both beneficial and detrimental effects of HGT.
We show that if rate of gene loss during genome replication is high, as was probably the case in the earliest
genomes before the time of the last universal common ancestor, then a high rate of HGT is favourable. HGT leads
to the rapid spread of new genes and allows the build-up of larger, fitter genomes than could be achieved by
purely vertical inheritance. In contrast, if the gene loss rate is lower, as in modern prokaryotes, then HGT is, on
average, unfavourable.
Conclusions: Modern cells should therefore evolve to reduce HGT if they can, although the prevalence of
independently replicating mobile elements and viruses may mean that cells cannot avoid HGT in practice. In the
model, natural selection leads to gradual improvement of the replication accuracy and gradual decrease in the
optimal rate of HGT. By clustering genomes based on gene content, we show that there are no separate lineages
of organisms when the rate of HGT is high; however, as the rate of HGT decreases, a tree-like structure emerges
with well-defined lineages. The model therefore passes through a Darwinian Threshold.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Eugene V. Koonin, Anthony Poole and J. Peter Gogarten.

Background
Traditionally, genetics is the study of vertical transmission of genes from parents to offspring. Since complete
genomes have become available, it has become clear
that, in addition to vertical inheritance, there is a substantial rate of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) from
unrelated individuals, at least in prokaryotes. According
to the principle of natural selection, if a gene increases
the fitness of an individual, that individual will have a
larger number of offspring on average, and the offspring
* Correspondence: higgsp@mcmaster.ca
Origins Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario L8 S 4M1, Canada

will inherit the beneficial gene. Hence, the frequency of
the beneficial gene will increase in the population. It is
therefore clear that vertical inheritance of genes allows
natural selection to occur. In contrast, if a gene is
acquired horizontally, there is no guarantee that it
increased the fitness of the previous individual.
Although there is the potential to gain useful new genes
by HGT, there is also the possibility of acquiring useless
or harmful genes. HGT is a risky evolutionary strategy,
whereas vertical inheritance is safe because the genes
have been tried and tested in the parent. The gain of a
gene by HGT depends on many processes inside the
receiving cell. Therefore, cells can potentially evolve to

© 2011 Vogan and Higgs; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

increase or decrease their rate of acceptance of horizontally acquired genes. In this paper, we ask if HGT is on
average beneficial to the organism and whether selection
will act to increase or decrease its rate.
If HGT is frequent, the traditional picture of the tree
of life is no longer valid [1,2]. Although it is possible to
construct a tree from the concatenated sequences of a
small number of highly conserved genes that are found
in all organisms [3], this tree is not representative of the
majority of the genes in most genomes [4]. Nevertheless,
even if HGT events are reasonably common, the signal
of the underlying tree is still discernible as a central
trend [5,6]. Gene trees tend to be slightly discordant,
but not completely randomized.
Woese has argued that HGT was particularly important in the early stages of life on Earth [7]. In his view,
separate lineages of species did not exist, but rather the
entire community of organisms co-developed and
evolved as one interconnected network. When individuals attained a certain degree of complexity, the likelihood of a gene gained by HGT being beneficial would
decrease, and the net HGT rate would decrease. At this
point, the population would cross what Woese coined,
the “Darwinian Threshold”. After this point, separate,
tree-like evolutionary lineages could emerge. This picture seems to be compatible with recent analysis of the
degree of phylogenetic consistency between gene trees
[6]. Recent branches of the tree tend to be fairly consistent across genes, whereas there is much higher inconsistency deep within the tree at the time of emergence
of the major prokaryotic groups. In this paper, we consider a simple evolutionary model that explains why we
would expect a Darwinian Threshold to occur.
The most obvious benefit to HGT is that a cell can
acquire a beneficial gene that arose in another cell. The
origin of new beneficial genes is presumably extremely
rare, and stealing a gene from a neighbor should be
much quicker than waiting to evolve it independently.
Secondly, cells may lose genes by deletion or by accumulation of deleterious mutations. Early cells may have
had genes as separate molecules or as very short chromosomes, rather than as large fully-linked chromosomes
as in modern prokaryotes. Inaccurate segregation would
be another problem that would lead to gene loss. If
replication accuracy was poor, accidental gene loss
would limit the size and complexity of genomes that
could evolve. In this case, HGT would be beneficial,
because it would enable a cell to regain a gene that it
had lost from another member of the population. The
set of genes that could be maintained by the whole
population, known as the pan-genome [8,9] would be
larger than the set contained in any one individual.
HGT also has many potential disadvantages. The simplest of these is that increasing the genome size will

Page 2 of 14

increase the replication time of the organism, so there
will be selection against genomes that contain large,
non-functional sections. A sequence acquired by HGT
may be non-functional because it is non-coding, because
it is a duplicate copy of a gene already in the cell, or
because it only functions in the presence of other genes
that are not contained in the recipient cell. If a newlyinserted gene is expressed, it imposes a cost of transcription and/or translation that will be detrimental to
the cell if the gene product has no useful function.
Furthermore, if a horizontally acquired sequence is
inserted randomly into a genome, it may disrupt the
existing gene at the point of insertion. The new gene
product might also interfere with the function of existing molecules in the cell. Finally, worse than any of the
above, the new gene may be a selfish replicator, e.g. a
transposable element that duplicates itself many times
within the host genome or a virus that destroys the
infected cell. So, evolutionarily, it should pay a cell to
‘think twice’ before accepting a foreign gene into its
genome.
A considerable amount is known about the way HGT
occurs in modern prokaryotes. Transformation is the
process by which cells import fragments of DNA from
the surrounding medium [10,11]. Once foreign DNA is
inside the cell, there is some possibility that it may
recombine with the cell’s DNA and become part of the
genome. Transformation requires expression of membrane proteins involved in DNA transport, and is thus
an active process. Not all types of bacteria are competent for DNA import, and competent species do not
necessarily turn on their DNA import machinery at all
times. Thus, it is clear that cells can evolve to control
their rate of import of foreign DNA and this will influence the likelihood that horizontally transferred genes
end up in the genome.
The other two mechanisms of HGT in modern cells
are conjugation, in which a mobile element such as a
plasmid actively transfers a copy of itself into another
cell, and transduction, in which a gene from a host cell
is packaged inside a virus and transferred to another
host along with the virus genes [11,12]. These transfer
mechanisms are controlled by genes on the mobile elements themselves; hence the rate of acquisition of horizontally transferred genes by these mechanisms is less
easily controlled by the recipient cell than it is for transformation. Nevertheless, recipient cells can still influence on the fate of the foreign DNA once it has entered
the cell by controlling the rate of recombination [13,14]
or evolving restriction enzymes that cleave foreign DNA
[15]. The net rate of HGT is adjustable by all these
means and is therefore subject to evolution. There are
also mechanisms by which cells can silence the expression of foreign genes that have become inserted into the

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

genome [16]. This avoids some of the potentially
harmful consequences of HGT, even though it does not
prevent the insertion event.
In the context of all the above factors that influence
the occurrence of HGT and its costs and benefits, we
now present a simple theoretical model to determine
under which circumstances HGT is advantageous and to
address the consequences of the changing rate of HGT
from the earliest organisms to modern prokaryotes.

Methods
The evolutionary model is defined in the following way.
The genome of each cell in the population is a list of
integers, where each integer is a label for a type of gene.
Some genes may be present in duplicate copies on the
same genome, so that the number of types of genes on
the genome, ntypes, may be less than the total number of
genes on the genome, n. There is a selective advantage,
s, for each different type of gene on the genome, and a
cost, c, for every gene (including duplicates). The fitness
of an individual genome is defined as w = (1+sntypes)/(1
+cn). We suppose that s >c, so that non-duplicated
genes are beneficial, but duplicate copies are deleterious.
We consider the evolution of a population of N individuals. At each time step, one genome is chosen to replicate with a probability proportional to its fitness, and
one individual is chosen to die with equal probability. A
generation is N birth/death events. The genome of each
new individual is copied from its parent. Each gene is
lost due to gene deletion with probability v and is successfully copied to the offspring with probability 1-v.
With probability u, a single new type of gene arises in
the offspring. Each gene type arises only once, and is
given a unique integer label to distinguish it from previous types. The new genome may then acquire genes
by HGT. Each gene gained is a copy of a random gene
in a random member of the population. This is intended
to model uptake of genes by transformation. The DNA
fragments available for uptake will come from cells that
have recently died; hence, they should be similar to
genes in the current population. The number of genes
gained by the new genome is a random integer, k, chosen from a Poisson distribution, P(k) = h k exp(-h)/k!.
The parameter h is the mean number of genes gained
by HGT per genome. Note that k is usually 0 or 1, but
can be more than 1 if h is large.
We use a definition of distance between genomes that
has successfully been used to construct phylogenetic
trees from real bacterial genomes [17]. For any pair of
individuals i and j, let ni and nj be the number of types
of gene in the two genomes and let nij be the number of
types of genes shared by both genomes. The maximum
number of genes that could be shared is equal to the
smaller of the two genome sizes, min(ni, nj). Therefore,

Page 3 of 14

we define the similarity as Sij = nij/min(ni, nj), and the
inter-genomic distance as dij = -ln(Sij).
Before presenting the results obtained with this model,
it is worth considering a few points that are not
included in the model. Firstly, we do not include variations at the level of single nucleotide mutations within a
gene. Achieving a high accuracy of replication at the
sequence level is clearly an important challenge for early
organisms, and other types of models such as errorthreshold models [18] address this point Relatively accurate sequence replication must have been achieved relatively early in evolution before genomes that contained
many genes could evolve. The only parameter in the
model that is related to genome replication accuracy is
the gene loss rate, v. It would also be possible to introduce deleterious mutations which would create nonfunctional genes. A deleterious mutation would be more
detrimental than a gene deletion in this model because
the benefit of the gene, s, would be lost but the cost, c,
would still be present, whereas with a deletion, both s
and c would be lost. Qualitatively, we expect gene deletions and deleterious mutations to have a similar effect
in this model; therefore, for simplicity, we include only
the deletion rate. Note that deletions are essential in
this model, because otherwise genome sizes would
increase indefinitely.
There has been a lot of theoretical work on self-replicating molecular systems prior to the origin of organisms with genomes in the modern sense - in particular,
the hypercycle theory [19] gives a mathematical model
for autocatalytic reaction cycles. A model of the origin
of autocatalytic cycles involving RNA molecules has also
been proposed recently [20]. There have also been a
number of studies of protocells at the level of ‘bags of
genes’, in which each gene is assumed to be a separate
molecule. This raises the issues of how a cell avoids loss
of important genes by inaccurate segregation and how it
avoids being over-run by selfish replicators. Theories
based on the stochastic corrector model [21-25] go a
long way to address these issues. However, in our view,
these questions are relevant at an earlier stage of evolution than that which we consider here. We are most
interested in the stage of the emergence of the major
lineages of prokaryotes. It is likely that cells had already
reached a level of complexity with hundreds or even
thousands of genes by this stage - i.e. comparable to
modern prokaryotes. It is difficult to conceive of cells
reaching this level of complexity unless they had already
evolved linked chromosomes and some kind of chromosomal segregation that is much better than random.
Therefore our model is based on replication of a bacterial chromosome with the possibility of gene loss by deletion, rather than on random segregation of independent
genes.

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

Page 4 of 14

Results
Determination of the optimal rate of HGT

For all the examples shown here, we keep N = 500, s = 0.1
and c = 0.01. The rate of origin of new genes is presumed
to be slow. In all these examples we fix u = 1/N = 0.002,
so that there is only one new gene in the whole population
per generation. Lowering this rate further would slow
down the time scale of the simulations unnecessarily, but
would not qualitatively change the predictions of the
model. The key variables to be studied in the simulation
are the gene deletion rate, v, and the horizontal transfer
rate h. Simulations were begun with a population of identical individuals having one gene each. For each combination of parameters, a simulation was run for many
generations until a stationary state was reached. Mean
quantities were then determined over 500,000 generations
in the stationary state.
Figure 1 shows the mean fitness w as a function of h
for three different values of v. For the largest value, v =
0.01, there is an optimum close to h = 0.6. When v is
reduced to 0.001, the optimum reduces to h = 0.035.
For the smallest deletion rate, v = 0.0001, the optimum
horizontal transfer rate is h = 0 (or is not distinguishable from zero in our simulation). The case v = 0.01 is
intended to model the situation in early cells with very
inaccurate replication. Note that v is per gene. A genome
of 100 genes will lose one gene per generation on average. A high rate of HGT is required to balance this loss,
i.e. h is of order 1 per individual. The rate of gain of
genes by HGT is much larger than the rate of gain of
genes by de novo evolution, which is only u = 0.002 per
individual in the simulation (and presumably even smaller in reality).
Figure 2 helps to explain why there is an optimal h.
The mean number of genes per individual, n , increases

6
5
v=0.0001

w

4
v=0.001

3

v=0.01

2

150
n
100
n pan
50
n types
p useful
0

0

1
2
1.5
h
Figure 2 Mean values of properties of the population as a
function of h for the case of high gene deletion rate, v = 0.01.
n , number of genes per individual; n types , number of different
types of gene per individual; n pan , number of different types of
gene in the whole population; puseful, probability that a horizontally
transferred gene is useful to the receiving organism.
0.5

with h because gain of genes by HGT balances gene
loss. The mean number of types of gene per individual,
n types , also increases with h, but not as quickly as n .
The difference between these two curves is the number
of duplicate genes per individual. This becomes very
large when h is high. Figure 2 also shows the size of the
pan-genome: n pan is the mean number of types of gene
in the whole population. Clearly n pan . A gene acquired
by HGT is only useful if it is different from the genes
already in the genome. From the simulations, the probability puseful that the acquired gene is useful was found
to decrease from about 25% when h = 0 to only a few
percent for large h. Thus, if h is small, genomes remain
of limited size. Larger, higher-fitness genomes can be
maintained if h is larger. However, if h is too large, HGT
causes the build-up of large numbers of duplicate genes
that reduce the fitness. When genome replication is more
accurate (smaller v), the optimum h is reduced, and is
found to be zero for very small v. In the latter case, large,
high-fitness genomes can be accurately replicated and are
maintained in the population by selection, even in
absence of HGT. If h = 0, there are no duplicate genes.
HGT does more harm than good in this situation
because it creates duplicates.
Evolution of the rate of HGT

1
0

200

0

1
2
1.5
h
Figure 1 Mean fitness of the population versus HGT rate, h, for
three different rates of gene deletion, v.
0.5

From the above results, we would expect that cells
would evolve towards high or low rates of HGT depending on whether the gene loss rate is high or low. In
order to show this, we allowed h to be a variable property of individual cells. Simulations were performed in
which each new cell inherited the h value of its parent,

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

Emergence of Evolutionary Lineages

As discussed in the background section, evolution is
expected to be tree-like in absence of HGT, but will
become a tangled web if HGT is frequent. If there is an
evolutionary tree, then it should be possible to cluster

v

0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0

h

but with a small probability, the offspring h was mutated
to be slightly higher or lower than the parent. When v =
0.01, the mean HGT rate of the population, evolved
towards a stable intermediate rate around h = 0.4 . This
is less than the value of h = 0.6 at which the peak in fitness occurs in Figure 1. Similarly, when v = 0.001, the
mean HGT rate evolved towards approximately
h = 0.01 , which is less than the value of 0.035 where
the peak fitness occurs. For the smallest deletion rate, v
= 0.0001, where the optimum in Figure 1 is at h = 0, it
was found that h evolved towards a very low value that
depended on the details of the way h was mutated
between parents and offspring.
The fact that h does not evolve straightforwardly to the
position of the peak fitness in the first two cases shows
that evolution does not automatically optimize the mean
fitness of the population. The most likely reason why the
dynamics leads to smaller than optimal h is that if a low h
value arises on a genome that has higher than average fitness, this low h value is beneficial in the short term because
it maintains the integrity of this genome. Therefore the
new h will spread, even though the mean fitness of the
population will decrease in the long term if all individuals
have the new h value. On the other hand, if a higher than
optimal h value arises on a fitter than average individual,
the descendants of this individual will acquire large numbers of duplicate genes and will not retain a high fitness.
Therefore a too-large h value is unlikely to spread.
What is most important for the current argument is
that h does indeed evolve towards smaller values when v
is smaller. It is particularly interesting to see what happens when both v and h are allowed to vary and be inherited from parent to offspring. Gene deletion is on average
deleterious in this model; therefore we expect variants
with lower values of v to be selected. We began with individuals with v = 0.01 and h = 0.6, representing early cells
with inaccurate replication and frequent HGT. Figure 3
shows mean values v and h as a function of time. These
are averaged over individuals in the population and over
five independent runs of the simulation. Error bars show
standard deviations across the simulation runs. The
model shows that v evolves towards very low values
because highly accurate replication is advantageous. It is
also seen that v evolves towards very low values because
lower h is favoured when v is lower. Limiting values of v
and h depend on the way v and h are mutated between
parents and offspring, and both would tend to zero if
only selection were operating.

Page 5 of 14

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

50000
Generation

1e+05

0

50000
Generation

1e+05

Figure 3 Variation of mean deletion rate, v , and mean HGT
rate, h , as a function of time in simulations in which both
quantities are heritable. Error bars show standard deviations over
five runs.

genomes according to their similarity. The basal split in
the tree defines the two largest scale clusters of genomes,
indicated schematically as black and white points in
Figure 4. Genomes in the same cluster should be closer
to one another in genome space than they are to genomes in the other cluster. If the tree is well-defined, there
will also be sub-clusters nested hierarchically within the
larger clusters (as in the centre of Figure 4). On the other
hand, if there is a high HGT rate, then there will not be a
clear way to split genomes into clusters. There will be an
amorphous cloud of points in genome space, and
although some genomes will be slightly closer to one
another than others, any attempt that we make to split
the population into clusters will be rather ill-defined and
unsatisfactory (as on the right of Figure 4).
We will now use the simulations of Figure 3 to show
that clusters of genomes are not well defined in our
model when h is high, but that they become well
defined as h decreases during the progress of the simulation. Our model therefore demonstrates the emergence
of separate evolutionary lineages over time, i.e. it goes
through Woese’s Darwinian threshold [7].
For each set of genomes generated by the model, we calculated the distance matrix between all pairs of genomes,
as described in Methods. This matrix was used as input to
the standard UPGMA method of hierarchical clustering.
Only the two largest-scale clusters were used, i.e. the two
clusters that remain at the penultimate step before the
root is reached. Using these two clusters, we measured d1,
the mean distance between pairs of individuals in
the same cluster, and d2, the mean distance between pairs
of individuals in different clusters. The clustering ratio,
R = d2/d1, was used as a measure of the extent of separation of these large-scale clusters. The higher the clustering

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

Page 6 of 14

Figure 4 Clustering individuals according to similarity of genomes.

ratio, the more clearly defined is the split at the base of the
evolutionary tree.
Rows 1-8 of Table 1 correspond to values of v and h
that arose at regularly spaced time intervals in Figure 3.
Row 9 corresponds to the smallest v that was used in Figure 1 combined with h = 0. As R fluctuates a lot between
populations for any given parameters, it is necessary to
generate many populations for each set of parameters.
Simulations were performed with v and h fixed at each of
the combinations shown in the table. Genome data was
printed out at well-spaced intervals, thus generating 100
independent populations for each parameter set. R was
calculated for each population. Mean R values are shown
in Table 1. For the highest HGT rate (Row 1), R is only
1.54. The clustering algorithm always produces a result
even if the input data matrix is very far from tree-like.
This means that R is bound to be greater than 1. However, this low value of R indicates that the basal split of
Table 1 Dependence of the clustering ratio, R, on rates of
deletion, v, and horizontal transfer, h
Row

Generation v

h

R (mean ±
std. err.)

1

0 0.0100

0.600

1.54 ± 0.02

2

15000 0.0051

0.200

1.95 ± 0.05

3

30000 0.0025

0.165

2.35 ± 0.07

4

45000 0.0019

0.073

2.59 ± 0.09

5

60000 0.0010

0.028

3.06 ± 0.13

6

75000 0.0006

0.021

3.85 ± 0.33

7

90000 0.0003

0.018

4.26 ± 0.27

8

105000 0.0002

0.012

4.66 ± 0.38

9

—— 0.0001

0.000

7.46 ± 0.87

the tree is poorly defined (as on the right of Figure 4).
Table 1 shows that as h decreases, R becomes much larger. Thus, the basal split is very clearly defined in these
latter cases (Rows 8 and 9): separate lineages have
emerged.

Discussion
Among those who study the evolutionary consequences
of HGT, there is a tendency to presume that it is automatically advantageous. According to Gogarten et al.
[1], “it is not clear that any evolved barriers to intergroup exchange (other than those effective against lethal
viruses and parasitic genetic elements) should exist in
prokaryotes”. They further argue that “even the most
promiscuous prokaryotes experience recombination
much less frequently than they reproduce”, and therefore “there is very little selective advantage in preventing
such rare interspecific exchange”. Our model shows that
this is not always true, and that we would expect barriers to HGT to evolve in cases where there is accurate
genome replication and large genomes can be efficiently
transmitted vertically.
The simple fitness definition in this model is actually
as favorable as possible to HGT. Every non-duplicate
gene is assumed to be beneficial, independently of its
context, whereas, more realistically, one would often
expect the function of a gene to depend on the presence
of specific other genes with which it interacts. The only
disadvantage to HGT in the model is the cost of gene
duplicates. There is no possibility of the inserted gene
disrupting an existing gene, and there are no selfish
replicators. If any of these additional features were
added to the model, HGT would be less advantageous
than in the case considered. Therefore, our conclusion

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

that HGT is disadvantageous when there is accurate
genome replication is robust. Woese [7] argued that vertical inheritance would become more important when
cell design became more complex and a more integrated
cellular organization emerged. It would be possible to
change the fitness function in our model to include networks of interacting genes, in which case we would
expect large, high-fitness genomes to have complex
interactions between genes. However, it does not matter
whether the larger genomes have high fitness because of
independent beneficial genes (as in the current model)
or because of complex networks of integrated genes.
The essential point is that large genomes can only
evolve if replication is accurate, and HGT becomes
unfavorable when replication is sufficiently accurate.
Poole [26] has raised some interesting questions about
whether selection acts at the level of genes or cells in
the earliest organisms. Modern bacterial genomes contain sets of genes that interact with one another and
function as a team. For genomes like this to evolve,
teams of genes have to stay together for long enough
for natural selection to increase the frequency of highfitness teams. At the other extreme, one could envisage
a world with such a high rate of gene exchange that
every cell contained a random set of genes that was
uncorrelated with sets of genes in previous cells. A way
to simulate this situation in a model would be to create
a new cell by selecting each gene independently from a
different parental cell. In this extreme limit, selection
would clearly act only at the gene level. We emphasize,
however, that our model is far from this extreme. Even
with the highest deletion rate considered in Figure 1 the
optimum h is only of order 1, and there are of order
100 genes in the genome. Thus most genes come from
a single parental cell, and genomes contain sets of genes
that are correlated with the sets of genes on ancestral
genomes many generations previously.
One issue that we have with Woese’s view of early cellular evolution is that he does not clearly distinguish
between two different phenomena that would occur if
the HGT rate were very large: the loss of coherence of
the species and the loss of coherence of the genome.
Our model clearly shows that when h is large, there are
no groups of genomes that form coherent species that
are separable from other species. Reduction of h leads
to the “origin of species” composed of coherent groups
of genomes. In view of the title of Darwin’s famous
book, it seems appropriate to name this transition the
Darwinian Threshold. However, this transition is not the
origin of Darwinian evolution. As we just pointed out,
even before the Darwinian Threshold, genomes contain
groups of genes that remain coherent over many generations and can be selected as a team. Although horizontal
transmission is very important prior to the Darwinian

Page 7 of 14

Threshold, this does not mean that vertical transmission
is irrelevant. In fact, the majority of transmission is still
vertical. In order to get to the point of loss of coherence
of genomes where vertical inheritance becomes irrelevant, we would need to turn up v and h to values very
much larger than any that we have considered in these
simulations. It is not clear to us whether such a situation could ever have existed, as problems such as the
spread of parasites [26] would indeed be extremely
severe in this situation. On the other hand, the situation
where the species lose coherence but genomes remain
coherent makes sense in the framework of our model,
and the high level of inconsistency of gene trees at the
root of the tree of life that is seen in real sequence data
suggests that this situation could well have existed in
the early stages of prokaryotic evolution.

Conclusions
Given that the model presented here predicts that
organisms will evolve towards low rates of HGT, it is
necessary to consider why there is still a significant rate
of HGT observed in modern prokaryotes. In the case of
transduction and conjugation, it may be that there is an
arms race between cells and mobile genetic elements,
and that cells are unable to prevent infection by viruses
and plasmids that are evolving for their own selfish
ends. Given that foreign DNA is entering the cell by
these means, it may be that HGT occurs as an inevitable
consequence. This arms race is not captured in the present model. In the case of transformation, imported
DNA may be used as a food source [27] or imported
sequences from another member of the population may
be used as template for gene repair and homologous
recombination [28]. These two potential advantages of
transformation have nothing to do with HGT per se, but
if higher DNA import rate were selected for these reasons, this would increase the rate of HGT as a side
effect. If an explicit benefit were added to the model
representing the nutrient value of imported DNA, it is
likely that the HGT rate would have a non-zero optimal
value, even if v were very low.
It should be remembered that when we observe examples of a gene with an apparently beneficial function
that appears to have spread horizontally, this may be
very rare in comparison to transfer of deleterious genes
or junk DNA. The few beneficial cases will have important consequences for adaptation of the organism.
Nevertheless, organisms cannot cherry-pick the best
genes. If, on average, a transferred gene is deleterious,
selection should lead to reduction of the HGT rate.
The rate of gene gain and loss among groups of closely related genomes is staggeringly high [29], but it is
likely that most of the genes gained are not beneficial
and are deleted again relatively rapidly [29,30]. A rapid

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

rate of gain and loss of non-beneficial genes is consistent with the observation that the size of the pan-genome is very much larger than the size of any one
genome [8,9]. If the pan-genome were very large and all
new genes were advantageous, then selection would
cause genomes to get larger and larger. In fact, bacterial
genomes vary considerably in size, and larger genomes
contain a higher fraction of genes that have been
acquired from phylogenetically distant sources [31], but
it seems unlikely that there has been a general increasing trend in genome size since the time of the emergence of the major lineages of prokaryotes. If the gene
deletion rate, v, is not too large in modern organisms,
the only way that the pan-genome can be large whilst
genomes remain small is if most genes in the pan-genome would not be beneficial if inserted. With this in
mind, it would be interesting to add a category of junk
genes to our model that would contribute a cost, c, in
the fitness, but no selective advantage. The rate of origination, u, of the junk genes might be much larger than
that for beneficial genes, so that the total pan-genome
would become very large, but the pan-genome of beneficial genes would remain comparable to the single genome size (as it is in Figure 2 for the simulation where
all genes are beneficial and u is small).
There are few population genetics theories that
include HGT; however, a theoretical calculation of the
probability of spread of a single new gene through a
population by HGT is possible [32]. To understand genome evolution, we will need theories that apply to gain
and loss of multiple genes. Population genetics modelling of systems with variable genome size, poorlydefined species boundaries and HGT is still in its
infancy, and is mathematically complex, even for the
neutral case [33]. The model we have introduced here
incorporates the simplest conceivable fitness function.
Nevertheless, it is sufficient to shed light on key questions related to the evolution of HGT both in the early
stages of life on Earth and in modern organisms.

Reviewer 1
Eugene V. Koonin - National Center of Biotechnology Information, Bethesda, Maryland.
I believe that this is a very useful, potentially important paper that addresses a key problem in evolutionary
biology, namely, the selective forces that affect the rate
of HGT, using a straightforward and transparent mathematical modeling approach. The results are intuitively
plausible, biologically relevant and I think overall correct: selection acts to increase the HGT rate if the accuracy of replication (here defined as the rate of gene
deletion/loss) is low but then, higher accuracy evolves,
and after crossing some threshold, selection acts to
lower HGT. This is not all - Vogan and Higgs make

Page 8 of 14

another observation of no lesser importance: the model
and its interpretation clearly distinguish, I believe for
the first time, between the coherence of genomes and
coherence of species. This distinction is logically unassailable and, once realized, should remove most of the
confusion that is habitually associated with the concept
of “rampant” HGT at the early stages of evolution.
I have one point of conceptual disagreement about the
“Darwinian threshold”. Vogan and Higgs write: “In view
of the title of Darwin’s famous book, it seems appropriate to name this transition the Darwinian Threshold.
However, this transition is not the origin of Darwinian
evolution.” Indeed, in view of the title of Darwin’s book,
the phrase “Darwinian threshold” might seem appropriate. The problem, however, is that (short version of)
Darwin’s title is extremely misleading - indeed, given
the unprecedented importance of the book, this might
be the most misleading book title in history. In his
book, Darwin does not explain the mechanism of speciation in any satisfactory manner. What he does
explain, is the mechanism of evolution by means of natural selection, and this concept survived, even if it is
only a part of the edifice of modern evolutionary biology. Therefore, I find the phrase Darwinian threshold to
be extremely unfortunate as the name for the evolutionary transition associated with the emergence of species.
Even if largely a semantic issue, this adds a lot to the
confusion about the early stages of evolution. Vogan
and Higgs correctly indicate that this threshold is not at
all the beginning of Darwinian evolution (how could it
be, indeed?!) but nevertheless stick with the unfortunate
phrase.
Author response: It is a fair comment that Darwin did
not discuss speciation, but we still need a name for the
transition, and this is the name that Woese gave it. The
reviewer is in agreement with us about what actually
occurs at the threshold, and about the importance of the
distinction between the coherence of genomes and the
coherence of species.
The main comment on presentation is that, when
speaking of replication accuracy, the authors should be
very clear that here they deal only with the gene loss
rate. Most people by default think of replication accuracy as the rate of single nucleotide mutations, so this
needs to be clearly distinguished. More substantially, I
wonder if it might be possible to somehow relate the
model to empirically observed gene loss rates? Certainly,
this would further increase the value of this work.
Author response: Clearly we do not want to complicate
the model to the level of single nucleotide mutations.
One possible addition would be to include a rate of deleterious mutation that creates non-functional genes that
do not contribute to fitness. We would expect deleterious
mutations to play a similar role to gene deletions in this

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

model. A paragraph was added in the methods section
that discusses factors omitted from the model, and
acknowledges that the model only includes gene loss and
not single nucleotide mutations.
The following sentence in the abstract “In contrast, if
the accuracy of genome replication is high, as in modern
prokaryotes, then HGT is unfavourable” and many similar statements in the text appear quite unfortunate. The
impression made by these statements is that all HGT
events are unfavourable, which would be ridiculous, and
of course, the authors realize perfectly well that this is
not the case, and say so. What is unfavourable, is a high
rate of HGT not all and any HGT. This should be made
crystal clear. In the same vein but more to the substance
of the matter (here is the issue that seems important to
me), I actually believe that selection acts to reduce but
not eliminate HGT. More specifically, inasmuch as gene
loss rate is certainly greater than zero, selection acts to
reduce HGT to the extent that it more or less precisely
balances the loss rate. Further decrease in HGT generally would unfavourable because a genome reduction
ratchet would be set in action. Actually, in the case of
intracellular parasites, when the HGT rate is dramatically reduced, we observe just such a ratchet. The most
reduced of these parasites seem to be evolving towards
the organelle status and then, in all likelihood, towards
elimination. I wonder if the model developed in this
paper has anything to say on that account, but even if
not, it would be useful to discuss this problem.
Author response: We changed the abstract to say that
HGT is, on average, unfavourable in these circumstances.
However, for the lowest gene loss rate in our simulations,
we spent some time trying to ascertain whether there
was some very small value of h that gave a higher mean
fitness than h = 0. Within the limits of accuracy of our
simulations, the optimum was indistinguishable from
h = 0. Whether the optimum h is zero in the real world
is a separate question, but it is perfectly possible that it
is extremely small. HGT is not the only thing that balances gene loss. Gene duplication and neo- or sub-functionalization also occur in real genomes (factors that are
omitted from our model). Also, even if the rate of occurrence of gene deletions in individual genomes is appreciable, the rate of fixation of a gene deletion in the
population may be negligible in bacteria with large effective population sizes. Although it is true that the rate of
insertion of genes via HGT is likely to be reduced in
intracellular bacteria, it seems to us that this is not the
main cause of the reduction of genome size that occurs
in these organisms. One reason for loss of genes in intracellular bacteria may be that genes that were required
for a free-living lifestyle are no longer needed in the
environment of the host cell and are no longer maintained by selection. Secondly, bacteria that switch to an

Page 9 of 14

intracellular lifestyle experience a reduction in effective
population size; hence there is a much higher chance of
fixation of a gene deletion, even if the gene is still useful.
Thirdly, if a newly functional advantageous gene arises
within a genome, it is less likely to be fixed in a population with small effective population size.

Reviewer 2
Anthony Poole - Stockholm University
This article investigates the possible role of horizontal
gene transfer in early evolution, and reports that, under
accurate replication, lower rates of HGT are optimal.
Taking a modelling approach to the genetic make-up of
early systems seems to me to be the most productive
way of addressing speculation on the role of HGT in
early evolution. The analyses reported by Vogan and
Higgs make a number of assumptions that are worth
considering further. In the model, there is a selective
advantage s for each gene type represented in a genome,
and a lower cost c for every gene present. Because s >c,
all non-duplicate genes are beneficial, but duplicate
copies are rendered deleterious, with cost c. Genes are
lost with probability v, an event that is far more frequent than the emergence of new gene types u, and h is
the mean number of genes gained per genome by HGT.
A consequence of this set up is that HGT will on the
whole be advantageous because genes are lost v, and
new genes are advantageous s. An obvious comment is
that because gene types are generally advantageous,
where deletion rates v are extremely low, HGT should
be marginalised. This leads to the interesting conclusion
that, using the gene-loss parameter v as a proxy for
mutational loss of function, the higher fidelity a system
is, the lower the optimal value of h. Under high v, HGT
becomes essential because this counters loss of fitness
arising from reduction in gene types.
The work presented here is interesting in that it
attempts to address the key question of whether rates
of gene transfer would have been higher at the earliest
stages of evolution. The assumption that early genetic
systems were subject to higher rates of transfer seems
to have been widely adopted, but Vogan and Higgs
rightfully recognise that this assumption does need to
be scrutinised. The analysis presented by the authors
does do this, and their result is therefore bound to be
of broad interest. However, an important omission in
this model is the association of genes with specific functions. Because all non-redundant genes are advantageous, and all combinations are allowed, in contrast to
models like the hypercycle [19] or the Stochastic Corrector Model [21], the model presented here has no
requirement for a specific combination of genes to be
present for the system (i.e. cells) to operate. This
amounts to an extreme form of functional redundancy

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

(any unique gene will do), making the model rather
abstract.
Another area where the analysis presented does need
to be taken further concerns how redundancy is treated.
In the model presented here, redundancy is disadvantageous. A significant body of literature argues that redundancy is likely for low-fidelity systems, since it buffers
against gene loss. Previous authors have shown this
using modelling-based approaches [22,23]. The model
presented here essentially replaces redundancy with
gene receipt (because any unique gene will do as a
counter to gene loss). Making redundant copies deleterious therefore ignores previous results arguing that
redundancy will be important in systems with low fidelity, both as it can buffer against mutation and because
selection can operate between variants even at high
copy number. It also seems clear that this model does
create the conditions wherein an alternative process
favours a different form of redundancy. It would therefore be interesting to know what happens if one requires
some combination of gene types to be present, and,
rather than a model wherein ‘any non-redundant gene
type will do’, the authors instead required specific gene
types to replace lost genes.
A third issue is that further examination of the possible role of HGT in early evolution may require a model
that incorporates different levels of selection. While the
authors discuss this in their manuscript, their model
focuses only on selection at the level of the cell. Expanding discussion to models where two levels of selection
can operate, such as the Stochastic Corrector Model
[21,24] would therefore be valuable.
Author response: We have added an additional paragraph at the end of the methods section that refers to
hypercycles and the stochastic corrector model (SCM).
The SCM deals with a situation in which each gene is
treated as a separate molecule segregating randomly in
the cell. In this situation, the possibility of loss of a gene
from one of the daughters is large. If the cell has multiple
copies of a gene prior to division, there is a larger chance
that both daughter cells will inherit at least one copy of
the gene. The SCM is important because it shows the
population can remain viable as a whole for some parameter values, even if some inviable cells are created. It
also shows that a population can resist invasion by parasites if there is sufficient selection between cells to overcome the competition between molecules inside the cell.
Furthermore, variants of the SCM have shown that
linked genes can be selected in this model [25], and this
is an important step to get from a situation of a protocell
with a bag of independent and potentially competing
genes to a modern cell with a team of linked, cooperating
genes that replicate together on large chromosomes.
Thus, in our view, the SCM is important because it

Page 10 of 14

shows that even the simplest bag of genes can overcome
key problems. However, it also highlights how inefficient
a cell with independent randomly-segregating genes
would be. It is difficult to imagine a protocell of this
form with more than a handful of different kinds of gene.
There would be huge selection pressure to create linked
chromosomes and to develop mechanisms that achieve
better than random segregation. In this paper, we want
to treat organisms that have reached the level of complexity of cells at the time of the LUCA, and we suppose
that these cells would have had at least a few hundred
genes, or maybe a few thousand as with modern bacteria. We suppose that these cells had already improved
well beyond the bag of genes stage. Our model supposes
that the genome already consists of linked chromosomes
and that gene loss is occurring principally due to deletions during replication rather than by segregational loss.
The model of Koch [23], which was raised by the
reviewer, assumes there are n copies of a gene, that this
is duplicated to 2n, and that exactly n of these are
passed on to each daughter cell. He then considers the
possibility of fixation of a new allele for this gene. However, by assuming an exact division with n copies each
side, this model disallows the possibility of loss of the
gene. So this model seems to miss the point about random segregation.
The reviewer also comments on the possible advantages
of redundant genes. One advantage is that the probability
that more than one copy will be lost (by deletion, mutation or inaccurate segregation) in one generation is less
that the probability that a single copy will be lost. Thus if
a parent cell contains duplicates it will have a higher proportion of viable daughter cells. This buffering effect gives
an indirect benefit to duplicates that can affect offspring
fitness but not parental cell fitness. However, larger cells
with many duplicate copies will take longer to replicate.
So redundant genes create a direct cost to the fitness of
the parent cell. Our model includes both of these features.
If a parent cell has n copies of a gene, the probability that
all these copies are deleted is vn, so there is a high probability that at least one copy is retained if n > 1 initially.
Nevertheless there is a cost c for each duplicate. It can be
seen in our results that, for the larger values of v, successful genomes possess duplicate genes. For example, in Figure
2 n is much greater than n types when h is close to its optimum (around 0.6). Thus, our model already includes the
buffering effect that the reviewer comments on.
There is another possibility that a duplicate gene could
give a direct fitness benefit to the parent cell because it
creates an increased dosage of the gene product. Many
modern bacterial genomes possess duplicate genes for
rRNA and tRNAs, presumably because this allows for
more rapid transcription of the large number of rRNA
and tRNA molecules that are required in the cell.

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

However, there are very few duplicate copies of proteincoding genes in bacteria, even when large numbers of
protein copies are required (as with ribosomal proteins).
This is presumably because a large number of proteins
can be translated from a small number of mRNAs, and
a single gene copy is sufficient to transcribe the required
number of mRNAs. Direct benefits of duplicates appear
to be rare in prokaryotes, and our model does not
include any direct benefits.
The concern I raised [26] about the ‘communal
ancestor’ model was that it isn’t clear on levels of
selection, and, in the form presented by Woese, it
seems to be predicated on naive group selection arguments (genes cooperating by default and in the
absence of parasites - a clear parallel exists with the
shortcomings of the hypercycle [34]. In this respect,
the model presented by Vogan and Higgs does not
address the problem of “communal” gene sets because
all non-redundant gene combinations are equivalent,
and no genes are ever detrimental. So if I understand
correctly, the only reason for transfer being favoured
at all in this model seems to be because v is not zero
and all genes are functionally redundant. Cooperating
gene sets must have emerged at some point, and
explaining their emergence from a system that is vulnerable to gene-level selection (i.e. parasites) is a crucial part of the evolutionary transition to cells [35]. I
note however that the authors state in their discussion
that, under a model with parasites and gene disruptions (via genome insertions), HGT would be less
advantageous than in the case considered.
Author response: The reviewer’s use of the word
redundancy is misleading. Each new gene in our model
represents a gene with a new function that is not
redundant with previous genes. For simplicity, we suppose each new gene gives the same fitness benefit, but
this is not the same as redundancy. The reason that
HGT is favoured in the model has nothing to do with
redundancy. The advantages of HGT are that it allows
a cell to acquire beneficial genes that were originally
evolved in another cell and it allows cells to regain
genes that were deleted. We agree that our model does
not deal with the levels of selection issue. We have
argued above that this problem must already have
been solved by creating linked chromosomes prior to
the stage considered in our model. It is obvious that if
we added horizontally transmitted parasites and gene
disruptions due to HGT, then HGT would be less
advantageous than in the present model. It is already
the case that there is selection to reduce the rate of
HGT in the present model. Therefore these additional
effects would just provide additional selection to reduce
HGT, and would not qualitatively change the results.

Page 11 of 14

Reviewer 3
J. Peter Gogarten, Department of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of Connecticut, USA.
The manuscript by Aaron Vogan and Paul Higgs
describes a simulation of genome evolution with the
aim to characterize the processes that occurred at the
emergence of coherent genomes. The simulations illuminate a valid point concerning the Darwinian threshold: accurate replication removes the necessity for high
levels of gene transfer. While I agree with this general
conclusion, I have a few questions, comments and suggestions. Some of these might seem unfair to invoke in
face of the straightforward and limited simulations;
however, the authors themselves take a broad view in
discussing their findings.
The performed simulations describe a sympatric process, corresponding to sympatric speciation, if viewed as
speciation. I do not know how frequent this process is
in extant microorganisms, but allopatric speciation, driven by geographical division of a population, appears to
be frequent among extant organisms. Its requirement is
that gene flow across the geographical barrier is low
compared to within group transfer. Geographical isolation could split a population of communal entities (precells, progenotes, or hypercycles) before crossing the
Darwinian threshold. The splitting of a population into
separate lineages through an allopatric process depends
on barriers to gene flow between the separate lineages,
and not on the question whether distinct genome genealogies exist within a single lineage.
Author response: In a more complex model, we might
have considered geographical barriers. However, the simple model we studied already shows the Darwinian
threshold effect that we are interested in, so additional
complexities are not required at this point.
As illustrated by the above comment, some of my
uneasiness in reading the article stems from the fact the
authors do not always distinguish between within species/population gene transfer, that often results in
homologous recombination, and gene transfer between
divergent organisms often resulting in non homologous
recombination. I readily admit that the distinction
between these processes is not always clear - in some
instances gene transfer between species can result in
homologous recombination and the transferred gene,
although very divergent in sequence, can be functionally
equivalent to alleles in a population [36]. The simulations by Vogan and Higgs treat gene transfer as equivalent to non-homologous recombination (the transferred
gene is added to the recipient genome); however, in the
discussion they also include processes that result in
homologous recombination, the latter process is equivalent to sex in eukaryotes in that it allows organisms to

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

combine beneficial mutations that occurred in different
genealogies [37], and prevents Muller’s ratchet [38] from
operating. The occurrence of homologous recombination in bacterial and archaeal species has been amply
documented (see [39] for review). While the benefits
and costs of sex continue to be debated, the widespread
occurrence of sex suggests that the benefits are substantial. If within population transfers resulting in homologous recombination are included under HGT, then the
generalized statement “if the accuracy of genome replication is high, then HGT is unfavourable” does not
appear warranted. It might be true for the performed
simulations, but not as a general statement for biology.
Author response: We hope it is clear that we are modelling gene gain and loss, which is non-homologous, and
we are not modelling homologous recombination because
we are not considering variations between alleles for the
same gene. The points above are relevant at the level of
evolution of a single gene. Our model is working at the
whole-genome level. The statement in the abstract is now
changed to “if the gene loss rate is lower, then HGT is,
on average, unfavourable”.
Evolution constitutes a strange loop where the process
by which evolution occurs can be subject to selection
pressure. Thus parameters such as mutation and gene
transfer rates might be subject to selection and change
over evolutionary time. It is tempting to speculate that
the observation that gene transfer is biased towards
transfer between closely related organisms [36,40,41]
might reflect the fact that transfer between more divergent organisms is more frequently detrimental to the
recipient, possibly because more molecular parasites
might be acquired through these transfers. However,
this bias might also reflect the simple fact that more
mechanisms exist for transfer between closely related
organisms, and that the transferred gene has a better
chance of being integrated into the recipients regulatory
and metabolic networks if it originated from an organisms with similar sequence biases and regulatory signals.
The question “if HGT is on average beneficial to the
organism” needs to be considered for the different types
of gene transfer (see the previous paragraph). Another
way the question needs to be differentiated is the meaning of “beneficial to the organism”. Sometime ago Jeff
Townsend and I proposed the neutral or nearly neutral
theory of HGT [42] in analogy to Kimura’s neutral theory. According to our proposal, most transferred genes
found in a population are neutral or nearly neutral to
the recipient. This does not mean that all transfers are
neutral, many, or even most transfers may be detrimental to the recipient, but because they lower the fitness of
the recipient, these genes are quickly eliminated from
the population. Neutral, or nearly neutral transferred
genes may be fixed in the population through drift, but

Page 12 of 14

as Lawrence and Ochman found, these genes often do
not persist in the recipient lineage over long periods of
time [43]. In addition, most of the genes identified as
acquired through HGT in a genome have not been fixed
in the population, and most of them never will be. The
hypothesis that most of the transferred genes observed
in a population are neutral or nearly neutral does not
say that most transferred genes are neutral, most of the
transferred genes might be detrimental, but because
they are subject to purifying selection they are not frequently encountered in the population.
Author response: The question of whether transfer
occurs more frequently between closely related species is
very interesting, and it is easy to envisage more complex
models where the either the attempt rate or the successful incorporation rate of HGT is larger for more similar
genomes. Also, we agree that many newly gained genes
are not beneficial and will not spread widely. This point
is already discussed in our conclusion, and we already
pointed out that it would be useful to extend our model
by including a category of non-functional genes. Addition
of non-functional genes would allow the pan-genome to
become much larger, without significantly increasing the
size of individual genomes. However, addition of nonfunctional genes would also make HGT less favourable
than the present case. Therefore, once again, this would
not change the central result of our model that there is
selection to reduce the rate of HGT.
The benefit or detriment of gene transfer to a population is a different matter. The authors claim that their
simulations provide evidence against a statement in [1]
that barriers to HGT from divergent organisms might
not be of significant selective advantage to the group.
Or in other words, according to [1] preventing rare
transfers, even if most were detrimental to the recipient,
would not create a significant selective advantage for the
group. An example might illustrate my reasoning (I
don’t claim to speak for my co-authors). Assume a
population of 10 9 organisms; 200 of these acquire a
gene from a divergent organisms. In half of the cases,
the recipient is less fit, and these genes will be rapidly
eliminated from the population, in 99 cases the transferred genes might be nearly neutral and most of them
will be eliminated from the population due to drift.
Even if a nearly neutral gene drifts to fixation in the
population, as long as it is not a molecular parasite with
mechanisms for its own long term survival, the gene
will be subject to the deletion bias prevailing in bacterial
genomes [44], and the nearly neutral gene will be eliminated on the long run. The rare advantageous gene
might open up new resources, be rapidly fixed in the
population, and/or spawn divergence into a new ecological niche. Even though in the example half of the
acquired genes are detrimental, the fitness of the

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

population is hardly affected negatively. The difference
between this reasoning [1] and the simulations by
Vogan and Higgs could be that in the simulation gene
transfer between organisms is not rare, rather in the
simulations transferred genes accumulate in the genomes of the population decreasing the average fitness of
its members. In real life the ballooning of genome content is prevented by the deletion bias, even though the
adaptive value of the deletion bias might be the inactivation of molecular parasites and not in streamlining the
genome.
Thus I still think that if gene acquisition from divergent species is rare, then effective selection for barriers
to transfer would not occur. To the contrary, the rare
transfers that provide a selective advantage, and that are
driven to fixation in the existing population, or that lead
to the founding of a new population in a different niche
conceivably could select for mechanism that enable
HGT events between divergent organisms. Some of
these HGTs have changed the face of this planet, e.g.,
the two photosystems working in series in oxygen producing photosynthesis [45,46], or the pathway that
allows methane production from acetate in Methanosarcina [47]. It is tempting to speculate that the creation of
new metabolic pathways and capabilities was a driving
force to select for and maintain HGT mechanism.
While the idea of gene sharing mechanism providing an
adaptive advantage is philosophically appealing to me, I
do not know of any evidence that the transfer mechanisms between divergent organisms are under purifying
selection due to the selective advantage provided to the
recipient (this is different for within group transfer,
where the existence of Gene Transfer Agents whose
sequences appear to be under purifying selection suggests selection for the gene transfer machinery [48]).
Furthermore, the transfer of genes beneficial to the recipient (antibiotic or heavy metal resistance genes) often
can be explained from the selfish gene point of view
rather than assuming group selection in favour of HGT
[49]. It appears possible that these transfer events, however big their impact on the evolution of our biosphere,
occurred as by products of other processes, such as
uptake of DNA as a nutrient [27] as detailed by Vogan
and Higgs, or as a by-product of the propagation of
molecular parasites and viruses.
Author response: The argument above seems to rest on
whether HGT is ‘rare’ or ‘common’. If it is as rare as in
the example above, there will be almost no selection
either way on the HGT rate because most individuals
will not experience HGT. But Woese’s proposal was that,
in the early stages, HGT was common. We have shown
that this makes sense if vertical inheritance is inaccurate,
because high HGT rates are then favoured. But our
model shows that when vertical inheritance becomes

Page 13 of 14

more accurate, there will be selection to reduce HGT.
This would lead to the state described in this example,
where HGT is too rare to be selected against. Thus, if we
accept Woese’s view that HGT was initially very common, there must already have been selection against it to
reduce it to the levels that we see now.
We agree that rare advantageous cases of HGT can be
important in evolutionary history, as in the examples
that the reviewer gives. We already stated in our conclusions that “the few beneficial cases will have important
consequences for adaptation of the organism”. We also
already said that the remaining low level of HGT could
be due to selfish genes (molecular parasites and viruses)
or selection for uptake of DNA as a nutrient. So the
reviewer seems to be largely in agreement with us.
Vogan and Higgs see the high level of inconsistency at
the root of the tree of life as an indication for high
levels of gene transfer at the time of the Last Universal
Common Ancestor (LUCA). I do not agree. At the time
of LUCA the use of the 20 canonical amino acids found
in modern proteins, the ribosome, signal recognition
particles, and chemisosmotic coupling had already been
established [50]. While not all of the molecules present
in all extant organisms were present in the same organismal common ancestor [51], the phylogenies of the
listed traits are congruent and rooting them using
ancient paralogs (see [52] for a review) or the echo from
the assembly of the genetic code [53] consistently places
the root between the archaea and bacteria, with the
eukaryotic nucleocytoplasm being the sister to the
archaea (which in the different analyses are recovered
either as mono- or paraphyletic). In contrast to the
statement in the manuscript by Vogan and Higgs, the
deepest split in the tree of life is recovered with a surprising consistency, even analyses based on genome content [54] and midpoint rooting of the rather frequently
transferred aminoacyl tRNA synthetases [55] place the
root of the genome network in the same place. Together
these observations (the inferred characteristics at the
root of the tree and the congruence of phylogenetic
patterns) suggest that LUCA had already crossed the
Darwinian threshold.
Author response: Our paper presents a theoretical
model only and therefore we cannot add to the debate
on the precise nature of the LUCA. For our purposes, it
does not matter whether the Darwinian threshold
occurred at the time of the LUCA or prior to this.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada and by the Origins Institute of McMaster University.
Authors’ contributions
AAV ran the evolutionary simulations and wrote the paper. PGH designed
the evolutionary model and wrote the paper.

Vogan and Higgs Biology Direct 2011, 6:1
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/1

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 13 December 2010 Accepted: 3 January 2011
Published: 3 January 2011
References
1. Gogarten JP, Doolittle WF, Lawrence JG: Prokaryotic Evolution in Light of
Gene Transfer. Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19:2226-2238.
2. Bapteste E, O’Malley MA, Beiko RG, Ereshefsky M, Gogarten JP, FranklinHall L, Lapointe FJ, Dupre J, Daga T, Boucher Y, Martin W: Prokaryotic
evolution and the tree of life are two different things. Biology Direct
2009, 4:34.
3. Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly-resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.
4. Dagan T, Martin W: The tree of one percent. Genome Biol 2006, 7:118.
5. Ge F, Wang LS, Kim J: The cobweb of life revealed by genome-scale
estimates of horizontal gene transfer. PloS Biol 2005, 3:1709-1718.
6. Puigbò P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Search for a ‘Tree of Life’ in the thicket of
the phylogenetic forest. J Biol 2009, 8:59.
7. Woese CR: On the evolution of cells. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2002,
99:8742-8747.
8. Medini D, Donati C, Tettelin H, Masignani V, Rappuoli R: The microbial pangenome. Current Opinion Genet Devel 2005, 15:589-594.
9. Lapierre P, Gogarten JP: Estimating the size of the bacterial pan-genome.
Trends Genet 2008, 25:107-110.
10. Lorenz MG, Wackernagel W: Bacterial gene transfer by natural genetic
transformation in the environment. Microbiol Rev 1994, 58:563-602.
11. Thomas CM, Nielsen KM: Mechanisms of, and barriers to, horizontal gene
transfer between bacteria. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3:711-721.
12. Frost LS, Leplae R, Summers AO, Toussaint A: Mobile genetic elements:
the agents of open source evolution. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3:722-732.
13. Matic I, Rayssiguier C, Radman M: Interspecies gene exchange in bacteria:
the role of SOS and mismatch repair systems in the evolution of
species. Cell 1995, 80:507-515.
14. Cohan FM: Sexual isolation and speciation in bacteria. Genetica 2002,
116:359-370.
15. Rocha EP, Danchin A, Viari A: Evolutionary role of restriction/modification
systems as revealed by comparative genome analysis. Genome Res 2001,
11:946-958.
16. Navarre WW, McClelland M, Libby SJ, Fang FC: Silencing of xenogenic
DNA by H-NS: facilitation of lateral gene transfer in bacteria by a
defence system that recognizes foreign DNA. Genes Devel 2007,
21:1456-1471.
17. Korbel JO, Snel B, Huynen MA, Bork P: SHOT: a web server for the
construction of genome phylogenies. Trends Genet 2002, 18:158-162.
18. Biebricher CK, Eigen M: The error threshold. Virus Res 2005, 107:117-127.
19. Eigen M, Schuster P: The Hypercycle: A principle of natural selforganization. Berlin: Springer; 1979.
20. Wu M, Higgs PG: Origin of Self-replicating Biopolymers: Autocatalytic
Feedback can Jump-start the RNA World. J Mol Evol 2009, 69:541-554.
21. Szathmáry E, Demeter L: Group selection of early replicators and the
origin of life. J Theor Biol 1987, 128:463-486.
22. Niesert U, Harnasch D, Bresch C: Origin of life between Scylla and
Charybdis. J Mol Evol 1981, 17:348-353.
23. Koch AL: Evolution vs the number of gene copies per primitive cell.
J Mol Evol 1984, 20:71-76.
24. Grey D, Hutson V, Szathmáry E: A reexamination of the stochastic
corrector model. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1995, 262:29-35.
25. Maynard Smith J, Szathmary E: The origin of chromosomes I. Selection for
linkage. J Theor Biol 1993, 164:437-446.
26. Poole AM: Horizontal gene transfer and the earliest stages of the
evolution of life. Res Microbiol 2009, 160:473-480.
27. Finkel SE, Kolter R: DNA as a nutrient: Novel role for bacterial
competence gene homologs. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:6288-6293.
28. Claverys JP, Prudhomme M, Martin B: Induction of competence regulons
as a general response to stress in Gram-positive bacteria. Annu Rev
Microbiol 2006, 60:451-475.
29. Hao W, Golding GB: The fate of laterally transferred genes: Life in the
fast lane to adaptation or death. Genome Res 2006, 16:636-643.

Page 14 of 14

30. Kuo CH, Ochman H: The fate of new bacterial genes. FEMS Microbiol Rev
2009, 33:38-43.
31. Cordero OX, Hogeweg P: The impact of long-distance horizontal gene
transfer on prokaryotic genome size. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:21748-21753.
32. Novozhilov AS, Karev GP, Koonin EV: Mathematical modelling of evolution
of horizontally transferred genes. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:1721-1732.
33. Baumdicker F, Hess WR, Pfaffelhuber P: The diversity of a distributed
genome in bacterial populations. Ann Appl Prob 2010 [http://www.imstat.
org/aap/future_papers.html].
34. Maynard Smith J: Hypercycles and the origin of life. Nature 1979,
280:445-446.
35. Maynard Smith J, Szathmáry E: The major transitions in evolution. Oxford:
W.H. Freeman/Spektrum; 1995.
36. Andam CP, Williams D, Gogarten JP: Biased gene transfer mimics patterns
created through shared ancestry. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2010, 107:10679-10684.
37. Vos M: Why do bacteria engage in homologous recombination? Trends in
microbiology 2009, 17:226-232.
38. Muller HJ: The relation of recombination to mutational advance. Mutat
Res 1964, 1:2-9.
39. Papke RT: A Critique of Prokaryotic Species Concepts. Methods in
molecular biology (Clifton, NJ) 2009, 532:379-395.
40. Hendrickson H, Lawrence JG: Selection for chromosome architecture in
bacteria. J Mol Evol 2006, 62:615-629.
41. Findlay WA, Redfield RJ: Coevolution of DNA uptake sequences and
bacterial proteomes. Genome Biol Evol 2009, 1:45-55.
42. Gogarten JP, Townsend JP: Horizontal gene transfer, genome innovation
and evolution. Nature reviews 2005, 3:679-687.
43. Lawrence JG, Ochman H: Amelioration of bacterial genomes: rates of
change and exchange. J Mol Evol 1997, 44:383-397.
44. Mira A, Ochman H, Moran NA: Deletional bias and the evolution of
bacterial genomes. Trends Genet 2001, 17:589-596.
45. Williams D, Andam CP, Gogarten JP: Horizontal Gene Transfer and the
Formation of Groups of Microorganisms. In Molecular Phylogeny of
Microorganisms. Edited by: Oren A. Papke RT: Caister Academic Press; 2010:.
46. Blankenship RE: Origin and Early Evolution of Photosynthesis. Photosynth
Res 1992, 33(2):91-111.
47. Fournier GP, Gogarten JP: Evolution of acetoclastic methanogenesis in
Methanosarcina via horizontal gene transfer from cellulolytic Clostridia.
Journal of bacteriology 2008, 190(3):1124-1127.
48. Lang AS, Beatty JT: Importance of widespread gene transfer agent genes
in alpha-proteobacteria. Trends in microbiology 2007, 15(2):54-62.
49. Olendzenski L, Gogarten JP: Evolution of genes and organisms: the tree/
web of life in light of horizontal gene transfer. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 2009, 1178:137-145.
50. Gogarten JP, Taiz L: Evolution of proton pumping ATPases: Rooting the
tree of life. Photosynthesis Research 1992, 33:137-146.
51. Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP: Cladogenesis, coalescence and the
evolution of the three domains of life. Trends in Genetics 2004,
20(4):182-187.
52. Zhaxybayeva O, Lapierre P, Gogarten JP: Ancient gene duplications and
the root(s) of the tree of life. Protoplasma 2005, 227(1):53-64.
53. Fournier GP, Gogarten JP: Rooting the Ribosomal Tree of Life. Mol Biol
Evol 2010.
54. Dagan T, Roettger M, Bryant D, Martin W: Genome networks root the tree
of life between prokaryotic domains. Genome Biol Evol 2010, 2:379-392.
55. Wolf YI, Aravind L, Grishin NV, Koonin EV: Evolution of aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases–analysis of unique domain architectures and phylogenetic
trees reveals a complex history of horizontal gene transfer events.
Genome research 1999, 9(8):689-710.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-1
Cite this article as: Vogan and Higgs: The advantages and
disadvantages of horizontal gene transfer and the emergence of the
first species. Biology Direct 2011 6:1.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
