<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A comprehensive transcriptome and immune-gene repertoire of the lepidopteran model host Galleria mellonella</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-308"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Heiko Vogel"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A comprehensive transcriptome and immunegene repertoire of the lepidopteran model
host Galleria mellonella
Heiko Vogel1†, Boran Altincicek2†, Gernot Glöckner3 and Andreas Vilcinskas4*

Abstract
Background: The larvae of the greater wax moth Galleria mellonella are increasingly used (i) as mini-hosts to study
pathogenesis and virulence factors of prominent bacterial and fungal human pathogens, (ii) as a whole-animal
high throughput infection system for testing pathogen mutant libraries, and (iii) as a reliable host model to
evaluate the efficacy of antibiotics against human pathogens. In order to compensate for the lack of genomic
information in Galleria, we subjected the transcriptome of different developmental stages and immune-challenged
larvae to next generation sequencing.
Results: We performed a Galleria transcriptome characterization on the Roche 454-FLX platform combined with
traditional Sanger sequencing to obtain a comprehensive transcriptome. To maximize sequence diversity, we
pooled RNA extracted from different developmental stages, larval tissues including hemocytes, and from immunechallenged larvae and normalized the cDNA pool. We generated a total of 789,105 pyrosequencing and 12,032
high-quality Sanger EST sequences which clustered into 18,690 contigs with an average length of 1,132 bases.
Approximately 40% of the ESTs were significantly similar (E ≤ e-03) to proteins of other insects, of which 45% have
a reported function. We identified a large number of genes encoding proteins with established functions in
immunity related sensing of microbial signatures and signaling, as well as effector molecules such as antimicrobial
peptides and inhibitors of microbial proteinases. In addition, we found genes known as mediators of melanization
or contributing to stress responses. Using the transcriptomic data, we identified hemolymph peptides and proteins
induced upon immune challenge by 2D-gelelectrophoresis combined with mass spectrometric analysis.
Conclusion: Here, we have developed extensive transcriptomic resources for Galleria. The data obtained is rich in gene
transcripts related to immunity, expanding remarkably our knowledge about immune and stress-inducible genes in
Galleria and providing the complete sequences of genes whose primary structure have only partially been characterized
using proteomic methods. The generated data provide for the first time access to the genetic architecture of immunity
in this model host, allowing us to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying pathogen and parasite response and
detailed analyses of both its immune responses against human pathogens, and its coevolution with entomopathogens.

Background
The introduction of novel high through-put sequencing
technologies provides insight into the genetic architecture
of an increasing number of non-model organisms including insects. Next-generation (NextGen) pyrosequencing
has become an important tool in transcriptomic studies
* Correspondence: Andreas.Vilcinskas@agrar.uni-giessen.de
† Contributed equally
4
Institute of Phytopathology and Applied Zoology, University of Giessen,
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32, 35392 Giessen, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

and allows targeted identification of genes which are
(differentially) expressed in distinct tissues or cells, during
development, or upon activation of immune responses.
This technology has been used, for example, to characterize both the midgut-specific and the immunity-related
transcriptome of Manduca sexta, which has emerged as a
model in lepidopteran biochemistry and physiology [1,2].
In this study, we subjected the immunity-related transcriptome of the greater wax moth Galleria mellonella to a
combination of Sanger and NextGen sequence analysis.
Our study was motivated by two reasons. Firstly, Galleria

© 2011 Vogel et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

is suited to identify ancient features of innate immunity in
lepidopterans because it belongs to the family Pyralidae
which has been placed in a basal phylogenetic position
within the Lepidoptera. Secondly, Galleria represents a
powerful, reliable and proven model system for innate
immunity studies. It is currently used as a host system
to reconstruct rapid reciprocal adaptations during hostparasite coevolution [3] and as a an alternative model host
for testing human pathogens, which is ethically better
acceptable than mammalian hosts such as mice, rats and
rabbits [4,5]. Galleria caterpillars prosper world-wide in
use as alternative mini-hosts because they combine advantages shared with other invertebrate host models with benefits that are unique to this lepidopteran. The advantages
of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster are complete, well-annotated
genomes and that microarrays, RNA interference libraries
and mutant strains are available which allow analysis of
host-pathogen interactions at the molecular level [6].
However, the larger size of Galleria caterpillars enables
precise injection of antibiotics or a number of pathogens,
easy manipulation and collection of tissue and hemolymph
samples to study pathophysiology with, for example,
proteomic approaches.
Further advantages of Galleria are (i) the low overall
costs of breeding large numbers, providing an inexpensive whole-animal high throughput infection assay
system [7], (ii) their worldwide commercial availability,
e.g., they are sold as bait for fishermen or as food for
pets (reptiles), (iii) the positive correlation between the
pathogenicity of bacteria and fungi when evaluated in
Galleria and mice [8], (iiii) and that this heterologous
insect host can be adapted in the laboratory to human
physiological temperature (37°C). This is essential in
order to mimic the physiological conditions in mammals
because human pathogens are adapted to the physiological temperature of their host which is often required for
the synthesis and the release of their pathogenic or virulence factors [4,5]. These advantages have convinced an
increasing number of researchers to favor Galleria as a
mini-host model for prominent pathogenic bacteria and
fungi that are responsible for severe human diseases
such as Bacillus cereus [9], Enterococcus faecalis [10],
Listeria monocytogenes [11], Pseudomonas aeruginosa
[12], Staphylococcus aureus [13], Candida albicans [14]
and Cryptococcus neoformans [15]. In addition, a number of antimicrobial peptides and inhibitors of microbial
virulence factors have been discovered during the past
decade in Galleria whose therapeutic potential in medicine and plant protection is presently being explored
[16,17].
The major disadvantage of Galleria as a heterologous
host system is that neither genome nor transcriptome
sequence data are available and, therefore, important

Page 2 of 19

information about the immunity and stress related
genes and their expression are lacking. Consequently,
this study was designed to fill this gap and to provide a
data set which enables more detailed studies, for example microarray or proteomic analysis, in the future. In
order to induce expression of immunity-related genes in
this lepidopteran species we injected a bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) preparation into last instar larvae
which has been proven as a potent elicitor of immune
responses in Galleria [18] and other insect species
[19,20]. Normalized larval dscDNA was sequenced using
Roche 454 FLX and Sanger (directional long reads)
methods. The combining of both technologies provided
deep sequencing coverage of the expressed genes
relevant to this research project.
Because of the large hemolymph sample volumes that
can be obtained from Galleria caterpillars, their host
response to pathogens can easily be studied at the peptide and protein level [21]. To test the correlation
between transcriptomic and proteomic data we collected
hemolymph samples from untreated and LPS-injected
larvae. In order to identify peptides and proteins that
are secreted within the hemolymph upon activation of
innate immune responses, we used 2D-gelelectrophoresis combined with mass spectrometric analysis of spots
that appear or are enhanced upon injection of LPS.
Complementary proteomic analysis of hemolymph samples confirmed induced expression and release into the
hemolymph of proteins known to mediate recognition
of microbes, immunity-related signaling or killing of
microbes.

Results and Discussion
Transcriptome assembly and functional analyses
using Gene Ontologies

Galleria has emerged as a powerful, surrogate and
ethically acceptable model host for human pathogens,
but the lack of genomic data is a major impediment for
its use in preclinical research. In order to provide more
detailed information about its transcriptome we subjected normalized larval cDNA to NextGen pyrosequence (Roche 454 FLX) and Sanger analysis.
Normalization of the larval cDNA resulted in reduction
of any over-abundant transcripts and production of
an even distribution of transcripts ranging from 0.2 to
> 3.0 kb in size. The average size of the cDNAs of the
Galleria mixed larval cDNA library that were cloned
and sequenced was 1,150 bp. With the 454 platform we
generated over 172 million bases sequence information.
The total number of reads was 789,105 with an average
length of read (bases) of 218. The data assembly consisted of 22,203 contigs and 11,7 million bases among
which 7,265 contigs were larger than 500 bases. The
average contig size of contigs larger than 500 bases was

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Page 3 of 19

1,132 bases. The largest contig had 4,762 bases, the N50
contig size was 1,309 bases. The Sanger sequencing
yielded a total of 12,032 high-quality ESTs, which after
assembly resulted in a total of 2,120 contiguous
sequences (contigs) and 4,775 singletons represented by
a single EST and a total of 6,895 putative gene objects
(summarized in table 1). Combined, the Sanger and the
pyrosequencing data of the Galleria larval cDNA library
resulted in a total of 18,690 contigs (putative gene
objects). For the subsequent BLAST searches and annotation, we excluded all of the singleton reads from the
454 pyrosequencing data as the singlets may be more
error-prone and unreliable as compared to contigs with
good sequence coverage. The complete set of sequences
were subjected to a protein translated BLASTx search
and a gene ontology (GO) analysis using Blast2GO [22].
7,556 Sequences (40%) matched described sequences in
Genbank (NR database; E-value cut-off of 10-3). More
than half of the sequences (11,134) had no BLAST
result, indicating a high number of lepidopteran or species-specific transcripts or transcript parts (orphan
UTRs) [23].
We then analyzed which part of the assembled contigs
had counterparts in certain species. For this purpose we
used BLAST databases for the complete proteomes of
Drosophila melanogaster, Bombyx mori, and Homo
sapiens. Using this approach we cannot discern gene
family members but get a rough overview on general
protein distributions between clades. The Venn diagram
(Figure 1) shows the distribution of hits with a score
threshold of 150. We chose the score value as excluding
criteria to make blast hits comparable, since p values are
influenced by the data base size. We observed a total of
6782 hits of which more than 3000 are common to all
species and therefore belong to the core of all metazoan
genes. Given that not all genes are active under the conditions chosen and that there are a number of species
specific genes, the 6507 identifiable genes shared
between Bombyx and Galleria indicate a good coverage
Table 1 Summary statistics for Galleria mellonella
expressed sequence tag (EST) analysis
Sanger
technology

454 FLX
technology

Sanger +
454 FLX

Total number of reads

14,120

789,105

-

Average length of read
(bases)

780

218

-

12,032

466,737

478,769

Total number of reads in the
assembly
Total number of contigs

2,120

22,203

18,690

Total number of singlets

4,775

25,604

-

Number of unique
sequences

6,895

47,807

-

995/3,560

1132/4,762

1180/4,762

Average/Largest contig size

Figure 1 Orthologous genes shared between Galleria, Bombyx,
Drosophila and humans. The Venn diagram shows the number of
orthologous groups of genes shared between Galleria, Bombyx,
Drosophila, and human genomes/transcriptomes. A larger fraction of
the Galleria transcripts is shared with all species but the majority of
Galleria genes are shared with Bombyx mori only.

of the Galleria transcriptome by our contig data set.
Not surprisingly another large fraction (2326) is shared
between the Lepidoptera only and 908 contigs are common between Diptera and Lepidoptera. The slightly
higher number of genes shared between Lepidoptera
and humans than between D. melanogaster and humans
(211 versus 134) indicate a D. melanogaster specific
gene loss. Overall, the species distribution of the top
BLAST hit against the nr database for the Galleria transcriptome shows a strong preference for matches against
Bombyx mori and Tribolium castaneum genes. Both
insect species are represented by complete genome
sequences in the public databases, as for Drosophila, but
the number of top BLAST hits against this insect model
organism is much smaller (Additional file 1).
For functional comparisons, all sequences were subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) analysis in Blast2GO,
where we classified all gene objects in Biological Function (Figure 2A) and Molecular Process class 3
(Figure 2B). To minimize the number of classes with
only few gene objects, we set the minimum number of
gene objects (cut-off level) in a class to 2% of the total
number of sequences that could be classified. Of
the 7,556 contigs in the Galleria cDNA library with
high-score matches in the Genbank non-redundant (nr)
protein database, 3,438 (45%) could be classified into a
GO category, with each class containing at least 17
sequences (2% of 3,438). Among the 3,438 genes for
which we obtained GO terms, we observed a wide

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Page 4 of 19

Figure 2 Gene ontology (GO) assignments for the Galleria transcriptome. GO assignments as predicted for their involvement in (A)
biological processes and (B) molecular functions. All data are presented at level 3 GO categorization. Classified gene objects are depicted as
absolute numbers and percentages (in brackets) of the total number of gene objects with GO assignments.

diversity of functional categories represented on all
levels of the Gene Ontology database. Figure 2 shows a
total of 28 (Biological Process) and 14 (Molecular Function) GO level-3 classes into which the gene objects
were classified. The most prominent GO Biological
Process categories were Cellular metabolic process,
Macromolecule metabolic process and Primary metabolic process (each with 13-22% of the total), followed
by the classes Biosynthetic process, Cellular component
organization and biogenesis, and Transport (each with

about 6-7%). The most prominent GO Molecular
Function categories were Protein Binding, Nucleic Acid
Binding and Hydrolase Activity (each with 16-24% of
the total hits). A comparison of the GO categorized
Galleria transcripts with a functional GO category and
the complete predicted Unigene set from the silk moth
(Bombyx mori) genome subjected to the same Blast2GO
process revealed a substantial overlap between the two
datasets. Out of 16,425 total Bombyx Unigenes, 12,076
had a significant BLAST hit (NR database; E-value cut-

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

off of 10-3), a much larger fraction (73%) as compared
to the Galleria sequence data set (40%). Of the 12,076
genes with a BLAST hit 6,058 Bombyx genes had a
functional GO category association (Additional file 2).
In a direct comparison of the presence and/or
abundance of GO terms, three GO classes were absent in
the Galleria transcriptome, but present in the Bombyx
Unigene dataset: Generation of precursor metabolites
and energy, Cell recognition and Regulation of biological
process. Based on the relative numbers of gene objects
with functional GO category associations the Galleria
sequences fall into GO categories with a roughly similar
distribution to that of the Bombyx genome showing
comparable numbers of most GO categories both for
Biological Process and Molecular Function (Additional
file 2). This suggests that the Galleria sequence data
contain a large diversity of genes involved in a variety of
biological processes, and do not contain notable biases
towards particular categories of genes.
The patterns of GO category associations nonetheless
differed between these two insect species in a few categories, with relatively high abundance of Multicellular
organismal development, Anatomical structure morphogenesis and Cellular developmental process in Bombyx
and Biosynthetic process and Macromolecule metabolic
process and response to stress being more abundant in
Galleria. In addition to this, several categories were only
present in Galleria (Oxidation reduction and Cell
death). Differences in GO category associations between
Bombyx and Galleria might be attributed to the fact
that ESTs of the latter originate predominantly from
larvae.
Recognition of pathogen or damage associated
molecular pattern genes

Peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRPs) and apolipophorin III which are known to mediate recognition of
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and
damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) have
been identified both among the determined transcripts
and the new or enhanced spots of the 2D-gels, implicating their release within the hemolymph during humoral
immune responses (Figure 3). Insect PGRPs specifically
bind to and hydrolyze bacterial peptidoglycan, activate
the Toll or IMD signal transduction pathways or proteolytic cascades that generate antimicrobial effectors, and
stimulate phagocytosis. They have been found to code
for up to 19 PGRPs, classified into short (S) and long
(L) forms. We identified six putative PGRP sequences in
Galleria, among which one pair solely originates from
recent gene duplication (Gme_PGRP3 and Gme_PGRP4)
event (Figure 4A). The two major classes of insect
PGRPs are well separated in the gene phylogeny as
depicted by the good bootstrap support of the

Page 5 of 19

Figure 3 Two-dimensional SDS-Page map of immunized
Galleria larvae. Hemolymph protein from untreated and LPSimmunized larvae was loaded on 24-cm pH 3 to 11 NL isoelectric
focusing strips, followed by Tris-Tricine-SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis on a 15% gel. Image analysis enabled visualization
of new or enhanced spots present in hemolymph samples from
immunized larvae depicted in orange color. Putative identifications
of immune-inducible proteins by MALDI-TOF analysis and according
to our recent study [21] are depicted next to the respective spots.
Molecular mass standards are indicated in kDa (left), and the pI
range by an arrow. PGRP, peptidoglycan recognition protein; GNBP,
Gram negative bacteria binding protein; GST, Glutathione-Stransferase; Apo III, apolipophorin III; DLS..., unknown protein.

Neighbour-Joining analysis. In the class which includes
the gut-expressed Drosophila PGRP-LB gene, we can
find two Galleria PGRPs (Figure 4B). Apolipophorin III
mediates pattern recognition of beta-1,3 glucans and
cellular encapsulation in Galleria [24]. Recently, it was
shown that apoliphorin III present in the hemolymph of
Galleria binds to nucleic acids released by damaged
cells and wounded tissues, and these aggregates enhance
both humoral and cellular defense reactions that can
protect from infection [25].
Gram negative bacteria binding proteins (GNBPs) and
b-1,3-glucan recognition proteins (bGRPs) have been
extensively studied as pattern recognition proteins in
Lepidoptera [26-28]. Most of these proteins are produced in the fat body and secreted into the caterpillar’s
hemolymph. Some are constitutively present whereas
others are induced upon microbial infection. We have
identified five different ßGRPs in the Galleria EST data
collection, including one most similar to the midgutspecific short ßGRP with glucanase activity as previously
described [26]. To further examine the relationships
among bGRP proteins across insects and the ßGRPs
identified in Galleria, a total of 45 sequences from 24
species, including many proteins that had previously
been found in insect hemolymph, were collected and
used to construct a Bayesian phylogeny (Additional
File 3). The phylogenetic analysis revealed that these
sequences clustered in two distinct clades. One of these

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Page 6 of 19

Figure 4 Gene phylogeny and amino acid alignment of PGRP protein sequences. (A) A bayesian phylogenetic tree of insect PGRP proteins.
Bayesian posterior probabilities are shown for all major nodes supported with probability higher than 60%. (B) Amino acid alignment of the 6
predicted proteins from Galleria together with predicted protein sequences deduced from publicly available insect sequence datasets. Amino
acid sequence alignments were performed using MAFFT multiple alignment program without the predicted signal peptide and part of the Nterminus as in some cases only partial sequence information was available. Identical residues are boxed with dark shading, and conserved
residues are boxed with light shading. Species abbreviations: Manduca sexta (Mse), Bombyx mori (Bmo), Trichoplusia ni (Tni), Phlebotomus papatasi
(Ppa), Samia cynthia ricini (Scr), Tribolium castaneum (Tca), Glossina morsitans (Gmm), Galleria mellonella (Gme), Tenebrio molitor (Tmo).

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

clades is clearly separated from the other clades by a
high posterior probability and contains the Helicoverpa
armigera Glucanase-1 protein (described in Pauchet et
al. [26]), and sequences from cDNA libraries made from
midgut tissue of different Lepidoptera species, including
one Galleria sequence. This phylogeny suggests that
Galleria does have all of the ßGRPs found in more
derived Lepidopteran species, including the gene coding
for a protein with glucanase activity. This supports the
idea of an ancient ßGRP duplication event in Lepidoptera, leading to paralogues that have different functions.
Immunity related signaling

In insects, cell signaling against fungal and bacterial
pathogens occurs through the Toll, Imd, and Jak-STAT
pathways [29]. These pathways are quite similar to the
vertebrate (e.g. TNF) signaling pathways, and induce the
expression of antimicrobial peptides and other molecules through interaction with NFkB factors. The major
signaling pathways Toll and Imd are represented by
central receptors such as toll, toll-like, 18 wheeler and
related LRR repeat-containing G-protein coupled receptors. We have identified at least three different toll or
toll-like receptor transcripts in the Galleria dataset. The
exact number of different toll receptors is not easy to
evaluate, as some of the transcripts are incomplete and
the predicted amino acid sequences do not always overlap. In addition to toll, we identified two different 18
wheeler partial transcripts with homology to Spodoptera
frugiperda 18 wheeler (Genbank entry ADV41489: Li, S:
A 18 wheeler toll receptor gene from S. frugiperda cell
is in response to LPS and Saccharomyces cerevisiae
stimulation). However, a critical evaluation of the role of
18 wheeler in Drosophila has put its postulated function
as a pattern recognition receptor for Gram negative
bacteria into question [30]. Interestingly, we identified
transcripts encoding for the transcription factors NFkB
and relish which function as obligate dimmers. Relish
regulates downstream of the IMD pathway expression of
antimicrobial peptides in Drosophila [31]. While the signaling pathways that stimulate immune gene expression
have been well characterized by genetic analysis in Drosophila, they are far from being well understood in most
other insect species. However, several proteins involved
in these pathways have recently been characterized
in Lepidoptera. One such pathway involves proteolytic
activation of a cytokine called Spaetzle, which functions
in dorsal-ventral patterning during early embryonic
development and in the antimicrobial immune response
in larvae and adults. Most interestingly, it could be
shown that injection of Spaetzle into M. sexta larvae stimulated expression of several immune-related peptides
and proteins, including cecropin, attacin, moricin and
lysozyme [32]. We have identified a Spaetzle homolog in

Page 7 of 19

Galleria. The Gme-Spaetzle cDNA encodes a polypeptide with 29%, 42% and 44% identity to N. vitripennis,
B. mori and M. sexta, respectively (Additional file 4Aalignment of Galleria, Bombyx, Manduca Spaetzle).
In addition to major immune signaling proteins, we
identified a calreticulin sequence in the immuneinduced Galleria transcriptome data. Calreticulin is
involved in signal transduction events associated with
innate immunity, cell adhesion, angiogenesis and apoptosis in mammals. The level of calreticulin on the
surface of human dentritic cells and polymorphonuclear
phagocytes correlates with their phagocytotic ability
[33]. Induction of calreticulin upon LPS challenge has
recently been determined in other invertebrates such as
the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea which is suggestive for its evolutionarily conserved roles in innate
immunity [34]. LPS-challenge also induced expression of
tetraspanins whose role in modulating immune signal
complexes in vertebrates is well established [35]. Its
induced expression upon LPS-injection has also been
documented in ancient insects such as the firebrat [19].
Similarly, an ankyrin repeat domain containing protein
was found both in this basal insect and in Galleria.
Antimicrobial peptides and proteins

Our transcriptomic analysis resulted in identification of
a large number of antimicrobial peptides and proteins
(AMPs) among which the moricin-like gene family, the
gloverins and the cecropins were prominent. We determined the presence of six genes coding for moricin-like
proteins of the eight moricin peptide fragments (several
of which are identical) reported from Galleria. Moricins
have been shown to exert in vitro activity against both
Gram negative and Gram positive bacteria, as well as
against yeast and filamentous fungi [36]. Although protein sequence alignments show highly conserved blocks
of amino acids, a phylogenetic analysis of moricin
sequences from Galleria and other Lepidoptera indicate
species-specific gene duplication events for some gene
family members (e.g. most of the Bombyx moricins),
while others cluster according to the species phylogeny
(Figure 5). Moricins belong to the amphipathic a-helical
antimicrobial peptides and have been first discovered in
the lepidopteran B. mori [37], while gloverins have first
been found in the silk moth Hyalophora gloveri [38].
The presence of moricins and gloverins seem to be
restricted to Lepidoptera. Both proteomic and transcriptomic analysis confirmed the induced expression of
gloverins and their secretion into the hemolymoh of in
Galleria (Figure 3). We identified five members among
the induced transcripts. Gloverins are basic and heatstable proteins enriched in glycine residues but lacking
cysteine residues (Figure 6). They interact with LPS and
thereby increase the permeability and inhibit the

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Page 8 of 19

Figure 5 Gene phylogeny and amino acid alignment of moricins. (A) Neighbor-joining (NJ) consensus tree of moricins from Galleria
mellonella (Gme) and other insect species. (A) Bootstrap values next to the nodes represent the percentage of 1000 replicate trees supporting
the corresponding clade. (B) Amino acid alignment of the predicted moricin peptides from Galleria together with predicted protein sequences
deduced from publicly available insect sequence datasets. Species abbreviations: Spodoptera exigua (Sex), Spodoptera littoralis (Sli), Heliothis
virescens (Hvi), Manduca sexta (Mse), Bombyx mori (Bmo), Plutella xylostella (Pxy), Pieris brassicae (Pbr). Sequences were aligned with MAFFT
multiple alignment program. Identical residues are boxed with dark shading, and conserved residues are boxed with light shading.

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Page 9 of 19

Figure 6 Gloverin gene phylogeny and amino acid alignment. (A) Bootstrap values next to the nodes represent the percentage of 1000
replicate trees supporting the corresponding clade. (B) The predicted gloverin proteins from Galleria (Gme) were aligned together with other
lepidopteran gloverin proteinsusing MAFFT multiple alignment program. Identical residues are boxed with dark shading, and conserved residues
are boxed with light shading. Sequences Gme_gloverin2 and 5 are almost identical to the (partial) gloverin sequence deposited in Genbank
(AAN15787). Abbreviated species names: Manduca sexta (Mse), Bombyx mori (Bmo), Spodoptera exigua (Sex), Helicoverpa armigera (Har),
Trichoplusia ni (Tni), Plutella xylostella (Pxy).

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

formation of the outer membrane in bacteria. At least 7
gloverins have been reported from the genome of the
silkworm B. mori [39].
Cecropins represent another group of linear and
amphipathic peptides with a-helical structure. The first
member of this peptide family exhibiting antibacterial
and antifungal activity was discovered in and isolated
from the hemolymph of the silk moth Hyalophora
cecropia and has therefore been named cecropin [40].
The cecropin-like peptide from Galleria is synthesized
as a propeptide, with a putative 22-residue signal peptide, a 4-residue propeptide and a 39-residue mature
peptide with a mass of 4.3 kDa. Like cecropins from
other insects it exhibits potent activity against both
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria [41]. We
have identified four different cecropins in the Galleria
transcriptome dataset, including a more diverged D-type
cecropin. This surprisingly large number of different
cecropins (Additional file 4B) covers a larger fraction of
the amino acid diversity encountered when comparing
cecropins from across the Lepidoptera.
We determined both cysteine-rich peptides reported
from Galleria which exclusively inhibit growth of filamentous fungi, the defensin-like antifungal peptides
galiomicin [42] and gallerimycin [43]. At least the latter
contributes to innate immune responses mediating resistance of G. mellonella larvae against normally lethal
infection by the human pathogenic yeast C. albicans
[14]. Transgenic expression of gallerimycin has been
shown to confer resistance to fungal diseases on crops
[43]. A homologue of spodoptericin, the third defensinlike peptide discovered in Lepidoptera [44], is also present in our Galleria transcriptome.
In a previous study, we used the suppression subtractive hybridization method to screen for genes that are
induced in Galleria upon challenge with LPS [18]. This
approach resulted in the discovery of novel peptides and
protein families which were also found in this extended
transcriptomic study. For example, we discovered a
cobatoxin-like molecule and a protein which was named
Gall-6-tox due to its six conserved tandem repeats of
cysteine-stabilized alpha beta motifs (CS-ab), the structural scaffold characteristic of invertebrate defensins and
scorpion toxins. Homologues of Gal-6-tox differing in
the number of tandem repeats of the CS-ab motif were
later found in other lepidopterans such as Bombyx mori
and Spodoptera exigua. It turned out that they belong to
a novel family of atypical defensin-derived immunerelated proteins, which is specific to Lepidoptera and
which is now called X-tox [45]. Moreover, our study
confirmed the induced expression of tenascin-like
proteins in Galleria upon LPS-challenge [18], which
represent immune effector molecules known from vertebrates. However, using RACE-PCR we obtained the full-

Page 10 of 19

length cDNA which is considerably shorter than vertebrate tenascins and lacks characteristic tenascin domains
such as fibronectin type-3-like repeats. These findings
make the relation of the identified sequences to tenascins
unlikely.
With transcriptomic and proteomic analysis we also
found different lysozymes, one of which was first identified in Galleria more than 40 years ago, representing
the first antimicrobial protein reported from insects
[46]. It shares structural similarity with C (chicken) type
lysozyme [47], and its activity against Gram-positive
bacteria has been attributed to its ability to degrade cell
wall peptidoglycan by hydrolysis of the b-1-4 linkages
between N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid
residues. Besides moderate activity against Gram-negative bacteria [48], Galleria lysozyme was also shown to
exhibit antifungal activity in vitro [49], similar to that of
human lysozyme against the pathogenic yeasts Candida
albicans and Coccidioides immitis [50]. We identified
four c-type lysozyme homologues and an additional
i-type lysozyme whose function remains to be elucidated.
To further examine the relationships among lysozyme
proteins identified in Galleria and those found in other
insects, c-type lysozyme sequences from 12 insect species
and from human were aligned and used to construct a
gene phylogeny (Figure 7A). The phylogenetic analysis
revealed that these sequences clustered in two distinct
clades. One of these clades clearly separated with a high
bootstrap support contains most of the lepidopteran lysozymes, including a group with two of the four Galleria
lysozymes identified here and a previously identified
partial lysozyme sequence (Figure 7B). These findings
suggest that Galleria exceeds the number of c-type lysozymes found in other Lepidoptera (e.g. three lysozymes
identified in the genome of Bombyx), supporting the idea
of species-specific lysozyme gene duplication events in
Galleria leading to paralogues with potentially different
functions.
The invertebrate i-type lysozymes, although somewhat
diverged in their activities, encompass a group of
proteins having highly related primary structures. They
differ from other lysozymes in having 10 or 12 cysteine
residues in the primary sequence. The latter are predicted to form five or six disulfide bonds which have
been attributed to cause stability against heat denaturation, high osmolarity and proteolytic degradation.
Although several i-type lysozymes have been shown to
be active at low temperatures, the enzyme is stabile
even after prolonged heating or long-term storage at
room temperature [51]. The i-type lysozymes are coded
for by single copy genes in Lepidoptera (Figure 8).
In addition, we identified a full-length cDNA sequence
which is identical to the deduced protein sequence of a
Galleria proline-rich peptide [52] and almost identical

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Page 11 of 19

Figure 7 Gene phylogeny and sequence similarity of C-type Lysozymes. Neighbour-joining phylogenetic analysis of C-type lysozymes (CLys) from Galleria mellonella (Gme), other insect species and humans (accession numbers are provided in the name IDs). (A) Bootstrap values
next to the nodes represent the percentage of 1000 replicate trees supporting the corresponding clade. (B) Amino acid alignment of the five
predicted C-type lysozyme proteins from Galleria together with predicted protein sequences deduced from publicly available insect sequence
datasets.

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Page 12 of 19

Figure 8 Gene phylogeny and amino acid alignment of i-type Lysozymes. (A) Neighbour-joining (NJ) phylogenetic analysis of i-type
lysozymes from Galleria mellonella (Gme), other insect and non-vertebrate species (accession numbers are provided in the name IDs). Bootstrap
values from NJ analyses are shown as percentages of 1000 replicate trees supporting the corresponding clade. (B) MAFFT alignment with part of
the predicted i-type lysozyme proteins listed in the phylogeny. Identical amino acids are shaded in black and depicted by an asterisc, conserved
amino acids are shaded in grey and depicted by a dot in the consensus sequence.

to two protein fragments identified in a previous study
analyzing hemolymph peptide fragments in Galleria
[53]. Finally, our transcriptomic analysis confirmed the
presence of genes encoding cobatoxin-like peptides
[18,45] (Additional file 4C).
Inhibitors of microbial proteases

The immunity-related transcriptome of Galleria comprises a number of serine proteinase inhibitors among
which we identified three genes encoding inhibitors
(ISPI-1, ISPI-2, and ISPI-3) that have previously been
purified from hemolymph and whose amino acid
sequence was partially determined by Edman sequencing. All three ISPIs with molecular masses between 9.2
(ISPI-1) and 6.3 (ISPI-3) were determined to be capable
of inhibiting the major virulence factors, designated as
Pr1 and Pr2, of the entomopathogenic fungus Metarhizium anisopliae which is used in biological control of

pest insects worldwide [54]. ISPI-1 and ISPI-3 do not
share sequence similarity with other known proteins
whereas ISPI-2 turned out to represent a Kunitz-type
inhibitor (Figure 9). In addition, we found transcripts
encoding for the insect metalloproteinase inhibitor
(IMPI) which represents the first and to date only peptide known from animals which is capable to specifically
inhibit thermolysin-like microbial metalloproteinases
belonging to the M4 family [55]. The latter encompass a
number of prominent members such as aureolysin,
bacillolysin, pseudolysin and vibriolysin which are produced by human pathogenic bacteria. Thermolysin-like
metalloproteases are recognized to be responsible for a
number of symptoms associated with severe infections
such as increase of vascular permeability, hemorrhagic
edema, sepsis and necrotic tissue destruction in infected
humans, and have therefore been implicated as targets
for the development of second generation antibiotics

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Page 13 of 19

Figure 9 Nucleotide and amino acid sequences of three insect serine protease inhibitors (ISPIs) in Galleria. Three identified cDNAs are
shown including open reading frames that encode Galleria ISPI1 (A), ISPI2 (B) or ISPI3 (C). Start methionine and stop codons are indicated. Signal
sequences predicted with ProP 1.0 Server http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/ProP/ are underlined and active peptide sequences are shaded.

[56]. The IMPI has been discovered in and was purified
from Galleria larvae which were preinjected with LPS
[57]. The amino acid sequence of the IMPI shares no
similarity with other known proteins and its prominent
stability against heat and acid treatment has been attributed to its five intra-molecular disulfide bonds. It has
recently been found to encode two distinct inhibitors.
The IMPI-peptide encoded by the N-terminal part contributes to innate immune responses by inhibiting

microbial metalloproteases, whereas the IMPI-peptide
encoded by the C-terminal part of the gene has been
implicated to mediate regulation of endogenous matrix
metalloproteinases with pleiotropic functions in immunity and development [58].
Transferrin

Several induced transcripts encode for transferrin
which represents a multifunctional and evolutionarily

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

conserved player in innate immunity. Its role in binding and removing available free iron ions, thus creating
unfavorable environments for bacteria has first been
reported in vertebrates [59]. A recent study using
B. mori confirmed both the induced expression of
transferrin upon LPS-challenge and its contribution to
antibacterial iron-withholding strategy in Lepidoptera
B. mori [60].
Stress response genes

In line with our previous studies in which we used LPSchallenge to screen for inducible immunity-related
genes in insects and other invertebrates [18-20,29,61]
we determined induced expression of genes involved in
detoxification and stress adaptation such as apolipoprotein D, cytochrome P450s, gluthathione S-transferases,
and a number of heat shock proteins which further
supports our hypothesis that interdependencies
between immune and stress responses are evolutionarily
conserved in insects [18-20,29,61]. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are a large and diverse family of detoxification enzymes found in most organisms. GSTs help to
protect cells from oxidative stress, but they also play a
central role in the detoxification of both endogenous
and xenobiotic compounds (e.g. plant secondary metabolites or insecticides) and are involved in intracellular
transport and biosynthesis of hormones. Eukaryotes
contain multiple GSTs belonging to different GST
classes and with differing enzyme activities to accommodate the wide range of functions of this enzyme family.
The insect GST supergene family encodes a group of
proteins that have been assigned to at least six classes:
Delta, Epsilon, Omega, Sigma, Theta and Zeta [62,63].
The Delta and Epsilon classes, both specific to insects,
are the largest classes and are often involved in xenobiotic metabolism whereas the Omega, Sigma, Theta and
Zeta classes have a much wider taxonomic distribution
and likely play essential housekeeping roles [62,63].
Herbivorous insects have to cope with toxic plant metabolites taken up with their diet and GSTs can play an
important role in their detoxification [64-66].
We identified a total of 19 different GSTs in Galleria
larval ESTs out of which 2 were microsomal GSTs. Five
out of the six classes identified in other insect species are
represented and most of the Galleria GSTs belong to the
insect-specific Delta and Epsilon classes with 4 and 6
members each, respectively. However, in contrast to a
comparable larval EST dataset of the generalist plant herbivore lepidopteran H. armigera [67] both the total number of GSTs identified and the strong overrepresentation
of the insect-specific GSTs is much lower in Galleria
(Additional file 5). The insect-specific Delta and Epsilon
GST classes are often involved in detoxification of xenobiotics and the limited number of GSTs from those classes

Page 14 of 19

may point at the unique ecological niche and highly specialized diet of Galleria which is devoid of any (potentially
toxic) plant secondary metabolites.

Conclusions
We have generated a comprehensive larval transcriptome map of the phylogenetically ancient lepidopteran
Galleria mellonella. This data set complements and
massively expands the known spectrum of immunity
and stress related genes of this model host which have
been found in previous studies using peptidomic [68] or
SSH-based transcriptomic approaches [18]. Besides
genes encoding proteins that mediate recognition of
microbial signatures such as GNBPs, bGRPs, PGRPs and
Toll or immunity-related signalling, we determined a
broad spectrum of defence related effectors such as
antimicrobial peptides and proteins among which moricins and gloverins are restricted to Lepidoptera. In line
with other studies, the spectrum of genes which is upregulated in response to injected LPS includes proteins
involved in detoxification (apolipoprotein D, cytochrome
P450s, gluthathione S-transferases) and stress response
(e.g. heat shock proteins). The secretion of induced
immunity-and stress-related peptides and proteins into
the hemolymph has been confirmed by comparative
proteomic analysis of hemolymph samples from
untreated and immunized larvae. Importantly, the
spectrum of immunity-related genes identified in this
study shares high similarity with that found in another
lepidopteran species, the tobacco hornworm M. sexta,
whose killed bacteria-induced transcriptome has previously been analyzed by pyrosequencing [1]. Furthermore, except for attacins, we identified in Galleria
members of all families of antimicrobial peptides which
are predicted from the complete genome sequence of
B. mori, [39]. Taken together we postulate that all effector molecule families contributing to lepidopteran innate
immunity are present in the phylogenetically basal
family Pyralidae to which Galleria belongs. The entity of
generated data provide a valuable platform for more
detailed analyses of immune responses in Galleria and,
therefore, improve the suitability of this lepidopteran
both as a model host for human pathogens and for
studies addressing coevolution with entomopathogens.
Methods
Insect material

Galleria mellonella individuals used here were obtained
from the laboratory culture which has been used in our
previous studies. Galleria caterpillars were reared on an
artificial diet (22% maize meal, 22% wheat germ, 11% dry
yeast, 17.5% bee wax, 11% honey, and 11% glycerin) at 31°
C in darkness. Last-instar larvae, each weighing between
250 and 350 mg, were used for immunization using

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

10 mg/ml LPS dissolved in water (Sigma, Taufkirchen,
Germany). Ten microliters of sample volume per caterpillar was injected dorsolaterally into the hemocoel using 1ml disposable syringes and 0.4-by 20-mm needles
mounted on a microapplicator. Larvae were homogenized
at 8 h postinjection for RNA isolation or bled at 24 h postinjection to obtain hemolymph samples.
RNA extraction, cDNA normalization and Next
Generation Sequencing

Total RNA was extracted from different life stages, from
hemocytes, and from immune-challenged larvae (injections) using TRIZOL and mRNA was subsequently isolated from total RNA using the MN-NucleoTrap mRNA
kit according to the manufacturers’ instructions
(Macherey & Nagel). cDNAs were generated from 1 μg
of poly(A)+ mRNA using the SMART PCR cDNA
synthesis kit (BD Clontech) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. Reverse transcription was performed with the
SMART KIT reverse transcriptase (Takara) for 60 min
at 42°C. In order to prevent over-representation of the
most common transcripts, the resulting single-stranded
cDNAs were normalized using the Kamchatka crab
duplex-specific nuclease method (Trimmer cDNA
normalization kit, Evrogen) [69]. Subsequently, SMART
kit components and Triple-Taq enzyme with proofreading activity were used to generate full-length
enriched double-stranded long cDNAs. Each step of the
normalization procedure was carefully monitored to
avoid the generation of artefacts and overcycling. The
optimal condition for ds-cDNA synthesis was empirically determined by subjecting the cDNA to a range of
thermocycling numbers and their products checked by
electrophoresis. The optimal cycle number was defined
as the maximum number of PCR cycles without any
signs of overcycling. The resulting normalized cDNA
library was used for 454 pyrosequencing [70] using the
Roche 454 FLX machine and Sanger sequencing using
an ABI 3730 × l capillary sequencer. The 454 sequence
reads were assembled using the newbler assembler
with standard settings and using the CLC Genomics
Workbench as an alternative assembly method. Before
assembly, obtained reads were preprocessed by masking
PolyA tails and removing SMART adapters using custom written Perl scripts. We compared the resulting
contigs to the refseq protein database containing all
information on coding sequences so far obtained
(March 2010). Furthermore, we set up species specific
databases from Drosophila, Bombyx, and human in
order to find species specific similarities.
Sanger Sequencing and Generation of EST Databases

A fraction of the dscDNAs was cloned in the pGEMT-easy vector. Ligations were transformed into E. coli

Page 15 of 19

ELECTROMAX DH5a-E electro-competent cells (Invitrogen). Plasmid minipreparation from bacterial colonies
grown in 96 deep-well plates was performed using the
96 well robot plasmid isolation kit (NextTec) on a
Tecan Evo Freedom 150 robotic platform (Tecan).
Sequencing of both the 5’ and 3’ termini of cDNA
library clones was carried out on an ABI 3730 xl automatic DNA sequencer (PE Applied Biosystems). Vector
clipping, quality trimming and sequence assembly using
stringent conditions (e.g. high quality sequence trimming parameters, 95% sequence identity cutoff, 25 bp
overlap) was done with the Lasergene software package
(DNAStar Inc.).
Blast homology searches and sequence annotation

We set up individual searchable databases for the complete sequence dataset and used this to identify the genes
we describe in more detail in the text. Blast searches were
conducted on a local server using the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) blastall program.
Homology searches (BLASTx and BLASTn) of unique
sequences and functional annotation by gene ontology
terms (GO; http://www.geneontology.org), InterPro terms
(InterProScan, EBI), enzyme classification codes (EC), and
metabolic pathways (KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes) were determined using the BLAST2GO
software suite v2.3.1 http://www.blast2go.de[71]. Homology searches were performed remotely on the NCBI server
through QBLAST, and followed a sequential strategy.
First, Sequences were searched against the NCBI nonredundant (nr) protein database using an E-value cut-off
of 10-3, with predicted polypeptides of a minimum length
of 15 amino acids. Second, sequences retrieving no
BLASTx hit were searched again by BLASTn, against an
NCBI nr nucleotide database using an E-value cut-off of
10-10. The GO data presented represent the level 3 analysis, illustrating general functional categories. Enzyme classification codes, and KEGG metabolic pathway
annotations, were generated from the direct mapping of
GO terms to their enzyme code equivalents. Finally, InterPro searches were performed remotely from BLAST2GO
via the InterProEBI web server. In order to obtain a rough
transcriptome coverage estimate for the Galleria larval
cDNA library, we went through a series of search steps in
order to i) obtain all hits against the conserved KEGG
pathway database, and ii) estimate genome coverage by
identifying the complete ribosomal protein dataset as compared to the full B. mori set. Based on these findings we
estimate the theoretical transcriptome coverage to be close
to 90% (e.g. 77/79 B. mori ribosomal proteins were found).
Nucleotide sequences were analyzed in more detail using
the commercial Lasergene Software package and the freeware BioEdit program. Genes were aligned by their amino
acid sequences using the ClustalW function [72] or the

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

MAFFT program. If necessary, alignments were then
corrected by eye and reverted back to the nucleotide
sequences for the phylogenetic analyses and in order to
remove redundant contigs.
Sequence submission

We have deposited the EST (Sanger) and short read
(454 Roche) data with the following accession numbers:
ERP000555 (SRA) and JG394435-JG406465 (dbEST).
Phylogenetic data was deposited at TreeBASE with
submission ID 11389. All of the predicted protein
sequences used for alignments and phylogenies can be
found in additional file 6. Note that the names of the
validated proteins are made from the letters Gme followed by the number of the contig from the assembly.
An assembly of the Galleria data with contig consensus
sequences, Blast2GO hits against nr database, hit accessions, and annotations including InterPro scans can be
found in Additional file 7.
Phylogenetic reconstruction

The phylogenetic reconstruction implemented for the
analysis of several proteins was performed using two different methods. For the Neighbour-Joining (NJ) method
we implemented the TREECON program. Amino acid
sequences were aligned by MAFFT http://mafft.cbrc.jp/
alignment/server/index.html and each visually inspected
for regions of high quality alignment. The NJ consensus
tree was generated with TREECON. Distance calculations
were performed after Tajima & Nei and bootstrap analysis, running 1000 bootstrap samples. Conserved residues
in the alignments were highlighted with BOXSHADE
3.21 http://www.ch.embnet.org/software/BOX_form.
html. In addition to the Neighbour-Joining method, for
some gene trees the phylogenetic reconstruction was
done by Bayesian inference using Mr. Bayes 3.1. The
prior was set for the amino acid models to mix, thereby
allowing model jumping between fixed-rate amino acid
models. Markov Chain Monte Carlo runs were carried
out for 10,000,000 generations after which log likelihood
values showed that equilibrium had been reached after
the first 5000 generations in all cases, and those data
were discarded from each run and considered as ‘burnin’.
Two runs were conducted for the dataset showing agreement in topology and likelihood scores. The Neighbourjoining and the Bayesian tree topologies including their
general subfamily relationships and node supports were
in agreement. The gene trees were visualized and
optimized with the MEGA4 software package [73].

Page 16 of 19

hemolymph samples from 10 larvae 24 h post immune
challenge and from 10 untreated larvae used as controls
were collected directly into 1.5 ml pre-cooled plastic
tubes containing traces of phenylthiourea to prevent
melanisation reactions. Hemocytes were removed by
brief centrifugation step and cell-free hemolymph was
precipitated by the addition of 3 volumes of 100% acetone and 0.4 volumes of 100% trichloroacetic acid and
incubation at 20°C for 1 h. After centrifugation at
20,000 × g for 10 min, the pellet was washed three
times with 100% acetone and resolved under agitation
in 8 M urea at 22°C for 16 h. Protein concentrations
were determined using a Micro BC assay kit (Uptima,
Montlucon, France). Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis was done with the Ettan IPGphor II system and the
Ettan DALTsix electrophoresis unit (Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden) according to the instructions
of the manufacturer. Briefly, 1 mg of protein was mixed
with immobilized pH gradient (IPG) buffer (pH 3 to 11
nonlinear gradient [NL]) and applied on an IPG strip
(24 cm; pH 3 to 11 NL). Isoelectric focusing was performed at 20°C and 75 μA per IPG strip as follows:
swelling for 24 h and isoelectric focusing for 1 h at 500
V, 8-h gradient to reach 1,000 V, 3-h gradient to reach
8,000 V, and isoelectric focusing for 4 h at 8,000
V. Prior to Tris-Tricine-sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (5) with 26-by 20-cm
15% gels, the strips were equilibrated with 6 M urea,
30% glycerin, 2% SDS, and 50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8 for
30 min. After electrophoresis at 20°C, the gels were
stained using colloidal Coomassie brilliant blue (Carl
Roth). For image analysis, the gels were scanned using
an Umax PowerLook II scanner and analyzed with
Delta2D software (Decodon, Greifswald, Germany). Spot
identity has been determined by comparing spots with
our recent study [21] combined with additional peptide
mass fingerprinting analyses. In brief, spots excised from
the gel were carbamidomethylated and in-gel digested
using mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega) in
0.025 M NH4HCO3. The mass spectra of the resulting
tryptic peptides were recorded using an Ultraflex TOF/
TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) operating under FlexControl 2.4 (Bruker) in the
positive-ion reflectron mode, with dihydroxy benzoic
acid as the matrix. Peptide mass profiles were analyzed
with local Mascot http://www.matrixscience.com, using
deduced protein sequences from our present Galleria
transcriptome analysis database.

Additional material
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
of hemolymph proteins

Proteomic analysis of immune hemolymph has been
performed as described previously [21]. In brief,

Additional file 1: Species distribution of the top BLAST hit in the nr
database for each contig of the Galleria transcriptome.

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Additional file 2: Comparison of GO category representations
between Bombyx mori (predicted genes) and Galleria mellonella
transcriptome data. Each transcript was assigned applicable highlevel generic GO terms. Data are presented for Biological Process
and Molecular GO-level 3. Note that one gene object can be
classified into more than 1 class, therefore the total number of
gene objects classified for both species is not identical to the
number of contigs with GO associations.
Additional file 3: Gene phylogeny of ßGRP protein sequences. A
bayesian phylogenetic tree of insect ßGRP proteins. Bayesian posterior
probabilities are shown for all major nodes supported with probability
higher than 60%. Amino acid sequence alignments were performed
using MAFFT multiple alignment program without the predicted signal
peptide and part of the N-terminus as in some cases only partial
sequence information was available. Identical residues are boxed with
dark shading, and conserved residues are boxed with light shading. All
Galleria ßGRP sequences are depicted in red and the group of ßGRP
sequences with beta-glucanase activity is shaded. (AdditionalFile-3.pdf)
Additional file 4: Amino acid alignments of (A) Spaetzle, (B)
Cecropins and (C) cobatoxin sequences from Galleria and other
insect species. Deduced from conceptual translation of Galleria
transcripts (ESTs) present in the larval dataset. All alignments were
performed with MAFFT. Identical residues are boxed with dark shading,
and conserved residues are boxed with light shading.
Additional file 5: Gene phylogeny of glutathione S-transferases
(GSTs). Neighbour-joining phylogenetic analysis of glutathione-Stransferases from Galleria mellonella (Gme) and other insect species
(accession numbers are given). Bootstrap values next to the nodes
represent the percentage of 1000 replicate trees that preserved the
corresponding clade. Positions containing alignment gaps and missing
data were eliminated and not used for the generation of the
phylogenetic analysis. An additional Bayesian analysis supported all major
nodes with posterior probabilities higher than 60%.
Additional file 6: Deduced protein sequences from Galleria
mellonella, other Lepidopteran ESTs and NCBI sequences used in
the phylogenetic analyses.
Additional file 7: Complete annotation file of the assembled
Galleria ESTs. Contig IDs, sequence length, Galleria contig sequences,
top BLAST hits (if any) in the NCBI nr database for each unique contig,
including accession number, E-value and percentage similarity, EC
numbers, GO annotations and InterPro scans are listed.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the help of M. Linder (University of Giessen) with Maldi-tof
MS analysis, A. Berisha (University of Giessen) with local Mascot analysis and
M. Fischer (University of Giessen) for technical assistance. The authors thank the
German Research Foundation for a Heisenberg Fellowship to BA (AL902/4-1)
and a grant within the DFG priority program 1399 (Host-parasite Coevolutionrapid reciprocal adaptation and its genetic base) to AV (VI 219/3-1). This work
was supported by the Max Planck Society.

Author details
1
Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, Hans-Knoell-Strasse 8, 07745
Jena, Germany. 2INRES-Phytomedicine, Rheinische Friedrich-WilhelmsUniversity of Bonn, Germany. 3Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and
Inland Fisheries, IGB Müggelseedamm 310, D-12587 Berlin, Germany.
4
Institute of Phytopathology and Applied Zoology, University of Giessen,
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32, 35392 Giessen, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
AV, HV and BA conceived the study. HV analyzed data, performed sequence
alignments and phylogenetic analyses, and participated in drafting the
manuscript. BA performed experimental work for the generation of the
cDNA library, analyzed part of the data and performed proteomic analysis of
hemolymph samples. GG generated the 454 data and was involved in
carrying out the bioinformatic analyses. AV conceived and coordinated the

Page 17 of 19

study, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed in
the conception and design of the study, read and approved the final
version of the manuscript.
Received: 25 February 2011 Accepted: 11 June 2011
Published: 11 June 2011
References
1. Zou Z, Najar F, Wang Y, Roe B, Jiang H: Pyrosequence analysis of
expressed sequence tags for Manduca sexta hemolymph proteins
involved in immune responses. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2008, 38:677-82.
2. Pauchet Y, Wilkinson P, Vogel H, Nelson DR, Reynolds SE, Heckel DG,
ffrench-Constant RH: Pyrosequencing the Manduca sexta larval midgut
transcriptome: messages for digestion, detoxification and defence. Insect
Mol Biol 2010, 19:61-75.
3. Vilcinskas A: Coevolution between pathogen-derived proteinases and
proteinase inhibitors of host insects. Virulence 2010, 1:206-14.
4. Scully L, Bidochka M: Developing insects as models for current and
emerging human pathogens. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2006, 263:1-9.
5. Fuchs B, Mylonakis E: Using non-mammalian hosts to study fungal
virulence and host defense. Curr Opin Microbiol 2006, 9:346-51.
6. Kavanagh K, Reeves EP: Exploiting the potential of insects for the in vivo
pathogenicity testing of microbial pathogens. FEMS Microbiol 2004,
28:101-12.
7. Mylonakis E, Casadevall A, Ausubel FM: Exploiting amoeboid and nonvertebrate animal model systems to study virulence of human
pathogenic fungi. Plos Path 2007, 3:3101.
8. Jander G, Rahme L, Ausubel FM, Drenkard E: Positive correlation between
virulence of Pseudomonas aeroginosa mutants in mice and insects.
J Bacteriol 2000, 182:3843-45.
9. Fedhila S, Daou N, Lereclus D, Nielsen-LeRoux C: Identification of Bacillus
cereus internalin and other candidate virulence genes specifically
induced during oral infection in insects. Mol Microbiol 2006, 62:339-55.
10. Park S, Kim KM, Lee JH, Seo SJ, Lee IH: Extracellular gelatinase of
Enterococcus faecalis destroys a defense system in insect hemolymph
and human serum. Infect Immun 2007, 75:1861-9.
11. Mukherjee K, Altincicek B, Hain T, Domann E, Vilcinskas A, Chakraborty T:
Galleria mellonella as model system to study Listeria pathogenesis. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2010, 76:310-7.
12. Miyata S, Casey M, Frank D, Ausubel F, Drenkard E: Use of the Galleria
mellonella caterpillar as a model host to study the role of type III
secretion system in Pseudomonas aeroginosa pathogenesis. Infect Immun
2003, 71:2404-13.
13. Garcia-Lara J, Needham A, Foster S: Invertebrates as animal models for
Staphylococcus aureus pathogenesis: A window into host-pathogen
interaction. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2005, 43:311-23.
14. Bergin D, Murphy L, Keenan J, Clynes M, Kavanagh K: Pre-exposure to
yeast protects larvae of Galleria mellonella from a subsequent lethal
infection by Candida albicans and is mediated by the increased
expression of antimicrobial peptides. Microbes Infect 2006, 8:2105-12.
15. Mylonakis E, Moreno R, El Khoury J, Idnurm A, Heitman J, Calderwood SB,
Ausubel FM, Diener A: Galleria mellonella as a model system to study
Cryptococcus neoformans pathogenesis. Infect Immun 2005, 73:3842-50.
16. Clermont A, Wedde M, Seitz V, Podsiadlowski L, Hummel M, Vilcinskas A:
Cloning and expression of an inhibitor against microbial
metalloproteinases from insects (IMPI) contributing to innate immunity.
Biochem J 2004, 382:315-22.
17. Vilcinskas A: Anti-Infective therapeutics from the lepidopteran model
host Galleria mellonella. Curr Pharm Des 2011, 17(13):1240-5.
18. Seitz V, Clermont A, Wedde M, Hummel M, Vilcinskas A, Schlatterer K,
Podsiadlowski L: Identification of immunorelevant genes from greater
wax moth (Galleria mellonella) by a subtractive hybridization approach.
Dev Comp Immunol 2003, 27:207-215.
19. Altincicek B, Vilcinskas A: Identification of immune-related genes from an
apterygote insect, the firebrat Thermobia domestica. Insect Biochem Mol
Biol 2007, 37:726-31.
20. Altincicek B, Vilcinskas A: Analysis of the immune-inducible transcriptome
from microbial stress resistant, rat-tailed maggots of the drone fly
Eristalis tenax. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:326.
21. Altincicek B, Lindner M, Linder D, Preissner K, Vilcinskas A: Microbial
metalloproteinases mediate sensing of invading pathogens and activate

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

innate immune responses in the lepidopteran model host Galleria
mellonella. Infect Immun 2007, 75:175-83.
Götz S, García-Gómez JM, Terol J, Williams TD, Nueda MJ, Robles M,
Talón M, Dopazo J, Conesa A: High-throughput functional annotation and
data mining with the Blast2GO suite. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:3420-35.
Beldade P, McMillan WO, Papanicolaou A: Butterfly genomics eclosing.
Heredity 2008, 100:150-7.
Whitten MM, Tew IF, Lee BL, Ratcliffe NA: A novel role for an insect
apolipoprotein (apolipophorin III) in beta-1,3-glucan pattern recognition
and cellular encapsulation reactions. J Immunol 2004, 172(4):2177-85.
Altincicek B, Stötzel S, Wygrecka M, Preissner KT, Vilcinskas A: Host-derived
extracellular nucleic acids enhance innate immune responses, induce
coagulation, and prolong survival upon infection in insects. J Immunol
2008, 181(4):2705-12.
Pauchet Y, Muck A, Svatos A, Heckel DG: Chromatographic and
electrophoretic resolution of proteins and protein complexes from the
larval midgut microvilli of Manduca sexta. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2009,
39:467-74.
Pauchet Y, Freitak D, Heidel-Fischer HM, Heckel DG, Vogel H: Immunity or
digestion: glucanase activity in a glucan-binding protein family from
Lepidoptera. J Biol Chem 2009, 284(4):2214-24.
Lee WJ, Lee JD, Kravchenko VV, Ulevitch RJ, Brey PT: Purification and
molecular cloning of an inducible gram-negative bacteria-binding
protein from the silkworm, Bombyx mori. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93:7888-93.
Lemaitre B, Hoffmann JA: The host defense of Drosophila melanogaster.
Annu Rev Immunol 2007, 25:697-743.
Ligoxygakis P, Bulet P, Reichhart JM: Critical evaluation of the role of the
Toll-like receptor 18-Wheeler in the host defense of Drosophila. EMBO
Rep 2002, 3:666-73.
Tanji T, Yun EY, Ip YT: Heterodimers of NF-kappaB transcription factors
DIF and Relish regulate antimicrobial peptide genes in Drosophila. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:14715-20.
An C, Jiang H, Kanost MR: Proteolytic activation and function of the
cytokine Spätzle in the innate immune response of a lepidopteran
insect, Manduca sexta. FEBS J 2010, 277:148-62.
Johnson S, Michalak M, Opas M, Eggleton P: The ins and outs of
calreticulin: from the ER lumen to the extracellular space. Trends Cell Biol
2001, 11:122-9.
Altincicek B, Vilcinskas A: Comparative analysis of septic injury-inducible
genes in phylogenetically distant model organisms of regeneration and
stem cell research, the planarian Schmidtea mediterranea and the
cnidarian Hydra vulgaris. Front Zool 2008, 5:6.
Levy S, Shoham T: The tetraspanin web modulates immune-signalling
complexes. Nat Rev Immunol 2005, 5:136-48.
Brown SE, Howard A, Kasprzak AB, Gordon KH, East PD: The discovery and
analysis of a divergend family of novel antifungal moricin-like peptides
in the wax moth Galleria mellonella. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2008,
38:201-12.
Hara S, Yamakawa M: Moricin, a novel type of antibacterial peptide
isolated from the silkworm, Bombyx mori. J Biol Chem 1995, 270:29923-7.
Axén A, Carlsson A, Engström A, Bennich H: Gloverin, an antibacterial
protein from the immune hemolymph of Hyalophora pupae. Eur J
Biochem 1997, 247:614-9.
Cheng T, Zhao P, Liu C, Xu P, Gao Z, Xia Q, Xiang Z: Structures, regulatory
regions, and inductive expression patterns of antimicrobial peptide
genes in the silkworm Bombyx mori. Genomics 2006, 87:356-65.
Steiner H, Hultmark D, Engström A, Bennich H, Boman HG: Sequence and
specificity of two antibacterial proteins involved in insect immunity.
Nature 1981, 292:246-8.
Kim CH, Lee JH, Kim I, Seo SJ, Son SM, Lee KY, Lee IH: Purification and
cDNA cloning of a cecropin-like peptide from the great wax moth,
Galleria mellonella. Mol Cells 2004, 17:262-6.
Lee YS, Yun EK, Jang WS, Kim I, Lee JH, Park SY, Ryu KS, Seo SJ, Kim CH,
Lee IH: Purification, cDNA cloning and expression of an insect defensin
from the great wax moth, Galleria mellonella. Insect Mol Biol 2004,
13:65-72.
Langen G, Imani J, Altincicek B, Kieseritzky G, Kogel KH, Vilcinskas A:
Transgenic expression of gallerimycin, a novel antifungal insect defensin
from the greater wax moth Galleria mellonella, confers resistance to
pathogenic fungi in tobacco. Biol Chem 2006, 387:549-57.

Page 18 of 19

44. Volkoff AN, Rocher J, d’Alencon E, Bouton M, Landais I, Quesada-Moraga E,
Vey A, Fournier P, Mita K, Devauchelle G: Characterization and
transcriptional profiles of three Spodoptera frugiperda genes encoding
cysteine-rich peptides. A new class of defensin-like genes from
lepidopteran insects? Gene 2003, 319:43-53.
45. Girard PA, Boublik Y, Wheat CW, Volkoff AN, Cousserans F, Brehélin M,
Escoubas JM: X-tox: an atypical defensin derived family of immunerelated proteins specific to Lepidoptera. Dev Comp Immunol 2008,
32:575-84.
46. Mohrig W, Messner B: Immunreaktionen bei Insekten. I. Lysozyme als
grundlegender antibakterieller Faktor im humoralen Abwehrgeschehen.
Biol Zentralbl 1968, 87:439-47.
47. Jolles J, Schoentgen F, Croizier G, et al: Insect lysozymes from three
species of Lepidoptera: Their structural relatedness to the C (chicken)
type lysozyme. J Mol Evol 1979, 14:267-71.
48. Yu KH, Kim KN, Lee JH, Lee HS, Kim SH, Cho KY, Nam MH, Lee IH:
Comparative study and characteristics of lysozymes from the
hemolymph of three lepidopteran larvae, Galleria mellonella, Bombyx
mori, Agrius convolvuli. Dev Comp Immunol 2002, 26:707-13.
49. Vilcinskas A, Matha V: Effect of the entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria
bassiana on humoral immune response of Galleria mellonella larvae
(Lepidoptera: Pyralidae). Eur J Entomol 1997, 94:461-72.
50. Vilcinskas A, Götz P: Parasitic fungi and their interactions with the insect
immune system. Adv Parasitol 1999, 43:267-313.
51. Nilsen IW, Overbø K, Sandsdalen E, Sandaker E, Sletten K, Myrnes B: Protein
purification and gene isolation of chlamysin, a cold-active lysozyme-like
enzyme with antibacterial activity. FEBS Lett 1999, 464:153-8.
52. Brown SE, Howard A, Kasprzak AB, Gordon KH, East PD: A peptidomic
study reveals the impressive antimicrobial peptide arsenal of the wax
moth Galleria mellonella. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2009, 39:792-800.
53. Cytrynska M, Zdybicka-Barabas A, Suder P, Jakubowicz T: Purification and
characterization of eight peptides from Galleria mellonella immune
hemolymph. Peptides 2007, 28:533-546.
54. Fröbius AC, Kanost MR, Götz P, Vilcinskas A: Isolation and characterization
of novel inducible serine protease inhibitors from larval hemolymph of
the greater wax moth Galleria mellonella. Eur J Biochem 2000,
267:2046-53.
55. Vilcinskas A, Wedde M: Insect inhibitors of metalloproteinases. IUBMB Life
54:339-43.
56. Adekoya O, Sylte I: The thermolysin family (M4) of enzymes: therapeutic
and biotechnological potential. Chem Biol Drug Des 2009, 73:7-16.
57. Wedde M, Weise C, Kopacek P, Franke P, Vilcinskas A: Purification and
characterization of an inducible metalloprotease inhibitor from the
hemolymph of greater wax moth larvae, Galleria mellonella. Eur J
Biochem 1998, 255:534-43.
58. Wedde M, Weise C, Nuck C, Altincicek B, Vilcinskas A: The insect
metalloproteinase inhibitor gene of the lepidopteran Galleria mellonella
encodes two distinct inhibitors. Biol Chem 2007, 388:119-27.
59. Kumagai T, Awai M, Okada S: Mobilization of iron and iron-related
proteins in rat spleen after intravenous injection of lipopolysaccharides
(LPS). Pathol Res Pract 1992, 188:931-41.
60. Yun EY, Lee JK, Kwon OY, Hwang JS, Kim I, Kang SW, Lee WJ, Ding JL,
You KH, Goo TW: Bombyx mori transferrin: genomic structure, expression
and antimicrobial activity of recombinant protein. Dev Comp Immunol
2009, 33:1064-9.
61. Altincicek B, Vilcinskas A: Analysis of the immune-related transcriptome of
a lophotrochozoan model, the marine annelid Platynereis dumerilii. Front
Zool 2007, 4:18.
62. Ranson H, Claudianos C, Ortelli F, Abgall C, Hemingway J,
Sharakhova MV, Unger MF, Collins FH, Feyereisen R: Evolution of
supergene families associated with insecticide resistance. Science 2002,
298(5591):179-81.
63. Ding Y, Ortelli F, Rossiter LC, Hemingway J, Ranson H: The Anopheles
gambiae glutathione transferase supergene family: annotation,
phylogeny and expression profiles. BMC Genomics 2003, 4:35.
64. Caccuri AM, Antonini G, Board PG, Flanagan J, Parker MW, Paolesse R,
Turella P, Chelvanayagam G, Ricci G: Identification, characterization, and
crystal structure of the omega class glutathione transferases. J Biol Chem
2000, 275(32):24798-806.
65. Yu SJ: Insect glutathione S-transferases. Zoological Studies 1996, 35(1):9-19.

Vogel et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/308

Page 19 of 19

66. Francis F, Vanhaelen N, Haubruge E: Glutathione S-transferases in the
adaptation to plant secondary metabolites in the Myzus persicae aphid.
Arch Insect Biochem Physiol 2005, 58:166-174.
67. Dabrowska P, Freitak D, Vogel H, Heckel DG, Boland W: The phytohormone
precursor OPDA is isomerized in the insect gut by a single, specific
glutathione transferase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(38):16304-9.
68. Brown SE, Howard A, Kasprzak AB, Gordon KH, East PD: A peptidomic
study reveals the impressive antimicrobial peptide arsenal of the wax
moth Galleria mellonella. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2009, 39:792-800.
69. Zhulidov PA, Bogdanova EA, Shcheglov AS, Vagner LL, Khaspekov GL,
Kozhemyako VB, Matz MV, Meleshkevitch E, Moroz LL, Lukyanov SA,
Shagin DA: Simple cDNA normalization using kamchatka crab duplexspecific nuclease. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:e37.
70. Margulies M, Egholm M, Altman WE, Attiya S, Bader JS, Bemben LA, Berka J,
Braverman MS, Chen YJ, Chen Z, Dewell SB, Du L, Fierro JM, Gomes XV,
Godwin BC, He W, Helgesen S, Ho CH, Irzyk GP, Jando SC, Alenquer ML,
Jarvie TP, Jirage KB, Kim JB, Knight JR, Lanza JR, Leamon JH, Lefkowitz SM,
Lei M, Li J, et al: Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density
picolitre reactors. Nature 2005, 437:376-80.
71. Conesa A, Götz S: Blast2GO: A Comprehensive Suite for Functional
Analysis in plant genomics. Int J Plant Genom 2008, 619832.
72. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-4.
73. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: molecular evolutionary
genetics analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-9.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-308
Cite this article as: Vogel et al.: A comprehensive transcriptome and
immune-gene repertoire of the lepidopteran model host Galleria
mellonella. BMC Genomics 2011 12:308.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
