<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Regulatory coordination of clustered microRNAs based on microRNA-transcription factor regulatory network</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199. doi:10.1186/1752-0509-5-199"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jin Wang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Regulatory coordination of clustered microRNAs
based on microRNA-transcription factor
regulatory network
Jin Wang1, Martin Haubrock2, Kun-Ming Cao1, Xu Hua1, Chen-Yu Zhang1*, Edgar Wingender2* and Jie Li1*

Abstract
Background: MicroRNA (miRNA) is a class of small RNAs of ~22nt which play essential roles in many crucial
biological processes and numerous human diseases at post-transcriptional level of gene expression. It has been
revealed that miRNA genes tend to be clustered, and the miRNAs organized into one cluster are usually
transcribed coordinately. This implies a coordinated regulation mode exerted by clustered miRNAs. However, how
the clustered miRNAs coordinate their regulations on large scale gene expression is still unclear.
Results: We constructed the miRNA-transcription factor regulatory network that contains the interactions between
transcription factors (TFs), miRNAs and non-TF protein-coding genes, and made a genome-wide study on the
regulatory coordination of clustered miRNAs. We found that there are two types of miRNA clusters, i.e. homoclusters that contain miRNAs of the same family and hetero-clusters that contain miRNAs of various families. In
general, the homo-clustered as well as the hetero-clustered miRNAs both exhibit coordinated regulation since the
miRNAs belonging to one cluster tend to be involved in the same network module, which performs a relatively
isolated biological function. However, the homo-clustered miRNAs show a direct regulatory coordination that is
realized by one-step regulation (i.e. the direct regulation of the coordinated targets), whereas the hetero-clustered
miRNAs show an indirect regulatory coordination that is realized by a regulation comprising at least three steps (e.
g. the regulation on the coordinated targets by a miRNA through a sequential action of two TFs). The direct and
indirect regulation target different categories of genes, the former predominantly regulating genes involved in
emergent responses, the latter targeting genes that imply long-term effects.
Conclusion: The genomic clustering of miRNAs is closely related to the coordinated regulation in the gene
regulatory network. The pattern of regulatory coordination is dependent on the composition of the miRNA cluster.
The homo-clustered miRNAs mainly coordinate their regulation rapidly, while the hetero-clustered miRNAs exert
control with a delay. The diverse pattern of regulatory coordination suggests distinct roles of the homo-clustered
and the hetero-clustered miRNAs in biological processes.

Background
MicroRNA (miRNA) is a class of ~22 nt small non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) which inhibit gene expression at
post-transcriptional stage by binding to the 3’UTR of
mRNAs. They play essential roles in many crucial biological processes, including development, differentiation,
* Correspondence: cyzhang@nju.edu.cn; e.wingender@med.uni-goettingen.
de; jlee@nju.edu.cn
1
The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and Jiangsu
Engineering Research Center for MicroRNA Biology and Biotechnology
2
Department of Bioinformatics, Medical School, Georg August University of
Göttingen, Goldschmidtstrasse 1, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

apoptosis and cell proliferation [1-4], as well as numerous human diseases, such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia, fragile X syndrome, and various types of cancers
[5-8].
The studies on the biogenesis of miRNAs [9,10] show
that miRNA is firstly transcribed as pri-miRNA (i.e. primary miRNA) in the nucleus, then exported to the cytoplasm after being cleaved into pre-miRNA (precursor
miRNA). In cytoplasm, pre-miRNA is processed into
mature miRNA and incorporated into the RNA-induced
silencing complex (RISC) which subsequently binds to
the 3’UTR of mRNAs. The conversion of pre-miRNA to

© 2011 Wang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

mature miRNA is generally one-to-one (i.e. one premiRNA once generates one mature miRNA), although
both strands of pre-miRNAs could potentially become
mature miRNAs [11]. However, the splicing of one primiRNA could result in multiple pre-miRNAs. This is
because miRNA genes tend to be clustered in the genome [12] and one pri-miRNA could be a cluster of several miRNAs [13].
A set of miRNAs that are closely distributed in genome is termed as the miRNA cluster. The clustering
propensity of miRNAs was first been discovered by
large-scale surveys of small ncRNAs [14,15]. At present,
it has been confirmed that miRNA clusters are widely
distributed in animal genomes [16,17]. The conservation
of miRNA clusters across species [18] indicates that
miRNA clusters adapt special regulatory functions in
biological processes. In addition, it has been shown by
expression studies that the clustered miRNAs are often
co-expressed [19-21], suggesting that they are jointly
transcribed as a polycistron. Thus, the hypothesis comes
up that the genomic coordination of clustered miRNA
genes, which further leads to their coordinated transcription, will consequently result in a functional coordination. However, it is still unclear how the clustered
miRNAs function coordinately.
Recently, Yuan X-Y et al. studied the functional coordination of clustered miRNAs based on the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network [22]. They found that the
clustered miRNAs tend to target the mRNA of proteins
that are located in the same functional module. While
this kind of correlation supports the view of functional
coordination of clustered miRNAs, little is known about
the underlying mechanisms. In addition, the PPI network which is composed of direct protein-protein interactions cannot provide the successive regulation details
of miRNAs. For example, the successive regulation on a
protein by a miRNA through one or more TFs is not
included in the PPI network.
Here, we studied the regulatory coordination of clustered miRNAs based on the miRNA-Transcription factor (miRNA-TF) regulatory network that comprises the
interactions between transcription factors (TF), miRNAs
and non-TF protein-coding genes. We found that there
are two types of miRNA clusters, i.e. homo-clusters
(miRNA clusters composed of miRNAs from a single
miRNA family) and hetero-clusters (miRNA clusters
composed of miRNAs from multiple miRNA families).
In general, both the homo- and the hetero-clustered
miRNAs show the behavior of regulatory coordination.
However, the ways of regulatory coordination of both
types of clustered miRNAs are different. The homoclustered miRNAs show a direct regulatory coordination
which is realized by a single regulation step (i.e. direct
regulation), and tend to be involved in emergency

Page 2 of 11

processes, whereas the hetero-clustered miRNAs show
an indirect regulatory coordination which is accomplished by 3 or more steps, and tend to participate in
more complex processes.

Results
Homologous and heterologous miRNA clusters

There are in total 66 miRNA clusters of human (see
Methods), which can be classified into two types. One is
the homologous cluster (homo-cluster) composed of
several miRNAs from the same family, and the other is
the heterologous cluster (hetero-cluster) composed of
miRNAs of various families (see Figure 1a and Additional File 1). We found that there are 25 homo-clusters
and 41 hetero-clusters. The detailed family diversity of
the miRNA clusters is characterized by the family
entropy (Efam, see Methods). It is seen that the distribution of Efam shows a polarized behavior (see Figure 1b).
Most of the family entropies are either 0 or 1. This
means most of the 66 miRNA clusters are composed of
the miRNAs from either one family or completely different families, suggesting that there is a fundamental difference of family composition between the homoclusters and the hetero-clusters.
Usually, the miRNAs of the same family target a similar set of mRNAs, since they have the same seed regions
[23] which predominantly determine the targets of
miRNA [24]. Thus, it is suggested that the homo-clustered and the hetero-clustered miRNAs may have quite
different regulatory features.
Clustered miRNAs in network modules

In the miRNA-TF regulatory network containing the
interactions between TF, miRNA and non-TF proteincoding genes (see Methods), 39 modules that have
dense interactions were found using MCODE plus [25]
of the network tool Cytoscape [26]. These modules altogether contain 47 homo-clustered miRNAs, 132 heteroclustered miRNAs and 232 isolated miRNAs that are far
from other miRNAs and do not belong to any clusters.
The statistical analysis (see Methods) shows that the
homo-clustered miRNAs and the hetero-clustered miRNAs are both significantly enriched (P < 0.01) in these
39 modules. Moreover, more than 50% of the modules
(i.e. 22 out of 39) contain at least one miRNA pair that
comes from the same miRNA cluster. The average cluster entropy (see Methods) of the 39 modules which
describes the diversity of the miRNA clusters within a
module is significantly lower (P < 0.01) than that in the
random case in which miRNAs were randomly assigned
to groups of the same number as human miRNA clusters (see Methods). These findings suggest that the miRNAs located within one genomic cluster tend to be
involved preferentially in the same module. Such

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

Page 3 of 11

Figure 1 Homo-clusters and hetero-clusters of miRNA. a) Illustration of miRNA distributions in genome. The miRNAs of the same family are
represented as squares of the same color; b) family entropy distribution of miRNA clusters.

preference means that, in general, the clustered miRNAs
exert a coordinated regulation since a module in a biological network usually represents a special or relatively
independent biological function [27].
The preference of homo-clustered miRNAs in the same
module is not surprising. Since the miRNAs in a homocluster bind to similar targets, they tend to form a local
community of dense interactions associating them with
common targets (see the orange circles in Figure 2a).
Nevertheless, not all the homo-clustered miRNAs are
involved in modules. The reason is that some homo-

clustered miRNAs have such a small number of targets
that the local community composed of these miRNAs and
their targets is not dense enough to be included in a module. In addition, some homologous members of heteroclustered miRNAs are found to be involved in the same
modules (see the blue circles in Figure 2a). It seems that
these homologous members of hetero-clustered miRNAs
have the same type of coordinated regulation with that of
the homo-clustered miRNAs. However, there are about
10% hetero-clusters in which the heterologous miRNA
members appear in the same modules (see the green

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

Page 4 of 11

Figure 2 Clustered miRNAs in two examples of modules. a) A module containing homologous miRNAs from a homo-cluster (orange) and a
hetero-cluster (blue); b) a module involving heterologous miRNAs from a hetero-cluster (green).

circles in Figure 2b). Since the coordinated regulation by
these heterologous miRNAs obviously does not work
through similar target sequences, it is assumed that there
are distinct mechanisms underlying the coordinated regulation by hetero- and homo-clustered miRNAs.
Distinctive regulatory coordination of homo- and heteroclusters

To measure the regulatory coordination of clustered
miRNAs quantitatively, we studied the target overlap of
miRNA pairs in the same cluster. The target overlap
(TO) of miRNA i and miRNA j is defined as:
N

Sik Sjk
TOij =

k

(1)

min(li , lj ) + 1

where li is the number of targets that are regulated by
miRNA i, N is the total number of targets, and sik is the
element of the connecting matrix. sik equals to 1 when
miRNA i regulates target k directly (or indirectly), otherwise it equals to 0. Clearly, TOij varies in the range of 0
to 1. The closer TOij is to 1, the more targets miRNA i
and miRNA j share, and the stronger is the coordinated
regulation by miRNA i and miRNA j.
We first studied the TO distribution by checking the
direct targets of miRNAs. As expected, the homo-

clustered miRNA pairs have high TOs. More than 75%
miRNA pairs in homo-clusters are of the TOs higher
than 0.8 (see Figure 3a). The average TO of homo-clusters (0.70) is significantly higher (P < 0.05) than those for
hetero-clusters (0.15) and random clusters (0.10). Nevertheless, the TOs of the hetero-clustered miRNA pairs are
as low as those of the miRNA pairs in random clusters (i.
e. the clusters that are randomly generated by keeping
the total number of miRNAs in each cluster, see Methods). About 90% miRNA pairs in hetero-clusters and random clusters are of the TOs lower than 0.3. This
indicates that there is no regulatory coordination of hetero-clustered miRNAs within one step. However, the TO
features of hetero-clustered miRNA pairs change when
the indirect targets of miRNAs are additionally considered. The behavior of TO distribution for hetero-clusters
looks more like that for the homo-clusters than the random clusters. Specifically, the relative frequency of hetero-clusters is apparently higher than that for random
clusters when TO > 0.8 (see Figure 3b). The average TOs
of homo-clusters and hetero-clusters which are 0.97 and
0.96 respectively are both significantly higher than that of
random clusters as 0.83 (P < 0.05). This indicates that the
regulatory coordination of the hetero-clustered miRNAs
comes up by indirect regulations.
Furthermore, we analyzed the dependence of the average TO on the number of regulation steps for homo-

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

Page 5 of 11

Figure 3 Distribution of target overlaps for homo-clustered, hetero-clustered and random-clustered miRNAs. a) Targets under direct
regulation only; b) targets including indirect regulation.

clusters, hetero-clusters and random clusters. A regulation step equal to 1 means that all the considered targets are directly regulated by miRNAs. As shown in
Figure 4, the TOs of homo-clusters and hetero-clusters,
which are both consistently higher than those of the
random clusters, saturate when the regulation steps is
more than 5. However, there are distinct differences
between the curves of homo-clusters and hetero-clusters. While the TO curve of hetero-clusters is first close
to that of random clusters for regulation steps less than
3, it approaches the curve of homo-clusters and become
significantly higher than that of random clusters (P <
0.05) as the regulation step is larger than 3. This means
that the regulatory coordination of hetero-clustered
miRNAs occurs after 3 steps (see example in Figure 4b),
unlike that of homo-clustered miRNAs, where it is
already effective at the first step (i.e. the direct regulation). Such distinction between regulatory coordination
mechanisms may indicate distinct roles of the homoand hetero-clustered miRNAs in biological processes.
Functional analysis of targets of homo- and heteroclusters

The function of miRNA targets was analyzed using the
tool DAVID (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/, see Methods). We found that the targets of homo-clustered miRNAs are significantly involved in emergency processes
that need to be preceded rapidly, such as response to

stimuli and the intrinsic apoptotic pathway that involves
mitochondria. The latter represents an emergency process since the intrinsic apoptotic pathway is usually activated to induce a rapid cell death [28]. In contrast, the
hetero-clustered miRNAs are involved in complex biological processes including the metabolism and the extrinsic apoptotic pathway that happens primarily in the
cytoplasm. These processes are generally of less urgency,
but they are more complex than those of homo-clusters.
It has been revealed that thousands of genes and reactions are involved in metabolic processes [29], and the
extrinsic apoptotic pathway is composed of several complex caspase processes [28].
Moreover, the extrinsic apoptotic process is also more
complex than the internal apoptotic process since it
comprises significantly more reactions [28]. Besides,
three functions (i.e. signal transduction, development
and transport) are shared targets of homo- and heteroclustered miRNAs.

Discussion
MicroRNA clusters, which are groups of tandem
miRNA genes that are closely located in the genome,
are abundantly and widely distributed in animal genomes. It has been revealed that about 50% of the
miRNA genes in Drosophila [15] and over 30% of the
miRNA genes in human, mouse, rat and chicken are
located in clusters [30]. Co-expression experiments of

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

Page 6 of 11

Figure 4 regulatory coordination by regulation steps. a) Variation of target overlap (TO) with the number of regulation steps; b) illustration
of 3-step regulations.

clustered miRNA genes show that one miRNA cluster is
usually transcribed as a single transcriptional unit [21].
This suggests the existence of some kind of regulatory
coordination between the clustered miRNAs. However,
it is still unclear how the clustered miRNAs coordinate
their regulation. Here, we describe a genome-wide study
on the regulatory coordination of clustered miRNAs
based on the miRNA-TF regulatory network.
The miRNA clusters are classified into homo-clusters
that contain miRNAs of the same family and heteroclusters that contain miRNAs of multiple families. Most
of the miRNA clusters are either homo-clusters or hetero-clusters of miRNAs with completely different
families. Such polarized behavior indicates that the
family composition of clustered miRNAs may be an
important characteristic that is closely related to the
regulatory features of miRNA clusters.
In this study, we have used a miRNA-TF regulatory
network that represents the regulation exerted by TFs
and miRNAs on gene expression of target genes. This
regulatory network presents a comprehensive view on
the regulations of miRNAs since it involves the transcriptional regulation of miRNAs genes by TFs as well
as the direct regulation of the targeted mRNAs by miRNAs. Such regulatory network has previously been used
to study the combinatory regulation of miRNAs and
TFs on gene expression. For example, different types of
miRNA-TF co-regulations have been revealed based on

the miRNA-TF regulatory network [31,32]. In addition,
it is reported by Kang et al. that there are two-layer regulations on the gene expression, where TFs function as
important mediators of miRNA-initiated regulatory
effects [33]. These studies suggest that the miRNA-TF
regulatory network is a good substrate for studying the
complex regulatory features of miRNAs.
The result that the clustered miRNAs, whether they
are from homo- or hetero-clusters, preferably exert their
effect in one module suggests a general regulatory coordination of clustered miRNAs. Intuitively, the regulatory
coordination of homo-clustered miRNAs is ascribed to
the high sequence similarity of homologous miRNAs.
However, not all the sequences of homologous miRNAs
are similar enough to bind to the same targets. More
than half of the homologous miRNA pairs share less
than 50% of the targets (see Additional File 2). An
example is miR-329 family, in which any pairs of the
three members (i.e. hsa-mir-543, hsa-mir-329, hsa-mir495) share less than 20% of the targets. The homo-clustered miRNAs are the homologous ones that share large
amount of targets. This suggests that the homo-clustered miRNAs are not the arbitrary homologous miRNAs, but the ones finely designed for the regulatory
coordination. The target overlaps of hetero-clustered
miRNAs are much smaller than the homo-clustered
miRNAs, but they similarly appear in the same modules.
This indicates that the homo-clustered miRNAs and the

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

hetero-clustered miRNAs have distinctive ways of coordinated regulation. In addition, there are some cases
that not all the members of miRNAs in homo-/heteroclusters are found in the same modules. One possible
reason is that the size of modules depends on the parameter that scales the density of interactions. If the parameter is strict, the resulting modules, which are
generally of small size, will include few miRNA cluster
members. Another reason may be that 10 kb is not an
accurate cutoff for the definition of miRNA clusters.
The miRNA cluster members that are not found in the
same modules may not be included anymore in the
cluster when there is a little deviation of the cutoff.
It is clear that the regulatory coordination of homoclustered miRNAs is achieved by one regulation step (i.
e. at the level of direct targets of miRNAs), since the
homologous miRNAs in homo-clusters have almost the
same targets. However, the regulatory coordination of
hetero-clustered miRNAs is realized by at least 3 steps.
Thus, the regulatory coordination of homo-clustered
miRNAs is direct, while that of hetero-clustered miRNAs is indirect. These two types of coordinated regulation both have their own advantage. Since there is no
intermediate regulator between the miRNAs and their
targets, the direct coordinated regulation has the advantage of accuracy and quickness. Whereas, the indirect
coordinated regulation has the advantage of variety
since diverse types of coordinated regulation can be realized by inducing additional cross-regulations between
intermediated regulators (see Additional File 3).
In general, the regulatory coordination of clustered miRNAs is to guarantee the validity and efficiency of miRNA
regulations in a certain biological process. The direct regulatory coordination means that the effective regulation is a
rapid one which is capable to cope with an emergency
situation (see Figure 5). Thus, the homo-clusters could be
involved in biological processes that match this requirement, such as response to certain stimuli. However, a
rapid coordinated regulation pushing the affected system
into a certain direction is accompanied by the risk to let
the corresponding biological processes run out of control
unless there are additional control processes counter-acting this push. Furthermore, the incorporation of more
intermediates may increase the flexibility of regulation.
Therefore, the indirect regulatory coordination that results
in a delayed regulation may be adopted by complex biological processes such as metabolism.

Conclusion
Our study is focused on the internal coordination of
genomic-clustered miRNAs. The results suggest that
there are two types of miRNA clusters, i.e. homo-clusters that contain miRNAs of the same family and hetero-clusters that contain miRNAs of multiple families.

Page 7 of 11

These two types of miRNA clusters show distinct behaviors of regulatory coordination in the gene regulatory
network that represents the direct interactions between
miRNA, TF and non-TF protein-coding genes. The
homo-clusters show a direct regulatory coordination
and tend to be involved in biological processes of emergency situations, while the hetero-clusters show an
indirect regulatory coordination and tend to take part in
more complex biological processes.
Our study shows the diversity of miRNA regulations
responding to the complex requirements of biological
functions and contributes to understand the complex
function and regulatory mechanism of miRNAs at a network scale.

Methods
miRNA clusters

All the human miRNAs along with their genomic information were retrieved from miRBase 13.0 [34]. Two
miRNAs that are consecutively located within 10 kb of
each other were considered to belong to one miRNA
cluster. This definition about miRNA clusters is based
on the study of miRNA genomic distribution. In previous, it has been revealed that the distances between
miRNA pairs located consecutively in genome are following a biomodal distribution. The valley between the
two peaks is located at around 10 kb, suggesting that 10
kb may be the reasonable cutoff to define miRNA clusters [31]. In total, there are 718 human precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs) of distinct genomic locations.
Among these 718 pre-miRNAs, about 36% form 66
miRNA clusters. The number of miRNA clusters is
stable as the cutoff deviates from 10 kb. It varies at the
range of 64-67 as the cutoff increases from 5 kb to 15
kb. The miRNAs in the same miRNA cluster composed
of intronic/extronic miRNAs are of the same host genes
(see Additional File 4), suggesting that the miRNA clusters tend to be transcribed into one transcript. For the
intergenic miRNA clusters, it is suggested that the intergenic miRNA cluster may have short transcript less than
4 kbp [35]. This means our definition about intergenic
miRNA clusters has the risk to draw an inaccurate conclusions since some of our intergenic miRNA clusters
(about 30%) are much longer than 4 kbp. To detect
whether our definition about intergenic miRNA clusters
take a bias impact on the conclusion, we compared the
coordinated behavior of our intergenic miRNA clusters
with that of a newly-defined clusters which follow the
constraint that the length of every intergenic miRNA
cluster should be less than 4 kbp (i.e. the 4 kbp-constraint intergenic miRNA cluster). The results show that
the direct and indirect coordinated behaviors of these
two types of intergenic clusters are both very similar
(see Additional File 5 and 6 for details). This suggests

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

Page 8 of 11

Figure 5 Illustration of regulations for homo-clusters and hetero-clusters. Homo-clustered miRNAs are represented as lined squares of a
same color, and hetero-clustered miRNAs as lined squares of different colors. Eclipses are TF/non-TF genes. Solid arrows denote direct
regulation, and dash arrows indirect regulation.

our definition on intergenic miRNA clusters is good
enough for our study, and it does not take any bias
impact on the final conclusion.
MiRNA families

The information on miRNA families has been derived
from Rfam database, in which various kinds of RNAs
are classified into families based on their sequence and
structural alignment [36]. A miRNA family generally
means a collection of miRNAs that are derived from a
common ancestor.
Family entropy of a miRNA cluster

The family entropy, which is defined to characterize the
diversity of miRNA families in a miRNA cluster, is
defined as follows:
Efam = −

1
ln Nfam

Nfam

pi ln pi

(2)

i

Given that a cluster comprises miRNAs of N fam
families, p i is the probability that any miRNA in the
cluster belongs to family i. Efam varies in the range of 01. E fam = 0 means that all the miRNAs in the cluster
come from the same family, and Efam = 1 means that all
clustered miRNAs come from different families.
Construction of the regulatory network

To study the regulatory feature of the clustered miRNAs, we constructed the miRNA-TF regulatory network,

which contains the regulatory relationships between
TFs, miRNAs and non-TF protein-coding genes for
human (see Additional File 7). Generally, there are two
kinds of interactions in the network which respectively
start from TFs and miRNAs. An interaction starting
from a TF means that the TF regulates the transcription
of the target, while an interaction starting from a
miRNA means that the miRNA represses the translation
of the target. We predicted the interactions starting
from a TF by searching the conserved TF binding sites
(TFBSs) within a putative promoter area 1 kb upstream
the transcriptional start site of the target. Firstly, all the
potential human TFBSs are collected from TRANSFAC
(version 2009.4) [37] based on the position weighted
matrix (PWM). Secondly, the conserved TFBSs are
derived from the conserved promoter area across the 5
species of human, mouse, dog, cow and opossum based
on RefSeq annotation of UCSC hg18 http://genome.
ucsc.edu/index.html. Finally, the conserved relationships
between TFBSs and TFs are predicted using the Matchalgorithm provided by TRANSFAC. Note that the prediction of the TFBSs is done based on phylogenetic
footprinting from five mammalian genomes in order to
limit the false positive of the TFBS prediction. Since it
has been discussed that the miRNAs within the same
cluster are often transcribed simultaneously, we took a
whole cluster of miRNAs as a single unit, and searched
the TFBSs in the 10 kb upstream to the start point of
the first miRNA in the cluster. In addition, we predicted
the interactions starting from miRNAs by the three

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

Page 9 of 11

Table 1 Enriched functions of miRNA targets
Homo-cluster

Hetero-cluster

Functional categories

Enrichment score

P-value

Functional categories

Enrichment score

P-value

Response to stimuli

1.73

0.004

Metabolism

2.60

0.002

Internal apoptotic pathway

1.64

0.002

External apoptotic pathway

2.08

0.003

Signal transduction

1.43

0.008

Signal transduction

2.20

0.005

Development

1.37

0.004

Development

1.50

0.007

Transport

1.21

0.007

Transport

1.25

0.005

The enriched function, enrichment scores and P-values are given. The left three columns are for the targets of homo-clustered miRNAs, and the right three
columns are for the targets of hetero-clustered miRNAs.

tools of Targetscan [24], Pictar [38] and Tarbase [39].
The union results predicted by these three tools are
taken to give a comprehensive regulatory network so
that many potential instants of regulatory coordination
will be dug out to help further studies in experiment.
Replacing the union results with the results of Tarbase
which are verified by experiments does not affect our
conclusion.
Statistic analysis on the clustered miRNAs in modules
Enrichment of homo-/hetero- clusters

The enrichment of homo-/hetero-clusters in the 39
modules is evaluated based on the random distribution
of the average homo-/hetero-clustered miRNA numbers
in modules. Firstly, 1000 random cases are generated by
randomly re-participating miRNAs into the 39 modules
with the total miRNA number in each module kept.
Then the random distribution is obtained by calculating
the average homo-/hetero-clustered miRNA numbers in
modules. Finally, the significance of the enrichment of
homo-/hetero-clustered miRNAs in modules is evaluated based on the random distribution.

clusters with the number of miRNAs in each cluster
maintained. All the distributions for the random miRNA
clusters are the ones averaged over 1000 random sets.
Functional analysis of miRNA targets

The public tool DAVID is used to analyze the functions of
the targets of homo-clustered and hetero-clustered miRNAs. GO [40] is selected as the annotated database. The
annotated level is set at “GOTERM_BP_5”. “Functional
Annotation Clustering” with default classification stringency is applied to derive all the related functions associating with their enrichment scores and P-values. The
enriched functions are defined as the ones with P-value
less than 0.01 and enrichment score more than 1.0 [41].
All of the enriched functions for the targets of homo-clustered and hetero-clustered miRNAs are respectively listed
in Additional File 8 and 9. To make the feature of
enriched functions more clear, we manually curated and
re-categorized the enriched functions as shown in Table 1
(Details in Additional File 8 and 9). Each enrichment score
and P-value for a functional category are the average on
the values of all the included functions.

miRNA cluster entropy of a module

The miRNA cluster entropy of a module (Ec) is defined
as follows:
1
Ec = −
ln Nc

Nc

pc i ln pc i

(3)

i

Note that p c i is the probability of miRNA cluster i
occurring in a module and N c is the total number of
miRNA clusters in the module. Similar as Efam, Ec varies
at the range of 0-1. Ec = 0 means that all the miRNAs
in the module are in a same cluster, and Ec = 1 means
that the miRNAs are from completely different clusters.
Random clusters of miRNAs

There are totally 458 isolated miRNAs and 66 miRNA
clusters in genome. If the isolated miRNAs are considered as the pseudo-cluster, there are 524 (i.e. 458 + 66)
clusters of miRNAs. Thus, a set of random clusters are
generated by re-assigning miRNAs into these 524

Additional material
Additional file 1: miRNA clusters. All of the 66 miRNA clusters are
listed associating with their types, i.e. homo-cluster or hetro-cluster.
Additional file 2: Distribution of target overlaps for homologous
miRNAs. The black is for the homologous miRNAs in homo-clusters, and
the red for all the homologous miRNAs.
Additional file 3: Examples of 3-steps coordinated regulation of
hetero-clustered miRNAs. Six examples embedding the cross-regulation
between intermediate regulators are illustrated.
Additional file 4: MiRNA clusters composed of intronic/extronic
miRNAs. The information about miRNA types and host genes of
intronic/extronic clustered miRNAs is derived from miRBase 13.0.
Additional file 5: Direct regulatory coordination for two types of
intergenic miRNA clusters. Target overlap (TO) distribution describing
the direct regulatory coordination. a) for our intergenic miRNA clusters;
b) for 4 kbp-constraint intergenic miRNA clusters. The black, red and blue
plots are respectively for the homo-clustered, hetero-clustered and
randomized miRNA pairs (i.e. the miRNA pairs randomly selected from
different intergenic miRNA clusters) that are located in intergenic miRNA
clusters. The TO distributions show a similar behavior in figure a) and b),
suggesting that the definition of the intergenic miRNA clusters has no
impact on the property of the direct regulatory coordination.

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

Additional file 6: Indirect regulatory coordination for two types of
intergenic miRNA clusters. TO distribution describing the indirect
regulatory coordination. a) for our intergenic miRNA clusters; b) for 4
kbp-constraint intergenic miRNA clusters. The black, red and blue plots
are respectively for the homo-clustered, hetero-clustered and
randomized miRNA pairs that are located in intergenic miRNA clusters.
The TO distributions show a similar behavior in figure a) and b),
suggesting that the definition of the intergenic miRNA clusters has no
impact on the property of the indirect regulatory coordination.

Page 10 of 11

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Additional file 7: Regulatory network. The whole regulatory network is
provided in SIF format.

14.

Additional file 8: Enriched functions of targets of homo-clustered
miRNAs. Detailed information about the enriched functions of the
targets of homo-clustered miRNAs is given.

15.

Additional file 9: Enriched functions of targets of hetero-clustered
miRNAs. Detailed information about the enriched functions of the
targets of hetero-clustered miRNAs is given.

17.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant no. 30890044), the National Basic Research Program of China
(Grant no. 2007CB814806), and the German-China joint project (Grant no.
CHN08/031).

16.

18.

19.
20.
21.

22.
Author details
The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and Jiangsu
Engineering Research Center for MicroRNA Biology and Biotechnology.
2
Department of Bioinformatics, Medical School, Georg August University of
Göttingen, Goldschmidtstrasse 1, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany.
1

23.

24.
Authors’ contributions
JW did the network analysis on the regulatory coordination of clustered
miRNAs. MH, KMC and XH participated in the construction of the miRNA-TF
regulatory network. CYZ, EW and JL conceptualized and designed the study,
coordinated among research collaborators, and helped to draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 12 April 2011 Accepted: 16 December 2011
Published: 16 December 2011
References
1. He L, Hannon GJ: MicroRNAs: small RNAs with a big role in gene
regulation. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5:522-531.
2. Harfe BD: MicroRNAs in vertebrate development. Curr Opin Genet Dev
2005, 15:410-415.
3. Bushati N, Cohen SM: microRNA functions. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2007,
23:175-205.
4. Krol J, Loedige I, Filipowicz W: The widespread regulation of microRNA
biogenesis, function and decay. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11:597-610.
5. Calin GA, Ferracin M, Cimmino A, Di Leva G, Shimizu M, Wojcik SE, Iorio MV,
Visone R, Sever NI, Fabbri M, Luliano R, Palumbo T, Pichiorri F, Roldo C,
Garzon R, Sevignani C, Rassenti L, Alder H, Volinia S, Liu CG, Kipps TJ,
Negrini M, Croce CM: A MicroRNA signature associated with prognosis
and progression in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 2005,
353:1793-1801.
6. Alvarez-Garcia I, Miska EA: MicroRNA functions in animal development
and human disease. Development 2005, 132:4653-4662.
7. Mitchell PS, Parkin RK, Kroh EM, Fritz BR, Wyman SK, PogosovaAgadjanyan EL, Peterson A, Noteboom J, O’Briant KC, Allen A, Lin DW,
Urban N, Drescher CW, Knudsen BS, Stirewalt DL, Gentleman R, Vessella RL,
Nelson PS, Martin DB, Tewari M: Circulating microRNAs as stable bloodbased markers for cancer detection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:10513-10518.
8. Beezhold KJ, Castranova V, Chen F: Microprocessor of microRNAs:
regulation and potential for therapeutic intervention. Mol Cancer 2010,
9:134.

25.

26.

27.
28.
29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.
35.
36.
37.

Bartel DP: MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function.
Cell 2004, 116:281-297.
Kim VN: MicroRNA biogenesis: coordinated cropping and dicing. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2005, 6:376-385.
Ro S, Park C, Young D, Sanders KM, Yan W: Tissue-dependent paired
expression of miRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:5944-5953.
Kim VN, Nam JW: Genomics of microRNA. Trends Genet 2006, 22:165-173.
Rodriguez A, Griffiths-Jones S, Ashurst JL, Bradley A: Identification of
mammalian microRNA host genes and transcription units. Genome Res
2004, 14:1902-1910.
Lagos-Quintana M, Rauhut R, Meyer J, Borkhardt A, Tuschl T: New
microRNAs from mouse and human. RNA 2003, 9:175-179.
Lai EC, Tomancak P, Williams RW, Rubin GM: Computational identification
of Drosophila microRNA genes. Genome Biol 2003, 4:R42.
Thatcher EJ, Bond J, Paydar I, Patton JG: Genomic organization of
zebrafish microRNAs. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:253.
Olena AF, Patton JG: Genomic organization of microRNAs. J Cell Physiol
2010, 222:540-545.
Altuvia Y, Landgraf P, Lithwick G, Elefant N, Pfeffer S, Aravin A,
Brownstein MJ, Tuschl T, Margalit H: Clustering and conservation patterns
of human microRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:2697-2706.
Ambros V: The functions of animal microRNAs. Nature 2004, 431:350-355.
Cullen BR: Transcription and processing of human microRNA precursors.
Mol Cell 2004, 16:861-865.
Baskerville S, Bartel DP: Microarray profiling of microRNAs reveals
frequent coexpression with neighboring miRNAs and host genes. RNA
2005, 11:241-247.
Yuan X, Liu C, Yang P, He S, Liao Q, Kang S, Zhao Y: Clustered microRNAs’
coordination in regulating protein-protein interaction network. BMC Syst
Biol 2009, 3:65.
Griffiths-Jones S, Grocock RJ, van Dongen S, Bateman A, Enright AJ:
miRBase: microRNA sequences, targets and gene nomenclature. Nucleic
Acids Res 2006, 34:D140-144.
Lewis BP, Shih IH, Jones-Rhoades MW, Bartel DP, Burge CB: Prediction of
mammalian microRNA targets. Cell 2003, 115:787-798.
Bader GD, Hogue CW: An automated method for finding molecular
complexes in large protein interaction networks. BMC Bioinformatics 2003,
4:2.
Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res
2003, 13:2498-2504.
Rives AW, Galitski T: Modular organization of cellular networks. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:1128-1133.
Jin Z, El-Deiry WS: Overview of cell death signaling pathways. Cancer Biol
Ther 2005, 4:139-163.
Ravasz E, Somera AL, Mongru DA, Oltvai ZN, Barabasi AL: Hierarchical
organization of modularity in metabolic networks. Science 2002,
297:1551-1555.
Megraw M, Sethupathy P, Corda B, Hatzigeorgiou AG: miRGen: a database
for the study of animal microRNA genomic organization and function.
Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D149-155.
Shalgi R, Lieber D, Oren M, Pilpel Y: Global and local architecture of the
mammalian microRNA-transcription factor regulatory network. PLoS
Comput Biol 2007, 3:e131.
Zhou Y, Ferguson J, Chang JT, Kluger Y: Inter- and intra-combinatorial
regulation by transcription factors and microRNAs. BMC Genomics 2007,
8:396.
Tu K, Yu H, Hua YJ, Li YY, Liu L, Xie L, Li YX: Combinatorial network of
primary and secondary microRNA-driven regulatory mechanisms. Nucleic
Acids Res 2009, 37:5969-5980.
Griffiths-Jones S, Saini HK, van Dongen S, Enright AJ: miRBase: tools for
microRNA genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D154-158.
Saini HK, Griffiths-Jones S, Enright AJ: Genomic analysis of human
microRNA transcripts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:17719-17724.
Griffiths-Jones S, Bateman A, Marshall M, Khanna A, Eddy SR: Rfam: an RNA
family database. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:439-441.
Matys V, Fricke E, Geffers R, Gossling E, Haubrock M, Hehl R, Hornischer K,
Karas D, Kel AE, Kel-Margoulis OV, Kloos DU, Land S, Lewicki-Potapov B,
Michael H, Munch R, Reuter I, Rotert S, Saxel H, Scheer M, Thiele S,

Wang et al. BMC Systems Biology 2011, 5:199
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/5/199

38.

39.

40.

41.

Page 11 of 11

Wingender E: TRANSFAC: transcriptional regulation, from patterns to
profiles. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:374-378.
Krek A, Grun D, Poy MN, Wolf R, Rosenberg L, Epstein EJ, MacMenamin P,
da Piedade I, Gunsalus KC, Stoffel M, Rajewsky N: Combinatorial microRNA
target predictions. Nat Genet 2005, 37:495-500.
Sethupathy P, Corda B, Hatzigeorgiou AG: TarBase: A comprehensive
database of experimentally supported animal microRNA targets. RNA
2006, 12:192-197.
Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis A,
Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson JE, Ringwald M, Rubin GM, Sherlock G: Gene
ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nat Genet 2000, 25:25-29.
Dennis G Jr, Sherman BT, Hosack DA, Yang J, Gao W, Lane HC, Lempicki RA:
DAVID: Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery.
Genome Biol 2003, 4:P3.

doi:10.1186/1752-0509-5-199
Cite this article as: Wang et al.: Regulatory coordination of clustered
microRNAs based on microRNA-transcription factor regulatory network.
BMC Systems Biology 2011 5:199.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
