<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Sequence-structure-function relations of the mosquito leucine-rich repeat immune proteins</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:531. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-531"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Robert M Waterhouse"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Sequence-structure-function relations of the
mosquito leucine-rich repeat immune proteins
Robert M Waterhouse1,2*, Michael Povelones3, George K Christophides3

Abstract
Background: The discovery and characterisation of factors governing innate immune responses in insects has
driven the elucidation of many immune system components in mammals and other organisms. Focusing on the
immune system responses of the malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, has uncovered an array of components
and mechanisms involved in defence against pathogen infections. Two of these immune factors are LRIM1 and
APL1C, which are leucine-rich repeat (LRR) containing proteins that activate complement-like defence responses
against malaria parasites. In addition to their LRR domains, these leucine-rich repeat immune (LRIM) proteins share
several structural features including signal peptides, patterns of cysteine residues, and coiled-coil domains.
Results: The identification and characterisation of genes related to LRIM1 and APL1C revealed putatively novel
innate immune factors and furthered the understanding of their likely molecular functions. Genomic scans using
the shared features of LRIM1 and APL1C identified more than 20 LRIM-like genes exhibiting all or most of their
sequence features in each of three disease-vector mosquitoes with sequenced genomes: An. gambiae, Aedes
aegypti, and Culex quinquefasciatus. Comparative sequence analyses revealed that this family of mosquito LRIM-like
genes is characterised by a variable number of 6 to 14 LRRs of different lengths. The “Long” LRIM subfamily, with
10 or more LRRs, and the “Short” LRIMs, with 6 or 7 LRRs, also share the signal peptide, cysteine residue patterning,
and coiled-coil sequence features of LRIM1 and APL1C. The “TM” LRIMs have a predicted C-terminal
transmembrane region, and the “Coil-less” LRIMs exhibit the characteristic LRIM sequence signatures but lack the
C-terminal coiled-coil domains.
Conclusions: The evolutionary plasticity of the LRIM LRR domains may provide templates for diverse recognition
properties, while their coiled-coil domains could be involved in the formation of LRIM protein complexes or
mediate interactions with other immune proteins. The conserved LRIM cysteine residue patterns are likely to be
important for structural fold stability and the formation of protein complexes. These sequence-structure-function
relations of mosquito LRIMs will serve to guide the experimental elucidation of their molecular roles in mosquito
immunity.

Background
Disease-vector mosquitoes transmit some of the most
devastating diseases of humankind including malaria,
dengue, and filariasis. The ability of different mosquito
species to transmit these and other pathogens varies
greatly and much of this variation in vectorial capacity
can be attributed to the success or failure of the mosquito immune system to recognise and eliminate the
pathogen. The availability of complete mosquito genome
* Correspondence: robert.waterhouse@unige.ch
1
Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva
Medical School, 1 rue Michel-Servet, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

sequences has facilitated both large-scale and targeted
experiments, which together with hypotheses generated
from extensive comparative genomic analyses have driven dramatic advances in the understanding of vector
biology. These studies have revealed key components
and underlying mechanisms that constitute the dynamically evolving repertoire of the mosquito’s systemic and
local epithelial immunity [1].
Recent genetic and biochemical studies of immune
system responses to malaria parasite infections in An.
gambiae have linked three major antiparasitic factors
together in a complement-like pathway that mediates
parasite killing [2,3]. Two of these factors, LRIM1 and

© 2010 Waterhouse et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

APL1C, are leucine-rich repeat (LRR) containing proteins that form a disulphide-bridged complex that interacts with the third factor, thioester-containing protein 1
(TEP1) a complement C3-like protein. The LRR proteins
were initially identified as putative immune factors
through microarray studies in An. gambiae [4]. Leucinerich repeat immune protein 1 (LRIM1) was highly upregulated during infection with the rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium berghei, and RNAi-mediated silencing
of LRIM1 resulted in prominent increases in oocyst
numbers, identifying LRIM1 as a key mosquito antagonist of parasite development [5]. A population survey of
West African An. gambiae mosquitoes mapped the second LRR gene (Anopheles-Plasmodium-responsive Leucine-rich repeat 1: APL1, also called LRIM2) to a genetic
locus with major effects on the development and melanization of the human malaria parasite, P. falciparum
[6]. Laboratory testing of APL1 produced similar effects
to LRIM1 silencing, with significantly increased numbers
of developing P. berghei oocysts.
Similarly to the effects of silencing LRIM1 and APL1,
knocking down TEP1 led to dramatically increased
numbers of developing P. berghei oocysts [7]. TEP1
binds to bacterial surfaces promoting phagocytosis [8,9]
and to the surface of invading ookinetes resulting in
their lysis or melanization [7], resembling the roles of
vertebrate complement factors. Testing orthologues of
all three factors in the non-vector mosquito, An. quadriannulatus species A, identified them as key factors in
the lysis and melanization responses that these mosquitoes naturally mount against malaria parasites [10].
LRIM1, APL1, and TEP1 are also important in mediating An. gambiae immune responses to infections with
the rodent malaria parasite, P. yoelii [11]. The An. gambiae APL1 genomic locus in fact encompasses three distinct genes (APL1A, APL1B and APL1C) of which only
the product of APL1C acts as a P. berghei antagonist
[12]. While APL1C functions in immunity against
rodent malaria parasites, the APL1A gene product protects An. gambiae against P. falciparum [13]. The
LRIM1/APL1C protein complex circulates in the mosquito hemolymph where it is shown to interact with the
processed form of TEP1 and promote its subsequent
localization on the surface of midgut-invading P. berghei
parasites [2,3]. In the absence of the LRIM1/APL1C
complex, the processed form of TEP1 is found sequestered on self tissues [2]. These studies established the
cooperative roles of three key parasite antagonists in the
mosquito hemolymph functioning as a complement-like
system to achieve targeted pathogen elimination.
LRIM1 and APL1C exhibit several common protein
sequence features in addition to their LRRs including
signal peptides, patterns of cysteine residues, and coiledcoil domains that identify them as founding members of

Page 2 of 10

a family of related mosquito LRR proteins. The relative
positioning of only a few key amino acids defines the
structural integrity of both LRR and coiled-coil domains,
tolerating high levels of sequence variation that may
obscure homologous sequence relationships within the
superfamily of LRR-containing proteins. This is in contrast to the relatively well-defined family of thioestercontaining proteins, which despite the elevated amino
acid substitution levels [14] and exceptional allelic polymorphism [15] exhibited by TEP1, form a distinct clade
within a superfamily including the pan-protease inhibitors, a-macroglobulins, and the vertebrate complement
factors [16,17].
Here we present the results of a comprehensive computational comparative analysis of the sequence characteristics that define the family of LRIM proteins in three
disease-vector mosquito species. Predicted structural
features suggest an architecture that confers diverse
recognition receptor properties with the ability to form
multimeric complexes and interact with other components of the mosquito immune system.

Results
The LRIM Family

The LRR superfamily is made up of LRR-containing
proteins with a variety of domain architectures such as
the transmembrane Toll receptors with their intracellular Toll-Interleukin Receptor (TIR) domains. Over 180
LRR superfamily members are found in the predicted
proteomes of each of the three mosquitoes as recognised through their InterPro ‘Leucine-rich repeat’
(IPR001611) annotations. The search for LRR-containing
genes with sequence features most closely resembling
AgLRIM1 and AgAPL1C employed a combination of
approaches and identified 24 An. gambiae, 29 Ae.
aegypti, and 30 Cx. quinquefasciatus LRIM-like genes
(see additional file 1). Their encoded proteins exhibit all
or most of the key characteristics of AgLRIM1 and
AgAPL1C: the signal peptide, the LRRs, the patterns of
cysteine residues, and the coiled-coils. However, no
related genes with these defining characteristics were
identified in any of the other representative insect genomes (fruitfly, honey bee, or body louse). The mosquito
LRIMs with all the key sequence features can be
grouped into the “Long” subfamily with 10 or more
LRRs that includes AgLRIM1 and AgAPL1C, and the
“Short” LRIMs with only 6 or 7 LRRs (Figure 1).
Additional related genes include the “TM” LRIMs with a
predicted C-terminal transmembrane region, and the
“Coil-less” LRIMs that exhibit the characteristic sequence
signatures but lack the C-terminal coiled-coil domains.
The principal sequence characteristics of the LRIM
family members allow inferences to be made regarding
their likely structural architectures, with their common

Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

Figure 1 The identified mosquito LRIM proteins can be
classified into four distinct subfamilies. LRIM family members
that match all the defining features are classified as Long LRIMs
with 10 or more LRRs, and Short LRIMs with 6 or 7 LRRs. Those
exhibiting the defining features but which are additionally predicted
to contain a C-terminal transmembrane domain are classified as TM
LRIMs, and those lacking only the coiled-coil domain are termed
Coil-less LRIMs. The repeating LRR units form a horseshoe-like
structure where the short beta-strands form a parallel beta sheet on
the concave face of the arc and the linking helices or turns lie on
the convex face.

feature of a variable-length LRR domain. The crystal
structures of several LRR-containing proteins reveal that
each repeat consists of a short beta-strand and a helix
or beta-turn where the strands form a parallel beta
sheet on the inner face of a horseshoe-like structure
whereas the helices or turns lie on the outer face. Structure determination of the human Toll-Like Receptor 3
(TLR3) LRR ectodomain confirmed the horseshoe-like
fold, and enabled an interaction model to be proposed
where the glycosylaytion-free surface could be important
for both oligomerisation as well as ligand binding
[18,19].These structures suggest that the 6 or 7 LRRcontaining LRIMs are likely to form a shallow arc while
those with more LRRs may curve into more extended
horseshoe-like structures (Figure 1).
Comparative sequence analyses of the mosquito
LRIM-like genes identified likely orthologous and paralogous relations. This was assisted by examination of
orthologous genomic regions (synteny) among the three
mosquitoes, which identified clusters of LRIM orthologues with local gene duplication and shuffling events. A
cluster of short LRIMs (LRIMs 7, 8, 9, and 10) is in

Page 3 of 10

close proximity to a guanine nucleotide exchange factor
(GNEF) containing gene found in all three species (Figure 2). Duplications of LRIM8 in An. gambiae and
LRIM10 in Ae. aegypti have created two paralogous
pairs, while LRIM7 and LRIM9 have remained as singlecopy orthologues. The relative location and orientation
of LRIM9 has remained conserved while LRIM10
appears inverted in An. gambiae. The LRIM7-LRIM8
pair has preserved its head-to-tail orientation in all
three species (with the LRIM8B paralogue in An. gambiae), but in Ae. aegypti it has relocated relative to the
duplicated LRIM10. The genomic span of the orthologous region in Ae. aegypti is about four times greater,
primarily due to the accumulation of numerous repetitive elements and consistent with the overall ~4.6-fold
larger span of synteny regions in Ae. aegypti compared
to An. gambiae [20]. This notable genomic expansion in
Ae. aegypti is also observed in the AgAPL1 cluster,
which is located with LRIM 3, 4, and 11 orthologues
between conserved BRACA2-like (breast cancer susceptibility protein) and Zinc finger genes. Examining the
genomic organisation of LRIM-like genes thus reveals
events of gene duplication and shuffling that have
shaped the evolution of the LRIM gene family in
mosquitoes.
Several of the identified LRIM-like genes have been
putatively ascribed immune-related roles from functional
studies, suggesting that they too may function in key
mosquito immune reactions. These include AgLRIM4, a
Long LRIM induced in the midgut by P. falciparum
ookinete invasion [21]; AgLRIM7 and AgLRIM10, short
LRIMs that exhibit transcriptional responses to malaria
parasites [21]; and AgLRIM8B, a third Short LRIM gene
that shows parasite-responsive transcriptional patterns
[21] and is downregulated during infections with a
Gram-negative bacterium [22]. The Coil-less AgLRIM17
gene is also transcriptionally induced in the mosquito
midgut upon parasite invasion [21] and was initially
identified in the same An. gambiae population survey
that highlighted the role of AgAPL1 in response to Plasmodium [6]. Silencing of AgLRIM17 revealed that it is
an antagonist of both P. berghei and P. falciparum [21].
In Ae. aegypti, the likely LRIM1 orthologue is upregulated together with other immune genes following infection with Wolbachia bacteria resulting in immune
activation and shortened mosquito life spans [23].
Querying results from microarray experiments examining An. gambiae transcriptional responses to malaria
parasite infections [24] and blood feeding [25] identified
at least 18 LRIMs with significant changes in gene
expression (see additional file 1). Almost all of these An.
gambiae LRIMs are responsive to blood feeding, while
LRIMs 1, 4, 6, 8A, 8B, 10 and 26 respond to P. berghei
infections. In addition, at least 12 LRIMs show significantly

Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2 Orthologous genomic clusters of mosquito Short LRIM genes. Anopheles gambiae (red) chromosome (Chr), and orthologous Culex
quinquefasciatus (purple) and Aedes aegypti (yellow) supercontigs (Scont) are depicted with LRIM genes (green), a guanine nucleotide exchange
factor (GNEF) containing gene (blue), and repeat regions (light shading). Comparative sequence analyses reveal duplications (dashed lines) of
LRIM8 in An. gambiae and of LRIM10 in Ae. aegypti, while LRIM7 and LRIM9 remain as single-copy orthologues. Some shuffling of LRIM gene
orders and orientations has occurred, and the accumulation of repetitive elements has left the Ae. aegypti region ~4-fold larger.

higher expression in the fat body, the principal insect
immune organ, compared to midgut or ovary tissues.
The identified LRIM-like genes thus form a family of
disease-vector mosquito genes that appear to be
important effectors in mosquito innate immunity.
LRIM protein sequence features

The repeating nature of both the LRR and coiled-coil
domains, together with their tolerance for high levels
of amino acid substitutions, present a considerable
challenge to multiple sequence alignment algorithms.
Nevertheless, stepwise approaches with manual curation of LRIM protein sequence alignments served to
identify characteristic features that define the family
and help to infer likely sequence-structure-function
relationships. These sequence characteristics become
clearly discernible on comparing the mosquito proteins
most closely related to AgLRIM1 and AgAPL1A/B/C
(Figure 3): the Long LRIMs (LRIMs 1-4 and APL1),
the longest Coil-less LRIM (LRIM17), and the TM
LRIMs (LRIMs 15-16).
LRIMs are targeted to the mosquito hemolymph

AgLRIM1 and AgAPL1C peptide antibodies specifically
recognise single protein bands of the predicted sizes in
An. gambiae hemolymph extracts [3], consistent with
the predicted signal peptide sequences that would direct
these proteins to be secreted into the mosquito circulatory system. Interestingly, depletion of either transcript
blocks secretion of both proteins from hemocytes,

indicating that co-expression of these two LRIMs is
required for correct formation and secretion of the
functional LRIM1/APL1C complex [3]. Apart from one
of the Cx. quinquefasciatus LRIM2 paralogues
(CqLRIM2C, Figure 3A), cleavage sites for signal peptide
predictions are found for all the LRIM proteins (see
additional file 1). The signal peptide-containing first
exon of CqLRIM2C is likely obscured by a closely neighbouring transposable element (TE) insertion which may
render this gene non-functional. Similarly, a ~4.4 Kb
stretch of TE insertions in the coiled-coil encoding
region of the CqLRIM2A paralogue (Figure 3A) may disrupt the function of this copy, leaving CqLRIM2B as the
likely functional APL1/LRIM2 orthologue. The signal
peptides of the TM LRIMs should direct them towards
the secretory pathway, but their hydrophobic C-terminal
regions likely anchor them in the cell membrane exposing their LRR-containing ectodomains in a manner similar to the TLRs. The short, ~30 amino acid, intracellular
regions of the TM LRIMs have no recognisable sorting
or signalling domains, but conserved serine and threonine residues could be potential phosphorylation targets.
Secreted into the mosquito hemolymph or exposed on
cell membranes (possibly hemocytes), the LRIMs are
thus able to circulate widely to sites where an immune
challenge may elicit a response.
The PANGGL repeat is unique to AgAPL1C

The N-terminal region adjacent to the signal peptide of
the AgAPL1C gene encompasses multiple repeats of the

Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

Page 5 of 10

Figure 3 Characteristic sequence features of the family of mosquito LRIM proteins. A. The annotated multiple sequence alignment of the
Long LRIMs (LRIM1-4), the longest Coil-less LRIM (LRIM17), and the TM LRIMs (LRIM15-16) from Anopheles gambiae (Ag, red), Aedes aegypti (Aa,
yellow), and Culex quinquefasciatus (Cq, purple). The alignment highlights the defining LRIM features including the signal peptide (SP), patterns of
cysteine residues (C-C, C-CC, and C*), leucine-rich leader (LRL), leucine-rich repeats (LRRs a-n) and the double and single coiled-coil domains
(dark, >90% propensity, light <90% propensity). The C-terminal transmembrane (TM) region identifies the TM LRIMs and the PANGGL (Pro-AlaAsn-Gly-Gly-Leu) amino acid repeat is unique to AgAPL1C. Black diamonds indicate positions of a sequence frameshift in the gene encoding
AgAPL1A and a transposable element insertion in the gene encoding CqLRIM2A. B. Examining LRR length variations reveals different constraints
on the lengths of sequences connecting the beta-strands that form the LRR horseshoe-like structure. The proportions of LRR lengths are shown
for each set of aligned LRRs defined in Figure 3A (excluding those with only 3 or 4 representative sequences) and for those calculated from
automated scanning of all 26 LRIMs shown in panel A (A), the complete proteomes of each of the three mosquito species (MS), and the
proteomes of four other insects (IN, Apis mellifera, Bombyx mori, Drosophila melanogaster, and Tribolium castaneum). C. The conservation pattern
of amino acid residues of the unusually short LRR-g (defined in panel A) is depicted in sequence logo format. The LRR signature is distinguished
by the conserved asparagine (N) and leucines (L) (or the physicochemically similar isoleucines (I) and valines (V)), and proline (P) residues are
common at positions 17 and 18 of LRR-g.

consensus amino acid sequence Pro-Ala-Asn-Gly-GlyLeu, PANGGL (Figure 3A). Such repeats are not present
in the other LRIM proteins and could not be identified
in any other protein-coding genes. Sequencing multiple
APL1C cDNA clones from laboratory adult male An.
gambiae mosquitoes indicated the existence of polymorphic AgAPL1C alleles encoding variable numbers of
PANGGL repeats (Figure 4). The G3 mosquitoes exhibit
three major bands likely corresponding to different

alleles, while up to six different alleles were identified
from individuals of the more recently colonised
Yaounde strain. However, the possible structural and
functional significance of these PANGGL repeat polymorphisms remains to be determined.
LRIMs contain 6 to 14 LRRs of different lengths

The Short LRIMs and the majority of Coil-less LRIMs
contain 6 or 7 recognisable LRRs while the LRR
domains of the Long, TM, and remaining 3 Coil-less

Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

Figure 4 Variation of Anopheles gambiae APL1C PANGGL (ProAla-Asn-Gly-Gly-Leu) repeats in individual male mosquitoes
from three laboratory strains. PCR primers amplify variable-length
fragments likely corresponding to up to three, four, and six PANGGL
repeat copy-number variations in samples of 12 individual G3, L35,
and Yaounde mosquitoes, respectively.

LRIMs are made up of 10 to 14 repeats (see additional
file 1). LRR motifs are typically 20 to 30 residues in
length and are characterised by an 11-residue consensus
defined principally by the spacing of the leucines,
LxxLxLxxNxL (Figure 3). The LRR pattern tolerates various substitutions with the leucines (L) frequently being
replaced by valine (V) or isoleucine (I) and the position
of the asparagine (N) accepting serine (S), threonine (T),
or cysteine (C) replacements. LRRs of the Coil-less
LRIMs show frequent N replacements while the N
is ubiquitous among Long LRIM LRRs and highlyconserved among TM and Short LRIMs: T replaces N
in LRR-k of the TM LRIMs (Figure 3A), and the Short
LRIM5 and LRIM11 each have one LRR where N is not
maintained. Apart from the LRIM1 orthologues, the
LRIM LRR domains are preceded by a leucine-rich leader (LRL, Figure 3A) that resembles the LRR signature
sequence but exhibits elevated leucine substitutions and
almost never has the characteristic N. The similarity
suggests that LRLs may form similar strand-helix/turn
structures of the more canonical LRRs, but as the first
of these repeating structures the LRL sequences are
likely to be less constrained. The Short and Coil-less
LRIMs also exhibit LRL sequences, but these are less
distinct among many Coil-less LRIMs where the LRR
consensus sequences are generally less well-defined.
Such an irregular type of LRR-like sequence found at
the start of the LRR domain is also frequently observed

Page 6 of 10

in the sequences of vertebrate TLRs [26]. The last LRR
(LRR-n) is distinct from the other LRIM LRRs, this LRR
is well-conserved with a tryptophan (W) or phenylalanine (F) consistently replacing the last ‘L’ of the LRR
consensus followed by a ubiquitously present cysteine
residue (LxxLxLxxNx[WF]xC). This distinctive terminal
LRR pattern is also observed among the Short and Coilless LRIMs.
Examining the lengths of the LRIM LRRs revealed the
exceptionally short LRR-g, which is consistently only 19
amino acids long (Figure 3B). The majority of LRIM
LRRs are 24 residues in length, which is also the most
common LRR length among LRR-containing proteins of
mosquitoes and other insects. LRR lengths include the
11-residue consensus identifiable from sequence profiles
plus the additional variable-length region before the
start of the next consensus, which for LRR-g is just 8
residues long (Figure 3C). Although rare, examples of
short LRRs with only 19 amino acids have been identified, e.g. Mimivirus protein R380 [27], suggesting that
such short LRRs may not necessarily interrupt the complete LRR fold. Proline residues in the LRR variable
regions are common in short LRRs where they form
part of the convex side of these repeats. Consistent with
this observation, proline is the most common residue at
positions 17 and 18 of LRR-g (Figure 3C). The LRR
immediately following the short LRR-g exhibits the most
variable lengths with LRRs of 20, 21, 22, 23, and 24
amino acids (LRR-h) and the third ‘L’ of its 11-residue
LRR consensus is almost always replaced by a less bulky
alanine (A) residue. The mosquito LRIM-like genes are
thus characterised by a variable number of 6 to 14
recognisable LRRs of different lengths, with a subset of
LRIMs that exhibit an unusually short LRR of only 19
amino acids.
Patterns of LRIM cysteine residues suggest critical
disulphide bridging

The comparison of protein sequences most closely
related to AgLRIM1 and AgAPL1C highlights several
well-conserved patterns of cysteine residues (Figure 3A).
The leading C-C motif is notably absent from AgLRIM1
and AgAPL1B, while the double-cysteine motif (C-CC)
is incomplete in AaLRIM2 and missing from the frameshift-disrupted AgAPL1A. This frameshift is present in
the sequenced An. gambiae PEST genome assembly but
may not occur in other populations where anti-parasitic
effects of AgAPL1A have been observed [13]. The double-cysteine motif is consistently replaced by a tyrosinecysteine motif in the TM LRIMs, and a third solitary
cysteine (C*) is conserved in only LRIM1 and LRIM2/
APL1 proteins. The leading C-C motif and the doublecysteine motif are also present in all Short and Coil-less
LRIMs apart from the three LRIM20 orthologues that
lack the leading C-C motif (see additional file 1). Such

Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

cysteine patterns are common to many LRR-containing
proteins in the regions immediately flanking the LRR
domain where they form intramolecular disulphidebonded caps that stabilise the N-and C-terminal ends of
the LRR domains [27]. A double-cysteine motif resembling that found in the LRIMs forms the disulphidebonded C-terminal cap of the Nogo-66 receptor, a
human LRR protein involved in signalling that modulates axon regeneration [28]. This motif contains six
cysteines that form three disulphide bridges, suggesting
that the LRIM C-CC motif, together with a ubiquitously
conserved cysteine residue that immediately follows the
last LRR consensus, could allow for the formation of
two disulphide bridges to build a stabilising cap.
As well as forming the N-and C-terminal LRR caps,
the patterns of cysteine residues may also be important
in stabilising LRIM-LRIM interactions as in the case of
AgLRIM1 and AgAPL1C. Examining the behaviour of
AgLRIM1 and AgAPL1C using specific antibodies under
non-reducing conditions revealed major protein bands
of a high molecular weight complex that resolved into
expected monomer sizes under reducing conditions [3].
Thus, these two LRIMs form a disulphide-bridged complex, further suggesting that the patterns of conserved
cysteine residues that characterise the family of LRIM
proteins may be critical to the formation of LRIM complexes. LRR-flanking cysteines have also been implicated
in facilitating interactions with other proteins as in the
case of mammalian TLR4 and its MD-2 (myeloid differentiation protein) partner required for the recognition
of lipopolysaccharide [29]. The MD-2-like family of proteins is expanded in mosquitoes compared to the fruitfly
and exhibits six conserved cysteines that may be important in such protein-protein interactions [1,21]. At least
one of these MD-2-like proteins in An. gambiae shows
specificity in regulating resistance to P. falciparum [21].
Thus, cysteine residue patterns among LRIM-like proteins may be important for LRR capping as well as for
stable interactions both in the formation of LRIM complexes and in the interaction with other protein
partners.
LRIM coiled-coil domains may facilitate protein-protein
interactions

The LRIM1 and APL1/LRIM2 proteins all exhibit a
double coiled-coil C-terminal domain (Figure 3A), while
the remaining Long LRIMs and all the Short LRIMs
exhibit at least one coiled-coil C-terminal region (see
additional file 1). Coiled-coil domains can take on a
variety of conformations with different helix stoichiometries and orientations [30]. Protein coiled-coils are
formed when alpha-helices wrap around each other into
stable supercoiled structures of parallel or anti-parallel,
homo-or hetero-, dimers or higher order oligomers
found in both fibrous and globular proteins. Each of the

Page 7 of 10

seven-residue repeats that define the primary structure
of coiled-coils gives rise to a complete turn along the
alpha-helix, with an amphipathic nature required for
supercoil formation. Despite understanding these principles, reliable predictions of coiled-coil domain interactions remain generally unfeasible.
While the predicted monomer sizes of An. gambiae
LRIM1 and APL1C are ~55 kD and ~80 kD, respectively, the disulphide-bridged complex migrated at ~260
kD suggesting the presence of a functional multimer in
the hemolymph [3]. However, given that the observed
size changes significantly depending on the resolving
power of the gel system used for protein separation
(Povelones M, unpublished data), and that coiled-coil
containing proteins often exhibit aberrantly slow electrophoretic mobility, it is possible that the complex is
assembled from 2-4 LRIM1 or APL1C monomers. Their
double coiled-coil domains may facilitate initial associations that bring the proteins together in an orientation
to promote the formation of stabilising disulphide
bridges. The LRIM coiled-coil domains may therefore
play critical roles in facilitating protein-protein interactions, both in the formation of LRIM protein complexes
as well as in associating with other components of the
mosquito complement-like system.

Discussion
The identification and feature characterisation of the
family of mosquito LRIM-like genes revealed several
putatively important sequence-structure-function relations. Notably, their variable LRRs suggest a stable arc
or horseshoe-like fold with potential for surface structural plasticity that could facilitate multiple interactions.
Interaction properties of LRRs are extremely diverse,
exemplified by plant R-proteins that may sense parasites
by binding to avirulence proteins or to host proteins
that have been perturbed by the presence of parasite
effectors [31]. As in the case of the An. gambiae
LRIM1/APL1C complex, some R-proteins require the
formation of homo-or heteromeric complexes to achieve
effective activation. LRRs of the related nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat (NLR) proteins are believed to
sense Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPs)
such as flagellin, initiating amino-terminal domain
recruitment of downstream effectors such as procaspases to trigger immune responses [32]. TLR ectodomains are also composed of LRRs, where in mammals
the direct binding of components from infectious agents
leads to the intracellular activation of immune responses
[33]. In Drosophila immunity, the Toll LRRs similarly
perform a recognition function but rather than directly
sensing PAMPs, the receptor is activated by the cytokine, Spaetzle. The remarkable potential of LRR
domains for diverse recognition properties is exploited

Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

in the jawless vertebrates, lamprey and hagfish, where
LRRs have been shown to form the basis of their adaptive immune system [34]. Combinatorial assembly from
a single germline variable lymphocyte receptor (VLR)
gene can incorporate repeats from upstream or downstream LRR cassettes to create mature receptors with an
incredible diversity of LRRs [35]. Interestingly, lamprey
B-subtype VLRs circulate in the blood as disulphidelinked multimers [36], as do AgLRIM1 and AgAPL1C in
An. gambiae hemolymph.
Many thousands of LRR-containing proteins have
been found in a wide range of organisms from viruses
to eukaryotes where the repeat structures appear to provide versatile recognition and/or interaction functionality often in combination with a variety of other
functional, often signalling, domains [37]. Some of the
most common include TIR, Nucleotide-Binding Domain
(NBD), and protein kinase domains as in the case of
many plant R-proteins. Many R-proteins combine a variable number of LRRs with an NBD and an amino-terminal TIR homology region or a coiled-coil domain [31].
Similarly, the identified LRIM-like genes contain a variable number of recognisable LRRs combined with
coiled-coils in the Short and Long LRIMs and an additional transmembrane domain in the TM LRIMs. However, none of the LRIM family members encompasses a
known signalling domain, suggesting that LRIMs are
unlikely to perform immune signalling roles typical of
TLRs, NLRs and R-proteins. Instead, LRIMs may operate by sensing and responding to pathogens locally as
part of the mosquito complement-like system.
While the LRRs are likely to be responsible for pathogen sensing, the LRIM coiled-coil domains may be
important for driving additional interactions. The oligomerisation properties of coiled-coils mean that they can
serve as protein-protein interaction domains, as in the
case of the SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive
factor attachment protein receptor) proteins where a
four-helix bundle brings three proteins together to facilitate the processes of membrane fusion [38]. Interactions
between LRIM coiled-coils may promote favourable
orientations of cysteine residues for the formation of
stabilising disulphide bridges. This interaction model
may be extended to incorporate LRIMs with both double
and single coiled-coil C-terminal regions, to form alternative complexes of coiled-coil containing LRIM proteins. As well as promoting structural organisations that
allow disulphide bridge formation, the interactions of the
coiled-coil domains could direct the specificity of the
LRIM-LRIM partnerships, e.g. to ensure the pairing of
AgLRIM1 with AgAPL1C. Under this model, the Coil-less
LRIMs may act as promiscuous family members that are
less restricted in their choice of interaction partner. The
LRIM coiled-coil domains may also facilitate important

Page 8 of 10

interactions with other components of the mosquito
complement-like system. The An. gambiae LRIM1/
APL1C complex interacts with the processed form of
TEP1 and promotes its localisation to parasite surfaces
[2,3]. Such interactions with components of the complement-like system may be mediated through the
coiled-coils of the LRIM complex. In this way, the
complex could shield the reactive thioester protein
from inadvertent binding to self tissues until sensing of
pathogens via the LRIM LRR domains resulted in targeted thioester protein release.

Conclusions
The known characteristics of the LRR domains of
R-genes, NLRs, TLRs, and VLRs, together with functional data from mosquitoes and the interaction properties of coiled-coil domains support the role of LRIM
proteins as putative recognition receptors of the mosquito innate immune system. This family of LRIM-like
genes appears to be unique and expanded in mosquitoes
with more than 20 members in each species but no
clearly related genes in other insects. Nevertheless, both
LRR and coiled-coil domains are tolerant of high levels
of sequence variation that may obscure ancestral relations to genes in other organisms. The 6 to 14 variablelength LRRs that characterise the LRIM proteins may
facilitate multiple interactions, which in turn may be
augmented by the formation of LRIM protein complexes
mediated by coiled-coils and stabilised by disulphide
bridges. The appreciation of these relations between key
protein sequence and structural features and their likely
molecular functions will drive experimental elucidation
of their roles in the biology of the mosquito complement-like system and innate immunity.
Methods
Gene Prediction

An. gambiae LRIM1 and APL1C gene products both
have signal peptide sequences followed by a stretch of
LRRs. The C-terminal sequences of both these genes
exhibit characteristic 7-residue repeats that define the
primary structure of coiled-coil domains. A distinctive
cysteine-rich pattern can be identified in the hinge
region between the LRR and the coiled-coils. These
characteristic shared features served as the basis for
comparative genomic searches to identify putative
LRIM-like genes. Official predicted protein sets for An.
gambiae, Ae. aegypti, Cx. quinquefasciatus and the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster, were scanned for the distinctive cysteine-rich pattern of the hinge region using
Perl regular expressions. Hits that also exhibited LRR
and coiled-coil domains were then used as seeds for
searches of the genomes of the three mosquito species,
as well as D. melanogaster, Apis mellifera (honey bee),

Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

and Pediculus humanus (body louse). Homology-based
gene predictions were then performed for each region
using multiple approaches with sequence profiles or
individual protein sequences. These predictions were
manually examined with available supporting data (e.g.
expressed sequence tags) to confirm LRIM-like gene
models.

Page 9 of 10

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary tables of LRIM gene features and
expression data. A table listing the sequence features of each of the
identified LRIM genes in the mosquitoes Anopheles gambiae, Aedes
aegypti and Culex quinquefasciatus, and a table listing Anopheles gambiae
LRIM genes with experimental evidence of transcriptional responses to
malaria parasite infections or blood feeding.

Gene Characterisation

The architectures of the identified LRIM-like genes were
analysed using InterProScan [39], REP [40], PCOILS
[41], Marcoil [42], and SignalP [43]. Both MUSCLE [44]
and Probcons [45] were employed for multiple protein
sequence alignments, with manual editing to improve
alignments of the repeating LRRs and coiled-coils.
These alignments were used to build neighbour joining
phylogenetic trees with ClustalW [46] to predict the
likely evolutionary relations among the genes supported
by gene orthology assignments from the OrthoDB
resource [47]. Protein sequence logos [48] were built
from the LRR alignments to examine amino acid conservation patterns. The relative genomic organisations of
the identified LRIM-like genes in each of the three mosquito species were examined using the VectorBase [49]
genome browser facilities. Perl regular expressions were
developed to identify and measure the lengths of individual LRRs of the LRIM-like proteins and to scan the
predicted protein-coding genes of each mosquito species
as well as those of A. mellifera, Bombyx mori (silk
moth), D. melanogaster, and Tribolium castaneum (flour
beetle). The VectorBase expression data BioMart facility
(database release 1.1.2) was employed to identify An.
gambiae LRIMs that exhibited transcriptional responses
to malaria parasite infections or blood feeding.
PCR Analysis of PANGGL Repeat Region of AgAPL1C

Genomic DNA was prepared from single male mosquitoes from three laboratory strains; G3, L3-5 and
Yaounde. Mosquitoes were placed in a tube containing
100 μL of a 50% w/v suspension of Chelex 100 beads
(Sigma) in water. Mosquitoes and beads were homogenised using a disposable pestle and samples were incubated at 100°C for 10 minutes. Homogenates were spun
at 20,000 xg for 1 minute. 1 μL of an 800 unit/mL stock
of Proteinase K (Sigma) was added to 10 μL of the
cleared supernatant and the samples were incubated at
37°C for 30 minutes, and then at 100°C for 5 minutes.
10 uL PCR reactions were run using 0.5 μL of the genomic DNA, GoTaq master mix (Promega) and the following primers flanking the AgAPL1C PANGGL repeat
region: gcggatccaccATGTGCTGGTTACACGCCGTATC and ACCTATATGGGTTGGAGTTC. Products
were analysed on a 2% agarose gel.

Abbreviations
APL: Anopheles-Plasmodium-responsive leucine-rich repeat protein; BRACA:
breast cancer susceptibility protein; cDNA: complementary deoxyribonucleic
acid; GNEF: guanine nucleotide exchange factor; LRIM: leucine-rich repeat
immune protein; LRL: leucine-rich leader; LRR: leucine-rich repeat; MD:
myeloid differentiation protein; NBD: nucleotide-binding domain; NLR:
nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat protein; PAMP: pathogen associated
molecular pattern; SNARE: soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor
attachment protein receptor; TE: transposable element; TEP: thioestercontaining protein; TIR: toll-interleukin receptor; TLR: toll-like receptor; TM:
transmembrane; VLR: variable lymphocyte receptor.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Wellcome Trust Program Grant (GR077229/Z/
05/Z), a National Institutes of Health Program Project (2PO1AI044220-06A1),
and a Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council Grant (BB/
E002641/1). R.M.W. was supported by a Wellcome Trust PhD Fellowship.
Author details
Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva
Medical School, 1 rue Michel-Servet, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland. 2Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics, 1 rue Michel-Servet, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
3
Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Life Sciences,
Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ London, UK.
1

Authors’ contributions
RMW conceived and designed the study, carried out the computational
comparative genomic analyses, and wrote the manuscript. MP performed
the PANGGL repeat polymorphism experiments, participated in the design
of the study and helped to write the manuscript. GKC coordinated the
study, participated in the design, and helped to write the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 7 July 2010 Accepted: 30 September 2010
Published: 30 September 2010
References
1. Waterhouse R, Kriventseva E, Meister S, Xi Z, Alvarez K, Bartholomay L,
Barillas-Mury C, Bian G, Blandin S, Christensen B, et al: Evolutionary
dynamics of immune-related genes and pathways in disease-vector
mosquitoes. Science 2007, 316(5832):1738-1743.
2. Fraiture M, Baxter R, Steinert S, Chelliah Y, Frolet C, Quispe-Tintaya W,
Hoffmann J, Blandin S, Levashina E: Two mosquito LRR proteins function
as complement control factors in the TEP1-mediated killing of
Plasmodium. Cell Host Microbe 2009, 5(3):273-284.
3. Povelones M, Waterhouse R, Kafatos F, Christophides G: Leucine-rich repeat
protein complex activates mosquito complement in defense against
Plasmodium parasites. Science 2009, 324(5924):258-261.
4. Dimopoulos G, Christophides G, Meister S, Schultz J, White K, BarillasMury C, Kafatos F: Genome expression analysis of Anopheles gambiae:
responses to injury, bacterial challenge, and malaria infection. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(13):8814-8819.
5. Osta M, Christophides G, Kafatos F: Effects of mosquito genes on
Plasmodium development. Science 2004, 303(5666):2030-2032.

Waterhouse et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:531
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/531

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.
20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

Riehle M, Markianos K, Niaré O, Xu J, Li J, Touré A, Podiougou B, Oduol F,
Diawara S, Diallo M, et al: Natural malaria infection in Anopheles gambiae
is regulated by a single genomic control region. Science 2006,
312(5773):577-579.
Blandin S, Shiao S, Moita L, Janse C, Waters A, Kafatos F, Levashina E:
Complement-like protein TEP1 is a determinant of vectorial capacity in
the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae. Cell 2004, 116(5):661-670.
Levashina E, Moita L, Blandin S, Vriend G, Lagueux M, Kafatos F: Conserved
role of a complement-like protein in phagocytosis revealed by dsRNA
knockout in cultured cells of the mosquito, Anopheles gambiae. Cell
2001, 104(5):709-718.
Moita L, Wang-Sattler R, Michel K, Zimmermann T, Blandin S, Levashina E,
Kafatos F: In vivo identification of novel regulators and conserved
pathways of phagocytosis in A. gambiae. Immunity 2005, 23(1):65-73.
Habtewold T, Povelones M, Blagborough A, Christophides G: Transmission
blocking immunity in the malaria non-vector mosquito Anopheles
quadriannulatus species A. PLoS Pathog 2008, 4(5):e1000070.
Jaramillo-Gutierrez G, Rodrigues J, Ndikuyeze G, Povelones M, MolinaCruz A, Barillas-Mury C: Mosquito immune responses and compatibility
between Plasmodium parasites and anopheline mosquitoes. BMC
Microbiol 2009, 9:154.
Riehle M, Xu J, Lazzaro B, Rottschaefer S, Coulibaly B, Sacko M, Niare O,
Morlais I, Traore S, Vernick K: Anopheles gambiae APL1 is a family of
variable LRR proteins required for Rel1-mediated protection from the
malaria parasite, Plasmodium berghei. PLoS One 2008, 3(11):e3672.
Mitri C, Jacques J, Thiery I, Riehle M, Xu J, Bischoff E, Morlais I, Nsango S,
Vernick K, Bourgouin C: Fine pathogen discrimination within the APL1
gene family protects Anopheles gambiae against human and rodent
malaria species. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5(9):e1000576.
Little T, Cobbe N: The evolution of immune-related genes from disease
carrying mosquitoes: diversity in a peptidoglycan-and a thioesterrecognizing protein. Insect Mol Biol 2005, 14(6):599-605.
Obbard D, Callister D, Jiggins F, Soares D, Yan G, Little T: The evolution of
TEP1, an exceptionally polymorphic immunity gene in Anopheles
gambiae. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:274.
Blandin S, Levashina E: Thioester-containing proteins and insect
immunity. Mol Immunol 2004, 40(12):903-908.
Baxter R, Chang C, Chelliah Y, Blandin S, Levashina E, Deisenhofer J:
Structural basis for conserved complement factor-like function in the
antimalarial protein TEP1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104(28):11615-11620.
Bell J, Botos I, Hall P, Askins J, Shiloach J, Segal D, Davies D: The molecular
structure of the Toll-like receptor 3 ligand-binding domain. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(31):10976-10980.
Choe J, Kelker M, Wilson I: Crystal structure of human toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3) ectodomain. Science 2005, 309(5734):581-585.
Waterhouse R, Wyder S, Zdobnov E: The Aedes aegypti genome: a
comparative perspective. Insect Mol Biol 2008, 17(1):1-8.
Dong Y, Aguilar R, Xi Z, Warr E, Mongin E, Dimopoulos G: Anopheles
gambiae immune responses to human and rodent Plasmodium parasite
species. PLoS Pathog 2006, 2(6):e52.
Aguilar R, Jedlicka A, Mintz M, Mahairaki V, Scott A, Dimopoulos G: Global
gene expression analysis of Anopheles gambiae responses to microbial
challenge. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2005, 35(7):709-719.
Kambris Z, Cook P, Phuc H, Sinkins S: Immune activation by lifeshortening Wolbachia and reduced filarial competence in mosquitoes.
Science 2009, 326(5949):134-136.
Vlachou D, Schlegelmilch T, Christophides G, Kafatos F: Functional genomic
analysis of midgut epithelial responses in Anopheles during Plasmodium
invasion. Curr Biol 2005, 15(13):1185-1195.
Marinotti O, Nguyen Q, Calvo E, James A, Ribeiro J: Microarray analysis of
genes showing variable expression following a blood meal in Anopheles
gambiae. Insect Mol Biol 2005, 14(4):365-373.
Matsushima N, Tanaka T, Enkhbayar P, Mikami T, Taga M, Yamada K,
Kuroki Y: Comparative sequence analysis of leucine-rich repeats (LRRs)
within vertebrate toll-like receptors. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:124.
Bella J, Hindle K, McEwan P, Lovell S: The leucine-rich repeat structure. Cell
Mol Life Sci 2008, 65(15):2307-2333.
Wen D, Wildes C, Silvian L, Walus L, Mi S, Lee D, Meier W, Pepinsky R:
Disulfide structure of the leucine-rich repeat C-terminal cap and C-

Page 10 of 10

29.

30.
31.

32.
33.
34.

35.

36.

37.
38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

43.
44.
45.

46.

47.

48.
49.

terminal stalk region of Nogo-66 receptor. Biochemistry 2005,
44(50):16491-16501.
Nishitani C, Mitsuzawa H, Sano H, Shimizu T, Matsushima N, Kuroki Y: Tolllike receptor 4 region Glu24-Lys47 is a site for MD-2 binding:
importance of CYS29 and CYS40. J Biol Chem 2006, 281(50):38322-38329.
Grigoryan G, Keating A: Structural specificity in coiled-coil interactions.
Curr Opin Struct Biol 2008, 18(4):477-483.
Bent A, Mackey D: Elicitors, effectors, and R genes: the new paradigm
and a lifetime supply of questions. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2007,
45:399-436.
Ye Z, Ting J: NLR, the nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich repeat
containing gene family. Curr Opin Immunol 2008, 20(1):3-9.
Leulier F, Lemaitre B: Toll-like receptors–taking an evolutionary approach.
Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9(3):165-178.
Pancer Z, Amemiya C, Ehrhardt G, Ceitlin J, Gartland G, Cooper M: Somatic
diversification of variable lymphocyte receptors in the agnathan sea
lamprey. Nature 2004, 430(6996):174-180.
Herrin B, Alder M, Roux K, Sina C, Ehrhardt G, Boydston J, Turnbough CJ,
Cooper M: Structure and specificity of lamprey monoclonal antibodies.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(6):2040-2045.
Alder M, Herrin B, Sadlonova A, Stockard C, Grizzle W, Gartland L,
Gartland G, Boydston J, Turnbough CJ, Cooper M: Antibody responses of
variable lymphocyte receptors in the lamprey. Nat Immunol 2008,
9(3):319-327.
Kobe B, Kajava A: The leucine-rich repeat as a protein recognition motif.
Curr Opin Struct Biol 2001, 11(6):725-732.
Sutton R, Fasshauer D, Jahn R, Brunger A: Crystal structure of a SNARE
complex involved in synaptic exocytosis at 2.4 A resolution. Nature 1998,
395(6700):347-353.
Zdobnov E, Apweiler R: InterProScan–an integration platform for the
signature-recognition methods in InterPro. Bioinformatics 2001,
17(9):847-848.
Andrade M, Ponting C, Gibson T, Bork P: Homology-based method for
identification of protein repeats using statistical significance estimates. J
Mol Biol 2000, 298(3):521-537.
Lupas A, Van Dyke M, Stock J: Predicting coiled coils from protein
sequences. Science 1991, 252(5010):1162-1164.
Delorenzi M, Speed T: An HMM model for coiled-coil domains and a
comparison with PSSM-based predictions. Bioinformatics 2002,
18(4):617-625.
Bendtsen J, Nielsen H, von Heijne G, Brunak S: Improved prediction of
signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J Mol Biol 2004, 340(4):783-795.
Edgar R: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
Do C, Mahabhashyam M, Brudno M, Batzoglou S: ProbCons: Probabilistic
consistency-based multiple sequence alignment. Genome Res 2005,
15(2):330-340.
Thompson J, Higgins D, Gibson T: CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity
of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence
weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice.
Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22(22):4673-4680.
Kriventseva E, Rahman N, Espinosa O, Zdobnov E: OrthoDB: the
hierarchical catalog of eukaryotic orthologs. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36
Database: D271-275.
Crooks G, Hon G, Chandonia J, Brenner S: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14(6):1188-1190.
Lawson D, Arensburger P, Atkinson P, Besansky N, Bruggner R, Butler R,
Campbell K, Christophides G, Christley S, Dialynas E, et al: VectorBase: a
data resource for invertebrate vector genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, ,
37 Database: D583-587.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-531
Cite this article as: Waterhouse et al.: Sequence-structure-function
relations of the mosquito leucine-rich repeat immune proteins. BMC
Genomics 2010 11:531.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
