<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Enhancer of split transcription factor Her8a is a novel dimerisation partner for Her3 that controls anterior hindbrain neurogenesis in zebrafish</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-11-27"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Katharine J Webb"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The Enhancer of split transcription factor Her8a is a
novel dimerisation partner for Her3 that controls
anterior hindbrain neurogenesis in zebrafish
Katharine J Webb1,5,6*†, Marion Coolen1,4,10†, Christian J Gloeckner2,3, Christian Stigloher1,7, Brigitte Bahn1,8,
Stefanie Topp1,9, Marius Ueffing2,3 and Laure Bally-Cuif1,4,10*

Abstract
Background: Neurogenesis control and the prevention of premature differentiation in the vertebrate embryo are
crucial processes, allowing the formation of late-born cell types and ensuring the correct shape and
cytoarchitecture of the brain. Members of the Hairy/Enhancer of Split (Hairy/E(spl)) family of bHLH-Orange
transcription factors, such as zebrafish Her3, 5, 9 and 11, are implicated in the local inhibition of neurogenesis to
maintain progenitor pools within the early neural plate. To better understand how these factors exert their
inhibitory function, we aimed to isolate some of their functional interactors.
Results: We used a yeast two-hybrid screen with Her5 as bait and recovered a novel zebrafish Hairy/E(spl) factor Her8a. Using phylogenetic and synteny analyses, we demonstrate that her8a evolved from an ancient duplicate of
Hes6 that was recently lost in the mammalian lineage. We show that her8a is expressed across the mid- and
anterior hindbrain from the start of segmentation. Through knockdown and misexpression experiments, we
demonstrate that Her8a is a negative regulator of neurogenesis and plays an essential role in generating
progenitor pools within rhombomeres 2 and 4 - a role resembling that of Her3. Her8a co-purifies with Her3,
suggesting that Her8a-Her3 heterodimers may be relevant in this domain of the neural plate, where both proteins
are co-expressed. Finally, we demonstrate that her8a expression is independent of Notch signaling at the early
neural plate stage but that SoxB factors play a role in its expression, linking patterning information to neurogenesis
control. Overall, the regulation and function of Her8a differ strikingly from those of its closest relative in other
vertebrates - the Hes6-like proteins.
Conclusions: Our results characterize the phylogeny, expression and functional interactions involving a new Her
factor, Her8a, and highlight the complex interplay of E(spl) proteins that generates the neurogenesis pattern of the
zebrafish early neural plate.
Keywords: zebrafish, primary neurogenesis, midbrain-hindbrain, Hairy/E(spl), Her/Hes

Background
Neurogenesis in the early vertebrate neural plate
begins at stereotyped loci - termed proneural clusters
-, which prefigure the localization of the earliest neuronal groups and the architecture of the primary
embryonic neuronal scaffold. These proneural clusters
consist of spatially defined progenitor groups engaged
in active neurogenesis, within which committed
* Correspondence: webb@helmholtz-muenchen.de; bally-cuif@inaf.cnrs-gif.fr
† Contributed equally
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

precursors expressing higher levels of proneural genes
(such as neurogenin or achaete-scute-like genes,
respectively neurog1 and ascl1 in zebrafish) are singled
out to differentiate first. An identical scaffold is found
in all vertebrate embryos, highlighting the robustness
and functional relevance of this organization [1-4].
Dissecting the regulatory cascades involved in this process is therefore of universal importance.
The control of neurogenesis progression within proneural clusters relies on Hairy/Enhancer of split (E(spl))
factors (Hes in mouse; Her in zebrafish). These

© 2011 Webb et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

transcription factors belong to the basic-helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) family, characterized by a DNA-binding basic
domain and an HLH domain composed of two alpha
helices intervened by a loop of a few amino acids [5]. In
addition, Hairy/Enhancer of split (E(spl)) factors contain
an Orange domain, which is most probably involved in
protein-protein interactions, and a WRPW C-terminal
tetrapeptide, which mediates transcriptional repression
(reviewed in [6,7]). During the so-called process of lateral inhibition, the expression of Notch ligands in committed precursors activates Notch signaling in
neighbouring progenitors, which in turn induces expression of Hes/Her factors. The latter down-regulate proneural genes, hence maintaining Notch-receiving cells in
a progenitor state. Reflecting the intermingled distribution of committed and transiently inhibited progenitors,
the proneural and E(spl) genes are expressed in a saltand-pepper fashion within proneural clusters. E(Spl) factors expressed in proneural clusters in zebrafish include
her4.1 [8-10], hes5/her15, her2 and her12 [11]. In agreement with the lateral inhibition model, her4.1 expression
is positively regulated by Notch, and inhibits expression
of neurog1 [10].
Recent work has demonstrated that proneural clusters
are delimited negatively, through a process of active
neurogenesis suppression taking place in surrounding
areas (reviewed in [12]). These “inhibited” areas, socalled “progenitor pools”, are transiently maintained in
an refractory state to be recruited in later events of neuronal production, and are organized as tight groups of
adjacent cells at stereotyped positions within the neural
plate. Major progenitor pools can be found at the presumptive midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) [3,13]
and in longitudinal stripes separating the columns of
presumptive moto- and lateral neurons in the hindbrain,
or moto-, inter- and sensory neurons in the spinal cord
[11,14,15]. At the least, the MHB pool is maintained
until adulthood in zebrafish, where it participates in the
generation of adult-born neurons and oligodendrocytes
[16]. Embryonic progenitor pools are characterised by
the expression of a specific set of transcription factors,
including Zic, BF1/Anf and Rx family members [17] as
well as Hes/Her proteins. In zebrafish, the combinatorial
expression of a distinct set of her genes - which to date
includes her3, her5, her9 and her11 - characterises all
progenitor pools [12], while in mouse the genes Hes1,
Hes3 and Hes5 share sustained expression in adjacent
cells of the MHB pool, for example [18-20]. These her/
Hes genes exhibit functional similarities and have been
implicated in progenitor pool maintenance: their misexpression inhibits neurogenesis, whereas loss-of-function
causes premature expression of proneural genes in at
least part of their expression domains [11,13,15,19-22].
In addition, her3/5/9/11 as well as Hes1 at the mouse

Page 2 of 19

MHB all demonstrate an irregular association with
Notch: while Hes/her genes in proneural clusters are
activated by Notch signaling, the expression of her3/5/9/
11 and Hes1 at the MHB is controlled in a Notch-independent manner. The mechanisms accounting for these
specific features remain unknown.
The HLH region of Hes/Her factors functions as a
dimerisation domain, and the formation of hetero- and
homodimers as well as further possible interactions
through the Orange domain are key components of the
specificity of the actions of these proteins. Heterodimerisation can involve closely related members of the Her/
Hes family, or several different transcription factors or
transcriptional cofactors [7]. In order to better understand the mechanism of action of Her factors expressed
in progenitor pools, and the pathways regulating their
activity, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen using
the HLH and Orange domains of Her5 as bait. This led
to the recovery of Her8a, a novel Her factor of the Hes6
subfamily expressed in a broad manner at the presumptive midbrain-hindbrain domain of the early zebrafish
neural plate. Morpholino-mediated knockdown and misexpression studies establish Her8a as a negative-regulator of neurogenesis playing an essential role in
maintaining progenitor pools of rhombomeres (r) 2 and
4. her8a knockdown produces a similar phenotype to
that of her3 knockdown, and co-purification demonstrates that Her8a dimerises with Her3. At the MHB
however, we show that the predominant activity is
exerted by the combination of Her3, 5, 9 and 11.
Together, our results identify a new player in progenitor
pool formation and highlight the region-specific combinatorial activity of E(spl) factors in this process.

Results
Identification of Her8a as a potential binding partner for
Her proteins

To recover binding partners for Her proteins, we used a
yeast two-hybrid screen where a 181-amino acid fragment of Her5 (excluding the basic domain and the
WRPW motif) was screened against an 18-20 hpf
embryo zebrafish library. This screen returned 280 positive clones, from a total of 76.1 million tested interactions. These 280 positive clones represented 75 unique
protein-protein interactions. The quality of these interactions was graded using a PBS scoring system - where
A is the highest score of confidence, B is very good, C is
good, D is low and N/A is used when no score could be
assigned (see Materials and Methods). Our screen
returned 6 As, 9 Bs, 2 Cs, 49 Ds and 9 N/As (see Additional file 1, Table S1 for a detailed description of all
recovered candidates). Gene ontology enrichment analysis of the recovered binding partners revealed an enrichment of proteins involved in protein transport and also

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

heterodimerisation (see Additional file 2, Table S2).
Among these candidates, we note the presence of 7 distinct Her factors, in agreement with the postulated capacity for protein heterodimerisation within this family [7].
As further indication of the validity of the assay, Her5
was found to bind with Her11 with a score of B, an
interaction that had been shown previously in our
laboratory [22]. Her8a, scored A and corresponding to a
new E(spl) family member, proved very strongly
expressed in the midbrain-hindbrain (MH) area (see
below), and we consequently focused on this factor.
Her8a is a new Hes6-like protein, the ortholog of which
was lost in the mammalian lineage

The predicted Her8a protein displays a bHLH and an
orange domain, and harbors a WRPW motif at its Cterminus - characteristics common to the Hairy/E(spl)
family. Sequence comparisons of the bHLH domain of
this family classify Her8a, together with zebrafish Her13
(previously Her13.1), Hes6 (previously Her13.2) and
Her8.2, within the subfamily showing highest homology
to mouse Hes6 [23]. Proteins of this subfamily exhibit a
shortened loop when compared to other Hairy-E(spl)
members [24], such as mouse Hes1 and Hes5 (Additional file 3, Figure S1). Hes6-like proteins also share
substantial similarity outside the bHLH domains (Additional file 3, Figure S1), allowing their phylogeny to be

Page 3 of 19

studied using extended protein sequences. This confirmed the existence of two subfamilies of Hes6-like
proteins, Hes6.1 and Hes6.2, comprising respectively
Her13/Hes6 and Her8a/Her8.2 (Figure 1A) (and see
[23]), encoded by gene pairs (Figure 1B). Importantly, it
also resolved for the first time their relationship with
the single mammalian Hes6 protein, as sequence alignments directly assign mammalian Hes6 to the Hes6.1
subfamily (Figure 1A). hes6.2-like genes are found
neither in eutherian mammals nor in marsupials, but
exist in all other phyla, suggesting a late secondary loss
of this gene shortly after the divergence of eutherians
and marsupials from the monotreme lineage. Finally,
and as expected from the whole genome duplication
undergone in the teleost fish lineage subsequent to its
divergence from other vertebrates [25], followed by secondary gene loss, teleost species exhibit three or four
Hes6-like genes. Synteny analyses (Figure 1C) indeed
identify a conserved orthologous gene pair (locus 1) as
well as a conserved duplicate (locus 2). This duplicate
only contains the hes6.1-like member and, based on the
situation in other vertebrates, most likely lost the
hes6.2-like gene. Strikingly, in zebrafish, the latter gene
(her8a) was kept and transferred onto a different genomic location (locus 3). Together, these results indicate
that her8a is the ortholog of her8.2 and that it is located
in a unique genomic setting compared to other related

Figure 1 her8a encodes a Hes6-like E(spl) protein closely related to, but not directly orthologous to, mammalian Hes6. A. Phylogenetic
tree depicting protein relationship within the Hes6 subfamily, based on the bHLH and Orange domain sequences. Note the absence of Hes6.2
proteins in marsupials and eutherian mammals. In zebrafish, the closest relative to Her8a is Her8.2, and the closest relative to Her13 is Hes6. B.
Genomic organization of Hes6-like genes through evolution, confirming that the generation of the two Hes6.1 and Hes6.2 genes is ancestral and
that Hes6.2 was secondarily lost within the mammalian taxa subsequent to the divergence of marsupials and eutherian mammals from
monotremes. “?” indicates cases where genomic linkage cannot be resolved at present, in the absence of a genome sequence for the
corresponding species. C. Genomic organization of the areas surrounding Hes6-like genes in teleost species compared to mouse. With the
exception of zebrafish, for all of the teleosts studied, synteny analyses suggest a secondary loss of the hes6.2 duplicate (missing from locus 2)
after the duplication of locus 1. In zebrafish, this gene (her8a) has been relocated to a third locus on a distinct chromosome. 1-3: genomic loci.

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

genes. It also assigns her8a to a subfamily of Hes6-like
genes that is closely related to but not directly orthologous to mammalian Hes6.
her8a is expressed across progenitor pools and proneural
clusters in the anterior neural plate

Among hes6-like genes, we found that her8a was the
only one with expression in the anterior neural plate at
the 3-somite stage. At this stage, her13 was restricted to
a portion of the presumptive lateral proneural clusters
in the anterior spinal cord (Additional file 4, Figure S2).
As shown previously, hes6 was found to be expressed in
the tail bud and posterior paraxial mesoderm (Thisse
and Thisse, 2004), and her8.2 was very weakly or not
expressed (not shown). In contrast, following weak
expression during gastrulation [26], her8a displayed
strong expression in the neural plate from the tailbud
stage onwards. At tailbud, her8a is expressed throughout the neural plate, with the exception of the eye field
and the midline, with strongest intensity at presumptive
midbrain and hindbrain levels (Figure 2A, bracket). At
early segmentation stages, the domain of strong her8a
expression overlaps with that of genes expressed in progenitor pools within the presumptive mid- and hindbrain, such as her3 (Figure 2B) and her5 (Figure 2C)
(purple arrows). It also encompasses the proneural clusters located in the mid- and anterior hindbrain area (e.g.
compare with neurog1 expression, Figure 3A). At 10
somites her8a is expressed in stripes in the hindbrain,
with denser expression in rhombomeres (r) 1 and 3-5
(Figure 2D,E). Expression in the midbrain persists. From
24hpf onwards, her8a acquires a distinct expression profile, highlighting neurogenic domains throughout the
central nervous system, with weaker staining at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (mhb) (arrow) and at the
zona limitans intrathalamica (Figure 2F) (asterisk). Cross
sections of the brain at this stage reveal that her8a
expression is confined to the progenitor, ventricular
domain, largely complementary to the expression of the
post-mitotic neuronal marker HuC/D (Figure 2G). From
48hpf through to adult, her8a remains expressed in proliferation/ventricular zones throughout the brain (Figure
2H,I, and data not shown).
Gain of Her8a function inhibits neurogenesis

Mouse and Xenopus Hes6 proteins are known as positive regulators of differentiation [24,27]. In this context,
the expression of her8a across both pro-neural and nonneurogenic domains was puzzling and prompted us to
explore Her8a function.
In a first gain-of-function approach, embryos were
injected with her8a capped mRNA encoding the fulllength protein at the one cell stage. They were subsequently fixed and analyzed at 3 somites. We observed

Page 4 of 19

that her8a misexpression caused a complete loss of neurog1 expression throughout the embryo (Figure 3A,B)
(77% of cases, n = 22). Co-labeling with tp63 (previously
ΔNp63), which highlights the border of the epidermal
ectoderm juxtaposed to the neural plate [28] (Figure 3A,
white arrowheads), showed that the size or morphology
of the neural plate were not affected (100% of cases, n =
22), suggesting that overexpressing Her8a specifically
blocks neurogenesis without an effect on neural plate
formation. This was confirmed by expression analyses
for patterning markers such as barhl2, her5 and her9,
which highlight distinct domains along the entire
antero-posterior axis of the neural plate [11,29,30]
(Additional file 5, Figure S3). Together, these results
indicate that her8a is capable of inhibiting neurogenesis,
at least at non-physiological concentrations, and this
even across domains normally co-expressing neurog1
and her8a such as the proneural clusters of the midand anterior hindbrain (vcc, r2MN, r2l, R4MN, r4l).
Her8a is required to maintain the proper neurogenesis
pattern in rhombomeres 2 and 4 and acts as binding
partner for Her3

To better appreciate the endogenous requirements for
Her8a, we next turned to a loss-of-function approach.
Embryos at the one-cell stage were injected with morpholinos (MO) directed against the donor splice site of
her8a exon 1 (MO1), the acceptor splice site of her8a
exon 2 (MO2), or the her8a ATG (MO3), and were analyzed at 3 somites. Reverse transcription PCR was used
to reveal strong down-regulation of expression and
abnormal splicing of her8a transcripts with both MO1
and MO2, whereas other genes, such as bactin2,
remained unaffected (Figure 3G). These observations
substantiate that her8aMOs lead to knock-down of
her8a expression.
Blocking Her8a resulted in an ectopic expression of
neurog1 within the normally non-neurogenic area separating motor- and lateral proneural clusters of r2 and 4
(Figure 3C, arrowheads, Figure 3D, arrows) (80% of
cases, n = 60). Although the location of neurog1-positive
cells can be slightly variable from embryo to embryo,
this phenotype was robust and never observed in wildtype animals. The results obtained with the three MOs
were strictly identical (Additional file 6, Figure S4 for a
comparison of MO1 and MO2, and data not shown),
confirming their specificity. We will compile these data
below. This knockdown phenotype strikingly resembles
the published effect of her3 knockdown [15], which we
further confirmed (Figure 3E) (56% of cases, n = 50).
Given that the r2/r4 area of ectopic neurogenesis is
where the intense expression of her8a overlaps with that
of her3 (Figure 1B, Figure 4B), these identical phenotypes suggest a direct or indirect functional interaction

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

Page 5 of 19

Figure 2 Embryonic expression of her8a. Expression is revealed by whole-mount in situ hybridization at the stages indicated (som: somites,
hpf: hours post-fertilization) together with other positional marker genes (B,C,E, color-coded) or proteins (G, immunocytochemistry for the
neuronal marker HuC/D in green). A-E and H are dorsal views of flat-mounted embryos, F,I are lateral views, all embryos are viewed anterior left.
G is a cross section of a 24hpf embryo at midbrain levels (as indicated in F). At early neural plate stages, the domain of strongest her8a
expression covers the mid- and anterior hindbrain (bracket in A-C). It overlaps the presumptive midbrain-hindbrain boundary (her5-positive,
purple arrow in C) and the progenitor pools separating medial and lateral hindbrain neurons (her3-positive, purple arrow in B). It extends into
rhombomere 2 (white arrowhead in C), more posterior rhombomeres being more weakly labeled. At 10 somites, expression in the midbrain is
maintained. It resolves in stripes in the rhombencephalon (D,E). It avoids the midbrain-hindbrain boundary and zona limitans intrathalamica
(asterisk). From 24 hpf onwards, her8a characterizes the ventricular zone and progenitor domains of the neural tube (G-I, arrows in I point to the
ventricular zone and the arrowhead points to the progenitor domain of the optic tectum). Abbreviations: e: eye field, mid: presumptive
midbrain, mhb: midbrain-hindbrain boundary, r: rhombomere. Scale bars: 100 μm.

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

Page 6 of 19

Figure 3 Like Her3, Her8a activity maintains the non-neurogenic areas of rhombomeres 2 and 4. A,B. neurog1 expression highlights the
proneural clusters at the 3-somite stage (black arrows in A) and is eliminated upon her8a overexpression (B, embryo injected with her8a capped
mRNA). Expression of tp63, which highlights the neural plate border (white arrowheads in A), is unchanged. C-F. Compared expression of neurog1
in control embryos (C) and embryos injected with her8aMO (D), her3MO (E) or both MOs (F) shows ectopic neurogenesis between the medial and
lateral proneural clusters of r2 and r4 (blue arrows in D-F, compare with white arrowheads in C) when Her8a and/or Her3 activities are blocked. Few
“ectopic” neurog1-positive can sometimes be found between the vcc and mnr2; this is however highly variable between individuals and observed
in both control and morphant embryos. A-F are dorsal views of flat-mounted embryos, anterior left. Abbreviations: black arrows indicate proneural
clusters: IN: presumptive interneurons, MN: presumptive motoneurons, r2: rhombomere 2, r4: rhombomere 4, r2l: lateral neurons of rhombomere 2,
r4l: lateral neurons of rhombomere 4, SN: presumptive sensory neurons, vcc: ventro-caudal cluster. G. RT-PCR analysis of her8a expression (left and
middle panels) in embryos injected with her8aMO1 ("mo1”) and her8aMO2 ("mo2”) versus control embryos ("ctr”). Low levels of full length, normally
spliced her8a transcripts are detectable in morphants (left and middle panels, arrows) while abnormally spliced transcripts including all or part of
intron 1 become produced (stars). Expression of bactin2, used as RT-PCR control, is indentical in all samples (right panel). The scheme at the top
indicates the genomic structure of her8a, the position of exons (E, purple) and introns (black bars), the binding sites of her8aMO1 and MO2 (red),
the position of RT-PCR primers (blue arrows) and the length of amplified wild-type products (excluding introns) (blue bars).

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

Page 7 of 19

Figure 4 The heterodimerisation potential of full-length Her8a and Her3 proteins may account for their identical loss-of-function
phenotypes. A. Co-affinity purification of full-length Her3 and Her8a proteins in HEK293T cells. When lysates from cells expressing both N-Strep/
Flag-Her3 (N-SF-Her3) and Myc-tagged Her8a (myc-Her8a) proteins are eluted from a STREP-Tactin resin, myc-Her8a is observed to co-purify with
N-SF-Her3 (lane 4). B-E. Schematized summary of the expression patterns (B) and loss-of-function phenotypes (C-E) of her8a and her3. Genes
expression are color-coded and her5/her11 expression is indicated as a landmark (see also Figure 5H). Abbreviations: as in Figure 3; tg: trigeminal
ganglion.

of Her3 and Her8a in controlling common progenitors.
As a first obvious possibility, we tested whether her3
and her8a influence each other’s expression. Ruling out
this scenario, her8aMO-injected embryos displayed a
normal expression of her3, and her3MO embryos a normal expression of her8a (not shown) (100% of cases, n
= 37 and 24, respectively). A following hypothesis is that

her3 and her8a act in a dose-dependent manner to compensate for each other outside r2 and r4, with r2 and r4
showing highest sensitivity to the amount of “Her3
+Her8a” proteins. A similar situation was previously
demonstrated for Her5+Her11 at the MHB [22]. In this
case, we expect that the knockdown of both genes
would produce a phenotype of a greater magnitude than

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

the ectopic expression of proneural markers in r2 and
r4. To test this possibility, we simultaneously blocked
Her3 and Her8a by the co-injection of her3MO and
her8aMO (at the same concentrations shown to produce
the individual phenotypes). This produced no additional
effect on neurog1 expression (Figure 3F) (80% of cases,
n = 20). Likewise, the co-injection of her3MO and her8aMO in amounts just below their effective doses (0.75
mM for her8a and 0.375 mM for her3) induced no phenotype in r2 and r4 (not shown). Together, these observations indicate that these two factors alone are not
compensating for each other to repress neurog1 in other
areas of the embryo.
As a final alternative hypothesis, and based on the
recovery of Her8a as binding to a Her bHLH domain in
yeast cells, we tested whether Her8a and Her3 could act
as necessary heterodimerisation partners. As no commercial antibodies are available for Her3 and Her8a, and
attempts by our laboratory to have them manufactured
failed, we chose a co-purification approach using tagged
versions of the full-length zebrafish proteins recombinantly expressed in HEK293T cells. By purifying Strep/
Flag-tagged Her3 via its Strep-tag II moiety, Myc-tagged
Her8a was successfully co-purified (Figure 4A), demonstrating that both proteins interact with each other. This
interaction may be relevant to the maintenance of the
progenitor pools within r2 and r4, where both her3 and
her8a are strongly expressed, and hereby account for
the identical phenotypes of Her3 and Her8a loss of
function (summarized in Figure 4B-E).
In the absence of Her3, 5, 9 and 11 activity, endogenous
Her8a alone is insufficient to preserve neurog1-free
progenitor pools in the midbrain-hindbrain domain

The results above indicate that, although her8a is
expressed across the entire MH domain, it is only
strictly required to block neurogenesis in r2 and r4.
This raises the question of which her genes combination
encodes the endogenous pattern of neurogenesis inhibition in the MH domain, and whether this combination
involves her8a expression. To address this issue, we
used double in situ hybridization to re-analyze expression of the progenitor pools genes, comparing her3, 5, 9
and 11. Our data confirmed the full overlap of her5 and
her11 (Figure 5A,D) as well as the extension of her3
longitudinal stripes into the presumptive MHB domain
[15] (Figure 5B, arrows), and revealed a previously unreported expression of her9 coinciding with the antero-lateral aspects of the her5/11 territory (Figure 5C, arrows)
(summarized in Figure 5K,L). Previous loss-of-function
experiments of combinations of these genes never
achieved a full neurogenic phenotype: concomitantly
blocking her5 and her11 induced neurog1 medially but
only to a lesser extent in mediolateral and lateral MHB

Page 8 of 19

domains [22] (Figure 5M,N), and the co-inhibition of
her3 and her9 largely recapitulated her3 loss-of-function
in the MH area, with a restricted induction of neurog1
within r2 and r4 [11] (Figure 5O,P). We found that the
down-regulation of all four factors together, through the
coinjection of the relevant gripNA antisense oligonucleotides, was required to generate a large neurog1-positive domain across the presumptive MHB and r2
(Figure 5E,F) (74% of cases, n = 19) - although the most
lateral aspects of the neural plate remained neurog1-free
-. In these conditions however, her8a expression
remained unperturbed (Figure 5G,H) (100% of cases, n
= 39) (schematized in Figure 5Q). Together, these
results demonstrate that the endogenous activity of
Her8a, in the absence of other progenitor pools Her factors, is insufficient to inhibit neurog1 expression in the
MH area. her8a expression also appears insensitive to
the combined expression levels of Her3/5/9/11 and to
the neurogenic status of this neural plate domain. When
following the fate of ectopic neurog1-expressing progenitors in the absence of Her3/5/9 and 11 activities, we
found however that only a subset were maintained until
24hpf. These were located ventrally across the midbrainhindbrain boundary, immediately posterior to vccderived neurons (Figure 5I,J).
Endogenous her8a expression in the early neural plate is
independent of Notch signaling but requires the
expression of SoxB factors

Although many E(spl) transcription factors are downstream effectors of Notch signalling, previous work has
shown that zebrafish her genes expressed in progenitor
pools, such as her3, 5, 9 and 11 [11,13,31] exhibit a
non-canonical regulation by Notch: they do not require
Notch for their expression, and are insensitive to or
transcriptionally inhibited upon ectopic Notch activation. This is in contrast to other family members such
as her4.1 that are expressed in neurogenic zones and are
activated by Notch signaling [32].
Unusually, her8a is expressed across both progenitor
pools and proneural clusters in the early neural plate.
To analyze the effect of ectopic Notch activation, we
overexpressed the intracellular domain of zebrafish
Notch1a (NICD) [10] through capped mRNA injection
at the one-cell stage. We could replicate previously
published results [10] showing that NICD misexpression completely downregulates neurogenesis throughout the early neural plate (Figure 6A,B) (88% of cases,
n = 16). We found that overexpression of NICD causes
ectopic or enhanced expression of her8a throughout
the embryo (Figure 6C,D) (100% of cases, n = 17),
although this induction was weaker at the caudal end
of the neural plate (Figure 6D, asterisk). The latter
observation was repeated when studying the her4.1

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

Page 9 of 19

Figure 5 The activities of Her3, Her5, Her9 and Her11 together account for the progenitor pool pattern of the midbrain-hindbrain
area and do not influence her8a expression. A-D. A comparison of the expression patterns of her3, her5, her9, her11 and neurog1 at 3
somites in the midbrain-hindbrain (MH) area using double in situ hybridization (color-coded), on dorsal views of flat-mounted embryos. Arrows
point to the her5/her11 domains co-expressing her3 or her9. E-J. Compared neurogenesis in control embryos (E,G,I) and embryos co-injected
with the four gripNA antisense oligonucleotides directed against her3, 5, 9 and 11 transcripts (see Methods) (F,H,J). E,F. Expression of neurog1
(revealed by in situ hybridization against gfp in -8.4neurog1:gfp transgenic embryos) [62]: the majority of the MHB/r2 area is induced to express
neurog1. G,H. The expression her8a is unaltered upon injection of the four gripNAs. I,J. Detection of GFP in -8.4neurog1:gfp embryos at 24 hpf
(sagittal view, confocal projection of a 20 μm section of the neural tube). Ectopic neurons are formed ventrally across the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary (position of the boundary indicated by the white bar), in a location normally devoid of GFP-positive cells (arrowheads). K,L.
Summarized compared expression of her3, 5, 9 and 11 (K), also together with her8a (L). M-Q. Summary of the combined loss-of-function results
for MH-expressed her genes, from Geling et al. [13] (M), Ninkovic et al. [22] (N), Bae et al. [11] (O,P) and the present paper (Q). Abbreviations: mid:
midbrain, MN: presumptive motoneurons, r: rhombomere, r2l: lateral neurons of rhombomere 2, vcc: ventro-caudal cluster.

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

Page 10 of 19

Figure 6 her8a expression is independent of endogenous Notch signaling in the early neural plate. Dorsal views of flat-mounted embryos
analyzed at the 3-somite stage for the expression of the genes indicated. A-F. Ectopic Notch activation (injection of capped NICD mRNA) abolished
neurog1 expression (B) and activates her8a (D) and her4.1 (F) compared to non-injected embryos (ctrl). G-J’. Notch blockade (incubation in the
gamma-secretase inhibitor DAPT) increases neurog1 expression within proneural clusters (H) but leaves her8a expression intact (J) at early neural
plate stages compared to embryos treated with a vehicle only (ctrl). G’-J’ are high magnification views of the areas boxed in G-J.

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

target gene (Figure 6E,F) (100% of cases, n = 13), suggesting a generally lower ability of this neural plate
area to respond to NICD overexpression, rather than a
her8a-specific feature in Notch response. Next, to
determine whether her8a expression depends on endogenous Notch signaling, we incubated embryos
between the 50% epiboly and 3-somite stages into the
gamma-secretase inhibitor DAPT, which blocks Notch
by preventing the cleavage of NICD and has a strong
neurogenic effect [33,34]. As anticipated from previous
studies [33], DAPT treatment increased the amount of
neurog1-positive cells within each proneural cluster
(Figure 6G-H>’) (79% of cases, n = 19). However, it
failed to reproducibly affect the expression of her8a
(Figure 6C,I-J’) (100% of cases, n = 15). Together,
these results indicate that endogenous Notch signaling
is not required for her8a expression in the early neural
plate.
In order to gain further insight into the endogenous
mechanisms controlling her8a regulation at these stages,
we scanned the her8a promoter (100 bp downstream
and 1000 bp upstream of the ATG start site) with the
ModelInspector program (Genomatix) [35]. This
revealed a potential Sox (Sry-related HMG box) binding
site (SORY_OCT1_01) at position 873-897(+). ModelInspector uses Genomatix’s in-house Promoter Module
Library, which includes experimentally verified models
for functional promoter subunits. In this case the promoter sequence was derived from a publication describing the activation of the mouse Fgf4 enhancer by Sox2
and Oct-3 [36]. This led us to investigate the possibility
that a member of the sox gene family is controlling
her8a expression. Mouse Sox2 is a member of Group
B1, a subdivision of Sox genes involved in neural development [37]. Within this subgroup, we focused on the
zebrafish genes sox2 [37], sox3 [37], sox19a and sox19b
[38] (see [37] for phylogenetic description), excluding
sox1a and sox1b, which are not expressed at the MHB
at early embryonic stages [26,37]. In addition, we also
investigated sox21a (previously sox21 or sox30), a member of the related subgroup B2 with specific MHB
expression at early embryonic stages [39]. We found
that expression of these different sox genes overlapped
all or part of the her8a-positive domain at the 5-somite
stage: sox2 and sox3 displayed strongest overlap with
her8a expression in the anterior hindbrain (mostly r3)
(Figure 7A,B), sox21a at the MHB (Figure 7E), while
sox19a and b were intensely expressed throughout the
MH (Figure 7C,D). In addition, sox2, 3, 19a and 19b all
displayed an expression identical to her8a in the presumptive telencephalon and ventral diencephalon,
excluding the eye field (Figure 7A-D, compare with F).
To analyze the role of these genes in controlling her8a
expression, we used MOs targeting their ATG start site

Page 11 of 19

[40-43]. A single MO was used to inhibit sox2 and 3,
which share the sequence surrounding their ATG.
When injected individually at the one-cell stage, none of
these MOs produced a phenotype on her8a expression
at the 3-somite stage (not shown) (n = 25). However,
the combined knock-down of all five sox genes at once
caused reduced her8a staining in the MH area (Figure
7G-I) (100% of cases, n = 18), indicating that these factors cooperate, possibly in a dose-dependent manner, to
enhance her8a expression within the early neural plate.
In a reverse step, we analyzed whether these genes were
linked by a positive regulatory loop. We found however
that blocking Her8a function upon her8aMO injection
had no effect on sox genes expression at the 3-somite
stage (not shown) (100% of cases, n = 10 for each sox
gene tested).

Discussion
Her8a is a neurogenesis repressor in the early zebrafish
neural plate

Two lines of evidence demonstrate that Her8a can act
as a repressor of neurogenesis: firstly, the overexpression of full-length her8a causes a complete loss of neurog1 expression in the early embryo; secondly, we show
that morpholino-mediated knockdown of her8a causes
ectopic neurog1 expression in rhombomeres 2 and 4.
These results are surprising, since the Hes6-like factors
studied to date tend to exhibit neurogenesis-promoting
activity. When ectopically expressed, Hes6 promotes
neurogenesis in the Xenopus embryo [27], the differentiation of cortical neurons at the expense of astrocytes
in the mouse [44,45], and the differentiation of retinal
precursor cells into photoreceptors in mouse retinal
explants [24]. These activities at least in part involve
functionally antagonizing Hes1, since it was shown that
Hes6 alone cannot bind the canonical E(spl) binding
site (N box) [24,45]. Rather, Hes6 dimerises with Hes1
and modifies its DNA binding properties [24], its capacity for recruiting the co-repressor Groucho or its stability [44]. Interestingly at least some of these properties
appear controlled by the loop domain of Hes6, which is
five amino acids shorter than that of other E(spl) proteins (see Additional file 3, Figure S1). Indeed, the addition of five amino acid residues into the loop of Hes6
confers Hes1-like repressor activity on the N box, while
conversely, the removal of five amino acid residues
from the loop of Hes1 completely ceases repression
activity and confers Hes6-like activity [24]. We observed
that Her8a has an intermediate loop-length compared
to Hes6 and Hes1 (Additional file 3, Figure S1).
Although the functional significance of this feature
remains a matter for investigation, it is possible that it
confers specific mechanistic properties to Her8a that
distinguish it from Hes6 and bring it closer to the

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

Page 12 of 19

Figure 7 her8a expression in the early neural plate is partially dependent on the expression of SoxB factors. Dorsal views of flatmounted embryos analyzed at the 5-somite stage (A-F) and 3-somite stage (G-H) for the expression of the genes indicated (color-coded). A-F.
her8a expression overlaps with that of the Sox family members sox2, sox3, sox19a, sox19b and sox21a, including the mid- and anterior hindbrain
(red brackets). G-I. the simultaneous knockdown of sox2/3/19a/19b and 21a causes a reduction of her8a expression in the MH area of the early
neural plate (white arrows).

mode of action of Hes1-like proteins. In addition, our
phylogenetic and synteny analyses revealed the complex
evolution of Hes6-like genes and, contrary to previous
belief, that Her8a is not a direct ortholog of Hes6.
Rather, Hes6 orthologs comprise zebrafish Her13 and
Hes6, both of which have the same loop length as
mouse Hes6. We show here that zebrafish her13 is specifically expressed in a pattern coincident with neurogenesis (Additional file 4, Figure S2) reminiscent of
Hes6 expression in the developing nervous system of

both mouse and Xenopus, highlighting committed progenitors or early neurons [24,27]. Thus we would predict that zebrafish Her13, rather than Her8a, shares
functional properties with mammalian Hes6. The function of Hes6.2 subfamily proteins, to which Her8a
belongs, has not been thoroughly tested, largely due to
their absence in mammals. In the chicken neural tube
however, Hes6.2 exerts a neurogenesis promoting activity [46], suggesting that Hes6.2 proteins may differ in
their activities. We further propose that the splitting of

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

her8a from locus 2 to a distinct genomic location (Figure 1C) permitted the acquisition of a unique expression profile for this gene in zebrafish.
Combined Her activities generate the midbrain-hindbrain
progenitor pool pattern through different modalities

Our loss-of-function studies demonstrate that Her8a
activity is necessary to prevent neurogenesis within the
mediolateral territory of r2 and 4, hence keeping the
proneural clusters for moto- and lateral neurons spatially separated within the anterior hindbrain. Combined
with the fact that endogenous her8a expression does
not depend on Notch at this developmental stage (Figure 6), this function is typical of a “pre-patterning”
activity, comparable to that exhibited by the other E(spl)
factors Her3, 5, 9 and 11 that delimit the territories
competent for neurog1 expression within the neural
plate [11,13,15]. Despite this functional relevance, the
phenotype of her8a morphants appears very restricted
compared to the broad expression of her8a, which
encompasses the entire mid- and anterior hindbrain
(Figure 4B). Functional redundancy and dosage effects
have been described for other members of the E(spl)
family in the mouse neural tube [20] and the zebrafish
early neural plate [11,22]. For example, Her5 and Her11
act in an equivalent and dose-dependent manner to
block neurog1 expression in the medial and lateral
aspects of the presumptive MHB [22], and Her3 and
Her9 also cooperate to inhibit neurogenesis within the
longitudinal stripe separating the presumptive motoand interneuron clusters of the spinal cord [11]. We
found that all her genes analyzed here (her3, 5, 9, 11
and 8a) were at least partially co-expressed within the
presumptive MH (Figure 5L), strongly suggesting that
redundancy may account for the normal development of
this area in her8a morphants. The situation in the hindbrain, however, appears different. The only two her
genes highlighting progenitor pools in r2-4 are her3 and
her8a. While morphant embryos for each of these genes
have an identical phenotype, our results argue against a
dose-dependent mechanism involving Her3 and Her8a.
Indeed, we found that the co-injection of her8aMO and
her3MO at active doses did not produce an additional
phenotype (Figure 3F) and that, if both morpholinos
were injected together in amounts just below their effective concentration, ectopic neurog1 expression was not
observed. Given that the two factors do not regulate
each other’s expression, these experiments suggest that
the presence of each factor individually, rather than
their overall dose, is relevant to maintain neurogenesis
inhibition within r2 and r4. Although Her8a was isolated
as a binding partner for Her5 in yeast cells, co-purification shows that the full length Her8a and Her3 proteins
heterodimerise (Figure 4A), and the overlapping

Page 13 of 19

expression of her8a and her3 makes it possible that this
interaction occurs in vivo. Her proteins can dimerise
with a variety of partners, as also supported by our yeast
two-hybrid results (Additional file 1, Table S1), and
Her-Her heterodimers display enhanced stability over
homodimers [7,22]. A parsimonious interpretation of
our results is therefore that the heterodimerisation of
Her8a and Her3 is required for sufficient activity of
these factors in r2 and r4. Alternatively, the individual
activities of Her3 and Her8a may control complementary properties necessary to maintain the progenitor
pool cell state.
In spite of the high level of her8a expression across
the MHB progenitor pool, the results of the present
paper also identify that the decisive inhibition of neurog1 expression in this location is played by other factors, namely Her3, 5, 9 and 11. Her5 and 11 were
known for their dose-dependent redundant functions,
accounting for neurogenesis inhibition across part of
this domain [22]. Through knocking-down all four
genes, we could achieve for the first time the transformation of most of the MHB into a neurogenic domain
(Figure 5), while leaving her8a expression intact. Collectively, our findings show that the progenitor pool pattern of the midbrain and anterior hindbrain is
established by the joined activities of five prepatterning
E(spl) factors which act in different combination in the
MHB and rhombomere domains. They also suggest that
distinct mechanisms of action of these factors may be
involved in these two domains.
Importantly however, we observed that the massive
neurogenic phenotype induced upon blocking Her3/5/9/
11 E(spl) activities is only partially followed by neuronal
differentiation (Figure 5). In fact, ectopic neurons are
restricted to the ventrolateral aspects of the midbrainhindbrain boundary, like upon blocking Her5 function
alone [21]. The corresponding progenitor population
may be particularly prone to neuronal differentiation.
For all other progenitors, our observations suggest the
need for a further commitment event, independent of
Her3/5/9/11 activities, to achieve neuronal differentiation following neurog1 induction. Blocking Notch signaling concomitantly to Her3/5/9/11 did not allow further
neurogenesis progression (C. Stigloher, unpub.). Persistent her8a expression in this context may contribute to
neurogenesis reversion, although it was not possible to
evaluate this possibility as embryos blocked for the
activities of all five E(spl) factors developed abnormally.
her8a expression in the early neural plate is controlled by
Sox transcription factors but not Notch signaling

Two types of her genes have been recently distinguished
based on their Notch response profile: those acting as
Notch mediators, depending on Notch signaling for

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

their expression and overexpressed upon Notch activation, and “non-canonical” her genes endogenously independent of Notch and repressed when Notch is
experimentally activated (reviewed in [12]). The former
class comprises zebrafish her4.1 and her15, expressed in
active neurogenic domains such as proneural clusters of
the early neural plate [9-11]; the latter class is composed
of her3, 5, 9 and 11, expressed in progenitor pools
[11,13,15,21,22]. Our results illustrate that her8a is unusual in its expression pattern, which overlaps both proneural clusters and progenitor pools. This property is
shared with its ortholog Hes6.2 in chicken [46]. her8a
also shows a distinctive response to Notch signaling
among hairy/E(spl) genes within the early neural plate,
since it endogenously does not depend on Notch signaling but responds positively to the experimental activation of Notch (Figure 6). In agreement with the latter
observation, we could identify Su(H) binding sites in the
upstream regulatory sequence of her8a. However, this
potential appears not to be used within proneural clusters of the early neural plate, demonstrating that Her8a
is not a mediator of lateral inhibition. This is also in
agreement with its uniform rather than salt-and-pepper
expression profile. We found nevertheless that overexpressing her8a abolishes neurog1 expression even in
proneural clusters where the two genes are normally coexpressed. Although we cannot ascertain that high overexpression levels mimic endogenous Her8a activity, one
hypothesis reconciling this different information is that
Her8a function within proneural clusters may generally
dampen neurog1 expression, contributing to the function of other Her factors in Notch-inhibited precursors,
and ensuring a proper differentiation schedule in committed progenitors. Although not further analyzed in
this paper, we noted also that her8a expression becomes
dependent on Notch signaling at later developmental
stages (K. Webb, unpublished).
Our analyses of her8a expression in morphant contexts for other Her factors did not highlight cross-regulations, although we found several consensus N and E
boxes within the 600 bp upstream of the her8a start
site. Previous work demonstrated the positive regulation
of Xenopus Hes6 by proneural bHLH proteins, in particular Neurogenin [27]. Given the presence of E boxes
on the her8a promoter, and the co-expression of her8a
and neurog1 in proneural clusters, it will be interesting
to test whether her8a expression is also positively controlled by proneural factors in these locations. The
Ngn1/Hes6 cascade is positively reinforcing proneural
activity in Xenopus [27], but our functional data would
predict an opposite outcome for a Neurog1/Her8a regulation in zebrafish.
Finally, our results show that the levels of her8a
expression are under control of a combination of SoxB1

Page 14 of 19

and B2 factors (Sox2/3/19a/19b and Sox21a, respectively) that display intense and partially overlapping
expression within the anterior neural plate (Figure 7). In
a recent study, Okuda et al. [41] demonstrated that
SoxB1 factors function redundantly to control several
successive aspects of zebrafish nervous system development, including neural plate patterning and primary
neurogenesis. Although single morphants do not harbor
a visible phenotype, her3 expression fails to be induced
in quadruple SoxB1 morphants, strongly suggesting that
the four factors act redundantly to activate her3 transcription [41]. In a comparable manner, we found that
individual SoxB1/B2 morphants display no phenotype,
while her8a expression is reduced in the MH domain
when all five SoxB1/B2 proteins are abolished. Although
we have not tested all possible knock-down combinations, and in particular did not assess the individual
relevance of Sox21a in the context of the quadruple
knock-out for SoxB1 proteins, these results demonstrate
that her8a expression levels are under control of the
activity of at least partially redundant SoxB proteins.
Expression of these factors is an integral part of the
mechanisms patterning the early embryo [40,41], linking
her8a expression with neural plate regionalization. The
identification of a Sox2 binding site within the her8a
enhancer, and the fact that all SoxB proteins recognize a
similar binding motif in vitro, further suggests that part
of this control may be direct. In support of this hypothesis, direct binding of SoxB1 factors onto the her3
enhancer has been demonstrated [41]. Like several other
SoxB2 proteins, Sox21b was shown to act as a transcriptional inhibitor during dorsoventral patterning of the
zebrafish gastrula [40] and generally promotes neurogenesis [47]. It can however act as an activator in other
contexts [48], and its specific effect on MH neurogenesis
and her genes needs to be directly evaluated. It was
recently proposed that SoxB1 transcription factors and
Notch cooperate through distinct mechanisms in their
control of neurogenesis inhibition, including the inhibition of proneural protein activity and the transcriptional
upregulation of Hes/her genes, respectively [49]. Our
results and those of Okuda et al. [41] suggest yet
another level of regulation, where SoxB proteins directly
control the level of expression of some her genes.
Whether this is limited to Notch-independent contexts,
such as with the regulation of her3 and her8a, remains
to be addressed.

Conclusions
In this work, we identify the Hairy/E(spl) transcription
factor Her8a as a local inhibitor of neurogenesis in the
developing hindbrain. Specifically, we show that Her8a
function, like Her3 [11], is required to generate the
non-neurogenic progenitor pools normally separating

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

the presumptive moto- and lateral neurons of r2 and 4.
We demonstrate that Her8a is a binding partner for
Her3 and we propose that this interaction may be functionally relevant in r2 and r4. We further show that
Her8a alone is not sufficient to inhibit neurog1 expression in the presumptive MHB area; this event depends,
in contrast, on the combined activities of four other E
(spl) factors, Her3, 5, 9 and 11. Unlike canonical E(spl)
genes, we demonstrate that her8a does not depend on
Notch signaling for its expression at early neural plate
stages, and we identify a combination of SoxB factors
that together enhance her8a expression. Finally, using
phylogenetic analyses, we show that Her8a belongs to a
Hes6-like subfamily that was recently lost in the mammalian lineage. This observation provides a context for
the strikingly divergent functions of Her8a from Hes6;
Hes6, which was previously believed to be the mammalian ortholog of Her8a, displays proneural activity.
Together, our results characterize the phylogeny, expression and functional cascades involving a new Her factor,
and highlight the complex interplay of E(spl) proteins
that generates the neurogenesis pattern of the zebrafish
midbrain-hindbrain area.

Methods
Yeast Two-Hybrid Analysis

Yeast two-hybrid screening was performed by Hybrigenics, S.A., Paris, France (http://www.hybrigenics.com).
The coding sequence for amino acids 20 to 201 of the
Danio rerio Her5 protein (GenBank proteic accession
number gi: 18858797)
(amino acid sequence DRINQSLETLRMLLLENTN
NEKLKNPKVEKAEILESVVHFLRAEQASETDPFQITR
VKRARTEESDEDVESPCKRQSYHDGMRTCLLRVSNFITGKSHEFGQELEKACENIHK SHSRQVQLLSTPSLI
EPQVHLYEDPSQQHLAHVQL SNSCTPSGCSKLAQRT
VPAMTSSPKQPVMLCDPV)
was PCR-amplified and cloned into pB29 as an Nterminal fusion to LexA (N-Her5-LexA-C). The construct was checked by sequencing the entire insert and
used as a bait to screen a random-primed Danio rerio
embryo (stages 18-20 hpf) cDNA library constructed
into pP6. pB29 and pP6 derive from the original
pBTM116 [50] and pGADGH [51] plasmids, respectively. 76 million clones (7.6 -fold the complexity of the
library) were screened using a mating approach with
Y187 (mata) and L40DGal4 (mata) yeast strains as previously described [52]. 280 His+ colonies were selected
on a medium lacking tryptophan, leucine and histidine,
and supplemented with 2 mM 3-aminotriazole to handle
bait autoactivation. The prey fragments of the positive
clones were amplified by PCR and sequenced at their 5’
and 3’ junctions. The resulting sequences were used to
identify the corresponding interacting proteins in the

Page 15 of 19

GenBank database (NCBI) using a fully automated procedure. For each interaction, a Predicted Biological
Score (PBS) was computed to assess interaction reliability. This score represents the probability of an interaction being nonspecific. PBS relies on two different levels
of analysis; the algorithm and methods used in the calculation are described in detail in Formstecher et al.
[53]. Briefly, at first a local score takes into account the
redundancy and independency of prey fragments (i.e.
the times the interaction was detected with different
independent clones and whether it was detected with
different or the same fragments), as well as the distribution of reading frames and stop codons in overlapping
fragments. Thus, interactions detected with several and
different fragments are ranked with a very high confidence score and interactions detected with a single independent fragment are ranked with a moderate
confidence score. Secondly, a global score takes into
account the interactions found in all the screens performed at Hybrigenics using the same library. This global score represents the probability of an interaction
being nonspecific. For practical use, the scores were
divided into four categories, from A (highest confidence)
to D (lowest confidence). A fifth category (E) specifically
flags interactions involving highly connected prey
domains previously found several times in screens performed on libraries derived from the same organism.
Finally, several of these highly connected domains have
been confirmed as false-positives of the technique and
are now tagged as F. The PBS scores have been shown
to positively correlate with the biological significance of
interactions [54,55].
Gene ontology analysis

Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed on
the recovered yeast-2-hybrid candidates from the categories A, B and C using the AmiGO “Term Enrichment
tool” [56] (available at http://amigo.geneontology.org/
cgi-bin/amigo/term_enrichment), using the following
settings: ZFIN database as a background set, the maximum p-value set at 0.05 and a minimum number of
gene products of two.
Sequence alignment, protein domain identification,
phylogenetic and synteny analyses

Protein sequences were retrieved by using a tblastn
search [57] against the non redundant database on
NCBI or on Ensembl genomic data (current release of
genomes, July 2010). For non-annotated sequences and
to further support the expression of the predicted gene,
a search for expressed sequence tags was also performed
by tblastn on the EST database of the NCBI server. A
list of all sequences used for the molecular phylogeny
and their genomic locations is provided in Additional

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

file 7, Table S3. Protein sequences were aligned using
the ClustalX software. Only unambiguously aligned residues were retained to build the phylogenetic tree:
namely the basic, HLH and Orange domains (see Additional file 3, Figure S1). Maximum likelihood phylogeny
was constructed using PhyML (substitution model: JTT,
number of substitution rate categories: 4; gamma distribution parameter estimated; proportion of invariable
sites estimated) [58]. Branch support was estimated by
approximate likelihood-ratio test (aLRT, SH-like) [59].
For the synteny analysis, the position and orientation of
annotated genes surrounding hes6 family members was
retrieved using the Ensembl genome browser.
Zebrafish strains

Adult zebrafish were maintained using standard fishkeeping protocols and in accordance with institute
guidelines for animal welfare (defined by the Regierung
von Oberbayern and the Services Vétérinaires de l’Essonne). Wildtype (AB) embryos were obtained through
natural matings and were staged according to Kimmel
et al. [60].
In situ hybridization

In situ hybridization on embryos was performed as previously described [22,61] using the following probes: gfp
[62], neurog1 [63], deltaNP63 [64], her4.1 [10], her5
[29], her9 [65], her3 [11] and barhl2 [30]. For the her8a
and her13 probes, 648bp and 785bp fragments (respectively) were cloned into pCRII-TOPO (Invitrogen) from
cDNA from 24hpf AB embryos using the following primers: for her8a forward 5’CACTGCTTGGAAGCAAATGA34, reverse 5’GACTTGGCGTGTGATTG
ATG3’ and for her13 forward 5’TTTCTGTCCAACCCC
TTCTG3’, reverse 5’GATCCAATCCGATGTTGCTT3’
(PCR conditions available on request). The successful
clones were verified by sequencing. RNA probes were
synthesized following published protocols [66]. For
immunohistochemisty the primary antibody was mouse
Anti-Hu (diluted 1:1500) (A21271; Molecular Probes)
revealed using Cy-2.
Whole-mount immunohistochemistry

GFP of the -8.4neurog1:gfp line [67] was detected using
a chicken primary antibody (GFP-1020, Aves Labs, Inc)
followed by a secondary antibody anti-chicken coupled
to Alexa-488 (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen).
RNA and morpholino injections

Capped RNAs were synthesized using Ambion mMessage mMachine Kit and embryos were injected at the
one-cell stage. For her8a overexpression, full-length
her8a was cloned by PCR (forward primer: 5’AATAATGACGGCCTCCAACA3’; reverse primer: 5’GGCTGCAT
TCATTCACCAG3’) and cloned into pXT7. her8a

Page 16 of 19

capped mRNA was injected at a concentration of 62.5
ng/μl. NICD overexpression was achieved by injecting
capped RNA for nic, which encodes the NICD fragment
of zebrafish Notch1 [9,10]. Morpholinos were purchased
from Gene-Tools (Philomath, USA) and gripNAs were
purchased from Active Motif (Carlsbad, USA). Two
her8a splice morpholinos were used, targeted against
the donor and acceptor sites of her8a exons 1 and 2
(respectively her8aMO1 and MO2, see Figure 3G). Both
her8aMO1 (ATGTGACATTACCTTTCGCTCCTCT)
and MO2 (CGCAGCTAAAATGATAGAAAGCATG)
were injected at 1mM. Their efficiency was evaluated by
RT-PCR following standard protocols on pools of 25
embryos at the 3-somite stage, in comparison to bactin2
expression, using the following PCR primers (FL: primer
designed to amplify the full-length her8 transcript; E2:
primer designed to amplify the E1-E2 domain; FW: forward primer; REV: reverse primer): her8a-FL-FW:
AATAATGACGGCCTCCAACA; her8a-FL-REV: GGCT
GCATTCATTCACCAG; her8a-E2-REV: TCCTCTC
TCTGCGTTTCTTCTC; bactin2-FWD: AAGGCCAACAGGGAAAAGAT; bactin2-REV: GTGGTACGACCAGAGGCATAC (expected size 109bp). A third her8a
MO, targeted against the her8a ATG (MO3:
CATTGCCCATGTTGGAGGCCGTCAT) was also used
and injected at 1.5 mM. The her3 morpholino [15] was
injected at 0.5mM. For the combined knockdown of
her3, her5, her9 and her11 the following gripNAs were
used, each at 0.4mM: her3 gripNA (AGCCATTGTCCTTAAATG) (overlapping the MO sequence published in
[15]), her5 gripNA (GGTTCGCTCATTTTGTGT) [22],
her9 gripNA (TGATTTTTACCTTTCTAT) (overlapping the MO sequence published in [11]) and her11
gripNA (AGTCGGTGTGCTCTTCAT) [22]. For the
combined knock-down of sox genes, we used: sox2/sox3
morpholino (CTCGGTTTCCATACATGTTATACATT)
[42,43] at 1mM (this MO was initially reported to target
sox2 only, but we found that its target site is shared
between sox2 and sox3), sox19a morpholino
(TGCTGTACATGGCTGCCAACAGAAG) [41] at 1
mM, sox19b morpholino (TAGCCCTTTTCTCAAAACAAACCTG) at 0.25mM, sox21a morpholino (CATG
GGCTTTGCCATTTCTTGATAC) (overlapping with
the sox21aMO used in [40] at 1mM.
DAPT treatment

DAPT treatment was carried out according to Geling
et al. [33]. Embryos were placed in 100 μm DAPT
(Alexis Biochemicals), 1% DMSO in embryo medium
from 50% epiboly to 3 somites. Control embryos
received a corresponding treatment with 1% DMSO.
After treatment, the embryos were fixed in 4% PFA
overnight at 4°C before being processed for in situ
hybridisation.

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

Co-affinity purification

The full length coding sequences of her3 and her8a
were subcloned into the N-Strep/Flag (SF) TAP [68]
and myc pCS3+ vectors, respectively. SF-TAP-tagged
Her3 and Myc-tagged-Her8a were co-expressed in
HEK293T cells. For this purpose 2 μg of pCS3-mycher8a was co-transfected with either 6 μg pcDNA3.0-SFTAP-her3 or control vector per 14 cm culture dish of
HEK293T cells. After 48 h, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (TBS supplemented with Complete protease inhibitor
(Roche), phosphatase inhibitor cocktails I and II (Sigma)
and 0.5% NP-40 (Roche)). Beside the solubilization of
cytoplasmic proteins, this condition allows the extraction of nuclear proteins which are not tightly bond to
DNA. After incubation for 30 min at 4°C cell debris
including nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at
10,000 xg for 10 min, 4°C. The supernatants were filtered through 22-μm syringe filtration units (Millipore).
Cleared lysates from two 14 cm culture dishes containing 5-6 mg total protein were incubated with 25 μl
Strep-Tactin resin (IBA) for 2 h. After incubation the
resin was washed 3 times with lysis buffer. The SFTAP-tagged Her3 protein was eluted with 100 μl
desthiobiotin elution buffer (IBA) and subjected to SDS
PAGE. For detection, proteins were blotted onto PVDF
membranes (GE Healthcare). The blots were incubated
for 1 h with blocking solution (5% dry milk powder in
TBST). The SF-TAP-tagged Her3 was detected by incubation of the blots with rabbit polyclonal anti FLAG
antibodies (Sigma, 1:2000 in blocking reagent) overnight
and secondary anti-rabbit antibodies (Jackson Immuno
Research, 1:15,000 in blocking reagent) for 2 h. After
each antibody incubation step, the blots were washed 4
times 5 min with TBST. For detection of Myc-Her8a,
the blots were stripped using standard protocols and
incubated with mouse anti-Myc (Cell signalling, 1:2000)
overnight and secondary anti-mouse antibodies (Jackson
Immuno Research, 1:15,000 in blocking reagent) for 2 h.
Antibody-antigen complexes were visualized using the
ECL+ chemiluminescence detection system (GE Healthcare) on Hyperfilms (GE Healthcare).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1. Summary of yeast two-hybrid results.
The 75 unique protein-protein interactions recovered are listed, ordered
according to their interaction scores (PBS: Protein Binding Score). The
recovered her genes are underlined.
Additional file 2: Table S2. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis. This
analysis was conducted on the recovered yeast-2-hybrid candidates from
the categories A, B and C.
Additional file 3: Figure S1. Alignment of mouse (Mm) Hes1, Hes5
and Hes6 with Hes6-like proteins from zebrafish (Dr) (Her8a, Her8.2,
Her13 and Hes6) and other species (Fr: Fugu rubripes, Ol: Oryzias
latipes, Gg: Gallus gallus, Hs: Homo sapiens, Xt: Xenopus tropicalis).
Protein domains are color-coded: green: basic domain, purple: HLH

Page 17 of 19

domain, orange: orange domain. Note the signature of the Hes6-like
subfamily: the loops of Her13 and Hes6 contain 5 less amino acids when
compared with other members, and the loops of Her8a and Her8.2 have
3 less amino acids (domain overlayed with the black bar). In addition, the
Orange domains of Hes6-like proteins are 65-86% identical to each other,
while they show only 23-37% identity with the Orange domains of other
Her/Hes proteins. Finally, similarities extending beyond the domains
above also identify the Hes6.1 and Hes6.2 subfamilies within Hes6-like
proteins (hatched red and blue boxes).
Additional file 4: Figure S2. her13 expression highlights early
neurogenesis domains during zebrafish embryonic development.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization for her13 (blue staining) at the stages
indicated (A-C and E are lateral views, D and F are dorsal views, all with
anterior to the left). Note her13 expression in proneural clusters
encompassing presumptive spinal interneurons (arrows) and sensory
neurons (arrowheads), trigeminal ganglion neurons (asterisk),
telencephlaic (t) and epiphyseal (e) neurons.
Additional file 5: Figure S3. Neural plate patterning is unaffected
upon blocking Her8a function. Whole-mount in situ hybridization for
barhl2 (A,B), her5 (C,D) and her9 (E,F) in embryos injected with her8a
capped mRNA (right column) compared to control embryos (left
column). Dorsal views of whole-mount embryos are shown, anterior to
the top. All three markers highlight defined neural plate territories
(barhl2: transverse diencephalic domain; her5: prospective midbrainhindbrain boundary; her9: prospective eye field, midbrain-hindbrain
boundary and lateral rhombencephalic stripes, see Figure 5) and appear
identically expressed in the wild-type and morphant neural plate.
Abbreviations: d: diencephalon; e: eye field; mhb: midbrain-hindbrain
boundary; sc: presumptive spinal cord.
Additional file 6: Figure S4. her8aMO1 and her8aMO2 have identical
effects on neurog1 expression. Whole-mount in situ hybridization for
neurog1 expression in embryos injected with her8aMO1 (B) or her8aMO2
(C) compared to control embryos (whole-mount views of 3 somiteembryos, anterior to the top). neurog1 expression is ectopically induced
between the clusters of motoneurons and lateral neurons in
rhombomeres 2 and 4 (blue arrowheads in B,C), a location normally
devoid of neurog1 transcripts (white arrowheads in A). The phenotype is
highly reproducible and identical in both morphant groups.
Additional file 7: Table S3. List of the sequences used for the
molecular phylogeny (Figure 1) and their genomic locations.

Acknowledgements and Funding
We thank colleagues from the past and present Bally-Cuif lab for their
valuable input into this project, and the fish house teams at the Helmholtz
Zentrum München and CNRS. Work in the LBC laboratory at the Helmholtz
Zentrum München was funded by the Helmholtz Association, the EU ZFModels integrated project (contract No. LSHG-CT-2003-503466) and the
Center for Protein Science-Munich (CIPSM). Work in the LBC lab at the CNRS
is supported by funds from the EU 7th framework integrated projects
NeuroXsys and ZF-Health, the Agence Nationale pour la Recherche, the
Ecole des Neurosciences de Paris, the Fondation pour la Recherche
Médicale, the PIME program and the Schlumberger Association. MC has
been recipient of a Marie Curie Intra-European Fellowship and an EMBO
Long Term postdoctoral fellowship. Work of MU and CJG is supported by
the Helmholtz Alliance for Mental Health in an Aging Society (HelMA, FKZ:
HA-215) and the BMBF (neurogenesis from brain and skin cells, FKZ: 01 GN
1009 C), respectively.
Author details
1
Zebrafish Neurogenetics Department, Helmholtz Zentrum München,
German Research Center for Environmental Health, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1,
D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany. 2Department of Protein Science, Helmholtz
Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Ingolstaedter Landstr. 1; D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany. 3Division of
Experimental Ophthalmology and Medical Proteome Center, Center of
Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.
4
Zebrafish Neurogenetics Group, Laboratory of Neurobiology and

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

Development (N&D), CNRS UPR 3294, Institute of Neurobiology Alfred
Fessard, Avenue de la Terrasse, Building 5, F-91198-Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
5
Max Planck Institute for Psychiatry, Kraepelinstr. 2-10, 80804, Munich,
Germany. 6Institute for Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Ingolstädter
Landstr.1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany. 7Genetics and Neurobiology of C.
elegans, INSERM U1024, Institute of Biology of the Ecole Normale Supérieure,
46 rue d'Ulm, F-75005 Paris, France. 8Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Nonnenwald
2, D-82377 Penzberg, Germany. 9Eppendorf Instrumente GmbH,
Barkhausenweg 1, 22339, Hamburg, Germany. 10Zebrafish Neurogenetics
Group, Laboratory of Neurobiology and Development (N&D), CNRS UPR
3294, Institute of Neurobiology Alfred Fessard, Avenue de la Terrasse,
Building 5, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Page 18 of 19

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.
Authors’ contributions
KJW designed the two-hybrid assay, characterized the recovered proteins,
identified her8a and carried out its initial functional characterization. She
participated in the design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript.
MC conducted the genomic and evolutionary analyses of Her8a, validated
the efficiency of MO1 and MO2, conducted the functional characterization
of Her8a using MO2 (including late fate analyses), and participated in the
analyses of her8a regulation by Sox proteins. She drafted the relevant parts
of the manuscript and provided critical input on the study as a whole. CJG
developed the STREP/Flag assay in the laboratory of MU and conducted the
co-purification experiments under his supervision and advice. He wrote the
relevant sections of the manuscript. CS characterized the combined activities
of her3, 5, 9 and 11 and provided critical input during the study. BB and ST
carried out the expression analyses in situ. LBC conceived the study,
participated in its design and coordination, and drafted the manuscript
together with KJW. All authors read and approved the manuscript.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Received: 4 November 2010 Accepted: 17 May 2011
Published: 17 May 2011

23.

References
1. Easter SS Jr, Burrill J, Marcus RC, Ross L, Taylor JSH, Wilson SW: Initial tract
formation in the vertebrate brain. Progress in Brain Research 1994,
102:79-93.
2. Wilson SW, Ross LS, Parrett T, Easter SSJ: The development of a simple
scaffold of axon tracts in the brain o the embryonic zebrafish
Brachydanio rerio. Development 1990, 108:121-145.
3. Bally-Cuif L, Goridis C, Santoni MJ: The mouse NCAM gene displays a
biphasic expression pattern during neural tube development.
Development 1993, 117:543-552.
4. Chédotal A, Pourquié O, Sotelo C: Initial tract formation in the brain of
the chick embryo: selective expression of the BEN/SC1/DM-GRASP cell
adhesion molecule. Eur J Neurosci 1995, 7:198-212.
5. Massari ME, Murre C: Helix-loop-helix proteins: regulators of transcription
in eucaryotic organisms. Mol Cell Biol 2000, 20:429-440.
6. Fisher A, Caudy M: The function of hairy-related bHLH repressor proteins
in cell fate decisions. Bioessays 1998, 20:298-306.
7. Fischer A, Gessler M: Delta-Notch–and then? Protein interactions and
proposed modes of repression by Hes and Hey bHLH factors. Nucleic
Acids Res 2007, 35:4583-4596.
8. Appel B, Givan LA, Eisen JS: Delta-Notch signaling and lateral inhibition in
zebrafish spinal cord development. BMC Dev Biol 2001, 1:13.
9. Haddon C, Smithers L, Schneider-Maunoury S, Coche T, Henrique D,
Lewis J: Multiple delta genes and lateral inhibition in zebrafish primary
neurogenesis. Development 1998, 125:359-370.
10. Takke C, Dornseifer P, v Weizsäcker E, Campos-Ortega JA: her4, a zebrafish
homologue of the Drosophila neurogenic gene E(spl), is a target of
NOTCH signalling. Development 1999, 126:1811-1821.
11. Bae YK, Shimizu T, Hibi M: Patterning of proneuronal and interproneuronal domains by hairy- and enhancer of split-related genes in
zebrafish neuroectoderm. Development 2005, 132:1375-1385.
12. Stigloher C, Chapouton P, Adolf B, Bally-Cuif L: Identification of neural
progenitor pools by E(Spl) factors in the embryonic and adult brain.
Brain Res Bull 2008, 75:266-273.
13. Geling A, Itoh M, Tallafuss A, Chapouton P, Tannhäuser B, Kuwada JY,
Chitnis AB, Bally-Cuif L: bHLH transcription factor Her5 links patterning to

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

regional inhibition of neurogenesis at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary.
Development 2003, 130:1591-1604.
Brewster R, Lee J, Ruiz i Altaba A: Gli/Zic factors pattern the neural plate
by defining domains of cell differentiation. Nature 1998, 393:579-583.
Hans S, Scheer N, Riedl I, v Weizsacker E, Blader P, Campos-Ortega JA: her3,
a zebrafish member of the hairy-E(spl) family, is repressed by Notch
signalling. Development 2004, 131:2957-2969.
Chapouton P, Adolf B, Leucht C, Ryu S, Driever W, Bally-Cuif L: her5
expression reveals a pool of neural stem cells in the adult zebrafish
midbrain. Development 2006, 133:4293-4303.
Bally-Cuif L, Hammerschmidt M: Induction and patterning of neuronal
development, and its connection to cell cycle control. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 2003, 13:16-25.
Baek JH, Hatakeyama J, Sakamoto S, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R: Persistent and
high levels of Hes1 expression regulate boundary formation in the
developing central nervous system. Development 2006, 133:2467-2476.
Hirata H, Tomita K, Bessho Y, Kageyama R: Hes1 and Hes3 regulate
maintenance of the isthmic organizer and development of the mid/
hindbrain. Embo J 2001, 20:4454-4466.
Hatakeyama J, Bessho Y, Katoh K, Ookawara S, Fujioka M, Guillemot F,
Kageyama R: Hes genes regulate size, shape and histogenesis of the
nervous system by control of the timing of neural stem cell
differentiation. Development 2004, 131:5539-5550.
Geling A, Plessy C, Rastegar S, Strähle U, Bally-Cuif L: Her5 acts as a
prepattern factor that blocks neurogenin1 and coe2 expression
upstream of Notch to inhibit neurogenesis at the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary. Development 2004, 131:1993-2006.
Ninkovic J, Tallafuss A, Leucht C, Topczewski J, Tannhauser B, SolnicaKrezel L, Bally-Cuif L: Inhibition of neurogenesis at the zebrafish
midbrain-hindbrain boundary by the combined and dose-dependent
activity of a new hairy/E(spl) gene pair. Development 2005, 132:75-88.
Gajewski M, Elmasri H, Girschick M, Sieger D, Winkler C: Comparative
analysis of her genes during fish somitogenesis suggests a mouse/chicklike mode of oscillation in medaka. Dev Genes Evol 2006, 216:315-332.
Bae S, Bessho Y, Hojo M, Kageyama R: The bHLH gene Hes6, an inhibitor
of Hes1, promotes neuronal differentiation. Development 2000,
127:2933-2943.
Jaillon O, Aury JM, Brunet F, Petit JL, Stange-Thomann N, Mauceli E,
Bouneau L, Fischer C, Ozouf-Costaz C, Bernot A, Nicaud S, Jaffe D, Fisher S,
Lutfalla G, Dossat C, Segurens B, Dasilva C, Salanoubat M, Levy M, Boudet N,
Castellano S, Anthouard V, Jubin C, Castelli V, Katinka M, Vacherie B,
Biemont C, Skalli Z, Cattolico L, Poulain J, De Berardinis V, Cruaud C,
Duprat S, Brottier P, Coutanceau JP, Gouzy J, Parra G, Lardier G, Chapple C,
McKernan KJ, McEwan P, Bosak S, Kellis M, Volff JN, Guigo R, Zody MC,
Mesirov J, Lindblad-Toh K, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Kahn D, RobinsonRechavi M, Laudet V, Schachter V, Quetier F, Saurin W, Scarpelli C,
Wincker P, Lander ES, Weissenbach J, Roest Crollius H: Genome duplication
in the teleost fish Tetraodon nigroviridis reveals the early vertebrate
proto-karyotype. Nature 2004, 431:946-957.
Thisse B, Thisse C: Fast release clones: a high throughput expression
analysis. ZFIN Direct Data Submission 2004.
Koyano-Nakagawa N, Kim J, Anderson D, Kintner C: Hes6 acts in a positive
feedback loop with the neurogenins to promote neuronal
differentiation. Development 2000, 127:4203-4216.
Bakkers J, Hild M, Kramer C, Furutani-Seiki M, Hammerschmidt M: Zebrafish
DeltaNp63 is a direct target of Bmp signaling and encodes a
transcriptional repressor blocking neural specification in the ventral
ectoderm. Dev Cell 2002, 2:617-627.
Müller M, v. Weizsäcker E, Campos-Ortega JA: Transcription of a zebrafish
gene of the hairy-Enhancer of split family delineates the midbrain
anlage in the neural plate. Dev Genes Evol 1996, 206:153-160.
Colombo A, Reig G, Mione M, Concha ML: Zebrafish BarH-like genes
define discrete neural domains in the early embryo. Gene Expr Patterns
2006, 6:347-352.
Latimer AJ, Shin J, Appel B: her9 promotes floor plate development in
zebrafish. Dev Dyn 2005, 232:1098-1104.
Yeo SY, Kim M, Kim HS, Huh TL, Chitnis AB: Fluorescent protein expression
driven by her4 regulatory elements reveals the spatiotemporal pattern
of Notch signaling in the nervous system of zebrafish embryos. Dev Biol
2007, 301:555-567.

Webb et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2011, 11:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/11/27

33. Geling A, Steiner H, Willem M, Bally-Cuif L, Haass C: A gamma-secretase
inhibitor blocks Notch signaling in vivo and causes a severe neurogenic
phenotype in zebrafish. EMBO Rep 2002, 3:688-694.
34. Crawford TQ, Roelink H: The notch response inhibitor DAPT enhances
neuronal differentiation in embryonic stem cell-derived embryoid
bodies independently of sonic hedgehog signaling. Dev Dyn 2007,
236:886-892.
35. Frech K, Danescu-Mayer J, Werner T: A novel method to develop highly
specific models for regulatory units detects a new LTR in GenBank
which contains a functional promoter. J Mol Biol 1997, 270:674-687.
36. Ambrosetti DC, Basilico C, Dailey L: Synergistic activation of the fibroblast
growth factor 4 enhancer by Sox2 and Oct-3 depends on proteinprotein interactions facilitated by a specific spatial arrangement of
factor binding sites. Mol Cell Biol 1997, 17:6321-6329.
37. Okuda Y, Yoda H, Uchikawa M, Furutani-Seiki M, Takeda H, Kondoh H,
Kamachi Y: Comparative genomic and expression analysis of group B1
sox genes in zebrafish indicates their diversification during vertebrate
evolution. Dev Dyn 2006, 235:811-825.
38. Thisse B, Pflumio S, Fürthauer M, Loppin B, Heyer V, Degrave A, Woehl R,
Lux A, Steffan T, Charbonnier XQ, Thisse C: Expression of the zebrafish
genome during embryogenesis. ZFIN Direct Data Submission 2001.
39. Rimini R, Beltrame M, Argenton F, Szymczak D, Cotelli F, Bianchi ME:
Expression patterns of zebrafish sox11A, sox11B and sox21. Mech Dev
1999, 89:167-171.
40. Argenton F, Giudici S, Deflorian G, Cimbro S, Cotelli F, Beltrame M: Ectopic
expression and knockdown of a zebrafish sox21 reveal its role as a
transcriptional repressor in early development. Mech Dev 2004,
121:131-142.
41. Okuda Y, Ogura E, Kondoh H, Kamachi Y: B1 SOX coordinate cell
specification with patterning and morphogenesis in the early zebrafish
embryo. PLoS Genet 2010, 6:e1000936.
42. Christen B, Robles V, Raya M, Paramonov I, Belmonte JC: Regeneration and
reprogramming compared. BMC Biol 2010, 8:5.
43. Pujic Z, Omori Y, Tsujikawa M, Thisse B, Thisse C, Malicki J: Reverse genetic
analysis of neurogenesis in the zebrafish retina. Dev Biol 2006,
293:330-347.
44. Gratton MO, Torban E, Jasmin SB, Theriault FM, German MS, Stifani S: Hes6
promotes cortical neurogenesis and inhibits Hes1 transcription
repression activity by multiple mechanisms. Mol Cell Biol 2003,
23:6922-6935.
45. Jhas S, Ciura S, Belanger-Jasmin S, Dong Z, Llamosas E, Theriault FM,
Joachim K, Tang Y, Liu L, Liu J, Stifani S: Hes6 inhibits astrocyte
differentiation and promotes neurogenesis through different
mechanisms. J Neurosci 2006, 26:11061-11071.
46. Fior R, Henrique D: A novel hes5/hes6 circuitry of negative regulation
controls Notch activity during neurogenesis. Dev Biol 2005, 281:318-333.
47. Sandberg M, Kallstrom M, Muhr J: Sox21 promotes the progression of
vertebrate neurogenesis. Nat Neurosci 2005, 8:995-1001.
48. Hwang CK, Wu X, Wang G, Kim CS, Loh HH: Mouse mu opioid receptor
distal promoter transcriptional regulation by SOX proteins. J Biol Chem
2003, 278:3742-3750.
49. Holmberg J, Hansson E, Malewicz M, Sandberg M, Perlmann T, Lendahl U,
Muhr J: SoxB1 transcription factors and Notch signaling use distinct
mechanisms to regulate proneural gene function and neural progenitor
differentiation. Development 2008, 135:1843-1851.
50. Vojtek AB, Hollenberg SM: Ras-Raf interaction: two-hybrid analysis.
Methods Enzymol 1995, 255:331-342.
51. Bartel PL: Unsing the two-hybrid system to detect protein-protein
interactions. In Cellular Interactions in Development: A Practical Approach
1993, 153-179.
52. Fromont-Racine M, Rain JC, Legrain P: Toward a functional analysis of the
yeast genome through exhaustive two-hybrid screens. Nat Genet 1997,
16:277-282.
53. Formstecher E, Aresta S, Collura V, Hamburger A, Meil A, Trehin A,
Reverdy C, Betin V, Maire S, Brun C, Jacq B, Arpin M, Bellaiche Y, Bellusci S,
Benaroch P, Bornens M, Chanet R, Chavrier P, Delattre O, Doye V, Fehon R,
Faye G, Galli T, Girault JA, Goud B, de Gunzburg J, Johannes L, Junier MP,
Mirouse V, Mukherjee A, Papadopoulo D, Perez F, Plessis A, Rosse C, Saule S,
Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Vincent A, White M, Legrain P, Wojcik J, Camonis J,
Daviet L: Protein interaction mapping: a Drosophila case study. Genome
Res 2005, 15:376-384.

Page 19 of 19

54. Rain JC, Selig L, De Reuse H, Battaglia V, Reverdy C, Simon S, Lenzen G,
Petel F, Wojcik J, Schachter V, Chemama Y, Labigne A, Legrain P: The
protein-protein interaction map of Helicobacter pylori. Nature 2001,
409:211-215.
55. Wojcik J, Boneca IG, Legrain P: Prediction, assessment and validation of
protein interaction maps in bacteria. J Mol Biol 2002, 323:763-770.
56. Carbon S, Ireland A, Mungall CJ, Shu S, Marshall B, Lewis S: AmiGO: online
access to ontology and annotation data. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:288-289.
57. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
58. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
59. Anisimova M, Gascuel O: Approximate likelihood-ratio test for branches:
A fast, accurate, and powerful alternative. Syst Biol 2006, 55:539-552.
60. Kimmel CB, Ballard WW, Kimmel SR, Ullmann B, Schilling TF: Stages of
embryonic development of the zebrafish. Dev Dyn 1995, 203:253-310.
61. Hammerschmidt M, Bitgood MJ, McMahon AP: Protein kinase A is a
common negative regulator of Hedgehog signaling in the vertebrate
embryo. Genes Dev 1996, 10:647-658.
62. Blader P, Plessy C, Strahle U: Multiple regulatory elements with spatially
and temporally distinct activities control neurogenin1 expression in
primary neurons of the zebrafish embryo. Mech Dev 2003, 120:211-218.
63. Korzh V, Sleptsova I, Liao J, He J, Gong Z: Expression of zebrafish bHLH
genes ngn1 and nrd defines distinct stages of Neural differentiation. Dev
Dynam 1998, 213:92-104.
64. Kudoh T, Tsang M, Hukriede NA, Chen X, Dedekian M, Clarke CJ, Kiang A,
Schultz S, Epstein JA, Toyama R, Dawid IB: A gene expression screen in
zebrafish embryogenesis. Genome Res 2001, 11:1979-1987.
65. Leve C, Gajewski M, Rohr KB, Tautz D: Homologues of c-hairy1 (her9) and
lunatic fringe in zebrafish are expressed in the developing central
nervous system, but not in the presomitic mesoderm. Dev Genes Evol
2001, 211:493-500.
66. Hauptmann G, Gerster T: Two-colour whole-mount in situ hybridization to
vertebrate and Drosophila embryos. Trends Genet 1994, 10:266.
67. Blader P, Lam CS, Rastegar S, Scardigli R, Nicod JC, Simplicio N, Plessy C,
Fischer N, Schuurmans C, Guillemot F, Strahle U: Conserved and acquired
features of neurogenin1 regulation. Development 2004, 131:5627-5637.
68. Gloeckner CJ, Boldt K, Schumacher A, Roepman R, Ueffing M: A novel
tandem affinity purification strategy for the efficient isolation and
characterisation of native protein complexes. Proteomics 2007,
7:4228-4234.
doi:10.1186/1471-213X-11-27
Cite this article as: Webb et al.: The Enhancer of split transcription factor
Her8a is a novel dimerisation partner for Her3 that controls anterior
hindbrain neurogenesis in zebrafish. BMC Developmental Biology 2011 11:27.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
