<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>eCOMPAGT integrates mtDNA: import, validation and export of mitochondrial DNA profiles for population genetics, tumour dynamics and genotype-phenotype association studies</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:122. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-122"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Hansi Weißensteiner"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Weißensteiner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/122

DATABASE

Open Access

eCOMPAGT integrates mtDNA: import, validation
and export of mitochondrial DNA profiles for
population genetics, tumour dynamics and
genotype-phenotype association studies
Hansi Weißensteiner1,2†, Sebastian Schönherr1,2†, Günther Specht2, Florian Kronenberg1, Anita Brandstätter1*

Abstract
Background: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is widely being used for population genetics, forensic DNA
fingerprinting and clinical disease association studies. The recent past has uncovered severe problems with mtDNA
genotyping, not only due to the genotyping method itself, but mainly to the post-lab transcription, storage and
report of mtDNA genotypes.
Description: eCOMPAGT, a system to store, administer and connect phenotype data to all kinds of genotype data
is now enhanced by the possibility of storing mtDNA profiles and allowing their validation, linking to phenotypes
and export as numerous formats. mtDNA profiles can be imported from different sequence evaluation programs,
compared between evaluations and their haplogroup affiliations stored. Furthermore, eCOMPAGT has been
improved in its sophisticated transparency (support of MySQL and Oracle), security aspects (by using database
technology) and the option to import, manage and store genotypes derived from various genotyping methods
(SNPlex, TaqMan, and STRs). It is a software solution designed for project management, laboratory work and the
evaluation process all-in-one.
Conclusions: The extended mtDNA version of eCOMPAGT was designed to enable error-free post-laboratory data
handling of human mtDNA profiles. This software is suited for small to medium-sized human genetic, forensic and
clinical genetic laboratories. The direct support of MySQL and the improved database security options render
eCOMPAGT a powerful tool to build an automated workflow architecture for several genotyping methods.
eCOMPAGT is freely available at http://dbis-informatik.uibk.ac.at/ecompagt.

Background
Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is routinely analyzed in various disciplines, such as medical genetics
(searching for inheritable or somatic pathogenic mutations), population genetics (studying the differences
between human populations), and forensic genetics
(estimating the chance of a random match between two
samples).
The strict maternal inheritance of mtDNA results in a
natural grouping of sequence haplotypes into
* Correspondence: anita.brandstaetter@i-med.ac.at
† Contributed equally
1
Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics,
Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology; Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria

monophyletic clusters, referred to as haplogroups [1].
The members of a haplogroup carry a specific sequence
motif as a consequence of sharing a common ancestor.
As a general practice, mtDNA haplotypes are reported
as a list of nucleotide positions that deviate from the
revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS; [2]).
Unfortunately, mtDNA sequencing efforts are quite
often affected by technical and interpretation problems.
Sample mix-up, contamination, biochemical problems,
use of a wrong reference sequence and transcription
errors lead to “phantom mutations” [3], which in turn
result in false associations and erroneous conclusions
[4-7]. Even forensic databases, which are used to estimate the rarity of an mtDNA profile, were hit by a variety of errors [8-10] and as a consequence, guidelines

© 2010 Weißensteiner et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Weißensteiner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/122

concerning mtDNA genotyping were issued [10-14].
These especially recommend double evaluation of
mtDNA sequences, a check for phylogenetic consistency
using haplogroup determination and the construction of
networks for the detection of phantom mutations [15].
In addition, specific computer programs can automatically export mtDNA profiles as differences to the rCRS
(e.g. Sequencher (GeneCodes, Ann Arbor, USA) or
SeqScape (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA)).
We present a new and extended version of eCOMPAGT [16], a database system which now allows the successful data handling and quality assurance of mtDNA
genotypes for medical genetics, population genetics and
forensics. eCOMPAGT imports mtDNA profiles generated with Sequencher or SeqScape, compares double evaluations of profiles for validation, stores profiles in a
relational database system and allows different export
formats for disease-association studies, population genetics, forensic databases and for the construction of phylogenetic networks. In particular, the search for inherited
pathogenic mutations is facilitated by linking mtDNA
polymorphisms to phenotypes, thus enabling a

Page 2 of 8

hypothesis-free scan for new genotype-phenotype associations when all common mtDNA polymorphisms are
covered. Furthermore, the study of somatic mtDNA
instabilities caused by carcinogenesis or by the action of
a particular toxin is enabled by the possibility to import
mtDNA profiles from different tissues and the automatic
export of alteration patterns. Finally, haplogroup affiliations of samples can also be stored, thus enabling a phylogenetic view of the mtDNA profiles.

Construction and Content
eCOMPAGT [16] is a Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS) designed to store the complete set of
project-relevant information in a compact, straightforward
and efficient way. Previously published features of eCOMPAGT, such as the phenotype and genotype storage capacity, the user friendly export interface for the combination
of genotypes and phenotypes, the versioning component
for traceability and the widespread project and customer
management have been optimized. eCOMPAGT has been
further enhanced by the option to store and evaluate mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) data in various ways (Figure 1).

Figure 1 eCOMPAGT’s mtDNA GUI. The new menu entry on the left side „mtDNA“ allows the management of mtDNA profiles. The menu item
“Import” reads two lists of files and compares them pairwise, the menu item “Show mtDNA” gives an overview of the imported data and allows
an export of data to different file formats. “Export mtDNA” enables the combination of phenotypes and mtDNA data.

Weißensteiner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/122

The goal was to integrate the workflow of mtDNA
analysis into eCOMPAGT to securely import, validate,
store and export mtDNA profiles and to connect
mtDNA polymorphisms with phenotypic data by making
use of eCOMPAGT’s combination and evaluation features. Errors in steps such as transcription of mtDNA
profiles, merging of different samples into one file, converting data for phylogenetic programs or connecting
genotypes to phenotypes for disease association studies
are thus avoided. The newly developed mtDNA capacity
allows the import of data from the alignment and analysis software systems SeqScape and Sequencher from two
independent scientists in the form of mutation reports
(examples of accepted mutation report formats can be
found at http://dbis-informatik.uibk.ac.at/ecompagt).
Furthermore, the import of mtDNA data can be performed for population data, gene-phenotype association
or tumour studies (for the identification of somatic
mutations in tumour tissue compared to benign cells),
in which case the project type needs to be selected initially using eCOMPAGT’s project management capability.
For quality management purposes, it is recommended
that all mtDNA sequences are evaluated by two different

Page 3 of 8

scientists or lab technicians [17]. These two evaluations
should be checked for consistency by a senior mtDNA
expert, a process that is called “validation”. eCOMPAGT
enables the validation of sequence evaluations of
mtDNA profiles from two different files derived from
two different evaluators and from different sequence
evaluation programs. eCOMPAGT generates reports
which indicate differences between the evaluations for
the senior validating scientist; it then stores the appropriate file - selected by the scientist - securely in a relational database. The imported data can be displayed as
EMPOP (EDNAP mtDNA population database) format
[17,18] or as a binary matrix, further supported by an
export interface to generate different kinds of formats
(EMPOP [17,18], binary matrix, tab-delimited files for
Excel, mtDNAManager [19], Network.exe [20], and
FASTA).

Specific mtDNA features
Import and validation of mtDNA

eCOMPAGT is constructed in a way that allows the
import of different kinds of mtDNA project types
(Figure 2). At project creation, the project type

Figure 2 Entity relationship diagram of the mtDNA extension of eCOMPAGT. Four new relations are introduced: MTDNAASSOC,
MTDNAPOP and the corresponding values MTDNAVAL/MTNDAVAL1. Entities are represented as rectangles and relationships as diamonds.

Weißensteiner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/122

(population data, association study or tumour study)
needs to be specified, which then automatically generates the corresponding graphical user interface (GUI).
The import interface supports the simultaneous
upload of hundreds of mutation reports (Seqscape or
Sequencher), including two mutation reports from two
different scientists for each sample and performs a row
by row (i.e. polymorphism by polymorphism) comparison of the different sequence evaluations for each sample. Human mtDNA variation is recorded by aligning
mtDNA sequences to the rCRS. This task is straightforward for the vast majority of nucleotide positions, but is
difficult in regions displaying length variation. Different
alignments of the same sample can result in mismatches
on several nucleotide positions. To remedy the situation,
samples should be evaluated and aligned by at least two
mtDNA analysts, and a third person should perform a
comparison of these two evaluations. If differences
occur between the two different reports from one sample, eCOMPAGT indicates those differences and allows
the validating scientist to either select the appropriate
file or to additionally import, upload and store a third
sequence evaluation. If no profile differences occur, one
of the identical files is stored in the database automatically. In addition, if the sequence mutation reports were
generated with Sequencher, the sequenced range of the
sample is also stored, as this information is exported by
Sequencher. A short video describing this very important feature can be found at http://dbis-informatik.uibk.
ac.at/ecompagt.
It is important to note that phenotypes can be easily
imported at any time into an existing project, by specifying the relevant ID column at the time of upload. For
genotypes we decided to use the filename of the mutation report as an identifier. More precisely, we are using
the underscore ("_”) as a separator to extract the ID.
This means that for example, in the file “12334_ABC.
txt” the digits before the underscore state our identifier
and the characters after the underscore refer to the initials of the person evaluating the sequence. As already
mentioned, this identifier needs to be numeric for
tumour or association studies, but not necessarily for
population data. The advantage of using the filename as
an identifier is that it simplifies the ability to edit ID
typing errors. Furthermore, the file extension of
the mutation reports represents the corresponding
input format (”.sqs” for SeqScape, “.txt” for Sequencher)
(Figure 3).

Page 4 of 8

only and mtDNA data complemented by corresponding
phenotypes. This is where the actual strength of eCOMPAGT comes into play (Figure 4) with the design of two
different graphical user interfaces:
The first GUI consists of two tables, one for mtDNA
data only, which displays the imported polymorphisms
for each sample, as well as a binary matrix (see below).
The imported data can be modified and each modification is logged by eCOMPAGT’s history function. A history function (Table 1) enables an easy and reliable
tracking of data modifications. It provides information
on the person who modified data (employee), on the
time-point when data were modified (date & time), on
the kind of modified data (location), and on the modified value (old value and new value).
• Export of the binary matrix as a tab-delimited file:
this file can be opened in any spreadsheet application or text editor; all observed polymorphisms are
listed in the header row, the sample names are listed
in the first column; the cell entries corresponding to
each sample are either 1 if the sample has the specific polymorphism headed in the given column or 0
otherwise.
• EMPOP file format: sample identifier (sample ID),
haplogroup, frequency and the profiles as differences
to the rCRS are indicated per row for each sample.
If the haplogroup is unknown a question mark is
inserted instead.
• Tab-delimited file for spreadsheets (MS Excel,
Open Office): like the EMPOP file format with the
additional columns “range” and “tumour profiles”.
• mtDNAmanager: adapted to be imported in
mtDNAmanager, this file format fulfils additional
grouping of mtDNA data as an extension to the
EMPOP format. The three ranges of grouping are:
[16024-16569], [1-437], [438-576].
• Network.exe: this file format displays polymorphisms in the first row and lists the mtDNA as a
sequence, in which the reference nucleotide is indicated in case of absence of a given polymorphism in
the corresponding sample. The sample names can be
up to 13 characters long. If insertions of 3 or more
nucleotides appear, the Fluxus Network application
gives a warning stating duplicated header information.
• FASTA file format: the user can choose any ranges,
single positions or any arbitrary combination of
ranges which results in a file of DNA sequences for
each sample.

Export of mtDNA

The mtDNA extension of eCOMPAGT can generate
several different file export formats for further downstream analysis of mtDNA data. For that purpose, we
divide the exports into two classes: export of mtDNA

The second GUI allows the connection of mtDNA
data to phenotypes as required in association or tumour
studies. Two adjacent tables show phenotypes listed row
by row in the left hand table and mtDNA

Weißensteiner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/122

Page 5 of 8

Figure 3 Flowchart of the mtDNA uploading process. mtDNA mutation reports can be uploaded from two different sequence evaluators per
sample and from different sequence evaluation programs (SeqScape or Sequencher). The different sequence reports are automatically compared
with each other; equal reports are stored automatically, while inconsistent reports can be revised by the validating senior scientist, who can also
upload a third evaluation for final storage.

polymorphisms in the right hand table as a list of all
mtDNA mutations. This enables the user (assuming that
he has the corresponding privileges to export data) to
select either all phenotypes and mtDNA polymorphisms
or any combination of arbitrary phenotypes and mtDNA
data. This file is exported as a standard BIFF8 format
(MS Excel, Open Office) and can be further analyzed
with statistics applications.
Sample information

Storage of sample information in a database system is a
highly sensitive issue, and it is one of the most important design features to restrict access to this

information. A software based authorization system is
not sufficient in such a case, which means that the database itself needs to authorize the access. eCOMPAGT
achieves this by creating database views, separate database user accounts and decides if a user is allowed to
access all sample data according to internal access
rights. To let the system know which data is actually
sample relevant, it has to be selected initially at the phenotype import step, in which the columns containing
sample specific information are also included. The
selected sample columns are then stored in a separate
database relation, accessible only with special database
access rights.

Weißensteiner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/122

Page 6 of 8

Figure 4 Flowchart of the mtDNA export process. mtDNA data can be modified (where each modification is stored by eCOMPAGT’s history
function) and exported. If the project is a gene-phenotype association study or a tumour study, the export with phenotypes is enabled.
Otherwise the user can pick out from several file formats to proceed with further downstream data analysis.

Table 1 Example file of eCOMPAGT’s history function
Project

Employee

Date

Location

Old value

New value

Burma1

Sebastian

2009-10-09 15:07

Export XLS:\home\sebastian\1.xls

1C

11C

PopTest

Hansi

2009-10-17 16:12

MTDNA haplogr.: Sample17

null

F1a1c

Burma2

Anita

2009-10-17 17:43

MTDNA haplogr.: Sample17

F1a1c

F1a1

Burma2

Florian

2009-10-17 19:11

MTDNA haplogr.: Sample17

F1a1

PopTest

Gunther

2009-10-18 09:31

Deleted: Phenotype BMI

...

...

...

...

Further features
Support of MySQL and Oracle database systems

eCOMPAGT can be run under MySQL and Oracle. The
support of both systems should lead to a higher user
accessibility and make the set up for small laboratories
much easier through the use of MySQL as background
database system.

...

...

easy error recognition. Before a final export (combination of phenotypes and related genotypes) can be executed, the double entries of samples need to be deleted.
The elimination of double entries is logged by eCOMPAGT and is only executable by a user with dedicated
rights (defined by eCOMPAGT).

Utility and Discussion
Enhancement of other genotyping methods

Import from various sources

eCOMPAGT’s new release enables the import and storage of STR (Short Tandem Repeats) data exported
from GeneMapper (Applied Biosystems, Foster City,
USA). The import of phenotypes is possible at any time,
as for Taqman and SNPlex data. In addition, besides the
storage and the combined export of SNPlex data with
corresponding phenotypes, we enhanced eCOMPAGT
to enable quality control statistics. This feature is useful
in the laboratory, where double genotyping is performed
and positive controls need to be checked. This data can
be exported and viewed in spreadsheet applications,
which provide the scientists with a powerful tool for

eCOMPAGT presents the possibility to analyse mtDNA
profiles generated by two independent sequence evaluators in a single step, each of them possibly using different computer programs (Sequencher, SeqScape). The
systems export formats are recognized automatically, the
files are imported into eCOMPAGT and are then compared in a pairwise manner. This feature reflects an
important validation process for quality management,
since errors in the evaluation process and different
interpretations of e.g. point or length heteroplasmy can
be detected. Additionally, transcription errors can be
avoided through the automated import process.

Weißensteiner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/122

Export to various software programs and
population databases

In forensic genetics it is necessary to determine the rarity of a given mtDNA profile. Therefore databases like
EMPOP [17,18] or mtDNAmanager [19] exist. Our software generates export formats for both databases.
Furthermore, mtDNA data can be saved as network.exe
file format, otherwise a complex and error prone task.
For phylogenetic programs like PAUP*, PHYLIP,
MrBayes, Migrate, Arlequin etc. we created the FASTA
file, a format which can then be easily adapted to each
particular program For association studies, which aim at
identifying genetic markers that are associated with certain phenotypes, we created a binary matrix. This binary
matrix can be imported directly into statistical programs
like SPSS, SAS or R, where association studies are executed primarily. The storage of haplogroups allows
further quality controls (e.g. correct interpretation of
length heteroplasmies) and association studies (e.g. affinity of specific haplogroups to a disease).
Comparison to other systems

The software mtDNAmanager allows the storage of
mtDNA sequence data, gives an estimate of the mostprobable mtDNA haplogroup affiliation and provides
frequency estimates on the rarity of mtDNA profiles.
Therefore, mtDNAmanager can be used as downstream
application to eCOMPAGT. In a similar manner,
EMPOP can also be used for frequency estimates and
for the construction of quasi median networks [21].
New features compared to the previous version of
eCOMPAGT

The new version of eCOMPAGT was extended to various applications of mtDNA genotyping:
• Storage and management of mtDNA data for
population genetics, tumour dynamics and genotypephenotype association studies;
• Validation process for mtDNA profiling (by
importing and comparing mutation reports generated by SeqScape and Sequencher);
• Export of mtDNA profiles in EMPOP [17,18] format, as a binary matrix, as tab-delimited files for
Excel, as mtDNAmanager [19] format, as input file
for Network.exe [20], and as FASTA format.

Page 7 of 8

Strength and limitations

The key features of our software are summarized in
Table 2. Our software has several strengths: (1) with
eCOMPAGT we provide automatic import and validation of mtDNA profiles combined with various export
formats. Many error prone and time consuming tasks
can therefore be avoided or simplified; (2) the usage of
the freely available MySQL database allows the installation and use of our software with no additional licence
costs. Furthermore, all user-related information is
securely stored in the database, supported by separated
database accounts and usage of database views; (3) classical elements of a customer relationship management,
combined with data management for numerous genotyping methods and the linkage to phenotypes render
eCOMPAGT a powerful tool which covers different
aspects of the laboratory workflow.
Our software has limitations as well, as eCOMPAGT
doesn’t automatically assign mtDNA haplogroups to
samples. However, the assignment of haplogroups to
mtDNA profiles is difficult, especially if only control
region information is available, and most haplogroups
are defined by coding region polymorphisms [22].
Therefore, instead of tempting the user to trust incomplete or inconsistent haplogroup assignments, we
decided to exclude this function from eCOMPAGT and
to give the user the opportunity to enter, store, review
and update the haplogroup affiliation of the samples.

Conclusions
eCOMPAGT has been enhanced by the import, storage
and management of mtDNA profiles. This makes the
Table 2 Key features of the mtDNA-version of eCOMPAGT
Advantages

Disadvantages

Import of population data in EMPOP
format

No automatic haplogroup
assignment

Import of Sequencher/SeqScape mutation
reports
Upload of phenotypes at any time
Comparison of double evaluations
History function for traceability
MySQL and ORACLE support
Export of several file formats:
FASTA
Network.exe
mtdnaManager

Further enhancements of eCOMPAGT include:

EMPOP
binary matrix as a tab-delimited file

• Import, storage and management of STR-data;
• Direct support of MySQL;
• Check of quality controls (double genotyping) for
SNPlex.

Excel format with phenotypes
Tab-delimited file for spreadsheets
Tumor mutations: Automatic detection of
somatic mutations

Weißensteiner et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:122
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/122

software interesting not only for epidemiologic laboratories, but also for forensic institutes, human-genetic
facilities and anthropological research laboratories,
which are engaged with mtDNA in terms of population
genetics and phylogenetics. Errors in mtDNA profiles,
which led to erroneous conclusions and endless discussions in recent years, can therefore be avoided. Furthermore, the field of genetic epidemiology is expanded by
mitochondrial association studies.
Availability and Requirements
Project name: eCOMPAGT
Project home page: http://dbis-informatik.uibk.ac.at/ecompagt
Operating system(s): Platform independent
Programming language: Java
Other requirements: Java 1.6., relational database (available for Oracle and
MySQL, tested for IBM DB2)

Page 8 of 8

6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

15.
Acknowledgements
The project was supported by the Medizinische Forschungsförderung
Innsbruck (Grant 2007-402) and the Österreichische Nationalbank (Grant
13059) to AB and by grants from the “Genomics of Lipidassociated
Disorders-GOLD” of the Austrian Genome Research Programme GEN-AU to
FK. Sebastian Schönherr was supported by a scholarship from the University
of Innsbruck (Doktoratsstipendium aus der Nachwuchsförderung, MIP10/
2009/3). We thank Dr. Sarah J. Bourlat (Museum of Natural History,
Stockholm, Sweden) for language revision of the article.
Author details
1
Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics,
Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology; Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria. 2Department of Database and Information Systems;
Institute of Computer Science, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
Authors’ contributions
SS and HW were responsible for programming and designing eCOMPAGT
and drafted the manuscript. AB initialized the project, supervised it and
drafted the manuscript. FK and GS drafted the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

Authors’ informations
SS and HW are PhD-students in computer science. AB is a junior group
leader in bioinformatics and molecular biology. FK is a full professor for
Genetic Epidemiology and GS is a full professor for computer science in the
area of databases and information systems.
Received: 20 January 2010
Accepted: 9 March 2010 Published: 9 March 2010
References
1. Kivisild T, Shen P, Wall DP, Do B, Sung R, Davis K, Passarino G, Underhill PA,
Scharfe C, Torroni A, et al: The role of selection in the evolution of
human mitochondrial genomes. Genetics 2006, 172:373-387.
2. Andrews RM, Kubacka I, Chinnery PF, Lightowlers RN, Turnbull DM,
Howell N: Reanalysis and revision of the Cambridge reference sequence
for human mitochondrial DNA. Nat Genet 1999, 23:147.
3. Brandstätter A, Sänger T, Lutz-Bonengel S, Parson W, Béraud-Colomb E,
Wen B, Kong Q-P, Bravi CM, Bandelt H-J: Phantom mutation hotspots in
human mitochondrial DNA. Electrophoresis 2005, 26:3414-3429.
4. Bandelt HJ, Yao YG, Salas A, Kivisild T, Bravi CM: High penetrance of
sequencing errors and interpretative shortcomings in mtDNA sequence
analysis of LHON patients. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007,
352:283-291.
5. Bandelt HJ, Salas A: Contamination and sample mix-up can best explain
some patterns of mtDNA instabilities in buccal cells and oral squamous
cell carcinoma. BMC Cancer 2009, 9:113.

22.

Bandelt HJ: Misanalysis gave false association of mtDNA mutations with
infertility. Int J Androl 2008, 31:450-453.
Bandelt HJ, Olivieri A, Bravi C, Yao YG, Torroni A, Salas A: ’Distorted’
mitochondrial DNA sequences in schizophrenic patients. Eur J Hum Genet
2007, 15:400-402.
Bandelt H-J, Salas A, Bravi C: Problems in FBI mtDNA database. Science
2004, 305:1402-1404.
Bandelt H-J, Salas A, Lutz-Bonengel S: Artificial recombination in forensic
mtDNA population databases. Int J Legal Med 2004, 118:267-273.
Yao Y-G, Bravi CM, Bandelt H-J: A call for mtDNA data quality control in
forensic science. Forensic Sci Int 2004, 141:1-6.
Bandelt H-J, Lahermo P, Richards M, Macaulay V: Detecting errors in
mtDNA data by phylogenetic analysis. Int J Legal Med 2001, 115:64-69.
Parson W, Bandelt H-J: Extended guidelines for mtDNA typing of
population data in forensic science. Forensic Sci Int Genet 2007, 1:13-19.
Bandelt H-J, Dür A: Translating DNA data tables into quasi-median
networks for parsimony analysis and error detection. Mol Phylogenet Evol
2007, 42:256-271.
Salas A, Carracedo A, Macaulay V, Richards M, Bandelt HJ: A practical guide
to mitochondrial DNA error prevention in clinical, forensic, and
population genetics. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005, 335:891-899.
Brandstätter A, Klein R, Duftner N, Wiegand P, Parson W: Application of a
quasi-median network analysis for the visualization of character conflicts
to a population sample of mitochondrial DNA control region sequences
from southern Germany (Ulm). Int J Legal Med 2006, 120:310-314.
Schönherr S, Weissensteiner H, Coassin S, Specht G, Kronenberg F,
Brandstätter A: eCOMPAGT – efficient combination and management of
phenotypes and genotypes for genetic epidemiology. BMC Bioinformatics
2009, 10:139.
Brandstätter A, Niederstätter H, Pavlic M, Grubwieser P, Parson W:
Generating population data for the EMPOP database - an overview of
the mtDNA sequencing and data evaluation processes considering 273
Austrian control region sequences as example. Forensic Sci Int 2007,
166:164-175.
Parson W, Brandstätter A, Pircher M, Steinlechner M, Scheithauer R: EMPOP
- The EDNAP mtDNA population database concept for a new
generation, high-quality mtDNA database. Int Congress Series 2004,
1261:106-108.
Lee HY, Song I, Ha E, Cho SB, Yang WI, Shin KJ: mtDNAmanager: a Webbased tool for the management and quality analysis of mitochondrial
DNA control-region sequences. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:483.
Bandelt H-J, Forster P, Röhl A: Median-joining networks for inferring
intraspecific phylogenies. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:37-48.
Parson W, Dür A: EMPOP–a forensic mtDNA database. Forensic Sci Int
Genet 2007, 1:88-92.
van Oven M, Kayser M: Updated comprehensive phylogenetic tree of
global human mitochondrial DNA variation. Hum Mutat 2008, 30:
E386-E394.

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-122
Cite this article as: Weißensteiner et al.: eCOMPAGT integrates mtDNA:
import, validation and export of mitochondrial DNA profiles for
population genetics, tumour dynamics and genotype-phenotype
association studies. BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:122.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
