<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Building and analyzing protein interactome networks by cross-species comparisons</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Systems Biology 2010 4:36. doi:10.1186/1752-0509-4-36"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Amy M Wiles"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Building and analyzing protein interactome
networks by cross-species comparisons
Amy M Wiles1†, Mark Doderer3†, Jianhua Ruan3†, Ting-Ting Gu1, Dashnamoorthy Ravi1, Barron Blackman1,
Alexander JR Bishop1,2*

Abstract
Background: A genomic catalogue of protein-protein interactions is a rich source of information, particularly for
exploring the relationships between proteins. Numerous systems-wide and small-scale experiments have been
conducted to identify interactions; however, our knowledge of all interactions for any one species is incomplete,
and alternative means to expand these network maps is needed. We therefore took a comparative biology
approach to predict protein-protein interactions across five species (human, mouse, fly, worm, and yeast) and
developed InterologFinder for research biologists to easily navigate this data. We also developed a confidence
score for interactions based on available experimental evidence and conservation across species.
Results: The connectivity of the resultant networks was determined to have scale-free distribution, small-world
properties, and increased local modularity, indicating that the added interactions do not disrupt our current
understanding of protein network structures. We show examples of how these improved interactomes can be used
to analyze a genome-scale dataset (RNAi screen) and to assign new function to proteins. Predicted interactions
within this dataset were tested by co-immunoprecipitation, resulting in a high rate of validation, suggesting the
high quality of networks produced.
Conclusions: Protein-protein interactions were predicted in five species, based on orthology. An InteroScore, a
score accounting for homology, number of orthologues with evidence of interactions, and number of unique
observations of interactions, is given to each known and predicted interaction. Our website http://www.
interologfinder.org provides research biologists intuitive access to this data.

Background
Proteins often physically interact to carry out their functions within living cells. A protein-protein interactome,
or a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, is the
collection of these interactions between proteins in a
single organism. The utility of generating a high quality
PPI network with significant protein coverage for any
species is manifold. It has been suggested that if two
proteins interact, then they are likely to have related
functions [1]. Therefore, perhaps the greatest benefit of
a comprehensive PPI map will be to provide insight into
the biology of proteins with no known function, a significant issue for all species in this “post-genomic era.”

* Correspondence: bishopa@uthscsa.edu
† Contributed equally
1
Greehey Children’s Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA

Systematic identification of PPI has provided new
insights into the relationships between both individual
proteins and the processes within which they are
involved. There have been several studies aimed at
determining the full set of PPI for multiple model
organisms [2-8], as well as for humans [9-11], and a
wide range of publications on PPI at a much smaller
scale. The strength of an interactome is in the quality
and extent of the available data. Although there is a
considerable amount of interaction data available for
organisms such as yeast, worm, fly, human, and to a lesser extent mouse, unfortunately there is an underrepresentation of the potential PPI, with a majority of
proteins not included in the current maps for any one
species. The exception is yeast, which is estimated to
have 18,000 ± 4500 interactions [12] encompassing 84%
of the known proteome. In the absence of a technological advance that would improve the coverage of PPI

© 2010 Wiles et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

identification for a single species, alternative approaches
need to be incorporated to speed the development of
more complete PPI network maps.
One way to address the current deficiencies within
available PPI data is to examine orthologues of interacting proteins in other organisms and predict possible
interologues (conserved PPI between sets of conserved
orthologues). The basis of this comparison is that proteins encoded by orthologous genes maintaining a conserved function also maintain most, if not all, PPI with
other conserved proteins. In order to predict interologues by conservation, one must first obtain an accurate
set of orthologues. In general, the BLAST sequence
alignment algorithm [13] is commonly used for identifying interspecies orthologues due to being computationally inexpensive, albeit less robust than algorithms such
as Smith-Waterman [14]. With this cross-species mapping, conserved interologues can be identified and predicted as has been reported by others [15-21]. The
interaction prediction database STRING [19,22-24] uses
Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COGs) for
orthologues between species.
Alternatively, Michaut et al. [22] predicted interactions in a multitude of organisms using pair-wise SmithWaterman similarity to determine orthology, with a best
reciprocal hit approach, resulting in all “orthologues”
existing in a one-to-one relationship. A more powerful
approach for orthology mapping was used by Ensembl
[25], where a combination of BLAST and Smith-Waterman was used for alignments, followed by reconciliation
using the phylogenetic tree of all species in their database. This allows for more than one-to-one orthologues,
a feature of which we take advantage to generate comprehensive, predicted PPI network maps.
Considering the recent use of protein interactomes in
defining pathways or predicting gene involvement in
disease on the premise of “guilt-by-association,” expanding our knowledge of PPIs would be of benefit to health
sciences [26,27]. Because the number of interactions
observed within a single species is very limited, we have
endeavored to predict interologues from known interactions in other species. Through intra-species and interspecies analysis, we predict new PPI for human, mouse,
fly, worm, and yeast. We then assign a confidence measurement to each interaction based on the level of conservation of the interaction across multiple species and
the number of supporting experiments. This measurement allows interologues comprised of one-to-many and
many-to-many orthologues to be scored, although here,
we score them lower based on their level of homology.
In addition, we implement PPI predictions to interpret
biological data. Because the software Cytoscape [28]
offers highly flexible network visualization, we provide
all of our results in a Cytoscape compatible format as

Page 2 of 16

supplementary data. We also developed a web interface
(interologfinder.org) for downloading pre-computed files
and exploring user-specified genes of interest, for which
both browsing and Cytoscape files are available.

Results
Comparison of Orthologues

In order to facilitate the comparison of interactions
across species, we first surveyed the amount of gene
conservation between species. Orthologue data from
Ensembl 50 were compared between five species:
human, mouse, fly, worm, and yeast, and the number of
orthologues between species were determined for those
genes whose status Ensembl annotated as “known.” Figure 1 shows the overlap between the organisms as a
five-way Venn diagram. Human and mouse are the
most closely related organisms we are investigating and
as such, demonstrate a high level of gene conservation.
Yeast, however, shares less than half of its genome with
the four animal species in this study. A large majority of
genes annotated “novel” was found to be unique to their
species. For instance 9,390 human genes were “novel”
(as noted by Ensembl), and 9,165 of these did not have
orthologues in any of the other four species, bringing
their authenticity into question.
For those genes that are conserved in all five species,
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis reveals an overrepresentation of a wide variety of metabolic, biosynthetic, and
DNA repair processes (Additional file 1: Table S1).
These same GO annotations are consequently underrepresented in the non-conserved genes for each species.
In contrast, processes such as signal transduction, extracellular communication, integral membrane channel/
transporter activities, and regulation of transcription and
gene expression were over-represented in the non-conserved group and are consequently under-represented in
the conserved gene group.
Comparison of Databases

Genes and the binary interactions of the proteins they
encode were retrieved from three databases, IntAct, DIP,
and BIND, for the five species investigated. Retired gene
accession numbers were converted to updated numbers,
then each accession number was converted to its Ensembl
Gene ID. Only accession numbers matching the expected
species were retained from each database. A summary of
the data preserved from each database is presented in
Additional file 2: Table S2. Unless otherwise noted, only
genes annotated either “known” or “novel” by Ensembl
were used. For each species, we determined the overlap
between the three protein interaction databases employed
(Additional file 2: Table S2). Although the number of proteins shared between any two databases is more than
expected (Additional file 2: Table S2), there are few

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Five-way Venn Diagram of orthologous genes in five species. Orthologues in human (red), mouse (orange), fly (yellow), worm
(green), and yeast (blue). Numbers of genes overlapping between all five species are given in their respective colors and encircled. All other
groups of orthologous genes only show the number of genes found in the organism with the largest number in that group. Orthologues were
retrieved from Ensembl 50.

protein interactions present in all three databases, likely
due to the small percentage of the proteome covered.
Merging the three databases has therefore extended the
PPI network coverage for each species. For example,
InAct, DIP, and BIND each house protein interactions for
17, 10%, and 2.5% of the human proteome, respectively,
but their combination achieved 21% coverage (28% if considering only “known” genes), highlighting the lack of
knowledge in the currently available PPI networks (Additional file 2: Table S2). Yeast, however, has the largest

percent of its proteome represented, with 77% present
when the databases are combined, or 84% if only “known”
genes are considered.
Comparison of Interologues and Predicted Interologues

Protein interactions conserved between organisms are
called interologues. Existing interologues between the
five merged interactomes that we produced were identified (Additional file 3: Figure S1A). We also predicted
interologues in each organism from pairs of interacting

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

orthologues present in the other four species (Additional
file 3: Figure S1B). Files have been generated for each
species and are available for download as supplemental
data or at http://www.interologfinder.org (listed in Additional file 4: Table S3).
We observed 99 worm interactions conserved in fly
and 96 fly interactions conserved in worm, even with
25,476 known interactions in fly. Perhaps this is due to
the small number of interactions known in worm, only
5204. Because of the low number of interologues
between fly and worm, there were almost no interologues predicted in any species from interactions present
in both of these two species. We tested the proportions
of orthologues for each species of those found in the
interactomes verses in the whole genomes, and found
that for both fly and worm, statistically, orthologues
were underrepresented in the interactomes for these
two species (p-value < 0.0001). Indeed, across all species,
the test for proportions of proteins with orthologues
present in the interactome of each species, worm had
the most extreme t-statistics of all species (t-value > 40
when compared to human, mouse, and fly versus median t-value of 22 for human, mouse, and fly when compared with each other (t-value range 19 - 55). A GO
analysis was conducted on the highly conserved proteins
present in the combined known and predicted interactomes (Additional file 1: Table S1). In particular, GO
annotations were compared between all proteins in the
known fly and worm interactomes and found to be dissimilar (data not shown). Indeed, only 20% of the
“known” genes in worm have an orthologue in at least
one of the other four species investigated (Figure 1).
Additionally, comparing the proteins represented in the
interactome and total proteome for each species
revealed that proteins with orthologues are highly overrepresented in known PPI.
To provide a quality measurement for protein interactions, known and predicted, we developed three confidence scores. The SpeciesScore relates both to the
number of species in which an interologue has been
observed and to the percent homology between orthologues known or predicted to be involved in the interaction. The ExperimentScore is based on the number of
experiments in which a PPI has been observed. Finally,
the InteroScore is a combination of the SpeciesScore,
the ExperimentScore, and the ExperimentQualityScore.
We also include the SpeciesNotation to denote the species in which an interologue is present and which species have the potential for an interologue but have not
yet had one verified. The summary of this nomenclature
and data available for download can be found in Additional file 4: Table S3.
Because the known interactomes for every species but
yeast has a dramatic underrepresentation of the full

Page 4 of 16

proteome, we wanted to provide biologists with all of
the predictions so that they may further investigate
those potential interactions of interest to them. If a
score is low, it does not mean that we have little confidence in it, only that there was only one species in
which the interaction has been observed thus far. Given
the poor coverage of the proteomes, this is not surprising. With this in mind, however, we wanted to assess
the distribution of InteroScores in each of the five species. A cutoff of 1.5 was chosen, with those predicted
interactions with an InteroScore of at least 1.5 to be
those in which we have high confidence. The percentages of predicted interactions with high confidence are
as follows: 50.2% for yeast, 18.4% for fly, 14.7% for
worm, 11.7% for human, and 10.8% for mouse. Many of
the interactions have been predicted from yeast, because
it has the greatest coverage. Another factor contributing
to a low score could be that the pair of predicted interacting proteins is only found in one other species, making a higher score less likely.
Topological Analysis of PPI Networks

Many studies simply compare GO annotations between
predicted interacting proteins as a benchmarking
method [29]. Although GO may be used as a tool to
examine a general overview of the data, we do not
believe that this approach is valid as benchmarking
because of the varied level and completeness of the gene
annotation. Other studies compare their results to a
“gold standard” [30]. Defining a gold standard for all
species, considering the apparent substantial deficiency
in each PPI database, however, appears inappropriate,
even assuming that almost all yeast two-hybrid data is
correct [31]. Given that 84% (5510/6532 known proteincoding Ensembl Gene IDs) of the yeast proteome is
represented in its known interactome, we make the
assumption that it is the closest to being complete. We
therefore attempt to compare results from the other
four species to that of yeast. Unfortunately, yeast is also
the organism with the least gene conservation in the
other species in this study, and this may affect the
comparisons.
To determine the effect of including predicted interactions on the PPI network structure, we analyzed their
topology. We first examined the degree distribution of
the networks. As can be seen in the left panels of
Figure 2, like the yeast network, all networks, either
with or without the predicted interactions, exhibit scalefree degree distributions (i.e. the majority of the nodes
in the network have very few connections to other proteins, e.g. they have low degrees), while a small number
of nodes have much higher degrees. More precisely, the
degree distributions fit with the power-law function p(k)
= c k -r . It is well known that many types of real

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

Figure 2 Degree distributions of the known (circle) and known
and predicted (plus) networks (left panels) and plot of the number
of known versus predicted interactions for each node (right panels)
for human, mouse, fly, worm, and yeast.

networks, including social networks and the Internet,
have scale-free degree distributions [32], which are
believed to contribute to the robustness of complex systems against random node failures. The predicted interactions did not change the degree distribution for any
species, which suggests that the predicted interactions
are not random.
Secondly, we analyzed network diameter and clustering coefficient (Additional file 5: Figure S2A and B,

Page 5 of 16

respectively), which are related to the definition of
small-world networks. When the known and predicted
interactions are combined, for all species except yeast,
the network diameters are significantly reduced and the
clustering coefficients are significantly increased. With
yeast, we predicted relatively few new interactions due
to the robustness of the experimentally derived data,
and therefore our predictions made little impact on the
complete PPI network. The reduction in network diameters and increase in clustering coefficients strongly
indicate that the predicted interactions increase local
modularity (e.g. connecting members of a protein complex), moving closer to what is observed in the yeast
known interactome. This suggestion is confirmed by our
co-immunoprecipitation experiments (see below). To
assess the confidence level of the results, we conducted
similar tests using two random counterparts for each
combined network. The first random network was
obtained by randomly rewiring the combined network
while preserving the degree of each node (denoted as
the “rewired” network). The second random network
was obtained by randomly rewiring the predicted interactions and combining them with the known interactions (denoted as the “partially rewired” network). As
shown in Additional file 5: Figure S2, the partially
rewired networks have diameters similar to the true
combined networks, but the former have much smaller
clustering coefficients. The rewired networks in all five
species, on the other hand, have both smaller diameter
and smaller clustering coefficients than the true combined networks. The diameter shrinkage after random
rewiring often indicates a collapse of local “community”
structures existing in real-world networks.
It is possible that the predicted interologues could have
an over-representation of highly self-interacting protein
complexes. Such a scenario would bias our network efficiency measurements. We therefore examined the efficiency of “Known” (0.0076), “Predicted” (0.0175), and
“Randomized Predicted” (0.0138) human networks for
each Gene Ontology (GO) slim term; the average efficiency is provided in parentheses. GO slim allows a
broad view of gene ontologies for use in genome scale
analysis. From these measurements, it is clear that the
known human interactome is more highly connected
than the predicted interactions that were added, which
are no better than random interactions within the same
set of proteins. Thus, the predicted interologues are
represented throughout the known protein interactome
and do not represent complexes or protein modules. In
contrast, the connectivity (global efficiency) was
improved for every slim GO term examined, with a median increase of more than 200% connectivity (data not
shown). In general, increased connectivity was associated
with an increased clustering coefficient (data not shown).

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

The greatest increases in connectivity was observed in
processes involved in metabolism, as might be expected
considering these were the proteins most highly conserved across organisms and thus allowed the greatest
number of interologue predictions. In contrast, the GO
terms where we observe the least improvement in connectivity, such as extracellular space (GO:0005615),
extracellular structure organization (GO:0043062) and
cell surface (GO:0009986), are less well conserved across
our five model organisms, and would be expected to have
the least interologue predictions. In conclusion, it is
expected that two proteins that are involved in the same
process are likely to be more closely connected in the
network, thus our predictions appear to be improving
this relationship within each GO. This also suggests the
predicted interologues have biological value and indicates
the quality of this analysis.
In a final analysis of the networks, we compared proteins that are highly conserved across species (present in
four or five of our test species) to proteins that are only
moderately conserved (present in two or three of our
test species) or are unique to their species. The degree
distribution was measured for each group of proteins
(Additional file 5: Figure S2). Weakly and highly conserved proteins have similar degree distributions in the
known interactomes, but following interologue prediction, highly conserved proteins have an increased level
of connectivity compared to those weakly conserved.
This is expected because PPI are predicted based on
interactions between conserved proteins, thus biasing
the outcome. Obviously, the degree distribution of
unique proteins is unchanged between known and combined interactomes, since no new interactions were predicted for these proteins.
In summary, we conclude that the combined networks
have both scale-free and small-world properties, and the
predicted interactions increase local modularity of the
networks. Analysis of the PPI networks for all five species shows that both the known and the combined interactomes for each species exhibit scale-free degree
distribution. This indicates that the predicted PPI are
not random because the network structure did not
change. Interestingly, we find that the number of predicted interactions for each node is inversely proportionally to the number of known interactions (Figure 2,
right panels). This suggests that our method is effective
in predicting PPI that have not yet been captured by
experimental techniques. If a protein already has many
known interactions, we may expect to predict relatively
fewer interactions for it, since its interaction partners
may have been extensively surveyed, either due to its
popularity as a research target, or because of the nontransient nature of its interactions. But because of the
extensive research previously conducted on yeast PPI,

Page 6 of 16

we were unable to predict many new interactions in our
“gold standard” species, indicating its likely near-completeness. Again, the degree distributions for each species after prediction better resemble yeast (Additional
file 5: Figure S2), suggesting that we are advancing to
more complete interactomes.
Comparison with Previous Works

There have been several studies predicting interactions;
most do not include the stringent one-to-many or
many-to-many orthologues as we did. Inclusion of these
orthologous relationships resulting from speciation
events allows for increased support of our predicted
interactions. We therefore compared the predictions we
made for the human interactome with those human predictions made by four earlier reports [19,22-24]. We
examined the clustering coefficients and degree distributions of the four networks compared to their randomly
rewired networks (range of 0.128-0.317 compared to
0.019-0.079 rewired). Similar to our predicted networks,
the four other predicted networks had a higher clustering coefficient compared to that of the randomly
rewired network and were similar to our benchmark of
yeast. Additionally, the diameter of each was reduced
when compared to the rewired network (range of 10-13
compared to 6-10 rewired), as was ours, suggesting
modularity of the networks predicted by each study.
We directly compared our predicted interactions with
those from STRING. To evaluate the quality of various
experimental supports (see ExperimentQualityScore), we
determined the ratio of interactions in both STRING
and our interactome as supported by an experiment.
When comparing the ratios among experiments, we discovered that the ratios among the known interactions
were higher than the predicted interactions. Some ratios
were dramatically different. For example in humans for
MI:0397(two_hybrid_array), 185 of the 8251 (0.022) predicted interactions were included in the STRING database, however, 218 of the 237 known interactions
(0.919) were included in STRING. This was not the case
for all experiments. MI:0114(x-ray_crystallography)
ratios of 0.427 (68 out of 159 predicted) and 0.659 (184
out of 279 known) were more similar.
Online Tools

At http://www.interologfinder.org, we provide a link to
download each set of Cytoscape files for each species
(listed in Additional file 4: Table S3). In addition, we
provide the ability to search for a protein or list of proteins by Ensembl Gene ID or gene name. Data retrieved
from this search includes all known and predicted interactions involving the queried proteins, the InteroScore,
the SpeciesNotation, and the experimental evidence for
the known interactions or the evidence for the

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

interactions from which an interologue was predicted.
PPI are divided by known and predicted interactions
between the queried proteins and by interactions
between the queried proteins and others within the species. Data may be viewed in the user’s web browser or
downloaded to be directly imported into Cytoscape.
Application 1

PPI networks can be used to reveal a higher order structure within an experimental dataset, to subsequently
identify proteins and processes worth pursuing, and to
derive hypotheses. We therefore employed our predicted

Page 7 of 16

interactome in improving the connectivity of a genomic
dataset of proteins identified to be involved in damage
survival [33]. We recently reported a genome-wide
RNAi screen for genes required for viability after treatment with methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) in fly [34].
We validated 202 of the potential positives from the
screen as being real hits; 159 are present in the known
fly interactome, connected by only 42 edges (Figure 3).
Seventeen proteins were present in the “predicted fly
interactome” that were not present in the “known interactome,” bringing the total number of proteins to 176 in
the combined MMS survival subnetwork, connected by

Figure 3 Network analysis of proteins required for survival after MMS damage. A) Subnetwork of proteins required for survival after
treatment with the DNA damaging agent MMS in fly, before (left) and after (right) PPI prediction. Nodes in black are connected before
prediction, while nodes in red are orphans before prediction. Yellow nodes are added to the interactome after interologue prediction. Blue
edges are interactions known in fly, while black edges are predicted interactions. B) Global efficiency of the subnetworks before (left) and after
(right) interologue prediction (dashed red line). The global efficiency of random networks determined by a set of random nodes equal to the
number of nodes used in the actual set are shown with blue bars.

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

291 edges. Forty-one of the 111 orphan proteins (nodes
not connected to another node in the subnetwork) were
connected to another protein after prediction. Therefore, using the predicted fly PPI network greatly
increased the number of proteins in the network and
the connections involved.
We used the global efficiency of the MMS survival
subnetwork to examine the connectivity of the subnetwork before and after interaction prediction. The global
efficiency is measured as the mean of the reciprocal of
pair-wise distances and is represented by values between
0 and 1, a larger value indicating a shorter average distance, or higher connectivity. Because we expect that
the predicted subnetwork will already have a much
higher connectivity, as the predicted interactome did, we
compared the two subnetworks with their respective
randomly rewired networks. The global efficiency for
the MMS subnetwork before and after prediction is 0.21
and 0.34, respectively. The Z-scores for the two measures, when compared to the same measurement in random networks, are 3.3 (p = 5e-4) and 8.4 (p < 1e-16),
respectively, suggesting that the predicted PPI improved
the MMS protein viability network connectivity better
than by chance.
Application 2

One potential advantage of using PPI networks is to
facilitate the assignment of function to proteins. If the
interaction of two proteins suggests that they share a
role in a process, then developing improved PPI networks are of significant benefit. To test this hypothesis,
we examined the role of proteins interacting with fly
proteasome on proteasome activity. Forty-one members
of the fly proteasome (using data from KEGG; http://
www.genome.jp/) and 155 proteasome interactors are
present in the “known interactome” and 409 additional
interactors are predicted. Using RNA interference knock
down, we individually removed each of 30 proteins that
interact with proteasome components and measured
proteasome activity. Knock down of seven genes
resulted in a statistically significant decrease in proteasome activity (P < 0.05), while knock down of four
others resulted in a decease of at least 10% in proteasome activity albeit not significantly. Of these 11 genes,
four were previously known to interact with proteasome
components while seven are predicted interactors (Figure 4). Among the known proteasome interactors,
FK506-BP belongs to the immunophilin family involved
in protein trafficking and interacts with most of the
components present in the 26S proteasome [35], thus
providing a “proof of principle” for this approach.
Among the predicted interactors are the ribosomal proteins sta, RpL9, and RpL23. Recent investigations suggest that the proteasome might be involved in

Page 8 of 16

regulating translation through direct interaction with
ribosomal proteins [36], which supports the interaction
of these proteins, though our observation suggests a
reciprocal modulation of activity. Although 19 of 30 the
proteins examined did not affect proteasome function
under the conditions tested, this does not imply that
these proteins do not interact with proteasome components, only that their removal does not affect proteasome activity. Together these results demonstrate the
utility PPI predictions and the utility of improved and
expanded PPI network maps.
Confirmation of Predicted Interactions

In order to validate our findings of predicted interactions, we tested six known and 15 predicted fly PPI. For
this we selected only proteins that have a one-to-one
orthologous relationship with interacting human proteins. We selected predicted interactions in which at
least one of the proteins was either known to be
required for viability after MMS exposure [34] or
known to interact with an MMS viability protein. Pairs
of predicted interacting proteins were epitope tagged
with either FLAG or HA and expressed in Kc167 cells
and immunoprecipitated with FLAG-antibody. All six
known protein interaction pairs were confirmed, and all
but four predicted PPI tested were found to be correctly
predicted (Figure 5). Some of predicted PPI are part of
the mediator complex [37]. The predicted interactions
in such complexes increase the local modularity of this
subnetwork, and because complexes are known to exist
and function as such, it is most likely that these are biologically relevant PPI. There did not seem to be a correlation between InteroScore of a predicted interaction
and whether or not it was confirmed. Interestingly,
three of the PPI that we predicted and validated were
not predicted by STRING, namely MED26 and MED4,
MED26 and MED17, and MED16 and MED2, each with
an InteroScore of 1.18. All other interaction we tested,
including those that we could not confirm, were predicted by STRING.

Discussion
PPI Prediction Across Multiple Species

Identification of PPI in multiple model organisms and in
human has been accomplished by many different in
vitro techniques, including two-hybrid expression, coimmunoprecipitation, and affinity chromatography
[31,38]. Even so, a large proportion of the proteomes
have not been represented in these analyses. Like several
recent studies [8,19,30], we have successfully used
orthologous interacting proteins from one species to
predict interactions in another species. Here we have
compared orthologous genes in five species (human,
mouse, fly, worm, and yeast) in order to predict

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

Page 9 of 16

Figure 4 Predicted interactors of proteasome components that affect its activity. A) Subnetwork of proteasome components (black circles) and
interactors (white squares) that affect proteasome activity in fly. Thick black edges are known PPI, while grey edges are predicted PPI. B) Proteasome
activity normalized per cell after knock down of proteins indicated in A. Luc (non-targeting RNAi against luciferase) and Rpn2 as negative and positive
controls, respectively). Error bars represent the standard deviation of four replicates, and p-values are given above each bar.

interologues in these organisms and created an easy to
use, online tool for biologists to access the data of interest to them. Unlike comparisons conducted in other studies using only BLAST for homology, we used high
quality homology annotation from Ensembl to compare
orthologous genes. For orthologue determination,
Ensembl has used Blastp and Smith-Waterman to compare sequences, followed by phylogenetic tree analysis,

allowing one-to-many and many-to-many orthologous
relationships. We found that proteins involved in metabolic processes and DNA repair were highly conserved
across all species, but those proteins used in either signal transduction or cell-cell communication and transmembrane proteins were more likely to be unique to
their species. Metabolism is known to be well-conserved
[39], and conservation of transmembrane lies in

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

Page 10 of 16

Figure 5 Western blots of co-immunoprecipitations (coIP) of predicted and known interactions. CoIP was conducted with anti-FLAG, and
membranes were probed with anti-HA, stripped, and probed with anti-FLAG. Bands indicate a presence of tagged protein. “Input” is total
protein before coIP, while “FLAG-IP” is protein present after coIP. If a band is present in both the input and FLAG-IP lanes, it indicates that the
protein has been pulled down with the anti-FLAG antibody. When the protein in question is tagged with HA instead of FLAG, this indicates an
interaction between the FLAG-tagged protein and the HA-tagged protein. InteroScores are given in parentheses: PPI between LSm7 and CG6610
(3.27), LSm7 and SmD3 (1.27), CG2021 and CG17768 (3.27), CG9344 and CG6610 (3.27), LSm7 and CG17768 (3.27), and CG12703 and spn-A (1.27)
were positive controls of known PPI. Predicted PPI that were confirmed to interact were: CG10418 and CG6610 (1.39), LSm7 and CG2021 (1.69),
LSm7 and CG9344 (1.39), CG9344 and CG2021 (2.69), RfC4 and RfC38 (2.64), RfC4 and CG8142 (3.27), DNApol-alpha50 and DNApol-alpha60 (1.39),
MED26 and MED4 (1.18), ix and MED28 (1.18), CG5325 and CG5525 (1.39), MED17 and MED26 (1.18). Those that were not confirmed were:
CG10418 and CG17768 (1.77), CG10418 and SmD3 (1.53), dup and CG6905 (1.12), and MED6 and MED26 (1.18).

hydrophobicity and charge probably more so than in
conserved residues [40], so these discoveries are not
surprising.
Unlike most PPI prediction studies predicting interaction in human only, we compared and predicted PPI in
human, mouse, fly, worm, and yeast, with data retrieved
from three publically available PPI databases, IntAct,
DIP, and BIND. By limiting the proteins retained from
these databases to those with current identifiers or convertible to current identifiers, and found only in the target species, we increase confidence in the combined PPI
network. The known yeast interactome, with 5688

known or Ensembl-predicted proteins observed to be
involved in 40249 interactions, is the species with the
most complete protein interactome map. After prediction
of interologues from the other four species, connectivity
was nearly unchanged (Additional file 5 Figure S2), and
as a species with nearly complete proteome coverage
within its interactome (and thus our “gold standard”), we
find the representation of both proteins and interactions
observed in the other species sorely lacking. Our predictions for human extrapolated from other species
increases the coverage from 7541 to 11647 proteins, or
32% of the proteome, or 43% of the “known” proteome.

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

Although this is still less than half of the proteome it still
includes 50% more proteins than previously included.
The overlap of interologues was surprisingly little: only
1837 of the 24612 interactions observed in human had
also been observed in at least one of the other species.
Indeed, Gandhi et al. [41] only found 36 interologues
overlapping between fly and worm that were not known
in human, demonstrating the poor overlap in observed
interactions between species. Because of the scale-free
degree distribution and small-world properties of the
combined interactomes, we have confidence that most of
the predicted interactions are real.
Confidence Measures

Measures akin to our SpeciesScore have been used by
other researchers. Yu, et al. [30] reviewed two methods
for determining orthologous relationships and the scoring thereof: the simplistic, albeit inaccurate, determination similarity by best-match of sequence homology
versus the higher accuracy of reciprocal best-match of
homology mapping. Ensembl maintains the accuracy of
the reciprocal best-match, but extends it to find more
complex one-to-many and many-to-many relationships
based on clustering and phylogenetic trees. By using
their percent identity score, we take advantage of their
more complex discovery and scoring mechanism. Therefore, our SpeciesScore, exploits orthologous type
descriptions given at Ensembl by scoring not just the
single best orthologous pair in another species, as other
researchers have done, but also other likely orthologues
with slightly weaker sequence homology. We also bolster the prediction of interactions if they, or the PPI
that predict them, have been found by more than one
type of experiment with the ExperimentScore. When
this is combined with the SpeciesScore to obtain the
InteroScore, we obtain a metric that is a reasonable and
intuitive solution incorporating multiple predictive PPI
evidences, with higher InteroScores having more evidence supporting the interaction, either from more species or by more types of experiments. Because it appears
that a large proportion of PPI are not represented in
experimental data, a low score should not indicate a
lack of confidence in a PPI, but rather a high score
should indicate a likelihood that the interologue exists.
Applications for Research Biologists

We have validated this methodology by verifying predicted interactions in fly by co-immunoprecipitation.
Based on our interologue predictions, we have confirmed eleven new protein-protein interactions in fly.
Validation of the predicted interactions was chosen not
to validate our prediction method, but rather to demonstrate that predicted PPI are more likely to be real when
taken together with real biological data, in this case

Page 11 of 16

proteins required for viability after exposure to MMS
[34]. Thus, our “validation” rate is higher than expected.
We therefore believe the use of interologue predictions
is a powerful means to expand upon our currently available PPI network maps.
Unlike other studies, we provide a website useful to
research biologists - http://www.interologfinder.org. At
the website, users may not only download our data in
its entirety, but also upload a list of genes of interest to
them, and retrieve known and predicted interactions
involving those proteins. Also included in the retrieval
are InteroScores, ExperimentalEvidence, and SpeciesNotation. We have designed our output to be used with
Cytoscape [28], an open source, network visualization
and data integration tool that is widely adaptable.
Suggestions for Future PPI Identification Studies

A proteome-wide analysis of interactions is unlikely to
capture all possible interactions, even under the single
condition in which the experiment is carried out. Braun
et al. [38] and Venkatesan et al. [42] address this issue
as inherent to the current high-throughput assays
designed to detect PPI. Using prediction of interologues
from PPI present in other species, therefore, is a promising method for research biologists to either choose pairs
of proteins to test for interaction or to use as a more
robust model of the interactome in order to construct
hypotheses regarding their proteins of interest.
Schwartz et al. [43] suggest that predictions based on
orthology should preferentially be used to empirically
complete the interactomes cost-effectively because there is
more confidence in the interactions. We believe, however,
emphasis should be placed on testing PPI in which at least
one protein is not conserved between species, because
while these may be easily predicted, PPI between proteins
with no orthology can never be predicted in this manner.

Conclusions
Here we have predicted PPI in human and four commonly used model organisms based on orthology to proteins involved in known interactions within these five
species. We provide a simple scoring mechanism, an
InteroScore. This score is inclusive of the extent of
homology, the number of orthologues demonstrating evidence of interaction, and the number of types of different
experiments implicating the PPI. We supply our data in
two formats, both readily available to the research biologist: our website http://www.interologfinder.org at which
users can search for information on proteins of interest
to them and also whole proteome files that may be used
with the network viewer Cytoscape. Here we demonstrate
two of the myriad of ways that these PPI predictions may
be used to further biological research - a way to examine
data from high-throughput screens (genes required for

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

viability after MMS treatment) and to assign new function to proteins (proteins interacting with components of
the proteasome). Although we are able to successfully
predict PPI based on orthology, a good deal of data that
cannot be predicted is still missing from these interactomes. Focus therefore must now be placed on testing
interactions for those proteins.

Methods
Orthologue Data Collection

Orthologue data were retrieved from Ensembl 50 for all
genes in Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Ensembl has compared all genes for all species
for which they have complete genome data, first against
all genes of its own genome and second against all genes
of every other genome in their database [25]http://www.
ensembl.org/info/docs/compara/index.html. In short,
Ensembl conducted the following: they used the longest
translation from each gene to run both Blastp and SmithWaterman sequence comparisons. Relationships between
genes were graphed based on best reciprocal hits and
best score ratios, before constructing multiple sequence
alignment on each cluster that was derived. Phylogenetic
trees were then constructed for each gene cluster, and
these were fit with speciation trees. Finally, typical pairwise gene relationships were determined - orthologues of
one-to-one, one-to-many, and many-to-many. Additionally, Ensembl provides paralogous relationships both
within and between species. These data, along with the
percent sequence identities and similarities, were
retrieved from Ensembl for each of the five organisms
investigated from BioMart at Ensembl http://www.
ensembl.org/biomart/.
A one-sample, two-tailed, hypothesis t-test for proportions was conducted for each pair-wise set of species to
determine if the proportion of the interactome that had
orthologues was equal to the proportion of the genome
with orthologues.
Gene Ontology Analysis

FuncAssociate [44] was used to determine the over- and
under-represented GO for genes that are highly conserved or unique between the five species investigated
and for proteins highly conserved that are represented
in the interactomes. An adjusted p-vale of 0.05 was considered significant.
Interactome Data Collection

Binary PPI data were retrieved from three databases:
IntAct [45]http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/, the Database of
Interacting Proteins (DIP, dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu) [46], and
the Biomolecular Interaction Network Database (BIND,
bond.unleashedinformatics.com) [47]. Data was retrieved

Page 12 of 16

on Aug 28th, 2008 from all databases, and experimental
evidence annotation was obtained when available.
Conversion of Identifiers to Ensembl Gene IDs

Synonym tables provided by Ensembl (external data
downloadable from their BioMart site) were used to
convert the identifier for each protein used from IntAct
and DIP into an Ensembl Gene ID. BIND, however,
does not provide an identifier present in the Ensembl
tables, but provides NCBI Gene Identifier (gi) numbers.
We therefore queried NCBI [48]http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov to retrieve the newest gi, and subsequently the
associated NCBI protein accession numbers, for each
protein. Because we were only interested in PPI, we
omitted interactions involving non-protein molecules
provided by BIND. For all databases, we selected only
those interactions between proteins of the same species
using the taxonomy identification provided. For each
species, a single file with non-redundant experiments
supporting the interactions was created. Gene name
synonyms were also retrieved from NCBI to be used at
our website, http://www.interologfinder.org, in order to
accept gene names as a query.
Interologue Prediction

For those PPI where orthologues exist for both interacting proteins in another species, but no interaction is
known between those proteins in that other species, a
conserved interaction (an interologue) were predicted.
Confidence Measurements for Interologues

To achieve a single, unified confidence score for interactions and predicted interactions, we developed several
scores taking into account different attributes of an interaction and combined them to form a single InteroScore.
OrthoScore

In order to obtain a score that represents how similar
interacting partners are to their orthologues, all orthologues of a protein were combined to form a single score.
Each orthologue pair (P1sP1t, where s is the source species and t is the target species) has an OrthoScore, which
represents a score adjusted to represent one-to-one, oneto-many, and many-to-many relationships between P1s
and P1t. For the one-to-one proteins, an OrthoScore is
assigned a value of 1. This score, however, does not
encompass evidence from other highly related proteins in
other species, which exist as one-to-many or many-tomany orthologues, having varying degrees of identity.
Orthologues which provide evidence for a predicted PPI
but which have weaker homology than the highest orthologue pair are accounted for with scores having values
less than 1, proportional to their percent identities as
compared to the protein with the highest identity. As an
example, the percent identities for three orthologues may

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

be 92%, 87%, and 72%. The highest identity is adjusted to
100%, while the other two are scaled relative to 92%
(94.5% and 78%, respectively). The values are squared to
give low scores less of an effect than high scores. The
resulting OrthoScore is the sum of these percents
squared (1.02 + 0.9452 + 0.782 = 2.501).
OrthoScore( P1sP1 ’ t ) 



(norm( EnsemblIdentity( P1P1 ’)) 2

P1 ’ isOrthoP1

SingleSpeciesScore

Each annotated interologue (P1P2s P1P2t) has a Single
Species Interaction Percent Identity Score (SingleSpeciesScore), formed by the product of the OrthoScores
for both orthologues when the orthologues were found
to interact in the target species. For example, an interaction predicted in fly is known in human with both fly
proteins having a one-to-one relationship with their
orthologues in human. Each OrthoScore will contribute
1.00 to the score because each is both the maximum
and the only value. The combined score is 1.0
(1.00·1.00) representing the support of the interologue.
However, given the more complex one-to-many example
above to represent P1sP1t (2.501), combined with a
one-to-one OrthoScore for P2sP2t (1.00), the resulting
SingleSpeciesScore is 2.501 (2.501·1.00).
SingleSpeciesScore(P1P 2 sP1P 2t ) 



(Ortho _ score(P1sP1 ’ t )  Ortho _ score(P 2 sP 2 ’ t ))

P1 ’OrthoP1, P 2 ’OrthoP 2

SpeciesScore

The SpeciesScore representing the conservation of the
interaction is a combination of the number of species
that support the annotated interaction, the strength of
the orthologous relationships, and the number of interologues supporting the annotation. Interaction scores
were not penalized for their apparent absence in another
species in which the orthologues were conserved but no
interaction known. In this five species analysis, a predicted interaction from only one-to-one orthologous,
with the highest degree of confidence would therefore
have a score of 4 (four other species have orthologues
with an experimentally verified PPI). Of course if a single
OrthoScore is greater than one, the overall SpeciesScore
can exceed 4. For example, an interaction predicted in fly
is known in human, worm, and yeast, with both fly proteins having a one-to-one relationship with their orthologues in each species. Each species will contribute 1.00
(1.002) to the score because each is both the maximum
and the only value. The final SpeciesScore would be 3.00
(1.00 + 1.00 + 1.00) and reflects the number of species
supporting the interaction. A more complex example is
an interaction predicted in fly that is known in worm as a
single interaction (again, with all proteins being one-toone orthologues), but is present in human as three

Page 13 of 16

interologues due to paralogues in human (in a one-tomany or many-to-many orthologous relationship with fly
proteins). The fly interaction would therefore score 1.00
from worm, but higher from human. Using the one-tomany example above, the final SpeciesScore for this second example fly predicted interaction is therefore 3.501
(1.00 + 2.501). Contrasting these two examples of high
support for the predictions, one is due to the diverse
number of species that support the prediction and the
other due to the number of interologues within a single
species that support the prediction.
SpeciesScore(P1P 2) 



SingleSpeciesScore n (P1P 2sP1P 2t )

n{comparisonspecies}

ExperimentScore

Using the experimental evidence available from DIP and
IntAct (experiment identifier and type), the ExperimentScore was developed. For each PPI, each type of experimental evidence was only counted once regardless of
the number of databases in which it was found, and the
total number of experiments for each PPI is the ExperimentScore. BIND does not include experiment type in
its publicly available database and was therefore generally excluded from this confidence score; PPI annotated
only in BIND were described as “protein_protein” and
given an ExperimentScore of 1. Cytoscape files were created for the annotated interactions. The following equation was used, where N is the count of all experiments
that support the interaction between P1 and P2.
N

ExperimentScore(P1P 2) 

1
i 1

ExperimentQualityScore

To quantify the quality of various experimental evidences,
we determined how many interactions annotated or predicted by a specific experiment were also present in
STRING. For a given experiment, such as MI:0019(coimmunoprecipitation) in worm, we determined that out of
4324 interactions annotated by this experiment only 813
of these interactions were present in the STRING database
for a ratio of 0.188 (813/4324). Conversely, 4287 interactions out of 5971 MI:0398(two_hybrid_pooling) annotated
interactions were found in STRING for a ratio of 0.718.
To incorporate as much evidence as possible while adjusting for quality of experimentation support, the ratios for a
single interaction’s experimental evidence were summed.
Thus, an interaction described by both MI:0019 and
MI:0398 would have an ExperimentQualityScore of 0.906
(0.188+0.718).
ExperimentQualityScore( P1P 2) 



n{ExperimentsThatSupportP1P 2}

ExperimentSupport n ( P1P 2)

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

InteroScore

To create a single, combined confidence measurement,
we took the product of the SpeciesScore and the ExperimentScore then added the ExperimentQualityScore for
each interaction and refer to it as the InteroScore.
InteroScore( P1P 2)  SpeciesScore(P1P 2)  ExperimentScore(P1P 2)  ExperimentQualityScore(P1P 2)

SpeciesNotation

To provide users with a quick indication of the species in
which each PPI is found and the species in which each
has the potential to exist, we developed the SpeciesNotation. We used the first letter of the genus, with uppercase
indicating that the PPI exists between orthologues in that
species, and lowercase indicating the existence of orthologues in that species but no confirmed interaction.
Data Output

The data is presented in a format compatible with the
interaction viewer Cytoscape [28]http://cytoscape.org/.
For each species, these files include a PPI file, files
noting the InteroScore, SpeciesScore, ExperimentScore, SpeciesNotation, and the type of orthology
(Additional file 4: Table S3, Additional file 6: Zip Hsap,
Additional file 7: Zip Mmus, Additional file 8: Zip Dmel,
Additional file 9: Zip Cele, Additional file 10: Zip Scer).

Page 14 of 16

If the first round of cloning failed, genes were cloned from
cDNA reverse transcribed using the ImProm-II Reverse
Transcription System (Promega, Madison, WI) from RNA
obtained from whole flies (generously provided by Dr.
Donald McEwen, UTHSCSA). PCR was conducted using
gene specific primers designed to the 5’ and 3’ ends of the
transcripts to be cloned. The 5’ end of each forward primer was designed as CACCATG in order to directionally
clone it into GATEWAY destination vectors, with the
ATG in frame for transcription. The reactions were 0.2
μM each primer, 0.2 mM dNTPs, 2 mM MgSO4, 1× high
fidelity buffer, 1 U Platinum Taq (Invitrogen), with 35
cycles per manufacturer’s instructions. PCR products were
TOPO TA cloned into pENTR/D-TOPO (Invitrogen) per
manufacturer’s instructions. Resultant plasmids were
bidirectionally sequenced with M13 primers. Clones were
then moved to one or more of the following GATEWAY
vectors, pAFW and pAWF (3xFLAG) or pAHW and
pAWH (3xHA) [49] per manufacturer’s instructions. A
GFP-expressing plasmid, pAB27, was constructed as a
control for transfection; EGFP-N1 (Clontech, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) was digested with KpnI and NotI,
and the fragment containing EGFP was directionally
cloned into pAct5 (Invitrogen), which had also been
digested with KpnI and NotI.
Transfection and Expression

Connectivity Measurements

Briefly, the shortest path between two given nodes in a
network is the minimum number of edges that need to
be traversed to get from one node to the other; the diameter of a network is the maximum length among all
shortest paths between any two nodes in the network.
Many real-world networks as well as random networks
(e.g., the canonical Erdos-Ryni network [32]) have small
diameters, while highly structured networks, such as
high-dimensional grids typically have large diameters
[32]. On the other hand, real-world networks often differ from random networks in their clustering coefficient,
which is defined as c = 3(tri/conn_trip), where tri is the
number of triangles in the graph and conn_trip is a
“connected triple” or a path of three nodes. For many
real-world networks, the clustering coefficient is
between 0.1 and 0.5, while for random networks (such
as the Erdos-Ryni network) of n nodes, limn®∞ c = 0. A
high clustering coefficient indicates that the network is
organized into modules, and networks with both high
clustering coefficients and small diameters are collectively called small-world networks [32].
Media, Strains, and Plasmid Constructs

Drosophila Kc167 cells were maintained in Schneider’s
medium as previously described [33]. Genes were cloned
from fly genomic DNA purified from Kc167 cells (Table 1).

For single transfections, Kc167 cells were plated at 2 × 106
cells at 1 mL/well in 6-well plates. Cellfectin (Invitrogen)
was added at 7 μL/mL cultured Kc 167 cells with 1 μg
DNA per manufacturer’s protocol. pAB27 was used as a
transfection control. All plasmids were cotransfected
with 0.1 μg pCoHygro (Invitrogen) for hygromycin resistance; hygromycin (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) was added
48 hours after transfection at 300 μg/mL. After an additional three days, medium was changed and 150 μg/mL
hygromycin was added. For cotransfections, 0.5 μg of
each plasmid was transfected along with pCoHygro. Cells
were plated in 100 mm dishes in 2 mL of medium.
Protein Purification, Immunoprecipitation, Separation,
and Detection

Cells were harvested in cold PBS, and protein lysates were
prepared using radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (50
mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% w/v SDS, 0.5% w/v
sodium deoxycholate, 1% w/v NP40, and the protease
inhibitors (Sigma) 0.2 U/mL Aprotinin, 1 mM phenylmethanesufonyl fluoride, and 1 mM Na3VO4), and protein
concentration was determined using a Bio-Rad Protein
Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Protein was immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG (Sigma) as described at
http://cellsignal.com/. Equal amounts of proteins were
resolved by 8% or 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Proteins were transferred to membrane and

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

detected using the ONE-HOUR Western Complete Kit
(GenScript, Piscataway, NJ), including their secondary
antibody and detection per manufacturer’s protocol. Either
mouse anti-HA (Convance, Quebec) or rabbit anti-FLAG
(Sigma) at 1:100 were used as the primary antibody. Two
additional washes with 1× TBST, pH 7.6 were employed
before the wash dictated by the protocol.
Proteasome Assay

Proteasome activity was measured in Drosophila Kc167
cells with a cell based Proteasome-Glo assay kit (Promega), using methods described before [34]. dsRNA
were produced also as previously described [33].
Additional file 1: Supplemental Table 1. GO Analyses. A Gene
Ontology analysis of genes unique to their species and genes that are
conserved in all five species in this study, and a Gene Ontology analysis
of highly conserved proteins that are represented in interactomes of the
five species in this study.
Additional file 2: Supplemental Table 2. Descriptive Statistics of
Interaction Databases. The number of genes and interactions unique to
each databases and total genes and interactions represented in each
databases is shown. The number of genes and interactions lost from each
database after conversion to unique Ensembl Gene IDs is also indicated. For
human data, the gene and interaction overlap (after conversion to Ensembl
Gene ID) is given as observed and expected values.
Additional file 3: Supplemental Figure 1. Four-way Venn Diagrams
of interologues in five species. For each species, human (red), mouse
(orange), fly (yellow), worm (green), and yeast (blue), A) interologues
known to be conserved by experimental evidence in the other four
species are shown. For example, there are 22775 interactions in human
that are not known to be conserved in any of the other four species, but
there are 573 human interactions that are conserved in yeast, and 50
human interactions conserved in yeast and mouse together. B)
Interologues predicted in each organism by orthology noted by the
species from which the predictions are based.
Additional file 4: Supplemental Table 3. File Types Available for
Download in Supplementary Material.
Additional file 5: Supplemental Figure 2. A) Diameters and B)
clustering coefficients for worm (ce), fly (dm), human (hs), mouse (mm),
and yeast (sc). Metrics for the combined known and predicted
interactions (dark blue), known (cyan), a random network obtained by
randomly rewiring the predicted interactions and combining them with
the known interactions (partially rewired, yellow), and a random network
obtained by randomly rewiring the combined network while preserving
the degree of each node (rewired, red) are shown.
Additional file 6: Zip Hsap. A zipped folder containing files formatted
for use in Cytoscape listed in Supplemental Table 3. These files are for
Homo sapiens proteins.
Additional file 7: Zip Mmus. A zipped folder containing files formatted
for use in Cytoscape listed in Supplemental Table 3. These files are for
Mus musculus proteins.
Additional file 8: Zio Dmel. A zipped folder containing files formatted
for use in Cytoscape listed in Supplemental Table 3. These files are for
Drosophila melanogaster proteins.
Additional file 9: Zip Cele. A zipped folder containing files formatted
for use in Cytoscape listed in Supplemental Table 3. These files are for
Caenorhabditis elegans proteins.
Additional file 10: Zip Cele. A zipped folder containing files formatted
for use in Cytoscape listed in Supplemental Table 3. These files are for
Caenorhabditis elegans proteins.

Page 15 of 16

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Don McEwen for providing whole fly RNA,
David Rodriguez for website design, and Shannon Dick for discussing
statistical analysis. AJRB is supported by NIEHS K22 5K22ES012264. JR is
supported by NIGMS SC3GM086305.
Author details
1
Greehey Children’s Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. 2Department of
Cellular and Structural Biology, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. 3Department of Computer
Science, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA.
Authors’ contributions
AMW obtained data from the outside sources, conducted the comparisons
between species, networks and annotations, designed the data and website
output, analyzed the results from the “applications,” coordinated all work on
the project, and drafted the paper. MD reconciled accession numbers to
current updates and Ensembl Gene IDs, integrated data from the
interactome databases, and computed predicted PPI and scores and assisted
in writing. JR conducted the network analysis, including clustering
coefficients and degree analysis and assisted in writing. TTG carried out the
gene cloning and co-IP experiments, and DR carried out the proteasome
experiments. BB organized the data for output files and wrote the code for
the website. AJRB designed the project and assisted in writing the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 25 September 2009 Accepted: 30 March 2010
Published: 30 March 2010
References
1. Wang L, Tu Z, Sun F: A network-based integrative approach to prioritize
reliable hits from multiple genome-wide RNAi screens in Drosophila.
BMC Genomics 2009, 10:220.
2. Fromont-Racine M, Rain JC, Legrain P: Toward a functional analysis of the
yeast genome through exhaustive two-hybrid screens. Nat Genet 1997,
16:277-282.
3. Uetz P, Giot L, Cagney G, Mansfield TA, Judson RS, Knight JR, Lockshon D,
Narayan V, Srinivasan M, Pochart P, et al: A comprehensive analysis of
protein-protein interactions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2000,
403:623-627.
4. Walhout AJ, Sordella R, Lu X, Hartley JL, Temple GF, Brasch MA, ThierryMieg N, Vidal M: Protein interaction mapping in C. elegans using
proteins involved in vulval development. Science 2000, 287:116-122.
5. Ito T, Chiba T, Ozawa R, Yoshida M, Hattori M, Sakaki Y: A comprehensive
two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein interactome. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:4569-4574.
6. Giot L, Bader JS, Brouwer C, Chaudhuri A, Kuang B, Li Y, Hao YL, Ooi CE,
Godwin B, Vitols E, et al: A protein interaction map of Drosophila
melanogaster. Science 2003, 302:1727-1736.
7. Reboul J, Vaglio P, Rual JF, Lamesch P, Martinez M, Armstrong CM, Li S,
Jacotot L, Bertin N, Janky R, et al: C. elegans ORFeome version 1.1:
experimental verification of the genome annotation and resource for
proteome-scale protein expression. Nat Genet 2003, 34:35-41.
8. Li S, Armstrong CM, Bertin N, Ge H, Milstein S, Boxem M, Vidalain PO,
Han JD, Chesneau A, Hao T, et al: A map of the interactome network of
the metazoan C. elegans. Science 2004, 303:540-543.
9. Colland F, Jacq X, Trouplin V, Mougin C, Groizeleau C, Hamburger A, Meil A,
Wojcik J, Legrain P, Gauthier JM: Functional proteomics mapping of a
human signaling pathway. Genome Res 2004, 14:1324-1332.
10. Rual JF, Venkatesan K, Hao T, Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Dricot A, Li N, Berriz GF,
Gibbons FD, Dreze M, Ayivi-Guedehoussou N, et al: Towards a proteomescale map of the human protein-protein interaction network. Nature
2005, 437:1173-1178.
11. Stelzl U, Worm U, Lalowski M, Haenig C, Brembeck FH, Goehler H,
Stroedicke M, Zenkner M, Schoenherr A, Koeppen S, et al: A human
protein-protein interaction network: a resource for annotating the
proteome. Cell 2005, 122:957-968.
12. Yu H, Braun P, Yildirim MA, Lemmens I, Venkatesan K, Sahalie J, HirozaneKishikawa T, Gebreab F, Li N, Simonis N, et al: High-quality binary protein

Wiles et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:36
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/36

13.

14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

interaction map of the yeast interactome network. Science 2008,
322:104-110.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
Smith TF, Waterman MS: Identification of common molecular
subsequences. J Mol Biol 1981, 147:195-197.
Goffard N, Garcia V, Iragne F, Groppi A, de Daruvar A: IPPRED: server for
proteins interactions inference. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:903-904.
Han K, Park B, Kim H, Hong J, Park J: HPID: the Human Protein Interaction
Database. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:2466-2470.
Huang TW, Tien AC, Huang WS, Lee YC, Peng CL, Tseng HH, Kao CY,
Huang CY: POINT: a database for the prediction of protein-protein
interactions based on the orthologous interactome. Bioinformatics 2004,
20:3273-3276.
Lehner B, Fraser AG: A first-draft human protein-interaction map. Genome
Biol 2004, 5:R63.
Brown KR, Jurisica I: Online predicted human interaction database.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2076-2082.
Persico M, Ceol A, Gavrila C, Hoffmann R, Florio A, Cesareni G: HomoMINT:
an inferred human network based on orthology mapping of protein
interactions discovered in model organisms. BMC Bioinformatics 2005,
6(Suppl 4):S21.
Rhodes DR, Tomlins SA, Varambally S, Mahavisno V, Barrette T, KalyanaSundaram S, Ghosh D, Pandey A, Chinnaiyan AM: Probabilistic model of
the human protein-protein interaction network. Nat Biotechnol 2005,
23:951-959.
Michaut M, Kerrien S, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Chauvat F, Cassier-Chauvat C,
Aude JC, Legrain P, Hermjakob H: InteroPORC: automated inference of
highly conserved protein interaction networks. Bioinformatics 2008,
24:1625-1631.
Jensen LJ, Kuhn M, Stark M, Chaffron S, Creevey C, Muller J, Doerks T,
Julien P, Roth A, Simonovic M, et al: STRING 8–a global view on proteins
and their functional interactions in 630 organisms. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37:D412-416.
Huang TW, Lin CY, Kao CY: Reconstruction of human protein interolog
network using evolutionary conserved network. BMC Bioinformatics 2007,
8:152.
Vilella AJ, Severin J, Ureta-Vidal A, Heng L, Durbin R, Birney E:
EnsemblCompara GeneTrees: Complete, duplication-aware phylogenetic
trees in vertebrates. Genome Res 2009, 19:327-335.
Oti M, Snel B, Huynen MA, Brunner HG: Predicting disease genes using
protein-protein interactions. J Med Genet 2006, 43:691-698.
Goh KI, Cusick ME, Valle D, Childs B, Vidal M, Barabasi AL: The human
disease network. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:8685-8690.
Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res
2003, 13:2498-2504.
Espadaler J, Romero-Isart O, Jackson RM, Oliva B: Prediction of proteinprotein interactions using distant conservation of sequence patterns
and structure relationships. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:3360-3368.
Yu H, Luscombe NM, Lu HX, Zhu X, Xia Y, Han JD, Bertin N, Chung S,
Vidal M, Gerstein M: Annotation transfer between genomes: proteinprotein interologs and protein-DNA regulogs. Genome Res 2004,
14:1107-1118.
Cusick ME, Yu H, Smolyar A, Venkatesan K, Carvunis AR, Simonis N, Rual JF,
Borick H, Braun P, Dreze M, et al: Literature-curated protein interaction
datasets. Nat Methods 2009, 6:39-46.
Newman MEJ: The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM
Review 2003, 45:167-256.
Wiles AM, Ravi D, Bhavani S, Bishop AJ: An analysis of normalization
methods for Drosophila RNAi genomic screens and development of a
robust validation scheme. J Biomol Screen 2008, 13:777-784.
Ravi D, Wiles AM, Bhavani S, Ruan J, Leder P, Bishop AJ: A network of
conserved damage survival pathways revealed by a genomic RNAi
screen. PLoS Genet 2009, 5:e1000527.
Nakagawa T, Shirane M, Iemura S, Natsume T, Nakayama KI: Anchoring of
the 26S proteasome to the organellar membrane by FKBP38. Genes Cells
2007, 12:709-719.

Page 16 of 16

36. Caldarola S, De Stefano MC, Amaldi F, Loreni F: Synthesis and function of
ribosomal proteins–fading models and new perspectives. FEBS J 2009,
276:3199-3210.
37. Kim YJ, Lis JT: Interactions between subunits of Drosophila Mediator and
activator proteins. Trends Biochem Sci 2005, 30:245-249.
38. Braun P, Tasan M, Dreze M, Barrios-Rodiles M, Lemmens I, Yu H, Sahalie JM,
Murray RR, Roncari L, de Smet AS, et al: An experimentally derived
confidence score for binary protein-protein interactions. Nat Methods
2009, 6:91-97.
39. Smith E, Morowitz HJ: Universality in intermediary metabolism. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:13168-13173.
40. Elofsson A, von Heijne G: Membrane protein structure: prediction versus
reality. Annu Rev Biochem 2007, 76:125-140.
41. Gandhi TK, Zhong J, Mathivanan S, Karthick L, Chandrika KN, Mohan SS,
Sharma S, Pinkert S, Nagaraju S, Periaswamy B, et al: Analysis of the human
protein interactome and comparison with yeast, worm and fly
interaction datasets. Nat Genet 2006, 38:285-293.
42. Venkatesan K, Rual JF, Vazquez A, Stelzl U, Lemmens I, Hirozane-Kishikawa T,
Hao T, Zenkner M, Xin X, Goh KI, et al: An empirical framework for binary
interactome mapping. Nat Methods 2009, 6:83-90.
43. Schwartz AS, Yu J, Gardenour KR, Finley RL Jr, Ideker T: Cost-effective
strategies for completing the interactome. Nat Methods 2009, 6:55-61.
44. Berriz GF, King OD, Bryant B, Sander C, Roth FP: Characterizing gene sets
with FuncAssociate. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:2502-2504.
45. Hermjakob H, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Lewington C, Mudali S, Kerrien S,
Orchard S, Vingron M, Roechert B, Roepstorff P, Valencia A, et al: IntAct: an
open source molecular interaction database. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:
D452-455.
46. Xenarios I, Salwinski L, Duan XJ, Higney P, Kim SM, Eisenberg D: DIP, the
Database of Interacting Proteins: a research tool for studying cellular
networks of protein interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:303-305.
47. Alfarano C, Andrade CE, Anthony K, Bahroos N, Bajec M, Bantoft K, Betel D,
Bobechko B, Boutilier K, Burgess E, et al: The Biomolecular Interaction
Network Database and related tools 2005 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:D418-424.
48. Maglott D, Ostell J, Pruitt KD, Tatusova T: Entrez Gene: gene-centered
information at NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D26-31.
49. The Drosophila Gateway Vector Collection. [http://www.ciwemb.edu/labs/
murphy/Gateway%20vectors.html].
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-4-36
Cite this article as: Wiles et al.: Building and analyzing protein
interactome networks by cross-species comparisons. BMC Systems
Biology 2010 4:36.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
