<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Assessment of carbon in woody plants and soil across a vineyard-woodland landscape</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11. doi:10.1186/1750-0680-6-11"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="John N Williams"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

RESEARCH

Open Access

Assessment of carbon in woody plants and soil
across a vineyard-woodland landscape
John N Williams1*, Allan D Hollander1, A Toby O’Geen1, L Ann Thrupp2, Robert Hanifin3, Kerri Steenwerth3,
Glenn McGourty4 and Louise E Jackson1*

Abstract
Background: Quantification of ecosystem services, such as carbon (C) storage, can demonstrate the benefits of
managing for both production and habitat conservation in agricultural landscapes. In this study, we evaluated C
stocks and woody plant diversity across vineyard blocks and adjoining woodland ecosystems (wildlands) for an
organic vineyard in northern California. Carbon was measured in soil from 44 one m deep pits, and in
aboveground woody biomass from 93 vegetation plots. These data were combined with physical landscape
variables to model C stocks using a geographic information system and multivariate linear regression.
Results: Field data showed wildlands to be heterogeneous in both C stocks and woody tree diversity, reflecting
the mosaic of several different vegetation types, and storing on average 36.8 Mg C/ha in aboveground woody
biomass and 89.3 Mg C/ha in soil. Not surprisingly, vineyard blocks showed less variation in above- and
belowground C, with an average of 3.0 and 84.1 Mg C/ha, respectively.
Conclusions: This research demonstrates that vineyards managed with practices that conserve some fraction of
adjoining wildlands yield benefits for increasing overall C stocks and species and habitat diversity in integrated
agricultural landscapes. For such complex landscapes, high resolution spatial modeling is challenging and requires
accurate characterization of the landscape by vegetation type, physical structure, sufficient sampling, and allometric
equations that relate tree species to each landscape. Geographic information systems and remote sensing
techniques are useful for integrating the above variables into an analysis platform to estimate C stocks in these
working landscapes, thereby helping land managers qualify for greenhouse gas mitigation credits. Carbon policy in
California, however, shows a lack of focus on C stocks compared to emissions, and on agriculture compared to
other sectors. Correcting these policy shortcomings could create incentives for ecosystem service provision,
including C storage, as well as encourage better farm stewardship and habitat conservation.
Keywords: aboveground carbon, agriculture, allometric equation, biodiversity, ecosystem services, GIS, habitat,
organic farming, sequestration, soil carbon

Background
Worldwide, landscape mosaics that include forests and
perennial agricultural production systems have benefits in
terms of stored C and biodiversity protection [1-3]. Integration of forest and agricultural ecosystems into complex
landscapes also increases the provision of other ecosystem
services, including pest management, nutrient retention,
erosion control, and water quality [4-7]. In regions where
intensive agriculture becomes economically successful,
* Correspondence: jnwill@ucdavis.edu; lejackson@ucdavis.edu
1
University of California, One Shields Ave., Davis, CA 95616, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

loss of natural ecosystems is often rapid, and people forego
the ecosystem services that are provided when these systems are included in the landscape mosaic [8,9]. In such
situations, the existing incentives may not be sufficient to
make complex landscape mosaics economically viable. For
sustained productivity and environmental health, incentive
mechanisms will need to be augmented or developed to
support the joint management of natural and agricultural
ecosystems in the same matrix. To that end, methods are
needed to evaluate C stocks and biodiversity of woody species as baseline properties of agricultural landscapes that
are composed of many types of ecosystems.

© 2011 Williams et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

Forests are storehouses of both biodiversity and C
[10-13] compared to most agricultural systems, which
are typically rebuked for their role as emitters of greenhouse gases (GHG) from soil and drivers of forest loss
[14-17]. Relatively little research has been conducted,
however, to assess the potentially beneficial role that
agricultural landscapes can play when managed as complex systems that harbor species and habitat diversity,
preserve forested lands and sequester C, while supplying
the essential provisioning services on which humanity
depends [18-23].
Given the extent to which agriculture has transformed
global terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems [24], and the
likelihood that much of the land in agricultural production today will stay that way for the foreseeable future,
there is an urgent need to promote multi-functionality in
agricultural landscapes [25,26]. Especially in areas of high
biodiversity, agricultural landscapes that contain a mosaic
of ecosystems provide multiple ecosystem services with
benefits that cross the boundaries of economic sectors
and scientific disciplines, such as pollination, regulation
of water quality and supply, and mitigation of GHGs [7].
In the species-rich Mediterranean-type ecosystems of
the world, vineyard expansion poses a major threat to biodiversity and ecosystem integrity [27,28], potentially contributing to the loss of natural habitat, species diversity
and to a net release of C into the atmosphere [29,30]. It is
possible, however, for vineyard managers to balance crop
production with habitat conservation and other ecosystem
services [31,32]. In the winegrowing region of California–
also widely recognized for species richness and habitat
diversity [33,34]–some private landowners are making a
concerted effort to maintain and/or restore natural plant
communities as part of the vineyard landscape matrix.
This study highlights one such example, examining the
effect of stewardship efforts at a vineyard in Mendocino
County, California, to maintain habitat diversity, safeguard
C stocks, use organic practices, and minimize the C footprint across the winegrower’s landholdings.
This study in northern California (Figure 1) represents a
participatory approach between a commercial winegrower,
Fetzer/Bonterra Vineyards, and university researchers with
the goal of quantifying C stocks across a landscape mosaic
of vineyards and wildlands on the owner’s land. (Wildlands are defined here as habitat dominated by native
vegetation that does not show obvious signs of degradation due to previous use, such as cropping, grazing or timber harvesting.) The specific objectives of the study were
to: 1) estimate C stocks across the vineyards and various
types of wildlands using field sampling and statistical models; 2) examine partitioning of aboveground and soil C
stocks in vineyards and wildlands on ranches in different
landscape positions; and 3) develop a methodology for
estimating C stocks that is accurate, accessible in terms of

Page 2 of 14

complexity, and meets requirements for government-regulated C accounting programs. The central hypothesis is
that the heterogeneous mixed vineyard-wildland mosaic
considered in this study reflects variability in vegetation
and C storage potential, and provides greater C stocks and
biodiversity protection than vineyards alone. The study
uses a geographic information system (GIS) to analyze
how a suite of variables affects C stocks, including tree
and shrub species data, topographic variables (slope, elevation, and aspect), maps of soil and vegetation types, and
remotely-sensed spectral data. We refer to vegetation
types as broad classes of wildland vegetation that were
identified in the GIS. The study concludes with a discussion of C policy in California, and recommends that policy
makers reconsider the importance of C stocks in agricultural systems for GHG mitigation as well as for improving
farm stewardship, conserving wildlands, and/or incorporate planting of native trees and vegetation on farm
properties.

Results
Aboveground woody C stocks were greater in wildlands
than in vineyards (Table 1). On average, forested wildlands had 45% more total C/hectare (ha) than vineyards.
That number breaks down to approximately 12 times
more aboveground woody C and 6% more soil C in wildlands than in vineyards. Soil organic carbon (SOC) varied
substantially within land-use types (i.e. vineyards or wildlands) across ranches, though not as much as aboveground C. Variation in total C/ha within ranches was
greatest for those ranches with more varied topography
and vegetation, such as Butler and Hooper (Figure 2). For
a given ranch and a given C source (soil or aboveground),
wildlands were consistently higher in C stocks than vineyard blocks, but variation within vegetation types was
greatest in upland forests and least within riparian
corridors.
Although SOC in the organic vineyard blocks was
relatively high by temperate conventional cropping standards [35,36], SOC was nevertheless consistently higher
in wildlands than in vineyards for a set of paired soil
pits (i.e., adjacent pits on the two land-use types) and
for ranch-wide estimates based on the averages of all
wildland and vineyard pits (Figure 3; Table 1). Overall,
SOC varied 1.7-fold among ranches, with the Chalfont/
Ledford ranch characterized by alluvial soils from the
Russian River having the highest C content, and the
Hooper ranch characterized by loamy upland soils with
the lowest C content. Within vineyard tracts, there were
no correlations found between SOC and vine age, slope,
aspect or elevation. There were no detectable effects of
management practices (such as tillage schedule, use of
compost, or cover crop mix) on C in the top 15 cm of
soil (the soil layer where management practices are

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

Page 3 of 14

Figure 1 Study site in Mendocino County, California (state shown in inset), with the location of the five wine grape-growing ranches
(labeled) where carbon stocks were assessed for vineyards and adjoining wildlands.

most likely to have an effect), as revealed by a survey
instrument that consisted of summarizing each block’s
management practices over the past five years with a
simple scoring system (Additional File 1: Appendix 1).

The maximum possible score was 6, and the mean score
was 2.2, with the majority of blocks having two or more
management practices applied to increase SOC and/or
boost nutrient retention.

Table 1 Carbon by reservoir for each of five ranches assessed by the two land cover types
Ranch
Soil
Mg C/ha

Vineyards
AG-Wood
Mg C/ha

Total
Mg C/ha

Soil
Mg C/ha

Wildlands
AG-Wood
Mg C/ha

Total
Mg C/ha

Chalfont/Ledford

118.7

3.6

122.3

132.7

14.0

146.6

Butler

76.0

2.3

78.3

87.6

47.6

135.2

McNab

92.3

4.5

96.8

106.8

19.2

125.9

Sundial

80.0

4.1

84.1

91.8

22.8

114.7

Hooper

68.0

0.7

68.7

83.8

34.3

118.1

Average

84.1

3.0

87.1

89.3

36.8

126.1

Std Dev

6.6

0.48

7.0

14.5

8.6

22.9

Estimates were derived by fitting multivariate linear regressions to C values for sample plots (aboveground) and measured soil C (from soil pits) using
environmental variables such as elevation, slope, solar radiation, soil taxonomy, normalized differential vegetation index (NDVI) and habitat type in a GIS platform
(see methods). Soil C is to 1 m depth; AG = aboveground; aboveground C on wildlands excludes grasslands.

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

Page 4 of 14

Figure 2 Spatial representation of total carbon stocks in aboveground wood and soil (to 1 m depth) for the five ranches considered
in this study. Counterclockwise from top left, they are: Chalfont/Ledford; Butler; McNab; Sundial; and Hooper.

Per ha, the aboveground woody C in vineyards varied
more than 6-fold among ranches, and was a direct function of vine age and number of vines per ha (Figure 4).
Aboveground woody C in wildlands varied 3.4-fold

among ranches (Table 1). More informative, however,
was the variation in aboveground C in wildland plots
within ranches, where C differences between sample
plots varied as little as 2-fold and as much as 120-fold

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

Figure 3 Comparison of wildlands (dark bars) and vineyards
(hollow bars) for carbon in the top meter of soil for paired
(adjacent) soil pits at different locations across the study site
(horizontal axis). Carbon values are extrapolated to per ha
estimates. Error bars represent standard error based on four
measurements per site.

(Additional File: Appendix 2). At the Chalfont/Ledford
ranch, where the within-ranch wildland C varied the
least, only valley riparian vegetation was present. Here,
woody plant diversity was lowest with a total of only
five tree species (dominated by a maple (Acer) - cottonwood (Populus) association), and the vegetation structure was defined primarily by a an understory layer of
immature trees 3-8 m tall, and an overstory layer 17-22
m tall. By contrast, at the Butler ranch where between
plot variation was greatest, at least 18 woody tree and
shrub species were present. All of the vegetation categories were represented, and habitats ranged from manzanita (Arctostaphylos) - dominated chaparral 2-3 m in
height, to oak (Quercus) woodland, to closed-canopy

Figure 4 Aboveground carbon in grape vines on each ranch as
a function of vine age (in years) and number of vines per ha.

Page 5 of 14

mixed conifer-hardwood forest 15-25 m in height. The
Hooper, McNab and Sundial ranches were intermediate
between these extremes, being composed mostly of
closed-canopy mixed hardwood stands 13-18 m in
height, and interspersed with patches of grassland, oak
woodland and valley riparian vegetation (Additional
File 1: Appendix 2).
Modeling of aboveground woody C in the entire wildland acreage was done using multivariate linear regression
with up to four environmental variables (topography, habitat, soil and ranch). The optimal model based on the lowest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) value [37]
included only ranch and habitat type as predictor variables
(R 2 = 0.131; p = 0.303). Thus, a separate equation was
used to estimate aboveground C across the landscape at
each ranch. An evaluation of the predictive ability of the
same model using training (70%) and testing (30%) data
sets yielded a weak relationship (R2 = 0.16) across the
entire land area of the five ranches.
Multivariate linear regressions relating estimated C and
basal area of woody biomass to environmental variables
for individual species generally yielded better correlations
than the all-species model. Table 2 shows the fit for the 14
most important species in terms of overall contribution to
biomass on the five ranches, which accounts for 95% of
the biomass sampled. Eight of these species-specific
regressions show a level of significance of p < 0.05; these
eight species account for 54% of the biomass measured in
the sample plots.
On average, each of the ranches had 4.6 of the seven
habitat types that had been identified by the PAM analysis
at the onset of the project (Table 3). Across the five
ranches, 28 woody species were sampled, representing 17
genera and 12 families (Additional File 1: Appendix 3). In
terms of taxonomic richness, the family Fagaceae and the
genus Quercus within it were the most important, with 9
and 8 species, respectively. The average number of woody
wildland species was 14.4 per ranch (std. dev. = 5.2), and
3.1 per 10 × 30 m plot (std. dev. = 1.2). While not quantitatively assessed, an informal visual assessment of herbaceous plants revealed that all ranches except Chalfont/
Ledford had substantial diversity in annual and perennial
herbs as well as healthy communities of native perennial
grasses mixed in with communities of European annual
ruderal grasses. The diversity of soil types was high, as a
total of eight great groups were sampled. These were
grouped according to topographic features as follows:
uplands (Haploxeralfs, Argixerolls, Palexeralfs, and
Xerorthents); valleys (Haploxerolls, Xerofluvents, and
Haplaquolls); and terraces (Palexeralfs).
Analysis of C and species diversity in multidimensional space using NMDS ordination revealed slope and
elevation to be the two strongest environmental variable
vectors affecting C (Additional File 1: Appendix 4). Soil

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

Page 6 of 14

Table 2 Coefficients of determination (R2) for species-specific regression equations fitting aboveground woody carbon
and basal area to topographic, vegetation, soil and landscape variables (see methods)
Biomass Ranking

Species

Carbon - R2

Basal Area - R2

1

Quercus kelloggii

0.203

0.262*

2

Q. wislizenii

0.103

0.118

3
4

Q. lobata
Q. douglasii

0.143
0.385***

0.176
0.379***

5

Arbutus menziesii

0.279**

0.300**

6

Acer negundo

0.307**

0.359***

7

Populus species

0.307**

0.350***

8

Salix species

0.515***

0.538***

9

Umbellularia californica

0.113

0.119

10

Q. species

0.103

0.069

11
12

Q. chrysolepis
Pseudotsuga menziesii

0.217
0.051

0.221*
0.079

13

Aesculus californica

0.186

0.186

14

Alnus rhombifolia

0.278**

0.310**

p-values: * < 0.05; ** < 0.01; *** < 0.001
Listed by rank are the 14 tree species that contribute most to total aboveground woody biomass estimated for sample plots in wildlands surrounding vineyards
on five ranches in Mendocino County, California.

organic C was a strong component that loaded in the
opposite direction of elevation, consistent with the fact
that organic matter is lost during erosion of upland soils
and accumulates in bottomlands. The ordination, which
had only moderate stress (12.3%), also showed species
and plots oriented along a primary axis characterized by
proximity to water, with riparian species such as alders
(Alnus sp.) and willows (Salix sp.) on ranches like Sundial (near the Russian River) on one end, and drought
tolerant species such as manzanitas (Arctostaphylos spp.)
and toyon (Heteromeles arbutifolia) on ranches like
Hooper (upland hills and small valleys) at the other end.
No other variables appeared to impose obvious structure
in the ordination.

Discussion
Research Implications

The most salient results of this research for C stocks are
that: 1) per ha, substantially more C was stored in the top

m of soil (not including roots) than in aboveground biomass; and 2) as expected, both the above- and belowground components of wildlands contained consistently
more C per ha than vineyards. Within-ranch SOC comparisons showed wildlands averaged 16% more C per ha
than vineyards–a value supported by the paired soil pit
comparisons (Table 1; Figure 3). Among wildland vegetation types, valley riparian vegetation was associated with
the highest C stocks, the major component of which came
from soil. This trend may be explained by long-term
deposition of organic material along the floodplains of the
Russian River and its tributaries [38]. For non-riparian
vegetation where SOC was more variable, closed-canopy
mixed hardwood forest (e.g., the Butler and Hooper
ranches) made the greatest contribution to C stocks. For
vineyard tracts, the differences in aboveground C were
explained by the age of the vines, which was tightly correlated with biomass and C content (Additional File: Appendix 5). Even the largest vines, however, had only about

Table 3 Land cover types found on the five wine grape-growing ranches in Mendocino County, California, considered
in this study
Number of Vegetation
Plots

Number of Soil
Pits

Habitat Type

Elevation
(meters)

Slope
(degrees)

Solar Radiation (W-hr/m2/
yr)

0

19

Vineyard I

173

0.7

2.18*106

0

6

Vineyard II

572

10.7

1.99*106

0

2

Annual Grassland

213

5.0

2.27*106

17

1

Valley Riparian

152

0.4

2.18*106

39

2

Mixed Hardwoods I

534

21.3

1.97*106

26

13

Mixed Hardwoods II

225

10.7

2.16*106

11

1

Mixed ConiferHardwood

407

25.8

2.06*106

The classification process consisted of a partitioning around mediod (PAM) analysis, which used 1013 random points and binned them into similar groups based
on four variables: land cover; elevation; slope; and solar radiation (see methods).

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

one-fourth of the woody biomass per ha of the adjacent
wooded wildlands.
The aim of this study was to determine whether vineyard landscapes managed as mosaics of vines and wildlands could yield ecosystem benefits, specifically higher C
stocks, superior to that of vineyard blocks alone. Considered this way, the results strongly support our starting
hypothesis and suggest that including closed canopy forest and forested riparian corridors as part of the wildlands component may be particularly good ways to
increase overall C stocks. Similarly, the planting of native
trees and habitat (in corridors or hedgerows) in farming
systems can have benefits for winegrowers and other
agricultural operations. Additional research examining C
dynamics within soil units and vegetation types would be
helpful for quantifying rates of C accumulation, as well as
for identifying the causal mechanisms for the C differences that were observed [e.g., [36]].
If maximizing C stocks is a management objective, then
the conversion of intact forest lands should be minimized, as these lands consistently store more C per ha
than vineyards (or than agricultural systems in general
[39]). Likewise, practices that conserve soil organic matter and reduce soil disturbance will protect the largest
single reservoir of C in the farm system [40,41]. We
recognize, however, that these are rarely the explicit
objectives of land managers. Instead, as managers map
out or reconfigure the array of vineyard rows on their
lands, they should look for opportunities to conserve
and/or restore existing wildlands and minimize soil disturbance. Maintaining wildland vegetation on steep
slopes or along stream corridors, for example, can reduce
erosion in California’s climate–thereby protecting soil
resources and safeguarding water quality–as well as
boost C stocks [42,43]. Evidence also suggests that in
places where vines are not appropriate but where wildlands do not exist, forest restoration and hedgerow plantings may offer additional ways to increase C stocks in the
landscape [[43]; see also http://privatelands.org/FSP/
NRCS_conservation_practices.htm, [44]].
Because the greatest quantities of C stocks in the
study landscape were below ground, soil management is
of major concern. The survey instrument to determine
whether different organic management practices yielded
similar scores because most tracts had multiple management interventions to achieve a variety of outcomes,
including nutrient retention, weed suppression and erosion control. Organic management practices have been
shown to increase soil C [45-47], and reducing soil disturbance has been shown elsewhere to decrease C loss
[15,48]. The small differences in soil C between paired
woodland and vineyard sites, compared to another study
that compared woodlands to conventional vineyards
[29], suggest that the no-till, cover cropping practices

Page 7 of 14

and organic matter management used in this study system are conducive to soil C retention. Future, smallscale manipulations with control plots could be used to
determine the effect of a specific interventions to
improve soil C, but would likely require several years to
show differences [41,49,50].
Modeling Challenges and Potential Solutions

The methods used and the subsequent results from this
research support a mosaic model for vineyard management, where management objectives and landscape
variability determine the amount and configuration of
vine tracts and wildlands. It was the landscape variability–whether in terms of slope, aspect, soil quality or species composition–that also presented the greatest
challenges to modeling C in this study. Our use of vegetation-based habitat types to classify C stocks in the
landscape was a good starting point for modeling aboveground C stocks. Woody species importance and composition frequently differed substantially within the
same habitat type, however, especially for the mixed
hardwood categories (these associations are known to
contain numerous vegetation series, see [34]). Thus,
while single-species models produced robust predictive
regressions using environmental variables, this approach
often did not improve prediction of C in the landscape
because of the numerous species involved. The high
variability of woody plant diversity at sampled sites both
within and among ranches made it challenging to correlate C with environmental variables such as slope,
aspect, and soil characteristics. To not consider the
variability in plant diversity, however, would have been
to ignore the complex patterns that shape the landscape
and the C contained therein. The models developed in
this study therefore demonstrate the importance of a
comprehensive approach that combines field data and
remotely-sensed environmental variables for predicting
C in the landscape. Future efforts can build on these
models to test the utility of including a second tier of
variables, such as dispersal patterns, evolutionary history
and phylogeny, biogeography and human influences (see
[51]).
The variability in species composition and distribution
within habitat types, as well as the diversity of soil types
across even small areas, highlight the need to refine
models to address heterogeneity for assessing C stocks.
Some assessments that have assigned a generalized C
value for a given habitat type (e.g., riparian forest vs.
oak woodland) or even an entire forest seem to offer a
pragmatic solution for C estimation (e.g. Brown et al.
[52]). The present study suggests, however, that such
approaches do not give acceptable resolution for the
complex Mediterranean-type ecosystems evaluated here.
Heterogeneity between stands means that extrapolating

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

a generalized C value for a habitat type to a regional
scale will result in an amplification of error, especially
when GIS data are used without field verification [53].
In addition, specific projects must consider heterogeneity in C stocks for addressing appropriate mitigation of
the GHG emissions that occur when wildlands are
deforested for agricultural production [54].
The C assessment methods used in this study were
based on recommendations outlined in the Climate
Action Registry (CAR) protocol for inventorying C in
California forests [55,56]. While the protocol has been
updated twice since our assessment began [57,58], additional improvements are both necessary and ongoing.
Our results highlight two areas that can be targeted for
improving future woody plant C estimates: 1) extrapolating aboveground woody biomass from field measurements using allometric equations based on metrics such
as diameter at breast height (DBH, where height = 1.3
m) and tree height; and 2) understanding which environmental variables best explain the variation in aboveground woody biomass and obtaining values for these
variables at the appropriate spatial scale.
Accurate modeling of aboveground woody C in a
mosaic of mixed-age, mixed-species vegetation remains
a challenge. A broad suite of allometric equations were
used in this study to differentiate between the woody
species found in the landscape and to account for the
effect of those differences on biomass. While this
method represents a best-available-information approach
to estimating C, a more complete set of allometric equations relating tree diameter to volume and biomass is
needed. Many of the equations available were either not
specific to the study species or were based on inappropriate subsamples of study species (e.g., subspecies
from a different part of a broad geographic range or
limited to size classes that may not extrapolate well to
the size classes encountered here). As a result, several
equations were generalized to genus, family, growth
form or foliage type (e.g., evergreen or deciduous) [59].
Equations do not currently reflect the natural variation
in site conditions and growth form among individuals.
Measured differences in architecture among species,
subspecies, regional races, or cultivars vary from 5 to
300% [60-63]. While more sample plots would arguably
improve estimation power, such efforts increase the
time and cost of research. The challenge is to find ways
to use species-specific equations to incorporate more
detail on vegetation variability without dramatically
increasing the number of sample plots. The use of
remote sensing for data collection may help in this
regard. While satellite imagery is generally too coarse
for the types of analyses conducted here, techniques
such as LiDAR may improve wood volume assessments
[64,65]. Currently, costs to obtain such data are high,

Page 8 of 14

however, and such techniques will still require ground
truthing of species diversity and species-specific wood
density to generate accurate data on C stocks.
Greater spatial resolution of soil taxonomic classifications and related maps across the landscape would
improve accuracy in estimating soil C. Given the importance of soil C in our findings, it is unfortunate that the
scale of soil mapping and intensity of investigation in
forests and rangeland are typically less than agricultural
areas [66]. We found that map units often contained
more than one component (soil type) but lacked explicit
delineation between components, resulting in a loss of
important information about soil variation. Also, SOC
measurement down to 1 m depth is labor intensive and
costly, so the methods used here are not practical for
most landowners. Updated mapping of wildland areas
by the National Cooperative Soil Survey would better
represent the edaphic complexities of the landscape,
improve the accuracy of SOC estimation and reduce
costs for a broad user base.
For both the above- and below-ground components of
C, there are also publicly available resources that assist
in C accounting and on-farm management. COMET-VR
from the United States Department of Agriculture
http://www.comet2.colostate.edu/about/ stands out as a
useful tool for on-farm evaluation and management
related to C sequestration. Likewise the Global Research
Alliance http://globalresearchalliance.org/ offers a forum
for sharing of research, data and expertise to reduce C
outputs and improve efficiency in agricultural systems.
Undoubtedly, numerous additional online resources also
exist.
Implications for Policy

The above suggestions for improving C stock estimation
are based on the premise that regulating bodies will
either make C accounting mandatory or provide incentives for maximizing C storage. At present, however, it
is not clear that this is the case. While C accounting is a
two-part issue made up of inputs (sequestration) and
outputs (emissions of CO2 and other GHGs), currently,
most regulation is focused on emissions. The California
Air Resources Board, for example, is responsible for
enforcing Assembly Bill 32, the state law that requires
statewide reductions of GHG emissions to 1990 levels
by 2020 [31]. The US Government has likewise taken an
emissions control approach, as was highlighted in
December 2009, when the Environmental Protection
Agency declared CO 2 and five other GHGs to be air
pollutants subject to regulation. Although C offset markets in the US are currently voluntary, this action may
pave the way for future compliance-based C markets. In
California, viable voluntary C offset projects are those
that qualify for one of three categories: reforestation;

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

Page 9 of 14

improved forest management; or avoided conversion.
The first two seek to increase forest cover by planting
or management techniques, while the third is for
forested land that is at risk of conversion and meets the
requirement of additionality.
Additionality refers to the stipulation that for a parcel
of forest to qualify for credit, it must be at imminent
risk of conversion to non-forest [58]. The owner must
also prove that s/he is not keeping the parcel forested
because of an existing easement or set-aside (as an
example, we note that part of the study area for the
research presented here is excluded from C credits
because it is in a conservation easement). While additionality is a common element of regulatory frameworks
because it prevents landowners from getting credit for
land that is either not at risk of conversion or would
yield no net reduction in emissions [12], it may lead to
perverse incentives such as preventing owners from
entering into conservation easements or encouraging
them to clear forested land just so it can be replanted
and qualify for reforestation.
Because the current regulatory focus in the US is on
pollution rather than storage, most of the funds go
toward curbing emissions. In California in 2006, transportation, energy production and industry accounted for
more than 80% of annual GHG emissions, whereas agriculture collectively contributed only 6% (of which livestock made up more than 50% [67]). Furthermore, the
average farm size in California in 2007 was 313 acres
(127 ha) with only 5.5% of farms larger than 1000 acres
(405 ha) [68]. Given there are more than 25 million acres
(10 million ha) of farmland in the state, this makes transaction costs very expensive.
Implementing an incentives program is only worthwhile if it results in pronounced increases in C stocks
(relative to emissions) or in other economic benefits.
With respect to the latter, one possibility is quantifying C
stocks together with other ecosystem services, such as
water quality and storage capacity, soil erosion and nutrient run-off control, and threatened or endangered species
habitat protection (e.g., stream habitat for salmon). This
approach is increasingly discussed in the environmental
economics literature, though examples of its implementation remain few [69,70]. Nevertheless, farmers who participated in programs that provided rewards for
responsible management of multiple ecosystem services
might find the transaction costs worthwhile in terms of
both the on- and off-farm goods received.

natural habitat was based not on an economic rationale,
but rather on an environmental ethic to combine wine
production with conservation of the landscape’s natural
integrity. This approach also included a series of sustainability measures (e.g., 3rd party certification, solar power
generation, reduced packaging, GHG emission reductions
through fleet fuel efficiency, etc.). The company did not
attempt to quantify either the ecosystem services generated by this type of land management or the biological
diversity protected as a result. The present research suggests, however, that this type of multifunctional land
management generates outputs, such as increased C
stocks and biodiversity protection, that are not necessarily included on a company’s ledger sheet. Additional
ecosystem services were not measured as part of this
study, but were likely generated from this management
approach, such as prevention of soil loss and water quality protection, and would be worth quantifying for associated benefits. If payments for ecosystem services
become a reality, a complete accounting of such benefits
may provide further justification for a multifunctional
management approach.
Although agriculture represents a small percentage of
overall GHG emissions, the agricultural landscape that
includes perennial woody crops such as vineyards, soil,
and wildland vegetation in the matrix around crops
represents a major source of potential C storage (or
release). Based on the example of a mixed vineyard/
woodland landscape, our research suggests that the C
storage potential and habitat conservation value of wildlands within the agricultural matrix may be much greater
than that of cultivated land alone. As other ecosystem
services provided by mixed agricultural systems becomes
better quantified [7,26,71], the natural habitat and biodiversity of these systems may be increasingly valued by
farmers and society alike. With a more thorough
accounting system for the ecosystem services (including
C storage) provided by agricultural landscapes, a regulation or an incentive program that encourages management approaches that promote C storage may become
viable. Vineyard landscapes are often composed of a mix
of agricultural and non-agricultural land that varies in
the above- and belowground C stocks it contains. To
maximize their C stocks, landowners need a way to assess
their actual and potential C stocks, and accurate ways to
measure them. The complexity of the Mediterraneantype biome provides a good context for addressing these
issues.

Conclusions
The company (Fetzer/Bonterra Vineyards) that purchased the ranches considered in this study did so with
the intention of growing organic grapes. The subsequent
decision to maintain a large fraction of that land in

Methods
This study estimates C stocks on the five ranches (Butler,
Chalfont/Ledford, Hooper, McNab, and Sundial) that
produce organic grapes for the Bonterra label of Fetzer
Vineyards, located in Mendocino County, California,

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

USA (39.0° latitude, -123.1° longitude). The ranches,
which are scattered across the Russian River Valley (Figure 1), vary in topography, size, and the number and
extent of different habitat types. In total, they comprise
1149 ha: 350 ha in vineyards; 400 ha in forested wildlands
(woodlands or forests with at least one tree or woody
shrub per 10 × 10 m), and 449 ha in grasslands (wildlands without trees). The ranches were converted to
organic management during the late 1980s, gaining
organic certification by California Certified Organic
Farmers between 1991 and 2005. The salient management practices in these organic vineyards include planting of cover crop mixes, use of compost, water and soil
conservation measures, elimination of synthetic pesticides and fertilizers, minimum tillage between vine rows
(~15 cm depth), mechanical weed removal under vines,
conservation of biodiversity, and planting of hedgerows
or habitat corridors in and around the vineyards.
Although the inclusion of wildlands as part of each ranch
occurred as a condition of the sale (i.e., it did not represent an explicit management objective on behalf of the
buyer), the current owner has actively protected the
majority of these lands for conservation and ecosystem
service values.
Selection of sites

To select vegetation and soil sampling locations, we
stratified the landscape according to habitat type to capture the variation in topography, land use, and vegetation on the five ranches. Data layers were input into a
geographic information system (GIS) for four variables:
land cover (according to the California Wildlife Habitat
Relationships system, http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/
cwhr/); elevation; slope; and clear-sky solar radiation
summed over a calendar year and modeled from a digital elevation model [72]. A random point generator
populated the classifiable area with 1013 points, for
which a matrix was created with the four GIS variable
values. Gower’s dissimilarity algorithm [73] generated
dissimilarity distances between all points based on the
numeric and categorical data. With this pre-selected
number of random points on the landscape, an unsupervised learning technique grouped the points into seven
classification units according to shared features drawn
from the layers [74]. A cluster analysis, called Partitioning Around Medoids (PAM), used the distance matrix
to group the points into the following habitat classification units: vineyard I on flat lowlands; vineyard II on
uplands; valley riparian; mixed hardwoods on moderatesloped, lower elevation lowlands; mixed hardwoods II
on steeper-sloped, higher elevation uplands; mixed hardwood-conifer on steeper-sloped uplands; and annual
grasslands. These clusters formed the basis for the stratified field sampling conducted on the five ranches.

Page 10 of 14

Because the focus was on woody C (herbaceous vegetation does not qualify for consideration in C credit programs because the decomposition, or turnover rate, is
considered too rapid to add any long-term sequestration
value), and because vineyard C was measured separately
(see below), no vegetation sampling was conducted on
vineyard or grassland habitat types. For the four remaining habitat types, the PAM clusters were used as the
basis for selection of the vegetation sampling sites
(Table 3), with the goal of sampling a habitat type at a
frequency consistent with its importance in the study
area.
Aboveground C stocks in vineyards

The aboveground C in the wood of grape vines was estimated for all tracts (management units) on the five
ranches using the age and number of vines per tract
(Additional File: Appendix 5). Vine wood volume was
estimated based on vine age, which was calculated from
a regression analysis based on samples of different ages.
For each sample, measurements were taken for main
trunk height, main trunk diameter at 0.5 m above the
ground surface, cordon lengths from the main trunk,
and a standard estimate of cordon diameter using age
(2.5 cm of growth in the first five years, then 0.25 cm
each additional year; D. Koball, Fetzer Vineyards, personal communication). Vine trunks and cordons were
assumed to be straight cylinders of constant diameter.
From these measurements, we generated the following
regression equation (1), where age is the number of
years since grafting the scion:
Wood volume = 179.19 ∗ (age1.3303 )) R2 = 0.84 (1)

This equation was derived by fitting a power function
to the relationship between vine age and aboveground
wood volume for 29 vineyard tracts (Additional File 1:
Appendix 5B; Equation 1 has not been evaluated for
vines older than 23 years, the maximum age of vines in
this study). Vine biomass was then calculated by multiplying volume by wood density. Vine wood density was
based on an analysis of Chardonnay vines on one of the
ranches and given as 0.95 g dry weight/cm 3 fresh
volume (J. Nosera and G. McGourty, unpublished data);
no other values are available for wine grapes. Carbon
content for vine wood (and wildland wood) was estimated as 50% of dry weight [75,76].
Aboveground C stocks and species diversity in woody
plants in wildlands

Ninety-three sample plots were located by first identifying the different habitat types for each ranch using the
PAM cluster analysis (Table 3). The habitat polygons
were then evaluated to note variation within type, and

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

enough sample sites were identified to capture the major
differences in vegetation, with a minimum of three samples located per habitat type per ranch, provided sufficient space. Each plot consisted of three 10 × 10 m
subplots laid out in a line (i.e. 10 × 30 m). For each
plot, the DBH of all live trees and shrubs over 5 cm
DBH within the plot boundary were recorded along
with the species identity. Because field data were collected during winter months when leaves and fruit were
sometimes absent, some individuals could only be identified to the genus level (tree habit, attached dry leaves,
bark, and bud scars were used to identify individuals
when other key vegetative or phenological material were
absent). Biomass volume of downed woody debris and
standing deadwood (snags) was estimated for logs ≥ 10
cm in diameter and 1 m in length, and for snags ≥ 10
cm DBH. Volume was estimated from DBH measurements using published allometric equations for individual species found in sample plots [59,77,78]. When a
species-specific equation was not available, the equation
used was first that of the genus, then family, then the
most morphologically similar species for which there
was an equation (Additional File 1: Appendix 3). Published species-specific values for wood density (or generic values where species data were not available) were
used to calculate woody biomass of the standing aboveground woody vegetation [59].
Soil C in vineyards and wildlands

Soil samples were collected from 44 soil pits (19 in vineyards, 25 in wildlands), including six paired sites, where
two adjacent pits were dug in a vineyard and in a wildland. The soil pit locations were determined using the
PAM classification and by consulting maps from the
USDA Soil Survey Geographic Database (SSURGO;
http://soils.usda.gov/survey/geography/ssurgo/). A soil
profile description was made at each site to ensure that
each of the soil great groups mapped on a given ranch
was represented.
Soil pits were dug with a backhoe or by hand to ≥ 1 m in
depth, and the coordinates of each pit were input into a
GIS. Soil samples were collected from four depths at each
pit: 0-15 cm; 15-45 cm; 45-75 cm; and 75-100 cm. For
each sample, bulk density was estimated by weighing clods
coated in paraffin and then submerging them in a volumetric flask to measure their displacement [79,80]. Percentage of rock fragments in each sample was measured
by sifting a known volume of soil through a 2 mm screen.
The fraction of rock (> 2 mm) was subtracted from the
soil volume. Dried, sieved, and weighed samples for each
depth were analyzed for C content using an elemental
combustion analyzer (Costech Analytical Technologies,
Inc., Valencia, CA).

Page 11 of 14

The soil pit descriptions were compared with those of
the mapped soil units from SSURGO (summarized by the
California Soil Resource Lab of the University of California, Davis, http://casoilresource.lawr.ucdavis.edu/drupal/).
This comparison was done by importing the SSURGO soil
unit maps into Google Earth http://earth.google.com and
using the high-definition aerial photography to locate our
soil pits within the mapped soil units. Descriptions of the
soil map units were compared to respective soil pit
descriptions to ensure that the generalized SSURGO
descriptions were accurate. Because many SSURGO soil
units were created from only a few sampled data points at
regional scales (e.g., county or state-wide), we wanted to
confirm the accuracy of this open-access data source. Soil
from the pits was classified by the landform in which it
was found (upland, bottomland, or terrace) and the soil
great group to which it belonged using soil taxonomy
techniques [81]. The resulting data were input as categorical environmental variables to inform regression analyses.
For the vineyard tracts, a management history for the
past five years was obtained with a short survey instrument given to vineyard managers. The questions in the
survey were about practices known to influence the rate
of storage or loss of C in cultivated soil, i.e., frequency
and extent of tillage, compost application and cover
crops on each block (Additional File 1: Appendix 1).
Responses to each question were coded as 1 or 0 (yes or
no), and the scores for all questions summed up to give
a cumulative management impact index where the
greater the score, the greater the potential increase in
soil C storage.
Determination of C stocks across the landscape

To estimate total aboveground wood C across the wildland areas, a grid of 10 × 10 m cells was overlaid on the
five ranches in a GIS. The woody biomass measured on
the sample plots (Additional File 1: Appendix 2) was
used in conjunction with a set of predictor variables from
a variety of data sources, including satellite imagery, aerial photography, soil surveys, and digital elevation models
to develop a set of multiple linear regression models. The
variables were categorized into the following four groups:
1) topography - elevation, slope and solar radiation; 2)
vegetation - summer normalized difference vegetation
index (NDVI, based on Landsat 7 sensor platform); 3)
soil - soil pH, soil organic matter, clay and sand (from
SSURGO maps); and 4) landscape - ranch and landcover
(vegetation) type (Additional File 1: Appendix 4). Fifteen
variants of these four groups were used to model aboveground C, and the best fit model was selected based on
the lowest AIC value [82]. The variable combination for
the best fit model was then used to predict C values for
unsampled grid cells by splitting the sample data into a

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

training set (two-thirds) to build the model and a test set
(one third) to evaluate how well the model predicts C for
the withheld points.
In addition to the all-species model, multiple linear
regression was used to model per species aboveground C
across the landscape for the 14 species that contributed
most to woody biomass in the sample plots (Table 2).
Each model used the same four groups of variables as the
all-species model, plus vegetation texture (a metric based
on fine resolution, 2 m gray scale contrasts of aerial imagery from the National Agriculture Imagery Program of
the USDA). This analysis was conducted to determine if
any of the species taken independently demonstrated a
stronger spatial relationship to C than was detectable in
the full model. The individual species were then modeled
again using basal area (m2/ha instead of Mg C/ha). Basal
area was directly measured for each sample plot, and thus
avoided the potential biases of allometric equations, which
are typically developed from a small number of trees
sampled from a single location rather than from across the
species’ range (as a result, such equations may be ill-suited
for predicting volumetric relationships for individuals
from other parts of the range).
Soil C (Mg C/ha to 1 m depth) was modeled in the
same way as aboveground woody C using multiple linear
regression, but with a different set of variable groups,
including: 1) slope, solar radiation and profile curvature
(a measure of the concavity or convexity of the 10 × 10
m cell); 2) land form (one of three topographic classifications: upland; valley/lowland; or terrace) and soil taxonomic group (the soil great group, from SSURGO); 3)
ranch and habitat type; and 4) soil organic matter (from
SSURGO). Different permutations of these variable
groups were used to model soil C, and the best model
was similarly selected using the AIC score. This model
was then used to predict soil C across the landscape.
Ordination analysis was conducted using non-metric
multi-dimensional scaling (NMDS) to examine the species and sample plot relationships to C stocks and environmental variables in multidimensional space. The
variables included in the ordination were wood C (Mg
C/ha), measured soil C (Mg C/ha to 1 m depth), slope,
elevation, solar radiation, Normalized Difference Vegetation (or Water) Index (NDVI or NDWI, Summer or
Winter), National Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP)
vegetation texture and soil organic matter, sand, clay
and pH from the SURRGO database (Additional File 1:
Appendix 4). All modeling and ordination analyses were
conducted using R (R Development Core Team, 2009).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Appendices to the manuscript. Five appendices to
the manuscript “Assessment of carbon in woody plants and soil across a

Page 12 of 14

vineyard-woodland landscape” are included in this file. The appendices
are as follows: 1. Survey instrument and results of survey given to
vineyard managers to determine vineyard management history. 2.
Woody biomass data from sample plots in wildlands. 3. Woody species
and genera encountered in wildland plots for which allometric equations
to calculate aboveground woody biomass were available, listed with
source of allometric equation used. 4. Ordination data and results.
Includes sample sites and environmental variables used in modeling and
ordination analysis, as well as a plot of the ordination results. 5. Vine
carbon calculation. Includes regression data, graph of regression curve,
and application of the resultant equation to estimate vine biomass as a
function of age across the five ranches where the study was conducted.

Abbreviations
AIC: Akaike Information Criterion; C: Carbon; CAR: Climate Action Registry;
DBH: Diameter at Breast Height; DCA: Detrended Correspondence Analysis;
GHG: Greenhouse Gas; GIS: Geographic Information System; LiDAR: Light
Detection and Ranging; NAIP: National Agriculture Imagery Program; NDVI:
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index; NDWI: Normalized Difference Water
Index; NMDS: Non-metric Multi-Dimensional Scaling; PAM: Partitioning
around Medoids; SOC: Soil Organic Carbon; SSURGO: Soil Survey Geographic
Database; USDA: United States Department of Agriculture.
Acknowledgements
We thank D. Koball and the staff of Fetzer Vineyards who provided help in the
field and with collecting background information for this research. Thanks also
go to J. Nosera and L. Williams for help with technical questions. Support was
provided by Brown-Forman Corporation, Fetzer Vineyards, and the Kearney
Foundation of Soil Science with additional support from the USDA-ARS and the
University of California Agricultural Experiment Station.
Author details
University of California, One Shields Ave., Davis, CA 95616, USA. 2Fetzer
Vineyards, 13601 Old River Road Hopland, CA 95449, USA. 3USDA
Agricultural Research Service, 595 Hilgard Lane, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
4
University of California Cooperative Extension, 890 North Bush Street, Ukiah,
CA 95482-3919, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
JNW collected the field data, conducted data analysis and was the lead
writer; ADH and conducted most of the data analysis, ATO’G conducted the
soil analysis; LAT, and KS helped design the research; RH collected the field
data and contributed to the manuscript; GMG helped design the research
and provided technical advice. LEJ was involved in all aspects of the
manuscript including edits and revisions. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 16 April 2011 Accepted: 9 November 2011
Published: 9 November 2011
References
1. Albrecht A, Kandji ST: Carbon sequestration in tropical agroforestry
systems. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment 2003, 99(1-3):15-27.
2. Hergoualc’h KHhK, Verchot LV: Stocks and fluxes of carbon associated
with land use change in Southeast Asian tropical peatlands: A review.
Global Biogeochemical Cycles 2011, 25.
3. Murdiyarso D, et al: Environmental benefits and sustainable land-use
options in the Jambi transect, Sumatra. Journal of Vegetation Science 2002,
13(3):429-438.
4. Gordon LJ, Finlayson CM, Falkenmark M: Managing water in agriculture
for food production and other ecosystem services. Agricultural Water
Management 2010, 97(4):512-519.
5. Price K: Effects of watershed topography, soils, land use, and climate on
baseflow hydrology in humid regions: A review. Progress in Physical
Geography 2011, 35(4):465-492.

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

17.
18.
19.

20.

21.
22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.
31.
32.

Steffan-Dewenter I, et al: Tradeoffs between income, biodiversity, and
ecosystem functioning during tropical rainforest conversion and
agroforestry intensification. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2007, 104(12):4973-4978.
Tscharntke T, et al: Landscape perspectives on agricultural intensification
and biodiversity - ecosystem service management. Ecology Letters 2005,
8(8):857-874.
Perfecto I, Vandermeer J: The agroecological matrix as alternative to the
land-sparing/agriculture intensification model. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2010,
107(13):5786-5791.
Rudel TK, et al: Forest transitions: towards a global understanding of land
use change. Global Environmental Change-Human and Policy Dimensions
2005, 15(1):23-31.
Dixon RK, et al: Carbon pools and flux of global forest ecosystems.
Science 1994, 263(5144):185-190.
Gibbs HK, et al: Monitoring and estimating tropical forest carbon stocks:
making REDD a reality. Environmental Research Letters 2007, 2(4).
Fahey TJ, et al: Forest carbon storage: ecology, management, and policy.
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 2010, 8(5):245-252.
Dirzo R, Raven PH: Global state of biodiversity and loss. Annual Review of
Environment and Resources 2003, 28:137-167.
West TO, Post WM: Soil organic carbon sequestration rates by tillage and
crop rotation: A global data analysis. Soil Science Society of America
Journal 2002, 66(6):1930-1946.
Paustian K, et al: Management options for reducing CO2 emissions from
agricultural soils. Biogeochemistry 2000, 48(1):147-163.
Ramankutty N, Foley JA: Estimating historical changes in global land
cover: Croplands from 1700 to 1992. Global Biogeochemical Cycles 1999,
13(4):997-1027.
Soares BS, et al: Modelling conservation in the Amazon basin. Nature
2006, 440(7083):520-523.
Schoeneberger MM: Agroforestry: working trees for sequestering carbon
on agricultural lands. Agroforestry Systems 2009, 75(1):27-37.
Clergue B, et al: Biodiversity: Function and Assessment in Agricultural
Areas: A Review. In Sustainable Agriculture Edited by: Springer-Verlag Berlin
E Lichtfouse, et al 2009, 309-327.
Lovell ST, et al: Integrating agroecology and landscape multifunctionality
in Vermont: An evolving framework to evaluate the design of
agroecosystems. Agricultural Systems 2010, 103(5):327-341.
Jackson LE, et al: Biodiversity in agricultural landscapes: Investing without
losing interest. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment 2007, 121(3):193-195.
Pascual U, Perrings C: Developing incentives and economic mechanisms
for in situ biodiversity conservation in agricultural landscapes. Agriculture
Ecosystems & Environment 2007, 121(3):256-268.
Morgan JA, et al: Carbon sequestration in agricultural lands of the United
States. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 2010, 65(1):6A-13A.
Tilman D: Global environmental impacts of agricultural expansion: The
need for sustainable and efficient practices. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1999, 96(11):5995-6000.
O’Farrell PJ, Anderson PML: Sustainable multifunctional landscapes: a
review to implementation. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability
2010, 2:59-65.
Jackson LE, Pascual U, Hodgkin T: Utilizing and conserving
agrobiodiversity in agricultural landscapes. Agriculture Ecosystems &
Environment 2007, 121(3):196-210.
Underwood EC, et al: Threats and biodiversity in the mediterranean
biome. Diversity and Distributions 2009, 15(2):188-197.
Fairbanks DHK, Hughes CJ, Turpie JK: Potential impact of viticulture
expansion on habitat types in the Cape Floristic Region, South Africa.
Biodiversity and Conservation 2004, 13(6):1075-1100.
Carlisle EA, Steenwerth KL, Smart DR: Effects of land use on soil
respiration: Conversion of oak woodlands to vineyards. Journal of
Environmental Quality 2006, 35(4):1396-1404.
Guo LB, Gifford RM: Soil carbon stocks and land use change: a meta
analysis. Global Change Biology 2002, 8(4):345-360.
Keating BA, et al: Eco-efficient Agriculture: Concepts, Challenges, and
Opportunities. Crop Science 2010, 50(2):S109-S119.
Badalucco L, et al: Reversing agriculture from intensive to sustainable
improves soil quality in a semiarid South Italian soil. Biology and Fertility
of Soils 2010, 46(5):481-489.

Page 13 of 14

33. Myers N, et al: Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature
2000, 403(6772):853-858.
34. Sawyer JO, Keeler-Wolf T, Evens J: A manual of California vegetation.
Sacramento CA: California Native Plant Society;, Second 2009, 1312.
35. van Groenigen KJ, et al: Soil C storage as affected by tillage and straw
management: An assessment using field measurements and model
predictions. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment 2011, 140(1-2):218-225.
36. VandenBygaart AJ, et al: Soil organic carbon stocks on long-term
agroecosystem experiments in Canada. Canadian Journal of Soil Science
2010, 90(4):543-550.
37. Akaike H: A new look at statistical model identification. IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control 1974, AC19(6):716-723.
38. Naiman RJ, Decamps H: The ecology of interfaces: Riparian zones. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics 1997, 28:621-658.
39. Houghton RA, Hackler JL: Changes in terrestrial carbon storage in the
United States. 1: The roles of agriculture and forestry. Global Ecology and
Biogeography 2000, 9(2):125-144.
40. Jackson LE, et al: Responses of soil microbial processes and community
structure to tillage events and implications for soil quality. Geoderma
2003, 114(3-4):305-317.
41. Smith R, et al: Vineyard floor management affects soil, plant nutrition,
and grape yield and quality. California Agriculture 2008, 62(4):184-190.
42. Young-Mathews A, et al: Plant-soil biodiversity relationships and nutrient
retention in agricultural riparian zones of the Sacramento Valley,
California. Agroforestry Systems 2010, 80(1):41-60.
43. Smukler SM, et al: Biodiversity and multiple ecosystem functions in an
organic farmscape. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment 2010, 139(12):80-97.
44. Niu XZ, Duiker SW: Carbon sequestration potential by afforestation of
marginal agricultural land in the Midwestern US. Forest Ecology and
Management 2006, 223(1-3):415-427.
45. Pulleman MM, et al: Soil organic matter content as a function of different
land use history. Soil Science Society of America Journal 2000, 64(2):689-693.
46. Burger M, et al: Microbial responses and nitrous oxide emissions during
wetting and drying of organically and conventionally managed soil
under tomatoes. Biology and Fertility of Soils 2005, 42(2):109-118.
47. Marriott EE, Wander MM: Total and labile soil organic matter in organic
and conventional farming systems. Soil Science Society of America Journal
2006, 70(3):950-959.
48. Follett RF: Soil management concepts and carbon sequestration zin
cropland soils. Soil & Tillage Research 2001, 61(1-2):77-92.
49. Smukler SM, et al: Transition to large-scale organic vegetable production
in the Salinas Valley, California. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment 2008,
126(3-4):168-188.
50. Jackson LE, et al: On-farm assessment of organic matter and tillage
management on vegetable yield, soil, weeds, pests, and economics in
California. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment 2004, 103(3):443-463.
51. Gotelli NJ, et al: Patterns and causes of species richness: a general
simulation model for macroecology. Ecology Letters 2009, 12(9):873-886.
52. Brown SL, Schroeder P, Kern JS: Spatial distribution of biomass in forests
of the eastern USA. Forest Ecology and Management 1999, 123(1):81-90.
53. Chan KMA, et al: Conservation planning for ecosystem services. Plos
Biology 2006, 4(11):2138-2152.
54. Murdiyarso D, Hergoualc’h K, Verchot LV: Opportunities for reducing
greenhouse gas emissions in tropical peatlands. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2010,
107(46):19655-19660.
55. Brown S, et al: Methods for Measuring and Monitoring Forestry Carbon
Projects in California. Winrock International, for the California Energy
Commission, PIER Energy-Related Environmental Research 2004, 500-04-072F.
56. CCAR: Forest Sector Protocol, Version 2.1. California Climate Action Registry:
Sacramento 2007.
57. CAR: Forest Project Protocol, Version 3.0. Climate Action Reserve:
Sacramento 2009.
58. CAR: Forest Project Protocol, Version 3.1. Climate Action Reserve:
Sacramento 2009.
59. Jenkins JC, et al: Comprehensive database of diameter-based biomass
regressions for North American tree species.Edited by: N.R. Station. USDA
Forest Service; 2004:.
60. Case BS, Hall RJ: Assessing prediction errors of generalized tree biomass
and volume equations for the boreal forest region of west-central

Williams et al. Carbon Balance and Management 2011, 6:11
http://www.cbmjournal.com/content/6/1/11

61.
62.

63.

64.

65.

66.
67.
68.
69.
70.

71.
72.

73.
74.
75.

76.
77.
78.
79.
80.

81.
82.

Page 14 of 14

Canada. Canadian Journal of Forest Research-Revue Canadienne De Recherche
Forestiere 2008, 38(4):878-889.
Parresol BR: Assessing tree and stand biomass: A review with examples
and critical comparisons. Forest Science 1999, 45(4):573-593.
McHale MR, et al: Urban forest biomass estimates: is it important to use
allometric relationships developed specifically for urban trees? Urban
Ecosystems 2009, 12(1):95-113.
Nelson BW, et al: Allometric regressions for improved estimate of
secondary forest biomass in the central Amazon. Forest Ecology and
Management 1999, 117(1-3):149-167.
Patenaude G, et al: Quantifying forest above ground carbon content
using LiDAR remote sensing. Remote Sensing of Environment 2004,
93(3):368-380.
Asner GP: Tropical forest carbon assessment: integrating satellite and
airborne mapping approaches. Environmental Research Letters 2009,
4(3):11.
O’Geen AT, et al: Soil-landscape model helps predict potassium supply in
vineyards. California Agriculture 2008, 62(4):195-201.
ARB: Greenhouse Gas Inventory Data - 2006-2009. California
Environmental Protection Agency, Air Resources Board 2009.
USDA: California State Fact Sheet, Farm Characteristics. United States
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service 2010.
Fisher B, Turner RK, Morling P: Defining and classifying ecosystem services
for decision making. Ecological Economics 2009, 68(3):643-653.
Kemkes RJ, Farley J, Koliba CJ: Determining when payments are an
effective policy approach to ecosystem service provision. Ecological
Economics 2010, 69(11):2069-2074.
Kremen C: Managing ecosystem services: what do we need to know
about their ecology? Ecology Letters 2005, 8(5):468-479.
Beaudette DE, O’Geen AT: Quantifying the Aspect Effect: An Application
of Solar Radiation Modeling for Soil Survey. Soil Science Society of America
Journal 2009, 73(4):1345-1352.
Gower JC: General coefficient of similarity and some of its properties.
Biometrics 1971, 27(4):857.
Kaufman L, Rousseeuw PJ: Finding groups in data: an introduction to
cluster analysis. New York: Wiley; 1990.
Smith JE, Heath LS, Jenkins JC: Forest volume-to-biomass models and
estimates of mass for live and standing dead trees of U.S. forests. USDA
Forest Service: Newtown Square, PA; 2003.
Birdsey RA: Carbon storage and accumulation in United States forest
ecosystems. USDA Forest Service: Washington, DC; 1992, 51.
Pillsbury NH, Kirkley ML: Equations for total, wood and saw-log volume
for thirteen California hardwoods. USDA Forest Service; 1984.
McGinnis TM, Keeley J: Woody plant biomass calculator. 2009 [http://
www.werc.usgs.gov/fire/seki/finefuels/regressions.html].
Brasher BR, et al: Use of saran resin to coat natural soil clods for bulkdensity and water-retention measurements. Soil Science 1966, 101(2):108.
Howard RF, Singer MJ: Measuring forest soil bulk-density using irregular
hole, paraffin clod, and air permeability. Forest Science 1981,
27(2):316-322.
USDA-NRCS: Keys to Soil Taxonomy, 10th Ed. United States Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service: Washington, DC; 2006.
Burnham KP, Anderson DR: Model selection and multimodel inference: a
practical information-theoretic approach. 2nd Edition. New York.:
Springer; 2002.

doi:10.1186/1750-0680-6-11
Cite this article as: Williams et al.: Assessment of carbon in woody
plants and soil across a vineyard-woodland landscape. Carbon Balance
and Management 2011 6:11.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
