<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>When species matches are unavailable are DNA barcodes correctly assigned to higher taxa? An assessment using sphingid moths</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18. doi:10.1186/1472-6785-11-18"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="John James Wilson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

When species matches are unavailable are DNA
barcodes correctly assigned to higher taxa? An
assessment using sphingid moths
John James Wilson1*, Rodolphe Rougerie1,5, Justin Schonfeld1, Daniel H Janzen2, Winnie Hallwachs2,
Mehrdad Hajibabaei1, Ian J Kitching3, Jean Haxaire4 and Paul DN Hebert1

Abstract
Background: When a specimen belongs to a species not yet represented in DNA barcode reference libraries there
is disagreement over the effectiveness of using sequence comparisons to assign the query accurately to a higher
taxon. Library completeness and the assignment criteria used have been proposed as critical factors affecting the
accuracy of such assignments but have not been thoroughly investigated. We explored the accuracy of
assignments to genus, tribe and subfamily in the Sphingidae, using the almost complete global DNA barcode
reference library (1095 species) available for this family. Costa Rican sphingids (118 species), a well-documented,
diverse subset of the family, with each of the tribes and subfamilies represented were used as queries. We
simulated libraries with different levels of completeness (10-100% of the available species), and recorded
assignments (positive or ambiguous) and their accuracy (true or false) under six criteria.
Results: A liberal tree-based criterion assigned 83% of queries accurately to genus, 74% to tribe and 90% to subfamily,
compared to a strict tree-based criterion, which assigned 75% of queries accurately to genus, 66% to tribe and 84% to
subfamily, with a library containing 100% of available species (but excluding the species of the query). The greater
number of true positives delivered by more relaxed criteria was negatively balanced by the occurrence of more false
positives. This effect was most sharply observed with libraries of the lowest completeness where, for example at the
genus level, 32% of assignments were false positives with the liberal criterion versus < 1% when using the strict. We
observed little difference (< 8% using the liberal criterion) however, in the overall accuracy of the assignments between
the lowest and highest levels of library completeness at the tribe and subfamily level.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that when using a strict tree-based criterion for higher taxon assignment with
DNA barcodes, the likelihood of assigning a query a genus name incorrectly is very low, if a genus name is
provided it has a high likelihood of being accurate, and if no genus match is available the query can nevertheless
be assigned to a subfamily with high accuracy regardless of library completeness. DNA barcoding often correctly
assigned sphingid moths to higher taxa when species matches were unavailable, suggesting that barcode
reference libraries can be useful for higher taxon assignments long before they achieve complete species coverage.

Background
Taxonomic assignments are crucial for effective communication of biological research, enabling comparability
between studies. Yet, the ability to categorize biodiversity effectively and accurately is hampered by a lack of
taxonomic experts [1]. DNA barcoding has been
* Correspondence: wilso04@gmail.com
1
Department of Integrative Biology & Biodiversity Institute of Ontario,
University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

proposed as a method capable of partially alleviating
this “taxonomic impediment” by enabling accurate species identifications by non-specialists using nucleotide
comparisons across a standard gene region [2].
In a typical scenario, a specimen of unknown species
affinity is encountered, the DNA barcode of the query is
sequenced and then compared with a reference library
of DNA barcodes [3] to establish a species match for
the query. However, just as morphological identification
keys cannot provide accurate binomial names for

© 2011 Wilson et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

queries from species not included in the key, DNA barcoding cannot assign a species identification when there
are no barcode records for conspecifics in the reference
library. Consequently, barcoding appraisal studies
usually require a priori knowledge that the species of
the query is present in the reference library (e.g. [4-6]).
In real life, a consequence of widespread routine use of
DNA barcoding is that failed species matches (e.g. <
98% similarity with the closest library sequence [5]) are
frequently encountered (e.g. [7]). In such situations it
may be tempting to attempt assignment to a higher
taxonomic level (i.e. genus, tribe, subfamily). For example, Armstrong and Ball [8] suggested their query barcode sharing 94.6% similarity with the closest library
match (Clostera albostigma) was a likely congener but
not conspecific of the reference library barcode. There is
considerable disagreement over the likely accuracy and
appropriateness of such assignment attempts (e.g.
[1,5,9-11]), which is not surprising given the different
purposes and criteria employed.
DNA barcoding assignment to higher taxa

Hebert et al. [12] expressed optimism for barcode-based
assignments to higher taxa in animals. Such assignments
are useful as shorthand for phylogenetic hypotheses
from which biological characteristics of organisms can
be predicted. For example, by assigning a specimen to
the genus Aellopos one can predict that as a caterpillar
it most likely fed on plants of the family Rubiaceae [13].
The capacity to make predictions based on taxon membership is especially pertinent where fundamental impediments, e.g. an egg or an incomplete specimen,
preclude morphology-based detection of characteristics.
While assignment to pre-determined taxa is an operation distinct from the description of taxa, assignment
accuracy is related to the ability of the character system
used as the basis of assignment to track organismal phylogeny (i.e. display a phylogenetic signal [14]). This
operation is confounded by the fact that many currently
recognized supraspecific taxa are not natural [10]. In
such cases, the failure of a character system to provide
accurate assignments can reflect “imperfect” taxonomy
rather than the lack of phylogenetic signal.
In this study, we test the ability of DNA barcodes to
enable accurate higher taxon assignments. Specifically
we ask: If species coverage in the DNA barcode library
is incomplete, can the barcode from a sphingid species
not represented in the library be assigned to the genus
it belongs to, or, recognised as being from a sphingid
genus missing from the library? Likewise, can the barcode from a sphingid genus not represented in the
library be accurately assigned at the tribe and subfamily
level? We address these questions using the moth family
Sphingidae because a comprehensive global reference

Page 2 of 14

barcode library is available (86% of known species [15])
containing relatively stable and well-studied taxa
(Figure 1A). This enables us to assemble sub-libraries
with a wide range of different species completeness and
also provides a robust taxonomic framework against
which to judge assignment accuracy. We evaluated
assignment accuracy using concordance with the current
classification of Sphingidae [16] while recognising that
morphologically derived taxonomy represents falsifiable
hypotheses. Consequently, we also examined the assignments a posteriori in light of a more recent phylogenetic
study of the family [17]. Sphingidae is the target of a
global barcoding campaign [15] and shows high success
for species-level barcode identifications (Figure 1B).
Assignment criteria

Since Hebert et al. [12] proposed that DNA barcoding
could be used to assign queries to higher taxa, researchers have performed higher taxa assignments using ad
hoc criteria based on the frequency of best hits, degree
of sequence similarity, bootstrapping or BLAST scores
(e.g. [18-22]). However, these studies usually involved
fragmentary tissues of unknown taxonomic origin and
consequently assignments could not be independently
confirmed (i.e. using morphology). Therefore, both the
accuracy and optimal approach for such assignments
remain unclear. In this study, we test the extent to
which assignment accuracy depends on assignment criteria applied by comparing the performance of several
approaches employed in prior studies.
Tree-based assignment criteria

While some consider the use of tree-based assignment
approaches controversial [23], we consider it justified
for supraspecific taxa sharing phylogenetic as opposed
to tokogenetic affinities. Using tree-based criteria,
queries are successfully assigned when they cluster with
barcodes from their correct taxon [24]. Meier et al. [25]
use the following example where they imagine a reference library containing a chimp barcode but no human
barcode to illustrate the difficulty with such an
approach: “Imagine a query clustering with a chimp barcode. Based on the query’s position, one cannot decide
whether it comes from Homo sapiens or another chimp,
i.e., forming a cluster on a tree is logically insufficient
for assigning a sequence.” We address this concern by
establishing objective rule sets for our tree-based assignment criteria based on topology (Table 1). We include
assignment criteria that require a taxon to be “monophyletic” or “exclusive” for a query to be assigned to
that taxon (Table 1). This requires that we overlook the
fact that trees based on COI do not perfectly track organismal phylogeny at deeper levels [14] and that many
“traditional” taxa are not monophyletic [17]. Ekrem et

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

Page 3 of 14

Figure 1 Taxonomy and DNA barcoding of Sphingidae. A). A tree representing the taxonomy of Sphingidae showing the three subfamilies
and eight tribes currently recognised (based on the classification and relationships in Kitching and Cadiou [16]) and used for the purposes of
evaluating assignment success in our experiments. There are 202 currently recognised genera. B) DNA barcoding of Sphingidae. The graphs
show the divergences in DNA barcodes within sphingid species and between sphingid species within the same genus. This is based on the
publicly available sphingid DNA barcodes on BOLD. A “barcode gap” between the intra and interspecific divergences indicates the ease of
species assignment based on DNA barcodes and a “best match” type distance criterion.

Table 1 Overview of assignment criteria used in this
study
Criteriaa

Requirements for “Positive” Assignment of Q
(query)b, c

“Liberal”

Q is sister to a single member of a taxon, (Aus aus, Q),
or a clade of members of a single taxon, ((Aus aus, Aus
bus)Q), the assignment is that of the taxon Aus.

“Strict”

Q is nested within a clade comprising of members of a
single taxon, (Aus aus, Q)Aus bus), the assignment is
that of the taxon Aus.

“Liberal &
exclusive”

Q is sister to a single member of a taxon, (Aus bus, Q),
or a clade of members of a single taxon, ((Aus aus, Aus
bus)Q), and members of taxon, Aus, are not found
elsewhere on the tree except in an Aus+Q clade, the
assignment is that of the taxon Aus.

“Strict &
exclusive”

Q is nested within a clade of a single taxon, ((Aus aus,
Q)Aus bus), and members of Aus are not found
elsewhere on the tree except in an Aus+Q clade, the
assignment is that of the taxon Aus.

“Best match”

Q is simply assigned to the genus of the most similar
library sequence based on K2P distance.

“Best close
match”

Q is assigned to the genus of the most similar library
sequence based on K2P distance provided it falls
below a threshold value.

a

The first four criteria are tree-based criteria, the last two are non-tree-based
criteria.
b
When the requirements for a positive assignment were not met, then Q was
unassignable (i.e. “ambiguous”).
c
The examples given refer to genus assignments but were extended to tribe
and subfamily using the exact same requirements.

al. [9] suggest the inability of COI analysis to reconstruct monophyletic taxa prohibits the use of barcodes
for higher taxon assignments.
Previous barcoding studies employed neighbor-joining
(NJ) algorithms [26] to produce “Taxon ID trees” since
the goal of DNA barcoding is species assignment and
species discovery and not phylogenetic reconstruction
[6]. In this study we used NJ as an approximation to
phylogenetic analysis due to computational constraints
and the large number of replications undertaken. NJ
provides additional comparability as both BOLD [3] and
GenBank [27] use NJ in their tree-based identification
options. Our tree-based assignment criteria are equally
applicable regardless of tree construction method
although use of trees selected with a different optimality
criterion may produce different results.
Direct sequence comparison assignment criteria

In addition to tree-based assignment we used criteria
based on direct sequence comparison. We chose not to
consider “character-based” approaches (e.g. [28])
because nucleotide synapomorphies are unlikely to be
pure (i.e. consistency index = 1 [10]) and compound
diagnostics have proven unwieldy [29-31]. Of the two
assignment criteria we use, both based on K2P [32]
genetic distance (Table 1), the least stringent is “best

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

match”. A query is assigned the taxon of the reference
barcode that it most closely matches irrespective of how
similar the query and library barcodes are. Under this
criterion some false assignments are inevitable. A “falsepositive” result, where a query barcode is matched to a
reference barcode despite significant divergence, is a frequent consequence of using the BLAST algorithm by
itself [33]. For example, the query dataset used here
contained five monobasic genera. For these barcodes the
only possible result for a genus assignment using “best
match” are “false-positive”. These errors can be avoided
by using the modified assignment criterion, “best close
match”. With “best close match” the best-matching
reference barcode is identified, but the query is only
assigned the taxon name of that barcode if the barcode
is sufficiently similar (i.e. below a threshold). Otherwise,
the query remains unassigned (i.e. “ambiguous”). In our
case, the threshold value can be selected by plotting the
number of “true-positives” and “false-positives” against
the K2P distance from the query to the “best match”.
We then determine a threshold that maximizes the
number of “true-positives” while minimizing the number
of “false-positives”. It remains unclear why one would
expect that there should be a common threshold across
taxonomic groups of the same rank or how this could
be implemented in a real-life scenario. Many studies
have shown a universal threshold of genetic distance to
distinguish taxa cannot be determined [10]. However, in
the absence of better strategies, this method at least provides a rigorously derived threshold value [25].
Library species completeness

Based on their study of species in one family of Diptera, Ekrem et al. [9] concluded that assigning a barcode record to the correct genus or species-group was
unlikely unless a “near perfect” match is present in the
reference library with the further prediction that a
“comprehensive” library is also essential for accurate
assignment to family or even order. Furthermore, Ball
and Armstrong [4] suggested that the failure of a
lymantriine barcode to group with other members of
its subfamily was attributable to low taxon sampling in
their reference library (also see [5,34]). Considering
that growth of the DNA barcode library will take time,
a key issue concerns the effect of completeness of the
reference library on the accuracy of higher taxon
assignments. By using a global and comprehensive barcode reference library of considerable phylogenetic
breadth (86% of known species in the family), the
Sphingidae, we addressed this uncertainty through
simulating different levels of species completeness of
the reference library and examining the effect on
assignment accuracy.

Page 4 of 14

Methods
Query dataset, 100% reference library and sub-libraries

Using barcode records assembled as part of the global
barcoding campaign on Sphingidae [15], we selected one
barcode from each species to act as a reference barcode
for that taxon. Reference barcodes were available for
1088 of the 1270 described species listed in Kitching
and Cadiou [16] and for an additional seven Costa
Rican species described or revalidated since 2000 (=
1095 sphingid species). Barcode sequences were selected
to maximize length and quality and ranged from 267658 bp, with 77% being 658 bp and 93% > 600 bp. The
sample comprised 200 genera with all the currently
recognised tribes and subfamilies (Figure 1A) represented. Three saturniid barcodes (Arsenura drucei,
Lonomia electra, Periga cluacina) were also included as
this family represents the putative sister family to the
Sphingidae [35] taking the full reference library to 1098
barcodes (see additional file 1: Full reference library).
Barcodes from 118 sphingid species collected in Area
de Conservacion Guanacaste, northwestern Costa Rica,
were used as query barcodes (see additional file 2:
Query dataset). DNA was extracted following automated
protocols [36] and the DNA barcode amplified and
sequenced [37]. These Costa Rican sphingids comprised
a well-documented [38,39], diverse subset of the family,
with each of the tribes and subfamilies represented
among 29 genera. All the queries were correctly
assigned to species when using the full reference library
and a “best match” assignment criterion.
For the purposes of this study the following were considered libraries of 100% completeness: for genus assignment attempts, the representative from the same species
as that of the query was the only barcode removed from
the reference library; for tribe and subfamily assignment
attempts, the barcodes from all the representatives of
species in the genus of the query were removed from
the reference library. All contribal genera were not
removed in the case of subfamily tests, due to the
increased level of uncertainty regarding naturalness of
these taxa.
We subsequently created sub-libraries from the full
reference library with different levels of species completeness. In an approach termed here “random sampling”
barcodes were chosen at random to construct sublibraries comprising 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 and
90% of the full reference library. Sub-sampling at each
species richness level was repeated 30 times. A different
approach termed here “constrained sampling” limited
the random selection of species to ensure a minimum of
one species per genus in the sub-library. This approach
was reiterated to construct sub-libraries comprising 20,
30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 and 90% of the full reference

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

library and was repeated 30 times at each species completeness level. For the sub-libraries as with the 100%
library, for genus assignment attempts, we removed the
reference barcode for the species of the query from the
sub-libraries. For tribe and subfamily assignment
attempts we removed the reference barcodes for the
genus of the query.
Query assignment criteria

In each assignment attempt we allowed two possible
outcomes: (i) A “positive” assignment (i.e. the query was
assigned to a taxon) or (ii) An “ambiguous” assignment
(i.e. the query was not assigned to a taxon). A “positive”
assignment was either true (TP) - it matched with the
morphology-based identification, or false (FP) - it disagreed with the morphology-based identification [40].
An “ambiguous” assignment was either true (TA) - the
true taxon based on morphology was not represented in
the reference library/sub-library (by at least two barcodes for “strict” criteria (Table 1)), or false (FA) - the
true taxon based on morphology was represented in the
reference library/sub-library (by at least two barcodes
for “strict” criteria (Table 1)) [40].
The requirements for a “positive” assignment depend
on the different criteria employed as detailed in Table 1.
Note, the number of “potential TP” will not always be
equal to 118 (i.e. the number of queries) because the
taxon of the query may not be present in the sublibrary. For example, the number of “potential TP” at
the genus level with the 100% library and the “liberal”
criterion is 113, due to 5 queries being members of
monobasic genera.
We developed software in C++ to automatically construct sub-libraries, perform assignments according to
four tree-based criteria and evaluate assignment success.
The main tool took as input the queries, the outgroups,
the complete reference library (all in fasta format), the
sampling strategy, and an integer (X) indicating the percentage of the reference library to sampled. The software automated the analytical process as follows:
For each query:
For each replication:
Remove query species (or genus) from reference
library.
Randomly select × percent of reference library
without replacement according to input sampling
strategy.
Combine query, outgroups, sampled reference
library into a single file.
Construct NJ tree from file using Clustal W v.2
[41].
For each of four criteria:

Page 5 of 14

Read tree, assign query a taxon or not
according to criterion.
Evaluate accuracy of assignment (true or
false).
The four tree-based methods were “liberal” (Figure
2A) [40], “strict” (Figure 2B) [25,40], “liberal & exclusive” and “strict & exclusive”. We also performed “best
match” for all taxon assignments and “best match” and
“best close match” for assignment to genus (with the
randomly sampled library) where assignment was based
only on the most similar reference library barcode
(Table 1). For “best match” only a “positive” assignment
is possible (i.e. the assignment is TP or FP) (Table 1).

Figure 2 Visualisation of two tree-based assignment criteria.
The distinction between a “positive” and an “ambiguous”
assignment and how the assignment is achieved - based on the
location of the query on the tree. A). “Liberal” - When the query
barcode (Q) was sister to (Aus, Q) a clade comprising members of a
single taxon, Aus, the assignment was that of the taxon in the
clade, Aus (i.e. “positive”). When Q is sister to a clade comprised of
multiple taxa, Aus and Bus, the assignment was “ambiguous”. B).
“Strict” - When the query sequence (Q) was nested within a clade
comprising of members of a single taxon ((Aus, Q)Aus) the
assignment was that of the taxon in the clade, Aus (i.e. “positive”).
When Q is nested within a clade of multiple taxa ((Aus, Q)Bus)) the
assignment was “ambiguous”.

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

Page 6 of 14

For “best close match” the query was assigned to the
taxon of the most similar library barcode based on K2P
distance, provided it was within a certain threshold. If
there were no barcodes in the library within the threshold, the assignment was “ambiguous”. In order to select
a threshold we looked at the results of the “best match”
criterion and plotted the number of “true-positives” and
“false-positives” against the K2P distance from the query
to the “best match”. The distance that maximized the
number of TP (which in our case also corresponded to
the distance with the lowest proportion of FP) was
selected as the threshold.
Measures of accuracy were calculated as follows: 1.
Precision, the fraction of barcodes placed in a taxon that
belongs there, TP/(TP+FP); and 2. Overall Accuracy, the
proportion of barcodes placed without any error, (TP
+TA)/(TP+FP+TA+FA) [33]. Note, for ‘best match” due
to the absence of the “ambiguous” category overall

accuracy equals precision. The results are discussed
below in terms of these measures.

Results
The results of all the experiments are provided in additional file 3: Results of all experiments.
Correct assignments to genus, tribe and subfamily (100%
library)

The overall accuracy of assignment to genus was 0.83
using the “liberal” and 0.75 using the “strict” criterion.
The precision of assignment to genus was 0.86 using the
“liberal” and 0.98 using the “strict” criterion. A number
of query species were consistently assigned to the wrong
genus across all analyses resulting in FP. Even though
these FP were technically incorrect assignments Table 2
details how in many cases the assignments made some
sense considering the taxonomic structure and

Table 2 False-positive assignments at the genus level
Query Sequence

Assignment

Notes

Eupyrrhoglossum sagra (2)

Aellopos (5)

Aellopos and Eupyrrhoglossum are most likely a sister pair [17]. Eupyrrhoglossum differs from
Aellopos only in forewing veins Rs3 and Rs4 remaining separate apically and the phallus lacking
spines on the right side (Kitching, personal communication).

Madoryx plutonius (4)

Pseudosphinx (1)

Pseudosphinx was close to Madoryx on the Kawahara et al. [17] phylogeny and both genera
belong to the same tribe (Dilophonotini). Pseudosphinx is very close to Isognathus; indeed, it
could be argued it is just an oversized Isognathus without yellow in the hindwing (Kitching,
personal communication).

Madoryx oiclus (4)

Hemeroplanes (4)

Hemeroplanes was close to Madoryx on the Kawahara et al. [17] phylogeny and are considered a
sister pair (Kitching, personal communication).

Manduca albiplaga (58)

Apocalypsis (1)

Apocalypsis and M. albiplaga were not sampled by Kawahara et al. [17], however, Apocalypsis was
mentioned as an oriental genus expected to fall near the base of the Acherontini/Sphingini clade
which included a paraphyletic Manduca.

Neococytius cluentius (1)

Amphimoea (1)

Amphimoea was not sampled by Kawahara et al. [17] but was placed by Kitching [49] as the
sister to Neococytius + Cocytius.

Pachylia darceta (3)

Pachylioides (1)

Pachylioides and Pachylia were not closely related on the Kawahara et al. [17] phylogeny,
however, Rothschild and Jordan [50] noted a closer morphological similarity of darceta to
resumens, both then being in Pachylia, than to the other two Pachylia, ficus and syces. Conversely,
the larvae (e.g. direction of stripes) suggests a closer link between darceta and ficus + syces
(Kitching, personal communication).

Pachylia ficus (3)

Kloneus (1)

P. ficus and Kloneus were sister taxa on the Kawahara et al. [17] phylogeny, and Kloneus is
considered just a Pachylia with a crenulated forewing outer edge (Kitching, personal
communication).

Pachylia syces (3)

Phylloxiphia (10)

Phylloxiphia, an African genus not sampled by Kawahara et al. [17], is part of the Clanis group of
Smerinthinae and a long way removed from P. syces (Kitching, personal communication).

Pachylioides resumens (1)

Pachylia (3)

Pachylioides and Pachylia were not closely related on the Kawahara et al. [17] phylogeny, but
were associated by Kitching and Cadiou [16].

Phryxus caicus (1)

Erinnyis (10

Not included by Kawahara et al. [17] but linked by Kitching and Cadiou [16] with Phryxus
considered just a highly divergent Erinnyis.

Pseudosphinx tetrio (1)

Madoryx (4)

Pseudosphinx and Madoryx were reciprocally mis-assigned. See above.

Xylophanes godmani (80)

Theretra (38)

X.godmani was not sampled by Kawahara et al. [17] but Xylophanes and Theretra are members of
the same tribe (Choericampina) and were suggested to be closely related by Hunsdoefer et al.
[51] based on their mtDNA phylogeny.

Xylophanes turbata (80)

Chaerocina (3)

X. turbata was not sampled by Kawahara et al. [17], but the unexpected placement of
Chaerocina, close to Xylophanes, was observed on their phylogeny.

Species and genus names are followed by a number in brackets which gives the number of species in the genus in the 100% reference library, e.g. Neococytius
cluentius (1) is the sole member of Neococytius in the 100% reference library.

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

phylogeny of the family. These included four species in
monobasic genera: Pachylioides resumens, Phryxus caicus, Pseudosphinx tetrio, and Neococytius cluentius, for
which the only possible outcomes were FP or TA, since
a query belonging to a monobasic genera cannot be a
TP. A second group of FP were query barcodes
(Madoryx plutonius, Manduca albiplaga, Pachylia darceta and Pachylia ficus) assigned to monobasic genera
in the reference library (see Table 2). Queries belonged
to species not present in the reference library, monobasic genera have only a single species that was present in
the library, therefore, this group could more correctly be
interpreted as TA or FA assignments. Two FP, Xylophanes godmani and Xylophanes turbata, were queries
from an exceptionally species-rich genus (104 species
globally). The overall accuracy of assignment to genus
in this study was similar to that reported by Elias et al.
[24] who found 69-81% of their Ithomiinae queries were
assigned to the correct genus using tree-based criteria.

Page 7 of 14

Overall accuracy of assignment to tribe was 0.75 using
the “liberal” and 0.66 using the “strict” criterion (Figure
3). Precision of assignment to tribe was 0.81 using the
“liberal” and 0.95 using the “strict” criterion. Many of
the query barcodes placed in the wrong tribe belonged
to genera that are positioned as paraphyletic or polyphyletic with respect to their current tribal designations,
according to recent phylogenetic study (e.g. Agrius,
Aleuron, Cautethia, Cocytius, Enyo, Eumorpha, Pachygonidia [17]), or were on long branches in a basal position
(Pachylia) within their tribe. An instructive example is
Eumorpha, a genus currently placed in the tribe Philampelini. Query barcodes belonging to Eumorpha were
assigned to tribe Macroglossini. This is consistent with
the placement of Eumorpha (+Enyo) as sister to a clade
comprised of Macroglossini on the phylogeny of Kawahara et al. [17].
Overall accuracy of assignment to subfamily was 0.90
using the “liberal” and 0.84 using the “strict” criterion

Figure 3 Rankings of assignment criteria based on overall accuracy and precision. Ranking of assignment criteria, four tree-based ("liberal”,
strict”, “liberal & exclusive”, “strict & exclusive”) and one direct sequence comparison ("best-match”) for assignments across three taxonomic levels
(genus, tribe, subfamily) using a library with 100% of available species.

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

with “best match” having the highest overall accuracy
for this taxonomic level (0.92) (Figure 3). Precision of
assignment to subfamily was 0.83 using the “liberal” and
0.96 using the “strict” criterion.
Success of tree-based assignment criteria

Considering Figures 4 and 5, it is clear that different criteria produced contrasting results. For example, “liberal”
was frequently the highest scoring criteria in terms of
overall accuracy (Figure 3), but performed less well in
terms of precision with an average of 18% of assignments to genus being FP (Figure 4). “Strict” had lower

Page 8 of 14

overall accuracy across all sub-libraries, but higher precision with an average of only 2% of assignments to
genus being FP (Figure 4).
The criteria requiring exclusivity resulted in an overwhelming number of FA assignments (Figure 5) and produced very low overall accuracy and precision despite
their lower incidence of FP (Figure 5). Note that the success rate for criteria without the exclusivity requirement
are higher, because they did not require “monophyly"; i.e.
queries can be assigned on trees with congeneric (or contribal and subfamilial) barcodes found in two different
“clades” as long as the rules of the criterion are met.

Figure 4 Taxonomic assignment success for “liberal”, “strict” and “best match”. DNA barcode higher taxonomic assignment success across
three taxonomic levels (genus, tribe, subfamily) using two tree-based criteria ("liberal”, “strict”) and one direct sequence comparison criterion
("best match”) for 118 query species, with reference sub-libraries of varying species completeness (10-100% of available species).

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

Page 9 of 14

that was matched by extremely low overall accuracy
(Figure 5). Precision was consistently high for the
“strict” criterion (> 0.90) for all sub-libraries and for
assignments to all taxonomic levels. Precision was
lower using “liberal” but conversely overall accuracy
was higher (Figure 7).
The effect of library completeness was visible in
assignment to genus using “liberal” with overall accuracy
increasing from 0.59 with the 10% sub-library to 0.83
with the 100% library (Figure 7). Using “strict” however,
overall accuracy although generally lower was relatively
stable regardless of library completeness, increasing only
0.06 between the 10% and 100% libraries. The opposite
pattern was seen in overall accuracy of assignments to
tribe and subfamily with “liberal” being more stable
across sub-libraries, and “strict” being more variable
(Figure 7).
Results for assignment to genus using random versus
constrained sampling of sub-libraries were very close in
terms of overall accuracy, with constrained having
slightly lower overall accuracy across all completeness
levels (Figure 4a). Conversely, constrained sub-libraries
resulted in assignments with slightly higher precision
across all completeness levels.
Figure 5 Taxonomic assignment success for exclusivity criteria.
DNA barcode higher taxonomic assignment success across three
taxonomic levels (genus, tribe, subfamily) using two tree-based
criteria requiring exclusivity of taxa ("liberal & exclusive”, “strict &
exclusive”) for 118 query species, with reference sub-libraries of
varying species completeness (10-100% of available species).

Success of sequence comparison assignment criteria

Success under “best match” was similar to “strict” at the
tribe level but very similar to “liberal” at the subfamily
level (Figure 4), where it actually had the highest overall
accuracy but was still behind the “strict” criteria in
terms of precision (Figure 3).
In order to be able to use “best close match”, we first
determined the optimal threshold to be 0.05 K2P distance
(Figure 6) and this value was used to decide whether a
query had a close enough barcode match be given a “positive” assignment. “Best close match” successfully reduced
the high number of FP seen with “best match” (Figure 6),
but, like the “strict” criterion resulted in a large number of
FA. Success under “best close match” was very similar to
“strict” but it produced a much lower number of TP with
the larger sub-libraries (Figure 6).
Effect of library completeness

The “liberal” and “strict” criteria were generally the
highest-scoring criteria in terms of overall accuracy
and precision across all taxonomic levels and all sublibraries (Figure 3 and 4). An exception was the high
precision observed for the “strict & exclusive” criterion

Discussion
We present the results from an in-depth study of higher
taxon assignment using DNA barcoding. The reader of
DNA barcode literature may be surprised by the assignment accuracy reported here, values that may contrast
with the expectation of authors like Ekrem et al. [9].
This may be explained largely by differences in study
design. Our experimental design measures the relative
precision and overall accuracy of different assignment
criteria across reference libraries of different levels of
completeness and structure. No single assignment criterion was superior across the range of taxonomic scenarios examined and there was often a conflict between
overall accuracy and precision. Our results discussed
below, together with implications for criterion selection,
indicate a clear requirement for species to be in taxa
that are well-differentiated clades to maximize the number of correct assignments. Whether these success rates
are high enough to be useful remains a judgment call
for the end-user.
Assessing barcoding accuracy with taxonomic
classifications

In this study we have presented simplified examples
where the species of the query barcode is missing from
reference libraries (and the entire genus for assignments
to tribe and subfamily) to ensure we were solely addressing the question of assigning the query to the next
least inclusive taxon. By excluding the possibility of a

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

Page 10 of 14

Figure 6 The “best match” criterion used for genus assignments. a) Selecting a threshold for the “best close match” criterion. We looked at
the results of the “best match” criterion and plotted the number of assignments (y axis) against the K2P distance (x axis) between the queries
and the “best match” reference library barcodes ("true positives” as positive values above the × axis and “false positives” below the × axis). The
distance that maximized the number of TP (which in our case also corresponded to the distance with the lowest proportion of FP) was selected
as the threshold based on visual inspection of the histogram (i.e. 0.05) and is indicated by the dashed vertical line. The small inset chart is a
cartoon showing how each section of the larger chart corresponds to each of the four “best close match” assignment outcomes (TP, FP, TA and
FA) depending on the selection of a threshold i.e. placement of a vertical line. b) DNA barcode genus assignment success based on two
sequence direct comparison criteria ("best match”, “best close match”) for 118 query species, with reference sub-libraries of varying species
completeness (10-100% of available species selected randomly).

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

Page 11 of 14

Figure 7 Overall accuracy and precision across library completeness. Average overall accuracy and precision scores across DNA barcode
libraries of varying completeness (10-100% of available species) for two tree-based assignment criteria, “liberal” and “strict”.

species (or genus) match, which would effectively provide the higher taxonomy of the query, this study was a
rigorous test of the effect of assignment criteria and species completeness of the reference library on higher
taxon assignments. The arbiter of success was necessarily a classification [16] that is already considered “out
of date” [17,42]. As such, a pertinent issue to DNA barcoding success is taxonomy/species tree incongruence as
well as species tree/gene tree incongruence [43]. This is
especially the case for the large species-rich genera e.g.
Xylophanes, Manduca, where generic boundaries may
need to be revisited [17] (Table 2). The effect of using
an “old” classification was perhaps particularly apparent
when considering the results of the tribe experiments,
although adoption of a new classification did not appear
to improve assignment accuracy (data not presented).
FP at the tribe and subfamily level often reflected new
knowledge of Sphingidae phylogeny [17], and therefore
reflect real phylogenetic signal among barcode
sequences.
The Sphingidae has received a relatively extensive treatment by taxonomists. This raises a concern for other lesswell-studied groups; how accurately can barcoding be
expected to assign queries to taxa that are most likely not
natural [24,44,45]? While this study provided few examples where the barcode assignment was clearly at odds
with current taxonomic understanding, it would be much
more difficult to assess in other moth families. Despite
most systematists adhering to cladistics since Hennig [46],
many “good” Lepidoptera taxa, including those within
Sphingidae [17], lack reliable (private) morphological synapomorphies which would enable rapid assignment of species to higher taxa. It is difficult to assess how our results
would compare with morphological assignment accuracy

by a non-specialist. However, it is clear that even a specialist taxonomist would have difficulty in assigning an egg to
a genus, while DNA barcoding can be used with any tissue
sample from any life stage. There are groups of species e.g.
from Microlepidoptera, Pyralidae, that are far more difficult to assign morphologically to taxa and lack of morphological synapomorphies may reflect the instability of the
current classification. The results presented here echo the
relative stability of subfamilial and generic taxa compared
to the tribes [16,17] suggesting the real challenge in taxonomy is to build new, robust phylogenies, and ensure that
these are reflected in the classification.
Another challenge highlighted by our study is the lack
of equivalency of taxonomic ranks [47] in terms of
genetic distance [48]. This is clear through our inability
to increase success of sequence comparison criteria
through the use of “best close match”. An optimal
threshold will always be taxon specific and even within
a relatively small group a universal threshold is unlikely
to be effective. Avise and John [48] proposed a temporal
scheme to standardize taxonomic ranks. However, an
obvious objection is that the scheme would require significant revisions of all groups. Instead of speeding up
taxonomic work, to be effective, large-scale employment
of a distance-based assignment criterion would have to
start with the redefinition of most taxa. Like Kelly et al.
[33], we furthermore found that tree-based criteria outperform the direct sequence comparison methods,
thereby rendering threshold values for “taxon-level”
divergences unnecessary.
Effect of library structure and completeness

When the query’s taxon was not in the reference library,
only “strict” was relatively immune to FP, and

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

consequently was the best scoring criterion in terms of
precision. Given this ability to limit FP, “strict” was also
the criterion for which overall accuracy was least
affected by reference library completeness.
It seems intuitive that “best match” would perform
better in libraries where taxon matches are always available. However, in real-life, it is impossible to know
whether a query is from a “new” taxon or from a taxon
that is already represented in the reference library. Considering the problems with direct sequence comparison
methods, relying solely on distances, we do not believe
they are promising tools although arguably these are the
most practical. Interestingly, “best match” had highest
overall accuracy, beating tree-based criteria at the highest taxonomic level investigated in this study subfamily.
We tested criteria that allow for “ambiguous” assignments and found library completeness had a weak effect
and high overall accuracy and precision was seen at low
completeness. Our comparison of constrained and randomly selected reference sub-libraries showed that accuracy is not compromised by the absence of taxa in the
reference library. We found that whether the library was
incomplete or all species were present in the library, the
criteria selected to provide an assignment was still a factor determining success.
Strategies for higher taxonomic level assignment

Techniques for assigning sequences to a higher taxon
are still in their infancy, but new methods are appearing
more frequently (e.g. CAOS [28]). Based on our results,
we suggest a conservative approach that initially uses a
“strict” tree-based criterion in large-scale assignment
systems. Although a large number of queries would
remain ambiguous due to the more conservative nature
of the criterion, we nevertheless consider this result
with its higher precision to be preferable to an assignment criterion like “best match”, which yields marginally
more TP but also a large number of FP. Criteria requiring exclusivity were the most conservative, but given
their very low overall accuracy and precision they would
probably only be justifiable for forensic purposes [19].
Tree-based criteria could be easily incorporated into
the current library set-up (BOLD), by providing higher
taxonomy alongside the species name attached to barcodes on a Taxon-ID tree. The current approach offered
by BOLD uses a similarity search to collect the top 100
hits in the reference library and then constructs a NJ
tree to allow the attachment of a query barcode to this
100 best backbone tree [3]. From this tree an attempt
can be made to assign the query to genus using “strict”.
However, if no “positive” genus assignment can be
made, an attempt could be made at assignment to tribe,
etc. Alternatively, an assignment can be attempted to a

Page 12 of 14

taxonomic level determined by the taxonomic sufficiency requirements of the investigators. For example,
water monitoring using invertebrate diversity indices
may only require samples be identified to family to be
useful. Some could argue that heuristic taxonomic
groupings (OTUs) based on barcodes are better than no
taxonomic hypothesis at all, and certainly superior to
heuristic morphology-based equivalents, being rooted in
a standardised, objective, consistently coded character
set.

Conclusions
Our empirical test of higher taxonomic assignments
reveals that a tree-based assignment system would successfully assign most queries to a higher taxon at some
level. A conservative approach using the “strict” treebased method should be used initially in large-scale
identification systems. The failures we observed do not
make us question the usefulness of barcode libraries for
generic and suprageneric assignments. They indicate
imperfect taxonomy and suggest that the barcodes
themselves could aid our ability to revise non-natural
taxa. An advantage of any DNA-based system is that
the data are readily available for further analysis with
alternative models or approaches. Discounting DNA
barcoding as a tool for providing taxonomic assignments because the library is not yet complete is
pusillanimous.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Full reference library. Excel worksheet containing a
list of COI sequences used in the full reference library in this study,
including the species name attached to the barcode and BOLD (http://
www.barcodinglife.org) Sample IDs and Process IDs.
Additional file 2: Query dataset. Excel worksheet containing a list of
COI sequences used as the query dataset in this study, including the
species name attached to the barcode and BOLD (http://www.
barcodinglife.org) Sample IDs and Process IDs.
Additional file 3: Results of all experiments. Excel worksheet
containing the summarized results of all the experiments performed.

Acknowledgements
This study was funded by grants from NSERC and Genome Canada through
the Ontario Genomics Institute to PDNH. Acquisition of the 118 species of
query sphingids was supported by USA NSF grants DEB 0072730 and
0515699 to DHJ and the staff of ACG. The sphingid reference library includes
contributions by Sam Adams, Philippe Annoyer, Patrick Basquin, Robert Beck,
Alex Borisenko, Ron Brechlin, Philippe Darge, Ulf Eitschberger, Yves Estradel,
Axel Hausmann, John Janovec, Jean-François Landry, Tomas Melichar, Scott
J. Miller, Joël Minet, Kim Mitter, Jacques Pierre, Chris Schmidt, James Tuttle,
Thierry Vaglia, Evgeny Zakharov; many taxa were only accessible within the
collections of the following institutions: the Australian National Insect
Collection (Canberra), The Smithsonian Institution (Washington), the Muséum
National d’Histoire Naturelle (Paris), the Canadian National Collections of
Insects and Arachnids (Ottawa), the Bavarian State Collection of Zoology
(Munich). JJW would like to thank the staff and visitors to BIO and the
Hanner lab for helpful discussions and encouragement over the course of

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

Page 13 of 14

this study. Massimiliano Virgilio and an anonymous reviewer significantly
improved the manuscript through their comments.
19.
Author details
1
Department of Integrative Biology & Biodiversity Institute of Ontario,
University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. 2Department of
Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
3
Department of Entomology, Natural History Museum, London, SW7 5BD,
UK. 4Honorary Attaché, Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle de Paris, Le
Roc, F-47310 Laplume, France. 5ECODIV, Université de Rouen, Bâtiment IRESE
A, Place Emile Blondel, F-76821 Mont Saint Aignan Cedex, France.

20.

21.

22.
Authors’ contributions
JJW, RR, JS, PDNH conceived of the project and designed experiments. JJW,
DHJ, WH, MH assembled the query dataset. RR, IJK, JH assembled the
sphingid reference library and made it available for this study. JJW, RR, JS
performed the experiments and analyzed the data. JJW, RR, JS drafted the
manuscript. DHJ, WH, MH, IJK, PDNH assisted in writing the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

23.

24.

Received: 12 April 2011 Accepted: 1 August 2011
Published: 1 August 2011

25.

References
1. Waugh J: DNA barcoding in animal species: progress, potential and
pitfalls. BioEssays 2007, 29:188-197.
2. Floyd R, Wilson JJ, Hebert PDN: DNA barcodes and insect biodiversity. In
Insect Biodiversity: Science and Society. Edited by: Foottit RG, Adler PH.
Oxford, Blackwell Publishing; 2009:417-431.
3. Ratnasingham S, Hebert PDN: BOLD: The Barcode of Life Data System
[http://www.dnabarcoding.org]. Mol Ecol Notes 2007, 7:355-364.
4. Ball SL, Armstrong KF: DNA barcodes for insect pest identification: a test
case with tussock moths (Lepidoptera: Lymantriidae). Can J For Res 2006,
36:337-350.
5. Hebert PDN, Cywinska A, Ball SL, deWaard JR: Biological identifications
through DNA barcodes. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2003, 270:313-321.
6. Kerr KCR, Lijtmaer DA, Barreira AS, Hebert PDN, Tubaro PL: Probing
evolutionary patterns in Neotropical birds through DNA barcodes. PLoS
ONE 2009, 4(2):e4379.
7. Handfield D, Handfield L: A new species of Plusia (Lepidoptera:
Noctuidae) from North America. Canadian Entomologist 2006, 138:853-859.
8. Armstrong KF, Ball SL: DNA barcodes for biosecurity: Invasive species
identification. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond B 2005, 360:1813-1823.
9. Ekrem T, Willassen E, Stur E: A comprehensive DNA sequence library is
essential for identification with DNA barcodes. Mol Phyl Evol 2007,
43:530-542.
10. Rach J, DeSalle R, Sarkar IN, Schierwater B, Hadrys H: Character-based DNA
barcoding allows discrimination of genera, species and populations in
Odonata. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2008, 275:237-247.
11. Whitworth TL, Dawson RD, Magalon H, Baudry E: DNA barcoding cannot
reliably identify species of the blowfly genus Protocalliphora (Diptera:
Calliphoridae). Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2007, 274:1731-1739.
12. Hebert PDN, Ratnasingham S, deWaard JR: Barcoding animal life:
cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 divergences among closely related
species. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2003, 270:S96-S99.
13. Harris P: Food-plant groups of Semanophorinae (LepidopteraSphingidae): A possible taxonomic tool. Canadian Entomologist 1972,
104:71-80.
14. Wilson JJ: Assessing the value of DNA barcodes and other priority gene
regions for molecular phylogenetics of Lepidoptera. PLoS ONE 2010, 5(5):
e10525.
15. Lepidoptera barcode of Life: Sphingidae. [http://www.lepbarcoding.org/
sphingidae/index.php].
16. Kitching IJ, Cadiou J-M: Hawkmoths of the world: annotated and illustrated
revisionary checklist Ithaca, Cornell University Press; 2000.
17. Kawahara AY, Mignault AA, Regier JC, Kitching IJ, Mitter C: Phylogeny and
biogeography of hawkmoths (Lepidoptera: Sphingidae): evidence from
five nuclear genes. PLoS ONE 2009, 4(5):e5719.
18. Clare EL, Fraser EE, Braid HE, Fenton MB, Hebert PDN: Species on the
menu of a generalist predator, the eastern red bat (Lasiurus borealis):

26.
27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.

33.
34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.
41.
42.

using a molecular approach to detect arthropod prey. Mol Ecol 2009,
18:2532-2542.
Cohen NJ, Deeds JR, Wong ES, Hanner RH, Yancy HF, et al: Public health
response to puffer fish (tetrodotoxin) poisoning from mislabeled
product. J Food Protection 2009, 72:810-817.
Jurado-Rivera JA, Vogler AP, Reid CAM, Petitpierre E, Gomez-Zurita J: DNA
barcoding insect-host plant associations. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2009,
276:639-648.
Levkanicova Z, Bocak L: Identification of net-winged beetle larvae
(Coleoptera: Lycidae) using three mtDNA fragments: a comparison of
their utility. Syst Entomol 2009, 34:210-221.
Pons J: DNA-based identification of preys from non-destructive, total
DNA extractions of predators using arthropod universal primers. Mol Ecol
Notes 6:623-626.
DeSalle R, Egan MG, Siddall M: The unholy trinity: taxonomy, species
delimitation and DNA barcoding. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond B 2005,
36:1905-1916.
Elias M, Hill RI, Willmott KR, Dasmahapatra KK, Brower AVZ, et al: Limited
performance of DNA barcoding in diverse community of tropical
butterflies. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2007, 274:2881-2889.
Meier R, Shiyany K, Vaidya G, Ng PKL: DNA barcoding and taxonomy in
Diptera: a tale of high intraspecific variability and low identification
success. Syst Biol 2006, 55:715-728.
Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406-25.
Sayers EW, Barrett T, Benson DA, Bolton E, Bryant SH, et al: Database
resources of the National Center for Biotechnology Information. Nuc
Acids Res 2009, 38:D5-D16.
Sarkar IN, Planet PJ, DeSalle R: CAOS software for use in character-based
DNA barcoding. Mol Ecol Res 2008, 8:1256-1259.
Little DP, Stevenson DW: A comparison of algorithms for the
identification of specimens using DNA barcodes: examples from
gymnosperms. Cladistics 2007, 23:1-27.
Wiens JJ, Servedio MR: Species delimitation in systematics: inferring
diagnostic differences between species. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2000,
267:631-636.
Wong E, Shivji MS, Hanner RH: Identifying sharks with DNA barcodes:
assessing the utility of a nucleotide diagnostic approach. Mol Ecol Res
2009, 9(Suppl 1):243-256.
Kimura M: A simple method for estimating evolutionary rates of base
substitutions through comparative studies of nucleotide sequences. J
Mol Evol 1980, 16:111-120.
Kelly RP, Sarkar IN, Eernisse DJ, Desalle R: DNA barcoding using chitons
(genus Mopalia). Mol Ecol Notes 2007, 7:177-183.
Ball SL, Hebert PDN, Burian SK, Webb JM: Biological identifications of
mayflies (Ephemeroptera) using DNA barcodes. J Nor Amer Benth Soc
2005, 24:508-524.
Regier JC, Cook CP, Mitter C, Hussey A: A phylogenetic study of the
‘bombycoid complex’ (Lepidoptera) using five protein-coding nuclear
genes, with comments on the problem of macrolepidopteran
phylogeny. Syst Entomol 2008, 33:175-189.
Ivanova NV, DeWaard JR, Hebert PDN: An inexpensive, automationfriendly protocol for recovering high-quality DNA. Mol Ecol Notes 2006,
6:998-1002.
Hajibabaei M, Janzen DH, Burns JM, Hallwachs W, Hebert PDN: DNA
barcodes distinguish species of tropical Lepidoptera. Proc Nat Acad Sci
USA 2006, 103:968-971.
Janzen DH, Hajibabaei M, Burns JM, Hallwachs W, Remigio E, Hebert PDN:
Wedding biodiversity inventory of a large and complex Lepidoptera
fauna with DNA barcoding. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond B 2005, 360:1835-1845.
Janzen D, Hallwachs W, Blandin P, Burns JM, Cadiou J-M, et al: Integration
of DNA barcoding into an ongoing inventory of complex tropical
biodiversity. Mol Ecol Res 2009, 9:1-25.
Ross HA, Murugan S, Li WLS: Testing the reliability of genetic methods of
species identification via simulation. Syst Biol 2008, 57:216-230.
Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA, et al:
Clustal W and Clustal × version 2.0. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2947-2948.
Regier JC, Mitter C, Friedlander TP, Peigler RS: Phylogenetic relationships
and evolution of hostplant use in Sphingidae (Lepidoptera): initial
evidence from two nuclear genes. Mol Phyl Evol 2001, 20:311-316.

Wilson et al. BMC Ecology 2011, 11:18
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6785/11/18

Page 14 of 14

43. Rubinoff D, Cameron S, Will K: A genomic perspective on the
shortcomings of mitochondrial DNA for “barcoding” identification.
Journal of Heredity 2006, 97(6):581-594.
44. Meyer CP, Paulay G: DNA barcoding: error rates based on comprehensive
sampling. PloS Biology 2005, 3:e422.
45. Vogler AP: Will DNA barcoding advance efforts to conserve biodiversity
more efficiently than traditional taxonomic methods? Front Ecol Environ
2006, 4:270-272.
46. Hennig W: Phylogenetic Systematics Urbana, University of Illinois Press; 1966.
47. Nazari V, Zakharov EV, Sperling FAH: Phylogeny, historical biogeography,
and taxonomic ranking of Parnassiinae (Lepidoptera, Papilionidae) based
on morphology and seven genes. Mol Phyl Evol 2007, 42:131-156.
48. Avise JC, Johns GC: Proposal for a standardized temporal scheme of
biological classification for extant species. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1999,
96:7358-7363.
49. Kitching IJ: The phylogenetic relationships of Morgan’s Sphinx,
Xanthopan morganii (Walker), the tribe Acherontiini, and allied longtongued hawkmoths (Lepidoptera: Sphingidae, Sphinginae). Zoo J Lin
Soc 2002, 135:471-527.
50. Rothschild LW, Jordan K: A revision of the lepidopterous family
Sphingidae. Novitates Zoologicae 1903, 9(suppl):1-972.
51. Hundsdoerfer AK, Kitching IJ, Wink M: A molecular phylogeny of the
hawkmoth genus Hyles (Lepidoptera: Sphingidae, Macroglossinae). Mol
Phyl Evol 2005, 35:442-458.
doi:10.1186/1472-6785-11-18
Cite this article as: Wilson et al.: When species matches are unavailable
are DNA barcodes correctly assigned to higher taxa? An assessment
using sphingid moths. BMC Ecology 2011 11:18.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
