<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Speciation in little: the role of range and body size in the diversification of Malagasy mantellid frogs</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-217"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Katharina C Wollenberg"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Speciation in little: the role of range and body
size in the diversification of Malagasy mantellid
frogs
Wollenberg et al.
Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217 (21 July 2011)

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Speciation in little: the role of range and body
size in the diversification of Malagasy mantellid
frogs
Katharina C Wollenberg1*, David R Vieites2, Frank Glaw3 and Miguel Vences4

Abstract
Background: The rate and mode of lineage diversification might be shaped by clade-specific traits. In Madagascar,
many groups of organisms are characterized by tiny distribution ranges and small body sizes, and this high degree
of microendemism and miniaturization parallels a high species diversity in some of these groups. We here
investigate the geographic patterns characterizing the radiation of the frog family Mantellidae that is virtually
endemic to Madagascar. We integrate a newly reconstructed near-complete species-level timetree of the
Mantellidae with georeferenced distribution records and maximum male body size data to infer the influence of
these life-history traits on each other and on mantellid diversification.
Results: We reconstructed a molecular phylogeny based on nuclear and mitochondrial DNA for 257 species and
candidate species of the mantellid frog radiation. Based on this phylogeny we identified 53 well-supported pairs of
sister species that we used for phylogenetic comparative analyses, along with whole tree-based phylogenetic
comparative methods. Sister species within the Mantellidae diverged at 0.2-14.4 million years ago and more
recently diverged sister species had geographical range centroids more proximate to each other, independently of
their current sympatric or allopatric occurrence. The largest number of sister species pairs had non-overlapping
ranges, but several examples of young microendemic sister species occurring in full sympatry suggest the
possibility of non-allopatric speciation. Range sizes of species included in the sister species comparisons increased
with evolutionary age, as did range size differences between sister species, which rejects peripatric speciation. For
the majority of mantellid sister species and the whole mantellid radiation, range and body sizes were associated
with each other and small body sizes were linked to higher mitochondrial nucleotide substitution rates and higher
clade diversity. In contrast, small range sizes were unexpectedly associated with a slow-down of mitochondrial
substitution rates.
Conclusions: Based on these results we define a testable hypothesis under which small body sizes result in limited
dispersal capabilities and low physiological tolerances, causing smaller and more strongly fragmented ranges. This
can be thought to facilitate reproductive isolation and thus favor speciation. Contrary to the expectation of the
faster speciation of such microendemic phenotype species, we only found small body sizes of mantellid frogs to
be linked to higher diversification and substitution rates, but not small range sizes. A joint analysis of various
species-rich regional anuran radiations might provide enough species with all combinations of range and body
sizes for a more conclusive test of this hypothesis.

* Correspondence: kwollenberg@oeb.harvard.edu
1
Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology & Museum of
Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, 26 Oxford St., Cambridge, MA
02134, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Wollenberg et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

Background
Inferring the processes generating large-scale patterns of
biodiversity, especially those shaping adaptive radiations,
are fascinating areas of past and current biological
research [e.g., [1-3]]. Current debates on diversification
focus on speciation modes in the temporal dimension
(gradual vs. instantaneous speciation, e.g. through hybrid
speciation), the spatial dimension (allopatric, including
dichopatric and peripatric, versus parapatric and sympatric speciation), and increasingly on the general mechanisms driving divergence (ecological adaptation, sexual
selection, or non-adaptive factors such as genetic drift
[4,5]). Life history traits have equally long been discussed as drivers of speciation. Changes in these traits
might act as key innovations, promoting ecological
opportunity for the emergence of adaptive radiations in
the absence of habitat changes [[6-8]; reviewed in [2,3]].
Body size of animal species is such a life history trait
that has numerous ecological consequences [9]. For
instance, in many taxa body size seems to determine the
size of distribution ranges, with smaller taxa having
more restricted ranges [10]. This might, at least in some
taxa, be simply related to lower dispersal capabilities of
smaller species; for instance, a phylogenetically independent positive correlation between home range and body
size has been found in ferungulate mammals [11], a
result later refined using optimization methods [12].
Adaptive radiation likely evolves in stages [13], with
body size being one of the first proposed axes of morphological change leading to new ecological opportunity [[14]
as reviewed in [3]]. Body size frequency distributions of
animals are generally right-skewed, i.e., most species are
generally small [15-17], as for example in 99% of the
world’s major lizard groups [18] and often the rightskewed shape is kept after log-transformation. In lizards,
often there is a strong negative correlation between body
size within families and species richness: groups containing mainly small species are more species rich [18]. Similar
unimodal body size distributions have been found in other
poikilotherm vertebrates (frogs, deep-sea and freshwater
fishes), with right-skewedness of the distributions increasing towards the equator [19]. Other researchers found that
large radiations of species tend to be small bodied [20],
which is in agreement with the hypothesis that the number of ecological niches is potentially greater for smallbodied taxa (although this pattern was not statistically significant), which suggests a correlation between small body
size and species richness.
Despite the intuitive nature of the hypothesis that small
organisms should have elevated net rates of diversification, an influence of body size on clade richness has been
refuted on several taxonomic levels [17]. In a recent
study on toads of the cosmopolitan family Bufonidae,

Page 2 of 15

Van Bocxlaer and colleagues [21] found that speciose
clades were composed mainly of large species with large
range sizes. They used a combination of various traits to
define an optimal expansion phenotype (OEP) which
they invoked to explain the diversification and success of
these amphibians. In fact, much of the evolutionary success of bufonids is related to the fact that their radiation
was intimately connected to colonization of vast new
areas, i.e., continents on which these toads were previously absent [21]. This pattern is opposite than would
be expected from a classical explanation for adaptive
radiation, where small ranges and specialization by occupation of specific ecological niches are thought to promote diversification within a given area [3].
To test correlation among traits (like body and range
size) or influences of such traits on diversification rates,
phylogenetic comparative methods (PCM) are applied,
ensuring phylogenetic independence of data [22]. Usually,
PCM rely on ancestral character state reconstruction
along a phylogenetic tree [e.g., [23]]. A generally more
robust alternative is the direct comparison of sister species, with each pair of sister species being a phylogenetically independent data point (tip contrasts), but in most
data sets there are not sufficient sister species pairs for
adequate statistical analysis [22].
Frogs of the family Mantellidae are a highly diverse clade
restricted to Madagascar and the Comoroan island of
Mayotte, with 100% species-level endemism and over 250
species and candidate species [24]. A large number of
mantellid species are small sized, i.e., below 30 mm snoutvent length (SVL), and many are microendemic, i.e.,
restricted to a very small geographic area. Mantellids have
evolved a variety of ecological adaptations, including
arboreal, semiaquatic and fully terrestrial species. Given
that they diversified within a single geographic setting,
these frogs can serve as an excellent model group to test
mechanisms of diversification and correlates of diversity,
and their large species diversity allows to base PCM calculations on pairs of sister species additional to tree-based
methods. Because most amphibian lineages at the genus
or family level are restricted to major biogeographic areas
[25], and show a strong pattern of regional diversification
similar to the mantellids [e.g., [26-28]], we assume that
observations on these frogs in Madagascar are more representative for overall amphibian diversification patterns
than are bufonid toads with their high dispersal capacity.
In this paper, we reconstruct a near-complete specieslevel phylogeny of the Mantellidae from nuclear and mitochondrial markers (257 nominal and candidate species).
We integrate this phylogeny with 1371 geo-referenced GIS
records for 1371 species-locality records [29] and with bioclimatic information. Based on this phylogeny we identify
well-supported pairs of sister species. These are then used

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

in sister species comparisons, along with whole-tree based
PCM, to identify geographical patterns of speciation, to
test the influence of body size on range size, and the combined effect of these two traits on diversification and molecular rates of evolution. We hypothesize that, equivalent to
the OEP (Optimal expansion phenotype) characterized by
large body and range sizes and observed in successful
colonizing lineages in the Bufonidae, the majority of Malagasy mantellid frogs might exhibit a microendemic phenotype (MEP) with small range sizes as a result of their small
body size. We also develop the hypothesis that this MEP
may have influenced rapid diversification in the group,
making them one of the most speciose amphibian radiations to date [30].

Results
Molecular phylogeny of the Mantellidae

As the backbone of our species-level phylogeny, we used
a reduced-taxa phylogeny recovered for 46 mantellid species of all genera, subgenera and species groups, based on
3760 base pairs of six mitochondrial and nuclear genes.
The intrageneric relationships in this mantellid phylogeny were well resolved and highly supported in the
Bayesian analysis, with a similar topology recovered by
Maximum Parsimony (MP) and Maximum Likelihood
(ML) analyses (Additional File 1, Figure S1). All mantellid
genera were monophyletic with MP/ML bootstrap support values >95, and Bayesian posterior probabilities >99,
with the exception of Mantidactylus and Blommersia,
whose ML bootstrap values were 93%.
The Bayesian analysis of 257 species and confirmed candidate species in the all-taxa data set, including 1772 bp
from three mitochondrial genes and using the preferred
partitioning strategy (maximal partitioning strategy with
the 16S fragment and each of the codon positions for cob
and cox1 as separate partitions), yielded a well-supported
phylogenetic tree, with high posterior probability values
on the levels of species groups (Additional file 1, Figure
S2). Most of the subgenera in the Mantellidae [31], especially of Mantidactylus and Gephyromantis, were found to
be monophyletic. Basal relationships among genera in this
analysis were constrained on the basis of the previous
reduced-taxa topology.
The 50% majority-rule consensus tree obtained from
the all-taxa Bayesian analysis was converted into an ultrametric timetree using the software Pathd8 (Figure 1),
based on a combination of primary and secondary calibrations (see Materials and Methods). Alternative runs
including either only primary or only secondary calibrations recovered similar node ages (not shown). We thus
used the combined analysis with all calibrations to obtain
evolutionary ages for mantellid sister species, and used
these age data in further analyses.

Page 3 of 15

Among the 257 mantellid species in the phylogeny, we
identified 53 sister species pairs (19.9% of all species)
with high Bayesian posterior probabilities (>95) and
within subclades in which we consider taxonomy and
distribution ranges to be sufficiently understood. The
majority of these (33 = 63.7%) showed no range overlap
(allopatric sister species). 20 species pairs (36.4%)
showed partial or full overlap of their distribution ranges
(sympatric sister species). In 12 of these sympatric pairs
we ascertained syntopic occurrence (with distances of
1 km or less between specimens of the two species)
in the field, and in two further pairs we ascertained
occurrence in the same area, yet at different altitudes.
Correlation between evolutionary age and range (Agerange correlation) of sister species pairs was not significant (not shown).
Range overlap among sister species pairs was log-normally distributed, with a mean percentage of range overlap of 13.8%. This value is significantly higher than the
mean overlap among all possible combinations of nonsister species in mantellids (8.7%), as indicated by a Sign
test (Z = 3.88, p < 0.001). Mean range overlap of the
sympatric sister species is generally high (54.2%), with a
significantly higher median than all possible combinations of mantellid species when sister species were
excluded.
The initial diversification of mantellids was estimated
at 44 mya from our time-calibrated phylogeny. The 53
pairs of mantellid sister species were remarkably old,
with evolutionary ages ranging from 0.2 mya to 14.4
mya with an arithmetic mean of 7.3 mya, and with node
ages following a normal distribution (as proven by nonsignificant D-statistics of one-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test D = 0.09, not shown).
Spatial characteristics of diversification

Most mantellids had small body sizes and small to very
small range sizes (Additional file 1, Figure S3, Figure 2),
and this was true also for the subset of species included
in the tip contrast comparisons (pairs of sister species).
We found a positive correlation between evolutionary
age and centroid distance of ranges of pairs of sister
species (Figure 3a), which indicates lineage diversification in close spatial proximity.
Patterns related to range size were separately analyzed
for two range size estimates (RSA and RSB) that differed
in the extent of buffer zones assigned to single-locality
species (see Materials and Methods). For the 53 pairs of
sister species included in the analysis we found a trend
of increasing absolute range size with evolutionary age
(r = 0.173, p = 0.073 for RSA; r = 0.175 p = 0.07 for
RSB, not shown). All species with most recent splits
from their sister species (with one exception, Mantella

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 Timetree of mantellid frogs. Time-calibrated Bayesian phylogeny obtained with Pathd8 for 257 mantellid species. Circles indicate primary
(light red) and secondary (dark red) calibration points. Light and dark bars delimit genera. Purple bar shows estimated age of clades in Ma.

ebenaui) had small range sizes and range size differences
(Figure 3b), with larger range sizes and range size differences between sister species being present only in older
species (pairs). Under peripatric speciation, a triangular

or no correlation among evolutionary age and range size
(and consequently sister species range size contrasts) is
expected; we therefore performed quantile regression.
Quantile regression showed that the 90% quantile slope

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

Page 5 of 15

Figure 3 Relationships between range size, range centroid distance, age and body size in mantellid frogs. Scatterplots of range and
body size correlations for sister species contrasts. Because we used two different range size estimates, we overlaid the plots for these (RSA and
RSB). RSA is shown as large open dots and RSB is shown as small filled dots. Datapoints congruent among the two estimates are consequently
depicted as large filled dots. a - Range centroid distance increases with age of ss pair. b- Absolute differences in range size increase with age of
ss pair. c - range centroid distance increases with range size contrast in sister species. d- log range size tip contrasts of mantellid sister species
are correlated with log body size tip contrasts.

for absolute range size was positive (0.557), a pattern
that is not expected under peripatric speciation where
we expected the slope to be negative or zero (see Discussion below). Regression of the 90% quantile found
the slopes for absolute differences in RSA (0.656) and
RSB (0.656) to be positive. Congruent with these results,
the absolute differences in RSA and RSB also increased
with centroid distance (Figure 3c).
Body size as a predictor for range size in the Mantellidae

Range and body sizes for all mantellid species were highly
positively correlated (not shown). To ensure phylogenetic

independence of these results, standardized independent
contrasts for body size and range size estimates were subsequently computed for pairs of sister species [22].
Factorial regression through the origin found contrasts in
SVL per mantellid sister species pair to significantly predict tip contrasts of RSA and RSB (Table 1). Sister species
with small contrasts of SVL had small range size contrasts (shown as logarithms in Figure 3d, correlation after
exclusion of two outlier species pairs). We used the software CoEvol to assess the coupled evolution of SVL and
RSA/RSB in a probabilistic framework [32]. Partial
regression revealed a significantly positive effect of SVL

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

Page 6 of 15

Figure 2 Maximum Parsimony character tracing of SVL and log RSB. Visualisation of the distribution of SVL and range size (displayed as
logarithm of estimate RSB) over the mantellid species tree created by Maximum Parsimony character tracing in MESQUITE [78] (using the
ultrametric topology from Figure 1). Genera abbreviations: Ag - Aglyptodactylus, Lal - Laliostoma, Blo - Blommersia, Gui - Guibemantis, Man Mantella, Wa - Wakea, Spi - Spinomantis, Boe - Boehmantis, Gep - Gephyromantis, Mti - Mantidactylus, Tsi - Tsingymantis, Boo - Boophis.

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

Page 7 of 15

Table 1 Influence of body size on range size in pairs of mantellid sister species
Multiple R2

SS Model

MS Model

SS Residual

MS Residual

F

p

RSA tip contrast

0.265

1102.316

1102.316

3059.713

57.730

19.094

0.000058

RSB tip contrast

0.269

1128.238

1128.238

3057.452

57.6877

19.558

0.000049

Univariate regression through the origin results to determine the effect of standardized tip contrasts in SVL on range size estimators using large (RSA) and small
(RSB) buffer zones for one- or two locality species for mantellid sister species pairs. Significant p-values in bold.

on both estimates of range size, although the correlation
was not particularly strong (Table 2). Multiple regressions performed with each range size estimate and substitution rate did not alter the positive direction of the
correlation, however, the posterior probabilities remained
only significant for the smaller range size estimate (RSB),
but not for RSA (Additional file 1, Table S8).
The role of body size and range size influencing
mantellid diversification

To understand whether body size and range size affect
the rate and mode of diversification in the Mantellidae,
we first tested whether geographical proximity of ranges
and similarities of bioclimatic envelopes of sister species
are related to their range and body sizes. A factorial
regression analysis revealed standardized contrasts in
range size (both RSA and RSB) and body size to be
functions of spatial characteristics: microendemic and
miniaturized sister species have more proximate ranges
and climatically more similar niches than widely distributed or larger species (Table 3). Univariate results for
the single predictors and their interaction terms can be
found in Additional file 1, Table S7.
We used the software MacroCAIC as a whole-tree
based PCM to test whether mantellid lineages with
Table 2 Phylogenetically independent effects of body
and range size on each other and on substitution rate
Ds

SVL

RSA (0.0158)

RSB (0.001)

cov
r2

0.314
1

-0.0308
0.0246

0.253
0.0148

0.467
0.0244

pp

Ds

–

0.94

0.16

0.33

1

0.0152

0.0311

–

0.96

1

cov

13.5

14.4

r2
RSB

0.87

0.124

pp
RSA

0.026

cov
r2

SVL

1

0.537

pp
cov

–

1
28.3

r2

1

pp

–

Matrix of covariances, correlation coefficients, and posterior probabilities for
maximal male SVL, range size estimates and synonymous substitution rate Ds
obtained with CoEvol. Negative covariances indicate negative correlations,
posterior probabilities close to zero indicate significant negative correlation,
close to 100 indicate significant positive correlations. 1213 generations were
sampled and burnin was set = 100 after visual inspection of the trace file as
showing stability in estimated parameters.

smaller SVL are more speciation-prone than lineages
showing larger SVL [33]). Both lineage richness and SVL
contrasts were normally distributed (as assessed with
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests in STATISTICA, results not
shown), so we could perform standard regression
through the origin [11]. The null hypothesis of small SVL
not influencing clade diversification rate could not be
rejected with this test (F = 2.78, R2 = 0.0166, p = 0.0972).
However, the negative slope indicates that clades exhibiting smaller SVL have a trend of being more species-rich
(r = -0.143, p = 0.067; Figure 4). Effects of RSA and RSB
on clade diversification were, however not detectable at
all with this test (p = 0.37 for RSA and p = 0.55 for RSB,
respectively, not shown). A strong influence of small
body and range sizes not on the number of lineages but
on the mitochondrial substitution rate itself was detected
by phylogenetic regression in CoEvol [32] (Table 2). The
approximated synonymous substitution rate of the alltaxa dataset was, given the ultrametric phylogeny, significantly negatively correlated with SVL; small body size
turned out to be associated with high rates of molecular
substitution. This result remained unchanged if multiple
regressions including RSA and RSB were performed
(Additional file 1, Table S8). In contrast, the two range
size estimates were positively correlated with the substitution rate (if only very weakly), which means that in
extant species that are both small and have small range
sizes (exhibiting a MEP), substitution rate would experience a relative slow-down compared to lineages that have
small body sizes but large range sizes. These results were
supported in a multiple regression by high posterior
probabilities for RSB, but not for the larger minimal
range size estimate RSA (Additional file 1, Table S8).

Discussion
Characteristics of the mantellid radiation

Most mantellid sister species lineages diversified
between 7 and 8 mya. These generally old ages (upper
Miocene) indicate that Pleistocene speciation mechanisms as they have been proposed for lemurs [34] cannot
be invoked to explain the bulk of mantellid speciation,
and instead unveil an older speciation timing similar to
that detected in a diverse range of Neotropical taxa
[26,35] and in other Malagasy animals [36]. About 64%
of mantellid sister species did not show range overlap, a
percentage that is consistent with an average value of
72% allopatric species estimated for other animal clades

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

Page 8 of 15

Table 3 Effects of evolutionary age and spatial distance on range and body size
Multiple R2

SS Model

MS Model

SS Residual

MS Residual

F

p

SVL tip contrast

0.621

4743.239

677.606

2900.391

67.451

10.046

<0.0001

RSA tip contrast

0.633

2632.051

376.007

1527.497

35.524

10.585

<0.0001

RSB tip contrast

0.636

2659.325

379.903

1523.884

35.439

10.719

<0.0001

Results of factorial regressions through the origin to determine the effect of evolutionary age, of geographic distance and bioclimatic distance, and their
interaction terms on body size and range size contrasts using large (RSA) and small (RSB) buffer zones for one- or two locality species in mantellid sister species
pairs.

[23,37-40]. Mantellid frogs show a right-skewed body
size species richness pattern, contrary to what has been
observed in Malagasy mammals [41].
Speciation in close spatial proximity and rejection of
peripatric speciation

Although methods that attempt to quantify the frequency
of sympatric versus allopatric speciation exist, e.g., agerange overlap correlation [23,37,42,43], these have been
widely criticized when applied to fast-dispersing groups
of taxa due to the high probability of post-speciation
range shifts and because their results usually do not differ
from null models [1]. Most amphibians, and many mantellids in particular, are probably no fast dispersers, so
conclusions drawn from age-range overlap correlation in
this group might thus be less compromised than in other
groups. We found sympatric and allopatric sister species
to be present in all major mantellid lineages and to span
similar evolutionary age ranges. Youngest pairs of sister
species were both distributed in sympatry and in allopatry, which resulted in the absence of a correlation
between evolutionary age and range overlap. Such
absence of age-range overlap correlation can either be
caused by post-speciation range shifts, or by a mix of

Figure 4 Correlation between SVL and clade richness contrast.
Negative correlation between RRD (species richness contrast) and
logSVL as inferred with MacroCAIC, although this was not
significant.

different geographical modes of speciation [1]. In fact,
our results bear visual similarities to the modeled data
under multiple speciation modes [43]. Alternatively,
Pleistocene climate oscillations that postdate the time of
maximal lineage diversification in mantellid frogs can be
thought of having triggered post-speciation range shifts
[23]. Besides the many microendemic mantellids, also
widespread species do exist in this family [29], so we cannot conclusively distinguish between the hypotheses of
(i) a mix of speciation modes, or (ii) absence of a clear
pattern due to range shifts.
However, a clear conclusion derived from our data is
that lineage diversification in mantellid frogs typically
happens in close spatial proximity, since youngest mantellid sister species pairs were also the most geographically proximate and spatial distance gradually increased
with evolutionary age. Under sympatric speciation, the
geographical proximity is obvious, and under allopatric
speciation, the initial geographic separation of populations of the ancestral species is likely to be small in
non-vagile animals - except for cases of overseas dispersal [44] or speciation of relict populations in isolated
habitats.
In fact, in several species pairs with almost fully overlapping ranges, the currently available evidence would
favor sympatric or parapatric species formation, and we
flag them for future detailed study. Some of these are old
species, such as Gephyromantis azzurrae and G. corvus
(estimated divergence 10.9 ma), both of which are endemic to a very small range in the Isalo sandstone massif
in south-western Madagascar, or Spinomantis bertini and
S. sp. 6 (estimated divergence 8.6 ma) which occupy different altitudinal bands on the Andohahela massif in the
south-east. Boophis majori and B. sp. 35 (estimated divergence 7.2 ma) occur in syntopy in Ranomafana National
Park in the southern central east, and differ strongly by
advertisement calls and tadpole morphology [24]. And
one of the youngest mantellid sister species pairs,
Gephyromantis eiselti and G. thelenae (estimated divergence 3.2 ma), two species with endotrophic tadpole
development, even form mixed choruses at some sites
near Andasibe in the northern central east, with pronounced differences in advertisement calls [45,46].
Despite these examples, the high proportion of allopatric
pairs of sister species in the Mantellidae as apparent

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

from our analysis suggests that allopatric modes of species formation probably have played a predominant role
in the diversification of these frogs.
Range sizes of species included in the sister species
comparisons increased with evolutionary age, as did
range size differences between sister species. This is not
trivial as it firmly rejects peripatric speciation [47] as
predominant speciation mode for mantellid frogs (under
which we would assume range asymmetry in youngest
sister species to be high [48]). Speciation in mantellids
mostly resulted in microendemic sister species (with
proximate centroids), a pattern not expected under predominance of species formation based on peripheral,
allopatric isolation of small subpopulations as in peripatric speciation. A probable explanation for some mantellid frogs being widespread is that their ecological
tolerance is wider, which would make the interruption
of gene flow to peripheral populations by ecogeographic
barriers less likely. In contrast, narrow-range species are
likely habitat specialists, which increases the probability
of allopatric populations to become isolated, e.g. by
habitat changes through climatic shifts. Small adaptive
changes in such a population can already confer a significant shift in habitat preference, thus leading to
genetic isolation in parapatry or sympatry.
A role for a microendemic phenotype in lineage
diversification?

As a first hypothesis we tested whether our data support
the existence of a microendemic phenotype (MEP), i.e.,
whether frogs of small body size also have particularly
small range sizes. If this pattern is phylogenetically independent, we can conclude evolutionary convergence of
body size and small range sizes forming a distinct MEP.
Using robust tip-based PCM based on a high number of
mantellid sister species pairs we found SVL to be a significant predictor of range size. The correlation between
range size and SVL was positive, supporting that the
combination of small SVL and small range size defines a
MEP. Whole-tree based methods support this pattern:
CoEvol found a phylogenetically independent, significant
positive correlation between SVL and RSB, reflecting the
fact that most mantellids are both small and have small
range sizes, and hinting at replicated evolution of this
phenotype within the mantellid radiation. As a second
hypothesis, we posit that lineages exhibiting MEP will be
less dispersal-prone and therefore will be less able to
maintain gene flow among populations (due to small
body size equaling low dispersal capabilities), leading to
increased rates of speciation. If the MEP drives diversification in the Mantellidae, clades exhibiting MEP are thus
expected to be more species rich and to inhabit ranges in
close spatial proximity. Using PCM based on mantellid
sister species pairs we found small body and range size

Page 9 of 15

contrasts to be prevalent in proximate and young sister
species, thus supporting the hypothesis. The application
of tree-based PCM revealed more ambiguous results to
this question. MacroCAIC found the expected negative
regression slope between diversification rate and SVL,
but the regression through the origin could not reject the
null hypothesis of no effect of SVL on diversification rate
(albeit with a low rejection error probability of 0.097).
The effect size of the correlation, however, almost
reached significance (0.067), but no effects of range size
on clade diversification could be detected. While these
analyses using clade diversity remained ambiguous, we
found effects of both SVL and range size (RSB) on the
synonymous mitochondrial substitution rate. While small
SVL predicted a high rate of substitution, range size in
contrast was positively associated with the substitution
rate: larger-range lineages show higher rates of substitution. Mitochondrial substitution rates have been found
to be positively correlated with speciation rates and contemporary species richness before [49]. If we assume a
similar relationship in the Mantellidae, the positive correlation between range sizes and substitution rate would
contradict the hypothesis that MEP (lineages with both
small range and body sizes) promotes diversification.
Small-bodied species that also have small range sizes (the
majority of the extant mantellid species) would experience a net reduction in substitution rate, and presumably
in diversification rate, as compared to lineages with small
SVL but less microendemic distributions. A slow-down
of speciation rate is, however, implied in the definition of
adaptive radiations - after environmental niches are occupied in the later stages of adaptive radiation, lineages cannot continue to diversify as rapidly [7,50,51]. A similar
slow down of diversification rate with decreasing range
size has been predicted [50] under the scenario that
small range sizes are indicative of strong ecological competition from close relatives in adaptive radiations. However, a stronger rate slow-down in a bird dataset has
been found be related to larger ranges [50], contrary to
the expectation. In general, the association of rates of
clade diversification and molecular substitution clearly
require further study. Another factor possibly related to
the pattern observed is population density: in small frogs,
a viable population could be established in smaller ranges
than in large frogs [51], potentially driving the correlated
evolution of microendemism. However, the lack of data
on population densities for mantellid frogs (and most
other tropical amphibians) does not permit testing this
hypothesis at present.
From our results, we conclude that our data support an
association of small range and body size and thus the existence of a MEP. We furthermore find indications that not
the MEP, but instead small body sizes might be crucial in
promoting lineage diversification. Extant mantellids show

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

a high frequency of MEP lineages, but instead of having a
combined high diversification rate, these lineages might
experience a net slow down of diversification and substitution rates, as expected in the late stages of adaptive radiation. We can back up the results derived from tree-based
PCM (that might be sensitive to errors in phylogenetic
reconstruction) with tip-based PCM using a high number
of sister species pairs. Although we implicitly assume that
the sister lineages are characterized by the extant state
since they diverged at the nodes in tip-based PCM, these
can complement tree-based PCM in near-complete
phylogenies.

Conclusions
The MEP hypothesis complements the optimal expansion phenotype (OEP) hypothesis [21], residing at the
other end of a phenotypic continuum. The phenotypes at
both extremes of this continuum promote fast successful
speciation, but are based on different mechanisms. The
OEP promotes speciation by providing the ability to colonize vast ranges that create ecological opportunity [52]
while the MEP promotes rapid speciation on a smaller
spatial scale because of its association with low dispersal
capacity, and restriction of gene flow by making geographic barriers relatively larger [53]. The OEP contradicts the expectations from a classical adaptive radiation
[21], where small ranges and specialization by occupation
of specific ecological niches are thought to promote
diversification within a given area [reviewed in [1]]. Our
results provide evidence for the existence of an MEP in
the Mantellidae, but contrary to the expectation of the
faster diversification in microendemic phenotype species,
the majority of extant mantellids (MEP species) that
show small body sizes combined with small range sizes
can be thought of experiencing a relative slowed-down
rates of speciation compared to small but not microendemic species. A joint analysis of various species-rich
regional anuran radiations might provide enough species
with all combinations of range and body sizes for a more
conclusive test of the influence of body and range size on
the diversification rate in amphibians.
Methods
Time-calibrated molecular phylogeny

We compiled a near-complete set of samples for species
and candidate species of the Mantellidae. Only the
described mantellid species Spinomantis brunae, S. nussbaumi, and S. tavaratra are missing (“all-taxa data set”).
We are aware that new mantellid species will continue
being discovered in the future [24]. Along with other thorough molecular phylogenetic studies of species-rich tropical amphibian radiations [e.g., [26,27]] we are confident to
have assembled the most complete such data set to date.
To define candidate species, we followed an integrated

Page 10 of 15

approach that combined genetic divergence with bioacoustic and morphological characters [24,48,54,55]. For most
mantellid species, genetic data was available for more than
one population and individual, and these as well as bioacoustic and morphological data support a status as valid
species for the undescribed species included in this study
[24].
We compiled two sets of DNA sequences: (i) a combined mitochondrial/nuclear gene data set to reconstruct
the deep phylogenetic relationships among 46 species
representing all major mantellid lineages, including 3760
basepairs (bp) of the mitochondrial gene fragments
12SrRNA (12S, 538 bp), 16SrRNA (16S, two fragments of
582 bp and 505bp), cytochrome b (cob, 988 bp), cytochrome oxidase subunit I (cox1, 625 bp), and of the
nuclear rhodopsin exon 1 (289 bp) and RAG2 (816 bp)
gene fragments; (ii) a 1172 bp mitochondrial data set of
16S, cob and cox1 sequences from all but three described
mantellid species species (187 of the 190 described and
valid species) plus 67 undescribed confirmed candidate
species. The reduced-taxa data set was largely based on
sequences used in other studies [31,56], complemented
by additional sequences for crucial species (see Additional file 1, Table S1). In the all-taxa dataset, 16S
sequences were mainly taken from previous work [24],
whereas most sequences of cob and cox1 were newly
determined.
PCRs were performed according to the reaction conditions and thermocycling protocols described previously
[44,54,56,57]. Primers for the various genes were as specified in these previous publications (see Additional file
1, Table S2 for primer sequences). Sequencing reactions
were performed with the forward primers and resolved
on automated sequencers by Macrogen Inc., Korea for
mitochondrial markers. Nuclear markers and ambiguous
sequences of the mitochondrial markers were additionally sequenced with the reverse primers, with several
sequencing reactions being repeated numerous times to
obtain unambiguous results. The obtained electropherograms were manually edited and verified as mantellid
DNA via BLAST searches. Alignments were generated
with MEGA using the CLUSTALW algorithm [58] and
refined manually. Gapped and hypervariable regions of
the rRNA gene sequences were excluded from the analysis. Newly determined DNA sequences were submitted
to Genbank (accession numbers JN132821-JN133276;
for a complete list of GenBank accession numbers and a
list of voucher specimens see Additional file 1, Table S1.
For the reduced-taxa data set we used Heterixalus variabilis (a representative of the Hyperoliidae) as outgroup
and included Polypedates spp. (Rhacophoridae, the sister
group of the Mantellidae) as a hierarchical outgroup.
For the all-taxa data set we defined Polypedates spp. as
outgroup.

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

Best-fit models of evolution were constructed for the
various character sets used in the partitioned analysis
with MrModeltest [59] (Additional file 1, Table S3). To
obtain the optimal partitioning strategy for the dataset,
Bayesian tree searches were run for 20,000,000 generations for the reduced-taxa dataset and for 5,400,000 10,000,000 generations in the all-taxa dataset each with
2 runs and 4 chains (MrBayes V.3.1.2 [60]). Harmonic
means were calculated using the sump command in
MrBayes, with a conservative burn-in corresponding to
the first 500,000 generations after assessing that stability
of likelihood values had been reached in each case after
much fewer generations. The partitioning strategies that
explained the data set with the least random error were
the maximum partition datasets in both analyses [61].
For the reduced-taxa data set, ML searches were conducted using the software RaxML V.7.0.0 (under the
estimated best substitution model GammaInvar) [62],
and the rapid bootstrapping algorithm was used with an
estimated number of bootstraps [63]. Heuristic searches
under MP were conducted for the reduced-taxa dataset
in PAUP* [64], with 2000 bootstrap replicates. Characters in the MP searches were treated as unordered with
equal weight. Gaps were treated as “missing”; multistate
characters were interpreted as “uncertain”. Trees were
computed with random stepwise addition of taxa, and
branch swapping was performed with the TBR (TreeBisection-Reconnection) algorithm, without limitation in
the number of retained trees.
We then constrained the major lineages (subfamilies
and relationships among some genera and subgenera) in
the all-taxa dataset according to the optimal topology
found for the reduced-taxa dataset, to enable a stable
run of MrBayes under optimized computation time. A
final Bayesian analysis was then performed for the alltaxa dataset running 30,000,000 generations for 58 days
on a computing cluster at UC Berkeley and the 50%majority consensus tree from this run after discarding
the burnin was used as the preferred estimate of mantellid relationships.
For the all-taxa data set, we subsequently computed an
ultrametric tree to estimate evolutionary node ages for
ARC from the preferred Bayesian tree topology. We used
the software Pathd8 to estimate a time-calibrated phylogeny [65] which computes ultrametric trees for large data
sets. The rationale for using Pathd8 instead of more commonly used software like BEAST [66] or MultiDivtime
[67] was two-fold: first, both alternative software crashed
on our dataset during repeated trials. Second, the Pathd8
software has been introduced as especially suited for
large datasets, being only less precise compared with
penalized likelihood methods, but giving more sensible
answers for extreme data sets. The reason for its faster
performance with large data sets is that substitution rates

Page 11 of 15

are being smoothed locally, rather than simultaneously
over the whole tree [65]. We used the estimated evolutionary split of the two undescribed species endemic to
the Comoro island of Mayotte (Blommersia sp. 4, Boophis
sp. 1) as fixed calibration points, which is estimated at 8.7
ma based on the age of the volcanic island of Mayotte
[[44]; validated in [68]]. For adjustment of the deeper
branches, we furthermore applied secondary age constraints, with divergence time estimates between mantellid genera based on the confidence intervals calculated in
a previous study [69] (Additional file 1, Table S4). These
secondary constraints were obtained from a estimation of
divergence times on the basis of external calibration
points and in general were fully congruent with other
estimates of mantellid ages [e.g., [70]]. We also estimated
divergence times without these secondary constraints
and obtained a largely similar time frame for mantellid
diversification, leaving us confident that these secondary
constraints have not introduced any major bias in our
analysis. In any case, our subsequent analyses of body
and range size influences on diversification depend on
relative, not absolute age of nodes, and thus are independent from possible inaccuracies that may remain in our
estimates of absolute ages of diversification events.
We identified 53 pairs of mantellid sister species in
the all-taxa phylogeny that were supported by high
Bayesian posterior probabilities (>98). We did not consider sister species that had low Bayesian support values,
or unknown ranges. Due to severe uncertainties in taxonomy and thus range estimations we also excluded
well-supported sister species of the subgenera Ochthomantis (Mantidactylus) and Pandanusicola (Guibemantis). Because the two Comoroan species (Boophis sp. 1
and Blommersia sp. 4) likely originated by overseas dispersal (Vences et al., 2003), they were also excluded
from subsequent calculations. The ages of all nodes
separating pairs of sister species were extracted from the
ultrametric tree obtained with Pathd8 and were tested
for normal distribution with a one-tailed KolmogorovSmirnov test using STATISTICA ( © StatSoft, Tulsa,
OK).
Geographic data and analysis

We used point locality information for 242 species and
candidate species in our phylogeny obtained from an
extensive GIS-referenced database [29] to construct distribution maps with ArcView GIS (V.3.2a, Esri ©19922000). For species that were only known from one or
two localities, we estimated species distribution areas by
assigning buffer zones around these localities. The estimation of small range sizes is crucial for our paper, so
we conducted all analyses using two different estimates
for these buffer zones: a rather large one of 25 km
radius versus a small quasi-zero one of 17 m radius.

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

Comparing results obtained with both buffer zone estimates ensures the robustness of our results without
knowing the exact extent of range size of these species,
although according to our own observations [29], the
larger estimate is probably an overestimation of the
range sizes of microendemic species. However, we
emphasize that one or two-locality species do not equal
limited sampling effort: In most cases, these are wellidentifiable species that have not been found elsewhere
despite important survey efforts in Madagascar over the
past 20 years. Subclades with taxonomic or range uncertainties (e.g., in the subgenera Ochthomantis and Pandanusicola) were excluded from analysis). For species that
are known from more than two localities, minimum
convex polygons (MCPs) were taken as estimate for real
species distribution area size. MCPs span the whole area
between two occurrence records of a species, disregarding climatic and habitat differences and possible range
discontinuities. However, for the understanding of past
evolutionary processes, we consider these analyses as
adequate because the current distribution of a species
alone may be misleading. For instance, if a species has
currently a very fragmented range, in the past it must
have dispersed from one of its current range fragments
to the other and thus occupied a much larger and more
continuous range in which it may have co-occurred
broadly with other species. Especially in the instance of
limited extent of range size and locality records MCPs
may therefore be more realistic than fine-scale mapping
or modeling on the basis of habitat data as has been
applied for other purposes [71]. Furthermore, distribution area modeling is not advised for species with less
than five locality records. We call the dataset containing
MCPs and large buffer zones “Range Size A dataset”
(RSA) and the dataset containing MCPs and small buffer
zones “Range Size B dataset” (RSB). For each MCP, we
furthermore determined the centroid using the xtools®
extension in ArcView. Centroids for two-locality species
were estimated half way between these localities. Range
proximity among all mantellid species (measured as distance between polygon centroids in km) was determined
by calculating a Euclidean distance matrix of polygon
centroids using the ArcView “distance matrix” extension
(©Jenness, J., 2005), and age-range correlation [37] was
calculated based on range overlap in km2, transformed
to overlap in percent of the smaller of each two polygons. We automatized the computation of range overlap
in km 2 and the resulting percentage of range overlap
with a script in ArcView ( © Schmalstieg, K.J., 2007).
Centroid distances can be measured in species pairs
characterized by fully allopatric distributions as well as
in those with partly overlapping ranges. We furthermore
preferred using centroid distances because these are less

Page 12 of 15

heavily affected by possible sampling gaps than are
distances between range borders.
Under the hypothesis of peripatric speciation, range
size differences are thought to be initially large, a pattern that can but does not necessarily have to dilute
over time. Under initially large range size contrasts, we
expect either a negative or no correlation between range
size differences and evolutionary age of sister species.
We tested for this expected, possibly triangular pattern
of peripatric speciation in mantellids using quantile
regression in R [72,73] on sister species pairs. Quantile
regression accounts for the fact that more than a single
slope can describe the relationship between a response
variable and a predictor and can discover predictive
relationships between variables in cases where there is
no or only a weak relationship between the variable
means. It allows computing regressions of different sets
of the data (e.g., the 90% quantile is the regression slope
above 90% of the data points). Multiple slopes are used
to describe the relationship between variables that
would be missed by other regression models [73].
Due to limited number of localities and small extent of
distribution area for many species, environmental niche
modeling did not make sense for our dataset. Instead, 21
climatic variables for each locality per species were
extracted from the WORLDCLIM climatic maps (1 km ×
1 km resolution, interpolated from lower resolution)
[71,74]. To correct for co-variation among these 21 climatic variables, a Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
was performed in Varimax-rotated coordinate system,
yielding four factors (PCs) with Eigenvalues >1 (Additional file 1, Tables S5, S6). The highest Eigenvalues were
10.4 for PC1 and 5.9 for PC2, followed by lower Eigenvalues for PCs 3 and 4 (2.4, and 1.1, respectively). From
these four factors we calculated squared Mahalanobis
distances (which we chose because of multiple locality
information per species) between all mantellid species
and extracted the data for mantellid sister species with
significant branch support from this triangular matrix.
These bioclimatic distances served as a covariate of spatial distance.
Testing MEP hypotheses: body size, range size, and
diversification

Maximal Snout-Vent Length (SVL) of males has been
used as a proxy for body size of frog species before
[75,76]. We compiled values for maximal male SVL for
249 mantellid species and candidate species from Glaw
and Vences (2007) and complemented these with own,
unpublished data. For the complete list of SVL data, see
Additional file 1, Table S1. We computed range size frequency distributions for all mantellids, for mantellid sister species using STATISTICA (Tulsa, OK), and

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

counted the number of species with non-overlapping
ranges (allopatric species pairs) and partially or fully
overlapping ranges (sympatric species pairs).
A first set of statistical tests was carried out based on
the 53 well-supported pairs of sister species as identified
in our phylogenetic analysis. We used these pairs as independent data points in tip-based phylogenetic contrast
method (PCM) approaches. We computed standardized
tip contrasts for range size and body size between them
((RSA1 - RSA2)/SQRT(branch length 1 + branch length
2); ((RSB1 - RSB2)/SQRT(branch length 1 + branch
length 2); (SVL1 - SVL2)/SQRT(branch length 1 +
branch length 2)) [22]. The branch lengths were taken
from the Bayesian phylogeny before ultrametric
correction.
We tested whether contrasts in SVL are also a predictor for contrasts of range size in mantellid sister species
pairs using univariate regression analyses through the
origin. We furthermore correlated range size contrasts
with body size contrasts to infer whether small values in
both are associated with each other.
To infer whether small range size and/or body size contrasts are pronounced in proximate and recently diverged
lineages we performed a factorial regression analysis
through the origin. This analysis estimated the effect of
evolutionary age, range proximity (expressed as centroid
distance), bioclimatic distance (as a covariate to spatial distance, for spatial structure of the climatic niche) and their
respective interaction terms on SVL and range size (RSA
and RSB) contrasts between sister species pairs. Older species pairs with larger range sizes and/or larger body size
were expected to more likely have larger range size contrasts and larger body size contrasts, accounting for the
possibility of (potentially asymmetric) post-speciation
range shifts or range size changes.
Additional to the results obtained by the sister species
tip contrasts we applied phylogenetic comparative methods (PCM) that utilize the whole tree. Effects of SVL on
RSA/RSB as well as the effect of these characters on the
mitochondrial substitution rate of the all-taxa phylogeny
were determined using the software CoEvol [33]. The
approximated synonymous substitution rate (dS) and
the continuous characters were jointly modeled as a
multivariate Brownian diffusion process of unknown
covariance matrix [33] on the concatenated dataset with
fixed divergence times. The covariance matrix, phylogenetic variation of the substitution rates, and the continuous characters are then jointly estimated by a Bayesian
MCMC process. Because all parameters are modeled in
a single multivariate distribution process, substitution
rates and morphological traits can be analyzed in a single statistical framework [33].
We tested the effect of body size and range size on
clade diversity using a second PCM implemented in the

Page 13 of 15

software MacroCAIC [32], which is a modified version of
comparative analysis by independent contrasts [22,77].
Species richness contrasts (RRD) as implemented in
MacroCAIC are positive, when clades containing species
with large values of the inherited character in question
are more species-rich than their sister clade, leading to a
positive correlation between variable contrasts and richness contrasts [32]. In our example we expect negative
richness contrasts in clades with high SVL, leading to a
negative correlation between SVL contrast and richness
contrast (defining the MEP). To determine the effect of
SVL changes on species richness, we performed a regression through the origin for the contrasts produced by
MacroCAIC using STATISTICA [11].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Includes a full list of voucher specimens, Genbank
accession numbers, primer sequences, a phylogenetic tree obtained
on the basis of the reduced-taxa data set, as well as additional
tables with more detailed results of several statistical analyses.
Includes a full list of voucher specimens, Genbank accession
numbers, primer sequences, a phylogenetic tree obtained on the
basis of the reduced-taxa data set, as well as additional tables with
more detailed results of several statistical analyses.

Acknowledgements
Assembling the mantellid data set would not have been possible without
the help of many colleagues. We thank Franco Andreone, Parfait Bora, Neil
D’Cruze, Louis du Preez, Liliane Raharivololoniaina, Roger-Daniel
Randrianiaina, Jasmin E. Randrianirina, Axel Strauß, and Ché Weldon for their
help in the field. We are also grateful to Meike Kondermann, Gabriele
Keunecke, Susanne Hauswaldt and Eva Saxinger for their help in the lab.
Simone Hoegg provided some of the RAG-2 sequences, and John Measey
made helpful comments on an earlier manuscript version. Klaus-Juergen
Schmalstieg helped with automated computation of MCPs in ArcView. D.
Luke Mahler, and Adam C. Algar are thanked for fruitful discussions on range
and body size evolution. Adam C. Algar furthermore helped with the
quantile regression analyses. This study was made possible by collaboration
agreements of the author’s institutions with the Université d’Antananarivo
(Département de Biologie Animale) and the Association Nationale pour la
Gestion des Aires Protegées. We are grateful to the late Olga Ramilijaona, as
well as Noromalala Raminosoa and Daniel Rakotondravony for their
continuous support, and to the Malagasy authorities for research and export
permits. This research was supported by grants of the Volkswagen
Foundation to MV, FG and KCW, of the DFG to MV (grant number VE247/21), and a Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation grant (CGL2009-10198)
to DRV.
Author details
1
Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology & Museum of
Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, 26 Oxford St., Cambridge, MA
02134, USA. 2Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, CSIC, C/José Gutierrez
Abascal 2, Madrid 28006, Spain. 3Zoologische Staatssammlung München,
Münchhausenstraße 21 ,81247 München, Germany. 4Zoological Institute,
Division of Evolutionary Biology, Technical University of Braunschweig,
Mendelssohnstr 4, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
KCW, MV and DRV conceived the study. KCW performed all lab work and
analyses. FG and DRV provided crucial samples and contributed to data
interpretation. KCW and MV wrote the paper. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

Received: 7 April 2011 Accepted: 21 July 2011 Published: 21 July 2011
References
1. Losos JB, Glor R: Phylogenetic comparative methods and the geography
of speciation. Trends Ecol Evol 2003, 18:220-227.
2. Yoder JB, Clancey E, Des Roches S, Eastman JM, Gentry L, Godsoe W,
Hagey TJ, Jochimsen D, Oswald BP, Robertson J, Sarver BAJ, Schenk JJ,
Spear SF, Harmon LJ: Ecological opportunity and the origin of adaptive
radiations. J Evol Biol 2010, 23:1581-1596.
3. Losos JB: Adaptive radiation, ecological opportunity, and evolutionary
determinism. Am Nat 2010, 175:623-639.
4. Via S: Sympatric speciation in animals: the ugly duckling grows up.
Trends Ecol Evol 2001, 16:381-390.
5. Butlin RK, Galindo J, Grahame JW: Sympatric, parapatric or allopatric? The
most important way to classify speciation. Phil Trans Roy Soc B 2008,
363:2997-3007.
6. Simpson GG: Tempo and Mode in Evolution. Columbia University Press,
New York; 1949.
7. Simpson GG: The Major Features of Evolution. Columbia University Press,
New York; 1953.
8. Sanderson MJ, Donoghue MJ: Reconstructing shifts in diversification rates
on phylogenetic trees. Trends Ecol Evol 1996, 11:15-20.
9. Peters RH: The Ecological Implications of Body Size. Cambridge Studies in
Ecology Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; 1983.
10. Gaston KJ, Blackburn TM: Range size-body size relationships: evidence of
scale dependence. Oikos 1996, 75:479-485.
11. Garland TJ, Harvey PH, Ives AR: Procedures for the analysis of comparative
data using phylogenetically independent contrasts. Syst Biol 1992,
41:18-32.
12. Giannini NP, Goboloff PA: Delayed-response phylogenetic correlation: an
optimization-based method to test covariation of continuous characters.
Evolution 2010, 64:1885-1898.
13. Streelman JT, Danley PD: The stages of evolutionary radiation. Trends Ecol
Evol 2003, 18:126-131.
14. Williams EE: The origin of faunas: evolution of lizard congeners in a
complex island fauna: a trial analysis. Evol Biol 1972, 6:47-89.
15. Stanley SM: An explanation for Cope’s rule. Evolution 1973, 27:1-26.
16. Gaston KJ, Blackburn TM: Pattern and process in macroecology. Oxford:
Blackwell Science; 2000.
17. David C, Orme L, Isaac NJB, Purvis A: Are most species small? Not within
species-level phylogenies. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2002, 269:1279-1287.
18. Meiri S: Evolution and ecology of lizard body sizes. Global Ecol Biogeogr
2008, 17:724-734.
19. Lindsey CC: Body size of poikilotherm vertebrates at different latitudes.
Evolution 1966, 20:456-465.
20. Gardezi T, da Silva J: Diversity in relation to body size in mammals: a
comparative study. Am Nat 1999, 153:110-123.
21. Van Bocxlaer I, Loader SP, Roelants K, Biju SD, Menegon M, Bossuyt F:
Gradual adaptation toward a range-expansion phenotype initiated the
global radiation. Science 2010, 327:679-682.
22. Felsenstein J: Phylogenies and the comparative method. Am Nat 1985,
125:1-15.
23. Fitzpatrick BM, Turrelli M: The geography of mammalian speciation:
mixed signals from phylogenies and range maps. Evolution 2006,
60:601-615.
24. Vieites DR, Wollenberg KC, Andreone F, Köhler J, Glaw F, Vences M: Vast
underestimation of Madagascar’s biodiversity evidenced by an
integrative amphibian inventory. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:8267-8272.
25. Vences M, Köhler J: Global diversity of amphibians (Amphibia) in
freshwater. Hydrobiologia 2008, 595:569-580.
26. Santos JC, Coloma LA, Summers K, Caldwell JP, Ree R, Cannatella DC:
Amazonian amphibian diversity is primarily derived from Late Miocene
Andean lineages. PloS Biology 2009, 7:e1000056.
27. Heinicke MP, Duellmann WE, Hedges SB: Major Caribbean and Central
American frog faunas originated by ancient oceanic dispersal. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:10092-10097.
28. Van der Meijden A, Vences M, Hoegg S, Meyer A: A previously
unrecognized radiation of ranid frogs in southern Africa revealed by
nuclear and mitochondrial DNA sequences. Mol Phyl Evol 2005,
37:674-685.

Page 14 of 15

29. Glaw F, Vences M: A Field Guide to the Amphibians and Reptiles of
Madagascar. Vences and Glaw, Cologne;, 3 2007.
30. Stuart S, Hoffmann M, Chanson J, Cox N, Berridge R, Ramani P, Young B,
(eds): Threatened Amphibians of the world. Lynx Edicions, IUCN, and
Conservation International, Barcelona, Spain: Gland, Switzerland, and
Arlington, Virginia, USA; 2008.
31. Glaw F, Vences M: Phylogeny and genus-level classification of mantellid
frogs. Org Divers Evol 2006, 6:236-253.
32. Lartillot N, Poujol R: A phylogenetic model for investigating correlated
evolution of substitution rates and continuous phenotypic characters.
Mol Biol Evol 2011, 28:729-744.
33. Agapow PM, Isaac NJB: MacroCAIC: revealing correlates of species
richness by comparative analysis. Divers Distrib 2002, 8:41-43.
34. Wilmé L, Goodman SM, Ganzhorn JU: Biogeographic evolution of
Madagascar’s microendemic biota. Science 2006, 312:1063-1065.
35. Rull V: Speciation timing and Neotropical biodiversity: the TertiaryQuaternary debate in the light of molecular phylogenetic evidence. Mol
Ecol 2008, 17:2722-2729.
36. Townsend TM, Vieites DR, Glaw F, Vences M: Testing species-level
diversification hypotheses in Madagascar: the case of microendemic
Brookesia leaf chameleons. Syst Biol 2009, 58:461-656.
37. Lynch JD: The gauge of speciation: on the frequencies of modes of
speciation. In Speciation and its consequences. Edited by: D. Otte, J. A.
Endler. Sinauer, Sunderland; 1989:527-553.
38. Berlocher SH: Can sympatric speciation be proven from biogeographic
and phylogenetic evidence? In Endless Forms: Species and Speciation.
Edited by: J. D. Howard, S. H. Berlocher. Oxford University Press, New York;
1998:99-113.
39. Coyne JA, Price TD: Little evidence for sympatric speciation in island
birds. Evolution 2000, 54:2166-2171.
40. Bolnick DI, Fitzpatrick BM: Sympatric speciation: models and empirical
evidence. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 2007, 38:459-487.
41. Maurer BA, Brown JH, Rusler RD: The micro and macro in body size
evolution. Evolution 1992, 46:939-953.
42. Chesser RT, Zink RM: Modes of speciation in birds: a test of Lynch’s
method. Evolution 1994, 48:490-497.
43. Barraclough TG, Vogler AP: Detecting the geographical patterns of
speciation from species-level phylogenies. Am Nat 2000, 155:419-434.
44. Vences M, Vieites DR, Glaw F, Brinkmann H, Kosuch J, Veith M, Meyer A:
Multiple overseas dispersal in amphibians. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2003,
270:2435-2442.
45. Glaw F, Vences M: A new cryptic species of the Mantidactylus boulengeri
group with a divergent vocal sac structure. Amphibia-Reptilia 2002,
23:293-304.
46. Wollenberg KC, Harvey J: First assessment of the territorial vocal
behaviour in a Malagasy leaf litter frog (Gephyromantis thelenae).
Herpetology Notes 2010, 3:141-150.
47. Mayr E: Processes of speciation in animals. In Mechanisms of Speciation.
Edited by: A. R. I. Liss. Alan R. Liss Inc., New York; 1982:1-19.
48. Barraclough TG, Nee S: Phylogenetics and speciation. Trends Ecol Evol
2001, 16:391-399.
49. Eo SH, DeWoody A: Evolutionary rates of mitochondrial genomes
correspond to diversification rates and to contemporary species richness
in birds and reptiles. Proc Roy Soc Lond B 2010, 277:3587-3592.
50. Phillimore AB, Price TD: Ecological influences on the temporal pattern of
speciation. In Speciation and patterns of diversity. Edited by: R. K. Butlin, J. R.
Bridle, D. Schluter. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; 2009:240-256.
51. White EP, et al: Relationships between body size and abundance in
ecology. Trends Ecol Evol 2007, 22:323-330.
52. Schluter D: The Ecology of Adaptive Radiation. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford;
2000.
53. Hutchinson GE, MacArthur RH: A theoretical ecological model of size
distributions among species of animals. Am Nat 1959, 138:1478-1512.
54. Vences M, Thomas M, Bonnett RM, Vieites DR: Deciphering amphibian
diversity through DNA barcoding: chances and challenges. Phil Trans Roy
Soc Lond B 2005, 360:1859-1868.
55. Padial JM, Miralles A, de la Riva I, Vences M: The integrative future of
taxonomy. Front Zool 2010, 7:article 16.
56. Vences M, Wahl-Boos G, Hoegg S, Glaw F, Spinelli Oliveira E, Meyer A,
Perry S: Molecular systematics of mantelline frogs from Madagascar and
the evolution of their femoral glands. Biol J Linn Soc 2007, 92:529-539.

Wollenberg et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:217
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/217

57. Hoegg S, Vences M, Brinkmann H, Meyer A: Phylogeny and comparative
substitution rates of frogs inferred from three nuclear genes. Mol Biol
Evol 2004, 21:1188-1200.
58. Kumar S, Dudley J, Nei M, Tamura K: MEGA: A biologist-centric software
for evolutionary analysis of DNA and protein sequences. Brief Bioinf 2008,
9:299-306.
59. Nylander JAA: MrModeltest v2. Program distributed by the author.
Evolutionary Biology Center, Uppsala University; 2004.
60. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinf 2003, 19:1572-1574.
61. Brandley MC, Schmitz A, Reeder TW: Partitioned Bayesian analyses,
partition choice, and the phylogenetic relationships of scincid lizards.
Syst Biol 2005, 54:373-390.
62. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: Maximum Likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinf 2006,
22:2688-2690.
63. Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont J: A rapid bootstrap algorithm for the
RAxML web-servers. Syst Biol 2008, 75:758-771.
64. Swofford DL: PAUP* Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other
Methods). Version 4. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates; 2002.
65. Britton T, Anderson CL, Jacquet D, Lundqvist S, Bremer K: Estimating
divergence times in large phylogenetic trees. Syst Biol 2007, 56:741-752.
66. Drummond AJ, Rambaut A: BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary analysis by
sampling trees. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:214.
67. Thorne JL, Kishino H: Divergence time and evolutionary rate estimation
with multilocus data. Syst Biol 2002, 51:689-702.
68. San Mauro D, Vences M, Alcobendas M, Zardoya R, Meyer A: Initial
diversification of living amphibians predated the breakup of Pangaea.
Am Nat 2005, 165:590-599.
69. Kurabayashi A, Sumida M, Yonekawa H, Glaw F, Vences M, Hasegawa M:
Phylogeny, recombination, and mechanisms of stepwise mitochondrial
genome reorganization in mantellid frogs from Madagascar. Mol Biol Evol
2008, 25:874-891.
70. Roelants K, Gower DJ, Wilkinson M, Loader SP, Biju SD, Guillaume K,
Moriau L, Bossuyt F: Global patterns of diversification in the history of
modern amphibians. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:887-892.
71. Kremen C, Cameron A, Moilanen A, Phillips SJ, Thomas CD, Beentje H,
Dransfield J, Fisher BL, Glaw F, Good TC, Harper GJ, Hijmans RJ, Lees DC,
Louis E Jr, Nussbaum RA, Raxworthy CJ, Razafimpahanana A, Schatz GE,
Vences M, Vieites DR, Zjhra ML: Aligning conservation priorities across
taxa in Madagascar with high-resolution planning tools. Science 2008,
320:222-226.
72. Koenker R, Basset G: Regression quantiles. Econometrica 1978, 46:33-50.
73. Cade BS, Noon BR: A gentle introduction to quantile regression for
ecologists. Front Ecol Evol 2003, 1:412-420.
74. Hijmans RJ, Cameron SE, Parra JL, Jones PG, Jarvis A: Very high resolution
interpolated global terrestrial climate surfaces. Int J Climatol 2005,
25:1965-1978.
75. Moen DS, Smith SA, Wiens JJ: Community assembly through evolutionary
diversification and dispersal in Middle American treefrogs. Evolution
2009, 63:3228-3247.
76. Moen DS, Wiens JJ: Phylogenetic evidence for competitively driven
divergence: body-size evolution in Caribbean treefrogs (Hylidae:
Osteopilus). Evolution 2009, 63:195-214.
77. Purvis A, Rambaut A: Comparative analysis by independent contrasts
(CAIC): an Apple Macintosh application for analysing comparative data.
Comp Appl Biosci 1995, 11:247-251.
78. Maddison WP, Maddison DR: Mesquite: a modular system for
evolutionary analysis. 2006 [http://mesquiteproject.org/mesquite/mesquite.
html], Version 2.74.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-217
Cite this article as: Wollenberg et al.: Speciation in little: the role of
range and body size in the diversification of Malagasy mantellid frogs.
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:217.

Page 15 of 15

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
