<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Duplicate dmbx1 genes regulate progenitor cell cycle and differentiation during zebrafish midbrain and retinal development</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Developmental Biology 2010 10:100. doi:10.1186/1471-213X-10-100"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Loksum Wong"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Duplicate dmbx1 genes regulate progenitor cell
cycle and differentiation during zebrafish
midbrain and retinal development
Loksum Wong1, Cameron J Weadick2, Claire Kuo1, Belinda SW Chang1,2,3, Vincent Tropepe1,3*

Abstract
Background: The Dmbx1 gene is important for the development of the midbrain and hindbrain, and mouse gene
targeting experiments reveal that this gene is required for mediating postnatal and adult feeding behaviours. A
single Dmbx1 gene exists in terrestrial vertebrate genomes, while teleost genomes have at least two paralogs. We
compared the loss of function of the zebrafish dmbx1a and dmbx1b genes in order to gain insight into the
molecular mechanism by which dmbx1 regulates neurogenesis, and to begin to understand why these duplicate
genes have been retained in the zebrafish genome.
Results: Using gene knockdown experiments we examined the function of the dmbx1 gene paralogs in zebrafish,
dmbx1a and dmbx1b in regulating neurogenesis in the developing retina and midbrain. Dose-dependent loss of
dmbx1a and dmbx1b function causes a significant reduction in growth of the midbrain and retina that is evident
between 48-72 hpf. We show that this phenotype is not due to patterning defects or persistent cell death, but
rather a deficit in progenitor cell cycle exit and differentiation. Analyses of the morphant retina or anterior
hindbrain indicate that paralogous function is partially diverged since loss of dmbx1a is more severe than loss of
dmbx1b. Molecular evolutionary analyses of the Dmbx1 genes suggest that while this gene family is conservative in
its evolution, there was a dramatic change in selective constraint after the duplication event that gave rise to the
dmbx1a and dmbx1b gene families in teleost fish, suggestive of positive selection. Interestingly, in contrast to
zebrafish dmbx1a, over expression of the mouse Dmbx1 gene does not functionally compensate for the zebrafish
dmbx1a knockdown phenotype, while over expression of the dmbx1b gene only partially compensates for the
dmbx1a knockdown phenotype.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that both zebrafish dmbx1a and dmbx1b genes are retained in the fish genome due
to their requirement during midbrain and retinal neurogenesis, although their function is partially diverged. At the
cellular level, Dmbx1 regulates cell cycle exit and differentiation of progenitor cells. The unexpected observation of
putative post-duplication positive selection of teleost Dmbx1 genes, especially dmbx1a, and the differences in
functionality between the mouse and zebrafish genes suggests that the teleost Dmbx1 genes may have evolved a
diverged function in the regulation of neurogenesis.

Background
The vertebrate diencephalon/mesencephalon homeobox 1
(dmbx1) gene belongs to the K50 subclass of paired-like
homeobox genes (related to Goosecoid) whose expression in the neural plate has been shown to demarcate
the presumptive mesencephalic (midbrain) territory in
* Correspondence: v.tropepe@utoronto.ca
1
Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, 25 Harbord
Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3G5, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

mouse [1-6], chick [2] and zebrafish [7,8]. After neural
tube formation, Dmbx1 is predominantly expressed in
the hindbrain, posterior forebrain and midbrain. Loss of
function studies highlight a role for Dmbx1 (mouse) and
dmbx1a (zebrafish) in proper midbrain and hindbrain
development and in the case of zebrafish development
of the retinotectal pathway [8,9], although in mouse the
loss of function embryonic phenotype is comparatively
mild. Moreover, early postnatal lethality occurs in the
vast majority of Dmbx1 knockout mice. Those that

© 2010 Wong et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

survive to adulthood predominantly display hypophagia
and hyperactivity, likely a result of defects in the development of neural circuitry involved in energy homeostasis [9,10].
Genomic sequence analyses indicate that basal
metazoans, such as Ctenophores [11], and Poriferans
[12], do not have a Dmbx1 gene. However, a putative
Dmbx1 ortholog has been identified in the Cnidarian
genome [13], suggesting a pre-bilaterian origin of the
Dmbx1 homeobox gene family during animal evolution.
Non-chordate invertebrate Dmbx1 orthologs have not
been clearly identified, but based on overall class homology and function, the Drosophila Pph13/Mu gene is a
plausible candidate [14]. A single Dmbx1 gene exists in
the genomes of terrestrial vertebrates, while teleost genomes contain at least two paralogs: dmbx1a and
dmbx1b (previously annotated as mbx1 and mbx2) [7],
coincident with the more recent additional round of
gene/genome duplication that is speculated to have
occurred in the teleost lineage [15,16]. This has lead us
to examine why both copies of the dmbx1 gene duplicate have been retained in the zebrafish genome.
The retention of functional gene duplicates (paralogs)
in genomes is often attributed to their role in buffering
against loss-of-function mutations in one copy of an
essential gene [17,18]. However, the proportion of genes
that when deleted are embryonic lethal or lead to infertility in mouse (i.e. essential in a laboratory context) is
not significantly different between duplicates and singletons [19,20]. Even though protein sequences of some
paralogous genes in vertebrates are functionally interchangeable [21,22], paralogs can evolve distinct expression patterns and functions. The subfunctionalization
model suggests that subsequent to gene duplication,
degenerative mutations in regulatory or coding regions
of the gene result in complementary expression patterns
or function, respectively, the composite of which would
be representative of the pre-duplicated ancestral gene
[23,24]. This appears to be a predominant mechanism
in teleosts [22,25-28]. Neofunctionalization has also
been proposed to account for the retention of duplicate
genes [29]. A recent genome wide study in Xenopus laevis indicated that as many as 6% of duplicate genes exhibit an asymmetric rate of non-synonymous substitution
in one of the paralogs, which is consistent with a neofunctionalization model for paralog retention [30]. However, experimental evidence for neofunctionalization in
vertebrates is limited.
Our previous gene expression analyses of zebrafish
dmbx1a and dmbx1b showed that despite conservation in
the regulation of expression within particular regions (e.g.
midbrain primordium), there were clear differences in
onset, spatial distribution and relative abundance during
the first two days of development [7]. These differences in

Page 2 of 24

regulation correlated with variation in the extent of genomic sequence conservation between the paralogs in three
separate fish species [7]. We also noted that although the
amino acid sequence similarity was high (72%) between
the paralogs, this was mostly due to the N-terminus and
DNA binding domain, whereas much of the C-terminus
contained relatively divergent sequence. From these
results, we concluded that the zebrafish dmbx1 paralogs
might have been subfunctionalized during the course of
their evolution.
Here, we examined the functional requirement of zebrafish dmbx1a and dmbx1b during neural development
using morpholino oligonucleotide based loss of function
to decipher a possible mechanism for the retention of
these duplicate genes. We demonstrate that neither
functional redundancy nor subfunctionalization is an
adequate model to account for the retention of these
paralogs in the zebrafish genome. Instead, we show that
both genes are required during development. Loss of
function of dmbx1a and dmbx1b causes a prolonged
progenitor cell cycle in the midbrain and retina, which
results in reduced growth, and a significant defect in
differentiation. Although these knockdown phenotypes
can be rescued by exogenous zebrafish dmbx1 mRNA,
they cannot be efficiently rescued by exogenous mouse
Dmbx1 mRNA to the same degree. Finally, analyses of
the rate of non-synonymous to synonymous substitution
in the coding region of Dmbx1 genes provide evidence
for post-duplication positive selection in the dmbx1a
and dmbx1b gene families of teleost fish. These data
suggest that both zebrafish dmbx1 paralogous genes are
non-redundantly required for cell cycle exit regulation
and differentiation. Although the differences in gene
expression domains between the dmbx1 paralogs is
subtle at late embryonic and early larval stages, the
knockdown data demonstrate that regional functional
specialization, especially with respect to dmbx1a, exists.
Thus, the function of dmbx1 genes in teleost fish may
be evolutionarily diverged.

Results
Discrete variation in the timing and distribution of
dmbx1a and dmbx1b gene expression during the early
larval stage

Previous analyses suggested that the dmbx1a and
dmbx1b paralogs displayed partially divergent spatial
and temporal patterns of gene expression in early development [7]. For example, between shield and tailbud
stages, dmbx1a has a characteristic annulus expression
pattern specifying the midbrain territory, as well as progenitor cells of retinal and diencephalic lineages,
whereas dmbx1b expression during these stages is barely
detectable and appears later at mid-somitogenesis only
in the presumptive midbrain [7,8]. Between 24 - 48 hpf,

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

the expression domains of these two genes partially
overlapped in the midbrain and hindbrain, but neither
gene is expressed in the retina. We analyzed the expression patterns of the dmbx1 paralogs in the brain and
retina during the late embryonic to early larval stages
using in situ hybridization in order to clarify where the
paralogs exert their function during development.
At 72 hpf, dmbx1a was expressed in the optic tectum
(TeO) and very weakly in the tegmentum (T) (Figure
1A, B, F). Scattered cells of the retinal inner nuclear
layer (INL) and ganglion cell layer (GCL) also express
dmbx1a (Figure 1E). However, there is very weak or no
dmbx1a expression in the photoreceptor layer and no
expression in the ciliary marginal zone (CMZ), where
the post-embryonic retinal stem and progenitor cells
undergo continual proliferation [31]. Dmbx1a is also
expressed in discrete hindbrain cell populations that
appear to demarcate the cerebellar eminentia granularis
(EG) anteriorly (Figure 1A; B, white arrow) and the
medulla oblongata posteriorly (Figures 1A; B, red
arrow). In addition, dmbx1b was expressed throughout

Page 3 of 24

the midbrain and within the medulla at 72 hpf
(Figure 1C; D, red arrow), but only very weakly in the
INL and EG (Figures 1D, G).
Expression analyses at 96 hpf continued to reveal discrete variation in the distribution of cells expressing
dmbx1a and dmbx1b. For example, dmbx1a is predominantly localized to the medial and lateral compartments
of the TeO in the midbrain and weak expression is
detected in the tegmentum (Figure 1I,J,N), whereas
dmbx1b expression extends more ventrally to encompass more of the tegmentum (Figure 1K,L,P). This
difference in dorsoventral expression domains is consistent with our previous observations at 24 - 48 hpf [7].
Furthermore, the predominantly tectal expression of
dmbx1a is similar to that of mouse dmbx1 [4]. Expression of dmbx1b in the anterolateral hindbrain is also
more substantial at this stage, but not quite comparable
to dmbx1a (Figure 1I,K). Finally, both dmbx1a and
dmbx1b are expressed throughout the retinal INL, but
dmbx1a appears enhanced and localized to the central
region of the INL, whereas dmbx1b expression is relatively diffuse and less intense throughout most layers
(Figure 1M,O).
Taking into account the relative temporal, spatial, and
quantitative expression patterns of the dmbx1 paralogs
in the first 4 days of life ([7]; present results), our data
suggests that dmbx1 genes would predominantly function in midbrain formation, plus a role in retinal and
hindbrain development during later differentiation.
Therefore, we sought to compare the functional requirement of Dmbx1a and Dmbx1b.
Gene knockdown using dmbx1 paralog specific antisense
morpholino oligonucleotides

Figure 1 Spatiotemporal expression patterns of dmbx1a and
dmbx1b at 72 hpf and 96 hpf. Lateral view, anterior to the left (A,
C, I, K); dorsal view, anterior to the top (B, D, J, L). Coronal plastic
sections (~1 μm; dorsal to the top) of the retina (E, G, M, O) and
midbrain (F, H, N, P) were obtained after whole mount labeling with
RNA probes. White dotted line in B and D define the position of the
representative coronal plastic section shown in F and H,
respectively. White dotted line in J and L define the position of the
representative coronal plastic section shown in N and P,
respectively. White arrow in B, D, J, L demarcates the rostrolateral
region of the hindbrain (where the EG is located), and red arrow
demarcates the expression in the medulla oblongata. Black arrows
in E, M and O point to the INL (inner nuclear layer). The optic
tectum (TeO) is demarcated by dotted lines in F, H, N, P and the
region of the tegmentum (T) lies just ventral to the TeO. The
position of the lens is denoted in E, G, M, O. hpf, hours postfertilization.

Given the high degree of sequence similarity between
the dmbx1 paralogs, our strategy for using antisense
morpholino oligonucleotide (MO) based knockdown
required confirmation that paralog specific MOs could
independently block translation of dmbx1a and dmbx1b
mRNA. In the absence of commercially available antibodies that are validated to detect zebrafish Dmbx1a or
Dmbx1b proteins, we opted for an alternative approach
to estimate the level of protein knockdown for each
paralog. We constructed in-frame GFP fusion constructs
containing the unique paralog specific MO targeting
sequences, and co-injected each of the MOs with their
corresponding in vitro transcribed fusion mRNAs
(Figure 2A,B). When either dmbx1a-GFP (n = 62) or
dmbx1b-GFP (n = 73) fusion mRNA was injected, ~75%
of the embryos had bright ubiquitous GFP protein
expression after 24 hpf (Figure 2C,G). GFP expression
was completely suppressed in embryos that were coinjected with MO1a + dmbx1a-GFP (Figure 2D, n = 74)
or MO1b + dmbx1b-GFP (Figure 2H, n = 59), indicating

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

Page 4 of 24

Figure 2 Specificity of morpholino induced dmbx1a and dmbx1b knockdown using fusion protein constructs Dmbx1a-GFP and
Dmbx1b-GFP. (A, B) Schematic diagrams showing sequence of fusion constructs: 5’ UTR (black horizontal line); 5’ end of the CDS for either
dmbx1a or dmbx1b (white box), the full-length coding sequence for GFP (green box); site of polyadenylation (AAAA); relative position binding
sites (red horizontal line) where the MOs block translation of the fusion proteins. (C-J) dmbx1a- and dmbx1b-GFP mRNA was either injected alone
or co-injected with MOs as indicated at the bottom left of each panel, and embryos were examined for the presence of GFP fluorescence at 24
hpf (lateral view with anterior to the left). The percentage of GFP positive embryos is shown on the top right. UTR, untranslated region; CDS,
coding sequence; MO, morpholino; mMO, mismatch morpholino; GFP, green fluorescent protein; hpf, hours post-fertilization.

that the MOs result in very efficient translation
inhibition.
In order to control for MO sequence specificity, we
also co-injected the GFP fusion mRNA constructs with
a 5-bp mismatched MO (mMO1a or mMO1b; see
Materials & Methods for details) and quantified the percentage of injected embryos that were GFP positive after
24 hpf. Of the embryos that were co-injected with
mMO1a + dmbx1a-GFP (Figure 2E, n = 53) or mMO1b
+ dmbx1b-GFP (Figure 2I, n = 64), ~75 - 80% of the
embryos demonstrated ubiquitous GFP expression,
which was similar to the percentage of fusion construct
injected embryos expressing GFP without MO co-injection. These results indicate that the knockdown of either
GFP fusion construct depends precisely on the complementary MO sequences.
We further examined the paralog specific knockdown
characteristics of the MOs in order to confirm that
there were no cross-target effects. Co-injection of
MO1b + dmbx1a-GFP (Figure 2F, n = 60) or MO1a +
dmbx1b-GFP (Figure 2J, n = 62) resulted in ~75 - 80%
of the embryos with ubiquitous GFP expression in
injected embryos after 24 hpf. Again, the numbers of

GFP positive embryos within the test pool were comparable to the results obtained from injecting the GFP
fusion mRNA alone, indicating that it is unlikely that
cross targeting of MOs is occurring. These data suggest
that the MO knockdown of the Dmbx1-GFP fusion proteins, and by inference the endogenous Dmbx1 proteins,
is both efficient and paralog specific.
Midbrain growth defects in embryos with reduced levels
of either Dmbx1a or Dmbx1b

The early onset and sustained expression of dmbx1a
and dmbx1b within the midbrain suggested that these
genes play an important role in the development of this
neuroanatomical structure. Morphological analyses were
carried out to compare the MO-injected embryos (10
ng/embryo each) with mMO-injected (10 ng/embryo
each) as well as un-injected controls. After 24 hpf, we
were able to detect subtle differences in the size of the
midbrain (data not shown), but this morphological
change was more prominent at 48 hpf, where the size of
the dorsal tectum of the MO1a-injected embryos was
reduced (Figure 3C,D) compared to un-injected (Figure
3A,B) and mMO1a-injected embryos (Figure 3E,F),

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

Figure 3 Hypoplasia of the optic tectum in dmbx1 morphants
at 48 hpf. Gross morphologies of the optic tecta were compared
between morphants (C, G, K) and both the un-injected (A) and
mMO-injected (E, I, M) embryos. Dorsal view, anterior to the left.
Contour of the medial-posterior ridge of the optic tectum is
demarcated by red doted lines. The MOs used in each group are
shown on the bottom right of the panel. Arrows in A, C, E, G, I, K, M
represent the relative position where ~ 1 μm plastic sections were
obtained as depicted in B, D, F, H, J, L, N, respectively.
Measurements of the cross-sectional tectal area are summarized in
the graph (O). Asterisk indicates significant difference (p < 0.05)
between the morphant samples and the controls. TeO, optic
tectum; CeP, cerebellar plate; mob, medulla oblongata; MO,
morpholino; mMO, mismatch morpholino.

consistent with previous results using the same morpholino (MO1a) [8]. We observed that the overall cross-sectional area (or thickness) of the tectal hemispheres is
diminished in the MO1a morphant, but that the shape
of the contours of the tectal hemispheres and the extent
of the cerebellar plate (CeP) remains relatively unaffected. We analyzed transverse sections to quantify
these differences by measuring the average crosssectional area of the tectal wall unilaterally [from the
lateral sulcus separating the tectum dorsally from the
region of the torus semicircularis (TS) ventrally] and
observed a reduction of ~ 50% in the MO1a morphants
compared to controls at the same position along the
anteroposterior axis (Figure 3O). Interestingly, the tectal
morphology of MO1b morphant embryos (Figure 3G,H)
was also affected compared to mMO1b control injected
embryos (Figure 3I,J), and cross-sectional area measurements revealed a ~ 35% reduction in size (Figure 3O).
Knockdown of both dmbx1 genes simultaneously
(MO1a + MO1b) resulted in an obvious change in the
overall morphology of the tectum (Figure 3K,L)

Page 5 of 24

compared to the double control injected (mMO1a +
mMO1b) embryos (Figure 3M). In order to compare
with the single morphant embryos, we co-injected 5 ng
of each morpholino. In contrast to the single morphant
phenotype, we observed that the shape of the tectal
hemispheres in the double morphant often was abnormal and that the extent of the CeP was reduced, which
can be observed from a dorsal perspective (compare red
dotted line in Figure 3K with red dotted lines in 3A, C,
G). Despite the more extensive morphological alterations in the double morphants, the overall cross-sectional area of the tectal hemispheres was reduced to a
similar degree (~ 60%) when compared to the differences observed in the single morphant analyses (Figure
3L,O). Overall we observed that the average tectal crosssectional areas in a transverse section of the un-injected
and mMO1 injected embryos ranged between 5800 7600 μm2, whereas the morphant embryos had an average area that ranged between 2800-3900 μm 2 , which
were statistically significantly less than their cognate
controls, but not significantly different from each other.
The overall growth of the morphant embryos was not
significantly impaired by 48 hpf [length WT = 2986 ±
51 μm; MO1a+b = 2910 ± 210 μm; mMO1a+b = 3018
± 65 μm (n = 5 per group)] and we confirmed that after
normalizing the tectal cross-sectional area measurements to embryo length, the area in the double
morphants was significantly reduced compared to uninjected (t = 9.5, p = 1.2 × 10 -5 ; n = 5 per group) as
well as the mMO1a + mMO1b injected (t = 11.2,
p = 3.0 × 10-5; n = 5 per group) embryos, whereas the
two control groups were not significantly different
(t = 0.7, p = 0.5; n = 5 per group).
Midbrain gene expression defects in embryos with
reduced levels of either Dmbx1a or Dmbx1b

In order to determine whether the loss of function of
dmbx1a and dmbx1b altered neural differentiation, various neural markers were examined using whole-mount
in situ hybridization focusing on the combined knockdown of dmbx1 genes. Otx2, foxb1.2, and lim1 were
examined at 48 hpf and the expression of these markers
in the optic tecta was decreased in the morphants compared to control embryos (Additional file 1). The
expression of otx2 in the retina indicated a reduced
overall size in the morphant embryos beginning at 48
hpf (Additional file 1A - C). Expression of foxb1.2 in the
tectum was virtually eliminated in the double morphants
(Additional file 1D - F), but there was no change in
foxb1.2 expression in the ventral diencephalic domain or
in the MHB. Similarly, expression of lim1 (Additional
file 1G - I) was significantly reduced in the posterior
tectum adjacent to the MHB, but not altered in the cerebellar primordium on the posterior side of the MHB.

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

Expression of egr2b (krox20) (Additional file 1J - L) and
pax2a (Additional file 1M - O) confirmed that early specification and segmentation in the hindbrain region was
relatively unaffected in the double morphant embryos at
this stage. Nonetheless, judging by the foxb1.2 expression, specific subpopulations of hindbrain precursors
may be affected and analyses of transverse sections
demonstrate that overall tissue growth of the hindbrain
was reduced (data not shown). Interestingly, pax2a
expression within the optic stalk region was significantly
enhanced (Additional file 1P - R). This is consistent
with the fact that dmbx1a expression during gastrula
stages partially overlaps with anterior neural plate cells
destined for a retinal fate [7,8] and suggests that in the
absence of dmbx1a some of these cells are transformed
toward an optic stalk identity [32,33] while delaying
further retinal development during optic cup formation.
This may partly explain the persistent rx1 progenitor
cell marker expression in the dmbx1a morphant retina
up to 48 hpf [8], even though dmbx1 genes are not
apparently expressed in the retina proper before this
stage. Finally, we examined in more detail the expression of markers of the MHB (eng3, fgf8, erm, pax2a,
wnt1), as well as markers for various telencephalic and
diencephalic structures (shh, dlx2a, axial, emx2)
between 24 - 48 hpf. In general, we observed no significant differences between the double morphant embryos
and controls in the MHB (Additional file 2) or the forebrain (data not shown), although we note that there is
an apparent increase in fgf8 expression in rostral telencephalon of the morphant embryos (Additional file
2D-F), which correlates with a loss of dlx2a in the ventral telencephalon (data not shown). This could have
implications for telencephalic development.
The specific loss of foxb1.2 expression in midbrain and
hindbrain regions in the double morphants suggested
that the development of specific sub-regions with
dmbx1 gene expression were compromised as a result of
gene knock down. However, given that dmbx1a and
dmbx1b have partially non-overlapping expression
domains, we also investigated foxb1.2 expression in single morphant embryos. Knockdown of either Dmbx1a
or Dmbx1b caused a significant reduction in foxb1.2
expression in the midbrain, which was enhanced further
in the double morphants (Figure 4A,C,E,G, black arrow
head). However, in the hindbrain, foxb1.2 expression in
the anterolateral domain (presumptive EG) was eliminated only in the presence of MO1a and not MO1b
(black arrow in Figure 4B,D,F,H), which is consistent
with the expression of dmbx1a and absence of dmbx1b
in this region at 48 hpf (Figure 1). Although the trigeminal ganglion is also present in this anterior-lateral
domain, it does not appear to be defective in the MO1a
morphant as indicated by the relatively normal

Page 6 of 24

Figure 4 Distinct patterns of hindbrain foxb1.2 expression in
dmbx1a and dmbx1b morphant embryos. Lateral view anterior to
the left (A, C, E, G) and dorsal view anterior to the top (B, D, F, H) of
48 hpf embryos un-injected (A, B), or injected with MO1a (C, D),
MO1b (E, F) or MO1a + MO1b (G, H). The mismatch control injected
morpholinos resembled the un-injected controls and are not
shown. (A, C, E, G) Black arrow indicates the position of the MHB,
white arrowhead demarcates the position of the ventral
diencephalic/hypothalamic region of the forebrain, and black
arrowhead demarcate expression domain in the region of optic
tectum. Black arrow in B, D, F, H demarcates the region of the
rostrolateral hindbrain (where EG is located), and red arrow
demarcates the expression in the medulla oblongata. MO,
morpholino; MHB, midbrain-hindbrain boundary; hpf, hours postfertilization

expression of GFP in the isl2b:GFP transgenic embryos
(see Additional file 4B,D,F,H). The posterior-medial
domain of foxb1.2 expression was reduced in the MO1a
+ MO1b injected embryos (red arrow in Figure 4B,D,F,
H). We performed a dose-response analysis for morpholino efficacy using foxb1.2 gene expression as a reliable
correlated readout for the midbrain development defects
observed at 48 hpf. When 5 ng of either MO1a or
MO1b was used, there was no discernable change in
foxb1.2 expression in the midbrain (or hindbrain) compared to un-injected controls (Additional file 3). However, when 10 ng of either MO1a or MO1b was injected
separately, a similar reduction in foxb1.2 expression and
size of the midbrain was observed (Figure 3; Additional
file 3). Combined injection of 5 ng MO1a and 5 ng
MO1b caused a significant reduction in foxb1.2 expression (Additional file 3). Furthermore, we confirmed that
the ventral diencephalic/hypothalamic (white arrowhead
Figure 4A,C,E,G) and MHB (black arrow Figure 4A,C,E,G)
expression of foxb1.2 were relatively less affected in the
morphants. Thus, dmbx1a and dmbx1b appear to be independently required for region-specific midbrain and hindbrain development perhaps through a synergistic
mechanism.
Retinal growth defects in embryos with reduced levels of
either Dmbx1a or Dmbx1b

Comparing our previous expression analyses [7] with the
present results (Figure 1), the onset of expression of

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

dmbx1a within the retina (after the optic cup is formed)
occurs ~48 hpf, whereas retinal expression of dmbx1b
appears to be similar but slightly delayed. Thus, we reasoned that a requirement for both dmbx1 paralogs in
the retina proper would be manifest most prominently
between 72 - 96 hpf. Indeed, we did not observe any
significant gross morphological defects in the retina in
combined MO1a + MO1b injected embryos compared
to controls at 24 hpf (data not shown).
In order to determine the relative requirement of
dmbx1a and dmbx1b in the development of the retina,
we examined transverse sections of the retina at 72 hpf.
Single MO1a injected embryos had severely compromised differentiation and lamination (Figure 5B) compared to the un-injected (Figure 5A) or mMO1a
injected (Figure 5C) embryos. Furthermore, there was a
significant decrease in the average overall area of a midtransverse section (thickness) of the retina in the
dmbx1a morphants compared to controls (Figure 5H).
In contrast, the MO1b injected embryos displayed a
relatively mild retinal differentiation phenotype (most
prominently in the dorsal regions) (Figure 5D) compared to the un-injected (Figure 5A) and mMO1b
injected (Figure 5E) controls. However, similar to
the dmbx1a morphants, the dmbx1b morphants

Figure 5 Retinal hypoplasia in dmbx1 morphants at 72 hpf.
Coronal plastic sections (~ 1 μm) of retina from un-injected (A),
MO-injected (B, D, F), and mMO-injected (C, E, G) embryos. Layers in
the retina can be clearly distinguishable at this stage: retinal
ganglion cell layer (RGC), inner nuclear layer (INL), and
photoreceptor layer (PR). Measurements of the retinal cross-sectional
area summarized in the graph (H). Asterisk indicates significant
difference (p < 0.05) between the morphant samples and the
controls. MO, morpholino; mMO, mismatch morpholino.

Page 7 of 24

demonstrated an overall reduction in the average midtransverse area of the retina (Figure 5H). From these
results we predicted that the combined MO1a + MO1b
injected embryos would resemble the MO1a injected
embryos. Indeed, the severe defect in differentiation in
the double morphant (Figure 5F) compared to controls
(Figure 5A,G) appeared identical to that of the single
MO1a morphant. Interestingly, the reduction in
the average mid-transverse area in the double morphants was not significantly different from that observed
in the single morphant embryos, ranging from 40 - 60%
less than controls (Figure 5H). These observations indicate that retinal growth is primarily dependent on the
dmbx1a paralog, which can partially compensate for the
lack of dmbx1b, but that dmbx1b is also required for
the proper continued growth of the retina (from
approximately 48 - 72 hpf).
The overall growth by 72 hpf [length WT = 3302 ± 54
μm; MO1a+b = 2996 ± 159 μm; mMO1a+b = 3278 ± 65
μm (n = 5 per group)] of the double morphant embryos
was significantly less than un-injected (t = 3.36,
p = 0.01; n = 5 per group) and mMO1a + mMO1b
injected (t = 3.36, p = 0.01; n = 5 per group) embryos.
However, despite this difference, we still confirmed that
after normalizing the retinal area measurements to
embryo length, the area in the double morphants was
significantly reduced compared to un-injected (t = 7.7, p
= 2.4 × 10-4; n = 5 per group) as well as the mMO1a +
mMO1b injected (t = 10.0, p = 2.1 × 10 -5 ; n = 5 per
group) embryos, whereas the two control groups were
not significantly different (t = 0.08, p = 0.94; n = 5 per
group). The overall length difference in the morphants
is directly related to the reduced midbrain, retina and
hindbrain since other regions of the embryo appeared
normal in size (data not shown). We also observed that
the lens was smaller in MO1a and MO1a+MO1b morphants. Although the peripherally localized epithelial
cells are present, in all cases there appears to be a defect
in the differentiation of fiber cells forming the characteristic darkly stained concentric rings. This defect may be
due to a secondary disruption in the normal lens-retina
interactions during development. However, we did not
explore this possibility and further experiments are
required to characterize this lens defect in more detail.
Retinal differentiation defects in embryos with reduced
levels of either Dmbx1a or Dmbx1b

In order to gain more insight into retinal differentiation
changes due to reduced levels of the dmbx1 genes, we
examined a panel of markers on transverse sections
using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry
in double morphant embryos at 72 hpf. In control
embryos, otx2 was mostly absent from the RGC layer,
ONL and the CMZ, but expressed in central regions of

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

the INL at 72 hpf (Figure 6A). In the double morphant
embryos, otx2 expression appeared expanded and relatively uniform throughout the central retina, but not in
the CMZ (Figure 6B). Consistent with the notion that
differentiation of at least some of the retinal cell types is
reduced in the morphant embryos, we observed a significant expansion of vsx2-expressing stem and/or progenitor cells in the CMZ [34] compared to controls (Figure
6C,D). There was also an increase in neurod-expressing
cells (Figure 6E,F), a marker of photoreceptor progenitor
cells [35]. Together these data reveal that reduced levels
of Dmbx1 results in a persistent progenitor identity in
cells throughout the retina, which correlates with our
histological analyses.
To gain greater insight into the differentiation defects
of the morphant embryos, we analyzed several retinal
cell-type specific markers using immunohistochemistry
and confocal microscopy. Using an isl2b:gfp transgene to
mark retinal ganglion cells [36], we observed a reduction, but not a complete loss, of retinal ganglion cells
(GFP+) in the double morphant embryos compared to
controls (Figure 6G,H). The expression of Pax6, which
marks most amacrine cells and a subpopulation of ganglion cells [34], was also reduced (Figure 6I,J). Consistent
with these observations, expression of PKC, which
marks bipolar neurons, general markers for cone photoreceptors (Zpr1), rod photoreceptors (Zpr3), and Müller
glia (glutamine synthetase, GS) were almost completely
abolished in the double morphant embryos (Figure
6K-R). Thus, although there are some differentiated
ganglion cells and amacrine cells, most cells in the
dmbx1 double morphant retina have not differentiated
by 72 hpf, and this correlates with the relative increase
in progenitor cell marker expression and morphology.
Based on our histological analyses, we predicted that
the effects of gene knockdown on retinal cell differentiation might be paralog-specific. Thus, we carefully examined the expression of rhodopsin (rho) in single
morphant embryos compared to the double morphants
as a marker for photoreceptor differentiation. Consistent
with our histological and immunolabeling data, MO1a
injected embryos (Additional file 4C) showed a significant loss of rho expression that mimicked the double
morphant phenotype (Additional file 4G). The MO1b
injected embryos, in contrast, had a less attenuated rho
expression phenotype (Additional file 4E), confirming
that loss of dmbx1b in the retina results in a less severe
differentiation phenotype. Previous analyses demonstrated that knockdown of dmbx1a alone caused defects
in retinotectal projections and reduced terminal fields
within the TeO [8]. We confirmed this observation in
MO1a injected embryos using a Tg(isl2b:GFP)zc7 transgenic zebrafish line that robustly marks the RGCs in the
retina, their axonal trajectories along the retinotectal

Page 8 of 24

pathway, and the contralateral terminal fields in
the TeO [36]. Approximately 75% of MO1a injected
embryos (n = 25; Additional file 4D) showed a defasciculated optic nerve prior to the chiasma compared to
control (n = 30) (white arrowhead, Additional file 4B) as
well as reduced terminal fields in the TeO (white arrow,
Additional file 4D). In contrast, the retinotectal projection in MO1b injected embryos (n = 25) appeared
normal (Additional file 4F), which could be due to the
presence of normal levels of dmbx1a. If so, then a functional role of dmbx1b in RGC development may be
absent. Thus, we predicted that the retinotectal projection in the double morphants would resemble that of
the MO1a injected embryos. Again in approximately
75% of embryos, we observed a significant defect in the
retinotectal projections when both paralogs are knocked
down (n = 35), with significantly reduced terminal fields
in the TeO and optic nerve defasciculation (Additional
file 4H). These data suggest that dmbx1a has a predominant role in the development of the retinotectal projection, compared to dmbx1b, which was due to a defect
in RGC differentiation, a defect in the development of
the TeO, or both.
We examined the relative requirement of each paralog
in retinal differentiation by performing a similar dose
response analysis as mentioned above using rho gene
expression as a reliable correlated readout for the retinal
defects observed at 72 hpf. In contrast to the observations made for foxb1.2 expression in the midbrain/hindbrain, 5 ng of MO1a resulted in a substantial reduction
(~50%) in the extent of rho expression in the retina,
whereas 5 ng of MO1b resulted in a negligible difference in rho expression compared to un-injected controls
(Additional file 3). However, when 5 ng of MO1a and
MO1b was combined for a total of 10 ng injected, we
observed a significant reduction in rho expression
(Additional file 3). When 10 ng of MO1a was injected
individually, a similar reduction in rho expression and
size of the retina is observed when compared to the
double morphants derived from injections of 5 ng of
each morpholino combined (Additional file 3). Unexpectedly, when 10 ng of MO1b was injected individually,
a relatively mild reduction in rho expression was
observed compared to controls (Additional file 3). These
data suggest that dmbx1a has a predominant functional
role in retinal differentiation and that dmbx1b may only
have a minor, additive role.
Defects in tissue size and cell differentiation in the
midbrain and retina are not due to persistent cell death

Our data comparing the dmbx1 single and double morphants demonstrate that the size of the midbrain and
retina are reduced and that neural differentiation is
significantly attenuated. One possible mechanism to

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

Page 9 of 24

Figure 6 Altered retinal gene expression in morphant embryos. Coronal plastic sections (~ 1 μm) of retina at 72 hpf after whole mount in
situ hybridization labeling for progenitor markers from control mMO1a + mMO1b injected (A, C, E), or MO1a + MO1b injected (B, D, F) embryos.
Position of the lens (shown in A) is similar for all panels. Arrows in C and D demarcate the ciliary marginal zone (CMZ). Cryosections (~15 μm) of
control (G, I, K, M, O, Q) and MO1a + MO1b (H, J, L, N, P, R) embryos immunolabelled with antibodies for indicated differentiation markers (red
or green) and counter-stained with DAPI (blue). MO, morpholino.

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

account for this phenotype is increased cell death in
progenitor cells within these regions, resulting in diminished growth and differentiation potential of the tissue.
We tested this hypothesis by examining the level of cell
death at 24, 48 and 72 hpf using the chromatin binding
fluorescent marker acridine orange (AO) to detect apoptotic cells in live embryos [37]. An increased number of
AO+ cells was observed in the midbrain and hindbrain
at 24 hpf in MO1a + MO1b injected embryos compared
to un-injected and mMO1a + mMO1b injected embryos
(Additional file 5A, B). However, the growth defects in
morphant embryos were not apparent until after this
stage. Thus, to test whether persistent apoptotic cell
death was the cause of the growth defects, we analyzed
AO labelling at 48 and 72 hpf. Little or no apoptosis
was detected in any of the groups at 48 hpf (Additional
file 5C, D; data not shown). At 72 hpf, there is substantial remodelling occurring within the teleostean retinotectal pathway, which results in apoptotic cell death in
both retinal and tectal tissue [38]. This was detected
in un-injected embryos and similar levels of cell death
were observed in embryos injected with a combination
of mMO1a + mMO1b (Additional file 5E, K). In contrast, combined MO1a + MO1b injected embryos
showed less AO labelling in both the midbrain and the
retina compared to controls (Additional file 5F, L). We
confirmed these observations by staining for activated
Caspase3 and by performing TUNEL labelling at 72 hpf
to detect apoptotic cells. The number of Caspase3+ or
TUNEL+ nuclei in transverse sections of the midbrain
(Additional file 5G-J) or retina (Additional file 5M-P) at
this stage were not different between the controls and
double morphants. Furthermore, examination of our
semi-thin plastic sections from morphant tissues did not
reveal any evidence for enhanced pyknosis, cellular debris or large autophagic vacuoles relative to controls at
any time point between 48 - 96 hpf, suggesting that
neither necrosis nor autophagy appears to account for
the morphant phenotype. Thus, these data indicate that
persistent cell death likely does not account for the
defects in size and differentiation of the midbrain and
retina in dmbx1 morphants.
Dmbx1a and Dmbx1b are required for normal progenitor
cell cycle regulation

An alternative mechanism that can account for the
reduced size and attenuated differentiation of midbrain
and retinal tissue may entail changes in the capacity for
progenitor cell proliferation. We analyzed nuclear
PCNA protein expression by immunohistochemistry to
label cells that are actively in cell cycle [39]. By 72 hpf
cell proliferation becomes substantially restricted to
periventricular locations within the brain [39], and the
CMZ in the retina [40] under normal conditions. Thus,

Page 10 of 24

we predicted that a defect in cell cycle regulation would
be most evident by 72 hpf when neurogenic compartments are normally relatively small and very well circumscribed. PCNA labelling in the brain at 72 hpf
revealed that cell proliferation in the optic tectum is
maintained throughout the entire perimeter bilaterally
in the double morphants (Figure 7B), whereas at this
stage in control embryos the tectal neurogenic zones are
more restricted to the lateral (bordering with the torus
semicircularis anlagen) and most prominently the medial (bordering with the torus longitudinalis anlagen)
compartments (Figure 7A). These observations reveal
that the reduction of Dmbx1a and Dmbx1b expression
caused an increase in the number of actively cycling
cells in the midbrain.
To confirm these results with another cell cycle marker, we tested whether cells can incorporate 5-bromo2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU), a thymidine analog, during S
phase of the cell cycle. Embryos at 72 hpf received a
single intracerebroventricular bolus of 5 mM BrdU dissolved in embryo media, and subsequently processed for
immunohistochemistry after a 30 min survival period.
The combined knockdown of Dmbx1a and Dmbx1b
caused a significant increase in BrdU labelled cells (Figure 7D), compared to controls (Figure 7C).
An analysis of cell proliferation in the retina at 72 hpf
yielded similar results. PCNA expression in the double
morphants was greatly expanded toward the central
retina from the CMZ (Figure 7F), compared to the relatively few PCNA+ cells in the CMZ of control retinas
(Figure 7E) and this was similarly confirmed with BrdU
labelling (Figure 8, discussed below). Given that the
retina is smaller in the morphants, an increase in PCNA
+ and BrdU+ cells suggests that these cells might be
delayed or stalled in the G1/S transition of the cell
cycle. We examined the expression of phospho-histone
H3 (pHH3), which labels cells in M-phase of the cell
cycle, and found that there was approximately a twofold increase in the number of pHH3+ cells [Control
(n = 3): 15.3 ± 4.7 vs. MO1a + MO1b (n = 3): 28.0 ±
3.4; t = 3.7, p < 0.05] in transverse sections of the double morphant retinas primarily localized to the apical
domain if the CMZ and central retina (Figure 7H) compared to controls (Figure 7G). Thus, cells are able to
progress beyond S-phase of the cell cycle. We were also
able to rule out that progenitor cells were undergoing
endoreduplication of their DNA by using propidium
iodide (PI) labelling and flow cytometry to quantify the
average DNA content among a population of retinal
cells from 72 hpf embryos injected with MO1a + MO1b
and compared to cells from un-injected control
embryos of equivalent age. We pooled dissected retinal
tissue from 120 embryos in both groups. The vast
majority of un-injected retinal cells at this stage (89.3%)

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

Page 11 of 24

Figure 7 Proliferation defects in dmbx1 morphant embryos. Embryos at 72 hpf were examined for the presence of proliferating cells using
immunohistochemistry with antibodies to PCNA, pHH3 or BrdU (30 min survival). Coronal (~15 μm) sections of midbrain (A-D, dorsal to the top)
and retina (E-H, dorsal to the top, lens to the left). Arrow in A and B demarcates the proliferative zones of the dorsal and lateral TeO. Arrow in E
and G demarcates the CMZ. (I, J) Flow cytometric analysis of retinal cells derived from un-injected or MO1a + MO1b injected embryos at 72 hpf
using propidium iodide labeling. N, total number of cells analyzed; G1, gap-1 phase of the cell cycle; S, synthesis phase of the cell cycle; G2, gap2 phase of the cell cycle; MO, morpholino; mMO, mismatch morpholino; hpf, hours post-fertilization.

were within G1 of the cell cycle, whereas only 5.7%
were in S phase (Figure 7I). In contrast, 61.4% of the
morpholino injected cells were in G1 phase of the cell
cycle and 27.3% were in S phase (Figure 7J). The proportion of cells in G2-M of the cell cycle in either
group was < 1% and this is due to the fact that the
overall fraction of the cell population captured in these
short phases of the cell cycle is rather low using this
method. Nonetheless, there is a ~6.7 fold increase (from
0.07 to 0.47) in the proportion of cells in G2-M in the

morphant retinas. Importantly, there was no evidence of
polyploidy in either the control samples or the morphant samples. Therefore, these data indicate that retinal progenitor cells (and by inference midbrain cells) in
morphant embryos are not stalled in any particular
phase of the cell cycle and that they complete mitosis.
Taken together, the smaller retinal size and increased
proportion of cells that remain in cycle at 72 hpf
suggests that progenitor cell cycle length is significantly
increased.

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

Page 12 of 24

Figure 8 Cumulative BrdU labelling reveals an increase in the morphant progenitor cell cycle in the 72 hpf retina. (A-F) Immunolabelled
coronal sections (dorsal to the top, lens to the left) from embryos repeatedly injected with BrdU (red) after different survival times (indicated on
the left). Sections were counter-stained with DAPI (blue). (G, H) Regression analyses from cumulative labelling data. MO, morpholino; hpf, hours
post-fertilization, hr, hours.

To precisely quantify potential changes in cell cycle
length in the dmbx1 double morphants at 72 hpf,
we performed a BrdU cumulative labelling experiment
(see Materials and Methods section for details) focusing
on the retina. A 5 mM bolus of BrdU was given by
intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection with survival
times ranging from 0.5 hours to 10.5 hours at 2-hour
intervals. For example, embryos in the 0.5 hour group
would receive only a single BrdU injection and then
processed for immunolabeling after 30 min. In contrast,
embryos in the 10.5 hour group would have received a
total of 6 separate injections (2 hours apart) and then
processed for immunolabeling 30 min after the last

injection. In preliminary experiments we determined
that embryos receiving 6 repeated ICV injections
remained viable and healthy (data not shown). The central assumption in this analysis is that an asynchronously dividing population of cells exhibits single
population kinetics (i.e. all cells in the population have
the same cell cycle time). Representative confocal
images of BrdU labelled cells in control retinas at 0.5 hr,
6.5 hr, and 10.5 hr are shown in Figure 8A,C,E where
proliferating cells are exclusively confined to the region
of the CMZ. In contrast, in dmbx1 double morphant
retinas, BrdU+ cells appear scattered through the peripheral and central retina (Figure 8B,D,F). Proliferating

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

cells entering S-phase over time will incorporate BrdU
and become labelled until they re-enter S-phase, at
which point they can still incorporate BrdU, but they
will not be marked as newly positive cells. In controls,
the data during this interval (~0 - 5.5 hr) were fit to a
linear regression model (R2 = 0.93815), which allowed
us to estimate when the maximal number of BrdU+
cells in the population were labelled (the first time point
when the plateau is reached) (Figure 8G). Thus, by ~
5.5 hours of cumulative BrdU labelling, all of the cells
that are cycling in the population (the growth fraction)
are labelled and further incorporation of BrdU at later
time points does not increase this value. This allowed us
to estimate the growth fraction in the controls to be
~11%. Using these values obtained from the plotted data
(Figure 8G), we were able to estimate the progenitor cell
cycle to be ~ 10.5 hours in the control retina (see Material and Methods for calculation).
The same analysis for dmbx1 double morphant retinas
resulted in a significantly different cell cycle estimate.
First, the fraction of cells incorporating BrdU over time
continued to increase over the entire labelling interval
(R2 = 0.99055; Figure 8H). Therefore, were not able to
accurately determine the growth fraction for the 72 hpf
morphant retina, which would have required continuing
the cumulative BrdU labelling well beyond 10 hours.
However, we reasoned that the last time point assayed
(10.5 hours) could be used as a minimum estimate for
the time at which the growth fraction (i.e. ~35%) is
reached (Figure 8H). Therefore, a minimal estimate for
the cell cycle in these morphant progenitor cells is
~50.6 hours, which is approximately 5-fold longer than
in the control retina. This increase in cell cycle length
could account for the fact that the size of the retina at
72 hpf is significantly smaller since on average progenitor cells in the morphant retinas would not have completed one cell division between 48 hpf and 72 hpf. Our
data indicate that a reduction in Dmbx1 proteins causes
a significant increase in the cell cycle time of progenitor
cells in the retina (and by inference the optic tectum)
resulting is fewer differentiated cells.
Rescue of the zebrafish morphant phenotype

In order to confirm the specificity of our knockdown
phenotype, we co-injected either MO1a or MO1b morpholino with the corresponding zebrafish full-length
mRNA (lacking the morpholino binding sequence).
Microinjection of either dmbx1a mRNA or dmbx1b
mRNA resulted in a significant dose-dependent dorsalization phenotype that was evident in embryos as early
as tailbud stage and confirmed by 24 hpf (Additional file
6A; unpublished observations). We therefore, titrated
the mRNA and evaluated the percentage of embryos
co-injected with optimal amounts of mRNA and

Page 13 of 24

morpholino that demonstrated a rescued morphant phenotype. The highest concentration of either dmbx1a or
dmbx1b mRNA (250 pg) caused mild to severe dorsalization in ~70 - 75% of the embryos injected and that ≥
50% of these were in the severe category (Additional file
6B). Because some of these embryos showed signs of
necrosis at 24 hpf, in particular in the tail region, we
opted for a lower concentration of mRNA (150 pg for
dmbx1a and 188 pg for dmbx1b, yielding similar phenotypic results) in order to test whether the paralog specific mRNA could rescue the morphant phenotype (see
below). Using this lower concentration, ~ 50-70% fewer
embryos were severely dorsalized (Additional file 6B).
In a separate set of experiments we tested whether
zebrafish dmbx1a mRNA could rescue the zebrafish
MO1a morphant phenotype more by analyzing foxb1.2
and rho gene expression. The vast majority of embryos
injected with MO1a resulted in a reduction of foxb1.2
expression in the midbrain and a loss of foxb1.2 expression in the rostrolateral hindbrain compared to the uninjected controls (Figure 9A,B). Furthermore, similarly
treated embryos had dramatically reduced rho expression in the retina compared to un-injected controls (Figure 9E,F). By co-injecting zebrafish dmbx1a mRNA with
MO1a, we were able to rescue the expression of foxb1.2
in the midbrain and rostrolateral hindbrain in ~50% of
the injected embryos (when compared to the MO1a
only group), as well as rescue the expression of rho in
the retina by over 70% of the injected embryos (when
compared to the MO1a only group) (Figure 9C,D). We
also noticed that in embryos injected with zebrafish
dmbx1a mRNA (especially without co-injection of
MO1a) that there was a marked increase in foxb1.2
expression in the midbrain and rostromedial hindbrain
(e.g. asterisk in Figure 9C; data not shown). Although
we cannot completely rule-out subtle morpholino
off-target effects, our data strongly suggest that the morphant phenotype is specifically due to the reduction in
dmbx1 gene expression.
We also tested if the dmbx1b gene can rescue the
dmbx1a morphant phenotype by examining foxb1.2
expression in the brain. As shown above, foxb1.2 is
expressed in the dorsal midbrain and in the anterolateral
hindbrain (in the region of the EG) and this pattern is
similar to dmbx1a. In contrast, dmbx1b is not expressed
in this anterolateral hindbrain domain, although it is
expressed in the dorsal midbrain. Knockdown of
dmbx1a, but not dmbx1b, results in the loss of foxb1.2
expression in the anterolateral hindbrain (Figure 4B,D,
F). Therefore, we reasoned that if dmbx1b was capable
of rescuing the dmbx1a morphant phenotype, then the
expression of foxb1.2 in the anterolateral hindbrain
would be restored. The results showed that
while dmbx1a mRNA could rescue the midbrain and

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

Page 14 of 24

Figure 9 Rescue of the midbrain and retinal phenotype in morphants is species-specific. The expression domain of foxb1.2 in un-injected
48 hpf embryos (A) and rho in un-injected 72 hpf embryos (E) is significantly reduced in the MO1a injected embryos (B, F). Co-injection of
zebrafish dmbx1a significantly rescues these phenotypes (C, G), whereas co-injection of mouse Dmbx1 mRNA does not (D, H). Arrow in A-D
demarcates the region of the rostrolateral hindbrain (where the EG is located) at 48 hpf. For A-D, images represent dorsal views, anterior to the
top. For E-H, images represent ventral views, anterior to the top. MO, morpholino; hpf, hours post-fertilization. Asterisk in (C) demonstrates
ectopic foxb1.2 expression, which was commonly observed in embryos over-expressed with zebrafish dmbx1a, but not mouse Dmbx1 mRNA.

anterolateral hindbrain foxb1.2 expression in ~75% of
the embryos co injected with MO1a (Additional file 7C),
dmbx1b mRNA co-injected with MO1a was completely
ineffective at restoring foxb1.2 expression in the anterolateral hindbrain, although midbrain expression was
enhanced to control levels in ~50% of the embryos
(Additional file 7D). We conclude that the functionality
of the dmbx1 paralogs, in this experimental context, is
not completely interchangeable.
Given the coding-sequence conservation between the
mammalian Dmbx1 genes and the teleost dmbx1 genes,
we also examined whether the full-length mouse Dmbx1
mRNA (lacking the morpholino binding site) could rescue the MO1a phenotype. The mouse Dmbx1 mRNA
yielded a comparable dorsalization phenotype only after
a 2-3 fold relative increase in mRNA was injected (Additional file 6C). However, the mouse Dmbx1 mRNA cannot rescue the foxb1.2 morphant expression in the
midbrain and anterolateral hindbrain (Figure 9D), or the
rho morphant expression in the retina (Figure 9H), as
efficiently as the zebrafish mRNA. There were ~20% of
the embryos co-injected with mouse mRNA and MO1a
that had a slight increase in rho expression (compared
to the MO1a only group), but this was substantially less

than the control levels of expression (data not shown).
We observed similar results when comparing the MO1b
rescue with zebrafish dmbx1b compared to mouse
Dmbx1 mRNA (data not shown).
It is possible that the mouse Dmbx1 mRNA is less
stable in a zebrafish embryo accounting for the reduced
potency of mouse Dmbx1 to induce a dorsalized phenotype. Unfortunately, currently available commercial antibodies for Dmbx1 do not recognize the zebrafish
proteins (data not shown). Therefore, in order to
address whether the mouse mRNA was less stable, we
generated c-myc epitope-tagged mouse Dmbx1 and zebrafish dmbx1a constructs and monitored protein levels
by immunohistochemistry using an anti-c-myc antibody
at tailbud after injecting into 1-2 cell stage embryos.
Compared to un-injected controls (Additional file 8A),
embryos injected with either mouse myc-Dmbx1 (Additional file 8B) or zebrafish myc-dmbx1a (Additional file
8C) resulted in protein expression. Similar observations
were made with injected 24 hpf embryos (data not
shown). There was some variability in the overall intensity of staining between embryos regardless of the construct used, but in all cases injected embryos had
discernable nuclear staining compared to un-injected

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

controls (Additional file 8D-F). Thus, although subtle
differences in mRNA stability may not be detectable in
this assay, these data suggest that there is no overt difference in the mRNA stability of zebrafish and mouse
mRNA that would account for the inability of the
mouse Dmbx1 to rescue midbrain and retinal morphant
gene expression phenotypes.
A limitation in our morphant rescue analyses relates
to the dorsalization phenotype. The rescue of the brain
and retinal morphant phenotypes with zebrafish dmbx1
mRNAs is consistent with the fact that there is a significant loss of function phenotype in these specific tissues.
However, the rescue of the overall mRNA-induced dorsalization phenotype with co-injection of morpholino is
more difficult to interpret. The onset of dmbx1 expression occurs as early as 9 hpf and the expression domain
is strongest on the dorsal side close to the blastoderm
margin [7,8]. It is possible that in addition to affecting
the development of the midbrain territory, changes in
the relative levels of dmbx1 expression at this early time
might also indirectly affect the morphogenesis of tissues
adjacent to the dmbx1 domain (e.g., convergence-extension defects) resulting in dorsalized embryos with high
concentrations of mRNA. The co-injection of morpholino and zebrafish mRNA is presumably sufficient to
mitigate these early morphogenetic defects. However,
this hypothesis remains to be tested. In contrast, the
co-injection of morpholino and mouse mRNA may not
mitigate these early defects if the downstream effects of
ectopic mouse mRNA are different. In other words, the
dorsalization phenotypes from zebrafish and mouse
mRNA injections might be caused by distinct molecular
mechanisms. Further experiments are required to better
understand the underlying mechanisms that might
account for the dorsalization defects. Nonetheless, we
also know that lowering the concentration of injected
dmbx1a mRNA tends to significantly reduce the number of dorsalized embryos (Additional file 6), yet we are
still able to observe a rescue of the foxb1.2 expression in
the brain of MO1a morphants (preliminary data not
shown). Thus, overall these data suggest that we can
achieve a reliable rescue of the zebrafish MO1a and
MO1b morphant phenotypes with corresponding zebrafish dmbx1 mRNAs.
Molecular evolutionary analyses of vertebrate Dmbx1
genes

The morphant rescue results prompted us to examine
whether there are any changes in the protein coding
sequences among the vertebrate Dmbx1 genes that
might correlate with the putative functional differences
that we observed between the zebrafish and mouse
genes. The results of a variety of phylogenetic analyses,
including neighbour-joining, maximum likelihood and

Page 15 of 24

Bayesian methods, were largely congruent with current
understanding of phylogenetic relationships among vertebrates [41-44]. These analyses strongly support a fishspecific Dmbx1 duplication event (Additional file 9),
which we previously proposed [7] and may be associated
with a postulated ancient genome duplication event
early in the teleost lineage of fishes [45].
Determining the proportion of non-synonymous to
synonymous (dN/dS) changes in the coding sequences
of Dmbx1 genes allowed us to estimate the rate of
amino acid evolution as well as make inferences about
any changes in the selective constraints during the evolution of this gene family in vertebrates [46]. The results
of our molecular evolutionary analyses of Dmbx1 genes
suggest that although this family is generally quite conservative in its evolution, with an overall dN/dS of only
0.036, there was a dramatic change in selective constraint after the duplication event which gave rise to the
dmbx1a and dmbx1b families in fish (Additional file 10).
The elevation in dN/dS after this gene duplication is
particularly marked in the lineage leading to dmbx1a
(dN/dS = 46.88), suggestive of positive selection;
whereas estimates along the dmbx1b lineage (dN/dS =
0.37), which are much lower, would be consistent with
either weak positive selection or relaxed purifying selection. However, these results are based on analyses of a
fairly small data set, which is particularly deficient in
basal fish Dmbx1 genes; the inclusion of additional
sequence data will improve the ability of these statistical
methods to detect changes in the form and strength of
selection across the Dmbx1 gene family. Additionally, in
vivo assays of protein function, as we have done, are
necessary to confirm functional divergence following the
gene duplication event.

Discussion
The role of Dmbx1 in regulating brain and retinal
neurogenesis

Our present results expand upon previous zebrafish
dmbx1a knockdown experiments [8] to demonstrate that
the dmbx1 paralogs have evolved both cooperative and
divergent functions in brain neurogenesis. In the midbrain,
particularly in the TeO, there is an independent, nonredundant requirement for both dmbx1a and dmbx1b
functions, even though there is substantial overlap in progenitor cell expression of these genes. In contrast, divergent expression of the dmbx1 paralogs, particularly in the
anterior hindbrain, correlate with divergent, paralog-specific (i.e. dmbx1a) function in neurogenesis. We reveal for
the first time that the zebrafish dmbx1 genes have a fundamental role in regulating either the normal pace of progenitor cell cycle progression and/or the ability to exit the
cell cycle and differentiate at the appropriate time. Further
investigations will be required to ascertain the precise

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

mechanism by which Dmbx1 proteins influence cell cycle
timing.
A recent study demonstrated that zic2a and zic5 paralogous genes are required for TeO neurogenesis as early
as 15 hpf, and that transcription of these genes is
directly regulated by canonical Wnt signalling [47]. The
earlier effect of zic gene expression on tectal proliferation suggests that dmbx1 function may be downstream
of zic. One plausible model is that zic genes promote
cell cycle entry from G0 in cells with a normal cell
cycle, while dmbx1 genes promote cell cycle progression
or exit. Given that these genes encode transcription factors, this role in cell cycle regulation could be indirect
through the expression of cell cycle genes, such as
cyclind1 [48] or cdc16/26 of the APC complex [49], but
direct regulation of cell cycle proteins is also possible.
Our preliminary yeast-2-hybrid analysis recovered Zic2b
as a putative interacting partner with Dmbx1a, among
other proteins with known functions in cell cycle regulation (L.W. and V.T., unpublished observations). Thus, it
is possible that dmbx1 genes, zic genes and other cell
cycle regulators physically interact in a protein complex
to regulate transcription and/or other functions. Our
data is consistent with the function of other vertebrate
paired-like homeodomain transcription factors, such as
Chx10 (Vsx2) and Prox1, which have been shown to
play an important role in retinal progenitor cell cycle
and differentiation [50]. Interestingly, a putative Drosophila ortholog Pph13/Mu, which is expressed in photoreceptor cells, has been shown to be required for
differentiation and function, but not retinal progenitor
cell specification [14]. One appealing model is that
canonical cell cycle inhibitors interact with Dmbx1 and
other factors to activate transcription of genes that promote cell differentiation and/or to repress genes that
maintain a progenitor cell state.
Patterning and early morphogenesis of the midbrain,
prior to neurogenesis, requires the establishment of
organizing boundaries at the rostral extent (the diencephalic-midbrain boundary, DMB) and caudal extent
(MHB) of the midbrain territory. Otx2 and gbx2 are two
early expressing genes that pattern the neural plate
rostrocaudally [51,52] and the interface of the two
expression domains gives rise to the MHB, an organizer
that activates a cascade of downstream transcriptional
regulators, such as pou2, pax2a, pax5/8, and eng2/3,
through Fgf8 signalling [53-55]. The DMB is established
by the mutual repression of the forebrain marker pax6
and midbrain marker eng2 [56,57]. Consistent with previous loss of function data in both zebrafish [8] and
mouse [9], neither dmbx1a nor dmbx1b is essential for
MHB or DMB formation. Indeed, although the overall
size of the midbrain territory is reduced, the expression
of dmbx1a, dmbx1b, otx2 and wnt1 are normally

Page 16 of 24

regionalized in the double morphant embryos, indicating
that Dmbx1 is not essential for brain patterning, but is
instead an important regulator for subsequent
neurogenesis.
Zebrafish dmbx1a and dmbx1b are both required for
foxb1.2 expression in the midbrain and hindbrain.
Although we have not determined whether this interaction is direct via transcriptional regulation of the foxb1.2
gene, this data suggests that the function of Dmbx1 may
be mediated through foxb1.2. Dmbx1 has previously
been shown to act as a transcriptional repressor [58],
therefore it is possible that the mechanism for regulating
foxb1.2 expression may involve an indirect de-repression
mechanism. Interestingly, the relationship between the
Dmbx1 and Foxb1 orthologs in mouse is different. In
mouse, a null mutation in the orthologous Foxb1 gene
affects midbrain neurogenesis, particularly within the
inferior colliculus, which is most notable in the postnatal period with little or no effect on the development of
the superior colliculus (the homolog of the fish TeO)
[59,60]. In contrast, there is no discernable embryonic
or postnatal defect in the Dmbx1 null midbrain and
there is no change in Foxb1 gene expression in the
Dmbx1 null embryos [9]. This is strikingly different
from our observations that single knockdowns of either
dmbx1a or dmbx1b causes a significant growth and
differentiation defect in the midbrain, which is strongly
correlated with a significant reduction in foxb1.2 gene
expression. These observations lead us to speculate that
there is post-duplication evolutionary divergence of
function in teleosts in which dmbx1 genes have a more
prominent role in regulating neurogenesis compared to
other vertebrate classes that harbour a single Dmbx1
gene, possibly through the novel regulation of foxb1
genes. However, we cannot yet rule out that other components regulating neurogenesis in mice may have been
functionally compensating in the Dmbx1knockout, and
hence masking a phenotype that would otherwise
resemble the zebrafish dmbx1 knockdown phenotype.
Post-duplication functional divergence has also been
proposed for the zebrafish midkine genes [61], and so it
would be interesting to compare their functional evolution with that of the dmbx1 genes to determine if similar underlying mechanisms have evolved.
The Dmbx1 loss of function phenotype in the retina
(extended cell cycle length and reduced differentiation)
resembles the disarrayed [62] and caf-1b [63] mutants,
where both cell cycle progression and/or exit, and differentiation, are significantly delayed during retinal development. However, in both of these mutants there is a
substantial increase in apoptosis between 42 hpf and 65
hpf (for disarrayed), or 48 hpf and 72 hpf (for caf-1b).
Interestingly, rescue of apoptosis with a p53 morpholino
did not rescue the differentiation defect in the caf-1b

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

mutants [63], consistent with the possibility that a
delayed cell cycle defect (independent from the cell
survival defect) prevents differentiation, similar to what
we observe in dmbx1 morphants. In contrast, we did
not observe persistent cell death in the brain or retina
after 24 hpf in the dmbx1 morphants. Nonetheless, it
would be interesting to further characterize the network
of genes that regulate the transition from a proliferating
progenitor cell to a post-mitotic progenitor, for which
disarrayed, caf-1b and dmbx1 genes may be required.
Dmbx1 appears to have an essential role in the differentiation of the rod and cone photoreceptor lineages.
Interestingly, double morphant embryos had enhanced
expression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor gene neurod. It has been recently shown that
neurod expression marks early progenitor cells within
the INL that predominately give rise to rod (and cone)
precursor cells that express crx and traverse the ONL to
eventually differentiate into mature photoreceptors [35].
Both Dmbx1 paralogs are expressed in the INL during
photoreceptor lineage development, like Neurod1 and
Crx [35,64]. However, dmbx1 expression does not
appear to overlap with neurod1 and crx in the ONL.
Thus, we speculate that Dmbx1 functions in parallel
(or upstream) of neurod and crx in regulating photoreceptor progenitor cell cycle exit and/or the onset of
photoreceptor differentiation.
The evolution of vertebrate Dmbx1 genes

Studies in zebrafish are increasingly playing an important
role in deciphering the functional consequences of gene
duplication. In this regard, significant insight into
the fundamental changes in brain development that are
due to the retention of duplicate genes in zebrafish
comes from studies of the Dlx gene family [65,66], Hoxb
genes [67,68], the Zic gene family [47,69] and Pax6 [28].
In most cases, redundancy or subfunctionalization is
reported to play an important role in the retention of
duplicate genes. However, these mechanisms may not
result in substantial genomic novelty to account for the
developmental specializations during vertebrate neural
evolution [70]. Additional mechanisms for duplicate gene
retention, such as neofunctionalization [63] or function
shuffling [26] may have evolved, and may or may not
be operating on different gene duplicates within a single
genome [30]. Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume
that the function of individual genes of a duplicate pair
will have subtle and complex roles in brain development.
The Dmbx1 gene is also conserved in the Amphioxus
and ascidian genomes, but is either not expressed in the
nervous system during development (as in Amphioxus)
or is expressed in a domain that is posterior to the
developing sensory vesicle and neck (pax2/5/8a-expressing domain) region of the neural tube starting at

Page 17 of 24

approximately tailbud stage in ascidians [71-73]. These
observations indicate that the Dmbx1 neural expression
domain in invertebrate chordates is likely to be homologous to part of the vertebrate hindbrain domain, consistent with the notion that a true midbrain region is
absent in these species [72]. Thus, Dmbx1 expression in
a region that is anterior to the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary (MHB) demarcates a distinct midbrain territory hypothesized to be a derived anatomical trait that
evolved specifically in vertebrates.
Our findings suggest zebrafish Dmbx1 is required for
proper cell cycle progression or exit and cell differentiation of progenitor cells in the brain and retina. Furthermore, several observations, including: (1) the differences
in gene expression pattern, (2) loss of function phenotypes, (3) lack of complete interchangeable function in
rescue experiments, and (4) the changes in selective
constraints in protein sequence evolution, suggest that
the post-duplication zebrafish dmbx1 genes may have
evolved a diverged function during neural development.
Since our present study primarily focused at the level
of cell/tissue/development for our analyses, further studies are required to resolve whether changes at the
amino acid level have direct consequences for protein
function. A recent analysis of the statistical methods
used to determine positive selection in protein coding
sequences questions the reliability of some models, such
as the branch-site model not used in our analyses, in
their ability to predict positively selected sites and suggests that experimental confirmation would be necessary
in such analyses [74]. Our evidence of positive selection
in the teleost dmbx1 coding sequences is consistent
with the differences in functionality between zebrafish
and mouse Dmbx1 that we observed in our morphant
rescue experiments. Does this evidence support the possibility for neofunctionalization [75]? It is tempting, but
premature to answer this question in the affirmative. In
order to substantiate such a model we need to understand the function of the Dmbx1 proteins in various
vertebrate species in much more detail in order to
deduce which evolutionary mechanism could plausibly
explain the retention of the Dmbx1 paralogs in the teleost genome. Nonetheless, our data provide a reasonable
basis to further investigate this problem experimentally.

Conclusion
There are four main observations from our study of the
functional role of dmbx1 duplicate genes in zebrafish
development. First, both dmbx1a and dmbx1b are independently required, and hence cooperate in regulating
neurogenesis in the midbrain. Second, dmbx1a has a
predominant role in regulating neurogenesis in the
retina and anterior hindbrain, and is therefore partially
functionally diverged from dmbx1b. Third, the cellular

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

mechanism of zebrafish dmbx1 function is to control
cell cycle exit and/or differentiation in progenitor cells.
Finally, we provide evidence for post-duplication positive
selection in teleost dmbx1 genes that correlate with
differences in over expression/rescue phenotypes
between the zebrafish and mouse Dmbx1 genes. Therefore, zebrafish dmbx1 duplicate genes may be functionally diverged and appear to have an important role in
regulating the transition from a proliferating progenitor
cell to a post-mitotic differentiated neural cell.

Methods
Zebrafish husbandry

Adult zebrafish (Danio rerio) used in this study were
maintained at 28°C on a 14-hour light/10-hour dark
cycle and housed in an automated re-circulating system
(Aquaneering). Animals were treated in accordance with
the regulations on animal experimentation established
by the Canadian Council on Animal Care. The experimental procedures were approved by the University of
Toronto Animal Care Committee. Embryos were staged
as described in Kimmel et al. [76] and reared according
to standard procedures [77]. The wildtype strain used
was AB (Zebrafish International Resource Center) and
the Tg(isl2b:GFP) zc7 transgenic strain was a kind gift
from Dr. Chi-Bin Chien.
GFP fusion proteins

Primers were designed to flank part of the 5’-UTR and
N-terminal domains of dmbx1a and dmbx1b that are
complementary to the morpholino sequences. The previously described dmbx1a-MO (MO1a) was complementary to the sequences surrounding the ATG start codon
[8] and the corresponding fusion protein was generated by
cloning 70 bp of the 5’-UTR and the first 16 amino acids
of Dmbx1a in frame with the EGFP gene (Dmbx1a-FP
primers: F:5’-CGAGCTAGAAGCAAGAAAATATCA-3’
and R:5’-GAGTTCATGGCGTGGAGAGAGTA-3’. The
dmbx1b-MO (MO1b) targeted the 5’-UTR sequences just
upstream of the start codon. The fusion protein consisted
of the 99 bp of the 5’-UTR plus amino acids 1-16 of
Dmbx1b, followed by the EGFP gene sequences (Dmbx1bFP primers: F:5’-TGGGAAAAATCACTCGTGTTC-3’
and R: 5’-GAGTTCATGGCGTGCAAA-3’). The PCR
fragments of dmbx1a-FP and dmbx1b-FP were cloned
upstream and in frame with EGFP in pCS2+. Plasmids
were linearlized with BstX1 and in vitro transcribed with
the SP6 messenger kit (Ambion). For each fusion construct, 500 pg of mRNA was injected at the 1-cell stage
embryo in the presence or absence of morpholinos.
BrdU labelling

To label cells that were in S-phase, we injected 5 mM
of 5’-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU) into the tectal

Page 18 of 24

brain ventricle of 72 hpf embryos and fixed the animals (n = 10) with 4% paraformaldehyde half and hour
later. For cumulative cell cycle analysis using BrdU
incorporation, embryos (n = 12) were injected with 5
mM BrdU every two hours up to 10 hours followed by
4% paraformaldehyde fixation 30 minutes post-BrdU
injection. Cyrosectioning procedures were performed
as mentioned above. For BrdU-immunostaining, slides
were treated with 20U/mL DNase I at room temperature for 30 minutes followed by extensive washes with
PBS+1% DMSO+0.1% Tween-20 (PBDT). Sections
were blocked for two hours and incubated in rat antiBrdU (1:100, Cedarlane) primary antibody overnight at
4°C, which was then detected with Cy3 secondary antibody (1:500, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories,
Inc.). Images were obtained from mounted slides using
Leica TCS SP5 II Confocal Microscope and analyzed
with Leica LAS AF software. For the cumulative BrdU
assay, we counted the number of BrdU positive cells
per section (averaged over at least 3 separate retinas)
and we used cell density (number of DAPI positive
nuclei/area of section) to estimate the number of total
nuclei from each section and calculated the labelling
index (BrdU positive cells/total nuclei) at all six time
points. Cell cycle kinetics in control and morphant
embryos was determined as described in [78,79]
assuming this was a single population model. Briefly,
hours of BrdU injection (T) was plotted against the
labelling index (LI). Growth fraction (maximum LI on
the y-axis, LI m ) can be determined from where the
curve begins to plateau. The time when the maximum
amount of BrdU positive cells was labelled is equal to
total cell cycle time (Tc) minus S-phase time (Ts). By
extrapolating the curve back to time = 0, we can also
find out the labelling index at Ts (LI0). With this information, the total cell cycle time can be estimated using
the equation LI0/LIm = Ts/Tc.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization

Embryos treated with 0.003% of 1-phenyl-2-thiourea
(Sigma) were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and processed as previously described [7]. The following antisense RNA probes were used: eng2b [80], fgf8 [81],
foxb1.2 [82], egr2b (krox20) [83], islet1 [84], pax2a
[85], otx2 [86] (kind gifts from Dr. Ashley Bruce);
dmbx1a, dmbx1b and wnt1 (cloned from cDNA), and
erm, pea3 [87] (kind gift from Dr. Herbert Steinbeisser); neurod, opn1sw2, pax6a, rho, and vsx2 (Open Biosystems). Embryos were cleared in glycerol before
images were captured with a Leica MZ16F dissecting
microscope (whole mounted samples) or a Leica
DM4500B compound microscope (flat-mounted samples) with a QIMAGING digital camera and OpenLab
software.

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

Anitsense morpholino and RNA injection

Antisense morpholinos (MOs) were obtained from Gene
Tools, Inc. Dmbx1a-MO was complementary to the
sequences that flanked the ATG start cordon as previously described [8], whereas dmbx1b-MO was targeted
to sequences upstream of the start cordon in the 5’ UTR.
The sequences of the MOs are as follows, dmbx1a MO
(MO1a): 5’-ACTCCGTAGTGCTGCATGATTCACA-3’
and dmbx1b MO (MO1b): 5’-TCGAGCTTCTCTCTGGGAAGTTTTG-3’. A 5-mismatched nucleotides MO was
also synthesized for both dmbx1a (mMO1a): 5’ACTgCGTAcTGCTcCATcATTgACA-3’ and dmbx1b
(mMO1b): 5’-TCcAGCTTgTCTgTGcGAAcTTTTG-3’
as controls. Unless otherwise noted, embryos were
injected with 10 ng of a single MO, or 5 ng each of the
combined MOs into the yolk at 1- to 2-cell stages.
Ectopic gene expression

Dmbx1aCDS primers (F:5’-ATGCAGCACTACGGAGTGAA-3’ and R:5’-TCAGTTGGGCAGTGTGTCC-3’) and
Dmbx1bCDS primers (F:5’-ATGCAGCACTACGGGGTGA-3’ and R: 5’-TTAGTTTGGTAGCGTGTCCAGG3’) amplified the full coding sequences of dmbx1a and
dmbx1b, respectively, but which lack the 5’-UTR to avoid
binding of the corresponding morpholinos. Both PCR
fragments were cloned into pCS2+ and linearized with
SacII for in vitro RNA transcriptions using the mMESSAGE mMACHINE SP6 kit (Ambion). Mouse Dmbx1
mRNA was synthesized from pCMV6-Kan/Neo plasmid
containing the cloned full length mouse Dmbx1 cDNA
(OriGene), but lacked 5’-UTR sequences corresponding to
morpholino binding sites. The template was linearized
with SacII and transcribed using the mMESSAGE mMACHINE T7 kit (Ambion). N-terminal Myc-tagged mouse
Dmbx1 was subcloned using EcoRI and XbaI from
pCMB6Kan/Neo-Dmbx1 into the pCS2+ -MT plasmid,
whereas zebrafish N-terminal Myc-dmbx1a was generated
by cloning klenow-treated BamHI+XhoI pCS2
+
-dmbx1aCDS into CIAP-treated (Invitrogen) XbaI
digested pCS2+-MT plasmid. RNA for Myc-Dmbx1 and
Myc-dmbx1a were synthesized by linearlizing both plasmids with NotI, and then transcribed with the mMESSAGE mMACHINE SP6 kit (Ambion). RNA or RNA+MO
were injected into the yolk of 1-cell stage embryos at the
concentrations indicated.
Histology

Embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and
rinsed in phosphate-buffered saline solution after.
Embryos were first dehydrated using increasing concentrations of ethanol, followed by embedding with
increasing concentrations of Spurr’s resin in ethanol.
Embryos were then left to polymerization at 65°C in
100% Spurr’s resin. Semithin coronal sections

Page 19 of 24

(approximately 1 μm thick) were cut with a glass knife
using an ultramicrotome and dried onto glass slides.
This procedure was followed by counterstaining with
toluidine blue to visualize morphology. Whole-mount
in situ hybridization embryos in 100% glycerol were
washed with PBT and followed by the same embedding
and sectioning steps as above. Sections were 1.5 micrometers thick without counterstaining to maximize
visualization. To measure the area of the retina and
optic tecta, five plastic sections with similar focal plane
were chosen to represent each embryo, and images
were taken on a Leica DM4500B compound microscope with a QIMAGING digital camera and OpenLab
software. The areas of interest were outlined and measured using the program ImageJ (http://rsb.info.nih.
gov/ij/) [88]. Results represent the average obtained
from at least 5 embryos from each group. Statistical
analyses between injected and un-injected groups were
performed using student’s t-test. Differences were
regarded as significant for p < 0.05.
Immunohistochemistry

Two-three dpf embryos from each group (n = 10) were
fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4°C and
washed in sucrose series (from 5% to 30% sucrose in
PBS) for cryoprotection. For PCNA labelling, embryos
were fixed in 37% formaldehyde:95% ethanol (1:9 ratio)
solution. Samples were left in 30% sucrose:OCT (2:1
ratio) at -20°C before cutting into 10-15 μm sections
with a cryostat. Sections were re-hydrated with 1×PBS
and blocked for 2 hours in 0.2% Triton X-100 + 2%
goat serum in PBS at room temperature. Primary antibody in block solution was applied on sections overnight at 4°C. Slides were washed with PBS + 0.1%
Tween-20 and incubated with secondary antibody
(1:100 Cy2 or 1:500 Cy3, Jackson ImmunoResearch
Laboratories, Inc.) for 2 hours at 4°C. Nuclei were
counterstained with DAPI before mounting the slides.
Tg(isl2b:GFP) embryos were used to examine retinal
ganglion cells and no staining was performed after cryosectioning. Phospho-histone H3 antibody was conjugated to Alexa Fluor® 488 so no secondary antibody was
required. The following primary antibodies were used:
mouse anti-PCNA (1:100, ZYMED Laboratories), rabbit
anti-Phospho-histone H3 (Ser10) (1:100, Cell Signaling),
rabbit anti-Pax 6 (1:100, Covance), rabbit anti-PKC
(1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), mouse anit-GS
(1:500, Chemicon), mouse anti-Zpr1 (1:200, ZIRC), and
mouse anti-Zpr3 (1:200, ZIRC). Images were taken from
Leica TCS SP5 II Confocal Microscope and analyzed
with Leica LAS AF software. For phospho-histone H3
positive cell count, we obtained three sections from
different embryos of each group and took the average
number for comparison.

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

Whole-mount antibody staining

Ten embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C
overnight and washed with PBS. Samples were incubated with block solution (PBS+1%BSA+1%DMSO+0.8%
TritonX-100) for 1 hour at room temperature and overnight in anti-c-myc (9E10; Developmental Studies
Hybridoma Bank) antibody (1:20) at 4°C. Embryos were
then washed with PBS+Triton X-100 and incubated in
goat anti-mouse HRP antibody (1:500; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc.) overnight. Before DAB
staining, samples were washed with PBS+Trition X-100
followed by PBS only. Peroxidase activity was detected
with DAB and 3% hydrogen peroxide in the dark.
Images of the stained embryos were taken with a Leica
MZ16F dissecting microscope or a Leica DM4500B
compound microscope.
Cell death analyses

Embryos from 24 - 72 hpf (n = 10) were bathed in
embryo media that contained 5 μg/mL acridine orange
(AO; Sigma) for 15 min at room temperature, and
immediately followed by 4×10 min washes using regular media. AO-positive cells were imaged using a Leica
DM4500B compound microscope with a QIMAGING
digital camera and OpenLab software. For TUNEL
labelling, embryos at 72 hpf (n = 10) were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde at 4°C overnight followed by cryoprotection with sucrose and cryosectioning (same as
immunohistochemistry). Sections were rehydrated and
TUNEL assay was carried out according to manufacturer’s instruction (Apo-Direct TUNEL Assay Kit,
Millipore) and images were captured using Leica TCS
SP5 II Confocal Microscope and analyzed with Leica
LAS AF software.
Retinotectal projections

Tg(isl2b:GFP) larvae treated with 0.003% of 1-phenyl-2thiourea (PTU) at 4dpf were immobilized on long cover
slip and sandwiched with another smaller elevated cover
slip in order to observe their retinotectal projections
dorsally. Images were collected using Zeiss LSM 510
inverted confocal microscope.
Flow cytometry

Retinas from 60-80 embryos (~2 × 106 cells/mL) were
dissected out from sample and control groups and left
in Hank’s Buffered Salt Solution (HBSS) with trypsin for
30 minutes. Cells were centrifuged, supernatant was discarded, and pellet was re-suspended in 50 μL of HBSS
with 2% FBS. We next added 1 mL of ice-cold 80%
ethanol and kept samples in -20°C for at least 30 minutes. Cells were collected by centrifugation and washed
twice with HBSS + 2% FBS. Removed supernatant and
added 500 μL of 0.1 mg/mL propidium iodide (Sigma)

Page 20 of 24

in HBSS with 0.6% NP-40, together with 500 μL of 2
mg/mL RNaseA and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes. Samples were filtered through 85 μm Nitex mesh
filter and analyzed with BD FACSAria™ cell sorter. Flow
cytometry data were analyzed using FlowJo software.
Phylogenetic analyses

An alignment of vertebrate Dmbx1 genes was assembled
using BLAST searches of Ensembl (v.52) and NCBI
(including both annotated genes and whole-genome
shotgun reads). Amino acid-translated sequences were
aligned using ProbCons [89], and trimmed using
Gblocks (v0.91b; [90]) following the ‘relaxed’ trim procedure of [91]. This data set was subjected to a variety of
phylogenetic analyses, including maximum likelihood,
Bayesian inference, and neighbour-joining distance
methods [92-94]. Maximum likelihood phylogenetic
methods were implemented in the program PHYML
v2.2.4 [93,95]. A WAG substitution model was assumed
[96], including additional parameters for among-site rate
heterogeneity (+G; [97]) and invariant sites (+I; [98]). A
neighbour-joining tree [92]) was constructed in the
MEGA4 program, with a Poisson distance correction
[99]. For both the likelihood and neighbour-joining analyses, bootstrap analysis was used to assess the degree of
confidence in nodes of the phylogeny [100]. 100 replicates were performed for the likelihood analysis, and
1000 replicates for the neighbour-joining analysis.
Finally, Bayesian inference was performed in MrBayes
3.1.2 [94]. As with the likelihood methods, a WAG+I+G
substitution model was assumed. For all parameters in
the Bayesian analysis, uniform priors were used, except
for branch lengths, for which exponential priors were
implemented. Two independent analyses were performed, each composed of 4 Markov chains with default
heating values. Markov chains were run until the average standard deviation of split frequencies, a measure of
stationarity, dropped below 0.01, sampling trees (and
parameters) every 1000 generations. Convergence was
assessed using a number of methods. A convergence
diagnostic for branch length posterior probabilities, the
potential scale reduction factor (PSRF), roughly
approached 1 as the runs converged [101]. Convergence
to stationarity was also assessed by plotting log-likelihood scores and other parameter values in the program
Tracer 1.4.1 to ensure that there were no trends in the
data post burn-in [102]. Finally, adequacy of mixing was
assessed by examining acceptance rates for parameters
in MrBayes, and by calculating in Tracer effective sample sizes (ESS), the number of independent samples
from the marginal posterior distribution for each parameter; higher values being indicative of better sampling
from the posterior distribution. These values were all
well above 100. By these measures convergence was

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

achieved within the first 25% of trees sampled, which
were discarded as burn-in, and remaining trees were
taken as representative of the posterior probability
distribution.
Molecular evolutionary analyses

Maximum likelihood phylogenetic methods were used to
estimate the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous
rates (dN/dS) along lineages [46,103] in a pruned Dmbx1
phylogeny consisting of a subset of the sequences used
for the phylogenetic analysis. This phylogeny was not
only consistent with our analyses of the larger Dmbx1
data set, it is also congruent with current understanding
of relationships among vertebrate taxa, assuming a teleost-specific genome duplication event [45]. dN/dS ratios
can be used to estimate the form and strength of selection operating in the Dmbx1 gene family. Assuming no
selection pressure, coding sequences will evolve neutrally,
and nonsynonymous and synonymous substitutions
should accumulate at equal rates, resulting in a dN/dS
value equal to one [104,105]. Positive (or diversifying)
selection is indicated by dN/dS values greater than one,
while negative (or purifying) selection is indicated by dN/
dS values near zero. Codon models that allow for variation in dN/dS along branches were implemented in the
PAML package (v4.2a; [106]). Likelihood ratio tests were
used to determine which among nested models provided
a statistically significantly better fit to the data at hand
[97,107].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Altered midbrain gene expression in morphant
embryos. Lateral (A-F, J-L) and dorsal (G-I, M-O) views anterior to the left,
or anterior views (P-R) dorsal to the top of embryos either un-injected (A,
D, G, J, M, P) or injected with MO1a + MO1b (B, E, H, K, N, Q) or control
mMO1a + mMO1b (C, F, I, L, O, R). All embryos are at 48 hpf, except for
J-L, which are at 24 hpf. Arrowhead in B and E indicates the reduced
expression in the dorsal midbrain and arrow in E indicates reduced
expression in the hindbrain. Arrowhead in G, H and M, N demarcates the
position of the MHB. Arrowhead in P, Q indicates the optic stalk region.
MO, morpholino; mMO, mismatch morpholino; MHB, midbrain-hindbrain
boundary; hpf, hours post-fertilization.
Additional file 2: Midbrain-hindbrain boundary is unaffected in
dmbx1 morphants. Lateral view (anterior to the left) of embryos at 24
hpf (A-F, M-O) or 48 hpf (G-L). Analysis of genes normally expressed in
the midbrain-hindbrain boundary region in un-injected (A, D, G, J, M),
MO1a + MO1b injected (B, E, H, K, N), and mMO1a + mMO1b injected
(C, F, I, L, O) embryos. Arrowheads demarcate the position of the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary. MO, morpholino; mMO, mismatch
morpholino; hpf, hours post-fertilization.
Additional file 3: Dose-dependent changes in foxb1.2 and rhodopsin
gene expression in dmbx1 morphants. Analysis of gene expression at
72 hpf in un-injected, MO1a injected, MO1b injected or MO1a + MO1b
injected embryos using the MO concentrations listed. For foxb1.2
expression, embryos are shown in lateral view with anterior to the left.
For rhodopsin expression, embryos are shown in ventral view, anterior to
the left. Control embryos injected with mismatch MOs at similar
concentrations showed no change in expression and are not shown. MO,
morpholino; hpf, hours post-fertilization

Page 21 of 24

Additional file 4: Distinct patterns of rhodopsin expression and
retinotectal projections in dmbx1a and dmbx1b morphant embryos.
Dorsal view anterior to the top of un-injected (A, B), MO1a injected (C,
D), MO1b injected (E, F), and MO1a + MO1b injected (G, H) embryos
demonstrating expression of rhodopsin (rho) (A, C, E, G) or the
retinotectal projection pattern (green fluorescence) as defined in isl2b:
GFP transgenic embryos (B, D, F, H). The mismatch control injected
morpholinos resembled the un-injected controls and are not shown. In
B, D, F, H, white arrow demarcates the terminal field of the retinal
ganglion cells in the optic tectum and the white arrowhead demarcates
axonal fibers of the optic nerve. MO, morpholino. Asterisk demarcates
the region of trigeminal ganglion.
Additional file 5: Cell death does not persist in dmbx1 morphant
embryos. Live embryos at 24 hpf (A, B, lateral view anterior to the left),
48 hpf (C, D, dorsal view anterior to the left) and 72 hpf (E, F, dorsal view
anterior to the left; K, L, close up of retina lateral view dorsal to the top)
were examined for the presence of apoptotic cells using AO. Arrows
point to AO+ cells in the midbrain (bright spots). TUNEL+ cells (green) or
Caspase3+ cells (red) on cryosectioned tissue of 72 hpf midbrains (G-J)
and retina (M-P, arrow pointing to labelled cell) counter-stained with
DAPI (blue). (MO, morpholino; mMO, mismatch morpholino; hpf, hours
post-fertilization; AO, acridine orange.
Additional file 6: Zebrafish, but not mouse, Dmbx1 mRNA
counteracts the zebrafish knockdown phenotype. (A) Representative
images of single embryos, lateral view anterior to the left from the
different groups analyzed for a dorsalization phenotype. Embryos were
injected with the mRNA concentrations shown, co-injected with 10 ng of
either MO1a or MO1b as indicated, and scored for a dorsalized
phenotype at 24 hpf. Tabulated results for all groups from 2-5 separate
experiments using (B) zebrafish mRNA, or (C) mouse mRNA. MO,
morpholino; hpf, hours post-fertilization.
Additional file 7: Partial rescue of dmbx1a morphant with dmbx1b
mRNA. (A) Un-injected and (B) MO1a injected embryos showing foxb1.2
expression at 48 hpf. Note, the data in these two panels are identical to
panels (A) and (B) shown in Figure 9; they were duplicated here for ease
of reference. Representative images of embryos co-injected with MO1a
and either dmbx1a mRNA (C) or dmbx1b mRNA (D). Dorsal view of
embryos, anterior to the top. Black arrows in all panels point to the
anterolateral hindbrain region where foxb1.2 is normally expressed. White
arrows in all panels point to the dorsal midbrain. MO, morpholino.
Additional file 8: Monitoring mouse Myc-Dmbx1 and zebrafish Mycdmbx1a levels in vivo. Representative images of an (A) un-injected, (B)
mouse myc-Dmbx1 mRNA injected (400 pg), and (C) zebrafish mycdmbx1a mRNA injected (150 pg) tailbud stage embryo (lateral view)
processed for whole-mount immunolabeling using an anti-Myc antibody
(n = 10 per group). Panels D-F are representative high magnification
images of embryos in each of the three treatment groups; black arrows
indicate nuclei that are DAB+ in the injected groups, but lack DAB
staining in the un-injected group.
Additional file 9: Phylogenetic analysis of vertebrate Dmbx1 genes.
Phylogram showing the neighbour-joining tree topology, with support
values indicated for each node in the tree, for the three different
phylogenetic methods of analysis employed. Above the nodes are
neighbour-joining (1000 replicates), followed by likelihood bootstrap
percentages (100 replicates); below the nodes are the Bayesian posterior
probabilities. Bootstrap percentages below 50% are indicated by an
asterisk.
Additional file 10: Molecular evolutionary analysis of vertebrate
Dmbx1 genes. Proportions of non-synonymous to synonymous rates
(dN/dS) along lineages in the Dmbx1 phylogeny were estimated using
codon-based maximum likelihood phylogenetic methods. Results of a
branch model in which the post-duplication branches (PDBs) leading to
the dmbx1a and dmbx1b clades were each allowed to have
independently estimated dN/dS values are shown. Both PDBs display
elevated dN/dS estimates compared to the background estimate applied
to the remainder of the phylogeny. This model fit the data significantly
better than a model with a single dN/dS parameter (M0 model; p < 0.01,
d.f. = 2). Increases in dN/dS along each of the PDBs were also confirmed
through simpler branch models in which only a single PDB, either for

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

dmbx1a or dmbx1b, received separately estimated dN/dS values; in both
cases the increases in dN/dS was statistically significant (M0; p < 0.05, d.f.
= 1). Branch lengths shown in this figure were estimated under the 2
PDB branch model under which the dN/dS estimates were derived, and
are proportional to the number of substitutions per codon.

Page 22 of 24

7.

8.
9.

10.
Abbreviations
PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PBT: PBS with Triton-X100; HCl: hydrochloric
acid; dNTP: deoxy-nucleotide-triphosphates, where the nucleotide is an
equal mixture of adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine; FBS: fetal bovine
serum.
Acknowledgements
We would like thank Dr. Ashley Bruce and Dr. Herbert Steinbeisser for probe
constructs, Dr. Chi-Bin Chien for the isl2b-GFP transgenic fish, Henry Hong for
assisting us with our histological analyses, Dr. Brian Link for advice on BrdU
labelling, and the Zebrafish International Resource Center for reagents (P40
RR012546 from the NIH-NCRR). We are grateful to members of the Tropepe
and Bruce labs for helpful discussions and suggestions throughout the
course of this work, and to Dr. Ashley Bruce and Dr. Tony Harris for their
helpful comments on an earlier version of this manuscript. Funding for this
research was supported by a University of Toronto Vision Science Research
Program Scholarship (L.W.), and by grants from NSERC, Canada Foundation
for Innovation, and Ontario Innovations Trust, and the Foundation Fighting
Blindness - Canada (V.T.).

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.

Author details
1
Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, 25 Harbord
Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3G5, Canada. 2Department of Ecology &
Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 25 Willcocks Street, Toronto, ON,
M5S 3B2, Canada. 3Centre for the Analysis of Genome Evolution and
Function, University of Toronto, 25 Willcocks Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3B3,
Canada.
Authors’ contributions
LW contributed to the design of the experiments, performed all of the
molecular experiments, immunolabeling, and microinjections and
participated in the data analysis and drafting the manuscript. CK performed
the semi-thin plastic sectioning. CJW and BSWC carried out the phylogenetic
and molecular evolution analyses and analyzed the data. VT conceived of
the study, and participated in its design, coordination and data analysis,
drafted and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

18.
19.
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.

Received: 1 June 2010 Accepted: 22 September 2010
Published: 22 September 2010

25.

References
1. Broccoli V, Colombo E, Cossu G: Dmbx1 is a paired-box containing gene
specifically expressed in the caudal most brain structures. Mech Dev
2002, 114:219-223.
2. Gogoi RN, Schubert FR, J-P Martinez-Barbera, Acampora D, Simeone A,
Lumsden A: The paired-type homeobox gene Dmbx1 marks the
midbrain and pretectum. Mech Dev 2002, 114:213-217.
3. Miyamoto T, Kawahara A, Teufel A, Mukhopadhyay M, Zhao Y, Dawid IB,
Westphal H: Mbx, a novel mouse homeobox gene. Dev Genes Evol 2002,
212:104-106.
4. Ohtoshi A, Nishijima I, Justice MJ, Behringer RR: Dmbx1, a novel
evolutionarily conserved paired-like homeobox gene expressed in the
brain of mouse embryos. Mech Dev 2002, 110:241-4.
5. Takahashi T, Holland PWH, Cohn MJ, Shimizu K, Kurokawa M, Hirai H: An
orphan PRD class homeobox gene expressed in mouse brain and limb
development. Dev Genes Evol 2002, 212:293-297.
6. Zhang Y, Miki T, Iwanaga T, Koseki Y, Okuno M, Sunaga Y, Ozaki N, Yano H,
Koseki H, Seino S: Identification, tissue expression, and functional
characterization of Otx3, a novel member of the Otx family. J Biol Chem
2002, 277:28065-28069.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

Chang L, Khoo B, Wong L, Tropepe V: Genomic sequence and
spatiotemporal expression comparison of zebrafish mbx1 and its
paralog, mbx2. Dev Genes Evol 2006, 216:647-654.
Kawahara A, C-B Chien, Dawid IB: The homeobox gene mbx is involved in
eye and tectum development. Dev Biol 2002, 248:107-117.
Ohtoshi A, Behringer RR: Neonatal lethality, dwarfism, and abnormal
brain development in Dmbx1 mutant mice. Mol Cell Biol 2004,
24:7548-7558.
Fujimoto W, Shiuchi T, Miki T, Minokoshi Y, Takahashi Y, Takeuchi A,
Kimura K, Saito M, Iwanaga T, Seino S: Dmbx1 is essential in agoutirelated protein action. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:15514-15519.
Pang K, Martindale MQ: Developmental expression of homeobox genes
in the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218:307-319.
Larroux C, Luke GN, Koopman P, Rokhsar DS, Shimeld SM, Degnan BM:
Genesis and expansion of metazoan transcription factor gene classes.
Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:980-996.
Ryan JF, Burton PM, Mazza ME, Kwong GK, Mullikin JC, Finnerty JR: The
cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor possessed at least 56 homeoboxes:
evidence from the starlet sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis. Genome
Biol 2006, 7(7):R64.
Zelhof AC, Koundakjian E, Scully AL, Hardy RW, Pounds L: Mutation of the
photoreceptor specific homeodomain gene Pph13 results in defects in
phototransduction and rhabdomere morphogenesis. Development 2003,
130:4383-4392.
Friedman R, Hughes AL: Pattern and timing of gene duplication in animal
genomes. Genome Res 2001, 11:1842-1847.
Lynch M, Conery JS: The evolutionary fate and consequences of
duplicate genes. Science 2000, 290:1151-1155.
Gu Z, Steinmetz LM, Gu X, Scharfe C, Davis RW, Li W-H: Role of duplicate
genes in genetic robustness against null mutations. Nature 2003,
421:63-66.
Conant GC, Wagner A: Duplicate genes and robustness to transient gene
knock-downs in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Biol Sci 2004, 271:89-96.
Liang H, Li W-H: Gene essentiality, gene duplicability and protein
connectivity in human and mouse. Trends Genet 2007, 23:375-378.
B-Y Liao, Zhang J: Mouse duplicate genes are as essential as singletons.
Trends Genet 2007, 23:378-381.
Hanks M, Wurst W, Anson-Cartwright L, Auerbach AB, Joyner AL: Rescue of
the En-1 mutant phenotype by replacement of En-1 with En-2. Science
1995, 269:679-682.
Tvrdik P, Capecchi MR: Reversal of Hox1 gene subfunctionalization in the
mouse. Dev Cell 2006, 11:239-250.
Hughes AL: The evolution of functionally novel proteins after gene
duplication. Proc Biol Sci 1994, 256:119-24.
Force A, Lynch M, Pickett FB, Amores A, Yan YL, Postlethwait J:
Preservation of duplicate genes by complementary, degenerative
mutations. Genetics 1999, 151:1531-1545.
Bruce AE, Oates AC, Prince VE, Ho RK: Additional hox clusters in the
zebrafish: divergent expression patterns belie equivalent activities of
duplicate hoxB5 genes. Evol Dev 2001, 3:127-144.
McClintock JM, Kheirbek MA, Prince VE: Knockdown of duplicated
zebrafish hoxb1 genes reveals distinct roles in hindbrain patterning and
a novel mechanism of duplicate gene retention. Development 2002,
129:2339-2354.
Liu R-Z, Sharma MK, Sun Q, Thisse C, Thisse B, Denovan-Wright EM,
Wright JM: Retention of the duplicated cellular retinoic acid-binding
protein 1 genes (crabp1a and crabp1b) in the zebrafish genome by
subfunctionalization of tissue-specific expression. FEBS J 2005,
272:3561-3571.
Kleinjan DA, Bancewicz RM, Gautier P, Dahm R, Schonthaler HB, Damante G,
Seawright A, Hever AM, Yeyati PL, van Heyningen V, et al:
Subfunctionalization of duplicated zebrafish pax6 genes by cisregulatory divergence. PLoS Genet 2008, 4(2):e29.
Ohno S: Evolution by gene duplication. Berlin, New York,: Springer-Verlag
1970.
Chain FJJ, Evans BJ: Multiple mechanisms promote the retained
expression of gene duplicates in the tetraploid frog Xenopus laevis. PLoS
Genet 2006, 2(4):e56.
Hitchcock PF, Raymond PA: The teleost retina as a model for
developmental and regeneration biology. Zebrafish 2004, 1:257-71.

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

32. Ekker SC, Ungar AR, Greenstein P, von Kessler DP, Porter JA, Moon RT,
Beachy PA: Patterning activities of vertebrate hedgehog proteins in the
developing eye and brain. Curr Biol 1995, 5:944-955.
33. Macdonald R, Barth KA, Xu Q, Holder N, Mikkola I, Wilson SW: Midline
signalling is required for Pax gene regulation and patterning of the
eyes. Development 1995, 121:3267-3278.
34. Raymond PA, Barthel LK, Bernardos RL, Perkowski JJ: Molecular
characterization of retinal stem cells and their niches in adult zebrafish.
BMC Dev Biol 2006, 6:36.
35. Ochocinska MJ, Hitchcock PF: Dynamic expression of the basic helix-loophelix transcription factor neuroD in the rod and cone photoreceptor
lineages in the retina of the embryonic and larval zebrafish. J Comp
Neurol 2007, 501:1-12.
36. Pittman AJ, Law MY, Chien CB: Pathfinding in a large vertebrate axon
tract: isotypic interactions guide retinotectal axons at multiple choice
points. Development 2008, 135:2865-71.
37. Arama E, Steller H: Detection of apoptosis by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling and acridine orange in
Drosophila embryos and adult male gonads. Nat Protoc 2006, 1:1725-31.
38. Candal E, Anadon R, DeGrip WJ, Rodriguez-Moldes I: Patterns of cell
proliferation and cell death in the developing retina and optic tectum
of the brown trout. Brain Res Dev Brain Res 2005, 154:101-19.
39. Wullimann MF, Knipp S: Proliferation pattern changes in the zebrafish
brain from embryonic through early postembryonic stages. Anat Embryol
(Berl) 2000, 202:385-400.
40. Marcus RC, Delaney CL, Easter SS: Neurogenesis in the visual system of
embryonic and adult zebrafish (Danio rerio). off. Vis Neurosci 1999,
16:417-424.
41. Cotton JA, Page RD: Going nuclear: gene family evolution and vertebrate
phylogeny reconciled. Proc Biol Sci 2002, 269:1555-61.
42. Dettai A, di Prisco G, Lecointre G, Parisi E, Verde C: Inferring evolution of
fish proteins: the globin case study. Methods Enzymol 2008, 436:539-570.
43. Setiamarga DHE, Miya M, Yamanoue Y, Mabuchi K, Satoh TP, Inoue JG,
Nishida M: Interrelationships of Atherinomorpha (medakas, flyingfishes,
killifishes, silversides, and their relatives): The first evidence based on
whole mitogenome sequences. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2008, 49:598-605.
44. Springer MS, Stanhope MJ, Madsen O, de Jong WW: Molecules consolidate
the placental mammal tree. Trends Ecol Evol 2004, 19:430-8.
45. Taylor JS, Van de Peer Y, Braasch I, Meyer A: Comparative genomics
provides evidence for an ancient genome duplication event in fish.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2001, 356:1661-1679.
46. Yang Z, Nielsen R: Synonymous and nonsynonymous rate variation in
nuclear genes of mammals. J Mol Evol 1998, 46:409-418.
47. Nyholm MK, Wu S-F, Dorsky RI, Grinblat Y: The zebrafish zic2a-zic5 gene
pair acts downstream of canonical Wnt signaling to control cell
proliferation in the developing tectum. Development 2007, 134:735-746.
48. Yarden A, Salomon D, Geiger B: Zebrafish cyclin D1 is differentially
expressed during early embryogenesis. Biochim Biophys Acta 1995,
1264:257-260.
49. Wehman AM, Staub W, Baier H: The anaphase-promoting complex is
required in both dividing and quiescent cells during zebrafish
development. Dev Biol 2007, 303:144-156.
50. Levine EM, Green ES: Cell-intrinsic regulators of proliferation in vertebrate
retinal progenitors. Sem Cell Develop Biol 2004, 15:63-74.
51. Rhinn M, Brand M: The midbrain–hindbrain boundary organizer. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 2001, 11:34-42.
52. Raible F, Brand M: Divide et Impera–the midbrain-hindbrain boundary
and its organizer. Trends Neurosci 2004, 27:727-734.
53. Lun K, Brand M: A series of no isthmus (noi) alleles of the zebrafish
pax2.1 gene reveals multiple signaling events in development of the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary. Development 1998, 125:3049-62.
54. Pfeffer PL, Gerster T, Lun K, Brand M, Busslinger M: Characterization of
three novel members of the zebrafish Pax2/5/8 family: dependency of
Pax5 and Pax8 expression on the Pax2.1 (noi) function. Development
1998, 125:3063-3074.
55. Belting HG, Hauptmann G, Meyer D, Abdelilah-Seyfried S, Chitnis A,
Eschbach C, Soll I, Thisse C, Thisse B, Artinger KB, et al: spiel ohne grenzen/
pou2 is required during establishment of the zebrafish midbrainhindbrain boundary organizer. Development 2001, 128:4165-4176.
56. Matsunaga E, Araki I, Nakamura H: Pax6 defines the di-mesencephalic
boundary by repressing En1 and Pax2. Development 2000, 127:2357-2365.

Page 23 of 24

57. Nakamura H: Regionalisation and acquisition of polarity in the optic
tectum. Prog Neurobiol 2001, 65:473-488.
58. Kimura K, Miki T, Shibasaki T, Zhang Y, Ogawa M, Saisho H, Okuno M,
Iwanaga T, Seino S: Functional analysis of transcriptional repressor Otx3/
Dmbx1. FEBS Lett 2005, 579:2926-32.
59. Labosky PA, Winnier GE, Jetton TL, Hargett L, Ryan AK, Rosenfeld MG,
Parlow AF, Hogan BL: The winged helix gene, Mf3, is required for normal
development of the diencephalon and midbrain, postnatal growth and
the milk-ejection reflex. Development 1997, 124:1263-1274.
60. Wehr R, Mansouri A, de Maeyer T, Gruss P: Fkh5-deficient mice show
dysgenesis in the caudal midbrain and hypothalamic mammillary body.
Development 1997, 124:4447-4456.
61. Winkler C, Schafer M, Duschl J, Schartl M, Volff JN: Functional divergence
of two zebrafish midkine growth factors following fish-specific gene
duplication. Genome Res 2003, 13:1067-1081.
62. Baye LM, Link BA: The disarrayed mutation results in cell cycle and
neurogenesis defects during retinal development in zebrafish. BMC Dev
Biol 2007, 7:28-28.
63. Fischer S, Prykhozhij S, Rau MJ, Neumann CJ: Mutation of zebrafish caf-1b
results in S phase arrest, defective differentiation and p53-mediated
apoptosis during organogenesis. Cell Cycle 2007, 6:2963-2969.
64. Shen Y-c, Raymond PA: Zebrafish cone-rod (crx) homeobox gene
promotes retinogenesis. Dev Biol 2004, 269:237-251.
65. Ghanem N, Jarinova O, Amores A, Long Q, Hatch G, Park BK,
Rubenstein JLR, Ekker M: Regulatory roles of conserved intergenic
domains in vertebrate Dlx bigene clusters. Genome Res 2003, 13:533-543.
66. Ghanem N, Yu M, Long J, Hatch G, Rubenstein JLR, Ekker M: Distinct cisregulatory elements from the Dlx1/Dlx2 locus mark different progenitor
cell populations in the ganglionic eminences and different subtypes of
adult cortical interneurons. J Neurosci 2007, 27:5012-5022.
67. McClintock JM, Carlson R, Mann DM, Prince VE: Consequences of Hox
gene duplication in the vertebrates: an investigation of the zebrafish
Hox paralogue group 1 genes. Development 2001, 128:2471-2484.
68. Hurley IA, Scemama J-L, Prince VE: Consequences of hoxb1 duplication in
teleost fish. Evol Dev 2007, 9:540-554.
69. Elsen GE, Choi LY, Millen KJ, Grinblat Y, Prince VE: Zic1 and Zic4 regulate
zebrafish roof plate specification and hindbrain ventricle
morphogenesis. Dev Biol 2008, 314:376-392.
70. Holland PW, Takahashi T: The evolution of homeobox genes: Implications
for the study of brain development. Brain Res Bull 2005, 66:484-90.
71. Takahashi T, Holland PWH: Amphioxus and ascidian Dmbx homeobox
genes give clues to the vertebrate origins of midbrain development.
Development 2004, 131:3285-3294.
72. Takahashi T: The evolutionary origins of vertebrate midbrain and MHB:
insights from mouse, amphioxus and ascidian Dmbx homeobox genes.
Brain Res Bull 2005, 66:510-517.
73. Ikuta T, Saiga H: Dynamic change in the expression of developmental
genes in the ascidian central nervous system: revisit to the tripartite
model and the origin of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary region. Dev
Biol 2007, 312:631-643.
74. Nozawa M, Suzuki Y, Nei M: Reliabilities of identifying positive selection
by the branch-site and site-prediction methods. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106:6700-6705.
75. Conant GC, Wolfe KH: Turning a hobby into a job: how duplicated genes
find new functions. Nature Rev Genet 2008, 9:938-950.
76. Kimmel CB, Ballard WW, Kimmel SR, Ullmann B, Schilling TF: Stages of
embryonic development of the zebrafish. Dev Dyn 1995, 203:253-310.
77. Westerfield M: THE ZEBRAFISH BOOK - A guide for the laboratory use of
zebrafish (Danio rerio). Eugene: University of Oregon Press, 5 2007.
78. Morshead CM, van der Kooy D: Postmitotic death is the fate of
constitutively proliferating cells in the subependymal layer of the adult
mouse brain. J Neurosci 1992, 12:249-256.
79. Kim WY, Shen J: Presenilins are required for maintenance of neural stem
cells in the developing brain. Mol Neurodegener 2008, 3:2.
80. Ekker M, Wegner J, Akimenko MA, Westerfield M: Coordinate embryonic
expression of three zebrafish engrailed genes. Development 1992,
116:1001-1010.
81. Reifers F, Böhli H, Walsh EC, Crossley PH, Stainier DYR, Brand M: Fgf8 is
mutated in zebrafish acerebellar mutants and is required for
maintenance of midbrain-hindbrain boundary development and
somitogenesis. Development 1998, 125:2381-2395.

Wong et al. BMC Developmental Biology 2010, 10:100
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-213X/10/100

82. Moens CB, Yan YL, Appel B, Force AG, Kimmel CB: Valentino: a zebrafish
gene required for normal hindbrain segmentation. Development 1996,
122:3981-3990.
83. Oxtoby E, Jowett T: Cloning of the zebrafish krox-20 gene (krx-20) and its
expression during hindbrain development. Nucleic Acids Res 1993,
21:1087-1095.
84. Inoue A, Takahashi M, Hatta K, Hotta Y, Okamoto H: Developmental
regulation of islet-1 mRNA expression during neuronal differentiation in
embryonic zebrafish. Dev Dyn 1994, 199:1-11.
85. Krauss S, Johansen T, Korzh V, Fjose A: Expression of the zebrafish paired
box gene pax[zf-b] during early neurogenesis. Development 1991,
113:1193-1206.
86. Mercier P, Simeone A, Cotelli F, Boncinelli E: Expression pattern of two otx
genes suggests a role in specifying anterior body structures in zebrafish.
Int J Dev Biol 1995, 39:559-573.
87. Munchberg SR, Ober EA, Steinbeisser H: Expression of the Ets transcription
factors erm and pea3 in early zebrafish development. Mech Dev 1999,
88(2):233-6.
88. Abramoff M, Magelhaes P, Ram S: Image Processing with ImageJ.
Biophotonics International 2004, 11:36-42.
89. Do CB, Mahabhashyam MSP, Brudno M, Batzoglou S: ProbCons:
Probabilistic consistency-based multiple sequence alignment. Genome
Res 2005, 15:330-340.
90. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:540-552.
91. Talavera G, Castresana J: Improvement of phylogenies after removing
divergent and ambiguously aligned blocks from protein sequence
alignments. Syst Biol 2007, 56:564-577.
92. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406-425.
93. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
94. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
95. Guindon S, Lethiec F, Duroux P, Gascuel O: PHYML Online–a web server
for fast maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic inference. Nucleic Acids
Res 2005, 33:557-559.
96. Whelan S, Goldman N: A general empirical model of protein evolution
derived from multiple protein families using a maximum-likelihood
approach. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18:691-699.
97. Yang Z: Maximum likelihood phylogenetic estimation from DNA
sequences with variable rates over sites: approximate methods. J Mol
Evol 1994, 39:306-314.
98. Hasegawa M, Kishino H, Yano T: Dating of the human-ape splitting by a
molecular clock of mitochondrial DNA. J Mol Evol 1985, 22:160-174.
99. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
100. Felsenstein J: Confidence limits on phylogenies: An approach using the
bootstrap. Evolution 1985, 39:783-791.
101. Gelman A, Rubin DB: Inference from iterative simulation using multiple
sequences. Statistical Science 1992, 7:457-511.
102. Rambaut A, Drummond AJ: Tracer v1.4. Book Tracer v1.4 2007, City.
103. Yang Z: Likelihood ratio tests for detecting positive selection and
application to primate lysozyme evolution. Mol Biol Evol 1998, 15:568-73.
104. Kimura M: The neutral theory of molecular evolution. Cambridge
[Cambridgeshire]; New York: Cambridge University Press 1983.
105. Yang Z, Bielawski JP: Statistical methods for detecting molecular
adaptation. Trends Ecol Evol 2000, 15:496-503.
106. Yang Z: PAML 4: phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24:1586-91.
107. Navidi WC, Churchill GA, von Haeseler A: Methods for inferring
phylogenies from nucleic acid sequence data by using maximum
likelihood and linear invariants. Mol Biol Evol 1991, 8:128-143.
doi:10.1186/1471-213X-10-100
Cite this article as: Wong et al.: Duplicate dmbx1 genes regulate
progenitor cell cycle and differentiation during zebrafish midbrain and
retinal development. BMC Developmental Biology 2010 10:100.

Page 24 of 24

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
