<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.6)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

REVIEW

Identification of cis-regulatory sequence variations
in individual genome sequences
Rebecca Worsley-Hunt1,2, Virginie Bernard1 and Wyeth W Wasserman1*

Abstract
Functional contributions of cis-regulatory sequence
variations to human genetic disease are numerous. For
instance, disrupting variations in a HNF4A transcription
factor binding site upstream of the Factor IX gene
contributes causally to hemophilia B Leyden. Although
clinical genome sequence analysis currently focuses
on the identification of protein-altering variation, the
impact of cis-regulatory mutations can be similarly
strong. New technologies are now enabling genome
sequencing beyond exomes, revealing variation across
the non-coding 98% of the genome responsible for
developmental and physiological patterns of gene
activity. The capacity to identify causal regulatory
mutations is improving, but predicting functional
changes in regulatory DNA sequences remains a great
challenge. Here we explore the existing methods and
software for prediction of functional variation situated
in the cis-regulatory sequences governing gene
transcription and RNA processing.
Introduction
Cis-regulatory sequences control when, where and with
what intensity genes are expressed. Key to this control is
the recruitment of transcription factors (TFs) that bind
to regulatory sequences, such as promoters, enhancers,
repressors and insulators. These target sequences are
spread across DNA. Probably reflecting the secondary
structure properties of looped DNA within a nucleus, there
are confirmed cases of cis-regulatory elements up to about
106 bp distant from the transcription initiating promoter
of a gene [1]. Mutations in TF binding sites (TFBSs) can
disrupt the essential protein-DNA inter­ ctions required
a
*Correspondence: wyeth@cmmt.ubc.ca
1
Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics at the Child and Family
Research Institute, Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia,
950 West 28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 BioMed Central Ltd

© 2011 BioMed Central Ltd

for the appropriate patterning or magnitude of gene
expression. Similarly, mutations can disrupt other sequencespecific regulatory controls, such as elements regulating
RNA splicing or stability. Although much emphasis in the
age of exome sequencing has been placed on variation
within protein-encoding sequences, it is apparent that
regulatory sequence disruptions will become a key focus
as full genome sequences become widely accessible for
medical genetics research.
The emerging collection of cis-regulatory variations
that cause human disease or altered phenotype is grow­
ing [2-4]. Reports identify cis-acting, expression-altering
mutations observed within introns, far upstream of
genes, at splicing sites or within microRNA target sites.
For example, cis-regulatory mutations have roles in hemo­
philia, Gilbert’s syndrome, Bernard-Soulier syndrome,
irritable bowel syndrome, beta-thalassemia, cholesterol
homeostasis and altered limb formation [5-11]. The
number of cis-regulatory variants reported in the litera­
ture has continued to expand over the past 2 years [12‑18].
In addition, compilations of cis-regulatory variants have
been reported [4,19,20]. Although many studies associate
cis-regulatory variations with phenotype, it is rare for
researchers to conclusively demonstrate causality. The
strongest causal evidence is obtained with transgenic
approaches, in cell culture or animal models, to identify
phenotypes triggered by such variations [21,22]. The
impor­ ance of regulatory changes is nevertheless apparent.
t
Ultimately genetics researchers seeking regulatory
muta­ ions are best served by high-quality annotations of
t
the human genome, with clearly designated functional
elements. Most routinely expressed protein coding exons
are known, making initial identification of proteinaltering genetic changes simple. In contrast, despite
ongoing ambitious efforts to annotate non-coding
genome features, the inventory of cis-regulatory elements
is far from complete. Large-scale chromatin immuno­
precipitation (ChIP) experiments provide the vast
majority of data, eclipsing the compiled information of
the past 25 years derived from targeted studies of specific
regulatory elements. Many of the new ChIP-derived data,
however, highlight segments of DNA (about 200 to
1,000  bp) containing a functional element rather than a

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

1.1

Page 2 of 14

1.4

1.2

2.1

Exon

2.2

Intron

Exon

1.3
Transcription
3.1
4.1

4.2

AUG
5’ Cap 5’ UTR

3.2

Translation
AAAAA

3’ UTR

Transcription
1.1 Insulator region
1.2 Enhancer/repressor region
1.3 TFBSs
1.4 Initiation regions/core promoter

Splicing
2.1 Splice junctions
2.2 Splicing enhancers/suppressors

RNA stability
3.1 RNA structure
3.2 Polyadenylation site
Translation
4.1 Initation site
4.2 Termination site
Non-coding RNA
5.1 ncRNA targets not shown

Figure 1. Classification of the regulatory sequences in a gene that can be modified by genetic variation. The four colored groups reflect
mutations that have a deleterious impact on gene transcription (class 1 in red), splicing (class 2 in blue), RNA stability (class 3 in orange) and
translation (class 4 in green). A fifth class, non-coding RNA interaction sites, is not shown as sites can occur throughout DNA and RNA sequences.

specific element (average <15 bp). Similarly, DNase I
hyper­ ensitivity analysis specifies regions likely to contain
s
regulatory elements [23]. Thus, the experi­ entally
m
defined regions must be coupled to additional methods
to assess the potential for a specific DNA variation to
affect gene activity. Some of the key data resources
reporting regulatory regions and delineating specific
elements are introduced below.
Our perspective is biased to elements with sequencespecific properties, including TFBSs, microRNA, spliceregulating target sequences, and immediate corepromoter sequences critical to the initiation of trans­
cription (Figure 1). Although diverse types of cis-regula­
tory variations will become accessible for future studies,
at present the bioinformatics resources for the study of
variation within TFBSs are the most accessible and there­
fore our primary focus here.
We begin by outlining an example workflow. Then we
step through elements of the workflow in greater detail,
including a brief overview of the discovery of sequence
variations from high-throughput sequence data. Finally,
we review TFBS identification approaches and strategies
for the prioritization of cis-regulatory variations for
further analysis. We conclude with a brief mention of two
emerging experimental techniques that may be used in
the future to associate cis-regulatory variants and their
gene targets. Our aim is to assist medical genetics
researchers to identify potential regulatory variants
within non-coding regions of the human genome.

A workflow for identifying disease-causing
cis‑regulatory variants
An example workflow for the identification of cisregulatory TFBSs linked to a disease is outlined in the
following section, and is illustrated in Figure 2. Given a
Non- high-throughput sequencing data from an
set of coding
RNA
individual, the short sequences are individually aligned to
a reference human genome sequence. Sets of overlapping
5.1
reads are analyzed to determine the genotype at each
ncRNA
position for which sufficient aligned sequences are
targets
available. Common polymorphisms and rare variants are
distinguished relative to the reference genome. For
not
familial studies, variations segregating with the pheno­
shown
type can be determined, and researchers emerge with a
set of disease-causing candidates. For each candidate for
causality, it is desirable to assess the potential for the
sequence mutation to disrupt a biological function. Many
researchers will be content to focus on the subset of
candidates predicted to create a severe alteration in a
protein sequence. Software for the prediction of damag­
ing changes, including modules from SIFT [24] and
PolyPhen-2 [25], identify variants that substitute amino
acids expected to cause changes in protein structure,
alter a critical position in a protein domain, or change an
amino acid of high evolutionary conservation. Many
researchers will stop at this step.
For those interested in potential cis-regulatory changes,
a panel of computational analyses can be performed on
the candidate variations. At the core of the processes is a

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

Page 3 of 14

Identify variants in genome

Identify regulatory elements

Coding variant characterization

ChIP-Seq data
Motif discovery
TFBS profiles

*
Known common
variants
Classify variants

Known rare
variants

Genetic variant data
Unknown
variants

Select variants within regulatory
elements
TFBS variant characterization
data management and visualization

Use regulatory region filter(s)
to refine variant list
Data management
and visualization

Experimental analysis
on final list of variants

Figure 2. Overview of a workflow for cis-regulatory variant detection. The boxes represent steps in the workflow, and the italicized
descriptions under the boxes correspond to analysis resources listed in Table 1. For identification of regulatory elements and regions, the order
in the workflow may be changed without loss of information. Common variants, flagged by an asterisk, may be eliminated from the analysis or
alternatively flagged for later tracking.

method for TFBS prediction based on position weight
matrices, known alternatively as position-specific scoring
matrices (PSSMs, called ‘possums’). Each matrix is a
quantitative description of the frequency of each nucleo­
tide at each position of a set of known TFBSs for a
specific TF. Methods related to the generation and appli­
ca­ ion of the matrices are described below. Such matrices
t
can be useful for predicting the biochemical capacity of a
TF to interact with a specific DNA sequence, but the
models have no capacity to assess whether a specific
DNA segment in the genome will be accessible to the TF.
Thus, TFBS predictions are almost always combined with
one or more ‘filters’ to specify regions of the genome
expected to function as cis-regulatory regions. Such
filters may include data about epigenetic modifications or
DNA accessibility, the observed binding of TFs, or
sequence conservation (phylogenetic footprinting). The

process will be explored in greater detail in the following
sections.
For researchers who do not have bioinformatics tools
in the laboratory, the comparison of coordinate positions
between datasets (between variants and TFBSs, or
variants and regulatory region filters) can be done using
the Galaxy tools (a set of web-based, fundamental bio­
informatic tools for extracting and manipulating textbased data) [26]. Tutorials and help documentation are
accessible through the Galaxy wiki.

Overview of variant identification from
high‑throughput sequence data
The first step in the identification of disease-causing
regulatory variants in individual genomes requires both
sequencing technologies and software for processing the
data to distinguish technical errors from true variations.

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

Page 4 of 14

Table 1. Data and analysis tools (open-source)
Genetic variant data
	

dbSNP	

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/

	

1000 Genomes	

http://www.1000genomes.org/

	

HapMap Project	

http://hapmap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

	

SIFT	

http://sift.jcvi.org/

	

Polyphen-2	

http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/

	

Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)	

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/

	

ENCODE project	

http://genome.ucsc.edu/ENCODE/

	

PAZAR	

http://www.pazar.info/

Meme-ChIP	

http://meme.nbcr.net/

	

JASPAR	

http://jaspar.genereg.net/

	

PAZAR	

http://www.pazar.info/

Coding variant characterization

ChIP-Seq data

Motif discovery
	
TFBS profiles

TFBS databases		
	

PAZAR	

http://www.pazar.info/

	

ORegAnno	

http://www.oreganno.org/

	

Variant effect predictor	

http://uswest.ensembl.org/tools.html

	

is-rSNP	

http://www.genomics.csse.unimelb.edu.au/is-rSNP/

	

rSNP-MAPPER 	

http://genome.ufl.edu/mapper/

	

TopHat	

http://tophat.cbcb.umd.edu/

	

MapSplice	

http://www.netlab.uky.edu/p/bioinfo/MapSplice

	

SFmap	

http://sfmap.technion.ac.il/

	

ESE Finder	

http://rulai.cshl.edu/tools/ESE

	

Galaxy (tool kit)	

http://galaxy.psu.edu/

	

UCSC Genome Browser	

http://genome.ucsc.edu/

	

Ensembl BioMart	

http://www.ensembl.org/biomart/martview/

TFBS variant characterization

RNA-Seq splice analysis

Splice enhancer discrimination

Data management and visualization

Both of these methods are in a period of rapid
development [27,28] and it is unlikely that they will
become stable for several years. We will therefore begin
this section by outlining general concepts for working
with high-throughput sequencing data, before highlight­
ing the most promising recent developments. In Table 1
we provide specific examples of well-maintained openresource databases and software, including resources for
conceptual classes of software mentioned below.
The process of identifying a variation or mutation
anywhere in a DNA sequence begins with mapping the
sequenced DNA of interest to a reference human genome
sequence. Sequencing generates DNA segments termed

reads. Given a combination of technological sequence
errors and genetic variation, coupled to the extensive
sequence repetition in the human genome, many reads
cannot be uniquely mapped to a single reference co­
ordinate region. False variations may arise, in part, from
the incorrect mapping of reads. One can identify and set
aside reads that map to multiple locations in the genome
with nearly equal alignment quality, denoting such cases
as potential sources of variant-calling errors.
Once a set of uniquely mapped reads is determined, the
next step in an analysis pipeline is the identification of
genetic variations from the reference genome based on
the shared characteristics of overlapping reads. Greater

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

read depth (the number of times a nucleotide is
sequenced) is advantageous for more reliable statistical
confidence in the determination of a genotype at a
position. But depth is not the only influence to consider,
as systematic mismapping of reads can result in false calls
even with many reads overlapping. The complex nature
of the data causes genotype ‘calling’ software to be one of
the most rapidly changing components of the variant
identi­ cation process, with continuously improving methods
fi
emerging in a constant stream of publications [29].
Given a set of variations, it is common to classify
observed variants as common or rare. Common varia­
tions, such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
occur with at least a minimum frequency in a population
(commonly a minimum allele frequency of 1% is applied).
Lists of common variants can be obtained from HapMap
[30,31], dbSNP [32], and 1000 Genomes [33] databases,
but recently dbSNP has been consolidating data from
most of the major resources and may be sufficient for
most users. Please note that contrary to the formal
meaning of SNP, the dbSNP resource also includes rare
variations.
After filtering common variants from a dataset, the
remaining variants are categorized as rare (and conse­
quently considered by many researchers as more likely to
be causal for extremely rare phenotypes) [34]. Although
it has been frequent practice in genome sequencing
studies of familial disorders to exclude all previously
observed variants (both rare variants and poly­ or­
m
phisms), it is our perception that the rapidly growing
collection of genome sequence data and variants makes it
increasingly likely that such screens will exclude relevant
causal mutations. For each individual genome sequenced,
the researcher emerges with a categorized set of variants common polymorphisms, previously reported rare
variants, and novel variants. A recent technical report
presents a framework for variation discovery and
genotyping that reflects the above concepts [35].
For each individual sequenced, the number of variants
in each of the three categories will be large. The number
of variants to consider can be reduced by focusing on
variations that segregate with a phenotype in a family
study [36]. In addition, it has been common practice to
focus on mutations predicted to severely alter an encoded
protein, such as nonsense mutations. However, there is
now a growing interest in the impact of variants located
in the non-coding portion of a genome. The following
sections highlight methods that researchers can use to
focus on variants located within cis-regulatory elements,
in particular TFBSs.

Detection of cis-regulatory elements
The identification of variants situated in TFBSs is depen­
dent on the identification of bona fide TFBSs, which is a

Page 5 of 14

challenge. Common approaches include three primary
components: (i) databases of known TFBSs; (ii) compu­
tational prediction of TFBSs using software models; and
(iii) prediction of regions likely to contain TFBSs - a
process we term ‘filtering’. The first two components will
be introduced below, followed by the introduction of a
method highly related to the second component, for
predicting the subset of putative regulatory variants likely
to alter the binding energy of a TF-DNA interaction. The
third component - filtering - is described in the subse­ uent
q
section.
Databases of experimentally defined TFBSs

At some point in the future, there will be a reliable
database reporting every TFBS in the human genome,
the gene promoter(s) that each acts on, the biological
condition(s) under which each TFBS is active and the
TF(s) that interact with each. There have been attempts
over previous decades to develop databases housing such
information; nevertheless, none of these are ideal, and all
are constrained by a lack of high-resolution experimental
data. One of the most widely known databases of this
kind is Transfac, which operates under a commercial
access model [37]. Open-access proponents have imple­
mented alternative databases. The ORegAnno database
aims to collect a broad range of TFBS data, using a
convenient data format that allows rapid submission [38].
The PAZAR database has a more complex data model,
which allows rich annotation of the evidence underlying
each TFBS, as well as a full description of the TFBS
(conditions, interacting TFs, cell types, and so on) [39].
There are many databases restricted to lower resolution
data, such as ChIP with sequencing (ChIP-Seq), that
specify regions of DNA bound by a TF (such data are also
contained by ORegAnno, PAZAR, and the ENCODE
data center at the University of California, Santa Cruz UCSC [40]).
The data from the open-access collections can be
downloaded for high-throughput comparisons of TFBS
positions with variant positions. The logistics of such
comparisons are described in the subsection below on
‘Assessing the impact of sequence variations on TF-DNA
interactions’.
Computational prediction of TFBSs

Although a small set of TFBSs has been experimentally
validated as functional and recorded in reference data­
bases, this probably represents an insignificant portion of
the entire set of TFBSs in the human genome. We must
therefore, for now, rely heavily on computational methods
to predict TFBSs. A description of the most common
method follows.
A TFBS motif model summarizes what is known, at the
sequence level, about the properties of a set of TFBSs for

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

SPI1
binding sites

Page 6 of 14

Position frequency matrix (PFM)

SPI1 binding site logo

A

2 GTTTCCT

32

1

0

0

0

1

0

C

1 TCCTCAT

2

33

1

0

38

37

6

G

4 ACTTCTG

5

3

0

0

0

0

3

T

3 GCTTTCT

3

5

41

42

4

4

33

5 TCTTTCT
▪▪▪
38 ACTTCCT
39 ATTTCCT
40 ACTTCTC
41 CCTTCCT

Position specific scoring matrix (PSSM)
1.5

−2.2

−2.9

−2.9

−2.9

−2.2

−2.9

C

−1.7

1.5

−2.2

−2.9

1.7

1.7

−0.7

−0.9

−1.4

−2.9

−2.9

−2.9

−2.9

−1.4

T

▪▪▪ G

A

G

42 ACTTCCT

−1.4

−0.9

1.8

1.8

−1.1

−1.1

1.5

C

A

T

T

T

C

C

T

T ▪▪▪

PSSM
scores
−3.4
−0.4
9.2
−1.3

Figure 3. Transcription factor binding site (TFBS) motif model. Sequences known to be bound by a specific transcription factor (for example,
SPI1) are aligned. A position frequency matrix (PFM) is generated by counting the number of times each type of nucleotide occurs at each position
of the alignment. The PFM is then converted to a log-scale position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM). The score of any DNA sequence window, having
the same length as the matrix, is calculated by summing the corresponding nucleotide values from the PSSM. The PFM may also be represented as
a binding site logo, depicting the nucleotide properties of the TFBSs.

a given TF (Figure 3). Once constructed, such a model can
be used to scan a DNA sequence of interest in ‘windows’ of
the same length as the regulatory element that the motif
model represents. A computer program incrementally
moves along a DNA sequence in 1 bp steps, returning a
score at each step to indicate the strength with which each
window of the DNA sequence matches the motif. The top
scoring windows are the most similar to the consensus
sequence of the TFBS bound by a TF.
As defined above, the most commonly used motif
models for predicting the location of TFBSs are termed
PSSMs. A single TF will recognize similar DNA sequences,
but will tolerate variation from the consensus TF binding
site pattern [41]. A PSSM is generated from a DNA
sequence alignment of experimentally confirmed TFBSs
for a TF (Figure 3). Such alignments are commonly gener­
ated using pattern discovery software such as MEME
[42]. Once aligned, a matrix is created that reports the
frequency of each nucleotide (A, C, G, and T) at each

position of the alignment - the resulting matrix is called a
position frequency matrix (PFM). The last step in
obtaining a PSSM is to convert the PFM using a
logarithmic function that weights the frequency of each
nucleotide at each position by the frequency of that
nucleotide in the genomic background (in many software
implementations the default background frequency is set
to 0.25 for each nucleotide) [43]. The widths of most
published TFBS PSSMs fall in the range 8 to 14 bp. The
scores produced are analogous to binding energies [44]
and can thus be considered a prediction of the strength of
association of a TF protein with a specific DNA sequence.
Software for scanning DNA sequences using the matrix
models is widely available through computer program­
ming modules (TFBS [45]), downloadable software
(RSAT [46]) or online websites (ORCAtk [39]). Active
discussions are ongoing in the bioinformatics field about
how the models can be improved in light of the increasing
amount of TFBS data arising from ChIP-Seq studies [47].

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

PSSMs are available from open-resource databases
such as JASPAR [48], PAZAR [49] or Uniprobe [50]. Until
recently, the number of TFs with PSSMs has increased
slowly, but high-throughput laboratory approaches for
the profiling of TF-bound sequences have resulted in a
striking increase in the number and quality of PSSMs
[48,50]. Such high-throughput experimental data typically
arise from either in vivo ChIP, such as ChIP-Seq [51], or
from in vitro protein binding studies, such as protein
binding microarrays [52]. In ChIP-Seq experiments,
protein-DNA complexes are isolated using an antibody
specific to the TF of interest, and the recovered DNA
sequence is determined. For protein binding microarrays,
double-stranded DNA of known sequence is affixed to
the microarray surface and the adherence of a fluores­
cently labeled protein preparation of a TF (or frequently
just the DNA-binding domain from a TF) is measured;
the bound sequences are subsequently analyzed to deter­
mine the DNA sequence patterns targeted by the protein.
Driven by these new technologies, the number of TFs
with PSSMs in the open access JASPAR database has
increased fivefold in the past year, rising from 100 to 500
PSSMs (about 25% of the 1,500 vertebrate TFs are now
represented).
The prediction of functional regulatory elements by
PSSMs, although having good sensitivity (most true
positives are found), suffers from poor specificity (many
false positives are predicted) [53]. With regard to speci­
ficity, a simple biochemical explanation of the problem is
that the TFBS-predicting PSSMs determine sequences
that a TF can bind in vitro, but in vivo the DNA may not
be accessible to the TF. For instance, a predicted TFBS
may be buried in compact chromatin. Thus, a prediction
of a TFBS in isolation has limited relevance to the proba­
bility that a segment in the human genome will function
as a cis-regulatory element. Approaches to reduce the
specificity problems by filtering are discussed in the
section below on ‘Refining cis-regulatory predictions
with filters’.
The same concepts underlying the use of PSSMs to
predict TFBSs apply to most motif discrimination methods
for sequence-specific regulatory elements, ranging from
splice enhancers to translation start sites [54-56]. We
focus here principally on TFBSs, which are DNA-related;
more information about RNA-related cis-regulatory
elements can be found in a recent review [57].
Assessing the impact of sequence variations on TF-DNA
interactions

Given a PSSM for a specific TF, and both the reference
DNA sequence and the DNA sequence containing a
variant, one can predict whether the variant alters the
DNA sequence in a manner that strengthens or weakens
the biochemical interaction of the TF with the DNA. The

Page 7 of 14

reference sequence and the variant sequence are both
scanned and scored by the PSSM model. If the difference
between observed scores is large, and at least one of the
sequence isoforms is a known TFBS or is assigned a score
that exceeds a user defined threshold for TFBS presence,
the variation is predicted to have a functional impact.
Such thresholds depend on the software used. The impact
of the variant is calculated as the reported difference
between the two scores. The higher-scoring allele is
predicted to be bound by the TF with greater affinity. The
calculation of PSSM score differences has two directions
as variants have the potential to either knock out or
create a TFBS. The action of the variant is captured by
the sign (+/-) of the score difference in the above
calculation.
Software for prediction of TFBS alterations by
sequence variations includes the variant effect predictor,
is-rSNP, and rSNP-MAPPER tools [58-60]. Although use­
ful for identifying mutations overlapping known TFBSs,
in the absence of additional information, such compari­
sons have limited value for predicted TFBSs (including all
cases of de novo generation of TFBSs) [61,62], as the high
rate of false TFBS predictions by PSSMs remains un­
addressed. In the following section we outline additional
data that may be incorporated to improve TFBS
prediction specificity.
Similar allele comparison programs have been
developed to predict altered microRNA target sites [63]
and splicing elements [64].

Refining cis-regulatory predictions with filters
As stated above, predictions of TFBSs are unreliable
because of a high false positive prediction rate (poor
specificity). Predictions of cis-regulatory elements can be
overlaid with genome annotations or experimental data
to focus attention on the regions that are more likely to
be functional [18,65]. An increase in specificity can be
obtained by filtering predicted regulatory elements
against complementary data, such as: (i) gene structure
(topology filters); (ii) regions of sequence conservation
(phylogenetic footprinting); (iii) TF-bound regions
defined experimentally (such as ChIP-Seq for TFs); or (iv)
struc­ urally accessible (or inaccessible) regions (such as
t
ChIP-Seq for epigenetic marks or DNase I hyper­ ensi­
s
tivity analyses). All the filters can be used individually or
in combination, where it is functionally relevant; their
main purpose is to add supporting evidence that a
predicted regulatory element is func­ ional. Although
t
biologically relevant filters can dramatically increase the
specificity of cis-regulatory element predictions, there
may be a loss in sensitivity with the use of multiple
filters, so it is recommended that a researcher assess
results based on one filter before incorporating
additional filters.

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

Page 8 of 14

Topology filter

TF binding filters

The activity of many cis-regulatory elements is spatially
dependent (see Figure 1 for locations of cis-regulatory
elements). For instance, splice-regulating elements are
positioned adjacent to splice sites (reviewed in [57]) and
the target sequences for non-coding RNA, such as micro­
RNAs, may be preferentially situated within 3’ untrans­
lated regions [66]. Specific types of TFBSs within the core
and proximal promoters, such as the TATA box and the
downstream proximal element, are topologically con­
strained to occupy a specific location relative to the
transcription start site (TSS) [67]. Genome annotations
and laboratory data can specify TSS locations, allowing
researchers to focus on variants situated with functionally
relevant spatial localization. Existing annotations from
high-throughput profiling of 5’ capped RNA [68] and
cDNA sequencing in genome annotation databases can
delineate such regions. Increasingly, however, the anno­
tation of exons is defined by RNA-Seq experiments
applied to patient samples [69].
Each of these genomic data types can be retrieved as
genomic positions from either a genome browser (for
example, using the Galaxy tools [26] or Ensembl BioMart
[70]) or from laboratory data, and should be chosen for
their relevance to the type of regulatory element of
interest. The positions of topological annotations can
be compared with the positions of the predicted
regulatory elements, using data analysis tools such as
those that the Galaxy system provides. Where
topological features are proximal to or overlap with
corresponding variant-altered regulatory element
predictions, the variants may have greater reliability
than predictions lacking such support.

Increasing access to high-throughput profiles of ChIP
data is key to improved regulatory sequence studies. In
the ChIP method, a specific antibody targeting a protein
of interest is used to recover DNA sequences bound by
the protein [51]. The nucleotide sequence of the
recovered DNA is increasingly being identified by highthroughput sequencing, resulting in the procedure
known as ChIP-Seq. Regions containing a site bound by a
targeted protein are identified in ChIP-Seq experiments
as displaying a higher abundance of sequence reads
recovered relative to a control set of data at a specific
position in the genome. The method delivers two impor­
tant advances for cis-regulatory element detection over
past methodologies. First, it can be applied to detect TF
or transcription co-activator bound regions across the
entire genome of any species that has been sequenced
[74]. Second, the results provide improved resolution of
the boundaries for functional regulatory regions, provid­
ing the researcher with a refined search space for deter­
mining the active cis-regulatory element(s) in the region.
We focus here on two classes of ChIP-Seq experiments those that profile interactions between a sequencespecific binding TF with DNA and those proteins that
associate in a sequence-independent manner with regu­
latory regions (discussed in the next section).
With ChIP-Seq it is common to map the protein-DNA
interactions to regions as small as about 300 bp. Although
useful, the study of genetic variants requires more precise
mappings of individual TFBSs. Thus, ChIP-Seq-defined
regions are used as filters to refine the computational
predictions generated with PSSMs. If no PSSM is
available for the TF, the ChIP-Seq regions can be used in
a motif discovery program (such as MEME [42]) to
generate a PSSM that can be used in turn to predict TFBS
positions. As with the previous filters, for each predicted
TFBS-altering variant, those overlapping a ChIP-Seqdelineated region can be considered of sufficient relia­
bility to motivate further laboratory studies.

Conservation filters (phylogenetic footprinting)

Sequence conservation in the human genome can focus
attention on regions with functional roles, a process
termed phylogenetic footprinting. Using conservation
scores based on multiple species alignments, such as the
Phylogenetic P-values (PhyloP) [71] (obtainable using
the Galaxy system or directly from the UCSC genome
anno­ ation database), researchers can restrict attention
t
to regions more likely to have sequence-specific
function. Although there is evidence of functional
regulatory sequences being conserved over moderate
periods of evolution [72], there is also ample evidence of
plasticity in regulatory sequences [73]. Conservationbased filters can enrich for functional sequences, but, as
for all filters, functionally relevant sequences without
sequence con­ er­ ation may be lost [65]. If the position
s v
of a predicted variant-altered regulatory element
overlaps a conserved region, then the cis-regulatory
potential of the variant is considered to have functional
support.

Regulatory region accessibility filters

In addition to data pertaining to the sequence-specific
binding of TFs, ChIP-Seq data can be obtained that
delineate regions of a genome that are likely to contain
elements involved in gene regulation. Such approaches
may be based on antibodies that recognize specific epi­
genetic marks associated with cis-regulatory activity (for
example, histone modifications), or antibodies that
recog­ ize proteins, such as co-activators, associated with
n
regulatory sequences that interact with DNA-bound TFs.
DNase I accessibility analysis likewise reveals regions
with potential regulatory roles.
Studies focused on individual histone modifications
have shown that certain marks, such as H3K4me3,

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

associate with active promoter regions, whereas others,
such as H3K27me3, are pronounced at silent promoters
[75]. Combined with cis-regulatory predictions, combi­
nations of epigenetic marks can be used to more precisely
delineate regulatory regions with potential active roles.
Focusing cis-regulatory element predictions proximal to
or within epigenetic regions associated with active regu­
lation improves the specificity of cis-regulatory element
prediction [76,77].
The transcriptional co-activator p300, a component of
many regulatory protein associations, has been targeted
in ChIP-Seq studies to define transcriptional enhancers genomic regions containing multiple TFBSs that collect­
ively enhance transcription [78]. Visel et al. [78] took 86
regions associated with p300, tested them for regulatory
activity in vivo, and found that 88% of the predicted
regions were active regulatory regions. They found that
using p300-predicted enhancer regions reduced the rate
of false-positive predictions made by alternative methods
by four-fold. Given the difficulty in obtaining high quality
antibodies to proteins, and as the number of co-activators
(about 101) is small relative to the number of sequencespecific TFs (about 103), it is likely that ChIP-Seq data for
the complete set of co-activators will become a preferred
means of delineating likely regulatory regions active in
each cell type.
In both classes of ChIP-Seq experiments, the defined
regulatory regions from the ChIP-Seq studies can be used
to select the predicted regulatory elements and variants
most likely to affect cis-regulatory function.
Examples of applied regulatory sequence variation
prediction

Use of such filters as outlined above for the prediction of
regulatory variants is starting to emerge in the literature.
As interest rises with respect to the non-coding regula­
tory portions of the genome, we can expect to see more
examples similar to the two we briefly outline below.
A key paper has recently emerged, highlighting the
potential power behind combining SNP identification
and different lines of regulatory evidence. Ernst et al. [79]
combined non-coding disease-associated SNPs derived
from multiple genome-wide association studies with
epigenetic evidence for potential regulatory enhancer
regions, and TFBS predictions. Non-coding SNPs were
found to significantly overlap with enhancers predicted
by epigenetic analyses, and the SNP-containing en­ an­
h
cers tended to be detected in cell types relevant to the
disease. For instance, SNPs associated with systemic
lupus erythematosus coincided with enhancer regions
detected in lymphoblastoid cells. The authors further
investigated these regulatory variant predictions by
examining the potential of these disease-associated SNPs
to interrupt or strengthen predicted TFBSs in the

Page 9 of 14

overlapping enhancer regions, such as an ETS1 binding
motif in the aforementioned lupus example.
Oishi et al. [80] assessed multiple layers of regulatory
evidence, such as topology, conservation, TFBS predic­
tion, and TF binding, for regulatory variation prediction.
They focused on the KLF5 gene locus because of the
potential role of its upstream regulatory programs in
hypertension. Genotyping array experiments on 20 hyper­
tensive individuals identified an associated SNP located
upstream of a KLF5 transcription initiation site. The SNP
was observed to be situated at a position conserved
between humans, mice, and rats. Bioinformatics analysis
of TFBS motifs predicted an overlapping binding site for
MEF2a, which was subsequently confirmed by ChIP
analysis (in human aortic smooth muscle cells). Experi­
mental analysis demonstrated that the SNP altered the
MEF2a binding affinity.
These two examples highlight the effectiveness of using
regulatory annotation data and predictions to focus
atten­ ion on variants that might have an impact on gene
t
regulation.
Case studies of filter-based support of regulatory variant
predictions

We provide two examples of disease-associated variants
and some data filters that, if these variants were un­
known, could be overlaid to support a cis-regulatory
variant prediction (Figures 4 and 5). These case reviews
were in part chosen because they lend themselves to
viewing in the UCSC Genome Browser. The first variant
(Figure 4) is causal for hemophilia B Leyden and the
second (Figure 5) is associated with protection against a
disease; the latter is a case of a mutation creating a new
regulatory element. We selected genome annotations
from four tracks available on the UCSC Genome
Browser: (i) distance from a TSS (topology) - RefSeq gene
track; (ii) two databases for literature- derived TFBSs PAZAR and ORegAnno tracks; (iii) mammalian conser­
vation - PhyloP track; and (iv) known sequence variants dbSNP track. The UCSC Genome Browser provides
instructions for researchers wanting to add their own
data tracks to a display, or wishing to extract data from
tracks to apply to their own analysis.
A classic example of an inactivating mutation in a
regulatory sequence is the disruption of a binding site for
the TF HNF4A present in the promoter of the Factor IX
endopeptidase gene (F9) involved in blood coagulation
(Figure 4). The mutation is causal for hemophilia B
Leyden [5]. A single nucleotide change of T to A at the
most strongly conserved position of the HNF4A binding
site results in reduced transcription of F9. The position of
the variation relative to the regulatory element is
displayed in the HNF4A PSSM sequence logo (Figure 4b).
Figure 4c depicts a view of the region surrounding the

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

Page 10 of 14

(a)

(b)
−20 bp
Factor IX

X
HNF4A

TSS

Variant location
HNF4A binding site logo

(c)

HNF4A site

T>A

Factor
IX

− PAZAR track
- RefSeq track
- ORegAnno track
- Conservation
track
- SNP track

UCSC Genome browser view

Figure 4. Visualization of a causal cis-regulatory mutation for hemophilia B Leyden that alters an HNF4A binding site in the promoter of
the Factor IX gene. In this example, at least three sets of data support the hypothesis that the variant modifies a functional transcription factor
binding site (TFBS): a TFBS database, proximity to a transcription start site (TSS; topology filter), and conservation data. (a) Variant location in base
pairs between the regulatory element and the TSS. (b) Logo of nucleotide binding preferences for HNF4a. The mutated position in the HNF4A
binding site is highlighted. The height of the letters ‘T’ and ‘A’ at that position indicate the frequency of a thymine or an adenine nucleotide in HNF4a
TFBSs. The thymine at position 8 is strongly maintained among known TFBSs. (c) UCSC Genome Browser view highlighting four of the data types
that may be used to support the prediction of a cis-regulatory variant. Red and gold tracks, PAZAR and ORegAnno databases of TFBSs; dark blue
track, mammalian conservation; black track, data from dbSNP.

HNF4A binding site in the UCSC Genome Browser. The
PAZAR track shows the location of binding sites in the
region, one of which is for HNF4A, and the RefSeq track
illustrates that the binding sites are proximal to the gene’s
TSS. The PhyloP mammalian conservation track reports
sequence conservation at the HNF4a binding site, contri­
buting support to this site as a functional regulatory
element. For this region no SNP has been reported, as
represented by the empty track for dbSNP at the bottom
of Figure 4c. As dbSNP was originally intended as a
database for sequence polymorphisms and has only
recently started to acquire rare variants, the empty track
signifies that this variant may not be common.
Activating mutations may create binding sites. A
variation in the promoter of the Alox15 gene creates a
binding site for the TF SPI1 (Figure 5), which results in
elevated expression of the gene. The SPI1 TFBS-creating
variation has been linked to protection against athero­
sclerosis [81]. Comparing Figure 4 with Figure 5 we see
that a TFBS common to the population (Figure 4, HNF4A)
has various data annotations supporting its functional

importance, whereas a TFBS that has been newly
generated (Figure 5, SPI1) lacks most such annotations.
The RefSeq track shows the variant to be within the
promoter region of the Alox15 gene. However, consistent
with a variant creating a new regulatory element, no
overlapping TFBS has been annotated in either of the
PAZAR or ORegAnno databases, nor is there evidence of
significant sequence conservation at the location of this
element. The position of the variation is reported by the
dbSNP track, even though it is not a polymorphism,
which suggests this variant is not a technical error.
However, in this instance it may be present owing to the
dataset the variant was derived from being uploaded to
dbSNP. In a case such as this, where a variant is predicted
to have created a new regulatory element, the only useful
data filters are likely to be topological, unless a researcher
has access to ChIP-Seq data generated from the
individual(s) carrying the variant.
With the conclusion of a workflow, such as that over­
viewed here, a researcher will possess a refined list of
putative cis-regulatory variants. Determining the causality

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

Page 11 of 14

(a)

(b)
−292 bp
ALOX15

X
SPI1

TSS

Variant location
SPI1binding site logo

(c)

new SPI1 site

C>T

Alox15

− PAZAR track
- RefSeq track
- ORegAnno track
- Conservation
track

- SNP track
UCSC Genome browser view

Figure 5. Visualization of a cis-regulatory mutation creating a functional SPI1 binding site in the promoter of ALOX15. In this example,
the variant occurs near the transcription start site (TSS; topology filter), there is slight evidence that the site of the variant is conserved against
mutations, and the variant is found in dbSNP; thus, it is unlikely to be a technical error. (a) Variant location. (b) Logo of nucleotide binding
preferences for SPI1. The altered position of the ALOX15 sequence relative to a SPI1 binding site is highlighted. The mutation converts the
nucleotide at that position from a cysteine to the most strongly conserved nucleotide in all SPI1 binding sites - a thymine. (c) UCSC Genome
Browser view as in Figure 4.

of a variant for a disease and the gene it regulates
currently lies in the hands of experimental researchers.

The emerging challenge: associating
variant‑altered TFBSs with target genes
Unaddressed in the workflow reviewed up to this point is
the challenge of defining the associations between
potential cis-regulatory variants and target genes.
Possibly as a result of DNA looping, regulatory sequences
can act specifically on distant genes, skipping intervening
genes in some cases [82,83]. Within the nucleus, DNA
sequences that are not proximal in sequence may be
brought into proximity by the three-dimensional looping
of chromatin. Emerging methods that detect such DNA
proximity (such as the Hi-C method described in [84,85])
may provide data suitable for integration into future
bioinformatics methods for predicting the impact of a
variant. Alternatively, methods are emerging that specify
the edges of accessible DNA regions, features termed
insulators. Such methods, largely based on ChIP-based

experiments using antibodies to the insulator binding
protein CTCF, could be used to determine which
promoter regions are accessible to a TF bound between
insulator sequences [86,87]. As these techniques are still
maturing, bioinformatics approaches continue to asso­
ciate regulatory elements and putative target genes based
on distance measurements (the closest gene is the target),
or through predictions arising from linkage dis­ qui­
e
librium or differential gene expression studies. However,
we anticipate a time in the future when three-dimen­
sional maps of nuclei can be generated experimentally.

Conclusions and future directions
At present the tools for the study of genome-wide regu­
latory sequence variations are limited, leading resear­
chers to focus on variations predicted to alter genomic
regions with well developed annotation - protein-coding
sequences. This is due in part to the nature of the
regulatory target and in part the availability of data. The
cis-regulatory elements are short in length, widespread

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

throughout the genome and are not confined to specific
genomic landmarks - they can be both proximal and
distal to their gene targets. Computational predictions of
regulatory elements, in turn, are faced with extracting
short and variable signal from a large genomic space, in
which there is a mixture of functional elements and
apparent randomly occurring non-functional sequences.
Regulatory predictions are further complicated by the
fact that the cellular environment and stage of
development affects the functional activity of regulatory
elements - an element that is active in one cellular
context may not be active in another, an aspect important
to the study of disease. However, from the current era of
high-throughput technology, we can anticipate an
increased understanding of the biological dynamics of
cis-regulatory elements to feed into and improve compu­
tational algorithms predicting the locations of cisregulatory elements. With improved predictions we will
increase our ability to predict cis-regulatory-associated
variants and their functional impact on the regulatory
elements they coincide with.
The ability to look with increased resolution at the noncoding space of the genome has recently encouraged an
increasing number of laboratories to investigate the
impact of cis-regulatory-associated variants on disease,
which as a result has motivated the development of
bioinformatics tools for linking variants with regulatory
elements. Bioinformaticians are still in the early stages of
developing methods to integrate high-throughput regula­
tory data, such as ChIP-Seq and RNA-Seq, with regu­
latory element prediction, variant calling, and databases
of known regulatory elements and variants. At the
current time, researchers are best served by following a
workflow such as that described here. However, a critical
mass of interest in regulatory variants is being reached,
and automated workflows will become publicly available
in the near future.
The increased affordability of whole-genome sequenc­
ing has dramatically expanded the potential for studying
cis-regulatory-related diseases in a familial context. The
added power of having related genomes to study segre­
gation of familial sequence variants with a phenotype
dramatically improves the ability to predict diseaseassociated cis-regulatory variants. We anticipate that the
next few years will see a rapid expansion of such familyassociated studies.
Use of the aforementioned filters and tools in a
workflow, as outlined here, coupled to the improved
detec­ ion of causal variants provided by genome-wide
t
data for multiple related individuals, provides medical
genetic researchers with the means to prioritize the
potential regulatory impact of a given a set of variants. In
the future, integrated tools will consolidate the analysis
process, bringing diverse analysis methods and data

Page 12 of 14

sources into a self-contained workbench for regulatory
variation analysis.
Abbreviations
ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; PFM, position frequency matrix;
PSSM position-specific scoring matrix; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism;
TF, transcription factor; TFBS, transcription factor binding site; TSS, transcription
start site; UCSC, University of California, Santa Cruz.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (USA) grant
1R01GM084875, the Canadian Institutes for Health Research and the National
Science and Engineering Research Council (NSERC). RWH was supported by
fellowships from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Michael
Smith Foundation for Health Research.
Author details
1
Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics at the Child and Family
Research Institute, Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, 950 West 28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada.
2
Bioinformatics Graduate Program, University of British Columbia, 950 West
28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada.
Published: 10 October 2011
References
1.	 Gordon CT, Tan TY, Benko S, Fitzpatrick D, Lyonnet S, Farlie PG: Long-range
regulation at the SOX9 locus in development and disease. J Med Genet
2009, 46:649-656.
2.	 Wray GA: The evolutionary significance of cis-regulatory mutations. Nat
Rev Genet 2007, 8:206-216.
3.	 Wang GS, Cooper TA: Splicing in disease: disruption of the splicing code
and the decoding machinery. Nat Rev Genet 2007, 8:749-761.
4.	 Epstein DJ: Cis-regulatory mutations in human disease. Brief Funct Genomic
Proteomic 2009, 8:310-316.
5.	 Reijnen MJ, Sladek FM, Bertina RM, Reitsma PH: Disruption of a binding site
for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 results in hemophilia B Leyden. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1992, 89:6300-6303.
6.	 Bosma PJ, Chowdhury JR, Bakker C, Gantla S, de Boer A, Oostra BA, Lindhout
D, Tytgat GN, Jansen PL, Oude Elferink RP: The genetic basis of the reduced
expression of bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1 in Gilbert’s
syndrome. N Engl J Med 1995, 333:1171-1175.
7.	 Ludlow LB, Schick BP, Budarf ML, Driscoll DA, Zackai EH, Cohen A, Konkle BA:
Identification of a mutation in a GATA binding site of the platelet
glycoprotein Ibbeta promoter resulting in the Bernard-Soulier syndrome.
J Biol Chem 1996, 271:22076-22080.
8.	 Zhu H, Tucker HM, Grear KE, Simpson JF, Manning AK, Cupples LA, Estus S:
A common polymorphism decreases low-density lipoprotein receptor
exon 12 splicing efficiency and associates with increased cholesterol. Hum
Mol Genet 2007, 16:1765-1772.
9.	 Kapeller J, Houghton LA, Mönnikes H, Walstab J, Möller D, Bönisch H,
Burwinkel B, Autschbach F, Funke B, Lasitschka F, Gassler N, Fischer C,
Whorwell PJ, Atkinson W, Fell C, Büchner KJ, Schmidtmann M, van der Voort I,
Wisser AS, Berg T, Rappold G, Niesler B: First evidence for an association of a
functional variant in the microRNA-510 target site of the serotonin
receptor-type 3E gene with diarrhea predominant irritable bowel
syndrome. Hum Mol Genet 2008, 17:2967-2977.
10.	 de Vooght KM, van Wijk R, van Solinge WW: Management of gene promoter
mutations in molecular diagnostics. Clin Chem 2009, 55:698-708.
11.	 Vandermeer JE, Ahituv N: cis-regulatory mutations are a genetic cause of
human limb malformations. Dev Dyn 2011, 240:920-930.
12.	 Laurila K, Lahdesmaki H: Systematic analysis of disease-related regulatory
mutation classes reveals distinct effects on transcription factor binding.
In Silico Biol 2009, 9:209-224.
13.	 Wasserman NF, Aneas I, Nobrega MA: An 8q24 gene desert variant
associated with prostate cancer risk confers differential in vivo activity to
a MYC enhancer. Genome Res 2010, 20:1191-1197.
14.	 Murphy SM, Polke J, Manji H, Blake J, Reiniger L, Sweeney M, Houlden H,
Brandner S, Reilly MM: A novel mutation in the nerve-specific 5’UTR of the
GJB1 gene causes X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. J Peripher Nerv
Syst 2011, 16:65-70.

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

15.	 Gallione CJ, Solatycki A, Awad IA, Weber JL, Marchuk DA: A founder mutation
in the Ashkenazi Jewish population affecting messenger RNA splicing of
the CCM2 gene causes cerebral cavernous malformations. Genet Med 2011,
13:662-666.
16.	 Garone C, Pippucci T, Cordelli DM, Zuntini R, Castegnaro G, Marconi C,
Graziano C, Marchiani V, Verrotti A, Seri M, Franzoni E: FA2H-related disorders:
a novel c.270+3A>T splice-site mutation leads to a complex
neurodegenerative phenotype. Dev Med Child Neurol 2011, 53:958-961.
17.	 Luo X, Yang W, Ye DQ, Cui H, Zhang Y, Hirankarn N, Qian X, Tang Y, Lau YL, de
Vries N, Tak PP, Tsao BP, Shen N: A functional variant in microRNA-146a
promoter modulates its expression and confers disease risk for systemic
lupus erythematosus. PLoS Genet 2011, 7:e1002128.
18.	 Harismendy O, Notani D, Song X, Rahim NG, Tanasa B, Heintzman N, Ren B,
Fu XD, Topol EJ, Rosenfeld MG, Frazer KA: 9p21 DNA variants associated
with coronary artery disease impair interferon-gamma signalling
response. Nature 2011, 470:264-268.
19.	 Rockman MV, Wray GA: Abundant raw material for cis-regulatory evolution
in humans. Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19:1991-2004.
20.	 Buckland PR, Hoogendoorn B, Coleman SL, Guy CA, Smith SK, O’Donovan
MC: Strong bias in the location of functional promoter polymorphisms.
Hum Mutat 2005, 26:214-223.
21.	 van Wijk R, van Solinge WW, Nerlov C, Beutler E, Gelbart T, Rijksen G, Nielsen
FC: Disruption of a novel regulatory element in the erythroid-specific
promoter of the human PKLR gene causes severe pyruvate kinase
deficiency. Blood 2003, 101:1596-1602.
22.	 Prabhakar S, Visel A, Akiyama JA, Shoukry M, Lewis KD, Holt A, Plajzer-Frick I,
Morrison H, Fitzpatrick DR, Afzal V, Pennacchio LA, Rubin EM, Noonan JP:
Human-specific gain of function in a developmental enhancer. Science
2008, 321:1346-1350.
23.	 Crawford GE, Holt IE, Whittle J, Webb BD, Tai D, Davis S, Margulies EH, Chen Y,
Bernat JA, Ginsburg D, Zhou D, Luo S, Vasicek TJ, Daly MJ, Wolfsberg TG,
Collins FS: Genome-wide mapping of DNase hypersensitive sites using
massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS). Genome Res 2006,
16:123-131.
24.	 Kumar P, Henikoff S, Ng PC: Predicting the effects of coding nonsynonymous variants on protein function using the SIFT algorithm. Nat
Protoc 2009, 4:1073-1081.
25.	 Adzhubei IA, Schmidt S, Peshkin L, Ramensky VE, Gerasimova A, Bork P,
Kondrashov AS, Sunyaev SR: A method and server for predicting damaging
missense mutations. Nat Methods 2010, 7:248-249.
26.	 Goecks J, Nekrutenko A, Taylor J: Galaxy: a comprehensive approach for
supporting accessible, reproducible, and transparent computational
research in the life sciences. Genome Biol 2010, 11:R86.
27.	 Chorley BN, Wang X, Campbell MR, Pittman GS, Noureddine MA, Bell DA:
Discovery and verification of functional single nucleotide polymorphisms
in regulatory genomic regions: current and developing technologies.
Mutat Res 2008, 659:147-157.
28.	 Li H, Homer N: A survey of sequence alignment algorithms for nextgeneration sequencing. Brief Bioinform 2010, 11:473-483.
29.	 Nielsen R, Paul JS, Albrechtsen A, Song YS: Genotype and SNP calling from
next-generation sequencing data. Nat Rev Genet 2011, 12:443-451.
30.	 Kidd JM, Cooper GM, Donahue WF, Hayden HS, Sampas N, Graves T, Hansen
N, Teague B, Alkan C, Antonacci F, Haugen E, Zerr T, Yamada NA, Tsang P,
Newman TL, Tüzün E, Cheng Z, Ebling HM, Tusneem N, David R, Gillett W,
Phelps KA, Weaver M, Saranga D, Brand A, Tao W, Gustafson E, McKernan K,
Chen L, Malig M, et al.: Mapping and sequencing of structural variation
from eight human genomes. Nature 2008, 453:56-64.
31.	 Altshuler DM, Gibbs RA, Peltonen L, Altshuler DM, Gibbs RA, Peltonen L,
Dermitzakis E, Schaffner SF, Yu F, Peltonen L, Dermitzakis E, Bonnen PE,
Altshuler DM, Gibbs RA, de Bakker PI, Deloukas P, Gabriel SB, Gwilliam R, Hunt
S, Inouye M, Jia X, Palotie A, Parkin M, Whittaker P, Yu F, Chang K, Hawes A,
Lewis LR, Ren Y, Wheeler D, et al.: Integrating common and rare genetic
variation in diverse human populations. Nature 2010, 467:52-58.
32.	 Sherry ST, Ward MH, Kholodov M, Baker J, Phan L, Smigielski EM, Sirotkin K:
dbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res 2001,
29:308-311.
33.	 Durbin RM, Abecasis GR, Altshuler DL, Auton A, Brooks LD, Gibbs RA, Hurles
ME, McVean GA: A map of human genome variation from population-scale
sequencing. Nature 2010, 467:1061-1073.
34.	 Ng SB, Nickerson DA, Bamshad MJ, Shendure J: Massively parallel
sequencing and rare disease. Hum Mol Genet 2010, 19:R119-R124.

Page 13 of 14

35.	 DePristo MA, Banks E, Poplin R, Garimella KV, Maguire JR, Hartl C, Philippakis
AA, del Angel G, Rivas MA, Hanna M, McKenna A, Fennell TJ, Kernytsky AM,
Sivachenko AY, Cibulskis K, Gabriel SB, Altshuler D, Daly MJ: A framework for
variation discovery and genotyping using next-generation DNA
sequencing data. Nat Genet 2011, 43:491-498.
36.	 Hedges DJ, Hedges D, Burges D, Powell E, Almonte C, Huang J, Young S,
Boese B, Schmidt M, Pericak-Vance MA, Martin E, Zhang X, Harkins TT,
Züchner S: Exome sequencing of a multigenerational human pedigree.
PLoS One 2009, 4:e8232.
37.	 Wingender E: The TRANSFAC project as an example of framework
technology that supports the analysis of genomic regulation. Brief
Bioinform 2008, 9:326-332.
38.	 Griffith OL, Montgomery SB, Bernier B, Chu B, Kasaian K, Aerts S, Mahony S,
Sleumer MC, Bilenky M, Haeussler M, Griffith M, Gallo SM, Giardine B, Hooghe
B, Van Loo P, Blanco E, Ticoll A, Lithwick S, Portales-Casamar E, Donaldson IJ,
Robertson G, Wadelius C, De Bleser P, Vlieghe D, Halfon MS, Wasserman W,
Hardison R, Bergman CM, Jones SJ: ORegAnno: an open-access communitydriven resource for regulatory annotation. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:D107-D113.
39.	 Portales-Casamar E, Arenillas D, Lim J, Swanson MI, Jiang S, McCallum A, Kirov
S, Wasserman WW: The PAZAR database of gene regulatory information
coupled to the ORCA toolkit for the study of regulatory sequences. Nucleic
Acids Res 2009, 37:D54-D60.
40.	 Birney E, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Dutta A, Guigó R, Gingeras TR, Margulies
EH, Weng Z, Snyder M, Dermitzakis ET, Thurman RE, Kuehn MS, Taylor CM,
Neph S, Koch CM, Asthana S, Malhotra A, Adzhubei I, Greenbaum JA,
Andrews RM, Flicek P, Boyle PJ, Cao H, Carter NP, Clelland GK, Davis S, Day N,
Dhami P, Dillon SC, Dorschner MO, Fiegler H, et al.: Identification and analysis
of functional elements in 1% of the human genome by the ENCODE pilot
project. Nature 2007, 447:799-816.
41.	 Badis G, Berger MF, Philippakis AA, Talukder S, Gehrke AR, Jaeger SA, Chan ET,
Metzler G, Vedenko A, Chen X, Kuznetsov H, Wang CF, Coburn D, Newburger
DE, Morris Q, Hughes TR, Bulyk ML: Diversity and complexity in DNA
recognition by transcription factors. Science 2009, 324:1720-1723.
42.	 Machanick P, Bailey TL: MEME-ChIP: motif analysis of large DNA datasets.
Bioinformatics 2011, 27:1696-1697.
43.	 King OD, Roth FP: A non-parametric model for transcription factor binding
sites. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:e116.
44.	 Maerkl SJ, Quake SR: A systems approach to measuring the binding energy
landscapes of transcription factors. Science 2007, 315:233-237.
45.	 Lenhard B, Wasserman WW: TFBS: Computational framework for
transcription factor binding site analysis. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:1135-1136.
46.	 Thomas-Chollier M, Sand O, Turatsinze JV, Janky R, Defrance M, Vervisch E,
Brohee S, van Helden J: RSAT: regulatory sequence analysis tools. Nucleic
Acids Res 2008, 36:W119-W127.
47.	 Zhao Y, Stormo GD: Quantitative analysis demonstrates most transcription
factors require only simple models of specificity. Nat Biotechnol 2011,
29:480-483.
48.	 Portales-Casamar E, Thongjuea S, Kwon AT, Arenillas D, Zhao X, Valen E, Yusuf
D, Lenhard B, Wasserman WW, Sandelin A: JASPAR 2010: the greatly
expanded open-access database of transcription factor binding profiles.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D105-D110.
49.	 Portales-Casamar E, Kirov S, Lim J, Lithwick S, Swanson MI, Ticoll A, Snoddy J,
Wasserman WW: PAZAR: a framework for collection and dissemination of
cis-regulatory sequence annotation. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R207.
50.	 Robasky K, Bulyk ML: UniPROBE, update 2011: expanded content and
search tools in the online database of protein-binding microarray data on
protein-DNA interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 2011, 39:D124-D128.
51.	 Orlando V: Mapping chromosomal proteins in vivo by formaldehydecrosslinked-chromatin immunoprecipitation. Trends Biochem Sci 2000,
25:99-104.
52.	 Berger MF, Bulyk ML: Universal protein-binding microarrays for the
comprehensive characterization of the DNA-binding specificities of
transcription factors. Nat Protoc 2009, 4:393-411.
53.	 Wasserman WW, Sandelin A: Applied bioinformatics for the identification of
regulatory elements. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5:276-287.
54.	 Cartegni L, Chew SL, Krainer AR: Listening to silence and understanding
nonsense: exonic mutations that affect splicing. Nat Rev Genet 2002,
3:285-298.
55.	 Chasin LA: Searching for splicing motifs. Adv Exp Med Biol 2007, 623:85-106.
56.	 Sparks ME, Brendel V: MetWAMer: eukaryotic translation initiation site

Worsley-Hunt et al. Genome Medicine 2011, 3:65
http://genomemedicine.com/content/3/9/65

prediction. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:381.
57.	 Wang Z, Burge CB: Splicing regulation: from a parts list of regulatory
elements to an integrated splicing code. RNA 2008, 14:802-813.
58.	 Flicek P, Amode MR, Barrell D, Beal K, Brent S, Chen Y, Clapham P, Coates G,
Fairley S, Fitzgerald S, Gordon L, Hendrix M, Hourlier T, Johnson N, Kähäri A,
Keefe D, Keenan S, Kinsella R, Kokocinski F, Kulesha E, Larsson P, Longden I,
McLaren W, Overduin B, Pritchard B, Riat HS, Rios D, Ritchie GR, Ruffier M,
Schuster M, et al.: Ensembl 2011. Nucleic Acids Res 2011, 39:D800-D806.
59.	 Macintyre G, Bailey J, Haviv I, Kowalczyk A: is-rSNP: a novel technique for in
silico regulatory SNP detection. Bioinformatics 2010, 26:i524-530.
60.	 Mapper 2 - Multi-genome analysis of positions and patterns of elements
of regulation [http://genome.ufl.edu/mapper]
61.	 Montgomery SB, Griffith OL, Schuetz JM, Brooks-Wilson A, Jones SJ: A survey
of genomic properties for the detection of regulatory polymorphisms.
PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3:e106.
62.	 Andersen MC, Engstrom PG, Lithwick S, Arenillas D, Eriksson P, Lenhard B,
Wasserman WW, Odeberg J: In silico detection of sequence variations
modifying transcriptional regulation. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4:e5.
63.	 Barenboim M, Zoltick BJ, Guo Y, Weinberger DR: MicroSNiPer: a web tool for
prediction of SNP effects on putative microRNA targets. Hum Mutat 2010,
31:1223-1232.
64.	 Churbanov A, Vorechovsky I, Hicks C: A method of predicting changes in
human gene splicing induced by genetic variants in context of cis-acting
elements. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:22.
65.	 King DC, Taylor J, Zhang Y, Cheng Y, Lawson HA, Martin J, Chiaromonte F,
Miller W, Hardison RC: Finding cis-regulatory elements using comparative
genomics: some lessons from ENCODE data. Genome Res 2007, 17:775-786.
66.	 Sevignani C, Calin GA, Siracusa LD, Croce CM: Mammalian microRNAs:
a small world for fine-tuning gene expression. Mamm Genome 2006,
17:189-202.
67.	 Bernard V, Brunaud V, Lecharny A: TC-motifs at the TATA-box expected
position in plant genes: a novel class of motifs involved in the
transcription regulation. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:166.
68.	 Ni T, Corcoran DL, Rach EA, Song S, Spana EP, Gao Y, Ohler U, Zhu J: A pairedend sequencing strategy to map the complex landscape of transcription
initiation. Nat Methods 2010, 7:521-527.
69.	 Cirulli ET, Singh A, Shianna KV, Ge D, Smith JP, Maia JM, Heinzen EL, Goedert
JJ, Goldstein DB: Screening the human exome: a comparison of whole
genome and whole transcriptome sequencing. Genome Biol 2010, 11:R57.
70.	 Haider S, Ballester B, Smedley D, Zhang J, Rice P, Kasprzyk A: BioMart Central
Portal--unified access to biological data. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37:W23-W27.
71.	 Pollard KS, Hubisz MJ, Rosenbloom KR, Siepel A: Detection of nonneutral
substitution rates on mammalian phylogenies. Genome Res 2010,
20:110-121.
72.	 Lenhard B, Sandelin A, Mendoza L, Engstrom P, Jareborg N, Wasserman WW:
Identification of conserved regulatory elements by comparative genome
analysis. J Biol 2003, 2:13.
73.	 Schmidt D, Wilson MD, Ballester B, Schwalie PC, Brown GD, Marshall A, Kutter
C, Watt S, Martinez-Jimenez CP, Mackay S, Talianidis I, Flicek P, Odom DT:
Five‑vertebrate ChIP-seq reveals the evolutionary dynamics of
transcription factor binding. Science 2010, 328:1036-1040.
74.	 Park PJ: ChIP-seq: advantages and challenges of a maturing technology.
Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10:669-680.

Page 14 of 14

75.	 Zhou VW, Goren A, Bernstein BE: Charting histone modifications and the
functional organization of mammalian genomes. Nat Rev Genet 2011,
12:7-18.
76.	 Whitington T, Perkins AC, Bailey TL: High-throughput chromatin information
enables accurate tissue-specific prediction of transcription factor binding
sites. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:14-25.
77.	 Ramsey SA, Knijnenburg TA, Kennedy KA, Zak DE, Gilchrist M, Gold ES,
Johnson CD, Lampano AE, Litvak V, Navarro G, Stolyar T, Aderem A,
Shmulevich I: Genome-wide histone acetylation data improve prediction
of mammalian transcription factor binding sites. Bioinformatics 2010,
26:2071-2075.
78.	 Visel A, Blow MJ, Li Z, Zhang T, Akiyama JA, Holt A, Plajzer-Frick I, Shoukry M,
Wright C, Chen F, Afzal V, Ren B, Rubin EM, Pennacchio LA: ChIP-seq
accurately predicts tissue-specific activity of enhancers. Nature 2009,
457:854-858.
79.	 Ernst J, Kheradpour P, Mikkelsen TS, Shoresh N, Ward LD, Epstein CB, Zhang X,
Wang L, Issner R, Coyne M, Ku M, Durham T, Kellis M, Bernstein BE: Mapping
and analysis of chromatin state dynamics in nine human cell types. Nature
2011, 473:43-49.
80.	 Oishi Y, Manabe I, Imai Y, Hara K, Horikoshi M, Fujiu K, Tanaka T, Aizawa T,
Kadowaki T, Nagai R: Regulatory polymorphism in transcription factor KLF5
at the MEF2 element alters the response to angiotensin II and is
associated with human hypertension. FASEB J 2010, 24:1780-1788.
81.	 Wittwer J, Bayer M, Mosandl A, Muntwyler J, Hersberger M: The c.-292C>T
promoter polymorphism increases reticulocyte-type 15-lipoxygenase-1
activity and could be atheroprotective. Clin Chem Lab Med 2007,
45:487-492.
82.	 Dong X, Navratilova P, Fredman D, Drivenes O, Becker TS, Lenhard B: Exonic
remnants of whole-genome duplication reveal cis-regulatory function of
coding exons. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:1071-1085.
83.	 Dean A: In the loop: long range chromatin interactions and gene
regulation. Brief Funct Genomics 2011, 10:3-10.
84.	 Lieberman-Aiden E, van Berkum NL, Williams L, Imakaev M, Ragoczy T, Telling
A, Amit I, Lajoie BR, Sabo PJ, Dorschner MO, Sandstrom R, Bernstein B, Bender
MA, Groudine M, Gnirke A, Stamatoyannopoulos J, Mirny LA, Lander ES,
Dekker J: Comprehensive mapping of long-range interactions reveals
folding principles of the human genome. Science 2009, 326:289-293.
85.	 Vassetzky Y, Gavrilov A, Eivazova E, Priozhkova I, Lipinski M, Razin S:
Chromosome conformation capture (from 3C to 5C) and its ChIP-based
modification. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 567:171-188.
86.	 Gaszner M, Felsenfeld G: Insulators: exploiting transcriptional and
epigenetic mechanisms. Nat Rev Genet 2006, 7:703-713.
87.	 Cuddapah S, Jothi R, Schones DE, Roh TY, Cui K, Zhao K: Global analysis of
the insulator binding protein CTCF in chromatin barrier regions reveals
demarcation of active and repressive domains. Genome Res 2009, 19:24-32.

doi:10.1186/gm281
Cite this article as: Worsley-Hunt R, et al.: Identification of cis-regulatory
sequence variations in individual genome sequences. Genome Medicine
2011, 3:65.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
