<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Lack of adaptation to human tetherin in HIV-1 Group O and P</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Retrovirology 2011, 8:78. doi:10.1186/1742-4690-8-78"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Su Jung Yang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

RESEARCH

Open Access

Lack of adaptation to human tetherin in HIV-1
Group O and P
Su Jung Yang, Lisa A Lopez, Colin M Exline, Kevin G Haworth and Paula M Cannon*

Abstract
Background: HIV-1 viruses are categorized into four distinct groups: M, N, O and P. Despite the same genomic
organization, only the group M viruses are responsible for the world-wide pandemic of AIDS, suggesting better
adaptation to human hosts. Previously, it has been reported that the group M Vpu protein is capable of both
down-modulating CD4 and counteracting BST-2/tetherin restriction, while the group O Vpu cannot antagonize
tetherin. This led us to investigate if group O, and the related group P viruses, possess functional anti-tetherin
activities in Vpu or another viral protein, and to further map the residues required for group M Vpu to counteract
human tetherin.
Results: We found a lack of activity against human tetherin for both the Vpu and Nef proteins from group O and
P viruses. Furthermore, we found no evidence of anti-human tetherin activity in a fully infectious group O proviral
clone, ruling out the possibility of an alternative anti-tetherin factor in this virus. Interestingly, an activity against
primate tetherins was retained in the Nef proteins from both a group O and a group P virus. By making chimeras
between a functional group M and non-functional group O Vpu protein, we were able to map the first 18 amino
acids of group M Vpu as playing an essential role in the ability of the protein to antagonize human tetherin. We
further demonstrated the importance of residue alanine-18 for the group M Vpu activity. This residue lies on a
diagonal face of conserved alanines in the TM domain of the protein, and is necessary for specific Vpu-tetherin
interactions.
Conclusions: The absence of human specific anti-tetherin activities in HIV-1 group O and P suggests a failure of
these viruses to adapt to human hosts, which may have limited their spread.

Background
Tetherin (BST-2/CD317/HM1.24) is an interferon-inducible plasma membrane protein that can inhibit the
release of enveloped viruses by physical tethering nascent virions at the cell surface [1,2]. Within the primate
lentiviruses, this restriction is counteracted by antitetherin activities present in either the Vpu, Nef or Env
proteins [1-11]. Several of these interactions are speciesspecific, suggesting that selection to evolve and maintain
anti-tetherin functions has been part of the adaptation
of the viruses to their hosts. For example, HIV-1 clade
B Vpu counteracts human, but not primate or rodent
tetherins [7,12,13], while the SIVmac and SIVcpz Nef

* Correspondence: pcannon@usc.edu
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of
Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California,
USA

proteins antagonize macaque and chimpanzee tetherin,
but not the human protein [3-5,7].
HIV-1 is classified into four distinct groups that maintain a similar genome organization but are highly divergent in their sequences: M (major), O (outlier), N (nonmajor, non-outlier), and P (putative) [14-17] (Figure
1A). Although all four groups of HIV-1 originated from
the SIVcpz that infects Pan troglodytes troglodytes (Ptt)
chimpanzees [18], they are interspersed among the present day SIVcpz Ptt lineages in distinct clusters, suggesting that each group arose by an independent ape to
human transmission event [19,20]. HIV-1 groups M and
N, and SIVcpz, are phylogenetically approximately equidistant from each other, while HIV-1 groups O and P
are more closely related to the recently discovered SIVgor [17,18,21,22].
Overall, the independent cross-species transmission
events that gave rise to the four known groups of HIV-1

© 2011 Yang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

have resulted in very different outcomes in terms of
virus distribution [19]. HIV-1 group M is the most prevalent and diverse of the groups, accounting for greater
than 90% of worldwide HIV-1 infections and driving the
global pandemic of AIDS. In contrast, group N infections are very rare and have only been reported in a limited number of individuals in south central Cameroon
[23-25]. HIV-1 group O is also rare, being mainly
restricted to west central Africa [26,27] and accounting
for 1% of infections in Cameroon [25,28,29]. Group P
has been isolated from two individuals of Cameroonian
descent [17,30].
It is unclear why the group M viruses have spread to
become a global pandemic while the other viruses
remain more limited in prevalence and geographical distribution. Although one study reported that HIV-1 O
isolates may have reduced replicative fitness [31], a
more recent study found comparable fitness, and similar
or even higher cytopathicity when compared to group
M isolates [32]. In addition, no major differences have
been reported in the pathogenicity of group M and O
infections [33,34], and the genetic diversity present in
group O suggests that it is not a recent zoonotic transmission [16,35-37].
A previous study of anti-tetherin activities in HIV-1
groups M, N and O found that while the Vpu proteins
from multiple group M and a single group N virus were
able to antagonize human tetherin, no group O Vpu
proteins had this activity [3]. In addition to targeting
tetherin, Vpu also degrades CD4 complexed with HIV-1
Env in the endoplasmic reticulum [38-41] and all of the
group O Vpu proteins were found to be able to reduce
CD4 cell surface expression [3]. The Nef proteins from
seven group O isolates were also evaluated, and none of
these displayed activity against human tetherin [3].
These observations led us to question whether group O
viruses have an anti-tetherin activity that is a function
of a gene other than Vpu or Nef, or whether they are
simply unable to counteract human tetherin, a feature
that may have contributed to their limited penetration
into human populations.

Results
HIV-1 group O and P Vpu proteins do not counteract
human tetherin

To evaluate anti-tetherin activity in the non-pandemic
HIV-1 groups, we examined the ability of Vpu proteins
from groups O and P to counteract human tetherin
restriction (Figure 1). We used the Vpu proteins from
viral isolates ANT70 and MVP5180, which are representative of group O subtypes I and II respectively [42-44],
as well as the prototype group P isolate, RBF168 [17].
None of these Vpu proteins have previously been examined for anti-tetherin activity. As positive controls, we

Page 2 of 18

used Vpu proteins from HIV-1 group M (NL4-3) and N
(YBF30) isolates [3]. The non-M Vpu proteins were constructed as EGFP fusion proteins to facilitate detection
in the absence of specific or cross-reacting antibodies.
Expression of each protein was confirmed by Western
blotting, and functionality was demonstrated by the ability to degrade CD4 [38-41]. We found that all of the
Vpu proteins reduced steady state CD4 levels, including
the group N protein from isolate YBF30, which has previously been reported to be unable to remove CD4 from
the cell surface (Figure 1B) [3].
Activity against human tetherin was assessed as the
ability of the Vpu proteins to promote the release of
HIV-1 virus like particles (VLPs) from HeLa cells, which
naturally express tetherin [1,2]. Both group M and N
Vpu demonstrated anti-tetherin activities, resulting in
approximately 10-fold increases in the amount of VLPs
released (Figure 1C). In contrast, neither the group O
nor P proteins had any effect on VLP release. These
data confirm and extend the findings about group O
Vpu reported by Sauter et al. (2009) [3] and additionally
reveal that HIV-1 group P Vpu has no activity against
human tetherin.
A group O proviral clone does not counteract human
tetherin

The lack of anti-tetherin activity we observed in the
group O Vpu proteins led us to investigate whether we
could detect any activity in a full-length replication
competent group O clone, pCMO2.5 [45]. We measured
the extent of virus release when pCMO2.5, or a control
group M proviral clone, pNL4-3, were transfected into
HeLa cells and found that pNL4-3 was approximately 5
times more efficient at releasing HIV-1 particles into the
culture supernatant than pCMO2.5 (Figure 2A). This
contrasted with the situation when the clones were
transfected into 293A cells, which do not express significant amounts of tetherin [7,46], and where the virus
release efficiency was found to be more equivalent (Figure 2C).
Previously, we and others have shown that tetherin
antagonism by Vpu results in removal of tetherin from
the cell surface [2,46-50]. We examined the tetherin
population at the surface of HeLa cells following transfection by group M Vpu, pNL4-3 or pCMO2.5. FACS
analysis revealed efficient tetherin removal by both
group M Vpu and pNL4-3, but no significant change
occurred with pCMO2.5 (Figure 2B). Together, these
data suggest that the group O virus pCMO2.5 does not
express a protein that has activity against human
tetherin.
We next asked whether pCMO2.5 had activity against
primate tetherins, which could have been retained from
an ancestral virus, by examining the effects of human,

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Page 3 of 18

Figure 1 Anti-tetherin activities of Vpu proteins from major HIV-1 groups. (A) Origins of the four major groups of HIV-1. Solid arrows
represent established transmissions, while broken arrows are more speculative events. (B) Ability of Vpu or Vpu-EGFP constructs to degrade CD4,
examined by co-transfection of HeLa cells with a CD4 expression plasmid and the indicated Vpu plasmid. Western blots of cell lysates probed
with the indicated antibodies are shown. The Vpu- constructs are described by both the HIV-1 group letter and the virus strain. As controls we
included a group M Vpu from isolate NL4-3, and its S52/56N mutant that is unable to degrade CD4 [65]. (C) HIV-1 VLP release from tetherinpositive HeLa cells was measured by co-transfection of pHIV-1-pack (expresses HIV-1 Gag-Pol, Rev) in the absence (-) or presence of the
indicated Vpu plasmids. VLP release was measured as the ratio of p24-reacting bands in the supernatants versus cell lysates following Western
blot analysis, and made relative to the baseline level in the absence of Vpu, for n = 4 independent experiments. Statistical significance is
indicated as p < 0.01 (**).

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Page 4 of 18

Figure 2 Anti-tetherin activity in group O proviral clone pCMO2.5. (A) Five μg of group M (pNL4-3) or group O (pCMO2.5) proviral clones
were transfected into HeLa cells, and cell lysates and supernatants harvested and analyzed by Western blotting with an anti-p24 antibody. The
percent virus release was calculated as the ratio of p24-reacting bands in the supernatants relative to the cell lysates, and normalized to 100%
for the virus release from pNL4-3, for n = 2 independent experiments. (B) HeLa cells were transfected with 500 ng of a GFP expression plasmid
alone (red), or together with 2 μg of either an expression plasmid for group M Vpu, or 5 μg of the proviral clones pNL4-3 or pCMO2.5 (blue).
Cells were stained with an anti-tetherin antibody and analyzed for cell surface tetherin expression by FACS. The histograms show relative cell
numbers (% of maximum) vs. tetherin expression (fluorescence intensity of APC) in cells gated for GFP expression; graph shows mean MFI in
GFP-positive populations for n = 3 independent experiments, p < 0.01 (**). (C) Human (Hum), chimpanzee (Cpz), macaque (Mac), or a chimeric
human tetherin, H(+5), containing an insert from Cpz-tetherin in the cytoplasmic tail, were transiently expressed in 293A cells, together with
proviral clones pNL4-3, pNL4-3ΔVpu or pCMO2.5. The percent virus release was calculated as described above and made relative to the no
tetherin control for each virus, for n = 4 independent experiments. The Vpu antisera used does not cross-react with the group O protein.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

chimpanzee and macaque tetherin on pCMO2.5 release.
We also included a chimeric human tetherin, H(+5),
that contains an insertion of the sequence DDIWKK
from the cytoplasmic tail of chimpanzee tetherin, and
which we have previously shown renders human
tetherin susceptible to SIVmac Nef [7]. As controls we
included pNL4-3 and a derivative pNL4-3ΔVpu, which
does not express Vpu. Analysis of virus release from all
three clones revealed that the NL4-3ΔVpu virus had no
activity against any of the tetherins, while the wild type
pNL4-3 virus had equal activity against the human and
H(+5) tetherins, a partial activity against chimpanzee
tetherin, as has previously been reported for HIV-1 Vpu
[7,12], and only a small activity against macaque
tetherin. In contrast, pCMO2.5 had no activity against
human tetherin but was active against the other three
proteins (Figure 2C). These findings suggest that this
group O virus evolved from an ancestor that had activity
against tetherin in primate hosts, and while it still
retains some ability to counteract primate tetherins, it
has not developed a comparable activity against human
tetherin.
Evidence for ancestral anti-tetherin activities in group O
and P Nef proteins

The fact that the H(+5) tetherin was antagonized by
pCMO2.5 implicated Nef as the anti-tetherin factor in
this virus. We therefore examined the activity of the
pCMO2.5 Nef protein against the panel of tetherin proteins (Figure 3A). We also included Nef proteins from
HIV-1 O isolates ANT70 and MVP5180, since the Vpu
proteins from these viruses also lacked activity against
human tetherin (Figure 1C). As positive controls we
included group M Vpu, and the Nef proteins from
SIVcpz and SIVmac239, which are able to counteract
the human, chimpanzee and macaque tetherins, respectively [3-5,7]. We noticed that all cells transfected with
Nef expression plasmids displayed lower levels of intracellular HIV-1 Gag proteins. Although we have no
explanation for this consistent observation, the use of a
virus release assay that is based on the ratio of p24reacting proteins in the supernatant versus cell lysates,
allows us to control for such effects and still measure
the effect of tetherin, and its antagonists, on the efficiency of virus release.
Analysis of VLP release in the presence of the various
tetherins revealed that pCMO2.5 Nef had activity
against chimpanzee, macaque and H(+5) tetherin, but
not human tetherin. In contrast, the other two group O
Nef proteins had no activity against any of the tetherins
examined (Figure 3A). Since detection of some of the
group O/P Nef proteins on Western blots by the antigroup M Nef antibody was not robust, we also constructed Nef-EGFP fusion proteins, and confirmed their

Page 5 of 18

expression by Western blotting with an anti-GFP antibody to rule out problems with protein stability or
expression (Figure 3B). Using the EGFP-tagged proteins,
we observed the same results as with the untagged proteins (data not shown). Finally, we confirmed the activity
of all Nef constructs, both untagged and EGFP-tagged,
using a CD4 degradation assay [40,51] (Figure 3B).
We further investigated the activity of pCMO2.5 Nef
by introducing a G2A substitution that prevents Nef
myristoylation and plasma membrane localization [45].
A similar substitution in SIVmac239 Nef has been
shown to block its anti-tetherin activity [4]. Following
this mutation, pCMO2.5 Nef lost activity against H(+5)
tetherin (Figure 3C). Together these data suggest that
the partial activity the pCMO2.5 virus has against primate tetherins is a function of its Nef protein.
Next, we examined whether the Nef or Vpu proteins
from the group P isolate, RBF168 [17], had anti-tetherin
activity. We observed the same pattern as with
pCMO2.5, finding no activity against human tetherin,
but partial activity in the group P Nef protein against
both macaque and chimpanzee tetherins (Figure 3D).
Group P Nef, either untagged or EGFP-tagged, was able
to degrade human CD4 (Figure 3B). Together, these
data suggest that the group P viruses have also evolved
from an ancestor that used the Nef protein to counteract tetherin in its primate hosts, but similar to the
group O viruses, have failed to adapt to counteract
human tetherin.
Lack of anti-tetherin activity in group O Vpu maps to the
TM domain

We next examined why the group O Vpu proteins did
not have activity against human tetherin. We constructed a series of FLAG-tagged M-O chimeras
between the Vpu proteins from NL4-3 and ANT70 (Figure 4A), confirmed their expression by Western blotting,
and analyzed their ability to counteract human tetherin
in a VLP release assay (Figure 4B). To rule out problems
due to the lower expression of constructs O and O26M,
we also increased the amounts of DNA transfected into
HeLa cells to give equivalent levels of Vpu expression as
the functional group M protein (Figure 4C). We identified as important the first 18 amino acids of group M
Vpu, since chimera M18O had some activity, but M14O
did not. Increasing the amount of M sequences to contain the full TM domain (M26O) further increased
tetherin antagonism. Although the TM domain of group
M Vpu has been shown to be a key determinant of the
specificity of tetherin antagonism [6], a role for a hinge
region and two alpha helices in the cytoplasmic domain
of Vpu has also been noted [52]. The activity of M26O
suggests that the cytoplasmic tail of ANT70 group O
Vpu is functional for this activity.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Page 6 of 18

Figure 3 Anti-tetherin activities in group O and P Nef proteins. (A) Anti-tetherin activity of group O Nef proteins against the indicated
tetherins was examined in 293A cells. Graph shows VLP release in the presence of indicated tetherins and Vpu or Nef proteins relative to the
baseline levels of release from the tetherin alone controls (-), for n = 3 independent experiments. Group M Vpu, SIVcpz Nef-EGFP and SIVmac239
Nef-EGFP proteins were included as positive controls. Nef proteins were detected using antiserum raised against group M Nef protein that crossreacts with group O proteins but not SIVmac Nef. Statistical significance is indicated as p < 0.05 (*) or p < 0.01 (**). (B) Human CD4 expression
plasmid (1 μg) was transfected into 293A cells, together with 1 μg of the indicated Vpu or Nef plasmids. Group M Vpu and the defective VpuS52/56N mutant were included as positive and negative controls for CD4 degradation, respectively. Untagged Nef proteins were probed using
anti-group M Nef antiserum and GFP-tagged Nef proteins were detected using anti-GFP antibody. (C) Activity of CMO2.5 Nef and a
myristoylation site mutant (CMO2.5 Nef-G2A) against human and H(+5) tetherin, in 293A cells. Group M Vpu and SIVmac Nef were included as
positive controls and group M Nef was included as a negative control. (D) Effect of group P Vpu or Nef proteins on HIV-1 VLP release in the
presence of different tetherins, measured in 293A cells, as previously described, for n = 2 independent experiments. Vpu and Nef expression was
detected using anti-GFP antibody.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Page 7 of 18

Figure 4 Characterization of chimeric M-O Vpu proteins. (A) Schematic (not to scale) of major domains in FLAG-tagged chimeric Vpu
proteins formed between the functional group M (NL4-3, grey) and non-functional group O (ANT70, black) proteins. Numbers in name indicate
junction site and refer to the group M residues. (B) Activity of M-O chimeric Vpu-FLAG proteins against human tetherin in HeLa cells. Relative
VLP release was calculated as described previously and is shown for n = 3 independent experiments, p < 0.01 (**). Expression of Vpu-FLAG
proteins was confirmed using an anti-FLAG antibody. (C) Vpu-FLAG proteins O and O26M are expressed at lower levels than other Vpu
constructs, so increasing amounts of the plasmids were transfected into HeLa cells (range 2 to 6 μg), to confirm that their lack of anti-tetherin
activity was not simply due to lower levels of expression. As a control, 2 μg of group M Vpu-FLAG was transfected. (D) Ability of chimeric M-O
Vpu-FLAG proteins to remove tetherin from the surface of HeLa cells. Cells were co-transfected with 2 μg of indicated Vpu plasmid and 500 ng
of GFP expression plasmid and MFI calculated in the GFP-positive population. Graph shows mean MFI for n = 3 independent experiments, p <
0.01 (**). (E) 293T cells were transfected with HA-tagged tetherin alone (500 ng) or together with the indicated Vpu-FLAG expression plasmids (1
μg), except O and O26M (2 μg). Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed using anti-HA MicroBeads, followed by Western blot analysis of both
input lysates (1%) and immunoprecipitates, using anti-FLAG and anti-tetherin antibodies.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

The ability of the chimeras to remove human tetherin
from the surface of HeLa cells was also examined (Figure 4D). Only the wild-type group M Vpu was able to
markedly remove tetherin from the cell surface, with the
M26O chimera also showing an effect. For the minimal
functional chimera, M18O, its expression consistently
reduced tetherin levels but this did not reach statistical
significance, which may explain its less efficient ability
to antagonize tetherin.
Group M Vpu has been shown to physically interact
with human tetherin by co-immunoprecipitation (coIP) [47,48,53-55]. We examined the ability of the panel
of chimeric proteins to co-IP with an HA-tagged
tetherin, and found that only group M Vpu, and to a
lesser extent the O26M chimera, was able to demonstrate such an interaction (Figure 4E). The lack of
interaction between tetherin and either of the functional chimeras, M18O or M26O, was surprising, but
may reflect a less than optimal interaction that is not
detected in this system. More unexpected was the
positive interaction observed between tetherin and the
non-functional O26M chimera. This suggests that a
physical interaction between tetherin and Vpu can
occur in the absence of a functional tetherin antagonism, and may implicate other partners or processes in
tetherin counteraction.
A significant fraction of group M Vpu is present in
the TGN [46,56], and Vpu co-expression further concentrates tetherin to this compartment [46,48]. We
considered the possibility that the difference between
the functional and non-functional M-O chimeras could
reflect differences in their cellular distribution. Using
confocal microscopy, we observed that the group M
and O Vpu proteins had distinct distributions, with the
group M protein showing a strong colocalization with
the TGN, while the group O protein was found concentrated in the TGN, but also had a more reticular
distribution and ER overlap (Figure 5A). The M-O chimeras had various distributions, being either predominantly in the TGN (O26M), excluded from the TGN
(M14O), or present in both the TGN and ER (the rest
of the chimeras). We found no pattern that easily
explained the functionality, or lack thereof, of the chimeras (Figure 5B). However, comparison of the nonfunctional M14O and the partially functional M18O
chimera revealed re-acquisition of a TGN distribution
in M18O (Figure 5B), suggesting that while TGN localization is not sufficient for anti-tetherin activity, it
may well be necessary.
Alanine-18 is important for group M Vpu localization and
tetherin-Vpu interactions

The functional M18O and non-functional M14O Vpu
protein differ at three amino acids (Figure 6A). We were

Page 8 of 18

particularly interested in alanine-18 in the group M
sequence, since this is part of a string of alanines that
form a diagonal face of the transmembrane helix of Vpu
[57]. Furthermore, this face is conserved in both the
functional group M and N Vpu proteins, but is not present in the group O or P proteins (Figure 6B) [54,55].
We found that the introduction of alanine-18 into chimera M14O (designated M14O-N18A) was sufficient to
confer anti-tetherin activity (Figure 6C) and remove
tetherin from the cell surface (Figure 6D). In addition,
alanine-18 altered the cellular distribution of the chimera, increasing its co-localization with the TGN compartment (Figure 6E, F)
Further evidence for the importance of alanine-18 was
obtained by investigating the A18H mutant of group M
Vpu [58]. In agreement with a recent report [55] we
observed no functional anti-tetherin activity for this
mutant (Figure 7A), although it did possess a partial
ability to reduce tetherin levels on the cell surface (Figure 7B). It has been reported that A18H has a different
cellular distribution than the wild-type protein, being
present in the ER [55]. We also noted a more reticular,
ER localization for the A18H mutant as well as being in
the TGN (Figure 7C). In addition, the A18H mutant
was reported not to co-localize with tetherin [55]. However, our experiments produced a somewhat different
finding, since we observed that the A18H mutant
retained a significant ability to redistribute tetherin to
the TGN in about 75% of the cells examined (Figure
7C, arrowed), although 25% of the cells did not redistribute tetherin in this way.
It has recently been suggested that the alanine face
of group M Vpu could serve as a direct binding surface for tetherin [54,55]. We examined whether we
could also detect a specific Vpu-tetherin interaction,
and whether alanine face mutations reduced this.
Using EGFP-tagged wild-type M Vpu as a positive
control, and the SIVcpz Vpu and a previously
described non-interacting Vpu mutant (A14L) as
negative controls [3,7,54], we found that we were able
to specifically detect interactions between Vpu and
the mature glycosylated forms of tetherin that run
between 25 and 37kD [59], although the faster-running immature forms of tetherin that are a major species in transfected 293T cells were non-specifically
immunoprecipitated in all cases. Using this system,
we found that both mutations A18H and A14L prevented co-immunoprecipitation (Figure 7D). We conclude that the A18H mutation perturbs an essential
interaction between Vpu and tetherin, resulting in
reduced sequestration of tetherin in the TGN, less
efficient removal of tetherin from the cell surface and
an inability to counteract the restriction of virus
release.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Page 9 of 18

Figure 5 Subcellular localization of chimeric M-O Vpu proteins. (A) Subcellular localization of Vpu chimeras in HeLa cells, transfected with
the indicated Vpu-FLAG chimeras and stained with antiserum against FLAG (green), and TGN (left) or ER (right) markers (red). (B) The degree of
co-localization of Vpu proteins with the TGN marker was calculated using the Pearson coefficient.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Page 10 of 18

Figure 6 Role of Alanine-18 in tetherin antagonism by M-O chimeric Vpu proteins. (A) Schematic of TM domains from M14O and M18O,
highlighting location of alanine-18, and configuration of M14O-N18A. (B) Sequence alignment of Vpu TM domains from indicated viruses, with
numbering based on group M protein. Alanine residues that are conserved in the functional group M and N Vpu proteins, but are absent in the
non-functional group O and P proteins, are labeled in red; non-aromatic hydrophobic residues are labeled in green. Also shown is the 3-D
structure of the group M Vpu TM domain (residues 7 to 25 from isolate BH10) [57], created using PyMOL software (Schrödinger LLC), with the
conserved alanine residues highlighted in red. (C) Effects of indicated Vpu proteins on HIV-1 VLP release from HeLa cells, measured as previously
described, p < 0.01 (**). (D) Effects of indicated Vpu proteins on cell surface tetherin in HeLa cell, measured as previously described, p < 0.05 (*)
or p < 0.01 (**). (E) Subcellular localization of M14O and M14O-N18A proteins in HeLa cells, detected by confocal microscopy. Vpu proteins were
visualized using anti-FLAG antibody (green), and the TGN (red) was detected with specific antisera. (F) The degree of co-localization of Vpu
proteins with the TGN marker was calculated using the Pearson coefficient.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Page 11 of 18

Figure 7 Alanine-18 is important for group M Vpu anti-tetherin activity. (A) Effect of group M Vpu and the A18H mutant on VLP release
from HeLa cells, measured as previously described, p < 0.01 (**). (B) Effect of Vpu on tetherin expression on cell surface of HeLa cells, in the
absence (red) or presence (blue) of Vpu, examined as previously described. p < 0.01 (**) (C) Subcellular localization of indicated Vpu constructs
in HeLa cells and their effects on tetherin distribution. TGN (top) and ER (bottom) markers are included. Arrows indicate cells expressing Vpu that
redistributed tetherin to the TGN. (D) 293T cells were transfected with tetherin alone (500 ng) or together with the indicated Vpu-EGFP
expression plasmids (5 μg), where M is the Vpu protein from group M strain HXB2. SIVcpz Vpu-EGFP, which is not active against human tetherin,
and a Vpu mutant, A14L, were included as negative controls. Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed using anti-GFP MicroBeads, followed by
Western blot analysis of both input lysates (1%) and immunoprecipitates, using either anti-GFP or anti-tetherin antibodies. Mature glycosylated
forms of tetherin run between 25 and 37 kDa (bracketed) and interact specifically with wild-type group M Vpu, while an immature faster
running species that is also present in the transfected cells is non-specifically pulled down by all Vpu proteins.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Alanine face residues are not sufficient to confer antitetherin activity to group O Vpu

We next examined whether the alanine face residues
present in group M Vpu were sufficient to confer recognition of human tetherin to group O Vpu by substituting either alanine-18 alone (O-N18A), or the
combination of three alanines at positions 10, 14 and 18
together with serine at 12 to valine (O-3A,S12V), which
more fully mimics the group M TM domain in this
region (Figure 8A). However, we found that neither
alteration conferred anti-tetherin activity to the group O
protein (Figure 8B, C). These data suggest that additional sequences present in the first 14 residues of
group M Vpu are also required to confer anti-tetherin
activity.

Discussion
To date, three different proteins in the primate lentiviruses, Vpu, Env and Nef, have been found to target
the BST-2/tetherin protein [1-11]. Together with the

Page 12 of 18

host species specificities displayed by these factors, this
suggests that a strong selective pressure exists to counteract tetherin, and that such adaptations have been
important enablers of host species expansion. HIV-1 is
currently recognized to exist in four different groups;
group M, which is the major driver of the worldwide
pandemic, and the minor groups N, O and P. It has previously been reported that while the Vpu proteins from
both groups M and N have activity against human
tetherin, neither the Vpu or Nef proteins from group O
viruses have such a function [3,60]. Our study has confirmed these findings and further demonstrated that a
recently described group P virus also has no activity
against human tetherin in either its Vpu or Nef proteins.
Despite the apparent lack of anti-human tetherin
activity in group O Vpu and Nef proteins, group O
viruses are clearly still pathogenic in humans. They were
previously reported to have been responsible for 20.6%
of infections in Cameroon in the 1986-1988 time period
although this dropped to only about 1.4% by 1997 [28].

Figure 8 Residues from group M Vpu are not sufficient to confer anti-tetherin activity to group O Vpu. (A) Schematic of Vpu-FLAG
proteins based on group O Vpu, with group M substitutions at positions 10, 12, 14 and 18. (B) Ability of indicated Vpu proteins to increase HIV1 VLP release from HeLa cells, measured as previously described, p < 0.01 (**). (C) Effect of transfecting increasing amounts of plasmids O-N18A
and O-3A,S12V (range 2 to 6 μg) on VLP release from HeLa cells.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

We, therefore, considered the possibility that another
group O protein, apart from Vpu or Nef, could have
taken over an anti-tetherin function, similar to the use
of the Env protein by HIV-2 [9-11]. However, examination of the Env and Vpr proteins from the pCMO2.5
infectious molecular clone of HIV-1 O found no evidence of such an activity (data not shown), and the
whole virus was restricted by human tetherin. These
data point to a lack of anti-tetherin activity in HIV-1
group O viruses, and further suggest that the lower prevalence of group O in human populations could derive,
in part, from their inability to counteract human
tetherin.
As an alternative explanation, it is possible that group
O and P viruses do not encode an anti-tetherin factor
because infection by these viruses does not induce
tetherin. It has previously been reported that infection
by SIVagm only transiently induces type I interferon in
the early stages of an infection [61], and such limited
production would be expected to limit the expression of
tetherin. A corresponding lack of anti-tetherin factors in
the genome of this virus has been reported [62]. However, other reports have described anti-tetherin activities
in the Env and Nef proteins of SIVagm [5,8], so it is
unclear if such a precedent exists. Therefore, while it is
possible that the group O and P viruses could avoid
tetherin restriction indirectly, for example through low
interferon induction, further studies would be needed to
determine if this is indeed the case.
By analyzing activity against a panel of tetherins, we
found that pCMO2.5 retained a residual anti-tetherin
activity in its Nef protein that was able to recognize
both primate tetherins and a modified human protein
with an insert (DDIWKK) in its cytoplasmic tail. This
motif is also required for the interaction of SIV Nef proteins with primate tetherins [3-7], and suggests a similar
mechanism. These observations are consistent with the
immediate ancestor of HIV-1 group O using Nef to
counteract tetherin in its primate host, but being unable
to adapt Nef to counteract the human protein that is
missing this cytoplasmic target motif. Transmission of
HIV-1 group M and HIV-2 to humans has resulted in
the adaptation of Vpu and Env, respectively, to counteract human tetherin. The HIV-1/SIVcpz lineage of primate lentiviruses originated from a recombination
between SIVrcm and the SIVmus/mon/gsn sub-lineage
[63,64], and modern day SIVmus/mon/gsn viruses possess anti-tetherin activities in Vpu. Indeed, we have even
detected partial activity against human tetherin in an
SIVgsn isolate [7]. Therefore, adaptation of Vpu to
human tetherin would seem to be a straightforward
solution for all HIV-1 viruses, and it is somewhat surprising that the group O and P viruses do not appear to
have evolved this activity. Whether this reflects some

Page 13 of 18

other demand on Vpu function in these viruses that precludes such evolution is an open question.
We used the finding that the group O Vpu has not
adapted to counteract human tetherin to investigate
domains in group M Vpu that are necessary for its
activity. Previous studies of group M Vpu have suggested three domains in the protein that are involved in
tetherin antagonism; the TM domain [1,2], a membrane
proximal positively charged hinge region in the cytoplasmic tail [52] and a b-TrCP binding motif based on two
conserved serine residues in the tail that is also required
for Vpu’s ability to degrade CD4 [2,47,49,53]. The residues in the membrane proximal charged region are not
conserved between groups M, O and P, while two and
one of the tail serines, respectively, are present in the
group O and P proteins. All group O and P Vpu proteins used in this study retained the ability to degrade
CD4, suggesting that these serine motifs are still able to
recruit b-TrCP or that the proteins use an alternate
strategy to degrade CD4.
Through the construction of M-O Vpu chimeras, we
ruled out any significant defect in the cytoplasmic tail of
the group O protein used in these studies (ANT70),
since the chimera M26O was fully functional. In contrast, a series of chimeras with junctions in the TM
domain identified as important the first 18 residues of
group M Vpu, and in particular highlighted a role for
alanine-18. Our findings differ from a recent study using
group O isolates MVP9435 and HJ001, which mapped
the minimal contribution of group M sequences that
could produce a functional M-O chimera as comprising
both the full TM domain and the hinge region of the
cytoplasmic tail [60]. However, our data do agree with
another conclusion from this study, that the group O
cytoplasmic tail promotes the ER localization of the protein [60]. Indeed, the different cellular distribution of the
group O Vpu protein compared to group M may reflect
a requirement of another function of Vpu, which makes
the protein no longer compatible with tetherin antagonism in a human host.
Residue alanine-18 is part of a helical face of conserved alanine residues that are found in the group M
and N proteins but not in group O or P, and could
therefore represent a protein interacting domain that
recruits tetherin or some additional factor. A defective
group M Vpu with the equivalent of an A18H substitution has previously been described [55,58]. We confirmed the lack of anti-tetherin activity in this mutant
and further investigated the basis for its defect by analyzing both its sub-cellular distribution, and its ability to
remove tetherin from the cell surface and concentrate it
in the TGN, as previously observed for the wild type
group M Vpu [46,48]. We found that the A18H substitution resulted in a protein that was still located in the

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

TGN, although it was more present in the ER than the
wild-type protein. Co-immunoprecipitation analyses also
revealed that this mutation prevented a specific Vputetherin interaction. Interestingly, the A18H mutant was
still able to concentrate tetherin in the TGN in the
majority (75%) of cells in which it was expressed, and it
displayed some ability to remove tetherin from the cell
surface, but it is likely that these activities are below a
threshold needed to overcome tetherin restriction.
We also noted that the introduction of alanine-18 into
the defective chimera, M14O, to create construct
M14O-N18A, was sufficient to re-locate the protein
from an ER-like distribution to the TGN, and to restore
activity against tetherin. However, substitution of either
alanine-18 alone, or a more extensive stretch of residues
that include the alanine face comprising residues 10, 14
and 18 into the group O protein was not sufficient to
confer activity, implicating additional residues in the
TM of group M Vpu.
Overall, the data from the M-O chimeras argue
against a simple model whereby Vpu location in the
TGN, and the ability to co-immunoprecipitate with
tetherin, is predictive of anti-tetherin activity. For example, although comparison of the M14O and M14ON18A proteins indicates that the presence of Vpu in the
TGN is necessary to counteract tetherin, the lack of
activity of the O26M chimera, which has a robust presence in the TGN compartment, suggests that this is
not sufficient. Similarly, although we were able to detect
co-immunoprecipitation between tetherin and group M
Vpu that required the presence of alanine-18, as previously reported [55], we were unable to detect an association between tetherin and the functional M18O and
M26O chimeras, while being able to detect such an
interaction with the defective O26M chimera. Although
these observations may reflect either the technical limitations of co-immunoprecipitation assays, or defects
that are specific for this series of chimeric proteins, it is
also possible that additional factors are involved in the
Vpu-tetherin interaction that have not yet been
uncovered.

Conclusions
Primate lentiviruses display a remarkable variation in the
strategies they use to target the BST-2/tetherin protein.
Despite the seeming importance of this interaction, the
HIV-1 group O and P viruses do not possess antitetherin activities in their Vpu or Nef proteins that
recognize human tetherin, and studies with a group O
proviral clone further suggest that they may not have
been able to evolve such an activity. Such a failure to
counteract human tetherin may have impeded their
spread in human populations. Studies with chimeric
proteins suggest that multiple changes would be

Page 14 of 18

required in the group O Vpu protein to acquire such an
activity, including an alteration in the protein’s sub-cellular distribution, and this may have produced too high
a barrier to overcome.

Methods
Cell lines

HeLa, 293T and LLC-MK2 cells were obtained from the
American Type Culture Collection; 293A cells were
obtained from Qbiogene/MP Biomedicals (Irvine, CA).
All cells were maintained in D10 medium: Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Mediatech, Herndon, VA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) (Mediatech) and 2 mM glutamine (Gemini BioProducts, West Sacramento, CA).
Plasmids

Plasmid pHIV-1-pack expresses HIV-1 Gag-Pol and
Rev [11] and is used to produce HIV-1 virus-like particles (VLPs). Plasmid pcDNA-Vphu (renamed M Vpu)
encodes a human codon-optimized form of Vpu from
group M HIV-1 isolate NL4-3, and was kindly provided by Klaus Strebel (NIH). A Vpu mutant defective
in CD4 downregulation was generated by changing serine residues at 52 and 56 to asparagines (M Vpu-S52/
56N) by site-directed mutagenesis [65] and a substitution of alanine-18 to histidine was made to generate
plasmid M Vpu-A18H. Vpu sequences from HIV-1
group N YBF30 (GenBank: CAA06815), group O
strains ANT70 (AAA99882) and MVP5180
(AAA44863), and group P strain RBF168 (ACT66828)
were synthesized as human codon-optimized openreading frames (Bio Basic Inc., Ontario, Canada).
EGFP-tagged versions of the proteins were constructed
by cloning into vector pAcEGFP-N1 (Clontech, Mountain View, CA). An expression plasmid for SIVcpz
GAB1 Vpu-GFP [66] was provided by Ed Stephens
(University of Kansas). FLAG-tagged chimeric group
M-O Vpu proteins were made by splice-overlap PCR
between group M (NL4-3) and group O (ANT70) proteins and cloned into vector pCMV6-XL5 (Origene,
Rockville, MD); nomenclature follows the convention
where chimera M7O has the first 7 amino acids of
group M Vpu fused to the rest of the group O Vpu.
Additional point mutations were introduced by sitedirected mutagenesis.
Proviral clone pNL4-3 was obtained through the AIDS
Research and Reference Reagent Program (ARRP), from
Dr. Malcolm Martin [67]; derivative pNL4-3ΔVpu was
generated by PCR mutagenesis and contains a deletion
of the first 10 nucleotides of the Vpu open-reading
frame. The full-length group O proviral clone pCMO2.5
[45] was provided by Hans-Georg Kräusslich (University
of Heidelberg, Germany).

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Nef proteins from pNL4-3 and pCMO2.5 were PCR
amplified from the proviral clones and cloned into vector pAcEGFP-N1, with the addition of a stop codon to
prevent expression of the EGFP tag. A Gly to Ala mutation at the second amino acid was introduced into
CMO2.5 Nef by site-directed mutagenesis (CMO2.5
Nef-G2A). Nef sequences from HIV-1 group O ANT70
(AAA99884), MVP5180 (AAA44865), and group P
RBF168 (ACY40660) were synthesized (Bio Basic Inc.)
and cloned into vector pAcEGFP-N1 to generate NefEGFP tagged proteins; untagged versions were created
by introducing stop codon after the Nef sequence. NefEGFP proteins from SIVmac239 and SIVcpz EK505
have been previously described [7].
Expression plasmids for BST-2/tetherin from human
(Hum), chimpanzee (Cpz) and human tetherin with the
sequence DDIWKK replacing amino acid E-14 (H+5),
have been previously described [7]. Full-length macaque
tetherin (Mac) was PCR amplified from LLC-MK2 cells
and cloned into vector pCMV6-XL5 (Origene). Human
tetherin with an HA tag at the N-terminus (HAtetherin) was PCR amplified and cloned into vector
pCMV6-XL5 (Origene). Human CD4 was amplified
from plasmid CD4-YFP, provided by Stefano Marullo
(Université Paris Descartes, France) [68] and cloned into
vector pCMV6-XL5.
Production and analysis of HIV-1 VLPs

HIV-1 VLPs were generated from HeLa and 293A cells
by transient transfection as previously described [7]. The
following amounts of plasmid DNA were used: 2 μg
Vpu constructs, 5 μg proviral clones, 0.6 μg Nef constructs, 100 ng tetherin constructs. Amounts of DNA in
all transfections were equalized using empty expression
vectors. Cell lysates and viral particles were collected 24
hours post-transfection and the levels of p24 protein in
both lysates and supernatants analyzed by Western blot,
as previously described [7], using rabbit HIV-1SF2 p24
antiserum (ARRRP) at a 1:3,000 dilution, followed by
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:10,000) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA). Specific proteins were visualized using the
enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) detection system
(Amersham International, Arlington Heights, IL).
Exposed and developed films were scanned and quantified using the public domain NIH ImageJ software. The
fold-enhancement of virus release was calculated as the
ratios of p24-reacting bands in supernatants:lysates, and
normalized to either the pHIV-1-pack only control, or
pHIV-1-pack plus tetherin, as indicated. The statistical
significance of data was determined using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparison test from GraphPad Prism (GraphPad
Software, La Jolla, CA).

Page 15 of 18

Western blotting

Expression of Vpu-EGFP and Nef-EGFP constructs was
detected by Western blotting of cell lysates using rabbit
anti-GFP at a 1:1000 dilution (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
CD4 expression was detected using rabbit anti-CD4 at a
1:1000 dilution (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc). Actin
expression was detected using a monoclonal anti-actin
antibody, at 1:3000 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Nef
expression was detected with rabbit anti-Nef antiserum
at a 1:1000 dilution (ARRRP, from Ronald Swanstrom)
and Vpu expression was detected using rabbit anti-HIV1 Vpu antiserum at a 1:2000 dilution (ARRRP, from
Frank Maldarelli and Klaus Strebel). Expression of VpuFLAG proteins was detected using rabbit anti-FLAG at
a 1:1000 (Sigma-Aldrich). Tetherin expression was confirmed by rabbit anti-tetherin antibody at a 1:10000
dilution (ARRRP, from Klaus Strebel). The secondary
antibodies used were a 1:10,000 dilution of HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology)
and a 1:10,000 dilution of goat anti-mouse IgG (SigmaAldrich).
Flow cytometry

HeLa cells were transfected with 500 ng of a GFP
expression plasmid together with 2 μg of untagged Vpu
expression plasmid or 5 μg of the proviral clones pNL43 or pCMO2.5. For the M-O chimeric Vpu-FLAG proteins, 2 μg of the plasmids were transfected in HeLa
cells. Twenty-four hours later, cells were harvested,
incubated in 1% bovine serum albumin/phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 20 minutes at 4°C, and stained for
tetherin expression using rabbit anti-tetherin antiserum
(ARRRP, from Klaus Strebel) at a 1:5,000 dilution for 20
minutes at room temperature, followed by washing
three times with PBS and incubation with goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated to Alexa Fluor 647 (Invitrogen) at a
1:300 dilution for 20 minutes at room temperature.
After staining, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature and analyzed with a BD
FACSCanto II (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Ten
thousand events were collected and data analyses were
performed using FlowJo 6.2 software (Tree Star, Ashland, OR).
Confocal microscopy

HeLa cells plated in 10-cm dishes were transfected with
1 μg of Vpu or 2 μg of Vpu-FLAG expression plasmids,
then 18-24 hours later, seeded on coverslips coated with
poly-L-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich). The cells were incubated
for an additional 24 hours at 37°C, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 minutes at room temperature,
washed in PBS, permeabilized for 10 mins in 0.1% Triton X-100 at room temperature, and washed again in
PBS prior to antibody staining. Vpu was detected using

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

either rabbit anti-Vpu antiserum (ARRRP) at a 1:1000
dilution or a rabbit anti-FLAG polycolonal antibody at a
1:500 dilution (Sigma-Aldrich). The TGN was labeled
using sheep polyclonal anti-TGN46 antibody (Serotec,
Oxford, UK) at a 1:1000 dilution and the ER with a goat
polyclonal anti-calnexin antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at a 1:200 dilution. Tetherin was detected using
a polyclonal mouse anti-tetherin antibody, MaxPab
H00000684-B02P (Abnova, Taipei City, Taiwan), at a
1:250 dilution. The conjugated secondary antibodies
used were donkey anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 594, donkey
anti-sheep Alexa Fluor 647, and donkey anti-rabbit
Alexa Fluor 488, and donkey anti-goat Alex Fluor 647 at
1:200 dilutions (Invitrogen). Processed cells were
mounted in Prolong Gold antifade reagent (Molecular
Probes, Invitrogen). Images were acquired with the PerkinElmer Ultraview ERS laser spinning disk confocal
imaging system at 100× magnification (PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA) and processed using Volocity software
(Improvision, PerkinElmer) and Adobe Photoshop Creative Suite 2. Co-localization analysis of confocal images
was performed using NIH ImageJ software to calculate
Pearson correlation coefficient, as described previously
[46].
Immunoprecipitation

293T cells in 10-cm dishes were transfected with 500 ng
of untagged human tetherin, together with 5 μg of
group M HXB2 Vpu-EGFP or the equivalent A18H
mutant (corresponding to residue alanine-19 in HXB2),
kindly provided by Ed Stephens [58]. An A14L mutant
was generated by site-directed mutagenesis. Alternatively, for HA-tetherin pull-downs, 293T cells were
transfected with 500 ng of HA tagged human tetherin
(HA-tetherin) together with 2 μg of Vpu-FLAG proteins.
Cell lysates were harvested 24 hours post-transfection
and pull-downs performed using the μMACS GFP or
the μMACS HA isolation kits (Miltenyi Biotech Inc.,
Auburn, CA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Specific proteins in the input lysate and immunoprecipitates were detected by Western blotting using anti-GFP,
anti-FLAG or anti-tetherin antisera, as described above.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the California HIV/AIDS Research Program
award ID08-USC-038 and NIH grants AI068546 and AI068546-05S1.
Authors’ contributions
SJY participated in the design of the study, performed most of the
experiments, and wrote the draft manuscript. LAL, CME and KGH
contributed to experiments and participated in the review of the
manuscript. PMC conceived and co-ordinated the study, and wrote the final
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Page 16 of 18

Received: 14 May 2011 Accepted: 28 September 2011
Published: 28 September 2011
References
1. Neil SJ, Zang T, Bieniasz PD: Tetherin inhibits retrovirus release and is
antagonized by HIV-1 Vpu. Nature 2008, 451:425-430.
2. Van Damme N, Goff D, Katsura C, Jorgenson RL, Mitchell R, Johnson MC,
Stephens EB, Guatelli JC: The interferon-induced protein BST-2 restricts
HIV-1 release and is downregulated from the cell surface by the viral
Vpu protein. Cell Host Microbe 2008, 3:245-252.
3. Sauter D, Schindler M, Specht A, Landford WN, Münch J, Kim KA, Votteler J,
Schubert U, Bibollet-Ruche F, Keele BF, Takehisa J, Ogando Y,
Ochsenbauer C, Kappes JC, Ayouba A, Peeters M, Learn GH, Shaw G,
Sharp PM, Bieniasz PD, Hahn BH, Hatziioannou T, Kirchhoff F: Tetherindriven adaptation of Vpu and Nef function and the evolution of
pandemic and nonpandemic HIV-1 strains. Cell Host Microbe 2009,
6:409-421.
4. Jia B, Serra-Moreno R, Neidermyer W, Rahmberg A, Mackey J, Fofana IB,
Johnson WE, Westmoreland S, Evans DT: Species-specific activity of SIV
Nef and HIV-1 Vpu in overcoming restriction by tetherin/BST2. PLoS
Pathog 2009, 5:e1000429.
5. Zhang F, Wilson SJ, Landford WC, Virgen B, Gregory D, Johnson MC,
Munch J, Kirchhoff F, Bieniasz PD, Hatziioannou T: Nef proteins from
simian immunodeficiency viruses are tetherin antagonists. Cell Host
Microbe 2009, 6:54-67.
6. Lim ES, Malik HS, Emerman M: Ancient adaptive evolution of tetherin
shaped the functions of Vpu and Nef in human immunodeficiency virus
and primate lentiviruses. J Virol 2010, 84:7124-7134.
7. Yang SJ, Lopez LA, Hauser H, Exline CM, Haworth KG, Cannon PM: Antitetherin activities in Vpu-expressing primate lentiviruses. Retrovirology
2010, 7:13.
8. Gupta RK, Mlcochova P, Pelchen-Matthews A, Petit SJ, Mattiuzzo G, Pillay D,
Takeuchi Y, Marsh M, Towers GJ: Simian immunodeficiency virus envelope
glycoprotein counteracts tetherin/BST-2/CD317 by intracellular
sequestration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009.
9. Bour S, Schubert U, Peden K, Strebel K: The envelope glycoprotein of
human immunodeficiency virus type 2 enhances viral particle release: a
Vpu-like factor? J Virol 1996, 70:820-829.
10. Le Tortorec A, Neil SJ: Antagonism to and intracellular sequestration of
human tetherin by the human immunodeficiency virus type 2 envelope
glycoprotein. J Virol 2009, 83:11966-11978.
11. Abada P, Noble B, Cannon PM: Functional domains within the human
immunodeficiency virus type 2 envelope protein required to enhance
virus production. J Virol 2005, 79:3627-3638.
12. McNatt MW, Zang T, Hatziioannou T, Bartlett M, Fofana IB, Johnson WE,
Neil SJ, Bieniasz PD: Species-specific activity of HIV-1 Vpu and positive
selection of tetherin transmembrane domain variants. PLoS Pathog 2009,
5:e1000300.
13. Goffinet C, Allespach I, Homann S, Tervo HM, Habermann A, Rupp D,
Oberbremer L, Kern C, Tibroni N, Welsch S, Krijnse-Locker J, Banting G,
Kräusslich HG, Fackler OT, Keppler OT: HIV-1 antagonism of CD317 is
species specific and involves Vpu-mediated proteasomal degradation of
the restriction factor. Cell Host Microbe 2009, 5:285-297.
14. Corbet S, Müller-Trutwin MC, Versmisse P, Delarue S, Ayouba A, Lewis J,
Brunak S, Martin P, Brun-Vezinet F, Simon F, Barre-Sinoussi F, Mauclere P:
env sequences of simian immunodeficiency viruses from chimpanzees
in Cameroon are strongly related to those of human immunodeficiency
virus group N from the same geographic area. J Virol 2000, 74:529-534.
15. Simon F, Mauclère P, Roques P, Loussert-Ajaka I, Müller-Trutwin MC,
Saragosti S, Georges-Courbot MC, Barré-Sinoussi F, Brun-Vézinet F:
Identification of a new human immunodeficiency virus type 1 distinct
from group M and group O. Nat Med 1998, 4:1032-1037.
16. Charneau P, Borman AM, Quillent C, Guétard D, Chamaret S, Cohen J,
Rémy G, Montagnier L, Clavel F: Isolation and envelope sequence of a
highly divergent HIV-1 isolate: definition of a new HIV-1 group. Virology
1994, 205:247-253.
17. Plantier JC, Leoz M, Dickerson JE, De Oliveira F, Cordonnier F, Lemée V,
Damond F, Robertson DL, Simon F: A new human immunodeficiency
virus derived from gorillas. Nat Med 2009, 15:871-872.
18. Gao F, Bailes E, Robertson DL, Chen Y, Rodenburg CM, Michael SF,
Cummins LB, Arthur LO, Peeters M, Shaw GM, Sharp PM, Hahn BH: Origin

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

19.
20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

of HIV-1 in the chimpanzee Pan troglodytes troglodytes. Nature 1999,
397:436-441.
Sharp PM, Hahn BH: The evolution of HIV-1 and the origin of AIDS. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2010, 365:2487-2494.
Hahn BH, Shaw GM, De Cock KM, Sharp PM: AIDS as a zoonosis: scientific
and public health implications. Science 2000, 287:607-614.
Van Heuverswyn F, Li Y, Neel C, Bailes E, Keele BF, Liu W, Loul S, Butel C,
Liegeois F, Bienvenue Y, Ngolle EM, Sharp PM, Shaw GM, Delaporte E,
Hahn BH, Peeters M: Human immunodeficiency viruses: SIV infection in
wild gorillas. Nature 2006, 444:164.
Takehisa J, Kraus MH, Ayouba A, Bailes E, Van Heuverswyn F, Decker JM,
Li Y, Rudicell RS, Learn GH, Neel C, Ngole EM, Shaw GM, Peeters M,
Sharp PM, Hahn BH: Origin and biology of simian immunodeficiency
virus in wild-living western gorillas. J Virol 2009, 83:1635-1648.
Ayouba A, Souquières S, Njinku B, Martin PM, Müller-Trutwin MC, Roques P,
Barré-Sinoussi F, Mauclère P, Simon F, Nerrienet E: HIV-1 group N among
HIV-1-seropositive individuals in Cameroon. AIDS 2000, 14:2623-2625.
Bodelle P, Vallari A, Coffey R, McArthur CP, Beyeme M, Devare SG,
Schochetman G, Brennan CA: Identification and genomic sequence of an
HIV type 1 group N isolate from Cameroon. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses
2004, 20:902-908.
Vergne L, Bourgeois A, Mpoudi-Ngole E, Mougnutou R, Mbuagbaw J,
Liegeois F, Laurent C, Butel C, Zekeng L, Delaporte E, Peeters M: Biological
and genetic characteristics of HIV infections in Cameroon reveals dual
group M and O infections and a correlation between SI-inducing
phenotype of the predominant CRF02_AG variant and disease stage.
Virology 2003, 310:254-266.
Peeters M, Gueye A, Mboup S, Bibollet-Ruche F, Ekaza E, Mulanga C,
Ouedrago R, Gandji R, Mpele P, Dibanga G, Koumare B, Saidou M, EsuWilliams E, Lombart JP, Badombena W, Luo N, Vanden Haesevelde M,
Delaporte E: Geographical distribution of HIV-1 group O viruses in Africa.
AIDS 1997, 11:493-498.
Quiñones-Mateu ME, Ball SC, Arts EJ: Role of Human Immunodeficiency
Virus Type 1 Group O in the AIDS Pandemic. AIDS Rev 2000, 2:12.
Ayouba A, Mauclère P, Martin PM, Cunin P, Mfoupouendoun J, Njinku B,
Souquières S, Simon F: HIV-1 group O infection in Cameroon, 1986 to
1998. Emerg Infect Dis 2001, 7:466-467.
Brennan CA, Bodelle P, Coffey R, Devare SG, Golden A, Hackett JJ, Harris B,
Holzmayer V, Luk KC, Schochetman G, Swanson P, Yamaguchi J, Vallari A,
Ndembi N, Ngansop C, Makamche F, Mbanya D, Gürtler LG, Zekeng L,
Kaptué L: The prevalence of diverse HIV-1 strains was stable in
Cameroonian blood donors from 1996 to 2004. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr 2008, 49:432-439.
Vallari A, Holzmayer V, Harris B, Yamaguchi J, Ngansop C, Makamche F,
Mbanya D, Kaptué L, Ndembi N, Gürtler L, Devare S, Brennan CA:
Confirmation of putative HIV-1 group P in Cameroon. J Virol 2011,
85:1403-1407.
Ariën KK, Abraha A, Quiñones-Mateu ME, Kestens L, Vanham G, Arts EJ: The
replicative fitness of primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) group M, HIV-1 group O, and HIV-2 isolates. J Virol 2005,
79:8979-8990.
Geuenich S, Kaderali L, Allespach I, Sertel S, Keppler OT: Biological
signature characteristics of primary isolates from human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 group O in ex vivo human tonsil
histocultures. J Virol 2009, 83:10494-10503.
Laurent C, Bourgeois A, Faye MA, Mougnutou R, Seydi M, Gueye M,
Liégeois F, Kane CT, Butel C, Mbuagbaw J, Zekeng L, Mboup S, MpoudiNgolé E, Peeters M, Delaporte E: No difference in clinical progression
between patients infected with the predominant human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 circulating recombinant form (CRF)
02_AG strain and patients not infected with CRF02_AG, in Western and
West-Central Africa: a four-year prospective multicenter study. J Infect Dis
2002, 186:486-492.
Gueudin M, Plantier JC, Damond F, Roques P, Mauclère P, Simon F: Plasma
viral RNA assay in HIV-1 group O infection by real-time PCR. J Virol
Methods 2003, 113:43-49.
Jonassen TO, Stene-Johansen K, Berg ES, Hungnes O, Lindboe CF,
Frøland SS, Grinde B: Sequence analysis of HIV-1 group O from
Norwegian patients infected in the 1960s. Virology 1997, 231:43-47.
Bibollet-Ruche F, Loussert-Ajaka I, Simon F, Mboup S, Ngole EM, Saman E,
Delaporte E, Peeters M: Genetic characterization of accessory genes from

Page 17 of 18

37.

38.

39.
40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

human immunodeficiency virus type 1 group O strains. AIDS Res Hum
Retroviruses 1998, 14:951-961.
Loussert-Ajaka I, Chaix ML, Korber B, Letourneur F, Gomas E, Allen E, Ly TD,
Brun-Vézinet F, Simon F, Saragosti S: Variability of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 group O strains isolated from
Cameroonian patients living in France. J Virol 1995, 69:5640-5649.
Schubert U, Antón LC, Bacík I, Cox JH, Bour S, Bennink JR, Orlowski M,
Strebel K, Yewdell JW: CD4 glycoprotein degradation induced by human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu protein requires the function of
proteasomes and the ubiquitin-conjugating pathway. J Virol 1998,
72:2280-2288.
Ruiz A, Guatelli JC, Stephens EB: The Vpu Protein: New Concepts in Virus
Release and CD4 Down-Modulation. Curr HIV Res 2010.
Lindwasser OW, Chaudhuri R, Bonifacino JS: Mechanisms of CD4
downregulation by the Nef and Vpu proteins of primate
immunodeficiency viruses. Curr Mol Med 2007, 7:171-184.
Bour S, Schubert U, Strebel K: The human immunodeficiency virus type 1
Vpu protein specifically binds to the cytoplasmic domain of CD4:
implications for the mechanism of degradation. J Virol 1995,
69:1510-1520.
Roques P, Robertson DL, Souquière S, Damond F, Ayouba A, Farfara I,
Depienne C, Nerrienet E, Dormont D, Brun-Vézinet F, Simon F, Mauclère P:
Phylogenetic analysis of 49 newly derived HIV-1 group O strains: high
viral diversity but no group M-like subtype structure. Virology 2002,
302:259-273.
Yamaguchi J, Vallari AS, Swanson P, Bodelle P, Kaptué L, Ngansop C,
Zekeng L, Gürtler LG, Devare SG, Brennan CA: Evaluation of HIV type 1
group O isolates: identification of five phylogenetic clusters. AIDS Res
Hum Retroviruses 2002, 18:269-282.
Yamaguchi J, Bodelle P, Kaptué L, Zekeng L, Gürtler LG, Devare SG,
Brennan CA: Near full-length genomes of 15 HIV type 1 group O isolates.
AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2003, 19:979-988.
Tebit DM, Zekeng L, Kaptué L, Gürtler L, Fackler OT, Keppler OT,
Herchenröder O, Kräusslich HG: Construction and characterization of an
HIV-1 group O infectious molecular clone and analysis of vpr- and nefnegative derivatives. Virology 2004, 326:329-339.
Hauser H, Lopez LA, Yang SJ, Oldenburg JE, Exline CM, Guatelli JC,
Cannon PM: HIV-1 Vpu and HIV-2 Env counteract BST-2/tetherin by
sequestration in a perinuclear compartment. Retrovirology 2010, 7:51.
Douglas JL, Viswanathan K, McCarroll MN, Gustin JK, Früh K, Moses AV: Vpu
directs the degradation of the human immunodeficiency virus
restriction factor BST-2/Tetherin via a {beta}TrCP-dependent mechanism.
J Virol 2009, 83:7931-7947.
Dubé M, Roy BB, Guiot-Guillain P, Binette J, Mercier J, Chiasson A,
Cohen EA: Antagonism of tetherin restriction of HIV-1 release by Vpu
involves binding and sequestration of the restriction factor in a
perinuclear compartment. PLoS Pathog 2010, 6:e1000856.
Mitchell RS, Katsura C, Skasko MA, Fitzpatrick K, Lau D, Ruiz A, Stephens EB,
Margottin-Goguet F, Benarous R, Guatelli JC: Vpu antagonizes BST-2mediated restriction of HIV-1 release via beta-TrCP and endo-lysosomal
trafficking. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000450.
Rong L, Zhang J, Lu J, Pan Q, Lorgeoux RP, Aloysius C, Guo F, Liu SL,
Wainberg MA, Liang C: The transmembrane domain of BST-2 determines
its sensitivity to down-modulation by human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 Vpu. J Virol 2009, 83:7536-7546.
Piguet V, Gu F, Foti M, Demaurex N, Gruenberg J, Carpentier JL, Trono D:
Nef-induced CD4 degradation: a diacidic-based motif in Nef functions as
a lysosomal targeting signal through the binding of beta-COP in
endosomes. Cell 1999, 97:63-73.
Dubé M, Roy BB, Guiot-Guillain P, Mercier J, Binette J, Leung G, Cohen EA:
Suppression of Tetherin-restricting activity upon human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 particle release correlates with
localization of Vpu in the trans-Golgi network. J Virol 2009, 83:4574-4590.
Mangeat B, Gers-Huber G, Lehmann M, Zufferey M, Luban J, Piguet V: HIV-1
Vpu neutralizes the antiviral factor Tetherin/BST-2 by binding it and
directing its beta-TrCP2-dependent degradation. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:
e1000574.
Vigan R, Neil SJ: Determinants of tetherin antagonism in the
transmembrane domain of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1
Vpu protein. J Virol 2010, 84:12958-12970.

Yang et al. Retrovirology 2011, 8:78
http://www.retrovirology.com/content/8/1/78

Page 18 of 18

55. Skasko MA, Tokarev A, Chen CC, Fischer WB, Pillai SK, Guatelli JC: BST-2 is
rapidly down-regulated from the cell surface by the HIV-1 protein Vpu:
Evidence for a post-ER mechanism of Vpu-action. Virology 2011.
56. Pacyniak E, Gomez ML, Gomez LM, Mulcahy ER, Jackson M, Hout DR,
Wisdom BJ, Stephens EB: Identification of a region within the cytoplasmic
domain of the subtype B Vpu protein of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) that is responsible for retention in the golgi complex and
its absence in the Vpu protein from a subtype C HIV-1. AIDS Res Hum
Retroviruses 2005, 21:379-394.
57. Park SH, Mrse AA, Nevzorov AA, Mesleh MF, Oblatt-Montal M, Montal M,
Opella SJ: Three-dimensional structure of the channel-forming transmembrane domain of virus protein “u” (Vpu) from HIV-1. J Mol Biol 2003,
333:409-424.
58. Hout DR, Gomez LM, Pacyniak E, Miller JM, Hill MS, Stephens EB: A single
amino acid substitution within the transmembrane domain of the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu protein renders simianhuman immunodeficiency virus (SHIV(KU-1bMC33)) susceptible to
rimantadine. Virology 2006, 348:449-461.
59. Andrew AJ, Miyagi E, Kao S, Strebel K: The formation of cysteine-linked
dimers of BST-2/tetherin is important for inhibition of HIV-1 virus release
but not for sensitivity to Vpu. Retrovirology 2009, 6:80.
60. Vigan R, Neil SJ: Separable Determinants of Subcellular Localization and
Interaction Account for the Inability of Group O HIV-1 Vpu To
Counteract Tetherin. J Virol 2011, 85:9737-9748.
61. Diop OM, Ploquin MJ, Mortara L, Faye A, Jacquelin B, Kunkel D, Lebon P,
Butor C, Hosmalin A, Barré-Sinoussi F, Müller-Trutwin MC: Plasmacytoid
dendritic cell dynamics and alpha interferon production during Simian
immunodeficiency virus infection with a nonpathogenic outcome. J Virol
2008, 82:5145-5152.
62. Lim ES, Emerman M: Simian immunodeficiency virus SIVagm from African
green monkeys does not antagonize endogenous levels of African
green monkey tetherin/BST-2. J Virol 2009, 83:11673-11681.
63. Sharp PM, Shaw GM, Hahn BH: Simian immunodeficiency virus infection
of chimpanzees. J Virol 2005, 79:3891-3902.
64. Kirchhoff F: Is the high virulence of HIV-1 an unfortunate coincidence of
primate lentiviral evolution? Nat Rev Microbiol 2009, 7:467-476.
65. Schubert U, Strebel K: Differential activities of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1-encoded Vpu protein are regulated by
phosphorylation and occur in different cellular compartments. J Virol
1994, 68:2260-2271.
66. Gomez LM, Pacyniak E, Flick M, Hout DR, Gomez ML, Nerrienet E, Ayouba A,
Santiago ML, Hahn BH, Stephens EB: Vpu-mediated CD4 down-regulation
and degradation is conserved among highly divergent SIV(cpz) strains.
Virology 2005, 335:46-60.
67. Adachi A, Gendelman HE, Koenig S, Folks T, Willey R, Rabson A, Martin MA:
Production of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-associated
retrovirus in human and nonhuman cells transfected with an infectious
molecular clone. J Virol 1986, 59:284-291.
68. Achour L, Scott MG, Shirvani H, Thuret A, Bismuth G, Labbé-Jullié C,
Marullo S: CD4-CCR5 interaction in intracellular compartments
contributes to receptor expression at the cell surface. Blood 2009,
113:1938-1947.
doi:10.1186/1742-4690-8-78
Cite this article as: Yang et al.: Lack of adaptation to human tetherin in
HIV-1 Group O and P. Retrovirology 2011 8:78.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
