<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>2K09 and thereafter : the coming era of integrative bioinformatics, systems biology and intelligent computing for functional genomics and personalized medicine research</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:I1. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S3-I1"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jack Y Yang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

RESEARCH

Open Access

2K09 and thereafter : the coming era of
integrative bioinformatics, systems biology and
intelligent computing for functional genomics
and personalized medicine research
Jack Y Yang1,2,3*, Andrzej Niemierko1*, Ruzena Bajcsy4, Dong Xu5*, Brian D Athey6, Aidong Zhang7, Okan K Ersoy2,
Guo-zheng Li8, Mark Borodovsky9, Joe C Zhang11,12*, Hamid R Arabnia10, Youping Deng11,12, A Keith Dunker3,
Yunlong Liu3, Arif Ghafoor2*
From The ISIBM International Joint Conference on Bioinformatics, Systems Biology and
Intelligent Computing (IJCBS)
Shanghai, China. 3-8 August 2009

Abstract
Significant interest exists in establishing synergistic research in bioinformatics, systems biology and intelligent
computing. Supported by the United States National Science Foundation (NSF), International Society of Intelligent
Biological Medicine (http://www.ISIBM.org), International Journal of Computational Biology and Drug Design
(IJCBDD) and International Journal of Functional Informatics and Personalized Medicine, the ISIBM International
Joint Conferences on Bioinformatics, Systems Biology and Intelligent Computing (ISIBM IJCBS 2009) attracted more
than 300 papers and 400 researchers and medical doctors world-wide. It was the only inter/multidisciplinary
conference aimed to promote synergistic research and education in bioinformatics, systems biology and intelligent
computing. The conference committee was very grateful for the valuable advice and suggestions from honorary
chairs, steering committee members and scientific leaders including Dr. Michael S. Waterman (USC, Member of
United States National Academy of Sciences), Dr. Chih-Ming Ho (UCLA, Member of United States National Academy
of Engineering and Academician of Academia Sinica), Dr. Wing H. Wong (Stanford, Member of United States
National Academy of Sciences), Dr. Ruzena Bajcsy (UC Berkeley, Member of United States National Academy of
Engineering and Member of United States Institute of Medicine of the National Academies), Dr. Mary Qu Yang
(United States National Institutes of Health and Oak Ridge, DOE), Dr. Andrzej Niemierko (Harvard), Dr. A. Keith
Dunker (Indiana), Dr. Brian D. Athey (Michigan), Dr. Weida Tong (FDA, United States Department of Health and
Human Services), Dr. Cathy H. Wu (Georgetown), Dr. Dong Xu (Missouri), Drs. Arif Ghafoor and Okan K Ersoy
(Purdue), Dr. Mark Borodovsky (Georgia Tech, President of ISIBM), Dr. Hamid R. Arabnia (UGA, Vice-President of
ISIBM), and other scientific leaders. The committee presented the 2009 ISIBM Outstanding Achievement Awards to
Dr. Joydeep Ghosh (UT Austin), Dr. Aidong Zhang (Buffalo) and Dr. Zhi-Hua Zhou (Nanjing) for their significant
contributions to the field of intelligent biological medicine.

* Correspondence: dr.yang@jhu.edu; aniemierko@partners.org;
xudong@missouri.edu; chaoyang.zhang@usm.edu; ghafoor@ecn.purdue.edu
1
Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114 U.S.A.
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Indiana 47907 USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Yang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

Introduction
Bioinformatics, Systems Biology and Intelligent Computing have been extensively used in the advanced research in
biomedical, agricultural, environmental, pharmaceutical
and medical sciences as well as public health, drug design,
genomics and so on. Research and development in these
areas are impacting the advances of science and technology. Supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation
(NSF), International Society of Intelligent Biological Medicine (ISIBM), International Journal of Computational
Biology and Drug Design (IJCBDD) and International
Journal of Functional Informatics and Personalized Medicine (IJFIPM), the ISIBMInternational Joint Conference on
Bioinformatics, Systems Biology and Intelligent Computing
(ISIBM IJCBS 2009) (http://www.isibm.org/IJCBS) was
designed to promote synergistic research and education in
bioinformatics, systems biology and intelligent computing.
The ISIBM IJCBS 2009 has provided an integrated platform for the cross fertilization of ideas, and to help shape
knowledge and scientific achievements by bridging the
independent and complementary disciplines into an interactive and attractive forum. ISIBM IJCBS assembles a
spectrum of affiliated research workshops, keynote and
tutorial lectures and special interest research sessions into
a coordinated research meeting held at Tongji University
in Shanghai, China on 3–6 August, 2009. The ISIBM
IJCBS 2009 was a showcase for integrative research and
provided a platform of continuing education with presentations of a number of keynote sessions, workshops, special interest research sessions and tutorial sessions. The
conference was also designed for students to learn
advanced knowledge in bioinformatics and systems biology for their continued successes in conducting research.
Among 300 papers received by the ISIBM IJCBS, a significant portion of the papers were first-authored by students.
Each paper was reviewed and ranked by at least three
experts in the program and scientific review committee
which consists more than one hundred professors in USA,
China and worldwide. Over one hundred scholars in the
ISIBM IJCBS Program Committee have dedicated themselves to this great academic event in evaluating and
selecting papers based on high publication standard. After
a rigorous peer review process, 8 papers [1-8] were
selected to the BMC Systems Biology and 16 papers were
selected to the BMC Genomics[9-24] from 300+ submitted
papers. About 120 papers were selected to the ISIBM
IJCBS proceedings published by the IEEE Computer
Society.
Scientific Themes
The BMC Genomics and BMC Systems Biology supplements for the ISIBM IJCBS consist of 24 research
papers, amongst which 8 papers are in the BMC Systems

Page 2 of 11

Biology[1-8] and 16 papers [9-24] are in BMC Genomics
research. Those papers include the following scopes.
1. Systems biology modeling in molecular biology

Wang et. al. presented dynamic network to model cellular interactions of different cell types [5] (http://www.
biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/S1/S5). Chowdhary
et. al. [4] presented a comprehensive computational analysis on genome wide promoter studies of human histone gene (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/
S1/S4). Wang et. al. [3] presented a novel modelling of
protein - nucleic acid interactions on systems biology
studies (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/S1/
S3), Chitankar et. al. [7] presented an algorithm for
inferring gene regulatory networks from time series
DNA microarray data (http://www.biomedcentral.com/
1752-0509/4/S1/S7). To fulfil a model based drug development, Wang et. al. [8] proposed a new statistical
approach for model based drug development (http://
www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/S1/S8). Jiang et al.
[2] presented a network-based approach that can infer
potential microRNAs with disease relevancy (http://
www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/S1/S2). Wang
et al. [10] utilized machine learning to predict the
siRNA potencies (http://www.biomedcentral.com/14712164/11/S3/S2). Meng et. al. [19] studied inference of
the context specific structure and temporal dynamics of
gene regulatory network (http://www.biomedcentral.
com/1471-2164/11/S3/S11)
2. Systematic modelling and prediction of protein
structure and function

Xue et. al. [1] presented a comprehensive studies of disordered proteins in archaea, (http://www.biomedcentral.
com/1752-0509/4/S1/S1), Zhang et. al. [6] presented a
hybrid genetic and tabu search algorithm to predict 3D
structure of proteins. (http://www.biomedcentral.com/
1752-0509/4/S1/S6). Huang [22] et. al. developed an
algorithm for protein studies (http://www.biomedcentral.
com/1471-2164/11/S3/S14). Wang et. al. [18] provided
advances in clustering methods in proteins. (http://www.
biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/S10). Lo et. al. [15]
presented a databases for proteins (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/S7).
3. Computational cancer studies and modeling

Land et. al. [23] developed new statistical learning
approach to improve CT prediction of treatment in
patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma (http://
www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/S15). Dong
et. al. [24] investigated genes and miRNAs in glioblastoma (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/
S16). Sun et. al. [13] provided a comparative study of

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

cancer proteins in human protein-protein interaction
network (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/
S3/S5).
4. Bioinformatis and computational molecular biology
studies

Xu et. al. [9] studied pathogens (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/S1). This paper is part of the
plenary banquet keynote lecture of Dr. Dong Xu at the
ISIBM IJCBS 2009. Ghosh et. al. [11] studied signal transduction systems (http://www.biomedcentral.com/14712164/11/S3/S3). Chowbia et. al. [12] studied rat liver
pathways with DNT exposures. (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/S4). Tang et. al. [17] studied
adipose separation of small animals (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/S9). Zhang et. al. [16] presented a peak detection algorithm for LC/MS (http://
www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/S8).

Promoting emerging cutting-edge research fields
Bioinformatics, Systems Biology and intelligent computing have been effectively used in the cutting edge translational biomedical research. The resonance and synergy
of these fields are enormous, and are having profound
impact on the advances of science and medicine. In
cooperation with the International Society of Intelligent
Biological Medicine http://www.isibm.org, International
Journal of Computational Biology and Drug Design
(IJCBDD), International Journal of Functional Informatics and Personalized Medicine (IJFIPM), the ISIBM
IJCBS 2009 was designed dynamically to promote synergistic research and education. To this end, the ISBM
IJCBS program committee especially appreciates the following keynote lecturers:
1) Dr. Dong Xu
James C. Dowell Distinguished Professor, Director of
Digital Biology Laboratory and Chair of Computer
Science Department, University of Missouri, USA.
Keynote Lecture Title: New Frontiers in Translational
Research with Next-Generation Sequencing and Proteomics Analyses.
Recent advances in next-generation sequencing and
proteomics further empowered translational research in
medicine and agriculture. Based on new technologies,
systematic approaches for personalized medicine, bioenergy, and transgenic crops are being developed. Dr. Xu
showed that these developments have major social and
economical impact. New technologies also pushed frontiers towards large-scale studies of more complex systems, such as non-coding RNA, post-translational
modifications, and DNA methylations. These studies are
typically data rich and require extensive bioinformatics
developments. Dr. Xu was the plenary banquet keynote
lecturer, he presented a number of examples showing

Page 3 of 11

the roles of computer science and bioinformatics in the
related developments.
2) Dr. Joydeep Ghosh
Schlumberger Centennial Chair Professor of University
of Texas at Austin, USA.
Keynote Lecture Title: Locating a Few Useful Clusters
in Large Biological Datasets: A Tale of Two Viewpoints.
A key application of clustering data obtained from
sources such as microarrays, protein mass spectroscopy
and phylogenetic profiles, is the detection of functionally
related genes. Typically, only a small number of functionally related genes form meaningful groups, while the
rest need to be ignored. Additional complications arise
when there are several irrelevant experimental conditions, when the useful clusters occur at different resolutions/scales, and when genes participate in multiple
biological processes, leading to multiple cluster memberships. Thus the corresponding data mining problem is
to detect a small number of cohesive, possibly overlapping clusters in the data while ignoring irrelevant data
portions. Dr. Ghosh discussed two broad approaches to
this problem: (a) a generative approach where one determines and fits a suitable probabilistic model to the data,
and (b) a non-parametric approach inspired by
Wishart’s remarkable but obscure mode analysis work
from 1968. The pros and cons of the two approaches
have been illustrated by Dr. Ghosh using results from
gene expression data analysis. The 2009 ISIBM outstanding achievement award was presented by the committee to Dr. Ghosh right after his plenary keynote
lecture.
3) Dr. Aidong Zhang
Professor and Chair of Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, The
State University of New York, USA.
Keynote Lecture Title: Computational Analysis of Biological Networks.
The development of computational techniques for the
effective analysis of biological datasets is a crucial step in
the medical application of bioinformatics. This unique
merging of computer science and biomedical expertise is
expected to provide the synergy needed to advance biomedical research to the next level. When analyzing biological data, we face many new computational challenges.
Algorithms that are specifically designed for biological
data are required so that Dr. Zhang can take advantage
of their unique features and address the unique problems
they raised. In her keynote lecture, Dr. Zhang discussed
new computational research issues and approaches to
analysis of biological networks, especially protein interaction networks.
The 2009 ISIBM outstanding achievement award was
presented to Dr. Zhang by the committee right after her
plenary keynote lecture.

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

4) Dr. Susan M. Bridges
Co-Director of the Institute for Digital Biology and
Hearin Distinguished Professor,
Mississippi State University, USA.
Keynote Lecture Title: Algorithms for Structural Annotation of Genomes.
Novel approaches for structural annotation of genomes are required. Dr. Bridges extracted the full value
from the avalanche of genome sequence generated from
new sequencing technologies. New approaches for annotating genomes using proteomics data and for defragmenting dispersed repeats on genomes were described
by Dr. Bridges in her plenary keynote lecture.
5) Dr. Zhi-Hua Zhou
Cheung Kong Professor of Nanjing University, China.
Keynote Lecture Title: MIML: A New Machine Learning Framework with Application to Drosophila Gene
Expression Pattern Annotation.
A new machine learning framework, Multi-Instance
Multi-Label Learning (MIML), was proposed recently by
Dr. Zhou. In this framework, an object is represented by
multiple feature vectors, and is allowed to be associated
with multiple class labels simultaneously. His seminal
framework was particularly helpful for learning with
complicated objects, and has been found well useful in
applications such as image categorization and text categorization. The Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project
(BDGP) has generated a large amount of gene expression patterns during Drosophila embryogenesis. Automating the annotation process is very desired. However,
there is a big challenge; that is, the anatomical and
developmental ontology terms are body-part related and
present in local regions of images, while in the BDGP,
they are attached collectively to groups of images and it
is unknown which term is assigned to which region of
which image in the group. Dr. Zhou’s MIML provided a
promising way to address the challenge. His plenary
keynote talk gave an introduction to his MIML as well
as the application to Drosophila gene expression pattern
annotation. The 2009 ISIBM outstanding achievement
award was presented to Dr. Zhou by the committee
right after his plenary keynote lecture.
6) Dr. Xiaohua Tony Hu
College of Information Science and Technology,
Drexel University, USA.
Keynote Lecture Title: Mining, Modelling and Evaluation of the Biomolecular Network.
Biomolecular networks dynamically respond to stimuli
and implement cellular function, and understanding
these dynamic changes is the key challenge for cell biologists. As biomolecular networks grow in size and complexity, the model of a biomolecular network must
become more rigorous to keep track of all the components and their interactions, and in general this presents

Page 4 of 11

the need for computer simulation to manipulate and
understand the biomolecular network model. In his
keynote talk, Dr. Hu presented a novel method to
mining, modeling and evaluating a regulatory system that
executing cellular functions, which can be represented as
a biomolecular network. His method consists of two
steps. First, a novel scale-free network clustering
approach is applied to such biomolecular network to
obtain various sub-networks. Second, computational
models are generated for the sub-networks and simulated
to predict their behavior in the cellular context. He discussed and evaluated some of the advanced computational modeling approaches; in particular, state-space
modeling, probabilistic Boolean network modeling, and
fuzzy logic modeling. The modeling and simulation
results represented hypotheses that were tested against
high-throughput biological datasets (microarrays and/or
genetic screens) under normal and perturbation conditions. Experimental results on time-series gene expression data for the human cell cycle indicated that Dr. Hu’s
approach was promising for the sub-network mining and
simulation from large biomolecular networks.
7) Dr. Yi Pan
Chair and Professor of Computer Science, Professor of
Computer Information Systems, Georgia State University,
USA.
Keynote Lecture Title: Protein Structure Prediction and
its Understanding Based on Machine Learning Methods.
Understanding protein structures is vital to determining the function of a protein and its interaction with
DNA, RNA and enzymes. The information about its
conformation can provide essential information for drug
design and protein engineering. While there are over a
million known protein sequences, only a limited number
of protein structures were experimentally determined.
Hence, prediction of protein structures from protein
sequences using computer programs is an important
step to unveil proteins’ three dimensional conformation
and functions. As a result, prediction of protein structures has profound theoretical and practical influence
over biological study. The explanation of how a decision
is made during prediction is also important for improving protein structure prediction and guiding the experimental design. In his keynote talk, Dr. Pan showed how
to use machine learning methods to improve the accuracy of protein structure prediction and to interpret prediction results. He reported the frontier research on
using neural networks, Support Vector Machines combined with Decision Tree and Association Rule for protein structure prediction, rule extraction and prediction
interpretation. Evaluation and comparisons of various
prediction and rule extraction systems were presented
and future research direction in the area were also presented by Dr. Pan.

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

8) Dr. Patrick Shen-Pei Wang
Professor of Northeastern University and MIT, USA.
Keynote Lecture Title: Intelligent Pattern Recognition
and Applications to Similarity Measurement.
In his keynote talk, Dr Wang pointed out that time is
money, saving time is saving money. Every penny saved
is one penny earned as Dr. Wang stressed. His keynote
discussed two major concerns that he can consider saving time: communication by post mails, and, transportation on roads, by intelligent pattern recognition, in
terms of hierarchical structures and ambiguities.
Dr. Wang along with Dr. Xu are the only 2 plenary banquet speakers. His keynote lecture have drawn a lot of
interest among large audiences.
9) Dr. Sun Kim
Chair of Bioinformatics Program and Director of Center for Bioinformatics Research, Indiana University
School of Informatics, USA.
Keynote Lecture Title: A Data-driven, Systems Biology
Approach for Exploring the Role of Epigenetics in
Drug-resistant Human Cancer.
Dr. Kim’s keynote talk summarized a project to investigate the role of epigenetics in the development of the
drug resistant phenotype in human cancer, a major
research emphasis of the Indiana University and Ohio
State University Integrated Cancer Biology. His keynote
was a showcase of the translational genomics research
at the OSU -IU alliance led by Dr. Tim Hui-ming
Huang, a leading cancer biologist and PI of the NIH
grants for their collaborative multi-university research
projects.
Those keynote lectures showed that in order to understand the mechanisms of live organisms, information
must be integrated at multiple levels. ISIBM IJCBS was
designed for integrating information from bioinformatics, systems biology and intelligent computing points
of views. The synergy of integrative research on both
bioinformatics and systems biology using intelligent
computing was very beneficial. The ISIBM IJCBS successfully assembled a spectrum of affiliated research
workshops, keynote and tutorial lectures and special
interest research sessions into a coordinated research
meeting held at Tongji University in Shanghai, China on
3–6 August, 2009. The Program and Scientific Committee consists of more than a hundred professors and
scholars world-wide and was organized as follows:
Honorary General Chairs
Dr. Ruzena Bajcsy, Member of United States National
Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine, Member of
United States National Academy of Engineering, University Professor of the University of California at Berkeley,
USA
Dr. Joydeep Ghosh, Fellow of IEEE, Chair Professor of
the University of Texas at Austin, USA

Page 5 of 11

Dr. Michael S Waterman, Member of United States
National Academy of Sciences, Fellow of American
Academy of Art and Sciences and Academician of
French Académie des Sciences. University Professor of
the University of Southern California at Los Angles,
USA
General Chair
Dr. Mark Borodovsky, President of ISIBM and Regents
Professor of Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
General Co-Chair
Dr. Changjun Jiang, Dean of College of Engineering
and Information Technology and University Professor of
Tongji University, China
Steering Committee Members
1) Dr. Hamid R. Arabnia
Founding chair of WORLDCOMP Congress, Editorin-Chief of The Journal of Supercomputing (Springer)
and recipient of William F. Rockwell, Jr. Medal for promotion of multi-disciplinary research (Rockwell medal is
International Technology Institute’s highest honor). He
is on the editorial and advisory boards of 25 other journals and science magazines.
2) Dr. Ruzena Bajcsy
Member of United States National Academy of
Sciences, Institute of Medicine, Member of United
States National Academy of Engineering, the 2003-2005
United States President’s Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC), 2001 ACM Allen Newell
Award, Member of National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Member of National Research Council
Army Research Technical Assessment Board, Member
of Computer Research Association for Women, Member
of the Review Board of Stanford University Computer
Science, Fellow of ACM and Fellow of IEEE, Distinguished Professor and Director of CITRIS, University of
California at Berkeley, U.S.A.
3) Dr. Mark Borodovsky
President of International Society of Intelligent Biological Medicine, Founder of GeneMark and Pioneer of
Bioinformatics Research, Founder of Georgia Tech
Bioinformatics Ph.D. Programs, Distinguished Regents’
Professor and Director Center for the Bioinformatics
and Computational Genomics of the Georgia Institute
of Technology and Emory University School of Medicine, both in Atlanta, Georgia, USA
4) Dr. Arif Ghafoor
Fellow of IEEE and Professor of School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering of Purdue University. Dr. Ghafoor
is a leading researcher in multimedia systems, databases,
distributed computing systems, broadband multimedia networking and biomedical engineering. Areas of interest
include communications, networking, signal & image processing, computer engineering and biomedical engineering.
5) Dr. Joydeep Ghosh

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

Distinguished Schlumberger Centennial Chair Professor of Engineering, Chair of IEEE DMTC and Fellow of
IEEE, 1992 IEEE Darlington Award, Director of IDEAL
(Intelligent Data Exploration and Analysis Lab), University of Texas at Austin, U.S.A.
6) Dr. Tony Xiaohua Hu
IEEE Computer Society Bioinformatics and Biomedicine Steering Committee Chair and the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society Granular Computing
Technical Committee Chair, the founding Editor-inChief of the International Journal of Data Mining and
Bioinformatics, an associate editor/editorial board member of four international journals (KAIS, IJDWM, IJSOI
and JCIB). Dr. Hu has received a few prestigious awards
including the 2005 National Science Foundation (NSF)
Career award.
7) Dr. Yi Pan
Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal of Bioinformatics Research and Applications, series editor of
Wiley Book Series on Bioinformatics, Associate Editor
of 6 IEEE Transactions, winner of many awards, keynote
speaker for over 10 conferences, and Chair of Department of Computer Science at Georgia State University,
USA
8) Dr. Michael S. Waterman
Member of United States National Academy
of Sciences, Fellow of American Academy of Art and
Sciences and Academician of French Académie des
Sciences. Co Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Computational Biology, Editor-in-Chief of Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(LNCS, Springer). Distinguished University Professor of
University of Southern California, Los Angles, California,
USA
9) Dr. Cathy H. Wu
Dr. Wu has conducted bioinformatics research since
1990 and developed several protein classification systems and databases. She has managed large software
and database projects, led the bioinformatics effort of
the Protein Information Resource (PIR) since 1999, and
becoming the PIR Director in 2001. Her research interests include protein family classification and functional
annotation, biological data integration, and literature
mining.
10) Dr. Mary Qu Yang
Editor-in-Chief, International Journal of Computational Biology and Drug Design. Oak Ridge Institute for
Science and Education, Oak Ridge National Lab. U.S.
Department of Energy, USA, and National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health
(NIH) , U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
USA.
11) Dr. Aidong Zhang

Page 6 of 11

Fellow of IEEE and Professor and Chair of Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the State
University of New York at Buffalo and the director of
the Buffalo Center for Biomedical Computing (BCBC).
She is an author of more than 200 research publications
and has served on many editorial boards of prestigious
journals. Dr. Zhang is a recipient of the National
Science Foundation CAREER Award and SUNY (State
University of New York) Chancellor’s Research Recognition Award.
Program Chair
Dr. Joe Zhang,
Director of School of Computing, The University of
Southern Mississippi, USA
Program Co-Chairs
Dr. Andreas Dress,
Professor and Director, Chinese Academy of Science,
CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational Biology,
Shanghai, China; Professor of University of Bielefeld and
Max Planck Institute, Germany and Princeton Institute
for Advanced Studies, Princeton, USA;
Dr. Guo-Zheng Li,
Tongji University, China
Publication Chairs
Prof. Heng Huang, University of Texas, Arlington,
USA
Prof. Sumanth Yenduri , University of Southern Mississippi, USA
Prof. Zhongming Zhao, Vanderbilt University, USA
Workshop Principal Chairs and Coordinators
Prof. Abdullah N. Arslan, University of Vermont, USA
Dr. Ping Gong, Environmental Laboratory, U.S. Army
Engineer Research and Development Center, and SpecPro Inc.
Professor Liangjiang Wang, Clemson University, USA.
Workshop on Bioinformatics Algorithms
Chair: Dr. Abdullah N. Arslan, University of Vermont,
USA
Workshop on Bioinformatics in Radiation Oncology
and Robotic Interventions in Cancer Diagnosis and
Therapy
Chair: Dr. Yan Yu, Professor and Director of Medical
Physics, Thomas Jefferson University, USA
Workshop on Machine Learning and Human Diseases
Chairs: Dr. Liangjiang Wang, Clemson University,
USA
Dr. Susan M. Bridges, University Professor of the Mississippi State University, USA
Workshop on Bioinformatics and Systems Biology in
Traditional Chinese Medicine Research.
Chairs: Dr. Dan Xi, NIH, U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, USA
Dr. Su-Shing Chen, University of Florida, USA.

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

Workshop on Methods and Applications of Systems
Biology
Chairs: Dr. Yidong Chen, University of Texas,
Dr. Yufei Huang, University of Texas
Dr. Ji Zhang, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
Special Panel on future directions of bioinformatics
and systems biology
Chair: Professor Aidong Zhang, State University of
New York at Buffalo, USA
Panelists: Professor Susan M. Bridges, Mississippi
State University, USA.
Professor Sun Kim, Indiana University, USA.
Professor Yi Pan, Georgia State University, USA.
Professor Bo Yuan, Ohio State University, USA and
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
Special Session Principal Chairs and Coordinators
Prof. Jacqueline Signorini, Dean of the Faculty of
Sciences, University Paris 8, France
Prof. Tianrui Li, Southwest Jiaotong University, China
Special Session on Evolutionary Systems Biology
Chairs: Prof. Yufeng Wang, University of Texas at San
Antonio, USA.
Prof. Jianying Gu, City University of New York, USA.
Special Session on Biomedical Literature Mining and
Bioontology
Chair: Dr. Hongfang Liu, Georgetown University, USA
Special Session on Data Mining in Protein Interaction
Networks
Chairs: Dr. Xiaoli Li, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Dr. Erliang Zeng, University of Notre Dame, Indiana,
USA
Special Session on Computational Epidemiology
Chairs: Prof. Armin R. Mikler, University of North
Texas, USA
Dr. Courtney Corley, Pacific Northwest National Lab,
DOE, USA
Special Session on Linear and Nonlinear Analysis of
the EEG in Alzheimer’s Disease
Chair: Dr. Jaeseung Jeong, Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology, Korea
Special Session on Genomics and Personalize
Medicine
Chair: Dr. Leming Zhou, University of Pittsburgh,
USA
Special Session on Gene Networks and Pathway
Analysis
Chairs: Prof. Zhongming Zhao, Vanderbilt University,
USA.
Prof. Danail Bonchev, Virginia Commonwealth
University, USA
Tutorial Chair
Prof. Shuigeng Zhou, Fudan University, China

Page 7 of 11

Tutorial Lecture on Pattern Discovery in Genomics
Context
Speaker: Professor Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen, Deakin
University, Australia
Invited Lecture on Latent Structure Models and Diagnosis in Traditional Chinese Medicine
Invited Speaker: Professor Nevin L. Zhang, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong
Kong.
Publicity Chairs
Dr. Jiaoxiong Xia, Shanghai Municipal Education
Commission, China
Prof. Yilong Yin, Shandong University, China
Dr. Mehdi Pirooznia, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Dr. Yongqing Su, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
Registration Chairs
Prof. Youping Deng, University of Southern Mississippi and SpecPro Inc, USA
Prof. Fei Qiao, Tongji University, China
Organizing Chairs
Dr. Weisheng Xu, Tongji University, China
Dr. Youling Yu, Tongji University, China
Dr. Mingyu You, Tongji University, China
Dr. Preetam Ghosh , University of Southern Mississippi, USA
Award Chairs
Prof. Susan Bridges, Mississippi State University, USA
Prof. Hamid R. Arabnia , University of Georgia, USA
Prof. Yong-Sheng Ding , Donghua University, China
Prof. Jie Yang, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Prof. Duoqian Miao, Tongji University, China
Local Chair
Dr. Jing Yao, Tongji University, China
Committee Members
1. Dr. Sadaf ALAM, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
USA
2. Prof. Laurence Rodrigues Do AMARAL, Federal
University of Goias, Brazil
3. Dr. Purushotham BANGALORE, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA
4. Dr. Pierre BEAUSEROY, University of Technology
in Troyes, UTT, France
5. Dr. Mahua BHATTACHARYA, Indian Institute of
Information Technology & Management, India
6. Dr. Hong CAI, University of Texas at San Antonio,
USA
7. Rui CAMACHO, Porto University, Portugal
8. Prof. Zhiwei CAO, Tongji University, China
9. Cornelia CARAGEA, Iowa State University, USA
10. Dr. Doina CARAGEA, Kansas State University,
USA
11. Dr. Rui CHANG, University of California, USA

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

12. Dr. Bernard CHEN , University of Central Arkansas,
USA
13. Prof. Jake Y. CHEN, Indiana University Purdue
University Indianapolis, USA
14. Dr. Yidong CHEN, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, USA
15. Dr. Jianlin (Jack) CHENG, University of Missouri,
USA
16. Dr. Yanfeng CHENG, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
17. Dr. Qiang CHENG, Southern Illinois University
Carbondale, USA
18. Prof. Sung-Bae CHO, Yonsei University, Korea
19. Dr. Albert C. S. CHUNG , Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
20. Dr. Mark CLEMENT, Brigham Young University,
USA
21. Dr. Kevin DAIMI, University of Detroit Mercy,
USA
22. Dr. Phuongan DAM , University of Georgia, USA
23. Prof. Yisheng DING, Donghua University, China
24. Dr. Qiwen DONG, Fudan University, China
25. Dr. Pan DU, Northwestern University, USA
26. Prof. Ye DUAN, University of Missouri - Columbia, USA
27. Dr. Werner DUBITZKY, University of Ulster at
Coleraine, UK
28. Prof. Minrui FEI, Shanghai University, China
29. Dr. Elisa FICARRA, Politecnico di Torino, Italy
30. Christopher M. FRENZ, New York City College of
Technology (CUNY)
31. Dr. Jean X. GAO , University of Texas at Arlington, USA
32. Prof. Yang GAO, Nanjing University, China
33. Dr. Xin GENG, South East University, China
34. Dr. Preetam GHOSH , University of Southern
Mississippi, USA
35. Dr. Kreshna GOPAL, Texas A&M University, USA
36. Prof. Jianying GU , City University of New York,
USA
37. Dr. Jun-tao GUO , The University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
38. Prof. Maozu GUO, Harbin Institute of Technology,
China
39. Dr. Yufei Huang, University of Texas at San Antonio, USA
40. Prof. Wen-Lian HSU, Institute of Information
Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
41. Dr. Hongwei HUO, Xidian University, China
42. Dr. Jaeseung JEONG, Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology, Korea
43. Dr. Liangxiao JIANG, University of Geosciences,
China
44. Dr. Rui JIANG, Tsinghua University, China

Page 8 of 11

45. Dr. Zhenran JIANG, East China Normal University,
China
46. Prof. Jaewoo KANG , Korea University, Korea
47. Abdellali KELIL, University of Sherbrooke, Canada
48. Dr. Dongsup KIM , Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology, Korea
49. Dr. Hyunsoo KIM, Harvard University, USA
50. Dr. Sun KIM, Indiana University, USA
51. Dr. Jiejun KONG, University of California, USA
52. Dr. Wei KONG, Shanghai Maritime University,
China
53. Prof. Rui KUANG , University of Minnesota, USA
54. Dr. Zoé LACROIX, Arizona State University, USA
55. Prof. Feipei LAI, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
56. Dr. Chang-Shing LEE , National University of Tainan, Taiwan
57. Dr. Haim LEVKOWITZ, University of Massachusetts at Lowell, USA
58. Dr. Chang-Tsun LI , University of Warwick, UK
59. Dr. Jia LI, Shanghai University, China
60. Dr. Kang LI, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
61. Dr. Liao LI, University of Delaware, USA
62. Dr. Ming LI, Nanjing University, China
63. Prof. Shao LI, Tsinghua University, China
64. Prof. Shaozi LI, Shamen University, China
65. Dr. Shen LI, Indiana University, USA
66. Prof. Tianrui LI, Southwest Jiaotong University,
China
67. Dr. Xiaoli LI, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore
68. Dr. Xiaolin LI, Nanjing University, China
69. Dr. Ying-Xin LI, Nanjing University, China
70. Dr. Tim. G. LILBURN, American Type Culture
Collection, USA
71. Dr. Chun-Yuan LIN , Chang Gung University
72. Dr. Simon LIN, Northwestern University Biomedical Informatics Center, USA
73. Dr. Hongfang LIU, Georgetown University, USA
74. Dr. Jun LIU, Nanjing University of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, China
75. Dr. Qingzhong LIU, New Mexico Tech, USA
76. Dr. Tianming LIU, The University of Georgia,
USA
77. Prof. Gary LIVINGSTON, University of Massachusetts at Lowell, USA
78. Dr. Dang LONG, New York State Department of
Health, USA
79. Prof. Hongtao LU, Shanghai JiaoTong University,
China
80. Prof. Wencong LU, Shanghai University, China
81. Prof. Carol LUSHBOUGH, University of South
Dakota, USA
82. Dr. Xiaotu MA, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
China

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

83. Dr. Ian M. MACDONALD, The College of Saint
Rose, USA
84. Dr. Anant MADABHUSHI, Rutgers University,
The State University of New Jersey, USA
85. Dr. Krzysztof MALCZEWSKI, Poznan University
of Technology, Poland
86. Prof. Kezhi MAO, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
87. Dr. Majid MASSO , George Mason University, USA
88. Dr. Vasilis MEGALOOIKONOMOU, Temple
University, USA
89. Prof. Duoqian MIAO, Tongji University, China
90. Prof. Armin R. MIKLER, University of North
Texas, USA
91. Dr. Nasir-ud-Din, Institute of Molecular Sciences
& Bioinformatics, Pakistan
92. Dr. Jun NI , University of Iowa, USA
93. Dr. Giuseppe NICOSIA, University of Catania, Italy
94. Timothy O’CONNOR, University of Cambridge, UK
95. Prof. Manish PALIWAL, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, USA
96. Minseo PARK, University of Massachusetts, USA
97. Dr. Vinhthuy PHAN , University Of Memphis,
USA
98. Dr. Helen PIONTKIVSKA, Kent State University,
USA
99. Dr. Aleksandar POLEKSIC, University of Northern
Iowa, USA
100. Monika RAY, Washington University in St. Louis,
USA.
101. Dr. Tong RUAN, East China University of
Science and Technology, China
102. Dr. Ann RUNDELL, Purdue University, USA
103. Meena K. SAKHARKAR, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore
104. Prof. Jacqueline SIGNORINI, University Paris 8,
France
105. Dr. Xiaofeng SONG, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
106. Dr. Vojislav STOJKOVIC, Morgan State University, USA
107. Dr. Jonathan SUN, University of Southern Mississippi, USA
108. Prof. Xiao SUN, Southeast University, China
109. Dr. Jay URBAIN, Illinois Institute of Technology,
USA
110. Prof. Athanasios VASILAKOS, University of Peloponnese, Greece
111. Dr. Thanos VASILAKOS, University of Western
Macedonia, Greece
112. Dr. Miguel A. VEGARODRIGUEZ, University of
Extremadura, Spain
113. Dr. Jason T. L. WANG, New Jersey Institute of
Technology, USA

Page 9 of 11

114. Dr. Liangjiang WANG, Clemson University,
USA
115. Dr. Min WANG, Hohai University, China
116. Dr. Nan Wang, University of Southern Mississippi, USA
117. Dr. Ruizhi WANG, Tongji University, China
118. Dr. Yufeng WANG, University of Texas at San
Antonio, USA
119. Dr. Yuhang WANG, Southern Methodist University, USA
120. Dr. Yu-Ping WANG, University of Missouri-Kansas City, USA
121. Dr. Zhe WANG, East China University of Science
and Technology, China
122. Dr. Qishi WU , University of Memphis, USA
123. Dr. Jiaoxiong XIA, Shanghai Municipal Education
Commission, China
124. Dr. Min XU, University of Southern California,
USA
125. Prof. Weisheng XU, Tongji University, China
126. Dr. Jianhua XUAN , Virginia Tech, USA
127. Dr. Kaiguo YAN, Thomas Jefferson University,
USA
128. Prof. Jie YANG, Shanghai JiaoTong University,
China
129. Prof. Laurence T. YANG , St Francis Xavier
University, Canada
130, Prof. Yilong YIN, Shandong University, China
131. Dr. Jingkai YU, Wayne State University, USA
132. Dr. Yan YU, Thomas Jefferson University, USA
133. Dr. Erliang ZENG, University of Miami, USA
134. Prof. Aidong ZHANG, State University of New
York at Buffalo, USA
135. Dr. Daoqiang ZHANG, Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
136. Dr. Ji Zhang, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, China
137. Dr. Jun ZHANG, University of Kentucky, USA
138. Dr. Min-Ling ZHANG, Hohai University, China
139. Dr. Weixiong ZHANG, Washington University,
USA
140. Dr. Yanqing ZHANG, Georgia State University,
USA
141. Dr. Ying ZHAO, Tsinghua University, China
142. Dr. Huiru(Jane) ZHENG, University of Ulster, UK
143. Dr. W. Jim ZHENG, Medical University of South
Carolina, USA
144. Prof. Yang ZHONG, Fudan University, China
145. Dr. Jie ZHOU, Northern Illinois University, USA
146. Dr. Leming ZHOU, University of Pittsburgh, USA
147. Prof. Shuigeng ZHOU, Fudan University, China
148. Dr. Xiaobo ZHOU, Cornell University, USA
149. Prof. Zhi-Hua ZHOU, Nanjing University, China
150. Dr. Hill ZHU, Florida Atlantic University, USA

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

151. Prof. Qingxin ZHU, University of Electronic
Science and Technology, China,
152. Dr. Shanfeng ZHU, Fudan University
The International Society of Intelligent Biological
Medicine awards 1-3 scholars for the Outstanding
Achievement Awards each year based on following criteria: 1) Substantiated outstanding contributions to the
field of intelligent biological medicine; 2) Research of
the highest level; 3) Significant scientific impact; 4)
Scientific leadership. At the banquet of the conference,
the scientific committee presented the 2009 ISIBM Outstanding Achievement Awards to Dr. Joydeep Ghosh
(UT Austin), Dr. Aidong Zhang (Buffalo) and Dr. ZhiHua Zhou (Nanjing) for their significant contributions
to the field of intelligent biological medicine after their
plenary keynote presentations. Since 2007 ISIBM has
awarded 11 scholars for the Outstanding Achievement
Awards: The 2007 awards were presented to Dr. Ruzena
Bajcsy (UC Berkley), Dr. Mary Qu Yang (NIH) and
Dr. Chin-Mingh Ho (UCLA) at the IEEE International
Conference on Bioinformatics and Bioengineering at
Harvard Medical School in Boston, Massachusetts USA,
and the 2008 awards were presented to Dr. Brian D.
Athey (Michigan) and Dr Jack Yang (Harvard) at the
World Congress on Computer Science, Computer Engineering and Applied Computing in Las Vegas, Nevada
USA. Furthermore, by the time of this paper is published in November 2010, the scientific committee has
also presented the 2010 ISIBM Outstanding Achievement Awards to Dr. Arif Ghafoor (Purdue), Dr. Mark
Borodovsky (Georgia Tech) and Dr. Dong Xu (University of Missouri) for their significant contributions to
the field of intelligent biological medicine. The nonprofit academic society welcomes the nominations for
the 2011 awards. Please send your nominations to President of ISIBM T. K. Li Professor A. Keith Dunker, VicePresident Professor Hamid R. Arabnia and SecretaryGeneral Professor Yunlong Liu. 1-3 winners will be
announced by the president of the society after the rigorous evolution and selection process by the committee.

Page 10 of 11

in the keynote and tutorial lectures, in the open discussion sessions, and in special interest and scientific
exchange sessions to inspire innovations, novel ideas
and scientific discoveries. The BMC Genomics and the
BMC Systems Biology issues were products of part of
the achievement of the ISIBM International Joint Conferences on Bioinformatics, Systems Biology and Intelligent Computing in promoting emerging cutting-edge
research fields with most updated research trends, novel
technologies, breakthrough ideas and scientific discoveries. We hope that attendees’ experiences with the professional society were, are and will be always pleasant,
memorable and productive. The non-profit academic
society strives to promote science and education and
warmly welcomes suggestions world-wide.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declared no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 11
Supplement 3, 2010. The full contents of the supplement are available
online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11?issue=S3.
Author details
1
Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114 U.S.A..
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Indiana 47907 USA. 3Center for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indiana University
Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 USA. 4Center for
Information Technology Research in the Interest of Society, University of
California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California, 94720, USA. 5Department of
Computer Science, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211-2060
USA. 6National Center for Integrated Biomedical Informatics (NCIBI) and
Center for Computational Medicine and Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109 USA. 7Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo,
New York 14260-2000 USA. 8Department of Control Science & Engineering,
Tongji University, Shanghai 201804 China. 9Center for Bioinformatics and
Computational Genomics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta Georgia
30332-0535 USA. 10Department of Computer Science, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia 30602-7404 USA. 11The University of Southern Mississippi,
Hattisburg, MS 39402, USA. 12International Society of Intelligent Biological
Medicine and SpecPro Inc, 3909 Halls Ferry Road, Vicksburg, MS 39180 USA.
Published: 29 November 2010

Conclusions
As upcoming emerging fields, bioinformatics, systems
biology and intelligent computing integrate scientific
and engineering knowledge to solve significant biomedical problems. It is important to train the next generation bioinformatics and systems biology experts with
up-to-date technologies and advancements in the fields.
ISIBM IJCBS 2009 provided an opportunity to promote
inter/multidisciplinary scientific research and education
for students, faculty, scientists, engineers and medical
doctors, and help them better prepared for new initiatives and cutting-edge researches. Updated cutting-edge
technologies and breaking through ideas were presented

References
1. Xue Bin, Williams WRobert, Oldfield JChristopher, Dunker A Keith,
Uversky NVladimir: Archaic chaos: intrinsically disordered proteins in
Archaea. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S1, (28 May 2010) [Abstract]
[Full text] [PDF] [PubMed] [Related articles].
2. Jiang Qinghua, Hao Yangyang, Wang Guohua, Juan Liran, Zhang Tianjiao,
Teng Mingxiang, Liu Yunlong, Wang Yadong: Prioritization of disease
microRNAs through a human phenome-microRNAome network. BMC
Systems Biology 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S2, (28 May 2010) [Abstract] [Full text]
[PDF] [PubMed] [Related articles].
3. Wang Liangjiang, Huang Caiyan, Qu Yang Mary, Yang YJack: BindN+ for
accurate prediction of DNA and RNA-binding residues from protein
sequence features. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S3, (28 May 2010)
[Abstract] [Full text] [PDF] [PubMed] [Related articles].
4. Chowdhary Rajesh, Bajic BVladimir, Dong Difeng, Wong Limsoon, Liu SJun:
Genome-wide analysis of regions similar to promoters of histone genes.

Yang et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):I1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S3/I1

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S4, (28 May 2010) [Abstract] [Full text]
[PDF] [PubMed] [Related articles].
Wang Yunji, Han Hai-Chao, Yang YJack, Lindsey LMerry, Jin Yufang: A
conceptual cellular interaction model of left ventricular remodelling
post-MI: dynamic network with exit-entry competition strategy. BMC
Systems Biology 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S5, (28 May 2010) [Abstract] [Full text]
[PDF] [PubMed] [Related articles].
Zhang Xiaolong, Wang Ting, Luo Huiping, Yang YJack, Deng Youping,
Tang Jinshan, Qu Yang Mary: 3D Protein structure prediction with genetic
tabu search algorithm. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S6, (28 May
2010) [Abstract] [Full text] [PDF] [PubMed] [Related articles].
Chaitankar Vijender, Ghosh Preetam, Perkins JEdward, Gong Ping,
Deng Youping, Zhang Chaoyang: A novel gene network inference
algorithm using predictive minimum description length approach. BMC
Systems Biology 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S7, (28 May 2010) [Abstract] [Full text]
[PDF] [PubMed] [Related articles].
Wang Zhiping, Kim Seongho, Quinney KSara, Zhou Jihao, Li Lang: Noncompartment model to compartment model pharmacokinetics
transformation meta-analysis – a multivariate nonlinear mixed model.
BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S8, (28 May 2010) [Abstract] [Full text]
[PDF] [PubMed] [Related articles].
Xu Shunfu, Zhang Chao, Miao Yi, Gao Jianjiong, Xu Dong: Effector
prediction in host-pathogen interaction based on a Markov model of a
ubiquitous EPIYA motif. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S1, (28
November 2010).
Wang Liangjiang, Huang Caiyan, Qu Yang Mary, Yang YJack: Predicting
siRNA potency with random forests and support vector machines. BMC
Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S2, (28 November 2010).
Ghosh Preetam, Ghosh Samik, Basu Kalyan, Das KSajal, Zhang Chaoyang:
Discrete diffusion models to study the effects of Mg2+ concentration on
the PhoPQ signal transduction system. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):
S3, (28 November 2010).
Chowbina Sudhir, Deng Youping, Ai Junmei, Wu Xiaogang, Guan Xin,
Wilbanks SMitchell, Lynn Escalon Barbara, Meyer ASharon, Perkins JEdward,
Chen YJake: A new approach to construct pathway connected networks
and its application in dose responsive gene expression profiles of rat
liver regulated by 2,4DNT. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S4, (28
November 2010).
Sun Jingchun, Zhao Zhongming: A comparative study of cancer proteins
in the human protein- protein interaction network. BMC Genomics 2010,
11(Suppl 3):S5, (28 November 2010).
Xuan Weijian, Dai Manhong, Buckner Josh, Mirel Barbara, Song Jean,
Athey D.Brian, Watson JStanley, Meng Fan: Cross-domain neurobiology
data integration and exploration. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S6, (28
November 2010).
Lo Yu-Shu, Chen Yung-Chiang, Yang Jinn-Moon: 3D-interologs: An
evolution database of physical protein-protein interactions across
multiple genomes. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S7, (28 November
2010).
Zhang Jianqiu, Haskins William: ICPD-A new Peak Detection Algorithm for
LC/MS. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S8, (28 November 2010).
Tang Yang, Lee Susan, Nelson D.Marvin Jr, Moats A.Rex: Adipose
separation of small animal at 7T: a preliminary study. BMC Genomics
2010, 11(Suppl 3):S9, (28 November 2010).
Wang Jianxin, Li Min, Deng Youping, Pan Yi: Recent Advances in
Clustering Methods for Protein Interaction Networks. BMC Genomics
2010, 11(Suppl 3):S10, (28 November 2010).
Meng Jia, Lu Mingzhu, Chen Yidong, Gao Shou-Jiang, Huang Yufei: Robust
inference of the context specific structure and temporal dynamics of
gene regulatory network. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S11, (28
November 2010).
Liu Hui, Yue Dong, Zhang Lin, Chen Yidong, Gao Shou-Jiang, Huang Yufei:
A Bayesian Approach for Identifying miRNA Targets by Combining
Sequence Prediction and Gene Expression Profiling. BMC Genomics 2010,
11(Suppl 3):S12, (28 November 2010).
Cai Hong, Gu Jianying, Wang Yufeng, Yufeng : Core Genome Components
and Lineage Specific Expansions in Malaria Parasites Plasmodium. BMC
Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S13, (28 November 2010).
Hung Che-Lun, Lee Chihan, Lin Chun-Yuan, Chang Chih-Hung, Chung YehChing, Yi Tang Chuan: Feature Amplified Voting Algorithm for Functional

Page 11 of 11

Analysis of Protein Superfamily. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S14, (28
November 2010).
23. Land H.Walker, Margolis Dan, Gottlieb Ronald, Yang Jack,
Krupinski AElizabeth, Yang Y.Jack: Improving CT Prediction of Treatment
Response in Patients with Metastatic Colorectal Carcinoma Using
Statistical Learning Theory. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S15, (28
November 2010).
24. Dong Hua, Siu Hoicheong, Luo Li, Fang Xiangzhong, Jin Li, Xiong Momiao:
Investigation gene and microRNA expression in glioblastoma. BMC
Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S16, (28 November 2010) [Abstract] [Full text]
[PDF] [PubMed] [Related articles] http://www.biomedcentral.com/qc/14712164/11/S3/S16.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S3-I1
Cite this article as: Yang et al.: 2K09 and thereafter : the coming era of
integrative bioinformatics, systems biology and intelligent computing
for functional genomics and personalized medicine research. BMC
Genomics 2010 11(Suppl 3):I1.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
