<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Strand-specific RNA sequencing reveals extensive regulated long antisense transcripts that are conserved across yeast species</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010 11:R87. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-8-r87"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Moran Yassour"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

RESEARCH

Open Access

Strand-specific RNA sequencing reveals extensive
regulated long antisense transcripts that are
conserved across yeast species
Moran Yassour1,2,3, Jenna Pfiffner1†, Joshua Z Levin1†, Xian Adiconis1, Andreas Gnirke1, Chad Nusbaum1,
Dawn-Anne Thompson1*, Nir Friedman3,4*, Aviv Regev1,2*

Abstract
Background: Recent studies in budding yeast have shown that antisense transcription occurs at many loci.
However, the functional role of antisense transcripts has been demonstrated only in a few cases and it has been
suggested that most antisense transcripts may result from promiscuous bi-directional transcription in a dense
genome.
Results: Here, we use strand-specific RNA sequencing to study anti-sense transcription in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
We detect 1,103 putative antisense transcripts expressed in mid-log phase growth, ranging from 39 short
transcripts covering only the 3’ UTR of sense genes to 145 long transcripts covering the entire sense open reading
frame. Many of these antisense transcripts overlap sense genes that are repressed in mid-log phase and are
important in stationary phase, stress response, or meiosis. We validate the differential regulation of 67 antisense
transcripts and their sense targets in relevant conditions, including nutrient limitation and environmental stresses.
Moreover, we show that several antisense transcripts and, in some cases, their differential expression have been
conserved across five species of yeast spanning 150 million years of evolution. Divergence in the regulation of
antisense transcripts to two respiratory genes coincides with the evolution of respiro-fermentation.
Conclusions: Our work provides support for a global and conserved role for antisense transcription in yeast gene
regulation.

Background
Antisense transcription plays an important role in gene
regulation from bacteria to humans. While the role of
antisense transcripts is increasingly studied in metazoans
[1], less is known about its relevance for gene regulation
in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a key model for
eukaryotic gene regulation. Recent genomic studies
using tiling microarrays showed evidence of stable antisense transcription in S. cerevisiae [2,3] and Schizosaccharomyces pombe [4,5].

* Correspondence: dawnt@broadinstitute.org; nir@cs.huji.ac.il;
aregev@broadinstitute.org
† Contributed equally
1
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA
3
School of Engineering and Computer Science, Hebrew University, Ross
Building, Givat Ram Campus, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

It is unclear how broad the role of antisense transcription is and what key functional processes in yeast it
affects. A few functional antisense transcripts have been
implicated in the control of several key genes, including
the meiosis regulator gene IME4 [6], the phosphate
metabolism gene PHO84 [7], the galactose metabolism
gene GAL10 [8], and the inositol phosphate biosynthetic
gene KCS1 [9]. In contrast, genome-scale analysis in
yeast suggested that antisense transcripts largely arise
from bi-directional, possibly promiscuous, transcription
from nucleosome free regions in promoters or 3′ UTRs
of upstream protein coding genes [2,3]. The ability to
massively sequence cDNA libraries (RNA-seq) can facilitate the discovery of novel transcripts [10-12], but most
studies have not distinguished the transcribed strand.
Here, we used massively parallel sequencing to
sequence a strand-specific cDNA library from RNA isolated from S. cerevisiae cells at mid-log phase. We

© 2010 Yassour et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

found 1,103 putative antisense transcripts in those cells,
ranging from short ones that cover only the 3′ UTR of
sense genes to over a hundred long ones that cover the
entire sense ORF. Many of the putative sense targets
encode proteins with important roles in stationary
phase, stress responses, or meiosis. We validated the differential regulation of 67 antisense transcripts and their
sense targets in conditions ranging from nutrient limitation to stress, and show that the exosome component
Rrp6 affects their levels, but that the histone deacetylase
Hda2 does not. Furthermore, for a few examples we
show that antisense transcripts and their differential regulation are conserved over 150 million years across five
yeast species. Our results support a potential conserved
role for antisense transcription in yeast gene regulation.

Results
Strand-specific RNA-seq of S. cerevisiae cells

To identify antisense transcripts in yeast, we used massively parallel sequencing (Illumina) to sequence a
strand-specific cDNA library from S. cerevisiae during
mid-log growth in rich media. The approach we used
[13] relies on the incorporation of deoxy-UTP during
the second strand synthesis, allowing subsequent selective destruction of this strand (Materials and methods).
Our sequencing yielded 9.22 million 76-nucleotide
paired-end reads that map to unique positions in the
genome.
Of the reads that map to regions with a known annotation for uni-directional transcription (from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) [14]), only 0.62%
were mapped to the opposite (antisense) strand, demonstrating the strand-specificity of our library [15] (Materials and methods). We next combined these reads to
define consecutive regions of strand-specific transcription (Materials and methods), and found 8,778 units,
covering 4,944 of the 5,501 (90%) genes expressed in
this condition (top 85% [12]) at the correct orientation,
for at least 80% of the length of each gene (Materials
and methods; Additional files 1 and 2).
Identification of 1,103 antisense transcripts that vary in
sense coverage from the 3′ UTR to the entire ORF

We found 1,103 putative units that have an antisense
orientation relative to annotated transcripts and cover at
least 25% of a known transcript on the opposite strand,
using published UTR estimates [2] (Materials and methods; Additional file 1). While antisense reads are only a
small minority (0.62%) of the total reads, they aggregate
in a relatively small number of loci, with 62% of the
antisense reads concentrated in the 1,103 units we
defined. The remaining 38% are mostly isolated reads
scattered across the genome (Figure S1 in Additional
file 3).

Page 2 of 14

We observe a range of antisense unit lengths (Figure
S2 in Additional file 3). At one extreme are 39 units
that cover at least 25% of the transcript but none of the
ORF, most commonly at the 3′ UTR (for example,
Unit3689, a putative antisense transcript to NOP10; Figure 1a). Other units cover a substantial portion of the
sense ORF. For example, 438 units overlap with at least
50% of the sense ORF, and 145 units cover the entire
sense ORF (for example, Unit4966, a putative antisense
to the MBR1 gene; Figure 1b). In some cases a single
sense gene may be covered by more than one antisense
unit, most likely due to low antisense expression levels
that result in gaps in coverage (for example, Unit8753,
Unit8754, Unit8756 and Unit8758 all opposite to the
OPT2 gene; Figure S3 in Additional file 3). To avoid
spurious or ‘gapped’ calls by our automatic method, we
manually inspected each of the units, and focused on
the 402 units that passed manual inspection and overlap
at least 75% of a sense ORF (Materials and methods).
The 402 antisense units are supported by several lines
of evidence. First, comparing the units to published data
from strand-specific tiling arrays [2], we find that 143 of
our 402 units (36%) are at least 80% covered by stable
antisense units as previously defined [2], while 224 units
were not detected at all on tiling arrays (Additional file
1; Materials and methods). Finally, 336 of the 402 units
are supported by an independent RNA-seq experiment
we conducted using an RNA ligation protocol [16] for
strand-specific library preparation (Materials and methods) [15]. The lower number of units detected using the
independent library reflects the less continuous nature
of the data collected by the alternative protocol [15].
Antisense units are unlikely to result solely from
leaky transcription

We next assessed the previously suggested possibility
[2,17] that antisense transcription is a consequence of
leaky transcriptional regulation, through either unterminated transcription, bi-directional transcription initiation
from promoters, or transcription from potential nucleosome-free regions (NFRs) in 3′ UTRs. We found that 48
and 27 units might reside within a long 3′ or 5′ UTR,
respectively. Of the remaining 333 antisense units, 149
appear to share the (divergent) promoter of a known
neighbor transcript, consistent with previous reports
[2,3]. An additional 43 units may be transcribed from
potential NFRs in the 3′ UTR of an adjacent transcript
[18]. The remaining 141 units (35%) cannot be
accounted for by transcription from a known promoter
or 3′ UTR (when considering 400-bp margins; Figure S4
in Additional file 3).
We compared the change in expression of antisense
units and such neighboring genes between cells grown
in rich media containing glucose (yeast peptone dextrose

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

Page 3 of 14

Figure 1 Strand-specific RNA-seq identifies 1,103 antisense units associated with stationary phase, stress, and meiosis genes in
S. cerevisiae. (a) Typical short antisense (Unit3689, antisense to NOP10). Shown are reads mapped from a standard cDNA sequencing library [15]
(yellow), and from the strand-specific library prepared and run side-by-side on the same flow cell (green: forward reads above, reverse reads
below). All coverage tracks were normalized to the total number of reads mapped, and are shown up to a threshold of 3 × 10-8 of total
mapped reads (genome-wide). Units were called from the strand-specific library (blue units, known genes; orange, putative antisense), and are
shown along with the manually curated units (red) and the known gene annotations from the SGD (gray). (b) Typical long antisense
(ManualUnit225, antisense to MBR1). Tracks are as in (a). The figures are shown using the Integrative Genome Viewer [36].

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

(YPD)) and ethanol (yeast peptone ethanol (YPE)) as the
main carbon source [2]. We reasoned that ‘leaky transcription’ would result in strong positive correlation in
expression between the antisense transcript and the
neighboring gene. However, we found a very low correlation (R2 = 0.07; Figure S5 in Additional file 3), suggesting only weak co-regulation through leaky
transcription, from divergent promoters or 3′ NFRs, if at
all. Thus, even among the units that could hypothetically arise from leaky transcription, there is little if any
evidence of such events.
We also examined the hypothesis that antisense is
transcribed to prevent the neighboring gene from runthrough transcription. Of the 402 units, 72 (18%) end
relatively close (< 200 bp) to the 3’ ends of known genes
(for example, Unit3689 ends close to the NOP10 gene
shown in Figure 1a). On average, the 3′ UTRs of these
72 genes are shorter than those of other genes (P <
0.0058, Wilcoxon test; Figure S6 in Additional file 3).
This minority of units could thus potentially play a role
in curbing runthrough transcription.
Stress, meiosis and nutrient limitation genes are
associated with antisense transcripts at mid-log phase

To explore the potential function of the antisense units,
we examined the known function and expression pattern of their associated sense transcripts. We found that
the set of ORFs with 75% or more antisense coverage is
enriched for genes induced after the diauxic shift (P < 6
× 10-14) or in stationary phase (P < 2 × 10-10), during
stress (P < 2 × 10-27), and in some meiosis and sporulation experiments (for example, 85 of 805 genes induced
at 8 h in a sporulation time course, P < 3 × 10-6), and
include multiple central genes in these processes. For
example, the genes encoding the key meiosis proteins
IME4, NDT80, REC102, GAS2, SPS19, SLZ1, RIM9, and
SMK1 are all associated with long antisense transcription. This is consistent with previous studies in S.
pombe [4] showing a preponderance of antisense transcription in genes induced during meiosis. Long antisense is also found in many key respiration and
mitochondrial genes, including HAP3, COX8, CYB2,
CYC3, COX5B, MMF1, NCA3, CYC1, MBR1, PET10,
COX12, and ATP14. Genes from other processes
repressed during mid-log phase are also associated with
long antisense transcripts. Notably, these include at least
five members of the PHO regulon (VTC1, PHO5,
PHM8, ICS2, PHO3) and three genes from the GAL regulon (GAL4, GAL10, GAL2). This suggests that antisense
regulation may be prevalent across these regulons rather
than at single target genes (as found in [6-8]). Furthermore, the expression of 149 of the antisense transcripts
is inversely related to that of their sense targets, as measured on tiling arrays [2] in several conditions (glucose

Page 4 of 14

versus ethanol, versus galactose, and in Δrrp6; Figure S7
in Additional file 3). Certain key genes that are highly
expressed in mid-log phase are also associated with
detectable transcription of long antisense units. These
include some of the ribosomal protein genes (for example, RPS26A, RPS20), glycolytic enzymes (for example,
CDC19, PGK1), and cell cycle regulators (for example,
PCL2, APC11, ASK1). Nevertheless, these observations
suggest that antisense transcription may be regulated in
a condition-specific manner in S. cerevisiae and may be
involved in the repression of stress, stationary phase and
meiosis genes in rich growth conditions.
Differential regulation of antisense-sense pairs in
nutrient limitation and stress

To test this hypothesis, we first experimentally measured the existence and differential expression of nine
pairs of sense and antisense transcripts in S. cerevisiae,
where the sense gene was known to be induced and
important in stress or stationary phase states. We used
strand-specific RT-PCR (Materials and methods) followed by sequencing to check for the presence of each
sense and antisense transcript in mid-log (rich media),
and found that all of the nine tested antisense units
were present as expected (Additional file 4). Next, we
used strand-specific quantitative real-time PCR (qRTPCR; Materials and methods) to quantify the differential
expression of six sense and antisense transcript pairs
between mid-log and early stationary phase. We found
that all six of the pairs were differentially expressed,
with induction of the sense accompanied by repression
of the antisense (Figure 2a; Additional file 5). Third, we
devised a novel assay based on the nCounter technology
for sensitive multiplex measurement of mRNAs [19,20]
(Materials and methods) to measure the absolute level
of expression of the nine pairs across five conditions,
including mid-log, early stationary phase, stationary
phase, high salt and heat shock. We found that the gene
pairs exhibited inverse transcription patterns across all
the tested conditions (Figure 2b). The differential
expression we observed is consistent with antisense
interference with sense expression (Figure 2b; Additional
file 6), and with the known function and regulation of
the sense genes. These included proteins with roles in
respiration and mitochondria (PET10 and MBR1
[21,22]), repression of ribosomal protein gene expression
in stress and poor nutrients (CRF1 [23]), and the
response to caloric restriction (CTA1 [24]). Thus, differentially regulated antisense transcription may play a role
in the distinction between mid-log non-stress growth
and stationary phase and stress conditions in S.
cerevisiae.
Finally, to test the generality of these suggestive patterns, we expanded the nCounter assay to measure the

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

Page 5 of 14

(c)

(a)
change mid-log to
early stationary phase
(log ratio)

3

early
stationary
phase

1.5

sense
antisense

0

-1.5
PET10

(b)
change mid-log to
early stationary phase
(log ratio)

3

MRK1

MBR1

CRF1

C TA1

MOH1

C T A1
TA1

M OH1
MOH1

Early stationary phase

1.5
0

-1.5
P ET10
PET10

change mid-log to
late stationary phase
(log ratio)

3

M RK1
MRK1

0

-1.5

change mid-log to
heat shock
(log ratio)

Heat shock

1.5
0

-1.5

change mid-log to
salt shock
(log ratio)

3
1.5
0

C RF1
CRF1

Late stationary phase

1.5

3

M BR1
MBR1

Salt shock

A DH2
ADH2

A RO10
ARO10

T KL2
TKL2

heat
shock

S AS

Early stationary phase

S AS

MOH 1
MBR 1
LEE 1
IC L1
POT 1
C TA 1
URA1 0
MRK1
TKL 2
PET1 0
F MP4 6
CRF 1
HSP3 1
ADH 2
F MP1 6
ST L1
SOL 4
ATO 2
ISF 1
GLC 3
RIM 4
PEX 18
ARG 1
GA L4
LAP 4
PHO8 5
ATP1 4
FAA 1
TOM 6
CYC 3
GRE 1
R SB 1
SN O1
ACN 9
COX 8
CAP 2
NCA 3
UB C 5
PTH 1
C OX 5B
SUL 1
ELO 1
HMS 1
ICS 3
ECM3 4
P HM8
MET3 2
PEX 4
VPS5 5
PGU 1
GRE 2
PHO 5
MRPL4 4
MMF 1
FBA 1
ORM 1
NPC 2
SET 4
HPF 1
MET2
ACP 1
MTH 1
SUL 2
PGK 1
CWP 2
ADH 7
GPM 1

0.5
0

change
from
mid-log

-0 . 5

-1.5

Figure 2 Quantitative expression measurements of putative antisense units and the corresponding sense genes in S. cerevisiae.
(a) Strand-specific qRT-PCR measurements of six pairs of known sense genes and their putative antisense units in comparing mid-log and early
stationary phase (the y-axis shows the log2 ratio of expression in early stationary phase versus mid-log). Error bars indicate the standard deviation
between biological replicates and different primers. (b) nCounter [20] measurements of nine representative putative antisense units, comparing
mid-log to early stationary phase, stationary phase, heat shock and salt stress (the y-axis is as in (a) for the examined condition). Error bars
indicate the standard deviation between biological replicates. (c) nCounter measurement for 67 tested sense-antisense pairs in early stationary
phase (left) and heat shock (right), each relative to a mid-log (no stress) control. The columns marked ‘S’ and ‘A’ represent the sense and
antisense change, respectively. Red, induced; green, repressed; black, no change. The names of genes highlighted in the main text are shown
in red.

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

expression of 67 sense-antisense pairs in log-phase, early
stationary phase, and after 15 minutes under heat shock
conditions (Figure 2c; Additional file 6). We found 25
pairs where the sense was induced while the antisense
was repressed in either early stationary phase or heat
shock (12 in early stationary phase, 21 in heat shock, 8
in both), and 12 pairs where the sense was repressed
while the antisense was induced (6 in early stationary
phase, 8 in heat shock, 2 in both). Notably, 17 of the 25
pairs with induced sense and repressed antisense in
early stationary phase (relative to mid-log) involved
sense genes important in respiration, mitochondrial
function, alternative carbon source metabolism and starvation response (for example, PET10, MBR1, FMP46,
POT1, MOH1, TKL2, ICL1, CTA1). Conversely, four of
the six pairs with the opposite pattern involved sense
genes with key roles in glycolysis and fermentation (for
example, GPM1, PGK1). Many of the pairs with induced
sense and repressed antisense following heat shock overlapped with those responsive to early stationary phase
(consistent with known metabolic changes under stress
[25]). Furthermore, they also included four genes known
to be important under environmental stresses (the regulators CRF1 and MRK1, and the effectors HSP31 and
GRE2). Thus, antisense regulation may play a regulatory
role at coordinating the major metabolic changes in the
diauxic shift and early stationary phase, and some of the
changes in the environmental stress response [21-24].
The exosome component Rrp6 affects antisense levels,
but the histone deacetylase Hda2 does not

To explore the mechanistic regulation of antisense transcription, we measured the expression of the 67 pairs of
sense and antisense units using the nCounter assay in
strains deleted for the exosome component RRP6
(Δrrp6), the histone deacetylase HDA2 (Δhda2), or both
(Δrrp6Δhda2). Previous studies [2,7] have suggested that
Δrrp6 increases the levels of antisense transcription in
the PHO84 locus, and that Hda2 is required for mediating the effect of antisense transcription on the sense
transcripts in this locus. If these findings apply more
broadly, we expect higher levels of antisense transcripts
in Δrrp6, and a change in the relative levels of sense to
antisense in either the Δhda2 or Δrrp6Δhda2 strains.
We found increased transcription of the antisense
units in the Δrrp6 mutant, with a mild reduction of the
sense transcripts (R = -0.36; Figure 3a,c; Figure S8a in
Additional file 3). This is consistent with regulation of
antisense transcript levels by the exosome, and with a
possible, albeit mild, effect of this increase in antisense
on reduction in the level of sense transcripts. We found
only a very mild, if any, effect on either sense or antisense transcripts levels in Δhda2 (Figure 3b; Figure S8b
in Additional file 3), suggesting that Hda2 plays at most

Page 6 of 14

a very minor independent role in the regulation of our
transcripts. We also found no evidence for a synergistic
effect between the mechanisms, since transcript levels in
the double mutant were very close to those in Δrrp6
(Figure S8c in Additional file 3). Finally, the differential
expression of the sense genes between conditions was
not substantially affected in any of these mutants (for
example, R > 0.93 in all conditions; Figure 3d; Figure S9
in Additional file 3), suggesting that relative regulation
itself was not compromised in any of these mutants.
This may be due to a comparable effect of the deletion
in all conditions. Thus, the mechanistic basis of senseantisense regulation involved Rrp6, but may be more
complex than that in the simple model suggested for
PHO84 [7].
Evolutionary conservation of six antisense transcripts and
their regulation in five species of yeast

Finally, we tested whether the presence and regulation
of antisense transcripts is conserved in five other species
of yeast. We reasoned that while the biochemical function and mechanistic basis of each antisense unit may
be distinct or complex, their conservation would provide
additional support for their functional and ancestral role
in gene regulation. We chose five species with diverse
lifestyles and a broad phylogenetic range spanning
approximately 150 million years (Figure 4). These
include three sensu stricto Saccharomyces species (S.
paradoxus, S. mikatae, S. bayanus), a more distant species that diverged after the whole genome duplication
(WGD; S. castellii), and one species that diverged preWGD (Kluyveromyces lactis). Importantly, post-WGD
species are known to follow a respiro-fermentative lifestyle, repressing the expression of respiration genes (for
example, PET10) in mid-log phase, whereas pre-WGD
species follow a respirative lifestyle without such repression. We used conserved synteny and gene orthology of
S. cerevisiae loci [26,27] to identify orthologous regions
for candidate antisense transcription in the five species.
We focused on six of the units validated in S. cerevisiae
(PET10, MRK1, MBR1, CRF1, CTA1, MOH1), used
strand-specific RT-PCR and sequencing to validate the
presence of the orthologous sense and antisense transcripts in each species in mid-log and early stationary
phase, and used strand-specific quantitative real-time
PCR to quantify transcript levels (Additional file 5).
We found that the tested antisense units are largely
conserved in the sensu stricto species, and less so at
increasing evolutionary distances. All six units were
detected in at least one species besides S. cerevisiae. Five
of the six units are present in sensu stricto Saccharomyces, and four are still observed in S. castellii and K.
lactis. The absence in K. lactis of an antisense transcript
to the PET10 gene, important for respiratory growth, is

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

Page 7 of 14

Figure 3 Effect of Rrp6 and Hda2 on antisense transcript levels and sense-antisense regulation. (a,b) The distribution of changes in
expression levels (x-axis) for sense (blue) and antisense (orange) transcripts in the Δrrp6 (a) and Δhda2 (b) mutants compared to the wild type
(wt). In the Δrrp6 mutant (a) there is a mild increase in antisense levels and decrease in sense levels. No such changes are observed in the Δhda2
mutant (b). (c) Negative correlation between change in antisense transcript (y-axis) and in sense transcript (x-axis) in the Δrrp6 mutant relative to
the wild-type strain. (d) Similarity in differential sense gene expression from mid-log to early stationary phase between the wild type (x-axis) and
the Δrrp6 mutant (y-axis).

consistent with its respiratory lifestyle, and suggests that
antisense transcription in this gene may have appeared
after the whole genome duplication. We cannot rule out
the possibility, however, that other antisense units are
present in the K. lactis genome, or that the missing antisense units are expressed under different conditions.
The anti-correlation between sense and antisense units
observed in S. cerevisiae is conserved in most postWGD species, but not in the pre-WGD K. lactis. The

differential expression of five sense-antisense pairs
(PET10, MRK1, MBR1, CRF1, CTA1) is conserved in at
least two out of three other sensu stricto species. The
more distant S. castellii shows less conservation of transcriptional regulation, most prominently in the PET10
gene. In contrast, although we could detect four of the
antisense units in K. lactis, their differential expression
was not conserved. This is consistent with the lack of
repression of the corresponding sense gene in mid-log

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

Page 8 of 14

Figure 4 Conservation of the presence and regulation of antisense units in Hemiascomycota. Shown are the differential expression values
of antisense and sense units comparing mid-log and early stationary phase across S. cerevisiae and the five other species (red, higher in early
stationary phase; green, lower in early stationary phase; black, no change; hatched, no candidate orthologous contig; grey, no antisense
transcription detected in species). A phylogenetic tree of the species included in this study [27] is shown above (the star indicates the WGD).

K. lactis cultures. The absence of antisense (for two
genes) and the observed correlated (rather than anticorrelated) regulation (for three others) in K. lactis may
reflect either the increased phylogenetic distance or may
be more directly related to the shift to a respiro-fermentative lifestyle. In the latter case, either antisense transcription or its regulatory pattern in those genes may
have evolved concomitantly with the emergence of fermentative growth, and the repression of respiratory
genes, such as PET10 and MBR1. Further experiments
are needed to elucidate this relationship.

Discussion
In this study, we used strand-specific mRNA sequencing
to explore the extent of antisense transcription in yeast,
and found 1,103 putative antisense transcripts expressed
in mid-log phase in S. cerevisiae, ranging from 39 short
ones covering only the 3′ UTR of sense genes to 145
long ones covering the entire sense ORF. We focus on
402 long antisense units (each spanning over 75% of a
coding unit). In this category, our sequencing based
methodology allowed us to identify 224 new antisense
transcripts that, in previous studies based on tiling

microarrays [2], were either undetected or annotated as
long UTRs of neighboring genes.
What could be the role of such prevalent antisense
transcription? To date, functional studies have identified
a regulatory role for a few antisense transcripts [6-8],
whereas genome-wide analyses have suggested that antisense transcripts may represent promiscuous leaky transcription from NFRs at the promoter of a neighboring
gene or the 3′ UTR of the sense gene [2,3,28]. The
diversity of lengths in our 1,103 antisense units - ranging from long antisense units covering entire ORFs to
shorter ones mostly at the 3′ UTR - suggests that there
may be more than a single underlying mechanism for
their formation and function.
Our results do not support promiscuous or aberrant
transcription as the primary cause of the observed antisense transcripts. We find antisense transcription at
only 18% of the genes. Moreover, many of the units are
long and show robust sequence coverage, in contrast to
what we might expect in a noisy process. Finally, antisense genes are only very weakly correlated to their
neighbors, inconsistent with leaky transcription from
divergent promoters or 3′ NFRs.

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

Characterizing the functional effect of each unit
requires delicate assays to disable the antisense unit,
without harming the sense gene, which have been successfully performed only in a few examples [6-8]. We
therefore instead examined whether the changes in
expression of sense and antisense are consistent with a
regulatory function. We chose to focus on the long antisense units because they exhibit strong signal in our
data, are less well-studied, are less likely to reflect noise,
and can be verified more rigorously.
We found that the sense transcripts corresponding to
longer antisense units are significantly enriched for key
processes in S. cerevisiae, including stress response, the
differential regulation of growth and stationary phase, and
possibly meiosis and sporulation. The high level of antisense expression is consistent with the repression of these
processes in fast growing yeast, and suggests a potential
global function. Indeed, when we examined the relative
change in expression in sense and antisense units across
multiple conditions using three technologies (tiling arrays
[2], strand-specific qPCR, and nCounter measurements),
we found a strong and consistent anti-correlation between
sense genes and the corresponding antisense units. While
these results are consistent with regulatory function of
antisense units (for example, reduction of antisense transcription leads to increased sense transcription), we cannot
rule out the possibility that anti-correlation can occur
without active regulation of the antisense transcript. For
example, it is possible that when a sense gene is repressed,
there is a relieved hindrance of antisense-transcription.
Notably, we found support for the role of Rrp6 in the regulation of antisense levels, resulting in an increase in antisense levels in the Δrrp6 mutant, and a concomitant,
albeit very mild, decrease in sense levels. We could not
demonstrate a general effect of Hda2 on the levels of
sense or antisense transcripts (either alone or together
with Rrp6), and - in all mutants - the differential expression of sense and antisense remained highly correlated to
the wild-type regulation. This suggests that it may be challenging to generalize the mechanisms shown for specific
transcripts (PHO84) to all antisense transcripts.
Independent support for a potential function is the
conservation of expression and regulation of six antisense units tested across five species that have diverged
more than 150 million years ago, suggesting purifying
selection. Notably, previous studies in mammals have
shown that certain non-coding RNAs (that are not antisense) can be conserved at the sequence level [17,29],
but the applicability of such analyses to antisense transcripts that cover ORFs is limited, and hence experimental data are needed to show conservation. We find
that both the presence and the regulation of antisense
transcripts are most diverged in the distant, pre-WGD
species K. lactis. This may reflect either the increased

Page 9 of 14

phylogenetic distance per se, or an evolved role in regulating respiration genes in post-WGD species. Another
possibility for the lack of conservation in expression or
absence of antisense in S. castellii and K. lactis may be
the presence of RNA interference in these species [30].
Further experiments will be needed to elucidate these
possibilities and characterize the full functional scope of
antisense transcription in yeasts.

Conclusions
Our results expand and strengthen the existing body of
evidence that antisense transcription is a substantial phenomenon in yeast, and not solely a noisy by product of
imprecise transcription regulation. While the mechanism
and function of antisense transcription is still elusive, our
results indicate that antisense transcription is often conserved and plays a regulatory role in the yeast transcriptional response.
Materials and methods
Supplementary website

All tables, figures, raw sequenced reads, and a link to a
browser with the mapped reads appear on our supplementary website [31].
Strains and growth conditions

Strains are listed in Table 1. Cultures were grown in the
following rich medium: yeast extract (1.5%), peptone
(1%), dextrose (2%), SC Amino Acid mix (Sunrise
Science - San Diego, CA, USA) 2 g/l, adenine 100 mg/l,
tryptophan 100 mg/l, uracil 100 mg/l, at 200 RPM in a
New Brunswick Scientific (Edison, NJ, USA) air-shaker.
The medium was chosen to minimize cross-species variation in growth. Following the experimental treatments
described below, stressed and mock cultures were transferred to shaking water baths.
To generate strain RGV 69(rrp6Δ::KANMX6, hda2Δ::
NatMX4), strain RGV 71(rrp6Δ::KANMX6) was transformed with a PCR product constructed by using the
pAG25 containing the NatMX4 cassette using the following primers: GTAAAAGTATTTGGCTTCATTAG
TGTGTGAAAAATAAAGAAAATAGATACAATACTATCGACGGTCGACGGATCCCCGGGTT and AAGA
AAGTATATAAAATCTCTCTATATTATACAGGCTACTTCTTTTAGGAAACGTCACATCGATGAATTCGAGCTCGTT [32]. Correct integration of this
construct was confirmed with the following: (5′ left) left
TGGCGTATATGGTTCATTGC; (5′ right) GTATGGG
CTAAATGTACGGG; (3′ left) left TGGCGTATATGGT
TCATTGC; (3′ right) GGTTGGAGAGGCAAATTGAG.
Heat shock

Overnight cultures of S. cerevisiae were grown in 650 ml
of media at 22°C to between 3 × 107 and 1 × 108 cell/

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

Page 10 of 14

Table 1 Strains and growth conditions
Strain number

Species

BB32

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Background

Genotype

Source

BY4741

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

S288c

MATa, his3Δ1, leu2Δ0, met15Δ0, ura3Δ0

Gift from Andrew Murray’s lab

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

BY4741

Same as above with rrp6Δ::KANMX6

ATCC

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

BY4741

Same as above with hda2Δ::URA3

Gift from Oliver Rando’s lab

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

BY4741

Same as above with rrp6Δ::KANMX6, hda2Δ::NatMX4

This study

Gift from Leonid Kruglyak’s lab

NCYC2600

Saccharomyces paradoxus

NCYC Stock Center

IFO 1815

Saccharomyces mikatae

ATCC

CLIB 592
CLIB 209

Saccharomyces castellii
Kluyveromyces lactis

CLIB Stock Center
CLIB Stock Center

ATCC, American Type Culture Collection.

ml, OD600 = 1.0. The overnight culture was split into
two 300 ml cultures and cells from each were collected
by removing the media via vacuum filtration (Millipore
- Billerica, MA, USA). The cell-containing filters were
re-suspended in pre-warmed media to either control
(22°C) or heat-shock temperatures (37°C). Density measurements were taken approximately 1 minute after cells
were re-suspended to ensure that concentrations did not
change during the transfer from overnight media. We
harvested 12 ml of culture at 15 minutes and quenched
by adding to 30 ml liquid methanol at -40°C, which was
later removed by centrifugation at -9°C, and stored
these overnight at -80°C. Cell density measurements
were repeatedly taken every 5 to 15 minutes for the first
2 hours after treatment. Harvested cells were later
washed in RNase-free water and archived in RNAlater
(Ambion - Austin, TX, USA) for future preparations.
Cells were also harvested from cultures just before treatment for use as controls.

0.016, S. castellii 0.020, and K. lactis 0.024. The density
measurements were taken approximately 1 minute after
cells were re-suspended to ensure that concentrations
did not change during the transfer from overnight
media. Cells were harvested and quenched at a final
concentration of 60% methanol at the mid-log and early
stationary phase time points. Mid-log was taken at the
following OD600 values: S. cerevisiae, 0.35; S. paradoxus,
0.40; S. mikatae, 0.40; S. bayanus, 0.30; S. castellii, 0.35;
and K. lactis, 0.30. The early stationary phase time
points were taken 2 hours after the glucose levels
reached zero. Glucose levels were monitored hourly
using the YSI 2700 Select Bioanalyzer (YSI Life Sciences
- Yellow Springs, OH, USA). OD600 values for early stationary phase time points were: S. cerevisiae, 4.6; S.
paradoxus, 3.9; S. mikatae, 4.3; S. bayanus, 2.8; S. castellii, 3.2; and K. lactis, 5.0. Harvested cells were later
washed in RNase-free water, archived in RNAlater
(Ambion) for future preparations, and frozen at -80°C.

Salt stress

Stationary phase

Overnight cultures of S. cerevisiae (BB32) were grown in
600 ml of media at 30°C until reaching a final concentration of 3 × 107 and 1 × 108 cell/ml. The culture was
split into two parallel cultures of 250 ml and sodium
chloride was added to one culture for a final concentration of 0.3 M NaCl. Cells were harvested by vacuum filtration at 15 minutes after the addition of sodium
chloride and from cultures immediately before the addition of sodium chloride for use as controls (t = 0 minutes). Filters were placed in liquid nitrogen and stored
at -80°C and were later archived in RNAlater for future
use.

Stationary phase was done for S. cerevisiae (BB32) only.
This experiment was set up identically to the diauxic
shift, but samples were taken at mid-log, and 5-day time
points. The 5-day samples were taken at the same time
of day as the mid-log samples.

Diauxic shift

Overnight cultures for each species were grown to
saturation in 3 ml rich medium. From the 3 ml overnight cultures, 300 ml of rich media was inoculated at
the OD600 corresponding to 1 × 106 cell/ml: S. cerevisiae
0.016, S. paradoxus 0.016, S. mikatae 0.023, S. bayanus

Strand-specific cDNA library

The library was created by modifying the previously
described dUTP second strand method [13]. All reagents
were from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA) except as
noted. We fragmented 200 ng of S. cerevisiae polyA+
RNA by heating at 98°C for 40 minutes in 0.2 mM
sodium citrate, pH 6.4 (Ambion). Fragmented RNA was
concentrated to 5 μl, mixed with 3 μg random hexamers, incubated at 70°C for 10 minutes, and placed on
ice. First-strand cDNA was synthesized with this RNA
primer mix by adding 4 μl of 5× first-strand buffer, 2 μl
of 100 mM DTT, 1 μl of 10 mM dNTPs, 4 μg of actinomycin D (USB), 200 U SuperScript III, and 20 U

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

SUPERase-In (Ambion) and incubating at room temperature for 10 minutes followed by 1 hour at 55°C.
First-strand cDNA was cleaned up by extraction twice
with phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1), followed by ethanol precipitation with 0.1 volumes 5 M
ammonia acetate to remove dNTPs and re-suspension
in 104 μl H2O. Second-strand cDNA was synthesized by
adding 4 μl 5× first-strand buffer, 2 μl 100 mM DTT, 4
μl 10 mM dNTPs with dTTP replaced by dUTP (Sigma
- Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA), 30 μl 5× second strand
buffer, 40 U Escherichia coli DNA polymerase, 10 U E.
coli DNA ligase, 2 U E. coli RNase H and incubating at
16°C for 2 hours. A paired-end library for Illumina
sequencing was prepared according to the instructions
provided with the following modifications. First, five
times less adapter mix was ligated to the cDNAs. Second, 1 U USER (New England Biolabs - Ipswich, MA,
USA) was incubated with 180- to 480-bp size-selected,
adapter-ligated cDNA at 37°C for 15 minutes followed
by 5 minutes at 95°C before PCR. Third, PCR was performed with Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase
with GC buffer (New England Biolabs) and 2 M betaine
(Sigma). Fourth, PCR primers were removed using 1.8×
volume of AMPure PCR Purification kit (Beckman
Coulter Genomics - Danvers, MA, USA).

Page 11 of 14

end segments with coverage >1 and maximum signal
gaps of size 20 nucleotides.
Assessment of the strand specificity of the library

To evaluate the strand specificity of our library, we used
the known annotation from SGD [14], and published
estimates of UTR lengths [2], or when absent an estimation of 100 bp. According to these annotations we
found that only 53,803 reads (0.62%) mapped to the
opposite strand of known transcripts.
Identification of sense and antisense transcriptional units

We assigned a putative unit to a known gene if it is in
the same orientation as the unit and it overlaps the
known transcript boundaries, including published estimates of UTR length [2], or when absent an estimation
of 100 bp was used. When comparing our transcription
units to known annotations in the SGD [14], we examined the top 85% of expressed genes, as previously
described [12].
Manual annotation of 402 antisense units

We have manually annotated the boundaries of antisense units covering 75% or more of an opposite ORF,
resulting in 402 antisense units covering 75% or more of
412 ORFs.

Strand-specific library based on the RNA ligation method

The RNA ligation library was created using a previously
described method [16] starting from 1.2 μg of polyA+
RNA with the following modifications. RNA was fragmented by incubation at 70°C for 8 minutes in 1× fragmentation buffer (Ambion) and 65- to 80-nucleotide
RNA fragments were isolated from a gel. RNA was
reverse transcribed with SuperScript III (Invitrogen) at
55°C and cDNA was amplified with Herculase (Agilent Santa Clara, CA, USA) in the presence of 5% DMSO for
16 cycles of PCR followed by a clean up with 1.8×
volumes of AMPure beads (Beckman Coulter Genomics
- Danvers, MA, USA) rather than gel purification.
Illumina sequencing

Both cDNA libraries were sequenced with an Illumina
Genome Analyzer II (San Diego, CA, USA). The dUTP
library was sequenced using 1 lane of 76-nucleotide
paired reads, and the RNA ligation library was
sequenced using 2 lanes of 51-nucleotide reads. All
RNA-seq data are available in the Gene Expression
Omnibus [GEO:GSE21739].
Data pre-processing

We used the Arachne mapper [33] to map the reads to
the genome. We next identified consecutive regions of
transcription by segmenting the centers of the paired-

Comparing the antisense units to published data from
strand-specific tiling arrays

We compared our units to the published catalog of [2]
using the following criteria. For each of our units, we
searched for units in the catalog of [2] that are on the
same strand and overlap it. We chose the unit with the
highest overlap, and required a minimal threshold of
50% overlap.
Functional analysis of sense units

We constructed a gene set from the 377 sense genes, for
which at least 75% of the ORF is covered by an antisense unit, and tested it for functional enrichment using
a collection of functional categories as previously
described [27]. We also tested the genes for enriched
induction or repression in a compendium of 1,400
annotated arrays, as previously described [27].
Identification of candidate regions in other species

We searched for orthologs of the sense gene in other species, using our published orthogroup catalog [27], and
used the relative coordinates of the antisense transcripts
in S. cerevisiae relative to the sense gene to predict their
locations in other species. In cases where there were no
clear candidates for orthologs, or the synteny block was
broken [26], we did not define a candidate.

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

Strand-specific RT-PCR

Strand-specific RT-PCR followed an adaptation of a
published protocol [34]. Total RNA was isolated from
strain Bb32(3) at late log time point for two biological
replicates. RNA was Turbo DNase treated (Ambion) following the manufacturer’s stringent protocol followed
by phenol chloroform extraction. For each assay, a
gene-specific, strand-specific reverse transcription (RT)
was performed. The four reactions for each sample
were: +RT L-primer (sense), +RT R-Primer (antisense),
+RT no primer, -RT both primers. First strand cDNA
synthesis started RNA denaturation and the hybridization of the 2 pmol of gene specific primer. Total RNA
with primer (10 ng) was heated to 70°C for 10 minutes
and incubated on ice for at least 1 minute. A primer targeting ACT1 mRNA was always included as an internal
control for strand specificity. This was followed by adding a Master mix containing 200 U SuperScript III (Invitrogen), 40 U RNaseOut (Invitrogen) and 10 mM dNTP
mix for at 55°C for 15 minutes. The enzyme was heatinactivated at 70°C for 15 minutes. RNA complementary
to the cDNA was removed by E. coli RNase H (10 U;
Ambion) and remaining RNAs were digested with 20 U
of RNase Cocktail (Ambion) by incubating at 37°C for
20 minutes. PCR was performed for the sense and antisense transcripts independently. We added 5 μl of RT to
each reaction as template with two gene-specific primers
each at 250 nM final concentration (the same primers
that were used for the sense and antisense RT; Additional file 7), 300 μM dNTP and 1 U of Ampli Taq
Gold (Applied Biosystems - Carlsbad, CA, USA), in a 50
μl reaction. RNA contaminated with genomic DNA was
used as a positive control. The touch down amplification
program used was as follows: incubation of 95°C for 5
minutes followed by 10 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 60°C for
30 s -1 degree per cycle, 70°C for 45 s, then followed by
17 to 20 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 50°C for 30 s, 70°C
45 s, 72°C for 10 minutes (a step required for future
Topo TA cloning (Invitrogen)).
Strand-specific RT-PCR across species

Strand-specific RT-PCR across species used an adaptation of a published protocol [35]. Total RNA was isolated from each species at both the mid-log and early
stationary phase time points. Genomic DNA contamination was removed with Turbo DNase (Ambion) using
the stringent protocol, and phenol:chloroform to extract
the RNA and to inactivate the DNase. For each of the
species two biological replicates of the mid-log and early
stationary phase time points were tested. Four reactions
were performed for each sample: +RT L-primer (sense),
+RT R-primer (antisense), +RT no primer, -RT. The
sense, antisense, and -RT reactions were done with
2 pmol of primer (Additional file 7; only the primers

Page 12 of 14

with A1 in the title were used for the initial RT-PCR,
and all primers used were designed for the target species). RT was done with first strand synthesis only in
20-μl reactions, using 4 units of Omniscript reverse
transcriptase (Qiagen - Valencia, CA, USA) and 500 ng
of total RNA. Each reaction was carried out at 50°C for
20 minutes, and heat inactivated at 70°C for 15 minutes.
PCR was conducted as for the S. cerevisiae RT-PCR
described above.
Strand-specific qRT-PCR across species

The same RT protocol was followed for the qRT-PCR
across species as for the RT PCR above. For each senseantisense pair validated, two sets of primers were tested,
and primers for two internal control genes (ACT1 and
PDA1) were included in each reaction. Control primers
(’right primer’, Additional file 7) were added at a concentration of 2 pmol to each of the RT reactions. qPCR
was done using the Roche Light Cycler 480 in 12-μl
reactions in a 384 well plate (Roche - Indianapolis, IN,
USA). qPCR was done independently for sense, antisense, and control genes. RT samples were diluted 1:40
in water then 1:2 in Light Cycler 480 SYBR Green I
Master with gene specific primer pair (each primer at
200 nM final concentration). The program protocol
used was as follows: activation, 95°C for 5 minutes;
cycling, 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 45 s; melt, 95°C
continuous.
Analysis of strand-specific qRT-PCR data

The ratios reported in Additional file 5 and Figure 2a
are log 2 ratios of early stationary phase and mid-log
qRT-PCR reads (after normalization by the control gene
PDA1), averaged over the two sets of primers and the
two biological repeats.
nCounter measurements

The following experiments were done in biological
duplicates: heat shock - 0 and 15 minutes; salt stress - 0
and 15 minutes; diauxic shift - log and early stationary
phase; and stationary phase - log and 5 days. Details on
the nCounter system are presented in full in [20]. In a
nutshell, the nCounter system uses pre-defined probes
labeled with molecular barcodes (’code sets’) and single
molecule imaging to detect and directly count millions
of unique transcripts (from up to hundreds of genes) in
a single reaction. The assay is performed in cell lysates,
involves no enzymatic steps prior to detection, and is
highly accurate. Code sets were constructed to detect
putative antisense units and sense genes and additional
controls (Additional file 8). We lysed 7 × 10 7 (or 2 ×
107, depending on the code set) cells according to the
RNeasy (Qiagen) yeast mechanical lysis protocol. The
protocol was stopped after spinning the lysate to remove

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

Page 13 of 14

debris, and 3 μl of the lysate was hybridized for 16
hours followed by processing in the nCounter Prep Station and quantification by the nCounter Digital Analyzer. We normalized the nCounter data in two steps as
previously described [19]. In the first step, we controlled
for small variations in the efficiency of the automated
sample processing. To this end, we followed the manufacturer’s instructions, and normalized measurements
from all samples analyzed on a given run to the levels of
a chosen sample (in all cases we used the first sample in
the set). This was done using the positive spiked-in controls provided by the nCounter instrument. In the second step, we used the control genes for which we
designed probes to normalize for sample variation.

Additional file 7: Table S6. RT and qRT-PCR primers in each gene and
species.

Additional material

Additional file 8: Table S7. Control genes used for the Nanostring
nCounter assays.

Additional file 1: Table S1. Strand-specific (sense and antisense)
transcribed units in mid-log S. cerevisiae.
Additional file 2: Table S2. Sense and antisense coverage of SGD
annotated genes.
Additional file 3: Figure S1 to S9. Figure S1: read coverage at antisense
units. (a,b) The distribution (a) and cumulative distribution (CDF) (b) of
read coverage at antisense units ‘called’ by our method (gray) and at all
other loci in the genome with at least one antisense read (orange). The
called units have substantially deeper coverage, whereas 80% of sporadic
loci are covered by a single read. (c) Sense coverage (x-axis) versus
antisense coverage (y-axis) of all verified genes. Genes that we have
detected antisense units opposite them are shown in orange. Figure S2:
statistics for transcription units. (a) Distribution of antisense unit length,
colored by the percentage of overlap with the opposite ORF. Dark blue,
units with at least 25% overlap with the opposite transcript; light blue,
units with at least 50% overlap with the opposite ORF; green, units with
at least 75% overlap with the opposite ORF; orange, units with 100%
overlap with the opposite ORF. (b) Cumulative distribution function of
the units length. Blue, antisense units; red, other units. Figure S3: an
example of an over-segmented antisense unit. Shown is the genomic
region of OPT2; tracks and colors are as in Figure 1, with the addition of
the brown tracks showing the centers of the paired end segments
(forward and reverse), which were used for the segmentation (Materials
and methods). All coverage tracks are normalized and shown up to a
threshold of 3 × 10-8 of the total (genome-wide) number of mapped
reads. Due to low read coverage, both the sense (blue) and the
antisense units (yellow) are over-segmented. After the manual curation of
the antisense units, we defined one long antisense unit (ManualUnit402)
that covers the entire ORF of the gene OPT2. The figure is shown using
the Integrative Genome Viewer [36]. Figure S4: promoter types associated
with antisense units. Shown are two examples of promoter types of
antisense units; tracks and colors as in Figure 1. ManualUnit69 included
the BTT1 gene, and a very long 3′ UTR, as an antisense to the gene
MET32. ManualUnit70 is a long antisense to the gene CTA1, and is
transcribed from the divergent promoter of RMD5. The figures are shown
using the Integrative Genome Viewer [36]. Figure S5: correlation between
differential expression of antisense units and their neighboring (nonoverlapping) genes. Expression of antisense units versus neighboring
genes, which could be co-regulated (using published tiling array data
[2]). Shown is the log ratio of change from glucose (YPD) to ethanol
(YPE). Blue, antisense units with shared promoter (as in Figure S3 in
Additional file 3); red, antisense units with a nearby 3′ UTR; green, linear
fit. Figure S6: differences in UTR length between genes with nearby
antisense units, compared to all genes. Cumulative distribution of the
UTR lengths of all genes (blue) and those with antisense units ending
close to the 3′ UTR end. Figure S7: differential expression of antisense
units and their target sense transcripts. (a) Expression of sense versus
antisense units (using published tiling array data [2]). Shown is the log

ratio of change in sense gene expression from YPD to YPE (x-axis)
plotted versus the same for the antisense strand (y-axis). Red,
differentially expressed genes; green, linear fit. (b,c) The same as (a), only
comparing YPD to galactose growth and to an rrp6 deletion mutant,
respectively. Figure S8: mutant effect on transcription. (a-c) Expression
changes of the sense genes (x-axis) versus expression changes of the
antisense units (y-axis) in the Δrrp6 mutant (a), the Δhda2 mutant (b), and
the Δrrp6Δhda2 mutant (c). Figure S9: mutant effect on differential
expression. (a-c) Differential expression of the sense genes from mid-log
to early stationary phase in the wild type (x-axis) versus the Δrrp6 mutant
(a), the Δhda2 mutant (b), and the Δrrp6Δhda2 mutant (c).
Additional file 4: Table S3. Antisense units validated in RT experiments
in S. cerevisiae.
Additional file 5: Table S4. qRT-PCR results in each gene and species.
Additional file 6: Table S5. Nanostring results in S. cerevisiae.

Abbreviations
bp: base pair; DTT: dithiothreitol; NFR: nucleosome-free region; ORF: open
reading frame; qRT-PCR: quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR; RNA-seq: RNA
sequencing; SGD: Saccharomyces Genome Database; UTR: untranslated
region; WGD: whole genome duplication; YPD: yeast peptone dextrose; YPE:
yeast peptone ethanol.
Acknowledgements
MY was supported by the Canadian Friends of the Hebrew University. The
work was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the Human
Frontiers Science Program, a Career Award at the Scientific Interface from
the Burroughs Welcome Fund, an NIH PIONEER award, the Broad Institute,
and a Sloan Fellowship (AR), the National Human Genome Research Institute
(NHGRI) (CN), and by a US-Israel Bi-national Science Foundation award (NF
and MY).
Author details
1
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA. 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 31 Ames Street, 68-132, Cambridge,
MA 02139, USA. 3School of Engineering and Computer Science, Hebrew
University, Ross Building, Givat Ram Campus, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel.
4
Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, Hebrew University, Edmond J
Safra Campus, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel.
Authors’ contributions
MY, JP, JZL, AG, CN, D-AT, NF, and AR designed the research; MY, JP, JZL, XA,
D-AT, NF, and AR performed research; MY, NF, and AR analyzed data; JZL
and XA contributed text to the methods section; and MY, NF, and AR wrote
the paper with editorial input from all authors. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 15 February 2010 Revised: 26 July 2010
Accepted: 26 August 2010 Published: 26 August 2010
References
1. Faghihi MA, Wahlestedt C: Regulatory roles of natural antisense
transcripts. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009, 10:637-643.
2. Xu Z, Wei W, Gagneur J, Perocchi F, Clauder-Münster S, Camblong J,
Guffanti E, Stutz F, Huber W, Steinmetz LM: Bidirectional promoters
generate pervasive transcription in yeast. Nature 2009, 457:1033-1037.
3. Neil H, Malabat C, d’Aubenton-Carafa Y, Xu Z, Steinmetz LM, Jacquier A:
Widespread bidirectional promoters are the major source of cryptic
transcripts in yeast. Nature 2009, 457:1038-1042.
4. Wilhelm BT, Marguerat S, Watt S, Schubert F, Wood V, Goodhead I,
Penkett CJ, Rogers J, Bahler J: Dynamic repertoire of a eukaryotic

Yassour et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R87
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/8/R87

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

transcriptome surveyed at single-nucleotide resolution. Nature 2008,
453:1239-1243.
Dutrow N, Nix DA, Holt D, Milash B, Dalley B, Westbroek E, Parnell TJ,
Cairns BR: Dynamic transcriptome of Schizosaccharomyces pombe shown
by RNA-DNA hybrid mapping. Nat Genet 2008, 40:977-986.
Hongay , Grisafi , Galitski , Fink : Antisense transcription controls cell fate
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Cell 2006, 127:735-745.
Camblong J, Iglesias , Fickentscher , Dieppois , Stutz : Antisense RNA
stabilization induces transcriptional gene silencing via histone
deacetylation in S. cerevisiae. Cell 2007, 131:706-717.
Houseley , Rubbi , Grunstein , Tollervey , Vogelauer : A ncRNA modulates
histone modification and mRNA induction in the yeast GAL gene
cluster. Mol Cell 2008, 32:685-695.
Nishizawa , Komai , Katou , Shirahige , Ito , Toh-E : Nutrient-regulated
antisense and intragenic RNAs modulate a signal transduction pathway
in yeast. PLoS Biol 2008, 6:2817-2830.
Nagalakshmi U, Wang Z, Waern K, Shou C, Raha D, Gerstein M, Snyder M:
The transcriptional landscape of the yeast genome defined by RNA
sequencing. Science 2008, 320:1344-1349.
Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L, Wold B: Mapping and
quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nat Methods 2008,
5:621-628.
Yassour M, Kaplan T, Fraser HB, Levin JZ, Pfiffner J, Adiconis X, Schroth G,
Luo S, Khrebtukova I, Gnirke A, Nusbaum C, Thompson DA, Friedman N,
Regev A: Ab initio construction of a eukaryotic transcriptome by
massively parallel mRNA sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:3264-3269.
Parkhomchuk D, Borodina T, Amstislavskiy V, Banaru M, Hallen L,
Krobitsch S, Lehrach H, Soldatov A: Transcriptome analysis by strandspecific sequencing of complementary DNA. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:
e123.
Cherry JM, Adler C, Ball C, Chervitz SA, Dwight SS, Hester ET, Jia Y, Juvik G,
Roe T, Schroeder M, Weng S, Botstein D: SGD: Saccharomyces Genome
Database. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26:73-79.
Levin JZ, Yassour M, Adiconis X, Nusbaum C, Thompson DA, Friedman N,
Gnirke A, Regev A: Comprehensive comparative analysis of strandspecific RNA sequencing methods. Nat Methods 2010.
Lister R, O’Malley RC, Tonti-Filippini J, Gregory BD, Berry CC, Millar AH,
Ecker JR: Highly integrated single-base resolution maps of the
epigenome in Arabidopsis. Cell 2008, 133:523-536.
Berretta J, Morillon A: Pervasive transcription constitutes a new level of
eukaryotic genome regulation. EMBO Rep 2009, 10:973-982.
Tsankov A, Thompson DA, Socha A, Regev A, Rando OJ: The role of
nucleosome positioning in the evolution of gene regulation. PLoS Biol
2010, 8:e1000414.
Amit I, Garber M, Chevrier N, Leite AP, Donner Y, Eisenhaure T, Guttman M,
Grenier JK, Li W, Zuk O, Schubert LA, Birditt B, Shay T, Goren A, Zhang X,
Smith Z, Deering R, McDonald RC, Cabili M, Bernstein BE, Rinn JL,
Meissner A, Root DE, Hacohen N, Regev A: Unbiased reconstruction of a
mammalian transcriptional network mediating pathogen responses.
Science 2009, 326:257-263.
Geiss GK, Bumgarner RE, Birditt B, Dahl T, Dowidar N, Dunaway DL, Fell HP,
Ferree S, George RD, Grogan T, James JJ, Maysuria M, Mitton JD, Oliveri P,
Osborn JL, Peng T, Ratcliffe AL, Webster PJ, Davidson EH, Hood L,
Dimitrov K: Direct multiplexed measurement of gene expression with
color-coded probe pairs. Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26:317-325.
Brown MP, Grundy WN, Lin D, Cristianini N, Sugnet CW, Furey TS, Ares M Jr,
Haussler D: Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene expression
data by using support vector machines. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000,
97:262-267.
Reisdorf P, Boy-Marcotte E, Bolotin-Fukuhara M: The MBR1 gene from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is activated by and required for growth under
sub-optimal conditions. Mol Gen Genet 1997, 255:400-409.
Martin DE, Soulard A, Hall MN: TOR regulates ribosomal protein gene
expression via PKA and the Forkhead transcription factor FHL1. Cell 2004,
119:969-979.
Agarwal S, Sharma S, Agrawal V, Roy N: Caloric restriction augments ROS
defense in S. cerevisiae, by a Sir2p independent mechanism. Free Radic
Res 2005, 39:55-62.

Page 14 of 14

25. Chechik G, Oh E, Rando O, Weissman J, Regev A, Koller D: Activity motifs
reveal principles of timing in transcriptional control of the yeast
metabolic network. Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26:1251-1259.
26. Byrne KP, Wolfe KH: Visualizing syntenic relationships among the
hemiascomycetes with the Yeast Gene Order Browser. Nucleic Acids Res
2006, 34:D452-455.
27. Wapinski I, Pfeffer A, Friedman N, Regev A: Natural history and
evolutionary principles of gene duplication in fungi. Nature 2007,
449:54-61.
28. He Y, Vogelstein B, Velculescu VE, Papadopoulos N, Kinzler KW: The
antisense transcriptomes of human cells. Science 2008, 322:1855-1857.
29. Guttman M, Amit I, Garber M, French C, Lin MF, Feldser D, Huarte M, Zuk O,
Carey BW, Cassady JP, Cabili MN, Jaenisch R, Mikkelsen TS, Jacks T,
Hacohen N, Bernstein BE, Kellis M, Regev A, Rinn JL, Lander ES: Chromatin
signature reveals over a thousand highly conserved large non-coding
RNAs in mammals. Nature 2009, 458:223-227.
30. Drinnenberg IA, Weinberg DE, Xie KT, Mower JP, Wolfe KH, Fink GR,
Bartel DP: RNAi in budding yeast. Science 2009, 326:544-550.
31. Supplementary Website. [http://compbio.cs.huji.ac.il/YeastAntisense].
32. Goldstein AL, McCusker JH: Three new dominant drug resistance
cassettes for gene disruption in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 1999,
15:1541-1553.
33. Batzoglou S, Jaffe DB, Stanley K, Butler J, Gnerre S, Mauceli E, Berger B,
Mesirov JP, Lander ES: ARACHNE: a whole-genome shotgun assembler.
Genome Res 2002, 12:177-189.
34. Perocchi F, Xu Z, Clauder-Munster S, Steinmetz LM: Antisense artifacts in
transcriptome microarray experiments are resolved by actinomycin D.
Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:e128.
35. Haddad F, Qin AX, Giger JM, Guo H, Baldwin KM: Potential pitfalls in the
accuracy of analysis of natural sense-antisense RNA pairs by reverse
transcription-PCR. BMC Biotechnol 2007, 7:21.
36. Integrative Genomics Viewer. [http://www.broadinstitute.org/igv].
doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-8-r87
Cite this article as: Yassour et al.: Strand-specific RNA sequencing
reveals extensive regulated long antisense transcripts that are
conserved across yeast species. Genome Biology 2010 11:R87.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
