<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Thermostability in endoglucanases is fold-specific</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10. doi:10.1186/1472-6807-11-10"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ragothaman M Yennamalli"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Thermostability in endoglucanases is fold-specific
Ragothaman M Yennamalli1, Andrew J Rader2, Jeffrey D Wolt3, Taner Z Sen1,4,5*

Abstract
Background: Endoglucanases are usually considered to be synergistically involved in the initial stages of cellulose
breakdown-an essential step in the bioprocessing of lignocellulosic plant materials into bioethanol. Despite their
economic importance, we currently lack a basic understanding of how some endoglucanases can sustain their
ability to function at elevated temperatures required for bioprocessing, while others cannot. In this study, we
present a detailed comparative analysis of both thermophilic and mesophilic endoglucanases in order to gain
insights into origins of thermostability. We analyzed the sequences and structures for sets of endoglucanase
proteins drawn from the Carbohydrate-Active enZymes (CAZy) database.
Results: Our results demonstrate that thermophilic endoglucanases and their mesophilic counterparts differ
significantly in their amino acid compositions. Strikingly, these compositional differences are specific to protein
folds and enzyme families, and lead to differences in intramolecular interactions in a fold-dependent fashion.
Conclusions: Here, we provide fold-specific guidelines to control thermostability in endoglucanases that will aid in
making production of biofuels from plant biomass more efficient.

Background
Understanding the molecular basis of thermostability is
essential for protein engineering applications where the
thermal stability of a protein could potentially be
enhanced. An important industrial application is to
genetically engineer plants for increased biofuel production. For example, a thermostable endoglucanase from
Acidothermus cellulolyticus has been expressed in Zea
mays subsp. mays increasing the hydrolysis efficiency for
conversion of plant cellulose to ethanol [1]. Using this
transgenic modification allows hydrolysis of cellulose
fibers to begin a pre-processing step within the plant.
Transgenic corn feedstock expressing thermostable
endoglucanases is an innovation that simplifies the
hydrolysis of cellulose-derived ethanol, and hence lowers
the cost of production. Although the details of the exact
mechanism through which cellulases act is far from
complete, it is usually considered that endoglucanase
generates cellulose chain ends, following an attack by
cellobiohydrolase for subsequent hydrolysis [2-4].
Although thermophilic enzymes are industrially
important, our understanding of the factors responsible
* Correspondence: taner@iastate.edu
1
Department of Genetics, Development and Cell Biology, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50011, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

for thermostability in these enzymes is still incomplete.
Many studies have addressed this question by comparing homologous protein structures from different
families as an aggregate set [5-11] or by focusing on differences for a single family [12-14]. These comparative
studies typically analyze several factors such as the
energy of unfolding, number of VdW contacts per residue, number of hydrogen bonds per residue, or number
of residues involved in secondary structure at the protein level [5]. Often, these studies have sought to identify any detectable relationship between amino acid
composition and thermostability. One of the earlier
comparative studies with 18 different families of proteins observed that Arg and Tyr are significantly higher
in thermophiles, while Cys and Ser are significantly
lower in thermophilic proteins [7]. In a study by Sarai’s
group, the following factors were argued to impart thermostability: Gibbs free energy change of hydration,
long-range non-bonded energy, b-strand tendency and
average long-range contacts [11]. However, rather than
identifying the structural or sequence-based rules
governing increased thermostability these comparisons
have instead only suggested many physical or structural
features that may impart thermostability, including preferences of certain amino acids [7], increased hydrophobicity [8], or even a single amino acid mutation [14]. By

© 2011 Yennamalli et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

extending the comparison to many different pairs of
proteins from two organisms (one thermophilic and one
mesophilic) factors such as increase in compactness and
sequence dependent strong interactions have been identified as two physical mechanisms underlying thermostability [5].
Previously reported studies [5,10,15,16] involving comparison of thermophilic and mesophilic organism’s proteome have led to the conclusion that positively charged
residues play an important role in imparting thermophilicity. Berezovsky and Shakhnovich [5] concluded that
the strategy of organism’s adaptation in a thermophilic
environment depends on the “evolutionary history” and
“sequence-based” mechanism.
In another approach to the proteome level study, the
entire proteome of specific organisms were homology
modelled from the PDB database and both sequential
and structural comparisons were made between thermophiles and mesophiles. Berezovsky et al [15] used two
independently different datasets (the Mintz dataset consisting of 2907 protein structures and the Bordner dataset consisting of 435 protein structures). These authors
considered a temperature cutoff of 50°C for classifying
thermophiles or mesophiles and concluded that positively charged amino acids play a crucial role in thermophilic proteins by stabilizing the interface and overall
protein structures. Chakravarty and Varadarajan [16]
used 21 mesophilic (900 protein structures) and 9 thermophilic (300 protein structures) organisms as the dataset and a temperature cutoff of 37°C to differentiate
thermophiles from mesophiles. Their results showed
that Val and Glu are significantly higher in thermophiles
and are also solvent exposed. At the same time, Gln,
Asn, Ser, Thr, and His are significantly lower in thermophiles. Comparison of intramolecular interactions
showed that cation-π interactions are highly significant
in imparting thermophilicity. Similarly, Glyakina et al
[10] showed that positively charged residues (Lys, Arg
and Glu) on the solvent accessible surface are more significant in thermophiles than in mesophiles.
Because the features that cause thermostability for one
protein family are not significant for other families of
thermophilic proteins, many studies have focused on
thermostabilizing features within a single protein family
[12,14,17,18]. In the case of the (a/b)8 fold in glycosyl
hydrolases (GHs), for example, it was reported that a
reduction in the number of Gly residues in thermophilic
proteins led to greater stability at higher temperatures
[12]. However, this study had two shortcomings: the criteria to select a data set of 29 proteins was solely based
on higher crystallographic resolution, but not on lower
sequence identities, which can bias the results substantially. And among the 29 structures used, there were
only three endoglucanase structures (E.C 3.2.1.4) in the

Page 2 of 15

thermophilic set whereas none from the same enzyme
class in the mesophilic set. Therefore, the study analyzed
the lack of Gly preference in thermophilic glycosyl
hydrolase enzymes, rather than endoglucanases specifically. In contrast, here we focus specifically on endoglucanases (E.C. 3.2.1.4) that share no more than 70%
sequence identity.
From structural comparisons of proteins from a single
fold, Sandgren et al experimentally found that a single
amino acid mutation of alanine to valine was responsible for thermal stability among the GH12 family of
endoglucanases [14]. Although cases where a single residue change imparts increased stability are quite rare,
similar examples can be found in a cold shock protein
where two residues confer thermostability [19].
The overall inability to identify common trends for
thermostability among many different protein families
has caused some to speculate that no single rule defines
protein thermostability and the factors determining
thermostability for one fold or family of proteins may
never be universally applicable [12]. More likely, these
comparisons between homologous proteins are complicated by the underlying, unknown relationships between
protein sequence, structure, and function. For example,
several studies implicated intrinsic disorder as a factor
in thermostability at low temperatures, where an
increase in temperature induces partial, reversible folding of the protein [20,21]. With the recent hypothesis
that psychrophilic (cold-loving) proteins are intrinsically
disordered [22], this complex relationship is far from
resolved. Another issue to consider is the evolution of
folds. The emergence of folds within an enzyme family
is likely due to convergent evolution of the different
protein structures adapting to the same substrate (cellulose for endoglucanases) at different evolutionary periods. Convergent evolution of distinct folds adapting to
perform the same function and mechanism is well documented in pathogenic virulence factors [23], lectins [24],
toxins [25], receptors [26], and kinases [27]. Hence, the
question of the fold effect on thermostability for a protein enzyme family addresses whether convergent evolution for that family adopted different or similar factors
to impart thermostability.
Here we investigate how the evolution-driven mechanisms imparting thermostability may vary for different
folds. We look at the sequence- and structure-based factors that can contribute to thermostability for the family
of endoglucanase proteins across and within three distinct folds, namely the (a/b)8 fold, b-jelly roll fold and
the (a/a)6 fold. We specifically concentrate on 1,4-b-Dglucanases or endoglucanases, which belong to
the broader family of enzymes known as glycosyl hydrolases, extracted from bacterial and fungal sources. Glycosyl hydrolases are enzymes that hydrolyze complex

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

carbohydrate moieties and are comprised of cellulase,
xylanase, pectinases, b-glucanase, exocellulase, mananase
etc [28]. They are widely used in a wide range of industrial applications, such as juice and wine industries for
clarification of beverages; feed industries for increasing
the digestibility of the feed; paper and pulp industries
for pulp bleaching process; textile industries for selective
modification of cellulose fibers (depilling); and in reproducing the stonewashing effect on jeans [29].
In the last few years, cellulases have been used in the
conversion of biomass to fermentable sugars for ethanol
production. Currently they are extracted from microbial
sources leading to increased production costs [30]. Considerable efforts are being undertaken towards improved
yield and reduced costs of bioethanol production [31].
Even though they share the same structural fold and
catalytic mechanism, our knowledge is limited as to why
certain endoglucanases are thermophilic. Understanding
this limitation is crucial for enhanced utilization of thermophilic endoglucanases for conversion of biomass to
bioethanol. Although both protein folds and protein
functions play a role in contributing to thermostability,
our hypothesis is that protein folds rather than protein
families dominate in determining which specific factors
are responsible for protein thermostability.

Results and Discussion
Fold diversity in endoglucanases

Endoglucanases (E.C 3.2.1.4) have three distinct structure folds: the (a/b)8 fold, b-jelly roll fold and the (a/a)
6 fold (Figure 1).
(a/b)8 fold (GH5 and GH44 families)

This fold has an alternating pattern of eight a and b
subunits in a single domain, such that the eight parallel
b strands on the inside are protected by eight a helices
on the outside (Figure 1A). Often referred to as a TIM
barrel because it was first discovered in the triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) enzyme, this extremely common fold has been reported to display the highest
diversity of enzymatic functions [32]. Endoglucanases in
glycosyl hydrolases families 5 (GH 5) and 44 (GH 44)
share this fold.
b-jelly roll fold (GH7 and GH12 families)

This fold consists of 15 b-strands in two twisted antiparallel b-sheets, named A and B, that pack against
each another (Figure 1B). b-sheet A contains six antiparallel b-strands forming the back, convex surface
while b-sheet B contains nine anti-parallel b-strands
arranged to form the front, concave binding surface
[29]. Additionally two a-helices pack against the back
side of b-sheet B.
(a/a)6 fold (GH8, GH48 and GH9 families)

The substrate binding cleft in this fold has a tunnel
shape formed at the N-termini of six central, parallel

Page 3 of 15

a-helices (Figure 1C). These six helices are surrounded
by six external a-helices. Unlike the (a/b)8 and b-jelly
roll folds, the (a/a)6 fold utilizes the inverting mechanism for hydrolyzing glycosidic bonds (see below) [33].
Fold-dependent cellulose hydrolysis in endoglucanases

Cellulose is a linear homo-polysaccharide made up of
glucose units that are linked by b-1,4-glycosidic bonds.
There are two ends of the polymer: a reducing end,
where the terminating anomeric carbon is not linked to
another glucose unit, and a non-reducing end. Upon
synthesis, cellulose forms as microfibrils that are
strengthened by hydrogen, hydrophobic and van der
Waals interactions, making it more resistant to hydrolysis than starch, which is made up of a-1,4-glycosidic
bonds. Two main different catalytic mechanisms are
employed by the glycosyl hydrolases for hydrolysis of
glycosidic bonds: the retaining and the inverting
mechanisms [29].
Retaining mechanism

In this mechanism (Figure 1D), the stereometric configuration of the anomeric carbon is retained in the bconfiguration after hydrolysis. A pair of Glu amino
acids, separated by 5.5 Å, act as the catalytic residues:
one as a nucleophile and the other an acid-base donor.
The first step in this double displacement mechanism is
glycosylation, where one of the catalytic residue’s carboxylic group induces acid-catalyzed leaving group
departure simultaneous to a nucleophilic attack on the
anomeric carbon to form a glycosyl-enzyme intermediate by the second catalytic residue’s carboxylic group. In
the second step, a water molecule acts as a nucleophile
and the first residue’s carboxylic group acts as a base.
Once deprotonated, the water molecule is an activated
nucleophile that then hydrolyzes the glycosyl-enzyme
intermediate leading to a break in the polymer. The
(a/b)8 (GH5 and GH44 families) and b-jelly roll (GH7
and GH12 families) folds use the retaining mechanism.
Inverting mechanism

In this mechanism (Figure 1E), the configuration of the
anomeric carbon is inverted; i.e., hydrolysis of b-glycosidic bond leads to a-configuration of carbon and vice
versa. The details of this enzymatic mechanism are still
not completely known. Glu-Glu pairs usually act as
acid-based donors, but recent studies also suggest that
Asp may act as the base donor in inverting cellulases
[34,35]. Alzari’s work [35] suggests specifically Asp as
the probable catalytic base in the family GH8. Therefore
a pair of Glu-Glu or in some cases Glu-Asp amino acid
pairs, separated by 6.5Å to 9.5Å, may act as acid-base
donors and a water molecule acts as a nucleophile. Utilizing the water molecule on the opposite side of the
sugar ring to stabilize the transition, these residues catalyze the glycosylation or deglycosylation in one step.

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Page 4 of 15

(α/β)8
Retaining mechanism

(A)
β-jelly roll

(D)
(B)
(α/α)6

(C)

Inverting mechanism

(E)

Figure 1 Different folds in endoglucanases with the catalytic residues highlighted in inset. (A) (a/b)8 fold (Acidothermus cellulolyticus pdb
id: 1ece) (B) b-jelly roll fold (Streptomyces lividans pdb id: 2nlr), and (C) (a/a)6 fold (Clostridium thermocellum F7 pdb id: 1l1y) are shown in
cartoon representation with helices colored in red, sheets colored in yellow, and loops in green. (D) Two-step retaining mechanism of
endoglucanase catalysis in (a/b)8 and b-jelly roll folds, where the configuration of the anomeric carbon is retained after hydrolysis and a
glycosyl-enzyme intermediate is formed. (E) Single-step inverting mechanism of endoglucanase catalysis in (a/a)6 fold, where the configuration
of the anomeric carbon is inverted; i.e hydrolysis of b-glycosidic bond leads to a-configuration of carbon and vice versa. In (a/b)8 and b-jelly roll
fold, two glutamic acid residues act as the nucleophile and acid/base donor (shown in Inset (A) and Inset (B)). In (a/a)6 fold, a water molecule
acts as the nucleophile, and glutamic acid and aspartic acid residues act as the acid/base donor (Inset (C)). The individual residues in stick
representation are the nucleophile (in orange) and acid/base donor (in blue).

Unlike the retaining mechanism, this mechanism does
not involve the glycosyl-enzyme intermediate. The (a/a)
6 fold (GH8, GH48 and GH9 families) uses the inverting
mechanism for cellulose hydrolysis.
Amino Acid Composition and Intramolecular Interactions

It has long been suggested that in order to function at
higher temperatures, thermophilic proteins contain
amino acids that contribute to stronger interactions,
which stabilize the structure as compared to mesophiles. Such amino acids form salt-bridges [36], disulfide bonds [37] or cause greater core hydrophobicity
[8]. In order to investigate whether this holds true for
endoglucanases, we examined the statistical significance of different amino acid compositions and various
intramolecular features between mesophilic and thermophilic proteins.

In order to identify the different roles that catalytic
mechanism or overall structural fold might play in contributing to these differences, we performed the comparison between thermophilic and mesophilic proteins for
each of the following datasets: (A) the dataset comprising all endoglucanases as a enzyme group; (B) two datasets representing each of the two catalytic mechanisms;
and (C) three datasets representing the three distinct
folds separately. In each of the datasets, the proteins
were categorized as thermophilic or mesophilic. Table 1
lists the thermophilic and mesophilic endoglucanases in
the three distinct folds.
As described in the Methods section (see below), to
identify the significant amino acids (Figure 2 and
Figure 3) that make a contribution towards stabilizing
the protein structure, intramolecular interactions were
calculated. After normalizing with respect the protein

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Page 5 of 15

Table 1 Protein sets of Thermophilic and Mesophilic endoglucanases
(a/b)8 fold

b-jelly roll fold

(a/a)6 fold

GH5 and GH44 families

GH7 and GH12 families

GH8, GH48, and GH9 families

Organism

Length

Organism

PDB id

Length

Organism

PDB id

Length

Pyrococcus horikoshii

2zum

458

Humicola
insolens

1ojj

402

Clostridium
thermocellum NCIB

1kwf

363

Acidothermus
cellulolyticus

1ece

358

Humicola grisea

1olr

224

Clostridium
thermocellum

1clc

639

Clostridium
cellulolyticum

1edg

380

Rhodotermus
marinus

2bw8

227

Acyclobacillus
acidocaldarius

3gzk

537

Clostridium
thermocellum

Thermophilic
Endoglucanases

PDB id

1cec

343

Fusarium
oxysporum

3ovw

411

Clostridium
thermocellum F7

1l1y

678

Thermobifida fusca

1tf4

605

Bacillus sp.kas-635

364

1h1n

305

Uncultured
bacterium

3ii1

535

Clostridium
thermocellum

2e4t

509

Prevotella bryantii

3l55

353

Streptomyces
lividans

2nlr

234

Gluconacebacter xylinus

1wzz

334

Bacillus
agaradhaerens

7a3h

303

Hypocrea
jecorina

1oa2

218

Nasutitermes
takasagoensis

1ks8

433

Erwinia
chrysanthemi

1egz

291

Bacillus
licheniformis

2jen

261

Clostridium
cellulolyticum

1g87

614

Clostridium
acetobutylicum

3ik2

512

Aspergillus niger

1ks5

223

Clostridium
cellulolyticum

1ia6

441

Clostridium
cellulolyticum

Mesophilic
Endoglucanases

1g0c

Thermoascus
auranticus

1g9g

629

A subset of proteins with less than or equal to 70% sequence identity was created as described in the Methods section. A protein is considered thermophilic if
the source organism’s optimum growth temperature is above 40°C. GH stands for glycosyl hydrolase.

length, t-test was performed to identify statistical significance (Figure 3; please see Additional file 1 for detailed
quantitative results).
In the larger dataset representing the entire endoglucanase enzyme group, we observed that amino acids Arg
and Met are statistically significant among thermophiles,
whereas Gln and Ser are statistically significant among
mesophiles (Figure 2A and Figure 3). It was previously
reported that thermophilic glycosyl hydrolases are significantly missing Gly residues compared to their mesophilic counterparts [8], but we did not observe this negative
preference in the case of endoglucanase thermophiles.
This difference might be attributed to the fact that
endoglucanases form only a small part of the glycosyl
hydrolases data set used in the previous study.
We also compared significant intramolecular interactions in thermophiles and mesophiles. For the thermophiles, only ionic interactions were significant, whereas
for mesophiles, no intramolecular interactions were significantly different from thermophiles.
We also analyzed the effect of catalytic mechanism on
the amino acid distribution and intramolecular interactions. In the retaining mechanism ((a/b)8 and b-jelly roll

folds) amino acids Leu, Met, Pro, and Arg were significant among thermophiles, whereas Ser and Val were
significant among mesophiles (Figure 2B and Figure 3).
For the same mechanism, the MC-SC hydrogen bond
interactions were significant among thermophiles. In the
inverting mechanism ((a/a)6 fold) amino acids Glu, Val
were significant among thermophiles, whereas only Gln
was significant among mesophiles (Figure 2E and Figure
3). However, none of the intramolecular interactions
were significant. Strikingly, the significant amino acids
and intramolecular interactions are different for the catalytic mechanisms than for endoglucanases as an enzyme
group. Another interesting observation is that the significant amino acids and intramolecular interactions for the
retaining mechanism are different than those of the individual folds that make up that mechanism. This result
strengthens the idea that the analyses of folds provide
more informative and detailed understanding of thermostability than a larger set made of many folds.
It is noteworthy that overlaps of amino acid preferences
exist if we compare different folds of the endoglucanases.
For example, between (a/b)8 and b-jelly roll folds, Arg
and Leu are significantly higher in thermophiles than in

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Page 6 of 15

Figure 2 Normalized amino acid count per protein. The number of amino acids was normalized with respect to protein length. Amino acid
composition of (A) endoglucanases enzyme group, (B) endoglucanase retaining catalytic mechanism, (C) (a/b)8 fold, (D) b-jelly roll fold, and (E)
(a/a)6 fold. The mean of each amino acid and its standard error are shown in each plot, grouped as reported in [5] into charged (DEKR),
hydrophobic (ACFILMPVWY), and hydrophilic (HNQST) residues. Solid lines represent thermophilic protein set (squares show means) and dotted
lines represent mesophilic protein set (diamonds show means). The statistically significant amino acids are shown in Figure 3. Note that the
results for the (a/a)6 fold and the endoglucanase inverting mechanism are the same.

Intramolecular Interactions

Significant Amino
Acids

In Thermophile

Met, Arg

In Mesophile

Gln, Ser

main chain-mainchain (MC-MC)
main chain-side
chain (MC-SC)
side chain-side
chain (SC-SC)
hydrophobic
ionic

Page 7 of 15

Leu, Met,
Glu, Val
Pro, Arg

Ser, Val

Gln

Arg,
Leu,
Pro
─

Glu,
Arg,
Cys,
Leu,
His
Ser,
Thr

(α /α)6

Folds

β-jelly roll

Catalytic
Mechanism
Retaining Inverting
(α/β)8 and
(α /α)6
β-jelly roll
fold
folds

(α/β)8

Endoglucanase
enzyme group

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Glu,
Val

Gln

3.1×10−2
2.5×10−2

4.3×10−2

7.8×10−3

disulphide bonds

aromatic
aromatic-sulfur
cation-π

3.9×10−2

4.2×10−2

Figure 3 Statistically significant amino acids and intramolecular interactions between thermophilic and mesophilic endoglucanases.
They are shown in thermophilic endoglucanases as an enzyme group, based on the reaction mechanism, and within each fold, as compared to
their mesophilic counterparts (p-value < 5.0 × 10-2). The statistically significant intramolecular interactions for thermophiles are shaded dark gray.
Note that the results for inverting mechanism and on (a/a)6 fold are the same.

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Page 8 of 15

mesophiles (Figure 2C and 2D). Similarly, between b-jelly
roll and (a/a)6 folds, Glu is significantly higher in thermophiles than in mesophiles (Figure 2D and 2E). Similarities in amino acid preferences within an enzyme class
are usually assumed in many protein analyses. These
class-specific similarities are actually the basis of those
analyses that involve protein properties averaged over
many enzyme classes and families. We show here that
although similarities exist among the proteins forming an
enzyme class, strong fold-specific differences are also
present that need to be considered to understand the origin of thermostability.
Secondary Structure and Solvent Exposure Preference

After identifying a subset of amino acids as statistically
significant, we investigated if these amino acids displayed a preference for secondary structure state or solvent exposure.
(a/b)8 fold

In the GH5 and GH44 families, Arg, Leu, and Pro were
statistically more significant in thermophiles than in
mesophiles, while none of the amino acids were

Significant

statistically significant among mesophiles (Figure 2C,
Figure 3 and Additional file 2). Pro is significantly
absent in the b-sheets of the mesophiles whereas prominently present in the b-sheets in thermophiles (Figure 4,
Additional file 3 and Additional file 4). Similarly, Pro in
thermophiles is significant in the intermediate class of
relative surface accessibility (Figure 4).
b-jelly roll fold

In GH7 and GH12 families, Glu, Arg, Cys, Leu, and His
were statistically significant in thermophiles. The amino
acids Ser and Thr were statistically significant in mesophiles (Figure 2D, Figure 3 and Additional file 2).
Among the thermophiles Glu was significant in helices
but absent in mesophiles (Figure 4, Additional file 3 and
Additional file 4). Also all the Cys are significant in the
buried class. His is extremely significant in the intermediate class in thermophiles than in mesophiles
(Figure 4). Leu is highly significant in the exposed class
for thermophiles, as no Leu is exposed in mesophiles.
(a/a)6 fold

Similarly, in GH8, GH48, and GH9 families, Glu and
Val were statistically significant in thermophiles and Gln

Secondary structure

Relative Surface Accessibility

Fold
Amino Acid

Helix

Sheet

Loop

Buried

Intermediate

Exposed

Arg
(α/β)8 fold

Leu
1.0×10−2

Pro
Glu

5.0×10−2

4.6×10−2

Arg

β-jelly roll fold

Cys

3.6×10−2
4.7×10−3

Leu
His

5.0×10−3

Glu
(α /α)6 fold

Val
Figure 4 The p-values for secondary structure and relative surface accessibility preferences for the statistically significant amino acids
in thermophilic proteins among the three folds. The eight state classification of DSSP was reduced into three states (Helix, Sheet, and Loop)
as described in the text. The amino acids are classified into three classes according to relative surface accessibility: buried, if less than 9%;
intermediate, if between 9-36%; and exposed, if more than 36% [43]. The statistically significant secondary structure and solvent exposure
preferences for amino acids are bolded and underlined and p-values are provided. Our analysis showed that the significant amino acids in
mesophilic proteins do not show statistically significant preferences for secondary structure or solvent exposure.

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Page 9 of 15

(D)

Figure 5 Phylogenetic tree created using the structure-based multiple sequence alignments in each fold. The thermophilic proteins are
shown in boxes. The thermophilic-mesophilic protein pairs sharing a close evolutionary relationship that have been selected for further analysis
are marked with black stars for each of the three folds: (A) (a/b)8, (B) b-jelly roll, and (C) (a/a)6. (D) A fragment of the pairwise alignment
between the thermophilic (pdb id: 2e4t) and mesophilic (pdb id: 3ik2) (a/b)8 pair is shown to demonstrate the sequence differences for the
statistically significant amino acid arginine in the thermophilic protein. Four arginine positions (shown in boxes) in the thermophilic protein are
substituted by different amino acids in the mesophilic protein.

is statistically significant in mesophiles (Figure 2E, Figure 3 and Additional file 2). Glu and Val were not
located in secondary structure and surface accessibility
classes in a statistically significant manner (Figure 4,
Additional file 3 and Additional file 4).

Among the three folds of endoglucanases, it is interesting to note that the individual amino acid frequencies do
not follow a similar pattern. Each fold has specific groups
of amino acids that are significant, which cannot be universally applied to other folds, highlighting the importance

Table 2 Pairwise structural alignment of evolutionarily related thermophilic and mesophilic protein pairs for (a/b)8,
b-jelly roll, and (a/a)6 folds
Protein length
Fold

Thermophile

Mesophile

RMSD (Å)

Z-score Thermophile Mesophile

Sequence identity
(%)

Aligned/
Gap

(a/b)8

Clostridium
thermocellum
(pdb id: 2e4t)

Clostridium
acetobutylicum
(pdb id: 3ik2)

0.9

8.3

509

512

60.6

507/4

b-jelly
roll

Rhodotermus marinus
(pdb id: 2bw8)

Streptomyces lividans
(pdb id: 2nlr)

1.2

7.2

227

234

33.3

219/9

(a/a)6

Clostridium
thermocellum
(pdb id: 1l1y)

Clostridium
cellulolyticum
(pdb id: 1g9g)

0.8

8.3

678

629

61.6

612/33

(C)

Number of sites

(B)

Number of sites

(A)

Number of sites

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Page 10 of 15

Arginine

Thermophilic
to Mesophilic

Leucine

Thermophilic
to Mesophilic

Proline

Thermophilic
to Mesophilic

Figure 6 Mesophilic substitutions at the structurally equivalent
positions of significant amino acid types in thermophiles for
the (a/b)8 fold based on pairwise structural alignments.
Statistically significant amino acid types are (A) arginine, (B) leucine,
and (C) proline. Structurally equivalent positions of aligned amino
acids between mesophilic endoglucanases and their structurally
similar thermophilic counterpart were analyzed for substitutions. The
x-axis shows the type or class of amino acids substituted in
mesophiles. The count of substitution sites is plotted as a histogram
for the following pair shown in Figure 3A: Clostridium thermocellum
(Ca trace colored in red, pdb id: 2e4t) and mesophile Clostridium
acetobutylicum (Ca trace colored in blue, pdb id: 3ik2). Positions of
the amino acids are shown in CPK model in superimposed protein
structures, where they are differentially colored with respect to
atom type.

that sequence plays in determining structure. But also, and
more importantly, this result indicates that amino acids
responsible for thermophilicity may not rely on enzyme
family but more specifically on the protein fold.
Evolutionarily related thermophilic and mesophilic
protein pairs in endoglucanases

Multiple structural alignment of thermophilic and mesophilic proteins in each fold was performed to identify

structurally and evolutionarily similar proteins. Phylogenetic trees were constructed using the structure-based
multiple sequence alignments of each fold (Figure 5a,
5b, and 5c). From these trees, the closest pair of thermophilic and mesophilic proteins for each fold was
identified and selected for further analysis of possible
thermostabilizing differences. Table 2 lists these three
pairs of thermophilic and mesophilic proteins: Clostridium thermocellum (pdb id: 2e4t) and Clostridium acetobutylicum (pdb id: 3ik2); Rhodotermus marinus (pdb
id: 2bw8) and Streptomyces lividans (pdb id: 2nlr); and
Clostridium thermocellum (pdb id: 1l1y) and Clostridium cellulolyticum (pdb id: 1g9g) from the (a/b)8, bjelly roll, and (a/a)6 folds respectively.
Structural superimposition for each of the three pairs
shows the RMSD is below 1.5Å and Z-score above 7.2,
indicating that the pairwise structural comparison is of a
very good quality (Table 2). According to CE algorithm,
a Z-score of above 3.5 indicates a very high statistical
significance of structural alignment, which can also be
seen by the very low number of gaps in each of the
alignment (Table 2).
Using pairwise structural alignments for each of these
three sets, we were able to identify all the positions
where the statistically significant amino acids differ and
tally the nature of these substitutions. In particular, each
substitution was counted as being polar, aromatic,
hydrophobic, acidic, basic, proline, cysteine, or glycine.
Figures 6, 7, 8 plot the results for each significant amino
acid from each fold. Proline and glycine substitutions
were separately counted because the presence of these
two amino acids disrupts secondary structure by helixbreaking (Pro) and high flexibility (Gly). Likewise, Cys
substitutions were counted separately because of their
ability to form disulfide bonds.
For the (a/b)8 fold (Figure 6), Arg and Pro (significant
in thermophiles) are overwhelmingly replaced by polar
amino acids whereas Leu is primarily replaced with aromatic amino acids in the mesophilic counterpart. The
replacement of arginines by non-basic polar amino acids
in mesophiles supports the view that increased arginine
content enhances thermostability. Conversely, the
absence of these arginine amino acids leads to a loss of
ionic interactions in mesophiles, rendering them enzymatically inactive at higher temperatures.
In the b-jelly roll fold (Figure 7), the amino acids Glu,
Arg, and His are substituted with polar, hydrophobic
amino acids. Substitution to Pro is higher for Arg indicating the potential for fewer salt-bridges in mesophiles.
Quantitatively, we observe only 4 to 11 salt bridges in
the mesophiles versus 16 to 40 salt bridges in the thermophiles for this fold. It is unclear as to how the mesophilic protein benefits from substitution of positively
charged amino acids with negatively charged amino

Page 11 of 15

Glutamic Acid

Thermophilic
to Mesophilic

(D)

Number of sites

(A)

Number of sites

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Histidine

Thermophilic
to Mesophilic

Thermophilic
to Mesophilic

Leucine

Thermophilic
to Mesophilic

(F)

Number of sites

(E)

Number of sites

(C)

Number of sites

(B)

Number of sites

Arginine
Serine

Mesophilic to
Thermophilic

Threonine

Mesophilic to
Thermophilic

Figure 7 Substitutions at the structurally equivalent positions of significant amino acid types in thermophiles for the b-jelly roll fold
based on pairwise structural alignments. Statistically significant amino acid types are (A) glutamic acid, (B) arginine, (C) leucine, (D) histidine,
(E) serine, and (F) threonine. Structurally equivalent positions of aligned amino acids between mesophilic endoglucanases and their structurally
similar thermophilic counterpart were analyzed for substitutions. The x-axis shows the type or class of amino acids substituted in mesophiles ((a)(d)) and in thermophiles ((e) and (f)). The count of substitution sites is plotted as a histogram for the following pair shown in Figure 3B:
Rhodotermus marinus (Ca trace colored in red, pdb id: 2bw8) and mesophile Streptomyces lividans (Ca trace colored in blue, pdb id: 2nlr).
Positions of the amino acids are shown in CPK model in superimposed protein structures, where they are differentially colored with respect to
atom type.

acids. It is however possible that because some thermophiles lived in acidic environments during their evolutionary history (as some still do), they might have a
preference for positively charged amino acids that is carried over the generations that mesophiles do not have a
need for. For the Ser and Thr positions (significant
among mesophiles) the thermophilic protein has hydrophobic, acidic, and basic amino acids substituted. Interestingly, Thr is substituted with Gly in the thermophilic
protein at some positions.
In the (a/a)6 fold (Figure 8), Glu and Val are replaced
with polar amino acids and to a lesser extent with other
amino acid groups. Gln (significant in mesophiles) is substituted to a large extent by hydrophobic, acidic and to a
lesser extent with basic amino acid groups in thermophiles indicating that in the thermophilic protein these

substitutions contribute towards more intramolecular
interactions and extend stability to proteins at higher
temperatures such as has been suggested previously as
inducing better hydrophobic cores and packing [8].
Comparison to previous family-level and proteome-level
studies

Comparing our results to the previously reported thermophilic-mesophilic comparative studies, we find that
observations made for analysis across diverse families of
proteins do not necessarily correspond with our familyspecific analysis.
For example, Chakravarty and Varadarajan had
reported [16] that Val and Glu were significantly higher
in thermophiles, which matches only to (a/a) 6 fold.
Also, we find that Glu is significant only in b-jelly roll

(C)

Number of sites

(B)

Number of sites

(A)

Number of sites

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Page 12 of 15

Glutamic Acid

Thermophilic
to Mesophilic

Valine

Thermophilic
to Mesophilic

Glutamine

Mesophilic to
Thermophilic

Figure 8 Substitutions at the structurally equivalent positions
of significant amino acid types in thermophiles for the (a/a)6
fold based on pairwise structural alignments. Statistically
significant amino acid types are (A) glutamic acid, (B) valine, and (C)
glutamine. Structurally equivalent positions of aligned amino acids
between mesophilic endoglucanases and their structurally similar
thermophilic counterpart were analyzed for substitutions. The x-axis
shows the type or class of amino acids substituted in mesophiles
((a) and (b)) and in thermophiles ((c)). The count of substitution sites
is plotted as a histogram for the following pair shown in Figure 3C
Clostridium thermocellum (Ca trace colored in red, pdb id: 1l1y) and
mesophile Clostridium cellulolyticum (Ca trace colored in blue, pdb
id: 1g9g). Positions of the amino acids are shown in CPK model in
superimposed protein structures where they are differentially
colored with respect to atom type.

fold and not in the (a/b) 8 fold. At the same time, we
observe that Gln, Ser, and Thr are significant in mesophiles which is in agreement to their results. However,
when it comes to surface accessibility, we do not find
any of the significant amino acids in thermophiles as
exposed (Figure 4) in the three folds, whereas Chakravarty and Varadarajan found that the significant amino
acids in thermophiles are significantly exposed to the
surface.

Kumar et al performed a detailed statistical analysis
for non-redundant dataset of 18 families [7]. A pair of
thermophilic and mesophilic with high structural similarity from each family was selected. Among the amino
acids, Arg and Tyr were found to be significantly higher
in thermophiles. Among the intramolecular interactions,
salt bridges, SC-SC hydrogen bonds were significantly
higher in thermophiles.
Comparing our results to Berezovsky et al [15] we also
find positively charged amino acids significantly higher
in thermophiles, specifically Arg and His. However, we
did not find another positively charged amino acid, Lys,
significant in thermophiles. Also, since our study
involved single-domain proteins we did not calculate as
to how the protein interface is stabilized in thermophilic
proteins.
Our results also agree with Berezovsky and Shakhnovich’s [5] observation about sequence dependent strong
interactions for thermostability. However, we see that
only the b-jelly roll fold has (MC-MC, Ionic, and
Cation-π) significant interactions in thermophiles.

Conclusions
Understanding the processes responsible for thermostability in endoglucanases is complicated by the large
range of structural and sequence diversity these enzymes
adopt. Previous studies to derive trends explaining thermostability have focused on large number of protein
families, but not necessarily on distinct folds of the
same enzyme. In this study we have analyzed the known
endoglucanase structures from the PDB and have shown
that protein folds rather than protein families are more
important when defining rules for thermophilicity. Previous studies [5,7] used the presence or absence of certain types of amino acids in secondary structures (helix,
sheet, and loop) as an indication of their role in thermostability. We observed a similar pattern for endoglucanases, as shown in Figure 3, but the types of amino
acids contributing to thermostability for the three specific folds studied here differ from those obtained using a
more diverse set of proteins. Comparisons between evolutionarily close pairs of thermophilic and mesophilic
endoglucanases in each of the fold, reinforces previous
assertions that charged amino acids (Arg, His, and Glu)
are important for stabilizing the protein at higher temperatures. But one should note that the solvent accessibility of these amino acids also plays a role.
When it comes to thermostability, there is a caveat of
applying general heuristic rules based on averaged properties to specific proteins: although thermostability in
endoglucanases is usually conferred through altering
amino acid composition, in some cases even a singlepoint mutation is sufficient to convert a mesophilic protein into a thermophilic protein [14].

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

Upon analyzing the amino acid compositions and
intramolecular interactions for the three folds adopted
by endoglucanases a paradoxical picture emerges.
Namely, although some amino acids are far more significant in thermophiles or mesophiles, they may not significantly alter the overall intramolecular interactions. For
example, in the (a/b)8 fold, Arg is statistically significant, but ionic interactions are not statistically significant within this fold. Similarly in the b-jelly roll fold,
Cys is statistically significant, but the disulfide bridges
are not significant. We see a similar pattern for the
(a/a)6 fold where although Glu is statistically significant,
none of the intramolecular interactions are. These
results suggest that subtle changes in interactions act as
driving factors for thermostability.
For thermophilic proteins, distinct folds have distinct
factors that contribute to thermostability, suggesting a
fold-specific protein analysis requirement to understand
thermostability. Understanding the basis for thermostability aids in engineering enhanced protein activity,
which can lead to more cost effective processes for
many industrial applications. Our study sheds light on
endoglucanases, which could possibly be exploited to
increase biofuels crop production by designing a more
efficient endoglucanase enzyme. The enzymes currently
used in converting biomass to bioethanol for biofuel
production have been derived from microorganisms.
Unfortunately there are serious technological limitations
on biofuel production due to low yield and high production costs for pre-processing enzymes like endoglucanases. Thus the ability to insert a more efficiently
designed thermophilic endoglucanase into maize would
be very exciting [1].

Methods
Protein Dataset

A dataset of endoglucanase protein structures was
obtained from the more than 100 glycoside hydrolase
(GH) families within the Carbohydrate-Active enZymes
database (CAZy) [38]. The enzyme classification number
3.2.1.4 was used to identify all endoglucanases from
these various GH families and group them based upon
their three-dimensional structural fold. Endoglucanase
structures determined by either X-ray crystallography or
NMR spectroscopy were classified into one of three
structural folds: (a/b)8, b-jelly roll, or (a/a)6. Using the
primary citation of the PDB structure for conformation,
each protein was identified as either thermophilic and
mesophilic in the following manner: if the source organism’s optimum growth temperature (TL) is above 40°C,
then the protein was classified as thermophilic; if not, as
mesophilic. We note that although the melting temperature (Tm) of a given protein is a better indicator of its
thermostability than growth temperature of the

Page 13 of 15

organism, the melting temperature is not often widely
available. For instance we sought Tm values for all the
proteins in our dataset from the ProTherm database
[39], but except for one thermophilic protein (pdb id:
1olr) and for one mesophilic protein (pdb id: 1oa2) the
Tm values are unavailable. Previous studies comparing
thermophilic and mesophilic proteins also have mentioned that unavailability of Tm values is a limiting factor [7]. Since we are only using this information to
broadly classify proteins as thermophilic or mesophilic
rather than define a direct correlation with Tm, we follow the precedent of classifying by TL [7].
To ensure a similar degree of sequence variation
within each of these protein subsets, proteins with
greater than 70% sequence and structural similarity
were removed using PISCES [40]. For a given set of
PDB entries, PISCES uses Combinatorial Extension (CE)
algorithm and PSI-BLAST alignments to create a subset
of proteins that are evolutionarily related, but with low
sequence identity. Our final datasets, listed in Table 1,
contained 17 thermophiles and 13 mesophiles.
Comparisons of sequence and structure based features

Following the results of previous thermophilic-mesophilic comparison studies [7,8], we calculated the statistical
significance for several potentially stabilizing features
derived from endoglucanase sequences and structures.
Statistical significance was defined as having a p-value
less than 5.0 × 10 -2 (95% confidence interval) in an
unpaired two-tail t-test using the statistical software R
[41] between differences in mesophilic and thermophilic
proteins. All the structures in Table 1 are divided into
thermophilic and mesophilic structure sets. The amino
acid frequency for each type of amino acid was calculated for each protein. These amino acid frequencies
were averaged within the family and used as input into
the t-tests to determine which, if any, amino acids displayed a statistically significant difference. When an
amino acid was observed to be statistically significant,
(p < 0.05) then the set, thermophilic or mesophilic, that
had a higher mean frequency was determined to be significantly richer in that amino acid. These tests were
repeated for three different groupings of thermophilic
and mesophilic sets: all endoglucanases, split by their
catalytic mechanism, split by their fold. Additional features based upon intramolecular interactions and relative amino acid environment were compared in similar
ways.
DSSP [42] was used to determine the secondary structure of proteins. We used the following scheme to translate eight-letter DSSP code into a three-class scheme
where secondary structure states of a helix (H), 3-10
helix (G), and π helix (I) are translated into helix; isolated b-bridge (B) and extended strand (E) are translated

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

into sheet; and hydrogen bonded turn (T) and bend (S)
are translated into loop. We also used DSSP to obtain a
measure of relative solvent accessibility, A i , for each
residue, i. Equation 1 describes how the relative solvent
accessibility is calculated.

Page 14 of 15

Additional material
Additional file 1: Intramolecular interactions count for the three
folds.
Additional file 2: Results of unpaired t-test.
Additional file 3: Count of statistically significant amino acids.

(DSSP solvent accessibility) i
Ai 
(1)
Maximum accessibility for residue of type i

As suggested previously, this relative solvent accessibility, Ai, was classified as: (1) buried if less than 9%, (2)
intermediate if between 9-36% and (3) exposed if more
than 36% [43]. Another t-test was used to identify statistically significance differences between mesophilic and
thermophilic endoglucanases for any amino acids with
these various accessibility states. In these tests, the
count of each type of amino acid participating in an
accessibility state or secondary structure class was normalized by the total number of that particular amino
acid type in each protein.
Finally the Protein Interaction Calculator (PIC) [44]
was used to calculate the intramolecular interactions,
such as hydrophobic interactions; hydrogen bond interactions (main chain-main chain (MC-MC), main chainside chain (MC-SC), and side chain-side chain (SC-SC));
disulphide bridges; ionic interactions (distance cutoff of
6Å) [45]; aromatic-aromatic interactions (distance cutoff
of 4.5Å to 7Å) [46]; aromatic-sulfur interactions
(distance cutoff of 5.3Å) [47]; and cation-π interactions
(distance cutoff of 6Å) [48]. For statistical analysis, the
number of interactions in each category was normalized
by the number of residues in each protein.
Phylogenetic analysis of thermophilic and mesophilic
proteins

In order to identify similar regions in evolutionary
related thermophiles and mesophiles, we structurally
aligned proteins using the multiple structure alignment
tool CE [49]. To check the accuracy of alignments we
analyzed if the catalytic residues were aligned among
the thermophiles and mesophiles. The results were
visualized using PyMol [50]. With this simple check for
alignment performance, we used the PHYlogeny Inference Package (PHYLIP) [51] to construct a phylogenetic
tree of endoglucanases. The structure based multiple
sequence alignments were given as input to PHYLIP
and distances were calculated using maximum likelihood
estimates based on the Jones-Taylor-Thornton matrix
[52]. Then, a neighbor-joining method was used to cluster the sequences using the distance matrix. Based on
the clustered phylogenetic tree, we identified at least
one pair of thermophilic and mesophilic proteins for
each fold, that are structurally similar and evolutionarily
related.

Additional file 4: Results of unpaired t-test, showing the p-value of
statistically significant amino acids (bold and underlined) for secondary
structure and relative surface accessibility preferences in thermophiles.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their highly
appreciated comments. This project is supported by the Biotechnology Risk
Assessment Program Competitive Grant no. 2008-33522-04758 from the
USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture and USDA-Agricultural
Research Service.

Author details
Department of Genetics, Development and Cell Biology, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50011, USA. 2Department of Physics, Indiana UniversityPurdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. 3Biosafety
Institute for Genetically Modified Agricultural Products and Department of
Agronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA. 4U.S. Department of
Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service, Corn Insects and Crop Genomics
Research Unit, Ames, IA, 50011, USA. 5Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology Program, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 50011, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
TZS and JDW conceived the study and participated in its design and
coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. RMY conducted the
studies and drafted the manuscript. AJR gave valuable suggestions and
finalized the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 3 June 2010 Accepted: 3 February 2011
Published: 3 February 2011
References
1. Ransom C, Balan V, Biswas G, Dale B, Crockett E, Sticklen M: Heterologous
Acidothermus cellulolyticus 1,4-β-endoglucanase E1 produced within
the corn biomass converts corn stover into glucose. Applied Biochemistry
and Biotechnology 2007, 137-140:207-219.
2. Wood TM, McCrae SI: The cellulase of Trichoderma koningii. Purification
and properties of some endoglucanase components with special
reference to their action on cellulose when acting alone and in
synergism with the cellobiohydrolase. Biochem J 1978, 171:61-72.
3. Valjamae P, Sild V, Nutt A, Pettersson G, Johansson G: Acid hydrolysis of
bacterial cellulose reveals different modes of synergistic action between
cellobiohydrolase I and endoglucanase I. Eur J Biochem 1999, 266:327-334.
4. Hilden L, Johansson G: Recent developments on cellulases and
carbohydrate-binding modules with cellulose affinity. Biotechnol Lett
2004, 26:1683-1693.
5. Berezovsky IN, Shakhnovich EI: Physics and evolution of thermophilic
adaptation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:12742-12747.
6. Hsiang-Chuan L: A Novel Prediction Algorithm of Thermostable Proteins
by Using Hurst Exponent and Choquet Integral Regression Model.Edited
by: Yu-Chieh T, Bai-Cheng J, Tung-Sheng L 2008, 147-152.
7. Kumar S, Tsai CJ, Nussinov R: Factors enhancing protein thermostability.
Protein Eng 2000, 13:179-191.
8. Sadeghi M, Naderi-Manesh H, Zarrabi M, Ranjbar B: Effective factors in
thermostability of thermophilic proteins. Biophys Chem 2006, 119:256-270.
9. Razvi A, Scholtz JM: Lessons in stability from thermophilic proteins.
Protein Sci 2006, 15:1569-1578.
10. Glyakina AV, Garbuzynskiy SO, Lobanov MY, Galzitskaya OV: Different
packing of external residues can explain differences in the
thermostability of proteins from thermophilic and mesophilic organisms.
Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2231-2238.

Yennamalli et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:10
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/10

11. Gromiha MM, Oobatake M, Sarai A: Important amino acid properties for
enhanced thermostability from mesophilic to thermophilic proteins.
Biophys Chem 1999, 82:51-67.
12. Panasik N, Brenchley JE, Farber GK: Distributions of structural features
contributing to thermostability in mesophilic and thermophilic alpha/
beta barrel glycosyl hydrolases. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000, 1543:189-201.
13. Sonia M De Freitas, Werner L Treptow, Fabricia P De Faria, Maristela De
O Azevedo, Maigret B: Structural Contributions for Thermostability of a
New Endo-1,4-beta-xylanase from the Fungus Humicola grisea. Internet
Electronic Journal of Molecular Design 2003, 2:835-851.
14. Sandgren M, Gualfetti PJ, Shaw A, Gross LS, Saldajeno M, Day AG, Jones TA,
Mitchinson C: Comparison of family 12 glycoside hydrolases and
recruited substitutions important for thermal stability. Protein Sci 2003,
12:848-860.
15. Ma BG, Goncearenco A, Berezovsky IN: Thermophilic adaptation of protein
complexes inferred from proteomic homology modeling. Structure 2010,
18:819-828.
16. Chakravarty S, Varadarajan R: Elucidation of factors responsible for
enhanced thermal stability of proteins: a structural genomics based
study. Biochemistry 2002, 41:8152-8161.
17. Bell GS, Russell RJ, Connaris H, Hough DW, Danson MJ, Taylor GL: Stepwise
adaptations of citrate synthase to survival at life’s extremes. From
psychrophile to hyperthermophile. Eur J Biochem 2002, 269:6250-6260.
18. Arnold FH, Giver L, Gershenson A, Zhao H, Miyazaki K: Directed evolution
of mesophilic enzymes into their thermophilic counterparts. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1999, 870:400-403.
19. Perl D, Mueller U, Heinemann U, Schmid FX: Two exposed amino acid
residues confer thermostability on a cold shock protein. Nat Struct Mol
Biol 2000, 7:380-383.
20. Uversky VN: Intrinsically disordered proteins and their environment:
effects of strong denaturants, temperature, pH, counter ions,
membranes, binding partners, osmolytes, and macromolecular
crowding. Protein J 2009, 28:305-325.
21. Kumar N, Shukla S, Kumar S, Suryawanshi A, Chaudhry U, Ramachandran S,
Maiti S: Intrinsically disordered protein from a pathogenic mesophile
Mycobacterium tuberculosis adopts structured conformation at high
temperature. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 2008,
71:1123-1133.
22. Tantos A, Friedrich P, Tompa P: Cold stability of intrinsically disordered
proteins. FEBS Lett 2009, 583:465-469.
23. Stebbins CE, Galan JE: Structural mimicry in bacterial virulence. Nature
2001, 412:701-705.
24. Sharon N, Lis H: How proteins bind carbohydrates: lessons from legume
lectins. J Agric Food Chem 2002, 50:6586-6591.
25. Aminetzach YT, Srouji JR, Kong CY, Hoekstra HE: Convergent Evolution of
Novel Protein Function in Shrew and Lizard Venom. Current Biology 2009,
19:1925-1931.
26. Barten R, Torkar M, Haude A, Trowsdale J, Wilson MJ: Divergent and
convergent evolution of NK-cell receptors. Trends Immunol 2001, 22:52-57.
27. Bork P, Sander C, Valencia A: Convergent evolution of similar enzymatic
function on different protein folds: The hexokinase, ribokinase, and
galactokinase families of sugar kinases. Protein Science 1993, 2:31-40.
28. Henrissat B, Bairoch A: Updating the sequence-based classification of
glycosyl hydrolases. Biochem J 1996, 316(Pt 2):695-696.
29. Sandgren M, Stahlberg J, Mitchinson C: Structural and biochemical studies
of GH family 12 cellulases: improved thermal stability, and ligand
complexes. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 2005, 89:246-291.
30. Oraby H, Venkatesh B, Dale B, Ahmad R, Ransom C, Oehmke J, Sticklen M:
Enhanced conversion of plant biomass into glucose using transgenic
rice-produced endoglucanase for cellulosic ethanol. Transgenic Res 2007,
16:739-749.
31. Lopez-Casado G, Urbanowicz BR, Damasceno CM, Rose JK: Plant glycosyl
hydrolases and biofuels: a natural marriage. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2008,
11:329-337.
32. Wierenga RK: The TIM-barrel fold: a versatile framework for efficient
enzymes. FEBS Lett 2001, 492:193-198.
33. Alzari PM, Souchon H, Dominguez R: The crystal structure of
endoglucanase CelA, a family 8 glycosyl hydrolase from Clostridium
thermocellum. Structure 1996, 4:265-275.
34. Guimaraes BG, Souchon H, Lytle BL, David Wu JH, Alzari PM: The crystal
structure and catalytic mechanism of cellobiohydrolase CelS, the major

Page 15 of 15

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.
41.
42.

43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.

50.
51.
52.

enzymatic component of the Clostridium thermocellum Cellulosome.
J Mol Biol 2002, 320:587-596.
Guerin DM, Lascombe MB, Costabel M, Souchon H, Lamzin V, Beguin P,
Alzari PM: Atomic (0.94 A) resolution structure of an inverting
glycosidase in complex with substrate. J Mol Biol 2002, 316:1061-1069.
Vogt G, Woell S, Argos P: Protein thermal stability, hydrogen bonds, and
ion pairs. J Mol Biol 1997, 269:631-643.
Beeby M, O’Connor BD, Ryttersgaard C, Boutz DR, Perry LJ, Yeates TO: The
genomics of disulfide bonding and protein stabilization in thermophiles.
PLoS Biol 2005, 3:e309.
Cantarel BL, Coutinho PM, Rancurel C, Bernard T, Lombard V, Henrissat B:
The Carbohydrate-Active EnZymes database (CAZy): an expert resource
for Glycogenomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D233-238.
Kumar MD, Bava KA, Gromiha MM, Prabakaran P, Kitajima K, Uedaira H,
Sarai A: ProTherm and ProNIT: thermodynamic databases for proteins
and protein-nucleic acid interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:D204-206.
Wang G, Dunbrack RL, Jr : PISCES: a protein sequence culling server.
Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1589-1591.
R-Development-Core-Team: R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2008.
Kabsch W, Sander C: Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern
recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features. Biopolymers
1983, 22:2577-2637.
Rost B, Sander C: Conservation and prediction of solvent accessibility in
protein families. Proteins 1994, 20:216-226.
Tina KG, Bhadra R, Srinivasan N: PIC: Protein Interactions Calculator. Nucleic
Acids Res 2007, 35:W473-476.
Barlow DJ, Thornton JM: Ion-pairs in proteins. J Mol Biol 1983, 168:867-885.
Burley SK, Petsko GA: Aromatic-aromatic interaction: a mechanism of
protein structure stabilization. Science 1985, 229:23-28.
Reid KSC, Lindley PF, Thornton JM: Sulphur-aromatic interactions in
proteins. FEBS Letters 1985, 190:209-213.
Sathyapriya R, Vishveshwara S: Interaction of DNA with clusters of amino
acids in proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:4109-4118.
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: Protein structure alignment by incremental
combinatorial extension (CE) of the optimal path. Protein Eng 1998,
11:739-747.
DeLano WL: The PyMOL User’s Manual. Book The PyMOL User’s Manual
City: DeLano Scientific, Palo Alto, CA, USA; 2002, (Editor ed.^eds.).
Felsenstein J: PHYLIP-Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2). Cladistics
1989, 5:164-166.
Jones DT, Taylor WR, Thornton JM: The rapid generation of mutation data
matrices from protein sequences. Comput Appl Biosci 1992, 8:275-282.

doi:10.1186/1472-6807-11-10
Cite this article as: Yennamalli et al.: Thermostability in endoglucanases
is fold-specific. BMC Structural Biology 2011 11:10.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
