<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>454 sequencing reveals extreme complexity of the class II Major Histocompatibility Complex in the collared flycatcher</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-395"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Magdalena Zagalska-Neubauer"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

454 sequencing reveals extreme complexity of
the class II Major Histocompatibility Complex in
the collared flycatcher
Magdalena Zagalska-Neubauer1,2†, Wiesław Babik1†, Michał Stuglik1, Lars Gustafsson3, Mariusz Cichoń1,
Jacek Radwan1*

Abstract
Background: Because of their functional significance, the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class I and II
genes have been the subject of continuous interest in the fields of ecology, evolution and conservation. In some
vertebrate groups MHC consists of multiple loci with similar alleles; therefore, the multiple loci must be genotyped
simultaneously. In such complex systems, understanding of the evolutionary patterns and their causes has been
limited due to challenges posed by genotyping.
Results: Here we used 454 amplicon sequencing to characterize MHC class IIB exon 2 variation in the collared
flycatcher, an important organism in evolutionary and immuno-ecological studies. On the basis of over 152,000
sequencing reads we identified 194 putative alleles in 237 individuals. We found an extreme complexity of the
MHC class IIB in the collared flycatchers, with our estimates pointing to the presence of at least nine expressed loci
and a large, though difficult to estimate precisely, number of pseudogene loci. Many similar alleles occurred in the
pseudogenes indicating either a series of recent duplications or extensive concerted evolution. The expressed
alleles showed unambiguous signals of historical selection and the occurrence of apparent interlocus exchange of
alleles. Placing the collared flycatcher’s MHC sequences in the context of passerine diversity revealed transspecific
MHC class II evolution within the Muscicapidae family.
Conclusions: 454 amplicon sequencing is an effective tool for advancing our understanding of the MHC class II
structure and evolutionary patterns in Passeriformes. We found a highly dynamic pattern of evolution of MHC class
IIB genes with strong signals of selection and pronounced sequence divergence in expressed genes, in contrast to
the apparent sequence homogenization in pseudogenes. We show that next generation sequencing offers a
universal, affordable method for the characterization and, in perspective, genotyping of MHC systems of virtually
any complexity.

Background
The Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) includes
the most polymorphic genes in vertebrates [1]. MHC
polymorphism is functionally relevant and is thought to
be maintained by selection through the mechanisms of
heterozygote advantage and frequency dependence, driven by the host-pathogen interactions and, in some
cases, disassortative mating preferences (reviewed in
* Correspondence: jacek.radwan@uj.edu.pl
† Contributed equally
1
Institute of Environmental Sciences, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7,
30-387 Kraków, Poland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

[2]). The products of the MHC genes are involved in
triggering the adaptive immune response against pathogens [1], and may also play a role in mate choice and
individual recognition (reviewed in [3,4]). Because of
their functional significance, MHC class I and II genes
have been the subject of continuous interest in the fields
of ecology, evolution and conservation (reviewed in
[2,3,5,6]).
Usually, multiple MHC class I and II loci are present
in a given species. In some species, genes within each
class are both structurally and functionally divergent [7].
However, in other groups multiple loci may contain
similar (and thus presumably more or less functionally

© 2010 Zagalska-Neubauer et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

equivalent) alleles, or identical alleles may even be
shared among loci [8,9]. Repeated expansions and contractions of the number of MHC loci observed in several
vertebrate groups are thought to result from frequent
duplications followed by a birth and death process
[10-12]. In some taxa, concerted evolution through gene
conversion appears to be important, and recombination
may generate additional variation [13-16]. These processes may be manifested at the population level by the
coexistence of haplotypes that differ in the number of
loci [17,18]. A comprehensive understanding of the
actual mechanisms that generate and maintain copy
number variation in the MHC requires substantial
population genomic information from multiple species.
A well-established consequence of the presence of
multiple loci containing similar or identical alleles and
of copy number variation is a relatively broad range of
per-individual number of alleles within a population. It
has been proposed that in such situations, selection may
favor individuals with an intermediate number of alleles
(reviewed in [3]). This may be due to the tradeoff
between the ability to present the maximum number of
pathogen antigens, which is positively correlated with
the number of MHC alleles, and the ability to invoke an
effective immune response, which may be negatively
correlated with individual MHC diversity because a
higher proportion of lymphocytes must be eliminated to
prevent immune autoaggression problems [19,20]. Data
from sticklebacks, sparrows and bank voles appear to
support the optimality hypothesis [21-24]. However, the
hypothesis remains controversial [25,26] and, for its
thorough evaluation, additional data from natural populations of species showing extensive variation in individual MHC diversity is necessary.
MHC structure differs substantially between bird species, even within the same family [27]. Some species,
such as chicken or parrots, have an extremely small,
compact MHC, dubbed “the minimal essential MHC”
[28,29]. Other birds, such as owls [30], exhibit more
complex MHC structure with multiple loci that may
retain orthologous relationships over long periods of
evolutionary time, a situation resembling the patterns
observed in mammals [7,12]. The MHC of passerine
birds is very complex, commonly consisting of multiple
expressed loci and pseudogenes [14,31-36]. The relationships among passerine MHC genes tend to mirror phylogeny, with sequences of multiple loci generally
grouped according to species, indicating that extensive
sequence exchange among loci occurs in these birds
[9,14]. Repeated rounds of duplication and homogenization via gene conversion or exon shuffling among genes
[8,14] are thought to be responsible for this pattern.
The approximate number of MHC loci in passerines has
been estimated through Southern Blot experiments

Page 2 of 15

followed by limited cloning and sequencing [33,37].
Although this approach readily distinguishes between
simple and complex systems, and may provide information about the relationships among loci, it is not well
suited for studying the patterns of sequence variation in
multilocus systems. A comprehensive characterization of
such complex systems, which is necessary for the understanding of their evolution, requires extensive sampling
of sequences from individuals and across multiple individuals. Genomic data on the MHC organization, which
provide precise estimates of the number of MHC loci
(although, typically, do not allow to assess among-individual variation) have been obtained so far only for one
passerine species - the zebra finch [36].
Because of the presence of multiple MHC loci with
generally similar alleles, which may probably be
regarded as functionally equivalent, passerine birds are
an ideal system for studying the relationship between
the strength of immune response, mate choice and individual MHC diversity, as measured by the number and
the sequence divergence of MHC alleles. However, an
efficient and reliable genotyping method is a prerequisite
for such studies.
The presence of multiple, often similar alleles that
commonly cannot be assigned to loci and must be genotyped simultaneously poses substantial methodological
challenges [38]. None of the methods that have been
widely used in the field offer straightforward, reliable
and accurate genotyping that is scalable to systems of
arbitrary complexity [38]. The advent of next generation
sequencing (NGS) technologies (reviewed in [39]) has
brought the promise of such a method. Indeed one of
the NGS technologies, 454 pyrosequencing, has already
been successfully applied for genotyping complex multilocus MHC systems [24,40]. Reliability of 454 genotyping in multilocus was verified by cloning [24] and by
replicate genotyping [24,41]. Next generation sequencing
technologies have several key advantages for MHC genotyping. They are equivalent to cloning single-stranded
DNA molecules derived from amplicons in a cell-free
system, thus they avoid artifacts commonly observed
during cloning in biological vectors and propagation in
bacteria [42,43]. Parallel sequencing of clonally amplified
templates produces hundreds of thousands of sequencing reads and does not require colony picking, clone
handling and Sanger sequencing, the costly and timeconsuming procedures that have limited the throughput
of traditional cloning approaches. With NGS, the coverage of several hundreds or thousands of sequencing
reads per amplicon can be achieved at a moderate cost
of a few euro per sample, massive multiplexing allowing
simultaneous analysis of hundreds or thousands of samples in a single analysis is possible, and analyses can be
completed within days. The major problem with

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

applying NGS technologies to MHC genotyping appears
distinguishing true alleles from various kinds of artifacts
[40,41]. However this problem is common to all PCRbased methods [38].
Here, we used 454 pyrosequencing to assess the MHC
class IIB variation in the collared flycatcher with two
major goals in mind. First, we used the massive amount
of sequence data produced in our experiment to
advance the understanding of the evolutionary patterns
and processes occurring in the passerine MHC. Specifically, we were interested in: i) estimating the number of
MHC class IIB loci, with special emphasis on expressed
loci, ii) comparing patterns of diversity among expressed
and pseudogene sequences to infer the mechanisms
driving their evolution and iii) evaluating the relationship of the collared flycatcher MHC class IIB sequences
with the MHC II of other Passerine species. Second,
we aimed to establish a foundation for genotyping
the MHC in a model organism for evolutionary and
immuno-ecological studies [44-46]. Interpretation of the
large body of data regarding parasite load, immune
response and mating preferences in this species can
greatly benefit from an immunogenetic perspective.

Page 3 of 15

outlier, as the next lowest coverage was 182) to 1022.
Taking into account the misassignment rate given
above, we expected an average of less than two misassigned reads per amplicon, but given sequence differences between used tags, probably even less. Among
20,060 unique sequences, there were 13,927 singletons
(9.2% of all reads) and 6,133 variants represented by at
least two reads.
Sequence diversity and expression status

In this study, 194 sequence variants fulfilled the criteria
for distinguishing true alleles from artifacts resulting
from PCR (base substitutions and chimeras) and 454
sequencing (substitutions and indels) and are further
considered as putative alleles (PA). Cloning and Sanger
sequencing of cDNA from three additional individuals
revealed twelve alleles (adding seven new variants to the
list). Sequences of all variants were deposited in GenBank (accession numbers: HQ678311-HQ678511) The
relationships among PA are shown in Figure 1. Inspection of the tree reveals the presence of two clusters
(I and II), each with a considerable number of PA.

Results
Sequencing

A part of the exon 2 of the MHC class II B gene was
amplified and sequenced for 237 collared flycatchers; 39
individuals were amplified twice with different tags and
two individuals were amplified three times. Thus, a total
of 280 amplicons were sequenced. We obtained 152,053
188-bp sequences with complete tags. Only 35 tagged
primers were used for amplification, however theoretically any of 4,096 possible 6-bp tag sequences could
have been generated via errors in primer synthesis and/
or sequencing. We obtained 502 reads with tags that did
not match any of the used tag sequences; these reads
comprised 0.33% of all reads. To estimate the maximum
level of misassignment of reads to amplicons, we needed
to consider the proportion of unused tags which was
99.1%. Therefore, the maximum level of misassignment
was approximately equal to the fraction of reads with
tags not used in the amplification primers, i.e. 0.33%.
Although the estimated level of misassignment was
about two times higher than reported previously [40,47],
it was still low enough to ensure that misassigned reads
are rare, and as such will not affect the outcome of genotyping, which requires an allele to be present in multiple reads. Moreover, tags differed from each other by at
least three substitutions, which reduces the chance of
misassignment although does not eliminate it entirely,
because of indel mutations.
The mean coverage (number of reads per amplicon)
was 541 ± (SD) 166 and ranged from 88 (an apparent

Cluster I
82

100

*
65

*

*

*

*

*
*

*
*

*
*
*
*

Group II.A

*

*
*

Cluster II
*

*
*

*
*

*

* *

*
*

0.05

Figure 1 Relationship among the MHC class II alleles. Neighbor
Joining tree showing relationships among the collared flycatcher
MHC class II putative alleles. Sequences obtained from cDNA are
marked red. The tree was constructed from the matrix of TamuraNei nucleotide distances and rooted with the chicken sequence
(not shown). The robustness of the tree was tested with 1000
bootstrap replicates, bootstrap supports for major clades are
indicated with numbers, and other bootstrap values higher than
70% are marked with asterisks.

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

However, the PA in these clusters show dissimilar patterns of divergence. While most PA in cluster I are
extremely similar to each other, commonly differing by
only one substitution (Figure 1), cluster II PA are on
average much more divergent, forming multiple lineages
that are considerably different from each other. The
relationships among these lineages are poorly resolved.
A group of 20 very similar PA (group II.A) stands out
among other cluster II sequences. Group II.A is strongly
supported, with 100% bootstrap support and is separated by a long branch from other cluster II PA.
The pronounced differences in the degree of divergence among PA in various parts of the tree may
indicate that these variants experienced different evolutionary histories. A likely explanation for the dissimilar
patterns is that multiple evolutionary mechanisms
played a predominant role in shaping the diversity of
sequences depicted in Figure 1. Important insights in
this respect are provided by an analysis of expression.
All sequence variants obtained from cDNAs by cloning
and Sanger sequencing fell into cluster II. Five of twelve
variants supported by at least two clones were identical
to PA obtained in the 454 run. None of the expressed
sequences fell into cluster I or into group II.A. Most of
the cluster I PA contained a 1 or 2-bp deletion in the
middle of exon 2, causing a frameshift. Putative alleles
in group II.A contained two deletions, 9-bp and 1-bp,
also resulting in a frameshift. Taken together, these
observations constitute strong evidence that cluster I
and group II.A PA represent nonfunctional pseudogenes. Two observations suggest that most of the
sequences in cluster II (excluding group II.A) may be
functional MHC class IIB alleles. First, sequences
obtained from cDNA are widely distributed across the
tree, falling into many divergent lineages (Figure 1). Second, no frameshift mutations or stop codons occur in
any sequences.
It should be noted here, that, due to higher sequence
similarity among cluster I pseudogenes compared to
cluster II putative expressed alleles (PEA), our criteria
for distinguishing artifacts from true alleles (detailed in
Methods) were more conservative for cluster I pseudogenes than for PEA. This is because, if many sequences
differ by only 1-2 substitutions, many of them can be
interpreted as chimeras between other very similar
sequences. The consequences of this is illustrated by
the fact that from 157 cluster II PEA which passed the
preliminary 2-PCRs-3-copies-in-each criterion, 146
(93.0%) were retained after the PCR chimera filtering
step. On the contrary, from 225 cluster I pseudogene
sequences only 28 (12.4%) were retained. Thus, many
more of true cluster I pseudogene alleles than the
number we estimated are certainly present in the collared flycatchers.

Page 4 of 15

An inspection of the sequences of PAs indicated that
for the studies requiring efficient genotyping of functional MHC class IIB variation, the coverage required
may be considerably reduced by preventing amplification of the cluster I sequences by extending the forward
primer by one base pair (G) in the 3’ direction, since all
cluster II sequences contain a G in this position,
whereas all cluster I sequences have a C or T.
Estimating the number of MHC class IIB loci

The maximum number of PEA per individual provides
an estimate of the number of expressed MHC class IIB
loci in the collared flycatcher. Counting only PEA present in at least two reads per amplicon, the maximum
number of alleles per individual was 18 (mean = 9.6 ±
(SD) 3.2). It is possible however, that some of variants
present in any given individual are in fact PCR chimeras
identical to PEA. To evaluate this possibility we checked
genotypes of all nine amplicons with the highest number
of PEAs (16-18), and in each amplicon discarded all
PEAs which could have been classified as PCR chimeras
of more abundant (as measured by the number of reads)
PEAs. In four amplicons there were no such variants, in
two aplicons one variant, in two amplicons two variants,
and in one amplicon three possible PCR chimeras were
present. It should be noted here, that these variants
were not necessarily PCR chimeras, because true recombinant alleles may co-occur with both parental
sequences in some individuals. Thus, excluding all such
cases gives a conservative estimate of the maximum
number of PEA per individual at 17 alleles, corresponding to at least nine expressed loci.
Estimation of the maximum number of pseudogene
loci is more difficult for two reasons. First, as explained
in the previous section, a substantial and difficult to
estimate number of true pseudogene alleles were
excluded from the analysis because they could not be
reliably distinguished from PCR chimaeras on the level
of the full dataset. Second, again due to a very high
sequence similarity among pseudogene alleles, on the
individual level, true pseudogene alleles may often be
explained as chimeras, therefore an analysis similar to
this performed for PEA in the above paragraph would
not reflect any biological reality. Signalling these serious
limitations imposed by the nature of the data, we do not
want to leave the reader without an idea about the maximum number of pseudogene loci. Therefore we present
maximum numbers based on at least two reads for
amplicon, similarly as these for PEA. The maximum
number of cluster I pseudogene alleles was 19 (mean =
12.7, SD = 2.4) and that of the group II.A was 9
(mean = 2.64, SD = 1.3). These estimates thus point to
the presence of at least 10 cluster I and at least 5 group
II. A pseudogene loci in the collared flycatcher.

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

Page 5 of 15

Replicate genotypes, derived from two or three independent amplicons, were obtained for 41 individuals.
On average 24.6 PA were present in both (or all three
in case of triplicated samples) replicates (at least one
read in each), and 4.6 in only one replicate (a PA must
have been present in at least two reads in one replicate
and in no reads in the second replicate). The respective
values for PEA were 9.6 and 2.5, for cluster I 12.4 and
0.4 and for group II.A 2.4 and 0.4. A relatively high
number of alleles, which were not confirmed across
replicates, again indicate that coverage was not sufficient
for replicate genotyping, the effect was particularly
strong for PEA, as expected. As PEA constituted on
average 16% of reads, slightly less than 90 reads of PEA
per amplicon were obtained on average, which is not
sufficient for reliable genotyping of even 4 loci (the
maximum allowed by program) according to the criteria
of Galan et al. [41] based on an idealized model assuming equal amplification of all alleles. Thus this coverage
is even more inadequate for nine loci estimated in the
present paper.
Signatures of natural selection and recombination

Codon-based tests of natural selection were performed
separately for putative expressed alleles, cluster I pseudogenes and group II.A pseudogenes (Tables 1 and 2).
In order to keep the open reading frame, pseudogene
sequences required the removal of some alignment columns and sequences exhibiting internal stop codons.
In cluster II, for both putative expressed alleles and
group II.A pseudogenes, the model of codon evolution
allowing for positive selection produced a much better
fit to the data than one dN/dS ratio (M0) or nearly
neutral (M7) models (Table 1). However, only the
expressed alleles showed a highly significant excess of

Table 2 Synonymous and nonsynonymous rates
Sites

dN

dS

Z

P

Cluster I putative psudogenes
All

0.033(0.007)

0.029(0.008)

0.37

0.71

ABS

0.029(0.011)

0.047(0.029)

-0.64

0.52

non-ABS

0.035(0.009)

0.024(0.010)

0.91

0.36

Cluster II putative expressed alleles
All

0.210(0.032)

0.119(0.032)

1.97

0.051

ABS

0.455(0.081)

0.128(0.054)

3.30

0.001*

non-ABS

0.139(0.033)
0.117(0.035)
0.55
Group II.A - putative pseudogenes

0.58

All

0.021(0.009)

0.007(0.008)

1.29

0.20

ABS

0.019(0.013)

0.000(0.000)

1.65

0.10

non-ABS

0.022(0.010)

0.009(0.008)

0.95

0.34

The average rates of nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site
(dN) and synonymous substitutions per synonymous sites (dS) computed
according to the Nei-Gojobori method, with standard errors obtained through
1000 bootstrap replicates in parentheses, and the results of the Z test of
neutrality. * denotes significant P.

nonsynonymous substitutions in the putative Antigen
Binding Sites (ABS), but not in non-ABS, and extreme
nonsynonymous divergence in ABS (Table 2). In the
expressed alleles, the Bayes Empirical Bayes procedure
identified thirteen codons as evolving under positive
selection (Figure 2, all posterior probabilities (PP) ≥
0.98). Six of these were located in ABS, the proportion
of positively selected codons did not differ between
ABS and non-ABS (P = 0.16, Fisher’s exact test). An
excess of nonsynonymous substitutions in either ABS
or non-ABS was not observed for pseudogene
sequences (Table 2). The two positively-selected
codons detected in the group II.A pseudogenes were
not located in ABS. For cluster I pseudogenes, the
nearly neutral model of codon evolution (M7) fitted

Table 1 Evaluation of the goodness of fit for different models of codon evolution and estimated parameter values
Model

lnL

ΔAIC

Parameters

Cluster I putative pseudogenes
M0 - one ω

-525.2

7.0

M7 - nearly neutral with beta

-520.7

best

M8 - positive selection with beta (ω0 ≤ 1, ω1 > 1)

-520.3

3.2

ω = 0.568
p0 = 0.925, p1 = 0.075, ω1 = 3.133

Cluster II putative expressed alleles
M0 - one ω

-4108.8

931.4

M7 - nearly neutral with beta

-3744.3

118.2

M8 - positive selection with beta (ω0 ≤ 1, ω1 > 1)

-3685.6

best

ω = 0.687
p0 = 0.748, p1 = 0.252, ω1 = 3.238

Group II.A (putative pseudogenes)
M0 - one ω

-353.5

48.0

M7 - nearly neutral with beta

-343.1

29.2

M8 - positive selection with beta (ω0 ≤ 1, ω1 > 1)

-326.5

best

ω = 2.332
p0 = 0.962, p1 = 0.038, ω1 = 50.098

ω - dN/dS; nearly neutral with beta - for all sites ω ≤ 1 and the beta distribution approximates ω variation; positive selection - a proportion of sites evolves with
ω > 1; p0 - proportion of sites with ω ≤ 1, p1 - proportion of positively selected sites (ω > 1), ω1 - estimated value of ω for sites under positive selection; ΔAIC the difference between the value of the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) of a given model and the best model.

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

* * *

* ** *

Page 6 of 15

*

*

*

* **

*
Figure 2 Amino acid positions under positive selection. A sequence logo showing the relative frequencies of various amino acids in
particular positions of the examined fragment of the MHC class IIB 2nd exon. The plot is based on sequences of all putative expressed alleles.
Antigen Binding Sites (ABS) are shaded, and positions under positive selection as revealed by the Bayes Empirical Bayes (BEB) procedure are
indicated with asterisks.

the data best (Table 2). All three methods detected
recombination in the representative set of 25
sequences. The GARD method detected recombination
at a P level of 0.01 in all ten datasets of 25 randomly
selected sequences, whereas the Geneconv and MaxChi2 methods detected recombination in four datasets.
Overall, recombination appears frequently in the collared flycatcher’s MHC II, as it is easily detected in
relatively small subsets of the data.
MHC class IIB of the collared flycatcher in the context of
Passerine sequence diversity

The tree in Figure 3 shows the relationship of a representative set (selected to encompass the entire MHC
diversity) of the collared flycatcher’s MHC class IIB
sequences to other Passeriformes. The collared flycatcher’s PEA fall into a single moderately supported clade
(PP of 0.72). All expressed sequences from classical
MHC class IIB loci available for the pied flycatcher
(Ficedula hypoleuca), the collared flycatcher’s sister species [48] grouped together with cluster II PEA. In fact,
of 25 the pied flycatcher alleles four had identical
sequences to the collared flycatcher’s alleles. Several
bluethroat and nightingale alleles fall into this cluster as
well, with some of them forming highly supported (PP >
0.9) smaller clusters with collared flycatcher alleles.
Although expressed alleles appear to form a clade, their
diversity is comparable to the overall diversity of the
available Passeriformes sequences. Both pseudogene
lineages fall outside the expressed cluster, which may
indicate their long independent evolutionary history.
Interestingly the pseudogene sequence reported for the
pied flycatcher was identical to one of the cluster I
pseudogene alleles reported in the present study.

Discussion
We demonstrated an extreme complexity of the MHC
class IIB in the collared flycatchers, our estimates point
to the presence of at least nine expressed and fifteen
pseudogene loci, but this latter number is highly uncertain and likely to be a gross underestimate of the actual
number of pseudogene loci. Hence, it is not surprising
that the average coverage of 541 sequencing reads per

amplicon was not sufficient for reliable genotyping. The
massive amount of sequence data, generated in our
study from the large population sample was, however,
more than sufficient for assessing sequence diversity,
contrasting mechanisms driving the evolution of
expressed and pseudogene sequences, and advancing
our understanding of the MHC class II structure and
evolution in Passeriformes.
The biggest challenge in using 454 pyrosequencing for
genotyping complex MHC systems is distinguishing true
alleles from sequence artifacts that may emerge during
PCR or sequencing. Some of these artifacts may be produced repeatedly, depending on the sequence context,
particularly small insertions and deletions in regions
with homopolymer runs [49,50]. Chimeras may also be
generated repeatedly during independent PCRs via in
vitro recombination between true alleles. It has been
demonstrated that, given sufficient coverage, it is possible to establish frequency thresholds to effectively distinguish true alleles from artifacts. Replicate genotyping of
a fraction of individuals from independently obtained
amplicons is the natural choice for establishing genotyping thresholds [24,40]. For applications requiring exceptionally low genotyping error rates replicate genotyping
of all samples may be desirable, and may be easily
attained at a moderate cost [51]. However, identical chimaeras may occur in replicates, so an extra caution is
needed when chimeras are expected to pose a serious
problem. PCR protocols are available which should
minimize chimera frequency [43]. The most important
factor here appears the reduction of the number of PCR
cycles, but keeping the number of PCR cycles at the low
limit may lead to variation in DNA concentration
among amplicons, low PCR success rate, limiting
amounts of PCR product etc. When working with a
large number of samples with DNA of variable quality,
all these factors may impose a considerable logistical
burden while not guaranteeing elimination of the chimera problem. Therefore it may be desirable to consider
post-sequencing approaches for chimera elimination
similar to the one outlined in the present paper.
In the present study, we did not achieve coverage sufficient for genotyping, but apparently we were able to

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

Page 7 of 15

100
100

Ficedula hypoleuca pseudogene GU390297
Agelaius phoeniceus pseudogene AF030990
Andropadus virens AY437913

70

Andropadus virens AY437889
Acrocephalus arundinaceus AJ404376
Certhidea olivacea AY06446
Carpodacus mexicanus U23976
Carpodacus mexicanus U23969
Passer domesticus AY51817
Agelaius phoeniceus AF03098
Carpodacus mexicanus AH009507
Taenipygia guttata XM 002197722
Luscinia luscinia FJ529850

94

Petroica australis AY730460

99

Petroica traversi AY730419
96 97

Ficedula hypoleuca GU390233
Ficedula hypoleuca GU390234
92

Luscinia svecica FJ529901
100

75

Ficedula hypoleuca GU390241
72

Luscinia luscinia FJ529849

87
100

Ficedula hypoleuca GU390236
Luscinia svecica FJ529898

95

87
93

Ficedula hypoleuca GU390232
79

Luscinia svecica FJ529900
Luscinia svecica FJ529907

71

Luscinia luscinia FJ529856
Aphelocoma coerulescens U23975

72

Aphelocoma coerulescens U23962
Andropadus virens AY437893

100

Agelaius phoeniceus AF181841
Lonchura striata L42335
81

Passer domesticus AY518171
Agelaius phoeniceus pseudogene AF030994
Andropadus virens AY437899

96

Taeniopygia guttata XM 002198161
Ficedula hypoleuca GU390300
chicken EF554711
caiman AF277661

Figure 3 Collared flycatcher MHC II in the context of diversity in Passeriformes. Collared flycatcher sequences, representative of the entire
MHC II diversity, in the context of MHC II diversity in Passeriformes. Collared flycatcher putative expressed alleles - red, putative pseudogene
cluster I alleles - blue, putative pseudogene group II.A alleles - green. The majority rule consensus tree from the Bayesian analysis is shown with
posterior probabilities (PP) at least 0.70 indicated; for clarity PP are presented as percentages. GenBank accession numbers are given next to the
species names.

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

eliminate most PCR and sequencing artifacts and
obtained a comprehensive picture of the sequence diversity, at least for expressed loci, on the population level.
The number of the putative expressed alleles present in
the population and the lower bound for the maximum
number of expressed loci we report should be close to
reality, although may slightly underestimate the actual
numbers due to a limited coverage of the PEA which
constituted on average only ca 16% of reads per
amplicon.
On the contrary, several lines of evidence indicate that
we have only scratched the surface of the cluster I pseudogene diversity. First, cluster I pseudogenes represented on average 72% of reads per amplicon. If our
primers amplify various sequence variants with similar
efficiency, then the proportion of reads from a locus
should roughly correspond to the number of copies of
the locus in the genome. Sequences of 28 pied flycatcher’s 2nd exon alleles [48] span the binding sites of both
PCR primers used in the present study. These sequences
show excellent match with our primers ensuring efficient amplification of PEA. Comparison of the proportion of reads from the PEA, to the proportion of reads
from cluster I pseudogenes may point to the existence
of ca. 40 cluster I pseudogene loci in the collared flycatcher. Second, applying our conservative procedure
for chimera elimination to variants identified under the
2-PCRs-3-copies-in-each criterion reduced the number
of cluster I pseudogene variants considered as true
alleles by almost 90% compared to a modest 7% reduction for the PEA.
Because of the extreme similarity of cluster I pseudogene alleles, estimation of the per individual number of
loci may be challenging or even impossible using PCRbased techniques, because of chimera formation and the
relatively high frequency of base-substitution errors.
Possibly target-enrichment techniques coupled with next
generation sequencing technologies, approaches that
minimizes the use of PCR [52] could be helpful here.
MHC class IIB in the collared flycatcher is comprised of both putative expressed loci and pseudogenes. Only expressed alleles exhibited an excess of
nonsynonymous substitutions and codons under positive selection in the putative Antigen Binding Sites, as
expected for functional MHC sequences [2,6]. Pseudogene alleles showed signatures of nonfunctionality: frameshift-causing indels and the presence of internal
stop codons in multiple sequences. Although codonbased tests of selection detected some signatures of
positive selection in group II.A pseudogene sequences,
the evidence was more ambiguous than in the case of
expressed loci. Because signatures of positive selection
may be retained for very long periods of evolutionary
time [53], these inconsistent results of selection tests

Page 8 of 15

probably reflect ancient pseudogenization of once
functional MHC sequences. MHC class IIB pseudogenes, also ancient, which diverged from functional
loci over 40 Ma, have been described in a few other
passerine species [32,54,55].
Sequences from expressed and pseudogene clusters
differ not only in their signals of historical selection. A
remarkable difference was also observed in the degree of
divergence among expressed and pseudogene sequences.
Most pseudogene alleles were very similar to each other
(Figure 1), despite originating from a number of loci.
Two mechanisms may generate extreme similarity of
allele sequences among loci. Either pseudogenes have
recently undergone series of duplications, or they have
been evolving in concert through a mechanism of interlocus gene conversion. Recent duplications have been
described in passerine MHC [55] and gene conversion is
thought to be a major mechanism acting in the MHC of
birds [33,56,57] although its importance has not yet
been suggested for MHC pseudogene evolution. Distinguishing between these two mechanisms requires more
extensive genomic information.
Among expressed alleles, both similar and highly
divergent alleles occurred. However, these do not form
well-supported, divergent lineages that can be interpreted as corresponding to different loci. Therefore,
extensive genetic exchange among loci must have
occurred, a conclusion also supported by the frequent
cases of recombination detected among divergent
sequences. Yet, this process has not homogenized allele
sequences in a comparable way to that observed for
pseudogenes. It is likely that the divergence has been
maintained by selection which favored certain types of
genetic exchange between loci such as reciprocal recombination shuffling entire exons, e.g. through recombination in introns [34] or gene conversion involving only
short stretches of sequences [58]. Examining other parts
of genes, such as exon 3 [30] or the 3’ untranslated
regions [8,57], may allow the identification of locus specific sequences. In principle, identification of locus-specific primers may be possible in introns flanking the 2nd
exon [58]. This approach was used in the pied flycatcher
and although intron sequences discriminate pseudogenes and nonclassical MHC II B loci from classical
class IIB loci, they do not allow locus-specific amplification of the latter [48]. The processes of duplication and
interlocus genetic exchange, particularly gene conversion, may have operated synergistically to generate the
patterns observed in the collared flycatcher. Segmental
duplications could have boosted gene conversion, as it is
known that physical proximity in the genome facilitates
this process [59]. An interesting observation comes from
the genomic analysis of MHC class II region in the
zebra finch, where Balakrishnan et al. [36] found a large

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

number of retroelements which may facilitate gene
duplication in passerine MHC II.
Regardless of the details of recombination among
expressed loci, the consequence of a high rate of interlocus recombination is a blurring of orthologous relationships and the grouping of alleles in a species-specific
manner to the exclusion of other passerine sequences.
The grouping of MHC class II sequences according to
species and not gene phylogeny, is common among passerine birds [9,14,31]. Transspecific polymorphism is
usually detected only among closely related passerine
taxa [56,57], although exceptions are known [60]. The
Bayesian tree, which places the collared flycatcher’s
MHC class IIB PA in the context of passerine MHC
diversity, provides some support for grouping all collared flycatcher PEA together. These PEA are, however,
intermixed with the MHC class IIB sequences of three
other species from the Muscicapidae family, the pied flycatcher [48], the bluethroat and nightingale [35], and
form well-supported clusters with them in a few cases
(Figure 3) or even show identical sequences as some
pied flycatcher’s alleles. Thus, there is evidence for
transspecific polymorphism in the Muscicapidae family
not only at the genus level [35], but also among genera.
Even conservative estimates of the number of MHC
class IIB loci located in collared flycatchers and bluethroats [35] place them among vertebrate species with
the highest number of loci. It remains to be seen
whether Muscicapidae are an exception among passerines, or whether, as other studies, based on RFLP, probe
hybridization as well as cloning seem to suggest, possessing tens of MHC class IIB loci is the rule in these birds
[9,61]. The zebra finch, the only passerine species
sequenced so far has four expressed MHC class IIB loci
and five pseudogenes [36], as inferred from the genome
assembly; however there also appears to be variation in
the number of loci among individuals as revealed by
Southern Blot experiments in this species. Counting the
actual number of loci has been notoriously difficult
without the availability of genome sequences, and rough
estimates of copy number for highly multiplicated MHC
I genes have been obtained from blotting experiments
[62,63]. Next generation sequencing will enable better
characterization of copy number variation and allow the
study of the relationships among paralog sequences,
which is necessary for understanding the evolutionary
and population genetic processes that shape their evolution. In any case, an extraordinary number of expressed
MHC loci makes the collared flycatcher an excellent
model system for testing hypotheses relating to individual MHC diversity, effectiveness of the immune
response and mate choice. In this context, it is interesting to try to estimate the sequencing effort needed for
reliable genotyping. We suggest that reliable genotyping

Page 9 of 15

of pseudogenes may require methods which minimize
the use of PCR. Extrapolating the results from bank
voles, which have at least six loci, where a mean coverage of 200-400 (mean 344) reads per amplicon was sufficient for reliable genotyping of MHC II [24], a coverage
of 400-800 reads per amplicon should be sufficient for
reliable genotyping of expressed loci in collared flycatchers. The actual coverage may need to be increased
because of the co-amplification of the group II.A pseudogenes. Through the examination of sequences of hundreds putative alleles, we identified primers that can
amplify all expressed alleles, and preliminary experiments indicate that these primers indeed amplify mostly
PEA. Thus, we have laid a foundation for experimental
studies of the relationships between individual MHC
diversity, immune response and mate choice in this
extremely interesting system.

Conclusions
We found a highly dynamic pattern of evolution of
MHC class IIB genes with strong signals of selection
and pronounced sequence divergence in expressed
genes, in contrast to the apparent sequence homogenization in pseudogenes. Our study has broad implications
for testing hypotheses relating the individual MHC
diversity, effectiveness of the immune response and
mate choice. MHC genotyping in species particularly
suited for rigorous evaluation of such hypotheses, i.e.
showing multiple MHC loci as well as among-haplotype
variation in the number of loci, has been notoriously
difficult since appropriate methods have not been available. We showed that next generation sequencing is
bringing the promise of overcoming this obstacle to progress in the field by offering a universal, affordable
method for the characterization and in perspective genotyping of MHC systems of virtually any complexity.
Methods
Samples

We analyzed 237 females of the collared flycatcher Ficedula albicollis from the Gotland (Sweden) nest-box
breeding population. For detailed description of the
study area and species see [64]. Here we make use of
samples obtained from females caught during breeding
while incubating eggs or feeding young in year 2003.
Birds were individually marked with standard aluminum
rings ensuring that unique birds were used in the analyses. Blood was collected and stored in 96% ethanol.
DNA extraction was performed with the NucleoSpin®
Blood kit (Macherey-Nagel).
Development of primers

To design primers amplifying a substantial part of the
MHC class IIB exon 2 in the collared flycatchers we

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

used two complementary approaches. First, we used
conserved primers 1a and 2a [34] as well as primers
FicL2/FicR2 (for sequences and location of all primers
used in the study see Table 3 and Figure 4) located in
highly conserved parts of the exon, identified from the
alignment of passerine sequences available from the
NCBI (Accession Numbers: AF030992, AJ404374,
AY437903, AY518183, AY730452), to generate partial
exon 2 sequences. We then used the consensus from
these partial sequences to design specific primers within
the exon (FicLw1 and FicLw2 in the 3’ direction and
FicRw1, and FicRw2 in the 5’ direction), which led to
successful amplification, through vectorette PCR, of
longer 2nd exon sequences covering the regions where
we intended to place primers used for genotyping.
In the vectorette PCR approach, total genomic DNA is
digested with a restriction enzyme (RE) producing sticky
ends, then double stranded adapters (vectorettes) matching the overhangs but showing some internal mismatch
("bubble”) are ligated. Using one primer specific to the
sequence in question and the other specific to the
reverse complement of one of the vectorette strands (in
the region of mismatch), it is possible to directionally
amplify the genomic fragment located between the specific primer and the RE recognition site. Multiple REs
are usually used to ensure a fragment of sufficient
length will be obtained. A nested approach, using an
internal specific primer in the second PCR, facilitates
elimination of false positives, i.e. spurious bands not
representing the region of interest. Nested PCR was
used in all the vectorette PCR experiments.
We adopted the modified vectorette PCR protocol of
Ko et al. [65]. Briefly, ca. 3 μg portions of genomic
DNA were digested with 20 U of Bsu15I, EcoRI, MunI
and XapI REs (Fermentas) at 37°C for 4 hours in 100 μl
volumes. Double stranded vectorette adapters consisting
of vect53 and vect57GC for Bsu15I or vect57TTAA for
the remaining REs [65] were ligated to digested DNA
with 2000 U of T4 DNA ligase (New England Biolabs).
The mixture was incubated overnight at 16°C. The
Table 3 Sequences of primers used in the study
Primer

Sequence (5’-3’)

1a [34]

ATGGGACCCCAAAAGTGATT

2a [34]

CCGAGGGGACACGCTCT

FicL2
FicR2

CTTCATTAACGGCACGGAGA
GCGCTCCACGAGGAAC

FicLw1

GAGTGTCWCTTCDTTAACGGC

FicLw2

GTCACTTCDTTAACGGCACSGAGA

FicRw1

TCTGCGCTCCACGVKGAACGG

FicRw2

CGWACCGCCCCACGTCGCTGTCG

FicL1938

GAGTGTCHYTTCVTTAACGGCAC

FicR1938

CTCTGCGCTCCACGVBGAACGGG

Page 10 of 15

Figure 4 Location of primers used in the study. Location of
primers on the MHC class IIB 2nd exon is shown. Arrow heads are
pointing in primers’ 3’ direction. Location of the 5’ end of each
primer is indicated.

ligase was inactivated by incubation of mixture at 65°C
for 20 min. For the first vectorette PCR, we used a specific forward primer for amplification of the 3’ portion
of the 2nd MHC class IIB exon and a reverse primer for
the 5’ portion. The 20 μl PCR reactions contained 10 μl
of 2 × Hot Start Master Mix (Qiagen), 1 μM of the specific (FicLw1/FicRw1) and C20 vectorette [65] primers
and 1 μl of vectorette-ligated digested DNA. The touchdown PCR scheme was as follows: 95°C/15 min, 5×(94°C/
30 s, 64°C/30 s, 72°C/60 s), 5×(94°C/30 s, 60°C/30 s, 72°
C/60 s), 20× (94°C/30 s, 58°C/30 s, 72°C/60 s), 72°C/3
min. In the second PCR nested forward (FicLw2, for 3’)
and reverse (FicRw2, for 5’ end amplification) primers
were used together with the B21 vectorette primer [65].
As template we used 0.5 μl of the product of the first
PCR reaction; 20 μl of PCR mixture contained 2 μL of
10× PCR buffer with (NH4)2SO4, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 μM of
each primer, 0.2 mM of each dNTP and 1 U of Taq
polymerase (Fermentas). The cycling scheme was as follows: 94°C/3 min, 30×(94°C/30 s, 58°C/30 s, 72°C/60 s),
72°C/3 min. The PCR product was run on a 1.5% agarose
gel, clearly visible bands were excised, purified using the
MinElute Gel Purification Kit (Qiagen) and directly
sequenced with the nested specific and vectorette D19
[65] primer using the Big Dye Terminator (BDT) 3.1
chemistry (ABI). Sequencing reaction products were electrophoresed on an ABI 3130×l Genetic Analyzer. We
used the consensus from the obtained sequences as well
as sequences from other passerines to design a pair of
specific primers within the second exon (FicL1938,
FicR1938) which were used for further genotyping.
cDNA analysis

To evaluate the expression status of MHC class IIB
sequences obtained with FicL1938, FicR1938 primers we
amplified, cloned and sequenced cDNA. Bursa Fabrici
was extracted from three chicks from Niepołomice Forest (S Poland), preserved in the RNAlater reagent (Qiagen) and RNA was extracted with the RNeasy kit

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

(Qiagen) including the DNAse treatment step to remove
any DNA contamination. RNA was reverse transcribed
to cDNA using Omniscript Reverse Transcriptase kit
(QIAGEN) and Oligo(dT) 12-18 primer (Invitrogen).
cDNA was used as a template in PCR reactions with
sequence-tagged FicL1938, FicR1938 primers (see
below). PCR product for three individuals was purified
with the MinElute PCR Purification Kit (QIAGEN) and
T/A cloned using the Strataclone PCR cloning kit (Stratagene). Recombinant clones were detected by blue/
white screening and inserts were directly amplified with
M13F and M13R primers in colony PCR. Thirty two
clones containing inserts were sequenced using Big Dye
Terminator 3.1 chemistry on an ABI 3130×l genetic
analyzer. Sequences were assigned to individuals on the
basis of tag sequences (see below), checked and aligned
in SeqScape 2.5 (ABI).
Generation of amplicons and 454 sequencing

A 198-bp (without primers) fragment of the collared flycatcher MHC class IIB 2nd exon was amplified using
fusion primers containing sequences of the primers
FicR1938 and FicL1938 identified as described above.
The forward fusion primer 5’-GCCTCCCTCGCGCC
ATCAGNNNNNNGAGTGTCHYTTCVTTAACGG
CAC-3’ was composed of the 454 FLX amplicon A primer, a 6-bp tag (indicated with Ns), used to distinguish
individuals and the FicL1938 sequence (underlined); the
reverse fusion primer consisted of the 454 FLX amplicon B primer and the FicR1938 sequence (underlined)
5’-GCCTTGCCAGCCCGCTCAGCTCTGCGCTCCA
CGVBGAACGGG-3’. Polymerase chain reaction was
performed in 20 μl and contained approximately 100 ng
of genomic DNA, 2 uL of 10× PCR buffer with (NH4)
2 SO 4 , 2 mM MgCl 2, 1 μM of each primer, 0.2 mM of
each dNTP and 1 U of Taq polymerase (Fermentas).
PCR scheme was: 94°C/3 min, 33×(94°C/30 s, 58°C/30 s,
72°C/30 s), 72°C/3 min. The concentration of the PCR
product was estimated through agarose gel electrophoresis, and PCR products were pooled into approximately
equimolar quantities. The resulting pools were purified
using the MinElute PCR Purification Kit (QIAGEN).
Purified pools were then sequenced as a part of a single
454 FLX run (the run contained also MHC amplicons
from other species) according to the 454 Amplicon
Sequencing protocols provided by the manufacturer
(Roche 454) at the Functional Genomics Center, Uni ⁄
ETH Zurich. Since only 35 tagged primers were used,
the picotiter plate was divided into eight sections. The
sequence determination was made using a GS Run Processor in the Roche 454 Genome Sequencer FLX Software Package 2.0.00.22. The performance of the
sequencing run was gauged using known pieces of DNA
introduced in the sequencing run as DNA Control

Page 11 of 15

Beads. On average, 95% of reads from DNA Control
Beads matched the corresponding known sequences
with at least 98% accuracy over the first 200 bases,
which was above the typical threshold (80% matches of
98% accuracy over 200 bases).
Initially, reads containing FicL1938 and reverse complement FicR1938 sequences were extracted from the
multifasta files and assigned to the respective individuals
on the basis of the tag sequence. However, this procedure excluded ca. 15% of otherwise good reads which
did not reach into the reverse primer. Therefore, finally
we decided to analyze only first 188 bp of each read following the forward primer, which maximized the
sequence yield while reducing the length of the analyzed
fragment by only 5%. Extraction of sequences, assignment of reads to individuals and generation of alignments of variants present in each amplicon was
performed with the custom software written in Java and
available from http://code.google.com/p/jmhc/. Outputs
from jMHC were further analysed in Excel.
Distinguishing putative alleles from artifacts

For the initial assessment of sequences diversity we
included all sequence variants which occurred in at least
two independent PCR reactions, in each represented by
at least three reads. The two PCR criterion is a standard
in MHC studies [38], whereas the requirement of three
copies in each PCR stems from the probabilistic model
of Galan et al. [41], which showed that the probability
of observing three times the same artifactual variant as a
result of sequencing error is negligibly low. This heuristic 2-PCRs-3-copies-in-each criterion was useful for
revealing general patterns of sequence diversity and relationships, while excluding most sequencing errors. However, PCR recombinants (chimeras) could still be present
among variants which passed the 2-PCRs-3-copies-ineach threshold. Identical chimeras may be produced
repeatedly during PCR by recombination between pairs
of true alleles. Distinct recombination events may produce identical chimeras, thus they may be represented
by a substantial number of sequencing reads derived
from multiple amplicons. Some true alleles may have
sequences identical to chimeras because of their evolutionary origin through an in vivo recombination
between alleles already present in the population. However, a critical feature distinguishing true recombinants
from PCR chimeras is that the latter should always cooccur with both parental sequences in the same amplicon, whereas true recombinants may or may not cooccur with one or both parental sequences. Using this
rationale we applied the following procedure to distinguish putative expressed alleles (PEA) from PCR chimeras on the level of the whole dataset. We first
calculated maximum per amplicon frequency (MPAF)

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

for each putative expressed sequence variant which
passed the 2-PCRs-3-copies-in-each threshold. Then we
sorted the variants according to their MPAF. The variants were then examined starting from the lowest
MPAF value as follows:
• we selected three amplicons in which the given
variant was most abundant (including the one on
which the MPAF value was based)
• we checked whether in all three amplicons the variant can be explained as a chimera of more abundant
variants within the same amplicon - if so, the variant
was classified as PCR chimera, otherwise it was classified as putative expressed allele (PEA).
Working from the bottom of the list (lowest MPAF =
0.51%) up, all variants with MPAF lower than 1.5% were
checked. None of the variants with MPAF ≥ 0.97% was
classified as PCR chimera. Among 10 randomly selected
variants with MPAF > 1.5%, none could be classified as
PCR chimera either. Therefore, we can safely assume
that virtually all variants with MPAF ≥ 0.97% are PEA.
We suppose that the apparent success of the above
approach in identifying threshold frequency above
which artifacts are absent results from the high average
divergence among PEA (in contrast to pseudogene
sequences, see below).
Below the threshold of 0.97%, however, both PCR chimeras and apparent PEA occur. Among 31 variants in
this “grey zone”, 11 could be classified as PCR chimeras.
Thus, in the total sample of 159 variants, these 11 PCR
chimeras constituted 6.9% of all PEA which passed the
2-PCRs-3-copies-in-each threshold. Additionally, two
variants had one bp indel in homopolymer runs and
were classified as sequencing artifacts.
Sequence variants within each pseudogene cluster
were very similar to each other. Therefore, the proportion of variants which could have been explained as
PCR chimeras was high and we could not observe a
clear MPAF threshold above which chimeras could be
excluded, as was the case in PEA - the “grey zone” in
which apparent true pseudogene alleles and PCR chimeras co-occurred was very wide. Therefore, we decided
to use the threshold we calculated for PEA, after adjusting for relative frequencies of expressed and pseudogene
sequence variants among 454 reads. This assumes that
the actual frequency of PCR recombination is similar for
all variants.
The average per amplicon proportion of reads from
PEA, cluster I and group II.A pseudogene PA were
0.164, 0.718 and 0.118, respectively. Based on
the MAFT threshold distinguishing PEA from the
“grey zone” (0.97%, se above), we computed thresholds
for cluster I pseudogenes (4.25%) and group II.

Page 12 of 15

A pseudogenes (0.70%). In both pseudogene clusters we
confirmed the occurrence of variants which could not
have been explained as PCR chimeras below these
thresholds. However, we chose not to explore this zone
systematically, because given high similarity of pseudogene sequences, distinguishing PCR chimeras from true
alleles would be unreliable. Including in the analysis
only the pseudogene variants with MAFT above the
grey zone threshold is certainly conservative and reduces
the number of variants in pseudogene cluster I from
above 225 to 28. It should be emphasized though, that
this conservative approach does not change the general
conclusion of high similarity among variants in pseudogene clusters. On the other hand, the minimum number
of pseudogene loci obtained with this approach is certainly an underestimate. Nevertheless, we preferred this
underestimation over the alternative of inflating the estimates of the number of loci by including artifacts.
Relationships among the sequences

The relationships among the collared flycatcher’s putative MHC class IIB alleles were reconstructed with a
Neighbor Joining tree constructed from the matrix of
Tamura-Nei nucleotide distances. The robustness of the
topology was tested with 1,000 bootstrap replicates; the
tree was rooted with the chicken sequence.
To place the collared flycatcher’s MHC IIB sequences
in the context of MHC IIB variation in Passeriformes,
we downloaded the passerine sequences available from
GenBank and performed the phylogenetic reconstruction together with a set of collared flycatcher sequences
selected to represent the detected diversity. Selected
MHC IIB sequences from all passerine species, which
spanned the length of the fragment available for the collared flycatchers, were included in the tree. In case of
the Luscinia sequences [35], which were slightly shorter
than the collared flycatcher sequences, we filled in the
missing parts with amplification primer sequences in
order to analyze the full alignment length. Two Bayesian
analyses under the GTR + Γ model of sequence evolution were run for 2.5 × 10 7 generations and sampled
every 5,000 generations. The first 1,000 trees from each
analysis were discarded as burn-in, resulting in 8,000
sampled trees used to calculate the posterior probability
(PP) of each bipartition. Chicken and caiman MHC
class IIB sequences were used as outgroups to root the
tree.
Detecting signatures of historical selection

The average rates of synonymous (dS) and nonsynonymous (dN) substitutions were computed for all sites, as
well as for positions encoding amino acids forming the
antigen-binding groove (Antigen Binding Sites, ABS),
and positions encoding the remaining amino-acid

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

(non-ABS) The location of ABS was inferred from the
human MHC II molecular structure [66]. Computations
were performed in MEGA4 [67].
The impact of historical selection on the MHC
sequences was assessed through the Z-test of selection
in MEGA and by fitting three models of codon evolution available in PAML [68]. These were: (i) M0: one ω
(dN/dS ratio), (ii) M7: nearly neutral (ω ≤ 1) with the
beta distribution approximating ω variation, and (iii)
M8: positive selection (a proportion of sites evolving
with ω > 1) with the beta distribution approximating ω
variation. The best-fitting models were chosen on the
basis of the value of the Akaike information criterion
(AIC; [69,70]). Positively selected codons were identified
through the Bayes empirical Bayes procedure [71].
Recombination detection

We checked for signatures of recombination in our data
set using three methods. Two of these, GeneConv [72]
and MaxChi2 [73] performed very well in an assessment
of 14 recombination detection methods [74]. They are
implemented in the rdp3 software [75], used for computations. Additionally, a new method, genetic algorithm
recombination detection (GARD; [76]), was applied,
through a web-based routine http://www.datamonkey.org/.
Because the exploratory searches for recombination
signals require repetitive statistical testing, a multiple
test correction is necessary. As the number of tests
increases exponentially with the number of sequences,
taking into account the very high number of putative
alleles detected in our experiment, tests for recombination using all sequences would be extremely conservative due to the severity of multiple comparison
correction. Therefore we used two complementary
approaches to detect recombination. First, we selected
from the dataset 25 representative sequences, including
these which formed separate long branches, as they
might have been recombinants, second we randomly
chosen ten sets of 25 sequences and performed on them
the same analyses. In our opinion such approach is a
reasonable way to qualitatively assess the signals of
recombination in our dataset.
Acknowledgements
We thank Marzanna Kuenzli and Weihong Qui for running 454 sequencing
and Rafał Martyka for help in sample collection. The study was funded by
the Foundation for Polish Science, professor subsidy 9/2008 to JR, POLPOSTDOC III- POL-PBZ/MNiSW/07/2006/14 and N N304 401338 to MZN and
the Jagiellonian University (DS/WBINOZ/INOŚ/762/10).
Author details
1
Institute of Environmental Sciences, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7,
30-387 Kraków, Poland. 2Ornithological Station, Museum and Institute of
Zoology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Nadwiślańska 108, 80-680 Gdańsk,
Poland. 3Department of Ecology and Genetics/Animal Ecology, Evolutionary

Page 13 of 15

Biology Centre, Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18D, S-752 36 Uppsala,
Sweden.
Authors’ contributions
MZN participated in study design, carried out the laboratory analyses and
helped to draft the manuscript, WB analyzed the data and drafted the
manuscript, MS provided tools for bioinformatic analyses, LG provided the
samples, MC participated in study design and coordination, JR participated
in study design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 1 June 2010 Accepted: 31 December 2010
Published: 31 December 2010
References
1. Janeway CA, Travers P, Walport D, Shlomchik MJ: Immunobiology: The
Immune System in Health and Disease. New York: Garland Publishing;
2004.
2. Piertney SB, Oliver MK: The evolutionary ecology of the major
histocompatibility complex. Heredity 2006, 96(1):7-21.
3. Milinski M: The major histocompatibility complex, sexual selection, and
mate choice. Annual Review of Ecology Evolution and Systematics 2006,
37:159-186.
4. Penn DJ, Potts WK: The evolution of mating preferences and major
histocompatibility complex genes. American Naturalist 1999,
153(2):145-164.
5. Sommer S: The importance of immune gene variability (MHC) in
evolutionary ecology and conservation. Frontiers in Zoology 2005, 2:16.
6. Bernatchez L, Landry C: MHC studies in nonmodel vertebrates: what have
we learned about natural selection in 15 years? Journal of Evolutionary
Biology 2003, 16(3):363-377.
7. Kumanovics A, Takada T, Lindahl KF: Genomic organization of the
mammalian Mhc. Annual Review of Immunology 2003, 21:629-657.
8. Wittzell H, Bernot A, Auffray C, Zoorob R: Concerted evolution of two Mhc
class II B loci in pheasants and domestic chickens. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 1999, 16(4):479-490.
9. Westerdahl H: Passerine MHC; genetic variation and disease resistance in
the wild. Journal of Ornithology 2007, 148(Suppl 2):S469-S477.
10. Nei M, Rooney AP: Concerted and birth-and-death evolution of
multigene families. Annual Review of Genetics 2005, 39:121-152.
11. Kelley J, Walter L, Trowsdale J: Comparative genomics of major
histocompatibility complexes. Immunogenetics 2005, 56(10):683-695.
12. Nei M, Gu X, Sitnikova T: Evolution by the birth-and-death process in
multigene families of the vertebrate immune system. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1997,
94(15):7799-7806.
13. Mikko S, Andersson L: Low Major Histocompatibility Complex class-II
diversity in European and North-American moose. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1995,
92(10):4259-4263.
14. Hess CM, Edwards SV: The evolution of the major histocompatibility
complex in birds. Bioscience 2002, 52(5):423-431.
15. Richman AD, Herrera LG, Nash D, Schierup MH: Relative roles of mutation
and recombination in generating allelic polymorphism at an MHC class
II locus in Peromyscus maniculatus. Genet Res 2003, 82(2):89-99.
16. Reusch TBH, Langefors A: Inter- and intralocus recombination drive MHC
class IIB gene diversification in a teleost, the three-spined stickleback
Gasterosteus aculeatus. Journal of Molecular Evolution 2005, 61(4):531-U545.
17. Malaga-Trillo E, Zaleska-Rutczynska Z, McAndrew B, Vincek V, Figueroa F,
Sultmann H, Klein J: Linkage relationships and haplotype polymorphism
among cichlid Mhc class II B loci. Genetics 1998, 149(3):1527-1537.
18. Ellis SA, Morrison WI, MacHugh ND, Birch J, Burrells A, Stear MJ: Serological
and molecular diversity in the cattle MHC class I region. Immunogenetics
2005, 57(8):601-606.
19. Nowak MA, Tarczy-Hornoch K, Austyn JM: The optimal number of major
histocompatibility complex molecules in an individual. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1992,
89(22):10896-10899.
20. Woelfing B, Traulsen A, Milinski M, Boehm T: Does intra-individual major
histocompatibility complex diversity keep a golden mean? Philosophical

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.
39.
40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

Transactions of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 2009,
364(1513):117-128.
Wegner KM, Reusch TBH, Kalbe M: Multiple parasites are driving major
histocompatibility complex polymorphism in the wild. Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 2003, 16(2):224-232.
Wegner KM, Kalbe M, Kurtz J, Reusch TBH, Milinski M: Parasite selection for
immunogenetic optimality. Science 2003, 301(5638):1343-1343.
Bonneaud C, Chastel O, Federici P, Westerdahl H, Sorci G: Complex MHCbased mate choice in a wild passerine. Proceedings of the Royal Society BBiological Sciences 2006, 273(1590):1111-1116.
Kloch A, Babik W, Bajer A, Siński E, Radwan J: Effects of an MHC-DRB
genotype and allele number on the load of gut parasites in the bank
vole Myodes glareolus. Molecular Ecology 2010, 19(Suppl 1):255-265.
Borghans JAM, Noest AJ, De Boer RJ: Thymic selection does not limit the
individual MHC diversity. European Journal of Immunology 2003,
33(12):3353-3358.
Hedrick PW: Comment on “Parasite selection for immunogenetic
optimality”. Science 2004, 303(5660).
Eimes JA, Bollmer JL, Dunn PO, Whittingham LA, Wimpee C: Mhc class II
diversity and balancing selection in greater prairie-chickens. Genetica
2009, 138(2):265-271.
Kaufman J, Volk H, Wallny HJ: A ‘minimal essential Mhc’ and an
‘unrecognized Mhc’: Two extremes in selection for polymorphism.
Immunological Reviews 1995, , 143: 63-88.
Hughes CR, Miles S, Walbroehl JM: Support for the minimal essential MHC
hypothesis: A parrot with a single, highly polymorphic MHC class II B
gene. Immunogenetics 2008, 60(5):219-231.
Burri R, Hirzel HN, Salamin N, Roulin A, Fumagalli L: Evolutionary patterns of
MHC class II B in owls and their implications for the understanding of
avian MHC evolution. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2008, 25(6):1180-1191.
Edwards SV, Wakeland EK, Potts WK: Contrasting histories of avian and
mammalian MHC genes revealed by class II B sequences from
songbirds. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 1995, 92(26):12200-12204.
Edwards SV, Hess CM, Gasper J, Garrigan D: Toward an evolutionary
genomics of the avian Mhc. Immunological Reviews 1999, 167:119-132.
Westerdahl H, Wittzell H, von Schantz T: Polymorphism and transcription
of Mhc class I genes in a passerine bird, the great reed warbler.
Immunogenetics 1999, 49(3):158-170.
Aguilar A, Edwards SV, Smith TB, Wayne RK: Patterns of variation in MHC
class II β loci of the little greenbul (Andropadus virens) with comments
on MHC evolution in birds). Journal of Heredity 2006, 97(2):133-142.
Anmarkrud JA, Johnsen A, Bachmann L, Lijfeld JT: Ancestral polymorphism
in exon 2 of bluethroat (Luscinia svecica) MHC class II B genes. Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 2010, 23(6):1206-1217.
Balakrishnan CN, Ekblom R, Volker M, Westerdahl H, Godinez R,
Kotkiewicz H, Burt DW, Graves T, Griffin DK, Warren WC, Edwards SV: Gene
duplication and fragmentation in the zebra finch major
histocompatibility complex. BMC Biology 2010, 8:29.
Westerdahl H, Wittzell H, Von Schantz T: Mhc diversity in two passerine
birds: No evidence for a minimal essential Mhc. Immunogenetics 2000,
52(1-2):92-100.
Babik W: Methods for MHC genotyping in non-model vertebrates.
Molecular Ecology Resources 2010, 10(2):237-251.
Metzker ML: Sequencing technologies the next generation. Nature
Reviews Genetics 2010, 11(1):31-46.
Babik W, Taberlet P, Ejsmond MJ, Radwan J: New generation sequencers
as a tool for genotyping of highly polymorphic multilocus MHC system.
Molecular Ecology Resources 2009, 9(3):713-719.
Galan M, Guivier E, Caraux G, Charbonnel N, Cosson JF: A 454 multiplex
sequencing method for rapid and reliable genotyping of highly
polymorphic genes in large-scale studies. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(1):296.
Longeri M, Zanotti M, Damiani G: Recombinant DRB sequences produced
by mismatch repair of heteroduplexes during cloning in Escherichia coli.
European Journal of Immunogenetics 2002, 29(6):517-523.
Lenz TL, Becker S: Simple approach to reduce PCR artefact formation
leads to reliable genotyping of MHC and other highly polymorphic loci Implications for evolutionary analysis. Gene 2008, 427(1-2):117-123.
Nordling D, Andersson M, Zohari S, Gustafsson L: Reproductive effort
reduces specific immune response and parasite resistance. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 1998, 265(1403):1291-1298.

Page 14 of 15

45. Cichoń M, Sendecka J, Gustafsson L: Age-related decline in humoral
immune function in Collared Flycatchers. Journal of Evolutionary Biology
2003, 16(6):1205-1210.
46. Cichon M, Dubiec A, Chadzinska M: The effect of elevated reproductive
effort on humoral immune function in collared flycatcher females. Acta
Oecologica-International Journal of Ecology 2001, 22(1):71-76.
47. Parameswaran P, Jalili R, Tao L, Shokralla S, Gharizadeh B, Ronaghi M,
Fire AZ: A pyrosequencing-tailored nucleotide barcode design unveils
opportunities for large-scale sample multiplexing. Nucleic Acids Research
2007, 35(19).
48. Canal D, Alcaide M, Anmarkrud JA, Potti J: Towards the simplification of
MHC typing protocols: targeting classical MHC class II genes in a
passerine, the pied flycatcher Ficedula hypoleuca. BMC Res Notes 2010,
3:236.
49. Moore MJ, Dhingra A, Soltis PS, Shaw R, Farmerie WG, Folta KM, Soltis DE:
Rapid and accurate pyrosequencing of angiosperm plastid genomes.
BMC Plant Biology 2006, 6:17.
50. Brockman W, Alvarez P, Young S, Garber M, Giannoukos G, Lee WL, Russ C,
Lander ES, Nusbaum C, Jaffe DB: Quality scores and SNP detection in
sequencing-by-synthesis systems. Genome Research 2008, 18(5):763-770.
51. Wegner KM: Massive parallel MHC genotyping: titanium that shines.
Molecular Ecology 2009, 18(9):1818-1820.
52. Mamanova L, Coffey AJ, Scott CE, Kozarewa I, Turner EH, Kumar A,
Howard E, Shendure J, Turner DJ: Target-enrichment strategies for nextgeneration sequencing. Nature Methods 2010, 7(2):111-114.
53. Garrigan D, Hedrick PW: Perspective: Detecting adaptive molecular
polymorphism: Lessons from the MHC. Evolution 2003, 57(8):1707-1722.
54. Hess CM, Gasper J, Hoekstra HE, Hill CE, Edwards SV: MHC class II
pseudogene and genomic signature of a 32-kb cosmid in the house
finch (Carpodacus mexicanus). Genome Research 2000, 10(5):613-623.
55. Gasper JS, Shiina T, Inoko H, Edwards SV: Songbird genomics: Analysis of
45 kb upstream of a polymorphic Mhc class II gene in red-winged
blackbirds (Agelaius phoeniceus). Genomics 2001, 75(1-3):26-34.
56. Vincek V, O’Huigin C, Satta Y, Takahata N, Boag PT, Grant PR, Grant BR,
Klein J: How large was the founding population of Darwin’s finches?
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 1997,
264(1378):111-118.
57. Miller HC, Lambert DM: Genetic drift outweighs balancing selection in
shaping post-bottleneck major histocompatibility complex variation in
New Zealand robins (Petroicidae). Molecular Ecology 2004, 13(12):3709.
58. Burri R, Niculita-Hirzel H, Roulin A, Fumagalli L: Isolation and
characterization of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II B
genes in the Barn owl (Aves: Tyto alba). Immunogenetics 2008,
60(9):543-550.
59. Ezawa K, Oota S, Saitou N: Genome-wide search of gene conversions in
duplicated genes of mouse and rat. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2006,
23(5):927-940.
60. Bonneaud C, Sorci G, Morin V, Westerdahl H, Zoorob R, Wittzell H: Diversity
of Mhc class I and IIB genes in house sparrows (Passer domesticus).
Immunogenetics 2004, 55(12):855-865.
61. Bollmer JL, Dunn PO, Whittingham LA, Wimpee C: Extensive MHC class II B
gene duplication in a passerine, the common yellowthroat (Geothlypis
trichas). Journal of Heredity 2010, 101(4):448-460.
62. Vincek V, Nizetic D, Golubic M, Figueroa F, Nevo E, Klein J: Evolutionary
expansion of Mhc class I loci in the mole-rat, Spalax ehrenbergi.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 1987, 4(5):483-491.
63. Delarbre C, Jaulin C, Kourilsky P, Gachelin G: Evolution of the major
histocompatibility complex: A hundred-fold amplification of MHC class I
genes in the African pigmy mouse Nannomys setulosus. Immunogenetics
1992, 37(1):29-38.
64. Gustafsson L: Collared flycatcher. In Lifetime Reproduction in Birds. Edited
by: Newton I. London: Academic Press; 1989:75-88.
65. Ko WY, David RM, Akashi H: Molecular phylogeny of the Drosophila
melanogaster species subgroup. Journal of Molecular Evolution 2003,
57(5):562-573.
66. Brown JH, Jardetzky TS, Gorga JC, Stern LJ, Urban RG, Strominger JL,
Wiley DC: 3-Dimensional structure of the human class-II
histocompatibility antigen HLA-DR1. Nature 1993, 364(6432):33-39.
67. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular evolutionary
genetics analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 2007, 24(8):1596-1599.

Zagalska-Neubauer et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:395
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/395

Page 15 of 15

68. Yang ZH: PAML 4: Phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 2007, 24(8):1586-1591.
69. Posada D, Buckley TR: Model selection and model averaging in
phylogenetics: Advantages of Akaike information criterion and Bayesian
approaches over likelihood ratio tests. Systematic Biology 2004,
53(5):793-808.
70. Sullivan J, Joyce P: Model selection in phylogenetics. Annual Review of
Ecology Evolution and Systematics 2005, 36:445-466.
71. Zhang JZ, Nielsen R, Yang ZH: Evaluation of an improved branch-site
likelihood method for detecting positive selection at the molecular
level. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2005, 22(12):2472-2479.
72. Padidam M, Sawyer S, Fauquet CM: Possible emergence of new
geminiviruses by frequent recombination. Virology 1999, 265(2):218-225.
73. Maynard Smith J: Analyzing the mosaic structure of genes. Journal of
Molecular Evolution 1992, 34(2):126-129.
74. Posada D: Evaluation of methods for detecting recombination from DNA
sequences: Empirical data. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2002,
19(5):708-717.
75. Martin DP, Williamson C, Posada D: RDP2: recombination detection and
analysis from sequence alignments. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(2):260-262.
76. Pond SLK, Posada D, Gravenor MB, Woelk CH, Frost SDW: Automated
phylogenetic detection of recombination using a genetic algorithm.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 2006, 23(10):1891-1901.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-395
Cite this article as: Zagalska-Neubauer et al.: 454 sequencing reveals
extreme complexity of the class II Major Histocompatibility Complex in
the collared flycatcher. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:395.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
