<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>De novo assembly and characterization of a maternal and developmental transcriptome for the emerging model crustacean Parhyale hawaiensis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-581"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Victor Zeng"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
De novo assembly and characterization of a
maternal and developmental transcriptome for the
emerging model crustacean Parhyale hawaiensis
Zeng et al.
Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581 (25 November 2011)

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

De novo assembly and characterization of a
maternal and developmental transcriptome for
the emerging model crustacean Parhyale
hawaiensis
Victor Zeng1, Karina E Villanueva2, Ben S Ewen-Campen1, Frederike Alwes1, William E Browne2* and
Cassandra G Extavour1*

Abstract
Background: Arthropods are the most diverse animal phylum, but their genomic resources are relatively few.
While the genome of the branchiopod Daphnia pulex is now available, no other large-scale crustacean genomic
resources are available for comparison. In particular, genomic resources are lacking for the most tractable
laboratory model of crustacean development, the amphipod Parhyale hawaiensis. Insight into shared and divergent
characters of crustacean genomes will facilitate interpretation of future developmental, biomedical, and ecological
research using crustacean models.
Results: To generate a transcriptome enriched for maternally provided and zygotically transcribed developmental
genes, we created cDNA from ovaries and embryos of P. hawaiensis. Using 454 pyrosequencing, we sequenced over 1.1
billion bases of this cDNA, and assembled them de novo to create, to our knowledge, the second largest crustacean
genomic resource to date. We found an unusually high proportion of C2H2 zinc finger-containing transcripts, as has
also been reported for the genome of the pea aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum. Consistent with previous reports, we
detected trans-spliced transcripts, but found that they did not noticeably impact transcriptome assembly. Our assembly
products yielded 19,067 unique BLAST hits against nr (E-value cutoff e-10). These included over 400 predicted
transcripts with significant similarity to D. pulex sequences but not to sequences of any other animal. Annotation of
several hundred genes revealed P. hawaiensis homologues of genes involved in development, gametogenesis, and a
majority of the members of six major conserved metazoan signaling pathways.
Conclusions: The amphipod P. hawaiensis has higher transcript complexity than known insect transcriptomes, and
trans-splicing does not appear to be a major contributor to this complexity. We discuss the importance of a reliable
comparative genomic framework within which to consider findings from new crustacean models such as D. pulex and
P. hawaiensis, as well as the need for development of further substantial crustacean genomic resources.

Background
Crustaceans are one of the four major groups that make
up the phylum Arthropoda, the most speciose and morphologically diverse animal group [1]. Despite the fact
that arthropods as a whole make up the majority of
* Correspondence: wbrowne@bio.miami.edu; extavour@oeb.harvard.edu
1
Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 16
Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2
Department of Biology, University of Miami, 234 Cox Science Center, 1301
Memorial Drive, Coral Gables, FL 33146, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

animal species diversity and biomass, until recently the
only arthropod represented in the list of NIH model
organisms http://www.nih.gov/science/models/ was the
fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The water flea Daphnia pulex was recently added to this list, and is the only
crustacean to date with a publicly accessible sequenced
genome [2]. As crustaceans are now widely recognized
as sister group to the hexapods [3-7], the phylogenetic
position of D. pulex suggests that it could serve as a
useful outgroup to insects, providing meaningful comparisons with the many insights into developmental and

© 2011 Zeng et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

disease biology provided by work on D. melanogaster.
However, there are no genomic resources on a scale
comparable to the D. pulex genome, and so it is still not
known to what extent the characteristics of the water
flea genome are specific to this animal’s ecology or
shared by other crustaceans [2]. Moreover, comparisons
of biomedically relevant processes and mechanisms
between D. pulex and other model organisms must be
informed by robust phylogenetic hypotheses. At the
moment, which specific subgroup of crustaceans is closest to the hexapods (including D. melanogaster) is still
a matter of debate [8], but several phylogenetic hypotheses suggest that branchiopods may be more distant
from insects than other crustacean groups [6,9-12].
Crustaceans have long been the subject of ecological and
evolutionary study, as well as being lucrative commercial
species for human consumption. Even for many of the
most intensively studied of these [13], surprisingly few
genomic projects have been reported. Most of the crustacean EST projects completed to date, notably for the
farmed shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei (~163,000 ESTs)
[14-16], the salmon ectoparasite copepod Lepeophtheirus
salmonis (~129,000 ESTs) [17], the porcelain crab Petrolisthes cinctipes (~98,000 ESTs) [18], and the lobster
Homarus americanus (~52,000 ESTs) [19-21], have all
used Sanger sequencing of cDNA libraries. Next generation
sequencing technologies are increasingly affordable, accessible and robust even for organisms lacking a sequenced
genome [22], but have been reported to be applied to a
crustacean de novo transcriptome only once, in the Antarctic krill Euphausia superba [23]. This organism is the subject of ecological and climate change research, but is not a
viable laboratory model organism due to its specialized
habitat.
While new understanding of developmental and molecular mechanisms in D. pulex are expected to follow
from its genome sequence, it is important to note that
crustaceans have been the subject of comparative embryology for over a century [24], and in recent decades, of
evolutionary developmental biology (“evo-devo”). The
morphological and molecular mechanistic variations of
early embryogenesis, modifications of their body plans
and appendage diversifications displayed by crustaceans
have all been the subject of studies too numerous to
describe here. However, until recently most comparative
analyses of crustaceans have been limited to the study of
gene expression or experimental embryology, as crustacean models where functional genetic testing is possible
are still few in number. The limiting factor for comparative functional experiments is often obtaining specific
coding sequences of sufficient length. A large-scale genomic resource for a model crustacean would therefore
greatly facilitate development and deployment of transgenic tools.

Page 2 of 18

The amphipod Parhyale hawaiensis has emerged as an
important laboratory model crustacean species over the
last several years [25]. P. hawaiensis was first described in
the Hawaiian islands [24], but it occupies intertidal marine
habitats worldwide. Laboratory husbandry is easy and
affordable, and inbred lab cultures produce hundreds of
embryos year-round, providing ample material for developmental studies. Fate map and cell lineage analyses of the
early embryo show that all three germ layers and the germ
line are determined by the eight cell stage [26], and clonal
populations show predictable patterns at least up until
gastrulation [27]. Despite this apparently “mosaic”
embryonic development, significant regulative properties
have also been described for the embryonic mesoderm
and ectoderm [28]. Molecular techniques for the study of
development, including stable transgenesis [29-31] and
gene knockdown [32-34] are arguably better established
for P. hawaiensis than for any other laboratory crustacean
model.
However, the number of P. hawaiensis developmental
genes available as GenBank accessions is less than 25. Progress in understanding the development of P. hawaiensis
is thus is limited by the relative paucity of publicly available cloned coding and regulatory regions. Indeed, since
the development of germ line transgenesis in P. hawaiensis, its use in developmental studies has been reported
only three times [30,31,34].
Analysis of phenotypes of genomic transgene insertions
[29] and case studies of intron sizes [35] are consistent
with an extremely large genome size for this amphipod.
Accordingly, the genome size of P. hawaiensis is estimated
to be 2.98 Gb ([35], R. Gregory and C. Extavour, unpublished), very near that of Homo sapiens [36,37]. A genomic
BAC library for P. hawaiensis has been created and partially sequenced [35] but is not yet available in GenBank.
The genome of the closely related amphipod Jassa marmorata, with a much smaller genome of 690 Mbp (~4
times the size of the D. melanogaster genome) has been
approved for whole genome, BAC end, and EST sequencing by the Joint Genome Institute [13], but this work is
still ongoing, and laboratory culture of this amphipod is
difficult. A large transcriptome dataset for P. hawaiensis
would thus be a highly valuable resource for several scientific communities, and would in addition assist with the
annotation of planned amphipod genomic projects. Recent
construction of a de novo transcriptome for the milkweed
bug Oncopeltus fasciatus, which also lacks a sequenced
genome [22], suggested that 454 pyrosequencing would be
a fruitful approach to obtaining a large scale P. hawaiensis
transcriptome.
Here we present the de novo assembly of a maternal and
embryonic transcriptome for P. hawaiensis, sequenced
with 454 Titanium pyrosequencing. We describe particular
features of the P. hawaiensis transcriptome that were

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

revealed during assembly and annotation, including the
presence of trans-splicing and enrichment for C2H2 Zn
finger domain-containing transcripts. We annotate orthologues of genes involved in several major developmental
patterning processes, gametogenesis in males and females,
and members of major conserved animal signaling pathways. We observe a high proportion of apparently unique
sequences in the transcriptome, and discuss these findings
in the light of observations on the D. pulex genome and
other existing crustacean genomic resources.

Results and Discussion
Collection and preparation of material for ovarian and
embryonic cDNA libraries

Our goal was to create a transcriptome containing genes
relevant to embryonic development, including both maternally provided and zygotically transcribed genes. All three
germ layers and the germ line are determined by the eight
cell stage [26], and we wished to capture transcripts from

Page 3 of 18

that early stage (Figure 1D top). We also wished to sample
the intensively studied germ band stage (Figure 1D bottom), when major body axes have been patterned and
trunk segmentation is ongoing [38], as well as later stages
(S20-S27) when organogenesis is predominant. We therefore collected ovaries (Figure 1C) and embryos from all
stages of embryogenesis (Figure 1E), extracted mRNA and
prepared cDNA for 454 pyrosequencing. Because early
stage embryos have many fewer cells than later stage
embryos, we anticipated that transcripts present in early
embryos might suffer low representation if our collection
contained equal numbers of embryos of all stages. We
therefore collected greater numbers of earlier stages than
of later stages (Additional File 1).
Sequencing and assembly of the P. hawaiensis
transcriptome

We sequenced a total of 3,172,925 reads (Table 1) with a
median read length of 400 bp (Figure 2A; Additional File

Figure 1 Parhyale hawaiensis and the tissues used to construct a de novo transcriptome. (A) Adult female amphipod, P. hawaiensis. (B)
Adult male. (C) Ovaries of adult female. Oocytes and oogonia are visible at various stages of growth. (D) Schematic drawings of the eight cell
stage (top), at which all germ layers and the germ line are specified, and the germ band stage (bottom). Both of these signature stages are
represented in this transcriptome. (E) A sample of the range of stages of P. hawaiensis embryogenesis represented in this transcriptome; stages
as per [55]. Embryos from as early as S1 (one cell stage) and as late as S27 (just before hatching) were sampled; see Additional File 1 for details.
G: gonoduct; O: late stage oocyte; og: younger oocytes and oogonia. Anterior is to the left in A, B, and E, and up in C.

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

Page 4 of 18

Table 1 P. hawaiensis transcriptome assembly statistics
Raw reads (base pairs)
Assembled reads

3,172,925 (1,179,544,291)
3,157,373

Isotigs

35,301

Isotig N50
Singletons (% of assembled reads)

1,510
276,564 (8.8%)

# Unique BLAST hits

19,067

Isogroups ("genes”)

25,735

Mean # isotigs per isogroup

1.4

Newbler Contigs ("exons”)
Mean # contigs per isotig

89,664
2.1

2). For assembly of the de novo transcriptome we used
Newbler v2.5 (Roche). Newbler’s terminology for assembled
reads distinguishes between contigs (groups of assembled
reads with overlapping regions considered significant, i.e.
putative exons), isotigs (continuous paths through a set of
contigs, i.e. putative transcripts), and isogroups (groups of
isotigs assembled from the same set of contigs, i.e. putative
genes). For continuity, we use this terminology throughout
this paper to refer to the products of the Newbler assembly.
The default parameters of Newbler v2.5 were used to
screen for adapters and eliminate poor quality reads. The
resulting 3,157,373 reads (99.5% of raw reads) were then
assembled (Table 1). 2,349,266 (74.4%) of the screened
reads were incorporated into assembled sequences (isotigs
or contigs), with 276,564 (8.8%) singletons remaining.
531,543 reads (16.8% of reads subjected to assembly) were
excluded because they were only partially assembled

BLAST mapping of non-redundant transcriptome
sequences

Using an E-value cutoff of 1e-10, we first used BLASTX to
map all non-redundant assembly sequences to nr (total
number of sequences = 311,865 = 35,301 isotigs + 276,564
singletons), and obtained a total of 20,007 BLAST hits
(Table 2). Of the 35,301 isotigs, 10,424 (29.5%) had at least
one hit (including 9,715 contigs (10.8%), and of the
276,564 singletons, 9,583 (3.5%) had hits. The majority of
these BLAST hits were unique: among the isotigs there
were 10,203 (28.9%) unique hits, and among the singletons

# of Reads

B
# of Reads

A

(431,372; 13.7%), from repeat regions (5,022; 0.2%), outliers (86,822; 2.7%), or too short (< 40 bp: 8,327; 0.3%).
The assembly contained 89,664 contigs, which grouped
into 35,301 isotigs. 18,615 (52.7%) of these isotigs were
made up of only one contig, and the average number of
contigs per isotigs was 2.1. The isotig N50 length was
1,510 bp, and the number of isogroups was 25,735 (18,565
(72.1%) of these comprised only one isotig, and the mean
number of isotigs per isogroup was 1.4). The average coverage per contig was 7.1 reads/bp (Additional File 3).
Averaging across all bases in the entire assembly, the average coverage per base pair was 25.4, meaning that every
base pair in the transcriptome was sequenced 25.4 times
on average. This coverage is high compared to typical
numbers for de novo transcriptome assemblies, and should
be helpful for distinguishing SNPs and indels from potential sequencing errors in raw reads [39]. Fasta files of all
assembly products are freely available from the authors.

Read Length (bp)

Sequence Length (bp)

raw reads
Newbler assembly & singletons
Newbler assembled sequences (contigs & isotigs)

Figure 2 Read lengths of raw, trimmed, and assembled reads. (A) The raw reads (grey) ranged in length from < 40 bp to 1196 bp, with a
mean read length of 400 bp. The distribution of read lengths of those reads chosen for assembly (red) was comparable to that of raw reads for
the Newbler assembly (grey). (B) Read length distributions from all products of assembly of trimmed reads. The longest isotig per isogroup is
shown. Removing singletons (unassembled reads) from these data shows that most assembly products under ~600 bp are singletons, i.e. that
the vast majority of assembly products are transcript models over 600 bp (pink).

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

Page 5 of 18

Table 2 P. hawaiensis transcriptome BLAST results
#
Sequences

# BLAST hits against nr1
(%)

# Unique BLAST hits against nr1
(%)

Isogroups

25,735

n/a2

n/a2

Isotigs
Contigs

35,301
89,664

10,424 (29.5%)
9,715 (10.8%)

10,203 (28.9%)
n/a3

Singletons

276,564

9,583 (3.5%)

8,864 (3.2%)

Total Non-Redundant Assembly Sequences (= isotigs +
singletons)

311,865

20,007 (6.4%)

19,067 (6.1%)

1. nr = NCBI non-redundant database
2. Because isogroups are collections of isotigs that are hypothesized to originate from the same gene, they do not comprise a single sequence and so cannot be
compared by BLAST to nr.
3. The custom script UniqueBlast.pl was applied only to non-redundant assembly sequences (i.e. isotigs and singletons).

there were 8,864 (3.2%) unique hits (Table 2; see ‘Sequence
Annotation’ within Materials and Methods for our determination of “unique BLAST hits”). In summary, among all
non-redundant assembly sequences (i.e. isotigs + singletons), we obtained 19,067 unique BLAST hits (Table 2).
These BLAST results may mean that the transcriptome
contains as many as 19,067 unique gene transcripts. However, as for all de novo assemblies, several caveats must be
considered. First, different regions of a single transcript
may have different best top BLAST hits. Our assembly
likely contains sequences that belong to the same transcript
but are too far apart to be assembled together, and so
would be considered “different genes.” As a result, the
number of unique BLAST hits may be an overestimate of
unique gene number (see also discussion of total gene
number estimation in section “Comparison with other
arthropod genomic resources“ below). Second, 24,877 isotigs
(70.5% of all isotigs) and 266,981 singletons (96.5% of all
singletons) did not yield BLAST hits that met our E-value
cutoff of e-10. These values are comparable to or higher
than those obtained in other de novo transcriptome analyses [40-45]. However, these unmatched sequences may
represent transcript fragments whose similarities to known
genes is too poor to meet our E-value cutoff, or are noncoding. It is therefore not formally possible from de novo
assembly to know whether the 19,067 unique BLAST hit
number over- or under-estimates the true number of genes
contained in our transcriptome.
Transcriptome Gene Ontology (GO) term annotation

We used Blast2GO [46] to obtain the gene ontology terms
associated with the top 50 BLAST hits for each nonredundant assembly sequence. Of the 19,067 sequences
with unique BLAST hits as per our 1e-10 E-value cutoff,
9,451 (49.6%) of these had GO terms associated with
them. To determine whether or not major categories of
genes were missing or underrepresented in our transcriptome, we compared the proportions of sequences in
selected GO term groups to the proportions in these categories observed in the predicted transcript complement of

the only crustacean with a sequenced genome, D. pulex
(see Materials and methods; Figure 3). We did not find
significant differences in the proportion of genes in the
examined GO term categories between the P. hawaiensis
transcriptome and the water flea genome, suggesting that
our transcriptome does not lack major functional categories of genes. Interestingly, not only were the proportions similar for the two crustaceans, they also closely
matched the profiles observed for the sequenced genome
of the insect D. melanogaster, and a de novo insect transcriptome from a milkweed bug [22] (Figure 3), suggesting
that arthropod species as widely diverged as fruit flies and
water fleas share similar proportional gene expression profiles in certain functional genetic categories.
Unusual characteristics of the P. hawaiensis transcriptome

P. hawaiensis has been found to employ trans-splicing
among its genetic regulatory mechanisms [47]. In this
mechanism, sections of transcripts transcribed from independent genomic loci are spliced together post-transcriptionally to form a novel transcript. Such trans-spliced
transcripts are recognizable because they contain a diagnostic splice-leader sequence. We wished to determine to what
extent this additional transcript complexity affected our
assembly and our ability to assign high-confidence BLAST
annotations. We therefore processed the trimmed, preassembly reads to remove those containing the diagnostic
splice-leader sequences (2,584; 0.1%), and performed a
Newbler v2.5 assembly on the remaining reads. The results
of this assembly were not noticeably different from the
complete assembly, nor did the number of unique BLAST
hits increase (Additional File 4). We therefore concluded
that the presence of trans-spliced transcripts did not significantly affect our transcriptome assembly or annotation.
When we considered the species identity of the top
BLAST hit for each isotig and singleton (see Methods),
we found that a high proportion (50.5%) of our assembly
sequences most closely matched sequences from other
arthropods (Additional File 5). However, an unexpectedly high proportion (12.2%) was from the lancelet

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

Page 6 of 18

60%
D. pulex genome

50%

D. melanogaster genome

40%

P. hawaiensis transcriptome

O. fasciatus transcriptome

30%
20%
10%
response to stimulus
t ti l
cell cycle
sexual reproduction
gene expression
developmental process
multicellular organismal
anatomical structure
embryonic
post-embryonic
establishment of
cell death
gamete generation
A
RNA localization
ribosome biogenesis
regulation of gene
transcription
translation
A
ncRNA metabolic
electron carrier activity
transcription regulator
hydrolase activity
catalytic activity
nucleic acid binding
kinase activity
cytoskeletal protein
A
RNA binding
receptor activity
ligase activity
transmembrane
transcription factor
cytoplasm
t l m
nucleus
cytoskeleton
mitochondrion
Golgi apparatus
endoplasmic reticulum
ribosome

0%

Biological
Process

Molecular
Function

Cellular
Component

Figure 3 GO term distribution of BLAST hits from the P. hawaiensis transcriptome. For comparison, GO term distributions of transcript
predictions from a crustacean (Daphnia pulex: water flea) and an insect (Drosophila melanogaster: fruit fly) with sequenced genomes are shown,
as well as those from the largest available de novo pyrosequenced insect transcriptome to date (Oncopeltus fasciatus: milkweed bug [22]).
Selected GO categories are shown within the top-level divisions of Biological Process, Molecular Function, and Cellular Component. Column
heights reflect the percentage of annotated sequences that mapped to a given Biological Process GO term.

Branchiostoma floridae, which is phylogenetically very
far removed from P. hawaiensis. When we examined
those sequences with a lancelet sequence as top hit, we
noticed that (a) for many of them, the top 50 BLAST
hits were all B. floridae; and (b) the majority of them
seemed to contain C2H2 zinc fingers with a specific linker sequence (TGEKP) between C2H2 domains.
The genome of at least one other arthropod, the pea
aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum, has been found to be unusually rich in genes containing the same C2H2 zinc finger and diagnostic linker sequence [48]. We reasoned
that if both the amphioxus [49] and amphipod genomes
happened to contain a high proportion of such genes,
this could be responsible for the apparent high similarity
of several transcripts in these two species. To test this,
we removed reads containing C2H2 zinc finger-encoding sequences, following a previously defined low-stringency definition of a C2H2 zinc finger domain [50]. We
then assembled the remaining reads with Newbler v2.5,
and again scanned for and removed contigs and isotigs
containing the motif. The remaining assembly products

were mapped against nr using BLASTX, and the species
identities of their top hits were compared with those
obtained from the complete assembly. We found that
the new assembly retained a large proportion (54.3%) of
arthropod hits, but that the number of B. floridae hits
had dropped to 4.3%, and was now comparable to the
proportion of hits obtained from other deuterostome
phyla (Figure 4, Additional File 5).
Comparison with other arthropod genomic resources

The BLAST hit rate of the P. hawaiensis isotigs was 29.5%.
This is higher than those reported in other de novo transcriptome analyses [40-45], including that of an arctic
crustacean [23], but much lower than the 43.4% obtained
from a previously analyzed de novo insect maternal/
embryonic transcriptome [22]. The ~70% of P. hawaiensis
isotigs without a high confidence BLAST hit could be
either P. hawaiensis-specific genes, or genes with relatively
lower similarity to known genes. In addition, it is possible
that many of our transcripts represent untranslated
sequences rather than coding regions (for example, UTRs

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

Page 7 of 18

Flies & Mosquitoes
Moth

Tick

613
800

Nematode

169

Birds

241

Mammals

664

Amphibian

424

Fish

819

Amphioxus

538

Sea Squirt

137

Acorn Worm

438

Sea Urchin

593

Trichoplax

62

Cnidarians

720

Dinoflagellate

C = Chordata

800

Crustaceans

A = Arthropoda

499

Louse

M

2274

Aphid

2823 C

1335

Bee, Wasp & Ants

A

113

Beetle

8215

1781

170

M = Metazoa

Figure 4 Phylogenetic distribution of species of top unique BLAST hits for the P. hawaiensis transcriptome sequences. First, raw reads
that contained C2H2 zinc finger sequences were removed before assembly. Second, assembled sequences that contained C2H2 zinc finger
sequences were removed from the output file. We then determined the unique BLAST hits for the remaining non-redundant assembly products
(isotigs + singletons). 90% of the resulting unique BLAST hits were from species belonging to the clades shown. Blue circles are scaled according
to the proportion of sequences with species belonging the clade indicated as their top BLAST hit. Over 50% of top BLAST hits are from
arthropod species. Phylogenetic tree modified from [63,74,75]. Hits from the following most abundant species are represented: D. mojavensis, D.
willistoni, D. ananassae, D. grimshawi, D. pseudoobscura pseudoobscura, Aedes aegypti, Anopheles gambiae, Culex quinquefasciatus (Flies &
Mosquitoes), Bombyx mori (Moth), Tribolium castaneum (Beetle), Harpegnathos saltator, Camponotus floridanus, Apis mellifera, Nasonia vitripennnis
(Bee, Wasp & Ants), Acyrthosiphon pisum (Aphid), Pediculus humanus corporis (Louse), Ixodes scapularis (Tick), Penaeus monodon, Lepeophtheirus
salmonis, Litopenaeus vannamei (Crustaceans), Caenorhabditis remanei (Nematode), Gallus gallus, Taeniopygia guttata (Birds), Rattus norvegicus, Mus
musculus, Monodelphis domestica (Mammals), Xenopus laevis, X. tropicalis (Amphibian), Danio rerio, Tetraodon nigroviridis (Fish), Branchiostoma
floridae (Amphioxus), Ciona intestinalis (Sea Squirt), Saccoglossus kowalevskii (Acorn Worm), Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (Sea Urchin), Trichoplax
adherens (Trichoplax), Hydra magnipapillata, Nematostella vectensis (Cnidarians), Perkinsus marinus (Dinoflagellate). See Additional File 5 for details.

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

or noncoding RNAs), and therefore do not match nr protein sequences.
The relatively low proportion of hits may also reflect the
fact that until recently (and including the version of nr we
used for our analysis, which did not include the D. pulex
genome at the time of analysis) very few crustacean
sequences were included in nr. The D. pulex genome also
contains a high proportion (~36%) of apparently Daphniaspecific genes, thought to be largely the result of amplification of selected gene families [2]. Noting that the E-value
cutoff used for the D. pulex analyses (1e-5) was slightly
more relaxed than that used in our initial analysis (1e-10),
we repeated the BLASTX of our non-redundant
P. hawaiensis transcriptome sequences against nr with an
E-value cutoff of 1e-5. This yielded 26,494 unique BLAST
hits (including 34.8% of isotigs and 5.7% of singletons).
We therefore found that even adjusting the E-value cutoff
to that used for characterization of the D. pulex genome,
~59% of the sequences in this P. hawaiensis transcriptome
lack significant similarity to other characterized animal
sequences. These observations suggest that crustaceans
may have more species- or clade-specific genes than previously appreciated. Alternatively, these high numbers of
apparently lineage-restricted genes may simply reflect the
paucity of crustacean genomic resources currently in public databases.
Those P. hawaiensis transcriptome sequences which
failed to obtain a significant BLAST hit when compared
with nr might share more similarity with other crustaceans. To test this, we used BLAST to compare all
P. hawaiensis transcriptome sequences that had failed our
1e-10 E-value cutoff against nr, with the predicted
D. pulex transcriptome (see Methods) using BLASTX and
a 1e-10 E-value cutoff. We then used BLAST to compare
the obtained sequences with nr to determine their putative
identities. We did not set an E-value limit for this second
BLAST, in order to recover at least some minimal information about the identity of these genes (E-values for a
subset of these, described below, are shown in Additional
File 6). We found that 47.9% of these sequences came
from arthropods, only 2.5% of which were crustaceans.
The low crustacean representation in nr makes it difficult
to obtain high confidence BLAST hits for this group. We
therefore focused on determining what proportion of “nr
orphan” P. hawaiensis sequences were highly similar to
sequences from D. pulex by comparing the E-values for
BLAST hits against both nr and against the D. pulex predicted transcriptome. We found that of the 423
P. hawaiensis sequences with higher similarity to D. pulex
genes than to anything in nr (Additional File 6), 381
(90.1%) of these had E-values at least an order of magnitude higher for D. pulex compared to nr, and 30 of these
(7.1% of total) had E-values greater than one for nr hits,
but D. pulex hit E-values of 1e-11 or lower. Most of this

Page 8 of 18

“Daphnia-like” group matched arthropod sequences that
were previously annotated as “hypothetical proteins,” suggesting that non-insect crustacean sequence annotation
could improve future annotation of the existing insect
genomes.
The D. pulex genome has been found to contain a high
number of genes (at least 30,907) [2]. Without a genome
sequence for P. hawaiensis, we cannot accurately estimate
gene number in order to perform a rigorous comparison
with D. pulex. However, our transcriptome assembly identified 25,735 isogroups. Because isogroups are groups of
isotigs assembled from the same set of contigs, isogroups
may represent putative genes, with each isotig of the isogroup representing a transcript variant, for example a
splice variant. We therefore speculate that P. hawaiensis,
with a genome over one order of magnitude larger than
that of D. pulex (C. Extavour & R. Gregory, unpublished),
may also have a high gene number of at least 25,735 genes.
However, using isogroup number of this de novo transcriptome as a proxy for total gene number has two significant limitations. The first is the result of our chosen
tissue sampling strategy: this transcriptome does not capture postembryonic gene expression. After hatching,
expression of several genes with exclusively juvenile or
adult roles is likely, including at minimum additional
genes associated with molting, behavior, and gametogenesis. It is therefore possible that the number of isogroups
in our assembly underestimates the true gene number in
P. hawaiensis.
The second limitation is the unavoidable result of any de
novo assembly, which is that if two sequences from the
same transcript do not share significant overlap, they will
appear as separate assembly products rather than as a single transcript (see also discussion of unique BLAST hit
number in section “BLAST mapping of non-redundant
transcriptome sequences“ above). This could result in the
number of isogroups being an overestimate of the true
number of genes. A further complication results from
Newbler v2.5’s method of handling isogroups made of
multiple isotigs. When we performed our assembly, we
limited the number of isotigs in one isogroup to 10 (“-it”
flag; see Methods). This has the advantage of avoiding isogroups composed of large numbers of isotigs, as we suspect that in P. hawaiensis, as shown for other animals, the
vast majority of genes have fewer than ten splicing isoforms [51]. However, it can also result in problematic isogroup number calculation, because isogroups that exceed
the number of isotigs per isogroup threshold are returned
to the assembly file as contigs rather than isotigs, thus
inflating the gene number estimate. In summary, in order
to determine whether high numbers of species- or cladespecific genes is a general characteristic of crustaceans,
and the true extent of species-specific genes for
P. hawaiensis, more deep genomic resources will have to

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

Page 9 of 18

be developed for this amphipod and for more crustaceans
of diverse classes.
The high gene number of D. pulex is thought to be due
to lineage-specific expansions of gene families [2]. These
expansions may play adaptive roles in the water flea’s ecology [2], or they may be a general feature of crustacean
genomes that was previously unappreciated due to the
paucity of crustacean genomic resources. It is therefore of
interest to determine the extent of gene family expansion
in P. hawaiensis. In order for our de novo transcriptome to
provide a rigorous answer to this question, we would need
to distinguish between transcripts of paralogues, and
sequences originating from the same transcript that do
not overlap enough to belong to the same isotig, or even
obtain the same set of top BLAST hits. This distinction is
not unambiguously possible, given the absence of a reference genome. However, we performed a preliminary analysis of putative gene expansion in P. hawaiensis, focusing
on those gene families found to be expanded in the
D. pulex genome. Our analysis conservatively included

only those P. hawaiensis isotigs that had a top BLAST hit
against a duplicated D. pulex gene. We also made sure
that these isotigs had the same set of top BLAST hits but
belonged to different isogroups, and were therefore likely
to represent paralogues rather than splice variants (see
Methods). We found that in general, highly expanded
D. pulex gene families had more putative paralogues (isogroups) in P. hawaiensis, relative to less expanded gene
families (Figure 5). It is therefore possible that gene family
expansions are a common feature of certain enzymatic
gene families in some crustaceans, although genome
sequencing will ultimately be needed to provide definitive
answers to this question.
Assessment of depth and transcript coverage of the
transcriptome

Although the 19,067 unique BLAST hits that we identified
may represent unique genes, as discussed extensively
above we cannot verify how many transcripts are encoded
by the genome in the absence of an annotated genome

Number of putative Parhyale hawaiensis paralogues

60
E-value e-1
E-value e-5

50

Linear Trendline (e-1)
Linear Trendline (e-5)

40
R = 0.54194

30

20

R = 0.40784

10

0
0
-10

10

20

30

40

50

60

Number of Daphnia pulex paralogues

Figure 5 Putative gene family expansion assessed with the P. hawaiensis transcriptome. Gene families that were reported as expanded in
the D. pulex genome [2] were examined for signatures of expansion in P. hawaiensis using the de novo transcriptome (see Methods). Gene
families that appear particularly expanded in both crustaceans include chitinase (orange; KEGG EC number 3.2.1.14), adenosinetriphosphatase
(red; KEGG EC number 3.6.1.3), 4-galactosyl-N-acetylglucosaminide 3-alpha-L-fucosyltransferase (green; KEGG EC number 2.4.1.152) and DNAdirected RNA polymerase (blue; KEGG EC number 2.7.7.6).

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

Page 10 of 18

sequence. However, we wished to estimate how deeply we
had sequenced those transcripts that were present in our
oogenesis/embryogenesis cDNA sample. To do this, we
assembled progressively larger random subsets of the total
reads. For each subassembly, we used BLAST to compare
our non-redundant transcriptome sequences with nr, and
assessed the number of unique BLAST hits to see to what
extent adding sequence data from the same sample
improved gene discovery. Even with the maximum number of over 3 million reads, we did not observe a plateau
in the gene discovery rate (Figure 6A). This suggests that
despite the considerable depth of our coverage, sequencing
more reads from the same sample could yield even more
new gene discovery. This is in contrast with a recently
constructed de novo maternal and embryonic transcriptome for an insect, which was comprised of only 2 million
reads and yet saturated gene discovery in the cDNA sample that was sequenced [22]. The increased complexity of
the amphipod transcriptome may reflect its large genome
size ([35], C. Extavour and R. Gregory, unpublished), high
putative gene number (this study), or large predicted
intron sizes [35].
Total isotig length increased steadily as progressively
larger subsets of reads were assembled (Figure 6B). While
small numbers of isotigs over 4,500 bp could be obtained
with as few as ~300,000 reads, robust recovery of isotigs
longer than 6,500 bp required assembly of at least 60% of
our total reads, or ~1.9 million reads. This demonstrates
that increased depth of sequencing, in addition to
improving gene discovery, has the added benefit of
increasing predicted transcript lengths, thereby facilitating their annotation and making them more immediately
useful for downstream applications. In a related analysis,
we searched the transcriptome for the presence of the
small number of P. hawaiensis developmental genes
available as GenBank accessions, and found that 52.4%

(11/21) were present (Additional File 7). However, only
for one of these genes (Ph-prospero) did our transcriptome add sequence data to the GenBank accession (Additional File 8). This may be a reflection of both the
relatively rarity of these transcripts, and the fact that
those genes identified to date have been the subject of
intense developmental studies, and so sequences of considerable length have already been cloned to close to full
length [30,34,52-57].
The assembly yielded isotigs as long as 7,936 bp, with
average length 1,128 bp (Figure 6B, C). However, we
wished to determine what fraction of true full transcript
length was likely to be contained by these isotigs. To do
this, we used the methods of O’Neil and colleagues [39] in
calculating the ortholog hit ratio for isotigs, contigs, and
singletons. We found that 60.2% of isotigs represented
over 50% of putative true full-length transcripts compared
with predicted D. pulex transcripts, and 35.0% of isotigs
were over 80% full length (Figure 7A). These ratios were
not significantly higher than those obtained by comparing
transcriptome sequences to D. melanogaster transcripts
(58.1% and 33.2% respectively), suggesting that P.
hawaiensis sequences have comparable similarity to those
of the water flea and the fruit fly. Further, comparing transcripts from the fully sequenced genomes of D. pulex and
D. melanogaster yields ortholog hit ratio values of 65.1%
(above 0.5) and 41.7% (above 0.8) respectively, which are
similar to the P. hawaiensis/D. pulex comparison values.
These values are consistent with the increasing support
for hypotheses of crustacean paraphyly, which predict
large divergences between all of the lineages leading to
these arthropod species [see for example 6]. The current
state of understanding of crustacean-hexapod phylogenetic
relationships (see Conclusions) therefore does not allow
straightforward predictions of which pair of these three
transcriptomes should be most similar to each other.

B

# Reads

C

# Reads

# of Unique BLAST Hits

A

% Reads Assembled

Isotig Length (bp)

Isotig Length (bp)

Figure 6 Assessing complexity and depth of the P. hawaiensis transcriptome. Randomly sampled subsets of increasing percentages of the
total number of reads, in increments of 10%, were used to generate progressively larger sub-assemblies using Newbler v2.5. (A) The number of
unique BLAST hits (performed against nr) continues to increase as more sequences from this sample are assembled. (B) Full range of isotig
length distribution for each sub-assembly. The isotig length distribution remains similar across all sub-assemblies for the shorter (< 5000 bp)
reads in the assembly. (C) High read length (> 4000 bp) range of assembled read length distribution for each sub-assembly Assembly of reads
with length ≥ 5000 bp requires assembly of at least ≈60% of our reads, or ≈1.9 million reads. Legend shown in B applies to both B and C.

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

Page 11 of 18

A
Proportion of Isotigs

Proportion of Singletons

B

Ortholog Hit Ratio

Ortholog Hit Ratio
D. pulex vs D. melanogaster
Newbler assembly vs D. pulex
Newbler assembly vs D. melanolgaster

Figure 7 Ortholog hit ratio analysis of assembled reads and singletons in the P. hawaiensis transcriptome. As described in [39] an
ortholog hit ratio of one suggests that a transcript has been assembled to its true full length. Ortholog hit ratios for two arthropod genomic
datasets were obtained by using BLAST to compare the complete Daphnia pulex gene prediction set (downloaded from ftp://iubio.bio.indiana.
edu/daphnia/genome/Daphnia_pulex/dpulex_jgi060905/fasta/dpulex-gnomon-transcript-jgi060905.fasta.gz.) with the predicted gene set of
Drosophila melanogaster (r5.28 downloaded from ftp://ftp.flybase.net/genomes/Drosophila_melanogaster/) with an E-value cut-off of 1e-10. (A)
Ortholog hit ratio analysis for isotigs. A majority appear to contain at least 50% of the full length transcript sequence (arrow) compared to D.
pulex sequences (red), while over one third appear to represent at least 80% of the full length transcript sequence (arrowhead) compared to D.
pulex sequences. Comparison with D. melanogaster transcripts (pink) yields comparable ortholog hit ratios. (B) Ortholog hit ratio analysis for
singletons. Most singletons produced by both assemblers represent ≤ 20% of full-length transcripts. Arrow and arrowhead indicate 50% and 80%
of full-length transcripts, represented by an average of 7.7% and 1.3% of singletons, respectively. In both panels, grey indicates comparison of D.
pulex versus D. melanogaster transcripts based on predictions from genomic data.

Annotation of signaling pathway genes

Future functional genetic studies in P. hawaiensis will likely
focus on elucidating the function of highly conserved
metazoan genes in this amphipod. We therefore annotated
the transcriptome for the presence of genes belonging to
major conserved animal signaling pathways [58]. Using the
KEGG pathways as a guideline [59], we searched for
P. hawaiensis homologues of these genes using BLAST
using an E-value cutoff of 1e-10. In most cases, the D. melanogaster homologue of a gene was used as a query, but for
some searches, homologues from other organisms were
used as queries (Additional File 9). For the Notch, TGFb,
Wnt, Hedgehog, JAK/STAT and MAPK pathways, considering pathway members known from all animals, we identified likely P. hawaiensis homologues of an average of 52.8%
(103/195) of pathway genes (Figure 8). If we consider only
those pathway members with known D. melanogaster
homologues (n = 138), this proportion is an average of
74.6%. The proportion of genes found for each pathway
ranged from 58.8% (MAPK pathway) to 93.8% (JAK/STAT
pathway). Several genes of interest were found among the
singletons. Although singletons are sometimes discarded
before transcriptome annotation [see for example 23], our
data suggest that even these unassembled reads can be a
rich source of gene discovery. The transcriptome sequences
for these genes ranged in length from 276 bp (presenilin,

Notch pathway) to 4,882 bp (CK2, Wnt pathway), and the
majority are at least 500 bp long, making them immediately
useful for in situ hybridization, RNAi-mediated gene
knockdown, and RACE [60] in the case that longer or
flanking genomic sequences are required for specific applications. Interestingly, for several signaling pathway members without a D. melanogaster homologue, we found P.
hawaiensis homologues (Figure 8), suggesting that in some
respects, amphipod signaling pathways may bear greater
resemblance to vertebrate pathways than fruit flies.
Annotation of developmental and gametogenesis genes

Given the tractability of P. hawaiensis as a developmental
model, we sought to make this transcriptome of maximal
immediate use to the amphipod and broader developmental biology and biomedical research communities. We
therefore undertook manual annotation of over 450 genes
involved in embryonic patterning, developmental pathways
(Additional File 10) and gametogenesis in both males and
females (Additional File 11). We used lists of genes known
to function in these processes in Drosophila as a starting
point http://www.sdbonline.org/fly/aimain/1aahome.htm,
and identified over 200 likely P. hawaiensis homologues of
these genes. As we observed for our annotation of signaling pathway genes, the majority of matching transcriptome

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

A

Page 12 of 18

B

Fringe

Dvl

Chordin

DAN

Numb

SKIP

HATs

NICD

CSL
Hairless

LTBP1

PS-1

CKIε

CPB
βcatenin

GSK3β

CK2

PP2A

Axin

Axam

Wif-1

c-myc

c-jun
fra-1
TCF/LEF

CKIa

SMAD3

D

Groucho

Smad2/3
Smad2/3

Smad4
Smad6/7

PAR-1

Nkd

Gas1

Prickle

Stbm
Frizzled

Dvl

RhoA

ROCK2

Rac

Daam1

microtubule

Cos2
Fu Su(fu)

JNK

Ptc

Hh

Knypek

Ca2+

Wnt5

PLC

Frizzled

Megalin

CaMKII

PKA

Rab23

Cb1

F

STAM

IL2/3

IL6
UPD
EPO

P48

CytokineR

JAK

homo/hetero
STAT dimers

STAT

Tor

Drk

SOCS

Sos

MAPKK

MAPK

Ph1

Dsor1

Rolled

Ras85D

Ph1

Dsor1

Rolled

Ras85D

Ph1

Dsor1

Rolled

Ras85D

Tll
Hkb

Csw

CIS

Grk

Egfr

Drk

Sos

STAT5

IFN/IL10

SHP2

MAPKKK

Ts1

Pim-1

CPB
PIAS

Ptc
Slimb

CK1

PKC

E

Ci

GSK3b

NFAT

CaN

Wnt
Dpp

Zic2

Cul1
Rbx1

Skp1
Ebi1

Pitx2

Smad4

Skp1

SIP
APC

Smad2/3
Smad2/3

βTrCP

Siah-1

Dkk

Nodal RI
Nodal RII

Smo

scaffold

CtBP

Wnt1

p70S6K

Activin RII

PPARδ
Uterine

Xsox17

SP1

ROCK1

Hip

CycD

SMAD4

APC

Frizzled

p300

Activin RI

NLK

Duplin

DP1

MAPK
signaling

PP2A

Activin

Protein S2

GBP

Dvl

LRP 5/6

Cer-1

ICAT

PKA

Dally

Proc

Smad4

Lefty

HDAC

Idax

E2F4/5

Smad2/3

PST

FRP
Wnt

Smad2/3

TGFβ RI
TGFβ RII

TGFβ

Nodal

C

Cul1
Skp1

RhoA

CtBP Groucho

γ-secretase complex

Smad6/7
Smurf1/2

SARA

SMRT
CIR

PSE2 PSEN
NCSTN APH-1

TACE

Smad4

p107

PreTa
Decorin

Serrate

Id

Smad1/5/8

Rbx1

TNFα

Hes1/5
THBS1

Notch

Delta

Smad1/5/8

BMPRI
BMPRII

IFNγ

MAML

Deltex

Noggin

BMP

GRB

SOS

MAPK
signaling

Gap1

c-Myc

CycD
PI3K

AKT

BclXL
Spred
Sprouty

Boss

Sev

Drk

Sos

Pointed

Yan

Figure 8 Conserved metazoan signal transduction pathway components identified in the P. hawaiensis transcriptome. These results
were generated by using BLAST to compare sequences from known homologues against the full Newbler v2.5 assembly (see Additional File 9
and text for details), with genes identified marked in red. Genes outlined in grey with grey typeface indicate genes without D. melanogaster
homologues. Pathway schematics modified from KEGG pathway model images http://www.genome.jp/kegg/kegg1.html. (A) Notch pathway. (B)
TGFb pathway. (C) Wnt pathway. (D) Hedgehog pathway. (E) Janus Kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway.
(F) Mitogen-activated protein Kinase (MAPK) pathway.

reads are of sufficient length to allow immediate use in
gene expression and function studies.
Several of the genes contained multiple hits in our transcriptome, including a large number of singletons. For
some genes, these multiple hits included consecutively
numbered isotigs with very similar lengths. We examined
a subset of these genes to determine whether or not these
apparently highly similar isotigs were in fact different from
each other. We found that such sequences usually differed
from each other at a small number of nucleotide positions,
either because of low sequencing quality in one of the
component reads, or because of SNPs or small indels
(Additional File 12). Although annotation of SNPs in this
transcriptome is beyond the scope of this study, we

anticipate that the SNPs present in this transcriptome
could serve as a useful tool for population-level variation
studies in the future.

Conclusions
We have generated a maternal and embryonic transcriptome of the amphipod crustacean Parhyale hawaiensis
using 454 Titanium pyrosequencing. To our knowledge,
this represents the second largest crustacean genomic
resource, behind the genome of the cladoceran D. pulex,
and the largest de novo assembled pyrosequencing-based
transcriptome to date. We confirmed the previously
reported presence of trans-splicing in P. hawaiensis [47],
but found that the presence of these trans-spliced

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

transcripts did not greatly increase the complexity of the
transcriptome or impede assembly. The P. hawaiensis transcriptome appears to be enriched for a particular class of
C2H2 Zn finger-coding transcripts, which share high similarity with several Branchiostoma floridae transcripts, and is
also reported to be an enriched sequence class in the genome of the pea aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum [48].
We annotated the de novo transcriptome for a large
number of developmentally relevant genes, including
major conserved metazoan signaling pathways. We found
that even after assembly of over 3 million reads, gene discovery continued to increase, suggesting that the extremely large genome size of this amphipod may reflect high
gene numbers, high transcript complexity, or both. These
data should both facilitate future developmental and evolutionary studies using this emerging model crustacean
species, and contribute to future work in crustacean comparative genomics.
The bulk of existing arthropod genomic resources are
for insects, while the sister group to the insects, the crustaceans, remains relatively unexplored. The large genome
size and low relative similarity to existing annotated
arthropod genomes may be challenges to potential future
efforts to sequence the P. hawaiensis genome. However,
high throughput short read sequencing technologies such
as Illumina or SOLiD [61], combined with the transcriptome described here, should make such projects tractable.
Finally, this dataset should assist phylogenomic
approaches to resolution of controversies in crustacean
phylogenetic relationships, including the relationship
between crustaceans and hexapods. D. pulex belongs to
the Branchiopoda, and while some phylogenetic analyses
place this group closest to the hexapods [62-65], others
suggest that the Malacostraca (the group including
P. hawaiensis and most edible crustaceans such as shrimp,
lobster and crab) are sister to the hexapods [4,9-11,66].
Yet others suggest that Branchiopoda may be the most
derived group within a monophyletic clade containing all
crustaceans except for Malacostraca, Remipedia and
Cephalocarida [67]. The largest phylogenomic assessment
of this problem to date places both Branchiopoda
and Malacostraca in a monophyletic clade that is sister to
a (Hexapoda + Remipedia + Cephalocarida) clade [6].
Moreover, Daphnia species do not branch basally within
the Branchiopoda, and indeed are placed in the most
derived branchiopod clade by most phylogenetic analyses
[6,68,69]. These competing hypotheses emphasize the
importance of a reliable comparative genomic framework
within which to consider findings from new crustacean
models. In order to place future comparative, ecological,
environmental and biomedical studies using crustacean
models in an appropriate phylogenetic context, additional
crustacean genomic resources will be necessary.

Page 13 of 18

Methods
Animal culture

The P. hawaiensis (Figure 1A, B) specimens sequenced
in this study were from an inbred, non-backcrossed,
non-isogenic laboratory culture originally obtained
from Ernst Wimmer in 2002; the Wimmer culture in
turn was obtained from a laboratory culture from
Nipam H. Patel that was established with animals from
the John G. Shedd Aquarium (Chicago, IL) as previously described [55]. The animals were maintained in
the laboratory in artificial seawater (Instant Ocean, specific gravity 1.018-1.022), and fed a mixture of raw carrots, TetraAlgae Vegetable Enhanced Crisps, TetraMin
Tropical Flakes, and Hikari Wheat Germ Pellets. All
cultures were maintained under a 12:12 light/dark
cycle at 28°C.
cDNA Synthesis

471 mixed-stage embryos (Additional File 1; total weight
52.7 mg) representing the entirety of embryogenesis (Figure 1D) were shock frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored
at -80°C. 30 ovaries (comprising eight small ovaries from
young females and 22 late ovaries containing mature
oocytes from older females; Figure 1C) were dissected
from females in Trizol, flash frozen in Trizol, and stored
at -80°C. Total RNA was isolated separately from ovaries
(Figure 1C) and from mixed stages of embryogenesis
(Figure 1E), and a pool was created of 1.5 μg of total
RNA from each sample for use as a template for first
strand cDNA synthesis (3 μg total). cDNA was synthesized following a protocol developed specifically for 454
Titanium sequencing of cDNA [22], with the exception
that none of the cDNA was normalized in the present
study. This protocol is based on the SMART cDNA
library construction kit (Clontech, CA, USA), and
includes a modified poly(T) primer to enrich for mRNA,
and a DNAse treatment step to remove possible genomic
DNA contamination. Following first strand cDNA synthesis, primary amplification of the cDNA required thirteen
PCR cycles to maximize yield while avoiding overcycling
(monitored in real-time via qPCR [22]). Secondary amplification began to plateau after nine cycles. To obtain sufficient double-stranded cDNA for pyrosequencing
sequencing (~5 μg) without overcycling, 26 reactions of
100 μg each were run in parallel and subsequently copurified into 90 μl of elution buffer using QIAquick PCR
purification columns (Qiagen Inc).
454 Titanium Pyrosequencing

The samples were nebulized, adaptor-ligated, and pyrosequenced using the GS-FLX Titanium platform by the
Institute for Genome Science and Policy DNA Sequencing
Facility (Duke University). All of the raw reads generated

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

in this study have been submitted to the NCBI Short Read
Archive (Study Accession Number: SRA021010).
Sequence Assembly

Raw reads were assembled using the cDNA assembly algorithm (the “-cdna” flag) of Newbler v2.5. An adaptor-trimming step was included in the assembly (the “-vt” flag).
Screening adaptors used are available at http://extavourlab.com/protocols/ExtavourLab_454_Adapters.fasta). A
vector-screening step (the “-vs” flag) was performed using
a FASTA version of the Univec database ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.
gov/pub/UniVec/. Due to the long average length of the
raw 454 reads, the minimum overlapping length (the “-ml”
flag) was set to the default value of 40 base pairs. To
accommodate the possible existence of SNPs and pyrosequencing errors, the minimum identity between sequences
(the “-mi” flag) was set to require 95% identity between
aligned sequences. Trimmed singleton reads were specifically produced by Newbler (the “-trim” flag). A maximum
isogroup size of 10 isotigs was specified (the “-it” flag) to
prevent Newbler from constructing an isogroup using an
overly large quantity of short contigs. The resulting
assembled reads and unassembled singletons were used
for all subsequent analyses.
Sequence Annotation

Sequences were first mapped against the nr (all nonredundant GenBank CDS translations+PDB+SwissProt
+PIR+PRF) peptide sequence database [70, downloaded
from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/blast/db/on April 27, 2010]
using BLASTX. Unless otherwise specified, all BLAST
searches were conducted using BLAST v2.2.24+ [71] with
an E-value cutoff of 1e-10.
To annotate Gene Ontology (GO) terms [72] and their
parents associated with the top 50 BLAST hits for each
sequence, we used Blast2GO v1.2.7 [46].
Due to the sequence depth of this project, the transcripts were assembled with the raw 454 reads were not
all full-length. If sequences represent different regions of
the same transcript that are not assembled together due
to insufficient overlap, they run the risk of being counted
twice in our BLAST annotation. To address this problem,
a custom Perl script was created in order to estimate the
number of unique transcripts present in the P. hawaiensis transcriptome (called “UniqueBlast.pl” available at
http://www.extavourlab.com/protocols/bio_tools/Perl_Transcriptome_Analysis_Scripts.zip). UniqueBlast.pl utilizes the results of BLASTX against nr for all assembly
products with an E-value cutoff of 1e-10, to predict
whether multiple assembly products are fragments of the
same transcript. UniqueBlast.pl accomplishes this by
comparing the HSP region of assembly products with the
same top BLAST hit. Assembly products that have the
same top BLAST hit but non-overlapping HSP regions

Page 14 of 18

are considered as fragments of the same transcript.
Assembly products with the same top BLAST hits and
overlapping HSP regions are considered as putative isoforms or paralogues of each other. Overlapping is defined
as greater than 14 amino acids shared within the HSP,
because the assembly parameters require a minimum of
40 matching nucleotides in order for two raw reads to be
assembled together. UniqueBlast.pl then generates a list
of assembly sequences (isotigs or contigs) showing the
longest fragment of each transcript, as well as predicted
isoforms and paralogues. This list of unique transcripts
was then used for all subsequent analysis including GO
analysis, ortholog hit ratio calculations, and phylogenetic
distribution analysis of top BLAST hit organisms.
For analysis of the phylogenetic distribution of species of
top unique matches to non-redundant assembly
sequences, we used BLASTX to compare our non-redundant assembly products (isotigs + singletons, see Table 2)
with nr using an E-value cutoff of 1e-10. We discarded
redundant hits as described using “UniqueBlast.pl.” For
each gene in this list of unique BLAST hits, we recorded
the species identity of the top BLAST hit sequence. We
then tallied the total numbers for clades of interest, shown
in Figure 4 and Additional File 5. When assessing the
effect of Branchiostoma floridae C2H2 Zn finger
sequences on the annotation of the assemblies, we
assessed top BLAST hits obtained with both the NCBI
reference Sequence collection (RefSeq) and nr, and
obtained comparable results for both searches.
For comparison of sequences belonging to different GO
terms between species, we used the Oncopeltus fasciatus
data from a previously generated transcriptome [22] and a
precomputed GO annotation of the D. melanogaster genome [73]. To obtain GO category data for Daphnia pulex,
we used the transcripts predicted from the D. pulex genome (downloaded on 3 December 2010 from ftp://iubio.
bio.indiana.edu/daphnia/genome/Daphnia_pulex/dpulex_jgi060905/fasta/dpulex-gnomon-transcript-jgi060905.
fasta.gz).
To search for developmental genes of interest, we
used TBLASTN with protein queries being the full
length Drosophila melanogaster homologue of the gene
of interest. For genes that yielded no hits when the D.
melanogaster homologue was used as a query, homologues from other animals were used as queries. In cases
where proteins possessed domains that were also shared
by other genes from a different gene family (e.g.
abstrakt: zinc finger domain), the TBLASTN search was
performed by masking the relevant domain in the query
sequence. Finally, in cases of genes with small, diagnostic conserved domains within an otherwise poorly conserved sequence, the diagnostic domains were used as
the query (e.g. groucho). An E-value cutoff of e-10 was
used for all BLAST searches, except for those searches

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

with masked domains or specific protein domains, in
which case the E-value cutoff was e-5. For all developmental genes found, species identity and domain details
of the query used are indicated in the legends to Additional Files 9, 10 and 11.

Page 15 of 18

ortholog hit ratio script ("OrthologHitRatio.pl” available
at http://www.extavourlab.com/protocols/bio_tools/
Perl_Transcriptome_Analysis_Scripts.zip) to calculate
the values used to create the graphs in Figure 6.
Estimating extent of gene family expansion

Removal of reads from trans-spliced sequences

To determine how the presence of trans-spliced sequences
affected our assembly with Newbler, we used the
P. hawaiensis splice leader sequences [as per Figure 1 of
47] as an “adapter” sequence (the “-vs” flag) in the trimming step performed by Newbler prior to assembly. This
resulted in removal or trimming of all raw reads containing the splice leader sequence. The remaining reads were
assembled with Newbler v2.5 and compared using BLAST
against nr as described for the complete assembly.
Removal of C2H2 Zinc finger-containing sequences

Because we suspected that specific characteristics of
P. hawaiensis C2H2 Zn-finger containing proteins might
be responsible for a high incidence of BLAST hits to
sequences of the lancelet Branchiostoma floridae, we performed a new assembly after removing a subset of reads in
the following way: we scanned all reads for the presence of
C2H2 Zn finger-encoding sequences using the least stringent C2H2 motif defined in [50], which is X2-C-X1,2,4,5-CX12-H-X3-6-(H,C). We used this least stringent criterion
rather than the most stringent criterion defined by Böhm
and colleagues[50], in order to capture the largest number
of reads containing these motifs. We reasoned that even
“C2H2-like” domains might result in a Zn finger BLAST
match, thus skewing the proportions of B. floridae hits.
We used using a custom script ("C2H2.pl” available at
http://www.extavourlab.com/protocols/bio_tools/Perl_Transcriptome_Analysis_Scripts.zip) and removed reads
with matches. The remaining reads were assembled with
Newbler v2.5, and the resulting assembly was scanned
again for the presence of C2H2 Zn finger-encoding
sequences; assembled reads with hits were discarded. The
remaining sequences were compared with nr using
BLAST.
Estimating sequencing depth and transcript completion

To determine to what extent we had saturated gene discovery in the libraries we sequenced, we performed
independent assemblies of ten progressively larger, randomly sampled subsets of the reads. The total number
of genes in each sub-assembly was then identified via
BLASTX against nr. If multiple isotigs or contigs hit
non-overlapping portions of the same top BLAST hit,
only one of these sequences was counted. To calculate
the ortholog hit ratio [39], we first used the script for
generating a list of unique BLAST results described
above ("UniqueBlast.pl”). We then used a custom

We first identified the D. pulex transcripts belonging to
the duplicated gene families described by Colbourne and
colleagues et al (Figure S31 in [2]) based on the KEGG
enzyme code. We recorded the NCBI Gnomon transcript prediction ID of each D. pulex transcript that was
listed with the chosen KEGG enzyme codes. We then
mapped all of the P. hawaiensis isotigs against the D.
pulex Gnomon-predicted transcriptome using
TBLASTN. All P. hawaiensis isotigs with a top BLAST
hit matching any recorded D. pulex NCBI Gnomon
transcript prediction ID were identified. If the P.
hawaiensis isotigs identified in this way belonged to the
same isogroup, only a single isotig from that isogroup
was counted. Using this method, we counted the putative number of P. hawaiensis paralogues from a chosen
gene family.
[The sequence data from this study have been submitted to GenBank under study accession number
SRA021010. Custom scripts generated are available at
http://www.extavourlab.com/protocols/bio_tools/Python
%20Transcriptome%20Analysis%20Tools.tar.gz and
http://www.extavourlab.com/protocols/bio_tools/Perl_Transcriptome_Analysis_Scripts.zip. Assembly results
are available at http://www.extavourlab.com/resources/
index.html and at http://www.bio.miami.edu/wbrowne/
BrowneLab2/Community_Resources.html.]

Additional material
Additional file 1: Embryonic stages pooled for creation of the P.
hawaiensis transcriptome. Staging as per [55].
Additional file 2: Comparison of read lengths from Newbler v2.5 de
novo assembly of the P. hawaiensis transcriptome. (A) Distribution of
read lengths after assembly with Newbler v2.5 (red). (B) Distribution of
read lengths of the shortest assembled reads and raw reads. The
assembly yielded assembled reads of over ~4000 bp.
Additional file 3: Distribution of average coverage (reads/bp) within
contigs produced by Newbler v2.5 de novo assembly of the P.
hawaiensis transcriptome. The coverage within contigs is calculated by
dividing the total number of base pairs contained in the reads used to
construct a contig by the length of that contig.
Additional file 4: Analysis of the effect of trans-splicing transcripts
on de novo transcriptome assembly. Assembly of all trimmed
sequences compared to assembly of sequences lacking the trans-splicing
leader sequences [47]. Number of BLAST hits reflects a search against the
nr database with an E-value cut-off value of 1e-10.
Additional file 5: Phylogenetic distribution of species of top unique
BLAST hit for Newbler v2.5 assembly of the P. hawaiensis
transcriptome. Of the unique BLAST hits to all non-redundant assembly
products (isotigs + singletons), 90% were from species belonging to the
clades shown. Over 50% of these top BLAST hits are from arthropod
species. The large number (12.2%) of top BLAST hits in the complete

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

Page 16 of 18

assembly to sequences from Branchiostoma floridae is due to the high
similarity of C2H2 zinc finger domain-containing sequences with a
particular linker sequence (TGEKP) that is also highly represented in the
genome of the aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum [48]. Red: values after removal
of reads and sequences containing this domain. Phylogenetic tree
modified from [63,74,75]. Hits from the following most abundant species
are represented: D. mojavensis, D. willistoni, D. ananassae, D. grimshawi, D.
pseudoobscura pseudoobscura, Aedes aegypti, Anopheles gambiae, Culex
quinquefasciatus (Flies & Mosquitoes), Bombyx mori (Moth), Tribolium
castaneum (Beetle), Harpegnathos saltator, Camponotus floridanus, Apis
mellifera, Nasonia vitripennnis (Bee, Wasp & Ants), Acyrthosiphon pisum
(Aphid), Pediculus humanus corporis (Louse), Ixodes scapularis (Tick),
Penaeus monodon, Lepeophtheirus salmonis, Litopenaeus vannamei
(Crustaceans), Caenorhabditis remanei (Nematode), Gallus gallus,
Taeniopygia guttata (Birds), Rattus norvegicus, Mus musculus, Monodelphis
domestica (Mammals), Xenopus laevis, X. tropicalis (Amphibian), Danio
rerio, Tetraodon nigroviridis (Fish), Branchiostoma floridae (Amphioxus),
Ciona intestinalis (Sea Squirt), Saccoglossus kowalevskii (Acorn Worm),
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (Sea Urchin), Trichoplax adherens
(Trichoplax), Hydra magnipapillata, Nematostella vectensis (Cnidarians),
Perkinsus marinus (Dinoflagellate).

Additional file 11: Selected genes involved in gametogenesis
identified in the P. hawaiensis transcriptome. Hit ID indicates if gene
hits were found assembled reads (A) or singletons (S). Sequence length
(range) indicates the shortest and longest A or S hit sequences for each
gene. Groups of hits of a given colour indicate transcriptome sequences
that mapped to the same overlapping region of the BLAST target; hits of
different colours indicate transcriptome sequences that map to different,
non-overlapping regions of the BLAST target. Query organism was D.
melanogaster for all cases. Query sequence details: 1. S/T kinase domain
was masked. 2. Dead box/Zn finger domains were masked. 3. HLH
domain was masked 4. Peptidase C14 domain was masked. 5. Kinase
domain masked; amino acids 175-372 used as query. 6. BTB domain used
as query. 7. Kinase domain masked; amino acids 1-890 used as query.
Boldface indicates genes also present in other tables (Additional Files 9,
10); asterisks indicate that genes are also present elsewhere (in a
different functional category) in the same table.
Additional file 12: Representative of consecutively numbered
isotigs with highly similar lengths. An example of two isotigs which
both have Cyclin D as their top BLAST hit (see Additional File 9), differ in
length by only two nucleotides, and have highly similar sequences.
Isotig07129 is 4,279 bp long; isotig07130 is 4,277 bp long. Only a portion
of the sequence of each isotig is shown. Nucleotide positions differing
between the two are indicated in black (likely to be SNPs), white
(deletions) or grey (apparent sequence difference may be due to poor
quality sequence (lower case letters) at this position).

Additional file 6: Sequences with strong similarity to Daphnia pulex
gene sequences identified in the de novo P. hawaiensis
transcriptome. Because the D. pulex genome and nr are databases of
inevitably different sizes, E-values shown here are for information only
and are not strictly comparable. See text for additional details.
Additional file 7: Presence of existing P. hawaiensis GenBank
accessions in the de novo transcriptome. Sequences of P. hawaiensis
developmental genes from GenBank were used as a query to BLAST the
de novo transcriptome. Most genes with hits had several matches in the
transcriptome, among both assembled reads and singletons.
Additional file 8: The P. hawaiensis transcriptome adds sequence
data to GenBank accession number HM191476, the P. hawaiensis
prospero homologue. Extended contig for Ph-prospero, comprising the
complete mRNA GenBank accession (top, light grey), one isotigs and one
contig from the Newbler assembly of the transcriptome (dark grey). The
isotig provides an additional 445 bp of 3’ UTR sequence and 116 bp of
5’ UTR sequence (black) to the GenBank sequence. Comparison with the
GenBank sequence shows that isotig24415 and singleton
GAP9EXG06HFGHB belong to the same contig.
Additional file 9: Selected signaling pathway genes identified in the
P. hawaiensis transcriptome. Hit ID indicates if gene hits were found
assembled reads (A) or singletons (S). Sequence length (range) indicates
the shortest and longest A or S hit sequences for each gene. These
results are shown graphically in Figure 7. Groups of hits of a given colour
indicate transcriptome sequences that mapped to the same overlapping
region of the BLAST target; hits of different colours indicate
transcriptome sequences that map to different, non-overlapping regions
of the BLAST target. Query organisms: Dm = D. melanogaster; Dr = Danio
rerio; Xt = Xenopus tropicalis. Query sequence details: 1. Kinase domain
was masked. 2. FERM domain used as query. 3. Amino acids 500-833 (Dl/
Ser domain) used as query. 4. Amino acids 1-250 (groucho/TLE domain)
used as query. 5. Kinase domain masked; amino acids 420-1390 used as
query. 6. Kinase domain masked; amino acids 175-372 used as query. 7.
Kinase domain masked; amino acids 150-516 used as query. 8. Kinase
domain masked; amino acids 1-100 used as query. 9. Kinase domain
masked; amino acids 1-890 used as query. Asterisks indicate genes that
appear elsewhere in the same table (in a different pathway).
Additional file 10: Selected developmental process genes identified
in the P. hawaiensis transcriptome. Hit ID indicates if gene hits were
found assembled reads (A) or singletons (S). Sequence length (range)
indicates the shortest and longest A or S hit sequences for each gene.
Groups of hits of a given colour indicate transcriptome sequences that
mapped to the same overlapping region of the BLAST target; hits of
different colours indicate transcriptome sequences that map to different,
non-overlapping regions of the BLAST target. Query organism was D.
melanogaster for all cases. Boldface indicates genes also present in other
tables (Additional Files 9, 11); asterisks indicate genes that appear
elsewhere in the same table (in a different functional category).

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Friedemann Linsler for assistance with embryo collection, Lisa
Bukovnik for her administration of the sequencing, Ana Conesa and Stefan
Götz for valuable comments regarding use of the Blast2GO tool, and the
Extavour lab for discussions of the results. This work was partially supported
by NSF grant IOS-0817678, Ellison Medical Foundation New Scholar Award
AG-NS-07010-10, Harvard Stem Cell Institute Seed Grant SG-0057-10-00 (VZ)
and a Milton Fund Grant (FA) to CE, an NSF Predoctoral Fellowship to BEC,
and funding from the University of Miami College of Arts and Sciences to
WEB.
Author details
Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 16
Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 2Department of Biology,
University of Miami, 234 Cox Science Center, 1301 Memorial Drive, Coral
Gables, FL 33146, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
VZ performed experiments, helped design data analysis and analyzed data.
KEV performed experiments and analyzed data. BEC helped design research,
performed experiments, collected and analyzed data. FA performed ovary
dissections and embryo collections. WEB helped design the research,
performed experiments, analyzed data and obtained funding for the
research. CGE proposed the idea for the research, helped design the
research and analyze the data, wrote the manuscript with input from all
authors, and obtained funding for the research. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 10 August 2011 Accepted: 25 November 2011
Published: 25 November 2011
References
1. Brusca GJ, Brusca RC: Invertebrates. 2 edition. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates Inc.; 2003.
2. Colbourne JK, Pfrender ME, Gilbert D, Thomas WK, Tucker A, Oakley TH,
Tokishita S, Aerts A, Arnold GJ, Basu MK, et al: The ecoresponsive genome
of Daphnia pulex. Science 2011, 331:555-561.
3. Mallatt JM, Garey JR, Shultz JW: Ecdysozoan phylogeny and Bayesian
inference: first use of nearly complete 28S and 18S rRNA gene
sequences to classify the arthropods and their kin. Mol Phylogenet Evol
2004, 31:178-191.

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

Friedrich M, Tautz D: Ribosomal DNA phylogeny of the major extant
arthropod classes and the evolution of myriapods. Nature 1995,
376:165-167.
Boore JL, Lavrov DV, Brown WM: Gene translocation links insects and
crustaceans. Nature 1998, 392:667-668.
Regier JC, Shultz JW, Zwick A, Hussey A, Ball B, Wetzer R, Martin JW,
Cunningham CW: Arthropod relationships revealed by phylogenomic
analysis of nuclear protein-coding sequences. Nature 2010,
463:1079-1083.
Giribet G, Edgecombe GD, Wheeler WC: Arthropod phylogeny based on
eight molecular loci and morphology. Nature 2001, 413:157-161.
Richter S, Moller OS, Wirkner CW: Advances in Crustacean Phylogenetics.
Arthropod Systematics and Phylogeny 2009, 67:275-286.
Hwang UW, Friedrich M, Tautz D, Park CJ, Kim W: Mitochondrial protein
phylogeny joins myriapods with chelicerates. Nature 2001, 413:154-157.
Harzsch S: The phylogenetic significance of crustacean optic neuropils
and chiasmata: a re-examination. J Comp Neurol 2002, 453:10-21.
Sinakevitch I, Douglass JK, Scholtz G, Loesel R, Strausfeld NJ: Conserved
and convergent organization in the optic lobes of insects and isopods,
with reference to other crustacean taxa. J Comp Neurol 2003, 467:150-172.
Wilson K, Cahill V, Ballment E, Benzie J: The complete sequence of the
mitochondrial genome of the crustacean Penaeus monodon: are
malacostracan crustaceans more closely related to insects than to
branchiopods? Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:863-874.
Stillman JH, Colbourne JK, Lee CE, Patel NH, Phillips MR, Towle DW,
Eads BD, Gelembuik GW, Henry RP, Johnson EA, et al: Recent advances in
crustacean genomics. Integr Comp Biol 2008, 48:852-868.
Vega EDl, O’Leary NA, Robalino J, Peck ME, Bartlett TC, Richards M, Hikima S,
Browdy CL, Warr GW, Chapman RW, Gross PS: Litopenaeus vannamei Gene
Discovery Project. Book Litopenaeus vannamei Gene Discovery Project. 2008
edition. City: NCBI; 2008.
Alcivar-Warren A, Delaney M, Meehan-Meola D, Alcivar MN, Warren WB:
Expressed sequence tags from cadmium-exposed postlarvae stage 42 of
cultured, specific pathogen-free Pacific whiteleg shrimp, Litopenaeus
vannamei. Book Expressed sequence tags from cadmium-exposed postlarvae
stage 42 of cultured, specific pathogen-free Pacific whiteleg shrimp,
Litopenaeus vannamei. 2009 edition. City: NCBI; 2009.
Muller IC, Stocco PH, Marques MRF: Differentially expressed genes in gills
of farmed shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei infected with White Spot
Synfrome Virus. Book Differentially expressed genes in gills of farmed shrimp
Litopenaeus vannamei infected with White Spot Synfrome Virus. 2010 edition.
City: NCBI; 2010.
Nilsen F, Malde K, Kongshaug H: Functional genomics in sea lice. Book
Functional genomics in sea lice. 2010 edition. City: NCBI; 2010.
Tagmount A, Wang M, Lindquist E, Tanaka Y, Teranishi KS, Sunagawa S,
Wong M, Stillman JH: The porcelain crab transcriptome and PCAD, the
porcelain crab microarray and sequence database. PLoS ONE 2010, 5:
e9327.
Towle DW, Smith CM, Beale KM: Expressed Sequence Tags in a
normalized cDNA library prepared from multiple tissues of adult
intermolt and postmolt American lobster, Homarus americanus. Book
Expressed Sequence Tags in a normalized cDNA library prepared from multiple
tissues of adult intermolt and postmolt American lobster, Homarus
americanus. 2007 edition. City: NCBI; 2007.
Verslycke T, Tarrant AM, Stegeman JJ, McDowell J: Expressed sequence
tags associated with asymptomatic and shell-diseased lobsters. Book
Expressed sequence tags associated with asymptomatic and shell-diseased
lobsters. 2009 edition. City: NCBI; 2009.
Stepanyan R, Day K, Urban J, Hardin DL, Shetty RS, Derby CD, Ache BW,
McClintock TS: Gene expression and specificity in the mature zone of the
lobster olfactory organ. Physiol Genomics 2006, 25:224-233.
Ewen-Campen B, Shaner N, Panfilio KA, Suzuki Y, Roth S, Extavour CG: The
maternal and embryonic transcriptome of the milkweed bug Oncopeltus
fasciatus. BMC genomics 2011, 12:61.
Clark MS, Thorne MA, Toullec JY, Meng Y, Guan le L, Peck LS, Moore S:
Antarctic krill 454 pyrosequencing reveals chaperone and stress
transcriptome. PLoS ONE 2011, 6:e15919.
Dana JD: Crustacea. In US Exploring Edition during the years 1838-1842.
Volume XIII. Edited by: Wilkes C. C. Sherman; 1852.
Rehm EJ, Hannibal RL, Chaw RC, Vargas-Vila MA, Patel NH: The Crustacean
Parhyale hawaiensis, A New Model for Arthropod Development. In

Page 17 of 18

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

37.

38.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.
48.

Emerging Model Organisms: A Laboratory Manual. Volume 1. Cold Spring
Harbor: CSHL Press; 2008:373-404.
Gerberding M, Browne WE, Patel NH: Cell lineage analysis of the
amphipod crustacean Parhyale hawaiensis reveals an early restriction of
cell fates. Development 2002, 129:5789-5801.
Alwes F, Hinchen B, Extavour CG: Patterns of cell lineage, movement, and
migration from germ layer specification to gastrulation in the amphipod
crustacean Parhyale hawaiensis. Dev Biol 2011.
Price AL, Modrell MS, Hannibal RL, Patel NH: Mesoderm and ectoderm
lineages in the crustacean Parhyale hawaiensis display intra-germ layer
compensation. Dev Biol 2010, 341:256-266.
Pavlopoulos A, Averof M: Establishing genetic transformation for
comparative developmental studies in the crustacean Parhyale
hawaiensis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:7888-7893.
Pavlopoulos A, Kontarakis Z, Liubicich DM, Serano JM, Akam M, Patel NH,
Averof M: Probing the evolution of appendage specialization by Hox
gene misexpression in an emerging model crustacean. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2009, 106:13897-13902.
Kontarakis Z, Pavlopoulos A, Kiupakis A, Konstantinides N, Douris V,
Averof M: A versatile strategy for gene trapping and trap conversion in
emerging model organisms. Development 2011.
Vargas-Vila MA, Hannibal RL, Parchem RJ, Liu PZ, Patel NH: A prominent
requirement for single-minded and the ventral midline in patterning the
dorsoventral axis of the crustacean Parhyale hawaiensis. Development
2010, 137:3469-3476.
Özhan-Kizil G, Havemann J, Gerberding M: Germ cells in the crustacean
Parhyale hawaiensis depend on Vasa protein for their maintenance but
not for their formation. Dev Biol 2009, 327:320-239.
Liubicich DM, Serano JM, Pavlopoulos A, Kontarakis Z, Protas ME, Kwan E,
Chatterjee S, Tran KD, Averof M, Patel NH: Knockdown of Parhyale
Ultrabithorax recapitulates evolutionary changes in crustacean
appendage morphology. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:13892-13896.
Parchem RJ, Poulin F, Stuart AB, Amemiya CT, Patel NH: BAC library for the
amphipod crustacean, Parhyale hawaiensis. Genomics 2010, 95:261-267.
Venter JC, Adams MD, Myers EW, Li PW, Mural RJ, Sutton GG, Smith HO,
Yandell M, Evans CA, Holt RA, et al: The sequence of the human genome.
Science 2001, 291:1304-1351.
McPherson JD, Marra M, Hillier L, Waterston RH, Chinwalla A, Wallis J,
Sekhon M, Wylie K, Mardis ER, Wilson RK, et al: A physical map of the
human genome. Nature 2001, 409:934-941.
Sander K: Specification of the basic body pattern in insect
embryogenesis. Advances in Insect Physiology 1976, 12:125-238.
O’Neil ST, Dzurisin JDK, Carmichael RD, Lobo NF, Emrich SJ, Hellmann JJ:
Population-level transcriptome sequencing of nonmodel organisms
Erynnis propertius and Papilio zelicaon. BMC genomics 2010, 11:310.
Parchman TL, Geist KS, Grahnen JA, Benkman CW, Buerkle CA:
Transcriptome sequencing in an ecologically important tree species:
assembly, annotation, and marker discovery. BMC genomics 2010, 11:180.
Roeding F, Borner J, Kube M, Klages S, Reinhardt R, Burmester T: A 454
sequencing approach for large scale phylogenomic analysis of the
common emperor scorpion (Pandinus imperator). Mol Phylogenet Evol
2009, 53:826-834.
Novaes E, Drost DR, Farmerie WG, Pappas GJ Jr, Grattapaglia D, Sederoff RR,
Kirst M: High-throughput gene and SNP discovery in Eucalyptus grandis,
an uncharacterized genome. BMC genomics 2008, 9:312.
Vera JC, Wheat CW, Fescemyer HW, Frilander MJ, Crawford DL, Hanski I,
Marden JH: Rapid transcriptome characterization for a nonmodel
organism using 454 pyrosequencing. Mol Ecol 2008, 17:1636-1647.
Hahn DA, Ragland GJ, Shoemaker DD, Denlinger DL: Gene discovery using
massively parallel pyrosequencing to develop ESTs for the flesh fly
Sarcophaga crassipalpis. BMC genomics 2009, 10:234.
Meyer E, Aglyamova GV, Wang S, Buchanan-Carter J, Abrego D,
Colbourne JK, Willis BL, Matz MV: Sequencing and de novo analysis of a
coral larval transcriptome using 454 GSFlx. BMC genomics 2009, 10:219.
Conesa A, Götz S, Garcia-Gomez JM, Terol J, Talon M, Robles M: Blast2GO: a
universal tool for annotation, visualization and analysis in functional
genomics research. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:3674-3676.
Douris V, Telford MJ, Averof M: Evidence for multiple independent origins
of trans-splicing in Metazoa. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:684-693.
Shigenobu S, Bickel RD, Brisson JA, Butts T, Chang C-C, Christiaens O,
Davis GK, Duncan EJ, Ferrier DEK, Iga M, et al: Comprehensive survey of

Zeng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:581
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/581

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.
55.

56.

57.

58.
59.

60.
61.
62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

developmental genes in the pea aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum: frequent
lineage-specific duplications and losses of developmental genes. Insect
Mol Biol 2010, 19(Suppl 2):47-62.
Holland LZ, Albalat R, Azumi K, Benito-Gutiérrez E, Blow MJ, BronnerFraser M, Brunet F, Butts T, Candiani S, Dishaw LJ, et al: The amphioxus
genome illuminates vertebrate origins and cephalochordate biology.
Genome Res 2008, 18:1100-1111.
Böhm S, Frishman D, Mewes HW: Variations of the C2H2 zinc finger motif
in the yeast genome and classification of yeast zinc finger proteins.
Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:2464-2469.
Jin L, Kryukov K, Clemente JC, Komiyama T, Suzuki Y, Imanishi T, Ikeo K,
Gojobori T: The evolutionary relationship between gene duplication and
alternative splicing. Gene 2008, 427:19-31.
Browne WW, Schmid BGM, Wimmer EA, Martindale MQ: Expression of otd
orthologs in the amphipod crustacean, Parhyale hawaiensis. Development
Genes and Evolution 2006, 216:581-595.
Browne WE: The embryonic development of the amphipod crustacean
Parhyale hawaiensis. PhD University of Chicago, Molecular Genetics and
Cell Biology; 2003.
O’Day KE: Notch signaling and segmentation in Parhyale hawaiensis. PhD
University of California, Berkeley, Molecular and Cell Biology; 2006.
Browne WE, Price AL, Gerberding M, Patel NH: Stages of embryonic
development in the amphipod crustacean, Parhyale hawaiensis. Genesis
2005, 42:124-149.
Price AL: Gastrulation and Mesodem Development in Parhyale
hawaiensis. University of Chicago, Committee on Developmental Biology;
2005.
Price AL, Patel NH: Investigating divergent mechanisms of mesoderm
development in arthropods: the expression of Ph-twist and Ph-mef2 in
Parhyale hawaiensis. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular
Development and Evolution 2008, 310:24-40.
Pires-daSilva A, Sommer RJ: The evolution of signalling pathways in
animal development. Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4:39-49.
Kanehisa M, Goto S, Furumichi M, Tanabe M, Hirakawa M: KEGG for
representation and analysis of molecular networks involving diseases
and drugs. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D355-360.
Frohman MA: On beyond classic RACE (rapid amplification of cDNA
ends). PCR Methods Appl 1994, 4:S40-58.
Morozova O, Marra MA: Applications of next-generation sequencing
technologies in functional genomics. Genomics 2008, 92:255-264.
Mallatt J, Giribet G: Further use of nearly complete 28S and 18S rRNA
genes to classify Ecdysozoa: 37 more arthropods and a kinorhynch. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2006, 40:772-794.
Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, et al: Broad phylogenomic sampling
improves resolution of the animal tree of life. Nature 2008, 452:745-749.
Hejnol A, Obst M, Stamatakis A, Ott M, Rouse GW, Edgecombe GD,
Martinez P, Baguna J, Bailly X, Jondelius U, et al: Assessing the root of
bilaterian animals with scalable phylogenomic methods. Proc R Soc Lond
B Biol Sci 2009, 276:4261-4270.
Gaunt MW, Miles MA: An insect molecular clock dates the origin of the
insects and accords with palaeontological and biogeographic landmarks.
Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19:748-761.
Fanenbruck M, Harzsch S, Wagele JW: The brain of the Remipedia
(Crustacea) and an alternative hypothesis on their phylogenetic
relationships. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:3868-3873.
Koenemann S, Jenner RA, Hoenemann M, Stemme T, von Reumont BM:
Arthropod phylogeny revisited, with a focus on crustacean relationships.
Arthropod Structure & Development 2010, 39:88-110.
Olesen J: Phylogeny of Branchiopoda (Crustacea) - Character Evolution
and Constribution of Uniquely Preserved Fossils. Arthropod Systematics
and Phylogeny 2009, 67:3-39.
Stenderup JT, Olesen J, Glenner H: Molecular phylogeny of the
Branchiopoda (Crustacea)–multiple approaches suggest a ‘diplostracan’
ancestry of the Notostraca. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2006, 41:182-194.
Pruitt KD, Tatusova T, Maglott DR: NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq): a
curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and
proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D61-65.
Camacho C, Coulouris G, Avagyan V, Ma N, Papadopoulos J, Bealer K,
Madden TL: BLAST+: architecture and applications. BMC Bioinformatics
2009, 10:421.

Page 18 of 18

72. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al: Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25:25-29.
73. B2G-FAR: A Species Centered GO Annotation Repository. [http://bioinfo.
cipf.es/b2gfar/showspecies?species=7227].
74. Ishiwata K, Sasaki G, Ogawa J, Miyata T, Su Z-H: Phylogenetic relationships
among insect orders based on three nuclear protein-coding gene
sequences. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2010, 158:169-180.
75. Wheeler WC, Whiting M, Wheeler QD, Carpenter JM: The phylogeny of the
extant hexapod orders. Cladistics 2001, 17:113-169.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-581
Cite this article as: Zeng et al.: De novo assembly and characterization
of a maternal and developmental transcriptome for the emerging
model crustacean Parhyale hawaiensis. BMC Genomics 2011 12:581.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
