<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genome factor and gene pleiotropy hypotheses in protein evolution</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010, 5:37. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-37"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Yanwu Zeng, Xun Gu"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zeng and Gu Biology Direct 2010, 5:37
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/37

Open Access

HYPOTHESIS

Genome factor and gene pleiotropy hypotheses in
protein evolution
Hypothesis

Yanwu Zeng1 and Xun Gu*1,2

Abstract
: The debate of genomic correlations between sequence conservation, protein connectivity, gene essentiality and
gene expression, has generated a number of new hypotheses that are challenging the classical framework of
molecular evolution. For instance, the translational selection hypothesis claims that the determination of the rate of
protein evolution is the protein stability to avoid the misfolding toxicity. In this short article, we propose that gene
pleiotropy, the capacity for affecting multiple phenotypes, may play a vital role in molecular evolution. We discuss
several approaches to testing this hypothesis.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Dr Eugene Koonin, Dr Arcady Mushegian and Dr Claus Wilke.
Background
A high controversy in evolutionary genomics is around
the pervasive yet weak genomic correlations with the
evolutionary rate of protein sequence [1,2]. Initially, the
debate was about whether these weak correlations are
statistically meaningful or are caused by the confound
effects of gene expression [3-7]. Recently, the research
focus is shifting to having a better understanding of the
underlying mechanisms [8-17]. In spite of a number of
controversial issues, the logic of this type of analysis
remains roughly the same, that is, statistically establish
the correlation between biologically factors and the evolutionary rate. These efforts have generated some interesting hypotheses, but it has been found difficult to be
integrated to the theory of molecular evolution [17]
based on several population genetics mechanisms and
assumptions about the genotype-phenotype mapping.
Hence, it is desirable further to explore how genome factors can affect the underlying mechanisms of molecular
evolution.
The inverse relationship between functional importance and evolutionary rate, sometimes regarded as the
first principle of molecular evolution, has played a fundamental role in the early development of the neutral theory [17]. High throughput functional genomics data have
provided some opportunities to test this claim. For
* Correspondence: xgu@iastate.edu
1

School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

instance, over 30 years ago the relationship between gene
dispensability and evolutionary rate was predicted [16].
While the genome-wide protein dispensability can be
experimentally measured, people found there was indeed
a significant yet weak correlation between protein dispensability and evolutionary rate in S. cerevisiae [3] and
in bacteria species [18]. Here we use the genome factor
hypothesis to represent all kinds of association studies
between the rate of protein evolution and genome factors.
Another controversial example of the genome factor
hypothesis is the yeast protein-protein interactions.
Fraser et al. [4] demonstrated a negative correlation
between the protein connectivity and the rate of protein
sequence, that is, highly connected genes evolved slowly.
However, re-analyses [7,18-22] suggested that the rateinteractivity correlation was rather weak, and the effect
was largely caused by those network hubs (genes with
high number of interactions) with low evolutionary rate.
Besides, the rate-hub correlation has been heterogeneous
among different datasets, probably sensitive to various
technical treatments [6].
In contrast to above two examples, the evolutionary
rate of protein sequence is strongly negatively correlated
with the expression level, that is, highly expressed genes
tend to evolve significantly slower than genes with low
expression levels [19]. This has raised some hot debates
whether the observed weak correlation between other
genome factors (e.g., protein dispensability or hubs) and

© 2010 Zeng and Gu; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zeng and Gu Biology Direct 2010, 5:37
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/37

evolutionary rate could be confounded by the expression
level [6]. Some of follow-up analyses have shown that
these genomic correlations may remain statistically significant after controlling the expression effect at the phenomenological level, though understandably they became
weaker [5]. Two studies [9,13] utilized the principal component analysis (PCA) to transform multiple correlated
genomic variables into a smaller number of composite,
independent canonical variables that account for a
greater proportion of the variance of the evolutionary
rate among genes. Drummond et al [9] concentrated on
the substantial genomic data available in the yeast S. cerevisiae. Strikingly, they observed a single, dominant variable that determined the rate of protein evolution, which
comprised variables related to expression level, codon
adaptation index (CAI), and protein abundance. Their
analyses suggested an intuitive-counter conclusion: Coding sequence evolution is primarily governed by the
selection acting at the abundance level of gene expression
and translation.
In short, the consensus conclusion is that, among currently available genome factors, expression level has the
strongest contribution to the protein sequence evolution.
In additional, a number of genome factors may have independent yet weak (some are very weak) contributions to
the rate of protein evolution. However, we point out a
potential risk of this consensus. Since a strong statistical
association between two factors (expression level and rate
of protein evolution) cannot infer the cause-effect relationship, we cannot empirically nor logically rule out the
possibility that both are correlated with an unknown
underlying mechanism, or, to another extreme, that coding sequence conservation determines the expression
level. To address this issue, we have to explore the underlying mechanism.

Presentation of the hypothesis
From the view of systems biology, the capacity of a gene
to affect a number of phenotypic traits, known as gene
pleiotropy, should play a major role in protein evolution
[15,23-27]. As shown below, the problem is how this
mechanism can be parameterized into the theory of
molecular evolution, by the means of population genetics
and genotype-phenotype mapping.
Gu [25,26] postulated that molecular evolution of a
gene in a K-dimensional space of molecular phenotypes
that represent the multi-functionality of the encoding
protein. Under this framework, the functional dimensionality (K) can be viewed as a measure for gene pleiotropy. In particular, Gu [25] analyzed the pleiotropy model
under the following assumptions: (i) K molecular phenotypes of the gene are under Gaussian-like stabilizing
selection, indicating a single fitness optimum. Any devia-

Page 2 of 7

tion from the optimum is under the purifying selection.
(ii) The fitness optimum of molecular phenotypes may
shift randomly during the course of evolution, which may
generate the process of micro-adaptation. And (iii) the
distribution of mutational effects on molecular phenotypes follows a multivariate normal distribution. Under
the theme of nearly-neutral evolution, i.e., the stabilizing
selection is strong and the micro-adaptation is weak, with
close approximation the evolutionary rate can be written
as follows
⎛
⎞
cB0
l ≈ v(1 + 2B0 ) − K /2 ⎜ 1 +
K⎟
1+ 2B0 ⎠
⎝

(1)

where v is the mutation rate, B0 is the baseline selection
intensity and c ≈0.5772.
Therefore, the question for what is the main determinant of the rate of protein evolution may have different
answers, depending on how to decipher the functional
constraint imposed on the protein sequence. While the
genome factor hypothesis is in attempt to establish the
correlation between the biologically factor and the evolutionary rate, the gene pleiotropy hypothesis is to identify
the degree of multi-functionality based on a statistical
model of genotype-phenotype mapping. To be more specific, we have the followings:
(i)Gene pleiotropy (K) measures protein multi-functionality: The parameter K relates to the functional
importance of a gene in the up-level physiology and
cellular networks [1,15,23,25,26]. Many genomic
measures, such as protein-protein or protein-DNA
interactivity, physiological processes involved, developmental stages, tissue expression broadness, etc., are
biologically explanatory variables of the gene pleiotropy (K).
(ii)Baseline selection intensity (B0) involves many evolutionary mechanisms: By contrast, the baseline selection intensity (B0) could be affected by various
evolutionary forces. Symbolically, B0 can be written as
B0 = -2Ne(σ2m/σ2w)(1 - γ), where Ne is the effective
population size, σ2w is the strength of stabilizing selection on a single molecular phenotype (a smaller value
means more stringent selection, and vice versa), σ2m is
the mutational variance, and 0 < γ < 1 measures the
effect of microadaptation. Hence, if a genome factor is
correlated with B0, it could be the consequence of
protein structure stability (a component of σ2w),
mutability (σ2m) or micro-adaptation (γ). Apparently,
such correlations are sensitive to the strength genetic
drifts (Ne) in different organisms (genomes).

Zeng and Gu Biology Direct 2010, 5:37
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/37

Testing the Hypothesis
In summary, evolutionary analyses from high throughput
functional genomic datasets have formulated the genome
factor hypothesis of molecular evolution. On the other
hand, our studies [15,25,26] suggested that gene pleiotropy may be the main determinant for the evolutionary
rate of protein sequence, called the gene pleiotropy
hypothesis of molecular evolution. An immediate question is whether these two hypotheses are exclusive to
each other. Actually, this is the most frequently asked
question we have received since the publication of our
work.
First, we emphasize that the genome factor hypothesis
and the gene pleiotropy hypothesis represent two distinct
approaches to deciphering the functional constraint of
protein sequence evolution. In the case of genome factor
hypothesis, the functional constraint is decomposed into
a number of biological factors that can be experimentally
measured at the genome level. The best scenario of this
approach is to document in detail all biological factors
that may influence the sequence conservation. Hence, the
more we know about the genome complexity, the deeper
we have the understanding of protein evolution. The difficulty of such data-driven approach is how to draw a
clear evolutionary pattern, particularly when the biological factors are highly heterogeneous among genes and the
genomic data are highly noisy. By contrast, the gene
pleiotropy hypothesis of molecular evolution is mainly
model-driven. That is, based on a statistical modeling of
the genotype-phenotype association, the degree of gene
pleiotropy, defined as the dimensionality (K) of genotypephenotype space, can be integrated into the model of
molecular evolution without requiring the biological
detail.
In our view, the genome factor hypothesis and the gene
pleiotropy hypothesis are complementary rather than
exclusive, because two different interpretations of functional constraint may provide some new insights about
how biological factors influence molecular evolution. Figure 1 illustrates how genomic factors are correlated with
the gene pleiotropy (K) and/or the baseline selection
intensity (B0). Suppose we have observed a statistically
significant correlation between a particular genome factor and the rate of protein evolution. Under the theme of
nearly-neutral evolution, one may further ask whether
this genome factor is correlated with the gene pleiotropy
(K) or the baseline selection intensity (B0). The biological
significance is about the relative role between the functional importance in the biological system of a gene (gene
pleiotropy) and the sequence-structure feature for the
protein stability: Which one is the major determinant for
the rate of protein evolution? Note that gene pleiotropy is
a measure for the multiple roles of protein function in
development and physiology. Meanwhile, the baseline

Page 3 of 7

selection intensity is the product of effective population
size (Ne) and other factors.
In particular, we discuss in some details about the
translational selection hypothesis [12-14]. This theory
demonstrates that one of major components in the functional constraint imposed in the protein sequence is the
minimization of misfolding burden, or the sequence
requirement to retain the capability to fold into the correct, functional protein structure. Broadly speaking, the
effect of misfolding minimization is a combination of two
factors: First, the proportion of (misfolded) proteins that
need to be refolded or eliminated. Hence, the burden
would be proportionally heavy for those highly-expressed
genes. Consequently, genes coding for highly expressed
proteins evolve slowly due to the stabilizing selection for
the tolerance to translational errors that causes protein
misfoldings. The second factor is the actual toxicity to the
cell of some of the misfolded variants, which may be
related to protein stability rather than protein abundance
in the cell. As shown above, the baseline selection intensity (B0) combines some biochemical-biophysical properties of a gene (e.g., protein designability, stability and
mutability) that may be attributed to the mutational variance σ2m, as well as the strength of stabilizing selection
(σ2w). Together, the translational selection hypothesis
predicts that under the translational selection hypothesis,
the expression level should be correlated with the baseline selection intensity.
On the other hand, because optimal gene expression
level is the basis for any protein to perform functions
under a certain physiological condition, it is biologically
reasonable to claims that a highly pleiotropic gene may
have to maintain a relatively high level of gene expression.
In this sense, we expected a positive correlation between
gene pleiotropy (K) and the expression abundance. This
argument reveals that the effect of gene expression on the
rate of evolutionary rate, either abundance or broadness,
may have the same underlying mechanism. According to
Eq.(1), the rate-expression correlation could be the B0mode (as predicted by the translational selection hypothesis), or the K-mode (basis for multi-functionality). The
confound effect of expression on any K-related biological
factors of protein functions is thus not too hard to understand.
Gu [25,26] developed a computational pipeline to estimate the effective gene pleiotropy (Ke) from the phylogenetic analysis of protein sequences. Su et al [15] estimated
the effective gene pleiotropy for 321 vertebrate genes, and
found that a gene typically has Ke = 6-7, as well as the
baseline selection intensity B0 = 1-2. Moreover, we have
recently analyzed several hundred genes from the yeast
(five genomes) and Drosophila (12 genomes) and concluded that it seems to be a general pattern.

Zeng and Gu Biology Direct 2010, 5:37
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/37

Page 4 of 7

*HQRPH IDFWRU K\SRWKHVLV
UDWHKXE UDWHGLVSHQVDELOLW\
UDWHH[SUHVVLRQ WUDQVODWLRQDO
VHOHFWLRQ HWF

?

'DWDGULYHQ 8VLQJ YDULRXV
UHJUHVVLRQ DQDO\VHV HVWDEOLVK
WKH OLQHDU PRGHOIUHH UHODWLRQ
EHWZHHQ JHQRPH PHDVXUH
DQG HYROXWLRQDU\ UDWH

*HQH SOHLRWURS\ K\SRWKHVLV
. GHJUHH RI SOHLRWURS\
% %DVHOLQH VHOHFWLRQ
LQWHQVLW\

0RGHOGULYHQ 8QGHU VRPH
DVVXPSWLRQV HVWDEOLVK WKH
PRGHOEDVHG UHODWLRQ EHWZHHQ
. % DQG WKH SDWWHUQV RI
SURWHLQ HYROXWLRQ
)XQFWLRQDO FRQVWUDLQWV DQG
3DWWHUQV RI PROHFXODU HYROXWLRQ
5DWH RI SURWHLQ HYROXWLRQ
5DWH YDULDWLRQ DPRQJ VLWHV

Figure 1 A schematic illustration of the pleiotropy hypothesis and the genome factor hypothesis of protein evolution.

There are many biological factors that are related to the
degree of gene pleiotropy such as number of enzymes
substitutes, protein-protein or protein-DNA interactivity,
physiological processes involved, different developmental
stages, tissue expression broadness [1,2]. These genome
factors may provide small, additive effects that together
explain the extent of gene pleiotropy. We have two more
comments. First, for a given gene, a limited number of
biological factors can explain all nontrivial aspects of
multi-functionality of the encoded protein. Second, contributions of these biological factors to the gene pleiotropy are highly heterogeneous among genes.
Consequently, a specific type of high throughput technology such as protein-protein interactivity only measures
the multi-functionality of some genes in the genome.
Since many other genes may have trivial correlations with
this genomic factor, one should expect there is only a
weak genomic correlation in prior. Based on the limited
dataset of vertebrate genes, Su et al. [15] observed the
positive correlation of gene pleiotropy with the number
of GO biological processes, as well as the expression
broadness provides a biological basis for the sequencebased estimation of gene pleiotropy. To validate these
observations, we recently have shown significant correlations between Ke and protein-protein interactivity in the
yeast, while there is no correlation between the baseline
selection intensity and the protein-protein interactivity
(data not shown).

Rigorously speaking, gene dispensability is not the biological factor to explain the degree of gene pleiotropy. Yet,
gene dispensability and pleiotropy are conceptually
closely related. Current understanding of genetic robustness claims that a gene is dispensable because of either
genetic buffering or duplicate compensation [28]. For
each mechanism, the cost for buffering or compensating
a highly pleiotropic gene should also be high. Indeed, if
one gene has been involved in many biological processes,
genetic buffering after this gene is completely silenced
may have to activate the same number of alternative pathways. Therefore, the chance for a gene to be dispensable
is mainly determined by the successful probability for
genetic buffering or duplicate compensation, which is
inversely related to the degree of gene pleiotropy. Using
over five hundred yeast single-copy genes, we have
observed that the inverse relationship between K and the
fitness after the deletion is statistically significant.

Implications of the hypothesis
In this short article, we argue that the solution for what is
the main determinant of the rate of protein evolution may
depend on how to interpret the functional constraint of
protein sequence. The genome factor hypothesis postulates that the functional constraint can be decomposed
into a number of biological factors; but the factor-list
would be endless as more functional genomics data are
becoming available and more factor-factor interactions
have to be considered. On the other hand, the gene

Zeng and Gu Biology Direct 2010, 5:37
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/37

pleiotropy hypothesis is to identify the degree of multifunctionality based on a statistical model of genotypephenotype mapping, but the biological details are undetected. As they are from different routes that are not
exclusive, combination of these two approaches may provide some novel insights about molecular evolution in the
context of systems biology.

Reviewers' comments
Reviewer-1: Dr. Eugene Koonin

An interesting new look at a fundamental and certainly
not completely solved problem: what determines the rate
of protein evolution? Xun Gu recognizes the importance
of selection for robustness to misfolding (I am not sure it
is advisable to denote this effect "translational selection",
a term that usually applies to selection operating at the
codon choice level) but posits that functional pleiotropy
is an even more critical factor. The equation (1) in this
paper is helpful to lay out the dilemma explicitly: is protein evolution dominated by B0 ("baseline selection intensity" which includes selection against misfolding) or by K
(pleiotropy)? More generally, is protein evolution shaped
primarily by physics of protein molecules (B0) or by function (K)? I certainly agree with the author of the paper
that further, more careful and detailed studies of this fundamental question are required. Having said this, my current view is opposite to that expressed in Xun Gu's paper:
physics is likely to be decisive. I briefly espouse two arguments.
1.Well noticed lack of substantial correlation between
"biological importance", however measured (see especially the recent thorough work of Wang and Zhang
[29]). A positive correlation between pleiotropy and
"importance" certainly is expected, so this does not
bode particularly well for the pleiotropy hypothesis.
2.The distribution of evolutionary rates across
genome-wide sets of orthologous protein-coding
genes is essentially universal among cellular life
forms, from bacteria to mammals [30].
This seems to be best compatible with the hypothesis
that protein evolution largely depends on the simple
physics of folding (baseline selection, indeed) than on
functional features of proteins like pleiotropy which
hardly can be universally conserved.
Author's response: The central point of Dr. Koonin's
criticism is that the determination of evolutionary rate
could be 'physical', more precisely, the biophysical-biochemical property of proteins such as protein stability
(misfoldings) or mutability. While there is no doubt that
these physical properties may determine the baseline of
the protein evolution, the issue is what about the variation of evolutionary rate among proteins. In the context,
we have discussed substantially some issues with the first

Page 5 of 7

argument of Dr. Koonin. Briefly speaking, in principle we
can explain why a protein is (relatively) conserved at the
amino acid sequence level in some details, from physiological behavior, biological processes involved or tissue
broadness. All these factors are highly heterogeneous
among genes, and that is why to be a weak genomic correlation.
The second argument [also see [30]] is challenging.
Indeed, the distribution of evolutionary rates across
genome-wide sets of orthologous protein-coding genes is
essentially universal among cellular life forms, from bacteria to mammals. This is compatible to the view that
protein evolution largely depends on the simple physics
of folding. However, we point out the possibility that
functional features of orthologous proteins such as
pleiotropy could be conserved across species, if gene cooption, an important factor in the evolution of gene regulatory network, drove the phenotypic evolution. In this
case, the dimensionality of protein functionality may
remain a rough constant between the orthologous genes,
but the phenotypic consequences could be changed considerably. At any rate, these important speculations need
to be further elaborated empirically, in spite of some preliminary analyses we already have.
Reviewer-2: Dr. Arcady Mushegian

The paper by Gu is an attempt to juxtapose the "translational selection hypothesis", which here is stated in its
extreme, and I am not sure correct, form, i.e., that the
main determinant of the rate of protein evolution "is the
protein stability to avoid the misfolding toxicity", and
another hypothesis, namely that the main factor in protein evolution rate is its molecular pleiotropy, i.e., the
ability to perform multiple functions or to contribute to
multiple phenotypes.
My understanding of the translational selection
hypothesis is that the major selection factor in protein
sequence evolution is the minimization of misfolding
burden, which is a combination of the proportion of proteins that need to be refolded or removed and of the
actual toxicity to the cell of some of the misfolded variants. The first term is quite directly linked to the protein
abundance in the cell, while the second may not be so.
Into this mix, the author brings in molecular pleiotropy.
Unfortunately, it is not clear to me what would be the
connection between the degree of pleiotropy of a protein
and the protein abundance in the cell - is that a fact that
actin controls more phenotypes than a repair enzyme?
Furthermore, the high number of individual fitness components that may be affected by mutations in a highly
pleiotropic protein does not automatically mean that the
overall contribution of this protein to fitness is also
higher than that of a protein with low pleiotropy.

Zeng and Gu Biology Direct 2010, 5:37
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/37

Finally, most of the manuscript seems to restate the discussion in refs. 25 and 26 - what is the new ingredient
here?
Author's response: We appreciate Dr. Mushegian's clarification about the translational selection hypothesis.
There are two major critics. The first is about what would
be the connection between the degree of pleiotropy of a
protein and the protein abundance in the cell. In the
revised version, we have addressed this issue, arguing that
optimal functionality includes optimal protein functions
and optimal expression level. Hence, a highly pleiotropic
gene may require a relatively high expression level. Of
course, it is only one of many mechanisms to explain the
rate-expression correlation. The second critic is to question that the high number of individual fitness components affected by mutations in a highly pleiotropic
protein does not automatically mean that the overall contribution of this protein to fitness is also higher than that
of a protein with low pleiotropy. That is certainly true
because such claim implies that the baseline selection
intensity is roughly the same between the highly-pleiotropic gene and the low-pleiotropic gene. Since the baseline
selection intensity can be estimated from the sequence
data, the pleiotropy hypothesis can be falsified by this
assumption. Therefore, we have enhanced the discussion
in ref.[25,26] by explicitly formulating the hypothesistesting framework.
Reviewer-3: Dr. Claus Wilke

I don't understand the purpose of this paper. What
exactly is the original contribution? The paper seems
largely a rehashing of earlier work by the same author
[25]. Maybe I'm missing something here.
Regarding the proposed hypothesis. According to the
title of the paper, the pleiotropy hypothesis is presented
as an alternative to the translational selection hypothesis.
If this is the case, then there must be cases where the two
hypotheses make different predictions, and thus experiments must (at least in principle) be able to select one
hypothesis over the other. The author should list specific
cases where the two hypotheses make different predictions, and they should also present at least some evidence
that certain observations are better explained by the
pleiotropy hypothesis than by the translational selection
hypothesis. Moreover, as shown in Drummond & Wilke
2008 (ref 10), the translational selection hypothesis can
explain a large set of disparate experimental observations.
If the pleiotropy hypothesis is a viable alternative to the
translational selection hypothesis, then it should explain
the same observations at least as well, if not better. The
author has to make a strong case here that their hypothesis can provide this explanatory power. Finally, the author
should list a number of specific experiments or analyses

Page 6 of 7

that could be done in the future and that would either
confirm or refute his hypothesis.
Author's response: We have corrected some inaccurate
representations about the translational selection hypothesis in the early draft of the manuscript. We agree that
gene pleiotropy hypothesis and the translational selection
hypothesis are not alternative/exclusive (also see review
comment-2). The real issue is their relative contributions.
Though the theoretical work has been reported in our
previous publications, the goal of this short article is to
formulate the hypothesis that can provide the foundation
for further analysis. In the revised version, we follow the
suggestion to claim some potential analyses that would
falsify our hypothesis.
As correctly pointed out by Dr. Koonin, the true alternative hypothesis of the gene pleiotropy hypothesis is the
hypothesis of 'molecular biophysics', that is, "protein evolution largely depends on the simple physics of folding
(baseline selection, indeed) than on functional features of
proteins like pleiotropy which hardly can be universally
conserved". The translational selection hypothesis is a
special form of the later hypothesis, which may explain
the rate-expression correlation. On the other hand, the
gene pleiotropy hypothesis can also predict the rateexpression correlation as a highly pleiotropic gene
requires, on average, high abundance of protein.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
YZ analyzed some datasets and wrote the manuscript. XG proposed the
hypothesis and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Gunter Wager and Zhenglong Gu for constructive
comments in the early version of the manuscript.
Author Details
1School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China and
2Department of Genetics, Developmental and Cell Biology, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50011, USA
Received: 29 April 2010 Accepted: 24 May 2010
Published: 24 May 2010
© 2010 Directavailable article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/37
Biology Zeng and Gu; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.
article is 2010, 5:37

References
1. Pal C, Papp B, Lercher MJ: An integrated view of protein evolution. Nat
Rev Genet 2006, 7(5):337-348.
2. Koonin EV, Wolf YI: Evolutionary systems biology: links between gene
evolution and function. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2006, 17(5):481-487.
3. Hirsh AE, Fraser HB: Protein dispensability and rate of evolution. Nature
2001, 411(6841):1046-1049.
4. Fraser HB, Hirsh AE, Steinmetz LM, Scharfe C, Feldman MW: Evolutionary
rate in the protein interaction network. Science 2002,
296(5568):750-752.
5. Wall DP, Hirsh AE, Fraser HB, Kumm J, Giaever G, Eisen MB, Feldman MW:
Functional genomic analysis of the rates of protein evolution. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(15):5483-5488.
6. Pal C, Papp B, Hurst LD: Genomic function: Rate of evolution and gene
dispensability. Nature 2003, 421:496-497. discussion 497-498

Zeng and Gu Biology Direct 2010, 5:37
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/37

7.
8.

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.
26.
27.

28.
29.
30.

Batada NN, Hurst LD, Tyers M: Evolutionary and physiological
importance of hub proteins. PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2:e88.
Drummond DA, Bloom JD, Adami C, Wilke CO, Arnold FH: Why highly
expressed proteins evolve slowly. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102(40):14338-14343.
Drummond DA, Raval A, Wilke CO: A single determinant dominates the
rate of yeast protein evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(2):327-337.
Drummond DA, Wilke CO: Mistranslation-induced protein misfolding as
a dominant constraint on coding-sequence evolution. Cell 2008,
134(2):341-352.
Wolf YI, Carmel L, Koonin EV: Unifying measures of gene function and
evolution. Proc Biol Sci 2006, 273:1507-1515.
Gu X, Su Z: Tissue-driven hypothesis of genomic evolution and
sequence-expression correlations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:2779-2784.
Wolf MY, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Comparable contributions of structuralfunctional constraints and expression level to the rate of protein
sequence evolution. Biology Direct 2008, 3:40.
Su Z, Huang Y, Gu X: Gene ontology analysis of tissue-driven hypothesis
for genomic evolution. Annals of Biomedical Engineering 2007,
35:1088-1094.
Su Z, Zeng Y, Gu X: A preliminary analysis of gene pleiotropy estimated
from protein sequences. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2009, 314B:115-122.
Wilson AC, Carlson SS, White TJ: Biochemical evolution. Annu Rev
Biochem 1977, 46:573-639.
Kimura M: The neutral theory of molecular evolution. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge; New York; 1983.
Jordan IK, Rogozin IB, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Essential genes are more
evolutionarily conserved than are nonessential genes in bacteria.
Genome Res 2002, 12(6):962-968.
Pal C, Papp B, Hurst LD: Highly expressed genes in yeast evolve slowly.
Genetics 2001, 158(2):927-931.
Bloom JD, Adami C: Evolutionary rate depends on number of proteinprotein interactions independently of gene expression level:
Response. BMC Evol Biol 2004, 4:14.
Hahn MW, Conant GC, Wagner A: Molecular evolution in large genetic
networks: does connectivity equal constraint? J Mol Evol 2004,
58:203-211.
Agrafioti I, Swire J, Abbott J, et al.: Comparative analysis of the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Caenorhabditis elegans protein
interaction networks. BMC Evol Biol 2005, 5:23.
Fisher RA: The genetical theory of natural selection. The Clarendon
Press, Oxford; 1930.
Dudley AM, Janse DM, Tanay A, Shamir R, Church GM: A global view of
pleiotropy and phenotypically derived gene function in yeast. Mol Syst
Biol 2005, 1:0001.
Gu X: Evolutionary framework for protein sequence evolution and
gene pleiotropy. Genetics 2007, 175:1813-1822.
Gu X: Stabilizing selection of protein function and distribution of
selection coefficient among sites. Genetica 2007, 130:93-97.
Wagner GP, Kenney-Hunt JP, Pavlicev M, Peck JR, Waxman D, Cheverud
JM: Pleiotropic scaling of gene effects and the 'cost of complexity'.
Nature 2008, 452:470-472.
Gu X: Genetic buffering, gene duplication, and evolution. Trends in
Genetics 2003, 19:354-356.
Wang Z, Zhang J: Why is the correlation between gene importance and
gene evolutionary rate so weak? PLoS Genet 2009, 5(1):e1000329.
Wolf YI, Novichkov PS, Karev GP, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: The universal
distribution of evolutionary rates of genes and distinct characteristics
of eukaryotic genes of different apparent ages. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 5;106(18):7273-80.

doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-37
Cite this article as: Zeng and Gu, Genome factor and gene pleiotropy
hypotheses in protein evolution Biology Direct 2010, 5:37

Page 7 of 7

</pre>
</body>
</html>
