<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A mutation degree model for the identification of transcriptional regulatory elements</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-262"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Changqing Zhang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zhang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/262

METHODOLOGY ARTICLE

Open Access

A mutation degree model for the identification of
transcriptional regulatory elements
Changqing Zhang1,2,4†, Jin Wang1,2,3†, Xu Hua1, Jinggui Fang5, Huaiqiu Zhu3* and Xiang Gao2*

Abstract
Background: Current approaches for identifying transcriptional regulatory elements are mainly via the combination
of two properties, the evolutionary conservation and the overrepresentation of functional elements in the
promoters of co-regulated genes. Despite the development of many motif detection algorithms, the discovery of
conserved motifs in a wide range of phylogenetically related promoters is still a challenge, especially for the short
motifs embedded in distantly related gene promoters or very closely related promoters, or in the situation that
there are not enough orthologous genes available.
Results: A mutation degree model is proposed and a new word counting method is developed for the
identification of transcriptional regulatory elements from a set of co-expressed genes. The new method comprises
two parts: 1) identifying overrepresented oligo-nucleotides in promoters of co-expressed genes, 2) estimating the
conservation of the oligo-nucleotides in promoters of phylogenetically related genes by the mutation degree
model. Compared with the performance of other algorithms, our method shows the advantages of low false
positive rate and higher specificity, especially the robustness to noisy data. Applying the method to co-expressed
gene sets from Arabidopsis, most of known cis-elements were successfully detected. The tool and example are
available at http://mcube.nju.edu.cn/jwang/lab/soft/ocw/OCW.html.
Conclusions: The mutation degree model proposed in this paper is adapted to phylogenetic data of different
qualities, and to a wide range of evolutionary distances. The new word-counting method based on this model has
the advantage of better performance in detecting short sequence of cis-elements from co-expressed genes of
eukaryotes and is robust to less complete phylogenetic data.

Background
Transcriptional regulation is a major step to determine
the spatial and temporal activities of genes in eukaryotes. Various stimuli, whether external or internal, activate transcription factors. Then the transcription factors
initiate or repress the transcription of target genes by
binding to the specific sites (named transcription factor
binding sites, TFBSs or cis-elements) embedded in promoter sequences. Therefore, identifying these functional
regulatory elements from gene promoters seems to be a
promising way to decipher how the gene regulatory network is orchestrated [1,2]. With the availability of huge
genomic data and other omics data, as well as the high
* Correspondence: hqzhu@pku.edu.cn; gaoxiang@nicemice.cn
† Contributed equally
2
Model Animal Research Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, and Center for Theoretical Biology,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

performance computers, computational strategy has
shown the great potential in the discovery and functional characterization of cis-elements in many biological
aspects [3].
The methods based on the principle of over-representation identify cis-elements mainly by detecting the
motifs that occur more frequently in a set of promoters
of genes that may be expression-related or biological
process related. While this class of algorithms is successful in identifying many well-characterized cis-elements, they are still limited in determining the true
elements through which a specific set of genes are activated in certain biological processes, i.e., this type of
methods has the problem of high false positive rate.
Because, a piece of oligo-nucleotide (also known as a
word in the field of sequence analysis) presented in
most of the promoters of related genes does not necessarily mean that the genes are regulated via this short

© 2011 Zhang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zhang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/262

stretch of sequence. However, if the stretch is also conserved in the promoters of phylogenetically related
genes, then it is more probable that the oligo-nucleotide
is a functional element. Thus, one way of improving the
reliability of prediction algorithms is to introduce the
property of phylogenetic conservation.
So far, there are mainly two classes of phylogenybased methods of cis-element identification. One of
them is based on sequence comparison in an assumption that the functional elements are more conserved
than their flanking sequences. So the most conserved
segments are predicted as the functional elements
through global or local sequence alignments and with
the help of phylogenetic trees in some tools [4,5]. The
disadvantage of this class of methods is that the prediction is, to a large extent, dependent on whether the user
can retrieve a set of phylogenetic related genes with a
proper evolutionary distance. For the closely related species, the promoter sequences are too similar to distinguish the regulatory elements. In contrast, some short
functional elements in evolutionarily distant sequences
are usually not well pre-aligned into the local multiple
alignment, so they would be easily missed by the phylogenetic models.
Another class of prediction methods that circumvent
the problem of sequence alignment assumed that not all
the cis-elements are aligned to the most conserved
regions through sequence comparison. Instead, they
directly identify the motifs from the orthologous promoters based on a series of regulatory element features
including the sequence conservation, over-representation and the conserved distance between elements etc.
These algorithms are not so restricted to the evolutionary distance of orthologous genes and thus are more
adaptive to divergent biological problems. However,
there are also many shortcomings accompanied to this
type of prediction methods. Some of the tools only consider the phylogenetic relations between two species, for
example, orthoMEME [6]. Others even equally treated
the sequences of different evolutionary distances [7].
Many of the methods that integrate phylogenetic relations are still confronting the difficulty of providing the
reliable evolutionary information. The phylogenetic trees
requested by PhyloGibbs [8] and PhyME [9], or the substitution value requested by EmnEM [10] and weederH
[11] for producing the phylogenetic relations are more
or less experiential and frequently result in errors in the
prediction results. The situation becomes even worse
when the orthologous gene set is not well prepared.
So it seems that the quality of phylogenetic data comprises one of the determinants in the computational
identification of functional elements from evolutionary
related gene promoters. For vertebrates, yeasts and fruit
flies, there are a lot of genome sequences available. But,

Page 2 of 9

for plants, the sequencing and annotation of genomes
lag far behind [12]. As a matter of fact, even though
there are enough genome data available, it is not very
easy to collect a reliable set of orthologous genes in
some cases. This kind of restrictions limits the practical
application of computational tools in various biological
problems. Therefore, new models dealing with the evolutionary relations for the detection of cis-elements from
phylogenetic data are needed. In addition, there are
many practical cases in which users prefer to first work
on the most reliable predictions of gene regulation relation in wet lab. In this case, decreasing the false positive
rate in predicting functional elements from a set of coexpressed genes is critical.
To identify the potential functional motifs from diversiform phylogenetic data, we proposed a mutation
degree model, which incorporates word-counting algorithm to detect the overrepresented oligo-nucleotides in
a set of phylogenetical sequences. By combining the new
model with the over-representation property of functional element in co-expressed gene sets, a new tool
named OCW (Over-represented and Conserved Word)
was developed to identify cis-elements from coexpressed gene sets. The feasibility of the new method
was evaluated on synthetic data with different identity,
co-expressed gene data and noisy phylogenetic data with
different number of random sequences.

Results
Evaluation of OCW on synthetic data with different
evolutionary distances

To benchmark OCW and other tools, 4 sets of gene
sequences are required for one test: co-expressed genes
and their background genes, orthologs of the coexpressed genes and their background sequence. Here,
we first generate the sequences of co-expressed genes
and their background genes based on the information
that 25% probability for A, C, G, T, 1000 bp long for
co-expressed genes and their background genes, at least
one instance of the 6 bp motif which allows 1 bp mutation was randomly planted into the co-expressed gene.
The number of co-expressed genes is 7 and that of the
background sequences is 210 (thirty times that of the
co-expressed genes). Next, we generate the orthologs of
the co-expressed genes and their corresponding neutral
sequence. First, we assigned a certain mutation extension, like <20%, to co-expressed genes, and then
mutated each sequence of the dataset for 5 times at random to created a set of orthologous sequences with 5
members for each co-expressed genes. After then, we
further created the neutral promoter by using the base
composition of each member of the orthologs. Here, the
length of neutral promoter was 5000 bp (five times that
of the ortholog), and 4 mutation levels, <20%, <40%,

Zhang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/262

<60%, and <80%, were respectively used for each set of
co-expressed genes. As a result, 60 groups of synthetic
test data representing 15 repeats and 4 mutated levels
were generated.
To evaluate the performance of the new method, we
applied OCW, AlignACE[13], GLAM2[14], Weeder[15],
PhyloGibbs[8], PhyloCon[7] and WeederH[11] to the
synthetic data. Following Tompa [16], we used the
nucleotide-level sensitivity (nSN), specificity (nSP) and
positive predictive value (nPPV) to evaluate the performance. Where, the nPPV shows the nucleotide fraction
of predicted known sites out of the total positive predictions. The nSN shows the nucleotide fraction of predicted known sites out of the actual known sites. And
the nSP represents the nucleotide fraction of predicted
non-site over the actual non-sites.
As showed in Figure 1, the assessment value nPPV of
OCW is around 18%, which is higher than that of all
the other six tools. This means OCW has a higher effect
in reducing the false-positive rate of motif prediction.
The value of nSN for OCW is around 50%, which is
lower than the three tools, AlignACE, Weeder and WeederH, while the nSP value of 95% is higher than all the
other tools under the assessment. This result indicates
that OCW has a stronger capacity of non-site discrimination. Therefore, OCW has gone beyond the other 6
tools in positive predictive value and in specificity,
which provide a new choice for user-expected lower
false-positive rate or higher exclusion of non-site
sequences.

Page 3 of 9

What is also shown in Figure 1 is the assay of the
ability of robustness of the prediction methods to the
divergence of orthologous sequences. When the identity
between the sequences was increased from ≥20% to
≥80%, they show little change on the values, nPPV, nSN,
and nSP. Especially, the values from OCW are more
stable than others, which indicate that OCW is more
tolerant to the wide range of sequence evolutionary
distances.
OCW and WeederH could be categorized as the tool
of word enumeration algorithm, and PhyloGibbs and
PhyloCon as the heuristic algorithms. Comparing the
performance of the two types of tools, enumeration
algorithm is better than that of the heuristic algorithms,
suggesting that enumeration model has superiority in
detecting the functional motifs from co-expressed and
orthologous sequences, which agrees to the previous
opinion [17].
Performance of OCW in detecting functional elements
from co-expressed genes

To evaluate the feasibility of OCW on biological data,
we applied it on 7 sets of co-expressed genes from Arabidopsis. They were obtained from literatures [18-22]
that are listed in Table 1. The background sequences
are from the promoters of Arabidopsis genome excluding the co-expressed genes. The phylogenetic promoters
were retrieved from the plant database of DoOP (version
1.5) [23]. Their background sequences, i.e. the neutral
sequences, or referred as a set of phylogenetically

Figure 1 Performance comparisons of different tools on simulated data. The predictions shown in histogram are from AlignACE, GLAM2
and Weeder. These three tools are based on over-represented word detection. The predictions shown in line chart are from OCW, PhyloGibbs,
PhyloCon, and WeederH, which introduced phylogenetic information in the algorithms. The extent of convergence of artificial orthologous
sequences used in these tools is represented by the sequence identity.

Zhang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/262

Page 4 of 9

Table 1 The functional elements detected by 7 tools*
Dataset

Binding site

OCW

WeederH

PhyloGibbs

PhyloCon

AlignACE

GLAM2

Weeder

1

ABRE(ACGTGKC)

+

+

+

-

+

+

+

Ref.
[18]

DRE(TACCGACAT)

+

-

-

+

+

+

-

[18]

2

ARF(TGTCTC)

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

[19]

3

ARF(TGTCTC)

+

+

+

+

+

-

+

[19]

4

XBP1BS/P-UPRE/ERSEI(CCACGTCAT)

+

+

+

+

+

-

+

[20]

P-UPRE/ERSEI(ATTGGN9CCACG)

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

[20]

5

G-box(CACGTG)

-

+

+

+

+

+

+

[21]

6
7

SAUR(CATATG)
ABRE3(CAACGTG)

+
+

+
+

+

-

-

+
+

+
-

[22]
[22]

extA(AACGTGT)

+

+

-

-

-

+

-

[22]

* Only those elements already reported in literatures are listed. ‘+’ indicates successful detection, ‘-’ means failed detection.

unrelated promoters, were built by sampling 100 promoters randomly from its corresponding genome.
As shown in Table 1, OCW performed well and successfully detected 9 cis-elements reported in literatures
for 6 of 7 sets of co-expressed genes. Compared with
the other six tools, WeederH, PhyloGibbs, PhyloCon,
AlignACE, GLAM2 and Weeder, OCW detects much
more known sites. In consistence with the evaluation
results from synthetic data shown in Figure 1, this result
further indicates that OCW is better than other tools,
against true biological data.
The element G-box in dataset 5 was not detected by
OCW because it did not pass the Fisher’s exact test at
the second step of OCW method.
Performance on noisy data

To further measure the performance of OCW against
noisy data, i.e. data with unreliable phylogenetic genes,
we artificially introduced several sequences that were
randomly retrieved from genomes into the phylogenetic
promoter set. Here, the 25 co-regulated genes including
STE3 and MFA2 through the motifs MCM1 and
MATalpha2 are from S. cerevisiae genome. The background sequences are 196 and picked from S. cerevisiae.
The orthologous promoter sets of STE3 and MFA2 were
retrieved from genomes S. cerevisiae and S. castellii, and
their background sequences are merged sequences of 30
non orthologous promoter randomly retrieved from
genomes S. cerevisiae and S. castellii, where the two
genes STE3 and MFA2 should be excluded. The noisy
promoters were generated by sampling promoters randomly from the S. cerevisiae and S. castellii genomes. In
the tests, 2, 4, 6 and 8 noisy promoters were jammed
into the phylogenetic promoter sets of STE3 and MFA2,
respectively, which was repeated for 5 times to reduce
the sampling error.
Since the tools of AlignACE, GLAM2, and Weeder
were designed only to co-expressed genes, we only
benchmark the performance of tools, PhyloGibbs,

PhyloCon, WeederH and OCW here. Figure 2 shows
the result. Compared with the implementations of PhyloGibbs, PhyloCon and WeederH, OCW shows little
variation with the increasing number of noisy sequences.
While PhyloCon shows a sharp decrease in the ability of
detecting known elements (see nSN and nPPV in Figure
2) as the noisy data were increased, although it keeps a
good specificity (nSP) during this process. PhyloGibbs
shows an increasing sensitivity to the introduction of
noisy data, but the specificity decreases significantly,
although the nPPV value tends to be stable. This result
showed that OCW has a greater tolerance to noisy data.

Discussion
One of the biggest challenges in the era of systems biology is the discovery of complex gene regulatory networks [24]. To seek the gene regulatory relations, the
detection of transcription regulatory elements that control gene expression is regarded as a fundamental task.
To decrease the high false-positive rate of many motifdiscovery algorithms [25], conservation property of
functional elements were introduced by multiple
sequence alignment or other strategies that utilize phylogenetic information derived from orthologous
sequences. This class of algorithms normally performs
well on a set of phylogenetic genes with appropriate
diverging time [26]. Unfortunately, in most of the practical cases, especially in plant kingdom, to collect a reliable set of orthologous genes is often difficult. We tried
to tackle this problem by the mutation degree model
proposed in this paper. We firstly detect the over-represented words in a co-expressed gene set, and then, evaluate the conservation extent of these words in a
phylogenetically related promoter set by applying our
new mutation degree model. We named the whole
approach as the OCW method.
Based on the evaluation results, we found that OCW
showed two advantages over the current methods, the
lower rate of false-positives and the higher ability of

Zhang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/262

Page 5 of 9

Figure 2 Performance of OCW, PhyloCon, PhyloGibbs and WeederH on noisy data. The extent of noise was adjusted by introducing an
increasing number (k) of random promoters into the phylogenetic sets.

noise tolerance. Both of the advantages are beneficial to
the identification of cis-elements in practical cases. For
example, many users may hope to get a reliable prediction of the functional elements from a set of coexpressed genes for further experimental verification. In
this case, decreasing the false positive rate of the prediction is critical. Normally, it is not very easy to construct
a set of phylogenetic promoter set of high quality, especially in plant kingdom. So, the tolerance of the tools to
noisy data is of special importance in dealing with a
wide range of practical biological problems.
Resulted from the current difficulties in identifying
orthologous gene set, many non-orthologous genes are
often mistaken for orthologous genes, which significantly affects the accuracy of cis-element prediction.
In our mutation degree model, a step of pre-alignment
of promoters has been introduced to obtain the mutation degree allowed for the enumerated words. Meanwhile, this process also has the effect of ruling out the
false homologous promoters. As showing in Figure 2,
the performance of OCW against the increasing number of noisy sequences is much better than the other
tools.
Reduction of false-positive rate has remained a big
problem in the computational identification of transcriptional regulatory elements. Compared to the popular
tools currently used in the discovery of functional
motifs, OCW shows the best performance of an nPPV
of about 18% (Figure 1) or 26% (Figure 2). Yet, this
value is not good enough. There is still a long way to go
in improving the prediction method. A similar conclusion was drawn from a previous evaluation. In Tompa’s
experiment on assessing the tools of finding transcription factor binding sites [16], nPPV remained under
15% in most of the cases.

Despite of the advantages of OCW shown above, there
are still some limitations, for example, the relatively low
sensitivity of about 49% as shown in Figure 1. This is
mainly resulted from the simple application of Fisher’s
test in the production of overrepresented oligo-nucleotides out of the co-expressed gene sets. Further study
will focus on the design of new models for the detection
of overrepresented words and to optimize OCW to
improve the sensitivity. Besides, OCW does not consider
the interactive relations of cis-elements, like that of the
cis-module, but only counts the number of sites. What
should also be noted is that OCW was designed to identify the short motifs for eukaryotic genes. All the assessments in this study were performed on short motifs.
In developing the tool OCW for identifying functional
elements from co-expressed gene sets and orthologouse
gene sets, we mainly focused on the reduction of false
positives and the elevation of tolerance to noise data. By
artificially introducing the unrelated sequences into the
phylogenetically relevant promoter sets, we showed the
robustness of OCW to the orthologous sequence set of
low quality. The improvement in decreasing the false
positive rate is illustrated by the assessment of a couple
of tools on synthetic data. The feasibility of OCW in
identifying the functional motifs was shown by applying
the tool to several sets of co-expression genes of Arabidopsis. OCW found the most number of know sites. The
results from this study also support the previous suggestion that enumeration algorithm has some superiorities
over the heuristic algorithms in detecting the functional
motifs from co-expressed and orthologous sequences.

Conclusions
We present a mutation degree model to deal with the
sequence variation of functional element in different

Zhang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/262

Page 6 of 9

species. Our new model is adapted to phylogenetic data
of different qualities, and to a wide range of evolutionary
distances. Using this model, we developed a new wordcounting method for identifying short motifs of transcriptional regulatory elements from a set of coexpressed genes, by utilizing a group of phylogenetic
related gene promoters. Compared with other motif
detection programs, our method is more effective and
more adaptive to less complete phylogenetic data or
noisy data. Thus, this model will find a wider application in gene expression analysis, especially in exploring
new regulation mechanisms in species that have not
been well studied.

The mutation degree model

We assume that transcription regulatory elements are
conserved in a set of phylogenetically related promoters,
as these sequences may share the same regulatory
mechanism. So they should show a higher occurrence
frequency among these phylogenetically related
sequences. We score the extent of over-representation
of a motif to infer its conservation by a word-counting
algorithm [27], i.e. S in formula (1) could be regarded as
an approximation of conservation score of a motif in
this promoter set.
AO
EO

(1)

Where AO refers to the actual occurrence of an oligonucleotide in the phylogenetically related promoter set,
EO is the expected occurrence, and k is a correction
factor.
To enhance the signal-to-noise ratio, two corrections
are introduced as k1 and k2 . The former is defined to
correct the bias of neutral promoter set, in which the
members have no phylogenetic relationship.
k1 =

EO
AO

(2)

Where EO’ is the expected occurrence of an oligonucleotide in the set of phylogenetically unrelated promoters; AO’ is the corresponding actual occurrence.
Another correction, k 2 , is for bias of neutral oligonucleotide that is assumed to be non functional in a
promoter.
k2 =

1
n

Lm

Pi [28,29], where P i Î{ P a , P c , P g , P t }. So the total
i=1

occurrence of the motif in all the N sequences, taking
into account both strands, is calculated as
2N

EO =

Lp −Lm +1 Lm

[

Pi ]

1

Methods

S=k∗

the total number of all possible oligo-nucleotides that
are presented in the same promoter and have the same
length as the one under study.
In a long random DNA sequence of composition Pa,
P c , P g , P t , the expected occurrence probability of an
oligo-nucleotide M of length Lm could be estimated as

n

i=1

EO
AO

1

Where Lp is the length of promoter sequence.
If an oligo-nucleotide is over-represented in a set of
phylogenetically related sequences, the ratio of actual
occurrence to expected occurrence should be larger
than that in the neutral sequences set. Similarly, the
ratio should be larger than that of the neutral oligonucleotide with the same length. Therefore, we regard
an oligo-nucleotide as conserved only when its S values
are larger than 1 after both corrections.
The mutation of functional element in different species is further considered by introducing the mutation
degree as illustrated in Figure 3(A). Compared with
those models based on phylogenetic tree, it does not use
phylogenetic tree. Conversely, based on the fact that ciselements located in the same promoter, whether long or
short, and in either strand, usually functions in a combinatorial and cooperative manner [30], we assume that
they are under the same evolutionary selection pressure
and have a similar mutation degree. Here a local
sequence alignment tool for comparing two sequences is
used [31] to obtain the conserved block with maximal
mutation. Then the mutation degree, μ, between two
sequences is estimated from this region. Where, μ may
vary in different pairs between the reference promoter
and its orthologs, i.e., the values a1%, b1%, etc. in Figure
3A may be different.
We assign the number of mutational instances of an
element as f(μ). The actual occurrences of all the mutational instances of an element in a promoter were summarized. So, the model measuring the conservation
extent of an oligo-nucleotide in a set of phylogenetically
related promoters can be modified as formula (5).
f (u)

(3)
i

Where EO’’ and AO’’ are respectively the expected and
actual occurrences of a neutral oligo-nucleotide presented in the phylogenetically related promoter set, n is

(4)

i=1

AO(inst.j )
S= k∗

i

j=1

(5)

f (u)

AO(inst.j )
i

j=1

Zhang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/262

Page 7 of 9

Figure 3 Illustrations for mutation degree model and OCW method. (A) Illustration of the mutation degree model. The phylogenetic
promoter sequences of Gene#1, Gene#2 and Gene#3 etc. are highlighted in light blue. Mutation degrees between the promoter of species1 and
its phylogenetic related promoters are denoted as a1%, b1%, etc. The data in the result column is only for demonstration. The co-expressed gene
set highlighted in lavender belongs to Species1. (B) Flow chart of OCW. Step 1: All oligo-nucleotides presented in co-expressed genes are
enumerated; Step 2: Fisher’s exact test of the over-representation significance of the enumerated oligo-nucleotides; Step 3: Calculation of the
conservation score of the elements resulted from step 2, the elements with S>1 are reported; Step 4: Reporting functional elements that meet
the criteria assigned by user.

Where AO(inst. j ) indicates the actual occurrence of
mutational instance j of an oligo-nucleotide in promoter
i (j = 1,..., f(μ); i = 1,..., N, N is the number of promoters
included in a phylogenetically related gene set.). EO(inst.
j ) indicates the corresponding expected occurrence of
instance j.

of e.g. 6-10 bp presented in the promoters of coexpressed gene set and examines their statistical significance of over-representation through Fisher’s exact test
as follows:

The method OCW for identifying transcription regulatory
motifs

Where n1 denotes the number of co-expressed promoters containing an element, n 2 is the number of coexpressed promoters that do not contain this element;
m1 is the number of background promoters containing
the element, m2 is the number of background promoters
not containing the element.
The resulting over-represented elements in the coexpressed gene set are then further evaluated by conservation score or the overrepresentation score in each of
the phylogenetically related promoter set by applying

We joined the new mutation degree model to the
method of identifying overrepresented oligo-nucleotide
in set of co-expressed genes and proposed a new
method, OCW http://mcube.nju.edu.cn/jwang/lab/soft/
ocw/OCW.html, for the prediction of transcriptional
regulation elements from a set of co-expressed genes.
Figure 3(B) shows the flow chart of this tool. Where,
OCW begins with enumerating all the oligo-nucleotides

p=

(n1 + n2 )!(m1 + m2 )!(n1 + m1 )!(n2 + m2 )!
n1 !n2 !m1 !m2 !(n1 + n2 + m1 + m2 )!

Zhang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/262

the mutation degree model. Finally, the elements overrepresented both in co-expressed genes and in phylogenetically related promoters are determined.
Implementing the tools
On synthetic data

Seven established tools, AlignACE 3.0, GLAM2, Weeder,
PhyloGibbs, PhyloCon, WeederH and OCW were
applied. According to the categories of these tools, the
following rules were adopted in the implementations.
(1) For AlignACE, GLAM2, and Weeder, since they
detect motifs over-represented in co-regulated genes
while none of them take into account the phylogentic
information, we only provided co-expressed gene data
to these tools. The parameters were all default except
that the GC content is 0.50 for AlignACE, ‘yeast’ was
chosen for the selected check-box and the selected
organism for Weeder. All of these tools were obtained
from their website. (2) PhyloGibbs, PhyloCon and WeederH all use the phylogentic information and fit to the
category of finding motifs in sets of orthologs. We organized the synthetic data into the orthologous set according to each co-expressed gene and then provided the
tools with these data. For PhyloGibbs, we also prealigned the orthologs by using DIALIGN program. They
were all running at local machine, and implemented
with the default parameters, except that the ‘number of
standard deviations’ was set to 1 for PhyloCon, and the
motif length was set to 6 bp for PhyloGibbs, and the
selected organism, yeast, for WeederH. (3) For OCW,
the P value used in Fisher’s exact test is 0.01. The maximum mutation degree was generated as follows: a local
sequence alignment tool, BL2SEQ, was used to align the
reference promoter to each of its phylogenetically
related members, and then, based on the minimum
similarity (min similarity ) produced from each of their
alignment, we use the function μ = 1-minsimilarity to get
the maximum mutation degree. The criterions of S are
over 1.1 in both corrections.
On biological data

(1) For AlignACE, GLAM2, and Weeder, the parameters
were all taken as the default except that the selected
check-box of looking for motifs in both strands, the
selected check-box of thinking a motif might appear
more than once in a single sequence, and the selected
organism, arabidopsis, for Weeder. (2) For PhyloGibbs,
PhyloCon and WeederH, the implementation of PhyloGibbs and PhyloCon followed the same rules as that on
synthetic data, except that the motif length was set to 811 bp in PhyloGibbs, and the selected organism, Arabidopsis, for WeederH. (3) OCW followed the same rules
as that on synthetic data except that the motif length is
set to length of true motif.

Page 8 of 9

On noisy data

Running PhyloGibbs, PhyloCon, and OCW followed the
rules as that on synthetic data, except that the motif
length was set to 8-11 bp for PhyloGibbs.
Performance evaluation

Following Tompa [16], we used the nucleotide-level sensitivity (nSN), specificity (nSP) and positive predictive
value (nPPV) to evaluate the performance of different
motif detection algorithms. We define nTP as the number of nucleotide positions both in known motifs and in
predicted motifs. nFN is the number of positions in
known motifs but not in predicted motifs. nFP is the
number of positions not in known motifs but in predicted motifs. nTN is the number of positions in neither
known motifs nor in predicted motifs. Sensitivity is
defined as nSN = nTP/(nTP+nFN), specificity is defined
as nSP = nTN/(nTN+nFP), and positive predictive value
is defined as nPPV = nTP/(nTP+nFP).
Acknowledgements
We thank Qiaoyong Zhong for the helps in the manuscript. This work is
supported by the National Science Foundation of China (No. 90208021 and
60901053), 973 Program (No. 2003CB715905, 2007CB814806) funded by
MOST of China, Qing Lan Project of Jiangsu Province and Doctoral
Foundation of Jinling Institute of Technology. The implementation was done
in IBM-NJU Laboratory of Bioinformatics.
Author details
1
State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life
Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. 2Model Animal Research
Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. 3Department of
Biomedical Engineering, and Center for Theoretical Biology, Peking
University, Beijing 100871, China. 4College of Horticulture, Jinling Institute of
Technology, Nanjing 210038, China. 5College of Horticulture, Nanjing
agricultural university, Nanjing 210095, China.
Authors’ contributions
CQZ and JW designed the algorithm, measured tools in biological data and
noisy data, and drafted the manuscript. XH measured tools in synthetic data
and benchmarked with other programs. JGF critically read the draft and
contributed to the design of the algorithm. HQZ and XG conceived of the
study, coordinated the work and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 12 November 2010 Accepted: 27 June 2011
Published: 27 June 2011
References
1. Wasserman WW, Sandelin A: Applied bioinformatics for the identification
of regulatory elements. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5(4):276-287.
2. Raab JR, Kamakaka RT: Insulators and promoters: closer than we think.
Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11(6):439-446.
3. Priest HD, Filichkin SA, Mockler TC: Cis-regulatory elements in plant cell
signaling. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2009, 12(5):643-649.
4. Shah N, Couronne O, Pennacchio LA, Brudno M, Batzoglou S, Bethel EW,
Rubin EM, Hamann B, Dubchak I: Phylo-VISTA: interactive visualization of
multiple DNA sequence alignments. Bioinformatics 2004, 20(5):636-643.
5. Siepel A, Bejerano G, Pedersen JS, Hinrichs AS, Hou M, Rosenbloom K,
Clawson H, Spieth J, Hillier LW, Richards S, et al: Evolutionarily conserved

Zhang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:262
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/262

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

elements in vertebrate, insect, worm, and yeast genomes. Genome Res
2005, 15(8):1034-1050.
Prakash A, Blanchette M, Sinha S, Tompa M: Motif discovery in
heterogeneous sequence data. Pac Symp Biocomput 2004, 348-359.
Wang T, Stormo GD: Combining phylogenetic data with co-regulated
genes to identify regulatory motifs. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(18):2369-2380.
Siddharthan R, Siggia ED, van Nimwegen E: PhyloGibbs: a Gibbs sampling
motif finder that incorporates phylogeny. PLoS Comput Biol 2005, 1(7):e67.
Sinha S: PhyME: a software tool for finding motifs in sets of orthologous
sequences. Methods Mol Biol 2007, 395:309-318.
Moses AM, Chiang DY, Eisen MB: Phylogenetic motif detection by
expectation-maximization on evolutionary mixtures. Pac Symp Biocomput
2004, 324-335.
Pavesi G, Zambelli F, Pesole G: WeederH: an algorithm for finding
conserved regulatory motifs and regions in homologous sequences.
BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:46.
Haberer G, Mader MT, Kosarev P, Spannagl M, Yang L, Mayer KF: Largescale cis-element detection by analysis of correlated expression and
sequence conservation between Arabidopsis and Brassica oleracea. Plant
Physiol 2006, 142(4):1589-1602.
Roth FP, Hughes JD, Estep PW, Church GM: Finding DNA regulatory motifs
within unaligned noncoding sequences clustered by whole-genome
mRNA quantitation. Nat Biotechnol 1998, 16(10):939-945.
Frith MC, Saunders NF, Kobe B, Bailey TL: Discovering sequence motifs
with arbitrary insertions and deletions. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4(4):
e1000071.
Zambelli F, Pesole G, Pavesi G: Pscan: finding over-represented
transcription factor binding site motifs in sequences from co-regulated
or co-expressed genes. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37 Web Server: W247-252.
Tompa M, Li N, Bailey TL, Church GM, De Moor B, Eskin E, Favorov AV,
Frith MC, Fu Y, Kent WJ, et al: Assessing computational tools for the
discovery of transcription factor binding sites. Nat Biotechnol 2005,
23(1):137-144.
Boucher CBD, Church P: A Graph Clustering Approach to Weak Motif
Recognition. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2007, 4645:149-160.
Seki M, Narusaka M, Ishida J, Nanjo T, Fujita M, Oono Y, Kamiya A,
Nakajima M, Enju A, Sakurai T, et al: Monitoring the expression profiles of
7000 Arabidopsis genes under drought, cold and high-salinity stresses
using a full-length cDNA microarray. Plant J 2002, 31(3):279-292.
Goda H, Sawa S, Asami T, Fujioka S, Shimada Y, Yoshida S: Comprehensive
comparison of auxin-regulated and brassinosteroid-regulated genes in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 2004, 134(4):1555-1573.
Kamauchi S, Nakatani H, Nakano C, Urade R: Gene expression in response
to endoplasmic reticulum stress in Arabidopsis thaliana. FEBS J 2005,
272(13):3461-3476.
Gao Y, Li J, Strickland E, Hua S, Zhao H, Chen Z, Qu L, Deng XW: An
arabidopsis promoter microarray and its initial usage in the
identification of HY5 binding targets in vitro. Plant Mol Biol 2004,
54(5):683-699.
Oh S, Park S, Han KH: Transcriptional regulation of secondary growth in
Arabidopsis thaliana. J Exp Bot 2003, 54(393):2709-2722.
Barta E, Sebestyen E, Palfy TB, Toth G, Ortutay CP, Patthy L: DoOP:
Databases of Orthologous Promoters, collections of clusters of
orthologous upstream sequences from chordates and plants. Nucleic
Acids Res 2005, , 33 Database: D86-90.
Colecchia F, Kottwitz D, Wagner M, Pfenninger CV, Thiel G, Tamm I,
Peterson C, Nuber UA: Tissue-specific regulatory network extractor (TSREX): a database and software resource for the tissue and cell typespecific investigation of transcription factor-gene networks. Nucleic Acids
Res 2009, 37(11):e82.
Tokovenko B, Golda R, Protas O, Obolenskaya M, El’skaya A: COTRASIF:
conservation-aided transcription-factor-binding site finder. Nucleic Acids
Res 2009, 37(7):e49.
Storms V, Claeys M, Sanchez A, De Moor B, Verstuyf A, Marchal K: The
effect of orthology and coregulation on detecting regulatory motifs.
PLoS One 2010, 5(2):e8938.
Rombauts S, Florquin K, Lescot M, Marchal K, Rouze P, van de Peer Y:
Computational approaches to identify promoters and cis-regulatory
elements in plant genomes. Plant Physiol 2003, 132(3):1162-1176.

Page 9 of 9

28. ZHANG CQWJ, ZHU H, GAO X: The transcriptional regulatory mechanism
of CYP72B1 and AUR3 in response to light, auxin and brassinosteroid.
Prog Biochem Biophys 2009, 36(9):1215-1221.
29. Xue W, Wang J, Shen Z, Zhu H: Enrichment of transcriptional regulatory
sites in non-coding genomic region. Bioinformatics 2004, 20(4):569-575.
30. Hobert O: Gene regulation by transcription factors and microRNAs.
Science 2008, 319(5871):1785-1786.
31. Ye J, McGinnis S, Madden TL: BLAST: improvements for better sequence
analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34 Web Server: W6-9.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-262
Cite this article as: Zhang et al.: A mutation degree model for the
identification of transcriptional regulatory elements. BMC Bioinformatics
2011 12:262.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
