<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>gb-2003-4-9-r56.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="petere"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Open Access

Volume
et al.
Zhang
2003 4, Issue 9, Article R56

Research

Peng Zhang, Zhenglong Gu and Wen-Hsiung Li

comment

Different evolutionary patterns between young duplicate genes in
the human genome
Address: Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, East 57th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Correspondence: Wen-Hsiung Li. E-mail: whli@uchicago.edu

Received: 15 May 2003
Revised: 24 June 2003
Accepted: 24 July 2003

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R56

reviews

Published: 1 September 2003

The electronic version of this article is the complete one and can be
found online at http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/9/R56

reports

© 2003 Zhang et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.
duplicate function. Whether the two copies will
reached conflicting conclusions. In order genes evolve issue, by the human genome
diverge in gene from the whole duplicate to resolve experience relaxed functional constraints or studied 250 independent pairs may
Followinggenesduplication, two human genome.maythisin different patterns remains picture, however, because previous studies have also
Different evolutionary patterns between young duplicate genes inproviding a general unclear, we acquire different mutations, andof young

Abstract

Background

Lynch and Conery [2] conducted a study of several eukaryotic
genomes and concluded that duplicate genes often experience
relaxed functional constraints and accumulate mutations at
an accelerated rate. However, since their study used withingenome data without an outgroup, it could not reveal differences in evolutionary patterns between two duplicates.
Hughes and Hughes [3] used human genes as outgroups to

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R56

information

Since Ohno's work [1] gene duplication is widely believed to
be the major source of genetic novelties. However, how the
two duplicate genes evolve after the duplication event and
what the major factors are that determine the fate of duplicate
genes remain poorly understood and are currently under
intense research.

interactions

Conclusions: Our results suggest that duplicate genes tend to evolve in different patterns
following the duplication event. One copy evolves faster than the other and accumulates aminoacid substitutions evenly across the sequence, whereas the other copy evolves more slowly and
accumulates amino-acid substitutions unevenly across the sequence. Such different evolutionary
patterns may be largely due to different functional constraints on the two copies.

refereed research

Results: We showed that nearly 60% of the young duplicate gene pairs have evolved at the aminoacid level at significantly different rates from each other. More than 25% of these gene pairs also
showed significantly different ratios of nonsynonymous to synonymous rates (Ka/Ks ratios).
Moreover, duplicate pairs with different rates of amino-acid substitution also tend to differ in the
Ka/Ks ratio, with the fast-evolving copy tending to have a slightly higher Ks than the slow-evolving
one. Lastly, a substantial portion of fast-evolving copies have accumulated amino-acid substitutions
evenly across the protein sequences, whereas most of the slow-evolving copies exhibit uneven
substitution patterns.

deposited research

Background: Following gene duplication, two duplicate genes may experience relaxed functional
constraints or acquire different mutations, and may also diverge in function. Whether the two
copies will evolve in different patterns remains unclear, however, because previous studies have
reached conflicting conclusions. In order to resolve this issue, by providing a general picture, we
studied 250 independent pairs of young duplicate genes from the whole human genome.

R56.2 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 9, Article R56

Zhang et al.

(a)
r1
H1
r2
H2
Outgroup

(b)

r1

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/9/R56

outgroup sequences, the maximum likelihood method [7] can
be applied, which allows the comparison of various rate models [8]. Different models for amino-acid sequence evolution,
with outgroups incorporated, can be compared to judge
whether the amino-acid substitution rates are the same in two
duplicate copies (Figure 1). Similarly, the models for coding
sequences can also be compared to judge if the Ka/Ks ratios
are the same in the two copies after a gene duplication. Traditionally, Ka/Ks is taken as an index for the strength of functional constraints. Different Ka/Ks ratios usually suggest
different functional constraints on two duplicate copies.

H1
r2
H2
Outgroup
Figure 1
Two models of protein sequence evolution
Two models of protein sequence evolution. By comparing the likelihood
values of these two models, one can judge whether r1 = r2 (r1 and r2 are
the amino-acid substitution rates on branches H1 and H2, respectively).
(a) The model assumes r1 = r2. (b) The model allows r1 and r2 to be
different. H1 and H2: two human duplicate genes. Outgroup: the mouse
ortholog.

examine 17 pairs of duplicated frog genes, most of which have
been duplicated recently. They found that the two duplicate
copies of a gene had evolved at approximately the same rate.
However, human genes are only distantly related to frog
genes and may not be suitable outgroups for young duplicate
frog genes. In contrast, Robinson-Rechavi and Laudet [4] and
Van de Peer et al. [5], who used human or mammalian genes
as outgroups to zebrafish genes, found evidence of unequal
evolutionary rates between duplicate genes in zebrafish,
although the percentage of pairs with such a pattern differed
between the two studies. Furthermore, in a study of young
duplicate genes in humans and rodents, Kondrashov et al. [6]
found only two out of 49 duplicate genes showed different
rates of evolution. Thus, the issue remains to be resolved.
We are interested in the questions of whether duplicated
genes in general undergo different evolutionary patterns and
what the possible causes for this could be. To address these
questions, young human duplicate genes, which are defined
as duplicate genes with Ks < 0.3, are excellent materials for
several reasons. Firstly, in young duplicates the Ks (the
number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site)
and Ka (the number of nonsynonymous substitutions per
nonsynonymous site) values are small and can be estimated
more accurately than in older duplicates. Secondly, human
genes usually have no strong codon usage bias, so the Ks values are not strongly distorted by this effect. Thirdly, the
mouse genome provides a suitable outgroup. With the use of

Another way to examine if two duplicate copies have experienced different functional constraints is to see whether the
distribution of substitutions along their sequences are the
same. If a duplicate copy is free of functional constraints, then
amino-acid substitutions should occur evenly across the
sequence. On the other hand, if a duplicate copy is still under
considerable functional constraints, then functionally important regions should be subject to stronger constraints than
functionally less important regions, and will accumulate
fewer substitutions, thus yielding an uneven substitution pattern. Tang and Lewontin [9] described a statistical method to
give a quantitative measure for distinguishing between even
and uneven substitution patterns. The rationale of this
method is that if substitutions occur evenly across a sequence,
a cluster of short spaces (lengths between two consecutive
substitutions) should not be extremely long. To test the significance, the longest stretch where every space is short is
compared to a simulated distribution generated under the
hypothesis of even substitution pattern. We combined Tang
and Lewontin's [9] method and the maximum likelihood
method of locating substitutions [7] to test the evenness of the
substitution patterns of two duplicate genes.

Results and discussion
Amino-acid substitution rates
We examined first whether the amino-acid substitution rates
in two duplicate copies are the same. We found that among
the 250 pairs of young human duplicates studied, 145 pairs
showed significant evidence (at the 5% level) that one copy
had evolved faster than the other at the amino-acid level.
Among them, 130 pairs had significantly different rates at the
1% significance level.
Hughes and Hughes [3] found similar evolutionary rates in
the 17 frog duplicates they studied, probably because the
human outgroup they used was too distant to make the statistical test powerful. Using fairly closely related outgroups, our
results suggest that the majority of young human duplicates
evolve at different rates. Our results are consistent with those
of Van de Peer et al. [5], but the number of gene pairs with significantly unequal rates is much higher than RobinsonRechavi and Laudet [4] (four out of 19) and Kondrashov et al.
[6] (two out of 49) found.

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R56

Genome Biology 2003,

Table 1
Substitution rates versus Ka/Ks ratios in duplicate genes

Different Ka/Ks
ratios‡

Equal amino-acid
substitution rate†

Total

54

11

65

Equal Ka/Ks ratio§

91

94

185

Total

145

105

250

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
−0.2

−0.1

0
0.1
0.2
Ks difference

0.3

0.4

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R56

information

Figure
different2amino-acid substitution rates duplicate genes for gene pairs with
Distribution of Ks differences between
Distribution of Ks differences between duplicate genes for gene pairs with
different amino-acid substitution rates. The x axis is the Ks difference
between duplicate genes (the Ks of the fast-evolving copy minus the Ks of
the slow-evolving one). The y axis is the number of gene pairs within a Ks
bin. This figure shows that most pairs have a positive Ks difference, which
suggests that the fast-evolving copy usually has a higher Ks than the slowevolving copy.

interactions

One reason why we could not detect as many pairs with different Ka/Ks ratios as pairs with different amino-acid substitution rates could be, in part, because fast-evolving sequences
tend to have a higher Ks than slow-evolving ones. To see
whether this was true, we calculated the Ks difference between

refereed research

Among the 65 pairs that have different Ka/Ks ratios, 54 pairs
also differ between the two copies in their amino-acid substitution rates. Among the 185 pairs that showed no significant
difference in Ka/Ks ratios, less than 50% showed significantly
different amino-acid substitution rates. A 2 × 2 chi-square
test (Table 1, χ2 = 22.675, df = 1, p < 0.001) reveals a significant correlation between different Ka/Ks ratios and different
amino-acid substitution rates. Therefore, duplicate pairs with
different Ka/Ks ratios tend to evolve at different rates, suggesting that different functional constraints might be largely
responsible for the unequal evolutionary rates, although, as
mentioned below, some duplicate genes have apparently
undergone positive selection.

deposited research

To discover if the functional constraints were the same on two
duplicate genes, we examined the Ka/Ks ratio on each branch
leading to the two copies. Among the 250 pairs, 65 pairs
showed significantly different Ka/Ks ratios at the 5% level and
31 pairs showed a significant difference at the 1% level. As
mentioned earlier, the Ka/Ks ratio is an important index of
functional constraints. The smaller the Ka/Ks ratio is, the
stronger the functional constraints are. Our result suggests
that after gene duplication, a substantial proportion (65/250
= 26%) of the duplicate pairs have experienced different functional constraints.

We also looked for evidence of positive selection. Figure 3a
shows that most of the genes have a Ka/Ks ratio of less than
one, although there are still 113 genes with a Ka/Ks ratio
greater than one. Ka/Ks > 1 suggests positive selection but evidence for positive selection requires the ratio to be significantly greater than one. In the genes with Ka/Ks > 1, many
results are just slightly greater than one and only seven genes
are found to have the Ka/Ks ratio significantly greater than
one. However, this does not imply that only seven pairs of
duplicate genes were subject to positive selection because, in
many cases, the number of substitutions between two young

reports

Ka/Ks ratio

Two duplicate copies may differ significantly in the number of
amino-acid substitutions, which reflects a significant difference between two Ka values at the nucleotide level. However,
the two Ks values are also different (usually the copy with a
higher Ka also has a higher Ks) which reduces the chance for
the Ka/Ks ratios of the two copies to be significantly different.
This weak correlation between Ka and Ks is consistent with
several previous studies [10-13] and may be largely explained
by the fact that silent sites in some genes are also under purifying selection (that is, codon usage bias) [14]. So, although
we found nearly 60% of pairs with different amino-acid substitution rates, we found far fewer pairs having different Ka/
Ks ratios.

reviews

A 2 × 2 chi-square test. χ2 = 12.78, df = 1, p < 0.001. The null
hypothesis is that the number of pairs with different Ka/Ks ratios is
independent of the number of pairs with different amino-acid
substitution rates. The values are the observed number of pairs for
each category; for example, there are 54 pairs with both different Ka/Ks
ratios and different amino-acid substitution rates. The amino-acid
substitution rates (or the Ka/Ks ratios) in the two duplicate genes are
considered different only if the difference is statistically significant.
*Gene pairs with different amino-acid substitution rates between the
two duplicates. †Gene pairs with equal amino-acid substitution rates
between the two duplicates. ‡Gene pairs with different Ka/Ks ratios
between the two duplicates. §Gene pairs with equal Ka/Ks ratios
between the two duplicates.

Zhang et al. R56.3

comment

Different aminoacid substitution
rates*

Volume 4, Issue 9, Article R56

the two copies of each pair - the Ks of the fast-evolving copy
minus the Ks of the slow-evolving copy. Figure 2 shows that
most of the pairs have a positive Ks difference, which means
that in most of the pairs the fast-evolving copy has a higher Ks
than the slow-evolving copy.

Number of pairs

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/9/R56

R56.4 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 9, Article R56

Zhang et al.

Different substitution patterns

(a)

Among the 145 fast-evolving human young duplicates, 109
have an even amino-acid substitution pattern across the
sequence between the human and mouse orthologs. In other
words, these 109 sequences show no large highly-conserved
regions. On the other hand, 65 of the 145 slow-evolving copies
show evidence of an uneven substitution pattern between
human and mouse orthologs, which suggests that they have
some slow-evolving regions and some fast-evolving regions at
the protein level.

90
80

Number of genes

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/9/R56

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

0

0.5

1.0

1.5
2.0
Ka/Ks ratio

2.5

>10

(b)
35

Number of genes

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

0

0.5

1.0

1.5
2.0
Ka/Ks ratio

>10

(c)
90

Number of genes

80
70
60
50
40
30
20

In order to infer the position of each amino-acid substitution
in the sequence, we inferred the ancestral sequences by using
PAML (Phylogenetic Analysis by Maximum Likelihood) [7]
standard settings, which assume constant rates across sites. It
is possible, therefore, that our estimated substitutions may be
more evenly distributed than they actually are. However,
because we are comparing the percentage of sequences with
even patterns in fast-evolving copies to those in slow-evolving
copies, this potential bias should be on both sides of the comparison and should not change our conclusion.
Figure 4 with a chi-square test (χ2 = 12.78, df = 1, p < 0.01)
shows that fast-evolving duplicates have a significantly higher
proportion of sequences with an even substitution pattern.
This finding suggests that most of the fast-evolving copies
have more relaxed functional constraints than slow-evolving
copies and tend to accumulate substitutions evenly across the
sequence. The suggestion of relaxed functional constraints
for young duplicates is consistent with the observation of
Lynch and Conery [2]. Of course, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of the amino-acid substitutions in fastevolving copies might have been due to positive Darwinian
selection.

10
0

0

0.5

1.0

1.5
Ka/Ks ratio

2.0

>10

Figure/Ks ratio distribution of young human duplicates
The Ka 3
The Ka/Ks ratio distribution of young human duplicates. The x axis is the
Ka/Ks ratio on the branch leading to one human duplicated gene. The y axis
is the number of genes within a Ka/Ks bin. (a) All genes from the 250 pairs,
a total of 500 sequences. (b) The fast-evolving duplicate copies of 250
pairs, a total of 250 sequences. (c) The slow-evolving duplicate copies of
250 pairs, a total of 250 sequences.

duplicates may be too small for the test to be statistically
significant, even if some of the substitutions have occurred by
positive selection.
Most of the fast-evolving duplicate copies have higher Ka/Ks
ratios (Figure 3b) than slow-evolving duplicate copies (Figure
3c). This supports the view that after gene duplication, one
duplicate copy may have undergone purifying selection, while
the functional constraints on the other copy may have been
relaxed to some extent.

Our finding is very different from that of Kondrashov et al.
[6], who found only two pairs with unequal evolutionary rates
out of 49 pairs studied in mammals. Since they also focused
on young duplications (0.05 < Ks < 0.5) and the approach
they used to identify duplicate genes is similar to ours, this
may be due to the different datasets used. Since the neutral
pattern found in the fast-evolving copies in our study is to
some extent similar to the evolution of pseudogenes, we
examined the possibility of the inclusion of many pseudogenes in our sample.
The gene predictions in the Ensembl database [15] we used
always produce a translation for each gene and a stringent criterion (near full-length similarity) was used in our grouping
method; consequently, our dataset does not include pseudogenes due to premature codons. Since we limited our set of
duplicated genes to Ks > 0.05, a pseudogene in our sample
would be likely to have lost its function only very recently,
otherwise it would have gained one or more premature stop
codons since the time of nonfunctionalization. In the
Ensembl database we used only those genes ('known' genes)

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R56

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/9/R56

Genome Biology 2003,

Even pattern
Uneven pattern

100
80
60

Zhang et al. R56.5

copies may have been largely responsible for the different
rates. One copy may have relaxed functional constraints,
while the other could still be under strong constraints. The
stringent statistical tests used in this study might have underestimated the proportion of pairs with this pattern, but this
could only strengthen our argument.

comment

Materials and methods
Processing data and selecting independent young
human duplicate genes

40
20
0
Fast-evolving

Slow-evolving

information

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R56

interactions

We used conservative criteria to select young human duplicate pairs and applied a stringent statistical method to test
whether two duplicate copies exhibit different evolutionary
patterns. Our results suggest that, in most cases, during the
early stage of evolution following gene duplication, the two
duplicates evolve at different rates, which could affect the fate
of the two copies. Different functional constraints on the two

To calculate if the evolutionary rates and the Ka/Ks ratio are
the same between the two duplicate copies, the likelihoodratio test [8] was applied to each pair selected. To test the
hypothesis of equal evolutionary rates between the two duplicate copies at the amino-acid level, a two-rate model and a
free-rate model were compared. The two models differ in that
the two-rate model assumes the same evolutionary rate on
the two branches leading to the two duplicates but allows the
rate on the outgroup branch to be different, while the freerate model does not impose any equal rates among branches.

refereed research

Conclusion

Statistical methods to compare evolutionary patterns
between two copies

deposited research

with experimental support and those genes ('novel' genes)
with high similarity to known genes in human and other
organisms. Genes purely from Genscan predictions were not
used in this analysis. These approaches would have effectively
reduced the portion of pseudogenes in our dataset. If the
functional constraints on a gene are largely relaxed, the evolutionary pattern of this gene may be similar to that of pseudogenes. So it is possible that some of the fast-evolving genes
may be on their way to become pseudogenes, although it is
still possible that they may evolve new functions. Kondrashov
et al. [6] used a cDNA-based dataset and found only a few
duplicated pairs with different evolutionary rates, which may
have represented those genes that survived well through
selection and were still functioning. In other words, the
cDNA-based genes which they used are normally expressed,
meaning these genes may still be under strong selection pressure. Our dataset might be more appropriate for providing a
general scenario of how two duplicate genes evolve after gene
duplication.

reports

Figure 4
Comparison between fast-evolving copies and slow-evolving copies
Comparison between fast-evolving copies and slow-evolving copies. The
figure shows that fast-evolving copies have more cases with substitutions
distributed evenly along the sequence than slow-evolving copies. Fastevolving: the copy that has evolved faster than the other in each duplicate
pair. Slow-evolving: the copy that has evolved slower than the other in
each duplicate pair. Even pattern: a sequence that has evenly-distributed
substitutions along the sequence. Uneven pattern: a sequence that has
unevenly-distributed substitutions.

Human genes were downloaded from the Ensembl human
database [15] version 11.31 (28 February 2003). The original
dataset is available from the authors on request. Only known
and novel genes were used in this analysis; those sequences
containing repetitive elements detected by FASTA (E = 10-5)
searching against Repbase [16-18] were removed from the
dataset. If two genes overlapped at a chromosomal position,
the gene with the longer protein was retained. The protein
sequences selected were grouped into families by the method
used by Gu et al. [19]. Within each gene family, the selection
of independent duplicate gene pairs proceeded with increasing Ks. That is, within each gene family, we selected the gene
pair with the smallest Ks and excluded it from the family and
then selected the gene pair with the smallest Ks from among
the remaining genes. We repeated this until no gene pairs
could be selected. This method ensured that a gene in one pair
would not appear in another pair. Among the duplicate genes
we selected, those pairs with 0.05 < Ks < 0.3 were used in this
study. We used Ks < 0.3 as a cutoff to define young human
duplicates. With the Ks between human duplicate genes less
than 0.3, the duplication would have occurred less than 50
million years ago. Pairs with Ks < 0.05 have too few substitutions to make a statistical test meaningful. For each pair we
selected, both copies were used to search the mouse database.
Mouse genes were also obtained from the Ensembl database
[15] version 11.3 (28 February 2003) and were cleaned using
the same procedure that was used to clean the human database. The pairs in which the two copies had the same best hits
and a human-mouse Ks < 1 were kept for this study. We chose
Ks < 1 as a cutoff point because a distant outgroup makes it
harder to detect rate differences. A set of 250 young human
duplicate pairs and their mouse orthologs were thus retained.

reviews

Number of sequences

120

Volume 4, Issue 9, Article R56

R56.6 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 9, Article R56

Zhang et al.

The codeml program (set seqtype = 2 for amino-acid
sequences) in the PAML package was run for each of the two
models with all parameters set to default except for the
parameter 'model' for amino-acid substitution, which was set
to 'Poisson'. We also set this parameter to the 'Jones-TaylorThornton model' and the conclusion was basically the same.
Two maximum likelihood values for the two models were
given, and twice the difference was compared to a chi-square
distribution. If significant, the results suggest that the two
branches have evolved at unequal rates. To test if the Ka/Ks
ratios are different between the coding sequences of the two
duplicates, a two-ratio model, which assumes the same Ka/Ks
ratio on the branches leading to the two duplicates but an
independent Ka/Ks ratio on the branch leading to the outgroup, was compared to the free-ratio model, which assumes
an independent Ka/Ks ratio for each branch.

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/9/R56

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

14.
15.
16.

Substitution patterns and differential selection
Using the PAML package [7], the ancestral sequence of each
human duplicate gene pair was reconstructed and the position of each substitution was located. Tang and Lewontin's [9]
method was then applied to calculate the T statistics of each
human sequence. For each human sequence, 100,000
pseudo-sequences were generated under the null hypothesis
that the substitutions distribute evenly across the sequences,
and the distribution of T statistics of these 100,000 pseudosequences was generated. The T statistic of the real sequence
was then compared to this distribution. If the T statistic was
extremely large or small (the rejection level is 0.05), we considered it to be an even distribution. The program was written
in Perl and is available upon request.

17.
18.
19.

iation in nuclear genes of mammals. J Mol Evol 1998, 46:409-418.
Tang H, Lewontin RC: Locating regions of differential variability in DNA and protein sequences. Genetics 1999, 153:485-495.
Graur D: Amino acid composition and the evolutionary rates
of protein-coding genes. J Mol Evol 1985, 22:53-62.
Wolfe KH, Sharp PM: Mammalian gene evolution: nucleotide
sequence divergence between mouse and rat. J Mol Evol 1993,
37:441-456.
Mouchiroud D, Gautier C, Bernardi G: Frequencies of synonymous substitutions in mammals are gene-specific and correlated with frequencies of nonsynonymous substitutions. J Mol
Evol 1995, 40:107-113.
Ohta T, Ina Y: Variation in synonymous substitution rates
among mammalian genes and the correlation between synonymous and nonsynonymous divergence. J Mol Evol 1995,
41:717-720.
Hellmann I, Zollner S, Enard W, Ebersberger I, Nickel B, Paabo S:
Selection on human genes as revealed by comparisons to
chimpanzee cDNA. Genome Res 2003, 13:831-7.
Hubbard T, Barker D, Birney E, Cameron G, Chen Y, Clark L, Cox T,
Cuff J, Curwen V, Down T, et al.: The Ensembl genome database
project. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:38-41.
Jurka J: Repbase Update: a database and an electronic journal
of repetitive elements. Trends Genet 2000, 16:418-420.
Jurka J: Repeats in genomic DNA: mining and meaning. Curr
Opin Struct Biol 1998, 8:333-337.
Repbase [http://www.girinst.org/Repbase_Update.html]
Gu Z, Cavalcanti A, Chen FC, Bouman P, Li WH: Extent of gene
duplication in the genomes of Drosophila, nematode, and
yeast. Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19:256-262.

Additional data files

The amino-acid alignments (Additional data file 1) and coding sequence alignments (Additional data file 2) are available
in PAML format with the online version of this article.
Click here data alignments
The amino-acid file 1 alignments
Additionalfor additional data file
coding sequence
2

Acknowledgements
This study was supported by NIH grants.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Ohno S: Evolution by Gene Duplication. Berlin: Springer-Verlag:
1970.
Lynch M, Conery JS: The evolutionary fate and consequences of
duplicate genes. Science 2000, 290:1151-1155.
Hughes MK, Hughes AL: Evolution of duplicate genes in a tetraploid animal, Xenopus laevis. Mol Biol Evol 1993, 10:1360-1369.
Robinson-Rechavi M, Laudet V: Evolutionary rates of duplicate
genes in fish and mammals. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18:681-683.
Van de Peer Y, Taylor JS, Braasch I, Meyer A: The ghost of selection past: rates of evolution and functional divergence of
anciently duplicated genes. J Mol Evol 2001, 53:436-446.
Kondrashov FA, Rogozin IB, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Selection in the
evolution of gene duplications. Genome Biol 2002,
3:research0008.1-0008.9.
Yang Z: PAML: a program package for phylogenetic analysis
by maximum likelihood. CABIOS 1997, 13:555-556.
Yang Z, Nielsen R: Synonymous and nonsynonymous rate varGenome Biology 2003, 4:R56

</pre>
</body>
</html>
