<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Global assessment of genomic variation in cattle by genome resequencing and high-throughput genotyping</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-557"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Bujie Zhan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Global assessment of genomic variation in cattle
by genome resequencing and high-throughput
genotyping
Bujie Zhan1†, João Fadista1†, Bo Thomsen1, Jakob Hedegaard1,2, Frank Panitz1 and Christian Bendixen1*

Abstract
Background: Integration of genomic variation with phenotypic information is an effective approach for
uncovering genotype-phenotype associations. This requires an accurate identification of the different types of
variation in individual genomes.
Results: We report the integration of the whole genome sequence of a single Holstein Friesian bull with data
from single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array technologies to
determine a comprehensive spectrum of genomic variation. The performance of resequencing SNP detection was
assessed by combining SNPs that were identified to be either in identity by descent (IBD) or in copy number
variation (CNV) with results from SNP array genotyping. Coding insertions and deletions (indels) were found to be
enriched for size in multiples of 3 and were located near the N- and C-termini of proteins. For larger indels, a
combination of split-read and read-pair approaches proved to be complementary in finding different signatures.
CNVs were identified on the basis of the depth of sequenced reads, and by using SNP and CGH arrays.
Conclusions: Our results provide high resolution mapping of diverse classes of genomic variation in an individual
bovine genome and demonstrate that structural variation surpasses sequence variation as the main component of
genomic variability. Better accuracy of SNP detection was achieved with little loss of sensitivity when algorithms
that implemented mapping quality were used. IBD regions were found to be instrumental for calculating
resequencing SNP accuracy, while SNP detection within CNVs tended to be less reliable. CNV discovery was
affected dramatically by platform resolution and coverage biases. The combined data for this study showed that at
a moderate level of sequencing coverage, an ensemble of platforms and tools can be applied together to
maximize the accurate detection of sequence and structural variants.

Background
The domestic cow (Bos taurus) is a ruminant that
belongs to the Cetartiodactyl order of eutherian mammals. Being phylogenetically distant from primates and
rodents and with a drastically different biology, cattle
serve a significant role as animal model for studies of
evolution, metabolism, reproduction, and disease [1].
The recent publication of the cattle genome assembly
and the insights into sequence and structural variations
* Correspondence: christian.bendixen@agrsci.dk
† Contributed equally
1
Group of Molecular Genetics and Systems Biology, Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Aarhus University,
Blichers Allé 20, DK-8830 Tjele, Denmark
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

identified in the bovine HapMap project has sparked the
full potential of cattle genomic research, expanding our
knowledge of mammalian evolution and biology [2-5].
Furthermore, the integration of population-wide genotype information with phenotypic registrations generated
in the dairy and beef industry provides an important
resource for uncovering genes associated with complex
production traits [6-10].
Despite the fact that SNP genotyping technology has
enabled successful genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) in humans and in livestock species [11-13], it
has known disadvantages. For example, an ascertainment bias derived from the fact that the SNPs used are
chosen to have a minimum “rare” allele frequency as
well as to segregate in multiple breeds is sometimes

© 2011 Zhan et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

introduced. The identification of rare causal mutations
might be complicated due to failure to detect the disequilibrium between causal mutations and genotyped
SNPs [14,15]. In contrast, whole genome sequencing of
single individuals removes the polymorphism ascertainment bias, detects rare putative functional variants and
also retrieves structural variants [16], an important category of genomic variation that only recently has become
fully appreciated [17-24]. Despite their known functional
importance in humans [21,23], so far only a few smallscale studies have probed the extent of structural variants, mainly copy number variation (CNV), in cattle
[25-30]. The increasing cost efficiency of sequencing
technologies has enabled large scale sequencing of individual genomes, which has dramatically increased of the
catalogue of genomic sequences and structural variants
detected and filled some of the earlier gaps in resources
that were biased towards common sequence variants
[24,31-43]. Therefore, cattle research initiatives similar
to the human 1000 Genomes and Personal Genome
projects [24,44] are of paramount importance in order
to obtain a complete catalogue of genomic variation in
this species. This catalogue will help researchers to efficiently associate genomic information with productivity
traits and improve disease resistance to achieve breeding
goals [45]. Two recent studies have reported the analysis
of whole genome sequencing of cattle (Fleckevieh and
Kuchinoshima-Ushi bulls) focussing on SNP discovery
[46,47]. Nonetheless, to work out the links between
DNA sequence and phenotype, efforts to sequence the
genomes of more individuals are intensifying [48,49].
In this study, we have sequenced the genome of a
Holstein-Friesian bull using massive parallel sequencing
obtaining about 15 fold sequencing depth. Significant
sequence and structural variations were found using an
ensemble of variant callers: SNPs were identified using
Mosaik+GigaBayes [50,51] (hereafter giga), CLC Genomics Workbench [52] (hereafter clc), BWA+SAMtools
[53,54] pileup (hereafter bwa) and SMALT+SAMtools
[54,55] pileup (hereafter smalt); intra read indels were
detected with BWA+mpileup and BWA+Dindel; and
inter read indels, inversions, and translocations were
found using Pindel and BreakDancer [53,54,56-59].
Copy number variants were detected using three different platforms: sequence read-depth analysis; CGH arrays
by signal intensity variation by comparing two samples;
and SNP arrays by clustered pool references, signal
intensity, and allelic intensity [29,60,61]. Sequence and
structural variants were validated with the BovineHD
and BovineSNP50 BeadChips (Illumina, San Diego, California, USA), and RT-PCR respectively [62]. The tools
and pipelines applied here demonstrate that whole genome sequencing at relatively modest coverage levels is
sufficient firstly, to survey sequence and structural

Page 2 of 20

variations by integrating different variation detection
methods which minimized the false positive rate of polymorphism detection, a known problem of deep sequencing [63-66] and secondly, to provide accurate
information across different classes of structural genetic
variants.

Results and Discussion
Data production

Massively parallel DNA sequencing using Illumina
paired-end read chemistry [34] was performed to analyze
sequence and structural genomic variation in a HolsteinFriesian bull. Two paired-end libraries with a span size of
300 and 500 bases were constructed, and 41 gigabases of
sequence were generated (about 1.2 billion 36 base pair
reads) resulting in a sequencing depth of about 15 fold.
The sequences were aligned to the Bos taurus reference
genome assembly UMD3.1 [67] with BWA [53]. After
mapping on UMD3.1 and removing possible PCR duplicates, an average depth of 14.8 fold coverage was
achieved; 98.3% of the reference genome (including chromosome unknown) was covered and 94.3% of the aligned
bases had a phred-like quality score ≥20. Over 93.8% and
89.9% of the genome was covered by at least 3 and 4
reads, respectively (Figure 1). Approximately 3% of the
reads were not mapped to the reference assembly, possibly because of a combination of breed or individual
uniqueness, sequencing errors and contamination. All
the sequences were also mapped to the UMD3.1 assembly using the CLC Genomics Workbench [52], Mosaik
[50] and SMALT [55], and used mainly for SNP analysis
comparisons. Figure 1 shows the mapped sequence depth
variation for the different aligners (See also additional file
1). Uncovered bases were included when calculating
depth. There were more uncovered bases (depth 0) with
CLC and Mosaik because of the unique mapping strategy
applied. Mapping onto the assembly Btau4.0 [2] using
Mosaik produced similar results to those for the UMD3.1
assembly (Additional file 2).
SNP detection

First, we identified SNPs and evaluated the performance
of different SNP detection methods.
SNP detection based on resequencing

The detection of small genetic variations was performed
after mapping using the four aligning tools mentioned
above (Table 1). For the UMD3.1 reference assembly, a
total of 6,239,482 SNPs were called by the four pipelines
combined, 1,774,648 SNPs were called by only one of
the four pipelines, and 2,859,650 of the called SNPs
were at the intersection of all four pipelines (Figure 2).
Functional analysis of SNPs

To exclude most of the false positive predicted SNPs
from the functional analysis, we assessed possible

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 3 of 20

Figure 1 Genomic coverage and read depth obtained after mapping. Reads were mapped to the bovine genome assembly UMD3.1 using
four different mapping tools independently. smalt, SMALT alignment tool; bwa, Burrows-Wheeler Alignment Tool; mosaik, Mosaik assembler;
clcbio, CLC Genomics Workbench.

functional effects only for the SNPs that were called by
all four pipelines. Of these SNPs, 1,051,772 SNPs were
located inside genic regions, including 27,722 coding
SNPs of which 11,545 are predicted to cause either
non-synonymous amino acid substitutions in proteins
or to generate gain or loss of 182 stop codons. Eightyone SNPs were located inside transcriptional splice
sites, including 46 acceptor sites and 35 donor sites,
and they have the potential to cause alternative splicing

Table 1 SNPs called on the UMD3.1 assembly using
different pipelines
Tools

Algorithm SNPs

Homozygous Heterozygous

BWA +
SAMtools

Bayesian * 4,434,826 2,164,136

2,270,690

CLC Genomics
Workbench

NQS

4,740,179 1,997,225

2,742,954

SMALT +
SAMtools

Bayesian * 4,077,556 2,144,671

1,932,885

Mosaik +
GigaBayes

Bayesian

2,261,165

3,993,407 1,732,242

NQS, Neighbourhood Quality Standard; * pipelines that were implemented
with mapping quality.

transcripts [68-70]. Using SIFT [71,72] and PolyPhen
[72] to predict the effect of missense mutations, we
found 286 homozygous and 530 heterozygous SNPs
that were predicted to be deleterious to protein function. These missense SNPs correspond to 5% and 9.1%
of the homozygous and heterozygous non-synonymous
SNPs (nsSNPs), respectively; the difference reflecting
the fact that deleterious alleles are less likely to be
homozygous SNPs. However, we observed that the frequency of deleterious SNPs within CNV regions was
3.3-fold higher than the average across the whole genome (Chi-square test, p = 0.0001). The bias of deleterious SNPs in CNV regions may be explained either by a
sequence duplication resulting in pseudogenes or by
gene duplication where one copy harbours a deleterious
mutation while the other retains the gene function. A
gene set enrichment analysis for genes with nsSNPs
using all bovine genes as background showed an enrichment bias for olfactory transduction and immune
related pathways (p < 0.05). This result is similar to the
result of the enrichment analysis of genes located inside
CNV regions (see the discussion of the CNV regions
below).

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 4 of 20

Figure 2 The overlapping of SNPs called by four pipelines and based on the UMD3.1 reference assembly. Left, homozygous; right,
heterozygous. More than six millions unique SNP sites were identified by at least one of the aligners; 45.8% of them are consistent among all
aligners. smalt, SMALT+SAMtools pipeline; bwa, BWA+SAMtools pipeline; clc, CLC Genomics Workbench; giga, Mosaik+GigaBayes pipeline.

We found that the SNP frequency in the X chromosome is about 4.9 times lower than in the autosomes.
Because, while autosomes are diploid, in the sequenced
bull, the X chromosome is haploid; therefore, the
sequencing depth of the X chromosome will be about
half that of the autosomes resulting in the lower SNP
detection rate. However, data in this study and in previous studies [35] have indicated an almost linear correlation between the SNP detection rate and sequencing
depth in this sequence depth range, suggesting that low
sequencing depth only partially explains the low SNP
frequency found on the X chromosome. The low variant
frequency observed on the X chromosome of the
sequenced animal also suggests that cattle selection
often favours a lower mutation rate on the X chromosome compared with on the autosomes because of the
exposure of deleterious recessive mutations on hemizygous chromosomes [73,74].
We also found that the SNP frequency in CpG islands
is approximately half that of the SNP frequency in the
rest of the genome (Chi-square test, p < 0.0001) indicating that CpG islands are under more stringent selective
pressure. Variants in CpG islands can potentially break
the structure of the CpG dinucleotides thereby affecting
the methylation status of the cytosine residues, possibly
resulting in abnormal epigenetic regulation of gene
expression.
Because of the limited number of imprinted genes that
have been experimentally discovered in the cattle genome, we applied ortholog mapping of murine and
human imprinted genes to the cattle genome based on
Imprinted Gene Databases [75]. We found 47 cattle
genes that were potentially imprinted and that the frequency of the heterozygous nsSNPs was 3.7 fold lower

in the imprinted genes than in all the other genes in the
genome (Chi-square test, p = 0.0048). This result suggested that the potentially imprinted genes underwent
positive selection and is consistent with the parental
conflict theory [76,77]. However, because the imprint
status of these genes is yet to be determined experimentally in cattle, these results need to be verified by future
studies.
Based on the pedigree information for the sequenced
animal (Additional file 3), the inbreeding coefficient was
calculated by Pedigraph v2.4 to be 0.046875 [78], suggesting that some identical by descent (IBD) regions
exist in the genome. The SNPs detected in this study
also provided a means to survey large IBD regions that
were revealed as runs of homozygosity (ROH) in the
sequenced animal. Here, we defined the ROH regions
by applying a sliding window with size 1 Mb and a step
size 200 Kb, with the ratio of heterozygous and homozygous SNPs set to less than 0.1. Using these criteria, 71
ROH ranging in size from 1 Mb to 92.4 Mb and corresponding to 13.5% of the whole genome in the
sequenced individual, were identified.
Because the length of each IBD run is determined
partly by the number of generations since the common
ancestor, there is a continuum in the length of homozygous segments, depending on the degree of shared parental ancestry and its age. ROH due to recent
inbreeding tend to be longer because there has been little opportunity for recombination to break up the IBD
segments. On the other hand, ROH of much older origin are generally shorter because the chromosomal segments have been broken down by repeated meioses
[79]. According to pedigree data from this study, the
two largest IBD regions, with sizes of more than 50 Mb,

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

were most likely to have been derived from a shared
ancestor three generations ago.
Genotyping with the SNP chips

In addition to whole genome sequencing, the HolsteinFriesian bull was genotyped using both the Illumina
BovineHD and BovineSNP50 BeadChip arrays. After
quality filtration, the arrays revealed 770,343 and 52,345
effective SNP genotypes, respectively. Of the 47,093
SNPs that were shared on the two SNP arrays, only 26
had different allele calls and they were mostly heterozygous/homozygous disagreement calls. If we assume that
these 26 inconsistent alleles were incorrect genotypes, a
SNP chip error rate of 26/47093 = 0.0552% can be
deduced. Further filtering with unambiguous chromosome positions on the UMD3.1 assembly retained
756,243 and 42,603 effective genotypes for the BovineHD and BovineSNP50 arrays respectively. Excluding
the heterozygous SNPs on the sex chromosomes, which,
in a male genome, can arise either by error or within
the pseudoautosomal region, left 755,397 polymorphic
sites consisting of 207,670 heterozygous and 547,727
homozygous SNPs based on the BovineHD BeadChip
results. After similar filtering, 42,587 SNPs consisting of
11,569 heterozygous and 31,018 homozygous SNPs
remained based on the BovineSNP50 BeadChip results.
Comparison of the SNP chip and resequencing results

Detection rate, accuracy and false positive rate (FPR) are
crucial quality indicators that are affected mainly by the
algorithm applied in the analyses pipeline and the depth
of genome sequencing. The SNP detection rate in the
whole genome resequencing data was calculated as the
percentage of SNPs on the BovineHD BeadChip array
that was also discovered in the resequencing data. The
SNP detection accuracy was reported based on genotype
consistency between the resequencing and BovineHD
BeadChip data. A comparison of the results obtained in
this study with the results published by Eck et al [46],
considering only the sequence depth and disregarding
the different pipelines that have been applied, revealed
that an increase in sequence depth from 7.4 to 15.5 fold
significantly improved both the accuracy and sensitivity
of SNP calling. For example, the detection rate of SNP
sites almost doubled from 42.98% to 80.0% and the
accuracy increased from 70.67% to more than 93% (with
slight variations for the different pipelines applied in
this study).
The majority of SNPs were consistently called by both
the BovineHD BeadChip and the resequencing pipelines;
the inconsistent calls were separated into different categories: 1) heterozygous SNPs under-called as homozygous because of inadequate sequencing depth, or
homozygous SNPs over-called as heterozygous caused

Page 5 of 20

by incorrectly mapped reads or sequence errors in the
reads; 2) actual indels detected by resequencing but
called as SNPs by the BovineHD BeadChip; and 3) SNPs
called by both the resequencing and BovineHD BeadChip but with inconsistent types possibly caused by
reads being mapped to wrong positions or by sequence
errors either in the reads or in the reference sequences
(Table 2 and 3). SNP discovery performance was calculated based on the common SNPs called by more than
one pipeline (Figure 3).
The largest IBD region identified in the sequenced
genome with a size of 92.4 Mb (from position 13.2 Mb
to 105.6 Mb) was located on chromosome 9. Because a
large IBD region can only be due to recent inbreeding,
therefore, only few new variants caused by mutations in
this IBD region will be observable as heterozygote. Here,
the largest IBD region provides an opportunity to estimate the rate of false positive heterozygous calls calculated as the percentage of heterozygous SNPs in this
region. Both, the BWA and SMALT pipelines had low
false positive rates (FPRs) of 2.6% and 2.7%, respectively.
Surprisingly, the CLC and Mosaik pipelines gave much
higher FPRs of 19.2% and 19.3%, respectively. Thus,
most of the heterozygous sites called by the CLC or
Mosaik pipelines in this large IBD region were not identified as variants by either the BWA or the SMALT
pipelines. False positive variant calls can be introduced
either by sequencing errors or by wrong alignments in
which the reads are mapped to improper genomic positions. The SNP detection algorithm of the CLC pipeline
is based on Neighbourhood Quality Standard (NQS),
whereas Bayesian models are implemented in the other
three detection pipelines that were used in the present
study. Most of the false SNPs with low-quality discrepancies are likely to be the result of sequencing errors
and they can be distinguished by all the algorithms
using base quality values and by applying read depth criteria to cover each allele of the SNP. Resolving false
SNPs that are likely the result of improper alignments
requires a different approach for each of the four pipelines. We used only the reads that were uniquely
mapped to reference assemblies in the CLC and Mosaik
+GigaBayes pipelines to reduce possible mapping errors,
because both these read-mapping and SNP detection
algorithms do not utilize mapping quality information
[80]. Utilizing mapping quality requires that the aligner
considers suboptimal hits and this slows down the alignment process. However, applying a unique mapping
strategy does not exclude false alignments as efficiently
as filtering with mapping qualities [81]. A recent benchmark test highlighted that filtering using BWA generated mapping qualities with a stringent threshold
removed more than 80% of the false alignments at the
cost of 1% loss in sensitivity compared with the unique

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 6 of 20

Table 2 Comparison of heterozygous SNP calls made from BovineHD BeadChip genotype data and the resequencing
pipelines.
Pipeline

Consistent

Heterozygous > homozygous

As indel

Inconsistent

BWA + SAMtools

167,758 (93.8%)

10,590 (5.9%)

30

477

CLC Genomics Workbench

175,322 (94.6%)

9,589 (5.2%)

46

438

Mosaik + GigaBayes
SMALT + SAMtools

158, 564 (97.1%)
151,792 (94.1%)

4,467 (2.7%)
9,097 (5.6%)

196
31

0
401

Consistent, the same alleles at the same sites were determined by both the chip and resequencing methods; Heterozygous > homozygous, heterozygotes called
on the chip were under-called as homozygote with one identical allele in the resequencing pipelines; As indels, SNP sites on the chip were called as indels in
resequencing pipelines; Inconsistent, heterozygous calls with the chip and resequencing pipelines but with different alleles.

mapping strategy [80,82]. This indicates that the higher
number of heterozygous FPR calls with the CLC and
Mosaik+GigaBayes pipelines were caused by wrong
alignments. Moreover, using only the uniquely mapped
reads decreased local read depths and caused an artificial depth bias which affected the detection of both the
SNPs and the copy number variations (CNVs). Most
false variants caused by wrong alignments should appear
as heterozygous rather than homozygous SNPs because
it is unlikely that any genomic region will be exclusively
covered by false alignments with identical sequence
reads. An inspection of the minimum allele percentage
(MAP, percentage of reads covering the allele of a heterozygote that has low sequencing depth) of the SNPs
called in the largest IBD region showed that most of the
false positive (FP) heterozygous SNPs called by GigaBayes and CLC had a MAP that was relatively lower
than the MAP of SNPs called by BWA or SMALT, confirming that the FP calls were caused by false alignments
(Figure 4). More than 90% of the FP calls were eliminated by filtering with a coverage > 2 and a minimum
variant frequency > 35% for the heterozygous SNPs
identified by CLC. While adding this extra filtering step
after variation detection can reduce FPs caused by false
alignments, it is at the cost of a significant loss in sensitivity, especially when the sequencing depth was moderate. These results show that it is essential to utilize
alignment mapping quality to reduce the FPR caused by
the wrong alignment of short NGS sequences with low
to medium sequencing depth. The several FP heterozygote peaks that were common to all the resequencing
pipelines used are most likely to result from assembly

errors or structure variants rather than from random
errors from the pipelines. Some of the highest common
FP heterozygous peaks were located in the CNV regions
detected by both CNV-seq and the CGH array (Figure
5), indicating a decrease in SNP detection accuracy
within the CNV regions. The density of the small variants, the SNPs and the indels < 12 bp long, that were
detected inside the CNVs by the four pipelines showed
a strong dependence upon whether the CNV was a
duplication or a deletion. The density inside CNV duplications was much higher than the density that was
observed at the whole genomic level; for CNV deletions
it was the opposite. The density of the small variants
detected by the pipelines that take advantage of mapping quality (BWA and SMALT) within CNV duplications was about 5 times higher than their density within
deletions. For the pipelines that do not use mapping
quality, the ratio of their densities was even higher (Figure 6). Reads that were derived from CNV duplications
in the target genome and that mapped onto the corresponding reference paralogues resulted in the prediction
of more false small variants because the copies in CNV
regions of these reference sequences do not always have
identical sequences. In contrast, the reads that were
derived from CNV deletions in the target genome and
that were mapped to copies in the reference paralogues
either had reduced mapping quality or were rejected
when a unique mapping criterion was applied. These
results ultimately lead to lower sequence coverage
which, in turn, causes an underestimation of the predicted variant density in CNV deletions. The algorithms

Table 3 Comparison of homozygous SNP calls made from BovineHD BeadChip genotype data and the resequencing
pipelines.
Pipeline

Consistent

Homozygous > heterozygous

As indel

Inconsistent

BWA + SAMtools

253,102 (99.9%)

247 (0.1%)

107

16

CLC Genomics Workbench

254,195 (99.6%)

848 (0.3%)

101

28

Mosaik + GigaBayes

236,261 (97.8%)

3,522 (1.4%)

1,860 (0.8%)

20

SMALT + SAMtools

247,805 (99.8%)

272 (0.1%)

96

19

Consistent, the same alleles at the same sites were determined by both the chip and resequencing methods; Homozygous > heterozygous, homozygous SNPs
called on the chip that were over-called as heterozygous in the resequencing pipelines; As indels, SNP sites on the BovineHD BeadChip that were called as indels
in resequencing pipelines; Inconsistent, homozygous calls with both the BovineHD BeadChip and the resequencing pipelines but with different alleles.

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 7 of 20

Figure 3 Single and combined pipeline performances for SNP detection. FPR denotes false positive rate, bwa denotes BWA+SAMtools, clc
denotes CLC Genomics Workbench, giga denotes Mosaik+GigaBayes, smalt denotes SMALT+SAMtools, bc denotes the combination of bwa and
clc, bcs denotes the combination of bwa, clc and smalt, bcgs denotes the combination of bwa, clc, giga and smalt. False positive rate for the
heterozygous SNPs was calculated based on the heterozygous SNPs observed in an identical by descent region (IBD); the false positive rate for
homozygous SNPs was calculated based on the homozygous SNPs observed in an IBD region in which the sequences are identical to the
reference sequences. Pipelines without the implementation of alignment mapping quality parameter resulted in a higher FPR for heterozygous
SNP detection.

Figure 4 Heterozygous SNPs called on chromosome 9. Chromosome 9 contains the largest identical by descent (IBD) region detected in the
genome of the sequenced animal. The lower minimum allele percentage of heterozygous calls in the IBD region by both the Mosaik+GigaBayes
and CLC pipelines, indicates that even a few false alignments can introduce higher false positive rates (FPRs) compared to the FPRs using the
BWA and SMALT pipelines. bwa denotes BWA+SAMtools, clc denotes CLC Genomics Workbench, giga denotes Mosaik+GigaBayes, smalt denotes
SMALT+SAMtools.

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 8 of 20

Figure 5 Interaction of SNP detection and CNVs. Bases within CNV (green) and heterozygous SNPs (red) regions called on chromosome 9
which contains the largest identical by descent (IBD) region (from 13.2 Mb to 105.6 Mb) in the bovine genome. Some common false positive
peaks of heterozygous SNPs in this IBD region detected by all resequencing pipelines overlapped with the CNV regions described in this study
and in other literature, indicating a higher FPR for the detection of small size polymorphism inside relatively larger structural variant regions.

Figure 6 Densities of small variants detected within CNV regions by different pipelines. Densities were measured as number of variant
per 10 kb averaged across CNV duplication, CNV deletion and the whole genome. smalt, SMALT+SAMtools pipeline; bwa, BWA+SAMtools
pipeline; clc, CLC Genomics Workbench; giga, Mosaik+GigaBayes pipeline.

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

that apply mapping quality reduced this kind of bias significantly; however, the bias was not completely avoided.
In addition, there were 15 heterozygous SNPs called
by the BovineHD BeadChip in this largest IBD region
which was more than the expected number according to
its calculated error rate. Seven out of the 15 SNPs were
confirmed to be heterozygous with identical alleles
called by all four resequencing pipelines; one of the
SNPs was confirmed by three of the resequencing pipelines and another one was confirmed by two of the resequencing pipelines. These nine heterozygous SNPs
called by both the SNP chip and resequencing pipelines,
appear to have been caused by some systematic error.
When the nine SNPs were checked manually, six of
them were found to be located close to each other in a
119 kb block that gave a much higher density of heterozygous calls than in the flanking areas; an abnormally
high depth of mapped reads were also found upstream
to this block, strongly suggesting either an assembly
error or some structural genomic event in this region.
Two of the remaining three SNPs were also located in a
region that had a relatively higher density of heterozygous calls than its flanking areas, indicating that they
were also caused by either an assembly or mapping
error (Figure 7). The last heterozygous site that was
called by both the BovineHD BeadChip and the four
resequencing pipelines with identical alleles may be a
new mutation that occurred in the IBD region during
the last three generations and that was inherited following the common ancestor. In this study, the estimated
BovineHD SNP chip heterozygous detection rate was
0.09 (Additional file 4), giving us a deduced mutation
rate of 1/0.09/2/3/90M = 2e-8 (See also additional file
4), similar to the magnitude seen in other studies [83].
Structural Variation detection

To identify the whole spectrum of genetic variation, the
integration of different methods is a necessary task. In
this section, the analysis and integration of different
structural variant detection methods is described.

Page 9 of 20

Intra-read indels detection

Although present at lower rates than SNPs, small insertions and deletions (indels) represent a functionally
important type of genomic variation [20,84-87]. The
false positive rate of indel detection is generally higher
than for SNPs because reads bearing indels often align
with multiple mismatches to the reference sequence
rather than leave a gap, and because indels frequently
cannot be uniquely mapped onto the reference, for
example, when the indel is in a homopolymer repeat.
Therefore, to minimize false positives, the intra-read
indels were here identified as those that were called by
both the Dindel and SAMtools variant calling programs
(details in Methods) [54,57]. We identified 197,895
intra-read indels, of which 93,210 were deletions of up
to 12 bases and 104,686 were insertions of up to 10
bases at an average genome density of 7 indels per 100
kb. This indel size distribution is close to a normal distribution (Additional file 5).
We found 417 indels (0.21%) in the coding sequences
of 368 genes and observed that these coding indels were
enriched for sizes that are multiples of three (3 n). The
enrichment of 3 n coding indels compared to 3 n genome-wide indels may be explained by purifying selection
against frameshifts in coding regions (Figure 8a). A significant under-representation of indels in coding regions
was also detected. Whereas the genome-wide SNP:indel
ratio is 15:1, the SNP:indel ratio for coding regions is
67:1, as would be expected because of the more deleterious effect of indels in protein-coding regions [87].
Next, we investigated the location of the coding indels
in the respective proteins and found that the indels
were enriched near the N and C-termini of the proteins
with a slightly higher frequency at the C-termini (Figure
8b). This distribution of coding indels is consistent with
observations from previous studies [43,87], and can be
explained by the fact that a C-terminal indel would have
a lower likelihood of affecting protein function because
the major part of the protein would already have been
translated before the indel is encountered. A coding

Figure 7 False heterozygous SNPs called within identical by descent (IBD) regions. Some false heterozygous SNPs called inside the IBD
region on chromosome 9 by both the BovineHD BeadChip and resequencing pipelines were clustered close to each other, suggesting that they
were caused by some systematic errors instead of random errors.

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 10 of 20

Figure 8 Indels in coding regions of the genome. (a) Indel size distribution in the coding regions. The indels called by all methods
demonstrate strongest purifying selection against frameshifts (non 3 n) indels in coding regions. (b) Relative protein location of coding indels.
The relative position of the indel in the protein was calculated by dividing the position of the indel by the total protein length.

indel at the N-terminus may also be less critical because
a possible alternative downstream start codon may be
present. Thus, indels at the N- and C-termini of proteins may be less functionally constrained than indels at
other protein locations. We also analyzed the possible
functional importance of coding indels in genes that are
known to be involved in disease (OMIM database [70]).
Of the 24 indels found in 20 disease genes, 18 of the
indels were not multiples of 3 n, which would induce
frame shifts in these genes (Additional file 6). Further,
in the present study, a significant genome-wide correlation of SNP-indel density was discovered (Additional file
7, Pearson correlation R2 = 0.4, p < 0.05). This correlation was previously reported in human and other primate genome studies and seems to be a general
phenomenon [88-91].
Because, in this study, an indel was called by at least a
4× sequence coverage, we accept that this prevents at
least 10% of the genome being reachable to indel detection (Figure 1). Furthermore, indels are seriously underestimated in regions of local repetitive and
homopolymeric sequences.
Indels, inversions and translocations found by split-read
and mate-pair approaches

Although small intra-read indels can be detected by
SAMtools and Dindel variant callers, to detect larger
structural variants other tools have to be used. Here we
applied Pindel that uses a split-read approach to examine unmapped reads spanning breakpoints, and BreakDancer that examines discordantly mapped read pairs
having improper orientation relationships or span sizes

[58,59]. Both tools detect insertions and deletions as
well as inversions and translocations (Figure 9).
Using the BreakDancer tool we detected a total of
8,768 structural variants (SVs). Of these, 6,156 were
deletions (ranging in size from 47 bp to 127 kb), 2,125
were insertions (241 bp to 397 bp), 412 were inversions
(3 bp to 89 kb), and 120 were intra- and 18 inter-chromosomal translocations. In total, the SVs overlapped
2,529 genes. Inversions, intra- and inter-chromosomal
translocations were later filtered and kept only if their
positions could be located within the same chromosomes in both cow assemblies (Btau4.0 and UMD3.1).
This reduced the total number of these variants by 28%,
with inversions decreasing from 412 to 297, intra-chromosomal translocations from 120 to 86, and inter-chromosomal translocations from 18 to 13 (Additional file
8). Using the Pindel split-read approach, 1,416 SVs,
including 1,332 deletions (13 bp to 855 kb), 79 insertions (15 bp to 31 bp) and 5 inversions (7 bp to 28 bp)
(Additional file 9) were detected. In total, these SVs
overlap nine genes.
Pindel and BreakDancer are largely complementary
in that they identify SVs with different signatures. Pindel produces base-pair resolution for SV boundaries
and consequently can detect significantly smaller SVs
than BreakDancer. Both tools identified more deletions
than insertions, probably due to a bias against detection of insertions longer than our paired-end library
span size. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that deletions are more common, as hypothesized
recently [88]. We also noted that the number of SVs

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 11 of 20

Figure 9 Genomic distribution of structural variation. The innermost circle shows inversions (grey line) and intra and inter-chromosomal
translocations (blue and black lines, respectively). Black bars represent IBD regions identified in the bull. The next circle shows a histogram
representing deletions (red) and duplications (green) found by at least two of the CNV platforms; CNVs called by only one platform are in
orange. The circle outside the ring of solid coloured chromosomes represents the insertions (green) and deletions (red) found by the mate-pair
(BreakDancer) and split-pair (Pindel) analyses.

decreased rapidly with increasing size, except for two
peaks corresponding to short and long interspersed
nuclear elements (SINEs and LINEs) around 200 bp
and 2000 bp, respectively (Figure 10). This result is
consistent with previous studies that reported the presence and distribution of these repeat elements
[24,34,36,37].

Copy number variation

Three platforms were used for the detection of copy
number variation (CNV); by sequencing, and by SNP
and CGH arrays.
Array based variation

A high density custom Nimblegen comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) array with 6.3 M probes and the

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 12 of 20

Figure 10 Size distribution of deletions detected by BreakDancer and Pindel. With increasing deletion size, the frequency decreases
exponentially. The exceptions are for the bars (green) that correspond to SINE and LINE elements.

Illumina BovineHD BeadChip with 770 K probes were
used to identify relative copy number variants in the
bull sequenced in this study. The CGH array data was
available from a previous study in which the bull was
hybridized to two other animals using a dye swap design
[29]. From the CGH array set we called 196 CNVs (6.11
Mb) that had an average length of 31.2 kb and ranged
in size from 1.4 to 595.7 kb (Additional file 10). We
used the BovineHD BeadChip array to detect CNVs in
our bull when compared with a reference population of
Holsteins that were also tested in-house. Details of the
calling procedure are described in the Methods section.
Briefly, we used the PennCNV tool to detect the CNVs
and after visual plot inspection we identified 30 CNVs
(2.57 Mb) with an average length of 85.8 kb, that ranged
in size from 8 to 555.3 kb (Additional file 11). This
result reflects the lower resolution of the BovineHD
BeadChip compared to CGH array which makes it less
efficient in detecting short CNVs.
Sequence based variation

We also used a sequence based approach, called CNVseq [60], in which the sequencing depth of coverage of
our bull was compared with the sequencing depth of
coverage of another bull sequenced in another study
[46]. Assuming a uniform sequencing process, the

number of reads that map to a particular region should
be Poisson distributed and proportional to the copy
number of the reads. Despite this theoretical assumption, this and previous studies have reported a sequencing Poisson overdispersion [34,89]. This overdispersion
is probably due to the known sequencing bias of the
second generation sequencing technologies that causes
certain regions of the genome to be over or under
sampled; GC-rich regions and homopolymeric tracts are
the best known causes of this bias [63-65]. To minimize
the bias, the detection of CNVs in our bull was done by
comparing it to another bull sequenced on the same
sequencing platform with the same read length and the
same aligner. Here, based on the depth of coverage signature, we were able to detect 520 autosomal CNVs
(3.63 Mb) with an average length of 6.9 kb ranging in
size from 3.2 to 129.9 kb (Additional file 12).
Cross-platform CNV comparison

Notwithstanding the large differences in the numbers of
CNVs identified by the three platforms, the CNV genome coverage was similar; 0.10% for the BovineHD
BeadChip, 0.14% for CNV-seq, and 0.24% for the CGH
array. To compare the CNV datasets from the three
platforms, a CNV was described as overlapping another
CNV if there was an overlap of at least 1 bp. About 14%

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 13 of 20

of the CNVs detected by CNV-seq, nearly 23% of the
CNVs detected by the CGH array, and 23% of the
CNVs detected by BovineHD BeadChip overlapped
CNVs detected by at least one of the other platforms.
Figure 11 shows an overall comparison between the different platforms.
The apparently low overlap of CNVs detected by the
different platforms might have several different causes.
First, each platform has different advantages and disadvantages in terms of resolution and size distribution for
confident CNV calls (Figure 11). Second, coverage bias
also affects the CNVs called; the coverage range at
which CNV-seq can detect CNV is much higher than
for the array platforms because of microarray signal
saturation at high copy levels (Figure 11). Array coverage putatively correlates with copy number status of the
region. Third, the CNVs discovered by each platform
are relative to the animals that are probed against.
Hence, while for the CGH array two samples were
hybridized against our bull, a different population was
used as the reference population for calling CNVs using
the SNP platform and again, for CNV-seq, a different
animal was tested against our bull. Therefore, some of
the relative CNVs that we found may not have

300

originated from our sequenced bull but may have come
from the animals that we tested the CNVs against.
CNV validation by quantitative PCR

To verify whether any of the three reasons listed above
are valid, a subset of 28 CNVs was selected for testing
using quantitative RT-PCR. Five CNVs unique to each
of the platforms, nine CNVs found by two platforms
and four CNVs detected in all platforms formed the
subset. We used a DNA sample of the bull sequenced
here, samples from the two animals hybridized to the
bull in the CGH array experiment and DNA from four
of the animals used as our reference population in the
BovineHD BeadChip array. The primers did not work in
six of the 28 possible RT-PCR experiments. Of the
remaining 22 CNVs, 19 (86%) worked and gave positive
results, meaning that a CNV was detected in at least
one of the animals tested (Additional file 13). Despite
the fact that the CNVs tested by RT-PCR were a small
subset of the total number of CNVs found by all platforms, the results gave us an estimate of the real reasons
behind the lack of CNV overlap. Thus, for the CNVs
tested by RT-PCR that were unique to the CGH and
SNP arrays, the majority were detected in other animals
and not in our bull. The CNVs that were detected in

120

CGH array
CNVseq
SNP HD array

250

100

CGH coverage
CNVseq coverage
SNP HD coverage

150

60

40

50

20

0

Mean coverage

80

100

CNVs

200

0
1-2kb

2-3kb

3-4kb

4-5kb

5-6kb

6-7kb

7-8kb

8-9kb

9-10kb 10-15kb 15-20kb 20-30kb 30-60kb

60100kb

100200kb

200400kb

400600kb

CNV size

Figure 11 Comparison between different platforms. The Venn diagram depicts the number of CNVs that overlap among the three platforms;
CGH array (red), CNV-seq (blue), and SNP HD array (green). The bar plot depicts CNV size distribution for each platform in each of the size
ranges; the line plot represents the mean coverage of CNVs found in each size range.

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

our bull were in regions of low sequence coverage which
can affect the calling procedure of the CNV-seq method
(Figure 11, t-test p < 0.05 for CNV-seq which can detect
significant CNVs with higher coverage than the array
based methods). The RT-PCR results provided confidence that, for the genome-wide scan, the false positive
rate was low in CNV regions; however, the penalty was
a relatively high false negative rate when a single
method was used alone.
Functional analysis of CNVs

To test for the putative functional significance of our
CNVs, we restricted our analysis to the CNVs found by
at least two platforms; this should reduce the false positives and the risk that the CNVs are not found in our
animal but only in others. From 46 CNV regions that
were detected using at least two platforms, 27 (59%)
were overlapped by 84 genes giving a gene enrichment
of 2.6 fold in comparison with putative CNVs distributed at random locations. Similar to our results for the
SNPs, this gene enrichment is biased for functions
related to olfactory transduction, and signalling pathways including immune response (Additional file 14)
and is consistent with previous bovine and human CNV
studies [19-22,27-30,92]. This commonplace enrichment
involves the genes that encode proteins that interface
with the external environment and its selective pressures
(natural or artificial). These pressures results in differential adaptation to different metabolic and immune conditions (particularly important in the rumen microbiome and mucosal surfaces), to herd environment, and
to the artificial genetic selection that has significantly
impacted bovine genome evolution. However, to support
an argument for their potential evolutionary contributions to cattle domestication, breed formation and adaptation, the genomic variations reported here need to be
queried in a larger sample size and with breeds other
than Holstein. Comparisons to other farm animal species could also provide additional insights into the evolutionary mechanisms of genomic variation in livestock
research. CNV regions are also enriched in segmental
duplications which are known substrates of copy number formation [21]. We found no enrichment of CNVs
at evolutionary breakpoints when cattle-specific and
artiodactyl-specific evolutionary breakpoints [93] were
examined, in agreement with a previous study [92]. It is
interesting that our most stringent set of 46 CNVs
included 35 (76%) CNVs that overlapped with common
(frequency > 2.5%) cattle CNVs reported in previous
studies [27-30] (Additional file 15).
The high-confidence CNV dataset for the individual
bull sequenced here contains CNVs that were identified
by at least two platforms. This dataset could be used as
a reference control sample in future array CGH experiments. It would help alleviate doubts of whether a

Page 14 of 20

particular CNV is a gain or a loss in the investigated
sample because the absolute copy number status of the
reference animal is known. This strategy is similar to
one that is already used in human studies [91,94].
The detected genetic variation present in the bull’s
genome

After calling both the sequence and structural variations,
we generated an overview of the genetic variation found
in the Holstein-Friesian bull sequenced here. For the
overview we used the SNPs called by all four methods
(Mosaik+GigaBayes, CLC Genomics Workbench,
SMALT+SAMtools and BWA+SAMtools), the intraread indels called by SAMtools and Dindel, indels,
inversions and translocations predicted by Pindel and
BreakDancer, and finally the CNVs called by at least
two of the platforms (CNV-seq, CGH and SNP HD
arrays). While there were 2,859,650 bases of sequence
variation, the structurally variable part of the genome
comprised 11,672,807 bases, a finding supported by previous studies claiming that structural variation surmounts sequence variation as the main form of genetic
variability, measured as the number of basepairs
affected, in an individual genome [20,95]. A summary of
the different analyses that were performed is shown in
Table 4.

Conclusions
This study presents an in-depth analysis of the genomic
variation in the genome of a single bull at a comprehensive scale and resolution for Bos taurus species. Genetic
variations comprising SNPs, indels and large size structural variants like CNVs were explored using several
complementary technological platforms and analysis
software. We demonstrated that all the platforms were
powerful tools for the identification of sequence and
structural variations and that the various technologies
complemented each other. For instance, CNV discovery
by sequencing enabled the efficient detection of small,
highly variable CNV regions, while the CGH and SNP
platforms were better at detecting larger CNVs with
smaller copy number differences (Figure 11) [95]. The
large number of platform-specific CNVs and smaller
number of false positives (as shown by RT-PCR validation) indicated how all these platforms complement
each other in CNV discovery. Here, we propose that a
genome-wide picture of false positive and false negative
rates can be improved using sequencing trios.
For SNP detection with strict alignment criteria, the
inclusion or exclusion of non-uniquely mapped reads
did not significantly change the accuracy or rate of
detection; however, using only uniquely mapped reads
may reduce the number of detectable small insertions
and deletions. The SNP detection algorithms

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 15 of 20

Table 4 Genetic variation detected by different methods (size in base pairs).
Method

Type

Number

Mosaik+GigaBayes+CLC+BWA+SMALT+SAMtools

SNP

2,859,650

Min.

Median

Max

Length
2,859,650

SAMtools+Dindel

indel

197,895

1

1

12

349,248

BreakDancer (mate-pair)

indel, inv, transl

8,596

42

122

127,536

6,286,578

Pindel (split-read)

indel, inv

1,416

13

22

855,018

1,147,264

CNV-seq+Nimblegen6.3M+Illumina770 k

CNV

46

3,170

25,812

595,739

3,889,717

3,067,603

1

855,018

14,532,457

Total
inv denotes inversion, transl denotes translocation.

implemented in the Mosaik+GigaBayes and CLC Genomics Workbench pipelines are Bayesian and Neighbourhood Quality Standard respectively, but neither of them
includes alignment mapping quality in the model. This
leads to a relative higher false positive rate in heterozygous variants compared to the other Bayesian based
approaches, the BWA+SAMtools and SMALT+SAMtools pipelines, with mapping quality implemented.
Proper filter setting with minimum allele percentage for
heterozygous sites was essential to minimize the false
positive calls in the detection pipelines without mapping
quality; however, this filtering causes a serious loss in
detection sensitivity. This study also clearly documents
that applying more than one algorithm/tool to call common variants increased detection accuracy at the
expense of sensitivity. If multiple analyses using various
algorithms/tools are hard to achieve, the BWA+SAMtools pipeline could be considered to be a good balanced
choice. The detection of small variants located inside
large structural variants like CNV regions can be problematic for all algorithms, mainly because short reads
from different but highly similar structural sequence elements inevitably map and cluster together on the reference genome. Genetic variants inside and near to those
structural components should always be critically
evaluated.
In summary, we found that structural variation surpassed sequence variation as the main component of
genomic variability. This emphasizes the need to consider all types of variants when fine-mapping causal variants within trait-associated intervals. Furthermore, our
results suggest that, at the level of resolution and
sequencing coverage found in the present study, an
ensemble of platforms and tools can be used to maximize the detection of SV; however, the false positive
rates should be controlled by applying threshold settings
and performing subset validation experiments.
The methodology used in this study has a number of
limitations that should be addressed in future work.
One limitation relates to calling variants embedded in
repetitive regions which requires longer sequencing read
lengths for complete characterization [96,97]. De novo
local assembly could also help to resolve and validate

the breakpoints of structural variants [98,99], but the
present sequencing coverage prevented us from investigating this approach. Using paired-end sequencing of
additional libraries of different sizes will also help
resolve complex variants. With sequencing costs
decreasing rapidly, simply increasing the depth of
sequencing and using different mapping procedures
would increase the confidence and accuracy of the
results [100].
It could be argued that the relatively low read-depth
achieved here compared to other personal genome studies [34-39] may affect the accuracy of variant classification (whether by under- or overcalling) [101]. However,
we clearly demonstrated that platform integration can
mitigate such problems for structural variation detection, especially if the interest is in gaining a broader
understanding of the genomic characteristics of a breed
or population group and is not primarily focussed on
understanding the detailed genomic architecture of a
specific animal. Thus, we suggest that it would be more
prudent to sequence many individuals with lower depth
rather than a limited number of individuals with high
depth. The integrative methodology and resources generated for this study may be used as a template for
future genome sequencing studies on larger data sets.

Methods
Sequencing

Genomic DNA from a Holstein-Friesian bull was
extracted and purified from blood according to standard
protocols and as previously described [102]. Sample preparation, cluster generation and sequencing were performed according to the manufacture’s protocols with
minor modifications (Illumina paired-end cluster generation kit GA II v1, 36-cycle sequencing kit v1.2 and
v1.3). Briefly, two paired-end libraries were prepared
and sequenced using a Genome Analyzer II (Illumina,
San Diego, California, USA). Genomic DNA was sheared
by nebulization, ligated with Illumina’s PE adaptors, and
fragments approximately 300 and 500 bases in length
were gel purified followed by PCR amplification and column purification. Purity and yield were checked using
the 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara,

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

California, USA) and yields were additionally measured
using the QuBit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA).
To extract intensity measurements for each cluster and
sequencing cycle, image analysis was performed with the
Illumina Firecrest program as implemented in Illumina’s
pipeline version 1.3. Illumina’s Bustard program was
used for base calling on the extracted intensities; with
purity filtering was applied to discriminate between
good and bad reads. The quality score for each base was
used as an indicator of base call uncertainty.
Reference genome assemblies

We used the Btau4.0 [103] assembly from The Bovine
Genome Sequencing and Analysis Consortium and the
UMD3.1 assembly [104] from the Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology at the University of
Maryland as two independent references for mapping
and assembling the whole genome shotgun Illumina
reads [2,67].
SNP detection by sequencing

Short read alignment, consensus assembly and variant
calling were performed using the BWA v0.5.8 and
Mosaik v1.0 software packages, SAMtools v0.1.12a,
GigaBayes v0.4.1, and the CLC Genomics Workbench
v4. We used the default parameters for the BWA alignment. The SAMtools pileup command was used for variant detection in BWA pipeline with default parameters
but for filtering, a minimal mapping quality of 20 was
used. Options -n 8, -j 50, and -i 650 were used for the
SMALT alignments. The SAMtools pileup command
was used for variant detection in SMALT pipelines with
default parameters but for filtering a minimal mapping
quality of 20 was used. Parameters -hs 15 -mm 2 -a all
-m unique -mhp 100 -act 20 were applied for Mosaik
mapping in the Giga pipeline. GigaBayes was run in the
Giga pipeline for variant detection with the following
parameters: –indel –sample single –ploidy diploid (haploid for the sex chromosomes) –CRL 2 –CRU 60 (30
for the sex chromosomes) –QRL 20 –PSL 0.9 –anchor
–O 3. CLC Genomics Workbench was used for mapping reads with parameters set as: -p fb se 150 650. The
following CLC parameters were applied for variant
detection: Maximum coverage = 60 (30 for the sex chromosomes); Maximum expected variations (ploidy) = 2 (1
for the sex chromosomes); Maximum gap and mismatch
count = 2; Minimum average quality = 15; Minimum
central quality = 20; Minimum coverage = 2; Minimum
paired coverage = 0; required variant count threshold =
1; and the Sufficient variant count threshold = 2.
Structural variation detection by sequencing

Structural variants (excluding CNVs) were detected by
using the BWA mapping result on the UMD3.1

Page 16 of 20

assembly. Intra-read indels were detected by the intersection of Dindel v1.0 and SAMtools mpileup variant
callers with default parameters. After merging the two
indel sets, post-filtering was applied. Indels were kept if:
(1) the non-reference allele was covered by at least one
read for each strand; (2) the minimum base quality was
20; (3) the coefficient for downgrading mapping quality
for reads containing excessive mismatches was 50; (4)
the minimum read depth was 4; (5) the maximum read
depth was 30, and (6) the indels did not overlap Ns in
the assembly. For indels and inversions found by splitread, Pindel v0.2.0 was used with default parameters.
Post-filtering was applied to remove structural variants
not seen in both strands and variants having read depth
< 4. For indels, inversions and translocations found by
mate-pair approach, BreakDancer v1.1 was used with
default parameters, except that the minimum alternative
mapping quality was set to 20, the minimum number of
read pairs required to establish a connection was 4, and
the maximum threshold of haploid sequence coverage
for regions to be ignored was 50.
For CNV detection, CNV-seq was used with reads
mapped to assembly Btau4.0. Btau4.0 was chosen
because our previous array CGH study was designed for
this assembly and to compare the CNV detection platforms, the reads all had to be mapped to the same
assembly. Maq v0.7.1 [80] was used to map the reads
from our sequenced bull and another bull sequenced
elsewhere [46], while CNV-seq was used to compare the
normalized read-depth differences between the two animals in a sliding windows across the autosomes. A CNV
was kept if the |log2ratio| of the counts of reads per
sliding window was bigger than 1, and if the CNVs were
called by at least 5 consecutive windows.
Array based SNP chip genotyping

The sequenced animal was genotyped with BovineHD
and BovineSNP50 BeadChips (Illumina, San Diego, California, USA). To accurately detect chromosomal positions of the SNP sites, Tera-Blast (Timelogic, USA) was
used for mapping the flanking SNP sequences against
both the UMD3.1 and Btau4.0 genome assemblies
[80,81]. Only those SNPs with unique perfect hits were
used. GenomeStudio v1.7.4 software (Illumina, San
Diego, California, USA) was used to detect the SNPs for
both chips and both assemblies. The BovineHD BeadChip was also used to detect CNVs in Btau4.0. Briefly,
signal intensity (log R ratio, LRR) and allelic intensity (B
allele frequency, BAF) values were extracted, and used
by PennCNV to detect CNVs in our bull by comparing
with a reference population of 138 other Holstein bulls
that have been genotyped (data not shown) [61]. Only
high quality samples that had a call rate > 99.9%, standard deviation of log R ratio (LRR) below 0.3, BAF <

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 17 of 20

0.01 and wave adjusted values < 0.05 were used. A CNV
was detected if 5 consecutive SNPs showed the same
CNV pattern and if this pattern was confirmed by
visually inspection of signal intensity plots.

Additional file 2: Read depth plot. The read depth mapped on
assembly Btau4.0 by Mosaik mapping tool.
Additional file 3: Graph of pedigree. The pedigree of the sequenced
bull traced back five generations.
Additional file 4: Calculating description. A description of the
methods used to calculate the BovineHD BeadChip detection rate and
the mutation rate of the sequenced animal.

Array CGH

The array CGH experiment has been described elsewhere
[29]. Briefly, a custom 6.3 million probe array was produced by Nimblegen (Roche Nimblegen, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) to cover the Btau4.0 genome assembly at
301 bp median probe spacing. Twenty-one animals were
tested for CNVs and the data from three of them (the
bull sequenced for the present study and the two animals
that were hybridized with it) were used for this study.

Additional file 5: Indel sizes. The intra-read indel size distribution
detected by Dindel and SAMtools mpileup.
Additional file 6: Disease gene list. The genes affected by coding
indels that are known to be involved in disease (OMIM database).
Additional file 7: SNP-indel density correlation. The correlation of
SNP-indel densities in chromosome 1 at 20 kb intervals.
Additional file 8: Structural variant list. The structural variants
detected by the BreakDancer tool (UMD3.1 coordinates).
Additional file 9: Structural variant list. The structural variants
detected by the Pindel tool (UMD3.1 coordinates).

Functional analysis software

Additional file 10: CGH CNVs. The CNV data from the array CGH
(Btau4.0 coordinates).

Variant effects were analysed based on both the UMD3.1
and Btau4 genome annotations [67,105] using customized
perl scripts. The functional effects of non-synonymous
SNPs on the coded protein were predicted by SIFT and
PolyPhen [71,72]. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed with the DAVID bioinformatics resources v6.7
(with medium stringency) [106]. BEDtools and liftover utilities were used for data extraction, variant manipulation
and overlap of genome annotations [107,108].

Additional file 11: BovineHD BeadChip CNVs. The CNV data from the
BovineHD BeadChip (Btau4.0 coordinates).
Additional file 12: CNV-seq CNVs. The CNV data from read-depth of
sequencing using CNV-seq (Btau4.0 coordinates).
Additional file 13: Validation of CNVs. CNV validation result using RTPCR.
Additional file 14: Result of gene enrichment analysis. Gene and
pathway enrichment for CNVs found using at least two platforms (DAVID
database).
Additional file 15: Reported CNVs. Common (frequency > 2.5%) cattle
CNVs that overlap with CNVs from previous studies.

Quantitative Real Time PCR

Validation of the subset of CNV regions discovered by
sequencing, CGH and SNP arrays was performed as previously described [29]. Briefly, assays were run on an
Applied Biosystems 7900 HT Sequence Detection System and downstream analysis was done with the SDS
2.2 software following the guidelines of the manufacturer (Applied Biosystems). Primers and probes (Universal ProbeLibrary Probes, Roche Applied Science) were
designed using the ProbeFinder software from Roche
Applied Science (Additional file 13). In total, seven animal samples were assayed (samples from our sequenced
bull, 2 animals from the array CGH [29] and 4 from the
SNP array were used) using the sequenced bull as the
reference sample. For each target, the relative quantification analysis with the reference sample was done to calculate estimated copy numbers for each sample.

Abbreviations
BAF: B Allele Frequency; CGH: Comparative Genomic Hybridization; CNV:
Copy Number Variation; FP: False Positive; FPR: False Positive Rate; GWAS:
Genome-Wide Association Study; IBD: Identity by Descent; Indel: Insertion/
deletion; LRR: log R ratio; MAP: minimum allele percentage; NQS:
Neighbourhood Quality Standard; PCR: Polymerase Chain Reaction; ROH: Run
of Homozygous; RT-PCR: Real Time PCR; SNP: Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism; SV: Structural Variation; UMD3.1: Bos Taurus 3.1 assembly by
the Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology at the University of
Maryland.
Acknowledgements
We thank Mette Jeppesen and Hanne Jørgensen for technical assistance.
This work was funded by the Marie Curie Host Fellowships for Early Stage
Research Training, as part of the 6th Framework Programme of the
European Commission, by the Danish Food Industry Agency, the Danish
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries, and Viking Genetics.
Author details
Group of Molecular Genetics and Systems Biology, Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Aarhus University,
Blichers Allé 20, DK-8830 Tjele, Denmark. 2Department of Molecular Medicine
(MOMA), Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, Brendstrupgaardsvej 100, DK8200 Aarhus N, Denmark.
1

Data access

All purity filtered read data from the sequenced bull is
available at EBI sequence read archive, accession number: ERP000712.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Summary of short sequence read mapping
methods and results. The data is listed in a table that displays different
mapping methods and corresponding results.

Authors’ contributions
BZ, JF, FP, and CB designed the project. BZ and JF performed the data
analysis and drafted the manuscript. BT planned the RT-PCR validation
experiments. JH planned the resequencing and performed the basic
sequence analysis. CB was the principal investigator of the project. All the
authors have contributed to writing this manuscript and have read and
approved the contents of the final submitted version.

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 23 June 2011 Accepted: 14 November 2011
Published: 14 November 2011
References
1. de Koning DJ, Archibald A, Haley CS: Livestock genomics: bridging the
gap between mice and men. Trends Biotechnol 2007, 25(11):483-489.
2. Elsik CG, Tellam RL, Worley KC, Gibbs RA, Muzny DM, Weinstock GM,
Adelson DL, Eichler EE, Elnitski L, Guigo R, et al: The genome sequence of
taurine cattle: a window to ruminant biology and evolution. Science
2009, 324(5926):522-528.
3. Gibbs RA, Taylor JF, Van Tassell CP, Barendse W, Eversole KA, Gill CA,
Green RD, Hamernik DL, Kappes SM, Lien S, et al: Genome-wide survey of
SNP variation uncovers the genetic structure of cattle breeds. Science
2009, 324(5926):528-532.
4. Tellam RL, Lemay DG, Van Tassell CP, Lewin HA, Worley KC, Elsik CG:
Unlocking the bovine genome. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:193.
5. Editorial: The genome-assisted barnyard. Nat Biotechnol 2009, 27(6):487.
6. Hu ZL, Reecy JM: Animal QTLdb: beyond a repository. A public platform
for QTL comparisons and integration with diverse types of structural
genomic information. Mamm Genome 2007, 18(1):1-4.
7. Lemay DG, Lynn DJ, Martin WF, Neville MC, Casey TM, Rincon G,
Kriventseva EV, Barris WC, Hinrichs AS, Molenaar AJ, et al: The bovine
lactation genome: insights into the evolution of mammalian milk.
Genome Biol 2009, 10(4):R43.
8. Childers CP, Reese JT, Sundaram JP, Vile DC, Dickens CM, Childs KL, Salih H,
Bennett AK, Hagen DE, Adelson DL, et al: Bovine Genome Database:
integrated tools for genome annotation and discovery. Nucleic Acids Res
2011, , 39 Database: D830-834.
9. Ibeagha-Awemu EM, Kgwatalala P, Ibeagha AE, Zhao X: A critical analysis
of disease-associated DNA polymorphisms in the genes of cattle, goat,
sheep, and pig. Mamm Genome 2008, 19(4):226-245.
10. Harhay GP, Smith TP, Alexander LJ, Haudenschild CD, Keele JW,
Matukumalli LK, Schroeder SG, Van Tassell CP, Gresham CR, Bridges SM,
et al: An atlas of bovine gene expression reveals novel distinctive tissue
characteristics and evidence for improving genome annotation. Genome
Biol 2010, 11(10):R102.
11. Hindorff LA, Sethupathy P, Junkins HA, Ramos EM, Mehta JP, Collins FS,
Manolio TA: Potential etiologic and functional implications of genomewide association loci for human diseases and traits. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2009, 106(23):9362-9367.
12. Meuwissen TH, Hayes BJ, Goddard ME: Prediction of total genetic value
using genome-wide dense marker maps. Genetics 2001, 157(4):1819-1829.
13. Goddard ME, Hayes BJ: Mapping genes for complex traits in domestic
animals and their use in breeding programmes. Nat Rev Genet 2009,
10(6):381-391.
14. Nielsen R, Hubisz MJ, Clark AG: Reconstituting the frequency spectrum of
ascertained single-nucleotide polymorphism data. Genetics 2004,
168(4):2373-2382.
15. Clark AG, Hubisz MJ, Bustamante CD, Williamson SH, Nielsen R:
Ascertainment bias in studies of human genome-wide polymorphism.
Genome Res 2005, 15(11):1496-1502.
16. Medvedev P, Stanciu M, Brudno M: Computational methods for
discovering structural variation with next-generation sequencing. Nat
Methods 2009, 6(11 Suppl):S13-20.
17. Iafrate AJ, Feuk L, Rivera MN, Listewnik ML, Donahoe PK, Qi Y, Scherer SW,
Lee C: Detection of large-scale variation in the human genome. Nat
Genet 2004, 36(9):949-951.
18. Sebat J, Lakshmi B, Troge J, Alexander J, Young J, Lundin P, Maner S,
Massa H, Walker M, Chi M, et al: Large-scale copy number polymorphism
in the human genome. Science 2004, 305(5683):525-528.
19. Redon R, Ishikawa S, Fitch KR, Feuk L, Perry GH, Andrews TD, Fiegler H,
Shapero MH, Carson AR, Chen W, et al: Global variation in copy number
in the human genome. Nature 2006, 444(7118):444-454.
20. Levy S, Sutton G, Ng PC, Feuk L, Halpern AL, Walenz BP, Axelrod N,
Huang J, Kirkness EF, Denisov G, et al: The diploid genome sequence of
an individual human. PLoS Biol 2007, 5(10):e254.

Page 18 of 20

21. Zhang F, Gu W, Hurles ME, Lupski JR: Copy number variation in human
health, disease, and evolution. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2009,
10:451-481.
22. Conrad DF, Pinto D, Redon R, Feuk L, Gokcumen O, Zhang Y, Aerts J,
Andrews TD, Barnes C, Campbell P, et al: Origins and functional impact of
copy number variation in the human genome. Nature 2010,
464(7289):704-712.
23. Stankiewicz P, Lupski JR: Structural variation in the human genome and
its role in disease. Annu Rev Med 2010, 61:437-455.
24. Consortium GP: A map of human genome variation from populationscale sequencing. Nature 2010, 467(7319):1061-1073.
25. Liu GE, Van Tassel CP, Sonstegard TS, Li RW, Alexander LJ, Keele JW,
Matukumalli LK, Smith TP, Gasbarre LC: Detection of germline and somatic
copy number variations in cattle. Dev Biol (Basel) 2008, 132:231-237.
26. Matukumalli LK, Lawley CT, Schnabel RD, Taylor JF, Allan MF, Heaton MP,
O’Connell J, Moore SS, Smith TP, Sonstegard TS, et al: Development and
characterization of a high density SNP genotyping assay for cattle. PLoS
One 2009, 4(4):e5350.
27. Bae JS, Cheong HS, Kim LH, NamGung S, Park TJ, Chun JY, Kim JY,
Pasaje CF, Lee JS, Shin HD: Identification of copy number variations and
common deletion polymorphisms in cattle. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:232.
28. Liu GE, Hou Y, Zhu B, Cardone MF, Jiang L, Cellamare A, Mitra A,
Alexander LJ, Coutinho LL, Dell’Aquila ME, et al: Analysis of copy number
variations among diverse cattle breeds. Genome Res 2010, 20(5):693-703.
29. Fadista J, Thomsen B, Holm LE, Bendixen C: Copy number variation in the
bovine genome. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:284.
30. Seroussi E, Glick G, Shirak A, Yakobson E, Weller JI, Ezra E, Zeron Y: Analysis
of copy loss and gain variations in Holstein cattle autosomes using
BeadChip SNPs. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:673.
31. Mardis ER: The impact of next-generation sequencing technology on
genetics. Trends Genet 2008, 24(3):133-141.
32. Metzker ML: Sequencing technologies - the next generation. Nat Rev
Genet 2010, 11(1):31-46.
33. Wheeler DA, Srinivasan M, Egholm M, Shen Y, Chen L, McGuire A, He W,
Chen YJ, Makhijani V, Roth GT, et al: The complete genome of an
individual by massively parallel DNA sequencing. Nature 2008,
452(7189):872-876.
34. Bentley DR, Balasubramanian S, Swerdlow HP, Smith GP, Milton J,
Brown CG, Hall KP, Evers DJ, Barnes CL, Bignell HR, et al: Accurate whole
human genome sequencing using reversible terminator chemistry.
Nature 2008, 456(7218):53-59.
35. Wang J, Wang W, Li R, Li Y, Tian G, Goodman L, Fan W, Zhang J, Li J,
Guo Y, et al: The diploid genome sequence of an Asian individual. Nature
2008, 456(7218):60-65.
36. Ahn SM, Kim TH, Lee S, Kim D, Ghang H, Kim DS, Kim BC, Kim SY, Kim WY,
Kim C, et al: The first Korean genome sequence and analysis: full
genome sequencing for a socio-ethnic group. Genome Res 2009,
19(9):1622-1629.
37. McKernan KJ, Peckham HE, Costa GL, McLaughlin SF, Fu Y, Tsung EF,
Clouser CR, Duncan C, Ichikawa JK, Lee CC, et al: Sequence and structural
variation in a human genome uncovered by short-read, massively
parallel ligation sequencing using two-base encoding. Genome Res 2009,
19(9):1527-1541.
38. Kim JI, Ju YS, Park H, Kim S, Lee S, Yi JH, Mudge J, Miller NA, Hong D,
Bell CJ, et al: A highly annotated whole-genome sequence of a Korean
individual. Nature 2009, 460(7258):1011-1015.
39. Pushkarev D, Neff NF, Quake SR: Single-molecule sequencing of an
individual human genome. Nat Biotechnol 2009, 27(9):847-850.
40. Tong P, Prendergast JG, Lohan AJ, Farrington SM, Cronin S, Friel N,
Bradley DG, Hardiman O, Evans A, Wilson JF, et al: Sequencing and
analysis of an Irish human genome. Genome Biol 2010, 11(9):R91.
41. Schuster SC, Miller W, Ratan A, Tomsho LP, Giardine B, Kasson LR, Harris RS,
Petersen DC, Zhao F, Qi J, et al: Complete Khoisan and Bantu genomes
from southern Africa. Nature 2010, 463(7283):943-947.
42. Lupski JR, Reid JG, Gonzaga-Jauregui C, Rio Deiros D, Chen DC, Nazareth L,
Bainbridge M, Dinh H, Jing C, Wheeler DA, et al: Whole-genome
sequencing in a patient with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. N Engl J
Med 2010, 362(13):1181-1191.
43. Pelak K, Shianna KV, Ge D, Maia JM, Zhu M, Smith JP, Cirulli ET, Fellay J,
Dickson SP, Gumbs CE, et al: The characterization of twenty sequenced
human genomes. PLoS Genet 2010, 6(9).

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

44. Church GM: The personal genome project. Mol Syst Biol 2005, 1, 2005
0030.
45. Meuwissen T, Goddard M: Accurate prediction of genetic values for
complex traits by whole-genome resequencing. Genetics 2010,
185(2):623-631.
46. Eck SH, Benet-Pages A, Flisikowski K, Meitinger T, Fries R, Strom TM: Whole
genome sequencing of a single Bos taurus animal for single nucleotide
polymorphism discovery. Genome Biol 2009, 10(8):R82.
47. Kawahara-Miki R, Tsuda K, Shiwa Y, Arai-Kichise Y, Matsumoto T, Kanesaki Y,
Oda S, Ebihara S, Yajima S, Yoshikawa H, et al: Whole-genome
resequencing shows numerous genes with nonsynonymous SNPs in the
Japanese native cattle Kuchinoshima-Ushi. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:103.
48. Mir KU: Sequencing genomes: from individuals to populations. Brief Funct
Genomic Proteomic 2009, 8(5):367-378.
49. Perez-Enciso M, Ferretti L: Massive parallel sequencing in animal genetics:
wherefroms and wheretos. Anim Genet 2010, 41(6):561-569.
50. MOSAIK. [http://bioinformatics.bc.edu/marthlab/Mosaik].
51. gigaBayes. [http://bioinformatics.bc.edu/marthlab/GigaBayes].
52. CLCBio Genomic Workbench. [http://www.clcbio.com].
53. Li H, Durbin R: Fast and accurate short read alignment with BurrowsWheeler transform. Bioinformatics 2009, 25(14):1754-1760.
54. Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, Fennell T, Ruan J, Homer N, Marth G,
Abecasis G, Durbin R: The Sequence Alignment/Map format and
SAMtools. Bioinformatics 2009, 25(16):2078-2079.
55. SMALT. [http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/smalt/].
56. Hillier LW, Marth GT, Quinlan AR, Dooling D, Fewell G, Barnett D, Fox P,
Glasscock JI, Hickenbotham M, Huang W, et al: Whole-genome sequencing
and variant discovery in C. elegans. Nat Methods 2008, 5(2):183-188.
57. Albers CA, Lunter G, MacArthur DG, McVean G, Ouwehand WH, Durbin R:
Dindel: accurate indel calls from short-read data. Genome Res 2011,
21(6):961-973.
58. Ye K, Schulz MH, Long Q, Apweiler R, Ning Z: Pindel: a pattern growth
approach to detect break points of large deletions and medium sized
insertions from paired-end short reads. Bioinformatics 2009,
25(21):2865-2871.
59. Chen K, Wallis JW, McLellan MD, Larson DE, Kalicki JM, Pohl CS,
McGrath SD, Wendl MC, Zhang Q, Locke DP, et al: BreakDancer: an
algorithm for high-resolution mapping of genomic structural variation.
Nat Methods 2009, 6(9):677-681.
60. Xie C, Tammi MT: CNV-seq, a new method to detect copy number
variation using high-throughput sequencing. BMC Bioinformatics 2009,
10:80.
61. Wang K, Li M, Hadley D, Liu R, Glessner J, Grant SF, Hakonarson H, Bucan M:
PennCNV: an integrated hidden Markov model designed for highresolution copy number variation detection in whole-genome SNP
genotyping data. Genome Res 2007, 17(11):1665-1674.
62. Heid CA, Stevens J, Livak KJ, Williams PM: Real time quantitative PCR.
Genome Res 1996, 6(10):986-994.
63. Dohm JC, Lottaz C, Borodina T, Himmelbauer H: Substantial biases in
ultra-short read data sets from high-throughput DNA sequencing.
Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(16):e105.
64. Erlich Y, Mitra PP, delaBastide M, McCombie WR, Hannon GJ: Alta-Cyclic: a
self-optimizing base caller for next-generation sequencing. Nat Methods
2008, 5(8):679-682.
65. Harismendy O, Ng PC, Strausberg RL, Wang X, Stockwell TB, Beeson KY,
Schork NJ, Murray SS, Topol EJ, Levy S, et al: Evaluation of next generation
sequencing platforms for population targeted sequencing studies.
Genome Biol 2009, 10(3):R32.
66. Taub MA, Corrada Bravo H, Irizarry RA: Overcoming bias and systematic
errors in next generation sequencing data. Genome Med 2010, 2(12):87.
67. Zimin AV, Delcher AL, Florea L, Kelley DR, Schatz MC, Puiu D, Hanrahan F,
Pertea G, Van Tassell CP, Sonstegard TS, et al: A whole-genome assembly
of the domestic cow, Bos taurus. Genome Biol 2009, 10(4):R42.
68. Fraser HB, Xie X: Common polymorphic transcript variation in human
disease. Genome Res 2009, 19(4):567-575.
69. Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan V, Bartlett E: Identification of a unique splice site
variant in SLC39A4 in bovine hereditary zinc deficiency, lethal trait A46:
An animal model of acrodermatitis enteropathica. Genomics 2006,
88(4):521-526.
70. Whan V, Hobbs M, McWilliam S, Lynn DJ, Lutzow YS, Khatkar M,
Barendse W, Raadsma H, Tellam RL: Bovine proteins containing poly-

Page 19 of 20

71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

77.

78.
79.

80.

81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

glutamine repeats are often polymorphic and enriched for components
of transcriptional regulatory complexes. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:654.
Ng PC, Henikoff S: SIFT: Predicting amino acid changes that affect
protein function. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(13):3812-3814.
Ramensky V, Bork P, Sunyaev S: Human non-synonymous SNPs: server
and survey. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30(17):3894-3900.
Nachman MW, Crowell SL: Estimate of the mutation rate per nucleotide
in humans. Genetics 2000, 156(1):297-304.
McVean GT, Hurst LD: Evidence for a selectively favourable reduction in
the mutation rate of the X chromosome. Nature 1997, 386(6623):388-392.
Imprinted gene databases. [http://www.geneimprint.org].
McVean GT, Hurst LD: Molecular evolution of imprinted genes: no
evidence for antagonistic coevolution. Proc Biol Sci 1997,
264(1382):739-746.
Spillane C, Schmid KJ, Laoueille-Duprat S, Pien S, Escobar-Restrepo JM,
Baroux C, Gagliardini V, Page DR, Wolfe KH, Grossniklaus U: Positive
darwinian selection at the imprinted MEDEA locus in plants. Nature 2007,
448(7151):349-352.
Pedigraph. [http://animalgene.umn.edu/pedigraph/].
Kirin M, McQuillan R, Franklin CS, Campbell H, McKeigue PM, Wilson JF:
Genomic runs of homozygosity record population history and
consanguinity. PLoS One 2010, 5(11):e13996.
Li H, Ruan J, Durbin R: Mapping short DNA sequencing reads and calling
variants using mapping quality scores. Genome Res 2008,
18(11):1851-1858.
Li H: Improving SNP discovery by base alignment quality. Bioinformatics
2011, 27(8):1157-1158.
SAMTools FAQ. [http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/samtools/index.
php?title=SAM_FAQ].
Drake JW, Charlesworth B, Charlesworth D, Crow JF: Rates of spontaneous
mutation. Genetics 1998, 148(4):1667-1686.
Lunter G: Probabilistic whole-genome alignments reveal high indel rates
in the human and mouse genomes. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(13):i289-296.
Cartwright RA: Problems and solutions for estimating indel rates and
length distributions. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26(2):473-480.
Mills RE, Luttig CT, Larkins CE, Beauchamp A, Tsui C, Pittard WS, Devine SE:
An initial map of insertion and deletion (INDEL) variation in the human
genome. Genome Res 2006, 16(9):1182-1190.
Ng PC, Levy S, Huang J, Stockwell TB, Walenz BP, Li K, Axelrod N,
Busam DA, Strausberg RL, Venter JC: Genetic variation in an individual
human exome. PLoS Genet 2008, 4(8):e1000160.
Quinlan AR, Clark RA, Sokolova S, Leibowitz ML, Zhang Y, Hurles ME,
Mell JC, Hall IM: Genome-wide mapping and assembly of structural
variant breakpoints in the mouse genome. Genome Res 2010,
20(5):623-635.
Yoon S, Xuan Z, Makarov V, Ye K, Sebat J: Sensitive and accurate
detection of copy number variants using read depth of coverage.
Genome Res 2009, 19(9):1586-1592.
Hu ZL, Fritz ER, Reecy JM: AnimalQTLdb: a livestock QTL database tool set
for positional QTL information mining and beyond. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, , 35 Database: D604-609.
Park H, Kim JI, Ju YS, Gokcumen O, Mills RE, Kim S, Lee S, Suh D, Hong D,
Kang HP, et al: Discovery of common Asian copy number variants using
integrated high-resolution array CGH and massively parallel DNA
sequencing. Nat Genet 2010, 42(5):400-405.
Hou Y, Liu GE, Bickhart DM, Cardone MF, Wang K, Kim ES, Matukumalli LK,
Ventura M, Song J, VanRaden PM, et al: Genomic characteristics of cattle
copy number variations. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:127.
Larkin DM, Pape G, Donthu R, Auvil L, Welge M, Lewin HA: Breakpoint
regions and homologous synteny blocks in chromosomes have different
evolutionary histories. Genome Res 2009, 19(5):770-777.
Ju YS, Hong D, Kim S, Park SS, Lee S, Park H, Kim JI, Seo JS: Referenceunbiased copy number variant analysis using CGH microarrays. Nucleic
Acids Res 2010, 38(20):e190.
Pang AW, MacDonald JR, Pinto D, Wei J, Rafiq MA, Conrad DF, Park H,
Hurles ME, Lee C, Venter JC, et al: Towards a comprehensive structural
variation map of an individual human genome. Genome Biol 2010, 11(5):
R52.
Eid J, Fehr A, Gray J, Luong K, Lyle J, Otto G, Peluso P, Rank D, Baybayan P,
Bettman B, et al: Real-time DNA sequencing from single polymerase
molecules. Science 2009, 323(5910):133-138.

Zhan et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:557
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/557

Page 20 of 20

97. Ritz A, Bashir A, Raphael BJ: Structural variation analysis with strobe reads.
Bioinformatics 2010, 26(10):1291-1298.
98. Wong K, Keane TM, Stalker J, Adams DJ: Enhanced structural variant and
breakpoint detection using SVMerge by integration of multiple
detection methods and local assembly. Genome Biol 2010, 11(12):R128.
99. Li Y, Zheng H, Luo R, Wu H, Zhu H, Li R, Cao H, Wu B, Huang S, Shao H,
et al: Structural variation in two human genomes mapped at singlenucleotide resolution by whole genome de novo assembly. Nat
Biotechnol 2011, 29(8):723-730.
100. Alkan C, Kidd JM, Marques-Bonet T, Aksay G, Antonacci F, Hormozdiari F,
Kitzman JO, Baker C, Malig M, Mutlu O, et al: Personalized copy number
and segmental duplication maps using next-generation sequencing. Nat
Genet 2009, 41(10):1061-1067.
101. Ju YS, Yoo YJ, Kim JI, Seo JS: The first Irish genome and ways of
improving sequence accuracy. Genome Biol 2010, 11(9):132.
102. Fadista J, Nygaard M, Holm LE, Thomsen B, Bendixen C: A snapshot of
CNVs in the pig genome. PLoS One 2008, 3(12):e3916.
103. Assembly of cow genome. [ftp://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/
bosTau4/bigZips/].
104. The UMD 3.1 assembly of Bos taurus. [ftp://ftp.cbcb.umd.edu/pub/data/
assembly/Bos_taurus/Bos_taurus_UMD_3.1/].
105. Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Ayling S, Ballester B, Beal K, Bragin E, Brent S, Chen Y,
Clapham P, Clarke L, et al: Ensembl 2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37
Database: D690-697.
106. Dennis G Jr, Sherman BT, Hosack DA, Yang J, Gao W, Lane HC, Lempicki RA:
DAVID: Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery.
Genome Biol 2003, 4(5):P3.
107. Quinlan AR, Hall IM: BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing
genomic features. Bioinformatics 2010, 26(6):841-842.
108. Fujita PA, Rhead B, Zweig AS, Hinrichs AS, Karolchik D, Cline MS,
Goldman M, Barber GP, Clawson H, Coelho A, et al: The UCSC Genome
Browser database: update 2011. Nucleic Acids Res 2011, , 39 Database:
D876-882.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-557
Cite this article as: Zhan et al.: Global assessment of genomic variation
in cattle by genome resequencing and high-throughput genotyping.
BMC Genomics 2011 12:557.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
