<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2164-4-37.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Genomics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Methodology article

An improved probability mapping approach to assess genome
mosaicism
Olga Zhaxybayeva and J Peter Gogarten*
Address: Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, 91 North Eagleville Road, Storrs, CT, 06269-3125, USA
Email: Olga Zhaxybayeva - olga@carrot.mcb.uconn.edu; J Peter Gogarten* - gogarten@uconn.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 15 September 2003
BMC Genomics 2003, 4:37

Received: 19 June 2003
Accepted: 15 September 2003

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37
© 2003 Zhaxybayeva and Gogarten; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are
permitted in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

maximum likelihood mappinglong-branch attractionhorizontal gene transfertaxon samplingbootstrap support values mapping

Abstract
Background: Maximum likelihood and posterior probability mapping are useful visualization
techniques that are used to ascertain the mosaic nature of prokaryotic genomes. However,
posterior probabilities, especially when calculated for four-taxon cases, tend to overestimate the
support for tree topologies. Furthermore, because of poor taxon sampling four-taxon analyses
suffer from sensitivity to the long branch attraction artifact. Here we extend the probability
mapping approach by improving taxon sampling of the analyzed datasets, and by using bootstrap
support values, a more conservative tool to assess reliability.
Results: Quartets of orthologous proteins were complemented with homologs from selected
reference genomes. The mapping of bootstrap support values from these extended datasets gives
results similar to the original maximum likelihood and posterior probability mapping. The more
conservative nature of the plotted support values allows to focus further analyses on those protein
families that strongly disagree with the majority or plurality of genes present in the analyzed
genomes.
Conclusion: Posterior probability is a non-conservative measure for support, and posterior
probability mapping only provides a quick estimation of phylogenetic information content of four
genomes. This approach can be utilized as a pre-screen to select genes that might have been
horizontally transferred. Better taxon sampling combined with subtree analyses prevents the
inconsistencies associated with four-taxon analyses, but retains the power of visual representation.
Nevertheless, a case-by-case inspection of individual multi-taxon phylogenies remains necessary to
differentiate unrecognized paralogy and shared phylogenetic reconstruction artifacts from
horizontal gene transfer events.

Background
The analysis of four-taxon trees promises to provide valuable insight and visual documentation of genome mosaicism [1–5]. However, like other four-taxon analyses, our
probability mapping approach for comparative genome

analyses [4] is vulnerable to the long branch attraction
(LBA) artifact because it analyzes datasets consisting of
only four sequences. LBA is a well-known phylogenetic
artifact [6]. It is especially well studied for the case of fourtaxon trees (e.g., see [7–11]). In short, regardless of the
Page 1 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

reconstruction method and model used, if the branches
are long enough, the reconstructed tree might be affected
by LBA although to different degrees. Furthermore, fourtaxon analyses were shown to be instable and misleading
under some circumstances [12,13]. Addition of more taxa
can break up the long branches and increases reliability.
Simulation studies have shown that increase of the size of
a dataset by introducing additional homologous
sequences improves the accuracy of the reconstruction
[14] (see [15] and [16] for the recent discussion). An
increase in the sequence lengths of the analyzed data also
can improve the reliability of phylogenetic reconstruction
[16], but lumping different putative orthologs into a single dataset would defeat the purpose of the probability
mapping approach, i.e., the detection of genes that have
incompatible evolutionary histories. Merging proteins
with different histories into concatenated datasets would
not help to resolve their phylogenies.
Here we report an extension of probability mapping that
increases the number of homologous sequences per dataset, throughout the rest of the article referred as Operational Taxonomic Unit (OTU) sampling, but retains the
power to visualize genomic mosaicism from the original
approach. A quartet of orthologous proteins (QuartOP) is
defined as four homologs from four genomes that pick
each other as top-scoring reciprocal hits in BLAST searches
of the respective genomes (for more details see [4]). For
each QuartOP detected in a genome quartet we add
homologous sequences and evaluate the branching order
of the QuartOP in 100 bootstrap samples. The bootstrap
support values then are mapped into a barycentric coordinate system. We compare the mapping results with previously reported ones [4], and give examples that illustrate
the utility of this approach in detecting horizontally transferred genes.

Results and Discussion
Interdomain Genome Quartets
In [4] we described the analyses of several interdomain
genome quartets. Some of the analyses were performed
using a posterior probability mapping approach referred
to as Maximum Likelihood (ML) mapping, a name that
was coined in the original description of this approach
[17]. We will use this term throughout the manuscript. In
ML mapping posterior probabilities are calculated from
the maximum likelihood values (see [17] and [4] for the
details). One noteworthy finding was that in the genome
quartet including Synechocystis sp., Halobacterium sp.,
Aquifex aeolicus and Thermotoga maritima the grouping of
Halobacterium sp. with Synechocystis sp. was recovered by
many more QuartOPs than the grouping expected following 16S rRNA phylogeny (see Fig. 1A). Note that throughout the manuscript we refer to a particular tree by
mentioning two species out of four (e.g., in this case

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

grouping of Halobacterium sp. with Synechocystis sp.); however, the trees are unrooted and therefore grouping of the
other two taxa is implied. To test if this association was
specific for Synechocystis sp., we had repeated the analyses
replacing Synechocystis sp. with Bacillus subtilis. The results
were qualitatively the same (data not shown). To test for
the possibility that LBA [6] might be the reason for the
strong support of Halobacterium sp. grouping with Synechocystis sp., we had repeated the analyses replacing the
Halobacterium sp. genome with that from Archaeoglobus
fulgidus, another archaeon. The majority of QuartOPs supported the grouping of the thermophilic archaeon Archaeoglobus with the thermophilic bacteria Aquifex and
Thermotoga (see Fig. 1B). In this study, we reanalyzed the
above-mentioned genome quartets by adding homologous sequences from sixty reference genomes to each
QuartOP creating what we call "extended datasets". The
dataflow is depicted in Figure 2. For each extended dataset
we obtained bootstrap support values for each of the three
four-taxon "subtrees" and we plotted the bootstrap support values into barycentric coordinates. Throughout this
manuscript we use a graph theory definition of a subtree,
i.e. "A tree G' whose graph vertices and graph edges form
subsets of the graph vertices and graph edges of a given
tree G" [18]. In particular, sequences (OTUs) included in
the subtree are not required to be neighbors in the original
tree. Subtrees defined according to these rules are different
from subclades (see figure 2 for an illustration). For example, if the topology ((A,D),(B,C)) is supported by a given
bootstrap sample, this means that in the tree calculated
from this sample the sequence from genome A groups
closer to the one from D than to the one from B or C (figure 2).
Maps of bootstrap support values calculated from the
extended datasets are shown in figure 3. The results are
similar to the analyses using ML mapping (see [4] and figure 1). At every level of support the plurality consensus
groups the mesophilic archaeon with the mesophilic bacterium and the two thermophilic bacteria with one
another (figure 1 and 3, panels A). The plurality support
changes in favor of the archaeon – Aquifex grouping, when
the genome of a mesophilic archaeon is replaced with that
of an extremely thermophilic archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus (figure 1 and 3, panels B). The main difference
between ML maps and bootstrap support maps from
extended datasets is that the confidence values are much
lower for the extended datasets evaluated with bootstrap.
The cause for these lower support values is discussed
below.
Interdomain transfer, interphylum transfer, or shared
artifact?
The relation between the different bacterial phyla, and the
placement of the bacterial root remains uncertain (e.g.,

Page 2 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

A

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Synechocystis sp.(1), T.maritima(2), A.aeolicus(3), Halobacterium sp.(4)
((1,3),2,4)
45/34/27

((1,2),3,4)
29/20/12

B

((1,4),2,3)
86/69/56

Synechocystis sp.(1), T.maritima(2), A.aeolicus(3), A.fulgidus(4)
((1,3),2,4)
63/51/44

((1,2),3,4)
47/36/30

((1,4),2,3)
50/34/25

Figure 1
Posterior probability maps of genome quartets containing Synechocystis sp
Posterior probability maps of genome quartets containing Synechocystis sp. Posterior probabilities were calculated
according the maximum likelihood mapping approach described in [4,17]. Tree topologies assigned to the vertices are depicted
in New Hampshire tree format near the corresponding vertex of the triangle and they should be considered as unrooted tree
topologies. The three numbers associated with each tree topology indicate how many QuartOPs fall into each of the three
zones: "total" (i.e. posterior probability for the tree topology is larger than posterior probabilities for the other two topologies), 90% and 99% posterior probability respectively. A) Genome quartet consisting of Synechocystis sp., Halobacterium sp.,
Aquifex aeolicus and Thermotoga maritima. The majority of the QuartOPs support the grouping of the Halobacterium sp. with Synechocystis sp. B) Genome quartet consisting of Synechocystis sp., Archaeoglobus fulgidus, Aquifex aeolicus and Thermotoga maritima.
The archaeon – Synechocystis sp. grouping is supported by fewer QuartOPs than in panel A.

Page 3 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

For each Quartet of Orthologous Proteins (QuartOP):
- Add homologous sequences
from completely sequenced
genomes

Quartet of orthologous proteins :
B

A

- Align the new dataset
D

- Generate 100 bootstrap samples
C

- Reconstruct tree topologies

B

A

- Parse tree topology from
each bootstrap sample tree
for the topology of the
"sub-tree" that contains QuartOP
- Extract bootstrap support values
for the three possible "sub-trees"

D
C

100 trees

A
C

B

- Plot the bootstrap support vectors
for each QuartOP into barycentric coordinates

D

A

C

A

B

D

D

B
C

Figure 2 for construction and mapping of extended datasets for all QuartOPs in a genome quartet
Dataflow
Dataflow for construction and mapping of extended datasets for all QuartOPs in a genome quartet. See Materials and Methods for details.

Page 4 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

A

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Synechocystis sp.(1), T.maritima(2), A.aeolicus(3), Halobacterium sp.(4)
((1,3),2,4)
52/22/13

((1,2),3,4)
27/13/2

B

((1,4),2,3)
81/47/18

Synechocystis sp.(1), T.maritima(2), A.aeolicus(3), A.fulgidus(4)
((1,3),2,4)
59/34/23

((1,2),3,4)
44/18/4

((1,4),2,3)
57/31/14

Figure 3
Maps of bootstrap support from extended datasets for genome quartets containing Synechocystis sp
Maps of bootstrap support from extended datasets for genome quartets containing Synechocystis sp. The three
numbers associated with each tree topology indicate how many QuartOPs fall into each of the three zones: "total", 70% and
90% bootstrap support respectively. For other figure notations see figure 1. A) Genome quartet consisting of Synechocystis sp.,
Halobacterium sp., Aquifex aeolicus and Thermotoga maritima. B) Genome quartet consisting of Synechocystis sp., Archaeoglobus
fulgidus, Aquifex aeolicus and Thermotoga maritima. These maps are similar to the ML maps depicted in figure 1.

Page 5 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

see [19]). Therefore, it is not clear which of the three
unrooted trees for the genome quartet in question represents the true organismal phylogeny of the four genomes.
The lack of phylogenetic signal alone should result in
QuartOPs that map to the center of the triangle. However,
we observe many genes that prefer one topology to the
other two. The genes in figures 1A and 3A that group the
ortholog from Halobacterium with its putative ortholog
from Synechocystis might do so for a variety of different
reasons:
A) Horizontal gene transfer
A1) between a mesophilic bacterium and a mesophilic
archaeon
A2) between the extremely mesophilic bacteria Aquifex
and Thermotoga
B) Phylogenetic reconstruction artifacts
B1) due to long branch attraction
B2) due to compositional bias
B3) due to the lack of phylogenetic signal
C) Unrecognized paralogy
D) This grouping reflects organismal evolutionary history.
It is important to realize that any of the processes listed
under A through C, alone or in combination, might result
in well supported QuartOPs that group the halobacterial
homolog with the cyanobacterial counterpart. Some of
these possibilities can be distinguished in the individual
phylogenies of the extended datasets. Table 1 summarizes
these findings. There are many datasets which don't conform to the 16S rRNA based expectation in more than one
respect: Aquifex and Thermotoga are recovered as sister
groups, and either the cyanobacterial sequences groups
within a cluster of Archaeal sequences, or the halobacterial sequence groups within a well-supported cluster of
Bacterial homologs. We considered these unexpected phylogenies as supported, if the branch that separated this
group from the other homologs had at least 70% bootstrap support (note: in this case we used the bootstrap
support for individual branches, not the support for subtrees). At first sight this might appear as a rather low level
of support; however, adding more sequences tends to
shorten the internal branches and thus lowers their individual bootstrap support value (for discussion see [20]).
The support for the subtree topology (see figure 2) is
larger than 90% for all entries. There is only one case
where the observed subtree ((Aquifex, Thermotoga), (Halo-

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

bacterium, Synechocystis)) appears to be due to unrecognized paralogy. In four instances a well-supported branch
suggests an interdomain gene transfer and in 11 instances
an exchange between Thermotoga and Aquifex. These findings apparently support the notion that genes are frequently transferred between divergent prokaryotes;
however, Halobacterium has an amino acid composition
that often deviates significantly from that of the other
homologs. The instances where both the halobacterial
sequence and its phylogenetic neighbor failed a test for
homogeneous composition are indicated in table 1. This
leaves eight well-supported instances of at least one horizontal gene transfer event out of the twelve datasets without shared compositional biases.
The analyses depicted in figure 3 and table 1 demonstrate
that bootstrap support value mapping in general, and support value mapping using extended datasets in particular,
are useful in screening for genes that were transferred
between divergent organisms. Replacing the genome from
a mesophilic archaeon with that from an extremely thermophilic one, changes the topology of the subtree that
has plurality support. This observation is in agreement
with the hypothesis that genes are more frequently shared
between organisms that live in similar environments [21].
However, given that the Halobacterium genome is
renowned for its large number of genes with bacterial
character [22,23], the total number of genes identified in
this study as putatively transferred between the
mesophilic bacteria and the halobacteria is very small.
There are several reasons for this observation. Useful phylogenetic information retained in molecular sequences is
constantly overwritten by more recent substitution events.
The more divergent the analyzed genomes are, the more
QuartOPs will be undecided about the most supported
topology. Furthermore, support value mapping can only
identify gene transfers that resulted in orthologous
replacement. Last but not least, the applied approach to
assemble QuartOPs is overly restrictive. Lineage specific
duplications result in two orthologs being present in a single genome. These genes are paralogs of one another, but
both are orthologs to the gene present in the genomes that
branch off before the lineage specific duplication [24].
Despite these shortcomings, support value mapping,
especially when using extended datasets, provides a quick
method to appraise the extent of genomic mosaicism, to
delineate preliminarily the major flows of genes in microbial evolution (plurality or majority consensus), and to
find subsets of potentially transferred genes.
Screen for more recent interphylum transfers
To assess the utility of probability and bootstrap support
values mapping for detecting more recent interphylum
gene transfer events, we calculated extended datasets for
the genome quartet of Synechocystis sp., Chlorobium

Page 6 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Table 1: Analyses of the tree topologies for 18 candidates for horizontal gene transfer. Support for putative transfers between Bacteria
and Archaea is shown in the B&A column, and between Aquifex and Thermotoga is shown in the A&T column. The compositional bias
is listed as "strong", if both the halobacterial sequence and its nearest phylogenetic neighbor failed the test for homogeneous
composition. See Materials and Methods for details on performed analyses.

ID

Functional Assignment

B&A

A&T

Comments

Compositional
bias

008
020
054
062
072

thymidylate kinase
seryl-tRNA synthetase
valyl-tRNA synthetase
excision nuclease chain A
chromosome segregation SMC protein

weak
strong
none
none
strong

strong
strong
strong
strong
None

Strong
Strong
Strong

076
080

hypothetical protein
prolyl-tRNA synthetase

weak
none

strong
strong

100

hypothetical protein

-

-

105
106
107

DNA gyrase, subunit B
arginyl-tRNA synthetase
DNA gyrase, subunit A

none
strong
none

strong
weak
weak

110

cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase

strong

strong

113

hypothetical protein

weak

none

121
122

chorismate synthase
3-phosphoshikimate-1carboxyvinyltransferase
histidinol dehydrogenase
50S ribosomal protein L2
30S ribosomal protein S19

weak
none

none
strong

Cyanobacteria, Rickettsia and Aquifex
group within Archaea
Halobacterium groups within Bacteria
Archaeal type homologs are found in
some bacteria
Uninterpretable: no resemblance with
assumed organismal phylogeny
Archaea do not form a group
Both Thermotoga and Aquifex group with
Archaea
Both Thermotoga and Aquifex group within
Archaea
Both Thermotoga and Aquifex group within
Archaea
-

weak
none
weak

weak
strong
strong

Putative paralogs
-

134
144
145

tepidum, Rhodobacter capsulatus and Rhodopseudomonas
palustris (see figure 4 and [3]). This genome quartet has a
strong phylogenetic signal grouping together the two
alpha proteobacteria R. capsulatus and R. palustris. This
example had previously been utilized to demonstrate the
validity of ML mapping [3] showing that the vast majority
of QuartOPs group the proteins from the two more
closely related organisms together. However, there are 14
QuartOPs that support the two alternative topologies with
99% posterior probability. These have to be regarded as
candidates for horizontal gene transfer. Analysis of this
genome quartet using extended datasets shows that some
of these 14 QuartOPs are also supported by high bootstrap support values (above 90%). Figures 5 through 8
provide further analysis of the extended datasets for these
QuartOPs. The cases of the cation-transporting ATPases
(figure 5) and the hypothetical proteins depicted in figure
6 probably represent unrecognized paralogies. The proteins from R. palustris and R. capsulatus each group
together with homologs from other alpha proteobacteria,
and in some instances a single genome encodes both paralogs (Bradyrhizobium japonicum in case of hypothetical
protein family and Sinorhizobium meliloti in case of the cation-transporting ATPases). It appears likely that R. palus-

Strong
Strong
Strong
-

tris has lost one and R. capsulatus the other paralog. In
these two instances the unexpected behavior of the QuartOPs is due to failure of the strategy to select orthologous
genes. In contrast, the cases of the water channel protein
family and the methionyl-tRNA synthetases are best
explained by horizontal gene transfer. None of the reference genomes contains paralogs whose differential loss
might explain the observed phylogenies (figures 7 and 8).
The higher frequency of unrecognized paralogs among the
putatively horizontally transferred genes is due to the
much larger number of QuartOPs analyzed. The detected
number of unrecognized paralogs corresponds to less
than 1% of the QuartOPs that contain sufficient phylogenetic information to support a topology with more than
90% bootstrap support (figure 4C). Every instance of
unrecognized paralogy will result in a QuartOP deviating
from the majority consensus revealed in this analysis.
Loss of support strength: due to conservative measure or
taxon sampling?
It is difficult to compare posterior probabilities of QuartOPs directly with bootstrap support values of much
larger datasets. Empirical studies [4] as well as the simulaPage 7 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

A

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Synechocystis sp.(1), C.tepidum(2), R.palustris(3), R.capsulatus(4)
((1,3),2,4)
10/7/6

((1,2),3,4)
330/322/313

B

((1,4),2,3)
13/9/8
((1,3),2,4)
9/5/2

((1,2),3,4)
333/318/286

C

((1,4),2,3)
11/7/3
((1,3),2,4)
7/4/3

((1,2),3,4)
338/332/315

((1,4),2,3)
8/7/1

Figure 4quartet of Synechocystis sp., Chlorobium tepidum, Rhodobacter capsulatus and Rhodopseudomonas palustris
Genome
Genome quartet of Synechocystis sp., Chlorobium tepidum, Rhodobacter capsulatus and Rhodopseudomonas
palustris. A) Posterior probability map calculated using probability mapping as described in [4,17]. B) Bootstrap support map
(see [4] for methodology of bootstrap support map reconstruction). Only the four putatively orthologous sequences were utilized in the analyses. C) Bootstrap support map from extended datasets. For details on the figure notations see legends for figures 1 and 3. The majority of QuartOPs support one tree topology grouping two alpha proteobacteria together. The
QuartOPs located in the two other corners of the triangle are candidates for horizontal gene transfer.

Page 8 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Lactobacillus
Mesorhizobium
Sinorhizobium-3
Rhodopseudomonas
Bradyrhizobium
Chlorobium
Aquifex
Thermosynechococcus
Yersinia
Escherichia
Salmonella
Shewanella
Vibrio
Synechocystis
Nostoc-2
Nostoc
Deinococcus
82/-/91

Rhodobacter
Agrobacterium
Brucella
Sinorhizobium
Sinorhizobium-2
Pseudomonas
Ralstonia

0.1
Figure 5
Phylogeny of homologs of cation-transporting ATPases
Phylogeny of homologs of cation-transporting ATPases. Members of the QuartOP are highlighted in red. The three
support values indicated on a branch are bootstrap support values from Neighbor-Joining trees based on TREE-PUZZLE distances, bootstrap support values from parsimony analyses and posterior probabilities from Bayesian analyses respectively. See
Materials and Methods for details on phylogenetic reconstruction. The finding of other homologs from alpha proteobacteria
grouping with the Rhodopseudomonas and Rhodobacter sequences, and the finding of both homologs coexisting in the same
genome (Sinorhizobium) suggests that this QuartOP represents a case of unrecognized paralogy with differential gene loss.

Page 9 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Methanosarcina
Chlorobium

100/100/100

Rhodopseudomonas
Methanosarcina-2
Nostoc-2
Thermosynechococcus
Bradyrhizobium-2
Lactobacillus
Leptospira
Bifidobacterium
Deinococcus
Ralstonia
Caulobacter
Xanthomonas
Rhodobacter
Agrobacterium
Sinorhizobium-3
Brucella
Mesorhizobium-2
Corynebacterium-2
Campylobacter
Sinorhizobium-2
Nostoc
Vibrio
Bradyrhizobium
Pseudomonas-2
Mesorhizobium
Sinorhizobium
Corynebacterium
Mycobacterium
Streptomyces
Pseudomonas
Synechocystis

0.1

Figure 6
Phylogeny of hypothetical protein homologs
Phylogeny of hypothetical protein homologs. See figure 5 for notations and Materials and Methods for details on phylogenetic reconstruction. This QuartOP represents another likely example of unrecognized paralogy. See text and figure 5 for
discussion.

Page 10 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Other Homologs

Lactobacilus
Chlorobium
Caulobacter
Bifidobacterium

83/99/99

0.1

Rhodobacter
Mesorhizobium
Rhodopseudomonas
Bradyrhizobium
Brucella
Agrobacterium
Agrobacterium-2
Sinorhizobium
Sinorhizobium-2
Escherichia
Pseudomonas
Shewanella
Synechocystis

Figure 7
Phylogeny of water channel proteins family
Phylogeny of water channel proteins family. See figure 5 for notations and Materials and Methods for details on phylogenetic reconstruction. The two homologs from Rhodobacter and Rhodopseudomonas are separated by a well-supported branch.
The homologs grouping with Rhodobacter do not have a paralog among the homologs grouping with Rhodopseudomonas and vice
versa. This QuartOP remains a strong candidate for horizontal gene transfer.

tion studies [25,26] indicate that bootstrap measures are
much more conservative than Bayesian posterior probabilities. In the four-taxon cases analyzed in [4] a posterior
probability of 0.99 calculated according to Strimmer and
von Haeseler [17] was found to correspond to only 70%
bootstrap support calculated from non-extended datasets.
To demonstrate that the observed drop in support is due
to the more conservative nature of bootstrapping and not
due to increased OTU sampling we re-analyzed the same
genome quartets using ML mapping (figure 1 and figure
4A), bootstrap support values calculated from only the
four aligned QuartOPs (Additional file: 2 and figure 4B),
and bootstrap support values calculated from the

extended datasets (figure 3 and figure 4C) as described in
figure 2. Note that in case of ML mapping only posterior
probabilities greater than 0.99 are counted as strong support (greater than 0.9 for moderate support), whereas in
case of the bootstrap support value maps greater than 0.9
is classified as strong support (greater than 0.7 for moderate support). Table 2 summarizes the overall number of
QuartOPs supporting different topologies with different
measures of support. There is a dramatic drop in the
number of QuartOPs with strong support from the 99%
posterior probabilities to 90% bootstrap from nonextended datasets. However, the added accuracy obtained
through increased OTU sampling does not change the
support as radically as the shift from posterior probabili-

Page 11 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Pyrobaculum
Aeropyrum
Sulfolobus

0.1

Rhodobacter
Caulobacter
Borrelia
Treponema
Thermoplasma
Chlorobium
Chlamydophila
Pyrococcus
Methanopyrum
Methanothe
Methanocaldococcus
Halobacterium
Archaeoglobus
Methanosarcina
Bifidobacterium
Corynebacterium
Leptospira
Buchnera
Wigglesworthia
Pseudomonas
Shewanella
Vibrio
Yersinia
Escherichia
Salmonella
Haemophilus
Pasteurella
Neisseria
Ralstonia
Xanthomonas
Xylella
Deinococcus
Thermosynechococcus
Nostoc
Synechocystis
100/100/94
Thermotoga
Rickettsia
Mycobacterium
Rhodopseudomonas
Bradyrhizobium
Brucella
Mesorhizobium
Agrobacterium
Sinorhizobium
Streptomyces
Tropheryma
Aquifex
Campylobacter
Helicobacter
Fusobacterium
Staphylococcus
Oceanobacillus
Bacillus
Listeria
Lactococcus
Lactobacillus
Clostridium
Thermoanaerobacter
Mycoplasma
Ureaplasma

Figure 8
Phylogeny of methionyl-tRNA synthetases
Phylogeny of methionyl-tRNA synthetases. See figure 5 for notations and Materials and Methods for details on phylogenetic reconstruction. No paralogs were detected in the reference genomes. This QuartOP remains a strong candidate for horizontal gene transfer.

Page 12 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Table 2: Comparison of confidence levels for different types of mappings. Table entries give the numbers of QuartOPs in the indicated
genome quartets that prefer one of the three tree topologies with the specified level of support.

Genome Quartet

Interdomain quartet with Halobacterium
(see figure 1A, 3A and suppl. material)
Interdomain quartet with Archaeoglobus
(see figure 1B, 3B and suppl. material)
Interphylum quartet (see figure 4)

99% posterior probability

90% bootstrap support from
non-extended datasets

90% bootstrap support from
extended datasets

95

42

33

99

42

41

327

291

319

ties to the bootstrap support measure. Apparently, the
increased accuracy due to better OTU sampling on average
increases the bootstrap support of a given subtree as often
as it lowers the support value. The higher support values
found for ML mapping are solely due to the less conservative nature of the calculated support measure.

Conclusions
The original posterior probability mapping methods
reported in [4] return results similar to those obtained
from the analyses of extended datasets. ML mapping is
much faster than the bootstrap support values mapping of
extended datasets reported here. In interpreting results,
however, one needs to be aware of the non-conservative
nature of the posterior probability mapping approach,
and of the greater susceptibility of four-taxon analyses to
the long branch attraction artifact. The faster ML mapping
approach has utility as a quick estimation of phylogenetic
information content of four genomes. Even though ML
mapping greatly overestimates reliability, our results illustrate the utility of ML mapping as a pre-screen for putative
horizontal gene transfer events. The use of extended datasets combined with subtree analyses prevents the inconsistencies associated with four-taxon analyses, but retains
the power of visual representation. However, even an
increase in OTU sampling and the simultaneous use of a
more conservative probability measure does not obviate
the need to inspect the phylogenies of candidate genes to
detect instances of unrecognized paralogy. Given the public availability of over 100 prokaryotic genomes,
appropriate reference genomes can be selected in most
instances to distinguish differential loss of paralogs from
horizontal gene transfer events.

Methods
The methodology of obtaining QuartOPs for four
genomes is described in [4]. For each sequence in a QuartOP we detect the top-scoring BLAST [27] hit with an Evalue above 10-8 in each of 60 completely sequenced
archaeal and bacterial reference genomes (Aeropyrum pernix, Archaeoglobus fulgidus, Anabaena sp., Aquifex aeolicus,
Agrobacterium tumifaciens, Borrelia burgdorferi, Bradyrhizo-

bium japonicum, Bifidobacterium longum, Bacillus subtilis,
Brucella suis, Buchnera sp., Clostridium acetobutylicum, Caulobacter crescentus, Corynebacterium glutamicum, Campylobacter jejuni, Clamydophila pneumoniae, Deinococcus
radiodurans, Escherichia coli K12, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
Halobacterium sp., Haemophilus influenzae, Helicobacter
pylori, Leptospira interrogans, Lactococcus lactis, Listeria
monocytogenes, Lactobacillus plantarum, Mycoplasma genitalium, Methanococcus jannaschii, Methanopyrus kandleri,
Mezorhizobium loti, Methanosarcina mazei, Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Neisseria meningitides, Oceanobacillus iheyensis, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Pyrobaculum aerophilum, Pyrococcus horikoshii,
Pasteurella multocida, Rickettsia conorii, Ralstonia
solanacearum, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptomyces coelicolor,
Sinorhizobium meliloti, Shewanella oneidensis, Sulfolobus
solfataricus, Salmonella typhi, Synechocystis sp., Thermoplasma acidophilum, Thermosynechococcus elongates, Thermotoga maritime, Treponema pallidum, Thermoanaerobacter
tengcongensis, Tropheryma whipplei, Ureaplasma urealyticum,
Vibrio cholerae, Wigglesworthia brevipalpis, Xanthomonas
campestris, Xylella fastidiosa, Yersinia pestis). These genomes
were downloaded from the NCBI web page [28]. The
resulting sequences are added to the QuartOP dataset and
duplicated sequences are eliminated. The datasets are
aligned with ClustalW [29], and 100 bootstrap samples
are generated using the SEQBOOT program from the
PHYLIP package version 3.6a2.1 [30]. The distances are
generated using TREE-PUZZLE version 5.1 [31] under the
auto-detected substitution model. Neighbor-Joining trees
are calculated from these distances using NEIGHBOR
from the PHYLIP package version 3.6a2.1 [30]. The resulting trees are parsed with respect to which of the three fourtaxa subtrees they contain (see figure 2) using an in-house
Java program that utilizes PAL library classes [32]. The
resulting bootstrap support vectors are plotted into barycentric coordinates using GNUPLOT version 3.7 [33].
Scripts for data manipulation were written in Perl and
used many of the SEALS package subroutines [34].
The Rhodobacter capsulatus genome data were obtained
from Integrated Genomics [35]. Genome sequence for
Page 13 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

Chlorobium tepidum was downloaded from TIGR [36]. The
Rhodopseudomonas palustris genome was downloaded from
JGI [37]. Other genomes for the genome quartets were
downloaded from NCBI [28].

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

OTU – Operational Taxonomic Unit

Additional material
Additional File 1

The trees depicted in Figures 5 through 8 are neighborjoining trees calculated using the NEIGHBOR program
from PHYLIP version 3.6a2.1 [30]. The distances used in
NEIGHBOR were calculated in TREE-PUZZLE version 5.1
[31] with the option to correct for Among Site Rate Variation using a discrete approximation of a Gamma distribution with eight rate categories and estimating the shape
parameter. The three indicated support values are bootstrap support values calculated from 100 bootstrap
samples analyzed with NEIGHBOR from the distance calculated in TREE-PUZZLE, bootstrap support values
calculated from 100 bootstrap samples analyzed with the
PROTPARS program from PHYLIP version 3.6a2.1 [30],
and posterior probabilities as calculated with MrBayes
version 3.0B4 [38] (The analyses were performed independently three times, 200,000 generations each; the
lowest posterior probability for the bipartition from the
three runs is shown).
For eighteen potential candidates for the horizontal gene
transfer between Halobacterium sp. and Synechocystis sp., or
between Aquifex aeolicus and Thermotoga maritima phylogenetic trees were calculated and inspected manually. The
neighbor-joining trees were calculated using the NEIGHBOR program from PHYLIP version 3.6a2.1 [30]. The distances used in NEIGHBOR were calculated in TREEPUZZLE version 5.1 [31]. The trees were evaluated for
potential transfers between Bacteria and Archaea, and
between Thermotoga and Aquifex. 100 bootstrap samples
were analyzed to assess the reliability of the branches on
the tree. The possibility for the transfer was considered
"strong" if the bootstrap support was above 70%, "weak"
if the bootstrap support was lower, and "none" if no
indication for the transfer could be inferred from the phylogenetic tree. Compositional bias for Halobacterium sp.
and its closest phylogenetic neighbor was evaluated using
a chi-square test at a 5% significance level as implemented
in TREE-PUZZLE version 5.1. If both sequences failed the
test, this is indicated as "strong" in the table. The results of
these analyses are summarized in Table 1. The phylogenetic trees are available as additional data (see 1).

Abbreviations
LBA – Long Branch Attraction

Phylogenetic trees for the datasets presented in Table 1. The trees are in
the PDF format that can be viewed with Adobe Acrobat Reader http://
www.acrobat.com. The eighteen trees are archived into one file trees.zip,
and the archive can be expanded using WinZip http://www.winzip.com/
for Windows, StuffIt for Macintosh http://www.stuffit.com/, or unzip utility for Unix. The tree files are named after their ID number listed in Table
1. The names of the OTUs in the trees are the first 10 symbols of the genus
name (see Materials and Methods for the list of the full genome names).
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/14712164-4-37-S1.zip]

Additional File 2
Bootstrap support maps for non-extended datasets for genome quartets presented in figures 1 and 3. The maps are in the PDF format that can be
viewed with Adobe Acrobat Reader http://www.acrobat.com.
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/14712164-4-37-S2.pdf]

Acknowledgements
This work was supported through the NASA Astrobiology Institute at Arizona State University, the NASA Exobiology Program, and in part through
the NSF Microbial Genetics Program.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

HGT – Horizontal Gene Transfer
ML – Maximum Likelihood

11.
12.

QuartOP – Quartet of Orthologous Proteins

Ribeiro S and Golding GB: The mosaic nature of the eukaryotic
nucleus. Mol Biol Evol 1998, 15:779-788.
Raymond J, Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP, Gerdes SY and Blankenship
RE: Whole-genome analysis of photosynthetic prokaryotes.
Science 2002, 298:1616-1620.
Raymond J, Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP and Blankenship RE: Evolution of photosynthetic prokaryotes: a maximum-likelihood
mapping approach. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2003,
358:223-230.
Zhaxybayeva O and Gogarten JP: Bootstrap, Bayesian probability and maximum likelihood mapping: Exploring new tools
for comparative genome analyses. BMC Genomics 2002, 3:4.
Nesbo CL, Boucher Y and Doolittle WF: Defining the core of nontransferable prokaryotic genes: the euryarchaeal core. J Mol
Evol 2001, 53:340-350.
Felsenstein J: Cases in which parsimony and compatibility
methods will be positively misleading. Syst. Zool. 1978,
27:401-410.
Farris JS: Likelihood and Inconsistency. Cladistics 1999,
15:199-204.
Siddall ME: Success of Parsimony in the Four-Taxon Case:
Long-Branch Repulsion by Likelihood in the Farris Zone. Cladistics 1998, 14:209-220.
Felsenstein J: Phylogenies from molecular sequences: inference and reliability. Annu Rev Genet 1988, 22:521-565.
Huelsenbeck JP: The robustness of two phylogenetic methods:
four-taxon simulations reveal a slight superiority of maximum likelihood over neighbor joining. Mol Biol Evol 1995,
12:843-849.
Huelsenbeck JP and Hillis DM: Success of Phylogenetic Methods
in the Four-Taxon Case. Systematic Biology 1993, 42:247-264.
Philippe H and Douzery E: The pitfalls of molecular phylogeny
based on four species as illustrated by the Cetacea/Artiodactyla relationships. Journal of Mammalian Evolution 1994, 2:133-152.

Page 14 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Genomics 2003, 4

13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.
31.

32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

Adachi J and Hasegawa M: Instability of quartet analyses of
molecular sequence data by the maximum likelihood
method: the Cetacea/Artiodactyla relationships. Mol Phylogenet Evol 1996, 6:72-76.
Graybeal A: Is it better to add taxa or characters to a difficult
phylogenetic problem? Syst Biol 1998, 47:9-17.
Hillis DM, Pollock DD, McGuire JA and Zwickl DJ: Is sparse taxon
sampling a problem for phylogenetic inference? Syst Biol 2003,
52:124-126.
Rosenberg MS and Kumar S: Taxon sampling, bioinformatics,
and phylogenomics. Syst Biol 2003, 52:119-124.
Strimmer K and von Haeseler A: Likelihood-mapping: a simple
method to visualize phylogenetic content of a sequence
alignment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997, 94:6815-6819.
Eric Weisstein's World of Mathematics
[http://math
world.wolfram.com/]
Gribaldo S and Philippe H: Ancient Phylogenetic Relationships.
Theoretical Population Biology 2002, 61:391-408.
Wainright PO, Hinkle G, Sogin ML and Stickel SK: Monophyletic
origins of the metazoa: an evolutionary link with fungi. Science
1993, 260:340-342.
Jain R, Rivera MC, Moore JE and Lake JA: Horizontal Gene Transfer Accelerates Genome Innovation and Evolution. Mol Biol
Evol 2003.
Koonin EV, Makarova KS and Aravind L: Horizontal gene transfer
in prokaryotes: quantification and classification. Annu Rev
Microbiol 2001, 55:709-742.
Ng WV, Kennedy SP, Mahairas GG, Berquist B, Pan M, Shukla HD,
Lasky SR, Baliga NS, Thorsson V, Sbrogna J, Swartzell S, Weir D, Hall
J, Dahl TA, Welti R, Goo YA, Leithauser B, Keller K, Cruz R, Danson
MJ, Hough DW, Maddocks DG, Jablonski PE, Krebs MP, Angevine
CM, Dale H, Isenbarger TA, Peck RF, Pohlschroder M, Spudich JL,
Jung KW, Alam M, Freitas T, Hou S, Daniels CJ, Dennis PP, Omer AD,
Ebhardt H, Lowe TM, Liang P, Riley M, Hood L and DasSarma S:
Genome sequence of Halobacterium species NRC-1. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2000, 97:12176-12181.
Fitch WM: Homology a personal view on some of the
problems. Trends Genet 2000, 16:227-231.
Douady CJ, Delsuc F, Boucher Y, Doolittle WF and Douzery EJ:
Comparison of bayesian and maximum likelihood bootstrap
measures of phylogenetic reliability. Mol Biol Evol 2003,
20:248-254.
Alfaro ME, Zoller S and Lutzoni F: Bayes or bootstrap? A simulation study comparing the performance of bayesian markov
chain monte carlo sampling and bootstrapping in assessing
phylogenetic confidence. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20:255-266.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W and
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation
of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:3389-3402.
National Center for Biotechnology Information [http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/]
Thompson JD, Higgins DG and Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific gap
penalties and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994,
22:4673-4680.
Felsenstein J: PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version
3.6. Distributed by the author. Department of Genetics, University of
Washington, Seattle 1993.
Schmidt HA, Strimmer K, Vingron M and von Haeseler A: TREEPUZZLE: maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis using
quartets and parallel computing. Bioinformatics 2002,
18:502-504.
Drummond A and Strimmer K: PAL: an object-oriented programming
library
for
molecular
evolution
and
phylogenetics. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:662-663.
GNUPLOT Central [http://www.gnuplot.info]
Walker DR and Koonin EV: SEALS: a system for easy analysis of
lots of sequences. ISMB 1997, 5:333-339.
Integrated Genomics [http://www.integratedgenomics.com/]
The Institute for Genomic Research [http://www.tigr.org]
DOE Joint Genome Institute
[http://www.jgi.doe.gov/
JGI_microbial/html/index.html]
Huelsenbeck JP and Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference
of phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/4/37

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 15 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
