<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Sultr4;1 mutant seeds of Arabidopsis have an enhanced sulphate content and modified proteome suggesting metabolic adaptations to altered sulphate compartmentalization</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-78"/>
<meta name="Author" content="H_l_ne Zuber, Jean-Claude Davidian, Markus Wirtz, R_diger Hell, Maya Belghazi, Richard Thompson, Karine Gallardo"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Sultr4;1 mutant seeds of Arabidopsis have an
enhanced sulphate content and modified
proteome suggesting metabolic adaptations to
altered sulphate compartmentalization
Research article

Hélène Zuber*1, Jean-Claude Davidian2, Markus Wirtz3, Rüdiger Hell3, Maya Belghazi4, Richard Thompson1 and
Karine Gallardo1

Abstract
Background: Sulphur is an essential macronutrient needed for the synthesis of many cellular components. Sulphur
containing amino acids and stress response-related compounds, such as glutathione, are derived from reduction of
root-absorbed sulphate. Sulphate distribution in cell compartments necessitates specific transport systems. The lowaffinity sulphate transporters SULTR4;1 and SULTR4;2 have been localized to the vacuolar membrane, where they may
facilitate sulphate efflux from the vacuole.
Results: In the present study, we demonstrated that the Sultr4;1 gene is expressed in developing Arabidopsis seeds to
a level over 10-fold higher than the Sultr4;2 gene. A characterization of dry mature seeds from a Sultr4;1 T-DNA mutant
revealed a higher sulphate content, implying a function for this transporter in developing seeds. A fine dissection of
the Sultr4;1 seed proteome identified 29 spots whose abundance varied compared to wild-type. Specific metabolic
features characteristic of an adaptive response were revealed, such as an up-accumulation of various proteins involved
in sugar metabolism and in detoxification processes.
Conclusions: This study revealed a role for SULTR4;1 in determining sulphate content of mature Arabidopsis seeds.
Moreover, the adaptive response of sultr4;1 mutant seeds as revealed by proteomics suggests a function of SULTR4;1 in
redox homeostasis, a mechanism that has to be tightly controlled during development of orthodox seeds.
Background
In recent decades, sulphur deficiency has become an
increasing problem in crops of many countries, notably in
Western Europe, leading to sulphur deficiency symptoms
and resulting in decreased crop yields and quality parameters [1-3]. In this context, sulphur acquisition and
metabolism in plants has become a major concern for
research and crop improvement. Sulphur is an essential
macronutrient required for plant growth. It is mainly
acquired by the plant roots as inorganic sulphate and
then distributed within the tissues [4]. After entering the
cells, sulphate is reduced to sulphide with any excess sulphate being stored in the vacuole [5-7]. Sulphate assimila* Correspondence: helene.zuber@dijon.inra.fr
1 UMR102 Genetics and Ecophysiology of Grain legumes, INRA, F-21000 Dijon,
France

tion leads to the synthesis of many compounds, including
sulphur amino acids (cysteine and methionine), secondary products (glucosinolates and flavonoids) and numerous essential metabolites derived from sulphurcontaining amino acids, such as cofactors (e.g. glutathione, S-adenosylmethionine, coenzyme A) and vitamins
(e.g. biotin and thiamine). Therefore, sulphur assimilation is an essential part of plant metabolism and plays a
crucial role in many plant processes. For example, as part
of glutathione, sulphur has a role in the maintenance of
the cellular redox balance and mitigation of oxidative
stress in response to environmental changes. Furthermore, as constituent of sulphur amino acids, sulphur is
tightly connected to protein synthesis and metabolism
and is of great importance in terms of nutritional value.
Indeed, animals and humans are unable to synthesize

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Zuber et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

methionine and are dependent on dietary sources of this
amino acid. Seeds of many agronomically important
crops, including grain legumes, while rich in proteins, are
deficient in the sulphur amino acids. Tabe and Droux [8]
demonstrated that sulphate is the dominant form of sulphur found in the phloem supplying pods during lupin
seed development and that the seed is able to reduce and
assimilate sulphate in sufficient quantities for its needs.
Therefore, identifying the mechanisms involved in sulphate acquisition and distribution in the developing seed
is relevant to seed quality improvement.
The movement of sulphate around the plant and
between cell compartments is facilitated by specific sulphate transporters (SULTR), which are encoded by a large
gene family, consisting of 14 members in Arabidopsis and
rice. Phylogenetic analyses indicate this gene family can
be divided into four closely related groups (SULTR1 to 4)
each with 12 membrane-spanning domains and a STAS
(Sulphate Transporter and Anti-sigma Antagonist)
domain at the carboxy-terminus [9], and a fifth more distinct group, SULTR5, lacking the STAS domain [4]. Notably, the Arabidopsis Sultr5;2 gene has recently been
demonstrated to encode a high-affinity root molybdate
transporter [10], which raises the question of the role of
group 5 genes in sulphate transport. Considering differences in their kinetics and expression patterns, the different groups have been proposed to represent functional
subtypes [11,12]. Group 1 and 2 sulphate transporters,
which are localised at the plasma membrane, have been
the subject of several studies and are the best characterized groups. Members of group 1 represent high-affinity
transporters that facilitate uptake of sulphate by the root
(SULTR1;1 and SULTR1;2) or translocation of sulphate
from source-to-sink organs (SULTR1;3) [13-17]. Group 2
is composed of low-affinity sulphate transporters whose
gene products may rather play a role in vascular tissues,
faciliting the translocation of sulphate around the plant
[[4,14] and [18]]. Group 3 is composed of low affinity
transporters localized at the plasma membrane. The data
available in the litterature indicate a differential expression of these genes in plant tissues, which is not stimulated by sulphur deficiency [19], and a role for SULTR3;5
in the root-to-shoot transport of sulphate in cooperation
with SULTR2;1 in Arabidopsis [20].
Unlike groups 1 to 3, group 4 sulphate transporters
have been localized to the vacuolar membrane: a
SULTR4;1-GFP fusion protein was specifically accumulated in the vacuoles of roots and hypocotyls from young
seedlings [21]. The Sultr4;1 gene was shown to be
expressed in roots under sulphur-sufficient and deficient
conditions, where it may play a role in the efflux of sulphate from the vacuolar lumen into the cytoplasm and
influence the vacuolar storage capacity for sulphate [21].
In contrast, Sultr4;2 gene expression was shown to be

Page 2 of 13

highly inducible by sulphur limitation in the same tissue.
The sultr4;1/sultr4;2 double knock-out mutants contained higher amounts of sulphate than did wild-type
plants. Comparison of single and sultr4;1/sultr4;2 double
knock-out mutants suggested that Sultr4;1 plays a major
role and Sultr4;2 has a supplementary function [21].
Although sulphate transport has been extensively studied
in roots, to date there has been no investigation of the
roles of individual sulphate transporters within seeds.
The vacuole may certainly play a role in the storage and
unloading of sulphate within the developing seed, in
which case SULTR4 transporters would be key players.
In this study, we demonstrate that, the Arabidopsis
Sultr4;1 gene is strongly expressed in developing seeds
and that its disruption significantly increases seed sulphate content, suggesting that SULTR4;1 is involved in
the efflux of sulphate from vacuoles within developing
seeds. Furthermore, a proteome analysis of Sultr4;1
mutant seeds reveals metabolic modulations suggesting
adaptations to altered sulphate conpartmentation, which
implicates SULTR4;1-mediated sulphate transport in
establishment of defence mechanisms against oxidative
stress during seed development.

Results
Sultr4;1 is strongly expressed during seed filling

We first analysed by Real-Time Quantitative Reverse
Transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) gene expression levels of
the Arabidopsis sulphate transporters belonging to group
4 (SULTR4;1 and SULTR4;2) (Figure 1). The analysis was

Figure 1 Expression profiles of genes encoding SULTR4;1 and
SULTR4;2 in plant tissues. The relative mRNA abundance was estimated by qRT-PCR in developing Arabidopsis seeds removed from
siliques, in mature seeds, in siliques collected at 7-10 day after flowering DAF), and in other tissues of plants grown in sulphur-sufficient conditions. Developing seeds were collected during embryogenesis (7
days after flowering), and early seed filling (10 day after flowering). Bars
represent the mean ± SE of three independent measurements, which
are representative of two independent biological experiments.

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

performed on isolated seeds [7 and 10 days after flowering (DAF) corresponding to embryogenesis and seed filling stages, respectively], on isolated siliques (at 7-10
DAF) and for other tissues (leaves, flowers, roots, and
stems), all collected during the reproductive growth
phase of plants grown under sulphur-sufficient conditions. In addition, we compared qRT-PCR expression
profiles by using an available microarray-based transcriptomics dataset ([22], see Additional file 1). The qRT-PCR
data were consistent with the microarray dataset, but as
commonly observed, the dynamic range of expression
was higher with qRT-PCR.
The combined set of expression data (see Figure 1 and
Additional file 1) showed an expression of both genes in
various plant tissues during reproductive growth, but
with different levels and patterning of expression. First,
Sultr4;1 was strongly expressed in developing seeds,
whereas Sultr4;2 was preferentially expressed in flowers.
Second, microarray expression data available for roots of
10-day-old plants subjected to sulphur starvation for 24 h
revealed that the two genes respond differently to a limitation in sulphur supply, Sultr4;1 and Sultr4;2 expression
being up-regulated by 1.7 and 3.7 fold, respectively, in
these conditions (see Additional file 1). Third, the two
genes were differentially expressed during seed development: Sultr4;1 was highly expressed at the onset of seed
filling, whereas Sultr4;2 was expressed at almost constitutive levels from embryogenesis to the dry mature stage.
Finally, the qRT-PCR data revealed that the Sultr4;1 gene
was more highly expressed than Sultr4;2 in most plant
organs (Figure 1). Notably, Sultr4;1 was up to 10-fold
more expressed in the isolated developing seeds at 7 and
10 DAF as compared with Sultr4;2, whereas both transcripts were similarly abundant in the isolated siliques at
the same stages. These data suggested the SULTR4;1 may
have an important function within the developing seed,
which had not previously been reported and merited further investigations.

Page 3 of 13

decrease, see Additional file 2), suggesting that the TDNA insertion altered dramatically transcription and/or
mRNA stability.
The profiles and contents of major inorganic and
organic anions (sulphate, nitrate, phosphate, chloride,
malate and citrate) and the overall sulphur content were
determined (Figure 2). Interestingly, in mature sultr4;1
seeds, the average sulphate content was about 1.7 fold
higher than that of wild-type (Figure 2a), whereas seed
sulphur content was unchanged (Figure 2b). The sulphate
form represents a significant fraction of sulphur in
mature seeds: 7.7% and 13.24% of total sulphur content
respectively in wild-type and sultr4;1 mutant seeds. With
respect to the sultr4;1 plant phenotype, no significant difference in seed yield, leaf surface, or onset of flowering
was observed (Figure 3). Only a slight decrease in sultr4;1
seed weight was observed compared to wild-type (Figure
3c). These data suggest sulphur flux into developing
seeds may not be affected in sultr4;1 mutant and the
increase in seed sulphate content is therefore not related
to a drastic perturbation of sultr4;1 vegetative growth.
This was further confirmed by estimating the level of sulphate in the seed compartment (sulphate content × seed
mass per plant) and per seed (sulphate content × 1-seed
weight), which increased by ~60% in sultr4;1 seeds compared to wild-type (see Additional file 3).
For the other anions measured, only nitrate content was
found to increase in sultr4;1 seeds but nitrate levels in the
seed compartment or per seed were not significantly different compared to wild-type (see Additional file 3), suggesting sultr4;1 is particularly affected in seed sulphate

Sulphate content is elevated in SULTR4;1 mature seeds

To investigate the role of SULTR4;1 in determining seed
sulphate content, we used a sultr4;1 T-DNA insertion line
from the Arabidopsis SALK collection [23]. The T-DNA
was located in the STAS domain http://atensembl.arabidopsis.info/index.html critical for both the activity and
biosynthesis/stability of sulphate transporters [24]. The
presence of the insertion in plants was confirmed by PCR
(data not shown). Mature seeds were collected from
homozygous mutant plants and from the corresponding
wild-type (Columbia, Col-O). Sultr4;1 gene expression
was measured by qRT-PCR in mature seeds of wild-type
and sultr4;1 mutant plants, from three biological replicates. In the mutant line, the accumulation of the corresponding intact mRNA decreased strongly (94-99%

Figure 2 Analysis of anion, total nitrogen, carbon and sulphur
contents in mature Arabidopsis seeds of wild type (Wt) and
sultr4;1 mutant plants. a) Seed anion content (μmol.g-1) determined
by high performance ionic chromatography. b) Seed nitrogen (N), carbon (C) and sulphur (S) contents (%). Results are representative of three
biological experiments. Bars represent the mean ± SE of six measurements (at least two technical replicates from each biological replicate).
* and ** indicate p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively.

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

Figure 3 Projected rosette leaf surface at flowering a), seed yield
b), and seed weight c) of wild-type and sultr4;1 mutant plants.
Each bar represents the mean ± SE of at least three biological replicates. The data were submitted to variance analysis. * and ** indicate p
< 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively.

content. The significant increased pool of sulphate in
mature seeds of the sultr4;1 mutant could be related to a
reduced efflux of sulphate from the vacuoles during seed
development, therefore no longer accessible for its assimilatory reduction.
Alterations in protein quantities in sultr4;1 mature seeds

To determine if the increased sulphate content in sultr4;1
seeds, putatively due to a reduced vacuolar efflux capability, has influenced seed composition, seed nitrogen and
carbon contents were analysed along with the seed proteome complement. In mature sultr4;1 seeds, nitrogen
and carbon amounts were unchanged (Figure 2b) but
important proteome changes were observed as compared
to wild-type. With regard to the proteome analysis, total
proteins were extracted from three biological replicates
and separated by 2D electrophoresis. Image analysis of
Coomassie Blue gels using the Samespots software
allowed the quantification of protein abundance for 273
well-resolved spots (see Additional files 4 and 5). Statistical analyses (ANOVA and Levene tests) highlighted 29
spots for which the abundance in sultr4;1 seeds varied
significantly compared to wild-type (see Figure 4a and
Additional file 6). It is worth noting that among these 29
spots, 28 showed a higher relative abundance level in
sultr4;1 seeds, whereas only one spot (spot 239) showed a
decreased accumulation.
To study the putative function of the proteins whose
abundance varied or remained unchanged in sultr4;1
seeds, we annotated 152 spots detected in 2D gels by
using proteome reference maps previously established for

Page 4 of 13

Arabidopsis seeds [[25,26] and [27]]. The identity of 59
spots was confirmed by tryptic peptide mass fingerprinting or LC-MS/MS (see Additional file 7). Of the 29 spots
varying in the sultr4;1 seed proteome, 25 were identified.
The metabolic pathways modulated in mutant seeds
compared to wild-type were revealed by classifying the
proteins into functional categories according to the gene
ontology of Bevan et al. [28] (see Additional files 5 and 6).
The distribution into each functional category of proteins
whose abundance varied significantly, and the modulated
metabolic pathways, are shown in Figures 4 and 5 respectively. In mutant seeds, most of the spots whose abundance varied as compared to wild-type were related to
metabolism (eleven spots of 17 identified), detoxification
(four spots of nine identified) and energy (four spots of 13
identified).
Within the metabolism category, lipid and sterol
metabolism was particularly affected in mutant seeds:
among the five spots identified as proteins related to lipid
and sterol metabolism, four (spots 59, 235, 202 and 130)
showed an increased abundance in mutant seeds. Sugar
and polysaccharide metabolism may also be modulated in
mutant seeds, since several spots corresponding to
enzymes involved in polysaccharide catabolism, a β-glucosidase [spots 15, 38 (Figure 4), 83 and 134] and a βgalactosidase (spot 27), increased in mutant seeds. Finally
two proteins of amino acid metabolism were also overaccumulated in the sultr4;1 mutant seeds that correspond
to glutamine synthase (spot 137) and methionine synthase (spot 97 in Figure 4).
Another interesting result was the over-accumulation
in mutant seeds of several proteins related to stress
response mechanisms. Four spots corresponding to
enzymes involved in detoxification processes, a glutathione S-transferase (spot 122), an aldose reductase (spot
226), a formate dehydrogenase (spot 212), and a superoxide dismutase (spot 2, Figure 4), were over-accumulated
in the Sultr4;1 mutant seeds. Moreover, spots corresponding to proteins usually up-regulated during stress
response and notably oxidative stress [29-31], such as
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (spot 187)
and alcohol dehydrogenase (Spot 40 in Figure 4), were
increased in abundance in mutant seeds. These results
prompted us to estimate the level of oxidation of the glutathione pool in seeds, which is indicative of the redox
status. The amounts of reduced glutathione (GSH) and
glutathione disulphide (GSSG, oxidized form) were measured in dry mature seeds freshly collected from wildtype and sultr4;1 mutant plants (see Additional file 8).
The mutant seeds possessed higher GSSG levels (46%
against 42% for wild-type seeds), although the increases
were not statistically significant.
In contrast to the substantial variations of proteins
involved in metabolism and stress-related pathways,

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

Page 5 of 13

Figure 4 Proteome variations detected in mature seeds of Sultr4;1. a) A representative proteome map from mature Arabidopsis seeds is shown.
Circles and stars represent proteins whose level respectively increased and decreased in sultr4;1 mutant seeds compared to wild-type. The spots #11,
27, 32, 40, 45, 83, 122, 134, 137, 187 and 226 were identified by using the proteome reference maps from Gallardo et al. [25,26] and Rajjou et al. [27].
The other proteins were identified by mass spectrometry in the present study (see Additional file 7). Colors indicate the functional category of proteins
according to the ontological classification of Bevan et al. [29] (see Figure 4b, Additional files 5 and 6). Example of abundance variations for spots 2, 38,
40, 97, 122 and 239 in wild-type and sultr4;1 mutant are shown. Each bar represents the mean ± SE of at least three biological replicates. * and ** indicate p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 respectively (variance analysis). b) Distribution of proteins whose abundance varied significantly in each functional category. Within each class, the number of proteins whose abundance vary versus the total number of proteins identified is indicated. See Additional file
4 for a complete annotation of the proteome reference map.

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

Page 6 of 13

Figure 5 A summary of metabolic pathways modulated in Sultr4;1 mutant seeds. Proteins were located in their metabolic pathways according
to their annotation http://www.arabidopsis.org, ontological classification [29] and to established features of metabolism. The spots #11, 27, 32, 40, 45,
83, 122, 134, 137, 187 and 226 were identified by using the proteome reference maps from Gallardo et al. [25,26] and Rajjou et al. [27]. The other proteins were identified by mass spectrometry in the present study (see Additional file 7). Bars represent the means of spot level variations ± SE in mature
seeds of wild-type and sultr4;1 mutant. Significant variations are indicated by colored red (increased levels in sultr4;1 seeds) or green (decreased levels)
bars. * and ** indicate p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 respectively (variance analysis). GSH, glutathione; GSSG, glutathione disulphide, OAS, O-acetylserine; SMM,
S-methylmethionine; TCA, tricarboxylic acid cycle.

there were few changes in storage protein amounts. Of
the 57 spots annotated as 12S globulin isoforms, which
are the most abundant proteins found in Arabidopsis
seeds (i.e. they represent about 80% of total seed protein
content), only four varied in abundance between wildtype and mutant seeds. Of these variable spots, three
(spots 35 and 131, isoform At12S1 and spot 46, isoform
At12S4) and one (spot 239, isoform At12S3, Figure 4)
showed respectively an increased and a decreased accumulation in mutant seeds. These variations had no influence on seed protein content since values obtained by the
Bradford assay were similar for sultr4;1 and wild-type
seeds.

Discussion
In Arabidopsis, the sulphate transporter group 4 is composed of two members (SULTR4;1 and SULTR4;2), local-

ized in the vacuolar membrane and reported to be
expressed in roots, where a role was proposed in the
efflux of sulphate from the vacuole [21]. In the present
study, we observed that during the reproductive growth
phase, Sultr4;1 was preferentially expressed in developing
Arabidopsis seeds at the transition between embryogenesis and seed filling and presented a relative transcript
abundance much higher than Sultr4;2, which was
expressed at similar levels throughout seed development
(see Figure 1 and Additional file 1). These data, along
with previous data reporting that SULTR4;1 plays a major
role and SULTR4;2 only a small contribution in remobilising the sulphate reserves [21], prompted us to study the
role of SULTR4;1 in determining seed composition. We
found a remarkably high level of sulphate constrasting
with an unchanged sulphur content in mature seeds of a
sultr4;1 T-DNA mutant (Figure 2), which for the first

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

time implies a function for this transporter in developing
seeds. The unchanged seed sulphur content indicates that
the increased sulphate level is not related to an enhanced
sulphur supply to the developing seed, but rather to a
reduction of sulphate utilization/assimilation within the
seed. Despite the unchanged sulphur content in mature
seeds, we cannot exclude that the composition of sulphur
or the amount of sulphate and other sulphur metabolites
transported to developing seeds could be different
between the wild-type and the sultr4;1 mutant. However,
as no significant difference in seed yield, leaf surface or
onset of flowering were observed, the increased sulphate/
sulphur ratio in sultr4;1 seeds appears not to be related to
a drastic perturbation of sultr4;1 vegetative growth. The
increased sulphate/sulphur ratio in sultr4;1 seeds is possibly the consequence of a reduced remobilization (i.e.
assimilation) of the vacuolar sulphate pool within the
developing seed. The vacuolar localisation of the transporter in seeds has not yet been proven. We therefore
cannot exclude that the protein could be localised in different compartments in seeds. However, the increased
sulphate/sulphur ratio in mutant mature seeds is consistent with previous data showing that, in roots of sultr4;1
mutants, sulphate is retained as a consequence of defects
in sulphate efflux from the vacuole [21]. It should also be
noted, that other genes encoding sulphate transporters
are expressed in developing seeds [22]. In particular, the
Sultr3;4 gene encoding a putative plasma-membrane sulphate transporter is strongly expressed during early seed
filling at similar stages to those of Sultr4;1. Interestingly,
the seed proteome profile of the sultr4;1 mutant differs
from that of a sultr3;4 mutant (unpublished data), indicating that SULTR4;1 and SULTR3;4 may have distinct
roles/subcellular localization during seed filling.
Overall nitrogen and protein levels were unaltered in
sultr4;1 seeds, but a dissection of the sultr4;1 seed proteome revealed that ~10% of the minor protein spots
detected in 2D gels varied in abundance (see Additional
files 5 and 6), thus reflecting metabolic modifications
(Figure 5). In particular, several proteins with roles in the
oxidative stress response were up-accumulated. An oxidative stress response has frequently been observed during sulphate deprivation [32,33], notably in sulphurdeficient seeds [34]. In the present study, most of the proteins with roles in the oxidative stress response are
involved in detoxification mechanisms (Figure 5). Among
them were a scavenger of free oxygen radicals (superoxide dismutase, spot 2 in Figure 4), and the glutathione Stransferase isoform 6 (spot 122 in Figure 4) that may play
a protective role against oxidative damage due to hydrogen peroxide [35]. This may represent an adaptive
response to oxidative stress in sultr4;1 seeds as these
enzymes detoxify some of the toxic compounds, such as

Page 7 of 13

reactive oxygen species (ROS), produced by oxidative
stress.
At low levels, ROS participate in cellular signaling. In
Arabidopsis seeds, abundant proteins were identified that
act as scavengers of ROS generated during seed development, thereby counteracting their deleterious effects [36].
However, if ROS accumulate to harmful levels, seeds lose
their ability to control ROS and cannot restart their
metabolism [37], probably because ROS cause irreversible oxidative damage to lipids, proteins, and DNA. We
have observed that Sultr4;1 seeds lose their viability during storage much more rapidly than wild-type seeds.
Indeed, seeds collected from homozygous Sultr4;1 plants
did not germinate after two years of storage at room temperature, while almost all seeds collected at the same time
from wild-type plants germinated. A tetrazolium test
confimed the loss of viability of the Sultr4;1 mutant seeds
(see Additional file 9), which could be linked to their
increased sensitivity to oxidative stress during storage,
when ROS are known to be continuously produced [38].
However, the up-regulation of enzymes involved in ROS
removal that we see in sultr4;1 seeds probably reflects
seed developmental events and not changes during sample storage, as the seeds subjected to proteomics were
frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after harvest.
In summary, our data suggest sulphate remobilization
from the vacuole to the other cell compartments is
important for the seed's defence against abiotic oxidative
stress during seed development and storage. This could
also apply to other tissues, since in Arabidopsis roots and
shoots, cadmium stress induces an up-regulation of
Sultr4;1 gene expression concomitantly with an oxidative
stress response [39]. Also, in Brassica juncea seedlings,
Sultr4;1 gene expression was up-regulated in response to
arsenic-induced stress [40,41], which leads to the generation of ROS through the conversion of arsenate to arsenite [42].
Besides proteins related to the oxidative stress
response, an up-accumulation of proteins involved in the
biosynthesis of fatty acids and lipids was revealed. They
correspond to enoyl- [acyl-carrier-protein] reductase
(spot 59 in Figure 4), two isoforms of hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase 1 (HSD1, spots 130 and 202), and ketoacyl
carrier protein synthase I (spot 235). An up-regulation of
a ketoacyl carrier protein synthase was also observed in
developing Arabidopsis seeds under sulphur-starved conditions [34]. It is well known that under stress conditions,
toxic oxygen derivatives are produced that inactivate
enzymes and damage important cellular components,
such as membranes via lipid peroxidation and fatty-acid
de-esterification. In this context, the up-regulation of
enzymes involved in fatty acid and lipid biosynthesis may
represent a mechanism to repair stress-induced mem-

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

brane damage. In support of this, Li et al. [43] showed
that transgenic Arabidopsis lines overexpressing HSD1
have an increased tolerance to salt stress.
Interestingly, an up-regulation in proteins of the energy
and carbon metabolism was observed in sultr4;1 seeds.
These are involved in glycolysis (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, spot 187), photosynthesis or photorespiration (ribulose 1-5 biphosphate carboxylase large
chain, spot 39), and anaerobic fermentation (alcohol
dehydrogenase, spot 40 in Figure 4). Since an up-accumulation of enzymes involved in fatty acid and lipid biosynthesis was also observed in sultr4;1 seeds, it is possible
that energy production and glycolysis were enhanced in
sultr4;1 seeds to provide carbon skeletons for the synthesis of fatty acid precursors in these seeds [44]. Furthermore, members of the glycosyl hydrolases that
specifically release sugar from oligosaccharides [β-glucosidase, spots 15, 38 (Figure 4), 83, 134; and β-galactosidase, spot 27 (Figure 5)] were up-accumulated in sultr4;1,
probably as a way to sustain glycolysis and fatty acid biosynthesis.
This study demonstrated that the accumulation of storage proteins occurs in sultr4;1 mutant seeds (see Additional files 5). In 2D-gels, these proteins are located in the
20 to 30 kDa range (see Figure 4a and Additional files 4
and 5). Only a few storage proteins differ in abundance
from wild-type seeds and these correspond to globulin
12S isoforms (Figure 5). The only protein whose level
decreased was the At12S3 isoform (spot 239 in Figure 4a)
and the three proteins whose level increased were At12S1
(spots 35 and 131) and At12S4 (spot 46). Interestingly, the
isoforms whose level increased have a relatively poor sulphur amino acid content (2.4 and 2.8%, respectively)
compared to At12S3 (4.3% of total amino acid residues)
whose level decreased. A similar increase in sulphur-poor
seed proteins was observed during sulphur deprivation
[34,45-47]. This indicates that, in sulphur-sufficient conditions, sulphate exported from the vacuole via
SULTR4;1 participates but is not limiting for storage protein synthesis. A possibility to be considered is that
SULTR4;2 could also participate to vacuolar sulphate
release for storage protein synthesis. However, expression
patterns of the gene and data from the literature suggest
SULTR4;2 may have only a supplementary role in sulphate export from the vacuole [21].
Interestingly, an increased accumulation of a methionine synthase (spot 97, Figure 4) was observed in sultr4;1
seeds. It is also worth noting that under sulphatedeprived conditions, despite the almost complete depletion of cysteine, the plant is able to keep methionine levels constant [32,48,49]. This demonstrates the plant's
capacity to regenerate methionine through alternative
pathways under sulphate-deficient conditions and upon
cysteine restriction. Methionine can be regenerated

Page 8 of 13

through methylation of homocysteine produced by transmethylation via a reaction catalyzed by S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (Figure 5). Moreover, the use of the 4carbon moiety of S-adenosylmethionine for the synthesis
of polyamines and ethylene also is accompanied by recycling of the methylthio moiety and regeneration of methionine [50]. Interestingly, the protein spot identified in the
present study corresponds to a cytosolic isoform involved
in the regeneration of methionine from homocysteine
produced in the course of the activated methyl cycle [51].
In sultr4;1 mutant seeds, the up-regulation of methionine
synthesis could be a way to sustain seed protein synthesis.
Moreover, maintaining the synthesis of proteins rich in
methionine may be particularly important in stress conditions, since protein-endogenous methionine reacts
with ROS, as a scavenger, to form sulphoxide (MetSO)
without loss of activity of the corresponding protein
[52,53].

Conclusions
This study revealed a role for SULTR4;1 in determining
sulphate content of mature Arabidopsis seeds, possibly
because it controls the efflux of sulphate from the vacuoles for metabolism in other cell compartments [21]. Specific seed metabolic features were also revealed through a
fine dissection of the seed proteome of a sultr4;1 mutant
(Figures 4 and 5). In particular, an up-regulation of proteins involved in the oxidative stress response was
revealed that suggests a function of SULTR4;1 in maintaining redox homeostasis during seed development. The
maintenance of redox homeostasis is of crucial importance in plant tissues, and even more in seeds that have
the ability to tolerate dehydration in the course of their
development. This remarkable ability allows the orthodox
seed, i.e., seed that can be stored in a state of low moisture content [54], to survive for several years in a desiccated state with metabolic activities at a standstill, until
the environmental conditions become optimal for its germination. As seed desiccation enhances ROS formation,
mechanisms that protect from oxidative stress are therefore crucial for maintaining cellular integrity and homeostasis [55]. Glutathione, which is a sulphur-derived
product, is a major plant antioxidant. During desiccation,
it is converted into the oxidized form glutathione disulphide (GSSG) and the balance between these two compounds is crucial for homeostasis and seed survival.
Indeed, the GSSG versus GSH ratio can be applied to
assess seed viability, since an increased ratio was typically
correlated with viability loss in Pisum sativum seeds [54].
In the present study, we observed that mutant seeds,
freshly collected at the dry mature stage, possessed
higher GSSG levels, although the increases were not statistically significant (see Additional file 8). It is worth noting that generally, the level of GSSG is much higher in

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

mature seeds than in other plant parts. For example, only
10% of total glutathione is oxidized in Arabidopsis seedlings [56,57]. This indicates that the glutathione pool is
relatively highly oxidized in mature Arabidopsis seeds
compared to other plant organs. Despite the absence of
significant changes in GSH and GSSG levels between
wild-type and mutant seeds, we cannot exclude a localized disturbance of the redox balance in particular tissue
or subcellular compartments of sultr4;1 mutant seeds.
Indeed, as reported by Meyer et al. [58], measurements of
GSSG/GSH ratios in plant tissues are prone to artefacts
since they do not take into consideration the subcellular
compartmentalization. Also, partial oxidation of glutathione during extraction is difficult to avoid and a slight
increase in GSSG concentration, whilst barely detectable,
would suffice to shift the glutathione redox potential to
significantly less reducing values [59]. For these reasons,
and because GSSG/GSH ratio in mature seeds is not representative of the events occurring at specific stages of
seed development or during storage, future studies will
be necessary to evaluate the redox status in different cell
types throughout seed development and storage. Very little is known about the exact role of sulphate released
from the seed vacuoles in the course of seed development
in maintaining cellular homeostasis during seed development. Although further studies will be necessary, this
paper is the first contribution on this topic.

Methods
Plant materials and growth conditions

We studied Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion lines (Columbia ecotype, Col-0) from the Nottingham Arabidopsis
Stock Center (Nottingham University, UK) for the gene
4;1 (AT5G13550). The T-DNA line has the following
accession number: SALK-120920. Further information
about mutant accession and T-DNA localization can be
found at http://arabidopsis.info and http://atidb.org. The
T-DNA insertion line used in this study was not backcrossed and a single allele was used, but conscious of the
presence of other insertions in the genome and of the
limitations of using only one allele, we have taken care to
compare several mutant plants to several wild-type plants
derived from plants segregating the mutant allele, to minimize the possible effect of insertions elsewhere in the
genome. The plants were grown under sulphur-sufficient
conditions (peat-perlite mixture) in a greenhouse with
supplemental light to 16 h/day, and fertilized three times
a week by subirrigation (N-P-K: 20-20-20). For genotyping, DNA was extracted from a leaf disk by using the
CTAB method from Doyle and Doyle [60]. A PCR screen
was performed by using specific primers for each gene
binding upstream and downstream of the predicted TDNA insertion as well as one primer binding in the left
border region of the corresponding T-DNA. The follow-

Page 9 of 13

ing primers were used: Lba2-for(5'-GAACAACACTCAACCCTATCTC-3') for the T-DNA, and 4;1-for(5'GCA TTCGTTATCCACGAGTCTG-3') and 4;1-rev(5'CTCTGTACGTATTGTAGACA CAC-3') for the genespecific primers.
Phenotypic characters

Rosette leaf area and seed yield were measured from at
least three individual plants. Leaf area was quantified
from the rosette scan at flowering using the Visilog 5.4
software (Noesis, Les Ulis, France). The onset of flowering was scored and expressed in °C/day. Seed weight was
determined from three seed samples of 10 mg (around
400 seeds) collected on three individual plants. All data
were submitted to statistical analyses (variance analysis)
using the Statistica 7.0 software (Maisons-Alfort, France).
Only differences with P values < 0.05 were considered significant.
Tetrazolium test

Seed viability was estimated by using the tetrazolium test,
which differentiates viable from dead tissues of seed
embryos on the basis of dehydrogenase activity (respiration enzymes) that reduces tetrazolium salt to formazan
in viable tissues. The mutant and wild-type seeds collected at the same time and stored under the same conditions for 25 months were imbibed 24 hours in water.
Twenty five embryos from wild-type and mutant seeds
were isolated and placed for one hour in a 0.25% tetrazolium salt solution (2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride).
RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR

Silique and seed samples at three stages of development
(pods at 7 and 10 days after flowering, and mature seeds)
and tissue samples (flowers, roots, leaves, stems) were
collected on two independent batches of plants. Frozen
tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen and total RNA was
extracted using the method described by Chang et al.
[61]. RNAs (10 μg) were incubated in presence of 10 units
of RNAse-free RQ1 DNAse (Promega, Madison, USA).
Non reverse-transcribed RNA samples were checked for
absence of contaminating genomic DNA by PCR using
primers for the constitutively expressed elongation factor
alpha-chain gene (At5g60390). DNA-free RNA was converted into first-strand cDNA. Samples were reversetranscribed using the iScript cDNA synthesis Kit (BioRad, Hercules, USA). The quantitative RT-PCR was performed using the real-time SYBR Green method on a
BioRad iQ5 thermal cycler, using iQ SYBR Green Supermix (BioRad) and the following specific primers: 4;1for(5'-CACTTGACAATAGCAAGATCAGG-3'), 4;1-rev
(5'-CTCTGTACGT ATTGTAGACACAC-3'), 4;2-for(5'CTAGCAAGAGCAGGCATTGTGGA-3') and 4;2-rev
(5'-CTTGGACTGCGTCATGTACTCTC-3'). To establish the presence of a single PCR product and the absence

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

of primer-dimers, melting curve analysis (i.e. heat dissociation of oligonucleotides) was applied immediately after
PCR by heating PCR products from 59°C to 96°C. Normalization for cDNA quantity was performed for each
template with an Elongation factor gene (At5g60390) as
control gene using the relative standard curve method
(delta CT) according to the Biorad instructions. The
expression stability of the control gene in the different
test samples was verified by comparison with two other
constitutively expressed genes encoding an ubiquitin
(At4g27960) and a protein phosphatase (At1g13320)
(data not shown). The following control primers were
used: for(5'-GATTGCCACACCTCTCACATTGCAG-3')
and rev(5'-GCTCCTTCTCAATCTCCTT ACCAG-3')
for the elongation factor gene, for(5'-CCAAGGTGCTGCTATCGATCTGT-3') and rev (5'-AGGTCCGAGCAGTG GACTCG-3') for the ubiquitin gene and for(5'ATCGCTTCTCGCTCCAGTAATG-3') and rev(5'-GACTATCGGAATGAGAGATTGC-3') for the protein phosphate gene. This method was also applied to assess
transcript level changes in mature seed of sultr4;1 mutant
compared to wild-type. A 94-99% decrease was observed
in sultr4;1 seeds.
Determination of anion and N C S contents in mature seeds

Mature seeds harvested from three individual plants were
ground (50 mg) in liquid nitrogen. Anions were extracted
in Milli-Q water heated at 70°C for 20 min. The seed
extract was centrifugated at least 3 times at 20,000 g for
10 min at 4°C. Anion content of the final clear supernatant was determined by high performance ionic chromatography (LC20 Dionex) using a IonPaq AS11 column
and a sodium hydroxide linear gradient (1 to 22 mM), as
described [17]. Contents of total nitrogen, carbon and
sulphur in the dried powder of seed samples were measured were measured using an elemental analyzer (Vario
EL; Elemental analyser system). All data were submitted
to statistical analyses (variance analysis) using the Statistica 7.0 software (Maisons-Alfort, France). Only differences with P values < 0.05 were considered significant.
Glutathione content and redox state

20 mg of seeds were used for isolation of total or oxidized
thiols as described in Fey et al. [57]. Derivatization of thiols with monobromobimane (Calbiochem) and separation of thiol derivates were performed according to Wirtz
et al. [62] using the same HPLC-system. The Empower™
software (Waters) was used for data acquisition and processing.
Total protein extraction and 2D electrophoresis

The seed samples (dry mature stage) subjected to proteomics were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen after
harvest to avoid changes in protein abundance that can
be induced by storage. Total proteins were extracted as

Page 10 of 13

described by Gallardo et al., [63], from 20 mg of mature
seeds collected on four individual plants. Protein concentration was measured according to Bradford [64]. Eight
gels (four biological replicates and two technical replicates from each biological replicates) were performed for
each wild-type and mutant lines. A constant volume (57
μl) of the protein extracts (around 200 μg of proteins) was
used for isoelectrofocusing, that corresponded to a constant seed weight (2 mg). Proteins were separated in
duplicates using gel strips forming an immobilized nonlinear pH 3 to 10 gradient (Immobiline DryStrip, 24 cm;
GE Healthcare/Amersham Biosciences). Strips were
rehydrated in the IPGphor system (GE Healthcare/Amersham Biosciences) for 7 h at 20°C with the thiourea/urea
lysis buffer containing 2% (v/v) Triton X-100, 20 mM
DTT and the protein extracts. IEF was performed at 20°C
in the IPGphor system for 7 h at 50 V, 1 h at 300 V, 2 h at
3.5 kV and 7 h at 8 kV. Prior to the second dimension,
each gel strip was incubated at room temperature for 2 ×
15 min in 2 × 15 ml equilibration buffer as previously
described [26]. Proteins were separated in vertical polyacrylamide gels according to [26].
Protein staining and quantification

Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) according to Mathesius et
al. [65] Image acquisition was done using the Odyssey
Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln,
NE) at 700 nm with a resolution of 169 μm. Image analyses and spot volume quantification were carried out with
the Progenesis SameSpots version 2.0 software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) according to
the instruction manual. For each gel, normalized spot
volumes were calculated as the ratio of each spot volume
to the total spot volume of the gel (arbitrary unit). Eight
gels (four biological replicates and two technical replicates from each biological replicates) were analysed for
each wild-type and mutant lines. Molecular masses (Mr)
and isoelectric points (pI) were calculated according to
the migration of standard proteins (Bio-Rad, Bio-Rad,
Hercules, USA). All data were submitted to statistical
analyses (variance analysis and Levene's test) using the
Statistica 7.0 software (Maisons-Alfort, France). Only differences with p-values < 0.05 were considered significant.
Protein identification

Spots were annotated using proteome reference maps
previously established for Arabidopsis mature seeds ([2527], http://www.seed-proteome.com). In the present
work, we confirmed identification of 53 spots by nanoLC-MS/MS (Q-TOF-Ultima Global equipped with a
nano-ESI source coupled with a Cap LC nanoHPLC,
Waters Micromass, Waters, Saint Quentin en Yvelines,
France) as described by Gallardo et al. [66]. Detailed

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

information about protein digestion, mass spectrometry
data acquisition are in Additional file 7. Peak lists of precursor and fragment ions were matched to proteins in the
NCBI non redundant database (March 2008, 7,387,702
sequences; 2,551,671,261 residues, taxonomy of Arabidopsis) using the MASCOT version 2.2 program (Matrix
Science, London). The MASCOT search parameters are
described in Additional file 7. Only matches with individual ion scores above 20 were considered.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Comparison of the qRT-PCR data obtained in the
present study for the Arabidopsis genes belonging to the group 4 of
sulphate transporters with the corresponding data from a publicly
available expression atlas [22]. A drawing was made from a photo of the
Arabidopsis plant and, for each gene, gene expression in roots, rosette and
cauline leaves, entire flower, stem, and seeds, from the publicly available
expression atlas of Arabidopsis was mapped as colors. The qRT-PCR expression data are indicated by colored squares. These expression data were normalized to the highest expression value set to 1. A color scale represents
variations in transcript abundance for each gene, in which red represents
the highest expression and white the lowest expression. Missing values are
in grey. Microarray data showing Sultr4;1 expression in roots of young seedlings under sulfur-starvation conditions, versus normal conditions (AthXpressionist@CSB.DB, http://csbdb.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/csbdb/dbxp/ath/
ath_xpmgq.html) were also included.
Additional file 2 Structure of the Sultr4;1 gene, T-DNA insertion site
and trancript level (qRT-PCR) in wild-type and mutant lines. a) Structure of Sultr4;1 gene is shown with the insertion site of the T-DNA (SALK120920). Exons are indicated by white boxes, untranslated regions by dark
boxes and T-DNA insertion by a dashed box. b) The relative mRNA quantity
was estimated by qRT-PCR in mature seeds of wild-type (Wt) and sultr4;1
mutant plants. Bars represent the mean ± SE of three biological replicates.
Additional file 3 Estimation of anion levels in the seed compartment
(a) and per 100 seed (b) for wild type (Wt) and the sultr4;1 mutant. a)
Anion levels correspond to seed anion content * seed mass per plant. b)
Anion levels correspond to seed anion content * 100-seed weight. Seed
anion content was determined by high performance ionic chromatography. Results are representative of three biological experiments. Bars represent the mean ± SE of six measurements (at least two technical replicates
from each biological replicate). * and ** indicate p < 0.05 and p < 0.01
respectively (variance analysis).
Additional file 4 Proteome map of mature Arabidopsis seeds Col-0,
wild-type. Total soluble proteins were electrofocused in a non-linear pH
gradient from 3 to 10, then separated by SDS-PAGE (10%) (see Additional
files 5 and 6).
Additional file 5 Proteomics datasets from mature seeds in wild-type
and mutant lines. This table includes: MW and pI of the 273 detected proteins, their accumulation ratios (mutants versus wild-type), the ANOVA and
Levene P values, their annotation and ontological classification [29].
Additional file 6 Detailed information concerning proteins whose
abundances vary significantly between mutant and wild-type mature
seeds. This table includes: MW and pI of the 29 proteins whose abundance
vary significantly, their annotation, ontological classification [29], and their
accumulation level in wild-type and mutant seeds. Bars represent the mean
± SE of six measurements (at least two technical replicates from each biological replicate). ANOVA and significant differences are labelled: *, ** and
*** indicate p < 0.05, p < 0.01 and p < 0.001 respectively.
Additional file 7 Detailed information about LC-MS/MS protein identification. This table includes detailed information about protein digestion,
mass spectrometry, data acquisition, MASCOT search parameters, peptide
sequences and identification scores.
Additional file 8 Total glutathione, glutathione disulphide (GSSG),
reduced glutathione (GSH) in mature seeds of wild type and sultr4;1 mutant
lines.

Page 11 of 13

Additional file 9 Viability estimation of dry mature seeds freshly collected from the sultr4;1 mutant and wild type plants by using the tetrazolium test. Pictures are representative of twenty five embryos from
wild-type and mutant seeds placed for one hour in a tetrazolium salt solution (2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride). Red coloration allows visualizing
the living part of the embryo. All embryos isolated from wild-type seeds
were stained red, thus attesting to their viability. In contrast, all embryos
from mutant seeds were unstained, indicating a loss of viability.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
HZ participated in experimental design, conducted the bulk of the experimental work, performed the qRT-PCR experiment, 2D-electrophoresis analyses,
phenotypic T-DNA mutant characterisation and statistical analyses and drafted
the manuscript. JCD performed the HPIC analyses and was involved in revising
the manuscript critically. MW and RH performed CNS and GSSG/GSH analyses
and were involved in revising the manuscript critically. RT participated in
designing and surpervising the study and helped to draft the manuscript. KG
conceived, designed and supervised the study and participated in drafting the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Ph.D. fellowship jointly funded by INRA (Plant
Breeding and Genetics Department) and the Burgundy Regional Council. We
acknowledge the Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Center for providing us with
the Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion lines. We thank Anne-Lise Santoni, Grégoire
Aubert, Myriam Sanchez, Delphine Aimé, Catherine Conreux and Jean Potier
(Legume Ecophysiology and Genetics Research Unit, INRA-Center at Dijon) for
their very valuable technical support. We thank Sylvain Jeandroz and Marion
Corneillat (AgroSup Dijon) for helpful advice during manuscript revision as
regards to GSH measurements. We thank Hoai-Nam Truong and Ruth PérezVergas (Legume Ecophysiology and Genetics Research Unit, INRA-Center at
Dijon) for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful discussions.
Author Details
1UMR102 Genetics and Ecophysiology of Grain legumes, INRA, F-21000 Dijon,
France, 2UMR5004 Biochemistry and Plant Molecular Physiology, Montpellier
SupAgro/CNRS/INRA/Université MontpellierII, F-34060 Montpellier, France,
3Heidelberg Institute of Plant Sciences, University of Heidelberg, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany and 4Proteomic Analysis Center of Marseille, IFR Jean
Roche, F-13916 Marseille Cedex 20, France
Received: 4 September 2009 Accepted: 28 April 2010
Published: 28 April 2010
© 2010 Zuberavailable from:BioMed Central Ltd.
This articleBiology 2010, 10:78distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC is an Open Access article
Plant is et al; licensee http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

References
1. McGrath SP, Zhao F, Crosland AR, Salmon SE: Sulphur status in British
wheat grain and its relationship with quality parameters. Asp Appl Biol
1993, 36:317-326.
2. Schnug E: Sulphur nutritional status of European crops and
consequences for agriculture. Sulphur Agric 1991, 15:7-12.
3. Zhao F, McGrath SP: Assessing the risk of sulphur deficiency in cereals.
J Sci Food Agric 1993, 63:119.
4. Buchner P, Takahashi H, Hawkesford MJ: Plant sulphate transporters: coordination of uptake, intracellular and long-distance transport. J Exp
Bot 2004, 55:1765-73.
5. Kaiser G, Martinoia E, Schroppelmeier G, Heber U: Active-transport of
sulfate into the vacuole of plant cells provides halotolerance and can
detoxify SO2. J Plant Physiol 1989, 133:756-763.
6. Martinoia E, Massonneau A, Frangne N: Transport processes of solutes
across the vacuolar membrane of higher plants. Plant Cell Physiol 2000,
41:1175-1186.
7. Martinoia E, Maeshima M, Neuhaus HE: Vacuolar transporters and their
essential role in plant metabolism. J Exp Bot 2007, 58:83-102.
8. Tabe L, Droux M: Sulfur assimilation in developing lupin cotyledons
could contribute significantly to the accumulation of organic sulfur
reserves in the seed. Plant Physiol 2001, 126:176-187.

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Rouached H, Berthomieu P, El Kassis E, Cathala N, Catherinot V, Labesse G,
Davidian JC, Fourcroy P: Structural and Functional Analysis of the Cterminal STAS (Sulfate Transporter and Anti-sigma Antagonist) Domain
of the Arabidopsis thaliana Sulfate Transporter SULTR1.2. J Biol Chem
2005, 280:15976-15983.
Tomatsu H, Takano J, Takahashi H, Watanabe-Takahashi A, Shibagaki N,
Fujiwara T: An Arabidopsis thaliana high-affinity molybdate transporter
required for efficient uptake of molybdate from soil. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2007, 104:18807-12.
Hawkesford MJ: Transporter gene families in plants: the sulphate
transporter gene family: redundancy or specialization? Physiol Plant
2003, 117:115-163.
Smith FW, Ealing PM, Hawkesford MJ, Clarkson T: Plant members of a
family of sulfate transporters reveal functional subtypes. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1995, 92:9373-9377.
Smith FW, Hawkesford MJ, Ealing PM, Clarkson DT, Vanden Berg PJ,
Belcher AR, Warrilow AG: Regulation of expression of a cDNA from
barley roots encoding a high affinity sulphate transporter. Plant J 1997,
12:875-84.
Takahashi H, Watanabe-Takahashi A, Smith FW, Blake-Kalff M, Hawkesford
MJ, Saito K: The roles of three functional sulphate transporters involved
in uptake and translocation of sulphate in Arabidopsis thaliana. The
Plant J 2000, 23:171-182.
Shibagaki N, Rose A, McDermott JP, Fujiwara T, Hayashi H, Yoneyama T,
Davies JP: Selenate-resistant mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana identify
Sultr1;2, a sulfate transporter required for efficient transport of sulfate
into roots. Plant J 2002, 29:475-486.
Yoshimoto N, Takahashi H, Smith FW, Yamaya T, Saito K: Two distinct
high-affinity sulfate transporters with different inducibilities mediate
uptake of sulfate in Arabidopsis roots. Plant J 2002, 29:465-473.
El Kassis E, Cathala N, Rouached H, Fourcroy P, Berthomieu P, Terry N,
Davidian JC: Characterization of a selenate-resistant Arabidopsis
mutant. Root growth as a potential target for selenate toxicity. Plant
Physiol 2007, 143:1231-1241.
Awazuhara M, Fujiwara T, Hayashi H, Watanabe-Takahashi A, Takahashi H,
Saito K: The function of SULTR2;1 sulfate transporter during seed
development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Physiol 2005, 125:95-105.
Buchner P, Stuiver E, Westerman S, Wirtz M, Hell R, Hawkesford M, De Kok
L: Regulation of Sulfate Uptake and Expression of Sulfate Transporter
Genes in Brassica oleracea as Affected by Atmospheric H2S and
Pedospheric Sulfate Nutrition. Plant Physiol 2004, 136:3396-3408.
Kataoka T, Hayashi N, Yamaya T, Takahashi H: Root-to-shoot transport of
sulfate in Arabidopsis: Evidence for the role of SULTR3;5 as a
component of low-affinity sulfate transport system in the root
vasculature. Plant Physiol 2004, 136:4198-4204.
Kataoka T, Watanabe-Takahashi A, Hayashi N, Ohnishi M, Mimura T,
Buchner P, Hawkesford MJ, Yamaya T, Takahashi H: Vacuolar sulfate
transporters are essential determinants controlling internal
distribution of sulfate in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2004, 16:2693-2704.
Toufighi K, Brady SM, Austin R, Ly E, Provart NJ: The Botany Array
Resource: e-Northerns, Expression Angling, and promoter analyses.
Plant J 2005, 43:153-163.
Alonso JM, Stepanova AN, Leisse TJ, Kim CJ, Huaming C, Shinn P,
Stevenson DK, Zimmerman J, Barajas P, Cheuk R, Gadrinab C, Heller C,
Jeske A, Koesema E, Meyers CC, Parker H, Prednis L, Ansari Y, Choy N, Deen
H, Geralt M, Hazari N, Hom E, Karnes M, Mulholland C, Ndubaku R, Schmidt
I, Guzman P, Aguilar-Henonin L, Schmid M, Weigel D, Carter D, Marchand
T, Risseeuw E, Brogden D, Zeko A, Crosby WL, Berry CC, Ecker JR: Genomewide insertional mutagenesis of Arabidopsis thaliana. Science 2003,
301:653-657.
Shibagaki N, Grossman AR: The role of the STAS domain in the function
and biogenesis of a sulfate transporter as probed by random
mutagenesis. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:22964-22973.
Gallardo K, Job C, Groot SP, Puype M, Demol H, Vandekerckhove J, Job D:
Proteomic analysis of Arabidopsis seed germination and priming.
Plant Physiol 2001, 126:835-848.
Gallardo K, Job C, Groot SP, Puype M, Demol H, Vandekerckhove J, Job D:
Proteomics of Arabidopsis seed germination. A comparative study of
wild-type and gibberellin-deficient seeds. Plant Physiol 2002,
129:823-837.
Rajjou L, Gallardo K, Debeaujon I, Vandekerckhove J, Job C, Job D: The
effect of α-amanitin on the Arabidopsis seed proteome highlights the

Page 12 of 13

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

distinct roles of stored and neosynthesized mRNAs during
germination. Plant Physiol 2004, 134:1598-1613.
Bevan M, Bancroft I, Bent E, Love K, Goodman H, Dean C, Bergkamp R,
Dirkse W, Van Staveren M, Stiekema W, Drost L, Ridley P, Hudson SA, Patel
K, Murphy G, Piffanelli P, Wedler H, Wedler E, Wambutt R, Weitzenegger T,
Pohl TM, Terryn N, Gielen J, Villarroel R, De Clerck R, Van Montagu M,
Lecharny A, Auborg S, Gy I, Kreis M, Lao N, Kavanagh T, Hempel S, Kotter P,
Entian KD, Rieger M, Schaeffer M, Funk B, Mueller-Auer S, Silvey M, James
R, Montfort A, Pons A, Puigdomenech P, Douka A, Voukelatou E, Milioni D,
Hatzopoulos P, Piravandi E, Obermaier B, Hilbert H, Düsterhöft A, Moores
T, Jones JD, Eneva T, Palme K, Benes V, Rechman S, Ansorge W, Cooke R,
Berger C, Delseny M, Voet M, Volckaert G, Mewes HW, Klosterman S,
Schueller C, Chalwatzis N: Analysis of 1.9 Mb of contiguous sequence
from chromosome 4 of Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 1998, 391:485-488.
Sweetlove LJ, Heazlewood JL, Herald V, Holtzapffel R, Day DA, Leaver CJ,
Millar AH: The impact of oxidative stress on Arabidopsis mitochondria.
Plant J 2002, 32:891-904.
Bindschedler LV, Palmblad M, Cramer R: Hydroponic isotope labelling of
entire plants (HILEP) for quantitative plant proteomics; an oxidative
stress case study. Phytochem 2008, 69:1962-1972.
Desikan R, Mackerness SA-H, Hancock JT, Neill SJ: Regulation of the
Arabidopsis transcriptome by oxidative stress. Plant Physiol 2001,
127:159-172.
Nikiforova V, Freitag J, Kempa S, Adamikn M, Hesse H, Hoefgen R:
Transcriptome analysis of sulfur depletion in Arabidopsis thaliana:
interlacing of biosynthetic pathways provides response specificity.
Plant J 2003, 33:633-650.
Maruyama-Nakashita A, Inoue E, Watanabe-Takahashi A, Yamaya T,
Takahashi H: Transcriptome profiling of sulfur-responsive genes in
Arabidopsis reveals global effects of sulfur nutrition on multiple
metabolic pathways. Plant Physiol 2003, 132:597-605.
Higashi Y, Hirai MY, Fujiwara T, Naito S, Noji M, Saito K: Proteomic and
transcriptomic analysis of Arabidopsis seeds: molecular evidence for
successive processing of seed proteins and its implication in the stress
response to sulfur nutrition. Plant J 2006, 48:557-571.
Chen W, Singh K: The auxin, hydrogen peroxide and salicylic acid
induced expression of the Arabidopsis GST6 promoter is mediated in
part by an ocs element. Plant J 1999, 19:667-677.
Job C, Rajjou L, Lovigny Y, Belghazi M, Job D: Patterns of protein
oxidation in Arabidopsis seeds and during germination. Plant Physiol
2005, 138:790-802.
Rajjou L, Debeaujon I: Seed longevity: Survival and maintenance of high
germination ability of dry seeds. C R Biol 2008, 331:796-805.
Bailly C, El-Maarouf-Bouteau H, Corbineau F: From intracellular signaling
networks to cell death: the dual role of reactive oxygen species in seed
physiology. C R Biol 2008, 331:806-814.
Herbette S, Taconnat L, Hugouvieux V, Piette L, Magniette MLM, Cuine S,
Auroy P, Richaud P, Forestier C, Bourguignon J, Renou JP, Vavasseur A,
Leonhardt N: Genome-wide transcriptome profiling of the early
cadmium response of Arabidopsis roots and shoots. Biochimie 2006,
88:1751-1765.
Cho UH, Seo NH: Oxidative stress in Arabidopsis thaliana exposed to
cadmium is due to hydrogen peroxide accumulation. Plant Sci 2005,
168:113-120.
Srivastava S, Srivastava AK, Suprasanna P, D'Souza SF: Comparative
biochemical and transcriptional profiling of two contrasting varieties
of Brassica juncea L. in response to arsenic exposure reveals
mechanisms of stress perception and tolerance. J Exp Bot 2009,
60:3419-3431.
Mascher R, Lippmann B, Holzinger S, Bergmann H: Arsenate toxicity:
effects on oxidative stress response molecules and enzymes in red
clover plants. Plant Sci 2002, 163:961-969.
Li F, Asami T, Wu X, Tsang EWT, Cutler A: A Putative Hydroxysteroid
Dehydrogenase Involved in Regulating Plant Growth and
Development. Plant Physiol 2007, 145:87-97.
Baud S, Lepiniec L: Regulation of de novo fatty acid synthesis in
maturing oilseeds of Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry
2009, 47:448-455.
Higgins TJ, Chandler PM, Randall PJ, Spencer D, Beach LR, Blagrove RJ,
Kortt AA, Inglis AS: Gene structure, protein structure, and regulation of
the synthesis of a sulfur-rich protein in pea seeds. J Biol Chem 1986,
261:11124-11130.

Zuber et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:78
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/78

46. Hirai MY, Fujiwara T, Chino M, Naito S: Effects of sulfate concentrations
on the expression of a soybean seed storage protein gene and its
reversibility in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Physiol 1995,
36:1331-1339.
47. Tabe L, Droux M: Limits to sulfur accumulation in transgenic lupin seeds
expressing a foreign sulfur-rich protein. Plant Physiol 2002,
128:1137-1148.
48. Nikiforova VJ, Kopka J, Tolstikov V, Fiehn O, Hopkins L, Hawkesford MJ,
Hesse H, Hoefgen R: Systems Rebalancing of Metabolism in Response
to Sulfur Deprivation, as Revealed by Metabolome Analysis of
Arabidopsis Plants. Plant Physiol 2005, 138:304-318.
49. Nikiforova VJ, Bielecka M, Gakière B, Krueger S, Rinder J, Kempa S,
Morcuende R, Scheible WR, Hesse H, Hoefgen R: Effect of sulfur
availability on the integrity of amino acid biosynthesis in plants. Amino
acids 2006, 30:173-183.
50. Ravanel S, Gakière B, Job D, Douce R: The specific features of methionine
biosynthesis and metabolism in plants. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:7805-7812.
51. Ravanel S, Block MA, Rippert P, Jabrin S, Curien G, Rébeillé F, Douce R:
Methionine metabolism in plants: chloroplasts are autonomous for de
novo methionine synthesis and can import S-adenosylmethionine
from the cytosol. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:22548-22557.
52. Levine RL, Mosoni L, Berlett BS, Stadtman ER: Methionine residues as
endogenous antioxidants in proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93:15036-15040.
53. Levine R, Berlett B, Moskovitz J, Mosoni L, Stadtman ER: Methionine
residues may protect proteins from critical oxidative damage.
Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 1999, 107:323-332.
54. Bewley JD, Black M: Seeds: Physiology of development and germination New
York Plenum Press; 1994.
55. Kranner I, Birtic S: Modulating Role for Antioxidants in Desiccation
Tolerance. Integrative and Comparative Biology 2005, 45:734-740.
56. Bräutigam K, Dietzel L, Kleine T, Ströher E, Wormuth D, Dietz KJ, Radke D,
Wirtz M, Hell R, Dörmann P, Nunes-Nesi A, Schauer N, Fernie AR, Oliver SN,
Geigenberger P, Leister D, Pfannschmidt T: Dynamic Plastid Redox
Signals Integrate Gene Expression and Metabolism to Induce Distinct
Metabolic States in Photosynthetic Acclimation in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 2009, 21:2715-32.
57. Fey V, Wagner R, Bräutigam K, Wirtz M, Hell R, Dietzmann A, Leister D,
Oelmüller R, Pfannschmidt T: Retrograde plastid redox signals in the
expression of nuclear genes for chloroplast proteins of Arabidopsis
thaliana. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:5318-5328.
58. Meyer AJ: The integration of glutathione homeostasis and redox
signaling. J Plant Physiol 2008, 165:1390-1403.
59. Schwarzländer M, Fricker MD, Müller C, Marty L, Brach T, Novak J,
Sweetlove LJ, Hell R, Meyer AJ: Confocal imaging of glutathione redox
potential in living plant cells. J Microsc 2008, 231:299-316.
60. Doyle JL, Doyle JJ: Isolation of plant DNA from fresh tissue. Focus 1990,
12:13-15.
61. Chang S, Puryear J, Cairney J: A simple and efficient method for isolating
RNA from pine trees. Plant Mol Biol Rep 1993, 11:113-116.
62. Wirtz M, Droux M, Hell R: O-Acetylserine (thiol) lyase: An enigmatic
enzyme of plant cysteine biosynthesis revisited in Arabidopsis thaliana.
J Exp Bot 2004, 55:1785-1798.
63. Gallardo K, Le Signor C, Vandekerckhove J, Thompson RD, Burstin J:
Proteomics of Medicago truncatula seed development establishes the
time frame of diverse metabolic processes related to reserve
accumulation. Plant Physiol 2003, 133:664-82.
64. Bradford M: A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of
microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye
binding. Anal Biochem 1976, 72:248-254.
65. Mathesius U, Keijzers G, Natera SH, Weinman JJ, Djordjevic MA, Rolfe BG:
Establishment of a root proteome reference map for the model
legume Medicago truncatula using the expressed sequence tag
database for peptide mass fingerprinting. Proteomics 2001,
1:1424-1240.
66. Gallardo K, Firnhaber C, Zuber H, Héricher D, Belghazi M, Henry C, Küster
H, Thompson R: A Combined Proteome and Transcriptome Analysis of
Developing Medicago truncatula Seeds: Evidence for Metabolic
Specialization of Maternal and Filial Tissues. MCP 2007, 6:2165-2179.

Page 13 of 13

doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-78
Cite this article as: Zuber et al., Sultr4;1 mutant seeds of Arabidopsis have an
enhanced sulphate content and modified proteome suggesting metabolic
adaptations to altered sulphate compartmentalization BMC Plant Biology
2010, 10:78

</pre>
</body>
</html>
